THE COMICAL ROMANCE: OR A Facetious HISTORY of a COMPANY OF STAGE PLAYERS.
Interwoven with diverse Choice Novels, Rare Adventures, and Amorous Intrigues.

Written Originally in French by the Renowned SCARRON; And now Turned into
English By J. B.

London, Printed for John Playfere, at the White Lion in the Upper-walk of the
New Exchange: and William Crook, at the Three Bibles on Fleet-Bridge, 1665.

The Contents of the First PART.
CHap. 1. A Company of Comedians arrived at the City of Manse. page 1 Chap. 2.
What Mounsier de la Rapinire was. p. 4 Chap. 3. The deplorable success of the
Play. p. 7 Chap. 4. In which is continued the Relation of Mr. la Rapiniere,
with what happened in his house at that night. p. 11 Chap. 5. Which contains no
great matter. p. 15 Chap. 6. The accident of the Chamber Pot; the troublesome
night Rancour gave the Inn: The arrival of part of the Players Company: The
death of Doguin, and other remarkable passages. p. 19 Chap. 7. The Adventures
of the Horse Litters. p. 26. Chap. 8. In which you may read many things very
necessary to be known, for the better understanding of this Book. p. 30 Chap.
9. The History of the Invisible Lover. p. 34 Chap. 10. How Ragotin had a sound
rap on his fingers with a Busk. p. 59 Chap. 11. Containing what you shall find,
if you take the pains to read it. p. 66 Chap. 12. A Nocturnal Combat. p. 72
Chap. 13. The History of Mounsieur Destiny and Madam Star. p. 81 Chap. 14. What
befell the Curate of Dom-Front. p. 106 Chap. 15. The Operators arrival at the
Inn. A continuation of the History of Destiny and Star. p. 113 Chap 16. The
opening of a Theater, or Acting of a Play; with other things of no less
consequence. p. 117 Chap. 17. The ill success of Ragotins civility. p. 161
Chap. 18. The remainder of the History of Destiny and Star. p. 163 Chap. 19.
Several Reflections which are not amiss. Ragotins new disgrace, and other
things which you may read if you please. p. 178 Chap. 20 The shortest of the
present Volume. Ragotins fall from his Horse, and somewhat of the l^ke nature
happening to Roquebrune, p. 186 Chap. 21. Which perhaps will not be found very
pleasing. p. 188 Chap. 22. The Novel. Or the Trappanner Trapan'd. p. 194 Chap.
23. An unexpected misfortune, which hindered them from Acting the Comedy. p. 222
THE COMICAL ROMANCE.
CHAPTER I.
A Company of Comedians Arrive at the City of Manse.

THe sun had finished above half his course, and his Chariot having reached the
descent of the World, rolled a little swifter then he would have had it. If his
Horses had taken the advantage of the sloapiness of the way, they had ^nded the
remaining portion of the day in less ^hen half a quarter of an hour; But in
stead of ^rawing with all their strength, they fell to cur^eting; smelling a
Sea-air which made them Neigh, and informed them that the Sea was not far of,
where it is said their Master does lie every night. To speak more intelligibly,
it was between five and six; when a Cart entered into the Market place of the
City of Manse. This Cart was drawn by two yoke of very lean Oxen, conducted by
a Mare that had a Foal, which Foal ran up and down about the Cart, like a little
Fool as it was. The Cart was full of Trunks, Portmanteaux, and huge boundles of
Painted Cloth, which made a kind of Pyramid, upon the top whereof appeared a
Damsel, habited partly Citizen, partly Country-Gentleman-like. A young man as
poor in habit as rich in mien, marched by the Carts side, he had a great patch
on his face which covered one of his eyes and half his cheek, he carried a long
Gun upon his shoulder, with which he had murdered several Pies, Jayes and
Rooks, which made a kind of Bandelier about his neck, at the end whereof hung
a Hen and Goose by the heels, which showed, as if they were the spoils of some
little War. Instead of a Hat, he wore only a Nightcap, tackt about with
garters of different colors; and his head tire was no doubt a Turban only
rough-drawn, which wanted the las^ hand to finish it. His Doublet was a gray
freez^ coat, with a leather girt about his middle which he used also for a belt
to carry his sword which was so long, that it was not to be managed without a
Rest. He had short trunk hos^ to which his stockins were drawn up and stitched,
like those the Players use when they represent some Ancient Hero, and his shoes
were antique buskins, which the dirt had bemired unto his ancles. An old man
more regularly, though very ill clothed, went along by his side. He carried a
Base-Viol on his back, and because he stooped a little, he seemed at a distance
to be a Great Tortoise walking upon his hinder legs. Some Critic may perhaps
quarrel at this comparison, because of the disproportion betwixt a Man and a
Tortoise; but I mean of those overgrown Tortoises in the Indies; and besides, I
tie my self to no Authority but my own. But let us return to our Caravan. It
passed before the Tennis Court at the sign of the Hind, and made a halt at the
door, where a great many of the chiefest Citizens were assembled together. The
novelty of the Freight, and the noise of the Rascally boys that were gathered
about the Cart, caused those honorable Burgo-masters to cast their eyes upon
our strangers. A Provost amongst the rest named Le Rappiniere, accosted them
first, and asked with a kind of majesterial authority, What they were? The
young man, I lately told you of, without moving his Turban, because with one
hand he held his Gun, and with the other his sword, least it should flap
against his legs, told him; They were French by Birth, Players by profession,
that his Theatrical name was Destiny, his old Comrades Rancour, and the
Gentlewoman that was roosting like a Hen in her Nest on the top of their bag
and bagage, Cave. This fantastical name made some of the company smile,
whereupon the young player added, that the name of Cave ought not to sound more
ridiculously or harsh in a wise man's ear, then that of Mountain, Valley, Rose,
or Thornel. The conversation ended with some Oaths and Cuffs, which were heard
at the forepart of the Cart; occasioned by a servant of the Tenis Court, who
without any warning had beaten the Carter, because his lean Cattle had eaten
very liberally of a truss of hay that lay at the door. The noise was appeased,
and the good woman of the house, who loved Comedies better then Prayers or
Sermon, out of her more then common generosity, told the Car-man he might let
his beasts eat their fill. He willingly accepted her proffer, and while his
Cattle were feeding the Author reposed himself, and studied what should be the
subject of the second Chapter.

CHAP. II.
What Person Monsieur De la Rappiniere was.

MOnsieur De la Rappiniere was, at that time the Jester, Drole or Buffoon of
the City o^ Manse. It is not one alone that can serve turn in Paris; for they
have one at least in every Ward. I my self, that now Write, might have had the
dignity for the quarter I dwell in; Bu^ I have long since renounced all the
Vanities o^ this world, as those that know me well can justify. To return to
Monsieur De la Rappiniere, he soon renewed the conversation, which the scuffle
had interrupted, and asked our young Player if their company were composed but
of Mad. Cave Monsieur, Rancour, and himself? Our company, replied he, is as
full and complete, as the Prince of Orange's, or the Duke of Espernons: But by
a disgrace which happened to us at Tours, where one of our hair-brained
door-keepers killed one of our Governors Guard, we were forced to pack away in
all have, with one shoe off another on, in the equipage you see us. Those
Soldiers have done as much at La Flesche, said La Rappiniere, St. Anthony's
fire consume them, said the good woman, they are the cause we can have no Play
Acted. That should be no hinderance replied the old Commedian, had we but the
keys of our Chests to come at our Clothes; for we could undertake to please the
Gentlemen of this Town four or five days, before we go to Alenzon, where the
rest of our company is to Rendezvous. This answer made every one prick up his
ears, La Rappiniere proffered an old gown of his Wives to Cave, and the Tennis
Court woman two or three suits of Clothes she had in pawn to Destiny, and
Rancour. But said one that was present, there are but three of you; Puh! says
Rancour, I have Acted a Play my self alone, and have personated at the same
time the King, the Queen, and the Ambassador; I spoke very shrill and small
when I acted the Queen, when I Acted the Ambassador, I spoke through the Nose,
turning my self toward a Chair where I had placed my Crown; and when I came to
the Kings part, I ascended my Throne, put on my Crown, and assumed a kind of
Gravity, with a bigger and more manly voice: and least you should doubt this,
if you will but satisfy our Carter, and detray our charge, in our Inn; furnish
us but with your clothes, you shall see us act before night yet; or else we
will go drink, by your leave, or fell our selves a little, because we have
traveled a great journey this day already. The proposition pleased the company,
but that Devil De la Rappiniere who was ever studying to do mischief, said,
they needed no other habits; but two suits belonging to a couple of young
Citizens that were playing a se^ at Tennis, since Madam Caves dress would serve
for any person in a Play. No sooner said, but as soon done; in less then half a
quarter of an hour, the Players had drunk every one a dish or two, were
Travesty'd and the company which was ere this increased, having taken their
places in an upper room, from behind a foul sheet, which was drawn aside,
appears the Player Destiny, lying on a bed-mat, with a wicker basket for a
Crown upon his head, rubbing his drowsy eyes, like one that is newly waked,
and repeating Herod; part in a sad tone, which begins thus;

Injurious Ghost that troublest my Repose.

The Plaster which covered the one half of his face, did not hinder him from
approving himself a most excellent Actor; Madam Cave did wonderfully well in
Mariana's, and Salomes parts; and Rancour gave every one very great
satisfaction in what he undertook, so that the Play went exceeding well, when
the Devil who never sleeps, played his part too, and made the Tragedy end, not
with the death of Mariana and Herod's despair; but with a thousand sound blows,
as many buffets, kicks beyond number, and infinite Oaths, and at last a good
account of all taken upon examination by La Rappiniere, the most expert of
mankind in such affairs.

CHAP. III.
The deplorable success of the Play.

IN all the subordinate Towns of this Kingdom, there is commonly a Tennis
Court, where the idler sort of people flock together; some to play, and others
to look on or bet. In these places it is, where they curse and swear
frequently, riming so richly on the name of God, there they spare neither
friend nor foe in their discourse, murdering the reputation of their absent
neighbors with their poisonous tongues; they give quarter to none, but treat
mankind like Turks and Heathens, every one being admitted to scoff and raillie,
according to the Talent he is Master of. It is in one of these Tennis-courts,
as I remember, that I left three Comical Persons, reciting Mariana before a
Right Honorable Audience, of which la Rappiniere was chief; at the same
instant when Herod and Mariana were contending, the two young men, from whom
they had taken the Suits so freely, came into the Chamber in their Drawers,
each having his Racket in hand. They had neglected their being rubbed, for have
to see the Comedy; they soon knew their own clothes worn by Pherore and Herod,
and the most choleric of the two, turning toward the Marker: Son of a Bitch,
said he, wherefore did thou lend my clothes to that Puppet-player? The poor
fellow, knowing what a rugged Blade he was, replies with all humility, that it
was not he. And who was it then, you Cuckold Squire, added he? He durst not
accuse la Rappiniere to his face, but he himself, who was the most insolent
person in the World, rising a little out of his Chair, said, It was I, what
have you to say to me? That you are a Sot, replied the other, giving him an
unmerciful rap over the Pate with his Racket. La Rappiniere was so amazed with
his being prevented by this blow, which was the advantage he ever used to take
of others, that he remained immovable, either out of admiration, or because he
was not yet heated enough in his Harness; for he could not be easily provoked
to venture his Carcass, though it were only at Cuffs; and perhaps the Quarrel
had ended there, if his Man, who had more spirit than the Master, had not
fallen upon the Assailant with a smart blow on his face attended with all its
circumstances, and followed it at random with a number of others. La Rappiniere
set upon him in the Rear, and began to belabour him with all his might, as
being most concerned: A Kinsman of his Adversaries flies on la Rappiniere,
after the same manner, he was engaged by a friend of la Rappinieres to make a
diversion; this last was assaulted by another, and he by another likewise: In
the end, all in the Chamber were engaged, one swore, the other railed, and all
scuffled bravely: The Woman of the house finding her household stuff going to
wrack, filled the Air with her pitiful outcries; to say the truth, they were
all in danger of perishing with flinging of Chairs, and Forms, and giving Kicks
and Cuffs, if some of the Magistrates of the Town, who were passing by with the
Sheriff, had not come up at the Alarm. Some were of opinion to throw two or
three Pales of Water among them, to cool their courage; and this remedy might
perhaps have proved effectual, had they not parted out of pure lassitude:
Besides that two, Father Capucins moved with charity came upon the spot, and
made, not a firm peace, but a kind of Truce, in which interim they might treat
without prejudice taking an account of either party. This Player Destiny
behaved himself so stoutly ^t Fifty-cuffs, that the Fame of his Prowess remains
yet fresh in the memory of those Citi^ens, according to the report of the two
young Hectors, Authors of the Quarrel, with whom he was particularly engaged,
and so shrewdly banged, as he did many others, that they were quickly forced to
leave the Field. He lost the Plaster from his face during the Skirmish, which
discovered a face, as handsome as the shape of his body. The bloody muzles were
washed with cold water, the torn bands were changed, some at a plasmes were
applied, the rent clothes were stitched up, the household stuff marshalled in
due place, but not altogether so whole as in the beginning of the Fray. In
fine, some moments after there remained no signs of any Combat, but only a
little animosity was legible in their countenances. The poor Players went out a
good while after with la Rappiniere, who would needs have the last word: As
they went cross the Market, they were surrounded by seven or eight Bravo's,
with Weapons in hand; le Rappiniere as he was wont, grew very fearful, and had
found cause form, had not Destiny most generously interposed and put by a
Thrust which had run through him; which nevertheless he could not so absolutely
avoid, but he received a slight wound in his Arm: He drew his Sword upon this,
and in a very short time, forced two of theirs out of their hands, opened one
or two of their Skulls, sliced their Ears, and so Nobly defeated the Ambuscade
of these Monsieurs, that all the Spectators protested they never saw so valiant
a Champion. This routed Party, was set on la Rappiniere by two young Gallants;
one whereof had married his Sister, who began the Fray with his Racket: And it
is very probable la Rappiniere had been spoiled, had not fortune raised him
this valiant Comedian for Desendour. This good turn somewhat softened his stony
heart; so that not enduring this poor scattered Remnant of a broken Company
should be forced to quarter at an Inn, he invited them to his own house, where
the Carter unloaded their Players trumpery, and returned back to his native
Village.

CHAP. IV.
In which is contined the relation of Mr. la Rappiniere, with what happened in
his House at that Night.

MIstress la Rappiniere received the Company with great civility, being a woman
that submitted her self more freely than any other; she was not ugly, though so
lean and dry, that she never snuffed a Candle with her fingers end, but they
took fire: I could relate a hundred rare stories, which I omit, as being too
prolix. In half an hour the two women were so well acquainted, that they had no
other Title, but my Dearest, and my Joy, at every turn. La Rappiniere, who was
as full of vainglory, as any finical Barber in the town, bid them at his first
coming home, repair to the Kitching and Larder, and charge the Officers to
hasten Supper. This was a pure Rodomontado, for besides an ancient Groom that
kept his Horse, he had no other servants but a young wench, and an old hobling
Chair-woman as sickly as a decai'd Bitch. But his pride had a fall, by an
accident that befell him: He ordinarily ate at the Inns upon other Prodigal
young fools charges, and his Family at home so well regulated, they were
reduced to Cabbige, and Pottage according to the custom of the Country;
desiring to appear like some body before his Guests, and regale them with
extraordinaries, he thought to have conveyed some money to his man behind his
back, wherewith to purchase a treat: But whether it were the servants, or the
Masters fault, I know not how, the money falls gingling down upon the arm of
his Chair where he sat, and from thence to the ground; la Rappiniere looked
very blew upon it, his Wife blushed, Rancour did not mind it, the servant
swore, and Cave smiled; but as for Destiny, I cannot now tell what effect it
wrought upon his spirit. Well -- the money was gathered up again, and whilst
the Supper was providing, they entered into conversation. La Rappiniere asked
Destiny wherefore he disguised his face with a Plaster: He told him there was
Reason enough, for being accidentally forced to make his escape in those
uncouth clothes, he was willing to hide his face from the knowledge of his
Enemies, by keeping it under that cloud. In the end, the Supper, such as it
was, came in; la Rappiniere drunk till he was fudled, and Rancour was up to the
Hilts in the blood of Pacchus; Destiny eat very soberly like a temporate man,
Cave like a famished Player, and Mistress la Rappiniere as a woman that took
advantage of the present opportunity; that is to say, till she was over-gorg'd.
Whilst afterward the servants were feeding, and the beds making ready, la
Rappiniere tired them with a thousand frivolous stories. Destiny lay alone in a
little private Chamber, Cave with the young Wench in a by-closer, and Rancour I
know not where, with the serving-man. They had all a great mind to sleep, some
for weariness, the other with repletion; and yet they slept but very little, so
uncertain is every thing in this world. After her first slumber, Mistress la
Rappiniere had a mind to do that which no body could do for her, her Husband
waked immediately after she was gone, though he were sufficiently drunk still,
and finding he was left alone he called his Wife, but was not answered; this
bred a jealousy, his jealousy made him mad, and this madness made him rise in
an instant. Going out of his Chamber, he hears something trampling just before
him; a while he steals after it: And in the midst of a little Entry, that led
to Destiny's Chamber, he found himself so near the Party he traced, that he was
ready to tread on the heels of it; he thought to lay hands upon his Wife, and
seizes upon it crying out, Ah you Whore! But he grasped nothing but Air; while
his feet meeting a stumbling block, down comes he with his Nose on the floor,
where some sharp thing punch'd his breast so desperately; That he bawled out
Murder! I am stabbed! still keeping hold of his Wives Lock, as he imagined,
who was struggling to get away from underneath him. At his outcries, curses and
damnable oaths, all the house was in an uproar, and every one came to help him,
just at the same moment; the maid servant with a Candle, Rancour and the old
groom in their nasty shirts; Cave in a tattered morning coat; Destiny with his
naked tool in hand, and Mistress De la Rappiniere appeared last of all, as much
amazed as the rest, to behold her husband wrestling with a Goat, who suckled a
litter of young Dog whelps in the house, whose Bitch-mother dyed in Labor.
Never was mortal man so ashamed as La Rappiniere; His Wife mistrusting the
Jealousy of his cracked brain, asked him, if he had lost his Wits? He answered
at randum, not knowing indeed what he said; that he took the Goat for a Thief.
Destiny soon smelt the business; Every one returned to their Beds, and believed
what their own fancy suggested of the adventure, and the Goat was locked up
again with the Whelps.

CHAP. V.
Which contains no great Matter.

RAncour the Comedian, one of the principal Hero's of our Romance, (for we
shall have more then one in this Book) and since nothing is more complete then
a Romantique Hero, half a Dozen at least, or such as shall lay claim to that
Title, shall render mine more accomplished then a single one can do, who
perhaps is seldomest mentioned, there being nothing but right and wrong in this
World. This Rancour then, was one of those Misanthropes that hated every one
else, and scarce loved themselves: and I have been told by many that they never
saw him laugh. He had wit enough, and made ill Rhyms well enough, otherwise a
man of courage in some degree, as malicious as an old Ape, and envious as a
Dog; He found some fault with every one of his profession, Relleroze was too
affected, Mondory starched and stiff, Floridor bashful, and so forwards; nay, I
believe he would have had it thought himself was the only complete Actor,
though in truth, they had not kept him then in the Company, but only because
he had served a double apprentiship in the Trade. In those times when they were
confined to H -- s Plays, he imitated, a woman^ voice, and acted sometimes a
Nurses or Midwife part behind a vizard: but afterward when the Stage advanced
to higher perfection, he played sometimes the Constables Deputy, or a Confident,
an Ambassador, or Herald, when any Warlike or Tragical business was the
Theme, or made up one at the lewd singing of a Drunken catch, sometimes
appearing with a Mealy Visage to carry on a merry farce. With these plausible
Talents he laid the foundation of insupportable pride, which being accompanied
with his perpetual raillery, eternal backbiting, and a quarrelsome humor,
sometimes carried on with a little flashy valor, made him somewhat feared by his
associates; only to Destiny he was quiet as a Lamb, and behaved himself as
rationally as his nature would suffer him. Some would say that he had been
cudgel'd, but that report quickly vanished, as well as the other of his being
so greedy of Money as to pad for it, but for all this, we must allow him to be
as honest a man as lived. I related, as I remember, that he was lodged with La
Rappinieres servant, whose name was Doguin; whether the bed were not easy
enough, or whether Doguin were no good bedfellow, I know not, but he could not
sleep all the night. He rose at break of day, as well as Doguin who was called
for by his master, and passing along near La Rappinieres Chamber, he bad him
good morrow; La Rappiniere received his complement with the haughtiness of a
Provincial Provost, not returning him the tithe of his civilities, but he being
used to Act all sorts of humors took little notice of it. La Rappiniere
started a thousand frivolous questions concerning Plays, and from one thing to
another, at length came to mention Destiny, asking how long he had been of the
Company, and withal protested he was an Excellent Actor; All is not gold that
glisters, replies Rancour; he acted but Pages parts, when I was the Chiefest,
and how can he be perfect in a Trade he never learnt? Players do not spring up
like Mushrooms; because he is young you are taken with him, if you knew him as
thoroughly as I do, you would set a less value by half upon him: besides, he
takes upon him as if he were extracted from a Rib of St. Lewis, but never
discovers who he ^s, nor whence, no more then the fair Cloris ^is companion,
whom he calls his Sister, and ^od grant she be no worse. As mean as I seem ^o
be, I saved his life at Paris at the price of ^wo good cuts with a sword, when
he showed himself so ungrateful; As, in stead of following ^e when I was
carried betwixt four to a Chy^urgeons, he went searching about the durty ^reets
all night long after a bauble of Dia^onds, which I believe were but
counterfeit, whom those that set upon us, took away from ^im as he pretended.
La Rapiniere, demanded (...) Rancour how that accident fell upon them: (...)
was, replied he, upon Twelfth Night, on the ^ew-bridg. These words much
discomposed ^^th La Rappiniere and his man Doguin; they ^^ok'd pale, and then
blushed both in an in^nt; and La Rappiniere shifted that discourse (...)
abruptly and suddenly, as made Rancour ^uch admire.

The Hangman of the Town and some Halberteers, coming into the Chamber, broke
off their conversation, and did Rancour a courtesy, who plainly perceived that
he had touched Rappiniere to the quick, though he could not possib^y apprehend
why he should be concerned. In the mean time, poor Destiny, that had been the
subject of their discourse, was much troubled; Rancour found him with Mistress
Cave swearing at an old Botcher that he had ill understood and worse fashioned
the work they gave him to do. The subject of their difference was, that
unloading their Comical Bagage, Destiny found two Doublets and one pair of
Breeches very much worn, which he delivered to this old Tailor, to get out of
them a suit of clothes, somewhat more A-la-mode, then the Pages Trunks he wore;
and the Tailor instead of making use of one Doublet to mend the other, and the
Breeches, had, unbecoming the judgment of a man that had translated clothes all
his life time with the best part of the Breeches mended up the two Doublets, so
that poor Destiny with so many Doublets and so few Breeches, was constrained to
keep his Chamber, or expose himself to the Laughter of the Boys in the streets,
as h^ had done before in his Players habit. Rappinieres liberallity repaired
the Tailors fault, wh^ took the two mended Doublets, and gave. Destiny a suit
of a fellows that had been lately broken on the wheel: The Executioner who w^
present, and had left those clothes in the keeping of Rappinier's maid, most
insolently cha^lenged the clothes as his own, but Rappiniere threatened to make
him loose his Office; The suit fitted Destiny passing well, who went abroad
with La Rappiniere and Rancour; They Dined at a Tavern at a Citizen's cost who
had some business with La Rappiniere. Madam Cave busied her self about
Starching her fowl Gorget, and so kept company with her Landlady. The same day
Doguin was met with by one of the young men whom he had beaten the day before
at the Tenis Court, and returned home, with two good cuts over the pate, and
infinite bastonado's; and because he was so much wounded, Rancour after supper
went to lie at the next Inn, very much tired with trotting so much about the
Town, in company of Destiny and La Rappiniere, who would needs have
satisfaction for thus misusing his Servant.

CHAP. VI.
The accident of the Chamber Pot, the troublesome Nigh Rancour gave the Inn: The
Arrival of part of the Players Company. The Death of Doguin, and other
remarkable passages.

RAncour came to the Inn little better than half drunk. Mrs. Rappinier's Maid
who conducted him, desired the Hostess to have a bed made for him: A great
purchase indeed, said the Landlady, if this be the best trade we must look for,
good buoy Landlord; in faith you must seek your Rent elsewhere: Hold your peace
you Sot, replied her Husband, Monsieur de la Rappiniere, does us too much
Honor; therefore provide the Gentleman a bed quickly. Marry come up, quoth
she, but you must know where to find one first, there was but one to spare, and
that is just now taken up by a good Merchant: The Merchant came in just at the
nick of time, and having understood the cause of their Quarrel, proffered
Rancour part of his bed; whether it were that he had business with la
Rappiniere, or that he were naturally obliging, for which Rancour gave him as
many thanks as his barren civility could afford. The Merchant supped, mine Host
kept him company, and Rancour was easily entreated to make up a third, and took
off his Cups roundly at another man's cost. They discoursed of Taxes, railed
against Excise-men, and undertook to govern the Kingdom, but were so ill
Governors over themselves, and especially mine Host, that he draws out his
Purse, and calls for the Reckoning, forgetting he was eating Oats at his own
Manger; his Wife and her Maid seeing him in this pickle, pulled him out by head
and shoulders, and clapped him on a bed in his clothes Rancour told the Merchant
he was much troubled with a difficulty of making water, and wa^ therefore very
sorry he should be forced to disturb him; to which the Merchant replied, tha^ a
Night was soon over. The bed stood in a corner of the Chamber, with one side
close to the Wall; Rancour gets in first, and takes up the further side, and
the Merchant having laid himself outermost, Rancour desires he would help him
to the Chamber Pot: And what do you intend to do with it, says the Merchant? I
must contrive some way to set it by me, replies Rancour, for fear of troubling
you too often in the N^ght: The Merchant freely proffered to reach it to him,
upon all occasions; to which Rancour seemed but unwillingly to consent,
protesting it would grieve him to the heart to disturb him so much; the
Merchant fell asleep before he could make answer, and he was scarce thoroughly
so, but the malicious Player, who was of such a damned humor, he would
willingly lose an eye of his own, to put out another man's, pulled the poor
Merchant by the arm, crying out, Sir, O dear Sir: The Merchant not quite awake,
asked him yawning, what is it you desire? Pray give me the Pot a little, said
Rancour; the other reache^ to the Flore, and taking it up, gives it into
Rancours hands, who seemingly strived to piss, and after a hundred proffers and
trials, and as many oaths and mutterings between his teeth, not forgetting to
bemoan and bewail himself, he returns the Pot to the Merchant, without one drop
in it; The Merchant sets it down in its place again, and gaping as wide as an
oven for want of sleep, truly Sir, said he; I pity you very much, and
immediately fell into a sound sleep again. Rancour lets him sleep on a pretty
while, and when he heard him begin to snore as heartily, as if he had done
nothing else all his life time; the perfidious Rascal wakens him again, and
calls for the Chamber pot as maliciously as he did the time before. The
Merchant gives it him as orderly as at first; Rancour holds it to the place out
of which we use to piss, but with as little design to piss, as to let the
Merchant rest in quiet: he cries out louder then before, and was twice as long
not pissing, conjuring the Merchant not to trouble himself any more with
reaching the Pot, telling him it was unreasonable, and he would make a shift to
do it well enough himself: The poor man, who would at that time have given half
his estate to have fetched out his sleep, drouzily told him, he might do as he
pleased; and set the pot down again. They bid each other good night very
civilly, and the poor Merchant would have ventured a good wager, that he should
now sleep as quietly as ever he did in his life: Rancour who knew what would
happen, lets him fairly engage himself a while to a most sweet repose, and
making no conscience of waking him, he lays his sharp elbow just upon the pit
of his stomach, and throwing his whole body forwards, stretches his arm out of
the bed, as we use to do to take up any thing from the bedside; The
Unfortunate Merchant start up awake, feeling himself almost stifled and pressed
to death, crying out horribly with an oath, O Sir you kill me! Rancour replies
with as much softness, as the other spoke with passion: I beg your pardon, I
was only going to reach the Pot. Ah! cried the other, I had rather watched the
whole night and given it you my self, for you have done that to me, which I
shall carry to my Grave. Rancour made him no answer, but pissed so copiously,
and with so much strength, that this noise alone had been sufficient to have
awaked the Merchant. He filled the Pot up to the brim, blessing god with a
Phanitical Hypocrisy: The poor Merchant congratulated as well as he could the
emptying of his bladder, and plentiful ejaculation of Urine, which made him
promise himself an uninterrupted sleep, when the cursed Rancour making as if he
would set down the pot again, let both it and the piss fall down upon the
gentleman's Face, Beard, and Breast, crying out, Alas! Sir, I entreat your
pardon; The Merchant made no return to his civility, for as soon as he felt
himself pickled in that liquor, he rose up howling like a Fury, and bawling for
a Candle. Rancour with a most cunning calmness, said, faith this is an unlucky
accident; but the Merchant continued his clamours. The Host, Hostess, Tapsters
and Chambermaids, took the Alarm and came to them, the Merchant telling them
they had brought him the Devil for a bedfellow, called for a fire in another
Room. They demanded what he ailed, but his anger was so unexpressible he gave
no reply, but caught up his Clothes and Portmanteau, and went into the Kitchen
to dry himself, where he slept out the rest of the night on a bench by the
fireside: The Master of the House enquired of Rancour what the matter was, who
told him with a counterfeit ingenuity: I cannot imagine what reason he should
have to complain: but he started out of his sleep, and waked me at the same
time with a hideous outcry of murder, so that either some fearful dream
disturbed him, or else he must needs be distracted, for he has be-pissed the
bed till it is all on float again; the good woman felt the bed with her hand,
and found it so true, that she swore by her maker she would make him pay for
his nastiness: They wished Rancour a good night, who slept as quietly till
morning, as if he had had the clearest conscience in the world and so recruited
himself of the disturbance his Carcass had met with the precedent night at
Rappinieres: He was rouzed somewhat earlier though then he intended, Rappinieres
maid, calling him up in great have, to come and speak with Doguin who was
dying, and desired to see him before he left the world: He went not without
some trouble, being puzzled to guess what might be the occasion of this fellows
sending for him at such a time, having had no acquaintance with him but the day
before. But it proved only a mistake of the maids, who hearing him inquire for
the player, went for Rancour instead of Destiny; who was just come into Doguins
chamber before Rancour arrived, and had shut himself up with the Priest that
had confessed him, who had informed Destiny that the sick party had something
that concerned him to discover to him. He had not been thus in private with
Doguin above the eighth part of an hour, but La Rappiniere returned home from
the City, where he had been ever since break of day about business: At his
coming he was informed his man was dying, it being impossible to stanch his
blood, by reason a great vessel was cut asunder, and that he had requested to
speak with Destiny the Comedian before his senses left him; And has he been
with him? demanded La Rappin^re somewhat started; Answer was given, that they
were locked up together in private. He was thunder struck at these words, and
running to the Chamber door in a fury bounced at the door, where Doguin was
giving up the Ghost, just as Destiny opened it to call some body to help the
dying man then fallen into a trance- La Rappiniere asked him with a troubled
countenance, what his foolish servant had to say to him; I believe he raves,
replied Destiny very coldly, for he begged a thousand pardons of me, and I never
knew he had in the least offended; but pray let some body be called to his
assistance, for he is just dying; they went to his bed side where he was
gasping his last, which made La Rappiniere put on a more confident look then at
his first approach; Those that were not strangers to his temper thought it was
only because, he perhaps owed him wages which would now be saved: But Destiny
knew a more prevalent reason. Presently after two other persons came to the
house, who were welcome to our Player as being of the same company, of whom we
shall discourse more amply in the ensuing.

CHAP. VII.
The Adventure of the Hors-Litters.

THe Youngest of the Players that came to la Rappinieres house, was a servant
to Destiny, who gave him notice, that the residue of the company were all
arrived, excepting only Madam Star, who had put her foot out of joint, within
three Leagues of Manse. How came you hither? or who gave you information we
were in this place? said Destiny. The Plague raging at Alenson prevented our
going that way, and made us halt at Bonestable, replied the other Player, whose
name was Olive, where some Inhabitants of this town told us you had been
beaten, and were wounded; at which Madam Star is much troubled, and entreats
you to send her a Hors-Litter. The Master of the next Inn who was come to
Rappiniere's house upon the report of Doguins death, said he had a Litter,
which if they would give him his price, he would make ready with a couple of
Horses and dispatch it away by noon. The Players hired the Litter for a Crown,
and took up lodgings for the company at his house. De la Rappiniere undertook
to procure them a License from the Lieutenant General to Act, and about noon
Destiny and his companions took their way toward Bonestable. It was excessive
hot weather, Rancour slept in the Horse-Litter, Olive Rode on the hinder Horse,
and mine Hosts man lead the foremost, Destiny walked on foot, with his
Fowling-peece upon his shoulder, his man relating to him all that had happened to
them, from the Castle on the Loire till they came to the Village of Bonestable,
where Madam Star alighting from her Horse had wrench'd her foot. As they were
thus trudging along two men very well mounted, with their Cloaks thrown over
their Faces passing along by Destiny, drew near to the horse-Litter, on the
side which was open, and finding only an old fellow a sleep in it, he that was
the best mounted of the two, said to his comrade; I think all the Devils in
Hell are let loose to day, and are crept into these damned Litters to make me
mad. Having so said, he pricked his horse, and rod cross the fields and the
other after him. Olive called to Destiny who was a little distant, and told him
the adventure, which he could not apprehend, and was therefore hugely troubled
to conceive what it should mean. About a quarter of a League thence, the fellow
that guided the litter, being somewhat dozed with the heat of the scortching
Sun, plants me the Horse-Litter in a deep miry way, where Rancour had well nigh
been toppled in, the horses tore their harness, and were forced to be drawn
forth by head and tail after they were un-tackl'd. They gathered up the ruins
of this wrack, and crawled on to the next Village as well as they could. The
Harness wanted much reparation: whilst they were patching it up again, Olive,
Rancour, and Destiny's serving-man drank a pot or two at an Inn door in the
said Village: In the interim comes a second Horse-Litter, carried by two lusty
fellows, who made a halt likewise before the same Inn: and hardly was this set
down, but a third appears about a hundred paces in the rear, coming on the same
way; I believe said Rancour, all the Horse-Litters in the Country have
appointed their Rendez-vous here for a general Muster, or some business of
great importance; I think they had best to begin their conference and
consultation, for there is no likelihood of any more coming now. Nay, but here
is one more that will not be out of play, says the Hostess; and indeed, they
saw a fourth which with a great deal o^ expedition came from Manse. At this all
the company laughed heartily, except Rancour, who never was seen to laugh as I
told you before. This last Litter made a stop and stood in rank and file with
the first body; It was very strange^ to see so many Litters together; If those
Litter-Hunters, that were so curious to search us, were now here, said the
conductor of the first Litter, they might abundantly satisfy their humor. I
met with the like persons replied the second, who looked very narrowly into my
Litter; and so did I, said the third; and the last swore he had like to have
been beaten by them. And wherefore, said Destiny. Because, replied he, they
missed a Gentlewoman that had strained her Anckle, whom we had newly left at
Manse; never met with such chollerick people in my days, they were m^d with me,
because they had ^^pt their Prey. This made the Players prick ^p their ears,
and after two or three interroga^ories they discovered, that the Gentleman's
^ife, who was chief of the Village, where Maddam Star alighted and hurt her
foot, had out of Charity given her a visit being a stranger of no ordinary
Mien, and sent her in a Litter to Manse ^ith all the care imaginable. The
discourse amongst the Litter-men lasted some time, and ^hey gathered from one
another, that those were ^he same persons that had looked into all the se^eral
Litters. The first Litter carried the Cu^te of Domfront, who came from the
Waters at ^^llesme, and was passing into Manse to have a Consultation of
Physicians. The second had ^n it a wounded Officer that was sent from the
^irmy. The Litters parted and went their se^^ral ways; the Curates and the
Players to ^anse, the others a different road. The sick Curate alighted at the
same Inn with the Comedians, where we shall leave him at rest in his own
Chamber, and tell you what passed in the Players, in the following Chapter.

CHAP. VIII.
In which you may read many things very necessary to be known, for the better
understandin^ of this Book.

THe Comical Company consisted of Destiny Olive, and Rancour, who had each of
the^ a servant, that aspired in time to be whole sharers or masters of the
Troop. Amongst these some there were that could rehearse alread^ without
blushing, and come off reasonable well amongst the rest he that served Destiny
was apte^ understood what he said, and had no little wi^^ Madam Star, and Madam
Caves daughter acted most commonly the best of the women's parts Cave her self
played the Queen, an old Midwife or some such like person in a Farce. They ha^
besides these a Poet, or rather an Author, wh^ was very generally known, for
never a Groce or Mercers shop in the Kingdom wanted his was^ paper to wrap up
their spices and silks, both in Verse and Prose. This pregnant wit had gotten
in amongst them, almost whether they would or not, but because he had no share
at all and spent some of his own coin amongst them they suffered him sometimes
to act one of the slightest parts, which he did very scurvely. They perceived
plain enough he was in love with on^ of the Females; But yet was he so crafty,
though more Fool then Pollititian, that they could not certainly know which of
the two he would seduce, with his hopes of Fame and Immortality. He threatened
the Actors with a number of Plays of his own composing. But till now had
mercifully spared them: Only they conjectured that he was conjuring up of one,
under the Title of Martin Luther, of which they had found some loose fragments,
which nevertheless he discovered though it were of his own scribbling. When our
Players were come together in a Chamber, most of the vagrant Town Butterflies
flocked into their presence, amongst which some were unsatisfied at their cold
reception. They all began to discourse of Plays, Poetry and renowned Authors of
Romances: never was more noise made in any Chamber, unless at a Quarrel. And
above all the rest, the Poet with a ring of admirers about him of the chiefest
wits of the Town, was tearing his throat with telling them he had seen
Corneille, had drunk many a quart with Saint Amant and Beys, and lost a good
friend by the death of Rotrou. Madam Cave, and Madam Angellica her daughter,
were laying their clothes in order, with as little concern as if no body had
been in the room. Angelicas hands were sometimes squeezed or kissed, for those
Country gentlemen are great fumblers and slabberers; But she quickly found the
way to be delivered from the persecution by a timely kick on their shins, a
cuff, or a bite according as the present necessity required. It was not out of
any rudness or want of breeding, but her free jovial humor, waved all nice
ceremony; though she were otherwise very discreet, and of a fair deportment in
civil society. Madam Star was of a quite contrary temper, the world yields not
a modester girl, or of a milder nature, and so great was her complaisance that
she had not the power to free her self from that impertinent crew, though she
endured a great deal of pain by her sore leg, and wanted a little more rest
after her joging journey. She lay on the bed in her clothes, besieged by four
or five of the most finical Gallants, who had no more wit but to laugh at their
own clinches, which made her sometimes smile at them, whereas they guessed she
was taken with their dry jests: And indeed, amongst other inconveniences
belonging to that profession, besides the being forced sometimes to laugh when
they could rather weep, it is none of the least to be obliged to comply with
every new vampt gentleman, as Players are wont to do, and to be treated
sometimes like Queens and Emperesses, and a moment after used like
Kitchen-maids, to be called fair and beautiful, young and sprightly, when
perhaps their tougues that proclaim it, are the only painters that make them
so, unless sometimes they get a recruit of new Teeth, Perriwigs and Pomatums
that can hide their own defects under these Auxilliary Adornments. More might
be added on this Theme; but we must wisely husband and manage these Subjects,
and reserve a little for some other places to embellish and diversify our
Romance the better. Let us return to poor Madam Star, thronged with her Country
Gallants, the least pleasant and most prating persons in the whole world,
amongst whom there were some newly hopp'd out of the University. Besides these
there was a little Widower invaded her, a Counselor by profession, who had
(...) small Office, in a petty Court not far from thence; Ever since the death
of his Spouse, he had threatened the women of the Town with his Marriage, the
Clergy with his turning Priest, and the rest of those holy brethren with his
de^ign of making himself an eminent Prelate by, ^he power of his eloquent
Sermons. This was ^he greatest little fool that has appeared in the ^orld
since Rowlands time. He had been a stu^ent all his time, and though learning be
the ^^diest way to lead men to the knowledge of the ^^uth, yet would he lie like
a Court Page, was ^proud and opiniastre as a Pedant, and a Poet that deserved
to be pressed to death with his own ^orks, were there any law for it in the
Country. ^hen Destiny and Olive came into the Chamber, ^^e proffers, before
either of them knew in the ^ast what he was, to read a piece of his own
^mposing; Entitled, The Acts and Gests of Char^main in Four and Twenty
Journada's. This ^ade all their hair stand an end, but Destiny ^ho had not lost
all his prudence in the crowd, which so frighted the rest, smiling, told him,
^ere was no possibility to hear him before sup^r. Well then, says he, I will
repeat a story ^^en out of a Spanish Author sent me from Pa^^^, which I intend
to frame into a Comedy according to the modern rules. They fell upon other
Discourse once or twice, to avoid a History, which they guessed would be
nonsensically tedious; but the little fellow would not be so put off, and
beginning a fresh as often as they interrupted him, they were at last tired to
an attention, which they repented not, because it proved good, and contradicted
the opinion was conceived, that nothing of any value could proceed from
Ragotin, which was the Historians Name. This History I shall give you in the
next Chapter, not just so as Ragotin related it but as I might have heard it
from one that was present. It is not therefore Ragotin that speaks, but I my
self.

CHAP. IX.
The History of the Invisible Lover.

DOn Carlos of Arragon was a young Gentleman of the Family that bare that Name^
He acted Miracles in his own person at thos^ public solemnities which the
Viceroy appointed for the marriage of Phillip the Second, Third or Fourth, I
know not well which. The nex^ day after a course at the Ring, where he reape^
all the honor, the Viceroy permitted the La^ dies to go about the City
disguised, after the mode of the French Mascarades, for the great^^ convenience
of the many strangers, who floc^ed thither to Celebrate those Royal Nuptial
That day Don Carlos dressed himself to the best advantage he could possibly,
and with a multitude of the like Tyrants of Hearts, went to the great Church,
the Rendez-vous of all their gallantry. Now in those Countries they scruple as
little to profane their Church as we do ours, and that place which is ordained
for a Holy Temple, becomes a den of Amorous Thieves and prattling Gossips, where
their zeal is turned into lust, their Religion into Courtship, and their grace
into wantonness. Methinks they should take a Severe order to reform these
enormous scandals, and provide some such Officer to expel these wantons, as
they do dog-whippers elsewhere, they being the more unclean beasts of the two.
Perhaps some may ask me, wherefore I trouble my self with these things, but let
such fools remember, that all men are fools a^ well as liars in this world,
some more, some less, and I that speak now, it may be, a verier fool then most
others, though I am somewhat more ingenious in acknowledging it, and my book
being only a Collection of fooleries, I hope every Fool, will in one part or
other, find a brief, but true Character of himself, unless self love and a too
fond opinion of his own wisdom keep him in blindness still. Don Carlos, as I
said, to return to my story, was in a Church amongst a crowd of other Italian
and Spanish Gentlemen, who strutted with great feathers in their Hats, ^ike so
many Peacocks, when three Ladies masked accosted him in the midst of this
Batta^loon of Lovers, one of which spoke these, or the like words to him.
Signior Don Carlos, There is a Lady in this City, to whom you are highly
Obliged; for in all your performances at Barriers and running at the Ring, she
ever wished you might carry away all the Honor, as now it appears you have
done. The greatest advantage I find in this, answered he, is, that I am told
so by your Ladyship, who appear to be a person of merit; and truly, if I could
reasonably have hoped that any worthy Lady would have done me so much honor; I
should have strugled with more eagerness to have deserved her approbation. The
concealed Lady told him, he had omitted nothing that might render him one of
the most accomplished men she had seen, and she inferred from the White and
Black Colors he wore, that he was not in Love. I never was so well read in
Colors, as to understand their several significations, replied he, but I am
certain it is not so much out of insensibility that I am not a Liver, as a just
apprehension that I do not deserve to be beloved. They said a hundred more fine
things, which (...) forbear to repeat, because I do not exactly know them, and
shall not undertake to invent for them, least I should prejudice Don Carlos,
and the unknown Lady, who had a greater stock o^ wit then I, as it was told me
by an honest Neapolitan acquainted with them both. But i^ proceeded so far at
last, that the disguised Lady confessed to Don Carlos, It was she had an
inclination for him: He begged to see her unvailed she told him it was not come
to that yet, but promised she would seek a fairer opportunity, and to a sure
him, she did not fear to meet him singly, she gave him a Pawn, in earnest of
her further Engagement; at which words she discovered the whitest hand in the
world to the Spaniard, and presented a Ring to him, which he accepted, but with
so much surprise at the adventure, that he almost forgot to pay her that
respect was due to her at parting. The other Gentlemen who in civility had
retired to a becoming distance, came again to him. He told them what had
passed, and showed them the Ring she bestowed on him, which was of a
considerable value. Whereupon every man gave his opinion, and Don Carlos was as
much smitten with the unknown Lady, as if he had seen her face, so much
dominion and influence has another wit, upon those that are endued with it
themselves. Eight tedious days and more tedious nights did he linger out,
without any news of this apparition; How he resented it I cannot certainly
tell. But it was his daily custom to divert himself at the lodgings of a
certain Captains of a Foot Company, where many persons of quality resorted to
wear away the time at play. One night, in which he, not having played, retired
himself more early then he used ordinarily to do; he was called by his name,
from a lower Chamber of a great house; he drew near the wind ore, and observed
it was fenced with Iron grates, as that Country fashion is, and by the voice,
discovered perfectly it was his Invisible Lady, who said to him, Come hither
Don Carlos, I here wait for you, to make an end of that difference which is
betwixt us. You are but a Trifler, replies Don Carlos, you defy with
insolence, then hide your head a week together, and now play at boe peep behind
a grate. We shall have a nearer meeting in good time, added she, it is not want
of courage that makes we delay the encounter; but a desire to know you
thoroughly, before I appear openly; You know in Duels, the parties meet with
equal Arms, and if your heart were not as disengaged as mine, then would you
fight with advantage, and therefore I resolved to be first well informed: And
what have you discovered by your information? Said Don Carlos. That we may be a
fit match for each other, replies the invisible Lady. Don Carlos answered
betwixt jest and earnest, that there was no equality in that management; for
says he, you see me, and know who I am, and I can neither see nor attain to any
knowledge of you; What conjecture can I make of the care you take to conceal
your self? since those whose designs are fair and noble scorn to hide
themselves; One that stands open without a guard as I do may easily be
trappan'd: But pray take notice Lady, I shall not be apt to fall twice in the
same snare; If you make use of me only to create some jealousy in another,
give me leave to tell you that I am no fit instrument for any sach purpose,
therefore if I must serve you, it shall be only in loving you above the world
or any other interest. Have you any more trivial doubts left to urge? says the
Invisible. These are not trivial, replies he; know then, said she, that I am
very real, and such you shall be sure to find me in all my proceedings, as I
would desire you to be: That is but just, said Don Carlos; But it is no less
Just that I should see you, and be made happy by your name: You shall soon know
that, replies the Invisible; In the mean while, let patience rule your hopes,
for that is the way to deserve what you expect, while in the mean time, I shall
assure you, that all this entertainment be not fruitless, that I am equal to
you in quality, and have revenues enough to make you live at as high a rate as
any Prince in the Kingdom, that I am young, rather handsome then ill favored;
and for wit I dou^t not but your own ingenuity can satisfy you whether I have
any or not; Having said this, she immediately retired, leaving the Don with his
mouth open ready to reply, but so surpised at the brisk declaration she had
made of her self, and so charmed with the love of one he had never seen, that
he was so perplexed at the strange manner of her proceedings, which for ought
he knew might end in some cheat; as he continued at least a quarter of an hour
in the same place, making diverse conjectures of this extraordinary adventure.
He knew very well, that there were in Naples diverse Princesses and Ladies of
Quality; but he bethought himself likewise how many greedy Courtesans there
were too, notable crafty, and catching after strangers, who were the more
dangerous, because they are beautiful. I cannot exactly tell you, whether he
had supped that night, or went to bed empty, as some Romance-mongers use to do,
who regulate all their Hero's actions making them rise early, and tell on their
begun story till dinner time, then dine lightly, and after meal, proceed in the
discourse, or else retire to some shady Grove to talk by themselves, unless
they have something to discover to the Rocks and Trees: Then at supper time,
meet at the appointed Pointed place and time, where they sigh and sob instead
of eating, and afterward build Castles in the air on some Tarrace which looks
toward the sea, whilst the Squire in the interim reveals the secret, that his
Master is such a one, the son of a certain King, and that there is not a braver
Prince in the world, and though at present he is one of the coml^est creatures
that ever was born, yet he was yet far more handsome, nay clean another thing,
before love had disfigured him. But to return to my story, Don Carlos came the
next day to his Post, and found the Invisible already at hers; She asked him
whether he was not very much perplexed at their last conversation, and whether
in truth he were not in a kind of doubt of every thing she told him. Don
Carlos, not making any answer to these questions, beseeched her to tell him,
what danger could accrue by discovering her self, since the parties were equal,
and their Courtship tended to the same end on either side, which the whole
world could not but approve: There is danger enough, as you shall Jully know in
due time replied the Invisible, therefore once more let me desire you to
believe I am real, and have kept my self within bounds in the relation I made
you of my self. Don Carlos pressed her no farther in that particular; their
discourse continued a good while, and they both took deeper and stronger
impressions of love toward each other, then they had done before, parting with
hearty promises of a continuance of their affection, and a daily meeting at the
place assigned. The day following there was a grand Ball at the Viceroys; Don
Carlos hoped to discover his Lady there; and in the mean while, endeavored to
make enquiry whose house that was, where he had such a favorable audience. He
was informed that the house was an old Gentlewomans that lived very retired,
the Widow of a Spanish Captain, who had neither Daughters nor Niece. He
entreated to speak with her, she returned him an answer, That since the death
of her Husband she admitted no visits, which put him into a greater labyrinth
then before.

But he puts on a gallant resolution, and at night was at the Viceroys Bal,
where you may imagine there was a brave appearance. Don Carlos took exact
notice of all the Ladies in the presence, to judge which might be his unknown
Mistress. He made his Address to all those, he could conveniently talk with, but
found it labor lost: At last he applied himself to the Daughter of a Marquess,
of I know not what Marquesate, as they say, (for it is that of all things in
the world I should least swear for, especially now every one is a Marquess, at
lest Entitles himself so;) She was both young and beautiful, and had somewhat
the tone of her voice whom he hunted for: but at the long run, he found so
little resemblance in the behavior, and wit of this Lady, and his invisible
Lover, that he repented he had made so great a progress in his Court-ship with
this Lady, as might without flattery give him some claim to her favor. They
often danced together, and the Bal being ended, with very little satisfaction
to Don Carlos; he parted from his Captive, who was not a little proud that she
alone had enjoyed in that Glorious Assembly, the conversation of a Person, that
was the envy of all other men for his gallantry, and the highliest Esteemed of
all Women. From the Bal he returned hastily to his own lodging to take his
Sword, and from thence to the Fata^ Grate, which was not far distant. His Lady
was at the place before him, who asked him what news of the Bal, though she her
self had been there: He told her ingeniously, that he had danced many times
with a very beautiful person, and had entertained her all the time the Bal
lasted. Whereupon she made several doubtful questions, which plainly betrayed
a kind of jealousy. Don Carlos made her know, that he had some scruple
likewise, for her not appearing at the Bal, which made him a little suspicious,
whether she were of the quality she had pretended: She discovers it, and to
satisfy him, she makes use of all her charms, became very complaisant, and
showed him as much favor as could be expressed in communication through a
Grate, even so far as to assure him, she would be shortly visible. Hereupon
they take leave of each other, he much in doubt whether he should credit her or
no, and she a little stung with jealousy, for his having so assiduously kept
company with the fair Lady all the while the Bal lasted. The next day Don
Carlos going to hear Mass, in I know not what Church, proffered the Holy Water
to a couple of Ladies that were veiled, who were reaching for some at the same
instant; the best clothed of the two, told him, She would not put, him to that
trouble, but had a secret to reveal to him at a convenient time. Unless y^^r
have be too pressing, replies he, it will be the greater obligation if you
please to imform me now. Pray follow me into the next Chapel then, said she.
Thither goes she before, and Don Carlos would not stay long behind, his heart
wavering betwixt fear and hope, whether he should find this to be his own
Mistress or not, finding her much of the same stature, but withal somewhat
differing in her speech and accent, this seeming to have an affected lisping
pronunciation: being come together in the Chapel, and the door closed, she
addresses her self thus to him; The whole City of Naples, Signor Don Carlos
rings of the Fame and Reputation you have gained during the short time of your
abode here; so that you are justly esteemed one of the Gallantest Persons of
this Age: Nor have they any thing to object, unless it be your so nice retiring
of your self from all Great Companies, especially the choicest of our Sex, who
nevertheless have a most particular esteem and respect for you; This they have
testified as far as the rules of discretion and modesty would allow, and though
they heartily desire you would believe as much, yet if it cannot gain upon you,
it is wished the little notice you take may proceed rather from insensibility,
then disdain, or a pre-ingagement. Amongst the nest, there is a Lady a friend
of mine, who makes your interest so much her own, that she would needs make
this discovery to you, what ever it may produce; which is to let you know, that
your night adventures are not so closely managed, but they lie open to
discovery, and which is more, that you therein engage your self somewhat
imprudently by setting your affec^^n upon a thing you do not know, which you
may guess to be unworthy any further pursuit, since her so close concealment
does but inser that either she loves ignobly, or knows her self unfit to be
beloved. It is above all dispute, that your contemplative desires aim at a
Lady of a more then vulgar quality and spirit, and fancies a Mistress deserving
adoration: But Signior Don Carlos, do not prefer your fancy to your judgment,
but consulting with both together, beware of such a one as hides her self, and
wisely forbear any further nocturnal engagements. And why should I dissemble
any longer? No Sir, I will not, but do most freely confess, that I am the party
thus jealous of your Fantome or Nightly Apparition, holding it very strange
that you should run thus fondly after a shadow, and since I have adventured to
make this Declaration of my own weaknes^, I shall take the confidence to add
this to it, I am resolved to defeat all her ambushes, and gain the Victory
which is more my due, since I am not inferior to her, either in Beauty, Birth,
or Fortune, nor any other quality that carries ought of an honest temptation
with it; Therefore if you have that ingenuity the World reports, make the best
use of this my present Counsel. Having said this, she went away, before Don
Carlos could have the time to recollect his amazed spirits, and shape an
answer. He would have followed, but was stoped at the Church door, by an
eminent Gentleman, who kept him there a good space in discourse, which he could
no way avoid. The rest of the day he wasted in admiration of what happened, and
at first his thoughts persuaded him it was the same Lady he met at the Bal,
that made this discovery to him, but then reflecting on this Ladies wit, and
the others want of it, he knew not where to fix his belief, and could have
almost wished he were dis-ingaged from his obscure Mistress, to resign himself
entirely up to this new one: Yet then considering again, he was as far from
knowing the last as the first, whose charming conversation had wholly enchained
him, he resolved on his former choice, not valuing her threatening speeches to
obstruct him, as not being a person of so poor and grovelling a spirit to be
frighted from any thing he once designed. The same night he failed not to
appear at the Grate, at his assigned hour, nor did four men, who lay in wait
for him, fail to ceaze on him in the midst of his discourse, who soon disarmed
and lifted him into a Coach, that attended at the turning of the next street.
Now must I leave you to imagine what language and reproaches he bestowed on
those disguised fellows that thus took him at so much disadvantage; and when
that heat could do no good, then he endeavored to bribe them with large
promises: but instead of persuading them, all he could do, rather made them the
more resolute, and wary least he should escape, which they performed so
effectually, as took away all hope of gaining his liberty, either by his
entreaties or courage. Mean time the Coach rolled away as fast as four Fleet
Horses could hurry it; Out of Town they got, and about an hour after they
brought him into a very sumptuous building, the outward Gate standing ready
open to receive him, where the four Mascarades alighted with Don Carlos, and
taking him under the arms, led him like an Ambassador to his Audience before
the Grand Signior, they conducted him up one pair of stayres with the same
Ceremony, where two Masked Ladies received him at the Dining Room door with
lights in their hands. The men left him there at liberty, and withdrew, after
they had most humbly saluted him. It is likely they left neither Sword nor
Pistol with him, for which over great care, no doubt, he gave them many
thanks, and yet perhaps he might forget it too; not but he was highly civi^,
but a man so strangely surprised as he must needs have been, is pardonable if
he omit those Ceremonies. Neither can I tell you whether the Candlesticks the
two Women held were of Silver or not, but this I must assure you, they were
large, and A la Mode, and the Dining Room most Magnificent, and if you please,
as well furnished as some of those Apartments in our Modern Romances, (viz.)
Zelmanda's Ship in Polexander, Ibrahims Palace in the Illustrious Bassa, or the
Chamber where the King of Syria treated Mandane in the Grand Cyrus, which not
to disparage those other I mentioned, is without doubt, one of the most
magnificently furnished Books in the World: you may guess therefore whether our
Spaniard was not hugely astonished to find himself in so proud a Palace, with
two Ladies masked, who spoke not one syllable to him, but conducted him into a
neighboring Chamber, more Nobly furnished then the Dining Room, and there left
him alone. Had he been of Don Quixots humor, these adventures were enough to
have transported him to some extravagance, suitable to his Rodomontado's, and
he would surely have fancied himself at least Esplandian, or Amadis: But our
grave Spaniard was no more moved with all this, then if he had only been in
some common Inn, or Country Cottage; only he regretted the absence of his
invisible Mistress, and having all his thoughts fixed on her, he thought that
Room more melancholy then a Prison which never looks handsome but without
side. He readily persuaded himself, they could intend no mischief that had so
nobly lodged him; and was as apt to believe the Lady that talked with him the
preceding day in the Chapel, was the Sorceress that wrought all these
Enchantments: a while after, he began to admire in his own thoughts at these
capricious humors in Women, and with what expedition they execute those
designs they have once on foot, but was no less resolved on his part likewise,
patiently to expect the end of this adventure, and to keep constant to his
Mistress at the Grate, whatever threats or promises they could make use of to
undermine his faith. Some time after, certain Officers belonging to the House,
with Vizards and Rich Clothes on, came in to lay the cloth, which done, Supper
was brought up: all was very stately, Music and Perfumes were not wanting, and
our Don Carlos, besides his senses of smelling and hearing, satisfied also that
of the taste, more then I could have imagined, considering the condition he was
in; that is to say, he supped plentifully: But what can quell so great a
courage as his was? I forgot to tell you, that I believe he washed his mouth;
for I am certainly informed he was extraordinary curious of his teeth. The
Music lasted a while after Supper was done, and every one being retired, Don
Carlos walked up and down the room a good space, ruminating on all these
Enchantments, or on somewhat else, which matters not much, and then without
inquiring whether he desired to go to bed, two Gentlewomen masked, and a little
Dwarf with his vizard on likewise, came to undress him, afafter they had spread
a most sumptuous Toillet on a side Table. He freely submitted to all this, the
Women laid down the Bed-cloaths and went forth, the Dwarf pulled off his Shoes
or Boots, and then disroab'd him. Don Carlos laid him down in Bed, and all this
passed without breaking silence in the least on either part. Don Carlos slept
well enough for a Lover; a vollery of Birds not far from his window waked him
at daybreak, the masked Dwarf was ready to wait on him, and brought him the
finest, whitest, and sweetest scented Linen in the World: But let us, if you
please omit how he passed the time till Dinner, which was not inferior to the
Supper, and proceed to the breach of that religious silence, which had been
hitherto so exactly observed. Another masked Lady it was that first interrupted
it, by putting the question to him, Whether he would be pleased to see the
Mistress of that Enchanted Palace; He replied, She should be very welcome to
him; after which, she suddenly enters the room attended by four Gentlewomen
very richly clad.

Bright Cytherea is less fair
When she does all her Charms display;
And Decks her in her best Array,
To catch some new heart in her snare.
Never had our Spaniard beheld a Person of a Richer and more Majestic mean,
then this unknown Vrganda. He was so much ravished and astonished at the same
instant, that all the Congees and Steps he made, while he led her by the hand
into another room, whither she directed him, were but so many trips and
stumblings: All what he had admired and gazed on in the ^ormer Rooms were
trifles in comparison of that he found in this, whose Luster was yet ^ightned
by the bravery of the masked Lady. They trod upon the richest Carpets that
ever ^et were spread upon the ground, since the Spaniards used to trample on
them. The Spaniard ^as set down upon a Couch whether he would (...) not, and
the Lady having placed her self by ^im upon a heap of richly Embroidered
Cushi^ns, she spoke with a voice as sweet as a Virginal, and said these or the
like, fine things to him.

I doubt not, Signor Don Carlos, but you are hugely surprised withal that has
happened to you since your coming to my house last night; and though this may
perhaps have made but little impression on you, yet must it needs be sufficient
to evince, I can make good my words, and by what is past, you may believe me
capable of performing what now remains behind. Perhaps my Rival by her wiles,
and the good fortune of having attempted you first, is already in full
possession of that Fort, your heart, to which I now lay siedge: But know a
Woman will not be put off at first denial, and if my fortune which is not to be
despised, and all that may be had with me, is but too weak a motive to induce
you to love me, yet know that I have this self satisfaction, that I did not
obscure my self either out of shame or policy, rather choosing to run the
hazard of being denied for my imperfection, then to have won your Love by
Artifice. With these words she took off her mask, and gave Don Carlos a full
view of Heaven, or if you please, an Epitomy of it, in the loveliest Head in
the World, sustained by a body of the noblest stature he ever had beheld. In a
word, being joined together, they made up a person that was altogether Divine.
By the freshness o^ her visage, one would not have guessed her above sixteen;
but by I know not what great and magestick air, she appeared to be in her
twentieth. Don Carlos kept silence a while, being almost angry with his
Invisible Mistress, for hindering him from wholly bestowing himself upon the
loveliest creature he ever saw, doubting bot^ what he should say and do in so
pressing a temptation; at length, after an interior conflict, which held him
so long in suspense, as put the Lady of the Enchanted Palace to some trouble,
he took a fixed resolution to reveal the secrets of his soul, which was, it may
be, the most generous action he ever performed. The answer he made was this,
which some have judged might have been better contrived. I cannot deny Madam,
but it would have been too transcendent a happyness for me to have thus pleased
you, could I have been but so happy likewise as that I might have loved you. I
am sensible that I refuse the most Beautiful Person in the World, for another,
that perhaps is only so in my imagination: But Madam, could you have thought
me worthy of your Affection, if you had found me capable of Infidelity? And
could I continue faithful if I should yield to love you? Pitry me therefore
Madam, rather then accuse me, or rather let us bemoan each other, you, that you
cannot obtain your wishes, and I, that I cannot become so fortunate as to get
the least sight of her I Adore. He pronounced this with so mournful an accent,
that the Lady easily discerned his heart went along with his tongue. She
omitted no Arguments that might persuade him to change, but he was deaf at her
prayers, and her tears could not force him to relent; she repeated her Assaults
diverse times, but he Defended as well as she Attacked: In fine, she proceeded
to reproaches, and bitter language, and uttered; All that a raging mouth spits
forth,
When Choler is praedominant.
And so left him cursing his own misfortunes a thousand times, which sprung but
from his too great happiness. A Gentlewoman came and told him shortly after,
that he might take his own liberty to walk if he pleased, in the Garden. He
went through all those fair Apartments meeting no Creature in his way, till he
came to the Staircase, at the foot whereof he found Ten Men in Vizards, all
Armed with Swords and Pistols who guarded the door. As he walked through a
Court, to pass into the Garden, which was suitable to the bravery of the House;
One of the forementioned Guard steps near him, and with a kind of negligence
that might not be suspected, told him softly, for fear of being over-hear'd;
That an Ancient Gentleman had trusted him with a Letter Addressed to himself,
which he had engaged to deliver to his own hands, though the discovery of the
Enterprise might cost him his lise; which the reward of twenty Pistoles,
besides the promise of as many more after the work done made him undertake, Don
Carlos promised secrecy, and quickly got into the Garden to read the,

Letter.
Since the time I lost you, you may well imagine the trouble I am in by
comparing it with your own, if you continue to love me, but as sincerely as I
love you: which trouble was capable of no allay, till I happily made discovery
of the place you are in. It is the Princess Porcia that carried you away, and
keeps you prisoner; who never considers any thing when her own satisfaction is
concerned, nor are you the first Rinaldo of that dangerous Armida: But I shall
break all her Enchantments, and soon force you out of her arms, to welcome you
in my own, which is the least you can deserve, if you maintain your self but as
constant, as is wished by,

The Invisible Lady.


Don Carlos was so ravished to receive this news from his Lady, with whom he
was heartily in love, that he kissed the paper a hundred times, and returned to
the Garden gate to find out the happy Messenger, on whom he bestowed a very
fair Diamond Ring for recompense. He continued his walk in the Garden a long
time after, and could not enough admire this Princess Porcia, of whom he had
often heard speak, as a person both young and very rich, as being of one of the
best Families in the Kingdom; and having a great deal of virtue in himself it
begat so strange an aversion in his thoughts against her, that he resolved at
the hazard of his life, to do his utmost to make his escape thence. As he came
out of the Garden, he met a Gentlewoman unmasked, for now all their Masks were
thrown by in the Palace, who desired to be informed whether it would be
pleasing to him to have her Ladies company at his Table that day; I leave it to
your discretion to judge, whether he said he should be glad of the honor or
not. Soon after, supper or dinner was brought in, I have forgot now which is
next in order. Porcia appeared yet fairer, I told you even now, then Cytherea,
and for diversity it will not be amiss at present to say then the infant
morning, or the beauteous Aurora. She was so charming in her conversation at
Table, and so full of wu, that it was an inward trouble to him, to find so many
excellent talents so ill employed by a Lady of her extraordinary condition. He
endeavored all he could to put himself into a pleasant humor, though his best
thoughts were still rowing after his Invisible Mistress, and his heart earned to
be talking again with her at the grate. As soon as they had taken away, the
attendants left them alone, and Don Carlos sitting mute, either out of respect,
or to oblige the Lady to begin the discourse, she gives him a fresh charge in
these words. I cannot tell whether I have reason to hope for any thing from the
gayety which I think I have read in your countenance, or if the little beauty I
have discovered in mine, can be so considerable in your opinion, as to create a
doubt whether that which is so slily concealed from you, is likely to be more
tempting; I have not hid the gift I would have bestowed, because you should
have no cause to repent the acceptance, and though a person who daily recieves
Petitions from others, might justly take offense at such denials, yet shall I
forbear all further resentments, if you will now at last but make me
reparations for your former neglect, and grant that to me, which is much more
my due, then the Invisible Ladies? let me therefore know your last resolution,
that if it prove not to my advantage, I may on my part likewise endeavor to
muster up such arguments from my own reason, as may convince me of the weakness
I have betrayed in owning a love for you. Don Carlos paused a while to try
whether she would proceed in her discourse, but perceiving she had given over,
and with her eye fixed on the ground, waited for the sentance he was to
pronounce, he persisted in the resolution he had already taken to deal frankly
with her, and to put her past all hopes of ever becoming hers, he thus spoke to
her. Madam, Before I return any positive answer to what you are thus desirous
to know, I must beg you would, with the same freenes I have hitherto showed,
discover the real sentiments of your heart concerning what I shall propose. If
your self had obliged any one to love you, and by all the favors a Lady can
bestow, without forfeiting her modesty or discretion, you had engaged him to
vow himself your unalterable slave, would you not esteem him the most
treacherous and basest of men, if he should break his faith and decline your
service? and should not I be this vile unworthy wretch, if to obtain you, I
should throw off my willing fetters and trample on all those nob'e endearments
which justly makes her expect I should continue faithful in my love to her, to
put on other Chains. He would have heaped many other formal Arguments to
convince her; but she allowed him not the time, for starting briskly up, she
told him; She now perceived plainly at what he aimed, and could not but admire
his constancy, though it were a Virtue so prejudicial to her own happiness,
wherefore she left him to his full liberty from that moment, only she should
value it as a high favor if he would remain there till it were night, that he
might return incognito as he came. While she said this, she held a
Hand-cherchif before her eyes, as it were to hide her tears, and left the
Spaniard somewhat amazed, but yet so overjoyed for the recovery of his liberty,
that he could not have dissembled it, though he had been the greatest hypocrite
in the world; and it is probable if the Lady had observed it, it could not have
avoided a fresh quarrel. I cannot tell whether the night were long a coming,
for as I hinted before, I do not trouble my self any more with such punctual
observations of the times and hours; I shall only say, that the night did come
at last, and he was put into a close Coach, which brought him to his own
Lodging again, after a pretty good journey. And being one of the kindest
Masters in the World, his Servants were overcome with joy, to see him again,
and like to stifle him with huging him in their arms; but they enjoyed his
presence only a moment, for taking his Sword and Pistols, and two of his
Acquaintance with him, who were not people to be baffled, he made all possible
have to his Grate, and such was his speed that those who were to accompany him,
had much ado to keep pace with him. He had no sooner made the accustomed
signal, but the Invisible Deity answered him. They had a thousand such tender
and affectionate expressions, as draws some tears into my eyes every time I
think on them: At length, the Invisible Lady said, That she having received a
sensible affront in the house where she then was, she had sent for a Coach to
remove thence; but because it might be perhaps too long ere hers came, she
entreated he would cause his own to be made quickly ready for the better
dispatch, and send for it to convey her to a place where she intended to throw
off all disguise, and hide her face no longer from him. The impatient lover
stayed not for any more entreaty, but ran like one transported to his Servants,
or Compagnons, whom he had left at the corner of the street, and sent them
immediately to bring his Coach. The Coach being arrived, the Fair Invisible
made her words good, and went into it with him. She gave the directions her
self to the Coachman whither he should go, and made him stop at a Great House
into which they went, by Torch-light, where many at the Gate waited their
coming. The Gallant went up a large pair of stairs with the Lady, and so into
an upper Dining Room, where he continued still in some trouble, because she
kept on her Mask. At last several Gentlewomen richly apparelled, being come to
receive them, with Wax Candles in their hands; the Lady threw off her
Invisibility, and by unmasking her self, made it apparent to Don Carlos, that
his Mistress at the Grate, and the Princess Porcia was but the same person. I
shall not adventure to represent the strange surprise it was to Don Carlos; The
Beautiful Neapolitan told him, That she had brought him now away the second
time, to hear his final resolution, that the Lady at the Grate had yielded up
all pretenses to her self; to which she added a thousand other Gallant Witty
Speeches. Don Carlos fell down at her feet, Embraced her knees, and even
devoured her white hands with his greedy kissing them, thereby avoiding the
many impertinent expressions which overjoyed people are apt to fall into. After
his first transports were over, he fummon'd all the Wit and Eloquence he could
command to celebrate his Ladies pleasant contrivances, and tuned his tongue so
well to her advantage and applause, that it confirmed her more and more, she
was not at all mistaken in her choice. She told him withal, She had been
unwilling to trust any but her self, in a trial, without which she could never
have loved him, and that she would never have bestowed her heart on any man,
less constant then he had showed himself.

Upon this, the Princess Porcias Relations, being acquainted with her design,
came to them, who being of the most Considerable Persons of the Kingdom, soon
got a License, or dispensation rather, from the Archbishop for their Marriage;
which was Consumated that very night, by the Curate of the Parish, a good
Priest, and an excellent Preacher; so that you may believe they wanted not a
fitting Exhortation. It was reported, that they rose not up the next day till
it was very late, which I am apt enough to believe. The News was soon spread
abroad, whereat the Viceroy, who was nearly Related to Don Carlos, was so
glad, that the Public Divertisements began afresh in Naples, where they still
tell wonders of the brave Don Carlos, and his Invisible Mistress.

CHAP. X.
How Ragotin had a sound rap on his fingers with a busk.

RAgotins History had the general applause of the Company; which puffed him up
so, as if it had been of his own invention; this with his Natural Pride made
him begin to treat the Players Arrogantly, when going to the Women he took them
perforce by the hands, and would needs be sidling a little; as it is the
Country guise of Courtship, which savours more of the Satyr then Civility.
Madam Star did only pluck her snowy hands, out of his sweaty shaggy fists; but
her Associate, Madam Angelica gave him a sound rap on the knuckles with her
busk. This made him retire in a Fume, blushing and muttering between his teeth
to the rest of the company, where every ones tongue run at random, the one not
minding what another said. Ragotin put most of them to silence with his loud
bawling out, to know how they approved of his Nowel? A Young Fellow, whose name
is out of my thoughts at present, briskly replies, That it was no more his then
another, since he had taken it out of a Book, and as he said this, pulled one
that stuck half way out of Ragotin's greasy pocket, who scatched him fiercely
by the hands to recover it again; but in dispite of Ragotin, he gave it to the
next man whom Ragotin straight seized upon, but as unsuccesfully as the first,
the Book being conveyed already to a third, and so passing on through four or
five several hands, which Ragotin could not reach to, being the shortest man of
the company. At length, having raised himself a tip-toe five or six times, torn
as many cuffs, and clawed as many wrists in vain, whilst the Book still moved
above his reach in the middle region of the Chamber, poor Ragotin perceiving
every one laughed at this frolic, flew like a Tiger upon the first Author of
the Plot, giving him several thumps on the gutts with his dire fist, which was
the height of his Ability. Whilst the other crowing over him with advantage,
stroke him directly on the crown of his hat, which being extravagantly high,
broad at the top, and strait at the band, drove his head into it up to the very
chin, with the weight of his blows, which lighted so heavily on his noddle,
that it shook his weak brain out of all order, and amazed him so, he knew not
where he was; and to complete his Victory, this merciless Adversary throwing
his leg up between the little Fellows neck and shoulders, tumbled him down on
his punnion end, at the Women's feet, after a most precipitate retrogradation.
Imagine I beseech you, in what a huff and rage that little Fellow must have
been in, who had more pride then all the finical Barbers in the Nation, and
especially at that time, when he was cried up for his History, and in presence
of those fair Actresses, whom he intended to make Love to, but to which of them
in particular he designed his Addresses, he was not yet resolved on himself, as
you will find anon. And to tell the troth, his little body, now turned upon his
breech, expressed the wrath of his soul so much by the swift motions of his
legs and arms, that although his face were cased up in his Jugglers Hat, yet
all the company thought fit to join together, and make it as it were a
Barracado betwixt Ragotin and his Antagonist, whom they ^ook off, whilst the
charitable Women raised up the Little Fellow, roaring like a Bull within his
Hat, which stopping both his nose and mouth, ^ook away his breath. But the
trouble was, ^ow to get it off; being shaped as I told you, ^^ide toward the
crown, and narrow below, ^ike a Dutch Butter Box, for God knows, that what with
his long nose, and block-head, it stuck on so fast, that it could not be pulled
off so easily as it was thrust on. Yet was this misfortune, a kind of happiness
at that time; for he being then at the height of his fury, it would no doubt
have proved fatal to some body, had not the Hat, which stifled him, made him
think ^ather of saving himself, then injuring others. He did not call out for
any assistance, because he ^ould not speak; but when they beheld him ^earing
his Hat in vain with his trembling hands ^o relieve himself, and stamping on
the floor or madness, that he should take so much pains ^o so little purpose,
they then consulted how ^o deliver him. The first essay they made to ^luck it
off, was so violent, that he thought they would have torn off head and all;
which being unable to undergo, again, he made signs that they should cut off
his Headpiece with a pair of Cizars. Mistress Cave untied a pair which hung at
her Apron-strings, and Rancour, who was the Mountebank that wrought the cure,
after he had given a sign as if he would have made the incision along his face
and nose, which added to the poor patients fright, he ripp'd the Helmet open
just behind from crown to brim. As soon as he was unhooded, the whole company
burst into a laughter to see him so puffed up and swollen, as if he would have
burst, and the skin of his nose rubbed off. All this had passed well enough, if
a scurvy jybing compagnon had not told him, He were best to have the Hat
stitched, or fine drawn together again: This unseasonable counsel, did so
re-inflame his not quite extinguished chollar, that he snatches up one of the
And-irons out of the chimney-corner, and making as if he would throw amongst
them all; the stoutest of them shrunk in their horns, and hurried to the door
as fast as they all could drive, where every one strove so eagerly to be first
out, that but one of the throng could pass, who also fell down his whole
length, his spurs being entangled in some bodies Petticoates. This set Ragotin
a laughing, whose turn was now come to have a fit of mirth, which mirth
dispelled all their former fears, and called them into the room again, to
restore him his Fatal Book, and borrow another Hat fitter for his little Block.
Yet could he not forbear railing at the person that had used him so roughly;
but being more vain then vindicative, he changed his rude discourse for milder
language, and told the Players, as if he had promised them a great rarity, That
he intended to make a Comedy of his forementioned History, which he resolved to
handle so Poetically, as should make this first Essay a Masterpiece, whereas
others are forced to make diverse trials, and cannot arrive to any perfection
without much toil and labor, rising gradually step by step: Destiny replied,
That his Story was indeed very pleasant, and Comical, yet in his humble
opinion, not fit for the Theater: I shall not desire you to instruct me, says
Ragotin. my Mother was the Famous Poet Garniers Granddaughter, and I, as
simple as you take me to be, who thus vouch safe to answer you, I my own self,
have that Learned Man's Ink-horn in my own possession to this hour. Destiny
would not be satisfied with this, but took the confidence to proceed, and tell
him, That were the Famous Garnier himself to undertake it, he could never come
off with credit. And where lies the difficulty Witty Sir, demanded Ragotin? It
lies in this replies Destiny, That you cannot contrive this Plot into a Play,
according to any Rules of Art, nor without manifest errors in Judgment and
Discretion. A man of my Parts has Authority sufficient to make what Rules he
pleases said Ragotin. Do but consider I beseech you, says he, whether it would
not be a fine Scene, to bring a Church Porch on the mist of the Stage, with a
whole Congregation of Gallants and Ladies, making Love and Court ship to one
another; surely this cannot but take exceeding well, and would deserve to be
clapped; I confess I am of your opinion in one thing, that we must not Act
things undecant, either reflecting on Religion, or contrary to moral Virtues;
and therefore to avoid both those Rocks, I would not have them to meet or speak
of their Amors within the Church it self, but assign them a place before the
Church door. Destiny interrupted him, to know where he would find so many Men
and Women Actors as he intended for that Scene? Pray how do they do in the
Colleges? where they give Baettle sometimes, replies Rogatin. I myself at La
Flesche Acted once a part in the Defeat of the Pont dese, a Play so called,
where, said he, there appeared above a hundred Soldiers of the Queen Mothers
party in one body upon the Stage, besides those of the Kings Army more numerous
then the others; And I remember, that by reason of a great storm of Rain, which
fell that day; and partly spoiled our sport, the Plumes of all the Nobility we
had borrowed, being soaked in the shower, it was said, those Feathers would
hardly ever rise up in fashion in our days again. Destiny, who delighted to
hear him discourse so judiciously, Replied, That Colleges indeed were stored
with Scholars enough for such a design, but their whole company consisted but
of seven or eight when they were fullest; Rancour, who as I have elsewhere told
you, was an Arch-rogue, sided with Ragotin to make sport, and told his fellow
Player, that he could not be of his opinion; I was an Actor before you wore
breeches, said he, and therefore surely better able to judge then such a young
Maggot, and I say, that a Church Porch would make the bravest Scene in the
World, and for the throng of Men and Women, they might hire part of them cheap
enough, and make the rest of Past-board. This pretty device of Rancours
Past-board-men, made all the company smile; Ragotin smiled with the rest, and
swore he had contrived it so in his thoughts before; but was loath to mention
it, till time served; and then the Coach too, said he, what a pretty novelty
that would appear upon a Stage. I once Acted Toby's Dog, and did it so
naturally, that all the Audience was ravished at it; and for my own part,
continued he, as we must judge of things by the effects and impressions they
make upon our spirits, so I acknowledge that I never saw the Play of Pyramus
and This by, but I was more delighted at the sight of the Lion, then grieved
for the Death of the Lovers. Rancour maintained Ragotin's reasons, with a
number of ridiculous Arguments of the same stamp, and thereby insinuated
himself so deeply in his favor, that Ragotin invited him to Supper. The rest
of the importunate company left the Comedians to their own liberty, who had a
greater appetite to a good meals meat, then to all the chat those idle Citizens
could entertain them withal.

CHAP. XI.
Containing, what you shall find, if you take the pains to read it.

RAgotin led Rancour to a Tavern, where he called for all the best that the
House could afford. It may be supposed that he would not bring him to his own
home, because he had but short commons; but I shall not judge positively, for
fear I judge wrongfully; nor would I make further inquiry, because the
knowledge were not worth the pains, and I have somethings else to write, which
are of greater consequence and weight. Rancour who was a Man of a deep
inspection, and quickly sounded a strangers humor, no^ooner beheld a brace of
Partridges, and a Fat Capon provided for two single persons, but he imagined
that Ragotin had some design in it, and did not treat him thus for his own sake
alone, or because he maintained that his Novel was a fit Plot for a Play: He
therefore expected to hear some new extravegance from Ragotin, who would not at
first dash lay open his Soul, but continued the mention of his History. He
repeated a great many Satirical Poems, which he had for the most part written
against his Neighbors, and some amongst others against nameless Cuckolds, and
wanton Wives then he sung drinking Catches, and produced (...) number of
Anagrams, the ordinary plague wherewith puny Poets are infected, at their first
writing, which they afterward plague others with in reciting. Rancour to
complete his ruin, I mean the utter ruin of the little wit he had left, with
eyes lift up to Heaven, and a loosing Gamesters oaths, applauded all his works,
as he called them, and protested he had never seen any thing so sprightly and
excellent; nay, and ^he better to dissemble, he seemed to tear his very hair
from his head, though it were only the ^elicks of an out-worn Perriwig
translated to a Border, so infinitely was he transported: And ^e would often
say, You make your self unhappy Sir, and us no less, by not dedicating your
^elf wholly to the Stage, for within a year or ^wo, Corneille would be no more
esteemed or ^^lked of, then the forgotten Hardy is ^ow. I ^ave not the Art to
flatter, continued he, but to encourage you, and allow your just encomiums;
must confess, I judged you an Excellent Poet, (...) soon as ever I heard your
first discourse, which can bring my fellow Actors to justify if occa^on were.
Nor am I apt to be deceived, I have (...) much skill in Phisiognomy that I can
discover Poet at first sight, and had no sooner looked ^^on your Ingenious
Countenance, but I was (...) confident of your Ability, as if I had been at ^e
charge of your Education my self. Ragotin (...) allowed all this like
Butter-milk, together ^^th so many glasses of Wine, as intoxicated ^^m yet more
then Rancours praises, who for his ^^n part eat and drank most heartily, saying
from time to time, For Gods sake Monsieur Ragotin, employ your Talent once
more, you are much to blame you do not both in rich your self and us. I blur a
little paper my self sometimes, as well as other common Rhymers, but could I
write but half so well as you, I should not be compelled to draw the Devil by
the tail to gain a livelihood, as I now do, but might live in as good a
condition as Mondory with all his Revenues: Write therefore, dear Monsieur
Ragotin, pray write again for us, and if we do not throw dust in all the others
Players eyes, both at L' Hostel de Bourgongue, and du Marests, then let me
never ascend the Stage without breaking a leg or arm; this is all I have to
say, and so let me drink to you; then filling up a brimmer, he began a deep
health to Monsieur Ragotin, which he drank to Ragotin himself who pledged it,
and revived it again to the Actresses, which he took off bare-headed, and with
so much greediness, and transporting delight, that setting down hi^ empty glass
upon the Table, he broke off the paw before he was aware, which made him
endeavor once or twice to make it stand again (...) but finding it wanted the
foot, he threw it ove^ his head as in a frolic to the Ladies health, an^
pulled Rancour by the sleeve to take notice of it^ that he might not loose the
reputation of breaking a glass for their sakes: It troubled him a little that
Rancour vouchsafed not the least smil^ at this Gallantry; but as I told you
before, h^ was rather an envious then a risible anima^ Rancour then asked him,
what he though or (...) their she Players? the Little Fellow answered not, but
blushed as red as Scarlet; Rancour repeated the same question, at last,
stuttering, blushing afresh, and turning his head aside, he told Rancour, That
he was infinitely taken with one of them; And which of the two is it, said
Rancour? The discovery he had already made, and this sudden question puzzled him
so strangely, that he replied, I cannot tell; nor I neither said Rancour; This
perplexed him more, and made him cry, it is, it is; he repeated the same words
four or five several times over, which made the Comedian so impatient, that he
added, in troth I believe you, she is a very handsome Girl; this confounded him
so absolutely, that he could never express the particular party; and perhaps
there was reason for this hesitation; for I believe it was rather lust then
love, that had ceazed his heart, but which of the two he most inclined to
seduce, he knew not himself. In fine, Rancour naming Madam Star, he confessed
she was the object of his desires; but for my part, I believe, if he had named
Angelica first, or her Mother Cave, he would have forgiven the rap the one gave
him on his knuckles, and the others age, and have vowed both soul and body to
the thing he had named; so much was the Goat given up to his pleasure in Women.
The Player made him toss up another great glass full of Wine, to wash down his
confusion, and drank the like himself, after which he told him, whispering in
his ear, and looking round the room, as if it had been some weighty secret,
though he knew well enough no body was near, Well Sir, Your wound will not
prove mortal, since you have met with a Love-Chyrurgion, that can bring you a
Balsom may cure it, provided you give faith, and keep it secret; and yet it is
no easy Enterprise, for Madam Star is a very Tygress, and her Brother Destiny
a mere Lion; but however, I believe you may prove more then her match if you
follow my counsel, for I know what I know: in the mean while, let us take off
our drink, to morrow is a new day. The drinking of a fresh health or two
interrupted a while their Discourse, but then Ragotin again renewed it, by
giving a Catalogue of his Perfections and Wealth to Rancour; and telling him,
That he had a Nepueu, a servant to one of the Treasurers, that this Nepueu had
made acquaintance with the Partisan la Ralliere, during his being at Manse,
whither he was sent to settle a Tax or Impost, and made him believe he would
get him as considerable a Salary as any of the Kings Players by this Nepueu 's
interest: Nay he told him moreover, That if any of his Relations had Sons that
were Scholars, he could procure them some good Benefice or other, by the
intercession of a Niece of his, who was married to a good Woman's Brother that
was maintained by an^ Abbots Steward of that Country, who had many good places
in his disposal. Whilst Ragotin was thus displaying his prowess, Rancour who
grew thirsty with overmuch drinking, did nothing but fill the two glasses,
which were as soon tipped over their tongues again, Ragotin not daring to refuse
any thing at his hands, who was likely to do him so much good; At last, with
swallowing so much, they began to grow full; Rancour was only a little more
serious then before, but Ragotin grew so doz'd, and heavy, that he leaned his
head on the Table, and fell fast asleep. Rancour called for one to come and
make ready a bed, it being too late to return to his own Inn. The Maid told
him, She thought it would not be a miss to make ready two, seeing what a pickle
Monsieur Ragotin was in. In the mean time, he slept on, and never did any man
snore louder then himself. Two Beds were dressed in the same Chamber, where
there was a third unused, but all the noise they made in putting on the sheets,
and ordering the Chamber could not disturb our Little Man. He called the Wench
a thousand Whores and Jades, and threatened to slay her, when she called him to
go to his rest. In the conclusion, Rancour turned his Chair about toward the
fire, and then he opened his eyes, and suffered the Maid to uncloath him; after
which they threw him by main strength between his sheets, and Rancour being
gotten into Bed likewise, puts out the candle, after he had bolted the Chamber
door. An hour afterward Ragotin rises up, and goes out of his Bed, for what I
cannot readily tell. He wanders about the room, till he had over-turned most of
the chairs and stools, and himself likewise, groaping in every corner for his
Bed, which he could not find again for his heart; In the end he lights upon
Rancours, and wakes him with haling off the clothes; Rancour asked, What he
would have? I am hunting to find my bed, said Ragotin; You must go toward my
left hand, says Rancour; the Little Drunkard creeps to the right, and went and
nestled himself betwixt the Rugg and the Matt of the third Bed, which had
neither Bolster, nor Sheets; yet there he takes out his full nap with a great
deal of ease and quiet. Rancour in the morning put on his Apparel, before
Ragotins eyes were open; He roused the Drunken Dandy-Prat, and asked him,
whether it were to do penance, that he forsook a good Feather-bed, to lie in
lousie straw: Ragotin maintained he did not remove at all, and therefore for
certain, that Chamber was haunted with Spirits. He quarreled with the
Landlord, who stood up for his own concern, and threatened to Sue him, for
slandering his house: But I have been too tedious in relating Ragotins debauch;
let us return therefore to the place where I left our Players.

CHAP. XII.
A Nocturnal Combat.

I Am a person of too much honor and sincerity, not to Advertise my Courteous
Reader, that, if he be offended with the Fooleries he has hitherto met with in
this present Volume, he would do very well to proceed no further; for on my
credit, he shall find no other, though my book should swell to the bulk of a
Grand Cyrus; and if by the pattern he has seen already, he cannot give a guess
at the remainder of the piece, why, he is in no worse condition then my self,
for by my faith, one Chapter begets another, I do like the careless Traveller,
lay the raynes in my Pegasus neck, and let him take his own course; Or perhaps
I may have a studied design, without stuffing my Romance with polite
discriptions, both to divert and teach at the same instant, just as the sight
of a Drunkard, whose Vice gives us caution, and aversion, while his Apishness
makes us tickle with laughter, to see the strange effects of Wine. But to
conclude this Morality, and return to our Players once more. As soon as their
Chamber was cleared from the crowd, and Ragotin gone with Rancour his new
guest; the Carrier whom they left behind them at Tours, came to the Inn with a
Horse load of their goods, and sat down at Table amongst them: By whose
relation, as also by what they gathered from one another, it appeared how the
Intendant of the Country was put by the design he contrived against them,
having had much ado himself to get out of the peoples hands, and his Guard
likewise. Destiny related to them, how he made his escape in his Turkish habit,
wherein he intended to act the Soliman written by Mairet, and how he came to
Manse with Cave and Rancour, avoiding Alenson because the Plague was there,
they being all attired according to the description mentioned at the beginning
of these most true, but least Heroic adventures. Madam Star gave them also an
account of the assistance she received from the Lady at Tours, whose name never
came to my knowledge, and how by her means she was conducted to a Village not
far from Bounestable, where she sprained, or distocated her foot with a fall
from her horse. She added moreover, that being informed the rest of the company
was at Manse, she procured a Horse-Litter to carry her thither, for which
Litter she was beholding to the aforesaid charitable Lady. After Supper,
Destiny remained alone with the Ladies in their Chamber. Cave loved him as much
as if he had been her own Son; Madam Star was her darling too, and Angellica
her only Daughter and Heiress loved Destiny and Star, as Brother and Sister.
She did not yet certainly know what they were, nor why they became Players: But
thus much she plainly discovered, though they styled themselves Brother and
Sister, that their kindness was greater then their kindred, for Destiny behaved
himself with the highest respect imaginable toward her; and she was endued
with a great deal of Wit and Discretion, and as Destiny made it appear by all
his actions, that he was a person of no ordinary Education, so Madam Star had
rather the demeanor of a Lady of Quality, then a wandering Comedian. Now as
Destiny and Star were cherished by Mistress Cave and her Daughter, so did they
pay them a reciprocal friendship in return, which we need not much to wonder
at, since they deserved as much as any Players in France, though through want of
happiness, rather then any want of merit, they never had the honor to appear
on the Theaters of L' Hostel de Bourgogne, or du Marests, which are the Non
plus ultra of all Actors. Those that cannot understand these three short Latin
words (which I could not forbear to insert in this place, being so pat to the
present purpose) may get some body to expound them if they please. But to leave
this digression, Destiny and Star could not forbear to express their great joy
and caresses, after so long absence, in presence of the two Actresses
themselves. They owned the infinite care and troubles they had endured for each
other, and Destiny told Madam Star, that he verily believed, the last time they
Acted at Tours he saw their old persecutor; having spied him in the crowd that
were at that Play, though he endeavored to muffle himself in his Cloak; so
that finding himself unable to make any considerable resistance if he had
happened to be set upon at his going from the Town, he had clapped a great black
patch upon his cheek. Then he proceeded to relate the adventure of the many
Horse-Litters that met together on the way, and said, He was much mistaken if
the unknown person that searched all the Litters so narrowly, as may be seen in
the Seventh Chapter, were not the same forementioned enemy of theirs. Whilst
Destiny talked of these things, poor Star could not refrain from shedding some
tears; Destiny was much moved thereat, and having given her the best comfort he
could, he added, That in case she would but permit him to take as much care in
seeking out their common Enemy, as she had made him use, to shun him hitherto,
he dust engage that she should either quickly be freed from those persecutions,
or he would loose his life in the Attempt. These last words afflicted her yet
more and more; and Destiny could not but share therein, Cave and her Daughter,
who were naturally inclined to pity, kept consort with them out of civility,
or by contagion, so that I believe they shed some salt water too. I cannot
affirm that Destiny wept, but this I dare assure you, that both he and the
Women stood all mute for a good space, whilst those that were most
tenderhearted expressed it with the silent oratory of their trickling tears,
the others with loud sighs. At last, Cave put them out of this dumps, and
reproached Destiny and Star, for having conversed so long and friendly with
her, and her Daughter; and yet put so little confidence in either of them, as
to conceal their real condition from them all that while. To which she further
added, That she had undergone so much affliction in her own person, that they
could hardly ever meet with any one more capable to give counsel to such as
were in perplexity, as they appeared to be, then she her self was. To which
Destiny replied, That it was no distrust that had made them keep it a secret so
long; but only he fancied the relation of so many misfortunes would have proved
too Melancholy a story for her ear. He afterward proffered to give her an
account when she had so much time to throw away, or had a mind to hear it. Cave
would not have it deferred at all, and her Daughter, who earnestly desired the
same thing, being sat on the Bedside near her, and Star. Destiny was about to
begin his relation, when on a sudden they heard a great uproar in the next
Chamber. Destiny listened to it a while, but the noise being rather increased
then abated, and some body crying out murder, help, help, Destiny flung out of
the Chamber in three leaps, to the ruin of his doublet, which Cave and her
Daughter tore off from his back, thinking to withold him. He went into the
other room whence the noise proceeded, where though all was in darkness, yet
the many smart cuffs on the ears, kicks on the breech; confused gabbling of
Men's and Women's tongues who were desperately engaged in fight, together with
the trampling of their bare feet on the floor, made a most horrid noise. He
thrusts himself imprudently amongst the scuffle, and immediately received a box
on either cheek. This made him change his mind of parting those gobblins, into
an eager desire of revenge; he begins to make use of his fists, and whirling
his body round, with his arms spread like a turnstyle, they met with many an
invisible enemy, though not immortal, as afterward appeared by his bloody
hands. The battle lasted yet long enough to afford him a score of good lusty
thumps in return of his civility, which he repaid them again with double the
number for interest. In the heat of the Combat, he felt one bite him by the
calf of his leg, he puts down his hand, and feeling something that was hairy,
thought it some dog that had fastened on him; but Cave and her Daughter, who
appeared at the Chamber door, with a light, like St. Elmes fire after a storm,
made Destiny soon find he was in the midst of seven people in their shirts and
smocks only, who let go their hold, and ungrappled themselves from one another,
as soon as ever the light was brought. But the calm was soon ruffled again;
mine Host who was one of the seven white Penitents, lays hold again on the
Poet; Olive was likewise assaulted by mine Hosts Tapster, another white Friar.
Destiny endeavors to part the fray, but the Hostess who was the beast that bit
him by the leg, which he took for a dog, or bitch, by her bare head, and short
locks, flew at his face with the help of her two Maids, as naked and
bare-headed as her self. The yelping hunts-up began afresh, the blows went
merrily round, and the Engagement grew fiercer and hotter then at first. At
last, other people alarmed with the noise, came upon the spot, made their way
through the thickest of the crowd, parted them, and made them suspend the second
time. The question was now, to know the cause of the quarrel, and what could be
the accident that had drawn seven naked people into one Chamber without light.
Olive who seemed to be lest moved, said, That the Poet being gone forth of his
Chamber, returned again with more then usual speed, pursn'd by the Master of
the House, who threatened to beat him; the Hostess followed her Husband, and
sets upon the Poet, when himself going to part them, was engaged by the Man and
the two Maidservants, and the candle falling down, made them fight longer for
want of it, then he believed they would otherwise have done. Now the Poet was
to plead for himself, who told them, That he had made a couple of the rarest
Stanza's that ever were composed, but having them only in his memory, and
fearing lest such rarities should be lost for want of writing them down, he
went for a Candle to see to insert them in his Book, but the Maids only laughed
at him, and because he reproved them, mine Host called him Rope-dancer, which
he answered with the Epithet of Cuckold. he had no sooner spoken the word, but
mine Host, who was still within the reach of him, gave him a sound box, one
would have sworn this was the signal for battle, for the cuff on the ear was no
sooner given, but with one consent, the Wife, the Man, and the Maidservants
ran up to the Players, and charged them again most furiously, who received the
onset bravely. This last rencontre was more desparate, and lasted longer, then
both the others. Destiny having grappled and boarded a fat Wench, turned up her
tail, and clapped her lustily on the breech with the sole of his slipper. Olive
perceiving this made the company laugh, did as much to the other Lass. Mine
Host was at work with the Poet, and the Land-Lady, who was indeed the greatest
fury of all, being ceazed on by some of the Spectators, grew so mad at it, that
like a Bedlam, she bauled out thieves, thieves. Her cries awaked La Rappiniere
who lodged just over the way. He made them open the door, and imagining by the
hubbub, there could be no less then seven or eight at least slain, he commanded
them to keep the Peace in the Kings Name, and being informed of the occasion of
this disorder, he exhorted the Poet to make no more Stanza's in the night, and
was like to have cudgelled the Host and his Wife for railing at the Players,
calling them nicknames, and swearing he would unkennel them the next day; but
La Rappiniere to whom this Host was somewhat indebted, threatened to Arrest him,
and that muzled him. La Rappiniere returned home again, the rest went to their
several lodgings, and Destiny to the Actresses Chamber, where Cave conjured him
not to put off his promise any longer of relating both his own and his Sisters
Adventures. He told them, he desired no better, and began his story, in the
same manner as you shall find in the following.

CHAP. XIII.
Something longer then the foregoing. The History of Monsieur Destiny, and
Madam Star.

I Was born in a Village not far from Paris, and could perhaps make you
believe, if I would endeavor it, that I descended from some Illu^trious
Family, it being easy to impose on such ^s have an affection for us, and
cannot disprove ^s; but really I have too much generosity in my nature to deny
the meanness of my Extraction. My Father was indeed one of the Chiefest in that
Village, and as well to pass as the best of them: yet I have often heard him
confess he ^as a poor Gentleman born, and served the ^^ing in his Youngest
days as a Soldier, where ^aving reaped nothing but scars and wounds, ^e
turned Squire, or Gentleman Usher to a rich ^arisian Dame, where, after he had
scraped (...) ^^mm together, for he was a kind of Steward ^^kewise, and
fingered the cash, which no doubt ^^d sometimes stick to his fingers; he
married (...) ancient Gentlewoman in the Family, who ^^^ing shortly after, left
him sole Executor, which was a double advantage. He grew weary (...) a little
while of living single, and being no ^^s tired with his Service, he engaged him
self a second time in the snares of Matrimony with a Country-woman, that was
wont to furnish his Ladies Family with bread; and by this Woman was I brought
into the World. My Fathers name was Garigues, I never could learn certainly
what Country Man he was, and as for my Mothers name, that signifies little to
our History. It is sufficient to let you know, she was more covetous then my
Father, and my Father more covetous then any man, and both of them of (...)
large conscience. My Father had the repute o^ inventing the morsel of flesh
tied to a string and fastened to the Pot-hooks, that so it might be pulled out
before it consumed too much, and serve a week through, to make Broth or Soupe.
could reckon up a hundred other inventions o^ good Husbandry, which got him the
name o^ Spare-penny; but not to over-tyre you, I shall onl^ make mention of
two, very hard to be believed and yet not more strange then true. He ha^ heaped
up good store of Corn together, to mal^ his advantage of a dear Market; but a
genera^ abundance following, and the price growin^ less and less, he was so
possessed with dispa^^ and deprived of all judgment and reason that he would
needs hang himself: A Neig^bour of his coming into the Chamber, while (...) was
disposing him to execute this noble desig^ and had hid her self for fear of
discovery, (...) to some other intent, was very much astonish when she saw him
swinging on an Iron hook the chimney. She ran to him, and cried (...) for help,
and withal cut him down again whilst my Mother coming up at the noise, helped
to pull of the neck-lace he had on. Perhaps they afterward repented of the
good deed, for he banged both of them, like Balaams Ass, and made the poor
Woman pay for the new Cord she had cut, deducting what it cost out of a little
sum of money which he owed her. The other story is no less wonderful: He
grudged every thing he eat, and his Wife being brought a bed of a Boy, the
fancy took him, that she had milk enough to nourish both her Son, and himself
likewise; and hoped by this whimsey, that ^ucking his Wife would save him so
much other ^ood, and prove a diet of an easy digestion. My Mother had yet less
understanding then this Man, and was more covetous; so that although ^er
invention were not so fruitful, yet when ^e had once lighted on the secret,
she was more ^xact in observing and practicing those conceits ^hen himself. She
therefore makes a trial to ^urse both her Child and her Husband with ^er own
breast-milk, and sometimes took a share ^er self likewise, with so much
conceited reso^^tion, that the poor innocent Babe dyed a ^^artyr, for pure
hunger, and my Father and (...) other were so weakened, and afterward so
ra^nously hungry, that with overmuch repletion, ^^at fell into a tedious fit of
sickness. A while ^^ter my Mother was big with Child of me, and ^^ing happily
delivered, of a most unhappy ^reture, my Father hied him to Paris to in^^eat
his Lady to be, God-Mother, and Partner ^^th an honest Clergyman, who dwelt in
our Village, where he had a very good living. Coming home again about the
Evening, to avoid the excessive heat of the day, as he passed through one of the
great Streets in the Faux bourg, where most of the new Houses were then
building, he perceived something very bright and glistering, that crossed over
the street. He was not much concerned what it might be: but a kind of a
mournful noise, reaching his Ear, as from some body that was in great
distress, which noise seemed to proceed from the place he saw the bright
object go in at, he boldly follows the sound into a large Building not yet
finished, where he found a woman sitting on the ground. The place she set in
was so light with the Moon shine that my Father perceived she was very young,
and very well clad, and that which sparkled so in his Eyes, was a Cloth of
Silver Garment she had on; you need not doubt, but my Father who was valiant
enough from his Cradle, was less surprised then the young Gentlewoman; but she
was in such a condition, that worse could not befall her, then what she then
suffered; And that gave her confidence to speak first, and tell my Father; that
if he were a Christian he could not choose but pity her; she being then in
labor; and that finding her pain increase, her servant Maid not returning as
she expected, whom she had sent to a trusty Midwife of her acquaintance, she
was happily stol forth of her Fathers house, without disturbin any body: where
she had left the door open that the maid might get in again upon occasion she
had scarce ended these words, but she was delivered of a Child which my Father
wrapped up in his cloack. He supplied the Office she then put upon him, the
best he could, and this young less conjured him to carry away the little
Infant immediately, to be very careful of it, and within two days after, not
fail to go to a certain Clergyman, she named to him, who would supply him
with moneys, and let him have all the conveniences requisite for the
maintenance of the Babe. At this mention of money, my Father whose Soul
thirsted after Gain, was going about to display all the Squireships eloquence
he had; but she allowed him not so much time; For putting a Ring on his Finger,
which was the token to the Priest, whom ^e was to enquire for, she tied the
Child ^s well as she could in her Neck-handkerchief, and wrapping it again in
the Cloak, made ^im haste away with all speed; though he ^t first were
somewhat unwilling to leave her, ^n that condition. I suppose, she had much
a^oe to get back again to her Lodgin; as for ^y Father he comes home to the
Village, put ^e Child to his Wives custody, and failed ^ot, two days after,
to hunt out the old Priest, (...) whom he showed the Token. He understood (...)
this man, that the Mother of this Infant was (...) a very great and rich
Family; and had been ^t with Child by a Scots Lord, who was gone ^er into
Ireland to raise men for the Kings Ser^^ce, which Lord had promised her
Marriage. ^he Priest told him moreover, that by reason of the hardshift she
made when she was delivered, it had put her into such a Fever, that they
dispaired of her life, and in the extremity of her malady, she had confessed
all the Story to her own Father, and Mother, who instead of chiding,
endeavored to comfort her, as having indeed, but that only child in the
world; yet the misfortune was kept secret from the Family, and in conclusion he
assured my Father, that in case he took a special care of the Child, his
fortune was made for ever: whereupon he gave him fifty Crowns, and a bundle of
all things fitting for his little Nurssery. My Father returned to the Village,
after he had eaten a plentiful Dinner with the Priest. I was sent out to
Nurse, and a stranger was put into the Sons place. About a month after the
Scotch Lord arrived, and finding his Mistress in thi^ desparate condition, was
married to her a day before she dyed, and so became a Widdower almost as soon
as a Husband. He came to ou^ Village within a few days afterward, with hi^
late Wives Father and Mother. The sight of the Child renewed their sorrows
afresh, while the^ hugged the poor Infant almost to death wit^ kindness, and
kissed it eternally: My Father had reason to brag of the Scotch Lords bounty
nor did the others forget to bestow a largess upon their pretty Grandchildes
keeper. The^ went back to Paris very well satisfied (...) the care my Father
had taken, but would not ca^ry the Child away as then, the Marriage b^ing kept
private for some reasons best known themselves, as soon as I could go alone, my
father sent for me to his own house, to be a Compagnon to the young Count of
Glaris, (for so was the Child called after his Fathers Title.) The antipathy,
which is mentioned to have been betwixt Jacob and Esau, even from their Mothers
Womb, could not be greater then that betwixt this young Earl and my self: My
Father and Mother loved him tenderly, and had an aversion toward me, though I
gave them as much hopes that I might one day prove an honest man, as he did to
the contrary. There was nothing but what was very suspicious and mean in him;
and I appeared to be somewhat above my poor condition, rather behaving my self
like an Earls, than Garigues son: And though I am now reduced to the necessity
of being an Actor; yet I rather construe it a Pique of Fortune against Nature,
then any oversight of nature in my production; or if I may take leave to give
you my opinion freely, then let me tell you, it has been often observed, that
Nature takes delight sometimes to confer her favor on those whom fortune has
an unjust aversion for. I shall step over the infancy of two young country
Boys (for Glaris was by inclination more a Peasant than my self) since our
chiefest adventures in that unripe age, was only our frequent wrangling and
cuffing. But thus much by the way, when ever we fell together by the Ears, I
always got the Victory, unless my Father or mother took his part in the
contest, which they did so often, and with so much heat and passion, that my
God father, by name, Monsieur de Sant Sauveur, was troubled at it, and begged
of my Father to let him have me away. To this he consented with much gladness,
my Mother being yet more willing and joyful then my Father to be rid of my
company. Thus was I kept at my Godfathers well clad, and not ill fed, he very
much caressing and seldom beating me. He spared no cost to have m^ taught both
to Read and Write well, and as soon as I was advanced to an Age capable of
undertaking the Latin tongue, he persuaded a person of quality his neighbor,
and a man that had great riches, to let me Study with his two Sons, under the
tuition of a very learned Scholar, he had sent for from Paris, to whom he gave
a very considerable allowance. This Gentleman, by Name and Title, the Baron of
Arques bred up his children with a great deal of care. The elder was called St.
Far, a youth of an indifferent good shape, but withal brutish without
reclaiming; whereas the youngest, besides that he was better fashioned then his
brother was endued with a vivacity of Spirit and nobleness of mind equal to the
comeliness of his body. In short, I do not believe there could be greater
appearances or hopes of virtue and signal honesty in any person, then were to
be found in this Gentleman whose name was Verville. He honored me with his
friendship, and I loved him as if he had been my own brother, ever respecting
him like a Master. As for Saint Far he was incapable of every thing, but his
unruly passions, nor can I better express what sentiments his soul cherished
for his brother, and me, then by affirming, that he had no more regard or
affection for him, then for me, whom he treated with a careless neglect, and
had no less love for me, then for his brother whom he little valued. His
divertisements were very different from ours; He delighted in nothing but
hunting, and loathed his studies; Verville seldom followed that sport, but
gave himself much to his books, in which we held a rare conformity, as in most
other things, to which my inclination and not complaisance only prompted me,
though in civility I was obliged to the last. The Baron D Arques had a very
fair Library of Romances: Our Tutor, who had never met with any in his Latin
Province, and therefore had at first forbidden us the reading them, and often
condemned them to the Baron, there by to render them as despicable as they were
pleasing to him, was at last so charmed with them himself, that after he had
devoured both Ancient and Modern, he acknowledged, that in his opinion the
reading of good Romances, instructed so delightfully, that he believed them no
less effectual to stir us up to noble atchievments, and polish the mind with
Wit and Judgment, then Plutarch's works themselves. He therefore persuaded us
to be conversant in them, with as much earnestness, as he before prohibited it,
and bid us in the first place begin with the most Modern: but those were yet
above our apprehension, and till we came to be at the age of Fifteen, we found
more Gust^ in Amadis de Gaul, then Astrea, and those other curious Romances of
a latter date, wherein our French Authors have made it appear, as well as in a
thousand other particulars, that though they are not so happy at inventing, as
other nations, yet they exceed them all for imitation and improving. We
therefore wasted a great portion of the time, allowed us for our recreation, in
the lecture of Romances. But as for St. Far, he nicknamed us The dull
Book-wormes, and went each day abroad a hunting or beating the counrey people,
at which he was very active. The inclination I had to study and temperance, got
me the good will of the Baron of Arques, who was as tender of me as if I had
been his kinsman. He would not part me from his Sons, when he sent them to the
Accademy, about which time, an eminent Noble man, and one that was related to
the Baron D' Arques raising some troops of horse for the Venetians service.
Saint Far and Verville persuaded their Father so much that he gave them leave
to go thither with him. The good Gentleman would needs have me venture
likewise, and Monsieur de Saint Sauveur my God father, who loved me extremely,
freely gave me a very considerable bill of Exchange that I might not be too
chargeable to those whom I had the honor to accompany, and to make use of upon
occasion. We took the farthest way about that we might have the sight of Rome,
and some other of the chiefest Cities of Italy, in each of which we made some
stay, those only excepted whereof the Spaniards are Masters In Rome I fell
sick, and the two brothers prosecuted their journey; he that carried them not
daring to loose the opportunity of the Popes Galleys, which were going to join
with the Venetian Armada about the Dardenellas, where they lay in wait for the
Turks. Vervill was the most sorrowful man that could be, to leave me, and I
almost dispaired to think of his going at that time from me, when I hoped to
have rendered my self worthy of his affection, by some signal service. As for
Saint Far, I think he parted, as if he had never seen me, nor did I respect
him, but as the brother of Vervill, who left me all the money he could amass
together, but whether with his brothers consent or not, is unknown. Thus was I
left sick at Rome, without any other acquaintance then my Landlord, who was a
Flemish Apothecary; I had all the attendance and assistance that could be
desired, during my Malady; he had no little skill in Physic, and (according to
my poor judgment) I found him far more able then the Italian Doctor, that
undertook me. In the end, I recovered, and got strength enough, to go and view
the most remarquable things about Rome, where a stranger may find enough to
satisfy his greatest curiosity. I pleased my self extremely in frequenting the
Vine-yards, for so they call diverse Gardens much fairer then the Tuilleries)
which the Cardinals, and other persons of quality about Rome maintain with
great curiosity, rather out of pride and vainglory, then any delight of their
own, seldom or never going themselves thither. One day when I was walking in
one of the fairest gardens, I saw about the turning of the walk, a couple of
women in very good habits, whom two young French men had stopped, and would not
suffer to pass by them, till the youngest had taken off the vail which covered
her face. The one of these, who seemed to be the Master, was indeed so insolent
as to offer to pull off her vail by force, whilst she that was barefaced was
withheld by his servant. I made no demur upon what I thought my self obliged
to do; but told those uncivil persons, their insolence was not to be endured.
They were both amazed, hearing me speak with so much resolution, as might have
startled them, though they had been provided with swords, as I my self was,
which then indeed they were not. The two women ran toward me for shel^er, and
the young Frenchman preferring the displeasure of an affront to his being
beaten, said to me at his going thence, Monsieur Bravo, we may meet another
time, when all the weapons shall not be in one hand: To which I replied, that I
should never hide my self; his Valet followed him, and I remained with the two
Gentlewomen, the elder of them who was unvailed being about the age of thirty,
she returned me thanks in such good French, as had not the least Accent of
Italian, and told me amongst other passages, that if all the French nation were
like me, the Italian Ladies would make no scruple to follow our examples. After
which words, to retribute as it were the service I had done them, she added,
that although she had refused her daughter should unvail her face upon
compulsion, it was but just however, that she should uncover her self to me.
Lift up your vail Leonora, pursued she, that this gentleman may know we are not
altogether unworthy of the honor of his protection. She had no sooner said so,
but her daughter in obedience took off her vail, or rather dazzled me. I never
beheld any thing so beautiful; she cast her bright eyes twice or thrice upon
me, as it were by ^ealth, and seeing me still gaze upon her, it brought so
lively a red into her cheeks, as made her countenance look like an Angels. I
perceived her mother was very fond of her; for she see med to participate of
the delight I took in beholding her daughter. But I being unacquainted with the
like Adventures, and somewhat out of countenance through my youthful bash
fullness betrayed a timorous kind of weakness by the cold compliments I made in
answer to their repeated thanks; when they took their leaves of me, which
perhaps gave them a worse opinion of my judgment, then they had of my courage.
I was vexed in my mind, I had not inquired where they dwelt, and proffered to
wait upon them to their lodging; but when it was too late to overtake them, I
asked the Gardener whether he knew them; and it was a long time before we could
understand each other, he speaking as broken French, as my Italian. As last
more by figns then words, he made me understand, they were unknown to him. I
returned back again to my Dutch Apothecary, not the same man as I went forth,
that is to say, very much smitten, and very desirous to know, whether the fair
Leonora were a Courtezan, or an honest Lady, and whether she had as much wit as
her mother showed in her discourse. This made me resign my self up to
Melancholy and sullen pensiveness; flattering my self with a thousand
imaginary hopes, which somewhat diverted me at first, but after wards left me
in grief and trouble, when I had duly weighed the improbability of the thing
Having built many Castles in the air, at last, I took up a resolution of
seeking them out again, presuming I could, not hunt very long without retriving
them, in some part or other of that City, which is not over Populus. This made
me walk abroad the second time on the same day, searching in every place where
I could expect to find them, but I returned back much more tired and
discontented, then I was before. The next day I began a stricter search, but
with the same success, which increased my discontent. The speed I made in
hurrying up and down, the often casting up my eyes at every window I passed,
and the clutter I betrayed in following every woman, that had the least
resemblance of my Leonora's shape or stature, made me be taken by every one
that observed it, for the most ridiculous Monsieur that ever appeared in Rome,
to the disgrace of the whole Nation. It Is very strange, how I could recover any
strength, being in this damnable pickle, so over head and ears in love, with I
knew not whom. And yet my bodily health increased till I was perfectly well,
whilst I remained still distempered in mind, and divided betwixt Love and
honor the first detaining me in Rome, the other summoning me to Candia, so
that I knew not whether to obey, either the letters I often received from
Verville, who conjured me by all the ties of friendship to go and find him
out, or my foolish passion that had thus possessed me. At last considering I
could not get the least intelligence of the two Ladies, though I had used all
the possible diligence, I satisfied my Landlord, and made up my bun, dle ready
to depart. The day before I went Signor Stephano Vanbergue, (so was my
Apothecary called) told me, he would bestow a dinner upon me at a friends house
of his, and let me see that for a Dutch man he had made no ill choice, adding
withal, that he had forborne to invite me sooner, being a little jealous and
wary in a thing concerned his Amors. I promised to go rather out of
complaisance, then any other motive, and thither we went together just at
dinner time. The house he led me to, had neither the looks nor furniture
suitable to an Apothecary's Mistress: We came first into a Hall, very well
adorned, and from thence into a most magnificent chamber where I was received
by Leonora and her mother. You may well imagine how much this surprisal pleased
me. This fair Virgins mother came up toward me according to the French mode of
salutation, and truly rather kissed my cheek then I hers; I was so astonished,
that I scarce knew what I did, or heard what she said; At length I recovered my
senses; found Leonora more beautiful and charming then when I first beheld
her; yet had not the confidence to kiss her. I perceived my error as soon as I
had committed it, but not endeavoring, or daring to repair it, it called as
much blood into my face, as Leonars pretty modest bash fullness had into hers.
Her mother told me, she was desirous, Before I left that City, to give me
thanks for the pains I had taken in seeking for them; which increased my
confusion. She led me to a Ruell, trickt up after the French fashion, whither
her daughter did not follow, finding me without doubt too sottish in my
carriage and so not worthy her conversation. She staid with Signor Stephano,
whilst I behaved my self with her mother, just according to my birth, which was
to say truth, just like a country clown. She was pleased to furnish all the
discourse her self, and showed a great deal of discretion and wit, though there
is nothing more difficult then to make wit appear to those that are void of it.
For my part I never had less then at that nick of time, and if she were not
tired with my company then, surely she was never so with any one in her days.
She told me amongst many other things (to which I hardly answered I, or no)
that she was a French woman by birth, and I might know of Signor Stephano the
reasons which detained her at Rome. After this, to dinner I must go, and
behaved my self at Table as I had done before in the Ruell; for I was so
strangly troubled, that I could scarce know my right hand from my left. I sat
all the time they were eating, just like an Image, with my eyes constantly
fixed upon Leonoras, who was importuned with it no doubt, and to punish my
folly, cast her eyes another way all the while I stared at hers. If the mother
had not discoursed all the dinner time, there must have been a midnights
silence: but she entertained Signor Stephano, about the affairs of Rome, at
least I imagine so, for I am not certain of it. At last we rose from Table, to
every ones content but mine, who grew Visibly worse and worse. When it was
parting time, they told me a thousand fine ob^iging things, to which I answered
not, but what is usually subscribed at the bottom of our Letters: Only one
thing I had the confidence to beg before my exit, which I had not the cou^age
to take at my entrance, and that was a kiss from the fair Leonora, which
completed my ^uine. Stephano could not pump one single fil^able from me all
the time we were going home. (...) locked my self into my chamber, cast me down
upon a bed, with my Cloak and Sword about ^^e, there I considered all what had
passed. Leo^^ra presented her self to my imagination with ^ore beauty, then had
invaded my sight. I ^ethought my self of the little wit, I had shown ^oth to
the Mother and Daughter, in my sullen ^umour, and every time this came into my
me^ory, shame set my cheeks on fire. I wished I ^ad had a good fortune; was
afflicted at my ^ean birth; and then fancied a many brave adventures in my love
and whimsical designs In short studying nothing more then some fair pretense to
put off my journey, but finding none that pleased me, I was so foolishly
passionate as to wish for my former sickness again, to which I was but too much
inclined. Then nothing but a letter to her would serve turn; but when I had
begun it, I did not like it, and so put the beginning of one or two scribbles
in my pocket, which I durst never have sent her, though I had finished them.
After I had thus sufficiently tormented my self, having nothing in my thoughts
but Leonora, I would needs go to the same walk where I first had the hapiness
to see her, and there resign my self up wholly to my passion for a while, and
then return back again by their house for the last time. This spacious place
(...) walked to, was somewhat distant from the City, in the midst of several old
uninhabited buildings. As I was passing under a Portico, I heard somebody
coming after me, and at the same time was run into the body with a Rapier a
little beneath the Reins. I turned about very nimbly laying hold upon my sword,
and finding it was the young French Gentleman's servant I formerly mentioned,
intended to return him as much as he so basely gave me. But having beaten him
from his first Station a good way back, for he retreated still as he put by my
thrusts; his master coming from behind the Portico, and coward-like assaulting
me behind gave me a terrible cut over the head, and another thrust in my thigh,
which made me fal^ down. There was little hopes I should escape their hands,
being thus surprised; but want of ^udgment, as it commonly happens in such
unvorthy actions, made the young fellow wound ^is own Master in the right hand,
and at the same ^stant two Father Minimes Friars of the Trinity ^u Mont, who
passed that way, and saw their ^eacherous dealing with me, being come to my
^ssistance, my enemies fled, and left me woun^ed in 3 several places. Those
good Friars were ^rench-men to my very great comfort; for in so ^nfrequented a
place, if an Italian had seen me a such a condition he would sooner have
avoi^ed, then succored me, for fear least having ^^sisted me, he should be
taken in the act, and ^^demned for having murdered me. Whilst ^e of these
charitable Friars confessed me, the there ran to my lodgin to give my Landlord
^otice of my misfortune; who came instantly (...) me, and caused me to be
carried away half ^ead to my own Chamber. These wounds, and ^e violent love I
had late contracted, soon ^ought me into a desperate Fever. There was (...)
hopes of my life, nor did I much care what ^^came of me. Nevertheless, I could
not put ^^e thoughts of Leonora from my mind, they in^eased daily upon me, as
my strength wasted. ^^t being able therefore to undergo this bur^en any longer,
nor willing to dye till I had ^^de discovery it was for her sake, I called for
^n, Ink, and Paper. They verily thought I ^^v'd; but I repeated it with so much
earnest^^ss, and told them so often, they would drive me into despair, unless
they furnished me with what I called for, that at length Signor Stephano who
had discovered my passion, and had wit enough to judge what my design was, sent
me every thing I demanded, and as if he had been Secretary to my thoughts, he
would needs stay alone in my company. I read over the papers I had formerly
begun, once or twice, to help me in the style I had formerly fancied, and then
wrote thus to Leonora.

I no sooner beheld you, but I was compell^d to love you; my reason made no
opposition, but acknowledged with my eyes, that you were the loveliest object
in the World, instead of informing me that I was unworthy to be your Servant.
But what could this have done, save only to inflame my wounds by those
fruitless remedies, and after it had put me on the defensive posture, I must
have yielded at the last, to the necessity of loving you; a fate you do impose
on all that have the boldness to lift their eyes up to your beauty I have loved
you therefore, fairest Leonora, but with a lov^ so tempered with respect that
you in reason, ought (...) to hate me for it, though I have taken the
confidence (...) discover it. But, how is it possible to dye for your sak^ and
service, and not proclaim it to the world, or ho^ can you deny to pardon him
this crime, whom you wi^^ have so little time to chide. It Is true, having so
fai^ a cause, as you are, for my death, it proves a reco^^ pence not to be
deserved, but by a thousand service^ which may perhaps make you regret I die so
nobly. (...) do not envy me this happiness, most lovely Leonora since you
cannot deprive me of it, and since it is (...) only favor I ever received
from the hands of Fortune^ who never can sufficiently reward your Merit but in
raising you up servants, as much above my meaness, as all other beauties are
below yours. I am not therefore so proud or vain, to hope the least sentiment
of pity. I could proceed no further, my strength failed me of a sudden, the
Pen falling out of my hand; my body not being able to obey the Dictates of my
restless fancy; for otherwise, that part had been the least of what I had in my
thoughts to thrust into the Letter, so much had Love and my Indisposition
heated my heart and brain. I was a long time in a trance, not giving any signs
of Life: Signor Stephano, who ^erceiv'd it, opened the Chamber door, to ^end
for a Priest At the same instant Leonora and her Mother came to visit me. They
were ^nformed that I was wounded; and believing ^y the circumstances it was
upon their quarrel, though they knew themselves the innocent ^ause of this
misfortune, yet they made no ^ruple to give me a Visit in the sad condition I
^ay My trance lasted so long, that they went ^way again before I recovered,
being both very ^uch grieved, as you may conjecture, believing (...) would end
in death. They perused what I ^ad written, and the Mother more inquisitive ^^en
her Daughter had also read some papers ^^at were scattered at my Beds-head,
amongst which there happened to be one from my Father ^arigvez. I lay a long time
struggling betwixt ^^e and death; but at length, nature proved strongest, and
in fifteen days after, I was out of danger, and so in six weeks time, began to
crawl a new about the Chamber. My Landlord often told me tidings of Leonora;
and gave me an^ account of her Mothers Charitable Visit, which bred an extreme
joy in me, and though I wa^ somewhat dis satisfied that they had seen my
Fathers Letter, yet knowing they had read the other likewise it was enough to
overbalance the trouble it put me into. I could talk of nothing but Leonora
when ever Signo^ Stephan^ and my self were in discourse together, and one day
remembering how her mother had said, tha^ he could inform me what she was, and
why she resided in Rome, I entreated him to impart wha^ he knew of her: He told
me, she was called Madam De la Boissiere; and came to Rome with the Ambassadors
wife from France; where a Person of Quality near related to the Ambassador,
falling in Love with her, and she allowing of it they married secretly; and
from their lawful but private embraces, sprung this Leonora: H^ further
related, that the Gentleman havin^ had some controversy with the Ambassado^
Family, was thereby oblidged to quit Rome an^ retire a while to Venice with
Madam Boissier^ till the Embassy was over, and then havin^ brought her back to
Rome, furnished a house for her, and taken such order that she might live (...)
a handsome condition, he returned into Fran^^ Whither his Father summoned him,
but du^^ not carry her, as knowing the match wou^^ never be approved by his
friends. I must confess I could sometimes have wished my Leonora had not been
the Legitimate daughter of so great a person, that so her birth might have
better corresponded with mine; yet then I recanted those criminal desires, and
wished again her Fortune equal to her deserts, though these last thoughts
tumbled me into a kind of despair; for loving her above my own life, I foresaw
well enough, I never could be happy till I possessed her, tho I should make her
unhappy in my poor and wild condition. When I was perfectly recovered, and no
sign of my late misfortune appeared, but only the paleness of my face, caused
by the over much loss of blood; my young Masters returned from the Vinetians
service, the Plague which raged in the Army, not suffering them any longer to
remain there and exercise their Valor. Verville continued to love me still, as
he had done before, but Saint Far did not then discover he hated me so mortally
as I have since experimented. I made them a recital of all that had befallen
me, excepting only my passion toward Leonora. They expressed an infinite
desire to be acquainted with her, which I heightened by exagerating the worth
both of the Mother and her Daughter. It is no policy to praise her we love,
before those that may possibly become as much in love with the same person
themselves, since affection oftentimes steals into the Soul as well through the
Ear, as by the Eye, it being an oversight they too often repent of afterward,
that commit it; which I shall prove by my own sad experience. Saint Far every
day asked, when I would go with him to Madam De la Boissiere; and one day
importuning me very earnestly, I told him, I knew not whether she would admit
him by reason she lived very retired. I perceive you love her daughter, said
he, and then telling me he could find the way alone, began to urge me so much,
that I was surprised, and appeared so concerned, that he discovered clearly,
what before he only barely conjectured, which made him railly me so severely,
as made Verville pity the condition I was in. He took me away from his uncivil
brother, and made me walk with him to the Course, where I was extremely
perplexed, notwithstanding all the pains Vervil took to divert me. Mean time,
his ill-natured brother, was endeavoring his own satisfaction, or rather my
ruin. He goes directly to Madam De la Boissieres, where they gave him entrance
instead of me, being Trappan'd by my Landlords servingman whom he had chosen
for his guide, as being well acquainted at the house; without which invention
he would scarce have had admittance. Madam De La Boissiere was much surprised
to meet a stranger there. She told Saint Far, that being unacquainted with him,
she knew not to what she might attribute the honor of his visit. Saint Far
without more ceremony told her, that having a young fellow in his service, who
had been so happy to receive some wounds in their rescue, he was desirous to
wait upon them. Having afterward raved a long time according to his usual
method, which pleased neither the Mother nor her Daughter, as I was afterward
informed, and those two ingenious women not willing to hazard the reputation of
their wit, with one that seemed to have so little; the young fellow found but
small pleasure in their conversation, whilst they grew more weary of his But
that which most incensed him, was that he could not obtain the satisfaction of
seeing Leonora unvailed, whatever plea or compliments he made, her face being
covered all the time according to the Mode of Rome usual amongst persons of
Quality unmarried. At last this gallant Gentleman, grew weary of importuning
them, freed them from his troublesome Courtship, and returned to Signor
Stephanos, having reaped but very little advantage to himself by the unworthy
trick he put upon me. Ever after, as it is the nature of those brutish people,
to continue mischievous against those they have wronged, he became so insolent,
and disobliged me so frequently, that I would a hundred times have waved all
respect toward him, had not his brother Vervills goodness made me contain my
anger, and endure his follys. I did not as yet know the slurr he had put upon
me particularly, though I several times found the effects of it. I perceived
Madam De La Boissieres coldness indeed, had made her less respectful then at my
first acquaintance; but yet there was so much civility still in her deportment,
I did not think she was grown weary of me. As for Leonora she seemed very
pensive in her Mothers presence, but when alone, my thoughts her countenance
was more inviting, and her looks expressed somewhat of kindness. Destiny was
thus relating his story, and the Comedians gave attentive ear to him, not
seeming to have the least inclination to sleep, when the clock striking two,
Madam Cave put Destiny in mind he was to accompany the same La Rappiniere that
day to a house about two leagues out of Town, where they were to hunt. This
made him take leave of the Company, and retire to his own chamber, where it is
probable he laid him down to sleep, as the women likewise did, passing the
remainder of the Night or early morning very quietly in their Beds, the Poet
not being in Labor with any new Issue of his pregnant brain.

CHAP. XIV.
What befell the Curate of Dom-Front.

THose that have had so much spare time to throw away, as to read the former
Chapters, may remember, if they have not forgotten it; that the Curate of
Dom-Front was in one of the Horse-litters, when four of them met together in
the little Village, by an accident seldom heard of; Though as all the world
will acknowledge four Litters may sooner meet together then four Mountains. This
Curate then took up his lodgin at the same Inn with our Players, and having
consulted with a Physician about the Stone and Gravel, who told him very
Elegantly in Latin, that he was subject to that disease which he discovered to
him before, and also having made an end of some other affairs of his own
concern, which came not to my knowledge: This good Pastor, I say, went from the
Inn, about nine in the Morning, to his own Flock or Sheepfold, and a young
Niece of his, habited like a Gentlewoman, whether she were so or not, sat in
the forepart of the Litter at the good man's feet, who was very Short and Fat.
A Country Fellow, by name William, guided the fore-horse by express order of
the Curate, for fear the Horse should faulter, whilst the Curates serving-man,
hight Julian, took great care and pains with the hinder horse, who was so
resty, that trusty Julian was often forced to thrust him forwards with his
shoulders by main strength. The Curates Chamber Pot being of Copper and
Glistering like Gold, as having been newly scowred at the Inn, was fastened to
the right side of the Litter, which made it look much more trim then the left
side, that was only adorned with a past-board hat-case, which the Curate had
taken up of the Paris Messenger for a Gentleman and friend of his, who boarded
with him at Dom-Front. About a League and half from the Town, as the Litter was
jogging on, in the midst of a deep Road fenced on either hand with a very thick
hedge; three Horsemen seconded by two Footmen, made the venerable Litter
stand. The one of these, who seemed to be Captain of these Padders, said with a
surly voice; S' death, the first that mumbles one word I Will pistol him, and
presented the muzle of one within two inches of poor Williams forehead who led
the Horse-Litter; a second did the like to Julian, when one of the Footmen
levelled at the Neene, who all this while slept very soundly in the Litter,
never dreaming of the danger, and by consequence not frighted like the rest of
the pacifick train. These Villainous fellows drove along the Litter, with more
have then the dull Jades were willing to make, and never was there a greater
silence kept, where so much violence was offered. The Curates Niece was rather
dead then living, William and Julian wept, but durst not speak a Syllable, and
the Curate as I should have told you, slept as soundly as his Niece. One of the
Horsemen leaves the gross of the party, and gallops away before. In the
interim, the Horse* Litter was driven into a Wood, and no sooner in, but the
fore-horse, perhaps as much frighted as he that guided him, or else out of pure
spite, because they forced him to go faster then his dull nature had a mind
too; this poor Horse I say, sets his foot in a hole, and stumbles so rudely,
that Master Curate was awakened, and his Niece thrown out of the Litter, upon
the lean Jades scraggy crupper. The good man calls to Julian, who durst not
reply for his life; then he calls upon his Niece, who had somewhat else to do,
then listen to him, William was as hard-hearted as the rest; so that the Curate
was angry to purpose. Some hold that he swore by his Maker; but I shall not so
easily believe that of such a Curate. The Curates Niece having raised her self
up again from the hackneys crupper, sat down in her place again, but durst not
cast a look on her Uncle, and the Horse having gotten upon his feet also,
trotted away much swifter then before, notwithstanding, the Curate screamed out
all the while with his effeminate voice, stop, stop. His loud bawling, scared
the Horses, and made them run as if the Devil drove, and their running made him
gape and squeak the louder. Sometimes he called: Julian, another time William,
and many times his Niece; to whose name he often added the Epither of double
Whore and Carrion. She might have replied indeed, if she now would, for he that
had imposed that stoickt^ silence, had left the Litter to over take and join
with those that rode before, about fifty ^^aces from thence; But the sear of
the Carabine still kept her insensibly careless of her Uncles exclamations, and
opprobrious Epither^, which made him at last howl and cry out, help, and
murder, finding them so obstinately rebellion. Thereupon the two Caveliers
that rode in the head of the party; having notice given them by the Foot men,
returned back, to the Horse-Litter, and made it stand; and one speaking with an
imperious tone, asked Williams, What fool is that that bawls so in the Litter?
Alas! Sir, you know better then I, replied poor Will. The rugged Soldier runs
the butt end of his Pistol into the peasants teeth, and presenting the muzle to
the Niece, who was not used to play on such pipes, commands her to unmask, and
tell him, who she was. The Curate now perceiving all that passed out of his
Litter, and having a Suit in Law with a Gentleman Neighbor of his, name De
Laune, apprehended it must needs be he, that was come to murder him. Wherefore
he began to call out; Monsieur de Laune, I appeal to God Almighty, if you kill
me, being a Sacred Priest, I will amongst the innocent sheep at his right hand,
have you excommunicated to the left, with the Goats, and Ravenous Wolves. In
the mean while, his poor Niece pulls off her mask, and discovered an unknown
and affrighted countenance to the Cavelier. This produced an unexpected event;
For the choleric Gentleman discharged his Pistol in the Horses flank, that
carried the forepart of the Litter, and shot one of his Footmen in the head
with another Pistol that hung at his Sadle, Saying, this you deserve for your
false Intelligence. Then was the fears of the Curate and his small Retinue
increased. He called for confession; Julian and William cast themselves down
upon their knees, and the Niece crept close to her Uncle. But those that had
put them in this affright, left them, and hasted thence with all imaginable
speed, leaving none of the crew, but the dead man to keep them company. Julian
and William rose up again, and trembling told, the Curate and his Niece, the
Soldiers were gone. They unharness'd the hindermost horse to set the Litter
upright, and Willy was dispatched away to a neighboring Village for another
horse. The Curate knew not what to think of the accident that had befallen him,
nor could imagine wherefore they had brought him so far out of his way; left
him again without robbing him, and killed one of their own company, which
troubled him less then the loss of his own horse, who poor innocent creature,
as he fancied, could not be guilty of any confederacy with that Villain.
However he concluded still, it must be De Laune, that meant to murder him, and
therefore he resolved, to have satisfaction from him. His Niece maintained that
it was not De Laune, with whom she was acquainted; but yet the ( urate would
have it so, to make good an Indictment, trusting perhaps to some Knights of the
Post of his Kindreds acquaintance at Goron. Whilst they were in the heat of
this contest, Julian sp es some Horsemen coming afar off, and ran away for
fear as fast as his legs would carry him. The Curates Niece seeing Julian fly,
thought he had reason for it, and soon followed after; which made the Curate
loose all the little stock of reason he had left him, not being able to guess
what Malignant Planets influence, produced so many extraordinary events. At
last he saw the Horsemen that had made them run, and which was worse, saw them
riding directly toward him. This small Squadron consisted of nine or ten
Troopers, and in the midst was a Fellow bound, on a scurvey Jade, with a
hanging look. The Curate falls to his prayers, recommending his own, and his
horses safety to providence; but he was both astonished and comforted at the
same instant, finding it was La Rappiniere, and some of his black guard. La
Rappiniere asked him, what he did there, and whether he had killed the man that
lay dead by the Litter. The Curate gave him a full account of all passages, and
concluded it was de Laune that had waylaid him, upon which la Rappiniere made
ample inquiry. One of Archers, or Guard, went to the next Villagers, to fetch
off the dead corpse, and returned again with the Curates Niece, and Julian after
due information, who likewise met with honest William, bringing a fresh horse
for the Litter. The Curate returned to Domfront without any more obstacles,
where as long as he lives, this story of his Adventures, shall be his
Entertainment for all Strangers. The dead horse was eaten up by Crows, Wolves
or Dogs; the dead man was buried I know not where, and Rappiniere, Olive,
Rancour, and the Archers of the Guard, returned with their Prisoner to Manse.
And so the success of the Players hunting with Le Rappiniere, was such, that
they took a Man instead of a Hare.

CHAP. XV.
the Operatours Arrival at the Inn. A continuation of the History of Destiny
and Starr.

A SERENADE.

YOu may be pleased to remember, that in the foregoing Chapter, one of those
that set upon the Curate of Domfront, had left his com^pag nons, and galloped I
know not well whither. As he was spurring on amain in a deep and narrow way, he
spied some horse trotting directly toward him, and would have wheeled about ^o
shun the company, but turning too short, and with more have then good speed,
his horse ^ise up so precipitately that he fell down backwards, and his Rider
under him. La Rappiniere and his followers observing this, wonder^d, why a man
that came with such Post have ^owards them, should endeavor to avoid them ^ith
the like speed. It gave them therefore ^st cause of suspicion, especially to la
Rappiniere, ^ho was very susceptible of his own nature, be^des that his office
obliged him to make the ^orst interpretation of all such occurrences. ^^is
suspicion increased, when coming near that ^ellow, who had one leg engaged
under his horses weight, he perceived that he was not so much dismayed at his
fall, as that it was with such a witness; and as it could be no prejudi^^ to
him to make use of his suspicions, knowing his office better then any Provost
in the Nation I mean experimentally, drawing night to th^^ Fellow, he said;
What, are you caught in a tra^ to our hands, good Sir? Well I shall mount yo^^
upon a Post-horse, that will not throw you th^^ low in the dust, said he. This
amazed the fe^low much more then his fall had done, while la Rappiniere and his
harpies, took notice of h^^ countenance, and found so many tokens of guilty
conscience apparent on his visage, the one less forward then himself, would not
ha^^ let him pass unquestioned. He therefore commanded his men to assist him,
who having lift him from underneath his horse, bound h^^ both hand and foot,
and so drove him in t^^midst of the Troop on his own beast. His soon afterward
meeting with the Curate Domfront in that disorder, you have read with a person
murdered in the highway, a^^ a horse shot through, confirmed him in his s^^mer
suspicion of this Rascal, to which the ^^soners greater disturbance, and change
of lour was no small addition. Destiny surve^ him more exactly then any of the
rest, ima^ning he had some knowledge of him, wh^ yet he could not perfectly
call to mind. (...) scratched his dull pate all the way he rod awake his
drowsy memory, yet could not collect where he had seen him. At length, (...)
Arrived at Manse, where la Rappiniere caused this pretended guilty fellow to be
imprisoned. Whilst the Players, who were to Act the day following, retired to
their Inn to take order that all things might be in readiness. They were
reconciled to mine Host; and the Poet, who was as liberal as a true Poet
indeed, would needs give them their Supper. Ragotin who was then in the Inn,
and could not refrain coming ever since he was smitten with Madam Star, was
known by the Poet, who was so much fool as to invite all those that had been
spectators of the Combat, that was made the night before betwixt the Players
and the Inn Keepers in their shirts and smocks. A little before the Supper
began, the jolly company was yet increased by the Arrival of an O^erator and
his Train, which consisted of his Wife, an Old Black more-maid, a Monkey, and
^^o Footmen. Rancour was of his acquaintance (...) a long standing,; and they
saluted each o^^er very respectively, nor would the Poet, who as of an easy
complying nature, part with him ^or his Wife, before he had engaged them,
tho^ow his many high complements, which found^^ loud, and signified little,
only to come and ^ace him with their noble presence and society Supper. Well,
sup they did; where nothing ^ll out that is remarkable, only they eat hearti^^
and drank proportionably. Ragotin fed his ^^^s on Madam Stars face, which
intoxicated (...) more, then all the Liquor he swallowed, ^^d spoke but very
sparingly all the time they ^^e at Table, though the Poet started a subject
that deserved his discourse, absolutely condemning all the Poet Theophiles
Works, which Ragotin had ever cried up, and admired above others. The she
Players held some conversation with the Operators Wife, a Spanish woman, and no
way despicable. They afterward withdrew to their Chamber, whether Destiny
waited on them to prosecute and finish his History, which Cave and her Daughter
were impatient to hear. Starr in the mean time was studying her part, and
Destiny having taken a Chair by the Beds side, whereon Cave and her Daughter
lay Lolling, went on with his story after this manner.

The Continuation of the History of Monsieur Destiny and Madam Starr.
HItherto you have found me very Amorous and inquisitive to know what effects
my Letter had wrought in Leonora's, and her Mothers minds; you shall now see me
more in lov^ yet, and so much more in trouble and perplexity, that I was the
most dispairing creatur^ in the World. I went every day to visit an^ wait on
Madam Boissiere and her fair Daughte^* So blinded with my passion that I did
not observe the coldness of their reception, and les^ remember that old saying,
That familiarity bre^^ contempt, as too often repeated visits become in
portunate. Madam de la Boissiere was very wea^^ of my frequent company, which
eternally besieged them, and looked upon me coyly, ever since Saint Far had so
discourteously told her what I was, yet could she not with any justice or
civility forbid me the house, considering what I had done and suffered for her.
And for her Daughters part, if I may judge by what she has done since, then I
may truly say she pitted me, though contrary to her Mothers will, who kept so
strict a guard upon her, that we could never have the opportunity to meet in
private. But to say truth, though this fair Virgin would have been more
favorable then her Mother, she durst no^ give me the least token of it in her
presence. So that I suffered most hellishly, whilst my assiduous endeavors
made me more hateful, where I endeavored to grow more in favor. One day
Madam de la Boissiere received some Letters from Paris, which obliged her to go
forth as soon as she had read the contents of them, she sent imediately for a
Coach, and Signor Stephano to accompany her, not daring to go alone, after the
unlucky accident wherein I was engaged. I was my self both more willing and fit
to be her Squire, then the Fellow she sent for; But she would not accept of the
least service from a person whom she intended to rid ^er self of. By good
fortune Stephano was not to be found, so that she was compelled to be^oan her
self in my hearing, that she had no body to go along with her, thereby to
invite ^^e, which I accepted with as much joy, as she ^ould have regret to be
necessitated to make use of me. I conducted her to a certain Cardinals who was
then Protector of the French, who very kindly gave her Audience upon the first
motion she made. The business must needs have been of some importance, and no
little difficulty; for she was a long time with him in a private Grotto, or
covered Fountain in the midst of a fair Garden, whilst all the Cardinals
Followers walked into those parts of the Garden they had most fancy too. Now
was I gotten into a private, though large, walk of Orange Trees, alone with the
Beautiful Leonora as I had often wished before in vain, and yet as modest and
faint-hearted as ever I had been. I cannot tell whether she perceived it, or
not, or whether I owed these first words to her own good nature, which made her
addess her self to me in this manner. My Mother, said she, will have some
reason to chide Signor Stephano, for missing her to day, and giving you this
trouble to wait here so long. And I am infinitely obliged to him, replied I,
for having unawares procured me a happiness above my hopes and merit. I am too
far upon the score of obligation toward you, said she, too mit any thing that
may prove your advantage, therefore pray let me know wherein the happiness
consists, you mention, as procured by him, that I may share in the content, if
it be such as will not offend a Maidens modest car. I am afraid, replied I,
that you will think my words presumptuous, rather then immodest, and so tie up
my tongue again before I have said all the great truth, I would fain discover.
I, answered she, No, I am not so envious at any man's prosperity, to call it
presumptuous, especially a person to whom I am indebted for my Honor and
Protection. It Is not your envy that I fear, said I, but somewhat worse in my
opinion. What other motive, replied she, can there be to make me oppose your
happiness? Your disdam, said I. I shall be much perplexed, answered she, till
you let me know what I should disdam, and how this disdain may concern you. I
could soon unfold this ridle, said I, but I cannot tell whether you will be
pleased to understand it. Do not let me hear it then, replied she, for when we
have such doubts, it either signifies it cannot easily be understood, or, may
displease. I confess I have admired a hundred times since, how I could answer
this, my mind being more intent upon her Mothers return, and surprising us,
then on the discourse we held. However at last, I called up all my confidence,
and without more delay, I told her, without minding her last words; That I had
long sought for an opportunity to speak with her, thereby to confirm what I had
presumed to express in my Letter, which yet I durst not have undertaken, but on
the knowledge that she had seen that writing. To this I added a great deal of
what was in that scribble, and said moreover, that being now ready to go a
Soldier in the War the Pope was making on some of the Italian Princes, and
being resolved to dye there, since I found my self unworthy to live for her, I
would entreat her only to do me this last favor, to tell me what opinion she
would have had for me, had my Birth and Fortune been equal to the ambition I
had to love and adore her. She told me, blushing, That my death would be a real
hearty sorrow to her; and therefore said she, if you are still the same
obliging person, preserve your self still so, and let us not loose a man that
has been so serviceable to us; or at least, if you will needs dye, for some
greater reason, then you have hither expressed, yet reprieve the sad doom till
we are returned into France again, wither my Mother, and my self are suddenly
going. I implored her to discover her thoughts more fully and clearly. But her
Mother was by this time come so nigh, that she could not have satisfied me if
she had intended it. Madam de la Boissiere looked upon me slightly enough,
perhaps because she considered the convenience I had had to entertain her
Daughter in private, who likewise seemed to be somewhat troubled in her
thoughts, which made me stay but a little while with them after their being
returned home. I left them the most contented men in the World, putting the
best interpretation and inferences on her discourse. The next day I omitted not
to wait upon them according to my custom; I was told they were gone forth; nay
the same answer was given me for three days together, and yet I could not
refrain. In fine, Signor Stephano wished me to go no more, because Madam de la
Boissiere would not suffer me to see her Daughter, and, said he, I think you
have too much spirit to abide a personal refusal. Then he told me the reason of
this ill treatment. Leonoras Mother had caught her writing a Letter to me, and
having severely reproved her for it, did afterward give a strict order, that
her people should always deny their being within, when I came to pay my visit
and respects to her; and then I likewise discovered the unhandsome trick Saint
Far had put upon me, which was indeed the only cause of all these little
affronts were made use of against me, my company growing loathsome to her ever
since that unhandsome character was given of me. But though the Mother were
thus nice, yet Stephano assured me, from Leonoras own mouth, that my deserts,
made her wave my mean birth and fortune, and would have triumphed over her
highest thoughts, could she have gained her Mothers fair consent, who was too
haughty to be persuaded to such low submissions. I shall not trouble you, with
the desparate thoughts, this unwelcome news put me into; I was as much
concerned, as if Leonora had unjustly refused me, though I had little hopes,
and less right to claim the least possession in her heart; I railed against
Saint Far, and had some thoughts of sending a challenge to him; But in the end,
considering how much I was obliged to his father and brother, I had no other
refuge but my tears, to give my heart ease. I wept like an Infant, and became
troublesome or ridiculous in all society. Then was I near the time of my
departure thence, and that misfortune was imbittered by the consideration that
I must go away, and not take my last farewell to sweeten my tedious absence. We
made one Campania in the Popes Army, where I endeavored all I could to end my
days. But fortune opposed me in this, as she had done in all my other attempts.
I could not meet with death the only thing I sought for, but I acquired a
reputation which I sought not for, and that to such a high degree, it would
have made me proud at any other time; Whereas I then could value nothing but
the sorrowful remembrance of my dear Leonora. Saint Far and Verville were
called into France again by their Father, who received them with all imaginable
gladness and affection. My Mother gave me a very indifferent reception; and as
for my Father he dwelt at Paris with Count Glaris, who had chosen him Governor
to his son. The Baron D' Arques, who was made acquainted with my fears of Arms,
in Italy, where I had saved Vervilles life, would needs have me abide with him
in quality of a Gentleman. He gave me liberty to visit my Father at Paris,
where I found less welcome, then I had done from my Mother. Any other person,
that had had a son of my parts and experience, would certainly have endeavored
to have preferred him in the Earls Family; but my Father turned me out thence
with as much haste as if it had been some discredit to him; he reproached my
being too gallant, a thousand times as we went along the streets; told me I
seemed proud, and that it would have been fitter for me to have learned some
handy-crafts trade, then thus to flaunt with a sword. You may imagine this
discourse sounded but harsh in a young man's ears, that had been well bred, and
gained a more then vulgar repute by his valor; and who besides, had dared to
love a handsome Lady, and make it known unto her. I must confess the knowledge
of that respect due to a Father, nor all the ties of Nature could make me
refrain from looking on him as an old testy troublesome person. He led me
through three or four several streets, with the same civility and endearments,
and then shook me off suddenly, forbidding me from coming near him any more. I
was willing enough to obey this last injunction and therefore quitted him, to
go and wait upon Monsieur De St. Sauveur, who received me like a Father indeed,
and blamed my own Father for his unnaturalness, promising he would supply the
care incumbent on such a Parent, and never abandon me. The Baron D' Arques had
some business of importance which obliged him to go and dwell at Paris. He took
Lodgings at the very end of Saint Germains Fauxburg in a very stately house,
that had been lately built with many others, which together makes it one of the
pleasantest places about the whole City. Saint Far and Verville, went often to
the Kings Palace, to the Courts De La Reine, or their private Visits, as all
young men of quality are wont, which distinguishes them from country-Gentlemen
as much as any other character. And for my own part, when I waited not on them,
I haunted all the Fencing Schools and play houses perpetually, which was
perhaps one means to make me become a tolerable Actor. Verville took me aside
one day, and confessed to me, he was hugely in love with a Gentlewoman that
dwelt in the same street. He told me, she had a Brother, by name Saldaigne, who
was as jealous both of her, and another sister under his tuition, as if he had
been their husband, and moreover, he said, he had made no little progress in
his Amors, having gained her consent to give him a meeting in their garden by
night, the door of the garden looking toward the fields as that of our house
did likewise. Having discovered this secret to me, he entreated me to accompany
him, conjuring me to get as much as I could possibly in the Woman's favor that
attended her. I could not reasonably refuse a man I was so vastly indebted too:
So we went forth of our back door, about ten a clock at night, and were
admitted to the Garden where the Mistress and her woman waited for us. The poor
Innocent Lady, trembled like a leaf, and could not speak, Vervilles courage was
but little better, the waiting woman was mute, and I who only came to
accompany Verville spoke nothing neither, nor had any desire to twattle. At
last Verville took hearty grace, and led his Mistress into a by alley, having
first charged the waiting woman and my self to play the Centries part, which,
we observed so religiously, that for a long time we walked together without
opening our lips or moving our tongues. At the end of our walk we met with the
young pair of Lovers: Verville asked me aloud, whether I had Courted Madam
Maudlin as the deserved: I replied, that I thought she had no reason to
complain, no, in troth, answered the Lass, for as yet he has not troubled me
with a word; Verville laughed at her words, and assured Mandlin, that I was
worth her conversation, though I were somewhat Melancholy by nature. Madam
Saldagne, said likewise, that her woman was not to be despised, and thereupon
they left us again, only bidding us be sure, that no body came to surprise
them. I then prepared to have my ears grated by a waiting woman, whom I
expected would now examine me about my wages, what acquaintance I held amongst
the Chamber-maids in that Parish, how many new songs I could sing, or furnish
her in writing, and such other like trifling questions. After this, though I,
she will discover the secrets and intrigue of the Family, and lay open her
Masters and Ladies virtues, or defects, according as she likes the service she
is entered into: For there are few servants that meet and do not slander or
applaud their Masters, and tell what little regard they have either of their
own Fame, or their servants wages unless they mistrust the Fidelity of the
hearers, which makes them slatter more, and abuse them more grossly. But I was
amazed at the discourse of one, that began thus, I conjure thee, thou dumb
Spirit, to tell me whether thou art a Servant or not, and if thou art a
Servant, by what rare Virtue thou have refrained thus long, from slandering thy
Master? To hear a Chambermaid speak so extraordinarily, surprised me much: and
made me ask her, by what Authority she undertook to exorcise me? I perceive,
said she, thou art a stubborn Spirit, and do require a double conjuration.
Tell me therefore Rebellious Spirit, by the Power is given me over all Proud
and self-conceited Serving-men, tell me what thou art? I am a poor young
fellow, replied I, that would fain be now a sleep in my bed. It will be no
easy thing to sift thee out, pursued she; but yet thus much I clearly discover
already, that thou have little of a courtier in thee; for added she, should not
you have first broken silence to me by an humble address, then have taken me by
the Lilly hand, shot a Legion of Amorous Bolts and Sentences, prated
impertinently, strugled for a kiss, and attempted to storm my breast, till you
had been beaten off with a sound cuff or two on the ear, as many kicks in the
britch, and scratches over the nose, and then have returned home, with these
scars of Honor, Love, and Fortune De la Guerre. There are some such maids in
Paris, indeed, said I, from whom I should take all these little affronts, as
favors, and bless the gentle cruel hands that gave them; but there are others
too, that I should dread to look upon, for fear of dreaming asterwards of the
Devil. What you hint said she, that I perhaps am one of those Scare-Crows; but
good Master-Hard-To Please, or Master Sweet-Lips, do not you remember the old
saying, that All Cats are gray in the dark. Yes, but replied I, we must not
therefore venture to do that in the dark, whereof we may have cause to repent
when the light appears But if I be handsome said she, what then? Then I have
showed you less respect then you deserve replied I; for if your beauty be
equal to the charms of your wit, you deserve not only common Courtship, but
adoration, that is in a formal way, according to the modern rules. And could
you serve a Lady according to the rules in fashion, Said she? Better then any
man living replied I, provided I loved her. What Is matter for that, said she,
so she fancy you. Nay both must join Issue where I engage, replied I Well truly
said she If we may judge of the Master, by the serving man, then has my
Mistress made no ill choice in Monsieur Verville, and that waiting-maid that
could smite you, would have no little cause to be proud of her purchase. It Is
not enough to hear me only, said I, you must see me too. I believe either may
be better let alone, replies she. Here our conversation ended; For Monsieur
Saldagn knocked aloud at the street door, which they made no overgreat haste
to open, that his siister might have time to slip up into the Chamber. The poor
Lady and her woman went away in such haste and disorder, that they had not the
leisure to bid us adieu when they turned us forth of the Garden. Verville would
needs have me go along with him to his Chamber, when we got home. I never saw a
man so much in love, and so well pleased. He extolled the Wit of his Mistress,
and told me, he should never be satisfied, till I had seen her. In fine, he
kept me there all night, repeating every thing over and over so often, that I
could get no time to sleep, till it was just break of day. For my own part, I
admired to have met with such excellent witty discourse in a waiting maid, and
I must confess I had a kind of an itching desire to see, whether she were
handsome or not, though the memory of my Leonora, made me very indifferent
toward all the good faces I had seen in Paris. Monsieur Verville, and I, slept
till it was noon. As soon as he waked, he wrote to Madam Saldagne, and sent the
Letter by his footman, who had carried several others, having a kind of
correspondency with her Woman. This fellow was of lower Brittanie of a very ill
shape, and a worse brain. It came into my thoughts, when I saw him going, that
if the party, whether Waiting Gentlewoman, or Chamber maid for I knew not
which, whom I had entertained with discourse; should see him in that rugged
shape, and speak with him a while, that certainly she would not mistake him,
for the person that waited on Verville. This great sot did his message well
enough for a sot, he found Madam Saldagn with her elder Sister; named Madam
Lery, to whom she had imparted the affection she had for Verville. As he was
waiting for an answer, they heard Monsieur Saldagan singing on the stairs. He
was coming to his sisters chamber, who hastily conveyed the British Ambassador
into a close-stool room; The Brother made no long abode, so the Britain was
let out of the gunroom again. Madam Saldagn locked her self up in her Closet a
while, to write an answer to the Epistle, and Madam Lery talked with the
Bittain, whose conversation, I doubt proved but very dull. Her sister having
ended her letter, released her from our clown, sending him back with a Ticket,
wherein she promised to meet him that night at the same time and place as
before. As soon as it was night, you may believe that Verville was ready to go
to the place assigned. We entered the Garden, and I was appointed to the like
duty, I had before performed with the same Gentlewoman, that talked so wittily.
She expressed more wit this second time, then she had at first, and both her
accent and manner of speech was so taking, that I heartily wished she might
have a face as beautiful, as her tongue was charming. In the mean while, she
could not believe me to be the Letter-carrier she had seen, nor could imagine
why I should have so much more judgment by night then by day: Which I imposed
upon her, for having heard the fellow relate the passage of Monsieur Saldagnes
coming to the Chamber, when he was fain to be thrust in a corner, I played upon
her with it, teling her that I was not then in so much fear for my self, as for
Madam Saldagne. This put it but of all dispute that I was the same ill favored
Rogue, and I observed that afterward, he began indeed, to treat me
Chambermaid ^ike. She then told me, that Monsieur Saldagn was a terrible man,
who having lost both Father and Mother in his youth, being very rich, and
having only a few of his Kindred, he exercised (...) great deal of Tyranny over
his sisters, to make them become Nuns, treating them, not only like an unjust
Father, but rather like a hair-brained jealous husband. I was about to take my
turn, and tell her a story of the Baron Dr Arques, and his children, when the
garden door which we had not bolted, was thrown open, and in comes Monsieur
Saldagn with two Footmen, the one carried a lighted Torch in his hand. He came
from a house which stood in the same row, where they gamed every day, a place
frequenced by Saint Far, They had both played there that evening, and Saldagn
having soon lost his money, was coming home by his back door, contrary to his
custom, and there surprised us, as I told you, finding the gate unshut. We
were at that time all four of us together in a covered walk, which gave us
opportunity to shun his sight. The Gentlewoman remained there upon pretense of
taking the fresh Air, and to give it the better Color, began to sing, though
against her will, as you may easily believe. In the interim Verville having
scallado'd the wall, jumped down; But a third footman, that was but coming in,
seeing him leap, failed not to run and give his Master notice, he had seen a
man leap down the Garden wall as he came in. At the same instant I fell down
back wards with a great noise of stones and rubbish, which Verville having
loosened at his first going over, brake down and brought we with it on the
Earth. This noise together with the fellows tale, alarmed all those that were
in the garden; Saldagn hastens to the said place followed by his three men, and
spying a man with his sword drawn, (for as soon as I could get up I put my self
in a posture of defense) he sets upon me at the head of his company, I soon
made him know, I was no easy Conquest; the fellow that carried the Flambeau
advanced further then the rest, which gave me the benefit of seeing Saldagnes
face, whom I soon knew to be the same French man that would have murdered me
at Rome, for having hindered him to act his rudeness on Leonora, as I before
related. He remembered me likewise at first sight, and making no doubt, but I
was come thither to take my just revenge, he cried out, you shall not escape me
this time I assure you, and then I was hardly beset indeed, besides that I had
almost broken one of my legs with my fall. I still retreated as I put by their
thrusts, till I was gotten to a little Summer House, whither I saw Vervilles
Mistress run in before in a woeful condition. She kept within it, though she sa^
^e enter, whether she wanted time or courage to go forth I know not. For my
part, it increased my resolution, finding they could attaque me only before,
the passage being but narrow and the door less. I wounded Saldagn in one of his
hands, and his bold footman in his arm, which made them give me a little more
respite: Yet could I not have any probable hopes of making an escape; believing
they would at last bethink themselves of making shorter work with the Pistols,
they usually have in such houses, then they had made with their swords; But
Verville came to my re^ief; he would by no means go home without me, and having
heard the noise and bustle we made with our swords, he ventured to bring me off
from the perril he had cast me into, or at least participate with me. Saldagne
with whom he had made some acquaintance, thought he came to his aid as being a
neighbor and a friend. He thought himself highly obliged and said, You see Sir,
how I am set upon in my own house, Virville, who apprehended him, imediately
replied, He would be his servant against any man whatever, excepting this same.
Saldagne, enraged to find himself deluded, swore desparately, he did not doubt
but to make his party good against two such Traitors himself, and at the same
instant charged Virville most furiously, who defended himself with a great deal
of Gallantry. Then went I forth of my Summer House to join with, and assist my
friend, and just meeting with the Fellow that carried the Flambeau, I was loath
to ki^^ him, but I gave him such a slash over the pate, that it frighted him,
and made him run off from the spot, into the fields, crying out, Thieves,
Thieves. The rest of the Footmen fled likewise; and as for Saldagne, I saw him
fall into a hedge at the same instant that the light left us, either wounded by
Virville, or upon some other accident. We did not think it necessary to look
after him any more, but minded our own escape with all the have we could.
Saldagnes Sister, whom I saw, knowing her Brothers rash and violent humor,
stepped to us, and begged of us softly, and with many tears, that we would take
her along too. Verville was over-joyned to have his Mistress in his own Power
and Protection. We found our garden door half open as we left it, nor would we
make it fast as yet, least we should have a new occasion to go forth again of
the sudden. Within our own Garden, there was a little pretty Summer House
painted and nearly adorned; where they did sometimes eat in hot weather,
standing at some distance from the body of the Great House. My young Master and
my self, did sometimes practice our fencing there, and this being the
delightfullest place about the House, the Baron d' Arques, his Sons, and I, had
each of us a Key, that we might go in at pleasure, and keep our the Servants,
lest they should make havoc of the Books, and other choice things that were
there. In this place we locked up our Gentlewoman, whose grief was above our
consolation: I told her, we would only leave her a few moments to secure and
order things, as the necessity of the accident required, and then immediately
return again Verville was a long time waking his Footman, who had been
debauching himself. As soon as he had, gotten a Candle lighted, we consulted a
while where we should bestow Saldagnes Sister; at last we resolved, to lead her
to my Chamber, in the upper part of the house, as being frequenced by no body
but my self, and a Servant that belonged to me. We returned back to the
Summer House in the Garden with our light. Verville gave a great shreek at his
going in, which mightily surprised me. I had not the time to ask what ailed
him; hearing some voices just at the door, when I put out the light. Verville
called out, who goes there? His Brother, Saint Far, Answered; It is I, what the
Devil do you here in the dark, at this time of night? I am talking here with
Gariguez, said Verville, because I am not yet sleepy. The same reason brought
me hither too, replies he, therefore pray eave me in this room a while to my
self. We did not trouble him to ask twice; but I stealing out the Lady as
dexterously as I could, and thrusting my self betwixt her and Saint Far, who
went in at the same time, carried her away to my Chamber, bemoaning her self
infinitely, and then I went down to Vervilles room where his man was striking a
light. Verville then told me, with a sad countenance, that he must of necessity
return once more to Saldagnes: and what will you do there, said I, kill him
outright? Ha my poor Gariguez, said he, I shall be the most unhappy man in the
world, if I do not get Madam Saldagne out of her brothers clutches. And can she
be there still, replied I, and in my chamber too? would she were so safe, said
he, sighing. Surely you rave replied I. No I neither rave nor dream, said he;
We have brought away her elder sister instead of her, said he? why, replied I,
were not you both in the Garden together? nothing's more certain, said he, and
why will you return thither to endanger your self afresh, said I? since she
that was in the garden with you, is now safe in my Chamber: Ha Gariguez, cries
he again, I know what I saw: and so do I likewise, said I, and to prove your
mistake, do but come up, and see Madam Saldagne, whom I have secured. He told
me I was an ass and came after me with the greatest trouble in the world. My
astonishment was no less then his grief, when I found the Gentlewoman in my
Chamber, not the same I saw and brought from the other house. Verville was as
much amazed as my self: but more satisfied by far, knowing this to be his
Mistress contrary to expectation. He then confessed his own mistake, but I could
make no answer, as not able to comprehend by what Magic one Lady whom I had
seen and followed all the while, should be transformed to another whom I never
beheld till now, and all this in the time we went from the Summer house to the
Chamber. I looked earnestly upon Vervills Mistress, and was certain she was not
the same, that I brought with me from Saldagnes. Verville seeing me so
attentive, what is the matter, says he; I confess again, that it is my self was
mistaken. Nay it is I, rather, am deceived most, if Madam Saldagne came along
hither with us, said I: With whom could she come else, replies he? I know not,
nor no body else, said I, unless she discover it her self. Nor can I tell, with
whom I came my self, said she, unless it were with that Gentleman, pointing to
me, for it was not you Monsieur Verville that brought me off: It was a man,
that came into the Garden, immediately after you went first out of it; summoned
there I suppose either by my brothers means or the foot men's outcries, which
alarmed him no doubt, and gave him notice of what had passed. He caused my
brother to be carried into his Chamber, and my wating-woman, having related
this to me, and assured me he was of my brothers acquaintance, and a neighbor
as she perceived by his discourse with the servants; I went and staid for him
at the Garden door, where I conjured him to take me away with him till the next
day, that I could find convenience to retire to an acquaintance of mine, where
I would stay till my brothers fury was over, which I told him I had reason to
dread above all the things in the world. This person very civily proffered to
conduct me whither I would, and engaged to protect me from my brothers wrath,
to the utmost of his power. Under his conduct I came to this house; where I
heard Verville, whose voice I knew, speak to the same party, and immediately
after I was brought up to this same chamber where you now see me. This relation
of Madam Saldagnes, though it did not clear all my doubt, yet it discovered so
much, that it made me guess how it was brought about. As for Vervills part, he
was so busy in gazing upon his dear Mistress, that he scarce minded what she
said. He began to Court her with a many fine expressions, never examining how
she came thither. But I took a Candle, and leaving them together, went back to
the little Garden-house, resolving to speak with Saint. Far, though he should
be as captious as ever. But I woudred, in stead of him, to find the same
Gentlewoman there, whom I was certain I brought my self out of the next Garden,
and that which increased my wonder, was to see her in as much disorder, as if
some violence had been offered to her; her head attire torn off, and her night
handkerchief bloody in some parts of it, as her face was likewise. Verville,
said she, as soon as I appeared, Do not come near me unless it be to take away
my life: I shall approve that much better, then a second attempt upon my
honor. And as Heaven has given me strength to resist thee hitherto, so I
doubt not, but I shall be able to scratch thy eyes out, if I cannot move thy
heart. Is this the Noble, the Passionate Love you professed toward my Sister?
O how dear does my compliance with her follyes cost me? but when we act the
things we should not, it is but just we should feel the smart of what we ever
most abhor. But what do thou now meditate; pursued she, perceiving my
astonishment: Do thou repent thy baseness, if thou do it heartily, I can
as readily forgive thy violence. Thou art but young, and it was my own
weakness tempted thee, by putting my self into the hands of so unfit a
Guardian. Convey me therefore, to my brothers again, I do conjure thee, though
he be never so rash and severe, I dread him far less, then I do thee, who art
a mortal enemy to our Family, not sattisfied with seducing a young Lady, and
murdering a brother, unless this barbarous act complete the crime. Having said
this, which was uttered with great vehemence, she fell a weeping so bitterly,
that I never saw one so afflicted. This I confess, made me forfeit all the
little wit and judgment I was (...) I was till then Master of amidst so much
confusion, and if she had not ceased of her own accord to speak, I never should
have interrupted her, so much was I astonished, with her complaints, and the
positive accusation she charged me so sharply with. But then, I made reply, and
said, Madam, Neither am I Verville, nor will I ever believe, he can be guilty
of such an unhandsome action, as this you mention; What, said she, Did I not
see you engaged with my brother, did not a Gentleman come to your assistance;
and did not you bring me hither at my entreaty, where you have offered at such
rudness, as was unbecoming both your self and me? She could say no more, so
much her growing grief oppressed her heart. For my part, I was never in the like
perplexity, and could not apprehend, how she should both know Verville and not
know him at the same time. I told her as for the ugly violence she complained
of, (...) was utterly ignorant of it, and since Monsie^^ Saldagne was her
brother, I would conduct her if she pleased, to the same place where her sister
now was. Just when I had spoken this, I spied Verville and Madam Saldagne
coming into the room where we were, his Mistrisse being absolutely resolved,
to go back again to her own Lodgings, but how this dangerous freak came into
her head I know not. The two sisters embraced each other, as soon as they met,
and began to renew their flowing tears abundantly Verville earnestly entreated
them to return to my Chamber, laying before them the difficulty of getting into
their house at that unseasonable time; adding withal their brothers present
sury; the safety of the place they were in; and how near it was to break of
day, which being once come, they would inquire how all things went, and
accordingly they might resolve to remain, or go otherwhere as should be found
convenient. Verville soon persuaded them to condescend to this proposition, the
two sisters being now somewhat more secure in one another presence. We walked
up to my Chamber, where having examined the strange events that had occurred,
we were as apt to believe, as if our eyes had been witness, that it was Saint
Far had attempted Madam L^ry infallibly, Verville and my self, knowing him
capable of the like and worse actions. We were not deceived, in our
conjectures; Saint Far had been gaming in the very same house where Saldagne
lost his money, and passing by the Garden a little after the scuffle was over,
he met with Saldagnes Footman, who told him what had befallen his Master, whom
he swore had been set upon by eight or nine Thieves, thinking thereby to excuse
his own cowardice, in running from the Fray. Saint Far thought himself obliged
to proffer his service to his Neighbor, and did not leave him, till Y.e had
helped him into his bedchamber, after which he met Madam Saldagne at the Garden
door, Who entreated him to carry her somewhere in safety from her Brothers
fury, which caused him to conduct her, as we had done her Sister. He intended
therefore to secure her in the same place we had designed for the other, as you
may have read before; and being as much afraid least we should discover his
Lady, as we were careful he might not see ours, the two Sisters by this
accident, meeting together, just as he was coming in, and we going out; I
happened in the dark to catch his Lady by the hand, whilst he laid hold by a like
mistake upon mine, and thus the women were exchanged. Which was the easilier
done by reason it was very dark, and they so terribly affrighted at the late
accidents, they knew not what they did in the hurry. As soon as we had left her
in the Garden-house, Saint Far, finding himself alone with a very lovely Lady,
and having more instinct then reason, or to describe him in his natural colors
being indeed a very beast, he takes advantage of the opportunity, never minding
the consequence, or what an irreparable affront he offered to a Lady of
Quality, that had thrown her self into his Arms for protection. His baseness,
though received its due reward; Madam de Lery defended her self like a
Lyonness, bit him, scratched him, and tore his hair and face. After all which,
he only went up to bed, and slept as soundly, as if he were the innocentest
creature in the World. You cannot perhaps conceive how Madam Lery should come
into play, not being with her Sister in their Garden at the time we were
surprised, for as I before related, there were none besides Madam Saldagne, and
her Waiting Woman, my Witty Compagnon. This was a riddle to me likewise; But at
last it was unfolded thus, Madam Saldagne, not daring to trust any other, but
her own sister with the secret and management of her Amors, had persuaded her
to attend under the notion of a waiting woman, and this was the she I had
conversed with under the Title of Maudlin. Here my wonder was at an end, how a
Chambermaid should attain to so much wit and divertive Fancies, as I found in
her entertainment, and she told me she was no less puzzled to hear me answer so
handsomely by Night, and find me so sottish by day, when she mistook the dull
Britain to be the same, which she was now convinced of. Ever after that, we
had some concern, above a bare esteem for one another, and I dare avouch, that
she was no ^esse satisfied then I, to find our conditions more equal, then if
either of us had been a mercenary servant. The day appeared while we were yet
talking together, we left our Ladies in my Chamber, where they might sleep if
they would, whilst Verville and I went to consult, what was next to be done.
For my part, having no love fancies to disturb my brain, as Verville had, I
died almost for want of sleep; but there was no appearance I should forsake so
noble a friend, ^n so great a straight. I had a Footman Master of as much wit
and subtilty, as Vervilles dull Rogue wanted. I gave him what instructions I
could, and sent him to make discovery how affairs stood at Saldagnes. He
followed my orders very exactly, and brought us this fair account, that
Saldagnes servant reported, the Thieves had desperately wounded their Master,
but as for the sisters, there was no more mention of them, then if there had
never been any such alive, whether it were out of his neglect of them, or by
his express order, to stifle such disadvantageous rumors. I see here must be
something of a Duel after all this, said Verville; And perhaps somewhat worse,
replied I, whereupon I discovered that Saldagne was the same Hector that
intended to Murder me so basely at Rome, and how we came to know each other at
the beginning of the bustle; and said I, If he does but imagine, as there is
reason enough, that I lay there in wait to take my revenge of him, then
certainly, he cannot at all suspect the intelligence betwixt his Sisters and
you. I went to give an account to those fair Ladies of what we had learned, and
in the mean time Verville visited Saint Far, to discover his business, and
find out the truth of our Suspicions. He soon perceived his face was soundly
clawed. But whatever question VERVILLE propounded, he could get no other
answer but only, as he came from the Gameing-House, he found SALDAGNES Garden
door open, his House in an Uproar, and himself very much wounded, whom he
caused to be laid in his bed. A very strange accident, says VERVILLE no doubt
but his Sisters will be hugely affl^cted: They are very handsome Ladies, and I
must go and give them a visit.

What is that to me? says this brute, who fell a whistling, not minding or
giving any reply to what ever his Brother afterward desired to know. VERVILLE
left him and returns to my Chamber, where I was employing all my eloquence to
comfort the distressed Damsels. They even dispaired, and apprehended the
greatest severity from their brothers jealousy, a man wholly inslaved to his
passions. My servant brought them some Meat from the next Cook; which he was
constantly employed in for fifteen days together, so long were they concealed
in my quarters; not being all that while discovered, my chamber being above the
rest, and so much out of the common rode and passage, that no body disturbed
them in the ^east. They could willingly have put them selves into some Nunnery
for shelter, had not they feared their Brother would have confined them
Eternally to that melancho^y life, after so strange an accident. In the ^nterim
SALDAGNE was healed of his Wounds, and Saint FAR, as we observed went every day
to visit him, VERVILLE went not out of my Chamber, which was not taken much
notice of in the Family, he ^eing wont to pass many whole weeks in his Study,
or in discourse with me. His Love grew every day greater for Madam SALDAGNE;
and she loved him no less: I was not very unwelcome to her Elder Sister, nor
did I entertain her civility with indifferent thoughts. Not that my passion
toward LEONORA abated any whit; But there was little to be expected from her,
and though I might have obtained her, yet should I have made some scruple to
have brought her so much beneath her Birth. A while after, VERVILLE received a
Ticket from SALDAGNE, wherein he gave him notice that he waited for him with a
second to decide their quarrel by the Sword, and in the same Ticket, he
entreated VERVILLE to bring no other but my self against him, which made me
suspect, he intended to take us both in the same Trap. This suspicion had
foundation good enough from the former experience of his Treachery; but
VERVILLE would not countenance me in it, resolving to give him any just
satisfaction, and to proffer a marriage with his sister. He sent for a Hackney
Coach, though there were two belonging to their Family. We went too the place
appointed by the Message, where SALDAGNE waited for us, and where VERVILLE was
much astonished to find his own Brother, seconding his Enemy. We omitted
neither submissions nor entreaties to bring all things to a fair composure, but
nothing less the^ fighting would serve the turn of those two irrational men. I
was about to have confessed to Saint Far, how much it was against my will to
draw a Sword against him; He told me roundly, that ^e had never cherished any
kindness for me, ^or could any thing endear me to him, till he ^pened a passage
or two with his Swords point, ^or his good will to enter at. With these words
^e came fiercely toward me: I only put by his ^hrusts for some time, resolved,
if it were pos^ible, to disarm him, though not without ma^ifest danger to my
self. Fortune befriended ^^e therein, for he slipped down at my feet, I ^ave him
time to rise, and that which should ^ave made him become my friend, increased
^is Enmity. In fine, having given me a slight ^rick in the breast, he vapoured
like a Welsh ^an, and said, I think you feel me now; with ^o much insolence and
pride, that I quite lost ^y patience; This made me press upon him, and having
put him into some disorder, I got (...) happily within his Weapon, that I
seized ^n the Hilt. The Man, you have so little love love for, said I, will
give you your Life, Sir. ^e struggled a while most unseasonably, and ^ould not
reply a word, like an unworthy rash ^erson as he was, though I admonished him,
(...) go and part his Brother from Saldagne, who ^ere grappled and rolling over
one another ^on the ground. But I perceived I must be ^ore rough, and therefore
wrench'd his hand ^^d forced away his Sword, which I threw a good distance from
us. I ran imediately to assist Verville, who was closed with his Antagonist.
When I came near, I saw afar o^ several Horsemen galloping toward us; Saldagne
was soon after disarmed, and at the same instant I felt my self wounded in the
back by Saint Far. This made me throw a^ side all the respect I had for him,
and retu^^ him a thrust that made no little wound. The Baron his Father coming
in at that instant, an^ seeing me make the thrust, did now hate m^ the more,
for having loved me so much fo^^merly. He spurred his Horse up toward m^ and
stroke me on the head. Those that cam^ with him followed his example, and
joynt^^ set upon me. I defended my self most ha^pily from them all; but must
needs at la^ have fallen a sacrifice to this Multitude, (...) Verville, the
most generous friend on Earth had not thrust himself, betwixt them and m^ at
his own Peril. He gave his own Footman good out over the pate, because he found
hi^ more forward then the rest, to get his Maste^ Applause. I yielded up my
Sword to the Baron, but that could not appease him he called me Rascal, and
ungrateful Villai^ and all the injurious Names his Choler fu^nished his tongue
withal, even so far, as (...) threaten to have me hanged. I smartly r^plyed,
that as much Villain as I was, I h^^ given his Eldest Son his Life, when it l^^
at my mercy, Nor had I offered to hu^^ him in the least, till he had too much
pro^oked me to it, and wounded me unhand^omely behind, whilst I was busy in
parting ^he other Combatants. Verville maintained that I was in the right, but
he said he would ^ever see my face again, Saldagne went in^o the Barons Coach,
which they had brought ^or Saint Far, and Verville, who would by no ^eans leave
me, took me into another with himself. He set me down at one of our Great ^ens
Houses, where he had many friends, and ^eturned to his Fathers soon after.
Monsieur ^aint Sauveur sent a Coach for me that very ^ight, and carried me
privately to his own ^ouse, where he had as much tender care of me, (...) if I
had been his only Son. Verville came to ^e me the day following, and told me
his Fa^^er had been informed of the challenge by ^^ldagnes Sisters, whom he
happened to find in ^y Chamber. He likewise assured me with a ^^eat deal of Joy,
that the business was ta^^n up by an agreement of a double Mar^^age to be
consumate as soon as his B^o^^ers wounds were healed, who was not hurt (...)
any mortal part; That it lay in my power (...) be made friends with Saldagne,
his Fathers ^^ger being appeased, who was very sorry he ^^d misused me. He
added, his hopes of (...) sudden cure, that I might be a sharer (...) their
Joy; But I replied, I could not find (...) my heart to stay in a Country, where
I ^^s subject to be reproached with the meannesse of my Brith and Fortune, but
would suddenly leave that Kingdom, either to loose my life in some foreign
Service, o^ raise my self by my Sword to a condition proportionate to the
sentiments of Honor his Noble Example had inspired me with. believe my
resolution troubled him; But on that is so much in love as he was then, can not
mind any thing long but his over-rulin^ Passion. Destiny was thus going on with
h^ story, when they heard the report of a Pee^ in the street, and presently
after one playin^ upon a pair of Organs. This kind of Music^ never perhaps
before, used in the street, calle^ all those People in the Inn to their Window
that had been waked with the Gun. The Organs played on, and those that were n^
strangers to such Instruments, perceived it (...) be a Church Tune. No body
could appr^hend the drift of so devout a Sevenade, which yet they knew not what
to make. But the doubt was soon resolved by two pitiful singing-men, the one
squeeling out a treble part to which the other roared as sad base: These two
Catter-waulers making horrid a Consort with the Organs, as s^ all the Dogs a
howling round about. The Sung,

Let our Charming Notes, and our Ivory Lutis,
Ravish every soul, etc.
With the rest of that Dity. After these harsh notes: they over heard a third
person reviling them for singing so Cuco-like always one Tune. The poor
Choristers replied, they knew not what the Devil he would have them sing? sing
what you will else, said he, speaking little louder, you must not think to come
off thus, since I have hired you so dear. Upon this the Organs changed their
Tone, and sung another zealous Anthem with the like skill. None of the hearers
had yet spoken a word, for fear of interrupting their Melody; but at last
Rancour, who could not tie up his tongue, though his life lay on it, bawled out
aloud. What do they use to sing Divine Service here in the street? This shows a
Zeal to some Tune, I-faith, says another. It Is a nightly Procession adds a
third. They have robed some Chapel of the Organs, pursues a fourth, and are
now singing their thankful Mattins to the Devil their master. In fine, every
one that looked our, had some merry saying or other upon this subject, none
neither knowing or imagining who should be the simple Author of that ridiculous
freak. Mean time the Music went along playing: When, such a Baggage is blind
Fortune, nine or ten great Dogs, were sent by her to hunt after a proud Bitch,
who taking shelter betwixt the Musicians Legs, to save her self from a rope,
and these hot spirited Rival following her close at heels, and quarrelling as
Rivals are wont to do for their Mistress, after some grumbling, snarling and
grinning of Teeth; they fell together by the ears of a sudden, with so much
fury and animosity, that the poor fellows to save their shins ran all away, and
left their Engine to the mercy of the Dogs; whilst those immoderate Lovers were
so uncivil, in the heat of their scuffle as to throw down the Harmonious
Machine with the Frame that supported it, and I should be loath to swear that
some of them did not lift up a leg and piss upon the Reverend Orgains when
the Fray was ended, those creatures being extremely diuretic naturally; but
especially when the smell of an Amorous Mistress tells them she is in a
condition to proceed to the multiplication of her species. The Consort being
thus discorded, mine Host made them open his door, and would needs secure the
Organs and Frame from further mischief. Whilst he and his servants were doing
their charitable office; The Organist returns to his Instrument, accompanied
with three others, amongst whom were a Man with a Woman under his Cloak. This
Man was the very Ragotin himself, who would needs bestow a Serenade upon Madam
Star, and to that purpose had hired a little Eunuch, who was an Organist,
belonging to the Church: And this was the Monster, being neither man, woman,
nor Hermophodite, that Sung the treble part, and played upon the Organs, brought
thither by a Maid; whilst a Chorister that had been twice mewed, sung Base,
and all this for a brace of nine pences, so dear was every thing grown in that
good Country of Maine. As soon as mine Host had found out who were the
Authors of this rare Serenade, he spoke thus to him, so loud that every one of
his guest heard it. It Is you then, it seems, Monsieur Ragotin, that come with
your Vespers to my Gate, it had been wiselier done to have kept your folly at
home, then disturb my Guests at this time of Night. Ragotin replied, that he
was mistaken in his man; but yet spoke it so, as if he intended to discover
what he seemed to deny. But, infine, the Organist seeing his Instrument much
impaired, being a Choleric creature, as all Beardlesse Animals are wont to be,
swore to Ragotin that he should pay for the repairing of them. Ragotin replied,
that he should laugh at that. It is no laughing business, said the Eunuch, I
will be paid my Damages: Mine Host and his people gave their Votes for the
Gelding: But Ragotin made them understand like ignorants as they were, that
this was never the custom in Serenades, and so went away very proud of his
Gallantry: The Musicians laid the burden on the she Porters back, who carried
them home to their Caponised Masters house, he, sad Creature, following her
with the broken Frame; The Inn Doors were locked up again; DESTINY wished the
Ladies good rest, pleasant Dreams, and a cleanly resurrection next morning,
deferring the remainder of his story, to the next fit opportunity.

CHAP. XVI.
The opening of a Theater, or Acting of a Play, with other things of no less
Consequence.

THe next day the Comedians met together, in one of those Chambers they had at
the Inn, to rehearse the Comedy they were to Act that afternoon. RANCOVR, to
whom ROGOTIN had already discovered the secret of his Serenade, which he
seemingly made some difficulty to believe, told his Companions, that the little
fellow would not fail to be there suddenly to receive their thanks and
applause, for his so refined a piece of Courtship, and maliciously entreated
them, that when ever he hinted it, they would take no notice of it, but put him
off with some other discourse. RAGOTIN came into the Room at the same instant,
and having saluted the Company in general, began to mention somewhat of the
Serenade to Madam STAR, who proved at that time a mere wandering Star to her
poor Love; still removing from place to place while ^he talked, but giving no
answer to the many questions he propounded about the time of her going to bed,
and the manner how she had passed over the last night. This made him leave her,
and address himself to Madam ANGELICA, who instead of replying to him,
repeated the Part she had to Act in the Play. He goes to CAVE next, but she
would not afford him so much as one look. After this it came to the men's tune,
who, every one of them, exactly observed what RANCOVR enjoined, and either
answered nothing to his dull questions; or shot as wide from the Mark as if he
had talked quite of another thing. At length being impatient to proclaim his
vanity, he thus spoke aloud to them all. Will you give me leave to confess a
great truth to you. You may do what you please, replied one: Why, then, said
he, you must know it was I that gave you the last nights Serenade. What, do
they give Serenades with Organs in the Country, said DESTINY? and to whom did
you intend it? Was it not, pursued he, to the fair Lady that set the Dogs
together by the Ears. No doubt, said OLIVE; for those quarrelsome Puppies would
never have disturbed such Harmonious Musicians, had they not been Monsieur
RAGOTINS jealous Rivals. Another of the Company would needs have a fling at him
too, and said without doubt he is highly in his Ladies favor, and means
nothing but what is fair and honest, since he Courts in the open streets, nor
can he choose but succeed, when his Voices and Instrument are a degree above
howling. In fine, every one had a saying, except RANCOVR who spared him, being
his Confident; and it is likely the Raillery had continued; if the Poet who was
as Vain and Ridiculous an Ass as RAGOTIN, had not taken them off, by telling
them; Now you speak of Serenades, I remember that when I was Married, I had one
bestowed upon me, that lasted a fortnight together, it consisted of a hundred
several sorts of Instruments, and ranged all over the Marets; The Greatest
Gallants and Ladies of the Place Royal adopted it: Diverse persons of Quality
assumed the Honor of it, nay and a Great Man, that shall be nameless now, took
such a fit of jealousy upon it, that he made his Servants set upon those that
did it only for my sake. But they met with their Match; For these were all my
own Countrymen, as brave Fellows as ever pissed against a Wall; and the most
of them had been Officers of a Regiment I raised, in the last Rebellion of the
Commons. RANCOVR, who had bridled his biting Tongue in favor of RAGOTIN, could
not possibly forbear the Poet, whom he perpetually plagued; Wherefore he took
up the Cudgels against this Darling of the Muses, and told him, that the
Description he had made of this Fiction, sounded more of Bedlam or the
procession of Rams-Horns, then any thing of Gallantry, and so probably
importuned the Person of Quality rather to drive away the horrid noise of
disturbing him then any thing else. And that which confirms this opinion, is
the consideration of your Bride, who Expired of mee^ Age, within six Months
after this Hymeneal Serenade was over, as you term it, and therefore judge you
Gentlemen of the Rarity of the story. Nay but she dyed of a fit of the Mother,
said the Poet. It was rather a fit of the Great Great Grandmother, replied
RANCOVR: For in the beginning of Harry the Fourth's Reign, she had
Grandchildren enough to have made up the Regiment you mentioned, and therefore
surely there could be no spice of the mother left in her Thirty Years after,
when she became your Superanvated Spouse: and to let you know, that I am better
acquainted with her antiquity then you imagine, though you tell us such wonders
daily, I shall now relate some particulars of her story, wherewith you were
never yet acquainted. In the Court of Queeen MARGRET. This beginning of a
History drew all the Company in a ring about RANCOVR, they knowing him to be
furnished with Memories choicer then all the world beside. But the Poet who
dreaded him extremely, interrupted him, saying, I will wager a hundred Pistols
on the contrary: which abrupt defiance, set all the company a laughing. Yet
this was his constant custom, having no other shift but such like wagers to
maintain his daily Hyperboles, which amounted to the weakly sum of a Thousand
or Twelve Hundred impertinencies, besides the innumerable downright lies he
vented into the bargain. Now RANCOVR was the Controuler-General as well of his
Words as Actions, and the ascendent he had over him, was so great, that I dare
compare it to the Genius of AUGUSTUS over ANTHONY'S, that is to say, like to
like, not comparing the persons of a Brace of Country Commedians, with two such
Famous Romans. RANCOVR, having thus began his History, and being interrupted by
the Poet, as I related, was earnestly entreated by every one to proceed. But he
excused himself for that time, promising a fitter season to give them a
faithful account of the Poets whole life, wherein his Wives should be likewise
apprehended. It was now high time, to rehearse their parts, of a Play, which was
to be Acted that same day in a Neighboring Tennis-Court, nothing worth
observation happened at the Rehearsal. After Dinner they Acted for good and all,
and came off with applause. Madam STAR Charmed the Audience with her Beauty,
ANGELICA had her Partisans too, and both of them gave the World a great deal of
satisfaction in what they undertook. Destiny and his Comrades did wonderfully
well, insomuch, that many who had seen the Kings Players, attested they could
hardly have Acted it better. Ragotin in his heart and mind, ratified the
donative he had made of his Body and Soul to Madam Star, in presence of
Rancour, who engaged he would bring him in favor with his Mistress: Without
this promise, Despair had soon made of this little Pitiful Advocate, the
subject of some great Tragical Event. I cannot tell whether the Women pleased
the Ladies of the Town in their Acting, so much as the Men pleased their own
Sex: But if I did know the truth of it, I should hardly discover it: And since
the wisest Man, is not always able to bridle his own tongue; I shall conclude
this present Chapter, to avoid all occasions of further temptation on this
subject.

CHAP. XVII.
The ill success of Ragotins Civility.

AS soon as Destiny had stripped himself of his old Embrodery, and put on his
ordinary wearing Apparel, la Rappiniere led him to the Common-Goal, because the
Man they had taken, that day the Curate of Domfront was set upon in the
highway, desired to speak with him. In the mean time the Actresses went home
to their Inn, with a great Train of Citizens. Ragotin happening to be near Cave
when she came forth of the Tennis-Court, where the Play was Acted, proffered
her his hand to lead her to her Lodgings, though he would rather have waited on
his Dear Star, he did the like to Angelica, so that he was Squire to the right
and left. This double civility, begot a treble inconvenience, For Cave having
the upper hand, as was fit, was crowded to the Wall by Ragotin, that Angelica
might not be forced to walk in the Kennel: Besides, this little Dwarf, reaching
no higher then their wastes, pulled down their hands so much, they could scarce
keep themselves for tumbling over him: But that which most troubled them was,
his often looking over his shoulder to stare upon Madam Star, who was talking
to a pair of Fantastical Fellows, that would by all means lead her through the
streets against her will. The poor Women endeavored many times to get loose
from their small Gentleman Usher; But he gripped them so hard, their fingers
ends tingled again. They entreated him often to spare himself that labor; He
only answered them, your Servant, your Servant, (his ordinary Complement) and
gripped them still harder and harder. They were fain to be patient therefore,
till they came to the foot of their Chamber stairs, where they hoped to be set
at liberty: But Ragotin was no flincher, repeating only your Servant, your
Servant to all they could plead, he endeavored at first to go up with them a
breast, which he found not feisible; Then Cave turned her back toward the
wall, and crept up side-long, dragging Ragotin after her, who haled up Angelica
in like manner, she laughing all the while like a little fool. Now to make up
the misfortune, when they were within five or six steps of their Chamber, down
comes a man with a huge sack of Oats on his back, who with much ado, so heavy
was his load, bids them go down again, for he could not turn about with his
burden. Ragotin would needs dispute it; the Fellow bluntly swore he would
throw down his Oats upon them. This made them go back again a little faster
then they went up, but Ragotin would not let go his hold. The man with the
Oats pressed hastily upon them, which caused Ragotin to miss a step, so that
he hung in the air by the hand, it being out of his reach to the next stair,
till he pulled down Cave upon him, who crushing him down with her weight, she
lighted with her feet on the Pigmeys belly and breast, and knocked her head so
fiercely against ^er Daughters, that they lay all three tumbling on the floor.
The Fellow knowing they could not easily get up time enough, ^eing over-wearied
with his load, raps out ^ great Oath or two, and lets fall his oats upon them,
cursing and raving like an Ho^ler. The sack bursts open with the fall, ^ust
when mine Host came in, who was ready ^o beat out the Hosters brains. But as he
was mad at the Fellow, so the Fellow was ^s mad at the Women, and they as mad
at Ragotin, who was as mad as the made of them all; because Madam Star, the
Planet ^^e Adored, coming not far behind them, ^as witness of this mischance or
disgrace that ^ad befallen him, not much inferior to the ^dventure of the deep
crowned h^t, wherein his head was most unmercifully swallowed up, not to be
recovered till a pair of Cissars broke the spell, and freed him from most
eminent danger and torture, Cave took her great Oath, that Ragotin should never
lead her again, and showed Madam Star how black and blew he had squeezed her
hands. Star replied, that it was a just judgment for depriving her of her
Servant, who had engaged himself in the morning to bring her home after the
Play, and added, that she was glad of his fall, because he had broken his word.
He heard nothing of all this; being troubled that mine Host threatened he should
make good the damage of his Oats, having already beaten his man into the
bargan, who miscalled Ragotin, Angelica then began to rally with him again, and
handled him so severely that he plainly perceived Fortune did no^ yet favor
his foolish suit, so much as Rancour made him believe she would, telling him,
he might shortly be assured to gain^ her affection to that degree, as would ^n
title him to more happiness, then any lover, in the whole Country of Main, nay
and Laval added to it. The Oats were gathered up again, and the Gentlewomen
went to their Chambers one by one, without any further misfortune. Ragotin did
not follow them, nor can I say how the disposed of himself. Supper time came
and they made a merry meal after the sad mischance. Then such as had a mind to
it withdrew, but Destiny locked himself into the room with the Ladies, to tell
them the remainder of his story.

CHAP. XVIII.
The remainder of the History of Destiny and Star.

DEstiny took his wonted seat, and went on thus with his Relation. I shall
finish my story as succinthly as I can possible, ^earing I have but tired you
too much already with so unworthy an account of my ^fe, and fortune. Verville
having given me (...) Visit, but not able to persuade me to re^urn to his
Fathers; He left me, very much troubled at the resolution I had taken, and ^ent
home, where a while after he married Madam Saldagne, and Saint Far married
Madam de Lery. She had as much Wit, as ^aint Far wanted, and I wonder how two
^f such unequal talents, could be yoked together in the same bonds of
Matrimony. In the interim, I perfectly recovered, and the generous Monsieur de
Saint Sauveur, approving of my design to leave the Kingdom for some foreign
Employment, furnished me with money for my Voyage, and Verville who did not
forget me amidst his hymeneal joys, presented me with a very good Horse, and a
hundred Pistols in Gold I took my Journey toward Lions to pass^ into Italy,
with an intent to go once more to Rome, and after my last farewell from
Leonora, expose my life in Candy, having already lived too long thus unhappily.
A^ Newers, I lodged at an Inn which stood near the River. Coming thither very
early and not knowing how to spend my tim^ till supper were ready, I went to
diver my self upon the Great Stone Bridge the lies cross the River of Loire.
There were couple of Women walking over at the sam^ time, whereof the one being
sick leaned o^ the others shoulder, as not able to go with out a supporter. I
saluted them on passant and walked some time on the said Bridge being taken up
with the thoughts of m^^ misfortunes, and my Amors. I was we^^ enough clad for
a Travellor, my habit ^^ther speaking me a Gentleman, then a V^gabond. When I
came near the Women, overheard one of them say; For my part should believe it
were he, had we not hea^ he were dead. I cannot tell how I came look about,
having no reason to think they spoke of me; and yet I was the subject of their
discourse it seems: For I presently found the sick Lady was Madam Boissiere,
grown very pale and wan, who rested upon her daughters shoulder. This made me
go directly toward them, with more confidence then I had done at Rome, having
somewhat improved my self in my carriage during my late abode at Paris. It put
them to such a fright and amazement, that I verily believe they would have fled
from me, had Madam de la Boissiere been able to run, and this surprised me no
less. I asked them what happy star brought me to the presence of two persons
whom I esteemed above all the World. This dispelled their fears, and Madam de
la Boissiere told me, I need not wonder to see them so astonished; since Signor
Stephano had showed them a Letter from one of the Gentlemen I waited on at
Rome, wherein was related how I was slain in the War against Parma, but, added
she, I am overjoyed to find that news was so false, which has been so
unwelcome to those that respect you, as I have reason to do. I replied, that
death was not the greatest misfortune could happen, since I was now going to
Venice to Court it, as my only remedy. They grew sad at these words, and the
Mother began to express a great deal of tenderness toward me, which I knew not
how to interpret. At last she discovered the ground of this civility; she found
me in a capacity to serve her, and her condition required it; the case being
otherwise now, then when she made her Grimasses at Rome. They had met with
misfortunes which put them to a straight: For having turned all their
Household-stuff into money, which amounted to a considerable sum; they parted
from Rome with a French Chambermaid that had served them a long time, and
Signor Stephano's Valet, a Fleming like himself, who would needs return to his
native soil. The Fellow and Wench it seems loved each other enough to venture a
Marriage, and yet their business was so private, that no body ever discovered
the least spark of their mutual flame. Madam Boissiere being come to Rouane,
went by water thence. At Newers she found her self so ill, that she could go no
further. In the time of her sickness she was somewhat hard to be pleased, and
her Maid more unwilling to endeavor it, then ever she had appeared before. One
morning the Lass and her sweetheart were missing, and which was a great deal
worse, all their money was missing too. Her grief increased her malady, and she
was compelled to stay at Newers, till she could get a supply from Paris, which
she expected, to proceed in her Journey. This adventure she related in short,
and I led them back again to their Inn, being the same where I had taken up my
quarters, where after I had brought them to their chamber, and staid a while, I
retired to my own, leaving them to their supper. For my own part, I could not
eat a bit, but thought it long till I were with them again. I waited upon them,
as soon as they had given me notice it was convenient, and found the Mother in
bed, the Daughter receiving me with a countenance as sad, as it appeared
joyful before; Her Mothers grief was increased, and that put me into a dumps
likewise. We stared a while upon one another very wildly without speaking a
word. At length Madam de la Boissiere showed me a Letter she had newly received
from Paris, which made both her, and her Daughter Leonora the most afflicted
couple in the World. She expressed this affliction by so great an effusion of
tear, which made her Daughter weep so bitterly too, that it moved me so
sensibly, I thought I could never express my sense of it enough, though I
proffered them all I could possibly do for their assistance, with so much
freedom as put them out of doubt of my reality. I am ignorant of the cause of
your grief, said I; but if my life may contribute any thing to your relief, you
may safely rely upon me: Tell me therefore, Madam, wherein I can serve you;
Money I have if you want ought; and courage likewise to rescue you from the
danger of an Enemy, all which I shall employ upon no other condition then only
the satisfaction of doing you service. My countenance gave them so full
assurance; that both my heart and tongue consented to this proposition, that it
abated the over flowing deluge somewhat. Madam de la Boissiere gave me a Letter
to peruse, wherein a Gentlewoman of her acquaintance advertized her, that a
certain person, whom she named not, though I judged it to be Leonoras Father,
was commanded to leave the Court, and had retired himself into Holland. So that
this poor Lady was left in a strange Country, without either money, or the
least hopes of getting any for her subsistence. I made a second proffer of the
small stock I had, which might amount to about five hundred Crowns, and told
her, I would wait upon her either into Holland, or any other corner of the
World, she had a mind to go to. In fine, I fully assured her, she had retrieved
in me, a person that would render her the services she could expect from the
meanest Valet, by whom she should find her self respected and obeyed, as if I
were her Son. I blushed extremely when I told her this: But I was not now so
hateful as at Rome, when they denied themselves, and dwelt invisible, the fair
Leonora appearing much more civil, the Mother less severe. At every proffer I
made, she still replied, Leonora would be engaged to me: So that all was scored
on Leonoras account, insomuch that one would have taken her Mother to have been
only a waiting woman, that spoke in her Mistrisses behalf: so great a truth it
is the World respects people only according to their own interest. I left them
very well satisfied, and got to my Chamber the most contented man that could
be. The night passed over very happily, though I slept not at all, which kept
me somewhat late in bed, being a little drowfie about break of day. Leonora
trickt up her self with more curiosity then the day before, and could not but
observe I had done the like. I led her to Mass without her Mother, who was as
yet too weak to go abroad. We dined together, and afterward were of one
Family. Madam de la Boissiere acknowledged the services I rendered them, and
vowed she would not dye my debtor. I sold my Horse, and no sooner was the sick
patient, recovered, but we took a little boat and went down to Orleans. During
the time of our Navigation, I enjoyed my Leonoras conversation, and was not
interrupted by her Mother. I found her wit, as sprightly and charming as her
looks, nor had she reason to think mine so dull, as she found it at Rome, which
made her take a greater delight in the discourse I often entertained her with.
What can I say more, in short, she was taken as much with me, as I was
captivated by her, and you may witness, ever since we have been here together,
how little this reciprocal affection is diminished. What said Angelica,
interrupting him, Is Madam Star that Leonora? Who else? replied Destiny. At
which, Madam Star was pleased to say, her friend had reason to question whether
she were that Leonora, whom Destiny had described so advantageously. It is not
upon that account I start the question, replied Angelica; But we are ever most
in doubt of what we most desire. Madam Cave, added, that for her part, she was
confident of this from the beginning, but desired them to wave that discourse,
till Destiny had completed his story; who went on thus. We arrived at Orleans,
where our entrance was so pleasant as will deserve a particular Relation. A
throng of fellows who always wait in expectation of strangers; at the
Waterside, to carry home their Goods, crowded into our little Bark. There were
at least Thirty that took up two or three little bundles betwixt them, which
the weakest of those lazy Knaves might have carried singly under one arm. Had
I been alone, perhaps I should not have been so wise as to have suffered their
insolency. Eight of them lifted up a little box not weighing much above twenty
pounds; which they seemed to hoyst from ground with much trouble; and having
got it betwixt them, they held it aloft above their heads, upon their fingers
ends. The Rascallity that stood by, fell a laughing, and we were glad to do the
like: however it made me blush for shame to go all through the Town with such a
retinue: For the rest of our baggage which would not have laden one Porter,
had twenty at least, my very Pistols being borne in state by four lusty
rascals, two having each of them a Pistol, and the other two she Holsters. So
this was our order we march^d along in, eight Drunken Whoresons, or such as
deserved no better Title, as I told you before, carried the little Box. My
Pistols and Holsters followed them two by two. Madam de la Boissiere, no less
vexed at it then my self went next to those; Being carried in a great Wicker
Chair fastened to a couple of Cowl-staves, and supported by four Watermen, who
relieved one another by turns, and went along parting a hundred impertinencies,
to her, on the way: the rest of our goods came after her, being only a little
Portmanteau, and a bundle covered with Canvas, which nine or ten of these
Villains tossed from one to another all the way. And I brought up the rear of
this Regiment of Rogues, holding Leonora by the hand, who laughed so heartily
to see this pleasant procession, that I could not but be delighted as well as
vexed with the Waggery. In our March, the passengers stood still gazing upon
us, and shouted so loud, that it summoned all the people to their windows and
doors. At last we arrived at the Fanxbourgh, on the road toward Paris,
attended with a huge train of idle persons, and took up our Lodging at the sign
of the Emperors Head. I put the women into a lower room, and went forth and
threatened the drones so seriously, that they were contented to take very little
pay for their great labor, the Landlord and his Wife taking my part against
them. Madam de la Boissiere whom the money I had furnished her with, sooner
cured then all the Cordials besides could have done, found her self able in a
short time to travel by Coach, wherefore I took up three places in one, that
was to go the next morning, and within two days after, we came in safety to
Paris. Coming out of the Coach, I made acquaintance with Rancour, who came from
Orleans in another Coach at the same time as ours. He heard me inquire for the
Calais Coach-House, and told me he must go thither imediately, and if we had
not made choice of any particular Lodging, he would bring us to a Woman's of his
acquaintance, that kept Chambers ready furnished, where we might be very
conveniently. We believed him, and found it as he told us. This Woman was the
Widow of a person, that had all his life time belonged to a Playhouse,
sometimes a Doorkeeper, then a Prompter, and afterward a puny Actor,
endeavoring to rise higher, but wanting fit parts to attain it. Having scraped
some money together at the Theater, he betook himself to housekeeping,
furnished several Chambers, and hired them out by the week to no little profit.
We took a couple of Rooms that were none of the worst, Madam de la Boissiere
was confirmed of the ill news touching Leonoras Father, and heard so much
besides, though she concealed it from us, that it cast her upon her sick bed
again. This put off our voyage into Holland a while, whither she resolved to
go, and Rancour who was to go to the same Country to a Company of Players that
were there, was contented to wait our leisure, upon condition I would defray
his charges till we were ready. Madam de la Boisiere was frequently visited by
one of her Fellow Servants that lived at the fame time with her in the
Ambassadors Family, and had been her chief confident, when Leonoras Father was
first in love. This Woman gave her the account of her pretended Husbands
retirement, and did us many great courtesies during our residence at Paris. I
went out of doors as seldom as I could, for fear of being discovered by some
of my friends: and found it no great trouble to stay within, so long as I had
my Leonora, and the opportunity of ingratiating my self more and more with her
Mother. Upon this Woman's persuasions, who as I told you, came often to visit
us, we took a walk one morning toward Saint Clou, to air and refresh our
selves. Our Landlady made up one in the company, and Rancour another. We took a
Boat when we came to the water side; and landed at several of the fairest
Gardens where we walked and eat and drank, having so done, Rancour conducted
the Women toward the Boat, whilst I was paying the reckoning at a house,
where they asked most unreasonable prizes for what we had, and this kept me
longer from them, then I intended. I got off as well I could, and hasted to
join with my company. But I was hugely astonished to see the Boat gone a good
way from shore, carrying my friends toward Paris, and leaving me behind,
without any notice, or so much as my Footboy that had my Sword to wait upon
me, standing at the River side, somewhat troubled at their strange departure; I
heard a great uproar in another. Boat that lay there, and drawing somewhat
near, I perceived two or three Gentlemen, or persons that appeared to be such,
who would needs fall foul of a Waterman, because he refused to go after our
Boat. I leaped into this Boat at all adventure, just as it was launching forth,
the man fearing he should be roughly handled: But if I were troubled at the
sudden departure of my friends, I was no less perplexed to find that he that
offered this violence was the same Saldagne, whom I had so much reason to hate.
At the instant I discovered him, he removed from the same place he sat in, and
came just by me: I hid my face from him the best I could, But finding him so
near, that it was impossible to conceal my self long, and knowing I had no
Sword, I took the most desperate resolution that could be, though at that time
I judged it the safest; I seized upon him before he could have the time to sit
down, and threw my self into the River with him. He was not able to keep hold
of my clothes, whether his gloves hindered it, or his sudden surprisal. Never
was any man nearer drowning then he. A great many of the nearest boats came in
to save him, every one thinking we had fallen into the water accidentally,
except Saldagn who knew the truths, but was not in a condition either to
discover the same or pursue me. So I got on land again without much difficulty,
having only a thin suit on, which did not much hinder my swiming, and thinking
it worth my labor to make have, I got far enough off from Saint Clou, before
they finished up Saldagne. As they had no little ado to take him out of the
River, so they had no less ado I dare say to believe his Relation how I threw
him into it; when he affirmed how I ventured my own drowning to procure his,
which certainly he would not hide from them. I was forced to go a great way
about to get into Paris, and durst not enter the City, till Night, having no
need of a fire to dry my clothes, the heat of the sun and my exercise having
done that sufficiently. At length I got to my dear Leonora's, whom I found in
great affliction. Rancour and our Landlady were over joy'd to see me again, and
so was Madam De la Boissiere likewise, who the better ^o make him think I was
her son, bemoaned me ^xtreamly; she excused her self in private to ^e, for
their not staying, assuring me the fear ^aldagne put them in, made them leave
me be^^des that she considered their presence would ^ather have hindered then
helped me, if I had ^ngaged my Antagonist. They told me, that at their going
from the Garden house, the Gallant followed them to the water side; where he
uncivily pressed Leonora to unmask her self, and discovering him to be the very
same fellow that had attempted the like at Rome, they shuffled into the Boat
without more a do, and made the Woterman put from the shore immediately:
Saldagne having a couple more of the same stamp come to him, got into the next
Boat with his two comrades, where I found him threatening the Watermen to make
them pursue us. This adventure made me keep more within doors then I had done
formerly. A while after Madam De la Boissiere fell sick; her Melancholy
contributed much to her Malady, which made us remain part of the Winter at
Paris by Perone. Rancour got so much credit as to have us comprehended and put
down in his passe-port in Quality of Stage Players. One day, as we were going
to this Italian Prelates, who Lodged in the Rue de Sei^ we supped in a Frolic
in the Faux-Burgh of St? Germans, with some Actors of Rancours acquaintance: He
and I going over the Pont-Neuf, afterward very late, were set upon, by five or
six Robbers. I defended my self the best I could, and Rancour I protest did
what man could do, insomuch as he saved my life: though he could not save me
from being plundered of all I had about me, excepting my doublet and breeches,
they having rifled me of an Enamelled box, with Leonoras: Fathers Picture,
which Madam De la Boissiere had left with me, to try what I could get for some
Diamonds it had round the Case; whilst he escaped with the loss only of an
old cloak. I found Rancour at the Bridge foot wounded in the Arm and Face, as I
was on the head. Madam De la Boissiere was very much concerned for the loss of
the Picture, but the hopes of seeing the Original shortly, revived her again.
In fine, we went from Paris toward Perone, from Perone to Bruxels, and from
Bruxels to the Hague; from whence Leonora's Father was gone, about eight days
before into England, where he intended to serve the King against the
Parliamentarians. Leonoras Mother was so infinitely afflicted at his going,
that she fell suddenly sick and dyed. She saw me grieve as much when she was at
the worst, as if I had been really her child: She recommended her daughter to
me, and made me engage I would not forsake her, but endeavor to find out her
father, and re^tore her to his possession. Not long after, a French man robbed
me of all the rest of my money; which reduced me to that necessity, that was
forced to get into your Company, who ^ccepted of us for Actors, by the
recommen^ations of Rancour. The rest of my adven^ures are not unknown to you;
they having a ^ependancy on yours, only at Tours I think I ^aw that Devil
Saldagne; and if I be not very much mistaken, I believe it will not be long ^re
I meet him again in these parts. Which I less fear for my own sake, then
Leonoras, who would loose a most faithful servant if I should miscarry, or be
forced to part from her, by my rugged ^ate. Thus did Destiny finish his story,
and after he had comforted Madam Star a while, whom the relation had a little
disordered by renewing the remembrance of those disasters, which made her weep
as if they had but newly happened, he took his leave civilly of the Ladies, and
went to his bed.

CHAP. XIX.
Several Reflections which are not amisse^ Ragotins new disgrace, and other
things which you may read if you please.

LOve which makes youth undertake (...) thing, and old age forget every thing;
lo^ which occasioned the Wars of Troy, and man^ others beside, which I shall
not stand to mention here, would needs make it known in t^^ City of Manse, that
he can be as Imperious (...) a pitiful Inn, as in any place whatsoever. (...)
was not satisfied therefore with depriving t^^ Amorous Ragotin of his appetite;
but inspir^ La Rappiniere with a thousand irregular desire a person very
susceptable of them, and ma^^ Rocquebrune languish for the Operators wife,
adding to his vanity, bravery, and Poetry a a fourth ingredient of Folly; or
rather constraining him to a double infidelity: For he had prated Love a long
while before, both to Star and Angelica, who often counseled him not to waste
his time, and bestow his labor in vain in courting them. But all this is
nothing to what I shall now relate. Love triumphed likewise over the
insensibility and Misanthropie of Rancour, who became enamoured of the
Operatress too, and by consequence a Rival to the Poet Rocquebrune, as a
scourge for his wickedness, and expiation for the cursed writings he had
published. This Woman's name was Donna Inezilla del Prado, Native of Malaga, and
her husband, or he that styled himself ^o, Signor Ferdinando Ferdinandi a
gentleman of Venice, born at Caen in Normandy. There was diverse others besides
the abovenamed, in ^his Inn, infected with the same disease, as dan^erously,
if not more, then those I have nominated; And they shall be discovered too in
due time and place. La Rappiniere fell in love with Madam Star when she Acted
Ximene, and ^ntended then to have laid open his heart to Rancour, whom he
thought capable of under^aking any thing for a sum of Money Rocquebrune
imagined he had met with a Spanish ^ady, worthy a Soldiers Purchase and
Con^uest. But as for Rancour, I cannot imagine ^y what potent charms this
stranger-Lady could inflame such a person with Love, as hated all the world
beside. This out-worn Commedian being tormented before his time, I mean in
love, before his death, was in his bed, when Ragotin tormented likewise with
his passion, as with the Chollick, came to implore he would remember his
promise, and have pity on him. Rancour assured him, ere that day were at an
end, he would render him some signal service toward his Mistress, La Rappiniere
entered at the same instant into Rancour chamber, who was dressing himself, and
having taken him aside, confessed his infirmity and vowed, if he could bring
him into favou^ with Madam Star, there was nothing in hi^ power but he would
do for him, even to the making him one of his guard, or bestowing hi^ Niece in
marriage on him, who was to be sol^ Heiress after his death, because he had no
children of his own. The cheating Rascal promised him yet more then he had done
Ragotin which put this master Hangman in good hope^ Rocquebrune came likewise
to consult the Oracle He was the most incorrigible presumptious fe^low that
ever came from the borders of the G^rone, and one that thought every man
believe all he bragged, either of his Family, Poetry, (...) Valor, in so much
that he slighted all the d^^ jests and bobs that Rancour perpetually put u^ on
him; presuming that what he said was o^ of ignorance, or to prolong discourse;
besid^ which gift, he was endued with so much christi^^ Philosophy, that he took
all their Raillery very patiently, nor would be moved at the severest
reparties. He therefore believed he was admired by all the Players, nay, even
by Rancour himself, who had experience enough, to admire seldom any thing, and
was so far from having a good opinion of this poor Squire of the Bay-sprig,
that he had made a full enquiry of his extraction, thereby to discover whether
those Bishops and great Lords his Countrymen, whom he often quoted for his
Kindred, were the true branches of that Genealogick Tree, this fool of Arts,
and coats of Arms, together with many other things, had caused to be drawn in a
large skin of Parchment. He was very sorry to find Rancour had company with
him, though he had less need to be troubled at that then any one beside, it
being his ill custom to whiper at all times in peoples ears, and often make a
great secret of nothing. However he took Rancour in a corner, and very gravely
desired to know, whether the Operators Wife was a person of much understanding
or not; because he had loved Women of all nations but the Spaniards, and if she
were worth his purchase, he should not be much the poorer if he presented her
with a hundred Pistols of Gold, which he as often mentioned on every occasion,
as the great Family from whence he was descended. Rancour told him, he was not
yet so intimately acquainted with Donna Inezilla, as to give his judgment in
that particular, though he had often met her Husband in the chieftest Cities of
France, where he fold his Antidotes, but if he desired so much to know what wit
she had, he need but scrape acquaintance with her self, since she began to
speak French reasonable well. Rocquebru^e would needs lend him his Parchment
Genealogy, that so the Spanish Don might know the splendour of his birth. But
Rancour said, that was a fitter method for a Knight of Maltas Courtship.
Whereupon Rocquebrune with a smiling countenance added, Well, Sir, you know
what I am. Yes, yes, replies Rancour, I know well enough both what you are now,
and what you will ever be to your dying day. The Poet went away as he came, and
Rancour his Rival and confident at the same time, drew near to la Rappini^re
and Ragotin, who were Rivals also, though unknown to each other. As for old
Rancour, besides the propensity we have to hate any one that endeavors to
defeat us of what we design for our selves, and the general quarrel he had
against mankind, he ever had, besides all this, a particular aversion to this
Poet, which this discovery was not likely to abate. Wherefore Rancour
absolutely resolved, from that time forwards to do him all the mischief he
could possibly, to which his Apish Nature prompted him, and fitted him for; and
not to loose time, he began that very day, by basely borrowing money of him,
where with he new clothed himself inside and outside from top to toe, with
the best Linen and Woollen he could get. He had before, been very slovenly all
his life time; but love which works far greater miracles, made him grow curious
and spruce in his gray years. He changed his Linen oftener then did become a
Country Player, and began to wash, powder and trim himself so carefully, that
his Companions took notice of it. The Players were that day bespoken to Act a
Comedy, at one of the chiefest Citizens belonging to the Town, who made a grand
treat, and had a Ball at his Neeces Wedding, whose Guardian he had been. The
entertainment was made at a very fair Country House of his about a League from
the City, but whether Eastward, Westward, Northward, or Southward, I know
not. The Master of the Revels, and a Carpenter were sent in the morning early,
to make the Stage. The whole company of Players went afterward in two Coaches
about eleven a clock, that they might get thither by dinner time. Donna
Inezilla the Spanish Lady made one at their earnest entreaty. Ragotin having
notice of the business, went to an Inn where he waited the coming of the Coach,
and tied a very handsome horse at the door, which he had borrowed of some
friend. He was scarce set down to eat his dinner, when they told him the Coach
was in sight. He flew to Horse upon the wings of Love, with a great Sword by
his side, and a Carabine dangling at his breech. He would never confess, what
his fancy was, to go to a wedding with such offensive and defensive Arms and
Ammunition; No, not Rancour his bosom friend, could ever get him to discover
it. Having untied his Horses Bridle, the Coaches were so near, that he had not
the time to take his advantage, of mounting like a petty Saint George: And
being none of the best Horsemen, nor so much minding his getting up handsomely,
as his doing it suddenly, he came blewly off, for this Horses legs were as much
too long for him, as his were too short to ride such a tall beast. However he
got his foot nimbly into the stirrup, and threw his right leg over the saddle,
but the girths were loose it seems, and that somewhat troubled him; for this
made it run round while he was bestriding the steed, yet all went hitherto well
enough, but the cursed Carabine, which hung on a belt about his neck like a
Collar, got so unfortunately betwixt his legs e're he was aware, that he could
not reach the saddle with his breech, by I know not how much, the Carabine
lying along on the ridge from the pummel to the crupper, so that he was in no
great ease, as not being able with his duck legs to reach half way down toward
his stirrops; besides, his heels being armed with spurs, tickled the Horses
sides in a place he was never wont to be pricked in, which set him a going more
merrily then was necessary for a little Rider in that posture, having nothing
but the Carabine to rest upon, much like the Wooden Horse, or Cowl-staff; this
made him cling his legs close to the horses sides, and that clinging, made him
fling up his hinder legs, so that Ragotin following the nature of all heavy
bodies fell into the horses neck, with his nose broken, the beast lifting up
his head suddenly again at a check of the bridle he gave him unawares: to
repair this oversight he lets go the reyns, and gave the Horse his head, which
was no sooner at liberty but he gives a great leap, and casts his Squire quite
over the saddle upon his crupper, with the Carabine still between his thighs.
The horse not being used to carry any thing behind, makes a croupade, which
placed Ragotin just in the saddle again. The unskilful Squire claps his heels
close afresh, and then the Horse flung up his hinder legs more then at first,
which pitched the poor fellow just with his neck upon the pummel; where we must
leave him, as on a Pinnacle, to rest our selves a little; for on my reputation,
this description has cost me more pains then all the book besides, and yet I
am not very well satisfied with it my self.

CHAP. XX.
The shortest of the present Volume. Ragotins fall from his Horse, and somewhat
of the like nature happening to Rocquebrune.

WE left Ragotin planted on the pummel of a saddle, much concerned at this
mishap, and as much troubled how to behave himself. I scarce believe the
defunct Phaeton of unhappy memory, was more troubled with his Fathers four
fiery jades, then our small Advocate with this one Horse, as quiet as a lamb if
he had had but a skillful Rider; and that he lost not his life, as Phaeton did,
he was beholding more to fortune, then any judgment of his own; whose ill
menage were a fit subject for a longer discourse, were I not in conscience
obliged to release him from the eminent danger he was in; having many more
things to treat of concerning our Comedians during their residence at Manse. As
soon as Ragotin felt what an uneasy cushion he had under the two most fleshy
parts of his body, upon which he used to fit, as all other rational creatures
are wont; I mean as soon as he found ^ow narrow his seat was, he quitted his
bridle like a man of discretion, and caught hold of the Horses mane, who ran
away at full speed; this made the Carabine fire, Ragotin thought he was shot
through the body, the Horse surely believe^ the same, and stumbled so rudely,
that Ragotin lost his seat, and for a time hung by the mane, with one spur
entangled in the saddle-cloath, and the rest of his body hanging toward the
earth, in expectation of a fall as soon as his spur should break loose,
together with his Sword and Carabine in his Bandeleer. At length the
saddle-cloath gave way, his hands let go their hold, and down he fell, but with
more ease and skill then he got up. All this happened within sight of the
Coaches, who stopped purposely to see what would become of him, or rather to
have the pleasure of laughing at him. He cursed the Horse, who stood stock
still as soon as he laid down his load, but to comfort him they took him up
into one of the Coaches in the Poets room, who was willing to ride, that he
might court and galantize his Mistress Inezilla sitting in the Boot. Ragotin
resigned his Sword and Fire-Armes up to him, which he put on in a very martial
posture. He lengthned the stiprops, fitted the bridle, and no doubt went to get
up more methodically then Ragotin. But there was surely some ill fate attended
the horse that day. For the saddle being too loosely girted as before turned
round with him likewise, and the string of his breeches being broken, the Horse
ran a pretty way with him, whilst he had but one foot in the stirrup, his
other serving the Horse for a fifth leg, whilst his back-parts were exposed
to open view, his breeches dangling all the way at his heels. The Spectators
did not laugh very much as Ragotins mishap, because there was more apparent
danger in it; But Rocquebrunes, was accompanied with loud shouts from the
Coaches; who stood still to observe the event, and hallowed with all their
might, which drove him into a house for shelter, leaving the horse to his own
discretion, who very wisely walked back again to the Town. But Ragotin knowing
he was to be responsable for the beast, alighted out of the Coach, and went
after him. Then the Poet having cased up his posteriours returned to the
Players, and rode along in his former seat, much troubled with his Martial
Equipage, and more troublesome to the Company which made him declaim against
Ragotin, who had undergone this third disgrace in his Ladies presence, with
which we shall conclude our Twentieth Chapter.

CHAP. XXI.
Which perhaps will not be found very pleasing.

THe Players were very civilly received by the master of the house, who was a
good honest man, and one of the most considerable in those parts. They had two
chambers allotted them to lay their Clothes in and attire themselves for the
Play, which was put off till after Supper. They dined in private, and after
Dinner those that would walk had the liberty of a Grove and a large Garden. A
young Counselor of the Parliament of Renes, and near Kinsman to the master of
the house, accosted our Comedians, and staid some time to converse with them,
having discovered Destiny to be a person of more then Vulgar judgment, and the
women, besides their beauty to be such as could say more then just the parts
they learned by rote. They discoursed of things suitable to their profession as
Players and Poets. The young Counselor said amongst other things, that there
was scarce any remarkable Subject whereof they had not written, so that all
History was, as one may say, exhausted or pumped dry, and therefore Modern
Authors would be at length constrained to Wave those nice Rules of real stories
and accidents comprised in four and twenty hours, it being judged unnecessary
by most people that the Theater should be confined to such severe limits, for
since the generality are rather pleased with representations then recitals,
they might contrive such plots as would be acceptable, without either falling
into the Spaniards extravagancies, or tying themselves up to Aristotle's strickt
rules. From Commedies they fell to talk of Romances. The Counselor affirmed
that nothing could be more divertive then our Modern Romances, wherein the
French excelled all other Nations: but for Novels the Spaniards had an art
beyond us in contriving those little Histories, which are more useful, and
more probable patterns for us to follow, then those imaginary Hero's of
Antiquity, who are sometimes the worse for being charactred too good. In fine,
those examples that are imitable, are to be reckoned at least more useful, if
not more pleasant, then such as do exceed all probability and belief: And so he
concluded, that if they could but compose as quaint Novels in French as those
written by Michael de Cervantes who seldom brought any Princes on the Stage,
they would soon grow as current as ever Heroic Romances have been. Rocquebrune
was not of the same opinion; He said very positively, that there could be no
pleasure in reading of Romances, unless they contained the adventures of
Princes, yea and of Famous Princes too, and for that reason, Astrea pleased him
only in some parts of it. And in what Histories can one find Kings and
Emperors enough to make you new Romances, said the Counselor: we must feign
such, replied Rocquebrune, as they usually do in Fabulous stories, which have
no foundation but the paper they are built upon. I perceive then, said the
Counselor, that Don Quixot is but slightly esteemed by you. It Is the most
sottish piece that ere I read, replied he, though many people that pretend to
wit have fondly cried it up. Have a care it be not rather want of wit in you,
then any defect in the book, that makes you judge so rashly, said Destiny.
Rocquebrune would not have failed to answer Destiny, had he but heard what he
spoke; But he was so busy in entertaining the Laidies, who flocked about them,
that he minded him not, telling that fair Sex, he would write a Romance in
five parts, every part to contain ten Volumes, which should eclipse all the
Cassandras, Cleopaters, Polexanders, and Cyrus, though this last have the
Surname of the Grand, no less then the son of Pepin: Mean while the
Counselor was telling Destiny and the Actresses, that he had writ, some
Novels, in imitation of the Spaniards, promising them they should have the
perusal of them. Inezilla spoke to them, in a kind of French that had more of
the Gascon accent then the Spanish, and said her first husband had the
reputation of a competent Author in the Court of Spain; having composed several
Novels, that were much esteemed, some of which she had in Manuscript, which in
her opinion deserved to be translated into French. The young Counselor being
very curious of such kind of compositions; told the Spanish Lady, she would do
him an infinite favor in letting him have a sight of them; which she civilly
proffered, adding withal, that no body was better stored with such trifles then
her self, for it being the Mode in their Country for the women to write both in
Verse and Prose, she had made it her pastime like the rest, and could entertain
them with some of her own fashion, or making. Rocquebrune confidently, as his
humor was, proffered to put them into French. Inezilla who was perhaps the
gentellest Spaniard that ever crossed the Pyrenes to come into France, replied,
that it was not only requisite to understand the French tongue well, but that
he must be as perfectly knowing in the Spanish also, and therefore though she
would not discourage his attempts of the like nature, yet she should be
unwilling to thrust them upon him till she were certain he were so qualified as
she thought fit. Rancour who had not as yet opened his mouth, delighting in
piquent speeches, said, no doubt but that his ability was sufficient enough,
since he had been Corrector of a Printing House, he had no sooner told them
this, but he remembered he had borrowed money of Roquebrune; which made him
pursue no farther; to which the other dashed out of countenance at Rancours
words, replied that he could not deny, but that he had Corrected some few
sheets for an intimate Friend once or twice; and somewhat that he published of
his own. Madam Star, addressing her self to Inezilla, told her; that since she
was so well furnished with those pretty stories, she would often importune her
to relate some of them. The Spanish Lady replied, that ^he was ready to give
her satisfaction presently. They took her at her word, and all the company
seating themselves round about her, she began a History not in the very same
terms as you will find it in the following Chapter; but yet very intelligibly,
and in such polite Language ^s made them guess she had a pregnant wit and ^ree
expression in her own Tongue; since she was mistress of so much in a strange
one, which ^he had studied but a few months before.

CHAP. XXI.
The Novel. Or the Trapanner Trapan'd

A Young Lady of the City of Toledo, named Victoria, descended from the Ancient
Family of Portocarrero, had retired her self to (...) private-house situated
on the brink of the River Tagus in the absence of her brother, wh^^ was a
Captain of a Troop of Horse in the Lo^^ Countries. She became a widow at her
seventeenth year, being wedded to an ancient Gentleman that had gotten a great
estate in the Indies, who six months after his Marriage per^shed in a Storm at
Sea, leaving her much weak^^ behind. This fair widow after the loss of he^
husband kept house constantly with her brother* where she lived in such repute,
that at the age of Twenty all those Mothers that were made happy in her
acquaintance, proposed her for an^ Example or Pattern to their Children, the
Husbands to their Wives, and the Gallants to their desires, as a conquest
worthy their Noblest Ambition: But as her retirement quelled the love and
ho^pes of many, so on the other hand it increased the esteem the whole world
had for her* In this habitation, she enjoyed at liberty, al^ the innocent
pleasures of a Country Life; when ^^e morning her Shepherds brought into her
^use a couple of men, whom they found stripped (...) all their Clothes and bound
fast to a Tree, here they had been tied the whole Night. ^^ey had lent each of
them a scurvey Shepherds ^at to cover themselves withal, and in this ^uipage
did they appear before the pretty ^^ddow Victorio. The poverty of their habit
^^uld not hide the rich mien of the younger, ^o made her a hansome Complement,
and told (...) he was a Gentleman of Cordova, by name (...) Lopes de Gongora;
who was traveling from ^^^l to Madrid about business of importances, ^^d
having over slipped his time at play about half ^^ies journey from Toledo, where
he dined the (...) before, the night surprised them; and ^^ing a sleep as his
man likewise did, expecting ^ule-driver that stayed behind; some Thieves ^^ing
them both in that condition, tied them ^a Tree, after they had stripped them to
their ^y Shirts. Victoria doubted not of the Truth this Relation, his Noble
countenance speak^^ in his favor, and she knowing how great a ^erosity there
was in releeving a stranger, ^uced to that want. It happened that amongst Clothes
her brother left in his Guarderobe, ^^e were two good Suits, for the Spaniards
^^er part with their old Clothes, though they ^^e new, but hoord them up as
Relics of their ^ndeur. These two were bestowed on the ^^ter and his man, and
were not much unfit either of their Bodies. Dinner time being near, this
stranger whom Victoria invited her Table, appeared so complete, and ent^^tained
her with so much wit, that she fanci^ her Charity could never have been better
p^^ced. They kept company together the ^^maining part of the day, and were so
mu^^ taken with each others perfections, that neit^^^ of them slept so quietly
that night as they w^^ wont. The stranger would needs send his ^^vant to Madrid
to take up money and buy (...) Clothes; or at least pretended it, but the (...)
widow would not suffer him, promising (...) enough for his expenses to his
journeys (...) He mentioned somewhat of Love to her the ^^^ry same day; and she
gave him a very frien^^ audience. In fine, within fifteen days, the
^^portunity of the place, the equal merit of the p^^sons, a great many vows and
protestations u^ one side, and too much credulity and frank^ on the other,
their vigorous youth, a promis^ marriage, and a reciprocal faith given in the
(...) sense of an ancient Staward and Victorias W^^ing-woman, tempted her to
commit an oversig^^ she was thought incapable of running into, (...) put this
stranger in possession of the gre^^ and till then the chastest and severest
beaur^ Toledo. For at least eight days tegether it (...) nothing but Love and
Dear, Fire and Flame (...) twixt the young couple, Kissing, Embra^^ and
Courting, was their meat, drink and d^^tion, night and day: But part they must,
(...) Tears succeeded their Smiles and Caref^^^ though Victoria might have
spared them had known all; The stranger was desired to stay a ^hile longer, but
he told her such a tale of what ^e should loose by his delay, that when he
^emed to consent to her proposition, which ^e enjoyment of so great a bliss,
made him ^illing to continue to eternity, as he protested; ^e then changed her
mind and was as eager to ^^ve him gone, her passion having not blinded ^^r
reason so much, as to prefer the happiness (...) his Society, to his greater
advancement. ^e furnished him with new apparel from Tole^^ and gave him what
money he desired, where^^th he prosecutes his journey, being mount^^ on an
excellent Mule himself, and his man (...) another, the poor Lady being stung
with ^^ief at his departure, and he as much afflicted, ^^at least pretending to
be so, for leaving her ^^ne. The same day he went thence, the Cham^^r Maid
making the Bed, found a Picture case ^^apt in a Letter fallen down behind a
Chair ^ereon he laid his Clothes; she carried it im^ediately to her Mistress,
who opening the same, ^ued a most excellent young Ladies Picture ^^shrined in
it, and Reading the Letter, it con^ined these or the like following Lines.

Dearest Cousin,
HEre enclosed I send you a Picture of the beautiful Elvira de Sylva; but when
you shall be^^ld the Original, you will be forced to confess how ^^initely Art
falls short of Nature, and how much ^ighter this Sun of beauty is, then the
poor shadow ^^an by the skilfullest Painters hand. Her Father Don Pedro
expects you with much impatience, (...) Articles of marriage betwixt you and
Elvira (...) drawn up according to your wishes, very much (...) your advantage.
And this I hope will be a sufficie^^ motive to hasten your voyage to Madrid,
where (...) amongst other real friends shall find.

Madrid this, etc. Your Servant, etc. Don Antonio de Ribera.


The Letter was directed to Ferdinand de R^bera at Sevil. Imagine I beseech you
Victori^ astonishment at the Contents of this Pape^ which in all probability
could be intended for no other but her false Lopez de Congora, she no^
perceived, but too late, that this stranger, who^ she had so highly and hastily
obliged, had di^guised his Name, and by that counterfeit, sh^^ guessed at his
infidelity and treachery. The beauty of the Picture run in her mind, but the
Articles of marriage almost distracted her wit^ despair. Never was poor
forsaken Lover more deeply afflicted: Her sighs did well nigh bu^^ her heart,
and her tears drowned her eyes, for she wept till her head aked most
intollerably miserable, forlorn, wretched woman that I am said she to her self,
(and sometimes to her ol^ trusty Steward likewise, who was a witness o^ the
promise of Marriage:) have I acquired s^ much reputation and esteem of all the
worl^ to be thus Trappan'd, and refused so many proffers amongst my
acquaintance, who would have thought themselves too happy in my en^oyment, to
throw my self away upon a stranger, that perhaps laughs at my easy credulity,
how he has risled me of all my honor and ^oasted reputation, and ruind my
Fame eter^ally; What will they say at Toledo? and what will they not say in
Spain? Can a young cheat^ng pretender, be so discreet as to conceal the ^hame
he has stuck upon me? Why did I let ^im know my heart, before I was assured of
the ^ncerity of his vows? Could he have changed ^is Name if he had meant to
keep his flattering ^romises? Or can I hope he will be reclaimed after he has
enjoyed me? What will not my ^rother be provoked by this heinous fact to do
against me; and to what purpose is he Courting ^ame and Glory in a foreign
Land, when I ^last the Credit of his Name and Family thus (...) home. No, no,
Victoria must undertake ^omething that may repair her crime; But be^re I
proceed to vengeance, and a desperate ^ure, it will be fit to try a safer and
milder re^edy, I must endeavor by my craft to regain that I have lost by my
imprudence: It will be ^^en time to make use of desperate ways, when have
found all others ineffectual: Victoria had (...) seems some judgment left in
her distressed ^ondition, since she could fix on such good re^lutions in such a
dangerous intrigue. Her ^^d Steward and her Waiting woman would ^eds become her
Counselors: but she told them, she knew as much as they could say; Bu^ words
were wind, whereas sudden action mu^^ effect her business, and guide her out of
this Lab^^rinth. So the very same day a couple of Cart^ were Laden with
Household stuff and necessaries Victoria giving out, amongst her domestic
Servants, that she had business called her to the Court, which concerned her
Brother very much She took Coach with her Squire and Woman and hurried to
Madrid, whither her good were appointed to follow. As soon as she arrived, she
made inquiry for Don Pedro, de Silv^^ house, and being informed where abouts it
was hired one for her self in the same Street. He Stewards name was Rodrigo
Santillane, who from his youth was Bred up by Victorias Father which made him
have the same respect for hi^ Mistress as if she had been his own Sister. Having
much acquaintance in Madrid, where he ha^ often Sojourned, he soon discovered
that Do^ Pedro de Silvas daughter, was to be Wedded to a Sevillian Gentleman,
named Fernand de Ribera, which match was brought about by a Kinsman of his of
the same Name, it being so nere the conclusion that Don Pedro was providing
Servants and all other Necessaries for his Daughters family. The very next day
Rodrigo Santillane. in a plain and decent Garbe^ Victoria, in a sober Widows
habit, and Beatri^ her waiting Woman, who was to personate he^ Mother in Law
and Rodrigos Spouse, went al^ of them together to Don Pedro's, and desired to
speak with him; Don Pedro admitted them very civily; to whom Rodrigo said, with
much confidence; that he was a decayed Gentleman of Toledo, and having one
only Daughter by his Wife, which was Victoria, whose Hu^band deceased not long
since at Sevil, finding his own and his Daughters fortune very low and mean, he
had brought her to Court to get some good Service for her; and being informed
that his intent was to settle his Daughter Elviras Family at her marriage, he
hoped that it would not be unkindly taken, that he came to proffer the widows
service to him; she being a person very fit to become a Duegna to the Bride,
not doubting but her Breeding and good Nature would give her a better title to
her Mistresses Favor, then the small beauty she had to recommend her. Before I
proceed any farther, I must advertise those that are unacquainted with it, that
the Ladies in Spain keep Duegnas, in their houses, and these Duegnas are much
the same thing as our Governesses or Ladies of honor belonging to great
persons: I must add to this, that these Duegnas or Dovegnes in Spain, are
severe, troublesome, importunate animals, no less dreadful then a domineering
Mother in Law. But to go on with the Story: Roarigue played his part so well,
and Victoria whose beauty was the best oratry, appeared so comely in her modest
attire, and had so much good augury in her countenance, that he accepted of her
immediately to govern his Daughter. He proffered Redrigue and his wife an
employment in his own family likewise; but Rodrigue excused himself, and told
him several reasons did forbi^ to him lay hold of that honor and advantage but
having taken an house in the same street, h^ would be ready to wait upon him at
any tim^ he should command it. Thus was Victoria entertained in Don Pedros
house, infinitely belove^ both by him, and his Daughter Elvira, and n^^ less
envied of all the other Servants, Don Anto^nio di Ribera, who had contrived the
match for his faithless Cousin, came very often to bring him tidings that his
Kinsman was on his journey and had written to him at his setting forth from
Sevil. And yet this Galant did not appear, thi^ somewhat perplexed him; nor
could Don Pedro and Elvira tell what to judge of it, but Victori^ was the most
concerned. But Don Fernand ha^ reason not to come, The very same day he parted
from Victoria, heaven punished his infidelity. As soon as he was gotten to
Illescos; a fierce dog running out of a house unawares, affrighted his Mule
so terribly, that his Leg was sorely bruised against a neighboring wall, and
he thrown down and his Knee put out of joint, which pained him so much he could
not prosecute his journey. He was seven or eight days at least, in the
Chyrurgions hands, who having no great experience, and his grief not abating,
it constrained him at length to send his Cousin word of his misfortune, and
withal entreat him to procure a Horse-Litter for him that he might get to
Madrid. The news of his fall affrighted them no less, then the knowledge of his
being so nigh pleased them. Victoria, who still loved him, for all his
prevarication, was hugely afflicted. Don Antonio sent a Litter to convey
Fernand to Madrid, where being arrived, whilst they were providing Clothes for
him and his Retinue, which was very magnificent (he being the eldest Son of the
Family and wealthy enough) the Chyrurgions of Madrid, more skilful then he at
Illescas, cured him perfectly well. Don Pedro de Silva, and Elvira his
Daughter, had notice given them of the day whereon Don Antonio de Ribera had
engaged to bring his Cousin Don Fernand to them. It is very probable the young
Elvira had not neglected her self, nor was Victoria a little concerned. She saw
her faithless Lover make his entrance, trickt up like a Bridegroom, and if he
was so taking in his tattered habit, what must he not be now he was so
complete. Don Pedro was very well satisfied, and his Daughter must have been
very nice, had she not been fully pleased. The Servants of the house stared
upon their young Ladies sweet heart with open eyes, and every one of the Family
were overjoyed, excepting poor Victoria, whose heart was heavy and almost
overcharged with grief. Don Fernand was charmed with Elviras beauty;
confessing, as his Cousin informed him, that the Painter had much injured her.
His first complements expressed a great deal of wit, and were not made up of
those extravagant fooleries, most men are guilty of, in their first addresses
to a Father in Law, and a handsome Mistress. Don Pedro de Silva Locked himself
up in a Closset with the two Kinsmen and a Lawyer, to adjust somewhat that had
been left unfinished in the Articles. In the mean time Elvira staid in her own
apartment, surrounded with her Women, who were entertaining his with the
applause of her new Servitor: Only Victoria stood cold and mute, whilst they
sung her Encomiums; Elvira observed it, and took her aside to tell her, she
admired that she said nothing of the happy choice her Father had made of a
husband, who seemed so deserving, and subjoyned, that either out of
complaisance or civility, she ought to express somewhat. Madam, replied
Victoria, your Lovers presence speaks his worth so fully, it were needless to
add my dull judgment to it. The coldness you have taken notice of does not
proceed from any indifferency, I were unworthy of the favors you have
vouchsafed me, should I not share in all that does concern you: And therefore
be confident I should be no less transported with joy at your Marriage, then
all the rest about you are, were I not so well acquainted with the Gentleman
you are to Wedd. My own husband was an inhabitant of Sevil, whose house stood
but a very little distance from your Servants. He is indeed of a good Family,
Rich, Handsome, and I do believe a man of Wit and other Excelling qualities. In
fine, he is worthy of a Lady such as you are: But withal, I am certain you
deserve a man's entire affection, which he cannot bestow on you, because his
heart is divided. I could wave this discovery, which may perhaps displease you:
But this were to betray my trust, should I conceal what I know of Don Fernand,
in a business, whereon depends the happiness or unhappiness of your whole Life.
Elvira was amazed at her Duegneas words, and entreated her to clear those
doubts she had Started. Victoria replied, that it was neither to be done before
that presence, nor in few words. Elvira pretended she had some business of
privacy in her Chamber, where Victoria as soon as they were alone, told her:
That Fernand de Ribera was in love at Sevil, with one Lucretia de Monsalva, a
very beautiful Lady, though of a very mean Fortune; by whom he had three
Children upon promise of marriage; and that during Ribera's Fathers life it was
kept very secret, after whose death Lucretia having claimed his promise, he
grew very cold; whereupon she had referred the business to the Arbitration of
some friends; all which made so much noise in Sevil, that Don Fernand had, by
his friends persuasions, absented himself for a time, to shun the rage of
Lucretias kindred, who hunted for revenge and blood. In this posture were his
affairs; pursued she, when I came from thence, at which time it was also
reported that Don Fernand was going to Madrid to be married. Elvira could not
refrain asking, whether the aforesaid Lucretia were a beauty? Victoria told
her, she wanted nothing but wealth, and so left her extreme pensive, and firmly
resolved to give her Father a present account of the business. At the same
instant word was brought her that her designed husband waited without for her,
having concluded the Article that they were consulting on in the old Fathers
Closset: Elvira went to him, whilst Victoria staid in the withdrawing Room,
where the same fellow came to her that attended on him, when she so Nobly
releeved them after their being stripped. This diligent Servant of his, brought a
Packet of Letters for his Master, which he had taken up at the Post House. He
did not know Elvira, so much her change of habit had disguised her; wherefore
he desired to be admitted to the speech of his Master, to deliver the said
Packet; She told him, it would be a good while before he could have that
oppertunity with convenience, but if he durst trust her with his Letters, she
would be sure to give them, as soon as possibly she could get to him. The
fellow made no scruple in the case, but having left them in her custody, he
went about his affairs. Victoria who was resolved to leave no stone unturned,
goes up to her own Chamber, opens the Packet, and in a moment Seals it up
again, together with a Letter of her own contriving amongst the rest. This
being done the Kinsmen took their leaves. Elvira spying the Letters in her
Governess hand, asked what it was? Victoria coldly answered, that Don Fernands
Serving man had left some Letters with her to deliver to his Master, which she
was going to send after him, not being in the way, when he went forth. Elvira
said, it would not be amiss to break them open, since perhaps it might give
them some further light about the discovery she had made. This being that she
desired, Victoria rips open the Seal a ^econd time. Elvira reads the several
super^criptions, and fixing her eye upon one that ^eemed to be a woman's hand,
addressed to Don ^ernand de Ribera at Madrid, she unfolds it, and ^herein found
these following Lines.

YOur absence, and the News I hear that you are to be hastily married at Court,
will soon deprive ^u of a person that valued you above her own life, ^^less you
suddenly return and make good your pro^ise and solemn Engagement, which you can
neither ^^fer any longer or violate without a manifest disho^ur and Breach of
Faith. If what I hear be true, ^^at you regard your Promises and Vows so
little, which you made both to me and our Children, believe ^e you will run the
hazard of your life, (no less ^^n then the loss of your Fame, Credit and
Sincerity) ^^ich my Kindred are resolved to make you pay ^^wn for your
treachery, when ever I shall call upon them for my just Revenge, since you
enjoy it now ^ely at the request of,

From Seville. Lucretia de Monsalva.


Elvira did now absolutely believe all what ^^r Governess had told her, finding
it so au^entically confirmed by this fresh testrimony. ^^e imparts it to her
Father, who could not (...) infinitely admire, that a Gentleman of his ^ality
should be so unworthy as to ruin a Lady of equal Birth with him, after he had
(...) many Children by her, upon no other accoun^ but his inconstant humor.
This made him repair to a Sevillian Gentleman a Friend of hi^ for information,
as being one that had before given him a clear account of Don Fernands weal^^
and quality. He was scarce gone out of door^ when Don Fernand came to inquire
for his Pa^ket, attended with his Servant, who told him his young Mistresses
Governess had promised (...) deliver them into his hands. Elvira freely to^^
him, that she had taken them from her, a^^ had the Curiosity to Break them
open, n^^ doubting but a Man of his years had some E^gagement amongst so many
Galants as abou^ded in Sevil, and although she could not sa^ she had reaped any
great satisfaction, yet she had met with this caution in recompense, ho^^
dangerous a thing it was for young people to (...) married together, before
they were very thro^ly acquainted with each other, but now s^^ would not debar
him any longer of his delig^^ in perusing them. At these words she restore^
them, and slightly bowing to him in civility le^ him, before he could make any
reply: D^^ Fernand was strangely surprised at her di^course. He Examined the
supposed Lette^ and perceived it was some knack to hinder (...) marriage. He
addressed himself to Victori^ who remained in the outward Room, and to^^ her,
without minding her fault much; that ^ther some Rival, or malicious person. had
co^trived that Letter to abuse him. I a Wife (...) Sevil? cried he; I two or
three Children; If (...) do not prove this to be the most impudent im^ostor
that ever was set on foot, let me die? Victoria told him, he might possibly
indeed be ^nnocent, but yet his Mistress in discretion could ^o no less then
make a further inquiry as to the ^^uth of it, and therefore consequently his
mar^^age would be put off, till her Father Don Pedro ^ould be convinced by the
Gentleman his ^^iend, whom he was gone to seek, that this was ^^ly a pretended
intrigue. That is but reason, ^^swered he, and if there be but a Lady of the
^^ame of Lucretia de Monsalvo in all that whole ^ity, let me forfeit all the
Reputation and Ho^^ur of a Gentleman, and let me entreat you, ^^ded he, if you
are but so much acquainted ^^ith your Ladies secrets as to be her confident,
(...) much as I perceive you are her Favorite, that ^^u would be kind in your
good Offices, and take ^^y part in all these little contests. Truly, said
Vi^^ria, I can affirm without boasting, that she will (...) persuaded to any
thing sooner by me, then ^^y other; But this I must let you know with^^^, that
her humor is such as is not easily ap^^ased, when she believes her self really
disobli^^d: and as the entire hopes of my Fortunes (...) founded on the good
will she has toward ^^e, I shall never adventure to contradict her to ^^vance
you, or hazard her displeasure by en^^avouring to possess her with an opinion
of ^^ur sincerity. I am but poor and mean, added ^^e, and not to gain were to
loose a great deal: ^wors^ what she has promised me as a portion when I am
married a second time should fail, I might live a Widow all the rest of my
days; thoug^ I am yet young enough, and not so deforme^ but some body may
think me worth their purchase: But it is an old saying and a true on^ Without
Money -- She was going on thus wi^^ a right Widow-like tedious rabble; which
sh^^ as Governess, acted to the life, when Don Ferna^^ interrupting her, said,
Be pleased but to (...) one piece of service I shall require of you, an^ I will
put you in a condition above the hope^ (...) your Ladies reward; and to
convince you th^^ my words are not, Courtier like, my only deed^^ give me Pen,
Ink and Paper, and you shall have what you will under my hand; Jesus, Mounsieu^
says this feigned Governess, an honest man word is as good as his bond: But to
obey yo^ I will fetch you the Paper and Ink you desire; she returned again with
materials enough to have drawn a bond of a Million of Gold, and D^^ Fernand was
so Gallant, or at least had such (...) months mind to Elvira, that he signs
her (...) blank, and leaves her to make her own condit^ons, thereby to oblige
her with the greater confidence. This raised Victoria up to the Clouds she
promises wonders, and told him, she wish she might be the unhappiest woman in
the world, if she did do as much for him as she would do for her self, and in
this she spoke (...) great truth. Don Fernand leaves her fuller (...) hopes
then ever, and Rodrigo Santilane, her (...) Steward, that passed muster for her
Father, b^ing come to visit her to learn how her desig^ ^ent on, she gives him
an account of all, and ^hewed him the Paper subscribed, for which he ^ave
thanks to heaven with her, finding all things contribute so happily to forward
their ^^tents. To loose no time, he went home to ^he house that Victoria had
hired not far from ^on Pedros, as I before related: where he filled ^p the
blank Don Fernand had given with a pro^ise of marriage attested with witnesses,
and da^ed about the same time that Victoria received ^his faithless Gallant
into her house and heart. ^^e was as skilful at his Pen as any man in Spain,
^^d had considered Don Fernands hand so well in (...) Copy of Verses of his own
writing, which he ^^d bestowed on Victoria during his heat of love, ^r lust
rather, that Don Fernand could not have ^istinguished the counterfeit Copy from
the O^^ginal: Don Pedro de Sylva could not meet with ^^e Gentleman he sought,
to know the verity ^f the information, but left a Ticket at his lodg^^g, and
came back to his own, where that same ^ight Elvira unbosomed her secrets to her
Go^erness, and vowed she would sooner disobey ^er Father, then yield her self
up to be Don Fer^ands Wife, confessing withal that she was pre^^gaged to one
Don Maradas a long while be^^re, and had in reason complied enough with ^er
Fathers commands and her own duty, in ^utting a restraint on her first
inclinations to ^^tisfie him, and since Don Fernands levity was ^ow made
manifest, she thought she fafely ^ight re-sume her first affection, which could
^e interpreted no other then a resignation of her will to Heavens decree, where
certainly all marriages are made: You may believe Victoria fortified Elvira in
these good resolutions, and spoke as she intended for Don Fernand, but not as
he expected. Don Diego de Maradas, said then Elvira to her, is much
dis-satisfied with me, for having forsaken him, in obedience to my Father; But
the least inviting look from me, will bring him back again, were he at a
greater distance then D^n Fernand is from his Lucretia: Write to him Madam,
said Victoria, and I shall willingly carry your Embassey: Elvira was
transported with joy, to find her Governess so kind in her behalf; she
commanded the Coach to be made ready for Victoria, who immediately went away
with an Epistle for Don Diego, and being alighted at her reputed Father
Santilanes, she made the Coach return, telling the fellow she would go a foot
whither she was designed. Honest Santilane showed her the promise of marriage
he had drawn up, and she presently wrote two little Notes; one to Diego
Maradas, the other to Pedro de Silva her Ladies Father, wherein she entreated
him to repair to her house about some business of great importance, with the
direction where she dwelt, and signed Victoria Portocarrero; whilst they were
carrying these notes Victoria strips off her black weeds, puts on very rich
Clothes, pulls out her Locks (which were o^ the loveliest hair and color that
could be) and tricks her self up like a very Spark. Don Diego de Maradas came
in a while after to know what business of such great concernment she could have
with him, who was a mere stranger to him; she received him very civilly, and
was scarce sit down, when it was told her that Don Pedro de Silva was come to
wait upon her. She entreated Don Diego to conceal himself in an Alcove,
assuring him it would be much for his advantage to over-hear the discourse she
should have with Don Pedro. He did as she enjoined him without more ado, more
upon the account of her Beauty and brave mien, then any other expectation, and
Don Pedro was admitted into Victorias Chamber, not knowing her, so much had
these Adornments and fine Feathers changed the Bird that fed at his own Table:
She entreated him to place himself in a Chair, whence Don Diego could easily
over-hear all they spoke, and then began in these terms. I think Sir, it will
be most proper in the first place, to let you know who I am, to prevent those
doubts that otherwise my Narration might raise in you. I am one of the Family
of the Portocarrero's, born in the City of Toledo, where I was married at the
Age of Thirteen, and became a Widow about six months after; my Father was of
the Order of Saint James's Cross, and my Brother is a Knight of the Order of
Calatrava. Don Pedro interrupted her, to let her know her Father was of his
acquaintance, and a most intimate Friend. It rejoices me extremely, Sir, said
she, to know this from your mouth, for I shall stand in need of many Friends to
help me in my present condition, as I shall inform you. After this she gave an
account to Don Pedro of all that had passed betwixt her and Don Fernand, and
then showed him the promise of Marriage counterfeited by Santillane: He had, no
sooner read it, but she went on thus; No doubt but you know Sir, what Honor
obliges Persons of my Quality to do in these cases: For though Justice should
be partially denied me, yet have my Friends so much power and credit in these
Countries, that they would presecute my interest to the highest. I thought it
would be a becoming act, Sir, to make known my pretenses to you, that you might
put a stop o the intended Match you had designed: Your Daughter is too worthy
to be cast away upon such a faithless Match, and I believe you are so discreet,
you will not rob me to bestow one upon her must prove her ruin, and be subject
to that Divorce my 'Title will call for; were he a Grandee of Spain, replied
Don Pedro, I would have nothing to do with him, if he were unjust and false: I
shall therefore not only deny him my Daughter, but my House; and as for your
self Madam, both my Friends and Credit shall be ready to assist you when ever
you desire it: I had notice given me before, that he was a man would slip no
opportunity of taking his pleasure, even to the hazard of his Reputation, and
being of that vain humor, though you had no concern for him, he never should
have my Daughter, whom Heaven I hope will provide for in the Court of Spain,
where she may make a better choice. Don Pedro parted from Victoria having no
more to say, and then she called Don Diego out of the Alcove, where he stood
listening to all they said; That spared her the labor of repeating her story,
she delivered Elviras Letter to him, which even ravished him for joy, and least
he should be in some kind of perplexity to know how she came by it, ^he made a
discovery of her Metamorphose to (...) Duegna, knowing he was as much concerned
^o keep it secret as her self. Don Diego, before he went from Victoria wrote an
Answer to his Mistresses pleasing message, where the infinite ^ontent he
expressed for his revived hopes, e^inced the affliction he had endured ever
since ^he loss of her noble Society and Favor: He parted from the fair Widow
likewise, and was no sooner gone, but she gets into her old robes ^gain, and
returned to Don Pedros. In the inte^im Don Fernand de Ribera was gone to wait
upon his Mistress, and had taken his Cousin Antonio long with him, to endeavor
to set all that to ^ights again, which had been charged against him by
Victoria's feigned Letter. Don Pedro ^ound them together with his Daughter, who
was non-plust when they both desired no better ^ustification, then only a due
inquiry, whether ^ver such a Lady as Lucretia de Monsalvo were ^eard of in
Sevil. They repeated the same thing to Don Pedro to clear themselves, to which
^e answered, that if that pretended engagement with Lucretia were a fancy, it
was so much ^he better and easier to be blown off; but that ^e had been newly
with a Lady of Toledo, na^ed Victoria Portocarrero, to whom Don Fernand ^ad
promised marriage, and to whom he was indeed much more engaged, having been so
generously assisted by her, when he was rather an^ object of compassion then
love being poor and naked, and had no Title to her favor but Charity, being a
mere stranger; which he could not deny, since she had under his hand and Seal
a^^ promise of Marriage from him, which he had seen; to which he added, That a
person of Honor ought not to Court a Wife at Madrid, whilst he had one already
at Toledo. At which words, he pulls the promise of Marriage out of his Letter
case, as it was formally conterfeited; Don Antonio knows his Cousins writing,
and Don Fernand mistaking it himself, though he were confident he had never
given any, was quite confounded at the sight of it. The good man and his Wife
withdrew after they had coldly bid them Adieu. Don Antonio quarrelled with his
Cousin for employing him in this Treaty, when he had another on foot before:
They took Coach together, where Don Antonio having made him confess his
unhandsome proceeding with Victoria, reproved the heinous crime, and showed the
evil consequence it was like to beget; He told him he must not think of getting
any Wife at Madrid only, but in any part of Spain, and it would prove a
happiness if he could get himself out of the Briers by marrying Victoria, and
not forfeit his life with his honor; Victoria's Brother being a Person not
likely to put up so foul a business without full satisfaction; It was time for
Don Fernand to keep silence, though his Consin continued these reproaches His
Conscience accused him sufficiently of trea^hery and of falsehood against a
Lady that had so ^ighly obliged him, but this promise of mari^ge almost
distracted him, not knowing by what ^trange enchantment they had made him grant
(...). Victoria being come back again to Don Pe^^ro's in her widows attire,
delivered Don Diego's Letter to Elvira; who told her, how the two Kinsmen had
been there to justify themselves; ^ut that they were since charged with other
^uess practices, then Fernands Love for the Se^^lian Lady. She afterward
related, what she new better then her Mistress, though she pre^ended to admire
and detest those abominable ^ractises, whereof Fernand was made guilty. that
same day Elvira was invited to a Come^y, at one of her Neeces. Victoria who
made ^er advantage of every occasion, hoped, if El^^ra would follow her
Counsel, that this Come^y may prove favorable to her design. She ^old her
young Mistress, that if she had any in^ination to see her Servant Diego, there
was nothing more easy; her Fathers house being ^e most convenient place that
could be; and ^at since the Play was not to begin till late at ^^ght, she might
if she pleased but to go forth little early, have time enough to speak with
^^m, and then go to the Comedy time enough. ^^vira who really and heartily
loved Don Diego, ^^d had not without much trouble and reluctan^y consented to
entertain Don Fernands Court^ip at her Fathers persuasion and command, ^^d no
aversion to what Victoria propounded: Wherefore they hurried away in a Coach as
soo^ as ever the old man was gone to sleep, and went to Victorias house.
Santillane as Maste^ of the said house, together with Beatrize, who personated
the Mother in Law, welcomed them very civily. Elvira sent a Ticket to Don Dieg^
which was soon delivered, while Victoria di^ spatched another privately away
for Don Fernand. in Elvira's name, wherein she made him believe it was in his
power to complete the Match, to which his merit engaged her to adventure, as
not desiring to render her self unhappy for ever by loosing him, only to
pleas^ a Fathers crabbed humor. She gave him such particular directions in the
same Note, how h^ might find the house, that it was impossible h^ should miss
of it, which Paper was carrie^ a very little while after that other, from
Elvir^ to Don Diego. Victoria wrote a third likewise which Santillane himself
was to convey to D^^ Pedro de Silva, by which she informed him as true and
trusty Governess, that his Daughte^ instead of going to the Comedy, would need
stop at her Fathers house; and had sent for D^^ Fernand to consummate her
marriage with him which she believing was utterly against his pu^^ pose and
consent, she thought her self boun^ to give him notice, that he might know he
wa^ not at all mistaken in that good opinion he ha^ of her honesty, when he
first took her to be h^ Daughters Governess. Santillane likewise tol^ Don
redro, his Daughter had charged him, t^ wish him not to come thither by any
mean without bringing an Algovazil along with him, which is an Officer we call
a Commissary here at ^^aris. Don Pedro being in Bed, hasted to put ^n his
Clothes, being as much in wrath as ever ^hy poor drowsy creature was at his
first wak^^g. But whilst he is dressing himself and send^^g for a Commissary,
let us step back and see that they are doing at Victorias. It fortuned ^at the
Notes came safely to the brace of lovers ^ands. Don Diego having received his
first, ^^me likewise first to the Rendezvou, Victoria ^et him at the door and
conducted him up to Chamber, where she left him with Elvira. I ^ill not trouble
you nor my self, with the re^tion of the endearing expressions which passed
^twixt these young Lovers. Don Fernands ^ocking at the door gives me not time
enough, ^^ctoria lets him in her self, after she had magfied the great service
she did him by this at^ndance, for which the Amorous Blade gave ^ra thousand
thanks, promising he would yet (...) more for her, then all his former promises
^liged him to. She Leads him to another ^^hamber, where she entreated him to
stay a ^^ile for Elvira who was coming, and so locked ^m in without any light,
telling him his Mi^ess would needs have it thus, but only till ^e could check
her modest blushes, and then ^e would be visible again. This done, Victoria, ^th
as much haste as it was possible, attires her ^f in all her bravery, with as
much exactness ^^d curiosity as the short time would admit. She ^es into the
Chamber where Don Fernand was, who had not the least suspicion but that it w^^
Elvira, being no less young then she, and h^ving Gloves and others sweets about
her a^cording to the Spanish Mode of Perfumes amongst the Nobility. Hereupon
Don Pedr^ the Commissary and Santillane arrive. They e^^ter into the Chamber
where Elvira was in p^^vate with her Servant. The young lovers we^^ extremely
surprised, Don Pedro at the first m^^tions of his wrath, was so far blinded
with pa^sion, that he was ready to run the party th^^ row the Body with his
sword, whom he took (...) Don Fernand. The Commissary discovering was not he,
but Don Diego, held back his A^^ and bid him have a care what he did, since it
w^^ not the man he looked for, that was with (...) Daughter: But Signor Don
Diego de Marad^^ a person of as great quality and wealth as (...) Don Pedro at
this behaved himself like a discr^^ Gentleman, he quelled his first fury and
chan^ing it into a milder temper, raised up his Daug^ter, who had cast her self
upon her Knees at (...) feet. He considered, that although this we^^ an act
against his former intentions, yet in tru^^ it was as fair a Fortune as could
be expected (...) his dear Daughter. Santillane entreated Don ^^dro, the
Commissary, and all those that were w^^ them in the Room to follow him; he led
to (...) Chamber where Don Fernand was shut up w^^ Victoria. They commanded the
door to be o^ned in the Kings Name. Don Fernand lett^^ them in; seeing Don
Pedro attended with (...) Commissary, told them with a great deal of
c^^fidence, that he had no body with him but his Wife Elvira de Silva. Don
Pedro answered he ^as deceived, his Daughter being engaged to another party;
and for you pursued he, you cannot deny, but Victoria Portocarrero is your
law^^l Spouse. Victoria then discovered her self (...) her faithless Galant,
who was astonished be^ond expression. She reproached his ingrati^^de, to which
his silence was his only plea, as ^ell as to the Commissary when he told them
(...) could do no less in duty then carry him away (...) Prison. In fine, his
remorse of Conscience, ^^ar of Imprisonment, together with Don Pedros
^^thortations, who minded him of his honor ^^d reputation, joined to Victorias
tears and ^^auty, nothing inferior to Elviras, and above (...) some sparks of
generosity still remaining in (...) heart, notwithstanding all his youth, love
(...) change, and the new flames kindled by El^^ras bright eyes, made him
hearken to reason ^^d justice, and Victorias great deserts and claim. (...)
tenderly embraced her, she being like to ^oon betwixt his arms, which no doubt
but (...) soft Kisses preserved her from. Don Pedro, ^on Diego, and fair Elvira
shared in Victorias ^^ys; which infinitely transported both Santil^^^e and
Beatrix to find their designs brought that perfection. Don Pedro applauded Don
Fer^^nds goodness and wisdom for thus Nobly re^^ring the wrongs he had
committed. The two ^^ung Ladies hugged each other with as great ^^stimonies of
Love, as if they had been sisters, (...) Diego de Maradas made a thousand
protestations of obedience to his Father in Law, or h^^ that should be so in a
short season. Don Pedr^ before he took his Daughter home with him made them
plight their mutual faith and promises, and Engage that they should all com^^
and Dine the next day at his House; where for fifteen days following he would
endeavor (...) disband their former troubles, by their futur^ pastimes and
divertisements. The Commissary was invited too, who engaged to make u^ one at
their merry meeting, Don Pedro too him along with him, and Don Fernand remained
with Victoria, who had as much reason ^^bless her good Fortune now, as she had
cause t^ curse it formerly.

CHAP. XXIII.
An unexspected misfortune which hindered them from Acting the Comedy.

INezilla told her story very gracefully: R^quebrune was so well satisfied with
it, that h^^ caught up her hand, and kissed it whether sh^^ would or not. She
said to him in Spanish, tha^ great persons and fools had the liberty to d^^ any
thing; for which Rancour gave her thanks (...) his heart. This Spanish Ladies
beauty began (...) decay; yet were there many footsteps and ^elicks of her
former handsomeness to be seen, ^ut had she been less fair, the ingenuity she
was ^^ill Mistress of, made her deserve to be prefer^^d before most youthful
people, that had fresh^^ faces indeed, but wanted her sparkling wit. ^ll those
that heard her story, agreed in this, that she had told it very pleasantly,
though in Language she was but yet a Scholar in, being ^ftentimes compelled to
make use of some Spa^ish and Italian Phrases to express her mind. ^adam Star
told her, that instead of craving ^ardon for having put her to this trouble,
she ^xspected her thanks for giving her so fair an ^ccasion to show her ready
wit and judgment. ^he rest of the afternoon was spent in conver^^tion, the
Garden being full of Ladies, and ^any Citizens of Note till Supper time. They
^upped after their Country mode; that is to say ^t very plentifully, which
being over, every ^ne took their place to see the Play: But Madam ^ave and her
Daughter were missing: They sent (...) seek them out; and it was half an hour
at ^east before any tidings came. At last they ^eard a great rumor without the
Hall, and ^resently after in comes Madam Cave, with her ^air hanging about her
ears, her face bloody and bruised, crying out like a distracted crea^^re, that
her Daughter was stolen away. Her ^bbs and sighs did so interrupt her speech,
^^at it was a long time before she could make them understand, how a couple of
strangers, being gotten into the Garden, by a back door where she and her
Daughter were repeating their Parts, one of them ceazed upon her, whose eyes
she had almost scratched out of his head seeing two others force her Daughter
to go with them; the same Rascal having put her into that sad condition as they
saw, and afterward mounting on Horseback followed his Comerades whilst they
fled away with Angelica: She told them likewise, that she persued them as far
as she could; crying out a Rape, but finding no body was within hearing, she
hasted back again to the house to beg their assistance. Having said this she:
fell into such a fit of weeping, as made al^ their very hearts ache with grief.
The whole company was disturbed. Destiny, got to horse upon a beast that had
newly brought Ragotin to the place, I cannot justly tell whether or not i^ were
the same that threw him in the morning (...) Many other young men took the
first horses they could lay hands on, and Rode after Destiny who was gotten a
good way before them. Rancou^ and Olive marched a Foot with their swords in
their hands, in the rear of the horse; Roquebru^^ staid with Star and Inezilla,
who were indeavouing to comfort Cave as much as they could. I^ was somewhat
wondered at that he did not go along with the rest, some believed it was for
wan^ of courage, but others thought it rather discretion to stay with the
women. In the mean time the wedding guests were forced to change their Comedy
for dancing, and having no Fiddler because they expected a Play, two or three
sung ^e newest tunes they could hit upon, and the ^est Footed it after the
Mansean Fashion. Poor ^ave was so overcome with grief, that she went (...) bed
in one of the Chambers allotted for their Tyring; Star took as much care, as if
she had ^een her Mother, and Inezilla was very officious ^^kewise. The
afflicted woman desired they ^ould leave her alone, so Roquebrune leads the ^wo
Ladies to the rest of the Company that ^ere Dancing. Hardly were they sat down,
but ^ne of the house-maids, came and told Star, that Cave desired to speak with
her; she promised ^he Poet and the Spanish Lady to return imme^iately to them,
and went up to the Chamber. (...) Roquebrune had any thing in him, no doubt ^ut
he made good use of that opportunity, and ^ise vered his heart to Inezilla.
However, as ^oon as Cave faw Star, she prayed her to shut the ^oor and come to
her bedside. Star having sea^ed her self as she desired, the first thing she
did, ^as to weep so abundantly, as if she had not ^ropt one tear before, and
then wringing her ^y the hands, she groaned and sighed most la^entably. Star
bid her be of good cheer, ma^ing her hope, her Daughter would soon be re^overed
again, being pursued by so many sever^^ people. I wish she may never return,
said she, ^eeping still more and more; I wish she might ^ever, be found
repeated she again, and that this ^ight be all my grief: But I blame her most,
must blame her most, and have reason to hate ^er, and grieve that ever I
brought her so unhappily into the world. Look here! said she putting a Paper
into Stars hands, look and satisfi^ your self, what a pure companion you had of
her and read the Sentence of my Death, and my Child's infamy in this one scroule
of Paper. Cav^ continued her weeping still, and Star perused the Note, which
contained the following Lines.

YOU have no reason to doubt of the truth of what (...) have often told you of
my birth and fortune, sin^ there is no probability I would go about to deceive
her who can never be won but upon a score of the trut^ and sincerity of my
Protestations. I know no other way, fairest Angelica, to deserve your favor:
An^ therefore you may safely sign my Petition and Request, which I cannot, nor
shall not desire to obtain till I have made it appear, I am the same, I have
pretended, by such infallible testimonies, as sha^^ convince you of my reality.
When she had run over these things, Cave asked her, if she knew that hand? As
well as m^ own, replied S^ar; this is Leander my brother Servant, that writes
all our parts. This is the Traitor that murders me, said the poor woman see if
he have not plotted fairly, pursued she giving another Letter of the same
Leanders wri^ing into Madam Stars hand, which you man read as follows, word
for word.

IT rests only in you to complete my happiness, (...) continuing in the same
resolution you had tak^ two days since. My Fathers Tenant, who is ^o^^^ ^o
supply me with moneys, has furnished me with a hundred Pistoles, and a brace
of good Geldings, which will be more then enough to carry us both into England;
and being there, I am much deceived, if a Father, who loves his only Son and
Heir, more then his own life, do not quickly condescend to all his desires to
make him return again and live happily. Well, said Cave, what think you now of
your friend, and your Brothers man, of that Girl that I had bred with so much
care, and that young fellow whose quick wit and ripe judgment we so often
admired. But my greatest wonder, is that they were never observed to speak to
one another; nor did I ever find her inclined in the least to such a foolish
love, and passion: and yet we find it so, my dearest Star, and she has showed
her self so desperately besotted, that it declares as much of madness, as of
affection. I found her this day writing to her Leander in such passionate
expressions, that if I had not surprised her my self, the world could not have
persuaded me it was so. You never heard her speak such Language yet; ah, had I
not torn her Letters in my fury, you would be convinced, that at sixteen years
old, she knows as much as those that have made love their study double her Age.
I carried her aside into that Grove, whence she was taken from me, to chide her
for the trouble and ingratitude she returned me, for all the pains and toil I
have endured for her sake: I will relate my sufferings to you, and then judge
you, whether ever any Daughter, were more obliged to a Mother then she should
be to me. St^^ knew not what to answer, to these just complaints, nor did she
think it wisdom to stop the current too suddenly. But, continued Cave, if he
were so fond of the Daughter; wherefore, should he be so uncivil, nay cruel, to
the Mother; For one of his confederates that took hold of me, beat me most
unmercifully, nay, struck me diverse times, after I had given over struggling
with him: And if this fellow be so Rich as he braggs, why does he steal away my
Child like a Theer. Cave thus bemoaned her self for a long while, Star giving
her the best advice she was then capable of. The master of the house came to
inquire how she fared, and to let her know there was a Coach ready at her
Service, if she desired to return to Manse. But she begged the Liberty to
remain there that night, to which he readily condescended. Star kept her
company as long as she staid there and some of the Ladies took Inezilla into a
Coach with them, she being unwilling to be longer from her husband. Roquebrune,
who could not civily leave the two women alone behind him, was very sorry he
could not wait upon Inezilla; But we cannot have every thing we desire in this
world.

The end of the First Part.
THE Comical Romance. The Second Part.
Which serves but for an Introduction to the rest.
THE Sun shined directly on our Antipodes, and lent his Sister no more light
then just would serve to grope out her way in a very dark night: Silence
reigned over all the earth, unless in some certain places haunted with
Crickets, Owls, and musical Lovers, scrubbing of doleful Serenades under their
Mistrisses Balcones. I say, every thing in nature slept, or ought to have been
sleeping, some pitiful Poets excepted, whose brains were broken with hard
Rhimes; some damned unfortunate Lovers, and other rational or irrational
animals that had that night somewhat else to do. It were unnecessary to tell
you that Destiny was one of those that did not sleep, no more then Madam
Angelica's Ravishers, whom he pursued as fast as his Horse could gallop, from
whom the envious Clouds did often take away the feeble light of the Moon: He
tenderly loved Madam Cave, because she was very lovely, and he was sure to be
loved again, whose daughter was no less dear to him; besides that, his Madam or
Mistress Starr being necessitated to continue her acting of Plays, could not
amongst all the troops of wandering Comedians, have met with two Actresses more
virtuous then they were: I do not say but there are some of that Profession
that are such; but in the opinion of most people, they are not so well stored
with Virtue, as they are with Paint and old Embrodery; but perhaps such are
deceived, and wrong those Virtuoso's. Our generous Comedian rid therefore after
those Ravishers with more haste and animosity, then the Lapithes after the
Centaurs: He first rod down a long Lane, which led from the Garden door whence
Angelica had been hurried; and having galloped some time, he run at random
into a deep way, as most of those in the Country of Main are. This Rode was
full of holes and stones, and though it was Moonlight, yet was it so duskish,
that Destiny could make his Horse go no faster then a Trot: He cursed the bad
way in his heart, whilst at the same instant he felt either a Man or a Devil
leap up behind him on his Horses Crupper, who threw his arms about his neck.
Destiny was much affrighted, and his Horse so startled, that he had thrown him
off, had not the Fantome, who hugged and embraced him, kept him secure in his
Saddle: His Horse posted away as scared horses use to do, and Destiny put him
on with his Spurrs, not minding what he did, being very little pleased to feel
two naked arms about his neck, and a cold Nose snuffling behind his ear, and
keeping exact time with his horses gallop. The Race was long, because the way
was not short, and the Devil drove: But in fine at the entrance into a Plain,
the Horse moderated his pace, and Destiny his fear; For by degrees we at length
learn to endure the greatest troubles. The Moon then afforded light enough to
let him see that he had a great naked ugly Villain behind him, gaping and
staring upon him: He never asked him who he was, (I cannot tell whether it were
out of discretion) but he made his Horse continue on his Gallop, though he were
very much out of breath; and when he least hoped for it, the unwelcome
Crupper-rider threw himself down, and there lay laughing. Destiny put his Horse
forwards with speed, and turning his head back, he beheld his Fantome running
with great swiftness toward the place from whence he rod; he has since
confessed, that one cannot possibly be more affrighted then he was: about a
hundred paces thence he found a great Road that led him to a Hamlet, where he
heard all the Dogs in an uproar, which made him guess that those he pursued
might have passed that way, and given the alarm to those faithful guardians: To
inform himself therein, he did what he could to awaken the inhabitants that
were sleeping in three or four houses that stood next the highway; but he
could get no audience, and was only grumbled at by their Dogs: yet having at
length heard the cries of children in the last house, he made them open the
door with his threatenings, and was informed by a woman in her Smock, who could
not speak without trembling, That some Soldiers had passed throw the Village
but lately, and carried a woman along with them, who cried out very fiercely,
so that they had much ado with her: he told the woman his rencontre of the
naked man, and she replied, that he was a fellow of their Village, who having
lost his little wits, ran about the Country to find them. The information this
woman had given him of those Soldiers that had passed the same way, encouraged
him to go on, and made him spur his beast with more confidence. I shall not
tell you how often he stumbled, and was afraid of his own shadow; it shall
suffice to let you know that he lost his way in a Wood, and that sometimes
having no light at all and at best, but a very little glimmering of the Moon;
at the last he found it break of day jus^ by a Farm, where he thought fit to
bait his Horse (...) and there we leave him.

CHAP. II.
Of the Boots.

WHilst Destiny was thus running at random after those that had stolen away
Angelica; Rancour, and Olive, who did not take that misfortune so much to
heart, did not make so much have as the former after those Ravishers; and
besides, they were on foot. They went not far, before they met in the next
Village with a good Inn that was not yet shut up, where they desired a Lodging:
The people led them into a Chamber, where was already in bed another either
noble or ignoble, Traveller, who had supped, and being commanded to make all
possible speed, about some business that is unknown to me, intended to be gone
very early the next morning. The arrival of these Comedians did not contribute
much to his design of being early on horseback; for he was waked by them, and
perhaps cursed them for it in his thoughts; but the presence of two such
gentile blades did perhaps hinder him from expressing it to them. Rancour, who
was of an acosting carriage, did presently make some excuse for their having
interrupted his rest, and withal asked of him, whence he came? He told him he
was come from Anjou, and going into Normandy, for a business that required
have. Rancour dis-robing himself whilst they were airing his sheets, continued
his questions: which being needless to either party, and the poor wakened.
Traveller finding no end in them, he entreated him, to let him sleep. Rancour
made him some very cordial excuses thereupon, and at the same time, Charity
beginning at home, and the love of one self, making many often forget what they
owe their Neighbors, made him design to appropriate a pair of new Boots, which
a Boy had newly cleaned and brought into the room, to his own use. Olive, who
at that time had no other intention but to sleep soundly, got into the bed, and
Rancour remained by the fire side, not so much to see an end of the Faggot
which was burning, as to content his noble ambition of gaining a new pair of
Boots at another cost: When he guessed the fellow, whom he was going to rob,
to be duly and truly asleep, he took the Boots which lay at the beds feet, and
having put them on his bare legs, not forgetting to buckle the spurs in their
usual place, he crept into the bed to ^is Companian Olive: you must think, that
he lay as near the edge of the bed as possible, for fear his armed legs should
wound his bed-fellows bare ones, who would not have concealed his so
new-fashion night-hose, and so must have rendered his plot abortive. The rest of
the night was passed over very quietly. Rancour slept, and the rest waked not;
The Cocks crowed; the day peeped, and the forementioned Traveller, called for a
fire, and dressed himself: It came now to the Booting old himself; a servant
Maid presented him Rancours Boots, which he flung back with a rage; they
assured him they were his own, he begins to grow ^ot, and made a most devilish
noise. The Host ^omes up into the Chamber, and swore by the Faith of an
Innkeeper that there were no other Boots then those, not only in the house,
but ^n the Village, the Curate himself never using to ^ide on horseback;
Thereupon he begins to prate to him of the good qualities of the Curate, and
the manner how he came by his Cure, and for how long he had held it: This
prattling of mine Host made him lose all patience. Rancour and Olive, who were
wakened with the noise, took cognizance of the business, and Rancour exagerated
the enormity of the case, and told the Host it was very ugly. I look no more
upon a pair of new Boots, then I would do upon an old shoe, said the poor
bootless Plaintiff to Rancour; but I am concerned in a business of great
Importance, for a person of Quality, whom I would less fail then my own Father;
and could I meet with a pair of the worst Boots in the world, I would give the
owner more for them, then he could reasonably ask. Rancour, who had raised
himself up in his bed, shrunk up his shoulders from time to time, and answered
him nothing, casting his looks toward the Host, and the Maid, who sought the
Boots in vain, and then on the unhappy wight that had lost them; who in the
mean while cursed his Misfortune, and perhaps meditated upon some Tragical
resolution; when Rancour with an unparalled generosity, not very usual in
him, said aloud, creeping into the bed, like one that is almost dying for want
of sleep, S'lid Sir, make no more noise about your Boots, and take mine; but
upon conditi^^ that you leave us to ^ur rest, as you desired us to^le^^ you
last night. The unfortunate fellow, who wa^ so no longer, since he had found a
pair of Boots could hardly be persuaded to believe what he the^ heard: He made
a great medly of new-coyned Complements in so passionate a tone, that Rancour
was afraid he would in the end come and embrace him in the bed; wherefore, he
cried our angrily, and learnedly swore; God's Death, Sir, ho^ troublesome you are
both when you loose your Boots, ar^ when you return thanks to them that furnish
you again. In the name of God I tell you once more, take min^, f^^ which I only
crave that you would let us sleep quietly, or else give me my Boots again, and
make as much noise as you please: He opened his mouth to reply when Rancour
bawled out; for Gods sake either let me sleep, or else leave my Boots here. The
Master of the house having a great deal of respect for one who spoke so
positively, thrust his importunate Guest out of the Chamber, who would not else
have given over; so great was his resentment, for a pair of Boots so generously
bestowed: He was forced therefore to retreat out of the Chamber, and Boot
himself in the Kitchen, and then Rancour slept more securely then he had done
all the night before, his faculty of sleeping being no longer disturbed betwixt
a desire of stealing, and fear of being surprised in the Fact; as for Olive,
who had made a better night on it, he rose very early in the morning, and
calling for Wine, past his time in drinking, having no other employment to
divert him; Rancour slept till eleven of the Clock: As he was dressing himself,
Ragotin came into the Chamber; He had visited the Comedians in the morning, and
Madam Star, having reproached his want of Friendship, since he went not with
^he rest to find out her Compagnon, he promised ^er not to return to Manse,
till he had learned some intelligence; but not being able either to ^orrow, or
hire a Horse, he could not have performed his promise, had not his Miller lent
him (...) Mule, which he mounted without Boots, and arrived as I just now told
you in the same place where the two Comedians had lodged. Rancour having a very
quick apprehension, he no sooner espied Ragotins she is, but he imagined that
for^une had furnished him with a very fair cover to ^ide his theft, which had
not a little perplexed him: He therefore, immediately entreated him to lend him
those shoes, and take his Boots, which hurt his feet because they were new.
Ragotin changed them very willingly; for riding his Mule, a thorn had thorough
his Stockings so wounded his legs, that he wished them armed with Boots. It was
^ow Dinner time, Ragotin paid for the Comedians and the Mule, ever since his
fall, when his Ca^abine got betwixt his legs, he made oath that he would never
mount any Beast, without taking all the caution and security imaginable: He
therefore took an advantageous rising to get up at, but with all his
circumspection he could hardly seat himself fully in the Pad-saddle: His brisk
nature ever outrun his judgment, and this had made him inconsiderately draw
up Rancours Boots so high, that reaching up to his twist, they hindered him from
bending his little knees, which were not the most vigorous in the Province. But
in fine, Ragotin upon his Mule, and the Comedians on the hoof, took down into
the next way that lay before them, and traveling forward, Ragotin discovered
to the Players the design he had to be an Actor, protesting likewise, that
although he knew he should quickly prove the best Comedian in France, yet he
pretended not to make any gain by that Trade, which he would only practice out
of curiosity, and to make it appear that he was born to accomplish what ever he
would undertake. Rancour and Olive fortified him in his noble design; and with
their much commending and encouraging of him, put him into so good a humor,
that he fell a reciting some Verses (of Pyramus and Thisby, written by the Poet
Theophile) as he sat on his Mule: some country people who went along with a
Cart, that was loaded, the same way they did, believed that he Preached the
Word of God, hearing him declaim like one inspired; and whilst he repeated they
walked along by him bare-headed, and reverenced him like an Itinerant Priest.

CHAP. III.
The History of Mrs. Cave.

THE two women Actors whom we left in the house whence Angelica was stolen,
had slept ^s little as Destin^. Madam Star was gotten in^o the same bed with
Cave, that she might not ^e left alone with her despair, and to endeavor ^o
persuade her not to afflict her self so much as ^he did: In fine, judging that
a just affliction did not want reasons to defend it self, she opposed ^t no
longer with hers; but for diversion, she begins to bemoan her own misfortune,
as the other did hers; and by this means easily engaged her to tell her all her
Adventures, which she the more readily assented to, because Cave could not
suffer any one to compare their troubles to hers: She therefore dried up her
tears, which dewed her cheeks abundantly, and fetching a very deep sigh, as
knowing it more becoming to do so once for all, then to interrupt her Story too
often with such abrupt stops, she thus began her History.

I Was born a Comedian, the Daughter of a Comedi-an, whose Parents, as I ever
was informed, were all of the same profession. My Mother was a Merchants
daughter of Marseilles, who gave her in marriage to my Father, for a recompense
of having ventured his life for him, against an Officer of the Galleys, who
attaqued him upon advantage, he being as amorous of my Mother as he was hated
by her. This was a good Fortune for my Father, since without Courtship they be
stowed on him a Wife that was young, and rich then a country Comedian could
have ever hoped for. His Father in law endeavored all he could to make him
leave off that Trade, propounding more honor and profit in taking upon him
Merchandising: but my Mother, who was hugely pleased with Comedies, hindered my
Father from leaving it: He had no repugnance against the persuasions of his
Wives Father, knowing better then she could, that an Actors life is not so
happy as it appears: My Father went from Marseilles a while after his Nuptials;
carrying my Mother to make her first progress, who was more eager then himself,
and became in a short time a most rare Player: She was with child the first
year of her Marriage, and brought me into the world behind the Theater; a year
after I had a Brother, who loved me extremely well, as I loved him: Our Company
was composed of our own Family, and three other Actors, whereof the one was
wedded to a Comedian that played a meaner part: We passed one day throw a Hamlet
of Perigort, and my Mother, the other Actor and my self, were upon the Wagon
that carried our goods, and our men guarded us on foot; when our small Train
was set upon by seven or eight Vilains, so drunk, that having shot off a
fowling Piece to frighten us, I was covered with a shower of the small Shot,
and my Mother hurt in the Arm: They seized my Father, and two of his
compagnons, before they ^uld put themselves in any defensive posture, and ^eat
them cruelly: my Brother and the youngest ^f our Actors fled, and since that
time I could never recover the least news of him: The Inhabitants ^f the Hamlet
joined with those that committed ^his insolence, and made our Wagon return
again that way it came; They marched very fast and precipitately, as those that
have gotten a rich Booty, and are in have to secure it, and made so ^onfused a
noise they could not understand each other: After an hours hurry, they drove us
into a Castle, where as soon as we were entered, we heard several people cry
out with a great deal of joy, That the Gypsies were Trapan'd; By this we knew
they were mistaken, for those we were nothing of kin unto, and that afforded
some kind of consolation. The Mare that drew our Carriage fell down dead
through weariness, having been so overdriven and cudgelled; The Player to whom
it belonged, and who hired it out to the company, shreeked out as pitifully,
as if she beheld the death of her husband. My Mother at the same instant fell
into a swoon with the pain of her Arm; and my noise and moan for her was
greater then the others for her Mare. The great clamor which we, and those
savage Drunkards that brought us prisoners made, caused the Lord of the Castle,
with some four or five other ill complexion'd Scarlet Cloaks that followed him,
to come out to us. He at the very first word, asked Where those theeving
Gypsies were, and put us in alarm; But finding none amongst us, but fair
people, he demanded of my Father what he was, and had ^^ sooner information
that we were unhappy C^medians, but with an Impetuosity, which surpr^zed us,
and many of the most fearful Oaths tha^ ever I heard, he fell upon those that
had taken u^ with his Sword, who vanished in a moment, some as much hurt, as
the rest were scared. He cause my Father to be unbound with his companions
commanded to conduct us Females to a Chamber and put all our baggage into a
secure place: Several domestique servants presented themselves to serve us, and
prepared a Bed for my Mother^ who found her self much discomposed with the
wound on her Arm. A fellow who had the Mee^ of a Steward, came and made several
excuses o^ his Lords behalf, for what had happened: He told us, that those
Rascals, who were so unfortunately mistaken, were driven out of the Castle,
either well beaten or lamed; that they had dispatched away a messenger to the
next Village to bring back a Chyrurgion for my Mother; and made a very hot
inquiry whether or no we had lost any thing, wishing us to have our Trinkets
searched, to know whether any thing were wanting. At supper time they brought
us a very handsome Treat into our Chamber; the Chyrurgion they had sent for
came; my Mothers Arm was dressed, and she put to bed, in a very high Fever. The
next day, the Lord of the Castle caused all the Comedians to be brought before
him; He informed himself of my Mothers condition, and vowed she should not stir
thence till she were perfectly recevered: He had so much goodness also, as he
caused a strict search to be made all about those parts for my Brother and the
young fellow that made their escape together; but they could not be retrived,
and this added much to my Mothers former Fever. They also had a Doctor and
another Chyrurgeon more expert then he that had first dressed my Mothers wound;
and, in fine, the civil entertainment they made for us, made us soon lose the
Memory of their former violence. The Gentleman with whom we were was very rich,
more feared then beloved in the Country, severe in all his actions as a
Governor of a Frontire Garrison; and one that had the Reputation of being
Valiant as much as could be desired: He was called the Baron of Sigognac; by
this time he is at the least a Marquess, and at that time, he was the very
Tyrant of Perigord. A crew of Gypsies that had nestled within his Precinct, had
stolen some Horses from a Farm that he had within a League of his Castle, and
the people he sent to pursue them had mistaken us to our Cost, as I have
already related. My Mother perfectly recovered, and my Father and his
Comerades, to express their acknowledgments, as much as poor Comedians could
do; for their Civility and Care, proffered to act in the Castle, as long as the
Baron of Sigognac would require them: an overgrown Page of at least four and
twenty years old, who might have been the Dean of all the Pages in the Kingdom;
and another, a kind of Gentleman-waiter, learned the parts my Brother and the
other young fellow, that slipped away with him should have Acted.

The rumor of a Comedy to be Acted sprea^ round about the Country, many of the
Perig^rli^^ Nobility was invited, and when the Page had perfectly learned his
part, which was so difficult for him to attain to, that they were forced to
contra^ it, and reduce it all into a Distick'; we represented Rogiero and
Bradamant, written by Garnter the Poet. There was a very good Audience the Ha^
well lighted, the Theater very convenient, and the Scenes fitted to the
subject; we strained to d^ our utmost, and had the good fortune to succeed: My
Mother appeared as beauteous as a^ Angel, armed like an Amazon, and being newly
recovered of her Malady, that had left a Whiteness more then ordinary; she
out-shone the very Tapers that illuminated the place. But what great cause
soever I have now to be sad, yet can not I forbear laughing when I remember
that day and the pleasant manner of the great Pages acting; my melancholy must
not rob you of this Mirth: but perhaps you will not find it such; ye^ I must
assure you that it made the whole Company laugh heartily, and has often made
m^ laugh since at the least remembrance of it whether it were that there was
somewhat worth the laughing at, or that I am one of those that am easily moved
to laughter, I leave to be judged. He acted a part very proper to him, which
was the old Duke Aymons Page, and had but two lines to speak in all the Play:
his Cue coming after that old man^ having terribly stormed against his Daughter
Bradamant for not espousing the Emperors Son, being enamoured with Rogero; the
Page says to his Master in Rhyme; as all the whole piece is.

Sir, let us retire, you will fall if you do se^'t
You are too weak to stand upon your Feet.
This great Sot, although his part were thus ^^ort and easy to remember
because of the ^hyme, yet must needs faulter, and speaking ^^ke a disciplined
Monkey, trembling like a con^emned Cutpurse, corrupted it thus,

Sir, let us retire, I fear you will fall, d'ont seet!
You are too weak to stand upon your legs.
This foul mistaken Rhyme surprised the whole Company. The other that acted
Armon, burst out into a laughter, and could not possibly compose himself again
to personate the choleric old man: The whole Audience laughed no less, and I
my ^elf, who stood peeping out at the opening of the Curtain to see and to be
seen, had almost killed my self with gigling at this pleasant passage. The
Master of the Castle, who was one of those melancholy persons that seldom
laugh, and do not laugh at every trivial thing, found so much cause for
laughter in his dull Pages want of memory, and his mouthing of what he said,
that he had like ^o stifle himself with endeavoring to keep in his laughter
and preserve his Gravity: but, in fine, he was forced to laugh as loud as the
rest, and his Servants swore they never saw him do the like before; and as he
had acquired a great deal of Authority in the Country, there was not one in the
whole Audience that did not imitate him i^ this fit of Mirth, either out of
complaisance, or the jest. I justly fear, said Mistress Cave, I ha^^ done like
those that say, I will make you laugh t^ you die with the jest; I mean to tell
you, whi^^ many times proves abortive: for I confess I ha^^ made too great a
digression about this api^ Page. Not so, said Madam Star, I find it just (...)
good as you promised; It is true, it might appe^^ more pleasant to those that
beheld the action then it can to me that only hear it repeated, the countenance
of the Page, and suddenness of the mistake adding a great deal to it, besides
that the time and place might conduce much to the heightning of it, especially
considering how natural it is to all people to laugh in consort, whi^^ is here
wanting. Madam Cave, made no other excuses for the tale, but took up the thread
of he story where she had left off; After, said she that both the Actors and
Spectators had laughe^ their fill at this accident, the Baron of Sigogn^^ would
needs have his Page to return upon the Theater, to repair his fault, or at
least to rene^ the sport; but the Page the greatest Block-hea^ in nature, could
not be persuaded to it, wha^ ever command was laid upon him by the severest
Master that lives. He looked upon his Misfortune with the same judgment as he
acted, tha^ is to say, very ill-favouredly; and his passion which should have
ended with our laughter had he been any thing wise, brought upon us the
greatest calamity that could ever have lighted upon us; our Comedy had the
approbation of a^^ the Company: The Farce that followed, pleased them as much
if not more, yet, then the Play, as it most commonly happens in any place out
of Paris. The Baron of Sigognac, and the rest of ^he Gentry his Neighbors,
took so great delight, that they most earnestly desired to see us ^ct again.
Every Gentleman made some Present ^o the Actors, according to the liberality of
his Genius; and the Baron led the Dance, to excite ^he rest by his example; and
a new Comedy was promised at the next Holy day: We acted a full month before
this Perigordi^ Gentry, the Men and Women striving to outvie each other in
their largess toward us; so that besides other things, and entertainments, the
Company ^^wss pretty well furnished with cast Clothes. The Baron made us eat at
his Table; his people contended who should be most serviceable, and often
repeated to us how much they were obliged to us for having put their Master
into so Gay and Jovial a humor, who was as it were quite changed since we had
humaniz'd him, only the Page beheld us as such who had stained his Reputation,
and those two Verses, which every one in the Family, even to the very turn-spit
had often in their mouths, was as a Dagger so often stuck in his heart;
wherefore, in fine, he resolved to revenge himself upon some of our Company.
One day when the Baron of Sigognac had made an Assembly of the Neighborhood,
together with all his Peasants, to free his Woods from a Company of Wolves
which Rendevouzed there, and infested the Country; my Father and his Companions
took each of them a fowling Piece, as all the Barons Servants did: The unworthy
Page was one of the Crew, and thinking h^ had an occasion to execute his
treacherous design against us, he no sooner beheld my Father with his Comerades
separated from the rest, who were charging their Guns, and gave out the Powder
and Shot to each other, but he shot amongst them from behind a Tree, and
pierced my unappy Father with a brace of Bullets. His Companions being busy in
upholding my Father, did not mind at first the following and seizing on the
Murderer, who had time to make his flight, and quitted that Country: Two days
after my Father dyed of his Wounds; my Mother was almost at Deaths door through
grief; and fell desperately sick again; and I was as much afflicted, as a girl
o^ my age could possibly be: my Mothers relapse continuing a great while; the
rest of the Come^dians that made up our Troop took their leaves of the Baron of
Sigognac, and went from thence to get places in some other Companies. My Mother
continued sick above two Months, and a^ length recovered, having received many
testimomonies of Generosity and Bounty from the Baron of Sigognac, far
different from the Reputation ^e had in the Country of the greatest Tyrant tha^
ever ruled amongst them, though most of the Nobility and Gentry in those
Governments are wont to be haughty and severe. His Servants who had ever found
him to be without either civility or humanity, admired to see him live with us
in that most obliging manner: They might have believed that he was enamoured
with my Mother; but he spoke little to her, and rarely came into our Chamber,
where we confined our selves after my Fathers Death. It is true indeed he often
sent to inquire of her health, yet this was however ill spoken of in the
Country, which we were afterward informed of: But my Mother thinking she could
not handsomely make any longer stay in the Castle with a person of his
condition, had already designed to leave it, intending to retire to Marseilles
to her Fathers: She therefore informed the Baron of her retreat, returned him
innumerable thanks for all the favors she had received, and implored him to
add to all his former Obligations, this last, which was to furnish her with
some Horses and other conveyance to transport her self and Goods, to the next
City, where she intended to sell what was least necessary, and therewith be
furnished to prosecute her journey. The Baron appeared much surprised at my
Mothers proposition, and she was no less startled at his silence, who would
neither be Courted to promise, nor did he deny to assist her. The next day the
Curate of one of the adjoining Parishes under his command, came and gave us a
visit in our Chamber; He was accompanied with his Niece, a good natured, lovely
Gentlewoman, with whom I had made some acquaintance; we left her Uncle and my
Mother together, and went to divert our selves in the Castle Garden. The Curate
was a long time conversing with my Mother, and went not from her till Supper
time: I found her very thoughtful, and asked her twice or thrice what made her
so pensive, before she would answer me: Then I perceived her to weep, and tha^
made me weep also: In fine, having caused me to shut the Chamber door, she told
me, weeping still, That the Curate had informed her, the Baron of Sigognac was
desperately in love with her; and moreover, had assured him that he so tenderly
respected her, he had not till then dared, not would now offer to discover it
to her without propounding in the noblest way of Marriage* Ending her
Discourse, her sighs and tears so increased as they were like to break her
heart: (...) once more craved to know of her what she ailed, what my dear
Daughter, said she, have I not discovered enough to let you know I am the most
unhappy Woman alive? I replied that it was no^ such great Misfortune for a
Comedian to be made a person of that quality; Ha poor Girl, answered she, how
like a silly unexperienced Maid thou^ arguest; If he can delude this good
Curate to tempt me, and have no design to marry me, as he would make me fondly
believe, what violence must I not expect from a Man wholly enslaved to his
passions? and if he means truly to take me for his Wife, and I should consent,
what misery in this world can be comparable to mine, when his fancy changes?
and how much will he hate me then, for having so inconsiderately loved me now?
No, no Child, Fortune does not favor me so highly as you imagine, but having
laid one persecution upon me already by depriving me of a Husband, that truly
loved and was beloved by me, she now seems to threaten me with a fresh one, by
forcing me to a second, who no doubt will ere long hate me, and make him become
hateful to me. Her sorrow, which I thought to be without a cause, increased her
troubles so fierce^y, that it made her almost sink under the weight of them,
whilst I was busy in undressing her: I comforted her the best I could, and
urged all the reasons my youth could furnish me withal, not forgetting to
allege the obliging and respectful manner wherewith that severest and harshest
of men had lived with us, which I argued as a good presage; and especially the
modesty he had shown in not offering without the mediation of a Friend to
declare his affection to a person whose profession did not claim so much
circumspection and caution in the management of his Amors. My Mother suffered
me to say what I pleased, but went to bed very much disturbed, and was not at
quiet all the night, nor took the least repose. I would have banished sleep
from my own eyes too, but it was so powerful I was forced to yield, and so had
as much rest as she wanted. She rose betimes, and when I waked, I found her
dressed, and better composed in her looks and actions. I was willing to know
what resolution she had taken; for to tell you the truth, I flattered my
imagination with the future greatness, which I hoped to see my Mother attain
to, if the Baron of Sigognac meant as he promised, and could alure her to
consent to what he desired. The very thought of hearing my Mother called Madam,
or the Barons Lady, pleasingly took up my mind, and that ambition did by little
and little seize upon my heart. Mrs. Cave, was thus relating her story, and
Madam Star giving attentive ear to it, when they heard something walking in
their Chamber, which seemed the more strange to them, because they remembered
they had locked and bolted the door, mean while they still heard something
stalk up and down: They asked who was there, but were not answered, and a
moment after, Cave saw the resemblance of some body, heard it sigh, and felt it
press somewhat rudely upon her feet: She raised her self half way up in her bed
to look nearer what it might be that thus begun to affright her, and resolving
to speak, put her head out of the bed, but then nothing appeared: The least
Company gives us sometimes confidence; but sometimes again our fears are not
diminished when divided: Cave was frighted because the object vanished, and
Star was no less affrighted because her Bedfellow was so. They sunk down into
the Bed, hiding their heads under the Clothes, and creeping close to each
other, being so heartily afraid, that they durst not speak a word to each
other. In fine, Cave said to Madam Star, that her dear Daughter was dead, and
this was her Ghost which came to bemoan it self by her. Madam Star was,
perhaps, about to answer her, when they heard the same stamping again about the
Room, Madam Star crept lower yet into the Bed then she was before, and Cave
having reassumed some confidence upon the belief that it was her Daughters,
sat her self upright in the Bed, as before, and perceiving the same shape which
before had appeared and sighed so sadly at her Feet, she reached forth her hand
and felt something very hairy, which made her shreek out most hideously, and
tumble down backwards upon her pillow: At the instant they heard a terrible
barking in the Chamber, just as when a Dog is scared in the night with what he
sees. Cave had now recovered her courage again, and looking earnestly at what
it might be, plainly sound it was a large Greyhound that barked at the out cry
she made. She spoke to him in a threatening tone and Dialect, which made him run
toward a corner of the Chamber where he vanished. The valiant Comedian leaped
out of her bed, and by the light of the Moon which darted through the Window,
she discovered in that corner of the Chamber where the Fantosm Greyhound
disappeared, a little Trap-door that came up the back way, concealed behind the
Hangings, He had some desire to have lodged upon the bed, for they soon guessed
it to be one of the House-dogs that had stolen up by those private Stairs, and
not daring to presume so far without their free consent, sighed Dog-like, and
made the best signs could be expected from a dumb creature by laying his
fore-leggs upon the feet of the bed, and creeping under it, when Cave looked at
him the first time. This could not at the very first take off the impression of
its being her poor Daughters Ghost in Stars opinion, who not having seen the
Hound, could not easily be persuaded it was such: which though her affliction
were great, yet afforded her some matter to rally at Stars Cowardice, and gave
a pause to her History, till some fitter time, when sleep might be less Welcome
and necessary then it was at that season. The birth of day began to appear,
they fell asleep, and rose again about ten a Clock, having been informed that
the Coach which was to convey them to Manse was ready to set forth when they
pleased.

CAAP. IV.
Destiny finds Leander.

IN the mean time Destiny went from Village to Village, making inquiry for what
he sought, but could hear nothing to purpose: He ranged over a great deal of
Land, and made no halt till about two or three of the Clock, his own emptiness,
and his Horses weariness counseled him to return back to a great Town which he
had passed a while before: He found a pretty comodious Inn, as lying upon the
Road, and forgot not to inform himself, whether they had not heard of a Crew of
Horsemen that had stolen away a Woman? There is a Gentleman above, that can
tell you some tidings, said the Surgeon of the Town, who happened to hear his
question; I believe he has had some dispute with them, said he, and is come to
the worst, I have just now applied a Cataplasme Anodine, and resolving upon a
livid tumor which he has on the Vertebrae of the neck, and I have dressed a
great Wound he received in the Occiput. I would have Phlebotomized him, because
his body is so full of Contusions; but he would not suffer it, though there is
great need of ^it: He must needs have had some desperate fall, and received
many dangerous blows that has caused those Fractions and Contusions. This
Country Surgeon took so much Pride in repeating his barbarous terms of Art,
that although Destiny had left him, and no body gave attention, he continued
his learned discourse a great while, till at length they came and hurried him
away in much have to let a good Woman blood who was dying of an Apoplexy In the
interim Destiny was go^ten up to the Chamber where the Surgeon had directed
him; He found a young man there very well clad, with his head bound, and lying
on a bed to repose himself. Destiny would have framed some excuses, for his
having entered into the Chamber without his license; But he was very much
surprised, when at the beginning of his Complement, the other raised himself
up, and came to embrace him, making himself known to be Leander his Domestic
servant, Leander, who had left him four or five days before, without taking any
leave, and whom Cave imagined to be her Daughters Ravisher. Destiny knew not in
what manner he were best to speak to him, seeing him so well habited, and
appearing with so good a mien; whilst he was consulting with his thoughts,
Leander had time to recall his spirits; for at the first he seemed very much
cast down; I am as much ashamed, said he, to Destiny, to have behaved my self
with so little sincerity toward a person whom I so highly esteemed; but you
cannot but excuse a young man, who before was happy in your knowledge, thought
you to be of the same temper of the rest of your profession, and so durst not
confide so far in you, as to discover a secret on which depends all the
happiness of his life. Destiny, told him. That he alone could make it appear
wherein he had failed in his sincerity. I have a great deal more to tell you,
unless you have been informed of it already, replied Leander; but in the first
place I must beg to know of you, what brings you to this place. Destiny related
to him after what manner Angelica had been stolen; and said likewise, that he
pursued her Ravisher, and was informed, at his coming to that Inn, that he had
met with them, and could give him a fuller account. It is true, replied
Leander, sighing, that I met them, and that I acted as much as was possible for
one man to do against so many; but my Sword breaking in the body of the first I
lighted on, I neither could rescue Madam ^ngelica, nor die in serving her,
though I were resolved upon the one or the other: They put me into the
condition you now behold me in, having amazed me with a huge blow on the head,
and believing me past recovery, they hasted away with diligence; and this is
all I can tell you of Angelica. I now expect a Servant of mine, that can tell
you somewhat more; he followed them at distance, after he had horsed me upon a
beast, which they regarded not, as being of little value. Destiny, demanded of
him, why he left him without giving notice of it; whence he came, and who he
was; no longer doubting but he had disguised both his Name and Quality. Leander
confessed there was somewhat of truth in his doubt, and having laid himself
down on the bed again, because the hurts he had received pained him very much,
Destiny sat at the beds feet, and Leander related to him, what you may read in
the next Chapter.

CHAP. V.
Leanders History.

I Am a Gentleman of a Family not a little known in the Province: I hope one
day to have at least twelve thousand Livers per annum, provided my good Father
would but die, who although he be above fourscore years of age, makes all those
despair whose Fortune depends on his absence out of this world, or have any
thing to do with him, because he is so healthy, that I do more fear he will
never die, then hope to succeed him in three very handsome Farms, which are all
his income. He would needs have me to be a Counselor in the Parliament of
Bretaigne, against my inclination; and to this end he put me very early to my
Studies. I was a Scholar at la Flesche, when your Company came to Act. I saw
Madam Angelica, and became so in Love with her, that I had not the power to do
any thing else but what tended to express that love: I did more yet, for I had
the confidence to tell her that I loved her, she was not offended with it; I
wrote to her, she received my Letter, and did not show any tokens of disdain:
After that, Madam Cave being obliged to keep her Chamber whilst she was sick at
la Flesche, gave me the happy opportunity of frequently conversing with her
Daughter: She would no doubt have obstructed our communications, being too
severe for one of her profession, which seems to dispense with those that
undertake it from that scruple and reservedness which she practices. After I
was enamoured with her Daughter I forsook the College, and never missed one
day to see them Act. The Father Jesuits would have reduced me to my devoir; but
I could not be brought to submit to those crabbed Masters, after I had chosen
the most charning Mistress in the world; your Servant was killed at the
Playhouse door by some of our brutish Scholars, who all that year committed
many insolences at la Flesche, being very numerous, and the Wine very cheap:
That was the occasion partly that you quitted la Flesche to go to Angiers. I
could not take my farewell of Madam Angelica, because her Mother was never out
of her eye; all I could do, was to appear before her, when she went, with the
Characters of despair on my face, and tears in my eyes; a compassionate look
which she darted on me, had like to have cost me my life. I bolted my self up
in my Chamber, and wept the remaining portion of that day, and all the
succeeding night; and as soon as the Sun arose, changing my habit for that of
my man's, which fitted me exactly, I left him at la Flesche to sell my Scholars
equipage, and gave him a Letter for one of my Fathers Tenants, who furnishes me
with money when I demand it, with command to come to me at Angiers; so I
followed after you, and overtook you at Duretail, where many persons of Quality
that hunted the Stagg stopped you for seven or eight days. I proffered you my
service, and you took me to wait on you, whether it were that you found the
want of him that was murdered, or that my Garb and Looks which did not
displease you, invited you to accept it: My hair, which I had caused to be cut
very short, disguised me from the knowledge of those that had often seen me
discourse with Madam Angelica: to which my man's mean apparel contributed much,
making me appear quite other then I was in my own habit, which was most
commonly above the common wear of Scholars: I was at first however discovered
and known to Madam Angelica, who since acknowledged that she doubted not but my
affection was extraordinary, since I forsook all other interests to wait on
her; she was so generous as to dissuade me, and to bid me endeavor to retrive
my reason, which she found straggling; she entertained me a long while with so
much coyness, as would have disheartened any man less amorous then my self. But,
in fine with so much loving her, I engaged her to return me as much love again,
as I had for her; and as your soul is above the common standard, so you easily
perceived, that mine was above my low condition. I obtained your favor, and
soon got the good will of all the Gentlemen of your company; nor was I hated by
Rancour, who is thought by most to love no body, but rather hate all the world.
I will not trouble you with the tedious repetition of such things as usually
pass betwixt young persons who love one another, at every review or fresh
conversation; since I doubt not but you are well read in those things your
self. I shall only tell you, that Madam Cave, mistrusting our private
intelligence, or rather not mistrusting, but certainly knowing it, forbid her
Daughter to discourse at all with me, which she could not obey, but having
surprised her writing to me, she treated her so severely both in public and
private, that I had afterward no great difficulty to dispose her to let me
steal her away. I shall not be afraid to confess it to you, knowing you to be
as generous as any man whatever, and as amorous at least as my self. Destiny
blushed at Leanders last words, who went on in this manner, and told Destiny,
That he had not left the Company but to put himself into a posture to execute
his design; That a Farmer had promised to supply him with money, and that he
hoped to receive some more of a Merchants Son of St. Malo's, whose Friendship
he was assured of, and who by the death of his Parents was lately become Master
of a good Estate; he added, That by his friends means, he hoped to pass safely
over into England, and when he was there to make his peace with his Father,
without exposing Madam Angelica to the old man's anger, who without doubt would
have made use of all the rigor a rich man has the power to levy against a
pair of Actors. Destiny made Leander acknowledge that by reason of his youth,
and his condition, his Father could not but have accused Madam Cave of a
Trapan. But he did not assay to make him take off, or extinguish his affection,
knowing experimentally that Lovers are not capable of any counsel but what
their own passion suggests, but are more to be pitied, then directed: But he
highly disapproved the intention he had to go over into England, and
represented to him what judgment would be made of two young persons together in
a strange Country; together with the troubles and hazards of a Voyage by Sea,
the difficulty of drawing our money if they should find themselves in want;
and, in fine, the enterprise that Madam Angelica's beauty might put Forraigners
upon, and many other like inconveniences arising thereby. Leander would not
plead an ill cause, but once more craved pardon of Destiny for having stood so
long in the dark near him; and Destiny promised him all the assistance
possible, and assured him he would make the best use he could of the power he
thought he had with Madam Cave, to make her comply and become favorable. He
told him moreover, that if he were absolutely resolved never to have any other
but Madam Angelica, he were better not forsake the Company; for, said he, in
some time your Father may possibly die, or your passion may abate, and perhaps
vanish; at which words Leander cried out, that could never happen: Well then,
said Destiny, for fear of the like on your Mistresses part, keep still in sight
and play* Act with us, since it is now done very frequently by such as might
possibly undertake to do better things; write to your Father, making him
believe you are in the Army, and endeavor to squeeze a good sum of money out
of him: In the mean while we will dwell together like Brothers, and I shall
strive by my future deportment to make a fair amends for the mean treatment you
may have hitherto received at my hands, whilst I looked upon you as a menial
Servant only, not a disguised Lover and Gentleman: Leander would have cast
himself down at his feet, had not his wounds which disordered him very much
tied him to his bed, but he made up the want of that by so many expressions of
his civility and Obligations, and made likewise so many hearty vows of an
unalterable and ready Friendship, that he from that time gained as great an
esteem from Destiny as it was possible to beget in any man, after which they
consulted of seeking out Madam Angelica; but a great noise suddenly coming to
their ears did interrupt their conversation, and called Destiny hastily down
into the Kitchen, where somewhat happened, as is related in the following
Chapter.

CHAP. VI.
A Cuffing Combat. The death of mine Host, and other Remarkable things.

TWO men, one clad in Black like a Master of a Village, the other in Gray, who
had the Mien of a Baily, held one another by the Locks and Beards, and now and
then boxing each other in a most cruel manner: Both the one and the other were
what their habits or outsides spoke them to be. The fellow in Black was the
Curates Brother, and the Gray-coat was a Baily of the place, and Brother to
mine Host. The Host was then in a Chamber next the Kitchen ready to give up the
Ghost, having been so violently ceazed on by a Fever, that it had made him
almost distracted, insomuch as he had well-nigh beaten out his brains against a
wall, and his broken pate, together with the Fever, had brought him so low,
that when his frenzy quitted him, he found himself constrained to lose his life
too; which he was perhaps less grieved at, then he was to leave his ill-gotten
wealth: He had born arms a long while, and at last returning home to his Birth
place, crazed with wounds, age and little honesty, of which he brought less
home then of wealth, though he were poor: But, as Women are most times taken
with that which should least of all tempt them, his greasy Perriwig, which had
more bush then the rest of the crop-eared Villages, his Camp Oaths, flaunting
Feather, which he wore on fine days, and an old long rusty Rapier that
clattered at his Breech and armed heels, for spurs were the ordinary mode in
those days, though they had neither money nor credit to get horses; all this
parade appeared gentile and charming in the eyes of an old Hostess Widow that
was Mistress of the Inn: She had been woed by the richest Farmers in that
Country, not so much for her Beauty, as the Wealth she had scraped up in her
former Husbands time, by long Bills, and short or scant measure; both in Wine,
Beer, and Oats: But she had still withstood all these pretenders. When this old
Soldier joining the Battailloons of Mars and Cupid in a body, assaulted her,
and became Victor. The Visage of this Tavern Nymph was the least, and her belly
the biggest, of all the Women's in the Country of Main, although that Country
does abound in large wembs; I leave it to the Naturalists to find the reason of
this, as well as of the fatness of the Capons that are bred there: And to come
to our little great Woman, whom methinks I see every time I do but think on
her, she married her Soldier, without any advice or knowledge of her kindred,
and after she had a long time watched with him, and suffered very much, she had
the pleasure of seeing him die with a cracked Scull, which she attributed to a
just judgment, because he had often: endeavored to break hers. When Destiny
entered into the Kitchen, this woman and her Maid were assisting the old Curate
the Parish to part the Fray; But that was not so easily done, and therefore he
put in his helping hand, and having first made them stand a little, though he
could not so soon part them, as being grapled together like two men of War at
Sea, be by his terrible threats made them, as I said, susspend a while their
fury, which they submitted to out of respect to him who spoke very
magisterially, though they had little minded their good Pastors exhortations;
so the two mortal enemies at length separated, spitting out a great deal of
blood, and no small quantity of their teeth, whilst their Noses were besmeared
with their gore, and their chins and pates bald and disfigured. The Curate was
an honest man, and knew the world a little; He civilly thanked Destiny, and
Destiny to please and satisfy him, made those Combatants embrace one another
in Friendship, who but a moment before were doing so to strangle each other:
During this accommodation, the Host ended his obscure fate, without advertising
his friends: So that they found there remained no more to do, but only to
interre him, when they afterward went into his Chamber, after the peace had
been concluded. The Curate made his prayers for the dead, and made them sweet
for they were short; His Vicar came to assist him, and mean time the Widow
began to howl and lament with much ostentation and vanity. The dead man's
Brother either dissembled a great sadness, or was really so, nor were the
serving-men and maids behind him in their mournings and sorrow* The Curate
followed Destiny to his Chamber, making him proffers of service: He did the
like to Leander, and they made him sit down and eat with them. Destiny, who had
scarce eaten any thing that day, and had used exercise enough to procure him an
eager Appetite, fell to it very fiercely. Leander fed himself with amorous
thoughts more then with the provisions on the Board; and the Curate talked more
then he eat: He related a hundred pleasant Stories of the dead man's
Covetousness^, and told them the extravagant quarrels that predominant passion
had begot betwixt him, and his Wife and Neighbors; amongst others he described
a journey which he had made with his Wife to Laval; at their return, the Horse
which carried them both, having lost his fore-shoes, he left his Wife standing
under a tree, and holding the Horse by the bridle, till he went back to the
place and had sought most diligently for the shoes all along the rode they had
traveled: but he lost his labor, whilst his Wife had almost lost her patience
in waiting so long for him, he having walked at least four miles backward and
forward, which made her almost despair of his return, till at length she
perceived him trotting toward her barefooted, having tied his Boots and
Stockings cross his shoulders: She was much amazed at this novelty; but durst
not inquire the reason of it, his long obedience in the Army abroad, had taught
him so well to command at home; neither durst she mutter at him, when he made
her pull off her own shoes and and stockings, nor so much as ask him what his
fancy therein was; but only she imagined it might be somewhat of Devotion or
penance: So she took the Horse by the bridle, and he following behind
cudgelled him forward, and thus all three, beat it on the bare hoof till they
got home, which was not without infinite trouble to them all, it being past
midnight e're they arrived, being so foundred and battered, that they were not
able in a whole fortnight afterward to stand upon their galled feet: Never was
he so well pleased with any former stratagem as with this* and every time it
came into his memory, he would smile at the thrifty device, and say, Wife, had
we not unshoed our selves when we came from Laval* there had been two pair of
shoes the more squandred away, besides the Horse-shoes, and our stockings to
boot. Destiny and Leander were not much moved to laughter at this tale, which
the Curate thought to be very taking; whether, it were not so pleasant in their
opinions as in his, or they out of humor then, I know not: But the Curate, who
was a perpetual talker, would not give over thus; but addressing himself to
Desteny* he told him, That what he had just before related, was nothing to what
he had yet to entertain him with, about the same persons preparing himself for
death. It is at least four or five days since that he knew he must march off;
yet never did he concern himself more for the expenses of his Family, grudging
at every new laid Egg they dressed for himself during his malady; He would
needs cast up the account of the charges of his Funeral, and made a bargain
with me as soon as ever I came to confess him: and in fine, to end as he began,
about two hours before his last gasp, he ordained his Wife to wrap his body in
no other shroud then an old rag that had above a hundred tatters and holes in
it: His Wife told him it would be too beggarly, but he was obstinately resolved
to have no better; She could not possibly condescend, and knowing he was now
not in a condition to beat her, she spoke more resolutely, then she yet had
ever done to him, but yet did not forfeit the respect due to a Husband from a
Wife: Wherefore she proceeded to ask him with what confidence he could think to
appear thus in the Valley of Jehosaphat in that pitiful trim, when the time of
the resurrection should come to pass. The sick man, began to be in wrath, and
swearing as he was wont to do in his time of health: God's Death, cried he, you
slut, I will not appear at the Resurrection. I could as hardly forbear
laughing, as I could make him comprehend that he had offended God, both by his
being so angry at that season, and by the answer he gave to his Wife, which had
somewhat of impiety in it. He made some kind of show of contrition, but we were
fain to promise him that he should be wrapped in no other shroud then what he
contended for: My Brother who brake forth into a laughter when he thus
peremptorily renounced his Resurrection, could not contain himself afterward
every time he did but think on it. The dying man's Brother took an offense at
it, and from words to words, my Brother and he being both alike brutish,
succeeded to blows, and had laid good hold upon each other, after many repeated
cuffs, and would perhaps have continued their uncivil war till now, had they
not been timely parted. Thus did the Curate put a period to his relation,
addressing himself to Destiny, because he perceived Leander lent him but little
attention. He took his leave of the Comedians, after he had again proffered
them his service, and Destiny endeavored to comfort afflicted Leander, giving
him the best hopes his thoughts could prompt him withal. And as much wounded
as he was, the poor youth, from time to time gazed out of the Window to see
whether his man were coming, as if that could have made him hasten his steps.
Thus when we impatiently expect the return of some important message, the
wisest are then foolish enough to cast their looks often that way they are to
come; and with this observation I shall put an end to my si^t Chapter.

CHAP. VII.
Ragotins panick fear, followed with disgrace. The Advenventure of the dead
Corpse, another storm of Cuffing blows, and other accidents worthy of a place
and mention in this true History.

LEander thus looked out of the Chamber Window, toward the way his Servant was
to come by, when turning his head accidentally, the other way, he perceived the
little Ragotin, Booted up to the twist, mounted upon a small Mule, and having
at either side of him, his two Pages, Rancour upon one hand, and Olive on the
other. They had from Village to Village heard News of Destiny, and by a
diligent and long March, had, infine, overtaken him at the fore mentioned
place, Destiny went down Stairs to meet them, and made them come up into their
Room: They did not at the first view know the young Leander, who had changed
his Mien with his habit; and that they might not find out what he really was,
Destiny commanded him to go and cause Supper to be made ready, with the same
Authority he was wont to use; and the Comedians who thereby recovered their
former knowledge of him, had no sooner said to him that he was very Gallant,
but Destiny answered for him, and told them, that a rich Uncle of his in the
Country of Maine, had clothed him Cap a Pe, as they saw, and withal, had
furnished him with money to oblige him to leave acting, which he would not be
drawn to, and therefore had secretly left him, without his knowledge. Destiny
and the others, then inquired of each other the News of what they were in quest
of, but could answer little. Ragotin assured Destiny, that he had left the
Women in good health, though much afflicted for the loss of Madam Angelica. The
night came on, they supped, and these new comers drank as freely, as the others
had done sparingly. Ragotin began to be in a good humor; defied every one to
drink, like a Tavern Hector; played the Drole, and sung his Song in despite of
all the world; but not being seconded, and the deceased man's Brother in Law,
having represented to the Company, how undecent it was to be thus frolic and
debauched where a dead Corpse was, Ragotin made less noise, and drank more Wine.
They went to bed, Destiny and Leander in the Chamber they had taken up before.
Ragotin, Rancour, and Olive, in a little Chamber not far from the Kitchen, and
adjoining to the room where the Corpse lay, that was not yet nailed in the
Coffin. The Hostess lay in an upper Chamber next to Destiny's and Leanders
lodging, which she chose because she would not have the sad object of her
departed Husband so much in her eye, and that she might the better receive the
Visits of a great many Friends that came to comfort, and to condole with her;
for she was one of the greatest Dames in the Borough, and had ever been as
much beloved of them all; as her late Husband was hated. A general silence
reigned in the whole Inn; the Dogs slept since they did not bark; and all other
animals slept likewise, or at least ought to have slept, and this tranquillity
lasted yet till three or four of the Clock in the morning, when on a sudden
Ragotin cried out with all his might, that Rancour was dead; at the same
instant he waked Olive; went to allarm Destiny and Leander, and made them come
down into his Chamber to bemoan, or at least behold, Rancour, who suddenly died
in the bed just by him, as he would make them believe. Destiny and Leander
followed him, and the first object they met with coming into the room was
Rancour, who was walking about the Chamber, like one that is very well, though
that were very strange after a sudden death. Ragotin, who was the first that
entered, had no sooner espied him, but he retreated, as one that is ready to set
his foot on a Serpent, or in a hole: He gave a great shreek, became as pale as
death, and rushed so fiercely against Destiny and Leander, when he threw
himself backwards out of the door, that he had almost thrown them down: whilst
his fear made him fly into the Garden, where he ventured to starve in the
cold; Destiny and Leander demanded of Rancour the particulars of his Death and
Revival. Rancour told them he knew not so much of it as Ragotin; and added,
that he was not over wise: Olive in the mean while laughed like a fool; Rancour
spoke little and but coldly, as his custom was, and neither he nor Olive would
declare any thing further. Leander went after Ragotin, and found him hiding
himself behind a bush, trembling more for fear then cold, though he were but in
his shirt. His fancy was so possessed with his Companions death, that he at
first took Leander for his spirit, and thought to fly when he drew near him:
Thereupon Destiny arrived, whom he appehended to be another Fantome. They could
not get the least word from him, whatever they said; so that, in fine, they
took him by either arm to drag him to his bed: But at the same time that they
were haling him out of the Garden door, Rancour being just coming in, Ragotin
got loose from them, and threw himself, looking still behind him, into a hedge
of Rose-trees, where he entangled himself from head to foot, and could not
break through soon enough to avoid Rancour, who ran after him, telling him he
was a fool, and must be bound or chained: These three at length pulled him out
of the snare. Rancour gave him a good bang on his naked Breech, to evince him,
that he was not a Ghost, and so in the conclusion the little fellow was led
back to his Chamber and put to bed again: But he was scarce warm in the nest,
when a Feminine clamor arose in the Neighboring room, which put them to a
stand to guess what it might be; it was not the moan of an afflicted Woman, but
the horrid yellings of many Women together, as if they had been frighted.
Destiny went thither, and found fou^ or five Women with the Hostess, who were
searching under the beds, gazing up the Chimney, peeping behind the doors, and
groaping in every corner, with scared countenances; He demanded, what ailed
them, and the Hostess betwixt howling and scolding told him, they could not
imagine what was become of her dead Husbands body: Having done speaking, she
fell again to howling, and the Women in consort answering her, who altogether
made such lamentable and hideous noise, that every soul that was about the Inn,
came into her Chamber, besides all the Neighbors and Passengers came thronging
to the Inn. At the same instant a great Car having ceized on a Pigeon, which
the Maid had left half larded on the Dresser, and retiring with the prey into
Ragotins Chamber, had hid it self under the bed where he and Rancour had lain:
The Maid pursued it with a Faggot stick in her hand, and looking under the bed
to see what was become of the Pigeon, she likewise cried out as loud as she
could possibly, that she had found her Master, and repeated it so often, that
at length the Hostess and the whose crew of Women came thither to her. The Maid
hung about her Mistresses neck, telling her she found him, with so much joy,
that the poor Widow feared her Husband was come to life again; for it was
observed that she grew as pale as a condemned Prisoner. In fine, the Maid, bid
them look under the bed; where they found the dead Corpse they were so troubled
for; The trouble to get him thence, was not so great, though it were very
heavy, as to know how it came there. They carried it back to his Chamber, and
began to shroud it. The Comedians returned to their own; where Destiny lodged
who could comprehend nothing of all this strange adventure; as for Leander
nothing but his dear Angelica took up his thoughts, which made him as pensive,
as Ragotin was sorry that Rancour was not dead, whose biting Railleries had so
mortified him, that he became silent, contrary to his nature, which was to
speak eternally, and to be the chief in all Companies and Discourses, right or
wrong. Rancour and Olive were so little surprised and moved at all this Panick
terror, and the Transmigration of a dead Corpse from one Chamber to another
without any humane assistance, at least any they knew of, that Destiny judged
they had some hand in the Prodigy. Mean while the business was canvased in the
Kitchen; a Cart-driver being come out of the fields to Dinner, having heard the
Maid relate with great astonishment, how her Masters dead body, had risen of it
self and walked in another room, told her, that passing along the
Kitchin-window at break of day, he saw two men in their shirts that carried it
upon their shoulders into the Chamber where she found it: The Brother hearing
what this fellow affirmed, thought it very unhandsomely done; The Widow was
quickly made acquainted with the story, and her Gossips too; and all of them
were greatly scandalized therewith, and concluded infallibly, that those men
must needs be Sorcerers, and designed to act some heinous mischief with that
dead body: Just, as they were giving this Verdict of Rancour, he entered into
the Kitchen, and bid them bring his Breakfast to their Chamber. The defuncts
Brother asked him, wherefore he had carried the Corpse into his Chamber? Rancour
far from giving any reply, would not so much as bestow a look on him: The Widow
propounding the same question, and he showed the same indifference to her,
though she had not the like for him; She flew at his eyes like a Lioness robbed
of her Whelps, (I am afraid the comparison is too Magnificent here) Her Brother
in-law lent Rancour a sound cuff on the ear; the Hostesses she Champions would
not spare him neither; the Servants had their hands in too: But one man's body
had not place enough for so many blows, and they did but injure and hinder each
other. Rancour, alone against a great many, and by consequence a great many
against him singly, was not discouraged at the numbers of his enemies; but
making a virtue of necessity, began to lay about with all the strength God had
given him, leaving the rest to Fate. Never was unequal combat better managed;
But Rancour keeping his judgment in the midst of these perils, made use of his
wiles as well as his strength, dealing out his blows warily, that they might
not light in vain: He gave some blows, that were not downright to the first he
met with, and only sliding his hand along, as I may say, the same furious
stroke reached to a third, perhaps a fourth cheek; most of his strokes walking
round in a half circle; and these several strokes had each two or three
differing sounds, according as the chops they met with were more or less solid,
or hollow. At the noise of these Combatants Olive descended into the Kitchen,
and hardly had the time to find out his Companion amongst those that were
baiting of him, ere he was set upon himself, and as hardly engaged as the
other, whose vigorous resistance began to quell and cool their courage: Two or
three, therefore of those that had been worst dealt with by Rancour; fell upon
Olive, perhaps to regain their dying credit; The noise increased, and at the
same time, the Hostess received a great blow in her little eye; which made her
see a hundred thousand Candles (that is a certain; for an uncertain number) and
put her quite out of the lists: She roared louder, and far more heartily at
this, then she had done for her Husbands decease. Her bellowings drew in more
Neighbors, and summoned down Destiny and Leander; Though these came with a
Spirit of peace, yet was there immediately a War denounced against them; They
wanted not for blows, nor were they wanting to return them as stiffly back
again. The Hostess, her Friends and Servants, cried out Thieves, and were now
become only Spectators of the Scuffle; some their eyes swelled, others with
bloody Noses, the rest with battered muzles, and all unhooded and uncoyfed; The
Neighbors took the Women's part against those they termed Thieves. It would
require a sharper Pen then mine to represent the puissant blow were
enterchangeably given, and taken. A length, their animosity increasing, they
began to ceaze upon Spits and other Arms, both offensive and defensive,
flinging Stools, Pots and Pans a^ one another heads, when the Curate came upon
the spot, and endeavored to make the comba^ cease; But in troth, whatever
great respect they had for him, he had scarcely brought them to (...) cessation
had their own overgreat weariness no^ contributed to it: all acts of Hostility
were lai^ aside; and every one willing to speak first, especially the Women
with their whining tone, the poor man was fain to stop his ears at their
confused wrangling, and run out of doors faster then h^ came in. This quieted
the most tumultuous, and called him in again to the place of Battle, and the
Brother-in-law, being ordained by him to spea^ first, complained to him of the
removal of the body into their Chamber so inhumanely: He had agravated that
unworthy act more then he did, had he not spit so much blood, besides what
trickled from his Nose, which he could not stop. Rancour and Olive confessed
all what they alleged, but protested they had not done it out of any evil
design, but only to fright one of their Companions as they had done: The Curate
reproved them very sorely, and made them apprehend the consequence of such an
enterprise, which was not to be used in Raillery; and being a man of judgment,
and one that had a great deal of Credit amongst his Parishoners, he found it
easy enough to pacify them; so every one bare away what he had gotten. But
unhappy discord with her Snaky locks, had not yet done all in that house which
she intended to do: They heard an out cry above in the Chamber not much unlike
that of a Hog that is stuck in the throat, and who should it be but little
Ragotin. The Curate, the Comedians, and several others ran up to him, and found
all his body, only his small head excepted, buried in a great Chest, wherein
they used to lay their Sheets; and what was most unhappy for this poor entombed
fellow, the lid of this Wooden Sepulcher, being very heavy, was fallen just
upon his legs, and squeezed them so, that it was pitiful to behold. A lusty
Servant Maid, who stood not far from him, when they came up, and who appeared
very much disordered, was suspected to have thus intrapped and cased Ragotin:
It was so, and she was proud of it, insomuch that being busied in making up one
of the Beds in the Chamber, she would not vouchsafe so much as to look how they
plucked small Jack, out of his box, nor give the least reply to those that
asked her, whence that terrible noise proceeded which they had heard. Mean
time, this little Epitomy of a man was haled out of his Mouse-trap, and was no
sooner upon his legs and at liberty again, but he ran toward a Sword; They
hindered him from seizing on that, but could not keep him from flying at the
great Wench, nor her from discharging such a puissant blow upon his head, that
the vast seat of his little reason was miserably shaken out of order: He
retreated three steps, but this going backward was only to return with the
greater fury, if Olive had not withheld him by his Breeches; just as he was
going to leap like a nimble Serpent against his potent enemy. The bustle he
made, though in vain, was very violent, the wast-band of his Breeches broke,
and that broke the silence of the Spectators, who all fell into a laughter; The
very Curate forgot his Gravity, and the Brother-in law his sorrow: only Ragotin
bad no cause to be merry, whose anger now bent it self against Olive, who
finding himself attaqued, lifted him quite from the floor, and carried him by
strength of arm, to the bed which the Maid was just making, where with a
Herculean strength, he pulled down his already torn Breeches, and raising up,
and then letting fall his hand very nimbly upon his back-parts, soon made them
look all over as red as Scarlet: The undaunted Ragotin threw himself
desperately down from the bed; but this daring attempt had not its deserved
success: He slipped his foot into a Chamber Pot, which they had left at the side
next the wall to his trouble, and there it stuck so fast, that notable to get
it forth with the help of his other foot, he durst not come out of that corner
for fear of making the Company laugh afresh at his disgrace, and begin again
their Raillery, which he understood the worst of any one in the world. Every
one admired to see him so quiet, and smooth of a sudden, after such a furious
storm: Rancour imagined it was not without some cause, wherefore he led him
forth, partly per force, and partly with good will, and then every one
perceived where the shoe wrung him, nor could they forbear smilling to see what
mettle it was made him halt so strangely. We will leave ^im kicking this Pewter
Globe with a proud foot, ^o look after a new train of people coming at ^he same
time into the Inn.

CAAP. VIII.
What became of Ragotins Foot:

COuld Ragotin by his own strength, and without the assistance of his friends
have unpotted his foot, I mean, have drawn it out of the Pewter Gin, where it
was so unhappily engaged, his anger would have lasted that whole day at least,
but he was forced to abate somewhat of his natural Pride, and become meek,
humbly entreating Destiny and Rancour to do their utmost toward the recovery
of the liberty of his left or right foot, I cannot justly tell which. He made
no address to Olive, because of the late contest betwixt them: yet Olive came
to his relief without any invitation, and both himself and his two Associates
did what they could to release him. The little Fellow's struglings to draw
forth his foot himself, had made it swell very much, and their striving to
wrench it out also, made it swell the more. Rancour had at first been very
officious, but so unskilfully, or rather so maliciously, that Ragotin feared he
had lamed him to^ perpetuity; He prayed him earnestly not to trouble himself
any more, and entreated the rest likewise to let it alone, and so laid himself
down upon a bed till they should send for a Smith to file, or cut it off from
his foot. The rest of that day passed over quietly enough in the Inn, and as
sadly betwixt Destiny and Leander, the one very much troubled that his
Messenger was not returned to bring him some News of his Mistress, as he had
promised, and the other having no joy whilst absent from his dearest Madam
Star; besides that, he resented the loss of Madam Angelica, and was grieved for
Leander, upon whose face he beheld such Characters of a deep affliction.
Rancour and Olive soon made a match with some of the Inhabitants of that
Village, who were playing at Bowls, and after Ragotin had set the Smith to work
about his weighty clog, which was artificially taken away, he slept the
remainder of the day, whether he were drowsy, or ashamed to appear amongst
those that were witnesses of his Misfortunes, I know not. The dead man, was
carried to his last home, and the Widow, notwithstanding the thoughts and
Image of death was yet in her mind, did not forget to make a couple of
strangers pay unreasonably for what they had of her, who baited there in their
passage from Brittany to Paris. The Sun was newly set, when Destiny and
Leander, who could not quit the Windore, beheld a Coach and four Horses,
followed by three Horsemen and four or five Foot men that stopped at the Inn.
A Maid Servant, came and desired them to surrender their lodgding to the
Company that was newly arrived, and so Ragotin was forced to show himself,
though ^e was more willing to be confined to his Cham^er, and followed Destiny
and Leander into that other Room, where he thought he had seen Rancour give up
the Ghost. Destiny was known in ^he Kitchen by one of these new comers, who was
the same Counselor of the Parlaiment of Renes, with whom he had contracted a
kind of Friendship during the Wedding, which proved so unhappy to Madam Cave.
This Senator of Brittany demanded of Destiny what News they had of Madam
Angelica, and seemed sorrowful that they had not found her. He was called la
Garouffiere, which makes me imagine he was rather an Angevin then a Bretton,
for we do not meet with more of the low Trettons names beginning with Ker, then
of Angevins that terminate in Jere, of Normans in Ville, of Picards in Cour,
and of the people Bordering the Garonne in Ac. To return to Mounsieur de la
Garouffiere, he had wit enough as I have already told you, and did not look
upon himself as a Country Gentleman only, having often quitted the place of his
Birth, to spend his money and buy his breeding at the Ordnaries in Paris,
clothing himself either in a Mourning or Festivous Garb, according to the
Court standard, which being truly verified, and Registered, ought to be Patent
not of absolute Nobility altogether; but of Non-Peasantry, or mere Citizen, if
I may thus express it. Wit he had, moreover, as I say, which I infer from
hence, because all the World almost is ambitious of being skilful in the
Divertisements of Wit, as well those that really understand, as the Ignorant,
Presumptuous or Brutish, who judge rashly both of Verse and Prose; although
they think it some dishonor to write well, and would upon occasion reproach a
man for having Printed some Books, as highly as if he had coined false money.
The Comedians fare the better for this fondness to Wit and Poetry; They are the
more welcome in those places where they go to Act: for they being the Poets
Parrots or Mag-pies, and which is more, some of them being born to some small
Talen^s in the Art, undertaking now and then to write a Play, either of their
own stock, or of borrowed fragments, there is some honor and pleasure in being
acquainted with them. In these days, we have in some measure done justice to
their Profession, for they are far better esteemed of, then they were wont, and
truly, our Comedians does afford the people an innocent and happy
Divertisement, which at the same instant instructs and pleases; They being
purged at least of late, of all that was profane or licentious. It were to be
wished the houses were purged as severely from Pick pockets, Pages, and
Footmen, and other ordures of the lower world, whom the hopes of stealing
invites as much to come now, as the filthy Ribaldry and Farcing did heretofore.
But now that Brothel-House jesting is quite abolished, and I dare affirm they
have formerly approved and clapped up such pitiful, nay, Scurrilous Clinches
and Equivocations, as would now make the most confident audience blush and hiss
it down. But to end the digression, la Garouffiere was raised with joy to meet
Destiny at the Inn, and made him engage to sup with the Company that came in
the Coach, which consisted of the Bridegroom that came from Manse, and his
Bride whom he was carrying to his Estate at Laval; besides Madam his Mother, a
Gentleman of Provence, an Advocate of the Counsel, and Mounsieur de la
Garouffiere, all of a kindred, and such as Destiny had conversed with at the
Wedding where Madam Angelica was stolen away; add to all these I have just now
named an Attendant or Chamber Maid, and you will guess the Coach was well
filled, especially considering that Madam Bouvillon, so was the Bridegrooms
Mothers name, was one of the most corpulent Women in France, though she were
one of the shortest, for I have been seriously told that she carried about her
most commonly, were it a dear or cheap year, at least thirty Quintals of flesh,
besides the other materials weighty and solid, which go to the making up of a
humane body. Having told you this, it will not be difficult to make you believe
that she was very succulent or moist, as all such Women are; Supper was served
in; Destiny appeared with his handsome Mien which never was changed, nor was
then eclipsed by his foul Linen, Leander having newly furnished him with
clean. He spoke little as his custom was, but had he spoken as much as the
rest, who indeed talked very much, perhaps he would not have said so many
frivolous things as they did; la Garouffiere carved him of every thing that was
on the Table, Madam Bouvillon did the like to outvie the other, with so little
discretion, that all the dishes were emptied in a moment, and Destiny's Plate
so full of wings and legs of Pullets, that I have since often wondered how they
could with that haste and carelessness pile up such a vast Pyramide of meat,
upon so small a Basis as the belly of a Trecher-plate; la Garouffiere took no
notice of it so earnestly was he repeating and discoursing of Poems to Destiny,
and setting forth the sharpness of his wit and judgment. Madam Bouvillon having
her designs likewise, continued her good offices toward the Comedian, and
finding no more Pullets to carve, was compelled to cut him some pieces of a
Gigot of Mutton. He knew not where to place them and so held a piece in either
hand, as she had forced it upon him, looking about where he might bestow them;
when the Gentleman, who was resolved not to hold his peace so much to the
prejudice of his hunger, smillingly, asked Destiny, whether he should eat all
that which loaded his Plate? at which question Destiny cast his eye upon it^*
and was amazed to see a heap of carved meat almost up to his mouth, which la
Garouffiece, and Bouvillon had erected as a Trophy of his merits. He blushed,
and could not refrain from laughter, which discountenanced Bouvillon, and made
la Garouffiere laugh so heartily, that it made the whole Company do the like
four or five times together. The waiters began when their Masters left of, and
laughed in their turns, which the young Bride found so pleasant, that breaking
out into the like passion just as the Cup was at her mouth, she besprinkled her
Mother ther-in-laws, and Husbands face with all that was in the Glass, unless
it were a little which flew about the Table, and their Clothes that sat near
her. The merry game began afresh, and all but Bouvillon laughed, while she grew
red with anger, and looked upon the new Bride with a severe countenance, which
somewhat abated her jollity, at last their laughing ceased, because one cannot
laugh ever, every one wiped their eyes, Bouvillon and her Son dried their
dripping faces, and the Bride craved their pardon, having much ado still to
keep in her smiles. Destiny placed his Trencher-plate in the midst of the
Table, and so every one took their share. Nor could they talk of any other
subject during the whole Supper-time, and the Raillery was carried on to the
highest pitch, although the seriousness where with Bouvillon armed her self,
might justly have been some allay to their Gaiety: As soon as they had taken
away the Service, the Ladies retired to their Chambers; the Advocate and the
Gentleman called for Cards and went to Piquet, la Garouffiere and Destiny who
were none of those that know not what to do unless they played, entertained one
another very spiritually, and held the best conversation that ever was perhaps
in any Inn belonging to the lower Main. La Garouffiere discoursed purposely, of
such things as he thought stood in the dark, or were above a Comedian, whose
judgments have most commonly limits more narrow then their memory, and Destiny
entertained him like a very intelligent person, and one that was not a Novice
in the world. Amongst other things, he did with all the discretion imaginable,
observe the distinction betwixt Women that have a great deal of Wit, and do not
make a show of it but when a fit occasion requires it, and those that have no
more then what they prostitute every minute to make it be thought they have a
greater stock. Besides, those that envy some petty Jeasters, Drolling
qualities; laugh at Allusions and licentious Equivocations; make dry Clinches
of their own, and then applaud and admire them, and, in fine, are the
make-Sports of such a Ward or Parish, from those that make up the Noble Society
of the bravest Companies, and are of the truly renowned Caballas. He likewise
discoursed of Women that knew as well how to write as many men that undertake
it, and though they do not many times publish the productions of their wit,
that shows only their greater modesty, not their meaner ability. La Garouffiere
who was a very honest man, and was well skilled in the breeding of persons of
all qualities, did much admire, that a man of the profession Destiny was of,
should have such parts, above the rate of most of those that followed such an
employment. Whilst he admired him in his thoughts, the Advocate and Gentleman
having left off their play, wrangling about a Card that was turned up, they all
gaped as if they wanted sleep, and so a Servant came and made ready three beds
in the same room, where they supped, Destiny retiring to his own Chamber where
Leander was in bed.

CHAP. IX.
Another Misfortune befalls Ragotin.

RAncour and Ragotin lodged together, as for Olive, he wasted part of the night
in sowing his Clothes which were ripped in diverse places when he grappled with
the Choleric Ragotin. Those that were acquainted with this little fellow
particularly, have observed, that when ever he scuffled with any one, which was
frequently enough, he had always either unripped, or torn part or all his
enemies Clothes. That was his sure revenge, so that such as were to deal with
him at fisty-cuffs, must have been as watchful to defend their Clothes from his
direful Claws, as others are wary to save their faces at Foils. Rancour asked
him when he was going to bed whether he felt any hurt, because his countenance
looked very ill; Ragotin replied he never found himself better. It was not long
ere they fell asleep, and it happened well for Ragotin, that Rancour bare some
respect to the good Company that was then at the Inn, and would not disturb
their repose: had it not been for them, the small Mounsieur had probably
passed, but an unquiet Night. Olive the mean while was hard at work about his
Clothes, and having finished all that was amiss about them, he stole up
Ragotins Clothes, and as artificially as any Tailor could have contrived it, he
cut both the Breeches and Doublet a great deal less in the waste, and put them,
after they were neatly sowed into the same place again, and having wasted the
greatest part of the Night in ripping, cutting and sowing, crept into the same
bed with Ragotin and Rancour. They rose early, as people usually do in such
Inns, where there is a perpetual noise as soon as day appears. Rancour told
Ragotin, again, that he looked, very ill; Olive assured him so to: he began to
believe them, and finding his Clothes at the same time too strait for him, by
an Inch or two, he apprehended that his body was swollen to that proportion,
and was affrighted at the sudden accident. Rancour and Olive continued to
exagerate his unhealthy Mien, and Destiny and Leander whom they had acquainted
with the plot, did each of them tell him he was hugely changed. Poor Ragotin
stood amazed with tears in his eyes, which made Destiny smile a little, at
which he was extreme angry. He went into the Kitchen belonging to the Inn,
where every body repeated what the Comedians had before said to him, which
seconded likewise by the strangers who having along Journey to go that day, had
made themselves ready very early. They invited the Comedians to Breakfast with
them, where every man drank poor sick Ragotins health, who instead of returning
their civilities, went snarling away, to the Surgeon of the Town, to whom he
related his malady. The Surgeon discoursed of the cause and the effect of
his swelling Disease which he understood as little as the Algebra, and talked
to him a quarter of an hour in his terms of Art, which were no more to the
purpose of that subject, then if he had talked of Prester-John. Ragotin grew
impatient, and swearing admirably for a little man, asked him, whether he had
nothing else to say. The Surgeon would have continued his prating; and
Ragotin would needs beat him, and had done so, if he had not humbled himself
before his impatient patient, from whom he drew three Sawcers full of blood,
and applied Cupping-glasses to his Shoulders at all adventure. The Cure was no
sooner done, when Leander came, and told him that if he would promise him not
to be angry, he would discover a piece of Roguery that had been practiced
against him. He promised more then the other desired, and engaged upon his
eternal damnation to observe all he had promised. Leander told him, he would
witness to what he swore, and so led him home to the Inn, where in the presence
of all, both Masters and Servants, he made him swear afresh, and then declared
how they had used his Clothes. Ragotin did at the first grow red with shame,
and was going to break his execrable Oaths, when seven or eight of them did put
him in mind of the danger he ran, with so much vehemence, that although he
swore heartily, there were none could understand him. He left speaking; but the
others ceased not from bawling in his Ears, so loud, and long, that the poor
man thought he should have lost his hearing. In fine, he came off better then
they expected, and began to sing with all his might, any Song that came first
to his memory, which converted their clamorous speaking into a greater shout of
laughter, which was answered, not only from the gazing Servants in that place,
but through all the Rooms of the Inn, to which different occasions had called in
a great diversity of Company. Whilst the Eccho's of so much laughter does by
little and little vanish in the air, the faithful Chronologist ends this
present Chapter, with the leave of the Courteous or Discourteous Reader, or
what ever he be that shall be so fond as to read this Story.

CHAP. X.
How Madam Bouvillon could not resist a Temptation, and got a knock on her
forehead.

THe Coach which had a good days journey to make, was ready very early. The
seven Passengers who filled it to purpose, stowed themselves in: they drove
away, and within ten paces of the Inn the Axletree broke in the midst. The
Coach man cursed his life; they railed at him as if he had been responsable for
the lasting of an Axletree. They were forced to come out of the Coach, and
return the same way to the Inn. The Inhabitants of the maimed Coach were very
much perplexed when they were told, that in all that Country there was no Coach
nor Cart-maker nearer then three Leagues off that place at a great Town. They
held counsel but could determine nothing knowing the Coach would not be able to
fowl again till the next day. Bouvillon who still held a high commanding hand
over her Son, because all the wealth of that Family came by her, enjoined him
to mount a Horse that carried their Groom, and made his Wife get on another, to
give a visit to an old Uncle of hers, who was the Reverend Curate of the same
Village, where the Coach mender dwelt. The Lord of that place was of Kin to the
Counselor, and an acquaintance of the Advocates: They took a fancy to go and
wait on him, for Companies sake. The Hostess furnished them with Hackneys,
which she made them pay a little dear for, and thus Bonvillon only of all that
Company remained behind at the Inn, being somewhat tired, or pretending to be
so, besides that her round bulk could not with safety have been carried on an
Ass, had they found one strong enough to have traveled with such a weighty
burden. She sent her Maid to Destiny to invite him to Dinner with her, and
while that was making ready, she new dressed her head, frisled and powdered her
Locks, put on a laced Apron and Whisk, with a very rich point under it, which
was the Brides Pinner. She likewise took one of her Daughters best Peticoats
out of the bundle, and arrayed her self; in fine, she transformed her self to a
pretty little plump Nymph. Destiny would willingly have dined at liberty with
his Comerades, but how could he have refused his most humble Servan^ Madam
Bouvillon, who again sent for him as soo^ as ever the Dinner was served up.
Destiny wa^ surprised to see her so gaily clothed. She wel^comed him with a
smiling countenance; took him by the hands to make him wash, and gently gripe^
them in such a manner as seemed to signify something. He thought not so much of
the Dinner a^ of the occasion of the invitation: but Bouvillon reproached him
so frequently his not eating, tha^ he could not avoid it. He knew not what to
say being naturally very silent: but as for Bouvillon she was too ingenuous to
want matter for Discourse. When such persons as are very talkative, meet alone
with those that speak little, and seldom replies to what they chatter, they do
but speak the more; for judging of others by themselves, and finding they do
not answer to what they say, as they would do on the like occasion, they
believe they have not twattled enough to please their indifferent Auditor, and
so they pursue the Discourse and mean to repair the first weakness, which most
commonly is less considerable by the addition, yet will they never give over
whilst any attention is given. One might avoid such a larum indeed; but because
there are such infatigable Babblers, as will even continue to talk to
themselves if left alone, after that spirit has been once raised, or that
weight once drawn up in Company. I think the best way to deal with them were,
to speak as loud, as fast, and as much as they, if not more. For all the world
cannot stop this torrent of noise which a great talker makes when another
silently lends him an ear, and does not join words with him. This reflection I
can make good by many Experiments, nor do I know whether I my self am not one
of those I now Characterize. For the imcomparable Bouvillon, she was the
greatest Discourser of nothing that ever was: and she would not only talk to
her self, but she would answer her self likewise. Destiny's Ta^iturnity giving
her full scope, and having a design to please him with her Verbal
entertainment, she took her full swinge. She related to him all the passages
and intrigues of the Town of Laval where she dwelt; recounted the scandalous
story, and defamed no particular person, or whole Family, from whose dis-repute
she did not draw some commendations to her self; protesting, at every deffect
which she scored on their accounts, that although she knew she was frail her
self, yet was she not guilty of such a one, nor such a one. Destiny, was very
much mortified at the beginning, and returned not a syllable; but at length, he
thought himself obliged to smile now and then, and to tell her sometimes;
That Is very pleasant; This is very strange, and most commonly he spoke by
contraries. They took away the dishes, when Destiny had done eating and all
being disserved. Madam Bouvillon made him set down by her at the foot of the
bed, and her Maid who had turned out all the rest of the waiters belonging to
the Inn, going after them her self; shut the Chamber door as she went forth.
Bouvillon, who thought perhaps that Destiny had taken notice of it, said; see
this hair-brained maid, how she has shut us in. I will go and open it if you
please, said Destiny, I do not speak of that said Bouvillon stopping him: but
you know that two being locked in together, as we may do what we please, so may
others believe what they have a mind to of it. It is not of such as you, that
people judge rashly, replied Destiny to her. I believe that, said Bouvillon,
but you know we cannot be too cautious of such dangerous tongues. They must
have some ground though, added Destiny, and as for your self and I, the
inequality betwixt a poor Comedian, and a person of your quality is guard
enough. But will you have me open the door then continued he. That is not it,
said she, bolting it her self, for perhaps none will take notice whether it be
shut or not, but whether they do or not, it is better to make it past opening,
then to leave it at random. Having secured it, she approached Destiny, her
great visage much enflamed, and her little eyes sparkling notably, which made
him bethink himself how he should retreat honorably, or avoid without shame,
that battle which he thought she was ready to give him. This Fat sensual Lady
pulled off her Neck-handkerchief, and exposed to Destiny's sight, which was not
very tempting or pleasing to him; ten pound weight of Breasts at least, that is
to say, a third part of her Duggs, the rest being equally stowed under her
armpits. Her evil design, making her blush, (for they blush likewise those
shameless ones sometimes) her neck was no less Red then her Cheeks, and both
together at a convenient distance might have been taken for a Scarlet
Riding-hood. Destiny blushed likewise: but his was out of modesty, whereas
Bouvillon who had none left, blushed for, you may guess what. She told him she
felt something creeping down her back, and shrugging her self in her harness,
as when something itches, she entreated Destiny to put down his hand. The poor
youth did it trembling, and the mean while Bouvillon feeling his wast betwixt
his Doublet and Breeches, asked him, whether he were not ticklish? He must now
have fought it out, or surrendered, when Ragotin made a Noise at the door,
beating against it with his Hands and Feet, as if he would have broke it down,
and calling to Destiny to open quickly. Destiny plucked his hand out from
Bouvillons sweaty back, to let in Ragotin, who still made a devilish n^ise; and
going to pass by betwixt the Table and Bouvillon without rushing against her,
his Foot met with a rub which caused him to stumble, and run his head hard
enough against a Bench to amaze him for a time. Bouvillon having in the interim
shuffled on her Handkerchief, went to open to the impetuous Ragotin, who at the
same time pushing the door with all his strength, made it fly so rufly against
the poor Ladies forehead, that it grated off the skin of her nose, and made a
bump on her fore head as big as ones First. She cried out she was dead; The
little Rustic did not make her the least excuse, but leaping and repeating
Madam Angelica is found again, Madam Angelica is here; made Destiny almost
angry, who called Bouvillons Maid as loud as he could, to come to her
Mistresses aid, and could hardly be heard by reason of the terrible great
noise, which little Ragotin made. The Wench brought at length some water and a
clean Napkin. Destiny and she repaired the breach or hurt that was done to the
Lady by flinging open the door, and whatever impatience he was in to know,
whether Destiny spoke true, yet he did not follow his passion; nor would he
leave Bouvillon before her face was washed and dried, and her forehead bound
up, often calling Ragotin hair-brained, who for all that, would not cease
halling him, to go whither he had a mind to Conduct him.

CHAP. XI.
The least Divertising of the Volume.

IT was true, that Madam Angelica was newly arrived, being Conducted by
Leanders Servant, which Servant had wit enough not to discover that Leander was
his Master, and Madam Angelica pretended some wonder to see him so well clad,
and did that out of Discretion, which Rancour and Olive did out of Ignorance.
Leander asked Madam Angelica, and his own Servant, whom he dissembled as one of
his acquaintance or friends, how he had found her out, when Ragotin came into
the Room leading in Destiny as in Triumph, or rather training him after him,
because he went not fast enough to his hot apprehension. Destiny and Angelica
embraced with great testimonies of Friendship, and with that tenderness, which
is resented by those that love, when after a long absence, or where they had
lost all hopes of ever seeing one another again, they happen to meet by some
unexpected adventure. Leander and she entertained each other but only with
their mutual looks, whereby they expressed a great deal, omitting the rest till
a more convenient enterview. Mean time, Leanders Servant began his Narration,
and told his Master, as if he had spoken to a Friend, That after he had left
him to follow Angelica's Ravishers, as he had conjured him, he did not loose
sight of them till night, and then the next morning at the entrance into a
Wood, he was amazed to find Angelica alone on foot, and all in tears; and
added, that having told her, he was Leanders Friend, and had pursued her on his
behalf, she was very joyful, and beseeched him to Conduct her to Manse, or to
the place where Leander was, if he knew where to find him. It belongs to you
Madam, said he, to relate how those that had forced you away, then left you:
for I durst not inquire of you, finding you so deeply afflicted, all the time I
waited on you, that I feared your sighs and moans would have broke your heart.
The least concerned, were greatly impatient to learn from her own mouth, an
adventure which appeared so strange to them. For what could any one conjecture
of a young Woman hurried away so violently, and then forsaken or abandoned so
quietly, without being compelled thereto? Madam Angelica entreated that she
might go to bed; but the Inn being taken up already, the good Curate got her a
Chamber at his Sisters who dwelt the next door, and was then the Widow of one
of the richest Farmers in that Country. Angelica, did not so much want sleep,
as rest; wherefore Destiny and Leander went to visit her as soon as they were
informed she was in her bed: Although she were glad that Destiny was made a
confident of her Amor, yet could she not behold him without a blush. Destiny
pitied her confusion, and to divert her from shaping any excuses, courted her
to give them an account of what the fellow that came with her had no knowledge
of, which she did in this manner. You may guess what a surprise my Mother and
my self was in, when walking in the Park belonging to that House we were at, we
saw a little backdoor open toward the Fields, and four or five men running
toward us, who seized upon me, without scarce looking on my Mother, and
dragged me half dead through fear to the place where their Horses stood ready.
My Mother whom you know to be one of the most resolute Women in the world,
furiously assaulted the first she could light upon, and used him so coursly,
that not being able to get himself free, he was forced to call his Companions
for assistance. He that relieved him, and was so barbarous as to beat my
Mother, as I heard him brag upon the way, was the Author of the enterprise. He
came not near me, so long as the night lasted, during which time, we marched
like those that fly and are pursued. Had we past through any places inhabited,
my cries were loud enough to have caused them to be stopped; but they avoided all
such Roads as much as they possibly could, only one little Hamlet they were
constrained to ride by, where I awaked all the Inhabitants with my noise. The
day appeared, my Ravisher came near me, and had no sooner looked upon my face,
but giving a great Whoop, he assembled his Companions, and held a counsel with
them, which lasted in my opinion about half an hour. My Ravisher appeared as
much enraged, as I was afflicted; He swore so desperately as startled them all,
and quarrelled with most of them. In fine, their tumultuous counsel ended, and
I know not what they had resolved. They began their march again, and I began to
be treated with less respect then I had been. They were very angry with me,
every time I bemoaned my condition, and made many imprecations as if I had done
them great wrong. They had torn me away as you know with the clothes I acted
in, and to conceal it, had put one of their coats over it. They met a man upon
the way, of whom they inquired somewhat. I was much amazed to find it was
Leander, and I believe he admired no less to see me, whom he knew, as soon as I
made him see my clothes, which were not unknown to him, and which I discovered
at the same instant that he was gazing on my face. He may have told you how he
behaved himself. For my part seeing so many drawn Swords, I fainted in his arms
that held me on Horseback, and when I had recovered my spirits again, I found
we pursued our way, but could not find Leander in the Company. My shreeks
re-doubled, and my Ravishers, whereof one was wounded, took their way through
the Fields, and made a halt yesterday in a Village, where they quartered as
Soldiers. This morning at the entrance of a wood, they met a man that was
Conducting a Lady. They unmasked her, knew her, and expressing the like joy of
such as have found what they sought for, hurried her away, after they had
misused him that Conducted her. This Lady cried out as much as I had done
before, and my thought her Voice was no stranger to my ear. We had gotten above
fifty paces within the Wood, when he whom as I told you, seemed to command the
rest, approaching near the fellow that carried me, and speaking of me, said,
Set that bauling thing down. He was obeyed; they left me, hastened out of my
view, and I was left alone, and a foot. The fright I was in, knowing my self to
be alone was enough to have killed me, if he that brought me back hither, and
had followed us afar off as he informed you, had not come to me. The rest you
know. But, continued she, addressing her speech to Destiny, I think I ought to
tell you, that the Woman, they thus prefered before me, resembles your Sister,
my Companion; has the same Voice, yet I know not what to think; for the man
that was with her, is very like the Servant you took after Leander quitted you,
nor can I put it out of my thoughts, but it was he. What Is this you tell me,
said Destiny, very much troubled? This is what I conjecture, replied Angelica:
One ^ay be deceived in the resemblance of people, said she but I am much afraid
I am not mistaken at ^his time. I am possessed with the same fear likewise,
said Destiny, with a changed countenance, and I believe I have an enemy in this
Province from whom I may fear the worst: But who could have brought my Sister
to that Wood, whom Ra^^tin left yesterday at Manse? I must go and entreat some
of our Company to follow them with all speed, whilst I remain here, to
determine of things according as I shall receive intelligence from them; as he
ended these words, he heard some body call him in the street, he looked forth
at the Windore, and beheld Mounsieur Garrouffiere, who was returned from making
his Visit, and assured him he had an Affair of importance to communicate to
him. He went to him, and left Leander and Angelica together, who had thus the
liberty of entertaining each other, after a troublesome absence, discovering
what fears and troubles their hearts resented all that while. I doubt not, but
it would have been very pleasant to have overheard them, but it was the better
for them that their enterview was so secret. In the interim, Destiny demanded
of Garouffiere what the business was? Do you know a Gentleman named Verville,
and is he a Friend of yours, said Garouffiere? He is a person to whom I am the
most obliged, and honor the most in the world, and I believe he does not hate
me, said Destiny. I think so indeed, replied Garouffiere: I saw him to day at
the Gentleman's whom I went to visit; at Dinner they talk of you, and after you
had once been mentioned Verville could speak of nothing else, he asked me
hundred questions concerning you, which I could not resolve, and had I not
promised him, to persuade you to go to him, which he doubts not bu^ you will
perform at his entreaty, he would have come hither, though he have much
business where he is. Destiny returned him civil thanks for the good News he
had brought him, and having informed himself of the place where he should find
him, resolved to go, hoping to hear somewhat from him concerning his enemy
Saldaigne, whom he confidently guessed to be the Author of stealing away
Angelica, and the present Possessor, and Usurper of his dear Star, if it were
certainly she whom Angelica imagined she saw ceazed upon when they quitted her.
He entreated his Company to return to Manse, and comfort Cave with the good
News of her Daughter, and engaged them to send him an express, or to come one
of themselves, to let him know, what had befallen Madam Star. He got
Garouffiere to instruct him in the way, and the name of the Town he was to meet
Verville in. He made the Curate promise his Sister should take care of
Angelica, till they fetched her from Manse; took Leanders Horse, and arrived
that Evening at the place he intended. He thought it inconvenient to go to
Verville himself, for fear least Saldaigne whom he judged to be in that Country
should be with him at that time. He alighted therefore at a pitiful Inn, from
whence he dispatched a little youth to tell Verville that the Gentleman he
desired to see, waited there for him. Verville came, threw his arms about his
^eck, and embraced him a long while, before he ^ad the power to express the
tenderness he cherished for him. Let us leave them thus hugging one another,
like two friends that dearly love, and meet thus fortunately, after they had
lost all hopes of ever being so happy, and pass on to the next Chapter.

CHAP. XII.
Which will perhaps be as little pleasing as the last.

VErville and Destiny gave each other an exact account of all they were
ignorant of in each others little concerns. Verville related wonders to him of
the brutishness of his Brother Saint Far, and the virtue of his Wife in
suffering them. He exagerated the felicity he enjoyed in possessing his own,
and told him News of the Baron of Arques, and of Mounsieur St. Sauveur. Destiny
then gave him the little story of his own Adventures not concealing any thing;
and Verville avouched to him, that Saldaigne was still in the Country, a very
dishonest man still, and very dangerous, and promised him, if Madam Star were
in his hands, to do all he could possibly to discover it, and serve Destiny,
both in person, and by the power, of h^^ friends, in whatever should be
necessary to redeem her. He has no other retreat, said Verville, but my
Fathers House and another Gentleman's just like himself, who is not absolute
Maste^ of a house being the youngest Son of a younge^ Brother. He cannot but
return to see us, if h^ remains in the Country: my Father and my se^ suffering
him to do so because of his alliance: S^ Far loves him not now, whatever
resemblance there is betwixt them. I am therefore of opinion that it were best
for you to go with me to morrow; I know where to place you, nor shall you be
seen by any but whom you are willing to converse with; and in the mean while
Saldagne shall be watched, and so narrowly observed, that he shall do nothing
which shall not come to our knowledge. Destiny found a great deal of reason in
the counsel his friend gave him, and determined to follow it. Verville returned
to supper to the Lord of the Town an ancient Gentleman, of Kin^ to him, whose
Heir he hoped to be, and Destiny eat what he could get in his Inn, and went
early to bed, that he might not make Verville wait for him, who designed to be
going very early to his Fathers. They set forth at the hour appointed, and
during three Leagues riding, told each other many particulars they had not time
to Discourse of before. Verville placed Destiny at a Servants, who was married
in the Town, and had a little House very convenient, within five hundred paces
of the Castle belonging to the Baron of Arques. He gave order that he should be
kept privately, and promised him to come suddenly again to see him. Verville
had not left him above two hours, before he returned, and said at his coming
that he had a great many things to tell him. Destiny grew pale, and was
afflicted at his first words, and the other as readily gave him hopes of a
remedy for the trouble he was to relate, alighted from my horse, said he, I
beheld Saldaigne, carried betwixt four, into a lower Chamber. His horse threw
him and fell on him, about a League from hence, and has much bruised him, he
told me he had something to say to me, and entreated me to follow him into the
Chamber as soon as a Surgeon who was there, had seen his leg which is much
strained with his fall. When we were alone: I must ever, said he, reveal all my
faults to you, although you are the least indulgent of my censurers, your
Wisdom ever chiding my Folly. After this he confessed to me, that he had
stolen away a Comedian, of whom he had a long time been enamoured, and said he
would tell me some particulars of this enterprise which would raise my wonder.
He told me that Gentleman, whom I informed you to be his friend, had not been
able to find any place of retreat for him in the whole Province, and was
obliged to leave him, and carry off those men he had furnished him withal to
execute his design, because one of his Brothers, who used to make a conveyance
of prohibited Salt, was waylaid by the Searchers, and so stood in want of some
assistance to secure him. So that, said he, not daring to appear in the least
Village, where my enterprise had made a loud report, I am crept hither with my
prey. I have entreated my Siste^ your Wife to let her be concealed in your
apartment, our of the sight of the Baron of Arques whose severity I dread, and
I conjure you, since I cannot keep her here, and have only two Servants the
veriest Sots in the world, to lend me yours to Conduct her, together with my
own, to the Lands I have in Brittany, whether I will go my self, as soon as I
can ride on Horseback. He asked me whether I could not spare him some others
besides my own Servant, for as rash as he is, he apprehends it very difficult
to carry a Woman far against her will: For my part, I made him believe the
undertaking was very easy: which he soon credited, as Fools do ever hope
things will succeed according to their wishes. His Servants do not know you,
and mine is very crafty, and very faithful to me. I will make him tell
Saldaigne that he can get a very stout friend of his, which shall be your self;
your Mistress shall have notice of it, and this night wherein they intend to
make a long journey, she shall feign her self sick at the first place they come
to. My man, shall endeavor to Fuddle the other two, which is very easy, and
this shall make it very opportune for you to convey away the Damosel, and
making the two Drunkards believe that you are already gone after her, he shall
lead them a quite contrary Road, and so be sure not to interrupt you. Destiny
found a great deal of probability in what Verville proposed, whose trusty
Servant came at the same time into the Chamber, they consulted together what
was to be done. Verville kept himself all the rest of that day with Destiny in
obscurity; having much ado to part with him after so ^ong an absence, which
perhaps might be followed with a more tedious one. Indeed Destiny hoped to see
Verville at Burbon, whither he was to go, and where Destiny promised to engage
their Company to follow him. The Night came on; Destiny arrived at the places
assigned with Vervilles man, Saldaignes two Servants failed not, and Verville
did himself put Madam Star into their hands. Imagine the joy of two young
Lovers, who had as much affection as hearts can hold, and the constraint they
were in, being hindered from expressing their minds. Within half a League of
that place, Star begins to complain; they bid her take courage till they came
to a Town two Leagues distant, where they put her in hopes she should bait. She
feigns that her malady increases still, Vervilles Servant and Destiny seemed
to be much concerned, thereby to prepare Saldaignes Servants not to think it
strange that they should make a stop so near the place they came from. In fine,
they came to the Town, and demanded lodging at the Inn, which they happily
found to be full of Lodgers and Drinkers. Madam Star acted the sick Woman's part
better by Candle light then she had done in the dark: She lay down in her
Clothes, and desired they would let her rest only one hour, and made them
believe that after she thought she might be able to ride again. Saldaignes men,
being Drunkards, did let Vervilles do what he pleased, he being indeed
commanded to take the sole charge upon him, they Club immediately with four or
five Country fellows, as great Bubbers as them selves; These altogether began
to drink roundly, and wash down all sorrow, and the cares of the world.
Vervilles man, did now and then put in for a health with them to keep them in
play, and under the pretense of going up to see the sick Lady that he might
hasten her away, he conveyed he and Destiny forth and mounted them, whom h^
directed what way he must ride. He returned t^ his good fellows, told them the
Gentlewoma^ was asleep, and said there was the greater likelihood she would be
soon enabled to prosecute the journey. He told them likewise that Destiny ha^
thrown himself upon a bed; and then began t^ drink merrily, and talk of other
things, plying the two Servants very stiffly, who were already pretty hot
headed. They drank to excess, were fudled, and could not so much as rise from
the Table; Then were they removed into a Barn for fear they should spoil any
bed, might have been given them. Vervilles man counterseited the Drunkard, and
having slept till break of day, hastily waked the two others, telling them with
a dejected countenance, that the Damosel had mad^ her escape; that he had
dispatched his friend after her, and that it was time for them to moun^ their
Horses and ride several ways that she might not escape them. He was above an
hour a^ making them understand what he said, for I believe their brains were
dosed for a week after and as the whole house had tippled extraordinarily that
night, yea even the very Hostess and Maids they did not so much as trouble
themselves to make any inquiry what was become either of Destiny or the
Gentlewoman, whom they no more ^emembred then if they had never seen them.
Whilst these people were digesting or voiding their Wine, Vervilles Servant
exclaiming against fortune, and pressing his two Companions to ha^en away,
which those yet half-sober fellows could ^ot do, Destiny galloped on with his
dear Madam ^ar, ravished with joy that he had found her, and ^ot doubting but
Vervilles trusty Trojan had sent ^he two others the quite contrary Road. The
Moon shone then very bright, and they were in a ^road way easy enough to be
found, which led them to a Village, whether we intend to bring them in the next
Chapter.

CHAP. XIII.
An unhandsome Action of Mounsieur de la Rapiniere.

DEstiny was impatient to know of his dear Star, by what adventure she had been
con^eyed to the Wood, where Saldaigne surprised ^er: but he was as fearful
likewise of being pur^ed. He therefore minded nothing but to spur ^^s Horse,
which was none of the best, and beat ^^ers with his switch, and cherish him
with his ^^ice, who went but slow, though he were none of the worst tall
Hackneys In fine, the pair (...) Lovers assumed more confidence, and having
^^vished some tender expressions (for there was o^casion enough to use them,
after those acciden^ had happened, nor shall I doubt but they did so though I
know nothing particularly thereof.) After, then, that they had moved each
others hea^ with sweet words, Star acquainted Destiny with (...) the good
offices she had done to Cave, but I fea^ said she, that her troubles will bring
her into si^ness* for I never saw her fellow; For my part my dear Brother, you
may well conceive, tha^ had as much need of consolation as she, after yo^
Serving-man, having brought me a Horse as from you, informed me that you had
found Angelic^ ravishers, and that you were very much wounde^ I wounded,
replied Destiny, interruping her, neither was so, nor in any danger of being s^
nor did I send you my Horse: There must some Mystery in this which I understand
not; An^ in truth, I wondered all this while, what made y^^ so often inquire how
I did, and whether it we not troublesome to me to ride so fast. You bo^^
comfort, and afflict me in one breath, said Star your imaginary wounds did much
perplex m^^ but what you now affirm makes me suspect yo^ man was corrupted by
your enemies to betray (...) in some design against you. He has rather be
seduced by some that pretends to be too much o^^ friend, said Destiny, I have
no enemy but S^^daigne; and it could not be him, that has ma^^ my treacherous
man act thus, since he beat hi^ when they met with you; and how do you kno^
that, said Star; for I do not remember that I have ^iscovered any thing of it
to you? you shall be ^nformed sully, as soon as I am acquainted with ^he manner
of your being drawn out of Manse, ^eplyed he. I cannot give you any better
account ^hen what I have already hinted at, answered Star, The day after Cave
and my self arrived at Manse, your man brought me a Horse as from you, and
^eeming to be very much troubled told me, that you had been wounded by those
that stole away Angelica, and very much requested that I would ^ome to you; I
took Horse the same hour, al^hough it were very late; I lodged about six
Leagues from Ma^se in a place, the name whereof (...) have forgotten, and the
next day at the entrance into a Wood I was stopped by some unknown persons; I
saw your man ill used, and was grieved for it, I saw a Woman thrown down from a
Horse likewise in a very uncivil manner, and I knew it to be my associate; but
the sad condition I then was in my self, and troubles I conceived for you, made
me soon lose all thoughts of her: They set me up in her place and traveled
along till night: after we had rode a great way, and most commonly through
unfrequented Lanes, we arrived very late in the Night at a mock Gentleman's who
would not receive us; There it was that I discovered Saldaigne, and the
certainty that it was he completed my despair. We marched again a long time
and in fine, they made me go secretly into the house whence you most happily
redeem^ed me. Star ended the Narration of her adventures just as the day began
to appear; they then found themselves in a great Road that went d^rectly to
Manse, and hastened their Horses faste^^ then they had done, to get into a Town
which la^ before them: Destiny infinitely desired to me^^ with his man, to
discover from what other enemy besides Saldaigne, they were to guard them
selves in that Country: but there was no great likelihood, that after such an
ugly act as he ha^ committed he would ever come in his sight again He told his
dear Star all what he knew concernin^ Angelica; when a man strethed out at his
full lengt^ close by a hedge, so afrighted their horses, tha^ Destinys had
almost leaped away from under him and Madam Stars threw her upon the ground
Destiny being troubled at her fall, made all the have he could to raise her up
again, while his hors^ went back, snorting blowing and stumbling, a^ frighted
jades use to do. The Damosel was no^ hurt; the horses forgot the fright, and
Destiny went up to see whether the man were living o^dend: One may say, he was
both, being so lamentably drunk, that although he snored lou^^ enough, which
was a certain to en of life in him yet Destiny could hardly make him awake. In
the end, with much pulling and tumbling, he opened his eyes, and discovered
himself to be that very Servant of his he so much wished to find. The Rogue as
drunk as he was, soon knew it was his Master, and was so perplexed when he
beheld him, that Destiny doubted now no longer of the Treason he had before
suspected him guilty of. He demanded of him, wherefore he had told Madam Star
that he was wounded, wherefore he carried her out of Manse? whither he would
have led her; and who furnished him with a horse: but he could get no answer
from him, whether he were too drunk, or counterfeited it out of craft. Destiny
grew angry, gave him some blows with his Sword, and having tied his hands with
his horse Reins, made a shift with some other trappings he had about him, to
lead him along his Prisoner. He cut a good Cudgel from a Tree to make use of
upon occasion, if his man should refuse to trot after him handsomely; He set
his Damosel up on Horseback again, and mounted his own likewise, continuing on
his way, with his Prisoner running by his side like a Greyhound. The Town they
saw before them, was the very same he parted from two days before, where he
left Mounsieur la Garouffiere, and his Company, who were there still, because
Madam Bouvillon had been sick of a furious Cholora Morbuus. When Destiny
arrived there, he found neither Rancour, Olive, nor Ragotin, who were gone back
to Manse; as for Leander, he left not his dear Angelica. I shall not tell you
in what manner she received Madam Star, one may easily imagine the Caresses
betwixt two Virgins that were entire friends, and had run through so many
dangers since they parted. Destiny informed la Garouffiere of the success of
his journey, and having entertained him a while private, they caused Destinys
man to be brought into a room in the Inn. There he was examined anew, and
because he would still play the dumb delinquent, they called for a cord to tie
his thumbs. At the sight of that engine he fell upon his knees; wept very
sorely, begged pardon of his Master, and confessed tha^ la Rapiniere had put
him upon all he had done, having promised him in recompense to take him into
his Service. They understood by him also that Rapiniere was at a house within
two League of that place, which he had gotten from a poo^ ancient Widow.
Destiny spoke again in privat^ with Garouffiere, who at the same time sent a
Lackey to tell la Rapin^ere, that he must needs com^ to him, about a business
of consequence. This Counselor of Renes, had a great deal of power over that
Provost of Manse. He had reprieved him from being broken on the Wheel in
Brittany and had still protected him in all his criminal dangers; Not but that
he knew him, to be a great Villain; but la Rapinieres wife was somewhat allied
to him: The foot man that was sent, found him just ready to mount on horseback
to go to Manse; as soon as ever he heard, that la Garouffier^ wanted his
Company, he set forward to obey him. Mean time la Garouffiere who pretended to
a great deal of Wit, had called for a bag of Papers whence he drew forth Poems
of all sorts; good and bad. He read them to Destiny, and afterward took out
this little story which he had translated out o^ Spanish, as you may read it in
the following Chapter.

CHAP. XIV.
The Judge of his own Cause.

IN Africa, amongst certain little Rocks, bordering the Sea, which are not
distant from the great City of Fez above an hours riding. Prince Mulei Son of
the King of Marocco was left alone, in the night time, having lost his way in
hunting. The sky was not spotted with the least cloud; the Sea smooth, which
the Moon and Stars made it bright: in fine, it was one of those fair nights
usual in those hotter Climates which are far more pleasant then the fairest
days in our colder Countries. The Marocan Prince gallopping along the Strand,
divertised himself in beholding the reflection of the Moon and lesser lamps of
Heaven on the surface of the Waves, as in a Looking-glass, when a mournful
outcry invaded his ears, and inspired him with the curiosity of going to the
place whence he guessed it to proceed. He spurred his Horse, which shall be, if
you please a Barbe, and found between some of those Rocks, a Woman, who
defended her self all she was able, against a man that struggled to tie her
hands, whilst another woman was endeavoring to stop her mouth with a linen
cloth. The young Princes arrival hindered those who offered this violence from
prosecuting it, and afforded some respect to the party they handled so roughly.
Mulei asked her what might be the cause of her crying out, and the others what
it was they were doing to her? But instead of a fair answer, the man goes
boldly up to him with his drawn Cymitar, and made such a blow at him, as might
have dangerously wounded him, had he not avoided it by the nimbleness of his
horse. Rascal, says Mulei to him, dare thou make an assault upon the Prince
of Fez? I knew thee very well to be such, replied the Moor, but it is because
thou art my Prince, and have the power to punish me, that I must either take
away thy life, or pay down my own.

Having told him this, he flew upon Mulei, with so much fury, that the Prince,
though exceeding valiant, was reduced to put himself into a posture, not so
much of assaulting, as defending his own person against so dangerous and bold
an Enemy. The two Women in the mean time were hotly engaged, and she who a
moment before gave her self up for lost, kept the other from running away, as
if it were above all doubt that her defender must be Victorious. Despair
heightens courage, nay sometimes enables those that have the least portion of
it, although the Princes Valor were incomparably greater then his Adversaries,
and was seconded by an address and vigor more then common, the punishment
which the Moors crime made him Judge he deserved, made him hazard all, and lent
him so much fury and strength, that the victory hung a long while doubtfully
betwixt the Prince and him: but Heaven which commonly protects those it raises
above others, most happily guided the Princes followers thither, within hearing
of the noise the Combatants made, and the Women's cries. They hasted to them,
and came in just when their Master having the advantage of his fierce opponant
had tumbled him on the ground, where he would not kill him, but reserve him to
an exemplary punishment. He forbad his people to do any other to him, save only
to bind him to a Horses tail in such manner, that he could neither mischief
himself, nor any that approached him. Two Gentlemen carried the Women behind
them, and in this Equipage Mulei and his retinue arrived at Fez just at the
break of day. This young Prince commanded as absolutely in Fez, as if he had
been King already. He ordered the Moor to be brought before him, who was called
Amet, and the Son of one of the wealthiest inhabitants of Fez. The two Women
were known by none, because the Moors, being the most jealous of all people,
take a strict care to conceal their Wives and Slaves from the worlds eye. The
woman whom the Prince had rescued, surprised both him and the whole Court with
her transcendent beauty, Superior to all that had been seen in Africa, and her
majestic air, not to be hid from their prying eyes by her mean slavish habit.
The other woman was clad, as the rest of that Country are, whose quality allows
them a distinction above the Rabble, and might have passed for handsome, though
not equal to the first; but could she have stood in competition with the others
beauty, yet a paleness, which her fear had contracted, invaded and allayed the
luster of it as much, as the others was heightened with a becoming blush that
overspread her modest cheeks. The Moor appeared before Mulei with the dejected
countenance of a guilty wretch, and fastened his looks still on the ground.
Mulei commanded him to declare his crime himself, unless he would die in
torment. I know what is prepared for me, and what I have deserved, replied he
very boldly, and were it any advantage not to discover it, there is no torture
should force it from me: But I cannot avoid my death, since I would have given
it thee, and I confess the rage I feel for having missed my purpose of
destroying thee, torments me more then all the exquisite pains the Executioners
can either invent or inflict upon me. These Spanish women, pursued he, were my
Slaves; the one of them made the best of her Fortune by a compliance to marry
my Brother Zaides; the other would never alter her Religion, nor show the least
good nature in any return of kindness for the love I cherished for her; He
would discover no more how sharply soever they threatened him. Mulei, commanded
him to be cast into a Dungeon laden with chains. Zaides Renegado Wife was
thrust into another Prison, and the beautiful slave was conducted to a Moors
house named Zulema, a person of Quality, originally a Spaniard, who had quitted
that Country, because he could not be persuaded to become a Christan. He was
descended of the Illustrious Family of Zegris, otherwhile so famous in Granado,
whose Wife Zoraida of the same house, held the repute to be one of the fairest
women in Fez, and of a judgment as transcendent as her beauty. She was at the
first sight of her even charmed with the beauty of the Christian slave, and
after some hours conversation no less taken with her wit. Had this rare
Christian been capable of any consolation, she had met it in the caresses she
received from Zoraida; but as if she shunned whatever might assuage her sorrow,
she was never pleased but when alone, that she might swell her griefs; and when
she was with Zoraida, it was not without much violence that she withheld her
sighs and tears so long Prince Mulei had an extreme desire to be acquainted
with her story. This he had told Zulema, and as he concealed nothing from him,
he had also confessed that he found himself inclined to love her, and would
have owned it to her, had not the great affliction which yet was legible in her
countenance, made him suspect he might have some such unknown rival in Spain,
who tho absent, might yet hinder him from obtaining the happines^ he desired of
her, even in a place where he was absolute Master. Zulema therefore gave his
Wife order to enquire into the particulars of the Christians life, and by what
accident she was become a slave to Amet. Zoraida had as great a curiosity to
know it as the Prince, and found no great difficulty in disposing the Spanish
slave to satisfy her, who believed she could not reasonably deny any thing to
her, who paid her so many marks and testimonies of tenderness and amity. She
assured Zoraida, she would answer her curiosity when she pleased; though having
nothing but Misfortunes to relate, she feared the story would appear too
melancholy for her entertainment. You will find it otherwise, replies Zoraida,
by the attention I shall give to it, and the interest I shall have in it, will
soon create a belief that you could never trust those secrets with any one that
has a truer affection for you. She gently embraced her, after this civil
expression, conjuring her not to delay any longer what she so much desired to
be satisfied in. They were alone, and the fair slave having wiped off those
tears which the remembrance of her unhappiness had called into her eyes, she
began the recital as follows.

My name is Sophia, I am a Spaniard, born at Valentia, and brought up with all
the care, which persons of Quality and Wealth, as were my Father and Mother,
are wont to have for a Daughter who was the first fruits of their happy
Marriage, and whose early youth appeared worthy of their choicest affection. I
had a Brother younger then my self by a year, as lovely as was possible; he
loved me as tenderly as I loved him, which mutual Friendship increased to that
degree, that when ever we were asunder, so great a sadness dwelt upon our
countenances, that the most charming Divertisements which are wont to delight
persons of our age could not disperse it. They would not therefore part us; we
learned together all those things, which are usually taught children, of good
Families, of either Sex, and so it happened to all the worlds astonishment, that
I was no less dextrous then he in all the violent exercises of a Cavalier, and
he no less accomplished in whatsoever is requisite for Ladies of Quality to be
skilled in. This extraordinary way of Education begot an infinite desire, in a
Gentleman acquainted with my Father, to have his children bred with us. He
propounded it to my Parents, who gave consent, and the nearness of our dwelling
facilitated the designs on either hand: This Gentleman equalled my Father in
Wealth, and was not inferior to him in Nobility. He likewise had but one Son
and a Daughter, much of the like Age with my Brother and my self, insomuch that
it was not doubted by all the City, but these two Families would be one day
united together by a double Marriage. Don Carlos and Lucia, (these were the
names of the Brother and Sister) were equally amiable; my Brother loved Lucia,
and was reciprocally beloloved again: Don Carlos loved me, and I him likewise.
Our Parents were acquainted with it, and were so far from prohibiting it, that
had not our greener Age hindered, they would not have deferred our Marriage then;
But the happy progress of our innocent affections was disturbed by the immature
death of my noble Brother, a violent Fever cut him off in eight days time, and
this was the first of my Misfortunes. Lucia was so afflicted, that no
persuasions could keep her from devoting her self a Nun. I was sick unto death,
and Don Carlos so overcome with sadness, his Father had reason to fear he might
shortly be left without issue, so sensibly the loss of my dear Brother whom he
doted on, the danger I was in, and the resolution his Sister had taken wrought
their dire effects upon him. In fine, reason cured us, when time had moderated
our griefs. Don Carlos's Father died shortly after, leaving his Son vastly ric^
and free from Debts. His wealth furnished hi^ wherewith to satisfy his haughty
nature; The Gallantries he invented to please me, flattere^ my vanity; made his
love more public, and increased mine. Don Carlos was often at the Fee^ of my
Parents, to conjure them to defer out happiness no longer, but complete it by
giving him their Daughter. He continued in the mean while his Expenses and
Gallantries: My Father doubted his Estate would in the end diminish, and that
was it made him resolve to marry me with him^ He therefore made Don Carlos hope
he should b^ shortly his Son-in-law; and Don Carlos testified so extraordinary
a joy, that it was alone sufficient to have made me confidently believe he
valued m^ above his own life, though I had been less persuaded of it, then
indeed I was. He appointed a Ball for me, and invited all the Town to it. But
both for his unhappiness and my own, there chanced to come a Neapolitan Count,
brought thither about some affairs of importance from Spain. He found me fair
enough to be enamoured with me^ and to ask me in Marriage of my Father, after
a^ enquiry of what rank he held in the Kingdom of Valencia. My Father dazzled
with the wealth and quality of this stranger, agreed to his demands, and that
very day told Don Carlos he must pretend no more to his Daughter; forbad me to
receive any Visits from him, and at the same moment enjoined me to think on the
Italian Count, as a person who should be Wedded to me at his return from a
journey he was to make to Madrid. I dissembled my trouble before my Father; but
when (...) was alone, Don Carlos presented himself to my thoughts as the most
amiable man in the world. (...) made reflections on all that was defective in
the Italian Count; then conceived a mortal aversion against him, and soon found
I loved Don Carlos more then I ever thought I could have done, and that it was
impossible to live without the enjoyment of him, or be happy in owning his
rival. I ^ad recourse to my tears; but that was a feeble ^emedy, for such a
misfortune. Don Carlos at that instant entered my Chamber, without craving any
permission as he was wont to do: He found me dissolving into a flood of tears,
and could not ^^op his own, though he endeavored to conceal what was within
his heart, till he had made a full discovery of the true Sentiments of mine. He
^hrew himself at my feet, and taking me gently by ^he hands, which he bedewed
with his tears: Sophia! said he, must I loose you? and shall a stranger that
does scarcely know you, be happier th^n (...), because he had more wealth; He
must enjoy ^ou, Sophia; and you give your conser^t; you whom I have so
passionately loved and who were pleased to make me believe you loved me too,
and were moreover, promised to me by a Father; but ^^as! an unjust; an
interressed Father; and one that has started from his fair word! Were you,
^^id he, a Treasure that could be set at any rate, nothing but my Fidelity
could purchase you, and that alone would yet give me a Title to you, would you
remember how you stand engaged to me But, cries he, can you believe that he who
had the courage to aspire to you, has not enough left t^ revenge himself on
him you now prefer, or wi^ it be thought strange that a wretch, who now (...)
rifled of all, should undertake what ever his d^spair can prompt him to? ah! if
you are conten^ that I alone should perish, let him live, this happ^ rival,
since you vouchsafe to protect him, and h^ has found the art to please you;
but Don Carlos who is become so hateful to you, and whom yo^ have resigned up
to this misfortune, will die (...) death cruel enough to glut that hate your
brea^ conceives against him.

Don Carlos, replied I, do you take part too wit^ an unjust Father, and that
man I shall never love to heighten my begun persecution; and can yo^ fasten
that as a particular crime on me, which is (...) common misfortune to us both?
Bemoan, rathe^ then accuse me, and study a ready way how t^ preserve me for
your self, instead of loading m^ with these reproaches: I could perhaps alledg^
them justlier against you, and bring you to confess that you did never love me
sufficiently, sin^ you have never known me so. But we have n^ so much time now
to throw away in fruitless contests. I dare follow you, wherever you shall
desire to lead me, I give you free leave to undertak^ any thing, and here
engage to second you in al^ that I may never be parted from you. Don Carl^^ was
so revived at these words, that his joy transported him as much as his grief
had done. H^ implored my pardon for his having accused me (...) that injustice
he thought they offered him, and showing me evidently that unless I suffered my
self to be conveyed thence, it would be impossible not to obey my Father; I
consented to all he propounded, and promised him, that the night of the day
following, I would make my self ready to follow him wherever he thought good to
hurry me. Nothing is difficult to Lovers, Don Carlos in one day put all things
in a handsome readiness for his designs; made a good provision of money, and
hired a small Bark of Barcellone, which was to set sail as what hour soever we
would summon it. In the interim, I had packed up all my Jewels, and all the
money I could heap together; and for so young a person I had so well contrived
and dissembled this design, that no body doubted of it in the least. I was not
therefore observed by any one, and could at night slip out at the back door of
a Garden, where I found Claudio a Page, who was very well esteemed by Carlos,
because his skill in singing equaled his Voice, which was exquisite, and in
all whose actions there appeared more ingenuity and polite handsomness then are
to be met with, either in one of his Age, or the condition he was in. He
informed me his Master had sent him before to conduct me to a Bark that waited
for him, and that he could not personally come to fetch me, for some reasons he
would give me an account of. A slave belonging to Don Carlos, not unknown to
me, came also along with ^s, we stole out of the City without any let, they
having wisely ordered it so, and had not gone far before we espied a Vessel in
the Road, and a shallop that attended us at the shore. They told me my dear Don
Carlos would come immediately, and that it were best for me, in the mean time
to get aboard the Vessel. The slave carried me into the shallop, and many men
who flocked about us, and whom I took Sailors, caused Claudio also to come in
after me, who seemed to me to oppose it, an^ make some kind of struggling not to
come. Thi^ increased the little fears the absence of my Don Carlos had already
awakened in me. I asked the slave for him, who briskly answered me, there wa^
now no Don Carlos to be expected by me.

In the mean time I heard Claudio cry out aloud and weeping call the slave
Treacherous Amet! I^ this the promise you made, to remove my Rival and to leave
me with my Love? Impruden^ Claudio! replied the slave, is any man obliged t^
keep his word with a Traitor, and had I reason t^ believe that one that has
betrayed his own master would be so true to me, as not to give intelligenc^ to
those that guard the Coasts to follow me, an^ rescue my Sophia from me. whom I
prize abov^ my life? These words directed to a Woman whom I mistook for a man,
and which I could no^ well comprehend, begot so terrible a troubl^ and
amazement, that I sunk down as one dead betwixt the Moors arms, who had not let
me go. continued a long time in this condition, and when I was recovered, I
found my self in the Cabin o^ the ship, which had now sailed a good way from
the Port: Imagine what my despair must need be, finding my self alone without
Don Carlos, a^ midst the enemies of my Faith, for I now plainly discovered I
was under the power of the Moors; that the slave Amet had absolute Authority
over them, and his Brother Zaida was Master of the Vessel. This insolent
Villain no sooner found me in a condition to hear him, but he discovered in few
words, how he had loved me a long while, and this his passion had compelled him
to steal me away, and carry me to Fez, where it depended on me to make my life
as happy as it could have been in Spain, since he would endeavor by his
kindness to remove every thing that might occasion the least regret for the
absence of Don Carlos. I flew at him, notwithstanding the weakness my late
swooning had left upon me, and with a more vigorous skill then he expected,
acquired by my Education, as I before related, I snatched his Cymetar forth of
its sheath, and was going to punish his perfidiousness, had not his Brother
Zaida seized my arm just time enough to save his life. They easily disarmed me,
for having missed my revenge, I would not vainly resist or Cope with such a
multitude of opposers, as flocked about me. Amet, who was much startled at this
my resolution, turned out all those that had thrust themselves into the Cabin,
and left me, in such a condition of despair, as you may sooner conjecture, then
I can express, when I reflected on the stupendous and sudden change of my sad
Fortune.

I passed the whole night in bemoaning my self, nor did the following day,
produce any thing that could diminish my sorrow; Time, which does often allay
the most tempestuous grief, wrought no cure upon mine, for the second day of
our Navigation, left me as full of affliction as I was on the fatal night
whereon I lost, together with my liberty the hopes of ever seeing my Don
Carlos, or eve^ enjoying the least comfort in all my life again Amet had found
me so terrible when ever he had dared to show himself before me, that he
presumed not to do it more. They brought me where with to refresh my self from
time to time, which I refused so obstinately, as made the Moor to fea^ he had
but gotten a very useless prize. In the interim the Vessel had passed through
the straights mouth, and was not far from the City of Fez when Claudio, came
into my Cabin. As soon as perceived it! Villain! who have betrayed me, cried I
what had I done, that should induce thee to make me become the most wretched of
all woman kind and to deprive me of my Don Carlos You were too well beloved by
him, replies he, and since my affection to him was no whit inferior to yours,
it could be no great crime, to endeavor to remove a Rival so much doted on.
Amet has likewise betrayed me, and I should be perhaps as much afflicted as
your self, did I not find somewhat of comfort and support in having another in
the like condition of misery with my self; unfold these Riddles, said I, and
inform me whom thou art, that so I may be able to guess whether thou art a
friend or enemy to me! Sophia, replies he straightway, I am of your own Sex,
and like your self was inamoured of Don Carlos; but though we burned with equal
flames, yet the success was different. Don Carlos ever loved you, and ever
thought that you repaid it him again; but me he never loved, nor could believe
I cherished any such passion for him, as having never known me to be what
indeed I am. I am a Native of Valentia like your self, and was not of so poor a
Birth or Fortune, but that if Don Carlos had married me, he might have been
above the censure of such as cast away themselves too meanly. But the affection
he had for you, took him so wholly up, that he was blind to any object else.
Nor were my eyes wanting to do their utmost to save my mouth the shame and
labor of making a public discovery of my weakness; I went to all places where
I could hope to meet him; and set my self where he might best behold me,
omitting nothing in my diligence toward him which he indeed should have done
toward me, had he loved me, as I loved him. I was then at my own disposal both
for my Person and Estate, being left an Orphan very young; and I had often
propositions made of parties suitable to my quality; but still the flattering
hopes of alluring Don Carlos to my wishes, made me stop my ears to all could be
alleged by any else. Instead of being disheart^ed at the unhappy progress of
my love, as any other would have surely been, that had been Mi^tress of the
Perfections which made me more accomplished then vulgar Ladies are, I was the
rather excited to love Don Carlos more and more, my passion increasing with the
difficulty I met in obtaining what I sought so eagerly for. In fine, that I
might leave nothing unassaid, which might prove a self reproach, but attempt
all things conducing, even to the least appearance of possibility, I designed
to cut off my hair, and having shrouded my self in a man's habit, I was
presented to do Don Carlos, by an old Domestic Servant o^ mine, who had lived
in the Family many years who took upon him the Title of a decayed Gentleman,
and my Father, an inhabitant of the Va^leys of Toledo. My shape and Mien which
were not displeasing to your lover, soon persuaded him to take me, yet did he
not discover who I truly was, though he had so often behe'd me formerly and he
was as much taken with my Wit, and Skil^ in singing and playing, as with my
person, finding my aptness to all those little Arts, which are no^ to be
condemned in the best Nobility. H^ thought he found in me, that breeding to
which few Pages do attain, to which I added so many testimonies of Fidelity and
Discretion, that he soon treated me rather as his Confident then his Servant.
You know better then any one whethe^ I give a faithful account in what I relate
to my own advantage. You have a thousand time^ praised me your self before Don
Carlos even in my presence, and rendered me many obliging office^ toward him;
but it stung me to the heart to be indebted for them to a Rival, which
consideration made you become so much the more hateful to the unhappy Claudia
(for so I am called) as they made me the dearer to Don Carlos. Your Marriage,
in the mean time went forward, and my hopes backward. The first was concluded,
the other was destroyed. The Italian Count, who about that time fell in love
with you, whose Wealth and Quality were as great baits to your Father, as his
ill Mien and more unhandsome qualities were scare-crows to you, procured me at
least the pleasure to see you countermined in your love; and then flattered my
soul with those fond hopes which every little change breeds in unhapy minds. In
fine, your Father, preferred the stranger you did not love, to him you loved
more then your self. I beheld him who had made me unfortunate, plunged into a
greater misfortune himself, and that Rival I had so much aversion for, thrown
from her highest hopes into a worse condition then my own, because I lost
nothing in him in whom I never could get any interest; but you lost all in Don
Carlos who was yours entirely, which loss moreover, though it were very great,
was yet far less considerable, then to become a Subject to that eternal Tyrant,
whom you could never fancy in the least. But this Mushroom prosperity, or to
say better, this vain imagined hope, soon withered again. I understood by Don
Carlos, that you were resolved to follow him, and was my self employed to see
all things in readiness for his design to convey you to Barcellona, and from
thence to France or Italy. All the strength and patience I was till then endued
with to support my Sufferings, left me at once at this strange resolution,
which was so much the more amazing, as it was unexpected that ever it could
have been put in practice. I was afflicted even to sickness, and such a
sickness as confined me to my bed. One day as I was bemoaning my self of my
cruel Fate, when my belief that no body was near enough to over-hear, made me
as earnest and loud as if I had spoken to some confident of my Amors, I saw
the Moor Amet appearing before me, who had listened to my Discourse, and who
after he had given me time enough to recollect my self from the disturbance he
had put me into, spoke thus to me.

I know thee Claudia, and that even before thou had disguised thy Sex, to
serve Don Carlos as a Page; and the reason why I never discovered that I knew
thee, was because I had a design on foot as well as thou had. I have now
overheard what desperate resolutions thou have fixed upon; thou will reveal
thy self to thy Master, and let him know thou art a young Maid, languishing for
the love of him, yet not expecting any retribution of love again, resolvest to
kill thy self before his face, thereby to deserve he should at least regret her
whom he never would vouchsafe to love. Poor Maid! what can thou think to do
in murdering thy self, but secure Sophia the better in the possession of her
Don Carlos? I have better and more happy counsel for thee, if thou be
capable of apprehending me. Deprive thy Rival of her Lover; the way is facile,
if you dare believe me, and though it requires some more then ordinary
resolution, yet not above what thou have shown in taking the habit of a man
upon thee, which made thee run the hazard of forfeiting thy honor to obtain
thy love. Hearken therefore to me with attention, continued the Moor; for I
will now reveal a secret to thee, which I till now did never commit to any
trust but thine, and if the design I shall now propound, be not both rational
and pleasing, it depends on you to follow, or to slight it. I am of Fez, a
person of Quality in my own Country; my misfortune made me a slave to Don
Carlos, and my inclination subjected me as much to Sophia's beauty; Thus have I
in a few Syllables discovered many things of moment. Thou think thy misery
above relief, because thy Lover contrives to carry away his Mistress, and
convey her to Barcellona. This makes both for thy happiness and mine, if thou will take the best advantage of this opportunity; I have treated about my
ransom, and paid it down. An Africa Galeot attends for me in the Road, not far
distant from the place, where Don Carlos has appointed another to lie ready at
Anchor to complete his design. He has defered his Voyage for a day: let us
prevent him with as much diligence as policy. Go and advertise Sophia, on thy
Masters behalf, that she should prepare her self to go away this night, when
thou shall come and give warning of it: Conduct her to my Vessel, I will
transport her into Africa, and thou shall remain alone in Valentia to enjoy thy
beloved; who perhaps would as soon have chosen thee as Sophia, had he been made
acquainted with thy passion.

At these last words of Claudia, I was so overcome with my just grief, that
fetching a deep sigh, I fell into another swound, without leaving any the least
sign of life. The shreeks of Claudia, who happily then began to repent her,
that she had made me so unfortunate, and yet undone her self, summoned * Amet
and his Brother into the Cabin where I lay. They applied all the Remedies they
could, with which I recovered at length, and then heard. Claudia reviling the
Moor for the treachery he had used toward us. Faithless dog said she to him,
why did thou counsel me to reduce this beautiful Creature to the deplorable
condition thou beholdest her in, since thou has^ not left me to the possession
of what she is robbed of? and why have thou made me perpetrate such a crime
against him I so dearly loved, which proves as pernicious to my self as him?
How durst thou avouch thou art of noble Parentage in thy Country, since thou
ownest a spirit beneath the meanest of slaves? Peace, simple Girl, replied
Amet, do not asperse me in a crime in which thou art Confederate, I have
already put you in mind, that whosoever could betray a Master, like thy self,
deserved to be trapann'd, and that in bringing thee away, I secured my own, and
perhaps Sophia's life, who might possibly have died for grief, should she have
known thou had remained with Don Carlos.

The noise made by the Mariners who were entering into the harbor of Salley,
and the shooting of some Guns aboard, to which the Town gave answer,
interrupted the further reproaches betwixt Amet and Claudia, and for a time
freed me from the loathed sight of those two persons: We went a ashore; Claudia
and my self had Veils thrown over our faces, and we were lodged with the
perfidious Amet, at a Moors of his kindred. The next day, we were put into a
close Chariot, and driven to Fez, whereas Amet was welcomed by his Father with
much joy, I went in as the most afflicted, and the most despairing person in
the world. As for Claudia, she soon provided better for her condition, by
renouncing her Christianity and espousing Zaida, the Brother to the treacherous
Amet. This wicked wretch omitted no artifice to persuade me likewise to change
my belief; and take Amet into my Marriage bed, as she had done Zaida, and
became the greatest Tyrant to me, even when, they having assaid in vain by
kindness, promises and civil treatments to allure me to a compliance; Amet, and
his people exercised on me all the Barbarisms they could imagine. I was fain to
make use of my constancy every day in opposing so great a number of enemies,
and then found my self indeed more able to undergo my troubles, then I could
have desired; when I began again to believe that Claudia repented her having
been so strangely wicked: In public she seemed to persecute me with more
animosity then the rest, but in private, she sometimes rendered me some good
services, which made me look upon her, as one that might possibly have proved
Virtuous; had she but been Educated accordingly.

One day, when all the rest of the Women were gone to the public Baths, as
it is the custom amongst you Mahometans, she came and found me where I then
was, with a face compose to sadness, and spoke to me in these terms. Fairest
Sophia! whatever former reason I have had to hate you, that aversion is now
disbanded, having lost the hopes of ever enjoying him, who never loved me
enough, because he loved you too well. I must now condemn my self perpetually
for having rendered you unhappy, and for abandoning my God, for fear of man; The
least part of which remorse were enough to arm me to the undertaking of what
is most difficult to my Sex. I can live no longer at this distance from Spain,
and the Christian Continent, with infidels, amongst whom, I know it is
impossible to find Salvation either whilst I live, or after I am dead: You may
judge of the sincerity of my repentance, by this secret which I now impart to
you, which makes you Mistress of my life; and puts an opportunity into your
hands to retribute all those mischiefs I have been forced to act against you. I
have gained fifty Christian slaves, the most part Spaniards to be for me all
persons fit and capable to undertake a great design, with some moneys which I
have secretly furnished them vvithall; they have procured a Bark able to carry
us all into Spain, if God will prosper so good a design; It rests in you,
whether you will follovv me in this enterprise, and save your self if I be
saved, or perishing with me, at least free your self from the Captivity of
your cruel enemies, by putting a Period to so troublesome a life; as, now,
yours needs must be. Determine therefore, Sophia, and while we cannot be
suspected to have any design, resolve without vvasting the time, on that
which most concerns both your liberty and mine.

I cast my self at Claudia's feet, and judging of hers by my own heart, could
not at all distrust the sincerity of her fair words; I thanked her with all
the power of expression, and all the gratitude of my soul; and methoughts this
was an earnest of those benefits she would bestow on me: We appointed the day
to take our flight toward the Seaside, where she assured me, that cercain
little Rocks hid our Vessel from being easily discovered. The day which I had
promised to my self should be so happy was now come; We got forth both out of
the House and Town very prosperously. I admired at the goodness of Heaven for
the safety we met with in the beginning of our defign, and gave them hearty
thanks for this early success; But my troubles were not so near their Period as
I reckoned. Claudia acted only by order of the perfidious Amet; and being more
perfidious then he, she led me into this solitary Creek, in the Evening, only
to expose me to the violence of the Moor, who durst not make an assault upon my
chastity in his Fathers House, although a Mohammedan, because he was a very
honest moral man. I innocently wandered after her, who was leading me to my
ruin, and guessed I could never be able sufficiently to acknowledge the favor
of that happy liberty she was going to bestow on me. I was not weary of hiving
her thanks, nor yet of going a good pace through bad ways encompassed with
Rocks, where she assured me her people waited for us, when suddenly hearing a
great Noise behind me, and turning my head, I perceived Amet with his Cymitar
drawn. Infamous slaves I cried he, it is thus you run away from your Masters? I
had not the leisure to answer him, Claudia seizing on my arms behind, and Amet
letting his Cymitar fall out of his hand, joined with the Renegado, and
together used al^ their strength to bind my hands with cords which they had
brought thither for that purpose. Bu^ I having more strength and activity then
is ordi^nary to my Sex, did a long while resist the at^tempts of these two
wicked wretches; when a^ length I found my self enfeebled, and distrusting my
resistance, had no other recourse but to my cries, which I hoped might call in
and direct some Passenger to that Solitary place; nay I had almos^ lost those
very hopes too, when the Prince Mule^ came to my rescue, beyond my Expectation.
You know how he preserved my honor, and I may say my life, since I should
certainly have yielded it up to grief, had the base Amet gained so much his
will as to have satiated his brutish intents. Sophia* thus concluded the
recital of her Adventures, and the amiable Zoraida encouraged her to hope the
Princes Generosity would furnish her with the means to return into Spain again,
and the same day she informed her husband of all what Sophia had told her,
which he related to Mulei; though what had been discovered to him of the
Fortune of the fair Christian, did no way flatter the passion he had for her,
yet was he satisfied, being truly Virtuous to have this knowledge of her, and
be ascertained that her affection was already engaged in her own Country, least
he might have attempted an unworthy action, out of the fond hope of an easy
Victory. He valued Sophia's virtue, and was prompted by his own to endeavor to
render her less unfortunate then she was. He sent her word by Zoraida, that he
would take care for her return into Spain, when ever she desired it, and ^^ter
he had taken up that resolution, he declined ^^siting of her, not daring to
trust his own Ve^^^e, or the Temptation her Beauty carried with it. ^he was not
a little troubled to find out a secure ^ay for her return. The Voyage was long
from ^^ence to Spain, who^^ Merchants Traded not (...) that Country, and though
she might find a Christian Vessel, yet being so young and hand^^me* as she was,
she feared she might light a^ongst some persons of her own Religion, that ^ould
be subject to the same frailties the Moors ^^d shown. Honest civility is a rare
freight on ^^ip-board, incontinence being as boundless ^^ere, as in a Camp; and
wherever beauty and in^^ency are un-guarded, the insolence of wicked ^^rsons
lays hold of the advantage, and sets them (...) to attempt all what their wild
desires inspires ^^em with. Zoraida counseled Sophia to put on ^^e Habit of a
man, since her advantageous stature ^bove that of other Women would facilitate
her ^^isguise; she told her it was Mulei's advice, who ^ould not find any one
in Fez, with whom he durst ^^fely trust her; and she further assured her that
(...) had so much goodness and consideration for that belonged to the decency
of her Sex; that (...) had provided her a Companion of her own ^aith, disguised
in the same manner, in whose ^ociety she might securely avoid those little
trou^les she might otherwise meet with alone in a ^^ip, amongst a Company of
Soldiers and Ma^^ners.

This Moorish Prince had purchased a Prize of a Pirate which he had taken at
Sea; it was a Vess^^ belonging to the Governor of Oran, which ha^ aboard the
whole Family of a Spanish Gentleman which out of some distaste that Governor
wa^ sending Prisoners into Spain. Mulei had hea^ that this Christian was one of
the skilfullest Hunt^ men in the world, and Hunting being this youth^^ful
Princes chief Recreation, he would needs kee^ him for his slave, and the better
to secure him s^^ he would by no means part him from his Wif^ and Son and
Daughter. In two years time, whi^^ he had worn out at Fez in Prince Mulei's
servic^ he had taught that Prince to shoot with a Pee^ exactly, both at Land or
Water fowl, sitting (...) flying, and showed him several other Games u^^known
to the Moors. By these little divertis^^ments he had so gained the Princes
favor, an^ was become so necessary a Companion in his pa^^times, that he would
never condescend to any ra^^som, but by all means and liberalities endeavour^
to wean him from the thoughts of Spain. But h^^ continual regret for being
banished from his Na^tive Soil without the least hope of ever returning begot
so deep a melancholy in him as soon aft^^ ended his life, his Wife not long
surviving hi^ Mulei felt a kind of remorse, that he had not rest^^red to
liberty upon their earnest demands, tho^^ persons that so highly deserved it
for their serv^^ces, and would needs repay the injury he had do^^ the Parents,
to the Children yet left with him* The Daughter was named Dorothea, about the
same age of Sophia; handsome and witty: h^^ Brother was not above Fifteen, and
was calle^ Sancho. Mulei made choice of these to accompany Sophia, and took
that opportunity to send them together into Spain; The business was kept very
secret, men's Clothes were provided for the two Ladies and the Youth, after the
Spanish mode: Mulei expressed his magnificence in the vast quantity of Jewels
he bestowed on Sophia. He made very handsome Presents to Dorothea likewise,
which added to all those her Father had before obtained from that Princes
liberality, enriched her with a considerable Fortune for her whole life.

Charles the Fifth made Wars about this time in Africa, and had beleaguered the
City of Tunis; He had dispatched an Ambassador to Mulei to treat about the
ransom of certain Spaniards of Quality, that had been Ship-wrack'd on the
Coasts of Marocco; It was to this Ambassador that Mulei recommeded Sophia
under the Title of Don Fernand, a Gentleman of Quality, who desired not to be
made known by his own name, and Dorothea with her Brother passed as her
followers, the one in quality of her Gentleman, the other her Page. Sophia and
Zoraida could not part without regret, and many tears were shed on either side.
Zoraida presented the fair Christian with a row of Pearls so rich, that she
would not have taken them if that obliging Moor, and her Husband Zulema, who
had no less respect for Sophia, then his Wife, had not assured her; she could
do nothing that would show more unkindly, then the refusing that pawn of their
true amity. Zoraida engaged Sophia to let her hear from her often by way of
Tangier; Oran, or those other places which the Emperor held in Africa. The
Christian Ambassador embarked at Saller, taking along with him Sophia, whom
we must henceforward call Do^ Fernand. He came to the Emperors Army, which lay
still before Tunis; our disguised Spanish Lady was presented to him as an
Andaluzian Gentleman, who for a long time had been a slave to the Prince of
Fez; she had no great reason to be so fond of her life, as to fear hazarding of
it in the War, and intending to play the Cavalier, she could not with honor
have declined to engage often in fight, as many other Valiant persons did,
whereof the Emperors Army was composed. She therefore thrust her self amongst
the Volunteers, lost no opportunity to signalize her self, and performed it
with so much bravery, that the Emperor heard of the Fame of the counterfeit
Don Fernand. It was her happiness to be near him, when in the heat of a dispute
wherein the Christians were worsted, he fell into an Ambuscado of Moors, was
deserted by his party, and surrounded by the infidels; and in all appearance
had been slain, his horse being so under him, had not our Amazon mounted him on
hers, and seconding his Valor with acts almost above belief, given to the
Christians leisure to rally and come to disingage that Valiant Emperor, so
Heroic a piece of service was not unrecompenced. The Emperor bestowed on the
unknown Don Fernand a Commandery of St. James of a great Revenue, and a
Regiment of Horse belonging to a Spanish Lord that died in the last Fight. He
also provided an Equipage fitting a person of Quality for him, and from that
day there was not in the whole Army any one either more esteemed or admired,
then this Valiant Maid. All the actions of a man were so natural to her; her
Visage was so fair, and made her appear so young; her Courage was so admitable
in so tender an age, and her Wit so charming, that hardly any man of Quality or
Command in all that crowd, but sought her friendship with eagerness. It is not
therefore to be wondered at, if all pleading for her, and above all her Gallant
deportment, she was suddenly risen to be a Favorite with her Master. About
that time some fresh Recruits came from Spain in certain ships which brought
over Money and Ammunitions for the Army. The Emperor would needs see them
Parade in Arms, being accompanied with his principal Officers, with whom was
our Heroine: Amongst those new come Soldiers, she fancied she had spied Don
Carlos, nor did her eyes give her false intelligence. She was somewhat
discomposed all the rest of that day; caused an inquiry to be made for him in
their Quarters, but missed of him, by reason he had changed his name; she slept
not all the night, rose with the Sun, and went her self to seek out that dear
lover, who had cost her so many tears: she found him, and was not known by him,
her stature being changed by her taller growth; and her complexion varied from
its primitive Whiteness, to a more tawny color by the heat of the African
Climate; she pretended to take him for another person of her acquaintance, and
inquired what News he brought from Sevill, and from such a one, naming the
first that came into he thoughts. Don Carlos told her she was mistake^ that he
had never been at Sevill, but was of Valentia; you perfectly resemble a man
that was extreme dear to me, said Sophia to him, and because of this
resemblance I shall gladly become you^ friend, if you have no aversion to be
mine^ The same reason which obliges you to proffer m^ this amity, had already
purchased mine in requital, were it of equal worth with yours, replies Do^
Carlos; you likewise bear the image of a person (...) have entirely loved a
long time: your countenance and speech express you one, only your Se^ is
different; and certainly, pursued he with (...) deep sigh, you are not of her
humor. Sophi^ could not forbear blushing at Don Carlos last words^ which he
took little notice of, perhaps by reason his eyes which began to be moistened
with tears^ could not perceive the sudden shifting of her countenance; she was
somewhat moved at it and being unable to hide it any longer, entreated Don
Carlos to come and give her a Visit in her Tent, whither she would return and
expect him; and so having instructed him where he should find her Quarters, and
told him she was called in the Army Don Fernand the Mestre del Campo: she left
him upon this information, Don Carlos doubted whether he had showed the respect
due to such an Officer. He had already learned in what esteem he was with the
Emperor, and how great a sharer of his Favor, though an unknown person, above
the rest of the Court; It was eafie to find out his Tent and Quarters, which
were noted of all, and was as well received there, as any Cavalier could be by
any principal Officer. He discovered Sophia's countenance in Don Fernands face
again, was more surprised then at first, and that increased when he heard a
Voice that struck him to the heart with every Syllable, renewing the sorrowful
remembrance of his dear absent Mistress, whom he had loved above all the world.
Sophia still unknown to her Lover, made him eat with her, and afterward,
having caused those which attended to withdraw, and giving strict order that
none should be admitted, she made him again repeat what he had told her. That
he was of Valentia; and then made him tell her, what she already knew, of their
Adventures until the day that she was forced into the Pirates Vessel. Can you
believe, added Don Carlos, that a Lady of Quality who had received so many
testimonies of my love, and had given me so many proofs of hers, should have no
Faith nor Honor; should have so much craft to hide such vile defects, and
should prove so blind in her choice, as to prefer a young Page that belonged to
me, who stole her away the day before the time appointed by us, to have escaped
together. But are you very certain of it, replies Sophia? Fortune over rules
all our Actions, and often takes pleasure in disappointing our Projects, and
giving a success contrary to what we designed: Your Mistress may have been
compell^d to leave you, and is perhaps less guilty then unfortunate; would to
God, answered Don Carlos, I had any place left to doubt of her frailty, all my
losses and trouble flowing from that Spring, would have given me some comfort;
nor should I yet think my self past all hopes of happiness ha^ I any reason to
believe she kept her Faith yet; bu^ that is all bestowed on treacherous
Claudia, while she only feigned a love to me, and yielded up he heart to him.
It is evident by what you now say^ that you had never any great love for her,
sai^ Sophia, since you condemn her without a hearing and proclaim her as wicked
as light and inconstant. And can any creature be more so, ther^ that imprudent
Maid has been, since to take awa^ all suspicion that her Page had been guilty
of he^ flight, she left that night she fled away from her Fathers house, a
Letter which was too full of malice, and has made me too miserable to be ever
blotted out of my Memory, I shall repeat it to you, and by that leave you to
judge how much dissimulation that young Maid was capable of.

The Letter.
YOu should not have forbidden me to love Don Carlos after you had ordained me
to do it, so great a merit as his could not but inspire me with an Affection
proportionate; and when the heart of a young Person, is prepossest therewith,
it leaves no room for any other interest. And therefore I make my escape hence
with him whom you encouraged me to love, even from my youth, without whose
enjoyment it were as impossible for me to live, as it would be not to die if
confined to the embraces of a stranger, whom I should never affect, were he
Master of much greater riches then he is. Our offense, if it can be justly
esteemed any, deserves your pardon; which if you will vouchsafe, we shall
return with greater speed to obtain it, then we now fly from the unjust
Violence you would do us,

SOPHIA.


You may imagine, pursued D^n Carlos the extreme grief it cast Sophia's Parent
into upon the reading this Letter. They flattered themselves with the hopes
that I might be yet concealed in some part of the City with their Daughter, or
that at least we were not far from thence. They hid the knowledge of their
loss from every one but the Viceroy, who was of their kindred, and it was
scarcely daylight when the Officers of Justice came into my Chamber, and found
me asleep; I was surpized at such a Visit, as much as there was cause for it,
and when after they had asked me where Sophia was, I had made the same Question
my Answer; my Adversaries were incensed, and hurried me to Prison with extreme
severity. I was examined, and could plead nothing in my own Vindication against
Sophia's Letter; That evinced the design I had to carry her away, but it was
more apparent that my Page vanished at the same time with her. Sophia's Parents
made strict search after her, and my friends likewise were no less diligent in
making discovery whither the Page had conveyed her; That was the only means to
justify my innocence, but we could never get any intelligence of these
Fugitive Lovers, which made my enemies accuse me of being guilty of both their
Deaths. In fine, Justice seconded by Power, carried it against oppressed
innocence; I was informed that I should soon be sentenced, and that it would be
to die; I could not hope that Heaven would show any Miracles in my favor, and
therefore was resolved to adventure my own escape by an act of despair. I
clubbed with some Bandits, my fellow Prisoners, all resolute Knaves; so we
forced the Prison Gate, and through the assistance of our friends, we recovered
the Mountains nearest adjoining to Valentia, before the Viceroy could have any
notice of it; we kept our selves a long time Masters of the field: Sophia's
Infidelity, her Parents eager Persecution, the unjustice I thought the Viceroy
had done me; and lastly the loss of my Estate, cast me into so great a despair,
that I exposed my life in all the engagements where my Comrades and my self
found any resistance, by which I acquired so high a repute amongst them, that
they would needs make me their Leader. This I undertook with so great success;
that our Troop became dreadful to the Kingdoms of Arragon and Valentia, we
having the insolence to put those Countries to pay us contribution. I here make
a dangerous and confident discovery to you, added Don Carlos; but the honor
you do me, and my own inclination, do so far make me resign my self up to you,
that I a^ willing to make you Master of my life, by revealing such mad Pranks
as I then practiced. In the Conclusion, pursued he, I became weary of being so
wicked, I stole away from my Confederates who expected otherwise, and took my
journey toward Barcelona, where I was entertained a common Trooper amongst
those Recruits who were embarquing for Africa, and came newly to this Camp. I
have no cause to be fond of my life* for having made such ill use of it
hitherto, I think I cannot employ the remainder of it better, then by hazarding
of it against the enemies of our Faith, and for your service while the infinite
goodness you express toward me, is the only comfort my soul has tasted, since
the time the most ungrateful Virgin in the world has made me the most
miserable of mankind. The unknown Sophia took the unjustly accused Sophia's
part, and omitted nothing that might persuade her Lover not to misinterpret his
Mistresses actions, before he had a clearer information: She told the unhappy
Cavalier she took his Misfortunes much to heart, that she would willingly
sweeten and allay them, and to give him a more effectual evidence hereof then
single words; she entreated him to depend upon her, and when she sound a
favorable opportunity, she would make use of all her credit, and her friends
power to implore the Emperor to free him from the violent Persecution of
Spohia's Parents, and the Viceroys anger. Don Carlos could not be persuaded by
any Argument the feigned Don Fernand shaped, to justify Sophia; but he at
length accepted of the proffer of her Table and Quarter. The very same day,
this faithful Lover spoke to the Camp-Master concerning Don Carlos, and
obtained that as a Kinsman of her^ he might be under her command, his I should
say Thus our unfortunate Lover is in that Ladies service, whom he believed to
be dead or faithles^ He finds himself in a little time so much in favor that
it perplexed him to guess whence sprang the sudden love; He is immediately made
Treasure^ Secretary, Gentleman, and Confident. His fe^low Servants respect him
little less then Don Fernand himself, and no doubt he might be happy finding so
much affection in a Master, that appear so amiable, and one whom he is by a
secret instin^^ constrained to love above the common rate, (...) inconstant
Sophia did not so often come into h^^^ thoughts, and bring so great a
melancholy there that neither the caresses of so dear a Master, nor h^^
repaired Happiness and Fortune, could in the least dispel whatever endearments
Sophia used toward him; yet was she pleased to see him afflict himself so much,
not doubting but she her self was the cause of it. She spoke so often to him of
Sophia and Vindicated her often times with so much heat and tartness when he
inveighed against he want of Faith and Honor, that in the end he began to
believe that this Don Fernand, who ever renewed the same discourse, had without
doubt bee^ formerly enamoured with Sophia, and perhap^ cherished part of that
kindness still. The War in Africa was brought to that period, Recorded in the
History of those times; The Emperor afterward carried on the like in Germany,
in Italy, and diverse other Countries. Our Virago under the feigned name of Don
Fernand increased her Reputation of a Valiant and experienced Captain, by
several acts of Courage and Conduct, though this ^ist quality is seldom found
in a person of so green ^ears, as this daring Maidens Sex and Features ^ade her
appear to be. The Emperor was ob^^ged to go into Flanders, and to that purpose
de^^red the King of France to grant him passage ^^rough his Dominions. The
grand Monarch ^ho then reigned, would needs in generosity and ^^^eness surpass
a mortal enemy, who ever had ^^rpassed him in good Fortune, of which he had ^ot
always made the best use. Charles the Fifth ^^as received in Paris, as if he
had been really ^ing of France. The fair don Fernand was one of ^^e small
retinue of persons of Qualiy that atend^d him, and if his Master had made a
longer abode (...) that most Gallant Court, that beautiful Spani^d taken for a
man, had inspired a great many ^rench Ladies with her love, and caused no
little ^alousie in the mind of our most accomplished ^ourtiers.

In the mean while, the Viceroy of Valentia ^^ied in Spain, don Fernand had
confidence enough (...) his merits, and the affection his Master had so ^^ong
expressed as to adventure to Petition him ^or that important command; and
obtained it without opposition or envy; He acquainted Don ^arlos as hastily as
possible with the good success of ^^e Petition, and made him hope that as soon
as ever (...) had taken possession of the Government of ^alemia, he would
compose the difference between ^im and the Parents of Sophia, obtain his pardon
^f the Emperor for having been head of the Bandits; and also endeavor to
repossess him of (...) Estate, never leaving to do him all the o^fices lay in
his power when ever any opportuni^^ did profer the means. Don Carlos might have
tasted some consolation in these noble promises, the too great unhappiness of
his love had not ou^ weighed all latter comforts. The Emperor a^rived in
Spain; and went directly to Madrid, an^ Don Fernand to Valentia to be possessed
of that G^vernment; The next day after his arrival at V^lentia, Sophia's
Parents presented a Petition again^ Don Carlos, who had the Offices both of
Steward (...) the Viceroy and his Secretary. The Vice-Ro^ promised to do them
justice, and to protect D^^ Carlos his innocence; a new Indictment wa^ drawn
against him, witnesses were heard a second time, and in Conclusion Sophia's
Parents an^ mated, with the regret of the loss of their Daughter, and a desire
of a just revenge as they supposed, pressed the business so vigorously; that
(...) five or six days time it was ready for judgmen^ They desired that the
person accused might b^ sent to Prison; He gave his parole that he should not
stir out of the Court, and appointed a day t^^ give judgment. The Even of that
fatal day, which held all the inhabitants of Valentia in suspense, D^^ Carlos
begged audience of the Viceroy in pr^^vate, who granted it him: He cast
himself at (...) feet and spoke thus to him. To morrow is the tim^ my Lord,
that you are to make known my innocence (...) all the world; Though the
witnesses which have bee^ sworn in my behalf, do fully acquit me of the crime
a^^ ledged against me; yet am I come to make Oath before your Highness, as if I
were before a Deity, that not only I had no hand in the conveying away Sophia;
but that (...) did not so much as see her the day before she went, nor had any
intelligence from her then, nor ever since. It is ^ery true, that I should have
carried her away; but a Misfortune hitherto kept from my knowledge, ravished
^er hence, to my Ruin and her own.

Enough, enough, don Carlos, says the Viceroy to him; go and sleep in quiet:
I am thy Master, and thy friend, and better informed of thy innocence then thou
do imagine; and though I had some cause to doubt, yet am I obliged not to be
too exact in the search, since thou art both in my Family and of my Family, and
had not adventured hither with me, but on my promise of Security and
Protection. Don Carlos returned thanks to so obliging a Master with all the
Eloquence he was endued withal. He went to his repose, but his impatience to
be acquitted robbed him of sleep, he rose at the first approach of day, and
appeared before his Master in a braver Garb then was usual, having dressed him
with greatest curiosity, attending his Lords rising. But I mistake, he came not
to him till he was ready; for from the time Sophia disguised her Sex, none but
Dorothea the Confident of her disguise, and Travesty'd like her, was admitted
to the Chamber till she was habited, nor rendered her such necessary Sevices,
which performed by any other, might have discovered what she nicely concealed.
Don Carlos therefore entered the Viceroys Chamber, as soon as Dorothea had
opened it for all comers; and the Viceroy no sooner spied him, but he
reproached his early rising, being a person accused, who would have himself to
be though innocent; and told him, that such a person as di^ not sleep soundly,
must needs find his conscien^^ burdened with some guilt. Don Carlos replied,
little startled, that it was not the fear of being convicted had disturbed him
so much, as the hope that he should suddenly be disingaged from the pursuit of
his mortal enemies; by that Justice h^^ Highness would show in the decision of
the Process. But you are very fine and gallant, says the Viceroy to him, and
I find you very calm an^ composed at a time when Sentence of life or death is
to be passed upon you. I am now at a stand what to think of the Crime wherewith
you stand Charged; when ever we fall on the Discourse of Sophia, you speak of
her with less concern and more indifferency then I; yet am not I accused o^
having been beloved, or of having murdered her; and possibly young Claudio
likewise, on whom you endeavor to fasten this Rape of hers; you say you loved
her, continued the Viceroy, and yet live still, though she be lost to you; nor
do omi^ any thing that may acquit and gain your liberty again; you who should
hate your life, and al^ that might contribute to any thing of happiness; Ah,
inconstant Don Carlos! Certainly some other must needs have made a breach upon
your Sou^^ and Faith, which you should have preserved intire^ for the lost
Sophia, if you had truly loved her, when she was solely yours, and durst do any
thing for your sake. Don Carlos half dead at these sharp words of the
Viceroys, would have replied; but he would not suffer it: Hold thy tongue,
said he, with a severe countenance, and reserve your Eloquence for your Judges;
for as for my part, I cannot be Bribed, nor will I for a Servants sake give the
Emperor any cause to suspect me partial (...) my Justice; therefore in the
mean time, added the Viceroy, turning toward his Guard, take him into safe
custody: he that has broken Prison, may well break his word that he will never
seek his ^mpunity by flight. They soon disarmed Don Carlos, which begot pity in
all those that beheld ^im thus surrounded with Soldiers, pale and wan, and
hardly able to restrain his tears: While this poor Gentleman repented his too
great confidence in ^elying on the bare promises of fickle Nobility, the Judges
entered the Room, and took their Seats, after the Viceroy was set down in his.
The Ita^ian Count who was now at Valentia, and Sophia's Father and Mother
appeared, and produced their witnesses against the party accused, who so far
di^paired of his process, that he had scarce the cou^age left to make answer.
They made him acknowledge the Letters he had otherwhile addres^ed to Sophia;
her Fathers Neighbors and Domestic Servants were brought to confront him; and
in fine, they showed the very Letter she left ^n her Chamber, the day they
pretended he had ^onvey'd her away. The Prisoner caused his own Servants to be
examined, who avouched they saw their Master in bed that night; but he might
per^aps have risen again the same night after a pre^ended sleep. He made Oath,
indeed, he had not ^arried away Sophia, and desired the Judges to consider that
it was not probable he should stea^ her away to part from her; but they urged
h^ had murdered both her, and the Page, who wa^ the chief Privado in their
Amors; Nothing remained now, but to pass Sentence, and they were ready to
pronounce against him, when the Viceroy caused him to approach, and said;
Wretche^ Don Carlos! thou may well believe, having me with such frequent
testimonies of my affection that if I had in the least thought thee guilty of
the crime alleged against thee, I would not have per^swaded thee to come to
Valentia: But it is, no^ I find, utterly impossible to clear thee, unless
should begin to execute my Office by an act o^ unjustice, and therefore I leave
thee to judge ho^ much this unhappiness grieves me, by these tear^ that steal
down my cheeks; I might endeavou^ to make some agreement betwixt both parties
were not their quality and animosity too great t^ be compounded with; So that
in short, unless Sophia her self can personally appear to justify wha^ thou
do plead, thou have no other hopes but t^ prepare thy self for death. Carlos
dispairing o^ all mercy, cast himself at the Viceroys Feet; and said, You may
remember my Lord, that ever sinc^ the time I had the honor to be entertained
i^ your service in Africa, and as oftentimes as you^ Highness engaged me to the
troublesome, because melancholy, recital of my Misfortunes; I have ever
repeated it after the same manner, and you may believe that both there, or in
what other place soever, I should not have affirmed that, to a^ Master so
obliging as you showed your self in you^ particular affection toward me, which
I should dare deny before the severest Judges. I ever unbosom^d the real truth
to you, as I would do to my Confessor or the Deity it self; and therefore I
must reiterate the same again, by avowing that I loved, nay adored Sophia. Say,
thou do still adore her, ungrateful man, replies the Viceroy, surprising all
the Company; I do adore her yet, pursued Don Carlos, being amazed at what the
Viceroy said. I have engaged to marry her, continued he, and had agreed to
carry her to Barcellona; But if I now know who conveyed her hence, if I know
where she is now concealed, I shall submit to the worst of deaths. I cannot
aviod it now I find; but yet this comfort will go with me, That I die
innocently, unless it be a Crime to have loved an inconstant and perfidious
Maid above my Life and Fortunes. But, cried the Viceroy with a fierce
countenance, what are become of that Virgin and thy Page? Are they climbed up
to Heaven? Or are they hid beneath the Earth? The Page was a Gallant, answered
D^n Carlos, and she a Beauty; he was a Man, and she a Maiden. Ah! Traitor! said
the Viceroy, now thou do fully discover thy base jealousy, and the mean
esteem thou had for thy Sophia! Cursed is that Woman, who relies upon the
vain promises of man, whose easy faith does only breed their scorn. But
neither was Sophia a person endued only with those weak virtues common to her
Sex, thou wretch, nor was thy Page Claudio a man. Sophia was a constant Virgin,
and thy Page a Maid lost and transformed for the love of thee, who stole Sophia
from thee, betraying her because she was her only Rival. I am Sophia, thou
unjust, thou ungrateful Lover I am Sophia, who have endured things above
belief, for a person that never deserved to be beloved, having suspected m^
guilty of the ugliest infamy. Sophia could say n^ more: her Father who now
plainly discovered i^ was she, snatched her in his arms; Her mothe^ fell into a
swoon on one side, and Don Carlos on the other. Sophia broke from her Fathers
embraces t^ run to the assistance of those two, who were again recovered before
she could deliberate whether o^ them she should succor first. Her Mothers joy
expressed it self in tears, while she with tears repaid her Mothers love again.
She embraced he dear Don Carlos in her arms with so much tenderness and
affection, that he was like to have fallen again into a swoon; But much ado he
mastere^ his transporting content, and daring not to Kis^ his Sophia yet with
too much liberty, he reaped the satisfaction on her fair hands, which were du^
from her fairer lips. Sophia was almost tired wit^ the many civil embraces and
complements of the whole Company. The Italian Count did like the rest, but
withal began to mention the claim he laid to her, as having the engagement of
her Father and Mother: Don Carlos hearing that let go one of Sophias hands,
which he was greedily Kissing, and laying hold on his Sword, which was newly
restored to him, put himself in a posture^ that terrified the Company, and
swearing he would sooner ruin the whole City, made it appear that no earthly
power should deprive him o^ Sophia, unless she her self had otherwise
determined. But she openly declared she never would make any other person her
Husband but her dear Don Carlos, and conjured her Father and Mother to set
their Seal of approbation to it, unless they would resolve to make her vow her
self a Nun. her Parents willingly gave her free liberty to make her own choice;
so that the Italian Count rode away Post that very same day to Italy, or to
some such other Country as he most fancied Sophia related all her various
Adventures, which were admired by every one; a Courrier was dispatched away
with the News of this wonder to the Emperor, who bestowed the Command of
Viceroy upon Don Carlos after his Marriage was consummated, and for a
recompense of those Noble Actions which this Valiant Virgin had undertaken he
bestowed a Principallity upon the Family, which their Heirs have in possession
to this day. The City of Valentia made a magnificent preparation for the
Celebration of this Wedding at their own Charges: And Dorothea having changed
her habit, was at the same time espoused to a Cavalier that had a near relation
to Don Carlos.

CHAP. XV.
The impudence of Mounsieur de la Rapiniere.

THe Counselor of Reins had made an end of reading his Novel, when la
Rapiniere arrived at the Inn; He came rashly into the Chamber, where they told
him he should find Mounsieur de la Garouffiere; but the full blown Roses of his
face changed visibly, when he beheld Destiny in one corner of the Room, and his
Servant by him in as sad and trembling a condition, as a condemned Prisoner. La
Garouffiers bolted the Chamber Door within-side, and immediately demanded the
Bravo, if he could not guess wherefore he had sent for him? Is it not about a
Woman Actor whom I endeavored to have my share in, replied the wretch
laughing? How your share? Says Garouffiere, with a serious countenance; are
these becoming answers for a Judge, or have you ever caused a greater Villane
to be hanged then your self? La Rapiniere turned it still to Raillery, and
would fain have passed it over, as an Act only of Mirth or good fellowship; but
the Senator aggravated the Fact so much, that in the end he confessed the
enormity of his design, and excused it slightly to Destiny, who had need of a
great stock of Wisdom, not to require full satisfaction of a person that had so
hainously offended him, to whom he was obliged for his life, as may be seen ^n
the beginning of these Comical Adventures. But there was another business, yet,
to be decided betwixt this wicked Provost and him, of great concernment, which
he had communicated to Mounsieur la Garouffiere, who engaged to him full
^atisfaction for it, whatever pains I have taken to ^now this Rapiniere, yet
could I never discover ^hether he were more wicked toward God, or ^owards
Mankind, or less unjust to his Neigh^our, then vicious in his own person: But
this I ^ertainly know, that never any one man, had more Vices reigning in him
together, nor in a more e^inent degree. He owned that his plot was to ^ave
stolen away Madam Star, as confidently, as ^he talked of nothing but what was
justifiable in ^y honest heart; and boldly said to the Counselor and Comedian,
That he never had less cause to ^oubt of the success of any enterprise in that
^ind; for, continued he, turning himself toward Destiny, I had Bribed your
man; your Sister was ^^llen into the Trap, and intending to meet you, where I
had made her believe you lay wounded, he was not above two Leagues distant from
the ^ouse where I waited for her, when I know not that Devil took her away from
that great Sot ^ho was bringing her, and made him loose a good ^orse of mine,
after he had been shrewdly cud^elled himself. Destiny grew pale through
mad^ess, and sometimes blushed for shame to see with that an impudent face this
Rascal durst relate to him the injury he had endeavored a against him as if it
had been but an indifferent thing. La Garouffiere was moved likewise, and had
as much in dignation for so lewd and dangerous a fellow; wonder, said he, how
you dare so freely discove^ all these circumstances of an act, for which
Destiny had soundly banged you, had I not interposed But let me tell you, he
may peahaps do it yet, unless you restore that Box of Diamonds to hi^ which you
stole from him at Paris, when you were a Pick-pocket. Doguin your confederate
then and your Servant since, discovered at his death that you have it still;
and therefore I declare, tha^ if you make the least denial of it, I shall
become a^ much your Enemy, as I have hitherto been you Friend and Protector; La
Rapiniere was Thunder struck at these words which he little expected His usual
impudence to deny such crimes as these failed him on a sudden. He began
stammeringly to acknowledge that he had that Box at Manse and with horrible
execrations promised to restor it, and this was perhaps one of the most
ingeniou^ actions of his whole life, yet was he not sincere i^ this: for though
it be true indeed that he gave back the Box, yet he dissembled in telling them
(...) was at Manse, having it then about him, with intent to have bestowed it
upon Mrs. Star, in cas^ she would not have parted with her honor at a cheaper
rate. This he in private confessed to Garouffiere, whereby he thought to regain
hi^ good will, putting this Picture Box into his hand to dispose of it, as he
pleased; It was enriched with five Diamonds of a considerable value. Madam
Stars Fathers Picture was in it Enameled, and this handsome Girls face had so
great a resemblance with it, that this alone was sufficient to justify whose
Child she was. Destiny did not know where to find thanks sufficient to express
his mind to La Garouffiere, when he resigned up the Box to him; He found
himself eased of the trouble of getting it per force out of the Clutches of
Rapiniere, who was acquainted with nothing less then restitution, and who might
have prevailed against a mean Comedian being himself a Provost, which is a
crabbed Cudgel in a mad-mans hands. When this Box first was taken from Destiny,
it troubled him excessively, and this trouble increased upon the account of
Stars Mother, who preserved this Toy, as the Legacy of her Husbands affection.
One may from thence easily guess how mightily he rejoiced for the recovery of
such a treasure. He went and told the News to Star, whom he found at the Parish
Curates Sisters house, in company with Angelica and Leander: They consulted
about their return to Manse, and it was resolved for the next day. Mounsteur la
Garouffiere proffered them a Coach, which was not accepted of. The Actors of
both Sexes supped with la Garouffiere and his company; They went to bed betimes
in the Inn, and the next morning early Destiny and Leander, each with his
Mistress behind him, rode toward Manse, whither Ragotin, Rancour, and Olive,
were already returned. La Garouffiere proffered his service a hundred times over
to Destiny; As for la Bouvillon, she feigned her self sicker then she really
was, that so she might not be obliged to suffer the Comedian to take h^^
farewell of her, since he had not given her the satisfaction she desired.

CHAP. XVI.
Ragotin's Misfortune.

THE Brace of Comedians who returned to Manse with Ragotin, were lead out of
the direct Road by the little fellow, who would needs treat them in a small
Country house, proportionate to his stature; and though an exact Historian is
obliged to particularize all the important accidents of his History, and the
places where they happened, yet shall not be so curious as to tell you precisely
in what part of our Hemisphear stood the little Hovell to which Ragotin lead
his future Consorts, or Fellow Actors, whom I term thus, because he was not as
yet initiated into the Vagabond crew of Itinerant Comedians. I shall therefore
only assure you that it was within the pale of Christendom; when he had brought
them to it, he found the house occupied by a company of Bohemians or Gypsies,
who to his Tenants great sorrow had taken up their Quarters there, upon a
pretense that the Captains Wife was taken with the pains of Childbirth,
whereas it was rather in hopes to Feast their ungodly guts with some stolen Fowl
whereof there was great plenty in a place ^^r adjoining. At first desh, Ragotin
began to ^mineer, and in his anger was like a little pot, ^on heated,
threatening the Bohemians with the ^ovost of Manse, to whom, he said, he was
allied, (...) having married one of the Portals, whereupon (...) made a long
Discourse to inform the Auditors ^^w the Portals came to be of Kin to the
Ragotins, ^^ich tedious story nevertheless had not abated (...) Choleric
humor one jot, or made him leave ^s abominable swearing. He threatened him also
^ith the Provost la Rapiniere, at whose name eve^^^ one trembled: But the
Bohemian or Gipsey Bohemian Captain put him out of all patience by (...) taking
so civilly to him, and had the confidence (...) commend his good mien, which
was a token of (...) more then ordinary quality, and gave him no ^^use to
repent his having ignorantly taken up ^at Castle for his Quarters (for so this
Rascal call^^ his petty house, though it was only fortified ^ith a withered
hedge.) He told him moreover, that the groaning Lady would soon be delivered,
^^ed then their little Troop would march away with ^ag and Baggage, having
first paid the good Far^^er for such Provisions as they had used for themselves
and their Beasts. Ragotin was at his (...) its end, because he could not pick a
quarrel ^ith this fellow, who laughed at him to his very ^^ce, and made him a
thousand Congies, But yet ^is Phlegmatic Bohemian began to make his blood ^ise
in Rebellion in his heart and face, when Rancour and the Captains Brother
remembering each other, ^^s having been of old acquainted, opposed all, and
Ragotin laid aside his sharp contest, whi^^ might have bred ill blood, because
he had urg^ things a little too severely. Rancour brought h^^ quickly to an
accord, which he in his mind h^^ wished for before, and had perhaps sought for
himself, could he but have quelled his proud, r^ther then valiant, mind. In
this interim the Bohemian Lady was delivered of a Boy, Great was t^^ joy in
this little Company, so that the Captain i^vited the Comedians and Ragotin to
Supper, having before made some Chickens ready for Fricasee. They set down to
Table, the Bohemians were provided with partridges and Har^ which they had
taken with their Dogs, and two young Turkies, and as many Piggs they ha^
stolen; They likewise had a Jambon and Nea^ Tongues in store, and made a deep
incision in Levret Pie, whose crust was devoured by four o^ five Epitomies of
Bohemians that waited at the Table, add to these Ragotins Fricasee of six
Pigeons and you must confess they had cheer enough. The Guests, besides the
Comedians were to the number of Nine, all nimble Dauncers, and bette^ Pick
pockets: They began their Cups with the Kings health and the Princes, and they
proceeded till they had drank to all those Noblemen tha^ suffered them to
harbor in their Countries; The Captain entreated the Comedians to drink to the
Memory of the deceased Charles Dodo the Uncle of the Lady that lay in the
Straw, who was hanged during the siege of Rochel by the Treachery o^ Captain la
Grave. They made diverse imprecations against that Captain as a false Brother,
and against all Provost Martials, and made great waste (...) Ragotins Wine, the
virtue whereof was such, ^^at their debauch was free from any thing of ^arrel,
and every guest, not excepting the Mis^thropus Rancour made high protestations
of friendship each to the other, kissed each others ^eek, and being Maudlin,
watered their sprightly ^^asses of Wine with tears of joy and affection.
Ragotin was very pleasant and civil for the honor of his house, and soaked up
his tipple like a ^punge; Having been bibbing all night, one ^ould think he
should have laid down to sleep when the Sun rose; but the same Wine that had
^^ept them so peaceably in their Society, inspired them all at the same instant
with a spirit of separation, if I may say so. The Caravan made up their ^^cks,
not forgetting some small Trinkits belonging to Ragotins Tenants, and the jolly
Landlord ^ounted his Mule, and being now as serious as he ^as before
transported during the last meal, took ^is journey toward Manse, never minding
whether Olive or Rancour followed him, but wholly taken up with blowing a pipe
of Tobacco, though (...) had been all out above half an hour before. He had not
gone above half a League. still sucking his Pipe which afforded not one whiff
of smoke, but ^he fumes of the Wine invading his Crown Office made his brains
turn of a sudden; He fell off from ^is Mule, which very orderly returned to his
Farm ^ouse, whence it came, and as for Ragotin, after ^e had eased his
over-burthened stomach, he fell ^^to a profound sleep in the midst of the
Highway. He had not slept long, snoaring like a cracked Organ pipe, when a naked
man, like t^^ Picture of our old Father Adam; but strange hairy, dirty and
nasty, drew near him, and beg^^ to strip off his clothes. This wild man took
great deal of pains to draw off the new Boo^ which Rancour had by a supposition
appropriat^ to himself in an Inn, as I have formerly related some part of this
true History, but all this pull i^ which must have awakened Ragotin, had he ^^
been dead drunk (as the phrase is) and would ha^^ made him cry out like a man
dragged at a hors^ rail, had no other effect on him, but (...) draw him
bare-breeched seven or eight p^ces from the place he first lay in; a knife b^^
chance fell out of this sleepers pocket; the wi^^ fellow ceazed on it, and as
if he would have flea^ Ragotin, he slit his clothes, shirt, boots and
stoc^ings, and all what he could not otherwise strip o^^ easily, and having
uncased him, and made o^^ bundle of all the naked Drunkards spoil, he laid
(...) on his shoulder and fled with it as a Woolf do^^ with a Lamb; Leave we
this man running awa^ with his spoil, it being the same distracted fello^ that
had before affrighted Destiny so terribly, when he began his pursuit after
Angelica, and rather a^tend Ragotin, who waked not, though he indee^ deserved
to be awakened, standing so much i^ need of it. His naked Corpse being exposed
t^ the hot Sun, was soon covered, assaulted and stun^ by Bees and several other
sorts of armed flies which yet could not awaken him; but he wa^ rowzed soon
after by a company of Peasants who were driving a Cart. The naked Ragotin no
sooner appeared to their view, but they all cried, There (...) is, and drawing
nearer to him with the least ^oise possible, as if they had been afraid to
disturb ^im, they made themselves sure of his feet and ^ands, which they tied
together with good strong ^ords; and having thus bound him, they carried ^im to
their Cart, and so drove away with as much ^peed as a gallant that has stolen
a Mistress both against her own and her friends consent. Ragotin was so
damnably drunk that all this violence done ^im, did not make him sensible, no
more then the ^olting of the Cart, which these fellows drove a^ong so
furiously, and with such precipitation that (...) overturned in a deep miry way
wherein was a great deal of water, and Ragotin by consequence overturned with
it. The sudden cold of the wa^er, and the uneasiness of the stones, or some
such ^^even thing which saluted him at his rude fall, made him wake, and the
strange condition he felt himself in, made him almost mad; He found that ^e was
tied both hand and foot, and wallowing ^ike David's Sow in the mire; He felt his
head in ^ain both with his drink and fall, and could not ^ut wonder to see
three or four Country fellows ^ifting him up, and as many more dragging out ^he
Cart. He was so scared at this adventure, that he did not so much as speak one
word though ^e had so good a subject to prate of, and was naturally very
talkative; and a moment after he ^ould not have discovered to any body, though
he ^ad never so great mind to it: for the Peasants ^aving held a secret counsel
together, untied the ^ittle Prisoners legs only; and instead of telling him
wherefore, or expressing the least civility, observing a sullen silence amongst
them, they turne^ the Care back the same way it had come, and drov^ it with as
much precipitation as they came thither The discreet Reader is perhaps puzzled
to kno^ what these fellows would have had with Ragotin and wherefore they did
nothing to him* (...) The thing is certainly very ^ifficult to be unfolded, an^
cannot be well understood without a revelation^ And for my own part, what pains
soever I took though I had consulted with all my friends, ye^ could I never
have attained the knowledge but b^^ a chance when I least expected it; as I
shall no^ relate it to you.

A Priest of the lower Maine, somewhat foolishly melancholy, whom a Law suit
had brought (...) Paris, during the time his process was making ready for a
hearing, would needs Print some whims^cal fancies he had scribbled on the
Revelation^^ He was so fruitful in Chymera's, and hugged the last productions
of his own wit so much, that h^^ still blotted out the former, and so made the
Printers almost mad, being forced to correct the sam^ sheet twenty times over
at least; who tired there with would never venture on a second, but mad^ him
run from one Printers to another till at the last he lighted on the Printer
that was at work about this very Comical Romance, where by accident he perused
a leaf or two that mentioned thi^ same adventure. This good Priest being bette^
acquainted with the particulars thereof then myself, as having learned them
from the parties tha^ ceazed on Ragotin, as I said before, perceive^ wherein
the relation was defective, and having told the Printer as much (who was not a
little surprised; because he like many others had an opinion that my Romance
was only a Fabulous story of my own invention) was soon persuaded by the
Printer to come and give me a visit; Then was I informed by this faithful
Mansean, that the Peasants who had bound Ragotin when asleep, were the near
kindred of the poor Fool that run about the Country, whom Destiny met once in
the night, and who had stripped Ragotin in the day time. They had resolved to
coop up their Kinsman, had tried several times to do it, and had as many times
been soundly banged by him, he being a stout rugged fellow: Some that belonged
to the Village, having at a distance espied Ragotin lying in the Sun, took it
to be the fool asleep, and daring not come near him for fear of a beating; they
gave notice to those Country Fellows, who adventured to seize on him with all
those precau^ions before mentioned; took Ragotin without ^nowing who he was,
and discovering afterward their mistake, set his feet at liberty and turned
him going with his hands bound, that he might do them no mischief in revenge.
The Memoires (...) had from this Priest pleased me very much, ha^ing done me a
considerable service; nor did I do ^im a less in counselling him as a friend,
not to ^roceed any further in the publishing his Book of Ridiculous Visions,
Some Readers will perhaps ^ccuse me for having inserted this needless
cir^umstance; but others no less judicious, cannot but praise me for my
sincerity herein. Return we to Ragotin, his body all besmeared and bruised, his
mouth dry and gaping like the parched earth, his head dull and heavy, and his
arms pinnion'd behind him. He got up as well as he could^ and having cast his
eyes round about him as fa^ as he could look, not being able to see either
house or man near him, he beat it on the hoof down the nearest Road to him,
studying to find out the bottom of his disaster. His hands being thus tied
behind, exposed him to the troublesome inconvenience of many importunate flies,
who settled o^ those parts of his naked body whither his hand could not reach,
and obliged him oftentimes t^ lay him along on the ground, and so rub them off
or squeeze the little stinging Serpents to death A^ length he met with a deep
way, clothed with thick hedges on either hand, and filled with the streams of
a little purling Spring, which ran down to a Neighboring River. This gave him
cause to rejoice, intending to wash and cleanse himself of the mud which stuck
upon his body; but coming near a Foord, he saw a Coach over-turned out of which
the Coachman, and another fellow were haling five or six Religious Nuns who
were well soaked, and this charitable deed they performed upon the grave
exhortations of a Venerable Church man. It was the ancient Abbess of Estival
who was returning from Manse, whither an important business had summoned her,
and who by the Coach-mans fault was thus Coach-wrackt The Abbess and her Nuns
being pulled out of the Coach, perceived afar off the figure of naked Ragotin
walking directly toward them, whereat they were hugely scandalized, yet not so
much as Father Giflot, the discreet Director of the Abbey. He made the devout
Sisters hastily face about for ^ear of irregularity, and cried out with all his
night to Ragotin that he should make a halt. Ragotin thrust forward still, and
was coming over along plank that was put there for people to walk ^ver a foot,
and Father Giflot met him on the midway, being followed by the Coachman and
the Peasant, doubtful at first, whether he had not best ^xorcise him, so
Diabolical did his shape appear. At length, he asked him, whom he was, whence
^e came, wherefore he was naked, why his hands were manacled; and made all
these questions with a great deal of Eloquence, fitting his words ^o the tone
of his Voice, and the action of his ^ands. Ragotin incivilly replied, What have
you ^o do? and striving to go on w^rd, pushed the ^everend Father Giflot so
rudely, that he tumbled ^im into the water. The good Priest drew the Coachman
after him, and the Coachman the Country Bumkin, and Ragotin thought this
man^er of pulling one another in so pleasant, that he ^urst out into a great
fit of laughter; He held on ^is way toward the Nuns, who with their Veils ^ver
their eyes, turned their blind-sides to him, and their faces to the Fields.
Ragotin was very ^^different whether he saw the Nuns modest faces ^^r not, and
passed onward, thinking himself free from that encounter; which Father Giflot
did not ^^ean to put up so tamely. He pursued Ragotin, ^aving the Peasant and
the Coachman for his Seconds, which last being the most choleric of the
three; and somewhat heated before, because Madam Abbess had grumbled at his
mischance, lef^ the gross of the party in the rear, marched singly against
Ragotin, and charged him with his whip^ taking a smart revenge on the others
hide, for the water that had washed his own; Ragotin durs^ not abide a second
charge, but ran away like (...) dog with a bottle at his tail, while the
Coachman not satisfied with one lash, gave him half a scor^ more to increase
his speed, leaving at every stroke the Characters of his wrath written on his
bleeding Carcass. Giflot, though broken-winded wit^ running so fiercely, had
yet breath enough lef^ him to cry out, Whip him, whip him soundly (...) which
animated the Coachman to redouble hi^ stripes upon Ragotin, and began to
please himself with the cruelty, when a Mill proffered it self a^ Sanctuary to
this poor wretch. He ran in having his executioner closs at his heels; and
finding the door of a little back-yard open entered it, and wa^ immediately
surprised by a Mastiff who caught him by the Buttocks; He shreiked out most
dolefully, and fled to the Garden adjoining with so much have, and so little
good speed, that he tumbled down six hives of Bees that stood just at the going
in, which proved the worst of all his Misfortunes. These little winged
Elephants, adorned with Proboscides, and armed with stings, assailed this
little naked body, which had no hand^ to defend it self; and wounded him most
horribly. He bawled out so loud that the dog that had bitten him was scared
away for fear of him, o^ rather of the Bees: The implacable Coachman did the
like, and Father Giflot whose anger had for a time over-swayed his charity,
repented his having been too Vindicative, and went himself to hasten the Miller
and his people, who in his opinion came too lazily to the assistance of the
poor fellow thus worried in the Garden. The Miller snatched up Ragotin from
amongst the piercing venomous weapons of those swarming enemies; and though
much displeased for the overthrow of his Stocks of Bees, yet could he not but
pity the miserable patient; He asked him, how the Devil ^e came to thrust
himself naked and bound amongst his Bee-hives? But though Ragotin would ^ave
replied he could not for the extreme pain ^he suffered all over his body; a
little Cub newly whelp'd, that never was so much as licked into any shape by
the She-Bear, is compleater fashioned in its Cubbish condition, then Ragotin
appeared in his humane figure, after these stinging creatures had made him
swell from head to heel. The Millers Wife as pitiful as most good Women are,
got (...) bed provided for him, and laid him down in it. Father Giflot, the
Coachman and the Peasant returned back to the Abbess of Estival, and the Nuns
being re-imbarked in their Coach, and guarded by the Reverend Father Giflot
mounted ^on a Mare, continued their journey; It happened that this Mill belonged
to Du Rignon, or his Son-in-law Bagottiere (I cannot well say which.) This Du
Rignon was of Kin to Ragotin, who having made himself known to the Miller and
his Wife, was tended with a great deal of care, and his body dressed with a
happy success, till he was perfectly recovered by a Surgeon of the
Neighboring Town. As soon as he was able to walk, he returne^ to Manse, where
his joy for Rancour and Olive having found his Mule, and brought it home wi^^
them, swallowed up the grief and remembrance (...) his fall out of the Cart,
the Coach-mans whipping the biting of the Mastiff, and the stinging of the Bees.

CHAP. XVII.
The Passages between the Sma^ Ragotin, and the Great Baguenodiere.

DEstiny and Star, Leander and Angelica, tw^ Brace of fair and perfect Lovers,
arrived a^ the Capital City of Maine, without any misfortune in the way.
Destiny re-instated Angelica i^ her Mothers favor, to whom he had given s^
plausible an account and Character of Leander Amors and condition, that the
good natured Mrs Cave, began to approve the passion the young man and her
Daughter had for one another, a^ much as she had before opposed it. The poo^
company had not yet done their business in the City of Manse, but a man of
Quality that love^ Plays extream^y, supplied the covetous humor of the
Citizens; The greatest part of his Estate lying in Maine; he had taken a house
in Manse, which drew oftentimes many persons of worth thither who were of his
acquaintance or relation, as well Courtiers, as Country Gentlemen, and not
seldom some of the great Wits of Paris, amongst whom were found some Poets of
the greatest credit, he being indeed a kind of a modern Mecenas. He delighted
in Comedies most passionately, and all those that had any hand in them, and
this was it that invited the best Comedians once a year to make a journey to
the chief City of Maine. This Nobleman that I am speaking of ^ame to Manse, at
the same time that our poor Comedians were resolving to go from thence, being
little satisfied with the Mansean audience; He entreated them to abide there a
fortnight longer for his sake, and to oblige them the more willingly; bestowed
a hundred Pistols amongst them, promising them as much more at their departure:
He was willing to give the Divertisements of their Comedies to diverse persons
of Quality of either Sex, who flocked thither about the same time, and were by
him persuaded to make a short stay there. This Nobleman whom I shall call the
Marquess D'orse, was a great Hunter, and had brought all his Hunting Equipage
to Manse which was as complete as any man's in France. The Downs and Forests of
the County of Maine, make it one of the best places for those Sports in all the
Kingdom, either for Deer or Hare, and it being now the season for those Games,
the City of Manse was full of Huntsmen, which the approaching Festival had
drawn thither, most (...) them with their Wives, who were ravished to s^ the
Court Ladies, that they might have somethin^ to tattle of for ever after by
their Fire-sides. (...) is not the least ambition the Country is guilty o^ to
be able to relate sometimes and brag, how the^ have at such a time, and such
and such a place, see such and such Courtiers, whose name they nakedly repeat
and mention without any addition o^ Title, as for example; I lost my money
against Roquelaure, Crequi won so much, Coaqui^ hunts the Stagg in Tourain; and
if one lets the^ sometimes broach a Discourse of Policy or War they never stop
or unspeak (if I may term it so) till they have drawn all their little wit or
understanding dry, but run a tilt as long as they are able. But let us end the
digression. Mans^ was thus replenished with Nobility both great and small; The
Inns were full of Guests, and mos^ part of the chief Citizens, who admitted the
Courtiers or Country Gentry to lodge in their Houses, had in a short time
fouled all their fine Sheets, and Damask Napkins and Table clothes. The Stage
Players opened their Theater, resolving to act passing well, as having received
their money before hand. The Citizens of Manse grew hot again for the sport,
The Town Ladies were over joyed to behold all the Court Madams, by whose
example they learned how to trick themselves better and more a la mode then
they were wont, to the great benefit of their Tailors, who undertook to reform
many an old fashion Gown. They had a Ball every night, where some most wretched
Dancers, danced as pitiful Couranto's, and where many a young Citizen danced in
Canvas or Holland Drawers, with waxed pumps. Our Comedians were often entreated
to act at private Meetings. Star and Angelica bred love in the men, and envy in
the women. Jnezilla who danced the Saraband at the entreaty of the Players, was
admired; Roquebrune thought he should have burst with a repletion of love, so
much did his affection swell on a sudden; and Ragotin confessed to Rancour,
that if he did not quickly bring him in favor with Star, France would soon be
without a Ragotin. Rancour gave him good hopes, and as a testimony of the
particular esteem he had for him, prayed him to lend him twenty or thirty
Franks in silver. Ragotin looked pale at this uncivil request; repented of what
he had said to him, and was about to renounce his affection. But in the end,
mad with desire, he made up the sum in several sorts of Coin, which he fished
out of several little Purses, and very unwillingly gave it to Rancour, who
engaged that within four and twenty hours after, he should hear himself spoken
of: That same day they acted Don Japhet, a Stage Play as merry, as he that made
it has cause to be sad. The Audience was numerous; the Piece well acted, and
all the world very well satisfied, excepting only the disastrous Ragotin. He
came late into the Playhouse, and for punishment of his sin, placed himself
just behind a Country Gentleman, one of the largest size, who had a thick Coat
about him, which added very much to his overgrown bulk; Besides his spreading
Haunches, Chine, and Shoulders, he was of stature so much taller then the
tallest men; that although he sat down, yet Ragotin, who was but one rank
distant, thought he stood on tip-toe, and therefore cried out eternally to him,
that he should sit down as the rest did, not believing but a man that sat on
the same seat would be of the same height as other heads were. This Gentleman
whose name was la Baguenodiere, was ignorant a long time, that Ragotin spoke to
him. In fine, Rogotin calling him Mounsieur Green Feather, he having indeed a
very flaunting one, very much faded and not very fine, he turned his head
about, and saw the little Impatient, who somewhat roughly bid him sit down; la
Baguenodiere was so little moved, that he turned his face again toward the
Stage, as if nothing had passed: Ragotin re^cryed again that he should sit
down. He turned his head again toward him, looked on him, and returned it
again toward the Theater: Ragotin re-cry'd; Baguenodiere turned back his head
the third time, the third time looked upon the little Spit-fire, and turned
himself again toward the stage; As long as the Play lasted Ragotin cried out
in the same tone, that he should sit down, and la Baguenodiere looked upon him
with the same unconcern, which was capable to have made the whole world mad;
one might justly have compared la Baguenodiere to a huge Mastiff, and Ragotin
to a little shock that runs barking after him, while the great Dog takes no
other notice, but only lifts up his leg and Pisses against a wall; at length
the whole company began to take notice of what passed betwixt the biggest and
the least men amongst them, and every one presumed to smile at it, just when
Ragotin began to rave and swear through impatience, while la Baguenodiere did
no more then cast a cold indifferent glance upon him. This Baguenodiere was the
greatest man, and the greatest brutal in the world: he demanded, with his
former Gravity, of two Gentlemen that were by him, what they laughed at; they
told him ingeniously that it was at him and Ragotin; and, indeed as they had
reason, thought rather to congratulate then displease him with this answer:
However it digusted him, and You are very worthy So^s, which la Baguenodiere
with a frowning countenance cast in their teeth a little out of season, made
them understand that he took it ill, and obliged each of them to return him a
good cuff on the ear in requital; la Baguenodiere, could do nothing else at
first, but thrust them with his Elbows on either side, his hands being folded
in his Coat, and before he got them out, the Gentlemen who were Brothers, and
naturally very active, had time to deal him half a dozen good cuffs more, which
they happened to deliver in such an equal measure of time, that such as heard the
sound without seeing the blows given, thought verily it had been some body had
clapped their hands smartly together at equal intervals. In the end
Baguenodiere got his hands at liberty; but being clossely pressed upon by the
two Brothers, who flew upon him like Lions, his long arms could not move at
will; He would have gone back a little, and so sell upon a man that was behind
him, and tumbled both him and his seat down upon the unfortunate Ragotin, who
was thrown down upon another; which threw him down backwards upon another, who
was in like manner thrown down upon another, and so onwards to the last man
that sat behind, as far as the seats extended, they lying like a file of
Nine-pins newly tipped by a skilful Gamester. The noise of the tumblers; of the
crushed Ladies; of those that were affrighted; of crying Children; of babbling
women; of those that laughed; of those that lamented; and of those that hissed
and clapp^d their hands, made a hellish din: Never did so small a subject
occasion such great accidents, and that which was most wonderful, was that
there happened not to be one drawn sword, though the chief scuffle began amongst
such as wore them, there being at least a hundred more in the company: But that
which increased the wonder was, that Baguenodiere should cuff and be cuffed,
without being any more moved then if it had been the most indifferent thing in
nature; it having been further observed, that he had not once so much as opened
his mouth all that afternoon, excepting only when he uttered those three or
four unhandsome words, which brought down such a storm of cuffs about his ears,
nor did he afterward add one more all that night; so well was this man's phlegm
and taciturnity proportioned to his Gyant-like bulk. This hideous Chaos of so
many persons and seats hudled upon one another, was a long time putting into
order again; whilst they were busied about it, and some charitable Citizens
thrusting themselves betwixt Baguenodiere and his two Antagonists, a fearful
howling voice was heard as it were underground; Who could this be but Ragotin?
Truly when Fortune has once begun to persecute a poor wretch, she continues
her persecution still. This unhappy little imps seat was placed just upon a
board that cover^d the sink belonging to the Tennis-Court; which sink is
commonly in the very midst just under the line; It was an ordinary receptacle,
for the rainwater and such other filth as they threw away, and had a lid that
kept it close; but as time consumes all things, so had that rotted the boards
very much, and broke with his sitting just upon it, who dropped no sooner in,
but another man of a reasonable weight fell upon his head, and at his fall
slipped one leg into the same hole, where the poor Ragotins whole body lay. This
leg was booted, and the spur pricked Ragotin in the throat, which made him yell
so furiously that no body could imagine what it might be; a stander by gave
this man his hand to lift him up, and when his leg had shifted its first place
and posture, Ragotin bit him by the Foot so smartly, that the other thought
sure he had been stung by a Serpent, and gave a shreek that startled the fellow
so much who was helping him, that he let him go for fear: he In fine, recovered
his spirits again; and lent his hand once more to the man, who left off
bawling, because Ragotin left of biting, and both these together un-earth'd the
little one, who no sooner beheld the light, but threatening the whole world with
his nods and looks, and principally such as he perceived did laugh at him, he
thrust himself into the crowd that was going out; plotting something that
should prove as honorable to him, as dangerous for Baguenodiere; I never knew
how la Baguenodiere and the two Brothers were agreed, however it was brought
about, at lest I never heard that they ever did assault each other afterward:
And this was it that disturbed the first Play our Comedians acted before the
Illustrious Company that was then assembled in the City of Manse.

CHAP. XVIII.
Which needs no Title.

THE next day they represented the Nicomede of the incomparable Mounsieur de
Corneille: an admirable Comedy in my judgment, and the Piece that has the most
of the Authors own in it, and shows the height and fecundity of his Genius more
then any other, giving all his Actors confident stout Characters, all differing
the one from the others. They were not disturbed while it was acting, which
perhaps happened to be so quiet because Ragotin was that day absent; Hardly one
day passed wherein he did not meet with some broil, to which his peevish Pride,
and his hasty Presumptuous Spirit contributed as much as his ill Fortune, who
till then had never given him any Quarter. The little fellow had spent the
afternoon in Inezilla's Husbands Chamber, the Operator Ferdinando Ferdinandi; a
Norman, calling himself a Venetian, as I have told you already; a Spagyrick
Physician by profession, and to speak frankly, a great Mountebank, and yet a
greater Cheat. Rancour to free himself a while from the incessant importunity
of Ragotin, to whom he had engaged himself to make Madam Star love him, had
made him believe the Operator was a great Magician, that could compel the
wisest Woman to run in her smock only after any man he pleased: but withal,
that he did not make any trial of this Art but for some choice friends, whose
discretion he was acquainted with; because he had suffered some inconvenience
by putting it in practice for some of the greatest Lords in Europe: He
counseled Ragotin to do his utmost endeavor to gain his Friendship; which he
told him would prove no great difficulty, the Operator being a man of Wit and
Parts, easily induced to esteem all those that were so qualified, and where he
once took an affection, he kept nothing hid from them. We need do no more but
praise or respect a man of a proud Spirit to obtain what we covet from him; But
it is otherwise with the meek, they are not easily overruled, and experience
teaches us, that an humble mind having so much power over it self as to be
thankful to such as have refused them, attains their ends much sooner then one
that is offended at every denial. Ran^our persuaded Ragotin to what he pleased,
and Ragotin at the same instant went and persuaded the Operator that he was a
great Magician. I shall not stand to repeat all he said to him, its sufficient
that the Operator, who was beforehand made acquainted of it by Rancour, acted
his part so well, that he denied his being a Magician in such a manner as
increased the others confidence of it: Ragotin staid the whole Afternoon with
him, who kept a Matress upon the fire for some Chemical Operation, and would
own nothing affirmatively that day, which made the impatient Mansean pass over
that night very uncomfortably. The next day he came to the Operators Chamber,
who was yet in bed: Inezilla took it very ill; for she was not then so youthful
as to come out of her bed as fresh as a Rose, but was every morning locked up
some hours in private, before she could put her self into a condition to appear
in public; She slipped therefore into her little Closet, and was followed by
her little Black-moore waiting Maid who carried in all her Amorous Ammunition,
and in the mean while Ragotin began to talk to Signio^ Ferdinanai about his
skill in Magic, and the said Ferdinandi began to be more open to him, ye^
would not cercainly promise him any thing. Ragotin would needs give him some
tokens of his largess; He caused a very handsome Dinner to be made ready, and
invited the Players of both Sexe^ to it: I shall not give you any account of
the particulars of the Feast; you must only take notice that they were
extremely merry, and did feed very plentifully. After meal, Inezilla was
entreated by Destiny, and the Actresses to relat^ some little Spanish History
to them, such as she composed or translated every day by the assistance of the
Divine Roquebrune, who had sworn by Apollo and the Nine Muses* that in six
Months he would teach her all the Graces and Perfections of the French Tongue;
Inezilla did not stay for much entreating, but whilst Ragotin was courting the
Magician Fernandi, she read the Novel in the following Chapter with a most
charming Voice and accent.

CHAP. XIX.
The Rival Brothers.

DOrothea, and Feliciana de Montsalva were the two most amiable Ladies in
Sevil; but though they had not been such, their Fortunes and Quality were so
considerable as to have tempted all those Gentlemen to Court them that had any
desire to be advantageously matched. Don Manuel their Father had not yet openly
declared himself in favor of any one in particular, and Dorothea who as being
the Eldest, ought to have been first married, had as well as the other, managed
her looks and actions so circumspect^y, that the most confident of her
pretenders had ^eason enough to doubt, whether, his amorous profers were well
or ill received: However ^hese fair Sisters never went to Mass, without a
numeros crowd of Gallants at their heels. The^ could no sooner come near the
Holy Water, bu^ many hands, some fair, some otherwise, we^ ready to besprinkle
them at the instant; The^ could not lift their bright eyes from their Pray
Books, but they became the center of I know no how many amorous or lascivious
glances; no could they make one step into the Church without repaying many
salutations: But if the merit brought them somewhat of trouble the in public
and Sacred places, it had its rewar^ likewise before the Windows of their
Father house, where many appeared with such Dive^tisements, as rendered
supportable that sever restraint, to which the Custom of that Countr^ obliged
their Sex: Hardly a Night passed b^ they were regaled with Music, and in the
da^ time Tiltings and running at the Ring were n^ unfrequent, whereof they had
a full Prospec^ the House facing a large Market place most (...) for those
Exercises. One day above the rest, Stranger begot the admiration of every
Spectator by his Address above all the Cavaliers of the City, and was observed
to be a very comple^ Gentleman by the two Sisters; diverse person of Sevill, who
had been acquainted with him Flandens, where he Commanded a Regiment Horse,
invited him to run at the Ring wi^^ them, which he performed in the Garb of
Soldier; Some days after, there happened t^ Ceremony of Consecrating a Bishop
at Sev^^ The stranger, who took the name of Don Sanc^ de Sylva, appeared in the
Church where this w^^ done, together with the chiefest Gallants of the City,
and the two beautiful Sisters came thither likewise with many other Ladies
disguised after the Sevil mode, with Mantles of thick Stuff, and Hats with
Plumes of Feathers in them. Don Sancho obeyed her, and drawing toward Dorothea
de Montsalva, who stood nearer to him then her Sister; and had observed the
passages betwixt him and that other Lady: I was in some hopes, said he to her,
as being a stranger, that the Lady to whom I addressed my Speech, would not
have refused my. Conversation; but she has justly punished my confidence in
thinking I was worthy of hers. I conjure you, pursued he, to show less Cruelty
then she did toward a stranger who she so slights, and for the honor of the
Sevillian Ladies give him more cause to proclaim their kindness and civility.
You give me a just one to treat you with as much disdain as that other Lady,
replied Dorothea, since your request is but directed to me after her refusal;
but that you may have no ^eal occasion to complain of the Ladies of this
Country, I consent to Discourse only with you, as long as this Ceremony lasts,
that you may see (...) have appointed no man to meet me at this Rendezvous:
That is it which breeds my wonder, being of so excellent a shape, said Don
Sancho to, her, and either all men have a respectful ^ear of you, or the
Gallants of this City are but ^aint-hearted, unless the happy pesron whose
place I now usurp, be absent from the Town; and do you think, said Dorothea,
that I am so unskilful in the Art of love, that in the absence of my Gallant I
could not have abstained from appearing in an Assembly, where I knew he must be
wanting? Take heed another time of entertaining such unbecoming Opinions of
those you are no more acquainted with; you should find, replies Don Sancho,
that I cherish noble^ thoughts of your fair self then you imagine, would you
but let me serve you to that height of Adoration my inclination prompts me to.
It is not always safe to follow our first motions said Dorothea to him, and
besides there would many great difficulties be found in the pursuit of that you
now propound. There can be none so great or hazardous but I would undertake and
overcome to obtain the happiness of being yours, replies Don Sancho; It Is not a
design that can be brought to perfection in a few days reparted Dorothea: you
do not perhaps consider at present that you have only taken Sevil in your way,
nor do you it may be know how unkindly I should take it to be only loved en
passant; vouchsafe me, but what I beg, said he, and I do faithfully engage,
that I will be your constant Votary in Sevil during my whole life. What you now
proffer me, is brave and Courtly, replied Dorothea, and therefore I admire that
a person endued with so much Gallantry, has not before this made choice of
some worthy Ladies, to express his wit and fancy to; Is i^ that you esteem them
not worth the trouble It Is rather because I doubt of my ability and power to
complete a Conquest, said Don Sancho. Answer me precisely to what I shall now
demand, added Dorothea, and let me positively know, which of all our Ladies you
would the soonest submit to, and be kept a constant. Prisoner in Sevil for; I
have already declared, that you may fix me here for ever, if you will but give
me liberty to put on the chains I shall willingly receive from your fair hands
replied Don Sancho. You never yet saw me, said Dorothea; therefore pray name
some person. I must acknowledge then, Madam, said he, since you impose it, that
if the beauteous Dorothea de Montsalvo, had as great a stock of wit as I have
found in your self, I should esteem that man most highly Fortunate whose
Services and merits she would but own and smile upon; There are many other
Ladies in Sevil, that equal, nay surpass her, said Dorothea; but added she,
have you heard that amongst the crowd of her Servants there is one whom she
prefers much above the rest? Finding my self so much beneath her merits, said
Don Sancho. I never busied my inquiry in the search of what you ask? And
wherefore should not you deserve her as soon as the more confident, said she?
Ladies are of such pretty and sometimes strange humors, added she, that
oftentimes the first attempt of a new-comer, makes a happier progress then the
^ong-continued services of such Gallants as are hourly at their feet. You have
found our a very civil way to defeat and deny me your self, said Don Sancho, by
chis encouragement to love another, and I infer from hence, that the services
of a new Idolater would never appear so considerable to you as to become
prejudicial to any one that had been formerly engaged by you: Do not build your
faith on that, replies Dorothea, but believe I am not so easily cajolled, as to
take all you say for the effect of a new born passion, since your eyes never
yet beheld my face; If there be only that wanting to perfect the Declaration of
my love and make it authentic said Don Sancho, then do not hide your self any
longer from one that is already so much charmed by your wit. You would not be
so taken with my face, replied Dorothea; ah I you cannot choose but be most
lovely, reparted Don Sancho, since you so frankly deny that you are so, and I
begin to give way to my doubts, that you have a design to rid me hence, either
distasted with my too melancholy dull converse, or because every cornet of
your heart is prepossest with some more worthy guest; It were therefore unjust,
the goodness you have expressed in giving me so favorable an audience, should
make me trespass any longer, nor will I give you the least occasion to suspect
that I had no other design, when I made you the faithful profers of my life and
freedom, but only to divert my self. To evince, said Dorothea, how unwilling I
am that all this discourse should be lost in air and nothingness, I shall yet
be glad not to part from you, till I am made acquainted who you are. It cannot
be a crime then to obey you, Know then, incomparable unknown Lady, suid he,
that I am called by the name of Sylva, which is my Mothers; that my Father is
the Governor of Quitto in Peru; that I am come to Sevil by his order, and that
I have spent most part of my life ^n Flanders, where I have by my service
attained ^he highest commands in the Army, and a Com^andery of St. James. This
in a few words is what I truly am, and what I would be all my ^ife, rests only
upon you to give me leave to de^are to your self in some place less public
then ^his is; That shall be as soon as I can possibly, ^eplies Dorothea; in the
mean while, not to ^rouble your self to make any fuller discovery who I am,
unless you will run the hazard of never knowing me at all; be satisfied that I
am a ^erson of Quality, and that my Face is such as ^ightens none. Don Sancho
having humbly sa^ted her, quitted the place, and increased the ^umber of a
great many Gallants that were dis^oursing together. There are some sullen
La^ies, such as are ever censuring the Conduct of others, and magnifying their
own; who take upon themselves the Arbitration of what is good or evil, though
one might take odds in a ^ager of their. Virtues, as a thing not clearly
^erified, who fancy that for a little brutish coy^oss; and pretended Religious
squeamishness, ^hey may lay claim to a Supererogation in point of honor,
though the wantonness of their brisk ^outh has left more scandals, then ever
their ^rabbed wrinkles will afford good examples: These mumping Madams I say,
most commonly ^hort-sighted in their own faults, and so sharp^ghted in others,
will hereupon affirm, that Madam Dorothea was indiscreet and rash, no^ only for
having so suddenly showed such a willing forwardness to a person whom she only
knew by sight; but likewise in suffering him t^ plead love to her, and if any
young Lady under their Jurisdiction had done the like, she should within one
quarter of an hour have been sen^ into the other world to expiate the crime.
Bu^ let these Novice Ladies learn from me, that every Country has its
particular customs, and though in France the Women and Maids, who have the
liberty of walking any where upon their parole, are, or should be offended at
the least mention of love from so very a stranger; in Spain where they are
confined like Nuns, they rake it not amiss that any one should declare his love
for them, though he that should profess it had nothing in him that might
deserve their love again. Nay, they do much more; for it is the Women most
commonly that make the first overtures, and are first taken, because they are
last seen by their Gallants, whom they have the opportunity to see daily in
Churches, Walks, and from their Balcones and Jalousiers, or Lattic'd Windows.
Dorothea made her Sister Feliciana acquainted with the conversation she had
enjoyed with Don Sancho, and frankly confessed to her, that this stranger had
gained more upon her good opinion, then all the Cavaliers of Sevil; and her
Sister approved the design she had upon his liberty. The two fair Sisters
moralized a long while upon the advantageous privileges which men have above
Women, who seldom ever married any but such as their Parents chose for them,
which many time happened contrary to their inclination, whereas men were at
liberty to take only those that should most please their Fancies. For my own
part, says Dorothea to her. Sister, I am very certain that love shall never be
able to seduce me to any thing against my duty; but I am likewise fully
resolved never to marry any man, that does not possess in his single person,
all that I could expect in mankind, for I should much sooner choose to waste the
rest of my life in a solitary Nunnery, then be linked in the uneasy yoke of
Matrimony with a Husband I could no way affect. Feliciana told her Sister, that
was her resolution too, and they confirmed each others opinion herein, with all
the strongest Arguments their ingenuity could furnish them withal upon that
Subject. Dorothea met with some difficulty in making good the promise she had:
passed to Don Sancho of discovering her self to him, and showed her Sister the
perplexity she was in; but Feliciana, who was happy in finding out inventions,
put her Sister in mind of a Lady allied to them, and which was more an intimate
friend of theirs, (for all of ones Kindred are not such) that would serve her
faithfully and readily, in such a business as concerned her happiness: You
know, says this good Sister, that Marina, who has served us so many years, is
married to a Surgeon that lives in a little house belonging to our
Kinswoman, and joining to it, which two Houses have an Entry common to both;
They are Situate in a by place, and though any one should observe our going to
Visit that Kinswoman more frequently then formerly, they would have no
suspicion of Don Sanchos repairing to the Surgeons; besides that, he may
take the benefit of Night or a Disguise to avoid discovery. Whilst Dorothea
with her Sisters help, was thus contriving the plot for this Amorous intrigue;
preparing his Kinswoman to contribute her assistance, and giving her necessary.
Instructions to Marina^, Don Sancho's thoughts were wholly busied about his
unknown Lady; he could not determine whether she had made those promises of
further discovery only to mock his forward hopes; beholding her every day, yet
still concealed, either at Church or in her Window, receiving the Adorations of
her Gallants, who were of his acquaintance, and the best friends Don Sancho had
in Sevil: He was putting on his Clothes one morning, pleasing himself with the
thoughts of her, when word was brought that a Woman Veiled desired to speak
with him, They caused her to come in, and he received this Ticket, which you
are going to Read.

Ticket.
You had heard sooner from me, had it lain in my power; And if the great desire
you had to see me be not vanished, be pleased at night to come to the
Rand^zvous which this Messenger shall assign you, from whence she shall Conduct
you to a place where I shall expect you.


You may better imagine, then I express his joy for this News; He embraced the
Ambassadress very lovingly and presented her with a Gold chain, which after a
little Ceremony she accepted; She appointed him a remote place, where he was to
come without any Attendants, in the Evening, and so parted, leaving him the
most satisfied and the most impatient man in the world; at length the night was
come, he failed not to be at the place assigned, richly habited and perfumed,
where his morning Ambassadress waited for him: He was Conducted by her into an
ill-look'd little house, and from thence into a very fair apartment, where he
found three Ladies whose faces were veiled. He distinguished which was his Fair
Unknown by her Stature, and immediately broke forth into complaints because she
did not vouchsafe to unveil her; She made no great ado or fruitless Ceremony^
but both she and her Sister discovered themselves to the most happy Don Sancho
to be the beautiful Ladies de Montsalvo. You may now believe, said Dorothea,
when she threw off her Veil, that I spoke but the truth, when I told you that a
stranger might sometimes in an instant obtain more favor, then those Gallants
whom we daily converse with can merit in some years, and you would show your
self the most ungrateful person alive, should you not reckon this a very high
one, or misinterpret it to my disadvantage. I shall always value what I receive
from you, as if it came from Heaven, said the passionate Don Sancho, and you
may guess, by the care I shall take to merit the goodness you bestow upon me,
that if I ever be so unfortunate as to forfeit your esteem, it shall be more my
unhappiness then my crime.

In short, they said, without control,
All what such Lovers use to say
When Love is Master of the Soul.
The Mistress of the House and Feliciana knowing what was decent, had retired
themselves to an honest distance from our pair of Lovers, and thus had they all
the convenience requisite to inflame each others mutual affection to a greater
height then at the first meeting, though that was not indifferent, and
appointed another season to augment it yet more if possible. Dorothea promised
Don Sancho to do what lay in her power to meet him often he returned her thanks
in the best language he could, the other two Gentlewomen joined in conversation
with them for some while, till Marina put them in mind that it was time to
part. Dorothea was sad at it; Don Sancho changed countenance, but it was
necessary to bid adieu. The brave Gallant wrote the very next day to his fair
Lady, who returned him an answer suitable to his wishes. I shall not relate the
particulars of their Tickets, those amorous messages having never fallen into
my hands; They often met together at the formerly mentioned place, and upon the
same terms, and grew to such a fervency of affection, that abating the spilling
their blood like Pyramus and Thisbe, they were not inferior to them in their
violent tenderness. It is a saying, that Love, Fire, and Money cannot be long
concealed. Dorothea who had nothing in her fancy but her Gallant stranger,
could not speak meanly of him, but preferred him so infinitely above all other
Gentlemen of Sevil, that some other Ladies whose concerns were managed with as
much secrecy as hers, and who heard her talking eternally of Don Sancho, and
praising him to their prejudice, took both notice and a pique at it. Feliciana
had often warned her in private to speak more moderately, and a hundred times
in Company, when she found her transported with the delight she took in her
lavish Encomiums of his virtues, she trod upon her feet till she had almost
crippled her; a Spark that was enamoured with Dorothea had notice given him of
it by a Lady who was an intimat^ friend of his, and had no reason to doubt but
she might love Don Sancho, because he found ev^dently that since the arrival of
that stranger, he^ other slaves, amongst whom he was the mo^^ enchained, had
never received the least favorable look or audience. This Rival was rich, of
(...) good Family, and not displeasing to Don Manuel, who nevertheless did not
urge his daughter much to marry him, because when ever h^ did but mention it in
the least to her, she conjured him not let her marry so young. This Gallant
(now I remember, his name was Don Diego) would needs be fully assured of what
he rather yet suspected then could prove. He had one of those Vallets de
Chamber which they call Spruce fellows, who wear as good linen as their
Masters, or rather, indeed, wear their Masters own linen, bringing up new
fashions amongst inferior Servants, and being both esteemed and envied by the
waiting women. This Vallet was called Gusman, who having a little Spice of
Poetry, composed most of the Romances at Sevil, which are things we at Paris
called Ballads; he sung them to his Guittar, but never would sing plain Song,
because he could descant with divisions and quaverings, the embrodery of his
lips and tongue. He danced the Saraband likewise, never went without his
Castagnets; would once have turned Comedian, and to make up the composition of
his merit had something of the Hector; but to say truth, it was somewhat
Padding or Pick-pockettish. All these rich Talents added to a little kind of
Eloquence his Memory had furnished him withal from his Masters Table-talk,
made him without control, become ^he blank of all the Servant Maids, (if I may
so express it) as had the best Opinions of themselves. Don Diego charged him to
cast an amorous glance upon Isabella a young Wench that waited on the beautiful
Sisters de Montsalva; He obeyed his Master, Isabella observed it, and counted
it a happiness to be beloved by Gusman, whom she in a short time loved again,
as he indeed afterward really affected her; though at first he only intended
to make way for the accomplishent of that design his Master had on foot: As the
love of Gusman was a thing very considerable and much coveted amongst the
Servant Maids of that City, so was Isabella's Fortune as high as the most
ambitious Valet de Chamber could expect to be lifted; She was very well beloved
of her Mistresses, who were liberal toward her, and besides she expected a
competent portion from her Father an honest Tradesman. Gusman therefore
seriously intended to make her his Spouse, and she entertained him for a
Husband; they plighted their troth mutually to each other, and lived together
already as if they had been man and Wife. Isabella was much troubled to see
that Marina the Surgeons Wife, at whose house Dorothea and Don Sancho kept
their private Rendezvous, though she had been their Domestic Servant before
her, should be her confident and privado in a business of that nature, wherein
commonly a lovers largess is the oftenest expressed. She had discovered the
gift of a Gold Chain which Do^ Sancho had bestowed upon Marina; besides
se^veral other bountiful Rewards, and imagine^ there might be some she knew not
of. Thi^ made her hate her to the death, whence may b^ inferred, that this good
Lass was somewhat mercenary; Therefore it is no wonder if she a^ her dear
Gusmans first entreaty to tell him truly whether her Mistress had not a private
affection for some body, discovered part of that intrigue to him on whom she
had bestowed her heart; She revealed the whole secret of our young Lovers to
him, and discoursed not a little of Marina's good Frotune, who became daily
more and more enriched by Don Sancho's liberality, and then proceeded to curse
her, for thus robbing her of those profits which more duly belonged to her
Household Servant. Gusman entreated her to give him exact notice of the time
when Dorothea was to meet her Gallant, She did so, and he informed his Master
of all that had been told him by the faithless Isabella* Don Diego shrouded in
a Beggars habit, took up his standing not far from Marina's door at the time
appointed, saw his Rival go in, and a while after perceived a Coach make a stop
at the same place wherein were the fair Sisters, who alighted and went into
their Kinsmomans house, which put Don Diego into such a Fit of madness as you
may well imagine. He then resolved to rid himself of that potent Rival by
removing him out of this world: hired certain bloody Villains, watched Don
Sancho several Nights toge^^er, and at last met with him and set upon him ^ith
the help of his other two Hectors all arm^d for such an enterprise; Don Sancho
on the ^ther side was in a pretty good condition to de^^end himself; having
besides his Sword and Dag^er a pair of excellent Pistols at his Girdle: He
^eceived their first assault with a Lion-like bold^ess; finding his enemies
aimed at his Life, and ^^d Coats on that were Sword-proof. Don ^iego was more
forward and desperate then the ^ther two, whose mercenary Valor would not ^ide
their hire. At first he made good his re^^eat only till he had drawn them at a
conveni^nt distance from the House where his Dorothea ^as; but then fearing
some prejudice might ^^ght on him, if he stood only on the defensive ^osture,
and finding Don Diego press more hotly upon him, he lets fly one of his
Pistols at him, and laid him on the ground halfdead, crying out ^or a Priest
very loud. The report of the Pi^tols put the two Bravo's to flight: Don Sancho
^etired to his Lodgings, the Neighbors came ^orth and found the wounded man
gasping, who ^ccused Don Sancho of his death. This he had ^otice of by some
friends, who told him, that though the Law should not lay hold on him, yet Don
Diego's friends would never leave his death ^nrevenged, but endeavor to
murder him where ever they could find him at an advantage. He therefore betook
himself to a Monastery, from whence he sent the News to Dorothea, and ^rdered
his affairs so, that he might be in readiness to leave Sevil as soon as
opportun^^^ proffered it with security. The Magistrates (...) the mean time used
their diligence, seeking D^^ Sancho every where, but could not meet hi^ After
the first heat of their inquiry was ove^ and every one imagined he had made an
escap^ Dorothea and her Sister upon a pretense of D^votion went with their
Kinswoman to the M^nastery, where Don Sancho had taken Sanctuar^ and there by
the assistance of a Religious. F^ther of the Convent the two Lovers had meeting
in the Chapel, made mutual promis^ of a never-dying Faith and constancy, and
pa^ted with so much sorrow, saying such mournf^ things, that her Sister the
Priest and Kinswoma^ could not refrain from tears; which afterward turned to
sighs at every fresh remembrance that enterview; He left Sevil in a disguise,
le^^ving several Letters with his Factor before h^ going to be sent to the
Indies to his Father. B^^ those Letters he hinted to him the reasons tha^
obliged him to leave that City, and withdra^ himself to Naples: He arrived
there very happily, and was very welcome to the Viceroy t^ whom he had the
honor to belong; Bu^ though he had several Favors crowded upon him, yet he
grew weary of Naples within the revolution of one year, having never had any
News of Dorothea. The Viceroy Equipped six Galleys which he dispatched away to
scour^ those Coasts of the Turkish Pirates; Don Sancho's courage prompted him
not to neglect so fair an occasion to show it self, so that that the Admiral
accepted of his company with much ^ladness, lodged him in his own Cabin,
over^y'd to have a person of his Parts and Quality ^n his Vessel. These six
Neapolitan Galleys ^et with eight Turkish ones almost within sight ^f Messina,
and instantly engaged them. After ^ong Fight the Christians took three Enemies
Galleys, and sunk two more. The Admiral of ^^e Neapolitans was grappled with
the Turkish ^dmiral, which being better manned then the ^est, made greater
resistance; The Sea in the ^ean time grew somewhat rugged, and that ^orm
increased so fiercely, that at last both Turks and Christians had more reason
to mind their own safety, then each others ruin; wherefore they jointly
withdrew their grap^ling irons, and so got a good distance from ^ach other at
that time; when the too forward Don Sancho had boarded the Enemy, not se^onded
by any other, when he perceived himself ^n his Enemies Clutches, he prefered
Death before Slavery, and never minding the evident ^anger, cast himself into
the Sea, hoping, as trusting to his excellent swimming that he might ^each the
Christian Galleys again; but the ^ough waves kept him from their sight,
although ^is Admiral being an eyewitness of the action, and dispairing of his
safety, tacked about, and made all the haste he possibly could toward the
place where he leaped in. Don Sancho all the while bore up to Land-ward,
cutting the waves with his skilful arms, and swimming along both with the Wide
and Tide, finding to his great comfort a plank which had been torn out of
Turkish Galley by a great shot, which happil^ was sent him by his good Angel to
relieve hi^ in this most sad condition. The place they fir^^ engaged in, was
not at farthest above a Leagu^ and a half distant from the Coast of Sicily,
where Don Sancho got a shore sooner and safer then h^ expected, being very much
favored by the Wind and Tide; He set foot an shore without any prejudice at
his Landing, and after he ha^ paid his thanks to Heaven for his preservation in
so eminent danger, he walked forward a long as his wearied Limbs would carry
him and from a little Hill perceived a Neighboring Hamlet inhabited by
Fishermen, whom h^ found the most charitable people living. The extraordinary
weariness he contracted first in the Fight, and afterward in the Sea, together
with the coldness of the water and his we^ Clothes cast him into a violent
Fever, which confined him for a long time to his bed; but a^ length he was
freed from it, without any other Physic then a sober Diet. During his malady,
he designed to leave the world in their false opinion of his death, thereby to
abate the malice of Don Diego's Friends, and to make trial of his Dorothea's
Faith. He had during his abode in Flanders laid the Foundation of a noble
Friendship with a Sicilian Marquess of the Family of Montalto, whose name was
Fabio; He gave instructions to one of the Fishermen to make inquiry whether he
were at Missin^ where he knew his abode was, and being informed that he was
there, he went to him in a Fisher^ans habit, and entered the Marquesses House ^t
Night, who had wept as much as any other that unfortunate end he was supposed
to have ^ade. The Marquess was over joy'd to find that Friend again, whom he
had given over for ^ost. Don Sancho related to him the manner ^ow he had saved
himself, and also told him his ^dventure of Sevil, not omitting the violent
^assion he cherished for Dorothea. The Sicilian Marquess profer'd to go along
with him into Spain, and to bring away Dorothea into Sicily, if ^he would give
consent; But Don Sancho would ^ot accept of such dangerous demonstrations of
^is Friendship, but was infinitely pleased that ^e would bear him company into
Spain: Sauch^z* Don Sancho's Servant, was so afflicted for the loss of his
Master, that when the Neapolitan Galleys were come to refresh their men at
Sicily, he got unto a Monastery where he resolved to spend the ^emnant of his
days. The Marquess Fabio at whose request he was taken into the Monastery, sent
to the Superior to dismiss him again, which was readily granted because he had
not entered into their habit or order, Sanchez was extasied with joy when he
again beheld his lamented Master, and forgot all thought of returning to that
Solitary place again. Don Sancho sent him into Spain to make way for his
Projects, and to send him tidings of his Dorothea, who was like others
possessed with the belief of his death. The report went even to the Indies,
which caused his Father to expire with the regret, leaving four hundred
thousa^^ Crowns to a second Son, but upon condition th^^ he should restore him
the one moiety, in ca^^ that relation proved false. Don Sancho's Br^ther was
named Don Juan de Peralta, the san^^ with his Fathers; He took Shipping for
Spa^^ with all his wealth, and arrived at Sevil a yea^ after this accident
befell Don Sancho. Havin^ a distinct name from the other. it was easy for him
to conceal they were Brothers, which muc^^ concerned him to keep it secret,
being oblige^ to reside a long time in that City where his Brother had left so
many enemies; He happened t^ have a sight of the fair Dorothea, and becam^
enamored like his Brother, but could not ob^tain the same return of love. This
fair afflicted Lady finding nothing on earth worthy he^ true affection, having
lost her dear Sancho (...) whatever Don Juan de Peralta could propound in
Courtship, did but importune her, and she daily repeated her resolute denials
to the best Matches that could be mentioned by her Father. About this time
Sanchez came to Sevil, and observing his Masters Instructions, informed himself
of Dorothea's behavior; He was confirm^ed by the general report of all men,
that a very wealthy person lately came from the Indies, was deeply in love with
her, and omitted nothing that might express his Bravery and affection: He gave
intelligence of it by Letters to his Master, but made the story much worse then
it was told him, and his Master imagined it to be yet worse then he related.
The Marquess Fabio and Don Sancho shipped them^^^ves at Messina in some Vessels
that were re^rning to Spain, who prosperously landed at (...). Lucars, whence
they rode Post to Sevil. ^hey went into the City after Sun set, and took (...)
their Quarters at the House which Sanchez ^red for them: They kept within doors
all the ^ext day, and at Night Don Sancho and the Marquess Fabio together,
walked the rounds of that ^^art of the City where Don Manuel dwelt; ^hey heard
some tuning of Instruments under Dorothea's Windores, which was seconded with
^ost excellent Music; after which a single Voice married in Consort with a
Theorbo, ut^ered several complaints against the cruelty of a ^ygress in an
Angels shape. Don Sancho was almost tempted to have made an assault upon ^hese
Gentlemen that gave the Serenade; but ^he Marquess Fabio withheld him,
representing ^o him that he could have done no more had Dorothea appeared at
her Balcone, and obliged his Rival, or had those Songs been so many returns of
thanks for favors bestowed, whereas they were but the revilings of some
disdained Lovers, rather dispairing then expecting to attain his ambitious
hopes. The Serenade withdrew not a little dis-satisfied, and the Marquess Fabio
and Don Sancho withdrew likewise. In the interim Dorothea began to find her
self earnestly importuned by the Amorous Indian Gallant. Her Father Don Mannuel
had an extreme desire to see her married, and she was confident that if this
Indian Don Juan de Peralta being rich and of a good Family, should profer
himself (...) be his Son-in law, he would be prefered before any other, and she
be more hotly urged by (...) Father then heretofore; The day after the
^^^^renade, Dorothea was privately discoursing of (...) with her Sister,
telling her she could no long^ endure the Indians Courtship; and wondri^^^ he
had the confidence to act so publicly before ever he had acquainted her Father
with his pu^^poses. I never approved such things, said Fe^^^cia^a, and were I
in your place, the first oppo^^tunity should make him see the vanity of tho^^
hopes he has to please you. For my part (...) could never have the least good
opinion of him pursued she; he has not that brave meen'nor ai^ of Grandeur,
which is only found amongs^^ Courtiers, and all the vast expense he makes here,
is empty of politeness; every thing he does betrays a kind of Rusticity. She
endeavored afterward to make an unbecoming Character of Don Juan de Peralta,
not minding that at his first appearance in Sevil, she had confessed to her
Sister that she could like him well enough; and every time there was occasion
to mention him, she had been lavish in her praises of him. Dorothea observing
this true or feigned change of humor in her Sister concerning this Spark,
suspected she might have as great a secret inclination for him, as this
pretended aversion amounted to; and to discover it more fully, she told her
that she was not offended at Don Juans Courtship, out of any dislike toward
his person, but on the contrary finding some little resemblance of Don Sancho
in his countenance, she could sooner have been tempted by him, then any other
Gallant in Sevil; besides that, knowing him to be both Wealthy and well
Descended, she doubted not but her Father would soon have given his assent:
But, added she, nothing can win my heart, since I have lost Don Sancho's, and
fate having ordained that I shall never be his Wife, I never will be any
others; but am resolved to linger out the remainder of my days in a Nunnery;
Though you did not really intend to put this design in practice, says
Feliciana, yet the very mentioning of it to me is the greatest affliction in
the world: Never place it among your doubts, replies Dorothea; you shall be
shortly the most considerable Fortune in Sevil, and this alone made me desire
to speak with Don Juan, that I might endeavor to persuade him to look upon you
with the same affection he intended me; after I had undeceived him of any hopes
for him ever to gain any thing from me: But since, I perceive your aversion is
as great as mine, I shall only entreat him to cease further troubling both
himself and m^, by his further pursuits. And truly, added she, it does not a
little displease me, for I do not know any man that were more worthy your
choice for a Husband; He is rather indifferent then hateful to me, says
Feliciana, and when I told you how little I valued him, know that it was more
out of a compliance to your humor, then any real aversion in mine. Confess
rather my dearest Sister, answered Dorothea, that you deal not ingenuously with
me, and when you spoke so slightly of him, you presumed I had forgot how often
you had formerly applauded him; unless it were your fear made you suspect I
should discover how much you truly esteemed him. These last words raised a
blush in Feliciana's Cheeks, and put her out of Countenance; She pleaded, but
with a discomposed mind, several things in her own defense, but with so little
reason, that what she said served rather to confirm her Sisters accusation; and
finding her self at last past all reteat, she owned the love her Sister so
rightly guessed she had for Don Juan. The same day Isabella, who had broken off
all converse with her Gusman, ever since the fatal accident happened to Don
Sancho, received a Command from Dorothea to seek out Don Juan; and to leave the
Key of Don Manuels Garden with him, entreating him to come about midnight to
that place where Dorothea and her Sister would both wait on him as soon as
their old Father were in bed. Isabella, who had been greased in the fist by Don
Juan; and had endeavour^d her utmost to gain some respect from her Mistress
toward him, though it had hitherto proved but labor in vain, was infinitely
surpised to find this sudden change, and overjoyed to find this opportunity
of carrying him so happy tidings; She flew to his Lodgings with all the haste
imaginable, where what she told him was so much above his dying hopes, that
nothing but the Key could have begot his belief of it, which she deposited in
his hands; and that she might not go away with her own empty, he gave her a
little perfumed Leather Purse, wherein were fifty Pistols in Gold, which filled
her heart with as much joy at least, as she had done his. Fortune decreed it
so, that the very same night Don Juan was to meet them in the Garden, Don
Sancho accompanied by the Marquess, went their rounds again about the fair
Ladies house, to discover yet more particularly his Rivals designs. The
Marquess and he were at Eleven a Clock in the Street where Dorothea dwelt, and
four well Armed men took up their stand near them: The jealous lover believed
it was his Rival, He came up to those fellows, and told them the Post they had
taken up was very convenient for himself toward a design he had in hand, and
therefore entreated they would resign it to him; We should in civility grant
your request, said they, were not the same place absolutely necessary to a
design we are likewise concerned in, and this will be so suddenly done, that it
cannot retard the execution of yours so long as is worth mentioning. This
raised Don Sancho's anger to the highest pitch; so that to draw his weapon, and
set upon these rude fellows was but one act: The unexpected assault surprised
them, and put them into disorder, which being seconded by a new attaque from
the Marquess, they could not well defend themselves, but were driven with as
much haste on their side, as good speed on the others to the streets end, There
Don Sancho received a slight wound in his arm, and ran him through the body that
gave it him in such a manner, that he was a long while drawing his sword out
again, believing he had killed him. The Marquess in the mean time was
obstinately pursuing the rest who fled with all the speed they could make
before him as soon as ever they saw their Compagnons fall. At the other end of
the street Don Sancho espied some people with a light who came out at the noise
they had made; He was afraid it might be some Officer of Justice, and it proved
so: He retreated into the street where the fight first began; and from thence
into another, where in the midst of it he met hand to hand with an ancient
Gentleman that had a light, and his Sword drawn upon the noise Don Sancho made
with his running toward him. This was old Don Manuel, who came from gaming at
a Neighbors house, as he usually did every night, and was going in at his
Gardendoor not far from the place were he met Don Sancho; He asked our
Cavalier, who goes there? A man, replied Don Sancho, whom it concerns to be
gone quickly unless you stop him: Perhaps, said Don Manuel, some accident has
befallen you, which may oblige you to seek a place of Sanctuary; and if so, my
house being near at hand may do you service; It is true indeed, replied Don
Sancho, I am endeavoring to secure my self from the Justices hands, who I
doubt are following me, and since you are so generous as to profer your house
to a stranger, he puts the confidence of his safeguard in your hands,
promising never to forget the favor, not trouble you any longer with his
presence, then till they are past that possibly hunt for him. Don Manuel at
this opened the Garden-door with a Key he carried about him, and having caused
Don Sancho to go into the Garden, led him into an Arbor of Laurels; whilst he
went to take a better order about his concealment in the house without any ones
knowledge: Don Sancho had not been long in the Arbor when he saw a Woman
coming toward him, who said, follow me Sir, my Mistress Dorothea stays for
you. These words made him guess he might be in his Mistresses Garden, and the
old Gentleman might be her Father; He suspected Dorothea had assigned his Rival
to come to the same place, and followed Isabella, more tormented with jealousy
then fear of the Justice; In the interim, Don Juan, came at the appointed time,
opened the Garden-door with the Key Isabella left him, and went to the same
Arbor, which Don Sancho had newly forsaken; A moment after he spies a man come
to him, puts himself into a defensive posture in case he were assaulted, and
wondered when he perceived it to be Don Manuel, who bid him go along with him,
and he would secure him in a private Room where no body should find him; Don
Juan conjectured by his words, that he might have taken one into the Garden
that was pursued. He could do no less as Affairs then stood, but follow him,
giving him many thanks for so great a Charity; and it may justly be believed he
was no less troubled at the danger he was in, then vexed at this obstacle which
crossed his amorous design Don Manuel led him to his own Chamber, and left him
there, to get a bed made ready for himself in some other: leave we him in the
perplexity he needs must find himself, and let us follow his Brother Don Sancho
de Sylva; Isabella Conducts him to a lower Chamber which looked toward the
Garden, where Dorothea and Feliciana expected Don Juan de Peralta, the one as a
lover who desired to gain his favor, the other with a resolution to tell him
truly she could not love him; and therefore it were better he should make his
Addresses to her Sister. Don Sancho entered the Room where the fair Sisters
were, who were infinitely surprised to behold him; Dorothea stood Speechless,
as if death had ceazed on her, and had not her Sister held her up and placed
her in a Chair, she had sunk on the floor; Don Sancho became immovable,
Isabella was almost frighted out of her wits; and thought the dead Don Sancho's
Ghost appeared to be revenged of the wrong his Mistress did him: Feliciana
though very much terrified to see Don Sancho risen from the Grave again, was
yet more troubled at her Sisters condition, who at length came to her self, and
then Don Sancho spoke to her in this manner. If the the Fame of my death,
ungrateful Dorothea! did not in part excuse your inconstancy, the despair it
puts me into would not allow me so much life as to chide you for it; I was
willing to keep the world in the false opinion of my death, that I might be
neglected and forgotten by my Enemies, but not by you who had engaged your Soul
to love no other but my self, which promise you so soon have broken; I could
revenge the injury at full by making so much noise as should soon draw your
Father hither, and discover the person you have invited to your Chamber at this
season, but Fool that I am, I dare not yet displease you, being more afflicted
that I must love you no more then at your having bestowed your heart elsewhere.
Enjoy fair faithless Lady! Enjoy your love! Fear no disturbance in your
Newborn passion; I shall soon free you from the person who might for ever
reproach your treachery toward him, even when he exposed his own life to wait
on you. Don Sancho would have withdrawn himself after he had said this, but
Dorothea stopped him, and was about to justify her self, when Isabella came in
haste and told her Don Manuel was coming: Don Sancho had only time to step
behind the door; the old Gentleman was angry with his Daughters for being so
late up, and whilst his back was toward the door Don Sancho stole softly out,
and got into the same Arbor where he had been at his first coming in,
preparing himself against any sudden attempt, and expecting a fair opportunity
to be gone; Don Manuel went into his Daughters Chamber for a light to let in
the Officers of Justice then knocking at the same Garden-door, as having been
informed that Don Manuel had let in a man; that probably was one of those
engaged in the Scuffle: Don Manuel made no difficulty to open to them that they
might search his house, thinking the party was locked up in his own Chamber,
which they would never suspect; Don Sancho seeing he could not avoid them, came
forth of the Laurel Arbor, and stepping to Don Manuel who was much amazed to
see him, told him in his ear, that a person of Honor was always as good as his
word, and never forsook those he had once taken into his protection. Don Manuel
entreated the Provost who was his Friend, to leave Don Sancho in his custody:
which was easily assented to; both in respect to his Quality, and because the
others wounds were not dangerous; The Officers of the Justice withdrew, and Don
Manuel being confirmed by the repetition of the same words he had spoken to Don
Sancho when he first met with him, that it was he whom he had taken into his
Protection, no longer doubted but the other was some Gallant brought thither
either by his Daughters or Isabella. To discover which truth he caused Don
Sancho to go into a Chamber apart, desiring him to remain there till he
returned; He went into the other Room where he had left Don Juan de Peralto, a
Servant of his was come along with the Officers, and demanded to speak with
him; Don Juan knew well enough his Valet de Chamber was very sick, and not in a
condition to make inquiry after him; besides that, he durst not have done so
without his order, though he had known where he was, which he could not: He was
therefore hugely troubled at Don Manuels words, to whom he said at Random. That
his man might return and attend him at his Lodging. Don Manuel then discovered
that it was the young Indian Gentleman that had made such a noise in Sevil, and
being well acquainted with his Wealth and Quality, resolved not to let him ^tir
out of his house till he had married that Daughter of his whom he could best
fancy; He discoursed some time with him to pump out those mysteries which held
him yet in suspense. ^sabella saw them talking together from the other door,
and told her Mistress of it. Don Ma^uel perceived Isabella and imagined she was
coming with some message to Don Juan from his Daughter; He left him to run
after her just as ^he light that was in the Chamber was burnt ^ut, whilst he
was groping for Isabella, whom ^e could not meet with, this Wench tells
Doro^hea and Feliciana that Don Sancho was in their Fathers Chamber, and that
she had seen and ^eard them talking together. The two Sisters ^an thither upon
this assurance; Dorothea was ^ot afraid to meet Don Sancho with her Father.
^eing resolved to confess how much she loved ^im, and had been beloved by him,
and withal ^o inform him to what intent she had invited Don Juan thither, she
came therefore into the Chamber which was dark, just at the same in^ant that
Don Juan was stealing out, and meeting him, she took him for Don Sancho, held
him ^y the arm, and spoke thus to him: Why do ^hou fly form me, cruel Don
Sancho? and why ^ouldst thou not give ear to what I was about ^o plead in
Answer to those unjust reproaches ^hou have laid to my charge? I must confess
there would be cause enough, were I as guilty as thou have in some sort reason
to believe, but thou can not but know there are some mistakes have more
appearance of truth in them then truth it self which is ever best discovered by
examination and length of time: allow me therefore so much as may unravel these
false opinions, to which thy misfortunes, with my own, and possibly that of
others likewise has led us both; Help me to justify my self, and let not thy
passion which hurries thee to condemn me provoke thee to give an unjust
sentence, before a due conviction: Thou may have heard perhaps that a
Gentleman loves me; but have thou been convinced that I love him again? Thou
may have seen him in this very house; for I shall own that I sent hither for
him, but when thou know to what intent I did it, I am confident thou will
condemn thy own rashness for having condemned me, since that very act will
appear to be the greatest proof of my fidelity that I could ever give thee;
wherefore is he not in presence, that Gentleman whose love importunes me, thou
should be judge thy self, by what I could say to him whether he can pretand
he ever told me the story of his love, or whether I ever favored him so much
as to read one line of the many messages he has sent me. But my unhappiness
which ever brought him to me to my prejudice, does now keep him concealed, when
he might help me to c^ear my faith so foully aspersed: Den Juan had so much
patience as to hear all she could say without interruption, thereby to discover
what till then was kept secret from him, at length he was perhaps going to
contend with her, when Don Sancho who sought from Chamber to Chamber, the way
into the Garden which he had missed, and hearing Dorotheas tongue while she
talked to Don Juan, crept near her with the least noise he could, but yet was
overheard by Don Juan and the two Sisters. At the same moment Don Manuel comes
into the Chamber with a light brought by one of the Servants. The Rival
Brothers stared upon each other with angry looks, both laying their hands upon
their swords; Don Manuel stepped betwixt them, and cammanded his Daughter to
choose one for her husband, that so he might know which to second. Don Juan,
then told him, that his part he yielded up all his pretenses if he had any, to
the other Gentleman that was in presence: Don Sancho, said the same, adding
that since Don Juan had been invited to Don Manuels by his Daughter, no doubt
but she loved him, and he her, and therefore for his own part, he would rather
suffer a thousands deaths then marry with the least scruple. Doro^hea fell down
at her Fathers feet, and conjured him to give her a hearing: Then related she
to him all that passed betwixt her, and Don Sancho de Silva before he killed
Don Diego for the love of her; she informed him how Don Juan de Peralta had
afterward woed her, the design she had to let him know her aversion, and to
propound the match between him and Feliciana, and so concluded that if she
could not persuade Don Sancho to believe her innocence, she would the very next
day fly to a Nunnery never to set her foot out out again. By this relation the
two Brothers came to the knowledge of each other; Don Sancho was reconciled to
Dorothea whom he demanded in marriage of Don Manuel Don Juan also begged Don
Manuels consent to let him have Felic^ana for his Wife, and Don Manuel accepted
of them both for his Sons with so much satisfaction as is above expression; As
soon as it was day, Don Sancho sent for his friend the Marquess Fabio, who came
to participate of those joys: The business was kept secret till Don Manuel and
the Marquess had persuaded a Kinsman of Don Dieg^'s and his Heir, to forget the
occasion of his death, and lay aside his enmity against Don Sancho, during the
negotiation, the Marquess became enamored with that gallants Sister, and
proffered a match with her; He gave his consent with great willingness, finding
the proposition so much to his Sisters advantage, and then soon divested
himself of all revengeful thoughts against Don Sancho. The three happy couple
were linked together on the same day in the bonds of Matrimony, and every thing
succeeded well for a long time afterward, which ought to be considered.

CHAP. XX.
In what manner Ragotins sleep came to be interrupted.

THe agreeable Inezilla concluded the reading of her Novel, which made her
Auditory sorry it was no longer, whilst she was divertising the company with
this Lecture, Ragotin, who instead of giving his attention to it, was
entertaining her husband about his Magical designs, fell asleep in a low Chair,
as the Operator likewise did: Ragotins sleep was not altogether wilful, for
could he have resisted the many Vapors his plentiful Dinner sent up to his
Brain, he would have given better ear to the pleasant Novel; He did not sleep
therefore very soundly, but sometimes started, and nodded to his very knees, as
drowsy people do but too often at Church it self. There hapn d to be a ram
bred up at the Inn, whom the rascally Boys that went up and down the streets
and yard where it frequented, had used to make sport with, by putting both
their hands upon his head and provoking him to run at them with his horns,
which he would do with all his might, as those animals are naturally inclined;
this beast had liberty to range over all the house at his pleasure, and came
into the Chambers often times, where some delighted in feeding him: He was in
the Operators at the time they were reading the Novel. He spied Ragotin, whose
hat was fallen off from his crown, and who, as I before related, raised up and
then let fall his head upon his lap. The Ram took him for some champion that
thus defied him to try whose Scull was hardest; He retreated three or four
paces backward like one that is going to take a great leap; and rushing
forwards like a race horse, butted his head, armed with horns, most fiercely
against poor Ragotin, which was quite bald on the crown. He had broken his
brain-pain like an Earthen pitcher, no doubt, had not Ragotin most happily just
raised it up at the instant he made his blow, which by this fortune only grazed
along his face and battered the superficies of it. This accident did so
surprise the Spectators, that they were put into a kind of ecstasy, their
laughter only excepted; Insomch as the Ram who was taught to repeat this scurvy
trick, had time enough to make a second course, which inconsiderately lighted
betwixt his knees; at the time when Ragotin amazed with the blows, and his nose
and battered face bleeding in many places, had lifted up his hands to rub his
smarting eyes, which were both equally bruised with the Rams horns, they
happening to grow just at the same distance from each other at his eyes. This
second attaque, soon made him open them, and he no sooner discovered that
enemy, but striking with his closed fist upon his head, he hurt his hand most
grievously against his crest. This made him terrible mad, and that madness
increased at the whole Companies laughter, which made him wrangle with all of
them, and fling out of the room in a rage; he intended to have gone out of the
Inn likewise, but mine Host stopped him for the reckoning, which was perhaps as
unwelcome to him, as the battery of the Rams horns.

FINIS.
The Contents of the Second PART.
CHap. 1. Which served but for an Introduction to the rest. page 1 Chap. 2. Of
the Boots. p. 5 Chap. 3. The History of Mrs. Cave. p. 11 Chap. 4. Destiny finds
Leander. p. 26 Chap. 5. Leanders History. p. 29 Chap. 6. A Cuffing Combat: The
death of mine Host; and other Remarkable things. p. 35 Chap. 7. Ragotins panick
fear followed with disgrace. The Adventure of the dead Corpse; Another storm of
Cuffing blows, and other Accidents worthy of a place and mention in this true
History. p. 42 Chap. 8. What became of Ragotins Foot. p. 53 Chap. 9. Another
Misfortune befalls Ragotin. p. 61 Chap. 10. How Madam Bouvillon could not
resist a Temptation, and got a knock on her forehead. p. 64 Chap. 11. The
least Divertising of the Volume. p 70 Chap. 12. Which will perhaps be as little
pleasing as the last. p. 78 Chap. 13 An unhandsome Action of Mounsieur de la
Rapiniere. p. 83 Chap. 14. The Judge of his own Cause. p. 89 Chap. 15. The
Impudence of Mounsieur de la Rapiniere. p. 134 Chap. 16. Ragotins Misfortune.
p. 138 Chap. 17. The Passages between the Small Ragotin and the Great
Baguenodiere. p. 150 Chap. 18. Which needs no Title. p. 158 Chap. 19. The Rival
Brothers. p. 161 Chap. 20. In what manner Ragotins sleep came to be
interrupted. p. 196
FINIS.

