A SERMON Preached at BLOCKLEY IN Worcestershire UPON THE Thanksgiving-day,
Sept. 9th. 1683.

By Samuel Scattergood, M. A. Vicar of Blockley, and late Fellow of Trinity
College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by J. Heptinstall, for Thomas Yeate, at the Bell in Duck-Lane.
1683.

A SERMON Preached on the Thanksgiving-day, Sept. 9th. 1683.
PSALM 64.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. They encourage themselves in an evil matter: they
commune of laying snares privily; they say, Who shall see them? They search out
iniquities, they accomplish a diligent search: both the inward thought of every
one of them, and the heart is deep. But God shall shoot at them with an arrow,
suddenly shall they be wounded. So they shall make their own tongue to fall
upon themselves: all that see them shall flee away. And all men shall fear, and
shall declare the work of God: for they shall wisely consider of his doing. The
righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him, and all the
upright in heart shall glory.


WE are this day assembled together to pay the tribute of our devoutest praise
and thanks to Almighty God, as for the latest, so, perhaps, for the greatest
Deliverance that ever he has wrought for this Church and Nation. It Is the
only tribute this which a Creature can pay to his Creator, and it is that
which our Creator daily expects from us, and which he declares to be highly
acceptable and well pleasing in his sight; Whosoever offers me praise, says he,
glorifieth me. Psalm. 50.23. But though this duty be continually to be performed
by us, and (as the Apostle exhorts us, Ephesians. 5.20.) we ought to give thanks
always for all things unto God and the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ; forasmuch as every day, every hour, we partake of his goodness, and
taste of his mercy and loving kindness: yet then is it especially and most
indispensably necessary, when by showing some signal and extraordinary favor
toward us God himself calls for it, as it were by a voice from Heaven. And this
is our present case; every minute circumstance of which we have described to
us, and presented to the life in this portion of Scripture.

I. Here is our danger that threatened us. Cursed Sons of Belial combine
together, and contrive an Hellish Plot to destroy us. They encourage themselves
in an evil matter, etc. II. Here is God's gracious deliverance from this
danger. But God shall shoot at them with an arrow, etc. III. Here is our duty
thereupon. All men shall fear, etc. These are the things which my Text offers
to our consideration: of which in order.
And first, Here is a Plot contrived to destroy us. They encourage themselves
in an evil matter: they commune of laying snares privily; they say, Who shall
see them? They search out iniquities; they accomplish a diligent search: both
the inward thought of every one of them and the heart is deep. Which words
contain a most exact description of the methods and devices which cunning and
malicious Traitors make use of in contriving and managing the most execrable
and devilish Plots and Conspiracies for the Subversion of the Government under
which they live. The Psalmist here traces their footsteps all along, pursues
them from their infancy to their maturity, from their first trembling
initiation into Sedition, through all their secret whisperings and murmurings,
their stolen Cabals and Conventicles, until they are become Masters of the
Mysteries of Treason, and are ripe fruit for the accursed Tree. And so I shall
endeavor to expose them to your view in the same method that the Royal Prophet
has prescribed to us. And First, They encourage themselves in an evil matter.
Though it be most true that all men are conceived and born in sin; yet it is as
true that no man can all of a sudden, and as it were in a moment, become a
complete sinner, and arrive at the height and perfection of Wickedness and
Villainy. But though that secret infection which the sin of our first Parents
has conveyed to all their posterity (if it be not subdued and restrained by
the grace of God) be strong enough, and sure enough, to bring any man to Hell,
by breaking out into common and ordinary sins, which (unrepented of) will
certainly lead him to the chambers of death: yet to become one of Satan's
principal Agents, one of the chief Ministers of State in the Kingdom of
Darkness; this requires Pains and Sweat; and he must serve a most insufferable
Apprenticeship that will attain to it: and whosoever will embarque his Soul on
this manner for Hell (especially if he has been born and bred in a Christian
Church) must endure many sad conflicts and storms in his Conscience, before he
can thoroughly make shipwreck of his faith, and fit himself for the desperate
attempts of so fatal a voyage. When the Prophet Elisha told Hazael what cruelty
he should show toward the Children of Israel (2 King. 8.) that he should set
their strong holds on fire, and should slay their young men with the sword, and
dash their children, and rip up their women with child, he answers him, as if
he were astonished at such actions; What, says he, is thy servant a dog, that
he should do this great thing! And yet he did do it afterward, as the story
shows us. And so likewise it is not at all improbable but the most bloody
minded of all the Traitors that were concerned in this late Conspiracy, should
a man have surprised him on a sudden, and asked him, If he would undertake to
stab the King, or to fire a Blunderbus in his Face, before he had been fitly
prepared to hearken to such proposals, would have rejected the thing with
horror, and have looked upon it to be compared with Nero's insatiable thirst
after blood, when he wished that the people of Rome had but one neck, that he
might destroy them all at a blow. For though a man must be beholding to a
tender Conscience, and to the assistence of the Divine Grace to preserve him
from smaller sins, and to enable him to abstain from all appearance of evil;
yet such horrid crimes as this of Treason, Assassinating Kings, and ruining
Kingdoms, and procuring the destruction of (perhaps) more than an hundred
thousand innocent persons in a moment; I say, such villainy as this looks so
dreadful and ghastly, that even common humanity startles at the sight of it,
as if Hell it self were open to its view, and it had a full prospect of the
terrors of the Infernal pit: and therefore it is not to be propounded to any
persons but such as by a previous preparation are duly fitted and qualified for
it. And so David tells us here that the Conspiratours lay their designs
accordingly; and the beginning and rise of all Plots is this, They encourage
themselves in an evil matter. Those that are already thoroughly disposed for
Treason themselves, that they may draw others into their confederacy, labor to
possess them with an ill opinion of the Government; and, that the infection may
spread it self the faster through all parts of the Kingdom, they cause lying
and seditious Pamphlets and Libels to be dispersed abroad, to defame the King
and his Council, and to terrify the hearts of the credulous Vulgar with
groundless Fears and Jealousies. By such strategems as these, together with the
help of the Pulpit Incendiaries, that forced the Gospel of Peace to sound an
Alarm of War, and to command Rebellion instead of Obedience, did this unhappy
Nation lately lose its King, its Liberty, and its Religion, and was reduced to
most wretched Slavery under Tyranny, Schism and Heresy. And in the very same
manner was this last Conspiracy begun, fomented and carried on; and as direful
effects would it certainly have produced, had not God been graciously pleased
to discover it, and (I hope) utterly to defeat and confound it: and the Morning
Star is not a more infallible sign of approaching day than such methods as
these are of Plots and Treason being in agitation. By this means it comes to
pass that the Mouths of the Common people are opened, and, as the Psalmist
expresses it at the third verse of this Psalm, They whet their tongue like a
sword, and bend their bows to shoot their arrows, even bitter words against
those Governors; against whom they ought not to frame so much as an evil
thought: and every pragmatical Fop, that perhaps has not brains sufficient to
make a good Constable, takes upon him to be a mighty Politician, and arraigns
and censures the most prudent and advised proceedings of the King and his
Council. And while they that study to be quiet, and to do their own business,
leaving the management of State Affairs to those persons with whom God has
entrusted them, are looked upon to be Betrayers of the Subjects Liberty, they
only cry themselves up for the zealous Asserters of it who most evidently show
that they design to invade it, by trampling upon the Laws both of the Gospel
and the King, and in defiance of the former boldly calumniate and revile the
latter, despising Dominion, and speaking evil of Dignities. And thus much of
the first step toward Treason mentioned in my Text, and it is no small one
neither: They encourage themselves in an evil matter, by mooting sometimes upon
a Case of Treason, and letting their tongues loose to talk seditiously against
the Government.

And whosoever has learnt this lesson well is in a fair way to proceed
farther: and he that has conceived an ill opinion of the King and his
Government, that finds himself uneasy under it, and dares openly declare these
sentiments of his to others, must needs be supposed to be inclinable to engage
in any design by which he may have any probable hopes to mend his condition;
and will doubtless lend his helping hand, or head, or purse, or perhaps all of
them rather than fail, to free himself from that yoke with which he is pinched.
And this is the direct method of the Traitors here in my Text. After they have
sufficiently encouraged themselves in an evil matter by their factious and
seditious discourses, and begin thoroughly to understand themselves, and find
that they are all birds of the same feather, all Murmurers and Complainers
alike, afflicted with the same Grievances, and unanimously agreed upon the same
Verdict against the Government, we need not wonder if the next news we hear of
them be, That they are entering into Solemn Leagues and Covenants, and
Associations; that they are contriving Plots and Conspiracies, and that They
commune of laying snares privily, and say, Who shall see them? Thus Absalom
after he has alienated the hearts of the people of Israel from King David, and
stolen them unto himself, presently heads the Faction that he has raised;
causes himself to be proclaimed King in Hebron, and consults with Ahitophel how
to murder his Father David, and to possess himself of his Crown and Kingdom.
And whosoever has seriously considered the seditious and tumultuous behavior
of the Sectaries amongst us for these four, or five, last years, ever since the
breaking out of the Popish Plot; surely must either be one of the Party
himself, or else must apprehend that they had some dangerous designs in hand.
For when the Papists threatened the life of the King, and the destruction of
our Religion, who would have imagined but that the other Dissenters, who
pretend to be such furious Zealots against Popery, and such irreconcilable
enemies to Antichrist, would at that time especially have bent all their forces
against Rome, and have exposed the devilish Doctrines of that Church concerning
Equivocation, the Pope's Absolving Subjects from their Oaths of Allegiance, and
Excommunicating, Deposing and Murdering Kings, and the like? These would have
been worthy Subjects for the pens of Protestants. But instead of this, whilst
the Papists threaten us in the face with a damnable Plot, the other Dissenters
at the very same time charge us in the Rear; and, as if they were glad of such
an opportunity to serve his Holiness, with a great deal more than ordinary fury
and bitterness fall foul upon the Church of England: and I am very confident
that within these four last years they have written more seditious and infamous
Pamphlets against his Majesty, our Bishops and Clergy, and our Church as it is
by Law established, than in any four years besides since the late Rebellion.
And now who, that has but half an eye in his head, can choose but see and
conclude from such circumstances as these, that the Church of England is a
greater eyesore to these men than that of Rome; and that the two main
Ceremonies with which their tender Consciences are chiefly offended are
Monarchy and Episcopacy: the latter of which Christ will undoubtedly continue
in his Church even unto the end of the World, and I hope he will preserve both
of them as long in this Land from the rage and violence of unreasonable and
wicked men. I say, who that has impartially considered these things could
expect any thing less than some treasonable Plot from such restless Troublers
of our Israel; and that they that had taken all this pains by their factious
Writings and Discourses to encourage themselves in an evil matter, as they had
begun, so they would go on likewise with the Traitors in my Text, and soon
after commune of laying snares privily, and say, Who shall see them?

But the Psalmist pursues them yet farther, and in the next words sets forth
their indefatigable industry, and the utmost efforts of their diligence and
subtilty in laboring to effect their designs. They search out iniquities; they
accomplish a diligent search: both the inward thought of every one of them and
the heart is deep. After they have communed of laying snares, of contriving a
Plot, their next business is to consult together how to manage it and carry it
on with all possible secrecy and security. And for this end, before ever they
offer to strike a blow, they draw, up an exact Scheme and Platform of their
whole work, assign to every man his particular Office and Station, and agree,
to every little punctilio, in what order and method to proceed, that their
Conspiracy may be sure not to miscarry. Thus they search out iniquities. And if
ever any Traitors did so, certainly ours that were concerned in this late Plot
did it to the height: They accomplished a diligent search; they compassed both
Sea and Land to gain Proselytes, and had their Agents in Holland, as well as in
England and Scotland; and both the inward thought of every one of them and the
heart was deep.

How cunningly they had laid their designs the King has acquainted us in his
Declaration; by which we may see how far their malice extended; that they aimed
not their Blow at his Majesty only, but at all his Loyal Subjects, at all that
were friends to him and the Church, and were resolved not to stay their hands
from shedding blood, until they had thoroughly purged the Nation both of
Loyalty and Religion.

And now we are come to the last Scene of this bloody Tragedy; a Scene that
must necessarily end in the death either of the Innocent or of the Guilty,
either of the Traitors or of the King. They say, and are resolved that the King
shall die: but God says, and has decreed, that it shall be themselves. They
design to shoot Bullets at their Sovereign, but God determins to prevent them
by shooting an Arrow at them themselves: And so I come to the second part of my
Text, which is,

God's gracious deliverance from this danger that threatened us. But God shall
shoot at them with an arrow; suddenly shall they be wounded. So they shall make
their own tongue to fall upon themselves: all that see them shall flee away.
There are many devices in a man's heart, says Solomon; nevertheless the
counsel of the Lord that shall stand. Prove. 19.21. Certainly the devices of
these Traitors of ours were many and bloody. Their part was Malice and Cruelty;
but God's part is Mercy and Justice met together: to us Mercy, whom he has
delivered; Justice to them, whom he has confounded, and snared in the work of
their own hands. They had found out so convenient a place for the execution of
their Treason, that had the King come by that way according to their
expectation, it had been morally impossible for him to have made an escape; but
he must have run directly into the jaws of Death. But nevertheless the counsel
of the Lord that shall stand. The Persons of Kings are sacred: they have their
Guard in Heaven as well as upon Earth, and God himself stands in the
congregation of Princes. And though sometimes for the sins of a wicked people
whom he has a design to punish he permits even good Kings to fall by the hands
of the Sons of Belial; yet for one treasonable Plot that he suffers to take
effect he disappoints many; to show how tender he is over the Persons of his
Vicegerents, and that Kings are the particular care and charge of his
Providence. And never did this Providence of his more clearly and graciously
manifest it self, than in those many signal and wonderful deliverances which
he has wrought for our present King, whom he has so often rescued from the
very brink of Destruction, and covered with his own hand from the weapons of
his enemies, and from the instruments of Death. And surely he must be an
Atheist, or worse (if possible) one that believes there is a God, but is
resolved to fight against him and fly in his very face; if after all this he
can either plot or speak evil against him whom Heaven it self has so plainly
declared to be its Favorite. But never did the hand of God more visibly appear
in his preservation, than it did in the discovery and disappointment of this
late hellish Conspiracy. When the Traitors had gotten all things in a
readiness, and waited only for the fatal hour: when they had laid their snares
so privily, and contrived their Plot so strong and sure (as they thought) that
vain was the help of Man; then God himself arises to protect his Anointed, and
to scatter his enemies: he shoots at them with an arrow, and suddenly are they
wounded. By a gentle and merciful correction he prevents a most severe and
dreadful judgment; and by a light affliction of one small and inconsiderable
part of the Nation he preserves the whole from a most lamentable destruction.
By a sudden (though a very auspicious and happy) Fire he drives away the King
from his Recreations to make an escape for his Life, and so defeats and blasts
all the designs of the Traitors. This disappointment struck such a terror into
their hearts; that although some of them were so hardened in Villainy, that they
presumed to proceed in it still, and held farther Meetings and Consults for the
carrying it on, yet others began to tremble, and fear that God fought against
them (as most certainly he did) and so their mischief would return upon their
own head, and their violent dealing would come down upon their own pate, and
they should be sure to perish themselves in the Attempt: And thereupon they
begin to think it high time for them to leave off plotting any farther against
the King's Life, and to provide (if possible) for the security of their own, by
surrendering themselves up to his Majesty's mercy, and making a full confession
and discovery of the whole Conspiracy, to the utter confusion and ruin of the
rest of their Confederates; some of them being thereupon immediately
apprehended, and the rest forced to save their lives by flying from the Sword
of Justice, exactly according to the words of the Psalmist in my Text; So they
shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves: all that see them shall
flee away.

And now we have seen what these bloudy-minded men would have done against us,
and what God has done for us; it is highly reasonable in the next place to
bethink our selves of our own duty, and to consider what obligations this great
Deliverance which God has wrought for us has laid upon us. And for this David
gives us instructions in the remaining part of my Text; And all men shall fear,
and shall declare the work of God; for they shall wisely consider of his doing.
The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him, and all the
upright in heart shall glory. Which words (without any nice division of them)
recommend to us in general these two Duties. First, A Duty of Thankfulness to
God; to consider wisely of his doing, to declare his work, and to praise and
magnify his Name for this great and undeserved mercy which he has showed
toward us. Secondly, A Duty of Caution; to take heed and beware of such manner
of men as these, that encourage themselves in an evil matter, that commune of
laying snares privily, and labor to disturb the peace and tranquillity of our
Church and Nation by stirring up Faction and Sedition amongst us, and
contriving Plots and Conspiracies against the Government. All men shall fear.

First, here is a Duty of Thankfulness to God for this gracious Deliverance.
This is the duty of this day, to which God has so signally obliged us, and
which the King in his Name commands us to perform. And whosoever performs it
not sincerely and cordially, most humbly and devoutly offering up to the Divine
Majesty the sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, surely has neither any true
Religion nor Loyalty in his heart; but in contempt both of God and the King,
does what lies in his power to pull down a Curse instead of a Blessing upon
himself and the whole Kingdom. For where God sows plentifully he expects to
reap so too: and when he bestows upon us extraordinary favors, it is but just
that our grateful sense and acknowledgment of them should be, as far as is
possible, answerable. And he can be no better than an enemy to his King and
Country that will not acknowledge the discovery and disappointment of this
hellish Plot to have been a peculiar and extraordinary demonstration of the
Divine Goodness toward us. It Is a Mercy that has continued to us as great a
Blessing as we can desire; and has delivered us from as dreadful a Judgment as
we could fear. A Mercy that has preserved our Church from being made the
second time a Den of Thieves, that would have established Schism and Heresy
among us by a Law; and given us as fair a Plea for Damnation, as ever we had
for our Liberty and Property. A Mercy that has freed us from the heavy Curse
of having the Kingdom of God taken away from us; and instead thereof has
confirmed that Kingdom unto us, and has settled amongst us (I hope surer and
firmer than ever) the best Religion under the happy government and protection
of one of the best of Kings. I speak not this in flattery; but as a truth of
which I am so confident, that I make no doubt but that the very dissatisfied
party of the Nation themselves, if they look round about, cannot name any one
King now reigning in Christendom whom they would rather have to rule over them
than He under whose Government they are at the present so restless and uncasic.
But the truth is, they would have no King at all, but a Commonwealth: and so it
is a plain case, that if our Savior himself (as the Fifth-Monarchy-men dream)
should come down from Heaven incognito, and reign over persons of such
Principles as these, he would meet with as bad entertainment amongst them, as
he did amongst the Scribes and Pharisees. They would be sure to treat him with
Libels and Lampoons, and endeavor to persuade the people that he intended to
introduce Popery and Arbitrary Government. If then ever any Nation had,
certainly we have reason to say with Israel, If the Lord himself had not been
on our side; if the Lord himself had not been on our side when men rose up
against us; they had swallowed us up quick, when they were so wrathfully
displeased at us. But praised be the Lord who has not given us over for a prey
unto their teeth. Since God has been pleased to stretch out his omnipotent Arm
to defend us, and to preserve our Liberty, our Lives and Fortunes, and (which
ought to be dearer to us than they all) our Religion from the fanatic and
brutish rage and fury of the worst and most inexcusable generation of
Schismatics that ever infested the Church of Christ; if we pour not out our
hearts in the devoutest praise, and adoration, and thanks to our Almighty
Deliverer; surely we are the most ungrateful wretches that ever received any
favor from Heaven. The Psalmist tells us here in my Text, that to praise and
magnify the Name of God for such a Deliverance as this that he has wrought
for us is a piece of Wisdom: For, says he, they shall wisely consider of his
doing: and then not to do it must necessarily be an evident demonstration of
Folly. And therefore whosoever neglects the duty of this day, and refuses to
give unto God the honor that is due unto his Name, proclaims himself to be a
Fool, and that in the worst sense: either an Atheistical fool, that regards not
the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands; or else a Rebellious
fool, that in his heart favors the design of the Traitors, and inwardly
grieves and repines at the Goodness of God that has disappointed it. If then
we desire to escape the just imputation of Folly and Sin, let us all this day
wisely consider of God's doing, and declare his work. And that we may do it
wisely indeed, let us be careful to praise him (as our Church teaches us to
pray that we may) not only with our lips, but in our lives, by giving up our
selves to his Service. The Son of Sirach tells us, that Praise is not seemly in
the mouth of a Sinner: But if we utter Praise in Wisdom, then the Lord will
prosper it. Ecclus 15.9.10. And so says David in my Text; The righteous shall
be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him; and all the upright in heart shall
glory. Let us therefore this day make a new Covenant with the Lord our God to
walk in his ways, and to keep his Commandments. Let us search and examine our
hearts narrowly; and cleanse and purify them, that there may be no accursed
thing in them to defile our Sacrifice, and to render the Tribute of our Praise
unpassable in the Court of Heaven. Thus if we do, God that has hitherto
protected us will protect us still, and scatter our enemies that delight in
blood. But if we do otherwise, with that Rod which he has at this time only
showed us in great Mercy to affright us into Obedience, and with which he has
once already most severely chastised us, he will ever long in his just Anger
dash us in pieces. I shall conclude this Point with the Prophet Samuel's Advice
to the people of Israel, 2 Samuel 12.24, 25. Only fear the Lord, and serve him
in truth with all your heart; for consider how great things he has done for
you. But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your
King And so I proceed to the second duty recommended to us in these last words
of my Text: and that is

A Duty of Caution, to take heed of such men as these that encourage themselves
in an evil matter, and labor to disturb the peace and tranquillity of our
Church and Nation, by stirring up Faction and Sedition amongst us, and
contriving Plots and Conspiracies against the Government. All men shall fear.
This very counsel St. Paul gives to the Romans; and with great importunity begs
of them that they would receive it and follow it. Romans 16.17, 18. Now I beseech
you, Brethren, mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses contrary to the
doctrine which ye have learned; and avoid them. For they that are such serve
not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and by good words and fair
speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. And 2 Timothy 3.6. he tells us that of
this sort are they which creep into houses and lead captive silly women laden
with sins, led away with diverse lusts. And the same caution our Blessed Savior
himself gives us, Matthew. 7.15. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in
sheeps clothing; but inwardly they are ravening wolves. One would think that
it should be altogether needless to put us in mind of such a Caution as this,
who have had sufficient experience of the cursed Hypocrisy and Cruelty of such
false Prophets as these; who have seen their religious Vizards plucked off, and
having first been gulled and deluded by their fair pretenses in their sheeps
clothing, have afterward been sorely wounded and torn by their wolves teeth.
One would think that, if we have any consideration of what we have seen and
suffered from them already by the very same strategems which they now make use
of, we might easily discern that they are still carrying on the Good Old Cause,
and under color of Religion and Reformation are contriving how to take, not
the Kingdom of Heaven, but that of their lawful Sovereign, by force: and that
notwithstanding all their loud Clamours, and pretended Zeal against Popery,
they mightily contribute toward the introducing it, whilst they build upon
that very foundation which the Jesuits have laid; and are most helpful
Servants to his Holiness, and Journeymen to Antichrist. For though the learned
Dr. Stillingfleet contents himself to say, Preface to his History of the
Separation.
That there are strong probabilities that the Jesuits were the first that
preached down Episcopacy, and the Liturgy and Ceremonies of the Church of
England, since the full settlement of the Reformation in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign: yet he has proved the matter so clearly, that methinks any man may
safely fay, That it is unquestionably true. And that unfortunate Game which the
Jesuits first started has ever since been most eagerly pursued by our
Protestant Dissenters; and that to so fatal a purpose, that they have once
already by this means laid three Kingdoms weltering in blood. And that they
have not yet quenched their thirst this last Conspiracy is a sufficient
evidence. And therefore whosoever talks hotly against Popery, and yet is a
favourer of the other Sectaries, must either be a person that out of some hopes
of mending his condition desires an alteration in the Government; or else one
of those easy, unthinking people that are led captive (they know not why, nor
wherefore) by those Mountebanks in Divinity that creep into Houses, and lie in
wait to deceive unstable souls. The Devil never does so much mischief as when
he transforms himself into an Angel of light: and Treason and Rebellion is
never like to be so successful, as when it is carried on in Masquerade, and
cloaks it self under a Form of Godliness. For all men are naturally apt to
think well of persons of a strict life and conversation; and indeed Christian
charity obliges us to do so, until we have very good reason to alter our
opinion: and when we have such reason, he that has commanded us to be harmless
as Doves, and to wrong no man so much as in Word or Thought, has commanded us
also to be wise as Serpents, to beware of wolves in sheeps clothing; and that
we may be so, he has instructed us how to know them; even by their fruits:
that is, by the Doctrines which they teach and practice. And to my knowledge
there are as devilish, and treasonable, Doctrines to be found at this day in
the Writings of some of the Presbyterians, and Independents, and other
Sectaries, that in the late Rebellion passed for Saints among their own Party
(and they that are yet living of them do so still) as I believe any man can
show in the worst of the Jesuits. And if these things be so, either such men
are Cheats; or else the Gospel it self is false that threatens them that do
such things with Damnation. Therefore, Brethren, let us be both charitable and
wise; so charitable, as to grieve for these men's sins, and to pray heartily for
their conversion; and so wise, as not to be seduced by their Doctrine, nor
caught in their snares. But while they run from Christ into seditious and
schismatical Meetings, let us run toward him; even into the habitation of his
house and the place where his Honor dwells, praying always for the Peace of
Jerusalem, and for the Prosperity of that Church which they labor to destroy,
humbly beseeching God still to protect and defend it from the open Violence,
and secret Malice of all its Enemies; that neither Popery, nor Fanaticism, nor
the Gates of Hell may ever be able to prevail against it; but that it may
flourish as long as the Sun and Moon endure.

Which God grant, etc.

FINIS.

