THE ROYAL-PAY, AND PLAY MASTER. OR THE Indigent-Officers Comfort.

Delivered in a SERMON Preached Before the Honorable the MILITARY COMPANY at
St. Paul's Covent Garden, July 25th

BY WILLIAM SCLATER, D. D. Minister of St. James Clerkenwel.

And now Printed at their earnest entreaty.

Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior ito. London, Printed by Rich.
Hodgkinson, and are to be sold by E. Brewster, at his Shop at the Sign of the
Crane in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1671.

To the Right Worshipful Sir ROBERT PATON, PRESIDENT. Mr. JOHN CANNON, Mr. JOHN
GARDENER, Mr. RICHARD COOPER, Mr. STEPHEN BURKS, Mr. EDMUND BRACE, Mr. ROBERT
WHITE,
STEWARDS of the HONORABLE The Military Company.
And to the STEWARDS Elect, Capt. GRATIAN LINCH. Capt. JOHN PERRY. Capt. SAM.
BOUGHEY. Lieut. GEORGE CLARK. Lieut. JOHN BADHAM. Lieut. THO. CURTISE.

Worthy GENTLEMEN,
It Is not truly any ambition, that I have to be known in the world, (who have
too much cause to wish my self out of it) that occasioneth the publication of
this Discourse: I pretty well know the fortune of those that dare appear in
public: but it was your kind acceptance of this Sermon, when it was preached,
and your earnest desire since, that I would let it come abroad; and here you
see your Commands are obeyed; and so let it take its fortune, it cannot suffer
much having so many valiant Champions to defend it.

The principal Subject that is commended to your practice, is the Noble
Principle of Loyalty, and Fidelity, that is our duty to the great Captain of our
Salvation, whose Soldiers we are, and have taken our Oaths in our
Swadling-clothes to be true, and faithful to him unto our lives end.

Treachery, and Falsehood, as well as Cowardice, is the highest Crime, that can
be laid to a Soldiers charge.

To betray his Trust, and run from his Colors, and take part with his Generals
Enemies, is not to be expiated but by the death of the Traitor.

Therefore, Noble Soldiers, Consider how many great things Christ your
Captain, and General has committed to your charge.

He has trusted you with an immortal Soul, which can never die with the
Reprobate, nor perish with the virtuous parts of mortal men, but must have a
Being, either in Eternal Bliss, or woe. Oh! do not betray this precious Jewel
into the hands of her deadly enemies. Abstain from those fleshly lusts that
fight against her, and deliver her out of the hands of those that gape for her
destruction. Be saithful unto her in preserving her in the Love of God, and in
obedience to his will; that when God shall call for her, you may deliver her up
pure, and spotless into his merciful hands: And say with thy Great Captain,
Father, into thine hands I commit my Spirit.

He has entrusted you with his Word, which is the best weapon in the world to
defend you from your Ghostly Enemies. Do not let it lie and rust by you, as
Swords, Halberts, Armor does in Gentlemen's Halls: But buckle it about you, and
handle it lustily. When you are tempted to Infidelity, to Drunkenness, to
Whoredom, or the like, draw out thy weapon, and fight against them, it is
written, Rev. 21.8. That the fearful, and unbelieving, the abominable,
drunkards, murderers, whoremongers, liars shall have their part in the lake
which burns with fire and brimstone. Hide his Word therefore in thine heart
always, that thou may never sin against God.

He has entrusted you with his truth, and with a pure Religion. Oh! do not
betray either of them; fight for Truth against Error. And stand for thy
Religion to the death. Live as thou professest to believe. Nothing will uphold
dying, sinking Religion, like a holy and a heavenly conversation. Practice is
the best Syllogism, and Argument we can use to prevail with others; for he that
lives a debauched, wicked life is an Apostate from the truth, and a Traitor to
his Religion; it is not a pin matter what side a wicked man takes, for he will
bring a curse where ever he comes. Let your light then so shine before men, that
they may see your good works, that the world may know that you are Loyal
Subjects indeed, true Noble Royallists, not by your damning, and sinking, not
by your whoring, and drinking, but by your temperance, chastity, soberness, and
devotion; do not betray so good a Cause, and so holy a Religion, by your
vicious lives and conversations. He is the faithfullest Subject to his King,
and the truest friend to his Religion, and the greatest lover of his Country
that lives soberly, righteously, and Godly in this present world, Be not
Hectored neither out of the holy Principles of the Reformed Profession; some
have changed sides, on purpose to live more losely, thinking that is the surest
Haven to put into, where they may sin, and yet be safe. Be not fooled out of it
neither for a song, for delicate Music, or ravishing Voices, for fine shows,
and pretty nacks; but stick fast to the gravity and sincerity of the Catholic
Church of England, which is a most safe way unto salvation, and where you will
surely find rest unto your Souls.

And this Fidelity will cause the great Rewarder to look upon you, and to bless
you, your pay shall be certain, part in hand, and the rest in reversion; in
being Faithful, and keeping his Commandments, there will he, and is great
Reward; Virtue is a reward to its self, and Godliness has the promise of this
life.

And that which remains to be received, shall be surely paid you, he has
promised it, who is the Amen, the faithful and true witness, who is Yea, and
Amen, God blessed for evermore; To whose Gracious Protection I commit you, and
am

Worthy Sirs, Your Faithful Servant in Christ Jesus. W. SCLATER.
From my House on Clerkenwel-Green, Aug. 17. 1671.
THE ROYAL-PAY, AND PLAY MASTER.
OR THE Indigent-Officers Comfort.
Revel. 2. part of the 10th verse. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give
thee a Crown of life.


WIth what reluctance and unwillingness I appear to day in this place, those
can best bear witness who pressed me to this service: not considering those
heavy afflictions I now lie under, (which wet my cheeks too often) nor yet how
unfit a Man of peace (who seeks it, and pursues it, who loves it, and prays
for it, and fain would live in it) not considering, I say, how ill such a
person is qualified to make a Military Oration to expert Commanders, and
valorous Soldiers.

And therefore seeing you have overborn me by your importunities; I hope you
will accept the will for the deed, and chide your selves if you go away
disappointed of your expectation: Versa est in luctum cythera mea and organum
meum in vocem flentium.

The weapons of our warfare are not now carnal, but spiritual; And though my
self amongst others might say with the Prophet Jeremy 4.19. My bowels, my
bowels, I am pained at my very heart, my heart makes a noise within me,
because O my soul thou have heard the sound of the trumpet, and the alarm of
war: (that fatal Civil War wherein the sufferings of loyal souls were infinite
and unparalled; yet long since (God be thanked) we have beaten our Swords
into Plow-shares, and our Spears into Pruning Hooks, and have been so long
acquainted with the sweets of peace, that we have almost forgotten even the
terms of war.

And therefore (I presume) it will not be expected from me, that I should teach
here, the Art of war; nor set you together by the ears (as many have done) with
the Trumpet of my mouth. It Is not I hope so much as thought on, that I should
discourse of mounting of Guards, setting of Sentinels, drawing up of Men,
sending out of Parties, beating up of Quarters, placing of Ambushcadoes,
keeping of Reserves, securing Retreats, or the like, etc. No, you might then
justly blame me for taking your Trade out of your hands, and meddling with that,
which more properly belongs to your selves: And therefore leaving these to your
dextrous abilities, I have but one only Christian Military Virtue at this time
to commend unto you, necessary both for Soldiers and Commanders; and that is
Loyalty and Fidelity.

A Subject very fit to be discoursed in these slippery times, wherein many
loose ones run a gadding after the old Mumsimus, and others run a madding after
their new Sumpsimus: very few (in comparison) sticking close, and firm, to the
true ancient Catholic and Apostolic Truth taught and maintained, and defended
by the peaceable Church of England. Others there are that scarce make a
profession of any Religion at all, but make a mock of sin, and fleer at the
austerities of the Religious, thinking it folly and cowardice to be virtuous
and good, and that he is the most valorous person, who dares sin the most, and
storm Heaven it self with their accursed oaths and imprecations.

There are four Virtues which are absolutely requisite in a Commander, Wisdom,
Valor, Experience, and Fidelity.

Wisdom in a General many times ends the War without War. Of all Victories the
Romans thought that best, which was the least stained with blood; and they were
contented Camillus should triumph when he had scarce fought at all. Wisdom many
times has delivered a City when Weapons could not. Solomon tells us of a poor
wise man that once did so, though no body con'd him thanks for his labor.
Stratagems and Policies many times effect that which downright blows will
hardly compass. The Earl of Westmerland by a cunning trick of a Treat in Henry
the Fourth's time, entrapped Richard Scroop Archbishop of York, and Tho.
Mowbray Earl Marshall, who had twenty thousand men in the Field, which all the
strength they had could never have forced. And Aratus the Achaean General got
more by his nightly surprises, and beating up of quarters, than ever he could
obtain in the open field. Hannibal won more by his wit than by his sword. 'Twas
that which struck off Flaminius head, and trapan'd Scipio at the Battle of
Trebia, and laid an ambush in the open field at the fatal Battle of Canna
behind the back of T. Varro.

And as he must have Wisdom to manage his affairs, and to lay hold of
opportunity, so he must have Valor to execute his designs. Valiant he must
be, or else he will grow contemptible, lose his authority, and by his own fears
infect his Troops with cowardice. The noble Caesar in all his Commands in the
field, was never heard to say Ite Milites, sed venite Commilitones, ignave te
Caesar, etc. Not go, but come fellow Soldiers; follow me now, or bury me here;
follow me now, or bury me there. As if he scorned in all his on-sets, to be any
thing else but still a Leader. He always taught by that which is the strongest
Authority, his own forwardness, and his own example.

Thus did the noble and renowned George Lisle at Newberry-Wash strip himself to
his very shirt, and charged before his men to the mouth of the Cannon, when
suspected by his Soldiers to have Armor of proof upon him. Oh the blood of
that brave Man basely shed in cold blood. Who shall answer for it?

And though these be excelleut Virtues, yet without experience they are lame
and imperfect. Let a Commander be never so learned, His Books (which he has
consulted) cannot limit his designs to particular, and casual actions, which
it is impossible his reading should ever foresee or acquaint him with. It Is
experience and practice in War that must be the best Instructor: And though he
may be perfect in a paper plot, where his eye has all in view; yet he may fail
in a Leaguer, where he sees but a limb at once. Experience in War puts a credit
upon a Commanders person, and actions; and every one will willingly venture
with an experienced General, who with an untainted valor is grown old in Arms,
and deaf almost in hearing the Drums beat, and the Trumpets sound.

What an awe and veneration must needs be paid to a grave, aged, experienced
Soldier whom death has passed by so often, and shunned him, when it has
swept away all round about him. He seems to tell us, that he is one that the
supreme God has taken care of, and parricularly defended in the Hayl of death.

And now to all these, Wisdom, Valor, Experience, he must add Fidelity in the
discharge of his Trust: For though he be politic, valiant, and well
experienced, yet if he be treacherous and false, that will blast all his other
Virtues. How has this treachery and falsehood laid an indelible blot upon many?
How many examples have we of those that have basely betrayed their trust, and in
the end have been as basely betrayed themselves. Fidelity then must crown all.
Be faithful unto the death, is the Christian Soldiers Motto. We must never
here give over our spiritual warfare till death give us a writ of ease: there
the wicked shall cease from troubling, and there the weary shall be at rest.
And as that worthy General comforted himself, that though he was worsted by his
enemies, yet he was not outwitted, or circumvented by them; nothing had been
lost for want of skill, or industry to save; and so 'twas rather his misfortune
than his crime. So what a joy will it be to thy spirit, and a lightning to
thine heart, when thou can say, that though thou have by the frailty of thy
flesh, and the violence of a temptation, been worsted by thy spiritual
adversaries, yet thou did not cowardly, or basely quit the Field; though thou
have been foiled, beaten, and overcome, yet thou never did yield up the
Bucklers, thou were faithful and sincere toward God, thou never forsookst thy
love to his Cause: Though thou have been disarmed, sequestered, decimated, and
unrewarded for it.

When our souls gasp for comfort, this will refresh them, that they have been
faithful. At the day of Judgment the sentence will pass not according to the
greatness of Parts, Place, Riches, Honors, or the like, but according to our
Fidelity; Well done, not great, or cunning, or valiant, or learned, or rich,
but Well done good and faithful Servant, enter thou into thy Masters joy. And
here in my Text is the same Proclamation; Be faithful unto the death, and I
will give thee a Crown of life.

In the words we have but these parts to consider.

First, here is the word of Command; Be faithful. Secondly, Here is the stint
and extent of our duty, unto death, Be faithful unto death -- Thirdly, Here is
a promise of Reward, where we will consider. 1. Our Play Master, and that is
Christ, I will give. 2ly. The Pay it self, and that is a Crown, with this
addition, a Crown of life. Be faithful then, etc.
First then I begin with the Word of Command, Be faithful. Fidelity is required
of all Christians. Faith in Christ must be seconded with faithfulness unto
Christ. As we must have faith in Him, so we must keep faith to Him. For those
are only His true Soldiers who are elect, called, and faithful: I have
received mercy of God to be faithful, cries St. Paul.

'Twas of Gods mercy to be kept faithful to the righteous Cause of God and the
King, when there were so many temptations to withdraw us from our Loyalty. Be
faithful:

And the necessity of this will appear.

First, From the terms of Relation that are betwixt Christ and us.

Fidelity and Loyalty is in a more especial manner required in a Subject
toward his Sovereign, in a Soldier toward his Commander, in the Wife toward
her Husband. It Is treason in a Subject to fight against his Sovereign; it is
death for a Soldier to forsake his Colors; it is an unpardonable crime in a
Woman to be unfaithful to her Husbands Bed.

But Christ is our Lord and Master. You call me Lord and Master, and you say
well, for so I am, Matthew. 23.8.

He is the Captain of our salvation, Heb. 2.10. He is our Husband, and every
Christian soul is His Spouse, Hosea. 2.19. I have espoused thee unto me in much
mercy and fidelity.

And therefore it is all the reason in the world that we should show all loyalty
and fidelity unto this our Prince, Captain, and Husband. Consider-seriously
with your selves these Relations, and then tell me what he deserves that breaks
faith with Him?

Secondly, The Faith that must save us must be a Faith unfeigned. What Is a
Soldier good for except he will fight? To take pay, and quarter, and plunder
the Country, and when it comes to blows, whip, my Gentleman's gone: Such a
person is only fit to be ram'd into the mouth of a Cannon, and shot into a
Field of Corn to affright the Crows. So Faith severed from Fidelity is no Faith
but a mere fancy; Fides enim ab eo dicitur, quia id fit quod dicitur; Faith
without faithfulness is a false glavering counterfeit Faith; like Copper Coin,
that has the luster, but not the worth of gold: It is a faithless Faith, and a
Trust without truth. You trust in a lie, says the Prophet Jeremy 7.8. For a
man to repeat all the Articles of his Christian Faith, to profess with his
mouth to believe the Resurrection of his body, the General Judgment, and the
Life everlasting, and to live like a Devil, and swear like a Turk; and yet hope
to go to Heaven with a little of the Extreme Unction, and a few Ave Maria's?
Oh foolish people and unwise! this pretended faith without practice is no
better than a Musket charged only with powder, which will give a great report,
but do no execution at all.

Men trust in a Lie when they expect that God should keep Covenant with them,
when they have no care to keep promise with him.

Rabshekah's Argument against Hezekiah had been good, if his words of Hezekiah
had been true, Esai. 36.7. Little cause indeed could Hezekiah have to trust in
God whose Altars he had taken down, and whose places of Worship he had
demolished. How little Reason has any man to hope that God should save him
when he dies, that has no care to serve and please God whilst he lives. Alas!
when we cease to keep Faith with God, we free him from the performance of His
Promise to us. For, however it be true that the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 2.13.
Though we prove unfaithful, yet God abides faithful, He cannot deny Himself.
Man's distrust, and incredulity cannot annul God's fidelity. It Is a deplorable
Position that the Romanists hold, and cutteth asunder the sinews of Humane
Society, That Faith is not to be held with Heretics. Better said Heathen
Tully, Etiam infideli recte servatur fides; even with the unfaithful, Faith is
to be kept. Where Agreements between Party and Party are grounded on Conditions
to be mutually performed on either side, he that in such case breaks first,
does thereby absolutely free the other Party. Unfaithfulness therefore it is
not in God to deny to make his Promise good unto those that have no care to
keep Covenant with Him.

Frustra sibi Fidem quis postulat ab eo servari, cui fidem a se praestitam
servare recusat.

They kept not Covenant with me, and I regarded not them, says the Lord, Heb.
8.9.

Thirdly, There is nothing among Generous Men more odious than Falsehood, and
Treachery in Friendship: To find them false to us whom we have trusted: To be
betrayed by those that we thought our surest friends; This cuts a man to the
very heart. This made David complain, Psalm. 55.12. 'Twas not an open enemy that
did me this dishonor, for then I could have born it; neither was it mine
Adversary, that did magnify himself against me, for then peradventure I would
have hid my self from him: But it was even thou my Companion, my Captain, and
mine own familiar Friend. Surely it wounded deep the heart of the Great
Buckingham when he was betrayed by his Servant Bannister, whom he had raised to
a great Estate; and it was a bitter ingredient which was put into the Cup of
our late Martyred Sovereign, to have those that eat of his bread, to lift up
their hands against him: To see some of his own Domestic Servants whom he had
fed, and advanced to sit in that unjust Court to take away his Life.

So there is nothing that God takes more to heart, or can worse endure, than
disloyalty, and breach of Covenants by those which pretend to be in League with
Him. To acknowledge (as we do all) that in Him we live and move, and have our
being; To take our Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy to Him, that we will
serve Him faithfully, and fight against the Devil, the World, and the Flesh,
and continue His faithful Soldiers unto our Lives end; and yet notwithstanding
break all these Obligations, and never regard the performance of our Vows, but
basely betray our Trust, and serve his enemies. How can God endure this at our
hands? Will he not judge for these things, and shall not his Soul be avenged on
such perfidious wretches as we? See how God complains of this, Jer. 3.20.
Surely as a wife treacherously departs from her husband, so have ye dealt
treacherously with me, says the Lord. Jer. 5.23. This people have a revolting,
and rebellious heart, they are revolted, and gone, they have dealt very
Treacherously against me, says the Lord: Woe unto them, they have rewarded
evil unto to their own Souls.

Here we may learn how to try the sincerity, and soundness of our faith; If our
Faith, and Confidence in Christ, be accompanied with Fidelity and Faithfulness
unto Christ; if we be careful as well to observe what He requires of us, as to
expect what He promises to us, then we may be assured that our Faith is right.
The Romans are extolled by St. Paul, that their Faith was spoken of throughout
the whole world; and yet more than once they are commended for their Obedience.
Faithful Obedience that is the surest note of sound Faith: Neither can it be
true where that is wanting: Then may we know our Faith to be sound, when our
Faith in Christ produces in us a faithfulness unto Christ, a carefulness to
please Him, a willingness to obey Him, and to be guided by Him. Then does the
Soldier show his Loyalty and Fidelity, when he does not only list himself in
service, take Pay, Quarter, and the like, but when he obeys his Captains
Commands, if to storm a Town, if to charge up to the mouth of the Cannon.

But alas! How many will be found to have no true Faith, if they be brought to
this Touchstone: Every one is ready to say with him in the Gospel, Lord, I
believe: But all men have not Faith that make Profession of Faith. Here many
profess the Faith of Christ, that are wholly estranged from the Life of Christ?
They profess much, but practice nothing; just like a treacherous Soldier, that
takes pay of one side and runs to the other; that pretends to fight for you,
but when it comes to the push, either fights against you, or runs away, and
dares not fight at all; but hides himself under some hedge, or in some ditch or
other. Alas! this is a false counterfeit faith, and makes at the best but a
counterfeit Christian.

But beloved, if we desire to be accounted what we are called, Let us approve
the sincerity of our Faith in Christ, by our fidelity and faithfulness unto
Christ: If we look He should keep Covenant with us, let us be sure to keep
Covenant with him, Psalm. 25.10. All the ways of the Lord are mercy and Truth to
such as keep his Covenants, and his Testimonies: So Psalm. 103.18. The mercy of
God is for ever, and ever upon those that keep his Covenants, and think upon
his Commandments to do them.

Consider how unequal it is to expect he should perform to us, when we no ways
perform with Him? How unreasonable were it for a wife to require maintenance
from her husband, when she lives disloyly, and keeps company with another
man? For a Soldier to expect his Pay, when he refuses to fight, or to obey
his Commanders pleasures? Nor has any person any reason in the world to expect
salvation from Christ, who has no care to keep Faith with Christ.

That Is the first, we must be Faithful.

But how long must this last? A day or two, or so? Oh no! This Command is like
that heavy saying in Matrimony, Till death us depart. So long as life lasts,
we must be faithful. Fight it out to the last drop of blood in our veins; like
that famous Athenian Captain Cynoegirus, who held a flying Persian ship with
his right hand, till that was cut off, and then with his left, till that was
chopped off; and lastly with his teeth, till his head was cut off. So must we
never give off till death.

Christian Fidelity must continue to the last. Psalm. 119.112. I applied mine
heart to fulfill thy Satutes always, even to the end. So Heb. 3.6. His house we
are, if we hold fast the profession of our Faith unto the end: Knowing that he
is faithful that has promised.

For not to persevere is a maimed service, such as God will not accept of. To
sight a little and then give over, throw down our Arms, and run away, is base,
and cowardly: That which was offered to God must have horn and hoof; Nay, it
was not to want the very tail, Levitic. 3.9. It being thereby intimated, that
no holy course of life is accepted, if it be not concluded and closed up with a
good end. He was never a true Friend, that cease to be a friend; nor was he
ever truly Loyal to God, and his King, that ever leaves, or gives over his
Loyalty to them.

It is a Rule in the Civil Law, that it is as nothing, that holds not; and
nothing is held done, as long as ought remains to be done. A Will unfinished,
is no Will; a Deed unless it be signed, sealed, and delivered, is no Deed. The
end of each thing is all in all: Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright,
the end of that man is peace: And I saw the end of those men, says David.
Psalm. 37.37. that was satisfaction to him.

Every thing, we say, is well that ends well. And indeed the main end, and
aim of our whole life should be, how to make a good end of our life, that we
may at the last be found holy, and unblameable before Him in peace.

God Himself is Eternal from whom we expect our Reward, and this Reward we look
for, is its self also Eternal. But what has levity and inconstancy to do with
Eternity: Our fidelity must therefore hold out to the last, if we expect an
everlasting Reward: And most equal it is, that we continue to the end, who
expect those joys, that must last world without end.

Lastly, It is perseverance alone that carries away the Crown; Finis, non pugna
coronat: It Is the end that Crowns the action. We must be faithful to the death,
or else there is no Crown of life for us. He that persevereth to the end, the
same shall be saved; and he that does not loses all that he has done: The
former part of our life yields to the latter, and the latter part of our life
carries it away from the former. If the wicked man return from his wicked
courses, and do that which is lawful, and right, all his former wickedness
which be has committed shall be remembered no more. So, when the righteous
turns away from his righteousness and commits iniquity, all the
righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned, in his trespass that he
has trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in them he shall die,
Ezekiel. 18. Be faithful then unto the death.

Be admonished to hold fast that we have, that no body take our Crown, to
cleave to God, with full purpose of heart, to use all diligence to keep firm
the assurance of our hope unto the end; for it were better for us never to have
entered into Covenant with God, than to make Covenants with Him, and not to keep
them. Let us take heed left being drawn away by the error of the wicked, we
fall from our stedfastness, and faithfulness to our Lord Jesus: But say with
the Kingly Prophet, Psalm. 119.106. I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I
will keep thy righteous judgments.

And because it is to little purpose to be informed how dangerous our
unfaithfulness will be, unless we be taught how to prevent the danger;

Give me leave to add three or four Rules of Direction, which may help us to
persevere in Christ, and in those Religious courses which we have, or yet shall
enter, and I will come to your Play Master, and your Pay immediately.

First then, Brave Soldiers, would you continue faithful to Christ your
Master, and hold out in a Religious course unto the end: Enter with Resolution.
A good Resolution is the most fortifying Armor that a Soldier can wear; it is
no great matter for Back or Breast, or Headpiece, or Gauntlet, Resolution is
the only Armor of proof: It Is the only Marshal that can keep our wavering
minds in order: That which makes men Cowards is want of Resolution, when I know
my Cause to be good, and just, what should affright me from the vindication of
it.

'Twas an ingenuous, and resolved Answer which the Noble and Loyal Marquess of
Worcester returned to the General of the contrary Party, when he had lost
Ragland, and in it the richest Cargo that ever fraighted a Noble house: His
Petition was only for two tame Pigeons which used to sit upon his shoulder, and
to peck meat out of his hand, that the General would give him a Protection for
them; for he was afraid, when his back was turned, his Soldiers would shoot
them: This was readily assented to; and withal, the General told the Marquess,
that he was glad to see his Lordship so merry. I thank you, says the Marquess,
you have given me no other cause; and before you are gone, give me leave to
tell you this Story: Upon a time two Fellons went to Tyburn to be executed, the
one was very pensive and sad, the other was as jocular and merry: The merry
Thief gave great offense to his disconsolate Companion, insomuch that he
checked him, and told him, Ah, says he, how can thou be thus merry and
frolic considering the business that we are going about? Oh, says he, Thou
art a silly whining Fellow, thou went a Thieving and Roguing, and never
thought what would come on it; but when I first took up the Trade, I
forecasted the worst, so that nothing falls unexpected upon me, 'twas no more
than I looked for, So my Lord (said the Noble Marquess) when I first took up
Arms for the King, I was resolved to endure the utmost that you could inflict
upon me, and that makes me so merry, and cheerful as I am. What says our
Savior, Unless a man (in Resolution at least) Forsake Father and Mother, Wife,
and Children, and his own life too, he cannot be my Disciple.

The want of this Resolution makes many a one turn head, and sail back again,
as soon as they see storms, and oppositions begin to rise. These men were never
minded to go farther than they saw the way clear before them; like those that
go to Sea upon pleasure, who no sooner find the Sea to begin to work, and
themselves grow sick, but they presently cry out to make have to the shore:
whereas the Merchant that is bound for his Port, concerns not himself at all;
('it is no more than he expected) he will not be driven back with a little foul
weather, or Sea-sickness, but goes on through fair and foul, until he has made
his Voyage, and arrived at the Haven where he would be. What did three or four
Resolute men do but the other day, for a Kingly Crown of Gold? (And had like to
have carried it too, if they had not been providentially disappointed.) And
shall we do nothing for this Imperial Crown of life? Shall they be more
resolute to pilfer, than we honestly to gain? Oh! Lord Jesus, thou have a Crown
in thy right hand, and the Motto of that Crown is, To him that overcomes: Shall
my base lusts conquer me, and my vile corruptions enslave me so far, that I
dare venture nothing for thy sake? or my Religion, or the interest of my
immortal Soul? Shall I be valiant to do evil? Resolute in mine own Revenges?
Peremptory to damn my self? And shall I be a Coward in virtuous actions, not
dare to speak against vice, nor to fight one stroke against thine, and my
mortal enemies?

Oh! Far be that from a Noble mind, Let me Resolve to have but so much courage
as poor Ruth had, when her Mother-in-law beseech'd her to leave her afflicted
Company. Entreat me not (said she) to leave thee, or returning from following
after thee, for where thou go there will I go, where thou lie there will I
lie, where thou die there will I die, and there will I be buried: God do so
to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and me. So let us be
Resolved, come what will come, never to forsake our God, or our Religion; Let
us Resolve though he kill us, and starve us, never to leave him or forsake him.

That Is the First, Enter with Resolution.

Secondly, Be careful to keep a good Conscience both toward God, and all men.
Let the fear of God be fresh in thy Soul; holding faith and a good Conscience.

Sin will make a man an errant Coward; if not, it will bring a curse upon his
Courage: God has cursed the ways of sin, and is resolved no man shall prosper
in the end that lives, and wallows in it. Many a good Cause has suffered for
the wickedness of them that have managed it. It Is not Damning and Sinking,
Whoring or Drinking, that will at last win the day: Hypocrisy will be better
rewarded in this world than open profaneness: Have a care then to keep close
with God to fear his Name always, that it may go well with thee, and that thy
Soul may live.

There are two things wherein a Conscientious Christian excells all other men
in the world:

And,

Those are in true Valor, and Fidelity.

True Valor, I say, in a just Cause, for in a wicked one there is none more
timorous than he: And indeed to show courage in a bad matter is rather a token
of desperate folly, than any badge of a magnanimous mind. But in a just Cause
he is as bold as a Lion; no thing can daunt his courage.

Not Infamy. For in this the Christian knows he shares with his Master; and
while it is for his Names-sake, he knows he is blessed. If there be any Nectar
in this life, it is in sorrows we endure for goodness: And blessed be God, this
Cup of Nectar we drink for our draughts every morning. Oh! that God we fight
for is able enough to vindicate all our wrongs.

Not Afflictions. They shall not daunt the Courage of the Conscientious man; he
knows they are but for a time, transient, and momentary. Neither shall the
Israelites live always under the Tyranny of Pharaoh, or the Travels of the
Wilderness: he very well knows, the more abundant in sorrows here, the more
abundant in joys hereafter; his tears shall return in smiles, his weepings in
streams of pleasure.

Nor Death it self shall quail his Courage. For he knows that will be his
happiest day, and his bridge from woe to Glory. This was the Courage that bore
up the heads of the Apostles, and Martyrs; this was it that kept the poor
Royallists from sinking; they believed above hope, that there would come a day
wherein the right of Causes would be cleared up, and God should judge and plead
for his people: This made them say with St. Paul, I am not only willing to be
bound, but to die for the Name of the Lord Jesus: This made them leap for joy,
that they were so near their home; dying often, like Sampson, among their
Enemies; more Victory attending their end than their proceedings.

And as the Courage of the Conscientious man is great and exemplary, so his
Fidelity is remarkable: True Loyal Christianity knits more sure, and more
indissoluble than any other relation in the world. It ties a knot that
Alexander cannot cut in sunder; How has the Fidelity of the Primitive
Christians, and the Loyal Party been admired? who have chosen to embrace the
flames, and die in silence, rather than to reveal their Companions and
Fellow-partakers in the same Cause. Tyrants will sooner want invention for
Tortures, than they with Tortures be made Treacherous. The League which Heaven
has made, Hell wants power to break; Oh! invaluable Fidelity! Here, in this
one Conscientious man is met Courage, and Constancy; the one to withstand an
enemy; another to entertain a Friend: Give me any Foe rather than a Resolved
Christian: Labor then to keep a good Conscience, and this will make thee both
Valorous and Faithful.

I Will mention no more but this: Consider the Motive in my Text; The short time
that this laborious course is required of us; it is but till death: The
continuance of this fight is short. The Military age among the Romans was from
17 to 46, or in dangerous times, till fifty. The days of our age are
threescore years and ten, and in all this time there is no truce from War. The
Christian can never shut up the Temple of Janus. Legionum filii nati, we are
all born in the field, and sworn Soldiers in our swadling-Clouts, bearing Arms
against our common Enemy, from our Baptism to our Burial, and therefore we must
put on the Resolution of valiant men; aut sors, aut mors, either Death, or
Victory; Victory shall begin my joy, or Death shall end my misery; so a
Christian must say, Aut cito mors veniet, aut victoria laeta. Either God will
end our danger, or our days: it is but a little time we have to fight, it is but
a point or less, and that employment cannot be long, that must end with it; for
what can be long in that, which is not long in its self? It Is but till Death;
and that is a note of stint as well as of extent: Not that our fidelity unto
Christ shall not last longer, but because that after death there will be no
danger of disloyalty: All provocations, and temptations to the contrary being
then utterly abolished; it is but a spurt, and who would not for a short brunt
endure any hardship to live at hearts ease for ever after? Who would not serve
even an hard, and unkind Master, with all Fidelity, and diligence for a day or
two, that hereafter might be a Freeman, and an happy one for ever? It is not
long, and it is but light in respect of what is promised to us; for this light
hardship which is but for a moment, shall work for us a far more exceeding, and
eternal weight of Glory.

Be faithful then unto the death, etc. Which brings me now to your Play Master,
and your Pay. Your Play Master is Christ, and I hope you will not distrust him;
your pay is a Crown of life, and I hope you will not grumble at that. What if
you have been defrauded here? Perhaps your Arrears were so great, that the
whole State was not able to pay them; or perhaps, that little which was
assigned you, fell into the hands of them, who did deceive you.

But here is a Play Master that is rightly qualified to give every one content.
Consider, the Ability, the Fidelity, the Liberality of this great Play Master.

Ability.
I will give that have Power to give, that have Ability, and Authority so to
do. The Devil told our Savior he would give all the Kingdoms of the world, and
the glory of them with it; but he had no power to make good what he said: But
he that speaks here is able to perform what he promises. All power is given
to me in Heaven, and in Earth: And, to him that overcomes will I give to sit in
my Throne.

Fidelity.
Again, I will give, who am Amen, the Faithful, and True witness: He that is
Faithful to me, shall find me Faithful to him: I Will never promise that, which I
will not perform: It Is at this Pay-master's hands, that the Indigent Officer
and Loyal Soldier must expect his Arrears: This is the Cavaliers Play Master;
he will not deceive them of that is their just due: They have had but little
for their sufferings here: But, I will give, says Christ: I Will be faithful to
you, that have been faithful to God, and your King; though you are not rewarded
here, you shall be crowned hereafter; though you starve here, you shall one day
be invited to the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb, and drink your fill of those
Rivers of pleasures, which are at his right hand for evermore. Live then the
noblest lives of Christians; live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
present world, hold fast the profession of your Religion, and Loyalty till the
end. For, remember he is faithful that has promised; he is not like Antigonus
(...), who said he would give, but never did. But your Play Master will not
deceive you, he will give, and he has given to a thousand of our dead Friends;
and we tread but in the steps of those that already have inherited the promises.

Liberality.
And not like a niggard, a little snip, or so, he will not put you off with a
months pay for six, nor scotch you off with half your wages; No, he will give
liberally, and bountifully: Though he owes us not so much as thanks, yet he
will not for his Honor sake, suffer Loyalty, unparrall'd Loyalty, and renowned
Fidelity, to beg in the streets, and cry with that famous Captain, Da obulum
Bellizario: he will not suffer Families to be undone, and their blood to be
spilt unrewarded for his sake. No, he will countenance, and cherish such Loyal
Souls, he will prefer them to be near himself; he will at thy entering into
Heaven, bring forth the best Robe and put it on thee, a Ring on thy finger, and
a Crown on thine Head, and thou shall be arrayed in Purple, and fine Linen.
Thou shall be brought to the Tribunal of Christ by the hands of thy late
Martyred Sovereign, (for whom thou have suffered) and He in the head of all the
murdered Royallists, Renowned Montross, and Heroic Capel, Valiant Lucas, and
Fighting Lisle, Reverend Hewet, and Honest Vowel, Hardy Slingsby, and Thee
Sweet Andrews, Faithful Penrudduck, and Loyal Grove, these shall conduct thee
to the Tribunal of the Lord Jesus: and it shall there be proclaimed before all
the Saints, This is he that was faithful to the death, that durst be good, when
others were base, that did own the righteous Cause of God, and his Anointed,
when others were Neuters, Rebels, Cowards, or Apostates; this is he that stood
firm and unshaken when others proved false, and treacherous; Come, put the
Crown upon his Head, he has been Faithful to the death, and he shall now
receive a Crown of Life.

Which brings me, Fellow Soldiers, to your Pay, which I Will dispatch
immediately, for you shall have it all in Crown pieces.

A Crown of Life: That Is your Pay.
The words are Emphatical, sp'ritful, lively words, able to put metal into a
Coward: Life is the best of all Natural things; And a Crown is the best of all
Civil things: Here is the best, and the best. It Is true, a good man has his
Crown here; St. Paul had one, but it was an Apostolical one: He tells the
Philippians, You are my joy, and my Crown.

Every good Christian has a Crown here; a good Conscience is a continual
Feast, that same is a Crown; This was it that Job bound about the Temple of his
head, Job 27.6. My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go, my heart
shall not reproach me so long as I live. Oh blessed Crown! poor suffering
Royallist, cannot you live upon this a while?

Nay, every believer has his Crown here; his Faith, and Profession is his
Crown, Rev. 3. Hold fast that thou have, that no body take thy Crown.

And here every Faithful Soldier shall have a Crown: Crowns were the Rewards
of Conquerors; Cups, Garments, and Crowns were the rewards of such as won the
prize at the Olympic Games: But yet so poor they were, that if a Horse did but
run a Race, and won, he had a Crown, or a Cup given him; and therefore the Poet
Theocritus could say, See what poor things the world glories in: the Conquerors
are Crowned, and so are their Horses: But this Crown is not composed of
withering flowers; it is not a Crown of Ivy, or Oak, of Grass, or Laurel, of
Gold, or Stars, but a Crown of unfading, unperishing Glory, a Crown of Life, a
Crown that never fades.

This is the true Noble Honor. Here Honor is but a shadow, fading glory, like
the crackling of Thorns under a Pot, like the Triumphs of the Caesar's, splendid
indeed, but quickly over, and forgotten: But with thee, O Lord, there is
substantial, solid, essential Glory; a massy, ponderous, substantial Crown;
it is an exceeding eternal weight of Glory, which no rust shall corrupt, and
which no Thieves shall ever bereave us of.

A Crown of Life, It Is Honor maximus, the greatest Honor; there is nothing
higher in the estimation, or admiration of men: Then a Crown, it is the
Appendant of Majesty; Kings are Supreme: Excellent Majesty was added to King
Nebuchadnezzar, all Nations and Tongues are said to have acknowledged him their
Superior, and Sovereign Lord; yet all this Honor and Glory of the world is
but dark, and powerless in respect of the Crowns of Heaven. There is no Crown
but has its Cross, thorns there are, cares and troubles that grieve the bearer
of it: But this shall never cumber, or molest thee; here is that, which will
recompense all our labors and sufferings for the righteous Cause of God, and
the King; A Crown of Life: Rouse up then, Valiant Soldiers, Remember you fight
not for the Parliament half Crowns, nor for Crowns of Gold, but for a Crown of
Life, which will never be spent:

The afflictions of this present life are not worthy to be compared to the
Glory that shall be revealed in us. What are our expenses to the receiving?
It Is the expense but of a little suffering, for the receiving of an immortal
Crown of life. How much will wiced men suffer to enjoy their lusts? And shall
we do nothing for this incorruptible Crown of Glory? Demosthenes quickened up
himself to his Studies by the example of a poor Blacksmith; what a shame is it
for me to lie in my bed, and the Blacksmith to be at his work, he that is to
make but a few Horseshooes and nayls, and I that am to make an Oration to all
the Wits of Greece and Asia.

So do you say, what a shame is it for me to see men compass Sea and Land to
get a little muck in the world, to weary, and beat their brains, and expend all
they have, to give satisfaction to their lusts; and shall I be lazy, and idle,
slothful, and negligent, and do nothing for the security of my Soul, and
toward the attaining of everlasting happiness? I am a a Christian, and believe
I have an immortal Soul, shall wicked men do so much to fulfill the pleasures of
sin; and shall not I endure a little hardship for this immortal Crown of life?
Oh! Then Courage, Brave Soldiers, let us fight on, and press forward toward
the mark for the prize of our high Calling; let us hold out courageously, and
valiantly against all our spiritual Enemies, that we may live one day before we
die, to sing that Triumphant Song, Oh my Soul, thou have trodden down strength.

Let me dismiss you with those Spiriting words of Seneca in his Chorus to
Hercules Oetaeus.

Nunquam Stygias fertur ad umbras
Inclyta virtus, vivite fortes;
Nec Lethaeos, saeva per Amnes
Vos fata trahent: sed cum summas
Exiget horas, consumpta dies,
Iter ad superos gloria pandet.
True, Noble, Heroic, Renowned, Faithful Virtue is never brought to the
Stygian Lakes. Live, Live, Oh ye valint Men, neither shall the cruel Fates ever
waft you through the Lethaean streams, those Rivers of forgetfulness: But when
the consumed day shall cut off your latest hours, when death shall beat a
Retreat to your stiff Limbs. Glory, immortal Glory shall open you a way unto
the Gods.

Be faithful then, to God, to your Religion, to the interest of your immortal
Souls; Be faithful to your King, to your Country, and to one another; love
each other, speak well of one another, and promote each others interest. Resist
unto blood, striving against sin. Be faithful unto the death, and I will give
thee a Crown of Life.

Which the Almighty grant, etc.
FINIS.

