A SCHOOL FOR PRINCES.

OR, Political Reflections upon three Conspiracies preceding the Death of
Alexander the Great.

Translated out of French by A. O.

TF
printers device

^ONDON, Printed for Thomas Fabian, at the Bible in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1680.

Preface.
A Preface being no more than a Door giving entrance to a Tractate, I shall
here only just follow that Notion, and briefly present to view the Subject of
the ensuing Treatise.

Three Conspiracies preceding the Death of Alexander the Great, are here at
large represented; with Political Reflections upon every remarkable Occurrence.

The chief of the first Conspiracy, is Philotas, a Favorite of his Prince, and
General of the Cavalry; his Ambition gives Birth to his Disloyalty; and Dymnus
( a Confederate) his Affection toward Nicomachus (a Youth of his Acquaintance)
discovers him.

The Author of the second Conspiracy is Hermolaus, a Youth, one of the King's
Pages: The Occasion, His receiving Blows for killing a Wild Boar the King was
going to encounter with his Spear: His Design ready to take effect, is
strangely prevented by the intervening of a Woman, inspired with a Prophetic
Spirit, and totally disclosed by Epimenes (one of his Associates) either out of
Fear toward their Gods, or purely for Avarice.

The third and last Conspiracy is promoted by Antipater, for being at the
instances of Olympias (the King's Mother) removed from his Government of
Macedonia.

None are engaged in this Conspiracy but Antipater and his three Sons,
Cassander, Jollas, and Philip: And Jollas, Alexander' s chief Cup Bearer,
taking the opportunity of a Feast at Babylon, poisons Hercules his Cup; of
which Alexander drinks, and in a miserable manner breaths out the remaining
minutes of his Life.

A. O.

A SCHOOL FOR PRINCES.
HE that writes the Life and Death of Princes, may be liken'd to a Painter that
has drawn a Picture sidewayes, representing two several things, according as it
is viewed on either side. The Life of great Ones considered on the one side by
Philosophers, appears to them full of Troubles, and a Happiness not to be
desired. On the other side, Politicians admire in it Sovereign Power, and
laughing at those false Sages that never knew the worth of it; reverence in a
Monarch the inestimable Act of ruling Men. So likewise at the death of a
Prince, the Cynique exagerates the vanity of great Ones; but the true Sage
contemplates their End as the Limits of Glory, and the birth of a new Grandeur.

It Is not my design to write the Lives of Princes; we read in diverse Authors,
both Ancient and Modern, all that the most expert can imagine upon the Art of
Governing. I shall only tie my self to the consideration of diverse Events
commonly preceding, accompanying, or following their Death. History is like a
Theater, on which is represented the inconstancy of Fortune, there shall we
find Subjects Paricides of their Sovereigns, and Sovereigns precipitating
themselves from a Throne, to an Abyss of Misery. Sometimes there is more
Bloodshed at the death of Kings than Tears; their Funerals are disturbed by the
noise of Trumpets, and the clashing of glittering Arms, dissipates in a moment
the cloudy preparations of a Funeral-pomp; so that the memory of him, whom but
a little before, environed with Glory and Majesty, every one adored, becomes
then an abomination.

It may not therefore be unseasonable to draw this two-sided Portraiture;
Policy and Morality shall work together; the latter, austere and rough, shall
cover the Heavens with Clouds, and dart down Thunderbolts on the Heads of
Princes; the former, more clear and dextrous, shall avert the Storm, and show
them a Sanctuary: So that when one shall frighten a Prince with an imminent
Danger, the other shall presently give him the Hand; and it shall be easy for
him to avoid the Danger, if he make but good use of Political Precepts.

All that we can imagine most exquisite in Policy, the subtilest Discourses
upon the Art of Governing, the acutest Precepts, cannot make an Impression
strong enough upon the Spirit; an example of what is past, prevails upon it
farther than the fear of what is to come; Experience persuades with greater ease
than meditation; and we are more inclined to imitate great Actions that have
bin already executed, than to be the first Enterprisers of them; the Event is
not at all feared, where others have bin prosperous; but where they have bin
successless, there the Sage avoids falling into the same misfortune.

It Is for this Reason I have chosen for the Subject of my Work the History of a
Prince, whom Fortune, Merit, and Reputation, have advanced above all others,
and whose Actions ought to be of more Authority: Never was there Prince more
happy all his Life, nor more constantly favored by Fortune; but after he had
finished his course, he might be reckoned the unhappiest of all Princes, if
there be after Death any sentiment of earthly things.

I speak of Alexander the Great. Kings ought to imitate his Virtues, which none
more eminently possessed; and at the same time abominate the Vices he plunged
himself into, without any respect to his Rank, or consideration for the esteem
of Men. The Discreet will admire his judicious and clear Conduct, and cannot
but be transported at the irregularity of his Manners. Never was there any had
a better Birth, greater Grandeur, or truer Merit; nor was there ever any with
such notorious Vices so contrary to such a Merit, Birth and Grandeur. Was there
ever seen a Prince more glorious, more admired by Strangers; or more often
outrag'd by his Friends, in whom he most confided. When Fortune made him Master
of the Universe, hardly could he secure himself from Domestic Treasons; it is
true, he ran headlong to his own ruin, and I find not in any History, an
example of such Heroic Virtue, and such a prostitution to all sorts of Vices.
If then the remembrance of a Recompense is capable to engage the Spirit of a
Man to perform Actions full of Virtue and Glory; and if a sight of the Miseries
that accompany Vice can frighten and deter, without doubt there is no History
more clear than this, to direct Princes in their Conduct.

Alexander's Death was preceeded by three Conspiracies, accompanied with a
jealousy for Superiority among his Captains, and followed with the ruin of that
great Empire. The different Events that compose this History, the general
Desolation of several Kingdoms, the malignity of Fortune, and the unexpected
dismal Accidents, will furnish Princes with most necessary Precepts, both Moral
and Politic; and though it may seem that all things are absolutely subject to
the Order of Fate, yet it is very much for a Monarch's Glory when the Revolution
of his States cannot be imputed unto him, but only to that fatal and inevitable
necessity that the prudence of Man cannot alter. As for the rest, though the
Macedonians, and all those other Nations conquered by Alexander, had Laws and
Customs quite different from ours, they excelled in the Art of Government.
Policy is from all Ages.

I come therefore now to examine, in this Conqueror's Conduct, all that is most
remarkable, that Princes may form themselves according to so excellent a Model.
The Actions of Alexander, and the Intreigues of the Conspirators, will teach
them to defend themselves from Domestic Treasons, and to elevate themselves by
Justice, Clemency, and Liberality, as much above the Vulgar, as they exceed
them in Grandeur, and the advantages of Birth. I will begin with the Conspiracy
of Philotas, so much the more blameable, for conspiring the Death of his
Master, and his King, as he was indebted to him for his Fortune.

THE CONSPIRACY OF PHILOTAS.
ALexander was arrived to the highest pitch of Grandeur; Darius was dead, and
his Army vanquished; Asia had changed her Master, who seeing himself in the
Persian Throne, and finding nothing more on Earth to satisfy his Ambition,
would have had his Subjects given him Divine Worship. The luster of too great
Majesty, is so far from attracting Respect and Fear, that it excites great Ones
to Envy, and makes them aspire to wear the Diadem; and whosoever equals himself
to the Gods, is unworthy to live among Men. And hence it came that Philotas,
one in Alexander's Army, that could not support his Pride, endeavored to
dispatch him.

Of all Vices, Ambition is the most dangerous, because it bears a resemblance
of Virtue; it has apparently the same end; the desire of Glory is inseparable
to them both; and of this Philotas was as greedy as Alexander. Virtue and
Ambition have their original from the same Source, from grandeur of Courage,
from a noble, bold, and undertaking Spirit; the difference I find between them
is this, Justice limits bounds to Virtue; Ambition knows none, has no Faith, no
Friendship, no Honesty: it dares all things; neither the fear of Danger, nor
the power of Justice can detain it: it generates those criminal thoughts that
strike at Royalty, the hatred, jealousy, and revenge of great Ones.

Three sorts of Persons commonly conspire the Death of Princes. Certain
melancholy People, who at any price whatsoever, though it be at the expense of
their Lives, enterprise extraordinary Actions to eternise their Memory to
Posterity, not much caring whether it be honorable, or held in abomination;
such was he that burnt the Temple of Diana; the Jacobin that killed Henry III,
and many others. Some transported with an abominable desire of Revenge, care
not to survive an Injury received, as he that stabbed Henry IV. And almost all
great Ones, in the Revolution of a State, hope for some change of Fortune.

For this last reason the common People are to be feared, when a Government is
changed from a Democracy to a Monarchy; the Nobility, when it has bin an
Aristocracy; the Princes of the Blood, if a Kingdom be Hereditary; the
Ministers and Favorites, if Elective.

The Kingdom of Macedonia descended for several Ages from Father to Son; and
whilst there were Successors, no one dared enterprise any thing against his
King's Life. Alexander labored to secure himself immortality by Actions of an
Heroic Courage, by the grandeur of his Enterprises; he was enflamed with a
desire of Glory, little minding the preservation of his Life, and less the
leaving a Successor to his Empire. He preferred Bagoas before Barsine; Roxane
known to be great with Child at his Death, could not keep the Macedonian
Captains from dividing among themselves, those vast and lovely Provinces, into
as many Kingdoms. The Scepter of Alexander therefore being to fall into strange
Hands, his Nobles pretended to his Crown: which there was no appearance of
their arriving to, the King being young and vigorous; therefore they were to
hasten their Expectations by the means of Ingratitude, of Treachery, of a Crime
horrid and detestable. Nothing retains Ambition, but the fear of a lawful
Successor, in which consists the security of a Prince; for there is none will
form any Design contrary to his Faith and Duty, unless he be supported by more
than ordinary hopes. Alexander's Death would have made almost as many Kings as
were Macedonian Captains; what wonder then if he were continually exposed to
the murmuring of his Soldiers, to the Infidelity of his Friends, to Domestic
Treacheries?

I am much mistaken if it were not this that first gave Philotas thoughts of
advancing himself to Royalty: Parmenios's Valor, Merit, and Esteem, who
commanded a puissant Army in Media, confirmed him in his Design, and his own
Grandeur finished his Resolve.

It Is dangerous to suffer any to approach too near to that whose Possession can
make them happy; that Husband may blame himself, that shows his Wife to
another, who after falls in love with her. Royalty has greater Charms; it is
like a polished Glass, dulled with the least Breath of those are near it; or
like the Fountain of Narcissus, the transcendent Beauty appearing in it is so
charming, that there is none can see it, and live without the enjoyment. A
Prince that gives too great preferment to a Favorite, a Minister, or a great
Captain, nourishes a Rival, a cruel Enemy, a Competitor for his Empire; that
has but one step to mount into his Throne. We read in the Histories of all
Ages, of several Kings Favorites, of an obscure Birth, incapable of great
Matters, who coming into an entire possession of their Master's Favors,
oftentimes, by ways shameful and wicked, have dared to aspire to their Crowns.
What may we not then expect from a great Captain, Generous, Liberal, Ambitious,
of an illustrious Birth, Head of a powerful Army, beloved of the Soldiers, and
the common People?

I own it pleasant for a Monarch to discharge himself of the weighty Burden of
State Affairs, on the capacity of some Minister; to repose himself from the
Glory of his Armies, upon the valor of a great Captain; to entrust his most
secret Thoughts with the Wisdom and Discretion of a Favorite: But this
Favorite, this Minister, this Captain should be only Executors, and not Masters
of their Prince's Will; and this Prince should as far exceed them in discerning
Merit, in understanding of Affairs, in judicious Foresight, in eminency of
Capacity, as in Power and Grandeur. Such exquisite Parts are to be feared in a
Favorite, his Fidelity is shaken by so great Advantages, and we have seen in
this Age a King, formidable to his Enemies, implore the Assistance of another
King against his Favorite. If a Prince must needs spend his Generosity, if he
must needs heap up Favors upon his Subjects, let him take heed not to bestow
them all in one Place, or on several Persons united in Friendship or Blood, who
may have the same Desires, the same Will.

Be a Minister never so powerful, if he have but one Employ, one Charge in an
Empire, he can have no more Creatures than his Authority reaches: Should he
meditate any Design destructive to the State, he would meet with a thousand
Obstacles. A General of an Army, who is neither Master of the Treasury, nor has
Intelligence with a Superintendent, is not at all to be feared: He that
commands the Landforces is opposed to the Admiral, the Affection of the People
to the Soldier's Rebellion; but if a Minister be General of an Army,
Superintendent of the Treasury, Admiral; or if these Charges are at his
disposal, what is there that he cannot do? if faithful, he is formidable; if
unfaithful, he is King.

Parmenio and Philotas were Masters of the Empire, one General of the Cavalry,
the other of a whole Army; the former Governor of several Provinces,
Superintendent of the Treasury, having in all Battles the command of one Wing;
the latter awing the great Ones, a Favorite, and Arbiter of his Prince's Life.
The immense Riches of Philotas, the great number of Creatures of all sorts and
conditions inseparably linked to his Fortune; his Authority in the Armies
almost equalling the King's, might well induce him young as he was, cruel, full
of delicacy and pride, to conspire the death of Alexander, the only Let to him
in his way to the highest pitch of Grandeur. Add to these the Love of a Woman,
the true cause of his destruction.

Antigone, of a noble Birth; an excellent Beauty; a sweet Nature; a lively,
pleasant, charming Spirit; was one of those illustrious Prisoners that the
Governor of Damascus delivered to Permenio, with all the Treasures Darius had
committed to his disloyal custody. This fair Slave made her self Mistress of
Philotas his Liberty; he forgot that he had all power over her, and shamefully
submitted himself to her Laws. That pride, that contempt, that made him but a
little before despise Darius his Nobles, the chiefest of the Macedonians, and
equal himself to his King, changed it self immediately into submissions to his
own Captive; he became fearful, (as are the greatest part of Lovers) and
thought himself unworthy of her, because he was not Alexander.

The violence of his Passion, rouzes in his Heart a vehement desire of making
himself King: impatient of enjoying Antigone, he despairs of possessing her,
unless he share the Empire with her. At the Wars, egged on with great Love and
Courage, he exposes himself to dangers more than ordinary; he is liberal to
prodigality, gentle, affable, gains the Hearts of his Soldiers, clothes
himself like them, accommodates himself to their Manners, protects them, is
beloved, and reigns already over the whole Army. But so many good Qualities
were produced by Love, which being blind, can never guide Lovers in their
Conduct; and in his, Reason and Prudence had no share.

At Table, in his Bed, in the midst of good Cheer and Imbracements, he begins
to celebrate his Actions. Alexander could not recompense them with a Kingdom
large enough, for his Ambition. Philotas looks on him no longer as his
Benefactor; accuses him of Injustice; speaks insolently of him; debases this
great Monarch; ascribes all his Conquests to Parmenio; lets escape some
injurious Language: the most clear-sighted penetrate into his Designs, and
suspect his Loyalty.

Perhaps he might think that he discharged his Heart into the Bosom of a Woman
amorous and discreet. A strange thing; that so many Examples of Infidelity
cannot make Lovers suspicious of the usual Inconstancy of their Mistresses.
Fickle Antigone ceases to love Philotas, and betrays him. She must destroy him
to preserve her new Lover; She thinks it her securest way to acquaint Alexander
with the imminent danger threatening him. Craterus, whom the King honored
particularly with his Favor, jealous of Philotas his Glory, and an Enemy to
his Grandeur, seeks occasion to ruin him: which Antigone proffers him, and
tells him all that miserable Wretch had discovered to her of his Mind, during
the most tender moments of their privacy.

As it is impossible that the Dust cast into the Wind should not be scattered,
so it is very difficult for a Secret entrusted with a Woman, young, handsome,
and amorous, not to be divulged. She longs to know that that is kept from her,
and when she knows it, desires as much to publish it. She is ardent in her
Pursuit, treacherous after Enjoyment, cruel in her new Love. No kindness can
retain her, the remembrance of a Man she has loved tenderly, and amorously
embraced, affects her not, like the Earth that darkens the Sun, from whence it
receives its warmth. But if there be any thing firm in the tenderness of her
Sentiments, happy is the Man that has her, she is an inexhaustible Sourse of
Pleasures.

Craterus glad to destroy his Enemy, by preserving the Life of his King, runs
to Alexander, and gives him an account of what he had heard. Antigone is
called, and is not ashamed to publish her own Infamy, and the secret of a Man
that so entirely loved her. The King nevertheless dissembles, whether it were
that the consideration of Parmenio's great Services, his unbiased Friendship,
his incorrupted Loyalty, inclined him to Clemency; or whether it were that he
thought Philotas innocent, or feared too lightly to condemn, upon the bare
testimony of a slave, the fidelity of an ancient Servant, most passionate for
his Glory, one of his chief Captains and Confidents, adored by the Soldiers
for his Liberality and Magnificence. But Fortune, that took a particular care
of Alexander, and prepared for him new Conquests, discovered the whole
Intreigue of a most horrid Plot. Dymnus, one in no great Authority at Court,
but of a stout Heart, and great Spirit, was one of those that had conspired the
King's Death; he was so in love with a young Youth called Nicomachus, that he
could not but entrust him with a Secret, upon which depended his own safety;
and that of so many Persons of Quality who were concerned in the Enterprise. He
declares it to him, and endeavors to persuade him to make one, as well from
the consideration of their Friendship, as from that of his future Grandeur
after the Attempt. He Weeps, Caresses, Threatens, Urges, and sometimes
promising him a Kingdom; sometimes setting the Image of Death before his Eyes,
if he refuse to hold with them; Would thou have (says he) my dear
Nichomachus, a greater Testimony of my Affection? I trust my Life to thy Faith,
and I call thee to be a sharer in the Empire of all Asia.

This young Youth bearing a great love toward his King, was seized with horror
at a Crime so full of cruelty; he protests he will never be wanting to his Duty,
to the Loyalty he owes his Master; that all he can do for his Friend, is not to
ruin him, if he will repent of so great a wickedness.

Dymnus stood wavering between Love and Fear; at length setting his Sword at
his Friend's Breast, calling him sometimes Coward, sometimes Traitor, he was
going to begin with him the execution of his Design, but that the young Man in
a fright promised more than he was asked. He feigned therefore a resolution to
execute the Enterprise, and desired to know the number and quality of the
Conspirators. Dymnus, full of joy that he had gained him, names Peucolaus,
Nicanor, Aphaebetus, Loceus, Demetrius, Dioxenus, Archepolis and Amyntas. It Is
certain he made no mention of Philotas, who, I am ready to think, according to
the custom of great Ones, lay expecting the issue of the Conspiracy, and left
others to carry it on, that if it were discovered, he might cast the whole
Design on them.

Nicomachus transported with joy, that it lay in his power to show his King a
proof of his Fidelity, runs to his Brother Ceballinus, and acquaints him with
the whole Matter. It Is a wonder that the greatest Conspiracies mentioned in
History, have bin always discovered by the most wicked of those that have
enterpriz'd them. Intemperance of speech is the inseparable Companion of
Villainy, and incompatible with Prudence, which chiefly consists in hearing all,
in distrusting even Reason it self, and in keeping silence.

It was not convenient for Nicomachus to go to the King in Person, the
Conspirators might have suspected his Fidelity; they doubted nothing of
Ceballinus, who was usually in the Palace: And he not losing a minute of time,
endeavored to speak with Alexander. At first there was none to introduce him,
but afterward there appeared Philotas, to whom in a great fright he relates
what he had heard of the Conspiracy, and prays him to advertise the King.

Philotas his silence, is for certain a most convincing proof of his
disloyalty. He is not troubled at this Relation, the danger he sees himself
exposed to concerns him not, the Interest of his own preservation cannot abate
his Courage, fierce and cruel toward himself: he praises Ceballinus his
Loyalty, and is himself disloyal; he returns again to the King (for he could
not well do otherwise without giving suspicion) but discourses with him all the
while of other Matters.

The Night came on, Ceballinus wondered there was no stir made, the King being
in so imminent danger; and meeting with Philotas, asked him if he had informed
Alexander of what he had told him? His answer was, That he had not the
opportunity. Ceballinus grew more mistrustful, when he saw the Conspirators the
next day walking freely in the Palace, Alexander having done nothing to them,
suitable to the resolution his resentment should have made him take: and
addressing himself again to Philotas, he entreated him not to neglect an Affair
of that Consequence, that concerned the King's Life. He answered him again, He
would be mindful of it.

Several Historians have thought Philotas innocent; because, say they, there is
no likelihood that a Man of his Courage and Reputation, should have bin two
days without provideing for his safety, either by dispatching Ceballinus and
his Brother, or by an ingenuous acknowledgment of his perfidious Crime.
Plutarch, a great stickler for the Glory of the Grecians, endeavors to justify
him; but that Learned Man, as innocent as he makes Philotas, did not well
consider, that his silence could not but be esteemed a Crime, in the judgment
of all Politicians. 'Twas for his security to hold his peace; in speaking there
was danger, either of losing his Life, or his Reputation. It may be the King
might have pardoned him: Can a Man of Spirit survive an Infamy? His Authority
might have sheltered him from the storm, and have made the cloud break over
others heads. What likelihood? Do those that are drawn to Execution, fear after
Death the disgrace of great Ones? What then? tell the Conspirators that their
Plot was discovered? He, who was the Head of the Conspiracy, cared not to
frighten those that were to execute it. There Is no Resolution but staggers at
the fear of Punishment; Constancy shakes at the apprehension of being called in
question; there must be then a recourse to new Measures, Philotas must rather
animate his Confederates, than terrify them: What if he had made away with
Ceballinus in the King's Palace, in the Camp, in the very Arms of his
Companions, what would Nicomachus have said, whom 'twas impossible for him to
find as he had hid himself? All these Precautions were destructive. Philotas
did like a great Politician, to say nothing to the King, to say nothing to the
Conspirators, and to make no noise. He entertained Ceballinus with fair words,
the day for the Enterprise was come, and according to all appearance Ceballinus
should have relied on the fidelity of Philotas, a Favorite of Alexander's, and
one who had greater Interest than any in his preservation.

But Ceballinus not believing that the King would slight his Information, began
to be mistrustful. He goes to Metron, a young Gentleman that kept the King's
Wardrobe, and discovers the Enterprise to him: who presently causing him to be
hid, acquaints the King with it as he was bathing himself. Alexander
immediately gives order to apprehend Dymnus; he enters his Wardrobe, Ceballinus
cries out, I see, Sir, you are delivered from the hands of Traitors.

The King afterward enquiring touching the Circumstances of the Conspiracy, he
told him every thing that Dymnus had declared. But having confessed that it was
three days since his Brother gave him notice, Alexander doubted not but that he
was one of the Confederates, since he had so long deferred his Information. And
therefore he caused him presently to be shackl'd. Ceballinus, who expected a
recompense for his fidelity; feeling the weight of his Chains, cries out in an
astonishment, That the very first moment he knew of the Conspiracy, he ran and
gave notice of it to Philotas, the only cause of this delay.

Then Alexander, pierced with grief to see himself so basely betrayed by a Man
loaded with his Favors, and so particularly honored with his Friendship,
lifted up his hands toward Heaven; and, as it were, seized with horror,
detested with Tears so hideous an Ingratitude.

Without doubt there is no Grief equals that of having passionately loved one
that proves ungrateful and perfidious. When we call to mind, that after all the
pains we have taken, after all the proofs we have given of a true Affection and
great Trust, we are paid with Ingratitude, we can blame none but our selves, we
must condemn our own Judgments. One would think Nature declares her self
against us, since she has indu'd the meanest Plant with acknowledgment, and
seems to rob us of it. This example of Ingratitude will teach an honest Man not
to expect returns from a Person he obliges. Favors should only proceed from
our inclination to do good; the Heart of a Man's the more noble the less it is
interessed, and the pleasure of venting his Generosity, is to the honest Man
recompense enough.

Dymnus seeing himself environed with Guards, troubled at the enormity of his
Crime, and the Image of a Death, accompanied with a thousand pains, ran himself
through with his own Sword, and would have made an end of himself upon the
Spot, had not the Soldiers interrupted him.

To kill ones self, is in my opinion the basest and the unworthiest of all
Actions. Let Antiquity drain its Eloquence, to praise the resolution of Cato or
Lucretia; as for me, I cannot but blame Antiquity for calling Cowardice,
Valor; Folly, Wisdom; Despair, Virtue. He has no Heart that kills himself,
because he will not survive a misfortune more terrible than Death. I call
Grandeur of Courage, that constancy with which the wise Man boldly expects the
last moment of his Life, as the end of all things, not of misery. For then
Death's a favor, it sets at liberty, and makes those happy, that are swept
from a dark train of Miseries accompanying Life. Cato could die, but he could
not support Caesar's hatred. His Misfortunes cast him into despair, because his
Wisdom abandoned him in his Misfortunes. The desire of Life is more vehement
than any; to vanquish this may seem a complete Victory; true Wisdom, absolute
Government over the Passions: but in reality, it is Fear that is victorious,
occasioned by some present dislike, sight of Torments, or apprehension of worse
to come.

Dymnus thus wounded, was dragged to the Palace, Alexander, as soon as he saw
him, How comes it Vilain (says he in a passion) that thou have judged Philotas
more worthy of the Empire of the Universe than me? This miserable Wretch was
already speechless, and turning his Face from the King's, he fetched a deep
sigh (a proof as it were of his Crime) and yielded up the Ghost.

It Is a weakness to show any signs of Repentance. A Man that is any thing
dextrous, though he be suspected, accused, condemned, (...) him. Dymnus pressed
with remorse of Conscience, is troubled, stabs himself, sighs, and becomes his
own Accuser, Judg^, and Executioner. Could he have expected a greater
Punishment? Why then not endure the Face of Alexander? Why then avouch his
Perfidy, and declare himself a Vilain?

Ceballinus could not have desired a greater proof as to the truth of what he
had said; and Philotas justified him to his own condemnation, loosing him from
his Chains to put them on himself. The King, who whilst Philotas was absent,
had complained of his Ingratitude with tears, could not dissemble his
resentment when he saw him. Wherefore with anger in his looks he spoke thus;
Ceballinus deserves extreme punishment, if he has bin three days without making
me acquainted with a Conspiracy against my Person; but if he gave you
information as soon as ever he knew it, your silence is yet more inexcusable,
considering the great Testimonies of my Trust and Affection. I cannot imagine
what should induce you to so horrid a Treason. I have yet some sentiments of
Affection for you; If you are innocent, Ceballinus deserves to die; if guilty,
make an ingenuous confession, I am not inexorable.

It concerns the prudence of a Criminal to be thoroughly acquainted with the
quality of his Crime, and not to confess it, if of so heinous a nature, as to
exceed his Prince's Clemency. An ingenuous acknowledgment of a Fault, committed
through a desire of Revenge, or by the instigation of Choler or Envy, may meet
with favor; but for Ingratitude and Disloyalty in a Favorite, there is no hopes
of Pardon.

Nevertheless Philotas ingenuously confesses that Ceballinus informed him two
days since that Alexander was in danger of his Life, and that he told him the
whole order of the Conspiracy. But what likelihood, said he, that I should give
credit to the relation of an infamous Person, and in reporting it to the King,
expose my self to the laughter of the whole Court? He added, That if the thing
had bin found false, he should have sacrificed himself to the hatred of those
Nobles named among the Conspirators: that nevertheless Dymnus's Death did
sufficiently declare what he had thought fittest to conceal. And then embracing
the King's knees, he humbly besought him to pardon a Man he had so much loved,
and who had hitherto given a thousand proofs of an untainted Loyalty; since the
only Crime that could be imputed to him, was, that he had neglected an
Information, that he could not believe true.

As for me, I am ready to think, that if Philotas had disowned his Fault, the
King would never have suspected the fidelity of such a Friend, upon the bare
Testimony of a young debauched Youth. The Grandeur of his Services, the Merit
of Parmenio, his Birth, Alexander's Affection, Esteem, and Fortune, which made
him think himself beyond the reach of Ambushes, would have pleaded his Cause.
Dymnus was dead, Ceballinus had given him his Information in private; What had
this unfortunate Man to fear, but the remorse of his Conscience, which compelled
him to confess his Fault? Such force has Guilt to blind the Guilty.

As Philotas was free and ingenuous, so Alexander was close and counterfeit. He
gave him the Hand, seeming to believe him, and stayed him to sup with him, with
such amity and freedom, that Philotas, assured of his Reconciliation, thought
himself more in favor with his Prince than ever. But he was not well
acquainted with the Heart of Man, Fortune makes it as changeable as Proteus;
the Manners and Customs of the Persians, a new Grandeur, the Empire of the
Universe had altered for the worse a disposition formerly sweet, gentle, and
inclined to Good more than any; and Philotas should have bin persuaded, by the
alteration Ambition had made in himself, that when Fortune smiles, we are like
her, inconstant, disloyal, and quite a different thing from what we appear to
be. The Wine, and good Cheer warmed Alexander's Revenge. The Feast was no
sooner ended, but he called a Council of his Friends; who having heard the
Relation of Nicomachus, and the King's Sentiment thereupon, judged Philotas his
destruction as good, as resolved upon. Craterus, his Enemy, and one of
Alexander's Favorites, lays hold on this Occasion to exercise his particular
Vengeance, under pretext of zeal and love for his Master; says he,

Sir, Why did not you acquaint us presently with Philotas his Infidelity? We
would have counseled you to have pardoned this Traitor, without showing him
that he was indebted to you for his Life. After an attempt upon yours, and a
Pardon for that most abominable Crime, what will he not dare? What may he not
expect from your Clemency? Think not, Sir, that the danger he has seen himself
in, will render him more loyal for the future. It will not be always in your
power to prevent this Parricide. He Will observe other Measures, and lay such
Snares, as 'twill be impossible for you to escape. For fear the least Fault of
his should waken your Indignation, he will endeavor again to deprive you of your
Life. And though Philotas his Heart be entirely changed, the news of his Crime,
and your Clemency, will provoke Parmenio's. Will he, in the Authority he is in,
loaded with Honor and Glory, at the Head of a great Army, be willing to
acknowledge that he has any Obligation to you for his Son's Life? Some Favors
are looked upon as Injuries. Without doubt he will accuse you of Ingratitude and
Injustice, and will rather take away your Life, than have it thought that
Philotas has deserved Death. Pray, Sir, consider the imminent danger you are
threatened with; We have done our Duty, there is none can impute your Destruction
to us, after the counsel we have given you to provide for your Safety.

There Is no Eloquence more persuasive, than that of a Courtier; He Is a vehement
and pathetick Orator, who knows his Prince's Genius, his Weakness, his
Inclination, the Intriegues of the Court and all its Policies. Craterus his
Speech, though artificial, appeared full of Zeal, and prevailed in Council. You
see how cunningly he could conceal under a profound dissimulation, the jealousy
he had a long time had of Philotas his Grandeur. Of the whole Company, there
was not one that undertook this miserable Man's defense; all concluded upon his
Death.

The resolution they had taken required secrecy; which Alexander recommended to
them; and to avoid giving suspicion, he ordered all his Captains to get ready
to march on the morrow. In the mean while Caenus and Erigyus, Leonatus and
Perdiccas, received order to send out a detachment of Cavalry, to seize all the
Passages that led into Media, that Parmenio might have no intelligence given
him. And about midnight Attarras commanding threehundred Men, went out to
secure Philotas his House. Fifty of the boldest of them forced the Door; and
whether it were that he relied on his reconciliation with the King, or that his
Disquiets had over-tired his Spirits, Attarras loaded him with Irons whilst he
lay fast a-sleep. The rustling of Arms, and the weight of his Chains wakening
him at the same time, he cried out, starting; Ah! Sir, the malice of my Enemies
has prevailed with your bounty. They carried him afterward to the Palace,
neither his Fetters, nor the consideration of his Misery, being able to extract
from him so much as one word, or one groan.

The Authority of the Kings of Macedonia was limited, during Peace by the
common People, and in time of War by the Souldery; both the one and the other
were Judges of Capital Crimes; so that Alexander, Emperor as he was, and Master
of all the East, was forced by the Laws to plead his own Cause, and be the
Accuser of Philotas.

Alexander having caused the Macedonians to be assembled in the Palace, and
exposed the Body of Dymnus to their view, spoke to them in manner following:
Soldiers, a handful of Conspirators had almost robbed you of Alexander. I owe
my safety to the Gods. I have lived to see you; and your presence animates me
the more against my Parricides. I cannot bear it, that these wicked Vilains
would have frustrated me of my Intentions, and the Fruit of my Labors, which
can be no other than to honor your Valor, and to recompense your Services.
Here his Speech was interrupted by the sighing of his Soldiers, who all wept
bitterly; from whence he took occasion to prosecute in these terms. How will
you behave your selves then, when I show you who these Traitors are? I scarce
dare yet name them, I expel them as far as I am able from my memory, as if this
could save them from their Punishment. But I must stifle the remembrance of
former friendship, and discover this abominable Plot. And how indeed can I well
conceal it? Parmenio, our Friend of a longer standing than any, on whom both my
Father and I have liberally heaped up Favors, has, in his old Age, made
himself the Head of this Attempt. Philotas his Son, the chief Instrument of his
Treachery, has suborned Peucolaus, Demetrius, this wretched Dymnus whose Body
lies before you, and as many others as he could find capable of so great a
madness. At these words arose a great noise, and confused murmur, such as is
common to great Assemblies, especially of Soldiers seized with anger and
amazement. Nicomachus, Metron, and Ceballinus are introduced. Each of them
gives in what he had already declared; but none charges Philotas. So that the
whole Army, hearing no Evidence against him, immediately laid aside their
Anger, and there was a general silence. The King pursued thus: What can you
imagine the Design of a Man, who informed of this Conspiracy, kept it secret?
Dymnus by killing himself declared the Information true. Ceballinus chose
rather to expose himself to Tortures, than to conceal a thing of such
Importance, though he was not certain of it. Metron was so disquieted, that to
discharge himself soon enough, he rushed into the Chamber where I was bathing.
Only Philotas believes nothing, fears nothing. A most excellent Courage! when
his King's in greatest danger, he changes not his Countenance! he slights the
Information. Ah! doubtless this silence was not without Design. The desire of
reigning animated Philotas to the perpetration of the highest Crime. His Father
commands all Media, and he relying on the credit he has in my Army, and
imagining himself Master of my Forces, aspires to more than he is capable of,
to more than he deserves. It may be he despises me because I have no Children;
but he is mistaken, you are my Family; as long as you live, I am not without
Children. Then he rehearsed the Letter that had bin intercepted, written from
Parmenio to his two Sons Nicanor and Philotas. There was nothing charged them
more home of so capital an Enterprise. The substance of it was this; In the
first place take care of your selves, then of those that are under you, and we
need not fear accomplishing our Designs. The King added, That 'twas conceived
in these terms, for fear of being intercepted, that none but the Confederates
might understand it. But you will say, Dymnus, when he told Nicomachus the Names
of the Conspirators, said nothing of Philotas. That Is nothing at all,
Soldiers, to his Innocence, but rather an effect of his Power. He is so
dreaded by those that can accuse him, that when they confess their own Crime,
they conceal his. We may judge of Philotas by the Actions of his Life. He was a
Confederate in the Conspiracy of my Cousin Amyntas in Macedonia. He gave his
Sister in Marriage to Attalus, the greatest of my Enemies. And when I wrote to
him in a familiar Letter, what the Oracle of Jupiter Ammon had spoken in my
favor, he had the confidence to answer me, That he was glad to hear I was
received into the number of the Gods; but that he pitied those that were to
live under the Government of a Man that could not contain himself within the
bounds of Humane Nature. Are not these sufficient Marks of the alienation of
his Spirit, and of the envy he had for my Glory? All this I kept to my self as
long as possibly I could. For I looked on it as a ripping up of my own Bowels,
to disgrace those to whom I had bin so favorable. But now they are not Words
that are to be chastised. From liberty of Speech, he has proceeded to that of
Action, from wounds of Words, to those of Swords. Philotas (you may believe it)
has designed to assassinate me; and if he be capable to perform it, Soldiers,
Where shall I seek for safety? Whom shall I trust my Life with? I have made him
the only General of the Cavalry, which composes the greatest part of the Army,
and the Flower of the young Macedonian Nobility. I have committed to his trust
my Safety, Hopes, and Victories. I have advanced his Father to the same degreee
you advanced me: I have given him the Government of Media, the Richest of our
Provinces, with an absolute command over thousands of our Citizens and Allies.
In fine, those from whom I expected most defense, have bin the forwardest to
ruin me. Far better is it to fall at the Head of an Army by valiant Enemies,
than to be butchered in a Camp by treacherous Subjects. Preserved from Perils,
I had reason to be afraid of, I am now fallen into those I never feared.
Soldiers, you have oftentimes desired me to have a care of my Life; have a
care of it now your selves. I put my self into your hands, I have recourse to
your Arms; I will not live except you desire it, which if you do, show it in
avenging me. Then Philotas was introduced in Chains, his Head covered with an
old Cloth. 'Twas observed he was in that condition looked on with pity, by even
those who not long before had envied him. They had seen him the day before
General of the Cavalry; they knew he Supped the same Evening with the King, and
now they saw him at the same time Guilty, Condemned, and loaded with Chains.
They considered likewise the strange Fortune of Parmenio that great Captain,
who lately had lost two of his Sons, Hector and Nicanor, and would then shortly
hear the sad News of his only remaining Son's Condemnation, and of his own
Process being made in his absence. These Reflections made the Assembly incline
to pity. But Amyntas exasperated them afresh against Philotas; telling them,
That they were betrayed to the Barbarians; that they were in danger of never
seeing their own Country, their Relations, their Wives; that they were like to
be a Body without a Head, without Life, without a Name, exposed in a strange
Country to the derision of their Enemies. This Speech, though it prevailed
against Philotas, was not very pleasing to the King, who liked not that his
Soldiers should be discouraged by the remembrance of their Country, and their
Wives. Caenus, Brotherin-Law to Philotas, inveighed against him more violently
then any; He called him Traitor to his King, to his Country, to the Army, and
took up a great Stone to throw at his Head, (some have thought this was only to
free him from those Torments that were prepared for him); but the King holding
his hand, told him, That the Prisoner should have liberty to speak for himself,
and that he would not otherwise suffer him to be condemned. Philotas therefore
is ordered to plead his own Cause. But whether it were remorse of Conscience,
or fear of Death, he dared not so much as look up, or open his Mouth. He shed
Tears in abundance, and fainted away in the Arms of him that held him. They
wiped his Eyes, brought him to himself, and he was going to speak; which the
King perceiving, The Macedonians, said he, shall be thy Judges, tell me whether
thou intendest to use the Language of thy own Country?

There are here, answered Philotas, many that are not Macedonians, who will
understand me better if I use the same Language you have done; without doubt on
purpose to be understood of most.

Observe (says Alexander) Philotas his arrogance; he disdains to speak our
Language, as if he were ashamed of being born a Macedonian. No matter, let him
speak how he will; only remember, Soldiers, that our Customs and Manners are
an abomination to him, those of the Barbarians very agreeable.

Men are equally inclined to oppress the Great, and to pity the miserable. A
strange thing! if you are happy, you are persecuted by envy; if you are
unhappy, you are pitied by every one, but none comforts you. Caenus, who had
greater Interest than any to preserve the Honor and Life of Philotas, whose
Sister he had married, is the first that rises up against him; it is not enough
to call him Traitor to his King, to his Country, to the Army, he is the first
that takes up a Stone to throw at his Head. Many have believed that it was then
his intention to have him stoned, that so he might escape more cruel Tortures.
But the more expert, who have tried the Treachery and Inhumanity of the
greatest part of Relations, doubted not but that Caenus would have stifled the
Compassion Philotas his Misfortune had bred in the Hearts of the Soldiers,
which taking force through the Grandeur of his Merit, and the power of his
Oration, might at last cause him to be declared Innocent.

Caenus was one of the Council, when Philotas his Death was resolved upon, and
spoke not one word to justify him; neither acquainted he him of this Consult,
for fear, it may be, he should suspect him, or others look on him as a Traitor
to his King; thus far he is worthier of Praise than Censure. He should have
detested the Crime, but not condemned the Criminal; he should have executed
Alexander's Orders, but not inflamed his Choler and Revenge. As for me, I am
ready to think that the ambition of augmenting his Fortune from the ruins of
Philotus's, the Inheritance of the immense Riches of his Brother-in-Law, a
Grandeur o'retopping his, induced him to press his Execution. Thus does
Interest triumph in base Spirits over Duty and Friendship; thus is private
hatred covered with the Vail of Justice; thus are the Sacred Laws of Equity
made Instruments of Wrath and Vengeance.

Certainly Alexander merits eternal Praise for withholding Caenus his Hand.
Though he ardently desired Philotas his Death, he defers it till the Army, that
might have declared him innocent, has had perfect intelligence of his Crime. He
rather chooses to rescue Philotas from being tortured, and to deliver him over
to be judged by the Macedonians, than to oppress him by his own Authority.

Alexander having ended his Accusation, withdrew from the Assembly. A Prince
should never be present at the condemnation of a Criminal, nor at any thing
else that may make him be esteemed cruel and insensible. So that leaving to the
Judges the liberty of Condemning or Absolving, he will acquire himself in the
Hearts of the People, the reputation of being Just. He will avoid likewise
showing favor to the Criminal, which it is dangerous to refuse, being requested
by an Assembly touched with Compassion. Tho severity in a Prince, when it
proceeds not to cruelty, as in my Opinion more proper than Clemency, to attract
the Fear and Love of his Subjects; it concerns nevertheless the Policy of a
great Monarch seldom to refuse these sorts of Favors, which are a great proof
of his Power and Bounty. But it concerns his Prudence too, to avoid the
persecution of the Criminal's Friends or Relations, by a prompt execution of
the Sentence passed by the Judges.

Philotas having liberty to speak, said thus:

As naked Truth, without disguise, has much more force than an Eloquent and
Elaborate Discourse, so Innocence ought not to seek out words for its Defense.
I should have held my peace, had not the King, who was forestalled, incensed
you against me; his Speech is a Sentence of Death, which now to endeavor to
make him revoke, is to call him Cruel and Unjust. So that considering I must
condemn Alexander's Judgment, I cannot resolve to ask for Absolution. His
absence declares that my destruction is resolved upon; and what can I hope for,
if the best of my Judges be inexorable? However Philotas shall not die without
clearing himself of the Crime he stands charged with. What Proof have they? Am
I of the number of the Conspirators? Did Nicomachus name me to his Brother, or
Dymnus to Nicomachus? Who inquiring after the Names of those that had conspired
the Death of Alexander, and the Order of the Conspiracy; the other ingages in
it through the consideration of their Birth and Merit: How could Dymnus then
forget me, that am thought their Head? Did he fear destroying me? He that had
so great a confidence in Nicomachus; he, I say, that ventured with him his own
Life, and the Lives of his best Friends? Ceballinus the only Witness against
me, is not of the Conspiracy, can he believe that I am? he that discovered it
to me? Dymnus is dead, he never named me. His Confederates surviving him, may
hope for Pardon, if they can cast their Crime on me. Yet there is none accuses
me. What! cannot Tortures wrest the Truth from them, to whom, as it is common to
the Miserable, the engaging others in their Misfortunes, would be some comfort?
Do they believe, in the condition I am in, abandoned, condemned, I am able to
deliver them from their Tortures? So you see, Fellow Soldiers, the truth of
the first Crime I am accused of. I come now to the second; The King says, I
daigned not to advertise him of the imminent Peril that threatened him; I was
not at all troubled at it. It Is true, Sir, I was to blame, but you have
pardoned me. You invited me to Sup with you in token of a Reconciliation. At
least you ought not to condemn me without hearing my Defense. What new Crime
have I committed? Whence comes my Disgrace since yesterday-evening? I expected
nothing less than this dismal change. The Wicked are continually troubled with
the Image of their Crime. Their Souls agitated with a thousand different
Thoughts, keep them perpetually alarmed, pressed with remorse of Conscience,
they seek for their security. The ease Attarras found in apprehending me,
discovers the little care I took of my preservation. When he bound me with
Chains, I was in a deep sleep; I relied upon the credit of your word; I feared
not that the malice of my Enemies should prevail with your Clemency. Further,
Sir, could I fear any thing as to your Life, upon the bare report of a Youth of
no Reputation, who destitute of all proof, could do nothing but make a vain
Alarm. I suspected him too, because he came not to me himself; and looked on it
as some private revenge, not fit for me to meddle with. I feared likewise, that
he might deny what he had told Ceballinus, and that I might have nothing but
regret, for so lightly committing the chief Officers of the Court. But for all
these Precautions, I am sacrificed to those I have spared. It Is objected,
Dymnus anticipated his Punishment by a voluntary Death. Knew I that he would
kill himself? If Ceballinus his Relation have no other ground but this, what
does it prove against me? Again, had I bin a Confederate, how could I have bin
so quiet two days after the Conspiracy was detected? I could easily have
dispatched Ceballinus, or hastened the stroke. I was alone with the King in his
Chamber; who could have hindered me? Did I want Dymnus his presence? 'Twas he
then that was the Head of the Conspiracy, and yet it is I, as is said, that
would have made my self King of Macedonia. Whom among you, Fellow Soldiers,
have I endeavored to corrupt? On whom have I bestowed Presents? What Officers
are there more than ordinary sensible of my Favors? I am reproached for
despising the Language of Macedonians: What likelihood is there of it, if I
intend to make my self their King. You know very well, that since we have left
our own Country, and have learnt strange Tongues, it is to all of us some
trouble to speak our own. Alexander himself uses it not; therefore he despises
the Macedonians. In truth, all these Reproaches are but light, as well as that
of being a Friend to Amyntas, who conspired against Alexander. If it be a Crime
to be a Friend to a King's Brother, I am guilty; but if his Birth engaged me in
those Sentiments for him, can I not be innocent, because I did not divine? What
justice is there, that the Frieds of the Guilty should be punished with them? I
ought to have died long since had this Friendship bin a Crime: and if it be
not, Why is it brought in for my destruction? But I pitied the condition of
those that were to live under the Government of a Man that equaled himself to
the Gods. It Is true, I wrote thus to Alexander; but told I it any else? Gave he
me not the liberty to discover my Sentiments to him? Had I not reason to fear
that his Vanity might render him odious to his People? If he have such Faith in
the Oracle, let him consult it touching my Crime: Jupiter will never conceal a
Secret of such consequence to his Son's Life. And if you will rather trust to
Tortures, I am ready to undergo them. My misfortunes dispense with my
introducing my Relations. I had two Brothers, they both died in Battle for
Alexander's and Your Glory. I have only a Father left, accused of the same
Crime with me; neither the Grandeur of his Services, the consideration of his
Age, nor his passion for the King, prevailing against the cruelty of those that
envy him. Miserable Wretch! must I then, dear Father, be the cause of your
Death? Did you give me Life to deprive you of yours? Is this the Recompense of
so many Battles gained? of so much Blood spilt in your Family? Is this the
Comfort you expected from me in your last days? Nature was ready to redemand
your Life full of Glory; in the next Battle, the Grandeur of your Courage would
have laid you bleeding in the midst of your Trophies; but your Enemies not
contented to deprive you of an only Son, envy you the glory of a Death that
would have rendered you immortal. But, tell me, was Parmenio himself believed,
when he wrote to Alexander, how that Philip his Physician, corrupted by Darius
his Gifts and Promises, had engaged to poison him? The King gave so little
credit to his Letter, that he gave it Philip to read whilst he took his
Physic, to mock, as it were, at my Father's credulity. I have made my self too
the Subject of Rallery, for having too lightly believed things more probable
than what Ceballinus informed me. If I give Information, I make my self
ridiculous; if I hold my Peace, I am looked on as a Criminal; what should I do
them?

Presently one of the Company cried out; Not conspire against the Life of your
Prince and Benefactor. Whosoever thou art, thou have spoken wisely, (answered
Philotas) and if I am guilty of that Crime, I condemn my self to the worst of
punishments. And here I make an end, since you seem unmoved at the
consideration of my Misfortunes, and my last words have kindled your Choler.

Philotas his last words seemed neither to proceed from a Man that was
innocent, nor from one that had that courage he should have in the worst of
Fortunes. A good Conscience never despairs in bad Fortune; had but Philotas,
guilty as he was, had the confidence to answer with more vigor, his Innocence
would not have bin doubted, the Soldiers would have bin incited to compassion.
A bold and resolute word, uttered in the midst of the horrors of Death, has
preserved many a Criminal's Life. Nothing so easily persuades a multitude, as
the constancy of a great courage. Without doubt Philotas his Tears and Fainting
were Testimonies of his Crime, as they were tokens of his Despair or Repentance.

His Guards had no sooner conveyed him from the Assembly, but Belon, a stern
Man, and of a base Extract, who had raised himself to several Charges by his
Valor, spoke to the Soldiers with greater animosity against Philotas, than
had bin observed in Alexander, in manner following.

Is it possible that Macedonians, who have always abhorred Treachery, should be
touched with compassion for a Traitor to his King and Country? What has he done
to deserve your Clemency? Have you not had sufficient proof of his Pride, of
his Cruelty, of the Impudence of his Domestics? How often, when we have bin
tired, has he interrupted our repose, by the noise of a number of Slaves
following at his Heels? He that drove the Macedonians from his Tent, because he
would have no noise? Which of you could ever speak to him without an
Interpreter, as if he only were born in Macedonia, and all of us Barbarians?
Did he ever make you sensible of his Favors? He that after Battle always
loaded his Wagons with the Fruit of our Labors, and our Conquests? May we not
be ashamed that we have hitherto continued his Slaves, who has so long abused
the King's Favor, and our Patience? He would have Hammon tell the truth, and
yet he reckoned him an Impostor for owning Alexander for his Son. Did this
Traitor consult Jupiter, when he conspired against the Life of his King? He
would only gain ^im^ to give his Father Intelligence, that he may come down
upon us with all the Forces he can raise in Media. Let us send to the Oracle,
not to search a Truth we are already sufficiently informed of, but to return
thanks for Alexander's being preserved from the Snares of this Traitor.

There needed not all this to incense the Assembly; there was none appeared
concerned for Philotas his misery; they all unanimously breathed Revenge; the
King's Guard cried out, They should let them tear the Parricide in pieces. But
his Enemies reserved him for more cruel Tortures. The King having referred his
Sentence till the next day, called a Council, to advise whether it were better
to have him first tortured, or immediately delivered over to be Stoned. This
last Opinion was most humane, and had bin followed, but that the cruelty of
Hephaestion, Craterus, and Caenus was more prevalent. They were for having him
tortured, and charged themselves with the execution. All the Instruments of
Torture were set before Philotas his Eyes; at which the miserable Wreth shaking
for fear, cried out, That Rack was needless, since he confessed his Crime; that
he had conspired against the Life of Alexander; that he would have taken it
from him if he could; that they should therefore speedily give him the Death he
deserved.

But Craterus, glad of an opportunity to exercise his private revenge,
persisted in it, that they must extort from him who were his Confederates. In
vain did he implore the Gods of his Country, and the King's Mercy. He was put
to the Rack; his Judges were his Enemies and Tormentors; Scourges and Fire
could hardly satisfy their fury. A strange thing! Philotas but a little before
despairing at the sight of his Punishment, was, as it were, insensible in the
midst of Torment. The pain he endured, could not wrest one word from him; and
he suffered all that cruelty and vengeance could invent, till such time, as
mangled all over, he promised to discover what he knew. His Tormentors were
ordered to retire; Then addressing himself to Craterus, Tell me, says he, what
thou would have me say.

There Is no greater trouble, than that of being exposed to the vengeance of
Enemies; the Soul feels greater pain, than the Body groaning under the cruelty
of Tortures. Philotas, who endured the Rack without giving one groan, could not
refrain his Choler. Craterus not well brooking this derision, calls again for
his Tormentors. Then Philotas, vanquished by the rigor of his Stripes, and
infeebled by the great quantity of Blood he had lost, demanded respit, and
began afterward to tell them, how that Hegelochus, a Man of courage, and
ambitious, who died at the last Battle, not enduring to worship Alexander as
the Son of Jupiter, resolved to take away his Life; and not being able,
continued he, to accomplish so great a Design himself, he endeavored to engage
my Father and me it. What, said Hegelochus, shall we live under the tyranny of
a Monster? Who, though he is the wicked'st of Men, is not ashamed to trace his
Original from the Gods? If he have the confidence to abuse Jupiter himself,
then what can we expect from his Vanity? His Pride was insupportable to us
before the Oracle's ananswer; and since, it is grown to that height of
insolence, that not content with our Blood and Lives, he requires from us a
base complaisance, nothing l^ss than adoration. Parmenio, pursued Philota, was
very much astonished at this Discourse; the next day he talked with me about
it, and not knowing whether Hegelochus had bin transported with Choler, or
warmed with Wine, he sent a Messenger to desire him to come to him. Being come,
he said the same he had done the Evening before, and as it seemed, with more
resolution, adding, That if we would be the chief of the Conspiracy, he would
undertake to execute it. Parmenio and I having given him our Faith, thought it
best to wait till the death of Darius, that all the Orient might be the reward
of that Enterprise. As for that of Dymnus, I swear by the Life of Alexander, I
never knew any thing of it: And why should I disown an Attempt, that would be
no greater Crime than the other.

His Judges thought he had not said enough yet. They had him tortured a-fresh;
and Craterus, who had not fully satisfied his revenge, was glad of having
further time to exercise his fury against him. In fine, Philotas finding
himself no longer able to undergo the violence of his Tortures, confessed, That
he was the Head of that last Conspiracy, that his Fathers Age and Authority had
equally induced him to it; that seeing him Head of a powerful Army, Master of
Media, and the King's Treasury; and fearing further, that if he did not make
haste, Parmenio's Death might deprive him of the opportunity of making himself
King, he had conceived this execrable Design: As for the rest, that Parmenio
was no ways guilty; that he never had communicated his Intention to him; for
proof of which, they might, if they would, put him again to the Rack.

His Judges fearing he might expire in his Tortures, were obliged to let them
cease, to reserve him for a death more ignominious, as it was public. They
returned therefore to the King, and acquainted him with the Criminal's
Confession. Alexander commanded them to bring him the next day to the Assembly,
desiring that he might own what he had said in the presence of the Macedonians.
Philotas his Deposition was then publicly read, and acknowledged by him; and
Demetrius, one of his principal Confederates, was introduced. Never did the
most Innocent Man appear more concerned for a Reproach cast upon him, than
Demetrius, guilty as he was, seemed offended at the Examination made into his
Crime: which he disowned with all the confidence of a good Conscience, and
proffered himself to be racked to show his Innocence. His impudence stirred up
Philotas his Choler, who looking round about him, spied a young Man called
Calis, and asked him, How he could suffer Demetrius to stand so impudently in a
Lie? Calis, whose imprudence brought him thither, knew not what to answer: and
the Macedonians believed that Philotas accused as well the Innocent as Guilty.
But as soon as the Youth saw himself encompassed with Guards, he confessed his
Crime, and charged Demetrius.

Calis his Confession, shows how false it is what some Authors have written
touching Philotas his Innocence; For how could he know that this young Man was
of the Conspiracy, if he were not in it himself, since neither Ceballinus, nor
Nicomachus named him?

Pholotas and all his Confederates, according to the custom of Macedonia, were
immediately slain with Stones, whilst this miserable Wretch had the power to
disown so detestable a Crime. The Soldiers were touched with his Misfortune. A
little more constancy would have saved him from Death. It Is most certain
Alexander ran the risk of losing his Life, and of seeing all his Soldiers
revolt. They were inclined to Sedition; they pitied the deplorable Condition of
Parmenio, whom they loved as their Father; and his Son had never bin sacrificed
to the fury of his Enemies, had he but continued firm. But when they saw that
he confessed Conspiracy upon Conspiracy, Crime upon Crime, their Pity was
converted into Rage, and they all massacred him as a Parricide.

The Macedonians had a cruel custom; When any of them was convicted for
conspiring the Death of their King, that attempt was not only punished in the
Person of the Criminal, but his Relations received the same Punishment. Almost
all the Persons of Quality, and brave Soldiers in Alexander's Army, were
either Philotas his Relations, Friends, or Confederates. For fear of meeting
with the same Entertainment, some of them provided for their security by
flight; and others despairing of theirs, killed themselves. Without doubt the
misfortune of so many brave Men would have raised a tumult in the Camp, had not
Alexander proclaimed a Pardon to all the Conspirators Relations.

Amyntas and Simmias were excepted. The flight of Polemon, their younger
Brother, was the pretext of their disgrace; the true cause, the strict
friendship they had always had with Philotas. The King on his account bestowed
several Favors on them; and the care this unfortunate Man took to raise his
Friends, brought them into the same misery with himself. Alexander persuading
himself that they were of the Conspiracy, endeavored to have them condemned as
well as the rest. He represented therefore to his Soldiers, That he had reason
long since to suspect the fidelity of Amyntas and his Brothers; that his Mother
Olympias had given him notice of their evil Intentions; that the private
Conferences between them and Philotas increased his suspicion; that the flight
of their Brother was the effect of a bad Conscience; that they had bin all
three not long since with him, had dismissed the rest of their Company, and
would have executed their Design, but that the Guards coming in prevented them;
that the day before Philotas was taken; Antiphanes, Commissary of the Horse,
having demanded Horses from Amyntas for those that wanted them, he had
insolently refused them, and threatened him besides; that this arrogance could
proceed from nothing else but their conspiring his Death, and the hopes they
had of accomplishing their Design on the Morrow. That in fine, after so many
proofs of their perfidiousness, there was no place left for Doubts.

Amyntas was brought forth into the presence of the Army, and having obtained
liberty to defend himself, he desired that his Chains might be taken off, and a
Javelin given him; which was done accordingly as a sure presage of favor; for
these badges of Honor give encouragement to speak, whereas a Criminal groaning
under the weight of his Chains, commonly makes but a languishing harangue, of
little efficacy to stir up the compassion of his Judges.

Amyntas, full of hopes, represented, That the friendship he had with Philotas,
could not with justice be imputed to him as a Crime; that after that manner the
chiefest of the Court would be found guilty; that from that height of Fortune
the favor of Alexander had seated him in, he had attracted the respect or envy
of every one; that none being able to purchase the King's Favor, if he were
not supported by the friendship and protection of Philotas, 'twas no strange
thing that every one should court him; that they had with Alexander esteemed
his Zeal, his Courage, the Grandeur of his Services, his Father's Merit, but
that they detested his Crime; that they had had private Conferences with him,
but that this had bin all along their custom. In fine, That they had hated
Philotas when they knew him a Parricide and disloyal, as much as they had loved
him whilst a happy Favorite, and Arbiter of the Fortune of the Macedonians. He
added, That if he were guilty for refusing Horses to Antiphanes, the other was
no less for demanding them; that he had but two, which Antiphanes would have
taken away by force, though he could not spare them without being reduced to
the necessity of fighting on foot among the Cavalry. For the rest, that the
suspicions of Olympias were to be suspected, for that being sent into
Macedonia, he had, by Alexander's Order, drawn out Troops thence, contrary to
the Queen's pleasure; that from his Obedience and Services, sprang the
resentment of Olympias, that they should therefore punish him for having
faithfully served his King, and obeyed his Orders.

Amyntas was interrupted by the noise of those that brought back his Brother
Polemon bound in Chains. The Multitude seeing him in the condition of a
Criminal, could hardly forbear stoning him. But the young Man, for despair of
having thus exposed his Brothers, proffered to die, on condition their Lives
might be preserved. As he was extreme beautiful, and had committed no other
Fault but flying, all the Soldiers were so moved at his Repentance, that they
unanimously cried out, These brave Men deserved their Pardon. Alexander was
prevailed with, but Amyntas was inexorable; the King commanded him at last to
forgive Polemon, as he had done, and so dismissed the Assembly.

Polydamus was Parmenio's chiefest Friend; in Battle he had him always at his
side, to make him, as it were, participant of his Glory; he had enriched him
with his Favors, and had more confidence in him than any. Alexander causing
him to be called, commanded him to bring in his Brothers, whom he kept as
Hostages, and spoke to him in manner following.

Parmenio's attempt has wronged you more than any, for under shadow of Justice
and Zeal for my Service, he has particularly obliged you to his Interests. All
his Favors, all his Friendship tended to no other end than to corrupt you, and
to render you a Complice to his Treachery. It Is you therefore that must revenge
his Infidelity, and the Ingratitude he has shown toward me. See what
confidence I have in you, that I have chosen you to carry these Letters to my
Lieutenants in Media. You shall present two to Parmenio, one from me, and one
from his Son, for I have his Seal; he will not doubt of any thing when he sees
you. In the mean time I will keep your Brothers, as Pledges to assure me of
your Faith; and when you have executed my Orders, your fidelity shall be
rewarded.

Polydamas was so alarmed when the King caused him to be called, and commanded
him to bring in his Brothers, that he utterly despaired of Life, because of the
intimate friendship between him and Parmenio. Thinking therefore on nothing
more than the danger he had escaped, and forgetting what he owed his Friend, he
promised Alexander more than he required. Here you may observe the Frailty of
Court-friendship. Interest gives it its Original, and Fortune changes it every
moment: If you are happy, you are adored; if you are miserable, you are
insulted over.

Polydamus imploys all diligence, arrives in Media by Night, and instantly
delivers the King's Letters to his Lieutenants. Upon which they immediately
assemble in Cleander's Apartment, and deliberate on means to take away
Parmenio's Life. They resolved therefore to go to him the next day all in
Company, to execute Alexander's Orders.

Unfortunate Parmenio was walking with them in a Park, when Polydamus, whom he
had sent for, was brought unto him. He runs presently to embrace him, and being
glad to hear from his King, and to see his Friend, he receives him with extreme
joy. Polydamas having given him Alexander's Letter, Parmenio after he had read
it, told them, That he could not but admire that the King, after so many
Conquests, should yet think of subduing the Arachosians; That it was now time
for him to return into Macedonia, there in quiet to enjoy his Victories, and
the Glory he had acquired. After which, as he was reading Philotas his Letter
with great pleasure, Cleander thrust him into the Bosom with his Poniard and
gave him another stab in the Throat.

Thus expired Parmenio and Philotas, both of great credit in the Army, both
intimate Friends of Alexander, the most puissant of all the Nobility of the
Empire; the bravest of Captains; the most illustrious among the Macedonians.
The death of Philotas was miserable, full of pain and infamy; that of Parmenio
more cruel, unjust, and ominous to Alexander's Life, who afterward could find
no Captain of that valor and experience in his whole Empire, nor found he
afterward the same zeal and affection from his Soldiers, and the chief of his
Nobility.

We all die alike, but Death is not equally grievous to us all. If it be the
end of our Miseries, we desire it, we seek it, we run to it; but if it
terminate a Life full of Happiness, Grandeur, Glory, and Delights, it fills us
with despair. Parmenio had lived seventy Years in all prosperity, he had
exposed himself to several Dangers in his King's Service; he had bin the
Companion of his Victories, and had done many glorious Actions worthy the envy
of Kings; illustrious both in Peace and War: he died assassin'd by his
Confidents, upon Suspicions not well cleared, and by Alexander's Order, who was
indebted to him for his Empire.

There Is nothing more fit to compare the Courts of Princes to than the Sea.
There Is no greater pleasure than to fail on this Element during a Calm. Some
Voyages by Sea are as pleasant as profitable; but it is dangerous to make them a
Profession, since early or late one must perish in them. You Will say there is this
difference, That it is not in the power of Man to lay a Storm, but that the
Sage can in Princes Courts moderate his Passions, and not suffer himself to be
carried away with too much Ambition. Teach us this Lesson your self, and show
us how to curb Envy.

Some small reflection upon Philotas his Conspiracy, will easily inform us how
much more difficult it is for a Courtier, elevated to the highest pitch of
Favor, to moderate his Ambition, than for another who has every thing yet to
wish for. Nevertheless the latter has but one step to the accomplishment of
Grandeur, and the former is infinitely distant from it. The highest fortune of
a Minister differs as far from Royalty, as Supreme Power from the obedience of
Subjects. It Is therefore a folly to think the ascent to a Throne easy for being
near it.

THE CONSPIRACY OF HERMOLAUS.
THe consideration of a Danger happily avoided, renders the Sage more moderate
and cautious; whereas all the effect it has on a Savage Spirit, is to make it
more extravagant, rash, and arrogant. The fear Alexander had of the last
Conspiracy, was like that of those who see the falling of a Thunderbolt
without receiving any damage. They fear just at that moment, and presently
forget the Danger; like those that come to themselves from Swooning, incapable
to make reflection on an evil they have not felt. Add to this that Confidence
more dangerous than the Peril it self, and so common to Man, whereby he fears
not a Danger past, though when imminent it narrowly concerned his Life. Some
yet more irrational, are so forestalled with their good Fortune, that they
imagine themselves above Fate, and such are oftentimes reserved for a tragical
and miserable Catastrophe.

Alexander grew so outrageous after the death of Parmenio, that he knew no
Limits; the risk he ran in the last Conspiracy, rendered him less provident, he
thought he might for the future freely injure the Macedonians. The facility
wherewith he had quelled Parmenio and Philotas, made him more bold and
insolent; he thought himself King indeed, when he saw that he was Arbiter of
his Subjects Lives, and that there was nothing more to be done to place himself
beyond the reach of Envy, than to shed the best Blood in Macedonia. The more
you commend the vanity of great Ones, the more are they in love with it; the
more Blood a Tyrant sheds, the more is he desirous of shedding it.

Lyncestes Alexander had bin imprisoned three Years, upon an Accusation of two
Witnesses, for conspiring against the Life of Alexander; the Reason his
Punishment had bin so long deferred was, because he was the first that saluted
Alexander King after the death of Philip. Antipater, Lyncestes his
Father-in-Law, was Governor of Macedonia; and it seemed very probable, that the
intercession of one that was Master of so flourishing a Kingdom, should have
suspended his execution a far longer time. But Alexander would no longer
hearken to Policy: an insatiable desire of revenge carried him on toward his
own ruin. He caused therefore the Criminal to be brought forth, accused only by
two Persons, and had him dispatched according to their custom.

The Chief of the Macedonians perceived presently that Alexander grew more
cruel from day to day, and began to fear for themselves. They were ready to
think, that the Heavens provoked by the King's vanity, who dared equal himself
to the Gods, had inspired Philotas with the desire of taking away his Life.
However they spread this Rumor through the Army, the easier to engage the
Soldiers to a revolt.

The remembrance of Parmenio's Merit, and Philotas his Misfortune, who died in
the flower of his Age, had already excited pity in the Macedonians. In the one
they thought they had lost the Protector of their Liberty, the Avenger of the
Gods and of their Country; in the other a Captain of rare Valor, without whom
Alexander could do nothing that was great. These seditious Discourses would
have forged a Rebellion, had not the King caused his Army to march against the
Arachosians. Without doubt that was the only means to dissipate all ill
Designs. Idleness spoils the Soldiers Spirits, but all these murmurs vanish at
the first sound of the Trumpet.

Nevertheless Alexander's Conduct might well have made such brave Men
desperate. For having known that several highly resented Parmenio's Death, he
formed them into a Body, and made Leonidas their Captain, ordering them to
incamp separately from the rest, as it were, out of ignominy. It was not to be
feared that their seditious Discourses should have corrupted the rest of the
Macedonians; for, as is the custom of Soldiers, Martial Liberty, and the joy
of new Conquests, would have laid their Anger and their Malice.

In the mean while Alexander abandoned himself to all sorts of Vices. The
irregularity of his Manners increased with his Victories, and his Ambition no
longer curbed by Virtue, carried him to that excess of Pride, as to require
from the Macedonians and Persians Divine Honors. I cannot but pity the
weakness and vanity of this Prince. Could he think the Macedonians would
worship as a God, one born of Philip and Olympias, subject to the same
Infirmities with other Men? These Heroes, whom Antiquity has placed in the
Heavens, lived in such sort, that Posterity reckoned them in the number of the
Gods after their Death; and if during their Life they should have required from
Men Adoration and Divine Worship, without doubt they would have rendered
themselves despicable and ridiculous to the whole World. The Sages forbore not
to scoff at those false Divinities; and the more enlightened Pagans have
themselves laughed at their own Religion.

Alexander presumed too much upon the Grandeur of his Actions: the Persians,
and other strange Nations, might well admire them; but the Macedonians could do
no more than praise his Conduct and his Courage. Those that run the same
danger, are willing to participate with the General in the Glory of the
Conflict, and suffer with regret that any one should attribute to himself the
honor of the Victory. But if he were so intent to elevate himself above the
condition of Men, why was he not more diligent to gain respect from his People?
It is not for the Majesty of a Prince to make himself too public: if he will
be adored, he must separate himself from the Commerce of the World.

The old Macedonian Captains taking it ill that Alexander should publicly
debase his Father's Glory, scoffed at his Pride and pretended Divinity. Which
so incensed him, that he killed Clitus, his Nourses Son, with a Javelin. This
great Warrier, who had saved his Life at the Battle of Granicus, suffered with
regret his so outragiously attacking the Memory of Philip, and abhorred his
Vanity, and the enormity of his Crimes. Neither was he without a Second;
Calisthenes, who made profession of Wisdom, declared himself more openly: for
as Cleo one day, at Table with the chief of the Macedonians and Persians,
propounded to render Divine Honor to Alexander; This Philosopher answered him
with his usual freedom, That it was not in the power of Men to make a God, that
they could hardly make a King; and that the Persians would be their Conquerors,
if they followed them in their barbarous Customs. The freedom that Polypercon
took was yet greater, who seeing a Persian worshipping the King, began to
laugh, and throwing him upon his Face, bad him bow lower.

All these Scoffs tended to the diminution of Alexander's Glory: How then could
he expect Divine Honor from those that so much contemned him? For this he must
have changed the form of Government; have made himself absolute Monarch of the
Empire; have usurped the Macedonian Freedom; have bin Arbiter of their Lives
and Fortunes; have dispatched his Nobles; and have kept such a distance between
himself and his Subjects, as might have made him seem quite different from what
he was. But if the horror of so great an Impiety, or the necessity he then had
for his Captains, permitted him not to arrive to that excess of Cruelty; it
concerned his prudence and wisdom to moderate his Ambition; and the friendship
of his Nobility would have bin far more glorious, than the adoration of the
Persians, proceeding from the base complaisance of that Nation.

'Twas this unreasonable Pride which made him again run the risk of losing his
Life, which at last precipitated him to his ruin, and has rendered his Memory
odious to all Ages. The Death of Calisthenes is certainly deplorable, and a
great proof of Alexander's Wickedness, who could not suffer an honest Man in
his sight. In fine, he fell on a sudden from that moderation that had made him
admired and loved of every one, to so violent Extravagancies, and to so great
profusion of Vice, that it is no wonder that Hermolaus should have the boldness
to conspire his Death.

The Noblemens Children of Macedonia, according to custom, were obliged to
enter into the King's Service at fifteen Years of Age. After some Years the
Prince promoted them to the highest Charges; of them came Favorites, and the
greatest Captains. According to all appearance, these young Nobles were more
likely than any to tolerate their Prince's Defects and Government, as having
bin for a long time accustomed to his Humor, and brought up in his Court as
Sons. But as it is impossible entirely to bereave Lions of their natural
fierceness; so there is in humane Nature something so fierce and indomitable,
that though it may for some time be kept under, it can never be extinguished;
there is a self-love which is, as it were, the measure and first mover of all
our Affections; there is a Liberty which the weight of Chains cannot bow.

Who could have thought that these young Nobles, having contrived a Conspiracy
against Alexander, (so much the more dangerous, as they were driven by a desire
of Glory, and an implacable hatred) and given each other their Faith, should
neither by the caresses of their Prince, nor the inconstancy of their Age, be
induced to violate the same for a long time; all but one observing it entirely,
which is rare in Traitors.

Alexander being one day a Hunting, Hermolaus, one of his Pages, threw his Dart
at a Wild Boar and killed him. The King, who was running in to present the
Beast with his Spear, conceiving indignation against Hermolaus, caused him to
be whipped according to the custom of the Macedonians. But this young Nobleman
not brooking the Affront, showed, that those who are so far advanced in Years,
as to be able to take up Resolutions beseeming Men of courage, are not to be
dealt withal as Children. Nothing is more capable to incite a resolute and
ambitious Spirit to revenge, than the receiving shameful Punishment for a bold
and generous Action, worthy of a Prince's Applause. Virtue has its Venom; it is
dangerous to provoke it; we see daily Pity converted into Fury.

Hermolaus in despair seeks out Calisthenes, that wise Philosopher, and enemy
to Flattery, famous for his Learning, and the austerity of his Manners.
Presently he complains to him with tears of the outrage he has received; and
it is reported, that Calisthenes, whether it were to incite him to revenge, or
to comfort him, said to him; Consider, Hermolaus, that thou art now no Child.
These words gave him such courage, that from that very instant he conspired the
death of Alexander.

The Counsel of great Men is held in a Commonwealth as an Oracle and a Law;
whence it comes that a Man esteemed wise by the Vulgar, can easily raise a
Multitude, and cause a great disorder in a State. The more powerful therefore a
Man is in Counsel, the more moderate should he be in giving it. Calisthenes,
whom every one heard with pleasure, ought to have taken heed to his words more
than any, under the reign of a Prince who punished the intemperance of the
Tongue with the severest Punishment. He had done like a Man of great Wisdom, if
he had only comforted Hermolaus in his disgrace, and not set him on revenge, a
young Man apparently incapable of such kind of Enterprises. One must be certain
of the Event; destroy ones Enemy, or not attack him.

Hermolaus inflamed with a desire of Revenge, and not being able to accomplish
it himself, assembles his Companions, and speaks to them in this manner.

If the Affront I received only concerned me, I would only lament my disgrace,
and impute it to my bad Fortune. But all the Macedonians have part in my
Infamy, and it concerns their Glory to take a memorable Revenge. Doubtless the
Gods, jealous of their own Grandeur, have suffered Alexander, who dares equal
himself to them, to deal with us so unworthily, that they might inspire us with
a just resentment, and courage to free our selves from this Monster of Pride.
Be not deceived, my Companions, I have not bin punished according to Law:
Alexander could not suffer that I should rob him of the Glory of killing a Wild
Boar; he has exercised his private Indignation; Envy is the only cause of this
outrage. I have done a bold Exploit for my Age, fit to be admired, and he has
treated me like a Slave. What recompense can you now expect for your great
Services, if Ingratitude and Ignominy be the Reward of Courage? What avails it
you, Macedonians, that you have gained by the price of your Blood, the Empire
of the Universe? Were it not better to be in bondage to the Persians? A
generous Action gives a Slave his Liberty, which we lose in the midst of
Victories. Happier the Vanquished than the Vanquishers, under the Government of
a Tyrant? He cannot suffer the Glory of the latter, they are incessantly the
Object of his Fury, whereas the former come not within the reach of Envy. I
scruple not to say that Alexander is a Tyrant. What fitter name can be given to
one that is so greedy of his own Citizens Blood? How shall I find words to
express his Impiety, his Cruelty, his Arrogance? Is he not a Monster, to make
himself Arbiter of Men's Lives, and the Glory of the Gods? who would be Master
of our Bodies, and Tyrant over our Hearts? who not content to reign on Earth,
would have command in Heaven? He is not ashamed to require Honors that another
would refuse; and because we free Macedonians, laugh at the base complaisance
of the Persians, he hates us, he lays Snares for us, he oppresses us. See how
he recompenses those to whom he is indebted for the Empire of the East, his
Glory and his Life. His insolence ascends to that degree of impiety, as to make
us own for the Son of Jupiter, a wicked perfidious Desertor, who forsakes the
Laws of his Country to follow the Customs of Barbarians; whom we have known
born of Olympias; who is jealous of his Father's Glory, and assassinates his
best Friends. What do you expect, O generous Souls, a Death as cruel as that of
Parmenio and Clitus? Shall we yet sprinkle Alexander's Laurels with our Blood,
to be at last like those great Men sacrificed to his fury? Consider that there
is nothing dearer to miserable Mortals than their Lives; shall we suffer them
freely to be taken from us? Why should we not rather secure them by Alexander's
Death? So memorable an Action will eternize our glorious Memory to posterity.
This Tyrant's Life is in our Hands, the Heavens have given him over to our
Vengeance; in us, whom he has cruelly injured, he reposes all his confidence;
would you have a more convincing proof of the Will and Anger of the Gods?
Without doubt it is their pleasure to make use of our tender Youth in so bold an
Enterprise, to make it known to the World that they are the Authors, we only
their Instruments. Is there any of you so ill advised as to oppose the Gods?
Incited by the Heavens, Alexander's insupportable Pride and Cruelty, a^m'd,
greedy of Glory, and full of firm Resolution, shall we not dare attack a Man
without Guards, unarmed, oppressed with Crimes, in a deep sleep? I have chosen
you, my Companions, from all others, to participate in a Glory that shall never
die. Provide for your security, rescue the Liberty of your Country; shake off a
Yoke full of Infamy and Pain. Revenge the Gods, revenge your selves, join with
me, and put an end to our Calamities.

This invective of Hermolaus made such an Impression upon the Spirits of those
young Nobles, that they presently resolved to take away Alexander's Life.
Sostratus, one of them, who loved Hermolaus entirely, could not behold the
Marks of his Stripes but with extreme grief, and exagerating the King's
Cruelty, his Friends Merit, the Macedonians Disgrace, the injury done the Gods,
the necessity of revenging that Affront; he so inflamed those young Spirits,
already disposed for revenge, that they promised interchangeably to be faithful
one to another, and became unfaithful to Alexander.

So powerful is Religion, that it has an absolute dominion over the Spirits.
The Fealty Subjects usually swear to their Sovereign, is for the most part
inviolable, the People are seized with a Religious Horror when any one breaks
his Faith. But we must not mistake, there are two sorts of Religions; the one
draws its Original from Heaven, and being wholly Divine, has a secret force to
make us do good; the other is founded on humane fear and frailty: almost all
our inward Motions have no other Rule but this imperfect Religion; our
obedience to the Laws and Magistrates, proceeds from the fear we have of
Magistrates and of the Laws. When this Fear ceases in the Heart of Man,
Religion ceases too. You see Hermolaus and Sostratus persuade their Companions
that the Gods approve of their Revenge, and conspire together with them, and
upon that account they banish from their Hearts that fear which the Power of
the Laws had till then maintained in them; they are no longer restrained by
that Religion that is wholly Celestial; the Gods in their Opinion are offended
at the Affront given them, they think to revenge them in revenging themselves.

Confederates with Hermolaus and Sostratus were, Nicostratus, Antipater,
Asclepiodorus, Philotas, Articles, Elaptonius, and Epimenes. At the very first
they met with an Obstacle in their way. They foresaw, because they could not be
all on the Guard at once, that it would be difficult for them to execute their
Design. But at last, by changing the order of the Guards, they brought it about
that they were one Night altogether alone in the Palace. It Is a wonder that in
two and thirty days, (the time they employed in taking their Measures) not one
of them should reveal a Secret entrusted to so many.

Souls truly generous, which act only out of a desire of Glory, are most
capable of silence. 'Twas only their Animosity against the King, and the Honor
they thought would redound to them from that Action, that induced them to their
Revenge. Ambition, and Interest, had no share in it; for then likewise when
Riches, or some alteration in Affairs are expected, the fear of losing what is
already possessed, injoyns secresy. Those act with great courage, their desires
increase with the danger, and every moment seems to them an Age. These act
nothing without Fear, at the point of Execution they tremble, and the dread of
Punishment makes them think of their own and their Prince's preservation.

The Night came, in which the Conspirators intended, by treachery, to spoil
Alexander of his Life; they stood waiting at the Door, whilst the King was at
Supper, for his coming out to go to Bed. On the one hand they were glad to see
him sit at Table longer than ordinary, imagining that it would be easier for
them to dispatch him, charged with Wine and Sleep. On the other, they feared
that the pleasure of the Repast might retain him till it were day, and that
other Guards taking their places, they might be forced to defer the execution
of their Design eight days longer, which put them into strange disquiets. In
fine, Alexander retires, and the Conspirators think themselves certain of their
Enterprise. Let a prudent and wise Man order things with the exactest diligence
and greatest caution, neither his caution nor his diligence shall be able to
change the course of Fortune. Fortune in my opinion is no vain imaginary thing;
it is an assembling of certain Circumstances, which neither our Wisdom can unite
or separate; and it is great rashness to presume to change the order of Fate.

Just as Alexander was going to Bed, a Woman, accounted Foolish, who used to
foretell things to come, came and told him, that he was threatened with some
danger, and that he should return and spend the rest of the Night at Table.
Whether it were that the King was troubled at this Discourse, or that his own
Inclination persuaded him to debauch, he said, 'twas good to follow the Counsel
of the Gods, and caused his Company to be called back.

I know not why the Law forbids to give credit to those that pretend to foretell
things to come. A number of Events foreseen several Ages before they happened,
may persuade us that this Science is not altogether vain. Yet notwithstanding
we must be subject to the Law, as it is the emanation of the Wisdom of God, and
not believe Histories, which are oftentimes no other than mere humane Fictions.

As soon as it was day, the Guards, according to custom, were relieved; which
notwithstanding the Conspirators, whom a vehement desire of revenge pushed on
to the execution of their Design, would continue still. The King persuaded that
they were willing to give him a proof of their Obedience and Affection, praised
their Zeal, and sending them to take their Rest, ordered fifty thousand
Sesterces a Man to be given them.

What cannot a generous Action work upon the Spirit of Man? What cannot the
Favors of a King effect with a Soul never so passionate? An insatiable desire
of Avarice causes daily a thousand base Actions, a thousand Treacheries; how
much greater is the force of Liberality, that excites acknowledgment from the
most ingrate, that reclaims the cruelty of Tyrants, that appeases the Anger of
the Gods. If Riches in the corruption of the Age we live in serve to cover the
infamy of the wicked, will not Virtue, think you, accompanied with the Goods of
Fortune, appear with greater luster? What wonder then if it be of greater force
to attract the Hearts of Men? Without doubt Vice would not reign on Earth, if
Virtue were but recompensed. Here Princes should bestow their Favors; this is
the true means to secure themselves the Fidelity of their Subjects. The desire
of Man having no other Object than Honor and Riches, there is no one but had
rather merit them by faithful Services, then acquire them treacherously. Who is
he that would prefer Ignominy before Glory, punishment before a Reward, that
that is uncertain, and to come, before the enjoyment of a certain and present
good? Two things render a Prince odious, and incline his Subjects to revolt.
When he rewards the Services of the Upright with Ingratitude, and vents his
Favors on the Wicked and Vicious. The Honest, if they are in misery, seek not
to get out of it by ways of Honesty; they esteem them useless; they take the
shortest way, and endeavor to invest themselves in charges through
dissimulation, malice, and base complaisance; when flattery and such other
indirect means fail them, their Spirits corrupted by new Maxims, and imagining
that the Wicked cannot be without a Recompense, prompt them to Violence,
Injustice, Treachery, and oftentimes to conspire their Prince's Death. Princes
therefore should seek their security in the Hearts of those that live under
their Dominion. They should extend their (...)erosity to all their Subjects.
Not that a Monarch is obliged to bestow his Favors equally on all sorts of
Persons. Such a magnificence would rather attract Contempt, than Love and
Gratitude. Presents, like Meats, disgust, if they are not seasoned with justice
and distinction of Merit. That Prince cannot be esteemed liberal, that gives
indifferently to every one. That Is a prodigality, proceeding neither from
esteem nor friendship, the only ingredients to gain Hearts in bestowing
Benefits. We have no acknowledgment barely upon the account of a Benefit, our
Gratitude has a more noble and worthy Object, it considers principally the good
Will and Affection of the Giver. But on the other hand, a Prince should avoid
being so inconsiderately profuse, as to give so largely to his Favorites,
Ministers, or Friends, as to deprive himself of the means to show them further
Favors; nor indeed should he remove them from the necessity of desiring them;
for then they grow insolent in their good Fortune, they look on their Prince as
an exhausted Source, they contemn his Affection grown barren, they fly their
Benefactor, they hate him. When a Man is elevated to the highest degree of his
Ambition, Ingratitude, and Avarice, are the inseparable Companions of his
Pride. A Prince should therefore comfort the Miserable, but not make them
happy; do good, but not all the good he can; promote some many degrees above
others, but never to the highest.

Epimenes, one of the Conspirators, whether vanquished by Alexander's
Liberality, as considering that he might expect both a Pardon for his Crime,
and an extraordinary Recompense besides if he saved his King's Life; who for a
service of little consideration, had given him fifty thousand Sesterces; or
whether fearing the Anger of the Gods, revealed the Conspiracy to his Brother
Eurylochus. Who presently carries him to the Palace, and asks to speak with the
King. Ptolomaeus and Leonatus, who guarded his Chamber-dore, having learnt from
him, that he had something to tell the King that concerned his Life, warned by
Philotas his Example, gave them entrance; though the King after his debauch had
need of rest. Presently Epimenes relates the whole Order of the Conspiracy; and
Alexander, though frightened at the danger he had run, was glad of finding this
Pretext to ruin Calisthenes. Touching whom he asked Eurylochus several times,
if he were not a Confederate or Friend to the Conspirators? But Eurylochus
could give him no other Answer, than that Calisthenes gave ear to the
Invectives of those that spoke boldly concerning his Conduct and Behavior.
Alexander nevertheless treated him as a Confederate; and calling to mind the
freedom of that Philosopher, who had refused to render him Divine Honor, he
ordered him to be shut up close Prisoner with the Conspirators.

As Alexander was severe to the Conspirators, so he was liberal and grateful to
Eurylochus and Epimenes. To the latter he gave his Life, to the former fifty
Talents, and the confiscation of Tiridates his Goods, who was very rich.

So great Interest has a Prince in recompensing the fidelity of his Subjects,
that his Favors proceed rather from his Justice than his Liberality. As many
Favors as he confers, so many Sentinels has he to watch for him. Rewards have
greater force than Punishments; and the expectation of Good, than the fear of
Evil. The custom of pardoning those, that reveal Crimes themselves are guilty
of, is no less ancient than necessary. Impunity rouses the Conscience, causes
it to reveal the Treason, and preserves the Life of the Prince. However such
Traitors are not to be confided in: and it is dangerous to seem to mistrust
them; they are like those Animals that are tamed only for a time, early or
late, they return to their first fierceness.

The next day Alexander caused the Conspirators, all but Calisthenes, to be
brought forth into the Assembly. The Criminals Relations were called, and in
their presence the King asked those Traitors, What he had done to them to
induce them to conspire his Death? They as resolute, as if they had bin upon
the point of executing their Design, answered him boldly, That they were sorry
they could not yet take away his Life. These words stirred up the Soldiers
indignation; and they demanded those Parricides to be delivered to them.

A Crime, if acknowledged with some Tokens of Repentance, excites compassion;
if with impudent Confidence, it creates Horror. The Offense it self deserves
pardon, the vanity of boasting in it is insufferable. For in this there is
malice; the other is a weakness that may be born with.

The King admiring the boldness and contumacy of these Youths, represented to
them, That he had loved them all as his Children, that not long since they had
bin sensible of the effects of his Affection; that they should therefore freely
declare the occasion that led them to conceive so detestable a Design.

At these words they began to relent; only Hermolaus, with more constancy than
a good Conscience could furnish, took the word, and addressing himself to
Alexander, Know you not, said he, that we are born free? how comes it then that
you handle us like Slaves? A Tyrant, as you are, does not deserve to live. To
whom Alexander said, Continue boldly what thou have learnt of thy Master
Calisthenes.

I accept of thy favor, answered Hermolaus; and in giving me leave to speak,
thou sufficiently declarest thy impiety. Setting aside all thy other Actions,
Can there be a greater proof of thy licentiousness, than the opinion thou have
of the Grandeur of thy Merit? after having rendered thy self unworthy of
protection from the Gods, or the esteem of Men, thou ask, What induced us to
conspire thy Death? Does there any thing represent it self to my Eyes, or
Memory, that does not mind me of thy intolerable Vanity, of thy Cruelty, worthy
not of one, but a thousand deaths? If I look on thee, I see a Monster of Pride,
who disowns great Philip for his Father, and has the insolence to call himself
the Son of Jupiter. Nay, such is thy impudence, that thou requirest Worship
from us, as if thou were really in the number of the Gods, and not the Object
of their Fury. If I look upon the Army, I find I am first to make reflection on
my self; thou have used me unworthily for courageously killing of a Wild Boar.
After this I must pity the misfortune of so many brave Men, and valiant
Captains; thou have through a cruel Ingratitude inflicted Death on those that
have preserved thy Life. Was there ever such a Tyranny heard of? Was ever the
Virtue, Valor, and Love of Subjects thus rewarded? If I consider the many
Provinces we have conquered, this great Empire of the Persians, worthy of a
better Prince, I must own that we our selves are vanquished; Strangers are our
Masters, thou thy self yieldest to their Laws; their Customs, their Habits,
their Manners, their Alliances, their Friendship and Religion, which thou
preferrest before our Laws, sufficiently discover that they are Victors, and
thou their Slave. O wretched, O deplorable condition of the Macedonians! Do
thou see now what is the Subject of our Animosity? The only Obligation we have
from thee is, That thou will this day free us from a Servitude a thousand times
more ignominious and cruel than Death to generous Spirits. Happy those whom
thou have caused barbarously to be massacred, Attalus, Lyncestes, Clitus,
Parmenio, and Philotas. Had they lived, they would yet have groaned under thy
Tyranny; the God's were pleased to withdraw them from a dismal train of
miseries that thou inflictest on thy best Friends. It may be thy Affection is
seated in the Soldiers, and the common People. O Heavens! thirty thousand
Mules laden with Gold, and the riches, spoils of the Enemy, follow in the rear
of thy Army, when thy wretched Soldiers, of all their Conquests, retain
nothing but Scars, illustrious Marks of their Courage and thy Ingratitude. In
fine, thou art no longer King of Macedonia; thou art a Slave to the Persians.
Their delicacy pleases thee more than the Macedonian temperance. We justly
therefore pursue thee as a Desertor; and at most, it was not the King of
Macedonia, but the King of Persia that we would have killed. And you,
Macedonians, base Souls, unworthy the Glory of your Ancestors, miserable Slaves
to a Tyrant's Pride, Have you not the Hearts to shake off so infamous a Yoke?
And you, my Father, that hold your Sword at my Breast, deserve not to have given
Life to such a Son. This day will you acquire by my death a glorious and
eternal reputation; suffer me then to speak, and oppose not the liberty granted
me from your God. It Is because he fears not the words of a Child. Why hear
thou not, Calisthenes? To arrive to the highest pitch of Tyranny, I see thou
intendest to suppress in him all the freedom of the Greeks. Think not that he
is of the Conspiracy, he never knew any thing of it; and for proof of this we
all proffer our selves to be racked. Seek some other Pretext to satisfy thy
revenge, cut off the only true Macedonian, in whom resides all the virtue of
our Ancestors. For thou hate the looks of an honest Man. For the rest, pardon
the miserable old Age of our Fathers, and confound not the Innocent with the
Guilty. As for us, we die with regret, only for leaving thee alive.

These Invectives so incensed the Assembly, that the Soldiers would a hundred
times have torn Hermolaus in pieces. His own Father, called Sopolis, sometimes
stopped his Mouth, sometimes presented his Sword to his Breast to make him hold
his peace; but Alexander commanded him to retire. Sopolis his Indignation could
not be too great; Men are born Subjects before they are Fathers. The tender
affection of a Father toward a Son is natural, and cannot be stifled without
doing himself extreme violence; however, the safety of his Prince is to be
preferred before that of his Children; and the Voice of God to be obeyed rather
than the Voice of Nature.

Alexander with admirable patience bore all that Hermolaus had said against
him, and having seated himself where he might be heard, he answered in this
manner.

Had what this Impostor has said bin true, I could let you have torn him in
pieces, and not have heard his Invectives; and were I guilty of those Cruelties
he charges me with, I own it I were unworthy to be King of the Macedonians. But
what occasion have I given Hermolaus to speak thus of me? Some time since he
committed an insolence, and I caused him to be chastised according to our
ancient Custom; to hear him speak, you would say, I had cruelly tormented him.
What would not his Revenge have done, since for being beaten with a Whip, he
could resolve upon a Parricide? It Is no wonder he should have an horror for
the Punishment of Parmenio, of Philotas, of Aitalus, and Lyncestes; in
defending them he defends himself; he would not be guilty, if those who have
committed the same Crime, were declared Innocent. And as for Clitus, I wish I
had not bin constrained to punish the Intemperance of his Tongue. It is not
always in our power to use Moderation; the clemency of Kings is often times
surmounted by the audacity of Subjects; there are certain Injuries that cannot
be pardoned. When Kings are injured, they must be appeased by Submission, and
not provoked through Obstinacy and Pride. I wonder not at all that Hermolaus
accuses me of Cruelty, since he has the impudence to accuse me of Avarice. I
know Princes ought not to bear in mind the Favors they have bestowed on their
Subjects, but only the Services they have received from them. I shall not
therefore represent unto you, that there are none of you but what are sensible
of my Donatives, that would diminish the price of my Liberality, and the
Acknowledgment you owe me. But pray consider whence you had your Beds of Gold
and Silver, your Troops of Slaves, your sumptuous Spoils, and rich Booty. As
for the Persians, I confess, that coming into Asia to conquer, not to lay
desolate, I cannot resolve to handle as Slaves, a People whose Affection
secures my Empire and your Glory; and in this I think I give sufficient proof
of my Moderation, that I govern them in that manner, that they can have no
regret at my Victories. Would you be continually employed to subdue Provinces
already conquered, which under an Imperious Dominion would be always revolting?
Would you be stopped in the midst of your Victories by Insurrections, better
restrained by kind usage than by force of Arms? We should then extirpate whole
Nations, and make our selves feared more for our Cruelty, than our Courage.
What glory would it be to the Macedonians to change the Name of Conquerors, for
that of Thieves and Murderers? And after all, what have you to say against
those that sight for you? In sine, is not Hermolaus wicked, to scoff at the
Oracle for owning me a God? Should I refuse a Name so glorious, and oppose the
Will of Jupiter? as if the grandeur of my Actions did not elevate me above Men.
Further, in War Reputation is worth an Army; and I could wish for your Glory,
that the Indians would believe me a God. But I see very well, this insolent
Youth has said nothing but what he has learnt from his Master Calisthenes, and
he would have bin glad to have heard him vent the same Injuries against me in
your presence. He is an Olynthian, and therefore I had him not brought in,
because the Macedonians only have the Privilege to be tried by the Army. As for
the Criminals Relations, they shall live and enjoy their Charges; though I
should not have let these Parricides know this, that if they had any sentiment
of Affection for them, they might die with more regret.

Alexander is worthy of praise for pardoning the Criminals Relations. It
concerned his Prudence, as well as his Bounty, so to do. And I am ready to
think that this Law of the Macedonians, inveloping the Innocent with the
Guilty, was only made to give terror, without any design of putting it in
execution. For what likelihood was there of massacring a number of brave Men,
highly necessary to the State for their Valor and Experience? I suppose too,
in a great Army, it would have bin more dangerous than easy to have condemned
them. Laws are to be applied as Medicines, which not rightly used, work a
contrary effect, and bring Death instead of curing.

After the King had dismissed the Assembly, the Conspirators were delivered
over to their Companions; who, to testify their fidelity, and the horror they
had for the Treachery of Parricides, executed them in a cruel manner.

We can learn nothing certain from History concerning the Death of Calisthenes.
Some write that he died upon the Rack; others, that he endured the Rack, and
was afterward Crucified; all agree that either he lived a most miserable Life,
or died a most cruel Death. Certain it is, that he was no ways Confederate in
the Conspiracy; but he was of a morose humor, inflexible, and very unproper
for the Court. He would treat with the King upon equal terms, and speak at
Court as in the Schools; whence Aristotle said of him, That he had all the
Austerity of a Philosopher, all the Eloquence of an Orator, but very little
Conduct and Judgment. Whatsoever may be said, the memory of Alexander will be
odious to all Ages, for causing to be executed a Man of an incorruptible
probity, excellent in Wisdom and Knowledge, the fairest Ornament of Greece.

THE CONSPIRACY OF ANTIPATER.
NOw are we arrived to the triumph of Perfidy; hitherto have bin but vain
endeavors. Fortune was vigilant in Alexander's preservation; but at last she
delivers him over to a Traitor, who by Poison hurries him out of the World,
that had made himself Master of it.

Antipater is the Man, the more blameworthy, as Alexander had entrusted him
with the Kingdom of Macedonia. This Prince when he went for Asia, left behind
him his Mother Olympias, a Woman haughty, ambitious, cruel; and if we may
believe History, Adulterous, and skilled in Magic. He left her all the
Authority and State of a great Princess, and commanded Antipater to observe all
her Motions; but to do nothing that might show distrust. The jealousy of
supreme Authority presently divided these ambitious Spirits, and the affection
of the People. Antipater was the Image of their Prince, Olympias his Mother;
the Laws of the Kingdom defended Him, Nature protected Her.

Had Alexander foreseen these Discords, he had done like a great Prince, to
leave in Macedonia these two Spirits jealous one of another. This was the only
means in his absence to preserve himself the Kingdom of his Ancestors. To leave
his Mother in absolute Authority was dangerous; the Macedonians doubtless would
never have yielded Obedience to a Woman; the Grecian Provinces would have
revolted; and all the Neighbor Princes, jealous of Alexander's Grandeur, would
have taken up Arms, and have made use of his absence. On the other hand, it was
to be feared, that if Antipater were established sole Governor of so powerful a
Kingdom, Olympias, as the Prince's Mother, might make a Party sufficient to
effect the ruin of the State. But the choice Alexander made of these two
Persons was not the effect of his Providence. For Antipater having written a
Letter to him full of Invectives against Olympias, he laughed at the reading of
it, and said to those then present, That one Tear from his Mother was able to
efface all the evil Impressions that could be given of her Conduct; that
Antipater was a very bad Politician to oppose the Queen's Desires; and that all
Greece could not make him suspect her. And Antipater having added, That
Cleopater, Alexander's Sister, prostituted her self shamefully, and led a very
dissolute Life; he answered, That she might make use of her Royal Privilege. On
the other hand, Olympias accused Antipater of Tyranny. Her Policy was to set
Alexander against him, and to persuade him, that she had an entire motherly
Affection for him, a true Zeal and Passion for his Service.

Alexander desiring to please his Mother, and suspecting, upon the Advice she
had given him, Antipater's Fidelity, takes from him the Government of
Macedonia, and confers it on Craterus.

Alexander having therefore taken from Antipater the Government of Macedonia,
should either have secured a Man of so great Credit, or have recompensed his
Services. He, on the contrary, instead of sending him away, calls him into the
Army, and prefers his Sons, Jollas and Philip, to Charges, not to be entrusted
but with those on whom a Prince has showred Favors. In the mean while he
continues disaffected toward their Father, irritating his Courage, already not
well brooking the Affront given him.

Alexander glorying in his Conquests, meditated vast Designs; the extent of so
great an Empire not satisfying his Ambition, he aspired to the Monarchy of the
Universe. In the mean while Antipater receiving the news of his Disgrace,
presently conspires the Death of his King. And remembering the unfortunate
Success of the Conspiracies, both of Philotas and Hermolaus, he avoided the
Precipice into which they fell. He took other measures, and thought Poison an
infallible means to dispatch Alexander. Some write that Aristotle gave him this
Advice. But as for me, I cannot imagine that Philosopher capable of so great a
Villainy against his Pupil, and his King, who had loaded him with Favors. The
Example of Seneca, who according to all appearance conspired the Death of Nero,
proves nothing against Aristotle; he only made profession of Wisdom; the other
aspired to an Empire.

Alexander's Death being resolved upon, Antipater sent his Son Cassander to the
Army, intending speedily to follow him; and charged him to acquaint the King
how false and malicious Olympias her Accusations were. Coming to the Army near
Babylon, and seeing the Persians prostrate themselves at the King's feet, he
began openly to scoff at them, and could not forbear laughing; which so
offended the King, that he took him by the Hair of his Head, dragged him on the
Ground, and trampled on him. Some days after Cassander having undertaken his
Father's Defense against those that were come to accuse him, the King commanded
him to hold his peace; saying, 'Twas very unlikely Men should come so far to
tell him Lies. Cassander would continue, but Alexander told him in choler, That
he would make him repent of his Disobedience; that his Reasons were no other
than Aristotle' s Fallacies; and that he would not suffer Antipater, vain and
treacherous as he was, to go unpunished.

Not long after this Antipater arrived. He saw the Storm hovering over his
Head, and thought how he might prevent the Danger. Wherefore he called his
Sons, Cassander, Jollas, and Philip; and with all the authority and tenderness
of a Father, represents unto them, That in vain he had given them Being, if he
did not endeavor to procure them a Life full of Happiness and Pleasure; and
that he should be himself very unhappy if he did not live after his Death in
his Children, succeeding him in his Revenues and Imploiments. Those, said he,
have no reason to applaud Nature, that are born of an Illustrious Race, and
live unfortunately; the more splendid their Birth, the more heavy and
insupportable is their Misery. As Man is a part of the Universe, through the
qualities of his Temperaments and his Spirits; so he is no part of the World
Politic, without Riches and Promotions. To be without these, is not to live,
but to die, nay, to die every day as long as ones Life lasts. These Thoughts,
my dear Children, disturb me only upon your account. You know what great Glory
I have acquired in the Armies, which gained me a large share in Philip's
Affection. You have seen me raised to the highest degree of Grandeur, Arbiter
of a flourishing Kingdom; caressed by Alexander, till such time as his mind of
late, as much corrupted by the effeminacy of the Persians, as it was formerly
well instructed by the Precepts of Divine Aristotle, induced him to depose me
from governing Macedonia; and upon the Report of my Enemies to suspect my
Fidelity, always incorruptible. So that it is impossible to support our
Grandeur, unless we take off the Head of this Monster. Can you be of so base a
Spirit, as to resolve to live unhappy, without Wealth, without Honor? Can you
be so unnatural as to survive my Misfortune? What say I? Can you think to
escape Death, after they have taken away my Life? Cassander, thou have had
experience of this Tyrant's Cruelty, thou have heard his Threats; Can thou
doubt of suddenly seeing the Effects? Olympias, infamous as she is, has
prevailed against our Merit; shall we wait, like Clitus and Parmenio, to be
sacrificed to Alexander's Fury? No; I can never think that the Offspring of
Antipater will degenerate from his Glory, and that of his Ancestors. Be not
daunted at the Death of Philotas and Hermolaus: like a good Pilot I have learnt
to avoid those Rocks where others have bin Shipwrack'd. Those were forced to
have several Associates, to entrust a Secret to many Persons; we our selves can
execute the Design I meditate. They would have killed Alexander in the midst of
his Guards, in the sight of the the Army; We will take him off by Poison at
Table, in the midst of good Cheer. His Sickness and his Death will be imputed
to his debauching. Jollas is his chief Cupbearer, what is there more easy, than
to convey the Poison into his Wine, or into his Water? My dear Children, it is
now no longer time to deliberate, we must speedily kill Alexander, or he will
kill us.

Cassander, Jollas, and Philip, presently resolved upon that great Villainy, and
expected only the convenience of some Feast, that they might execute their
Design.

In the mean while Alexander hastens toward Babylon, where Ambassadors from
all parts of the World attended his coming, to congratulate with him for his
Conquests. Nearchus, one of his chief Officers, advertised him of a Prediction
of the Chaldeans, threatening him with inevitable peril if he entered the City
Babylon. Though he was as much given to Superstition as any one, yet nothing
could stop his Journey. In appearance he went thither as to the Diet of the
Universe, to impose Laws on all the Earth; but in reality his Destiny drew him,
thither he went to his own destruction.

As he drew near the Walls of Babylon, several Presages troubled him, and he
remembered the counsel of Nearchus. Nevertheless he would not return back, but
entered the City, foreseeing, as it were, his Misfortune. Not long after a
Thessalian Physician made a Feast, and invited Alexander and the chief of his
Courtiers thither. He failed not to be there, and having drank of Hercules his
Cup, he felt such violent pain, that he desired them to kill him with his
Sword. It was presently given out, that drinking too much Wine had occasioned
his Distemper; and thus Antipater's Authority stifled the Infamy of his Treason.

Plutarch writes, that Alexander died of a violent Fever; and reports for
proof of what he alleages, that his Body continued for several days as fresh
and sound, as at the moment of his expiring. I wonder that so Learned a Man
should be ignorant of the nature of some Poisons, that preserve from
corrupting, and leave no marks of their effect. Whatsoever may be said, it is
certain that perfidious Jollas poisoned the King's Water, and then mixed it
with his Wine.

Thus expired great Alexander, quelled by Domestic Treason, after he had
conquered all the East. The eminent Qualities appearing in him at the beginning
of his Reign, made every one admire him; the enormity of his Vices, proceeding
from his Fortune, rendered him odious to all the World. He continued a long
time magnificent, liberal, of a sweet and gentle disposition, inclined to
Justice and Clemency; he became at once unjust, cruel, extravagant,
mistrustful, superstitious, and so addicted to all sorts of Vice, that there
was no hopes of his returning.

So Illustious an Example as this, may serve to instruct all Princes, that
there is no Power stronger than a resolute Heart; that there is no Prudence but
may be o're-reach'd by Malice; and that the Despair of one Man is more to be
feared than an Army.

FINIS.

