THE HISTORY OF LAPLAND Wherein are showed the Original, Manners, Habits,
Marriages, Conjurations, etc. of that People. Written by John Shefferus
Professor of Law and Rhetorrick at Upsal in Sweden.

historiated title page border with title text in a cartouche composed of a
stretched reindeer hide; to either side stands a Laplander (the man on the left
holds a sledge, while the man on the right holds a pair of skis); at the foot
sits a man beside a small boat At the Theater in Oxon 1674



THE HISTORY OF LAPLAND WHEREIN Are showed the Original, Manners, Habits,
Marriages, Conjurations, etc. of that People. WRITTEN By JOHN SCHEFFER,
Professor of Law and Rhetoric at Upsal in Sweden.

depiction of two Laplanders walking, one carrying a bow, the other leading a
reindeer with a child in a cradle fastened to the pack-saddle

At the THEATER in OXFORD. M.DC.LXXIV. And are to be sold by GEORGE WEST and
AMOS CURTEIN.

Imprimatur

RA. BATHVRST, Vice-Canc.
July 8. 1674.
THE PREFACE.
THE Reader may please to take notice, that the diligent and learned Author of
this History, (to the writing of which he was commanded, and therein assisted
by the Chancellor of Sweden) has in the whole work taken care to justify what
he relates, from the faith of authentic records, the testimony of Historians,
and the Discourses of Laplanders themselves, with whom he had ready
opportunities of converse. And this he has don so precisely, that having in
the contexture of his work, given a full account of what he thought observable
in the writings, or narratives to which he refers; he afterward constantly
puts down at length the very words of his Authors, a great part of which are in
the Swedish Tongue. Now in this Edition we have spared our selves the labor of
such repetition; which we hope will not be regretted by the Reader, who we
suppose would not have bin much edified by them. As to the subject here
discoursed of, twill not be needful to give a character of it. Military
Action, and those public murders in which other Histories triumph, have no
share here. Hunger, cold and solitude are enemies that engage all the fortitude
of this People: and where so much passive valor is necessary, we may dispense
with the want of Active. Amidst the barbarity and darkness which reign in
Lapland, there appear strictures of light, which will entertain the eye of the
most knowing observer; as the Stars are no less remarkable then is the Sun it
self. However the Reader will not fail to meet here with what may gratify his
curiosity. Warmer Climates having all the comforts and necessaries of life
plentifully bestowed upon them, are but a more distant home; where we have
little else talked of, then what we daily see among our selves: but here it is
indeed, where, rather then in America, we have a new World discovered: and
those extravagant falsehoods, which have commonly past in the narratives of
these Northern Countries, are not so inexcusable for their being lies, as that
they were told without temtation; the real truth being equally entertaining,
and incredible.

map of Lapland

THE HISTORY OF LAPLAND
CHAP. I. Of the Name of Lapland.
THIS Country does not every where pass by the same name. By some it is called
Lappia, as Johann. Magnus in the Preface of his history, and Saxo Grammat. in
his 5th book; by others Lapponia, as Olaus Magnus in the explication of his Map
of Scandinavia, and Ziegler in his description of the Northern Countries, and
before these Ericus Versaliensis, and after them Andr. Buraeus. The Swedes
usually call the Country Lapmarkia, in whose language Mark signifies Land; the
Danes and Norwegians, Laplandia, and also Findmarkia, as appears from Petr.
Claudus description of Norway: for no one can gather any thing else but an
account of this Country, from his whole 38th Chapt. which himself too seems to
intimate, when he promises more about Findmarkia in his description of Lapland.
Of i'ts being called Findmark, I shall speak in another place; Now we will see
why it is called Lapponia and Lappia, the Etymology of which words is not yet
agreed upon by the Learned. Ziegler thinks they were named so by the Germans,
from the dullness and stupidity of the people, which the word Lappi signifies
amongst them; but this seems improbable, since this Country is but of late
known to the Germans, and none of their ancient Writers make any mention of
Lappia. Moreover, the Finlanders, Swedes and Russians, who differ much in their
language from one another, as well as from the Germans, call it all by the same
name; and the Germans, who are so remote from Lapland, could not transmit this
name to these more Northern Countries, especially when they had little or no
commerce with them. Neither are the people so very dull and stupid; as Ziegler
himself afterward acknowledges, when he confesses they are good at the needle,
and make delicate embroidered clothes. Neither can I assent to Wexionius's
opinion, that the Swedes gave them this name from their wearing of Skins; for
Lapper and Skinlapper do not signify skins, but the same as the Greeks (...)
(in English Rags) from whence Ol. Petr. Nieuren, who writ of Lapland in
Guslavus Adolphus's time, derives their name from their coming into Swedland
every year with rags lapt about them, which is the signification of Lapp in
that language. But they do not deserve that name, merely for this reason, any
more than the Finlanders and others, for they are generally clothed in good
woollen garments, as we shall show hereafter. Grotius thinks they are called
Lapps from running or leaping, but Loepa, which in the Swedish language
signifies to run, is writ with a single P, and the name of this Country with a
double one: and these People naturally are no great runners, tho by an art they
have of sliding over the frozen snow, they are very swift in their motions.
Some think that the Inhabitants do not denominate the Country, but the Country
the Inhabitants, as in the name of Norwegians and others, which seems to be
strengthened by this, because Ol. Magnus calls them Lappomanni, after the manner
of Nordmanni, Westmanni, and Sudermanni, in which words Manni signifying Men,
they were called Lappomanni, i. e. Men of Lappia. Johann. Tornaeus.
Others fancy that the name of the Country is derived from Lappu, which in the
Finnonick language is furthermost, because it lies in the farthest part of
Scandinavia. There is yet another opinion which may seem no less plausible then
any of the former, which agrees as well with the signification of the word Lapp
among the Laplanders themselves, as the credit given to what has been matter of
fact, viz. that 'twas called Lappia, not from its situation, or other such like
accident, but from the Lappi that inhabited it. So that I take Lappi to signify
no other than banished persons, which is the genuine signification of Lapp in
the Lapland language; for the Laplanders were originally Finlanders, and from
leaving their Country may be presumed to have took their name; and that not of
their own choosing, but the Finlanders Ol. Petr. Nieuren. Plantin. jun. Praef.
M S. Lexic. Lappon.
imposition, with whom to Lapp signifies to run away: whence the compellation
seeming something scandalous, no person of quality to this day will endure to
be called by it, tho from the Finlanders others Nations, as the Germans, Swedes
and Moscovites, have learnt to call them so. But they of Lappia Vmensis style
themselves Sabmienladti, and those of Lappia Tornensis, Sameednan, from the
word Sabmi or Same; the signification of which, and whence they had it, we
shall see hereafter.

At what time this Country and it is inhabitants were first distinguished by
these names Lappia and Lappi, it is hard to prove: it is certain 'twas but of
late, for the words are not found in any ancient writer, neither in Tacitus,
who mentions their neighbors and forefathers the Finlanders, nor in Ptolomy,
Solinus, Anton. Augustus, Rutilius, or others, neither in Authors nearer home
(not to name Jornandes, Paul Warnefrid, etc.) nor in those who have writ the
actions of Heraud and Bosa, or Goetricus and Rolfus, or King Olafus in the
Islandick, Norwegian or Gothic language: we find nothing of them in Adam
Bremensis, whose diligence in writing of the Northern Countries, his
Scandinavia sufficiently testifies; or in Sturlisonius, who writ very accuratly
of these parts in his own language. Therefore I cannot be so easily persuaded
with Grotius to believe Cluverius, who says they were mentioned in the
Peutingerian Tables, the Author of which is thought to have lived at least
before Theodosius's time, i. e. 600 years before Adam Bremensis: how then could
he, that was none of the best Geographers, if we may believe Welserus, and very
far distant from these parts, give us any account of them, since Adam
Bremensis, who was so near a neighbor, and had commerce with those that lived
there, could give us none? Besides, in that Table the Sarmatians are called
Lupiones, with whom the Lappi were nothing concerned; neither does any ancient
Author say they were seated so far Northward: wherefore the Lupiones there
described are any People rather then the Laplanders, for at that time, when the
Author writ, they were not so much as known to any of their neighbors, the
Gothic Norwegian or Danish writers. The first that mentions Lapland is Saxo
Gramat. Hist. Dan. l. 5. who lived and wrote about Ann. 1190, and therefore was
after Adam Bremensis (who lived about 1077) near 130 years, in which interval
this name must needs come first in use. For Saxo making mention of such a
Country a great while before, in the time of Frotho the third contemporary to
Alricus King of Swedland (who they say lived before Christ) does not prove that
'twas called so then, but that that Country might afterward have had this
appellation; and I am fully persuaded, that Adam Bremensis would not have
omitted this name if he had had any knowledge of it. Afterward Er. Vpsaliensis
speaks of it about 1470 i. e. almost 300 years after Saxo, and 200 before this
present time. After them Jac. Ziegler made a large and learned description of
it, by which it came to be known all over Europe. For however we may meet with
the name Lappia in Saxo, none but the Swedes and Finlanders, before Zieglers
time, knew any thing of it. And so much for the names of Lapland.

CHAP. II. Of the Situation of Lapland.
THE true and exact situation of this Country the Ancients seem not to have
sufficiently discovered. Saxo makes it bordering upon Jamtia, extending its
self as far, or rather lying as it were between Helsingia and Finland, when in
these words he says the Provinces of the Helsingi, Iarnberi, Iemti, with both
the Lappia's, as likewise Finnia and Estia paid annual tribute to one Domarus.
Ericus Vpsaliensis seems to make it a part of Finland, mistaking it for a
certain part of that Kingdom so called, on the one side adjoining to Swedland,
on the other to Russia, giving it a place between Carelia and Nylandia. Ol.
Magn. in his Table, and so his brother Johan. Magnus in the Preface of his
History, place it higher then the western Bothnia, making neighbors to it
Scrikfinnia furthest toward the North, and Biarmia toward the East; though
some Buraeus in his descr. of Swedland.
think there is no such place as Scrikfinnia, as it is certain there is none in
those parts at this day called by that name. But yet we must not slightly pass
over the unanimous opinion of so many learned men, especially Saxo, not a
little knowing in the Northern affairs, who have all not barely named it, but
have described the humors of the Inhabitants, their manners, habits and
fashion of their governments, with other matters belonging to them. Instead of
the Scrickfinni or Scricfinni of Johan. and Ol. Magn. I would rather read it
Scritofinni; and as for Skidfinni as Adr. Burae would have it, all the
Ancients, what ever else they differ in, will agree in this, that there must be
an R in the word. Jornandez calls them Scretfennae, Paul. Warnefrid. and
Diacon. Scritobini changing f in b (of which and some other things of the like
nature I will treat in due time and place) Adam Bremensis Scritefinni: and the
Greeks agree in this writing, so that we ought not to doubt of the Latins.
Procopius will have them sometimes (...), other times (...). Besides it is
manifest since the Scritefinni are the same with the Finni, whose Etymology in
their own language is from leaping, by an art they have, by which with crooked
pieces of wood under their feet like a bow they hunt wild beasts; they could
not therefore take their name from Skidh, signifying the wooden shoes
themselves, but from their leaping, i. e. swift running with them, which
doubtless anciently was meant by Skriida, and which the Author cited by Warnius
in the 46 page of his Lexicon confirms, where he relates the form of an oath
made by Hafur, that he would preserve the peace Quamdiu Finnur skriidar, i. e.
as long as the Finlanders continued their manner of leaping. As for the
Etymology that is there given, that it signifies their wandering up and down,
it is altogether false, for Skridsko at this day denotes those wooden shoes
which they run upon the ice with; neither does Skirida signify any thing else
among the Ancients but to glide along the ground, for they do not take up one
foot after the other, as in common running, but carrying themselves steady upon
the frozen snow, they move forward stooping a little, as shall be shown
hereafter. And perhaps this is the only cause that they are called
Himantopodes, People creeping upon their knees; which agrees exactly with these
Scritofinni: for they hearing that Skriida was to creep along, what could they
fancy the Scritofinni to be, but People not going like other men, but crawling
forward like creeping animalls, but of this I shall speak more at large when I
come to the Laplanders gliding upon the ice. That which I would chiefly evince
here, is, that there are such a people rightly called Scritofinni, and the
Country which they inhabit is Scritofinnia or Scritfinnia, and that there is no
reason we should think there was no such place, since there are those who are
called Scritfinni, i. e. Finlanders, who run upon the ice with wooden shoes,
whose Country from thence may well be called Scritofinnia. And the same may be
urged for Biarmia against those that will not allow there is any such place.
For first the ancient Writers making frequent mention of it, as that Author of
the History thereof, calls it often Biarmaland in the old Gothic or Islandick
language, who also calls the King of it Hereker in Chapter 7. and his two Sons, the
one Roerik the other Siggeir. Saxo likewise in his 9th book, speaks of a
certain King of this place, who reigned in the time of Regner King of the
Danes, making it border upon Finland, when he says the King of Biarmia fled for
refuge to Matullus, who then reigned in Finland. But now granting there were
anciently such names as Biarmia and Scritfinnia, it remains doubtful still
whether they were distinct Countries or no. All Authors except Johan. and Ol.
Magn. seem to make them the same, Procop. Jornand. Paul. Warnfrid. and Adam
Bremensis speak of Scritfinnia, but none of Biarmia, and the Northern writers
do just contrary. Saxo indeed mentions them both, but not at the same time:
once in his Preface he names Scritfinnia, leaving out Biarmia, in other places
he names Biarmia omitting the other; from whence I am almost of opinion that
it is the same Country called by native Writers Biarmia, by foreign
Scritfinnia. We may add further that as Adam Bremensis makes Scritfinnia next
to Helsingia, the Author of the History of Herand and Bosa sets Biarmia in the
same place, speaking of some Woods in it, and Rivers that emty themselves into
the Sinus Bothnicus or bay of Ganduia next to Helsingia. And moreover as the
Scritfinni are a People of Finland, which not only their name, but an old
Chorographick Table commended by Grotius does intimate, distinguishing the
Fenni into the Scritfenni and Redefenni, so it is probable of the Biarmians
Paul. Warnefrid.
Ad. Erem. Solin. c. 44.
as well for their neighborhood to Helsingia, of which before, as for their
worshipping a God by the name of Jomala, which is a Finland word, denoting God
amongst them to this day. Moreover the Biarmians have many other things like
the Finlanders, as the Art of darting, of Magic, etc. So that Biarmia may be a
Colony of Finland, whose People were, called by Strangers, from their skirring
along, or gliding upon the snow, Scritofinni. But now supposing all this true,
and that the Biarmia of the Ancients, and Scritfinnia were the same, it is a
question still whether Lapland be distinct from them or not. Joh. and Ol.
Magnus in their Geographic Tables and descriptions, make them distinct
Countries. But that cannot be; for if Scritfinnia and Biarmia reach one way to
Helsingia and Jamtia, on the other to Finland; if they lie so near these
Provinces, and extend to the Bay of Bothnia (both which have bin demonstrated
before) I do not see where Lapland can have any place at all. And the same
Authors are also mistaken in putting it South of Biarmia and Scritfinnia,
whereas the Ancients placed these beyond it. For that they meant only by
Biarmia that which the Swedes now call Trennes, appears to be false from what
has bin said before: for where are any Rivers in Trennes that run into the Bay
of Bothnia? and how is it bordering upon Finland? Wherefore contrary to Joh.
and Ol. Magnus, I think rather that Lapland is the same that was first by the
Inhabitants called Biarmia, by Strangers Scritfinnia, then changing the name
for some of the reasons here produced, it came to be Lappia or Lapponia; which
beginning from Jamtia and Angermannia, goes all about each Bothnia, and at
length ends in the extremities of Carelia and Finland, so as to comprehend all
the whole tract from the North even to the main Ocean, the white Sea, and the
Lake Ladek, which are the very bounds of old Biarmia and Scritfinnia. But that
it went as far as the Ocean, the Ancients seem not to have so well understood;
nor indeed Johan. and Ol. Magnus, who in those parts have made Scritfinnia and
Biarmia different Countries from Lapland. So also Damianus Goes, who, whatever
he knew of Lapland, had it from them, says it extends it self to unknown
Regions, because he knew not who lived further toward the North Sea. But the
Ancients have placed there, besides the Scritfinni, the Cynocephali, Busti,
Troglodytes, Pygmies, Cyclops's,: and some others, passing by the Himantopodes,
of whom we have spoken before: tho in this age none doubts but the Laplanders
inhabit it all, and those who have sailed along those Coasts have met with none
others but Laplanders. In fine Charles the 9th King of Swedland in the year
1600, being desirous to know the truth of that Country, sent two famous
Mathematicians, M. Aron. Forsius a Swedish Professor, and Hicronymus
Birkholten a German, with instruments, and all necessaries to make what
discoveries they could of Lapland; who at their return, did certify, and make
it out, that beyond the Elevation of the Pole 73 degrees there was no Continent
toward the North but the great frozen Sea, and that the farthest point was
Norcum or Norcap, not far from the Castle of Wardhouse. But of this distant
Lapland those that are curious may enquire at their leisure, we purpose to
treat here only of that which is subject to the Government of the Swedes; and
this is a vast Country, thought by Paulinus in his history of the North, of
equal extent almost with all Swedland properly so called. Andr. Buraeus says
it contains in length above 100 German miles, and in breadth 90. All this
Country comes now under the name of Lapland, in which all agree that ever
described it, and if we would take an account of the Climate of it by this vast
compass of Earth, we must begin from the 64th degree of latitude, and so to the
71; but in longitude it must extend at least to the 27th Meridian, or more.
Moreover if we will compute the longitude from journies that have bin made
thither, all hitherto have unanimously put the beginning of it about the 38th
degree, and the end in the 65th. And this may suffice partly for an account of
the situation of Lapland in general; and partly of that which is subject to the
Swedes. Dam. a Goes, a Knight of Portugal, sets its bounds thus in his
description of Spain: Lapland is divided into the Eastern and Western part, the
Bothnick Sea coming between. The extremity of it is Tornia. Eastward it reaches
to the white Lake, toward the North comprehending diverse Provinces, and
extends it self beyond all knowledge. On the West toward Island it joins to
part of Norway, and on the other side of Norway it is bounded with Swedland,
Finland, and both the Bothnia's. But Ol. Petr. Nieuren confutes this of the
Bothnic Sea lying between; for so part of Lapland would lie in Finland or
Ostrobothnia, part in Westrobothnia, which every one knows is false: and the
very vulgar can tell so much, that the Bothnic Sea comes not any where within
18 or 20 miles of Lapland: tho this ought not to pass beyond Damianus's time,
since Nieurenius himself confesses in another place, that the Laplanders had
their feat about the Bothnic Sea, but that afterward they were driven out, of
which I shall speak hereafter. I will only add here a Table of the latitudes
and longitudes of the chiefest Places, as they were taken by M. Aronis Forsius
and Hieronymus Birckholten Ann. 1600.

Longit. Latit. Uma 38, 0. 65, 11. Pitha 40, 0. 66, 14. Lula 40, 30. 66, 30.
Toerna 42, 27. 67, 0. Kimi 42, 20. 67, 1. Lappijaerf 42, 33. 70, 9. Antoware
44, 4. 70, 26. Tenokijle 46, 0. 70, 50. Porsanger 44, 2. 71, 42. Porsanger 43,
35. 71, 35. Lingen 37, 30. 70, 30. Traenees 32, 30. 70, 25. Euvenes 33, 35. 70,
0. Titisare 37, 55. 69, 40. Piala 41, 40. 60, 15. Siguar 38, 35. 68, 59.
Tingwar 38, 0. 69, 40. Rounula 39, 30. 69, 47. Kontokrine 42, 0. 69, 17.
Waranger 45, 0. 71, 35. Lanzoard 45, 35. 71, 26. Hwalsund 42, 40. 71, 12.
Skrisae 38, 50. 71, 18. Trumsae 35, 52. 70, 55. Andaces 32, 0. 70, 30. Serghen
32, 20. 69, 3. Wardhus 52, 0. 71, 55. Norkaap. 45, 30. 72, 30.

I proceed next to the disposition and nature of the Country, having first
given you a Map of it.

CHAP. III. Of the temperature of the Air, and soil of Lapland.
WE have seen how Lapland is situate; let us next proceed to other
particularities of it. That it is very near the Pole appears from its latitude,
insomuch that for some months in the Summer the Sun here never sets, and on the
contrary in the Winter it never rises; which Herbersten says is but forty days,
and tho three hours in the night the body of it is something darkened, so that
his rays appear not, yet there is so much light, that they continue their work
all the while. Indeed the same account is not to be taken of the whole Country,
since part of it lies nearer, and part further distant from the Pole; and of
these too some parts are more East, and some more to the West, from whence it is
that with some of them the Sun is scarce above the Horizon for so many days as
he pretends. And although in the Summer it never sets and goes below the Earth,
yet neither does it rise much above it, but as it were kisses and gently glides
along the Horizon for the most part; as likewise in the Winter when lowest it
is not much beneath it: which is the reason that tho they have one continued
night for some months, yet every day the Sun comes so near, that it makes a
kind of twilight. Joh. Magnus says that in the absence of the Sun there are
two twilights, one in the morning, the other in the evening, in which those
poor remainders of day provide that the night should not be utterly
destructive. And by how much the Sun is farther absent, the light of the Moon
is clearer. Hence Petr. Claud. says that when the Moon shines they go a
fishing, and dispatch all other necessaries that are to be done without doors;
and when it does not, if the air be clear, even the light of the Stars so much
abates the darkness, that the horror of the night is much lessened, and there
is light enough for the dispatch of several businesses, which is farther
assisted by the whiteness of the Snow. The Air of Lapland is cold, but fresh
and clear, and consequently very wholesome, being much purified by the winds
which are here very frequent and violent. It has bin attested to me by
eyewitnesses, that there rises a certain wind out of the Sea, which beginning
to blow raises presently such thick and dark clouds even in the midst of
Summer, that they utterly hinder the sight, and in the Winter drives the snow
with such force and quantity, that if any person be surprised abroad, he has
no other remedy but to throw himself on the ground with some garment over him,
suffering himself to be quite buried in snow till the storm is past, which don,
he rises up, and betakes himself to the next Cortage he can meet, all paths and
roads being hid in the snow. But the strongest and most irresistible winds are
upon the Mountains, where they throw down all things they meet with, and carry
them away by their violence into far distant places, where they are never seen
or heard of afterward. Their only help against these is to convey themselves
into dens and caves. Here is rain as in other places, sometimes more, and
sometimes less, but in the midst of Summer, this as likewise the neighboring
Countries have very seldom any at all. Snow they have more often, and so much
that in the Winter it covers all the Country, of which they make this
advantage, that they can travel the more securely in the night; for the light
of the Moon reflected from the snow, enlightens all the fields, that they can
discern and avoid any pits, precipices and wild Beasts, that would otherwise
annoy them: so convenient are the ways for any journey, that two rein deer will
draw a greater load over the trodden snow, then a Cart and ten Horses can in
the fields at other times. These snows in some places, as on the tops of their
highest hills, remain perpetually, and are never melted by the strongest heat
of the Sun. In the upper part of Lapland there are Mountains rising to such a
vast hight, that the snow continues upon them Summer and Winter, and is never
dissolved, but in other places the Land is every year overflown with floods of
melted snow. They have also very great frosts and mists, and good store of
them, which sometimes so thicken the air, that the sight is quite obstructed,
and Passengers cannot distinguish one man from another to salute or avoid him,
tho he be come close up to them. It is so extreme cold here in the Winter, that
it is not to be endured but by those who have bin bred up in it. The swiftest
Rivers are sometimes frozen so hard, that the ice is more than three or four
cubits thick; and their greatest Lakes and deepest Seas bear any burdens
whatever. Nor is the Summer, which to some may seem incredible, more moderately
hot. For tho the Sun be very low, and his rays oblique, yet lying upon them so
long together, their force is strangely increast; the only allay being from the
vapors rising out of the neighboring Sea, and from the snows, which as well in
Summer as Winter continue undissolv'd in hollow places between the hills. As
for Spring and Autumn they know neither, there being so very little space
between the extremity of cold in the Winter, and heat in Summer, that by
Strangers it is looked upon as a miracle to see every thing springing fresh and
green, when but a week before all things were overwhelmed with frost and snow.
Ol. Petr. Nieuren. has observed it as a memorable thing, and which he would not
have believed from any one had he not seen it himself, that in the year 1616,
June 24, going to the Church of Thor, he saw the trees budding, and the grass
coming up green out of the ground, and within a fortnight after he saw the
Plants full blown, and the leaves of the trees at their perfection, as if they
had known how short the Summer was to be, and therefore made such have to enjoy
it. Their soil is generally neither very fertile nor barren, but between both,
full of flints, stones and rocks, every where appearing high, by whose
unevenness and roughness the rest of the ground about is useless. The ground is
generally very soft and slabby, by reason of the many Lakes and Rivers
overslowing, yet would it be sit either for tillage or pasture if any would be
at the pains and charge of draining it. Ol. Petrus says of the Southern part,
lying under the same climate and influence of the Heavens with Bothnia, that
it is as apt to bear any grain as the Western Bothnia it self, but this is not
without a concurrence and aptitude likewise of the soil: and he himself
confesses in Chap. 12th, that the Land is stony, sandy, uneven, overrun in some
places with briars and thorns, and in others nothing but hills; moors, fennes
and standing waters, which are not the qualities that usually commend Land for
agriculture. Then as to his urging its verdant and rich pastures, it does not
follow that all Land which yields much grass should be equally capable of
bearing good corn. Yet does the Land afford plenty of grass, and that so good
that their Cattle are fatned much cheaper and sooner with it than any other
thing, as also diverse herbs, but particularly it is happy in all kind of
pot-hearbs. There are many large Woods and Forests, especially toward Norway,
but not very thick; likewise steep rocks and high mountains called Doffrini;
upon whose naked tops, by reason of the violence of the winds to which they are
exposed, never yet grew tree. Below these hills lie most pleasant Valleys, in
which are clear fountains and rivulets innumerable, which emtying themselves
into the rivers, at length are carried into the Bothnic Sea. Their water is
clear, sweet and wholesome, only their Forests abound with stinking and
standing Pools. This Country Winter and Summer has an incredible number of all
kinds of wild beasts, especially the lesser sorts, which suffice not only for
their own use, but to drive a great trade with their neighbors. They have
Birds also of all sorts very many, but Fish in such abundance that a great part
of the Natives are entirely fed by them. But of all these we shall speak in
their proper places, I will add no more here but this, that the Description of
old Finland or Scritofinnia by the Ancients is the same which has bin given
here of Lapland; to confirm what I said before that these Countries differ only
in name, and not in nature and situation. We come now to its Division.

CHAP. IV. Of the Division of Lapland.
THoSE who have writ of Lapland, mention disserent divisions of it. Saxo in his
5th Book, and elsewhere, speaks of two Laplands, and after him Johannes Magnus
tells us, that both the Laplands are joined together Southward. I suppose in
that division they had respect to their situation, and meant the Eastern and
the Western Lapland: for so Damianus Goes, who seems to borrow from Joh.
Magnus, expresses it. Lapland, says he, is divided into the Eastern and the
Western, separated from each other by the Bothnic Sea. From whence we may
gather that that part of the Country which lies on one side of the Bothnia, was
called the Eastern Lapland, and that which lies on the other, the Western.

Besides this division of Lapland, there is another taken from the places most
frequented by the Inhabitants. For one part thereof, lying along the Coasts of
the Ocean, is from thence called Sioefindmarken, that is the maritime Lapland;
the other lying higher on the Continent, Fioeldmarken, that is, inland Lapland:
tho by some they are called simply Findmarken and Lappmarken. This last
division Pet. Claud gives us in his 27th Chapter. All the Sea Coasts, says he,
Northward and Eastward as far as Findmarkia reaches, are possessed by the
Siaefinni, or maritime Finlanders, but the mountainous and champaign Country,
by the Lapfinni, from thence named Lapmarkia or Wildfindlandia, that is wild or
savage Findland. Where he calls one part of the Country Lapmarckia, the other
Findmarckia, the one lying along the shore, and bordering on the Sea, the other
mountainous, woody, and savage, upon the Terra firma. And this too may be worth
our notice, that Wildfinland with him is that which others call Lappmarkia: I
suppose, because the Natives live by hunting, as those of the other do by
fishing. For he presently adds, There are many thousands in that place that
feed on nothing but the flesh of wild Beasts. And indeed some there are with
whom those only pass for the true Laplanders: as Samuel Rheen, who in his 2d
Chapter of his forementioned Book, tells us, that besides the Scrickfinni (so
he calls them that with Pet. Claud. are Sioefinnes) there are other true
Laplanders, that live on nothing but rain deer. And so from the Natives feeding
on wild Beasts, Lapland properly so called, is also styled Wildfindland, in
opposition to Findmarkia, whose Inhabitants live both on Fish and Cattle. And
yet there may be given another reason for the imposition of this name, from the
many woods of that Country. Olaus Magnus in more places then one calls the
natives, men that dwell in woods, or Savages: as in the title of his 3d Chapt.
of his 4th Book, which is, Concerning the fierceness of the Savages, or those
that dwell in woods, in which Chapter he describes the Laplanders. And in the
following Chapter he says, that the wild Laplanders are clothed with rich skins
of several Beasts. The Baron Herberstenius also in his History of Moscovy,
calls them Savage Laplanders, who tho they dwell, says he, on the Sea Coast in
little Cottages, and lead a brutish kind of life, are yet more civilized then
the Savages of Lapland: whence it is plain, that by the Findlanders living near
the Sea, he means those that others call Sioefinnes, and by the Savage
Laplanders those that possess the inland Country, who he thinks were so called
from their wildness and barbarity. And by and by he adds, that by converse with
Strangers, who come thither to trade, they begin to lay aside their Savage
nature, and become a little more civilized. Afterward he calls them Diki
Loppi, which name the Moscovites give them at this time, as has been showed
elsewhere.

There is also a 3d Division of Lapland, that respects the several Princes to
whom the Country is in subjection. And this Andr. Buraeus intends, when he
tells us, The greatest part of Lapland, viz. the Southern and inland Country,
belongs all to the Kingdom of Sweden: The maritime tract, that lies on the
Ocean, and is called Findmark (whose Inhabitants the Sioefinni, or maritime
Findlanders, are so named from their living by fishing) to Norway: The rest of
them that dwell from the Castle of Warhuus to the mouth of the white Sea, are
subject to the Russians; which part the Swedes call Trennes, the Natives
Pyhinienni, and the Russians Tarchana voloch. Of their subjection to these
several Princes, we shall speak when we come to treat of their Government; and
also of those parts that belong to Norway or Denmark, and Russia. At present we
shall only mention the division of that part which is under the Swedes, and is
named by Buraeus, the Southern and inland Lapland, and by Petr. Claud.
Lappmarkia properly so called. This is divided into six lesser parts called
marker, or lands, tho Buraeus chooses to render them Territories or Provinces.
Each of these have their distinct names, and are called Aongermandlandslapmark,
Vmalappmark, Pithalappmark, Lulalapmark, Tornalapmark, Kiemilapmark. So Samuel
Rheen in his first Chapter, That part of Lapland which belongs to Sweden is
divided into the Kiemensian, Tornensian, Lulensian, Pithensian, Umensian, and
Angermanlandensian Lapmark. Buraeus mentions but five of these Provinces, viz.
Vmalappmark, Pithalappmark, Lulalapmark, Tornelapmark, and Kimilapmark,
comprehending Angermandlandslapmark under Vmalapmark, not that they are one and
the same Province, but because they are both governed by one Lieutenant. Each
of these Provinces take their name from Rivers that run through the midst of them,
as Wexionius in his description of Swedland assures us. As for their situation,
Angermanlandslapmark borders upon Andermannia and Jemtia, to this joins
Vmalapmark, next to that is Pithalapmark, and then Lulelapmark, all of them
lying Westward, reaching on one side to that ridg of Hills that divides
Swedland from Norway, and on the other side to the Western Bothnia. Northward
of them lies Tornelapmark, and extends it self from the fartheh corner of the
Bay of Bothnia all along the North Sea, called by Seamen Cape Noort. Next to
this lies Kimilapmark, winding from the North toward the East, and bounded on
one side by the Eastern Bothnia, on another side by that part of Lapland that
belongs to Russia, and on a third side by Cajania and Carelia.

Moreover these Provinces we are speaking of, are subdivided into lesser parts,
called by the Swedes Byar, as Samuel Rheen tells us, and are equivavalent to
our Shires, and the Pagi of the Ancients. So in Caesar we meet with Pagus
Tigurinus, and Pagi Suevorum, which were not Villages or Country Towns, but
large parts of a Country, such as the Greeks called (...), used in ancient
times in the division of Egypt. Hence the Glossary renders the ancient
Toparchiae, Pagus, (...). There are several of these Pagi or Shires in each
Province, except Angermanlandslapmark, which makes but one Pagus, vulgarly
called Aosahla. Vmalapmark has four, Vma, Lais or Raanby, Granby, and
Vapsteen. Pithalapmark seven, Graotreskby, Arfwejerfsby, Lochteby,
Arrieplogsby, Wisierfby, Norrvesterby, Westerby. Lulalapmark five, Jochmoch,
Sochjoch, Torpinjaur, Zerkislocht, and Rautomjaur. Tornelapmark eight,
Tingawaara, Siggewaara, Sondewara, Ronolaby, Pellejerf, Kiedkajerf, Manstalka,
Saodankyla, Kithilaby. So that all the Territories or Provinces are divided
into 33 Byars. In each of these there are several Clans or Families, which the
Swedes call raekar, each of which have a certain allotment of ground assigned
them for the maintenance of themselves and their Cattle; not in the nature of a
Country Farm with us, but of a very great length and breadth, so as to include
Rivers, Lakes, Woods, and the like, which all belong to one Clan or family. In
every Biar there are as many allotments as there are families that can live of
themselves, and are not forced by poverty to serve others. In the Byar called
Aosahla there are about 30 of these Clans, or families, in others more or less
according as they are in bigness, which all have their several names, tho it is
not worth while to repeat them. And thus much shall suffice of the third
division of Lapland, not lately made (except that under Charles IX some Clans
had certain allotments assigned them) but derived from very ancient time; as
appears from hence that neither the Laplanders have known, nor the Swedes given
them any other, since the Country has bin under their subjection. Nor are the
words modern, or taken from any thing that may give any cause to suspect them
of novelty: which I the rather observe, that from hence the native simplicity,
agreeable to the antiquity of the Nation, may appear.

CHAP. V. Of the Laplanders in reference to the inclinations, temper and habit,
of their minds and bodies.
IT is almost peculiar to this People to be all of them of low stature, which
is attested by the general suffrage of those Writers who have described this
Country. Hence the learned Isaac Vossius observes, that Pygmies are said to
inhabit here; and adds that they are a deformed People: but in truth their
feature and proportion is good enough, and that they are not distorted
sufficiently appears from their great agility of body, and fitness for active
emploiment. Nor need we dispute of this, since in Sweden, we see them every day
among us, and can observe no defect in any kind, or deformity, by Lomenius
unjustly ascribed to them. Ol. Mag. and Tornaeus esteem their young women
indifferently handsome, and of a clear skin, which I have often seen my self;
for they take great care to preserve their natural beauty, which the men
neglect to do: and therefore if they are less amiable then the other Sex, it is
to be imputed to their choice, not nature. To which we may add the length of
their frosts, and the bitterness of the Air, against which they neither arm
themselves sufficiently with clothes, nor know how to do so: besides the smoke
which continually fills their cottages empairs very much their natural
complexion, which is the reason why most of the men also are so swarthy. And as
they are generally short, they are also very lean, and it is rare to see a fat
man amongst them, for the cold that prevents their growing tall, dries up
likewise their moisture, and makes them apt to be slender. They are also very
light in respect of their bulk and stature, which comes from their not eating
any Salt, if we will believe Ol. Petr. And thus much may be said in general of
the frame and condition of their bodies. As for their particular parts they
have thick heads, prominent foreheads, hollow and blear eyes, short flat noses,
and wide mouths. Their hair is thin, short and flaggy, their beard straggling,
and scarce covers their chins. The hair of both Sexes is generally black and
hard, very seldom yellow, their breasts broad, slender wastes, spindle shanks,
and swift of foot. They are very strong in their limbs, so that in a bow which
a Norwegian can scarce half bend, they will draw an arrow up to the head. Their
strength is accompanied with such activity withal, that with their bows and
quivers at their backs they will throw themselves through a hoop of but a cubit in
diameter. But this seems to be spoken only of some Tumblers, for the People are
generally ignorant of such sports; their usual exercises being running races,
climbing inaccessible rocks and high trees. Tho they are thus nimble and
strong, yet they never go upright, but stooping, which habit they get by
frequent sitting in their cottages on the ground.

We come now to the habits of their mind, in which it is first observable that
they are much given to superstition, which is no wonder while they live in
Woods among wild Beasts, and maintain little correspondence one with another:
but of their superstition we shall treat elsewhere. Furthermore they are beyond
all imagination fearful and mean spirited, being frighted at the very sight of
a strange man, or ship; above all things dreading War: the reason of all this
being the cold to which they are condemned, and the meanness of their diet,
which cannot supply good blood and spirits; wherefore they are useless in war,
and the Swedes who raise men in all the other Provinces, find none in this, as
it appears from the ancient Records and Catalogues of all the Soldiers that
ever were listed by former Kings. So that it is fictitious, and rather an abuse
than history, which some have reported, that Gust. Adolphus had several
Companies of Laplanders in his Armies; but they were forced to find out some
excuse for those many defeats, which to the wonder of the World that most
victorious Prince gave his powerful and numerous Enemies; and pretend that
those Victories were obtained by the help of the Laplanders and Magic.
Wherefore I conclude as I said before, that this opinion is absurd and
contradictory, not only to the nature of the People, but to public testimonies
and writings. To which we may add that they cannot well live out of their own
Country, but fall into diseases and die, being no more able to endure a milder
air, or feed upon salt, bread, and boiled meats, than we could upon their raw
flesh and fish dried by the Sun: for it has bin often found by experience that
they are hardly temted by any reward to come even into these parts, or if they
do they die suddenly afterward, much less would they be induced to march into
any more remote Countries. Olaus Magnus gives us an instance of six Rain-deers
sent to Frederick Duke of Holsatia by Steno Sture junior Prince of Swedland,
with two Laplanders, a man and woman to be their keepers, and that both they
and the beasts wanting their accustomed manner of living, died all together in
a short time. Ziegler indeed on the other side says they are a valiant People,
and that they were a long time free, resisting the Arms both of Norway and
Swedland; and Scaliger after him says that against their enemies they were
courageous: and Petr. Claud. reports they had a King of their own called Motle,
and that Haraldus Pulcricomus, tho he had conquered the Countries round about,
could not subdue them; but all this does not evince their courage: for
whatsoever is said of this Prince Motle is nothing at all to the purpose, being
all taken out of the history of Snorro, which speaking of Motle, and something
of his skill in Magic, has not a word of his or his Peoples courage. And it is
manifest that Ziegler could have no ground for what he said, unless from such
histories as that of Snorro, which therefore only seemed true because there
were none extant more likely; for in his time the Laplanders were subject to
the Swedes: unless we had rather believe that he took the Laplanders and the
Biarmians to be the same, ascribing to the one People, what was said of the
other. There is indeed mention in Saxo, of several Wars of the Biarmians, but
those not managed by courage, but Magic and Enchantments: so that it no way
follows, that because they continued for many Ages a free People, that
therefore they were valiant. But whatever becomes of the Biarmians, it is sure
enough that the Laplanders are far from being stout or warlike, who must first
fight against their nature, before they can resist an enemy. Besides their
innate cowardice, they are strangely prone to suspicion and jealousy, being
conscious of their own weakness, and so exposed to all attemts upon them: a
consequent whereof is that they are also revengefull; endeavoring to prevent
those mischeifs which upon the slightest occasions seem to threaten them, by
the death and ruin of the Persons that caused their suspicion, helping
themselves herein, by conjuration and magic. Of this Pet. Claud. gives us a
memorable instance, in one, that having attemted to mischief his enemy, who was
secured by countercharms, after long attendance surpised him asleep under a
great stone, which by a spell he made break to pieces, and kill him. The women,
especially when grown old, cannot brook any sudden provocation, but upon the
least indignity offered fly out into passion, and are hurried to the most wild
transports that madness can dictate. The Laplanders besides are very notorious
cheats, and industrious to overreach each other in bargaining: tho heretofore
they had the reputation of plain dealing and honesty. So that it is probable
that they took up their present practice, having bin first cheated by those
Strangers with whom they dealt, and now think it best to be before hand with
one another. It is farther observable that they take great pleasure, if they
happen to outwit any one; imagining that tho they are hopeless to overcome by
manhood and courage, they have a nobler triumph over the minds of those whom
they circumvent. They are also noted to be of a censorious and detracting
humor, so as to make it a chief ingredient of their familiar converse, to
reproach and despise others: and this they do especially to Strangers, of what
Country soever. So fond admirers are all men of themselves, that even the
Laplanders will not exchange their interests with the Inhabitants of the most
happy Climate, and however barbarous they are, doubt not to prefer themselves
in point of wisdom, to those that are most ingenuously educated in Arts and
Letters. They are likewise exceedingly covetous, it being a part of their
cowardice to dread poverty; yet are they very lazy withal: and hereupon Olaus
Peter's observes, that tho their Country in several parts of it be capable of
emprovement by husbandry, yet it is suffered to lie wast: nay so unwilling are
they to take pains, that till they are compelled by necessity, they hardly
persuade themselves to hunt or fish. From this their covetousness and sloth
arises an ill consequent, their undutifulness to their Parents when grown old;
not only to contemn and neglect, but even hate and abhor them; thinking it
either long before they possess what they have, or thinking it grievous to
provide for those from whom they can hope for no advantage.

Their last good quality is their immoderate lust, which Herberstein takes to
be the more strange, considering their diet, that they have neither bread nor
salt, nor any other incentive of gluttony: but their promiscuous and continual
lying together in the same Hut, without any difference of age, sex, or
condition, seems to occasion this effect. Tornaeus indeed says of his
Countrymen, the Lappi Tornenses, who possibly are reclaimed by more civil
education, that they are very chaste, insomuch that among them scarce one
bastard is Christened in a whole year, which is the less to be wondered at, the
women being naturally barren.

Having given this account of the Laplanders ill qualities, it will now be
justice to recount their virtues, as first their veneration and due esteem of
Marriage, which they more seldom violate, then many who pretend to be much
better Christians. They also abhor theft; so that the Merchants only cover
their goods so as to secure them against the weather, when they have occasion
to leave them, and at their return are sure to find them safe, and untoucht;
which is the more commendable, for that in Lapland there are no Towns, or
storehouses, and no man could be sure of any thing, if the People were
inclined to thievery. They are likewise (those I mean of the better sort)
charitable to the poor, not only by receiving those that are destitute into
their Huts; but supplying them with stock whereon to live. In proof of this
Tornaeus and Sam. Rheen, say that it is usual with them to lend gratis, for a
considerable time, ten or twenty Rain-deers. Farther they are civil and
hospitable to Strangers, whom they with much kindness invite to their Huts, and
there treat with the best provisions they have. And of this there are several
instances, when any have happened to be cast upon their Coast by shipwreck, or
else in the snow, or on the mountains have lost their way. Moreover they are
thus far cleanly as often to wash their hands and face; tho notwithstanding
Tornaeus tells us, they are nasty and scabby, and use not to comb their heads.
Lastly they are sufficiently ingenious, making for themselves all sorts of
tools and implements for their fishing and hunting; and also for several
manufactures, some of which they do very artificially, as shall be shown
hereafter in its proper place.

CHAP. VI. Of the Original of the Laplanders.
WE have intimated our conjecture concerning the original of the Laps, and
more then that it will be hard to produce, there being no sober history which
gives testimony in this affair. Negatively we may pass sentence, and conclude
they were not Swedes, no People differing more both in constitution of body and
mind, in language and habit, or whatever else is taken for a character of
likeness, or having the same original. Neither can any one think that they
were ever Russians or Moscovites; seeing they differ as much from them, as from
the Swedes. The Russians are generally tall, the Laplanders on the contrary
very short; those are fat and corpulent, these lean and slender; those have
thick hair, long beards, and good complexions, these wear their hair short and
thin, and are dark and swarthy. But most of all the language is different, in
which the Laps and Russes have in a manner no kind of agreement. They must then
come from their Neighbors, either the Norwegians on the one side, or the
Finlanders upon the other. But they could not well be derived from Norway, who
are known to have drawn their original from the Swedes.

It remains therefore that they came from the Finlanders, who have a certain
division or allotment called Lappio. But tho we have showed that the name and
original of this Nation is not taken thence, it is not to be doubted that they
are of the race of the Finlanders and Samojedes, and this is the opinion of
most learned men, which may be farther proved by many arguments. First the name
of both Nations is the same, the Laplanders in their own language being called
Sabmi or Same, and the Finlanders Suoni, which two differ only in the Dialect;
and there is a tradition that they had both the same Founder Jumi, who could
not well have bin the Author of diverse Nations. We may also observe that their
languages have much affinity, tho they be not the very same, as shall be proved
at large in a particular Chapter. The Finlanders call God, Jumala, the
Laplanders, Jubmal, the Finlanders fire, Tuli, the Laplanders Toll; they call
a hill Wuori, these Warra, and so they agree in many other words. Besides they
have bodies and habits alike, both their limbs well set, black hair, broad
faces, and stern countenances, and whatever else they have different is very
small, or may easily proceed from their diet or Clime, in which they live.
Their clothes too are not much unlike; for if we compare the Picture of an
ancient Finlander, depiction of a man holding a spear as it still remains in
the Church of Storekyr in Ostrobothnia, where the slaughter of Bishop Henry was
drawn at large, with mine of a Laplander in Chapt. XVII. it. will appear there
is no great difference between them. Lastly they agree in disposition and
humor: they are both much given to laziness at home, unless when necessity
urges them to work; both, unmovable from their purpose, both superstitious and
lovers of Magic. And therefore Ol. Magn. says of them both, that they were so
skillful Magicians in the time of their Paganism as if they had had Zoroaster
himself for their teacher. In a word whatever Tacitus says of the Finlanders,
now holds true of the Laplanders, that they have neither weapons, horses, nor
household gods, they live upon herbs, are clothed with skins, lie upon the
ground, putting all their confidence in arrows, which they head with bones for
want of iron. Both the men and women support themselves by hunting, and they
have no other defense for their Children against the violence of wild beasts or
weather, but Huts or hurdles, which are the security of the old men as well as
young. And the same Description which Saxo gives of these, belongs as well to
the Laplanders, that they are the farthest People toward the North, living in
a Clime almost inhabitable, good archers and hunters, wanderers, and of an
uncertain habitations, wheresoever they kill a beast making that their mansion,
and they slide upon the snow in broad wooden shoes. Besides all this, the
Norwegians and Danes call the Laplanders, Fenni, as may be seen in Petr. Claud.
where he divides the Finlanders into Siofinnar, i. e. maritime Finlanders, and
Lappefinner, i. e. Lappfinlanders, the same with the Laplanders. This may be
collected too from the Russians calling them not only Loppi, but Eajienni, the
original of which name can be no other but that they esteem them to be the
Cajani, of which name there is a Province now in Finland called Cajania the
great.

But here some imagine that the Laplanders came not in probability from the
Finlanders, because the one are very warlike, the other cowards, these fat and
corpulent, those lean and meager. But this does not at all invalidate our
arguments; for every one knows that diet will much alter the habit of the body,
and the Finlanders have plenty of good nurishing meats, of which the Laplanders
are quite destitute. And for the Finlanders courage in war, heretofore they
were not so notable for it, for Tacitus says they had neither arms nor horses,
by which he implies they knew not at all what belonged to war. Neither are they
very expert at it yet, for by daily experience it is found when they are likely
to be pressed for Soldiers they hide themselves, and by all means decline
employment, therefore they are not warlike from their nature, but from their
discipline and arts, and in their natural temper they differ not much from the
Laplanders. But what need we go about to prove this by so many arguments, when
they confess themselves they are originally sprung from the Finlanders, and
still keep a list of the Captains that first led them forth into Lapland, of
whom Mieschogiesch is the chief. The same is confirmed by Andr. Andresonius who
lived there, and learned it from them, only that he said Thins kogreh was the
chief Captain, and so does Zachar. Plantin. But whatever is said of either of
these two Captains, we are not to imagine that they brought the first
Plantation of Laplanders into this Country, for it is not probable they should
so long remember their names, who must have lived before Saxo, for he mentions
this Country, and lived about 480 years before us, at which time the Finlanders
themselves scarce know what was done, much less the Laplanders. And this the
name Thinns, does something prove, which none shall persuade me to be an old
Finland word, for it is the same with the Swedes Thinnis, and the Dutch
Thinius, i. e. Antonius, and that the word Antonius was known to the Finlanders
before Christ no man will suspect. The same may be said concerning the
pretended occasion of the Colony of Finlanders settling in Lapland; for they
themselves say, that they left Brokarla and Rengoarvis, because they were
oppressed with taxes and pitched first in a wood in Ostrobothnia called Tavastia
near the Bodic bay. But all this, as has bin showed the very name of Lappi,
which signifies banished persons, sufficiently confutes. Plantin and Peter
Nieuren, pretend that though the Laplanders voluntarily removed to Tavastia,
they were forced to their present habitation: for the Natives of Tavastia,
grieved to see them in a flourishing condition, wearing rich clothes, fareing
deliciously, and abounding in all manner of wealth, chose them a Captain called
Matthias Kurk, and with a great number invaded their quarters, killing and
plundering all they met with, nor desisting till they had quite drove them as
far as the Rivers Kimi and Torn: and not long after perceiving they lived too
happily there, they set upon them the second time, dealing so cruelly with
them, that leaving their Cattle they were forced to fly into those barren
Countries they now inhabit, carrying with them only their nets. Plantin. adds
further that Andr. Andresonius affirms he saw some ancient letters, in which
mention was made of Kurk a Governor of the Laplanders: but as for his other
name of Matthias, it is plain it was postnate to Christianity, since which time
if we should imagine the Laplanders first to have come into these parts, we
must also suppose the Country to have bin till then uninhabited, whereas we
have all reason to believe that the Biarmi and Scridfinni lived here before
Christ, the latter of which seem by their name to have bin only a Colony sent
out of Finland: and mention is made of Finlanders in these parts in the time of
Harald the fair, or Harfager King of Norway, and his Son Ericus Bodsexe, who
lived long before the times of Christianity, and went down into Finmark and
Biarmia, and obtained a great victory over them. Now if he went by Sea
Northwards of Norway to come to Finmark, Finmark then must have bin near
Norway, as lying North of it near the Sea, that is the same Country that is now
named Finmark, which because then inhabited by Finlanders, as appears by the
name, it is not to be believed that it was first possess't by the Laplanders
that were drove out of South-Bothnia by Matthias Kurk. Neither are they called
Lappi from being driven out then, for they were so called in Saxo's time, and
there is little reason to believe that Matthias Kurk's expedition was before
him, especially from that inscription which mentions Kurk, since that in those
times they knew not so much of writing as to record any thing in it.

Wherefore we must find out some better authority to confirm to us the
original of the Lapps, for we may believe that the Finlanders more then once
marched out into Lapland, which is evident from the several names of their
leaders, whom some called Thinns-Kogre, others Mieschogiesche. The first and
most ancient is that from whence the Biarmi took their original, whom I
conclude to have descended from the Finlanders, from calling their Gods by
Finlandish names. Besides in their nature and manners they agree with the
ancient Finlanders: and lastly are called by all Strangers Scridfinni, i. e.
Finlanders going upon frozen snow, which, the ancient knowing none else to go
so, took to be the Biarmi. But the name of Biarmi was given them by the
Finlanders from their going to dwell upon the Mountains, from the word Varama,
which signifies a hilly Country: now because Strangers knew from the Swedes
they used wooden shoes to go upon the snow, which by the Swedes are called At
Skrlida, not knowing the name Biarmi, they called them Scridfinni: and because
the Finlanders and Biarmians were of the same original, they were often
subject to the same Prince, as to Cuso in King Holters time. What the occasion
was of this leaving their Country is yet doubtful, except it was for fear of
the Swedes, who in the reign of King Agnus invaded Froste King of Finland, and
harassed the whole Country. The second time of deserting their Country was when
the Russians enlarged their Empire as far as the lake Ladog. For fearing the
cruelty of these People they retired into Lapland: which I am apt to believe
because the Russians call them Kienni, as has bin said before from their
passage through Kajania into Lapland, which they could not have known but by
their own experience; and their wars with them, especially those of Carelia and
Cajania being so ignorant both in history and other Countries, that they scarce
know any thing of their own, that is of any antiquity. And this proves what we
said of their second leaving their Country, which was about the 6th age after
Christ: and these perhaps are they which are simply called Finni by the Danes,
Swedes, and Norwegians, or with the addition of Siae or Field, obsolete words
of the Biarmians, because they were more then they in number, especially after
Harald Harfiger King of Norway, who almost destroyed all the Biarmi in battle.
In the mean while the Finlanders lay secure in Finmark, and all the Biarmi
being extinct, the name of Finni obtained, and the name and credit of the
Biarmi was quite abolish't and forgot. And these are all the times they left
their Country before they were called Lappi, for till after this they were
never called otherwise than Finni, Scritofinni, and Biarmi. But in after ages
we find them named Lappones, of whom Adam. Bremensis makes no mention who lived
in 1077, but Saxo does, that lived in 1200; and therefore it is probable that in
that intervall of time, after they were called Lappones, they made their third
migration. But any one that will examine the histories of that time, will
scarce find any thing that should move the Finlanders to leave their Country,
as Ericus Sanctus has made it appear in that Expedition in which he brought
them under the Swedish Government, and planted among them the Christian
Religion, which he made in the year 1150, when no small number of them the
third time seem to have deserted their Country, and gone into Lapland. And the
reason is plain, having bin subject'd to Strangers, and forced to be of a
Religion different from that of their Ancestors, which thereupon was hateful
to them, and therefore no wonder some of them sought out a place where they
might live free: which is as good a reason too why they were called Lapps by
those that stayed, for they submitting to the Swedes, and embracing
Christianity, looked upon them as desertors of their Country, whom fear only of
a good Government, and better Religion, had made exiles, especially when the
King had put forth an Edict that all should be accounted banished that would
not renounce Pagan Superstition; therefore they were justly called Lappi, and
care not to hear of the name to this day.

And this is my opinion of their original and migrations, out of which I shall
not be persuaded by those learned men who believe they rather came from the
Tartars, for we never read of any of them going into the North Moreover the
Tartars live altogether by war and plunder, whereas the Laplanders live by
hunting and grasing, abhorring nothing more than war. Besides the chief delight
of the Tartars is in having many stately Horses, of which the Lapps are so
ignorant, that in their whole language they have not a word to signify an
Horse: the language also of the two Nations is so different that one cannot
possibly be derived from the other. And although some learned men, who pretend
they understood both languages of Finland and Lapland, considently aver that
they are altogether diverse: yet it will be easy to produce diverse men as well
skilled in them, as they that say the contrary. Besides it is no consequence
because there are a few differences between the Finland and Lapland languages,
that they are therefore utterly diverse, when this disagreeing may rather
proceed from the length of time than any diversity of the Tongues at first, as
we find now many Swedish words that do not at all agree with those now in
vogue, which yet do not constitute a new language. And their saying the
Laplanders could not come from the Finlanders, because they always hated one
another, is of little force, when the reasons of their hatred are enough
explained already. But it signifies less that the Finlanders have several
Customs and Manners not in use among the Laplanders, as the way of building
houses, etc. for these were to accommodate themselves to the nature of the
place whither they came, and to forget those things which would not be of any
use to them. And moreover, there remains still a memorial of those that came
out of Finland, where they first sat down in the woods of Tavastia, near a
Lake which they call Lappiakairo, that is the Fountain of the Laplanders, who
when their necessary food grew scarce, went further up into the Deserts, and
the Finlanders pursuing them in Tavastia, they retreat'd to the Bothnic bay,
where they might be more safe, and have more conveniences for living: and this
is that migration yet in memory which Plantin. speaks of, viz. that the
Laplanders lived here for an age, or more, till the time of King Magn.
Ladulaos, An. 1272, who to get them under his subjection, promised any one that
could effect it, the Government of them, which the Birkarli, i. e. those that
lived in the allotment or division of Birkala, undertook; and having for a
great while cunningly insinuated themselves into them, under a pretense of
friendship, at last set upon them unawares, and quite subdued them. But before
this they were infested by the Tavasti under the command of Kurk, which if we
would strictly examine, we should find it of later date than about Christ's
time, contrary to some men's opinions. As it happens in things that are taken
upon trust, the Laplanders confound the more modern with the ancient, making
but one history of all that happened in the distinct times of Ericus Sanctus,
Magnus Ladulaos, with some other Kings before and after, and that so confused
and lame, that it is hard for any one to understand it. Ol. Petr. mentions at
large one Matthias, Captain of the Finlanders, when they subdued and drove out
the Laplanders into the furthest and most desolate place of the North, whom
some think to be a noble Family of the Kurks in Finland, and that he ceased
not, by frequent inrodes upon them, to molest them, till they promised to pay
him yearly tribute, which he at length weary of the long and tedious journey
exchanged with some of Birkarla in Tavastia for a part of Finland, whence
followed what is most true, that the Laplanders to the year 1554 paid annual
tribute to the Birkarli, besides whom it was not lawful for any others to
trade with them. There are those now living who say they have seen the letters
and conditions of the Kurks kept in Ersnees, an allotment of Lulalapmark, by
one Jo. Nilson. Which things are so far from being immediately after the birth
of Christ, that they may be reasonably thought to have bin since Mag. Ladulaos,
unless we can imagine that Ol. Petr. by his Tavasti and Buraeus by Birkarli
meant the same people, since there were other Birkarli inhabitants of Tavastia,
who chose them a Captain named Kurk, under whom they drove out the Laplanders
out of the Borders of the Eastern Bothnia, and made them tributary, and the
letters may not be ascribed to Kurk, but to Ladulaos, in which he had granted
the Birkarli the privilege to receive tribute of the Lapps, and of trafficking
with them, for it is not probable that Kurk, though he was their chosen
Captain, was to have all the benefit of the Laplanders to himself, so as by
contract to tranfer to the Birkarli his right. For the Tavastii were either a
free People and so shared among one another whatever they got, or else under
some Prince, and so could not give another what was not their own, but their
Masters. Besides if they did give Kurk any thing, as some Villages, or the
like, it was not from any bargain that they were to receive in its stead
tribute from the Laplanders, but as a reward to himself for his pains and
conduct in the war. But whatever may be said of Kurk and the Tavasti, it is
certain the Laplanders never came originally from the Russians, nor as others
think from the Tartars, but from the Finlanders, having bin driven out of their
Country, and forced to change their habitations often, till at length they sixth
in this Land where they now live: and that Country, which from the remove of
its inhabitants was called Lapland, had the same name continued by the Swedes,
who had conquered the greatest part thereof. For after the Swedes had learnt
from the Finlanders that they were called Lapps, they also gave them the same
name, then the Danes took it up: then Saxo, afterward Ziegler, then Dam. Goes,
who had the account which he gives of the Laplanders from Ol. and Joh. Magn.
and so at last all the Country was called Lapland from the Bay of Bothnia
Northwards, especially after it was made subject to the Swedes, except only
that part which lies on the Coasts of Norway, which retained its ancient name
of Finland; as also that part toward the white Sea, called by the Moscovites,
Cajanica, although these sometimes call the inhabitants Loppi, which without doubt
they took from their neighbors the Finlanders.

CHAP. VII. Of the Religion of the Laplanders.
HAVING seen the rise and Original of the Laplanders, we come now to speak more
distinctly of them, but first of their Religion; not only what is now, but also
what was before Christianity came to be received there. For there were
Laplanders, or at least some Inhabitants of Lapland before the Christian
Religion was introduced: such as the Finni, Lappofinni, Scridfinni, or Biarmi,
as is above said; but it was very long before the Laplanders properly so called
embraced the Christian Religion. At first there is no doubt they were Pagans,
as all the Northern Nations were, but being all Pagans were not of the same
Religion, it may be enquired which the Laplanders professed. And I suppose it
could be no other then that of the Finlanders, from whom they derive their
original, and consequently their Religion too. But what the Religion of the
Finlanders was is very uncertain, since we have no account of the ancient
affairs of that Nation. Therefore we must make our conjectures from the Biarmi,
and Scridfinni, as also from some remains among the Finlanders and Laplanders.

We have already proved the Biarmi to be the first Colony that the Finlanders
sent into Lapland, of whom this is chiefly recorded in ancient Monuments, that
they worshipped a certain God whom they called Jumala: which Jumala or Jomala is
manifestly a different word from what is mentioned in the History of St. Olaus
King of Norway, and of Herrodus, for they relate it as peculiar to the Biarmi,
and unknown to themselves; who being either Goths, Norwegians or Islanders, it
cannot possibly be any old Gothic word, but of some other Country, and
therefore most probably of Finland, where it is now in use. For God, which is
by the Swedes, Goths, and all of the same original termed Got, or Gudh, is by
them called Jumala; custom without doubt prevailing that the same name, whereby
in ancient times they called the false God, was translated to the true One,
both by the Finlanders, the Biarmi and the Laplanders also who came out of
Finland, and being joined with the Biarmi made one Nation. Besides Jumala, it
seems the Laplanders had a God whom the Swedes call Thor, which may be
gathered, not only because they worship one Thor at this present among their
idols, as shall be shown hereafter, but also because in the number of Gods
which the old Finlanders, especially the Tavasti adored, there was reckoned
Turrisas, the God of War and Victory, which was no other then Thor. This
Turrisas is put in one word for Turris-As (i. e.) Turris, Turrus, or Torus (for
so his name is diversely written) the Prince of the Ases, or Asiatics, for those
who in former times came out of Asia into these parts were called Ases, of whom
this Turrus was the first, who from that time was worshipped by the Finlanders
by the name of Turrisas; which may farther be proved from Arngrinus Jonae, who
says the first King of the Finlanders was Torrus, one of the Predecessors of
King Norus, from whom some think Norige, (i. e.) Norway, quasi Nori Rige, to
take its denomination, it being frequent for the ancient Kings to take upon
them the names of their Gods. Thus among the ancient Greeks we find many who
were called by the names of Jupiter and Neptune. So Torrus the King was so
called from Torus the ancient God of the Finlanders, from whom without doubt he
was derived to the Laplanders, together with their language, worships, and
other customs. To these two (if they are two) Jumala and Thor, may be added the
Sun, which I gather from this, because he is still reckoned among their Gods.
Besides he is generally worshipped in all barbarous and pagan Countries, and if
he be adored for his light and heat by those People, who enjoy the benefit of a
warm air and temperate climate, how much more by the Laplanders, who for no
small space endure the hardship of continual night and bitter frosts? but I
shall speak more concerning the Sun hereafter.

These are the chief Gods of the Laplanders, whether they had any of less note
may be questioned, tho I doubt it not; because at this day they worship some
others, which the Finlanders did before them, and probably brought with them
into Lapland. Of these the Carelii had Rongotheus the God of Ry, Pellonpeko of
Barley, Wierecannos of Oats, Egres of Herbs, Pease, Turnips, Flax, and Homp; Vko
with his wife Rowne, of tempests; Kaekre the Protector of Cattle from wild
beasts; Hyse had the command of Wolves, and Bears, Nyrke of Squirrel-hunting,
Hyttavanes of Hare-hunting. Some of these the Laplanders worshipped; especially
those whose help they stood chiefly in need of to the performing of their
business, as the gods of hunting and preserving their Cattle from wild beasts,
and such like: others probably they neglected as useless, because they neither
plowed nor sowed. But I cannot say under what names they worshipped them,
because I find nothing of certainty thereof, either in their ancient records,
or modern customs.

Next we must consider what kind of worship they pai'd their Gods, which we
have already mentioned; but of this also we are in great uncertainty, unless we
make our judgment from the present times, and deliver those rites which are now
used by the Laplanders in their religious performances, but of this we shall
speak more when we come to treat of the present state of their Religion. We
shall only note here what is read of Jumala. He was heretofore represented in
the image of a man sitting upon an Altar, with a Crown on his head, adorned
with twelve gems, and a golden Chain about his neck, which was formerly of the
value of 300 Marks; tho whether the word in the History does signify a chain,
or may better be rendered a Jewel, it is uncertain; for it is said that Charles
lifting his Ax, cut the collar whereon it hanged: which shows that it was
rather gold artificially carved and set with jewels, which was (I suppose) the
reason why Herrodus does not set down its weight, as is usual in the valuing of
chains, but its price. This Jewel called Men from Mean the Moon whose figure it
represented, was, as I imagine, tied to a collar about the neck, and hanged
down upon the breast of the image, as is usual in all such ornaments at this
day. But whether this were a chain or locket, it is certain the other parts of
his habit were agreeable to our description of him; wherein he was not much
unlike the Swedes God Thor, as he is described in our History of Vpsal: for he
also was made sitting with a Crown on his head, adorned with Stars, as Jumala
with jewels, each to the number of twelve, from whence I am almost persuaded
that the Biarmi, and after them the Laplanders, either worshipped one God under
two names, or if they were two Gods, they used their names promiscuously. For
the true God, whom they knew partly by reason, and partly by tradition, was by
them called Jumala: but after the name of Thor began to be famous, they either
called Jumala by the name of Thor, or gave Thor the name of Jumala: which I
gather from hence, because at this day the Laplanders attribute that to their
Thor, which questionless formerly they did to Jumala, viz. the power and
command over the inferior Gods, especially the bad and hurtful: also over the
air, thunder, lightning, health, life and death of men, and such like; as shall
be shown hereafter. What his image was made of, is not known, but I suppose it
was wood, because Charles is said to have cut off his head with his Ax, when he
only designed the cutting of the collar that held the aforesaid jewel, which he
could hardly have don, had it bin either silver or gold. Besides, to prove it
was wood, it was burnt to ashes, together with the Temple, and all its
furniture, excepting some gold, and other precious things; with which gold
particularly they did homage to their God: for the Biarmi in their ceremonies
to Jumala, did cast gold as a sacred offertory to him into a golden dish, of a
vast weight and bigness, which stood upon his knees. This Vessel, in the
History of Olaus, is said to be of silver, and full of silver coin, for a
little before his time both basin and gold were lost, and the Biarmi never had
an opportunity of getting more. They did not worship Jumala every where, but in
some few places, or perhaps only in that one, where in a thick remote wood he
had a kind of a Temple, not as they are usually built with walls and roof, but
only a piece of ground fenced as the old Roman Temples were; from hence one
might look every way, which could not have bin don had they bin covered at the
top. As in the form of their Temples, so in the situation of them they did
imitate the ancients, who for the most part chose groves to worship their Gods
in, and there built their Temples. So much of Jumala, and the ancient manner of
worshipping him amongst the Biarmi, as it is transmitted to us by ancient
Writers; but of Thor, the Sun, and the other Gods, there is nothing read but
what belongs to the times of Christianity, and the superstition still remaining
amongst them, of which we shall speak particularly in the following Chapter.

CHAP. VIII. Of the second, or Christian Religion of the Laplanders.
LAPLAND among other Nations, after a long night of Paganism, was enlightened
with the Christian Religion: of which I shall now speak. In the first place we
must enquire how and when they first began to heard of Christ's name: but this
will be very difficult, because all Writers are silent herein. Plantin indeed
affirms from their report, that they first hear of the Christian Religion in
the last age; from whence he concludes that they came out of Finland before the
Finlanders were converted. But for all this we can hardly yield our assent to
him; for it is certain on the contrary that they knew, and some of them
embraced, the Christian Religion in the time of Ziegler, who lived in the very
beginning of the precedent age, and was present at the destruction of Stockholm
by Christiern the Tyrant, which he has very well described: he affirms that
they admited Christianity to obtain the favor of their Kings, which cannot be
spoken of Christiern, or his immediate Predecessor, but of several others in
former ages. And indeed it is very improbable that so many Christian Kings
should take no care of propagating their Religion among the Laplanders, but
permit them to live in a heathenish impiety, without so much as ever hearing
the name of Christ; especially since there are Letters of Ericus King of
Pomerania extant, wherein he advises the Consistory of Vpsal that they would
send Priests to instruct the Laplanders; which Charles the IX afterward made
an argument of his title to Lapland against his neighbors. Besides they had
adjoining to them the Birkarli, who were either Finlanders or Swedes, and were
converted long before; with these they maintained a commerce, and paid them
tribute even from the time of Ladulaus Magnus, who reigned four ages ago.
Therefore it is false what Plantin affirms of their being converted in the last
age; on the contrary I presume that from the time of Ladulaus, there always
were some in Lapland who either were Christians, or pretended to be so: for
then their Country was subdued and made a Province of Swedland, and it cannot
be doubted but the Swedes propagated the Christian Religion together with their
dominion in Lapland. Tho if our conjecture prove true of the Laplanders
removing out of Finland, by reason of the wars of Ericus Sanctus, and the
planting of the Christian Religion there, it will appear from thence that they
heard of Christ, tho they neglected him. However no prudent man can suppose
that their neighbors the Finlanders for so many ages should never mention any
thing of the Christian Religion to them. And therefore my opinion is the more
confirmed that the Laplanders had heard of Christ ever since Ericus Sanctus his
time, even these five ages, tho they rejected his Doctrine, as long as they
retained their own freedom: but after they became subject to the Swedes,
whether on their own accord to please their Kings, as Ziegler would have it, or
for other reasons, at length they took upon them the name of Christians, which
happened in the time of Ladulaus Magnus, in the year 1277, from whence we must
date the planting of Christian Religion in Lapland, which Religion they neither
wholly embraced, nor wholly refused, but retained it with an inveterate, and as
it were Jewish prejudice, not out of any zeal, or preferring it as more
necessary for their welfare before their former Religion; but outwardly only
and in show, esteeming it the best means to gain their Princes favor, and to
prevent those evils which threatened them, if they should persist in their
obstinacy. Hence it was that they were married by a Christian Priest, and
baptized their children according to the ceremonies of Christianity, which were
the two chief things wherein their Christian Religion consisted; and the only
things mentioned by Olaus M. For the use of catechizing, or preaching of the
Gospel, and other information in the heads of Christian Religion were wholly
unknown to them, as may be proved from the ancient records of Bishoprics,
wherein there is no mention of any Lapponian Diocese, or Church, or of any
Diocese to which Lapland might belong. Lastly, if it had not bin so, what need
was there of Ericus his express to Vpsal, that they would send Priests into
Lapland? this, and whatsoever else Ziegler alleges for the slow advance of
Christianity in Lapland, Olaus Magnus endevors to evade; but at length is
forced to confess that the Northern parts thereof are not yet reclaimed, and
therefore hopes for their conversion.

This was the State of Christianity in Lapland till the times of Gustavus,
differing from their ancient Paganism only in name, and a few external rites,
whereby they labored to make the World believe that they were Christians, which
gave Damianus a Goes (tho a friend and contemporary of Johannes and Olaus
Magnus) very good reason to complain that there was no knowledge of God and
Christ in the Land. From hence we may understand how to interpret Olaus M. when
he says that by the earnest and pious exhortations of the Catholic Priests,
great part of these wild People were, and more were likely to be brought over
to the Christian Religion. But when Gustavus came to the Crown, as he took
greater care then his Predecessors for promoting of the true Religion in other
parts of his dominions, so he did in Lapland also; and as the chief means to
effect this, he took the peculiar charge of them upon himself. Whereas
heretofore they were rather tributaries of the Birkarli then the Kings of
Sweden; and consequently neglected by those Kings; now at some set times in the
Winter, they were obliged to meet together in a place appointed, where they
were to pay their tribute to the Kings Officers, and be instructed in the
Gospel by the Priests, and also to give an account of what they learnt the year
before. This custom must needs have its beginning in Gustavus's time, for he
was the first King that demanded tribute of the Laplanders, and consequently
that assembled them together for the paying of it. Besides Olaus M. mentions no
such institution; which he would have don had it bin received in his time. Nay
he confesses that if the Laplanders had a mind to have their Children baptized,
they were forced to carry them on their backs two hundred Italian miles to a
Christian Church, in some of their neighboring Countries, as Aongermannia,
Helsingia, and the like, and if they neglected this duty, there was none to
reprove them for it. This made Gustavus complain in a Letter dated at
Stocholme, July 24. 1556, that there were many among them, who were never
baptized, which proceeded from an opinion that those who were baptized in their
riper years, would die within 7 or 8 days after; but when Gustavus together
with his Collectors sent Priests into Lapland, their children were baptized,
and they instructed at home. Nor were they obliged only to a bare hearing of
the word, but to a diligent attention, because they were to be catechized
afterward, and give an account of their progress; so that now it was that they
began to be Christians in good earnest, and in this respect it might with some
reason be said that in this last age the Gospel began to be preached among
them, and that before they were wholly ignorant of the means of their salvation.
Now it was that they had certain Priests appointed to instruct them, the first
whereof, or at least since the reformation, was one Michael, whom Gustavus in
his before mentioned Letter earnestly recommends to them, giving him especial
command by pious exhortation to reduce them to the true knowledge of God, and
the Christian Faith.

But this was more effectually don in the succeeding times of Charles Gustavus
Adolphus, and Christina; who first endowed Schools and Churches; those two firm
supports, without which Religion can neither maintain its present strength, nor
acquire more.

Charles the IX, about the latter end of his reign was the first that caused
Churches to be built in every one of the divisions or Marches at his own
peculiar charge; two of them are mentioned in Lapponia Tornensis, viz.
Tenotekis and Jukasjaerff, whereof one was built, ann. 1600, the other 3 years
after. Christina having found a silver mine there, followed his example; and by
a public Charter ordered the building of four more, in Arwitsieff, Arieplog,
Silbojoch, and Nasafiell, ann. 1640. then were Christian Churches built in
Lapland it self, and there are now reckoned in Lapponia Aongermannia one,
called Aosalo; in Lapponia Vmensis one called Lyaesala; in Lapponia Pithensis
four, whose name are Graatraesk, Arwitfierfs, Stora sawgcks, and Arieplogs;
there was also a fifth called Silbojochs, but this was long ago demolished and
burnt by the Danes. In Lapponia Luhlensis there is one called Jochmoch. There
was also another called Nafrilocht, but this was burnt accidentally not long
since. In Lapponia Tornensis there are reckoned three, Juckochsierfs, Rounala,
and Enotaches. In Lapponia Kimensis only Enare. All of them being 13 in number,
except Silbojochs and Nafrilochs, are kept in good repair, and frequented by
the Laplanders. They all own the Kings, and especially Charles the IX, for
their Founders, excepting only Kounala, which was built and adorned with a bell
at the sole charge of 3 brothers Laplanders, whose piety herein is the more
commendable because they were forced to fetch all the materials requisite for
such a work through long and troublesome ways, out of Norway with their
Rain-dears. A memorable example which most men in our days, tho desirous
enough to seem pious and religious, are so far from equalling, much more from
exceeding, that they never attemt to follow it. The manner of building their
Temples was plain indeed, but fit enough for the use they were designed to, the
matter of them is the same timber wherewith the Swedes usually build their
houses. Adjoining to their Churches they have belfrys, and houses for the use
of Priests and the convenience of those who living at a great distance from the
Church, have the liberty of refreshing themselves here in the Winter time by
the fire. This constitution was first made by Christina ann. 1640, commanding
the Priests to be always resident, whereas before they living a far off, came
but at some set times of the year.

Schools were first instituted by Gustavus Adolphus, and I suppose in the town
of Pithen, something before the year 1619, for in that year Nicolaus Andreae,
Minister of Pithen, dedicates his Ritual to him, in token of thanks and
commendation for this his piety. The reason why Gustavus Adolphus founded
Schools, was chiefly because he saw the Laplanders profited very little under
the Swedish Priests preaching in a foreign language, as they had hitherto don.
Besides, the harshness of the air, and coursness of the diet killed great part
of the Priests, who had bin used to a better climate, and made the rest more
unwilling to undergo this hardship: therefore was the first School instituted
in Pithen, and committed to the charge of Nicolaus Andreae, who was also
commanded for the better promoting of knowledge there, to translate the most
useful and necessary books out of the Swedish into the Laplandish tongue. For
the Laplanders before this were wholly ignorant of letters, and had not a book
writ in their language: the first, which I suppose they had, was the Primer,
such as children use to learn containing the chief heads of Christian Religion,
viz. the ten Commandments, Apostles Creed, Lords Prayer, and the like compiled
by the aforesaid Nicolaus, as himself witnesses: he likewise was the first that
published the Ritual in the Laplandish tongue, the book is now extant printed
at Stockholm by Ignatius Meurer, with this title, Liber Cantionum quomodo sit
celebranda Missa Sermon Lappico. These were the elements wherein they were
first to be instructed, afterward there were other books printed, amongst
which was a Manual translated out of Swedish by Joannes Tornaeus, Minister and
Schoolmaster of Tornen, containing the Psalms of David, Song of Solomon,
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Ecclesiasticus, Luthers Catechize, sacred Hymns,
Gospels, and Epistles, with the solemn Prayers. The history of Christ's Passion,
and destruction of Jerusalem, the Ritual, and Prayers of all sorts.

In the next place, for an encouragement to those that would send their
children to School, Gustavus Adolphus allowed money, not only for their diet,
but also for their clothes, and other necessaries, with a stipend for the
Schoolmaster: with these helps the Laplanders began more seriously to consider
of the Christian Religion, which was now preached to them in no other language
then their own: heretofore their Ministers using only the Swedish tongue, they
learnt something but understood it not, and muttered some Prayers, but they knew
not what: for sometimes there stood under the Pulpit, an Interpreter who
explained to the People as well as he could what the Minister said at length.
By the benefit of these aforesaid books they began to understand what they
prayed for, and some of the Youth of Lapland having studied at the University
of Vpsal, made so good progress in the knowledge of the Liberal Arts and
Sciences, and of the Christian Religion, that they were entrusted with the
Ministry.

Hitherto we have taken a view of Gustavus Adolphus his first care for the
advancement of Christianity in Lapland, but as all things in their beginnings
find some opposition, so did the preaching of the word of God here; first of
all it was a matter of great difficulty to maintain a School without the
confines of Lapland, to which the Youth of that Nation should resort, therefore
in the second place it was advised by that famous man Joannes Skytte, free
Baron of Duderhoff, and Senator of the Kingdom, who to his immortal praise
obtained that a School might be erected by the King in Lapland it self, in the
Province of Vma, near the Church Lyksala, from whence the School took its name.
This was the second School the Laplanders had, and by Gustavus Adolphus, then
engaged in a tedious war in Germany, the charge of it was committed to the
aforesaid Joannes Skytte, by a Roial Charter, and settled upon his Family for
ever, allowing the Schoolmaster the whole Tithe, after the ordinary charges
deducted; but still retaining to the Crown the superintendency of the
benefaction. The form thereof is as follows, WE GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS by the Grace
of God King of the Goths and Vandals, etc. declare that although our dear Father
Charles of blessed memory; as likewise we our selves, after we were by the
Divine Providence placed in the Throne of this Kingdom, have earnestly
endeavored that our Northern Subjects called Laplanders should be instructed, in
Arts and Letters; and be informed in the grounds of Christian Religion, yet the
distraction of the present time, has hitherto hindered our religious purpose;
but least our attemt should be utterly frustrated, we ordain and appoint our
faithful Senator, Chief Governor of Livonia, Ingria, and Carelia, the
illustrious Lord John Skytt L. B. in Dunderhoff, Governor and Visitor of a
School to be erected in Umalappmark, he having undertaken that Charge: We
farther ordain that the Government of the said School, shall from time to time
continue and belong to the Successors, in his family: and that the Master and
Scholars in the school aforesaid, may have a constant maintenance, we grant
unto them the Tithes which the inhabitants of that division, do yearly bring
into the Storehouse of Uma, after the ordinary paiments are deducted. These
Tithes, with other gifts and benefactions which the aforesaid Lord John Skitt
shall by his diligence acquire for the said charitable use; shall be disposed
by him for the benefit of the said School, reserving to our selves and
successors the supreme regulation of the same. In witness whereof we have set
our hand and Seal. Given in old Stetin in Pomerland, June 20. Ann. 1631.



This School had some peculiar advantages over others, because its setlement
was firmly established, having for its Visitor, not the Minister of the Parish,
but a Senator of the Kingdom. Besides here was not only a salary allowed to the
Master and Scholars, but also an order to receive it out of the Tithes of Vma;
whereas the other had indeed a set stipend, but because it was not certainly
decreed where they should receive it, it was not duly paid as the time and
their necessities required, which was no small disadvantage and impediment to
their design. But all inconveniences were here remedied and the salary most
firmly settled; and not only so, but also full authority granted unto the
Illustrious Lord John Skytte to find out and confirm any other means, which
might conduce more to the good of that foundation. Neither was that eminent man
wanting out of his singular piety to God, and love of learning, to make this
his whole business, till at last he gathered a sum of five thousand Dollars,
partly through his own, and partly through his friends liberality, which he delivered
to the Queen Christina for the use of a Copper Mine, that in lieu thereof the
School of Vma might yearly receive the whole revenue of the Crown, due from
certain Towns in that Province. This request of his the Queen easily granted,
and two years after issued out her Letters patents, and a new Charter by the
Protectors of the Kingdom, whose worthy Commemoration is not to be omitted. The
words of the Charter are as follow, WE CHRISTINA by the Grace of God Queen
elect and hereditary Princess of the Swedes, Goths and Vandals, Queen of
Finland, Esthonia, Carelia, and Ingria, do declare, that whereas our dearly
beloved Father, sometimes King of Swedland, did out of his singular zeal and
religious affection for the promoting of the Church of God, especially in the
Northern parts of his Dominions, institute a Laplandish School in the Province
of Uma, and did constitute our trusty and well beloved Senator the illustrious
Lord John Skytte, Senator of the Kingdom of Sweden, President of our Roial
Council in Gothland, Chancellor of our University of Upsal, High Commissioner
of South-Finland, free Baron of Duderhoff, Lord of Graensia, Straemfrum and
Skytteholm, Knight, to be superviser of this work, settling the same power upon
his Posterity after his decease, and bountifully allowing to this design out of
the stores of Uma the yearly Tithes due to the Crown; We therefore by virtue of
these Letters patents to not only confirm that wholesome Constitution of our
pious Father deceased, but do also certify that the illustrius Lord John Skytte
has brought in the sum of 5000 Dollars of silver given by himself and his
pious friends for the use of the Laplandish School, which entire sum he has
paid to the Copper-Company, humbly entreating that the said sum may remain in
that Company to Us and our Crown, and that We for the yearly interest of the
said money allowing 8 per Cent, would give to the Laplandish School the use of
certain Villages in Norlands, that the inhabitants thereof may pay their taxes
to the aforesaid School; which We graciously approving, do give, as a security,
the benefit and profit of these following Villages belonging to Us and our
Crown in the Provinces of Uma and West Bothnia; Roebeck 12 Farms. Staeksive 2.
3/16. Clabbiler 3. 9/16. Baggaboelet 2. 27/32. Kuddis 2. 5/16. Braeneland 2.
11/16. These Farms shall yearly pay to the Laplandish School all their ordinary
and extraordinary taxes which are hitherto imposed, which their inhabitants are
hereby commanded to do without intermission, during the time that we retain the
aforesaid sum of 5000 Dollars, paid to the Copper-Company, until We shall have
restored the sum entire to the Laplandish School. Wherefore We command our
Officers, and all whom it may concern, that they substract not from the said
School the aforesaid sum given in security, before such time as the money may
be restored; and that they do not offer nor suffer to be offered any injury or
prejudice to the aforesaid School, contrary to this our Edict, in confirmation
whereof Ours and the Kingdoms Protectors and Administrators have hereto set
their hands, and sealed it with the Roial Seal. Dated at Stockholm November. 5.
1634.



The Persons that subscribed were, Gabriel Oxenstern, Gustavi F. R. Drotsetus.
Jacobus de la Gardie High Marshal. Carolus Caroli Gyldenhielm High Admiral.
Petrus Baner Deputy Chancellor. Gabriel Oxenstern Tresurer.

This is that School to which the Laplanders ow their Progress in the knowledge
and love of Christian Religion, which appears from those many useful and
eminent Persons who have bin there bred; also the success may be seen from the
testimonials of the Examiners, who were constituted in the same year that the
School was endowed by the aforesaid Roial Charter, the words are related by
Brazius as follow, WE, whose names are underwritten, do testify that we were
called by the Reverend and Learned M. Olaus our Pastor of the Church of Uma, to
be present at the examination of the Laplandish Youth frequenting the School of
Lyksa in the Province of Uma; we also testify that we did hear them examined by
their Rector our aforesaid Pastor. First, they altogether sang the Psalms of
David translated into the Swedish language, as they are now used in the Church:
next they all, and singular repeted the Primer, containing not only the
Elements of Speech, but the Lords Prayer, ten Commandments, Apostles Creed, the
words used in administering the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords Supper;
also the Graces before and after meat, together with the Morning and Evening
Prayers. This Book they all read according to the manner prescribed in other
Schools, and the more ingenious of them did distinctly and without hesitation
repete the little Catechism made by Luther: Besides this, they read the Gospels
for Sundaies and Holy Days as they are published in the Swedish tongue, this
was the task of all the Scholars. Only 8 of them being of slower parts, did
nevertheless emulate the more ingenious according to their abilities. Now they
all begin to learn the Fundamentals in the Laplandish Idiom, that they may
instruct their Countrymen in their own mother tongue. This school exercise and
the fruit arising from thence as it exceeded our expectation, to see the
illiterate Youth in a short time by the blessing of God, learn the Principles
of our salvation, which better Scholars have bin much longer in attaining to,
so ought we to give singular thanks to Gods who has made their endevors so
successful. Nor must we omit the deserved Commendation of those pious men, who
by their bountiful largesses founded and endowed the School, and at this time
maintain it; although for the reward of their piety they must expect the blessing
of God, according as he has promised. Witness our hands and seals. Dated in
the place aforesaid Ann. 1634. Jacobus Andreae Buraeus. Petrus Jonae. Andreas
Hacquini. Jacobus Nicolai. Olaus Olai.



From this testimony it appears that the School was frequented by no small
number of the Laplandish Youth, also that they were not wholly unfit for the
study of learning and Religion; making it their chief care to learn those
things which are especially necessary to the improving of a Christian life.
Last of all, the readiness of the Laplanders to send their children to School:
so that now there appears another face of Religion in Lapland then what there
was in former ages, because the Kings have taken greater care in providing for
Churches, Schools, Books, Ministers, and Schoolmasters. The Priests in like
manner are more careful, being now for the most part Laplanders, or skilful in
that tongue, whereof there is in Lapponia Vmensis one, in Lapponia Pithensis 3,
in Lapponia Luhlensis one, whose trouble is the greater, because the Country is
large and the inhabitants dispersed.

In Lapponia Tornensis and Kiemensis they have both Laplandish and Swedish
Priests, who once a year at their public Fairs in February visit the Country,
baptising their children, and preaching to them in the Finnish language, which
they seem to understand. For their reward they have one third part of the
Rain-dears, which the Laplanders are bound to pay to the Crown: and whereas
every Laplander was obliged to pay for a tax either two pair of shoes, or a
white Fox, or a pound of Pike, this is now equally divided between the King and
the Priest; which makes not only the Priests more cheerful in doing their duty,
but the People also more diligent in their performances. Hence it is that they
pay their Ministers so much honor and respect, saluting them at their first
coming with bowing their head, giving them in token of Reverence the title of
Herrai, i.e. Sir, conducting them upon their Rain-dears to their Cottages,
adorned with birch bows, covered with their furrs, and showing them all the
civility they have. Upon a table or rather a plank laid upon the ground they
set them meat, which is usually fish, or flesh of Rain-dear dried together with
the tongue and marrow. They use neither Salt, Bread nor Wine, all which the
Priess are forced to bring with them, the Laplanders drinking only Water,
because the extremity of the cold spoils their Beer. They are careful in
observing Sundaies, refraining both themselves and their Cattle from all work
on that day, and sometimes on the day before; nay some there are who refuse to
milk their Raindears on Sundaies. While the Sermon is preaching they attend
diligently; and in singing of Psalms they are so zealous that they strive who
shall sing best. They very much reverence and frequent the Sacraments,
especially that of Baptism which they never defer; but the women themselves
within eight or fourteen days after their delivery do often bring their
children through long and tedious ways to the Priest. They likewise pay much
reverence to the Lords Supper, and to the ceremonies of Confession and
Absolution, which are always used before that Sacrament, which they now are
really partakers of, whereas in the times of Popery they received it without
any solemn consecration. Neither do they neglect the other parts of Christian
Piety. They most religiously abstain from swearing, cursing and blasphemy: they
are very charitable to the poor, and just, insomuch that there are scarce any
robberies ever heard of in the Country. Their mutual conversation is very
courteous, especially among persons of the same Country or family, often
visiting and discoursing with one another. This they learn from the precepts of
Christianity, which requiring them not only to regulate their Faith, but their
lives, teaches that tho there be three Persons, the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost, yet they are but one God. And as by the help of Christianity they learn
the rule of true piety; so do they utterly abhor all their ancient
superstition. They pull down all their drums, and burn and demolish all their
Images of wood and stone. A memorable example hereof is mentioned by Johannes
Tornaeus in this manner. A certain Laplander, just, pious, and wealthy, named
Petrus Peiwie dwelling in Peldojaerf, at a Village of Lappmarkia Tornensis,
with all his family worshipped the Idol Seita: it happened upon a certain time
that his Rain-dears died in great numbers; whereupon he implored the assistance
of his Seita. But he prayed in vain, for his Rain-dears died still. At length
with his whole family and good store of dry wood, he took a journey to the place
where Seita stood: round about the Idol he strewed green bows of Firr, and
offered sacrifice to him, the skins, horns, and skulls of Rain-dears; at last
he prostrates himself with his whole family before the Idol, beseeching him
that he would by some sign testify unto him, that he was the true God. But
after a whole days prayers and devotions finding no sign given, he sets fire to
the combustible wood, and burns down the Idol of the Town. When his offended
neighbors sought to kill him, he asked them why they would not permit the God
to revenge himself for the affront. But Peiwie became so constant an adherent
to the Christian Religion, that when others threatened with their charms to
mischief him, he on the contrary repeated the Lords Prayer, and the Apostles
Creed. He burnt all the Seitas he could meet with, and at length sent his
eldest Son Wuollaba to Enorreby to do the like there; for which he was forced
to fly into Norway to avoid the Inarenses, who lay in wait for him. There was
also one Clement, a Lappo-Jenabiensis whose Mother being grievously sick, he
sought remedy from the Drum, but his Mother died notwithstanding; whereupon he
cut his Drum in pieces, alleging that he saw no use of it.

Hitherto we have seen the Christian Religion much better received and improved
by the Laplanders, and applied to their daily conversation, then what it was in
ancient times. And from hence we may collect the care of those who by their
authority, counsel or ministry did promote it; yet cannot we triumph over
Pagan impiety wholly rooted out; as shall appear by the following Chapter.

CHAP. IX. Of some remains of Paganism in Lapland at this time.
BY the present State of Religion in Lapland, it cannot be doubted but all
possible means were used by their pious Kings and Priests, for the extirpating
of superstition and its evil consequences: nevertheless there remain some
relics thereof to employ their farther care and endeavor, many gross errors
prevailing among them, which renders the reality of their conversion
suspicious, as if they were still in love with the erroneous opinions of their
Ancestors, especially some of the Norwegian Laplanders, whose Idolatry
sufficiently demonstrates that all their pretenses to Christianity are but
fictitious. But tho it were impiety to believe this of all, since experience
shows us the contrary; yet it cannot be denied, but that many of them profess
Christianity rather out of dissimulation then any real affection. One chief
reason why they so stiffly adhere to their superstition and impiety, proceeds
from the miscarriage of their Priests, who either take no care of instructing
the People, or vilify their doctrine by the sordidness of their lives; whilst
under a pretense of propagating the Gospel, they endeavor only to advance
their own revennues. This the Laplandens, before none of the richest, could not
bare; to see themselves oppressed and disabled by the exactions of the Priests.
The truth of this Olaus Magnus strives to confute, calling it an impious and
false assertion, but he brings nothing to prove the truth of what he says, nor
answers Ziegler, by telling a fair story, of the industry and liberality of
some in the Southern parts: and particularly that his brother Joannes came to
the utmost border of Jemptia, and gave a large Alms to the poor people there,
and at his own great charge set up a Salt-work. A farther cause of the little
improvement of Christianity, is the vastness of the Country, some of the
Inhabitants living above 200 miles from the Christian Churches. But tho this
cause is now in some degree removed by having Churches more frequently, yet
that inconvenience still remains; because they are yet very far distant,
particularly in Lapponia Luhlensis, as we have already mentioned. There are
other causes of this unhappy effect, which more particularly reflect upon the
Natives. As their strong inclination to superstition, which has bin formerly
mentioned, and the occasions thereof intimated. To this we may add the high
estimation they have of their Predecessors, whom they think more wise then to
have bin ignorant of what God they ought to adore, or the manner of his
worship: wherefore out of reverence to them they will not recede from their
opinions, least they should seem to reprove them of ignorance or impiety.
Lastly, this happens upon the account of inveterate Custom, which at all times
is hardly forgot, especially where it prevails as a Law. This is it that
darkens their understanding, and renders it incapable of discerning between
true and false. For these and some other reasons there remain several tracks
of Superstition and Idolatry, which require no small time to be wore out; as we
see in several of the meaner sort, not only in Swedland, but in Germany,
France, and other Countries, where there is found much of the old superstition,
tho in other things they are orthodox enough.

Amongst the Laplanders these opinions may be reduced to two heads, for they
are superstitious and paganish, or Magical and Diabolical. Of the first sort
some of their superstitions are only vain and fabulous, others very impious and
heathenish. As first of all their distinctions between white and black days.
Of the later sort they account the Feasts of S. Katharine and S. Mark, whom
they call Cantepaive, and S. Clement, upon which days they abstain from all
business, and chiefly from hunting. And of this they give two reasons; first,
because they say if they should hunt on any of those days, their bows and
arrows would be broken, and they should forfeit their good success in that
sport all the year. In like manner they esteem the first day of Christmas to be
unlucky, insomuch that Masters of families go not out of their Cottages, not so
much as to Church, but send their Children and Servants, for fear of I know not
what spirits and demons, which they suppose to wander about the air in great
Companies upon that day; and that they must first be appeased by certain
Sacrifices, which we shall mention hereafter. This superstition, I suppose,
sprang from a misinterpretation of the story which they heard from their
Priest, how a great host of Angels came down from Heaven upon our Saviors
Nativity, and frighted the Shepherds. They are likewise great observers of
Omens, and amongst others they guess at the success of the day from the first
beast they meet in the morning. They forbid the woman to go out of that door
through which the man went a hunting, as thinking the way would be improsperous if
a woman trod the same steps.

And herein they are only superstitious but in what follows, they are impious
and heathenish. As first they go to Church not out of any devotion, but
compulsion. Next they stick at several Principles of the Christian Religion,
especially the resurrection of the dead, the union of the body and soul, and
the immortality of the soul. For they fancy to themselves that men and beasts
go the same way; and will not be persuaded that there is any life after this.
Whereupon one Georgius, a Laplandish Priest, desired upon his death bed that he
might be buried amongst the Laplanders, that at the last day when he should
rise together with them, they might find his doctrine of the resurrection true.
Notwithstanding they believe that something of a man remains after he is dead,
but they know not what it is; which was the very opinion of the Heathens, who
therefore feigned their Manes to be somewhat that did remain after their death.
A third impiety they are guilty of, is joining their own feigned gods with God
and Christ, and paying them equal reverence and worship, as if God and the
Devil had made an agreement together to share their devotions between them.

Those of Lapponia Pithensis and Luhlensis have their greater and lesser Gods;
the greater to whom they pay especial worship are, Thor, Storjunkaren, and the
Sun. Damianus a Goes writes that they worship the Fire and Statues of stone:
but those Statues are only the Images of Storjunkaren, and the Fire is only an
emblem of the Sun; for that they worshipped Fire it self for a God, is very
false, as appears from Tornaeus, who made particular enquiry into that thing.
The same may be said of Peucer, who taking his mistake from the wooden Image of
Thor, reports that they worship wood. So that there are only three, and that
among the Pithenses and Luhlenses; for the Tornenses and Kiemenses knew nothing
of them, but in their stead under one common name worshipped a Deity, whom they
called Seita, whereof every family and almost every person had one.
Nevertheless there was one chief Idol to which all the neighborhood paid
devotion. But tho this word Seita denotes any God among the Laplanders, yet may
we suppose that under that name, especially as it signifies the public Idol,
they worshipped the same, which the Luhlenses call Tiermes, or Aijeke (i. e.)
thunderer, or father, by others named Thor. And by the private Idols they
meant him, who by the Luhlenses is called Storjunkare, making the difference
to consist not in the Gods but their names. The Tornenses rather using a
general appellation, and calling them all Seitas, whereas the Luhlenses call
the greater Terms or Aijeke, and the lesser Storjunkar. And if one attend to
their manner of worshipping these Gods, they will appear to be the same.
Besides these greater, the Pithenses, Luhlenses, and their neighbors have some
inferior Gods, as the Tornenses likewise have, tho they worship them all under
one name, excepting only that which they call Wiru Accha, signifying a Livonian
old woman, which Olaus Petr. with some alteration calls Viresaka. This was only
the bare trunk of a tree, and is now wholly rotten. But who the inferior Gods
were, or to what end they were worshipped, there is no mention made; but we may
guess from what we find observable among the other Laplanders. First under that
name they worshipped the ghosts of departed persons, but especially of their
kindred, for they thought there was some divinity in them, and that they were
able to do harm: just such as the Romans fancied their Manes to be; therefore
it was that they offered Sacrifice to them, of which more hereafter. Besides
these Manes they worship other Specter and Demons, which they say wander about
Rocks, Woods, Rivers and Lakes, such as the Romans describe their Fauni,
Sylvani, and Tritons to be. The third sort dreaded by them are Genii, whether
good or bad, which they suppose to fly in the air about Christmas, as we
intimated before; these they call Juhlii from the word Juhl, denoting at
present the Nativity of Christ; but formerly the new year. And these are the
Gods which the Laplanders jointly adore with God and our Savior; of which we
shall now speak particularly, and of their respective worship.

CHAP. X. Of the heathenish Gods of the Laplanders, and their manner of worship
at this day.
WE have showed in the foregoing Chapter that there were three principal Gods
worshipped by the Laplanders; the first is Thor, signifying thunder, in the
Swedish Dialect called Thordoen, by the Laplanders themselves Tiermes, that is
any thing that makes a noise, agreeing very well with the notion the Romans had
of Jupiter the thunderer, and the God Taramis, which I have treated of in the
History of Vpsal. This Tiermes or thunder they think by a special virtue in the
Sky to be alive; intimating thereby that power from whence thunder proceeds, or
the thundering God, wherefore he is by them called Aljeke, which signifies
grand, or great-grand-Father, as the Romans saluted their father Jupiter; and
the Swedes their Gubba. This Aijeke when he thunders is by the Laplanders
called Tiermes, by the Scythians, Tarami, and by the Swedes, Tor or Toron. This
Tiermes or Aijeke the Laplanders suppose to have power over the life and death,
health and sickness of man: and also over the hurtful Demons who frequent
Rocks and Mountains, whom he often chastises, and sometimes destroies with his
lightning, as the Latins fancied their Jupiter to do, for which end they give
him a bow in his hand to shoot the Demons with, which they call Aijeke dauge:
also they give him a mallet, which they call Aijeke Wetschera, to dash out the
brains of the said evil spirits. Wherefore because the Laplanders expect so
many blessings from their Tiermes, and believe he bestows life on them, and
preserves their health, and that they cannot die unless it be his pleasure, and
drives away the Demons, which are prejudicial to their hunting, fowling, and
fishing, and never hurts them but when their offenses deserve it: therefore he
is to be worshipped in the first place. The next of the principal Gods is
Storjunkare, which the it be a Norwegian word, Junkare in that language
signifying the Governor of a Province, yet is it used by the Laplanders now;
tho perhaps it was not in use till some of them became subjects to Norway.
Certain it is, that this is not the only name of that God, for he is also
called Stourra Pass (i. e.) Great Saint, as appears by a Hymn which is sung at
his Sacrifices. His name they reverence very much, and pay him frequenter, if
not greater devotion then other Gods, for they suppose him to be their Tiermes
his Lieutenant, and as it were Royal Prefect, adding Stoere, which signifys
greater for distinction sake. Now they worship Storejunkar, because they think
that they receive all their blessings through his hands, and that all beasts and
Cattle, are subject to his will, and that he governs them as Tiermes does men
and spirits; wherefore he can give them to whom he will, and none can receive
them without his pleasure. These beasts therefore supplying the Laplanders with
meat and clothes, it may easily be imagined how necessary they held it to
worship Storjunkare. And these are the two peculiar Gods of the Laplanders,
whereof one has the dominion over men, the other over beasts; one bestows
life, the other all things required to the sustaining of it. Tornaeus says
they report of him that he has often appeared to Fowlers or Fishers in the
shape of a tall personable man, habited like a Nobleman, with a Gun in his
hand, and his feet like those of a bird. As often as he appears standing on the
shore, or in the ship by them, they say he makes their fishing successful, and
kills birds that happen to fly by with his Gun, which he bestows upon those
that are present. It is reported that a Laplander being to guide one of the
Kings Lieutenant, when he came over against a mountain where Storejunkar was
supposed to dwell, he stood still, and setting the helve of his Ax down upon
the Ice, turned it round, professing that he did it in honor of their
munificent God, who dwelt there. And tho there is mention made but of one
mountain where the Laplander performed this ceremony, yet we may suppose he
would have don it oftener, if there had happened to be more hills in the way.
But perhaps this distinction of name is used by the Laplanders which border
upon Norway, especially in Lulalapland, from his habit and clothing; and
because he used to appear in another dress to them of Lapponia Kiemensis and
Tornensis, therefore they did not worship him under that name, but by the
common appellation of Seita, from whom they believed that they receive the
benefits of hunting, fishing, and fowling.

I come now to the Sun, their third God, which is common to them with all other
Pagans, him they call Baiwe, and worship him chiefly for his light and heat:
also because they believe him to be the Author of Generation, and that all
things are made by his means, especially their Rain-dears, of whom and their
young they think he has a particular care to cherish them by his heat, and
bring them suddenly to strength and maturity. And being they live in a cold
Country where their native heat is diminished, and often wholly extinguished,
being they have nothing to sustain themselves with but the flesh of Rain-dear,
they think it very fit to pay the Sun very great honors, who is the Author of
so great blessings to them, and who at his return restores them that light
which they lost by his departure, and that not for a day or two, but for
several weeks, which being pai'd, the new day seems more welcome to them, by
reason of long absence.

To every one of these principal Gods they pay a several sort of worship; which
consists first in the diversity of places dedicated to their service, next in
the diversity of images erected to them in these places; lastly, in the
diversity of Sacrifices which they offer to them. The place where they worship
their Thor or Tiermes is a piece of ground set apart for this superstition, on
the backside of their Huts, above a bows shoot off; there upon boards set
together like a table they place their images. This table serves them instead
of an Altar, which they surround with bows of birch and pine; with the same
bows also they strew the way from their Huts to the Altar: and as the table
serves them for an Altar, so do the bows for a Temple. The same account, only
omitting the table, does Tornaeus give of the Tornenses and Kiemenses
worshipping of Seita, so that they may seem to be one and the same God: unless
his description should be applied to Storjunkar rather, because he mentions
Lakes to be the place of his worship; which was proper to Storjunkar, as shall
be shown. But I suppose the Seitas were worshipped in other places as well as
Lakes, and so they signified both Gods under one name, and that Tornaeus was
not so curious as to distinguish between them. In the same place where they
worshipped Tiermes they worshipped the Sun also, and upon the same table too,
which makes me suspect that they were but one God; whom they called Tiermes,
when they invoked him in the behalf of their lives, healths, or preservation
from Demons, and Baiwe when they begged of him light or warmth, or any thing
that might fortify them against the cold. But the place where Storjunkar was
worshipped, was upon some peculiar mountains, and on the banks of Lakes: for
almost every family has its particular rocks and hills appointed for this
business. Some of these rocks are so high and craggy that they are impassable
to any but Storjunkar. But it must not be supposed he lives only in rocks and
cliffes of mountains, but also on the shores of Lakes and banks of Rivers, for
there also he is peculiarly worshipped, because the Laplanders have observed
the same apparitions in these places, that they usually do upon rocks and
hills, namely Storjunkar habited and armed according to the description already
given, by which his presence they think he testifies his great love for those
places, which therefore they have in great veneration, and call them Passewara,
i. e. Sacred mountains, or rocks belonging to Storjunkar, supposing they cannot
pay their devotion to him in any place better, or be surer of finding him, then
where he himself appears. To these places they allot their certain bounds and
confines, that all people may know how far the sanctified ground reaches, and
avoid those evils, which otherwise Storejunkar would certainly inflict upon
them for violating his holy place. Now since every family, that is given to
this superstition has its peculiar place of worship, it is manifest that there
is good store of them throughout Lapland. Sam. Rheen reckons up thirty of them
in the Province of Luhla.

The first by the River Waikijaur, about a mile from the Laplandish Church
called Jochmochs. The second by the hill Piednackwari about a mile farther from
the said Church. The third in an Island of the River Porkijaur, a mile and half
off the River. The fourth on the top of a very high hill, which they call
Ackiakikwari, i. e. Fathers or Thors hill, 5 miles beyond Jochmoch, near
Porkijaur. The 5 near the Lake Skalkatraesk, 8 miles from the aforesaid place.
The 6 at a Cataract of Muskoummokke, 11 miles off. The 7 on the top of an high
hill Skierphi. The 8 on the top of the hill Tiackeli. The 9 at the hill
Haoraoaos. The 10 at the top of a high hill Cafla, near a little Lake called
Salbut. The 11 on a hill half a mile from Wallawari. The 12 on the top of a
prodigious hill called Darrawaori, 2 miles from the aforesaid place. The 13
near Kiedkiewari. The 14 at a place called Nobbel, near a Lake by Wirrijaur.
The 15 at the Lake Kaskajaur. The 16 at the hill Enudda toward Norway. The 17
at the hill Rarto, near the same place. The 18 in an Island of the Lake
Luhlatraesk called Hiertshulos. The 19 on a high mountain toward Norway called
Skipoiwe. The 20 at the Lake Saiivo. The 21 at Ollapassi, a bay of the Lake
Stoor Luhlatraesk. The 22 at the Lake Lugga. The 23 on the hill Kierkowari. The
24 on the hill Kautom Jaurlis. The 25 at the Cataract Sao. The 26 on the top of
a high hill called Kaiszikiae. The 27 at the Lake Zyggraesk. The 28 at the hill
Piouki. The 29 in an Island of the Lake Waikejaur called Lusbyshulos. The 30 in
a mountain near the River Juleo called Warieluth.
Neither are these are the places in the Country that are dedicated to this
use, but there are several others which the Idolatrous People endeavor to
concele, that they may avoid the suspicion of this impiety and their deserved
punishment. But in other parts of Lapland the number is far greater as may be
easily understood; and therefore I shall not tire the Reader with a recital of
them. For all these places they have a high esteem, whether dedicated to Thor,
the Sun, or Storjunkar, so that they exclude all women from them; not
permitting them so much as to go behind the house where Thor is worshipped, and
prohibiting all marriageble women to come near the borders of Storjunkars
consecrated hills: and the reason is because they think that Sex, especially at
that age, not pure enough for those devotions, but not knowing who are pure and
who are not, to prevent all danger they prohibit the whole Sex, who if they
transgress herein, they must expect many misfortunes to befall them, and
perhaps death it self.

I come now to the Images of their Gods, for with these they used to honor
them. Thors image, was always made of wood, wherefore he is called by them
Muora Jubmel, i. e. the wooden God. And because in Lapponia Tornensis, as well
as in other places they make their Gods of wood, it is very probable that they
worship Tiermes, tho they call him Seita. Of this wood, which is always Birch,
they make so many Idols as they have Sacrifices, and when they have done they
keep them in a cave by some hill side. The shape of them is very rude, only at
the top they are made to represent a man's head, according to the description of
Matthias Steuchius, which he relates from his Father, who was Superintendent of
Hernosandensis, and had the oversight of all things relating to Piety and
Religion in most parts of Lapland. Of the root of the tree they make the head,
and of the trunk the body of the image: for those Birches which grow in Fenny
grounds have usually their roots growing round, and from them there shoot out
other little roots, so that it is easily fitted to the shape of a man's head.
Now to manifest this to be Thor, they put a hammer into his right hand, which
is as it were his ensign by which he is known. Into his head they drive a nail
of Iron or Steel, and a small piece of flint to strike fire with, if he has a
mind to it. Tho I rather suppose it was first used to be an emblem of fire,
which together with the Sun they worshipped in Thor, whose Image is here
delineated.

depiction of a Laplander worshipping a wooden idol of the god Thor

But tho they usually make them in this shape, yet there are some, especially
in Lapponia Tornensis, who worship a mere stump. They have no Image of the Sun,
either because he is conspicuous enough of himself, or because in the mystery
of their Religion he is the same with Thor: but Storjunkar is represented with
a stone, as is clearly proved by several Writers, and easily deduced from
others. The form of this stone (if we will believe Olaus Petri Neuren.) was
like a Bird, Samuel Rheen says it sometimes represents a man, and sometimes some
other creature. The truth is its shape is so rude, that they may sooner fancy
it like something themselves, then persuade other People that it is so. In the
mean time their fancy is so strong, that they really believe it represents
their Storjunkar, and worship it accordingly. Neither do they use any art in
polishing it, but take it as they find it upon the banks of Lakes and Rivers.
In this shape therefore they worship it, not as tho it were so made by chance,
but by the immediate will and procurement of their god Storjunkar, that it
might be sacred to him. Thus they erect it as his image, and call it Kied Kie
Jubmal i. e. the stone God. The rudeness of these Images gave Tornaeus occasion
to deny that they had any shape at all, only made rough and hollow by the
falling of water upon them, tho their hallowness without doubt occasioned the
Laplanders fancy of their likeness to something: but he confesses that in an
Island made by a Cataract of the River Tornatraesk called Darra, there are
found Seitae, just in the shape of a man, one of them very tall, and hard by 4
others something lower, with a kind of Cap on their heads, But because the
passage into the Island is dangerous by reason of the Cataract, the Laplanders
are forced to desist from going to that place, so that it is impossible now to
know how those stones are worshipped, or how they came there. These stones are
not set up by themselves, but lie 3 or 4 together, according as they find them;
the first of which they honor with the title of Storjunkar, the second they
call Act, or Storjunkars wife; the third his Son or Daughter, and the rest his
Servants. And this they do because they would not have their Storjunkar, who is
Thors Viceroy, in a worse condition then other Roial Prefects, whom they
usually see thus accompanied by their Wives and Children, and Attendants. His
representation is as follows depiction of a Laplander worshipping a stone idol
of the god Storjunkar

I come now to their Sacrifices and other Ceremonies used to their Gods. First
it is observable that they are performed only by men, all women being excluded;
they esteeming it as great a crime for a woman to offer Sacrifice as to
frequent the consecrated places. They never offer Sacrifice till they have
enquired of their God whether he will accept it or no. This they do with a
certain instrument which they call Kannus, not unlike the old fashioned Drums,
from whence they are usually called Laplandish Drums, and shall be exactly
described hereafter. This Drum being beaten, and some Songs sung, they bring
the designed Sacrifice to Thor, who if he signifies by a ring in the Drum that
the Sacrifice is pleasing to him, they fall presently to work: otherwise they
carry it to the Sun, and so to Storjunkar, till one of them will accept of it.
The manner of it is thus. They pull off some of the hair at the bottom of the
beasts neck, and bind it to a ring which is fastened to the Drum, then one of
them beats the Drum, and all the rest sing these words, What say thou o Great
and Sacred God, do thou accept this Sacrifice, which we design to offer unto
thee? And while they chant these words, they repete the name of the mountain
where they are: then if the ring rests on that part of the Drum where the God
is pictured, they take it for granted that the God is pleased, and so proceed
to the Ceremony; or else they carry the Sacrifice to Thor, and use the like
form of words, Father God will you have my Sacrifice. Peucer either through false
intelligence, or misapprehension, relates this business something differently,
they have (says he) a brazen Drum whereon they paint several sorts of Beasts,
Birds, and Fishes, such as they can easily procure: bolt upright upon this Drum
they fix an iron perch, upon which stands a brazen Frog, which at the beating
of the Drum falls down upon some of the pictures, and that creature whose
picture the Frog touches, they sacrifice. Their usual sacrifices are
Rain-dears, tho sometimes they use other creatures, as Dogs, Cats, Lambs and
Hens, which they fetch out of Norway. The 3d thing observable is that they
offer their Sacrifices usually in the Autumn, because, I suppose, the Winter
and night being at hand they think they have more need of their Gods
assistance, which may probably be the reason too why every year about that time
they make a new image for Thor, which is always don 1^ days before
Michaelmas. And thus they consecrate it, first they sacrifice the Rain-dear,
then taking out his bones they anoint the Idol with the blood and fat, and bury
the flesh and bones under ground. Besides this Idol they erect one to him every
time they sacrifice, and then they place them all one by another upon a table
behind their Hut. First when the God has approved of the Sacrifice, which is
usually a Buck to Thor, they bind it behind the house, then with a sharp knife
they run him through the heart, and gather the heart-blood, wherewith they anoint
the Idol, into a vessel. After that having placed the images right, and
adorned the table, they approach reverently to it, anoint the head and back all
over with the blood, but on his breast they only draw several Crosses. Behind
him they place the skull, feet, and horns of the sacrificed Dear; before him
they place a Coffer made of the bark of Birch, into which they put a bit of
every member of the Rain-dear, with some of the fat, and the rest of the flesh
they convert to their private uses. This is the manner of the Laplanders
sacrificing to Thor. But when they offer Sacrifice to Storjunkar, which is
likewise a male Dear, then first they run a red thread through his right ear, and
bind him, and sacrifice him in the place they did that to Thor; preserving the
blood likewise in a vessel. Then he who performs the Ceremony takes the horns
and the bones of the head and neck, with the feet and hoofs, and carries them
to the mountain of that Storjunkar, for whom the Sacrifice was designed. When
he comes near the sacred Stone, he reverently uncovers his head, and bows his
body, paying all the ceremonies of respect and honor. Then he anoints the Stone
with the fat and blood, and places the horns behind it. Unto the right horn
they ty the Rain-dears yard, and to the left some red thread wrought upon tin
with a little piece of silver. The same rites that are observed to Storjunkar
are also used to Seita, to whom the Laplanders usually sacrifice upon
Holydaies, or after some loss or misfortune. Then making their Prayers and
Devotions to the Idol in their best clothes, they offer him all manner of
oblations, and the choicest parts of the Rain-dear, as the flesh, fat, skin,
bones, horns, and hoofs, whereof there are great heaps to be seen at this day
where Seita was worshipped. The horns are found placed one above another, in
the fashion of a fence to the God, which is therefore by the Laplanders called
Tiorfwigardi, that is a Court fenced with horns, which are sometimes above a
thousand in number. Before these horns they used to hang a garland made of
Birch tree, stuck about with bits of flesh cut from every member of the
sacrifice. This I suppose first caused the mistake of those who reported that
the Laplanders worshipped the horns of Rain-dears. All the flesh that remains
of the sacrifice the Laplanders spend in their houses: and this is the ordinary
way of sacrificing to Storjunkar. Two other methods there are but less used;
one when they bring the sacrifice alive to the hill where the Idol is placed:
another when they would do so, but cannot climb the hill where Storjunkar is by
reason of its steepness. For the first they kill the sacrifice hard by the
Idol, and when they have performed the usual ceremonies, they presently boil
the flesh in the place, especially that about the head and neck, and invite
their friends to the eating of it. This they call Storjunkars Feast, and when
they have done they leave the skin behind them. This is not used in all
Storjunkars hills, but only in some peculiar place where he has manifested to
them that he will be worshipped so. The other way of sacrificing is when the
hill is so craggy that they cannot ascend it with their sacrifice, then they
throw up a stone to the top of the mountain, which they dip in the blood and go
away, as having paid their devotion. But as (besides the sacrifice) they once a
year honor Thor with a new Image; so do they Storjunkar with fresh bows twice
every year. The first time in Summer with birch and grass; next in Winter with
pine. The same also Tornaeus reports of the Seitas. Then it is they seek
whether their God be favorable and propitious to them or no: for when they go
to strew the bows and grass under him, if the stone proves light, they hope he
will be kind; but if it be something heavier then ordinary, they suspect he is
angry with them, and immediately to reconcile him they devote some oblations to
him. And thus are Peucerus his words to be understood, when the Laplanders
(says he) go a hunting or fishing, or upon any other enterprise, they try their
success by the weight of their God, who if he is easily moved, they take it for
granted that he approves of their design; if hardly, then he dislikes it: but
if he be unmovable then they suppose him offended with them. This is not to be
understood of all their affairs, but only when they lay fresh straw under him,
for at other times they enquire his pleasure with a drum, of which I have
already spoken.

It remains now that we treat of the sacrifices used to the Sun, these are
young Rain-dears, and those not bucks but does: the rites are most of them the
same with those already mentioned; only instead of a red string through the right
ear of Storjunkars sacrifice, they run a white one through the Suns; then they
make a garland, not of birch, but willow, about as big as the hoop of an
Hogshead. This they place upon a table behind the Hut where they sacrifice to
Thor, not upon the same table, but one like it. And this sacrifice differs from
the other in that there are neither images erected here, nor horns, the beasts
being not come to their growth. But that there may be some resemblance of the
Sun, they place the chief bones of the sacrifice upon the table in a circle.

Besides these 3 principal Gods they have some petty ones, as the Manes of
deceased men, and the Julii troops. They have no particular names for the
Ghosts, but call them all Sit: neither do they erect them images as they do
to Thor and Storjunkar; only they offer them some certain sacrifices. At which
time their first business is to enquire the will of the dead, whether it please
him to be worshipped with that kind of sacrifice in these words, Maijke werro
Jabmike sit, o you Manes what will you have, then they beat the drum, and if
the ring falls upon any creature there pictured they take it for the sacrifice
which the ghost desires: they then run through his ear, or, as others say, ty
about his horns a woollen black thread. Having performed the sacrifice, they
spend all the flesh upon their own uses; except a bit of the heart, and another
of the lungs: each of which they divide into 3 parts, and fasten them upon as
many sticks, which they dip in the blood of the sacrifice, and so bury them in
a kind of Chest made in the form of a Laplandish Dray, as they do the bones of
all other sacrifices. But of this I shall speak more at large when I come to
their funeral rites, where the same things are likewise used. I shall only add
that these rites are still observed in Lapland by all that are superstitiously
given. The Juhlii, whom they call Juhlafalket, as I said of the ghosts, have no
statues, nor images; the manner of worshipping them is in this sort. The day
before the festival, which is Christmas day, they abstain from all flesh: and
of every thing that they eat, they take a little piece and preserve it very
carefully, which they do likewise the next day. In their feasting, the bits
which they have gathered in these two days they put into a chest, made of the
bark of Birch, in the fashion of a Boat with sails and oars, together with some
fat of the pottage, and hang it upon a tree behind the Hut, about a bows shot
off, for the Juhlii to feast on, whom they then suppose to wander in troops in
the Air, through woods and mountains; a ceremony not unlike to the ancient
libations to the Genii. But why they do this in a Boat they can give no reason:
but we may conjecture that hereby is intimated how the knowledge of
Christs-birth (declared by the company of Angels, which as I have showed
already was the meaning of these Juhlii) was brought by Christians, who came to
them in Boats. So much of the Laplanders Idolatry and Superstition, which
remains to this day amongst many of them, as is found by daily experience.

CHAP. XI. Of the magical Ceremonies of the Laplanders.
IT has bin a received opinion among all that did but know the name of the
Laplanders, that they are People addicted to Magic, wherefore I thought fit to
discourse next of this, as being one of the greatest of their impieties that
yet continues among them. And that this opinion may seem to be grounded upon
some authority, they are described both by ancient and modern Writers, to have
arrived to so great skill in enchantments, that among several strange effects
of their art, they could stop ships when under full sail. This judgment of the
Historians concerning the Laplanders is no less verified also of the Biarmi
their predecessors. So that we may justly suppose both of them to have
descended from the same original: for the Biarmi were so expert in these arts
that they could either by their looks, words, or some other wicked artifice, so
ensnare and bewitch men, as to deprive them of the use of limbs and reason, and
very often bring them into extreme danger of their lives. But tho in these
latter times they do not so frequently practice this, and dare not profess it
so publicly as before, being severely prohibited by the King of Sweden: yet
there are still many that give themselves wholly unto this study. But if we
enquire into the motives and reasons hereof, this, formerly mentioned, seems
the principal, that every one thinks it the surest way to defend himself from
the injuries and malicious designs of others: for they commonly profess that
their knowledge in these things is absolutely necessary for their own security.
Upon which account they have Teachers and Professors in this science: and
parents in their last will bequeath to their children, as the greatest part of
their estate, those spirits and devils that have bin any ways serviceable to
them in their life time. Sturlesonius writes of Gunilda, a maid, that was sent
by her father Odzor Huide, who dwelt in Halogaland, to Motle King of Finlapland
in Norway, to be instructed in this art. Where he gives an account also of two
other Finlanders, and the great knowledge they attained to in this profession.
But it is very seldom that the parents themselves are not so learned, as to
perform the duty, and save the expenses of a tutor. Thus they become famous in
these studies, especially when they happen to be apt Scholars. For as the
Laplanders do not all agree in the same disposition, so neither do they arrive
to the same perfection in this art. For some are so stupid and dull, that
however they may seem qualified for other emploiments, they prove altogether
unfit for this.

As to the bequeathing their familiars to their Children, they suppose it the
only means to raise their family; so that they excel one another in this art,
according to the largeness of the legacies they receive. From hence it is
manifest, that each house has peculiar spirits, and of different and quite
contrary natures from those of others. And not only each distinct family, but
single persons in them also have their particular spirits, sometimes one, two,
or more, according as they intend to stand on the defensive part, or are
maliciously inclined and design to be upon the offensive: so that there are a
set number of obsequious spirits, beyond which none has. But however some of
these will not engage themselves without great solicitation, and earnest
entreaties, when others more readily profer themselves to little children, when
they find them fit for their turn, so that diverse of the Inhabitants are
almost naturally Magicians. For when the devil takes a liking to any person in
his infancy, as a fit instrument for his designs, he presently seases on him by
a disease, in which he haunts them with several apparitions, from whence
according to the capacity of his years and understanding he learns what belongs
to the art. Those which are taken thus a second time see more visions, and gain
greater knowledge. If they are seized a third time, which is seldom without
great torment, or utmost danger of their life, the devil appears to them in all
his shapes, by which they arrive to the very perfection of this art; and become
so knowing, that without the Drum they can see things at greatest distances,
and are so possessed by the devil, that they see them even against their will.
For example, not long since a certain Lap, who is yet alive, upon my complaint
against him for his Drum, brought it to me; and confessed with tears, that tho he
should part with it, and not make him another, he should have the same visions
he had formerly: and he instanc't in my self, giving me a true and particuliar
relation of whatever had happened to me in my journey to Lapland. And he farther
complained, that he knew not how to make use of his eyes, since things
altogether distant were presented to them.

As for the art, it is, according to the diversity of the instruments they make
use of in it, divided into two parts: one comprehends all that to which their
Drum belongs, the other those things to which knots, darts, spells,
conjurations, and the like refer. First concerning the drum, as being peculiar
to the Laplanders; and called by them Kannus, or Quobdas; it is made out of a
hollow piece of wood, and must either be of pine, fir, or birch tree, which
grows in such a particular place, and turns directly according to the Suns
course; which is, when the grain of the wood, running from the bottom to the
top of the tree, winds it self from the right hand to the left. From this
perhaps they believe this tree very acceptable to the Sun, which under the
image of Thor they worship with all imaginable devotion. The piece of wood they
make it of, must be of the root cleft asunder, and made hollow on one side,
upon which they stretch a skin: the other side, being unequal, is the lower
part, in which they make two holes, where they put their fingers to hold it.
The shape of the upper side is oval, in diameter almost half an ell, very often
not so much; it is like a kettle drum, but not altogether so round, nor so
hollow; neither is the skin fastened with little iron screwes, but wooden pegs.
I have seen some sowed with the sinews of Rain-dears. Olaus termed the drum
very improperly an anvil, tho I believe he only meant by this a drum, as will
appear hereafter. This perhaps made the Engraver mistake, who made a Smith's
anvil for it, placing a Serpent and a frog upon it, with a Smith's hammer by.
The Laplanders use only a drum, which perhaps because they beat it with a
hammer, was by Olaus called an anvil. They paint upon the skin several pictures
in red, stained with the bark of an Alder tree. They draw near the middle of
the drum several lines quite cross, upon these they place those Gods, to whom
they pay the greatest worship, as Thor the chief God, with his attendance, and
Storjunkar with his: these are drawn on the top of the line; after this they
draw another line parallel to the former, only half cross the drum, on this
stands the image of Christ with some of his Apostles. Whatever is drawn above
these two lines represents birds, Stars, and the Moon; below these they place
the Sun, as middlemost of the Planets, in the very middle of the drum, upon
which they put a bunch of brazen rings when they beat it. Below the Sun they
paint the terrestrial things, and living creatures; as Bears, Wolves,
Rain-dears, Otters, Foxes, Serpents: as also Marshes, Lakes, Rivers, etc. This
is the description of the drum according to Sam. Rheen, of which this is the
picture.

The Explication of the Figures.
In the Drum A. a marks Thor. b Thors Servant. c Storjnnkare. d his Servant. e
Birds. f Stars. g Christ. h his Apostles. i a Bear. k a Wolf. l a Rain-deer. m
an Ox. n the Sun. o a Lake. p a Fox. q a Squeril. r a Serpent.

In the Drum B. a denotes God the Father. b Jesus Christ. c the Holy Ghost. d
S. John. e Death. f a Goat. g a Squeril. h Heaven. i the Sun. l a Wolf. m the
fish Siik. n a Cock. o Friendship with the wild Rain-deer. p Anundus Eerici
(whose Drum this was) killing a Wolf. q Gifts. r an Otter. s the friendship of
other Lapps. t a Swan. u a sign to try the condition of others, and whether a
disease be incurable. x a Bear. y a Hog. b a Fish. g one carrying a Soul to
Hell.

depiction of a drum marked with mystical symbols, including gods, stars, birds
and animals

I have observed that several of their drums have not the same pictures upon
them, I have three very different; one, which is here set down, marked by the
letter B. They are described differently by Tornaeus, in which the figures are
distinguished so as to refer to several places, of which there are chiefly
three. In the first stands Norland, and other Countries of Sweden, which are
placed on the South side of the drum, and are separated by a line from the
rest; in this also is contained the next great City, where they trafic most; as
in the drums made at Torn, or Kiemi, there is drawn the City Torn, with the
Temple, Priest, and Governor of the Laplanders, and many others with whom they
have any concerns: as also the highway that lies betwixt them and Torn, by
which they discover when their Priest, or Governor will come; besides other
affairs managed in those parts. On the North part, Norway is described with all
that is contained in it. In the middle of these two stands Lapland, this takes
up the greatest part of the drum: in it are the several sorts of beasts that
are in the Country, here they picture herds of Rain-dears, Bears, Foxes,
Wolves, and all manner of wild beasts, to signify when, and in what place they
may find them. If a tame Rain-dear be lost, how they may get him again.
Whether the Rain-deers young ones will live. Whether their net fishing will be
successful. If sick men will recover, or not. Whether women great with child
shall have a safe delivery. Or such, or such a man will die of such a
distemper, or by what other; and other things of the like nature which they are
desirous to know. I cannot give an account of the reason for this difference in
the drums, unless it is that some of them are made for more malicious designs,
others again for each man's private purpose. Upon this account I believe,
according to the nature of the business they intend, they add, and blot out,
and sometimes wholly change the figures. But that you may the better understand
the diversity of the drums, here are two represented to you, both which I had
out of the Study of the Chancellor of the Kingdom.

The explication of the Figures.
In the Drum C. a denotes Birds. b black Foxes. c Tinur, a God. d Thor, a God.
e Thors hammer. f Storjunkare. g a wooden Idol. h his Servant. i a Star. k an
Ox. l a Goat. m a Star. n the Moon. o the Sun. p a Star. q another Star. r a
Wolf.

depiction of the upper and lower sides of a drum marked with mystical symbols,
which include gods, stars, birds and animals

The two greater Figures represent, one the upper, the other the lower side of
the Drum, and so do also the two lesser.

Besides these two drums, I had also a third given me by the same Lord of as
great a size as any that can be usually met with.

depiction of a large drum marked with mystical symbols

To these I add a fourth, given me by the Illustrious Baron Lieutenant Henry
Flemming, marked with the letter F.

depiction of a drum marked with mystical symbols

Now there are two things required to fit the drum for use, an Index and a
Hammer, that shows among the pictures the thing they enquire after, with this
they beat the drum. The Index is the bunch of brazen rings mentioned before.
They first place one great ring upon the drum, then they hang several small
ones upon that; the shape of the Index's is very different, for of these I have
one made of copper, of the bigness of a Dollar, with a square hole in the
middle, several small chains hanging about it instead of rings. Another has an
Alchymy ring, on which a small round plate of copper is hung by little chains.
I have seen another also of bone, in the shape of the Greek D, with rings about
it; and others of a quite different make. I have described mine under the drums
A, and B, by the mark G; but the common sort of rings are of copper, and those
upon the Chancellors drums are altogether such. Some Writers call these rings
serpents, or brazen frogs, and toads; not that they resemble them, but because
by them they signify these creature, whose pictures they often use in their
conjuring, as supposing them very grateful and acceptable to the Devil. The
Laplanders call the Index Arpa, or Quobdas; and make it indifferently of any
sort of metal. The hammer they use in raising their familiars, is not the
Smith's; which was the error of him that drew it in Olaus Magn. but is an
instrument belonging only to the Laplanders, and called by a peculiar name by
them: it is made of a Raindeers horn, branching like a fork, this is the head
of the hammer, the other part serves for the handle. The instrument is placed
under the two drums A. B. with the letter H, with the hammer they beat the
drum, not so much to make a noise, as by the drumming to move the ring lying on
the skin, so as to pass over the pictures, and show what they sought after.
This is the description of the drum, with all its necessaries as it is used by
the Laplanders that are subject to the Swedes; the Finlappers also that are
under the Crown of Danemarke, make use of drums something different in fashion
from the former; yet however the difference is so small, that I believe their
drums are not of a different kind from ours, but made only for some particular
uses. I shall give an account of one of those, described in Wormius's Study,
who says that the Laplanders drum, which they use in their magic, and by
beating which they discover those things they desired, is made of an oval piece
of wood hollowed, in length a foot, in breadth ten inches; in this they make
six holes, and put a handle to it, that they may hold in the left hand, whilst
they beat it with the other; upon it they stretch over a skin, painted with
diverse rude figures, drawn with blood, or red; upon this lies a piece of
brass, in the shape of a Rhomboides, scmewhat convexe, about two inches in
diameter, in the middle of this, and at each corner hangs a small chain. The
instrument, with which they beat the drum, is of bone, six inches long, about
the thickness of a little finger, and made much like the Latin T.

This instrument the Laplanders use for diverse designs, and are of opinion
that whatever they do it is don by the help of this. For this reason they have
it in great esteem and reverence, taking such care in securing it, that they
wrap it with the Index, and hammer, up in a Lambskin, and and for its greater
safety, lay it in some private place. But I think it an error, to suppose them
to lay it in a Lambskin: for it is written in some places Loomskin, which
signifies the skin of a bird that lives altogether in the water. They think it
so sacred, and holy, that they suffer no maid that is marriageable to touch it;
and if they remove it from place to place, they carry it the last of all, and
this must be don too only by men; or else they go with it through some untrod way,
that no body may either meet or follow them. The reason they give for their
great care in this particular, is, because they believe if any one, especially
a maid that is marriageable, should follow the same way, they would in three
days time at least fall into some desperate disease, and commonly without any
hopes of recovery. This they seem to verify by many examples, that we may give
the more credit to it; and we have the less reason to doubt the truth of this,
since the devil severely commands his worship to be observed, and suffers not
those rites and customs he has imposed to be violated, so long as God is
pleased to grant him this liberty. Now because it may happen sometimes that a
woman may out of necessity be constrained to go that way, by which the drum
has bin carried, the devil is so favorable as to permit it without any danger,
upon condition she first offers a brazen ring to the drum.

In the next place, because they believe they can effect very strange things by
the drum, we will show what they are, and the manner used to perform them.
These are three, belonging either to their hunting, their sacred affairs, or
lastly the enquiring into things far distant. I find four chiefly mentioned by
another Writer, the first is, the knowing the state of affairs in foreign
Countries. The second, what success their designs in hand will meet. With the
third, how to cure diseases. The fourth, what Sacrifices their Gods will be
pleased to accept, and what beast each God desires or dislikes most. As to the
way in making enquiries, it is not the same among all these artists. But the
great thing they generally observe, is, to stretch the skin very stiff, which
is don by holding it to the fire. The next is, that they beat not altogether in
the same place, but round about the Index; then that they beat softly at first,
presently quicker, and continue this till they have effected their intent. The
drummer first lifts up the drum by degrees, then beats softly about the Index,
till it begins to stir, and when it is removed some distance from its first
place to either side, he strikes harder, till the Index points at something,
from whence he may collect what he sought for. They take care also that as well
he that beats the drum, as those that are present at the ceremony, should be
upon their knees. As to the occasions of their beating thus, the later of those
is already discoursed of. Now we proceed to the rest, the first of which is
concerning their enquiries into things acted in remote parts. Those who desire
to know the condition of their friends, or affairs abroad, whether distant five
hundred, or a thousand miles, go to some Laplander, or Finlander skillful in
this art, and present him with a linen garment, or piece of silver, as his
reward, for satisfying them in their demands. An example of this nature is to
be seen upon record, at Bergen, a famous Market Town in Norway, where the
effects of the German Merchants are registered; in this place there was one John
Delling, Factor then to a German, to whom a certain Finlapper of Norway came
with James Samaousuend: of him John Delling enquired about his Master then in
Germany; the Finlapper readily consenting to tell him, like a drunken man
presently made a great bawling, then reeling and dancing about several times in
a circle, fell at last upon the ground, lying there sometime as if he were
dead, then starting up on a sudden, related to him all things concerning his
Master, which were afterward found to agree to what he reported. There are
many more instances of this kind: the most considerable, is one concerning a
Laplander, now living, who gave Tornaeus an account of the Journey he first
made to Lapland, tho he had never seen him before that time; which, although it
was true, Tornaeus dissembled to him, least he might glory too much in his
devilish practices, and rely upon them, as the only means whereby he might
attain to truth. The authority of this man is so considerable, that it may gain
credit enough to the Story. As to the method taken in making discoveries, it is
very different. Olaus Magn. describes it thus, the drummer goes into some
private room, accompanied by one single person, besides his wife, and by
beating the drum moves the Index about, muttering at the same time several
charms, then presently he falls into an ecstasy, and lies for a short time as
if dead; in the mean while his companion takes great care, that no gnat, fly,
or other living creature touch him; for his Soul is carried by some ill Genius
into a foreign Country, from whence it is brought back depiction of the
handle on a Lapland drum with a knife, ring, or some other token, of his
knowledge, of what is done in those parts; after this rising up, he relates all
the circumstances belonging to the business that was enquired after; and that
they may seem certainly so, he shows what he has brought from thence. Petr.
Claud. makes no mention either of the drum, charms, company, or those things he
brings with him; but says he casts himself upon the ground, grows black in the
face, lying as if dead for an hour or two; according as the distance of the
place is, of which he makes enquiry; when he awakes he gives a full account of
all affairs there. depiction of a drum being used in a magical ceremony It is
clear from what was said before, that they made use of a drum; and it is
observed that for this sort of conjuring the lower part of the drum, whereby
they hold it, was commonly shaped like a cross. One of this make was given me
by the Lord Henry Flemming, Colonel of a foot Regiment in Finland, the Figure
of it is in the page foregoing. They hang about it several claws, and bones of
the creatures they take. That several persons also, as well men as women, are
permitted to be present at this ceremony, is asserted by Sam. Rheen in his
history, where he says that the drummer sings a song, called by them Joiike,
and the men and women that are present sing likewise, some in higher some in
lower notes, this they call Duura. Next as to the casting themselves on the
ground, there are various relations, some think them not really, but only in
appearance dead; others are apt to believe that the soul departs from the body,
and after its travel abroad, returns again. But without doubt this is false,
for it is impossible, for either man, or devil, to restore the soul to the body
it has once left. So that I believe the devil only stifles the faculties of
the soul for a time, and hinders their operations. Now after the drummer falls
down, he lays his drum as near as possibly on his head, in this posture.

Those in the mean time that are present, leave not off singing all the time he
lies sweating in this agony; which they do not only to put him in mind, when he
awakes, of the business he was to know; but also that he recover out of this
trance, which he would never do, (as they imagine) if they either ceased
singing, or any one stirred him with their hand or foot. This perhaps is the
reason why they suffer no fly, or any living creature to touch him; and it is
upon this account only that they watch him so diligently, and not out of any
fear they have least the devil should take away his body; which opinion of
Peucers is altogether false. It is uncertain how long they lie in this manner,
but it is commonly according as the place where they make their discovery, is
nearer or farther off; but the time never exceeds 24 hours, let the place be
at never so great a distance. After he awakes he shows them some tokens to
confirm their belief in what he tells them. This is the first and chiefest use
they make of the drum.

The next is, how to know the event of their own concerns, and what success
their hunting will have, or any other business which they undertake, for they
seldom venture on any thing, without first consulting that. In order to the
knowing this, they place the bunch of rings on the picture of the Sun in the
drum; then they beat, singing at the same time; if the rings go round toward
the right hand, according to the Suns course they promise to themselves good
health, fortune, and great increase both of men and beasts; if contrary,
toward the left, they expect sickness and all the evils attending on ill
success. We may easily ground this opinion of theirs upon the other mentioned
above, where they believe the Sun the only Author of all productions. Wherefore
when the Index moves according to his motion, it portends prosperity by
following his course, from whom they expect all the good they receive. This is
the way they take in all their more weighty affairs, as in a journey, hunting,
removing their habitations, or any such like thing, of which something before,
and more hereafter. Before they hunt they make particular observation which way
the Index turns, whether East, West, North, or South; and collect from thence
where their game lies. Other things for which the drum is serviceable, are,
first, the discovering the nature of diseases, whether they arise from any
disorder in the body, or are caused by magic; this being known, then to find
the remedy for them, which is commonly by sacrifice to one or other of their
angry Gods, but chiefly to Storjunkar, who bears greatest authority among them,
and if not appeased, leaves them small hopes of recovery. Wherefore the sick
person vows a sacrifice, either of a Rain-deer, Bull, Goat, or Ram, or
something of this kind to one of the Storiunkars, that stands upon the
mountains. The sacrifice is not left to the disposal of the sick man, but must
be made according to the directions of the drummer; for he is supposed to be
the only man able to advise them in this case, he first discovers which of the
Gods is displeased, and what sort of sacrifice is most acceptable to him, for
they refuse several, and the same also at several times. But before the drummer
appeases their Gods, they give him a copper and a silver ring, putting them on
his right arm, then he begins a song, and beats the drum, and all that are
present join with him in a Chorus; after this according to the place, to which
the Index points, he directs them. These are the things commonly done by the
drum. The last thing for which they think it necessary, is, the accomplishing
their wicked designs, as impairing men's health, or depriving them of their
lives; which is frequently enough practiced among them, tho not altogether so
publicly as heretofore. Some of them account this only unlawful, and exclude
themselves out of the number of those, which use it, thinking the other uses of
the drum to consist chiefly in doing good. But however this mischievous Art
continues still too much among them. Several inhabitants of Kiema in Lapland
were apprehended in the year 1671, with drums, for this purpose so large, that
they could not be removed from thence, but were burnt in the place. Among those
Laplanders there was one four score years of age, that confessed he was bred up
in this art from his childhood, who in 1670 upon some quarrel about a pair of
mittens, caused a Boar of Kiema to be drowned in a Cataract, for which he was
condemned to die, and in order to that was to be carried in chains to the next
town in Bothnia, but in the journey he contrived so by his art, that on a
sudden, tho he seemed well, and lusty, he died on the sledge, which he had
often foretold he would sooner do, then fall into the Executioners hands. As to
the ceremonies used in this particular, either in their words, gesture, or any
other thing, I can give no account, finding none in those writings, from whence
I collected the rest. The reason for this, I suppose, is, because they
themselves keep this secret, as the great mystery in their art; or that no one
would enquire into them, least they should be thought guilty of this damnable
sin.

Having treated largely of the drum, we come to the other parts of this art, to
which also belong proper sorts of instruments: the first is a cord tied with
knots for the raising of wind. They, as Zeiglers relates it, tie three magical
knots in this cord; when they untie the first, there blows a favorable gale of
wind; when the second, a brisket; when the third, the Sea and wind grow mighty
stormy, and tempestuous. This, that we have reported concerning the Laplanders,
is by Olaus Magnus, and justly, related of the Finlanders, who border on the
Sea, and sell winds to those Merchants that trafic with them, when they are at
any time detained by a contrary one. The manner is thus, they deliver a small
rope with three knots upon it, with this caution, that when they loose the
first, they shall have a good wind, if the second, a stronger, if the third,
such a storm will arise, that they can neither see how to direct the ship, and
avoid rocks, or so much as stand upon the decks, or handle the tackling. No
other Writers mention this concerning the Laplanders, and I am apt not to think
it at all probable, since they live in an inland Country, bordering no where
upon the Sea. Wherefore this properly belongs to the Finlappers in Norway. Now
those that are skilled in this art, have command chiefly over the winds that
blew at their birth; so that this wind obeys principally one man, that another,
as if they obtained this power when they first received their breath; now as
this belongs chiefly to the Finlappers and Finlanders of Norway, so does the
stopping of the course of ships, which is altogether of the same nature. This
is also attributed to the Laplanders, who according to the different affection
they have for Merchants, make the Sea either calmer, or more tempestuous.

We come now to their magical Darts, which they make of lead, in length about a
finger; by these they execute their revenge upon their enemies, and according
to the greatness of the injury received, they wound them with cankrous
swellings, either in the arms, or legs, which by the extremity of its pain,
kills them in three days time. They shoot these darts to what distance they
please, and that so right too, that they seldom miss their aim. Olaus Magnus
reports the same in his writings, which I believe is only a transcript of
Zeigler's, the words being the same, and without doubt he follows him in this
particular as he has in many others. But I suppose they are both mistaken, and
misrender'd them leaden darts, since I can find no person in these times that
knows of any such; neither is there any mention made of them in any other
writers, or by the common People, who seldom omit such circumstances as these
in their relations. But they might perhaps be mistaken in supposing them to be
made of lead, by misunderstanding the word Skott, which is commonly used for
their explanation. For when either man or beast is suddenly taken with a
disease, by which their strength fails, and they immediately perish; the common
People call this that takes them so Skott, that is a dart. This might make
Zeigler think to be really some dart, which the inhabitants are wholly ignorant
of, and most among us believe these things to be effected by some other means.
Petrus Claudius calls it a Began, which they send abroad: he likens it to a fly,
but says it is some little devil, of which the Finlanders in Norway that
excel most in this art, keep great numbers in a leathern bag, and dispatch
daily some of them abroad. Of these he relates a story, that happened in his
time: an Inhabitant of Helieland, who is still alive, going toward the
mountains in Norway to hunt Bears, came to a cave under the side of a hill,
where he found an image rudely shapen, which was the Idol of some Finlander;
near this stood a Ganeska, or magical satchel: he opened this, and found in it
several bluish flies crawling about, which they call Gans, or spirits, and are
daily sent out by the Finlanders to execute their devilish designs. But he
seems to intimate no more by this word Began, then that very thing which
endangers men's health, and lives. For he says that these Finlanders cannot
live peaceably, except they let out of their Ganeska or Gankiid, which is the
fatchel, every day one of the Gans, that is a fly or devil. But if the Began can
find no man to destroy, after they have sent him out, which they seldom do upon
no account at all, then he roves about at a venture, and destroies the first
thing he meets with; sometimes they command it out to the mountains, to cleave
rocks asunder: however these conjurers will, for very trivial causes, send out
their Began to ruin men. This word Began signifies no more then what Zeigler meant
by his dart, for the term by which they express its going out is de Skiuda
deris Began, that is, he as it were shoots out his Began like an arrow, for Skiuda
is only proper to the shooting out of an arrow.

This is the third thing belonging to their magic, which they use as well
against one another as strangers; nay sometimes against those that they know
are their equals in the art. Of this kind there happened a notable passage
betwixt two Finlanders, one of which was called Asbioern Gankonge, from his
great knowledge in the art, the other upon some small difference concerning
their skill, or some such trifle, would have destroyed Asbioern, but was still
prevented by his too powerful art, till at last finding an opportunity, as
Asbioern lay sleeping under a rock, he immediately dispatched away a Began, that
cleft the rock asunder, and tumbled it upon him. This happened in the time of
Petrus Claud. not long before he wrote his History. Some of the Conjurers are
contented only with the power to expel that Began out of men, or beasts, which
others send. This is remarkable among them, that they can hurt no man with
their Began, except they first know his parents name.

Now all that the Finlanders and Finlappers of Norway effect by their Began, the
Laplanders do by a thing they call Tire. This Tire is a round ball, about the
bigness of a wallnut, or small apple, made of the finest hair of a beast, or
else of moss, very smooth, and so light that it seems hollow, its color is a
mixture of yellow, green, and ash, but so that the yellow may appear most. I
had one of these given me by Mr John Otto Silverstroem, Warden of the College
belonging to the metals, and Master of the Mines at Saltzburg and Frahlune.
This is the figure of it.

depiction of attire, a round ball used in Lapland ritual

This Tire they say is quickened and moved by a particular art? it is sold by
the Laplanders, so that he that buies it may hurt whom he pleases with it. They
do persuade themselves, and others, that by the Tire they can send, either
Serpents, Toads, Mice, or what they please into any man, to make his torment
the greater. It goes like a whirlewind, and as swift as an arrow, and destroies
the first man, or beast, that it lights on, so that it often mistakes. Of these
we have too many instances in this time, which are too long to insert here:
having therefore done with all, or at least the chiefest matters concerning
their sacred, and superstitious rites, or worship; we proceed to other affairs.

CHAP. XII. Of the Government of the Laplanders.
WE come now to their secular affairs, which are either public or private: we
will treat first of the public, to which belong the form and constitution of
their Government. This in former times, before they were named Laplanders, was
in this manner; they were subject to no neighboring Country, but were governed
among themselves, yet so as to be subject to a King, they chose out of their
own Nation. Most of them, or at least those which bordered on Norway, and dwelt
near the Sea, were under this kind of Government, in the time of Harauld
Harfager King of Norway, cotemporary with Ericus the Conqueror, King of the
Swedes, this was 900 years after Christ; he conquered the greatest part of
Norway, except these Finlanders. The King that reigned over them at that time,
was named Mottle. This account was questionless taken from Haralds expedition
into Biarmia, and his ruining all that Country, except the part belonging to
these Finlanders. In those times the name of Laplanders was neither used, nor
known, as I have shown elsewhere, but they retained that of their ancestors,
which was also common to all of the same extraction.

Their condition was not much altered, after that they took this name, which
was when they first sent out Colonles into the inland Countries, on the farther
part of the mountains, which divide Swedland from Norway. For they that went
out had certainly some Leader, whom without doubt they chose for King, after
they had taken possession of those Countries; and I believe they would scarcely
submit to any other power whilst that he was living; and this seems the more
probable, because no one in those days would undertake the conquest of a
company of poor beggarly fugitives, who dwelt among Woods and Deserts, in
continual snow and the greatest extremity of cold. This was the Moscovites
opinion of them, who tho they dwelt near them, scarcely knew their nature and
disposition, and thought it madness to set upon them with a small party, and an
adventure of little profit, and less honor to raise an Army against a Country
already distressed by poverty. For this reason the Laplanders enjoied their own
customs for a long time. The first King of Sweden that had any thoughts of
conquering them was Ladulaus the great, who flourished about the year 1277, who
because it seemed difficult to bring them under the Crown of Sweden, promised
those that would undertake the conquest, the government over them. He thought
it too expensive to make a public war upon them, when they were to be dealt
with as wild beasts; yet however could not endure that a neighboring People,
dwelling almost in the heart of his Country, for they possessed at that time as
far as the Bay of Bothnia, should refuse obedience to his Kingdom. Wherefore he
thought upon the before mentioned project, and proposed great advantages to
private persons, upon which the Birkarli, their neighbors, readily engaged
themselves, and effected their enterprise no less successfully. In this design,
the plot of a particular person was most remarkable, as is related by Ericus,
and recorded by John Buraeus. One single man of the Birkarli went toward
Lapland to way-lay the Laplanders in their return from Birkala, (at this time
no one inhabited on the North side of that allotment) and ordered his wife to
cover him over with snow, in the middle of the way where the Laplanders must
necessarily pass over him. They came in the night time, and by their passing
over him he knew there were fifteen, which were the chief among them, and to
whom the rest were in subjection; when they were gone, he immediately arose out
of the snow, and going some shorter way, set upon them at unawares, as they
passed by, one by one, which is their usual way in traveling, and slew them
one after another. None of those that followed perceived the first men slain,
it being in the night time, and each of them at some distance from the others;
till the last man finding his fellows killed, made a stout resistance, but the
Birkarla by the assistance of his wife got the victory, and slew him likewise.
Thus the most powerful of them being slain, the rest readily submitted. Some
think the Birkarli deluded them by a pretended truce, and that before it was
expired, they assaulted them, not suspecting then the least danger, and killing
several, subdued the Country, as far as the Northern and Western Oceans. We
may easily collect from the truce mentioned here, that before their subjection
to the Swedes by the Birkarli, there was some kind of war betwixt both:
besides, it was shown above, that Ladulaus could not bring them under his
Crown. This perhaps may be Zeiglers meaning, when he describes them as a
warlike People, and free for a great time, that they also withstood the Arms of
Norway and Sweden, till they were forced at last to yield; but what Zeigler
imputes to their valor, proceeded only from the contemt they were then in, as
is plain from the opinion the Moscovites gave of them. And there is little
reason to suppose the Swedes were not of the same, since they were overcome
only by the allotment of Birkala; and Ladulaus did not conquer them out of any
fear he conceived of their forces, but by sleight, foreseeing the small
advantages he should receive would not quit the charges of an Army. Thus the
Laplanders were brought in subjection by the subtilty and expense of private
persons. About the year of our Savior 1277, the Birkarli had the authority over
them; yet so as to acknowledge their dependence on the King of Sweden. Now
whether all of them were thus overcome, as those that lived beyond the
mountains of Norway, near the Sea, which are the Finlanders, or Lappofinni, is
still in doubt, except we collect it from this, that all from the Northern and
Western Oceans were certainly subjected. But whatever dispute may arise
concerning that, it is manifest the Swedes were the first Conquerours of
Lapland, but afterward the Norwegians and Moscovites following their example,
put in also for a part; thus they became subject to these three several
Princes. But to pass by the others, the Swedes enjoyed, for some former ages,
half the dominions from Tidisfiorden to Walangar, over the Lappofinni, or
maritime Finlanders. This was given by Charles the IX, in his instructions to
his Ambassadors, sent to the King of Danemark, wherein he made it appear that
the Swedes had from former times, till then, enjoied half the rights, both
sacred and civil, whether as to tributes, punishments, men, or fisherie, with
the Crowns of Danemark and Norway. But the Swedes kept only a third part from
Malanger to Waranger, those of Norway and Moscovy laying claim to the other
two, till in the year 1595, the Moscovites, by a League, delivered up their
part, but the Swedes always possessed the mountainous and more neighboring
places from Ladulaus's time, for near four hundred years, and exercised their
authority over them. The Government after the conquest was in the hands of the
Birkarli, according to the grant given them by Ladulaus, who ruled over those
that dwelt near the Bay of Bothnia, imposed taxes, trafficked with them, and
received all the profit of the Salmon fishing, and all other advantages arising
from them; but in acknowledgement to the King, as Supreme, they paid a certain
number of gray Squirrils skins. The Laplanders, by common consent, received and
honored the Bergchara, that is men of the mountains, or Birkarli, as their
Governors, and paid them very rich skins, and several sorts of fish, both for
their tribute to the King of Sweden, and their own proper uses. Neither were
there any other commissioned by the King in those times to govern them, as will
appear afterward. He, that was their Governor was honored by them with the
title of King, his authority was confirmed by the Crown of Sweden, he wore a red
robe, as the token of his Roialty; now from this sort of garment, by which the
Birkarli were distinguished from others, it is evident they were the first
rulers in those parts; and perhaps only one governed them, whilst they dwelt
near the Bay of Bothnia, but when they enlarged their possessions farther into
the Land, and were divided into several Counties, each division had its
particular Governor. And that it was so, is manifested from the Letters of
Gustavus the first, where he divides the Birkarli into Luhlians, Pythians, and
Tornians, over which accordingly there were several Governors. It may perhaps
now be a dispute, who these Birkarli were, by whom the Swedes subdued Lapland;
Buraeus says they were the Inhabitants of the allotment, of Birkala, but Olaus
Magnus is of a different opinion, and calls them Bergchara, that is, men of the
mountains, from Berga mountain, and Charar or Karar men. What grounds he has
for this, he neither declares, nor can I easily imagine. But I think them so
small that they will find little credit any where; for from whence, or from
what mountains should they be thus called? not from those of Norway, when at
that time no body inhabited there; neither are there any other mountains
besides these, from whence they should take this name: moreover, the Birkarli
were subjects to the Swedes, and conversed commonly with the Laplanders. The
public records also contradict this opinion, for in them there is no mention of
Bergcharli, but Birkarleboa. It is yet clearer also from the Letters of Cnute
Joanson, written in Latin, in the year 1318, where he says in the Parliament
held at Telge, betwixt the Helsingers and Birkarleboa in his presence, there
was issued out this Placart, etc. This serves to confute Olaus. It is more
evident that they came from Birkala, an allotment in Tavastia, and described in
the Mapps. Next, as to Gustavus the first mentioning the Birkarli, in the
foresaid Letters, as belonging to several marches, viz. Luhla, Pitha, and
Torna it was upon this account: the Birkarli that descended from those of
Tavastia, were placed in these several Towns to govern the Laplanders, and
because they only had the privilege of commerce with them, they were called
Merchants. They were used in the Summer to buy those commodities of the
Merchants that came to Bothnia, which were necessary for the Laplanders, and in
the Winter, when the Rivers and Lakes were frozen over, they carried them up
into the Country. This way of trafic was used by all the Inhabitants of
Bothnia, but perhaps only at first by one allotment, which growing populous,
several of the Inhabitants removed farther into the Country, and retained the
same privilege that was first granted by Ladulaus, viz. that no one, but they,
should claim any privileges over the Laplanders, either as to the Government,
tribute, commerce, or any thing of this nature, which privileges they for a
long time enjoied, as is confirmed by the Letters wrote by Cnute Joanson, in
the time of King Smecke, in which it was provided that the Birkarli should not
be molested either in their passage to or from the Laplanders. This privilege
they maintained till Gustavus the first, who made a Contract with them at Vpsal
on the 4th of April 1528, concerning the yearly tribute they were to pay to the
Crown, for the great advantages they received from the Laplanders. This tribute
was only in respect of the privileges the Birkarli had from Ladulaus's time
till then, these were so largely granted, that they settled them as hereditary
upon their children, and none but those descended from the Birkarli could enjoy
them. This Gustavus also confirmed according to the former grants made to their
ancestors, but with this alteration that they should pay half as much more, as
they did formerly. This Government the Birkarli exercised over the Laplanders
which they got by subtility, had their authority from the King of Sweden,
preserved it in their own family, and delivered it down to their children for
near 300 years, till Gustavus the first, by reason of their insulting over the
common People, deprived them of this state; for when their riches increased
they oppressed the poorer sort, and extorted so much from them that they left
them very little, but that which was worth nothing. Upon this, complaint was
made to Gustavus, who thereupon committed Henricus Laurentii to prison, and
confiscated most of his estate, taking then the tribute from the Laplanders
into his hands, and granted to all People free trading with them. This Henricus
Laurentii was without doubt in that time the head of the Birkarli, and I
believe the brother of David Laurentii, who, together with Jonas Nicolas,
concluded the Treaty with Gustavus in the name of the Birkarli, in the year
1528, for settling the tribute, and other affairs. From hence we may collect
they lost their privileges, not long after this Contract; now it was not only
just to deprive them of those privileges, which they abused in oppressing
others, but prudent, as well from the jealousy of too great a power granted to
private persons over so large and populous a part of the Kingdom, as out of
consideration of its wealth, which was more necessary to the Kings, for driving
out the common enemy, ane establishing the Kingdoms liberty, then to maintain
the pride of the Birkarli, who besides their injustice, were inconsiderable
both in number and strength. Gustavus the first having thus deposed the
Birkarli, sent Deputies to gather the tribute, and manage all things in the
Kings name; the Deputies are called by the Swedes, Lappfougder, by the
Laplanders, Konunga Olmai, that is the Kings men; of these there is mention
made in the patent granted by Gustavus the first to Mr Michael, the first
Priest in Lapland in 1559, the words are to this purpose, We command all the
Inhabitants of Lapland, as well Deputies, as others, etc. These had at first
the charge of all public affairs, as will appear in the following Chapter, as
for collecting taxes, as executing justice among them. But afterward, when
Charles the ninth divided the Country into several parts, and formed it into
better order, more were added to the former, for examining causes, convicting
of criminals, and other such like things, till at last the state of Government
was little different from what it is now. Next under the King, they have a
Provincial Judge called by the Swedes, Lagman, under him one of the Senators,
Vnderlagman, next an Interpreter of the Laws, Laglaesaren, and diverse others
which enquire into causes, and do justice; then they have a Governor of the
Province, Landzhoefdingh, a head over the Laplanders, Lappafougten, their
Officers who perform all other duties. In this manner the Laplanders are now
governed by the Swedes.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Judicatures and Tributes of the Laplanders.
AFTER the manner of their Government, and the discipline they live under, we
descend to those affairs that are managed by it; which belong either to the
Courts of Judicature, or to the Tribute. I can scarce find any mention of the
former. Their own Kings, when they were a free Nation, exercised this authority,
and kept the jurisdiction in their own hands; but when the Birkarli ruled them,
it depended altogether on their pleasure. Zeigler makes no mention of any Judges
among them, but says that if any dispute happened that was dubious, it was
referred to the Courts in Swedland; I suppose he means the more weighty
controversies, which the Birkarli could not, or did not dare to decide. But
these were very rare with them, for great crimes, as theft, rapine, murder,
adultery, or such like are seldom committed, and scarce known by the
Laplanders. They neither borrow nor lend money, being content with what they
possess of their own, which are commonly the occasions of quarrels in other
Nations, and maintain so many Lawyers. The chief sin they are guilty of, is
their magical superstition, which since their embracing Christianity, is
forbidden by the Laws, and is not so frequent as formerly. After that Gustavus
the first had deposed the Birkarli, and given them governors of their own, they
lived under better discipline, and greater diligence was used in seeing Justice
done, but Charles the ninth was the first that took care to have them
instructed in the Swedish Laws, and that they should regulate themselves
accordingly. This charge was given by the same King in his instructions to
Laurentius Laurentii, Governor of Lapland, dated from Stockholm on the 10th of
Oct. 1610, wherein he commanded him to govern those of Vma, Pitha, and Luhla,
according to the Swedish Laws, and to protect them from all injuries. There are
at present in Lapland three Governors, and as many Courts of Judicature; the
first is called Anundsioeense, or Angermansian, the other Vhmensian, Pithensian
and Luhlensian, the other is the Tornensian, and Kiemensian. Over these are
particular Governors, who in the Kings name pass Sentence, but in the presence
of a Judge and a Priest; where it is observable that they added Priests to the
Governors, to restrain them from doing injustice by the authority of their
presence. Now as to the time when these Courts were called, it is a doubt, but
I believe it was at the Fair times, when they met about all public business;
this was commonly twice in a year, viz. in Winter and Summer, according to an
order of Charles the ninth's. It is now in January and February. They were held
in the same places where they kept their Markets and Fairs, which were
determined in each particular County, as will appear by and by.

Now we come to the Tribute they paid, which at first was only skins of beasts,
paid not by the Laplanders, but the Birkarli, yet only as an acknowledgement of
their subjection to the Crown of Sweden. Buraeus calls it naogra timber
graoskin, graoskin signifies gray Squirrils skins, of which color the Squirrils
were constantly in the Winter; timber denotes the number of the skins, which
were forty, tied together in a bundle. It is uncertain how many of these
bundles the Birkarli gave, but in the Contract with Gustavus the first, those
of Luhla and Pitha were engaged to pay 8, which makes in all 360 skins, besides
two Martins skins. Those also of Torn were taxed with the same number; and
shortly after this number was doubled, by an agreement made in 1528. But after
the Birkarli had lost their privileges, for the forementioned reasons, and the
King received the tax by Commissioners for himself, it is very probable some
more alteration were made. In the year 1602 they paid instead of skins every
tenth Rain-deer, and one tenth of all their dried fish; which is clear from the
commands given by Charles tc-his Deputies Olaus Burman and Henry Benegtson, at
Stockholm on the 22d of July in the same year, to require the tribute in this
manner, that so the Laplanders might know what and how much they were to pay:
for it seems that from Gustavus the first's time, till then, the Governors used
no constant method in raising it, but sometimes demanded skins, at other times
other sorts of goods that seemed most necessary for present use; so that by
this uncertainty the tribute grew very heavy upon the Inhabitants, and their
Governors took occasion from it to exact what they pleased under pretense of
the public account, for their own proper uses. Yet this custom continued not
long, being thought perhaps too burdensome to the Laplanders, and very
prejudiciable to their herds; wherefore it was ordered in 1606, that every one
which was then 17 years of age, should pay either two Bucks, or three Does out
of their herds of Rain-deers, and eight pound of dried fish; as also every
tenth Fawn out of their stock, and every tenth tun from their fishery. This tax
was also imposed on the Birkarli that had any trafic with them. This order was
kept a long while, and renewed again by the same King in 1610. The tribute they
pay at this time is either money, Rain-deers, or skins, either plain or fitted
up for use. These they pay according to the largeness of the Provinces in which
they dwell, the largest of which, they say, are even heel skatt, that is, they
pay the full tribute; the lesser even half skatt, that is, half tribute; and so
likewise for the rest. He that possesses a Province of the whole tribute, pays
two Patacoons, which they call Skattadaler, and others that have lesser
possessions and half tribute, give one Patacoon; those which want money, pay
fish or skins, which are commonly of Foxes or Squirrils, of these 50, of the
others one with a pair of Lapland shoes, are equal to a Patacoon: two pounds
also of dry fish are of the same value; now to every pound of dried fish they
allow five over, because so much is commonly lost in the drying. They call this
pound with its addition Skattpund, that is the pound for tribute. They value
their Rain-deers at 3 Dollars a piece, and pay the tenths of them, not each
family, but every hundred. I have set the prices down here, because if any one
had rather keep his Cattle, he can be forced to no more then after this rate.
Now concerning the tenths they pay of skins, every householder is taxed one
white Foxe's skin, or a pair of Lapland shoes; if he has neither of these,
half a pound of dried Jack. This is the Tribute yearly received by the Crown of
Sweden from Lapland, of which the greatest part is commonly by the Kings
gracious favor allowed for the maintenance of their Priests, as was shown in
another place. Now because it is so far both by Sea and Land, before these
commodities can be brought to the Kings Storehouses, besides the ordinary tax
they give a pair of Lapland shoes, which they call Haxapalka, that is the price
for carriage. This is all they pay to the King of Sweden, but besides they are
tributary to the Crown of Danmark, and the great Duke of Moscovy, not as
Subjects to these Princes, but upon the account of their receiving several
advantages from their Dominions in their hunting and fishing. Those that are
thus, are all the allotments of Torna beyond the mountains, who by reason of
the liberty they have to bring down their Cattle from the mountains into the
valleys in the Summer time, near the Sea shore, and taking the opportunity from
thence of fishing, are taxed by the Danes, but not at above half the rate that
they pay to the Swedes. These allotments are called Koutokeine, Aujouara, Teno,
and Vtziocki. The Laplanders also of the allotment of Lnare in Kiemi, are in
the same condition, who for fishing and hunting pay both to the Danes and
Moscovites as well as to the Swedes: to the first one half, to the other a
third part of what the Swedes receive. The tribute was in former time gathered
when the Governor pleased, but afterward only in the Winter, against which
time it was all brought into Storehouses, each County having its proper place
for that purpose. But when the place for their Markets and Fairs was
determined, the Governor came thither and received it, which course they still
take in this business. That this was also the time for receiving it, will
appear from the account I shall give of their Fairs in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Laplanders Fairs, and Customs in Trading.
THAT we may not yet leave the Public concerns of the Laplanders, of which we
have treated, let us proceed in the next place to consider their Fairs and
common Markets, in which what Customs they anciently used is not so well known.
Paulus Jovius says that among the Laplanders he that had any thing to sell,
after he had exposed his Wares, went his way and left them, and that the
Chapman coming, and taking what was for his turn, left in the place the full
value thereof in white furrs or skins. The reason why they did not speak and
bargain with their Chapmen, he says was, because they were a rustic People,
extremely fearful, and ready to run away from the very sight of a ship, or
stranger. Others, that are of a more probable opinion, confess indeed that they
used no words in their trading, but that it was not out of rusticity, want of
cunning, or the like; but because they had a language quite different from
others, and so peculiar to themselves, that they could neither understand, nor
be understood of their neighbors: so that it was rather the barbarism, and
roughness of their speech, then manners, that made them use this dumb way of
traffiking, But of their language we shall treat in its proper place.

Concerning their trading with their neighbors, it is most certain that it was
performed without words, by nods and silent gestures: neither was it properly a
buying and selling (for they did not of old use either gold or silver) but
rather an exchange of one commodity for another. So that whereas Zieglerus
tells us they did permutatione and pecunia commercia agere, we may justly doubt
whether it be not rather to be read nec pecunia, (unless happily he intend
pecunia in the primary sense, and has more respect to the original of the
word, then to the acception now in use.) And truly this way of exchange among
them, in those ancient times, was no less then necessary; when indeed, as well
the neighboring Countries, as the Laplanders were quite strangers to any
current money; and this we may understand from the Swedes, among whom there were
in those days either no coins at all; or else only such as had bin transported
out of England and Scotland, the use of the Mint being then utterly unknown in
that Country. And if at that time there was no money in Swedland, it is
certainly no great wonder there should be none in Lapland. But neither in after
times, and when they were under the Jurisdiction of the Birkarli, could the
Laplanders come to the use of money; for they that were Lords over them,
monopolizing the whole trade to themselves, did not give them money for their
commodities, but such other merchandise, as their Country stood in need of. In
fine to this very day the Laplanders know no other money but the Patacoon and
half Patacoon; other coins whether of copper, silver, or gold, they do not so
much value, which will give us to understand that the use of money among them
cannot be of any long date, for the Patacoon is but of later days, and was
never known before the discovery of the Mine in the Vale of Joachim.

These Patacoons they value singly at 2 onces of silver a piece, whence it
appears that as they had no other money, so neither did this pass current among
them, but only by weight, and as if it were in the Mass: and I believe was not
at all in use, until they were forced to pay tribute in that kind, of which I
have discoursed before, and showed that it was but of late instituted. But what
Damianus means by his permutatione tantum annonam and pecuniam acquirunt, we
cannot so easily guess; for we do not say that men barter and deal by exchange
when money is paid for a commodity: for to what end should those People seek
after getting money, which was in use neither among themselves nor their
neighbors; so that perhaps here also we ought to read nec pecuniam, and then
the sense runs, that they were not so sollicitous in getting money, as in
providing the more necessary things of life: although neither is that true which
he delivers of their provisions, as will appear from what follows.

But whatsoever Damianus means, it is most certain that in all their commerce
they did but exchange one thing for another; and that to this day the same
custom remains among them, who are now concerned for no more money then what is
sufficient to pay their tribute. Only if there is any commodity among them of
great and extraordinary value, that indeed is to be bought with money.

Their custom is now, not as formerly, to bargain by signs and nods, but either
they use speech, (for there are many of them now that are skilled in that of
their neighbors) or Interpreters, of which there are plenty enough among them.
They with whom they trafic are for the most part their neighbors, on the one
side the Swedes and Norwegians, on the other the Finlanders, Russians, and
Moscovites. Neither was it otherwise in old times, unless when they were under
the power of the Birkarli, who endeavoring to get all the trade into their own
hands, did more narrowly watch those that were nighest Sweden, that so they
might exclude all but themselves from trafficking in any part of Lapland. The
power that we read was given the Birkarli over the Laplanders by Ladulaus the
great King, I suppose, chiefly consisted in this; for the other special rights
and privileges, which they and their ancestors for a long time possessed,
Gustavus the first has set down, as I have in another place declared.

And this we may also gather from the prohibition of Charles the ninth, denying
the Birkarli the privilege of trafficking in Lapland, as they had formerly
done. The words of the injunction published in the year 1602 are to this
purpose; And we do utterly forbid the Birkarli any more to trade for skins or
other commodities, as they have formerly used. Before this time therefore they
were either the only, or chief Merchants in Lapland, whither when they had
brought their merchandise, they went round the Country purchasing all the skins
they could, of which afterward they made great sums of money. And this they
continually did till the time of Gustavus the first, when that privilege began
to be denied them; by which they were grown so rich and powerful, and what is
the common consequent thereof, proud and haughty.

But neither could Gustavus provide against all their arts and evasions; for
tho he took from them all power over the Laplanders, yet they being better
skilled in the commodities of the Country and constitution of the People then
others, did still, tho not so openly, keep correspondence and trafic with them,
till in the year 1602, in the time of Charles the ninth, they were forbid by
the forementioned injunction, at any time, or in any place, to hold any
commerce with them, and the monopoly of all skins was annexed to the Crown; a
certain rate being set at which they were to be sold. The words of the Edict
are thus: Whatsoever skins are found in Lapland, we do command and enjoin our
Governors to buy up for our use, according to the statute and rate in that case
provided. And this was also again enforced in the year 1610, only in this there
was a clause inserted, that the skins of Elkes should be brought into the Kings
tresury gratis. The clause runs thus: And we do command all Laplanders in our
name to bring to our Governors all saleable skins, for which they shall return
the worth in other commodities, as is by statute provided; but the skins of
Elkes they shall seize upon for our use, not giving any consideration for them;
if any man shall take this beast, it shall be lawful for him to keep the flesh
for his own private use, but the skin shall belong to Us and our Crown. But
their trading is now grown more general, and they have of late years learned to
deal more freely and openly with other Nations; for they that dwell among the
mountains that divide Norway and Swedland, deal both with the Norwegians and
Swedes, and they that live more Northerly and Easterly with the Russians and
Finlanders.

But I come to the commodities themselves, which Jovius says are only white
skins, or furrs, called Ermines. Zieglerus reckons fishes also, of which they
have so great draughts, that they are forced to keep them in trunks and ponds
till they can transport them into Northbothnia and Russia alba. But there are
several other sorts of skins, which Olaus Magnus comprehends under a more
general term, and calls pelles pretiosas. Sam. Rheen gives us this catalogue of
them, the commodities of the Laplanders are, Raindeers, skins of Raindeers,
skins of black, yellow, blew, white Foxes; skins of Otters, of Gluttons, or
Badgers, of Martins, of Beavers, of Squirrils, of Wolves, and of Bears,
Laplandish garments, Boots, shoes, Gloves, dried Pike, and Cheeses of
Rain-deers. With these commodities the Laplanders traffic for Silver,
Patacoons, Woollen and linen Cloth, Copper, Alchimy, Salt, Corn, Bulls hides,
Sulphur, Needles and Pins, Knives, Spirit of Wine, and which is more strange
for Tobacco, of which as I said before they are great admirers.

Upon all these things as was but now declared, there was a certain rate set by
Charles the ninth, according to which they were to be bought up for the use of
the Crown; and the same custom is so far yet observed, that to this very day,
with whomsoever they deal, they have a certain estimate, whereby they prize
both their own and others commodities: the proportion of which rates is
according to the Patacoon, or which is the same thing with them, 2 ounces of
silver. For example, an ordinary Rain-deer they value at 2 Patacoons, or 4
ounces of silver, the skin of a wild Rain-deer at one Patacoon and, or 3 ounces
of silver; the skin of a tame male Rain-deer at one Patacoon, but if castrated,
at of a Patacoon, and if a female at. So likewise an ordinary Fox skin is worth
a Patacoon, 40 gray colored Squirril skins are valued at the same price, which
number of those skins they call timber. The skin of a Martin at the same price,
3 white Fox skins at the same price, a Bears skin is worth 2 Patacoons, and a
Wolves skin as much, an ordinary Laplandish garment, which they call Mudd, is
worth 3 Patacoons, a pair of Boots half a Patacoon, and 4 pair of shoes, 4 pair
of gloves, and one pound of dried Pike, each of them are valued at the same
price.

Now on the other side, of the commodities for which they traffic, an ell of
ordinary cloth, commonly called Silesian or Tangermyndense, they esteem at the
rate of a Patacoon, or 2 ounces of silver; 3 pound of Copper at the same rate,
and one tunn of corn at 2 Patacoons and, or 5 ounces of silver, 2 pound of Salt
at of a Patacoon, 10 yards of course cloth, such as we call homespun, and they
call Waldmar, is worth a Patacoon, a Can of spirit of Wine half as much; but if
they chance to light upon any commodities of a lower price, they value them by
gray colored Squirril skins, proceeding from one to 10, which number of skins
they call Artog, and value at of a Patacoon, and these are the commodities that
drive the trade between the Swede and Laplander. But to those of Norway they
carry all sorts of coverlets, made of the skins of Rain-deers, also the beasts
themselves, their skins and cheeses, and the seathers of Birds; moreover those
things for which they trade with the Swedes, are Copper and Alchimy vessels,
ordinary cloth woven by the Swedish Boors, these they change for Bulls, and
Cows, whose milk they live on in the Summer, and on their flesh in the Winter,
also for Goats and Sheep, out of whose skins they make themselves coverlets,
for silver, for the skins of black Foxes, and Otters, for woollen blankets, and
for fish, which they sell again to the Swedes, as Herrings, dried Codfish,
Skails, and such like. Johannes Tornaeus comprehends them in a shorter
catalogue, the Laplanders, says he, traffic with those with Norway and
Bothnia, Subjects of the Crown of Sweden, for ordinary woollen cloth, linen
cloth of both sorts, as well the finest as coursest, for corn, bread, brass,
iron, and all sorts of Country utensils. But above all things it was their
chiefest care to get beasts out of Norway, which in the Autumn, they used to
Sacrifice to their Idols.

Whether there were anciently any set places or times in which they did trade,
I cannot certainly pronounce, tho Olaus Magnus, Lib. 4. Cap. 5. seems to affirm
it, and says, there were certain set places, some in open fields, and some
upon the Ice, in which they did every year keep their Fairs, and exhibit to the
public view what they had by their own industry gained, either at home or
abroad. But for all this he proceeds not to tell us where those Fairs were
kept, or where those places were. And Charles the ninth forbidding the Birkarli
continually, and at all times to make their circuits round the Gountry, did
nevertheless appoint certain times and places, in which, as at public Fairs,
all traffic should be free and open as well to them as others. The words of the
Edict published in the year 1602 I will give you, which run thus: Wherefore
seeing we have forbidden the Birkarli to trade in Lapland, according to their
old custom, and in manner aforesaid, We do will and command to be appointed two
Fairs every year in every Province, one in the Winter, the other in the Summer,
as it shall seem most convenient, and We do will and command our Governors to
take care that certain fit places be looked out, in which these Fairs may be
kept, and to appoint set times, at which most conveniently as well all
Laplanders, Birkarlians, Moscovites, as others, may resort unto them.
Furthermore our Will and pleasure is, that each Fair last for two or three
weeks, during which time, it shall be lawful for every one to make such
bargains as may be most for his own profit. And we do also command our
Governors, that certain Boothes and Sheds be provided after the most convenient
manner. Now by all this it may appear that in former times there were no such
things either observed or known, seeing the King here speaks of them as first
instituted by him; neither indeed in the Edict it self does he set down any
certain time or place, but names them only as things intended, and which he
leaves to the discretion of his Governors, which also Andr. Buraeus seems to
intimate was performed, when he says that when they were to pay their tribute,
they were at a certain time and in certain places gathered together, as into a
Storehouse, where those Merchants, we before called Birkarli, exhibited their
wares. But now he also leaves us in the dark as to a certainty either of time
or place, so that it may seem these Fairs and constitutions did not find so
good success as it was hoped they would, until at length the Queen Christina
taking the business into consideration, brought it to greater perfection. There
is an Edict of hers, published in the year 1640, in which two Fairs are
appointed, one at Arfwisjerf in January, the other at Arieplog to be kept in
February. The words are to this purpose: Furthermore We have given and granted,
and by these presents do give and grant 2 solemn Fairs, one at Arfwisjerf on
the Feast of the Conversion of S. Paul, being the 25 of Jan. the other at
Arieplog on the Feast of the Purification of the B. V. Mary, being the 2d of
February, each to be held for 3 days, at which times it shall be lawful for
the Pithenses and all Laplanders to exercise all sorts of traffic, and these
Fairs shall first be holden the next year 1641. From this time they began to be
more diligently observed, and are kept upon those Feasts to this very day, for
in all Provinces there are every Spring 3 Fairs kept; the first in Lapmarkia
Vmensis upon the Feast of the Epiphany, the 2d in Lapmarkia Luhlensis on the
Conversion of S. Paul, the last in Lapmarkia Pithensis, Tornensis, and Kimensis
on the Feast of the Purification. These are the Fairs which Christina
instituted, only that in Vmensis I believe was observed from the time of
Charles the ninth, and the rather because that Lapmark is nighest Swedland.
Into Norway they resort and keep Fairs twice a year, the first at Midsummer on
the Feast of S. John, the other in the Autumn on the Feast of Simon and Jude,
or All Saints day. And so much for the times and places of their Fairs.

As for their way of dealing they were of old in all their bargains very
faithful and just, tho Damianus a Goes seems to note some craftiness in them,
and says they were very cunning in all their tradings. And Sam. Rheen in plain
terms call them cheats, and says they were so deceitful, that one that did not
know all their tricks, could hardly escape being overreached by them. So that
we may suppose that as long as others dealt fairly with them, so long they were
trusty and faithful, but in after times coming to learn how others had served
them, by understanding how they had been cheated formerly, they themselves
learned to deceive others. But of this we have spoken before: and these thing
may serve to give us some light into their customs in trafficking.

CHAP. XV. Of the Language of the Laplanders.
IN the former Chapter we told you that the Language of the Laplanders was such
as did very much differ from that of their neighbors, our next business shall
be, as well as we can, to discover what it is. Now whatsoever is received,
used, commonly, and publikly spoken in any Country is certainly a Language, but
of this of the Laplanders, Zieglerus in general observes only that it was
peculiar to themselves, and not understood by their neighbors. Damianus speaks
more plain, and accuses them of barbarism and roughness of speech. Our modern
Writers say their speech is a confused miscellany of the Language of their
neighbors, and that it was called Lingua Lapponica, quasi corrasa, eet
Lappatspaock, and that it is made up of many other Tongues, as of that of
Finlanders and Swedes, as for instance; the Laplanders say stour, the Swedes,
stoor; the one Salug, the other saligh. And that there are also some Latin
words, as Porcus, Oriens, etc. But tho these Writers suppose that they have
borrowed many words from their neighbors, yet they confess that much of their
Language is their own, and neither used, or known by any other Naitons, but
that as well the original of the words, as propriety of the Phrases, is
peculiar to themselves. Others suppose it took its rise and was derived from
Finland: and indeed it is confessed on all hands that there are many words in
both Languages that seem no great strangers. So that there is little doubt but
there are many words in both Languages which very much agree, which any one
that is a little skilled in them must needs confess: and to make this more
clear, I shall here insert some words of both Languages not much unlike.

God The Laplanders call Jubmar or Immel The Finlanders say Jumala
Fire The Laplanders call Toll The Finlanders say Tuli
Day The Laplanders call Paiwe The Finlanders say Paiwa
Night The Laplanders call Ii The Finlanders say Yoe
A River The Laplanders call Jocki The Finlanders say the same
A Lake The Laplanders call Jaur The Finlanders say Jarwi
Ice The Laplanders call Jenga The Finlanders say Iaeae
a Hill The Laplanders call Warra The Finlanders say Wuori
Wood The Laplanders call Medz The Finlanders say Medza
the Eye The Laplanders call Silmae The Finlanders say the same.
the Nose The Laplanders call Niuna The Finlanders say Nenae
the Arm The Laplanders call Ketawerth The Finlanders say Kasiwersi
the Hand The Laplanders call Kiaett The Finlanders say Kaesi
the Foot The Laplanders call Kaote The Finlanders say Ialka
Cheese The Laplanders call Iost The Finlanders say Iuusto
Boots The Laplanders call Sappad The Finlanders say Saapas
a Show The Laplanders call Kamath The Finlanders say Kamgett
a Shed The Laplanders call Kaote The Finlanders say Koto
an Arrow The Laplanders call Niaola The Finlanders say Nuoli
War The Laplanders call Tziaod The Finlanders say Sotae
King The Laplanders call Konnagas The Finlanders say Cuningas
Father The Laplanders call Atkia The Finlanders say Aja
Mother The Laplanders call Am The Finlanders say Ama
Brother The Laplanders call Wellje The Finlanders say Weli
Wife The Laplanders call Morswi The Finlanders say Morsian
Dog The Laplanders call Piednax The Finlanders say Peinika
a Ferret The Laplanders call Natae The Finlanders say Naetae
a Squirrill The Laplanders call Orre The Finlanders say Orawa
a Bird The Laplanders call Lodo The Finlanders say Lindu
a Fish The Laplanders call Qwaelie The Finlanders say Cala
a Salmon The Laplanders call Losa The Finlanders say Lobi
a wild Pine tree. The Laplanders call Quaosa The Finlanders say Cuusi.



These words I suppose may serve to declare the affinity that we said was
between the Language of the Laplanders and Finlanders: and because the words
that I have set down, do not signify any foreign commodities, but things
natural, and such as are in use among all People alike, I am given to belevie
that the Laplanders had not any peculiar Language, which did wholly differ from
that of Finland, but that it took its original thence. For if, as some would
have it, they had any Language, they might properly call their own, why did
they not out of it, upon things of so common occurrence and ordinary use,
rather impose their own words, then such as no man could doubt were taken from
the Finlanders. No People certainly were ever guilty of so much folly as to
impose foreign names upon so common things, if they had any Language of their
own to express them in: as might be at large demonstrated from the Languages of
the Germans, ancient Gauls, Spaniards, Italians, Greeks, etc. neither have we
any reason to count it a hard inference if we should from hence gather, that
the Laplanders themselves sprung from the Finlanders. For otherwise why should
they have used any other Language then what they received from their
Forefathers. And this seems to be the argument Wexonius uses to prove the
Language of the Laplanders to have taken its rise from the Finlanders, when
from the original of the People he infers the same of the Speech; for in this
he intimates that to spring from any Country, and to use the same Language, are
very convertible propositions. All which indeed seems to be no more then the
truth. But now some one may object that the opinion of those men that affirm
the Language of this Country to be primarily its own, could not be destitute of
all reason, and that they must necessarily have had some probabilities whereon
they grounded their opinion; and truly it cannot be denied but that there are
many words which do not any ways agree with the Language of the Finlanders, as
may appear from what follows, The Sun The Laplanders call Beiwe The Finlanders
Auringa.
Heaven The Laplanders call Albme The Finlanders Taiwas
Water The Laplanders call Kietze The Finlanders Wesi
Rain The Laplanders call Abbrae The Finlanders Sade
Snow The Laplanders call Mota The Finlanders Lumi
a Man The Laplanders call Ulmugd The Finlanders Ihminen
Gent. Man The Laplanders call Albma The Finlanders Mies
Woman The Laplanders call Nissum The Finlanders Waimo
Hair The Laplanders call Waopt The Finlanders Hiuxi
the Mouth The Laplanders call Nialbme The Finlanders Suu
the Chin The Laplanders call Kaig The Finlanders Leuca
the Heart The Laplanders call Waibmi The Finlanders Sydaon
the Flesh The Laplanders call Ogge The Finlanders Liha
a Wolf The Laplanders call Seibik The Finlanders Susi
a Bear The Laplanders call Muriel The Finlanders Karhu
a Fox. The Laplanders call Riemnes The Finlanders Kettu.



And the Difference between these and the like words without doubt was that
which gave occasion to some to think that anciently the Laplanders had a Speech
peculiar to themselves, and quite different from that of Finland, of which
ancient Language these relicts did remain, and for this they give this reason;
that the Laplanders were forced to frame to themselves a new Language, for
fear, least being understood by their neighbors the Finlanders, they should
fall into their snares. So Olaus Petri says that often times they found spies
about their tents in the night, harkening after their Councels, now for this
reason, according to the Policy of their Forefathers, flying into the allotment
of Rengo, in the Province of Nolnense, they there agreed upon, and framed to
themselves a Speech quite different from that of Finland. So that there are
very few words found to agree in both Languages. Now by the Spies he there
talks of, he understands the Finlanders, who being driven out of their Country
by Matthias Kurkius and the Tavastians, roved up and down, seeking where they
might most conveniently settle, as may appear from what goes before in that
place. Others think that these are the relicts of that Language which they
first brought into Lapland, which they suppose to be no other but that of the
Tartars. But how false this is, may appear from the vast difference between
those Tongues, in which there is not one word that signifies the same thing in
both Languages. And that you may not think I say this without any reason, I
will give you a few instances.

God The Tartars call Allah The Laplanders Jubmel
the Sun The Tartars call Gynesch The Laplanders Beiwe
Heaven The Tartars call Gioech The Laplanders Alm
Fire The Tartars call Atasch The Laplanders Tulla
Air The Tartars call Jusger The Laplanders Biaegga
Water The Tartars call Sauf The Laplanders Tziatz
a Lake The Tartars call Dannis The Laplanders Jauur
Ice The Tartars call Buus The Laplanders Jenga
the Earth The Tartars call Ier or toprak The Laplanders Aennam
a Hill The Tartars call Dagda The Laplanders Ware
a Man The Tartars call Adam The Laplanders Aolmaitz
Hair The Tartars call Sadsch The Laplanders Waopta
the Eye The Tartars call Gios The Laplanders Tzialme
the Nose The Tartars call Burnum The Laplanders Nierune
a Beard The Tartars call Beichlar The Laplanders Saemao
an Arm. The Tartars call Aehl The Laplanders Kiettawerdi
a Hand The Tartars call Cholun The Laplanders Kietta
a Foot The Tartars call Ajach The Laplanders Iwobge
a Heart The Tartars call Jurek The Laplanders Waimao
a Bow The Tartars call Jay The Laplanders Taugh
an Arrow The Tartars call Och The Laplanders Niaela
Father The Tartars call Babam The Laplanders Atziae
Mother The Tartars call Anasse The Laplanders Aennae
Brother The Tartars call Cardasch The Laplanders Wiaelae
Sister The Tartars call Kiscardasche The Laplanders Aobbe
a Wolf The Tartars call Sirma The Laplanders Kurt
a Bear The Tartars call Ajuf The Laplanders Kwoptza
a Fish The Tartars call Balich The Laplanders Kwele.



And indeed there is as great incongruity in all the rest of the words as in
these, so that this opinion is not only foolish, but ridiculous. And neither is
the other, which pretends they framed a Language to themselves, grounded upon
any greater truth then this former. For first why should they only have changed
some words and not all? And then these words which do agree in both Languages
are not the names of things less known, or not so ordinarily used, as other
things, but of such as were as common as life, light, or breathing: wherefore I
am clearly of the other opinion, and do believe that these differing words are
as much Finnonick as any of the rest. But they who from the difference of these
words infer the independency of the Speeches, do not at all consider that, then
which there is nothing more common and incident to Languages, viz. to be
changed and altered according to the times, and so much the more by how much
the People have greater commerce with other Nations. And this is plain from the
example of the Islanders and Norwegians; for that the Islanders sprung from the
Norwegians is by the Histories of both Nations made so clear that no man can
doubt of it. But now the Islanders use many words which those of Norway are
quite ignorant of; and yet I hope no man will thence say that the Islanders
have a Language wholly independent and different from that of Norway: for the
one living by themselves, and having little or no dealings with other People,
do to this day keep entire the same Language which they first brought, and
which they received down from their ancestors: but it was quite otherwise with
the Norwegians, who together with their Empire lost also their ancient
Language. The same seems to be the case of the Finlanders, who being brought
under the Jurisdiction of others, and holding more frequent commerce with their
neighbors, lost much of their ancient manner of speaking, which the Laplanders
on the contrary living a more solitary life, it is probable, do still keep
incorrupt. Wherefore it is no wonder if in their language we meet with many
words, which compared with those of the modern Finlanders, seem to have nothing
of likeness; tho happily one that is well skilled in the dialect and propriety
of the Finnonick Language, will find enough to make him conjecture that there
are many words which, as they are now used seem quite different, yet are very
agreeable in the original. And this is likewise the common fate of other
languages, as for example of the German, in which a little too rashly the
learned Olaus Wormius in his literatura Runica, as he calls it, Cap. 27, has
taken notice of so great a difference. For in these days not only nach, but
effter is used, as may appear affterred, afterdam etc. And so likewise the
Germans use not only Gesicht, but also Antlitz; not only Verstand, but
Vernunfft; and as well essen, anfangen, Schuss, Alter, Gefaengnus, auffthun,
Bett, Dopff, etc. as, As, beginnen, keimen, uralt, haffte, entdecken,
Laegerstad, locken, in all which they agree with the ancient Germans. In my
opinion therefore the difference of a few words, is not authority enough to
prove that the Laplanders in ancient times had a peculiar language. But it
shows rather that they are not all of the same antiquity, but that some came
from Finland longer ago, who brought those obsolete words with them, and some
of later days, who now use the new; and this I think to be the best account of
the Language of the Laplanders. Of which this also is observable, that it does
not in all places alike agree with it self, but has its several different
Dialects, and is so various, that those that live in one part of the Country,
can scarce understand those of the other. There are especially three Dialects,
the first used by the Vmenses and Pithenses in the West, the 2d by the
Luhlenses in the North, the last by the Tornenses and Kimenses in the East. And
the variety of these Dialects was doubtless caused by the difference of times
in which they came into Lapland; some coming sooner, some later, some settling
in one part, some in another. Now of all these Dialect, there is none more
rough or unplesant then that of the Luhlenses, who as well in their life and
manners, as in their way of speaking, are far the most rustic and clownish of
all the Laplanders. But that you may see what a disparity there is between
these Dialects, I will set down a few example: the Pithenses say Jubmel, the
Tornenses, Immel, the Pithenses say Jocks, Warra, Olbmo, nisw, skaigki, kiist,
nissu, pardei, seibig, muriet, reppi; for which the Tornenses put, virte,
taodar, almai, kab, kawtza, raopka, kaap, alik, owre, kops, riemnes. Now as the
Language of the Laplanders is varied according to the diversity of the
Territories and Marches, just as it is in other Nations, particularly in
Germany, where the Swavelanders, Saxons, and Belgians, speak all different
tongues, so has it this also common with other Countries, viz. that the nigher
the Territory tends to any other People, so much the more do the Iuhabitants
participate of their Language; and so the Tornenses and Kimenses, who border
upon the Finlanders, do at this day use very much of their speech: nay they go
yet farther, and make it their business to learn the Language of their
Neighbors, so the Tornenses and Kimenses get the Finnonik, the Luhlenses,
Pithenses, and especially the Vmenses the Swedish Language; and that man that
is skilled in these Tongues has not little conceit of himself, and is indeed
much esteemed among his neighbors. It is therefore no wonder if there be many
Swedish words found among the Laplanders: for it could not otherwise happen but
that this People, who were supplied by others in many things which they had not
themselves, should with Foreign commodities receive also and use Foreign
names; and of this I could give many instances, but it is not the business in
hand. Now of this kind we ought to esteem these words following; in Lapland,
Salug signifies blessed, which the Swedes call Saligh: Niip a knife, the Swedes
call it kniif; Fiaelo, a rafter with the Swedes tilio, and many more of the
like nature. Of all which the R. and learned Johan. Tornaeus gives this
account, that the use of Foreign words was introduced partly by necessity, and
partly by conversing with Strangers; and upon this account it is that they that
converse with the Swedes do oftentimes use Swedish words. The like may be said
of those that deal with the Finlanders, and with the Germans in Norway; and
this is the reason why one and the same thing is often called by diverse
appellations, as for example, the Swedes call a Horse Haest, the Finlanders,
Hapoitz, the Germans, Ross, which also is the name the Laplanders give the
beast, for they having no Horses of their own were forced to borrow a name from
the Country from whence they had them. Now what Tornaeus observes concerning
the word Ross, I believe may be applied also to the word Porcus, which I
suppose they had rather from the Germans then Latins, for the Germans call a
Barrow-Hog, Bork, now their Swine they had all out of Norway, and it is very
probable they did thence borrow that appellation also. And not to trouble our
selves any farther, this will hold true in all the rest of that kind. Wherefore
setting apart other considerations, and looking upon this Language, not as it
contains in it foreign words, but only such as they always used within
themselves, and were ever received among them, it remains that we conclude it
to be not a miscellany or collection of Latin, German, Swedish scraps, and the
like, neither as a peculiar speech, different from them altogether, but such as
originally took its rise from the Finlanders, tho time has brought it to pass
that perhaps few of them understand it.

This Tongue, as well as others, has its Declensions, Comparisons,
Conjugations, Moods, Tenses, etc. and perhaps it may not be amiss if I should
here insert some examples: I will therefore first decline you a Laplandish
Noun, and afterward give you the Finnonick Declension of the same, that by
comparing both you may better understand the parity and disparity of these
Languages. This Noun shall be Immel, for so the Tornenses call it, tho other
say Jubmel, the Finlanders terms it Jumala, and it signifies God.

Lappon. Finlappon. Singul. Plural. Singul. Plural. N. Immel. N. Immeleck. N.
Jumala. N. Jumalat. G. Immele. G. Immeliig. G. Jumalan. G. Jumalden. D. Immela.
D. Immewoth. D. Jumalalle. D. Jumalille. A. Immel. A. Immeliidh. A. Jumalaa. A.
Jumalat. V. o Immel. V. o Immaeleck. V. Jumala. Plural. A. Immelist. A.
Immaeliie. A. Jumalasta. A. Jumalilda.

I will add one more Noun, that the case may be more clear, and that shall be
Olmai, which signifies a man.

Singul. Plural. N. Olmai. N. Olmack. G. Olma. G. Olmaig. D. Olmas. D. Olmaid.
A. Olma. A. Olmaig. V. o Olmai. V. o Olmack. A. Olmast. A. Olmaija.

And after this manner it is in all the rest.

Adjectives have their terminations in comparison, as

Stoure, great, stourapo, greater, stouramus, greatest.

Enach, much, enapo, more, enamus, most.

Vtze, little, utzapo, less, utzamus, least.

The comparative for the most part ends in po, the Superlative in mus.

They have also their Articles, but seldom use them before Nouns, as it also in
other Tongues.

In the Masc. and the Fem. Gender the Article has the same termination, but
differs in the Neuter; for tott signifies hic and haec, towt, hoc.

Their Pronouns are mun, I, tun, thou, sun, he, mii, we, sii, you, tack, they.
The Verbs also are conjugated in their Tenses, and Persons, as in the
Indicative mood thus, Sing. Mun pworastan I love, tum pworastack thou love,
sun pworasta. Plur. Mii pworastop we love, sii pworost you love, tack pwrost.
And after this manner do they decline their other Verbs.

Sing. mun laem I am, tun laeck, thou art, suu lia he is.
Plur. mil laep we are, sii lae you are, tack lae they are.
These will serve to give us some light into the nature of this Language, at
least as much as is to our purpose, who did not undertake to write a Grammar,
but only give some small description.

Now the Laplanders have a peculiar way of pronouncing words, according to
which it is impossible to express them in letters, for they do mouth out all
their words, so that the vowels might be heard loud enough, but the other
letters come very softly out; they do also quite out off and drown the last
Syllables, especially of Nouns. Letters they neither have, nor ever had any,
and in this they agree with their ancestors the Finlander: the Calendar which
they use, is no other but the Swedish in Runick letters. And this also, before
they came to have commerce with the Swedes, and had learned of them the
observation of Holy Days, was never in use among them. Johannes Burous tells
us that he heard from persons of good credit, of certain grave-stones and
monuments, which had sometimes bin found in Lapland (more whereof perhaps might
be found) on which were engraved Runick Characters. But suppose we this true,
it is not, I hope, therefore necessary that we should conclude that these were
formerly the letters of the Laplanders, to which indeed, as well themselves as
their forefathers the Finlanders are equally Strangers. But we have more reason
to think that the Swedes coming thither in ancient times, either by force of
arms, or otherwise, inhabited there abouts, and left those stones. To this day
both the Laplander and Finlander use the Latin letter; in the same Character
the Swedes and Germens make them, although the number of them that can read among
them is but very small, and of them that can write, a great deal less, and are
only such as they call great Scholars.

Now this Speech being only used among the Laplanders, and there being none
that desire to learn it but themselves, in all negotiations with others, they
are forced to use the help of Interpreters, of whom upon this account there are
great numbers, as I have formerly said: tho these Interpreters speak all
Languages, but the Finnonick, very barbarously, which is also the fault of all
Laplanders, who are very hardly brought to learn or pronounce any other Tongue,
and much given to confound one with another. So that they which traffic in
Norway, and border upon that Country, do in their speaking mingle together the
Speech of the Norwegians and Swedes, as for instance, jeghkiaemi, for jag kom,
jeg gaong, for jag goar. So for hustro, they say koona, for min myssa, mitt
hofwud, etc. But of the Language of the Laplanders let this suffice.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Houses of the Laplanders.
HITHERTO we have treated of the Laplander as he has relation to the
Commonwealth, we shall in the next place speak of him as a private person. And
this we shall do first, considering the things they have need of. Secondly,
their employments. And thirdly their leisure and pastimes. All necessary
accommodations are either such as are to defend us from ill inconveniences, or
to give us necessaries. Of the first sort, are Houses and Clothes, of the 2d,
Meat and Drink. We shall begin with their houses, or places of abode. The
Laplanders have not any houses like other Northern People, it having bin their
custom to wander up and down, and so, sometimes in one place and sometimes in
another, to set up small sheds for their present use: so that they had no
certain habitations, but having eaten and consumed the fish and beasts in one
place, they march to another, carrying their sheds or tents with them.

But this liberty of wandering up and down the Country, was in a special Edict
forbid them by Charles the ninth, in the year 1602, and a certain place of
habitation assigned to every family. The words of the Edict are to this
purpose: We do in the first place command that in every Lapmark an account be
taken of all Fenns, Rivers, Lakes, etc. and who they are that have hitherto had
the benefit and use of them, with the names of all such: and then that the
number of the families be compared with that of the Rivers, etc. and so equally
divided that one family shall not possess more Rivers and Fenns then are for
its use. Lastly every Lapmark being thus divided, it shall be committed to
honest and good men, who, without either favor or prejudice, shall assign to
every family its just portion: and thenceforth it shall not be lawful for any
Laplander, at his pleasure to wander up and down all marches, as has formerly
bin used. From the time of this Edict the Laplanders had their certain bounds
and limits assigned them sufficient for the sustaining of their families.
Neither was it afterward lawful for any one to invade the propriety of
another, or to wander where he pleased.

Notwithstanding, that custom of removing their sheds from one place to another
was quite abolished, but is yet used among them, tho now they move not out of
the bounds assigned them. So that they have no certain mansion, but as the
Season of the year offers it self, either for sishing or hunting, so do they
order their habitations accordingly on the side of some River, Wood, or
Mountain, and having spent there some days or weeks, remove their tents again
to a more seasonable place. To this agrees also our modern writer Sam. Rheen.
This wandering is chiefly caused by their manner of getting their living, for
the Laplanders having all their livelihood from Rain-deers, Fish, and wild
beasts, they are forced to live where they may have sufficient pastures for
their Rain-deers, and plenty of other beasts, and fishes for themselves; and
yet to take care that they destroy not the breed. But this cannot be done if
they should live always in one place, and therefore it is that Buraeus says,
they order their habitations according to the seasons of fishing, hunting, etc.
Now this convenience cannot be in all places at all times alike, for fish do
abound most when about the time of their spawning they are gathered together;
which some fish do at one time, and some at another, and one sort in one Lake,
and another sort in another Lake; so that they that are of this trade cannot
always live in one place. In like manner it is also with their Rain-deers: and
therefore Sam. Rheen says they take their journeys either to provide pasture
for their Raindeers, or to fish: for at that time, when fishes generate either
in this or that Lake or River, then the Laplander, with his house and family,
takes his journey. But this journeying is not so as that they should forsake and
never return again to their former places; but they do, as it were, go in a
circle: so that in the space of a year, the pasture being again grown that was
before consumed, they return into the same seats again, This is the custom of
the Laplanders that live in the Mountains: but they that live in the Woods, do
not only once a year, but oftener return into the same places. For they leave
and return to their habitations several times in a year, viz. as often as
occasion is offerred either of fishing, fowling, hunting, etc. Now they do so
order their journeys, that the Fishermen at those times when the fishes do
spawn, do always live on the side of some River. They that take care of, and
trade with Rain-deers, do in the Winter live in the Woods, but in the Summer
ascend toward the mountains of Norway: for in the Winter they cannot abide on
those Mountains, where there are so frequent storms, great Snows, and no Wood.
At that season therefore they descend into the nighest Woods, where by reason
of the depth of the Snow they can easily keep their Rain-deers together: so
that from Christmas until the Feast of the Annunciation they remain for the
most part in one place, at which time the Snow beginning to melt, they march
nigher and nigher again toward the Mountains, where they remain till S.
Ericus's day: about which time because the female Rain-deer use to bring forth,
therefore they remain in the same place until the feast of S. John, or
Midsummer-day. Afterward, when, as well in the Mountains as Valleys, the grass
and pasture do most flourish, they proceed farther and farther, some on the tops
of the highest Mountains, where the Rain-deers are less infested with flies and
gnats, in which Mountains they wander up and down till the feast of S.
Bartholomew, when by little and little they betake themselves to the Woods
again, and then Christmas coming they do again as we told you in the beginning.
And these are the circuits of the Laplanders, and reasons why they cannot stay
in one place, together with the times of their several removes. But now these
journeys sometimes are for many miles, and of a far longer space of ^me, so
that sometimes they march for 20 miles and farther. Now because some of them
live in the Mountains, some among the Trees, especially Pine-trees, nigh the
Rivers and Lakes; therefore are they accordingly called by disserent names.
Some are called fiaell Lapper, because they live in the Mountains nigh Norway,
which are called fiaell. Others are termed Graan Lapper, because they live
among the Pine trees, which are called by the Swedes and Norwegians, Graan. For
their journeys in the Summer they make different preparations from what they do
in the Winter; in the Winter they use sledges (of which I will speak hereafter)
but in the Summer they go on foot, the Rain-deers carrying their goods on
pannels and pack-saddles, and sometimes their Infants also. So that in the
Winter they put their household stuff in one sledge, and their tents in another,
and so march from place to place, but in the Summer they use pannels which they
make after this manner: depiction of a panel or saddle-pack, and a reindeer
laden with a pack-saddle They have two lathes something broad, but flexible,
made of firr, of which for the most part Boxes are made, these lathes they join
together at the top, putting the one end into a mortice made in the other end,
and so make a kind of a circle, then by that part where they are joined
together they hang them on the Rain-deer, one on the right-side, the other on
the left, and so again by withes ty them under the beasts belly, that they may
be the more steady. Now these are placed so to support their dorsers made of
the same wood, bended into an oval figure much like a drum, if both ends were
round. These dorsers at the bottom they draw together with twiggs of birch,
placed in the form of a grate, and the tops of them they tie with thongs, or
cords, which they loose as often as any thing is to be put in, or taken out;
and least any thing should fall out, they cover these dorsers all over with
bark of birch, or some skins. These dorsers they hang by ropes or thongs to the
tops of the forementioned lathes, which they call Tobbii, so that they may hang
down on both sides the Rain-deer, the tops being outward, and the bottoms
turned inward toward the belly of the beast. And thus they load their
Rain-deers, not only with their goods and household stuff, but also with their
Infants, which cannot walk themselves. For on one side of the Rain-deer they
often hang their cradles, and children in them, of which I will speak
hereafter. Now in these journeys they have a certain order which no one without
cause ought to disturb; for in the first place marches the Master of the
Family, having some Rain-deers after him, loaded after the foresaid manner,
afterward follows his wife in like manner; then the whole herd of Rain-deers,
which his Children and Servants drive softly on. Last of all brings up the
rear, he that carries the Drum. Now these pack-Rain-deers they do not use to
drive yoked or joined together, but in a long line one after another, that
which follows being always tied to the pannels of that which went before, and
the Laplander leading the foremost by a rope tied about his neck, and so they
march on till they come to the place intended, where they set up their sheds
again, and remain for some weeks, which are to them instead of houses. But now
there is some difference in the sheds of the Laplanders that live in the
mountains, and are called Fiaellapper, and those that live in the Woods, who
are called Graan Lapper; for the one coming to the same place but once in a
year, does not build this shed of so durable stuff as the other: the former,
when he departs, almost destroying his habitation, and the latter leaving it
standing. The former build their sheds thus, first, at four corners they erect
four posts, upon the tops of which they place three rafters, so that there
shall be one on each side, and one behind, but none cross the foremost posts;
upon these rafters they afterward place long poles, so that with their tops
they may lean upon, and support one another, whereby the whole form seems to be
like a quadrilaterall house, which ascending like a Pyramide, is narrower at
top, and broader at bottom. These poles so placed they cover with course
woollen cloth, which we before called Waldmar; but the richer sort over this
woollen cloth place linen also, by both which they may be the better defended
from rain and storms. These are the sheds of the Laplanders that dwell in the
mountains, for the most part made of clothes, etc. which when they leave any
place they take with them, and erect in another. But your Graanlapper, or
Wood-Laplanders, make their sheds for the most part of board and posts, that at
the top meet in a Cone, which they cover with the boughs of Firr and
Pine-trees, or else with the bark of those trees, and sometimes with turff.
That they covered them with the barks of trees, Herberstenius witnesses;
Andraeas Buraeus says that those barks were of birch trees, to whom also
assents Olaus Petri, who only adds, that they did a long time boil those barks
to make them more flexible. Olaus Magnus, Lib. 4. Cap. 3. adds also skins, and
these were the houses Lomenius Comes saw, and describes in his Itinerary to be
made of long poles and barks of trees. Sam. Rheen describes the tents of the
Wood-Laplanders to be made of boards with six sides or walls, covered with
boughs of Firr, or Pine-trees, sometimes with the barks, and sometimes only
with turffs. Wexionius increases the number of sides, and says that they were
octogons, somewhat broader toward the bottom, and five else high, and
especially those tents of the Kimenses. Olaus Petri tells us the same of the
Pithenses. Now these Tents they do not pull down or carry with them, but leave
them in the same place, only when they come again they add new boughs, etc.
where they were decayed, and to fit them for their use. Besides these two sorts
of Tents, Olaus Magnus reckons up another, for in this, Lib. 4. Cap. 2. he
says part of them place their Tents in trees that grow in a square figure,
least in the fenny Countries they should be choked with the great snows, or
devoured by the wild beasts, which come together in great troops. What he means
by trees that grow in a square figure I cannot tell, but I suppose he intends
only that they did use to erect their Tents between 4 trees which grew so, that
each of them might be the corner prop, of the four square shed, but this sort
is to us quite unknow. Tacitus says the Fenni used to dwell among a company of
boughs, and perhaps that gave occasion to our Author to talk thus. He has also
got a 4th sort which he could have no where else but from Zieglerus, for
Zieglerus had called them Amaxobios, from whence Olaus Magnus says they dwelt
in Waines and Carts; and therefore Olaus induced by this word of Zieglerus,
thought the Laplanders had bin such. But this is quite false, for Wagons and
Carts were utterly unknown to the Laplanders, for whom it was impossible to use
them, by reason of the slipperiness of the Ice, and depth of their snows.
Neither was it indeed in that sense that Zieglerus calls them Amaxiobios, but
because they wandered up and down like the Amaxobii, who are a known Nation of
the Scythians. There remains therefore only these two sorts of sheds, which I
have mentioned, for the 5th, which Paulus Jovius reckons, was either upon
sudden occasions, or used only by those that were under the dominion of the
Moscovites: the words of this Author are, These People lie in caves filled with
dried leaves, or in trunks of trees made hollow either by fire or age. But in
both our forementioned sorts, things are so ordered that every Tent had two
doors, one, a foredoor, and the other, a backward; the former bigger and more
ordinarily used, the latter less, through which they use to bring in their
provisions, and especially the prey they took in hunting, also Birds, Beasts,
Fishes, which it was unlawful for to bring in at the foredoor. These are the
two doors with the use of both, especially the backdoor, through which it was
unlawful for any woman to pass, because, as I said before, women were
forbidden to go into the back part of the Tent, the reason of which I think to
be partly this, because in that part they placed Thor and sacrificed to him,
and partly this, because it was esteemed an ill omen for a hunter to meet a
woman. And hither may we refer what Zieglerus says of that door, that it was
unlawful for the Woman to go out of the door of the Tent that day her husband
was gone a hunting, which cannot be understood of any door but the backdoor,
the use of which was not only that day but always forbid women. The Laplanders
have no Chambers, but only certain spaces; which they determine and bound by
loggs and posts laid along on the ground, of which we shall next speak. The
whole space of ground within the Tent was so ordered, that in the middle there
might be a hearth, surrounded with stones, in which there was a continual fire;
except at midnight; behind the hearth, toward the back part of the tent, they
place three loggs, with which they bound that space, of which we but now spoke.
In the middle of this space is the little door, at which only men must enter,
which they call Posse; right over against that is the common door, which they
call Ox; but that space we told you was bounded with these three loggs, they
call, lops; this place therefore is only proper to men, and it is unlawful for
any woman to pass those loggs, and go into it. Sam. Rheen says about the
kettle hanging over the fire, they place the 3 blocks, upon which, with a
hatchet, they divide their flesh, fish, or other things they intend to make
ready. He says here indeed the space is called Posse, but understands chiefly
the space of the door, for that was properly called Posse, the other space
being called Lops. The common door they used to make toward the South, and the
other toward the North. the space on both sides, and the sides themselves they
called Loide; here they made their bed chambers, the husband with his wife and
children lying on one side, and the servants on the other. Olaus Petri says
only the daughters lay on the side of the husband and wife, I believe, that
their Parents might have them always nigh them, and so take greater care to
secure their honesty, whilst the sons in the mean time lay with the servants:
but now the spaces that remain toward the doors they call Kitta, and are
ordained for the use of the women, for in the space nigh the common door they
are brought to bed. But that you may the better understand all this, I will
here insert a description of the Area. diagram showing the interior layout of a
Lapland tent A is the little door they call posse, B and C is called lopps, as
is the place where the men lay up their hunting instruments. D and E are called
loide, whereof one is the appartment of the Master of the Family and his wife,
the other of the servants. F. G. is kitta, were the women are conversant. H. is
the hearth, I. the door called ox; those three logs upon which they divide
their flesh are the two that lay along toward I. and the 3d crosswaies
distinguishes from other parts the men's appartment, or posse.

The 3d thing we are to note in these sheds, is that they strew their floors
with branches of Birch trees, least by the rain they should be wetted, and they
use no other kind of pavement; only upon the boughs, for cleanliness sake, they
lay skins of Rain-deers, on which they sit and lie. And these are the dwelling
houses of the Laplanders, besides which they have also Storehouses in which
they keep their commodities, especially flesh, fish, and such other provisions;
these they call Nalla, and make thus: they cut the upper part of a tree off, so
that the body remain four or five else from the ground high, upon this trunk
they place two rafters in the figure of an X, or St Andrews Cross, and upon
these they build their repository, making a door to it, and covering it with
boards. There is one thing peculiar to these Storehouses, which is, that the
door is not in the side, but bottom of them, so that when the Laplander is come
down, the door falls too, like a trap-door, and all things are safe. To these
they go up by ladders which they make of the trunks of trees, in which they cut
great notches like stairs. Now the reason why they place them so high, is
because of the Bears and other wild beasts, who oftentimes pull them down, and
to the great damage of the Master eat all his provision; they used also to cut
off the bark of the tree, and anoint the stock, so that neither mice nor wild
beasts could be able to climb up for slipperiness. And perhaps these are the
houses Olaus magnus meant, when he said, they placed their houses upon trees
for fear of wild beasts. But that you may the better conceive these
Storehouses also, I shall here give you the Figure of them.

depiction of a Lapland tent erected beside a storehouse built high in the
trunk of a tree

CHAP. XVII. Of the Garments of the Laplanders.
AMONG the Laplanders the men and women wear different kinds of Garments, which
they alter according to the Weather, and place: for they wear one sort of
clothes in the Winter, and another sort in the Summer, one kind at home, and
another abroad. Let us first consider the Garments of the men: These in the
Summer have trouses, or brougs, reaching down to their feet, close to their
body, upon which they wear a gown, or rather a coat with sleeves, which comes
down to the middle leg, which they tie fast with a girdle. And in this respect
it was that Zieglerus in his time wrote, that they used close Garments fitted
to their body, least they should hinder their work. He calls them close because
of their trouses, and fitted to their body because of their being girded. These
they wear next their bare skin, without such linen shirts as the Europeans
use, they having no flax in their Country. These Garments are of course
homespun woollen cloth called Waldmar, of a white or gray color, such as the
wool is of before it is dyed. The wool they have from Swedland, and buy it of
the Merchants called Birkarli, but the richer sort wear a finer cloth, and not
of the same color, but sometimes green or blew, and sometimes red, only black
they abominate. Tho sometimes in dirty works, and at home they wear the meanest
clothes, yet abroad, and especially upon Festivals and Holydaies, they love to
go very neat. Their girdles are made of leather, which the richer sort adorn
with filver studs, and poorer with tin. These studs stick out like buttons in a
semicircular figure. At this girdle they hang a knife and sheath, and a kind of
square bag, tho something longer then broad, also a leathern purse, and then a
case with needles and thread in it. Their knives they have from Norway, the
sheath is of the skin of the Rain-deers, sewed together with tin wire, and in
other parts with the same adornments, at the end of which they use to hang
rings: the bag is also made of the skin of the Raindeers, with the hair on it,
on the outside of which they also place another skin, equal to the bag, and
make it fast by three knots, and this skin they cover again with red cloth, or
of some other color, adorned also with wire. In this bag they keep a stone to
strike fire, not of flint, but crystal, as I will show hereafter. Also a
steel, with some brimestone to light a fire where ever they come: as also
Tobacco and other odd things. The leathern purse is also made of the same skin
in an oval figure like a pear, in which they keep their money, and other more
choice things, and at this also they hang rings. Their needle case is of a
peculiar sort, they have a single cloth with four sides, but the upper part is
much narrower then the lower, so that it is like an oblong triangle cut off at
the vertical angle, and to make it stronger they bind about the edges with
leather, and so stick their needles into it, this they put into a bag of the
same shape, adorned with red, or some other colored cloth, and wire, drawn
together by a leathern string, by which they hang it to their girdle. Besides
these, they have Alchymy chains, with a great company of rings of the same,
these they hang about all their body, the bag they hang before, nigh their
navel, all the rest they fling behind them. And these are the Garments and
ornaments of the body: their head they cover with a cap, over which the richer
sort wear a case of Fox, Beaver, or Badgers skin, they are very like our
night-caps, it is made of red or other colored cloth, or of the Hares fur,
first twisted into a thread, and then knit almost like our stockins; or lastly
of the skin of the bird called Loom, with the feathers on it: sometimes they so
order it, that keeping also the head and wings of the bird, they make not an
unbecoming cover for the head. Olaus Magnus in his 4. Book, Cap. 3. says they
make their caps of the skins of Geese, Ducks, Cocks, which, as well as other
birds, are there in great abundance. But he does does not here mean common
Cocks, but the Vrogalli, or Heath-Cocks; however he gives us the picture in his
17 Book, Cap. 26. They have ordinary gloves, but shoes of a peculiar make, they
are made of the skin of the Rain-deer with the hair on, out of one piece, only
where they tread they sew both ends together, so that the hairs of one part
may lie forward, and the other backward, least if they lay all one way they
should be too slippery: but neither is there any more leather on the bottom
then on other parts, as it is in our shoes, only there is a hole at the top in
which they put in their feet: the toe bends upwards, and ends as it were in a
point. Upon the seame they place some narrow pieces of red, or other colored
cloth: these shoes they wear on their bare feet, and bind them twice or thrice
about the bottom with a thong, and least they should be too loose, they fill
them up with a sort of long Hay, which they boil and keep for that purpose.

But now let us come to the garments they do not so ordinarily wear, but only
on some occasions, which both for the men and women are made alike, and all of
leather, to secure them from the gnats. But in the Winter time the men have
breeches to defend them from the weather, and coats which they call Mudd. These
Mudd are not all alike, but some better, some worse; the best are of the skins
of young wild Rain-deers, just when they have cast their first coat, in the
place of which comes a black one, which is about the Feast of St James, and
these are very soft and delicate. Their feet they defend with boots of the same
skins, and their hands with gloves or mittens of the same, and their heads with
a cap, which reaches down and covers part of their shoulders also, leaving only
a space for them to see through. All these Garments they wear next their skin
without any linen underneath, and tie them round with a girdle, only their
boots and gloves they stuff with hay, and sometimes in the Winter with wool.
And this is that which Johannes Tornaus says of their clothing, that their
garment is made of the Rain-deer, the skin of the beast supplying them with
coats, breeches, gloves, sandals, shoes, etc. the hair being always on the
outside, so that they seem to be all hairy. And hence we may understand
Zieglerus, when he says their Winter garments were made of the skins of Bears
and Sea-Calves, which they tied in a knot at the top of their heads, leaving
nothing to be seen but their eyes, so that they seemed to be in a sack, only
that it was made according to the shape of their members; and hence, says he,
I believe they came to be supposed all hairy like beasts, some reporting this
out of ignorance, and some delighting to tell of strange wonders they saw
abroad. And truly it is not without reason that he gathers the fable of hairy
men to be raised from their hairy Garments, which sort of monsters whether
there be in other Countries I cannot tell, but I find the Cyclops's with one
eye in their forehead by Adamus Bremensis to be placed here upon the same
account, because they had only a hole in their cap through which they looked,
all the rest of their body seeming hairy, and therefore this hole they feigned
to be an eye. But whereas he says the skins were of Bears and Sea-Calves, he
is a little mistaken, for these skins were not so common among the Laplanders,
and are by them designed quite for another use. However these Garments they
used after their fashion to adorn with pieces of red, or other colored cloth,
and embroider them with wire, in flowers, stars, etc. as I will hereafter
declare more at large.

But I come to the habit of the women, which also was of one sort in the
Summer, and of another in the Winter. In the Summer they wear coats which cover
their breasts, arms, and all their body, about the middle they are gathered,
and so hang down, these they call Volpi. These gowns they also wear next their
skin, for the use of smocks is no more known among women then the use of shirts
among men: and they horribly imposed upon Lomenius Comes, that made him believe
otherwise. Lomenius says thus, they have smocks, not made of linen, but of
the entrails of beasts, which they first spin into a thread, and afterward
wear them: but all this is quite false. The entrals indeed they do spin into
thread, but of that they make neither cloth nor smocks, but use it to few their
skins; but women of the common sort wear course cloth, and the better sort
finer, as it is with the men, which for the most part is English cloth, richly
wrought. They have also a girdle, but different from that of the men, for it is
much larger, and sometimes three fingers broad, and then also it is adorned not
with studs, but plates of a fingers length, or more, which are engraved with
diverse shapes of Birds, Flowers, etc. and these they fasten upon a leathern
fillet so nigh one another, that the girdle is almost covered with them. These
plates are most commonly made of tin, from whence Sam. Rheen calls them tin
girdles, but those for the better sort are made of silver. Upon these girdles
they hang many Alchymy chains, upon one of which they hang a knife and sheath,
upon another a pouch or purse, upon another a needle case, and upon all a great
company of Alchymy rings, according to the fashion of the men: These things
they do not hang by their sides, as women among us use, but before them. The
weight of the trinkets they carry about them, does commonly weigh twenty pound,
a pretty heavy burden, and such as a man would wonder they should be able to
bear: but they are very much delighted with it, especially with the number of
the rings, the gingling of which is very grateful to their ear, and as they
think no small commendation to their beauty. Wexionius makes the chains and
rings to be tin, which I believe is hardly true, commonly I am sure they were
made of Alchymy, and if they had bin of tin they had neither bin durable, nor
would they have made a noise. They have also another ornament for their breast,
which they call Kracha, it is made of red, or some other colored cloth. And
first it goes about their neck, and then on both sides comes down upon their
breast, and a little below their breast ends in a narrow point. This cloth,
especially before, and sometimes about the neck, they adorn with studs,
engraved with diverse forms, as also with bracelets, which the richer have of
silver and gold, the poorer of tin and Alchymy. After this manner, in short as
he uses, Johannes Tornaeus describes them, the women do so deck themselves with
gold and silver that their breasts shine like sheilds, but those that cannot
reach silver, use copper and Alchymy. Now these studs they use to have not only
about their neck, but upon their gowns where they draw them together, and lace
them; and not only in single but double and triple rows. They cover their heads
with a low kind of kercheif, plain at top, round, and of red color, some of the
richer sort on extraordinary times add also a strip of linen for ornament, as
at their Fairs, Weddings, and Feasts. Upon their legs they wear stockins, which
reach no lower then their ankles, but that only in the Summer. Their shoes are
like the men's, and so also bound to their feet with thongs. The women's habit in
the Winter is almost the same with the men's, for they have the Muddas made of
the skins of Rain-deers, and at that time wear breeches too, by reason of the
deep Snows, storms, and badness of the ways: nay and cover their head with the
same caps men do, which sort of caps they wear also sometimes in the Summer to
defend them from the gnats: these caps they tie about their heads, and the
lower part, which would otherwise fall about their shoulders, they make to
stand out like the brims of our hats. And these are the garments as well of
Virgins as married women, for both use the same attire, neither is there any
sign in their habit whereby to distinguish them. Besides these garments
wherewith they clothe themselves in the day, they have also other which they
use a nights, such as are called night-cloathes, for they have no feather beds:
and without all doubt Olaus Magnus is mistaken who in his 4 Book says they
had. Their night garments were of 2 sorts, such as they lay upon, or such as
they did cover themselves with, which also differ according to the Summer and
Winter Seasons. Those they lie upon are Rain-deers skins, 2 or 3 of which they
fling upon some birch leaves, which they use instead of matts, without beds,
upon the ground, that they may lie softer, so that they lie upon the skins
without sheets, of the use of which they are quite ignorant. They cover
themselves in the Summer with blankets, which they call raaner or ryer, and
with these blankets they cover not only their whole body, but also their heads
too, to avoid the gnats, with which they are extremly infested in the night
time. But that they may breath with more freedom, and not be inconvenienced
with the weight of these blankets, they sometimes hang them up over their head
with ropes fastened to the top of their Hut. These are their Summer coverlets:
but in the Winter they first throw about them the skins of Sheep or Rain-deer,
and on them the blankets now mentioned. And there is one thing more worth our
notice, that they lie under these both Winter and Summer stark naked, and make
no use of linen. And so much for the Garments of the Laplanders. I shall add
the Figures of both Sexes habited after their manner. The woman has a child in
her arms, in a Laplandish Cradle.

depiction of a Lapland family (man, woman, child and baby) dressed in clothes
made from reindeer skins; the baby is held in the mother's arms in a
traditional, sledge-shaped Lapland cradle

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Diet of the Laplanders.
HAVING discoursed of their Garments, I proceed to speak of their Diet. Their
food is not the same amongst them all, but different according to the places
they inhabit. The Mountaineers live almost wholly on their Rain-deers, that
furnish them with Milk, Cheese, and Flesh: tho sometimes they buy from the
neighboring parts of Norway Sheep, Goats, and Oxen, which they milk in the
Summer, and kill in the Winter, because they have neither Pasture nor Stable
room for them to keep them long. And for this reason they buy but very few of
them, and feed almost altogether on their Rain deer, which they have in great
abundance. The flesh of these they feed on in the Winter, and that always
boiled, but in the Summer their diet is Milk, Cheese, and dried flesh. Their
dainties most in esteem with them are the tongue and marrow of their
Rain-deers, and with these they are want to entertain their Priests. One odd
kind of dish these of the Mountains have, and that is the blood of their
Rain-deers boiled in water to the consistence of a hasty pudding. The others
that dwell in the Woods feed partly on Fish, and partly on Birds and Beasts,
and that too both Summer and Winter, bnt more frequently on Fish. The flesh of
Bears they prefer before all other, and with that they feast their dearest
friends.

They have also some kind of Sawces of Black-berries, Straw-berries, and other
peculiar ones of their own; as also wild Angelica, and the inner rine of the
Pine Tree. The use of Bread and Salt is almost unknown to them, and when they
have any of the later, they use it very sparingly. Instead of bread they eat
dried fish, which by grinding they reduce to a kind of meal, and instead of
Salt the inward rine of the Pine Tree, prepared after an odd kind of manner.
They pull the bark off first, and then they take the inward rine, and divide it
into thin skins like parchment, making it very clean; these they dry in the
Sun, and then tearing it into small pieces they put it up in boxes made of the
barks of trees: these they bury under ground, and cover them with sand. When
they have bin dried about a day, they kindle a great fire over the hole where
they put their boxes, and by that means the rines acquire a red color, and a
very pleasant taste. On Fridaies they eat no flesh, but feed either on fish, or
milk, having retained this custom from their Roman Catholic Priests. They boil
all their fresh flesh, but not very much; that their broth may be the better
and fuller of gravy: and sometimes they put also fish into the same kettle.
Their milk they either boil with some quantity of water, it being of it self to
thick, or else they let it stand in the cold, to freeze into a kind of Cheese,
that it may be kept longer for use. Their fish they eat sometimes fresh as soon
as they catch them; sometimes they dry them in the Sun, and being hardened by
the wind and air, they may be kept several years.

Their sweet meats, which serve them instead of Apples, Nuts, and the like, are
preparations made of several sorts of Berries. When their Straw-berrries begin
to be ripe, they gather them, and boil them in their own juice, without the
addition of water, with a slow fire, till they are very soft: then they
sprinkle them over with a little salt, and putting them into a vessel made of
birch-bark, they bury it in the ground; and in the Autumn and Winter when they
have occasion for them, they take them out as fresh as if they had bin newly
gathered: and these stand them in good stead when no other Berries are to be
had. Sometimes whilst they are fresh they put them to the flesh of Fish, and
make an odd kind of dish, after this manner. Having boiled the Fish they first
bone them, and then add Straw-berries to them, and beat them together in a
wooden pestle to a mash, and so eat it with spoons. And this dish they make
also with all other kinds of Berries. Another Kickshaw that pleases them very
much, they make of Angelica. They take the staulks before it seed, and scraping
of the outward skin, they put the rest upon coals, and so eat it broiled. They
have also another way of preparing it, and that is to boil them in whay for a
whole day till they look as red as blood. But this sort of meat is very bitter
of it self, but by custom becomes pleasant enough to them, especially since they
are persuaded it is a great preservative of health. They likewise boil sorrel
in milk; as also the rine of the Pine Tree, which, as was said before, being
prepared, serves them instead of salt.

I come next to speak of their drink, which is ordinarily nothing but water;
Lomenius calls it dissolved Ice: but certainly he is mistaken, for having such
plenty of Rivers and Lakes, for all the Ice they can hardly want water. And to
prevent its freezing, they have always some hanging over the fire in a kettle;
out of which every one with a spoon takes what he pleases, and so drinks it
hot, especially in the Winter time. Besides common water, they often drink the
broth I spoke of, made of flesh and fish, which they call Laebma, and also
whay, if you will believe Olaus. These are their usual drinks; for Ale and Beer
is utterly unknown to them. That which they drink for pleasure, is spirit of
Wine and Brandy, with a little of which you may win their very souls. This they
buy from Norway at their Fair times, and use it especially at their solemn
Feasts and Weddings. I had almost forgot Tobacco, of which they are very great
admirers, and traffic for it as one of their chief commodities.

In the next place let us see the manner of their eating. Their dining room in
the Winter time is that part of the Hut where the man and his wife and
daughters use to be, and is on the right hand as you go in at the foregate: but
in Summer without doors upon the green grass. Sometimes too they are want to
sit about the kettle in the middle of the Hut. They use not much ceremony about
their places, but every one takes it as he comes first. They seat themselves
upon a skin spread on the ground cross-leg'd in a round ring; and the meat is
set before them in the middle, upon a log or stump instead of a table; and
several have not that, but lay their meat upon the skin which they fit on.
Having taken the flesh out of the kettle, the common sort put it upon a woollen
table cloth called Waldmar, the richer on a linen; as for trenchers and dishes
they are quite unknown to them. But if any liquid thing be to be served up,
they put it in a kind of trey made of birch. Sometimes without any other
ceremony every one takes his share out of the kettle, and puts it upon his
gloves, or his cap. Their drink they take up in a wooden Ladle, which serves
instead of plate. And it is farther observable that they are abominable
gluttons when they can get meat enough; and yet hardy too to endure the most
pinching hunger when they are forced to it. When their meal is ended they first
give God thanks, and then they mutually exhort one another to Faith and
Charity, taking each other by the right hand, which is a symbol of their unity
and brotherhood. Samuel Rheen tells us they lift up their hands first, and then
say Grace after this manner, All thanks be given to God, who has provided this
meat for our sustenance. This is their Grace in Pithilapmark. In Tornelapmark
their Grace is a little different; they say in their own Tongue, Piaomaos Immel
laegos kitomatz piergao odest add misg mosea wicken ieggan taide ko mig laex
iegnaston, that is, Good God praised be thou for this meat: make that which we
have at this time eaten give strength to our bodies. And so much for their
Diet, and manner of eating.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Hunting of the Laplanders.
HAVING spoke of those things that relate to their Meat, Drink, Clothing, and
other necessities, the subject of our next discourse will be their employments,
which are either rare and more solemn, or daily and more usual: these latter
too are of two sorts, either common to both Sexes, or peculiar to one. Of those
that are proper to men Hunting is the chief, for in this Country that exercise
is lawful to none but men: Olaus Magnus is of the contrary opinion, and says
Lib. 4. Cap. 12. that there is here such a multitude of Beasts, that the men
alone, without the help of women, dare not go out to hunt; and therefore they
are as active in this sport, if not more than men. I believe he had not this
from any good tradition, or his own knowledge, but rather followed the authority
of some ancient Writers, as Procopius Lib. 2. Gothic. or Tacitus de mor. Ger.
for whatsoever they say concerning the Fenni and Scritfinni, is so far from
being true of the Laplanders, that they do not permit women so much as to touch
their hunting weapons or beasts brought home, and debar them all passage at
that door through which they go to that sport, as will be showed hereafter. They
observe in hunting many things with great superstition, as not to go out upon
ominous days, such as St Marks (whom they call Cantepaive) St Clements and S.
Catharines, because they believe on these days some misfortune will happen to
their weapons, and that they shall have no good success all the year after.
They think they cannot prosper, unless they have first consulted their Gods by
their Drum, which they use before their going out, and have therefore several
beasts pictured upon it. This is chiefly before the hunting a Bear. The third
observation is that they will not go out at the usual door, but at one in the
backside of the house called Posse, I suppose it is to avoid women, the meeting
of whom is an ill omen to huntsmen, and therefore they are forbidden to come on
that side of the house where this door is, as Ol. Matthias assured me while I
was writing this, who was very well acquainted with this Country. Zieglerus
says the same, tho something obscurely, that a woman is not to go through this
door that day her husband is hunting: but it is not only that day, but at no
time else. All these things are by way of preparation. The hunting it self is
various according to the time of year, and several sizes of beasts. In the
Summer they hunt on foot with Dogs, which are very good in these parts, not
only for their scent, but that they dare set upon any thing, being still tied
up to make them more fierce. In the Winter they themselves run down the game,
sliding over the snow in a kind of scates, which I shall describe more fully in
another place. Little beasts they chase with bow and arrows, the greater with
spears and guns; tho sometimes they use other arts. That sort of beast they
call Hermelines, they take in traps as we do Mice, which are so contrived of
wood that the touching of any part makes them fall; sometimes in pits and holes
covered with snow, to hide the deceit, as also with Dogs that will gripe them
to death. Squirrels they shoot with blunt darts, that they may not do an injury
to their skins, which they very much esteem. After this manner also they take
Ermines. Other beasts, as Foxes, Beavers, they kill with Javelins spiked with
iron: but if they meet with a beast that has a precious skin, they are so
expert at their weapons, as to direct the blow where it will do it least harm.
Foxes are frequently tempted with baits upon the snow strowed upon twigs over
deep pits, or caught in gins laid in their usual haunts, or else poisoned with
a sort of moss, which is peculiar for this use, but is seldom made use of
where there are abundance of field Mice, which are the Foxes general food.
They fasten snares to boughs of trees to catch Hares in, and some of the above
mentioned beasts: and if any one find any thing fast in these, he is obliged to
give notice to the owner. I come now to the larger beasts, of which Wolves are
most commonly caught in holes, but sometimes shot with bullets: these are their
game frequently because they have the greatest plenty of them, and suffer the
most damages by them: and for their greater destruction, Sithes are often
hiden under the snow to cut off their legs. After this manner too Leopards and
Gulo's are destroyed, which is now a days almost left off, because the
Country is so well furnished with guns, with which they also kill Elkes when
they can find them. But with greatest care and diligence they hunt Rain-deers
and Bears, the former with all kind of weapons. At their rutting time in
Autumn, about S. Matthews day, they entice them to their tame does, behind
which the Huntsman lies to shoot them. And in the Spring, when the Snow is
deep, the men themselves slide after them, and easily take them, or sometimes
drive them into traps with Dogs: or lastly they set up hurdles on both sides of
a way, and chase them in between them, so that at last they must necessarily
fall into holes made for that purpose at the end of the work. The hunting of
the Bear follows, which, because it is done with the most ceremonies and
superstitions, will require the more care and accurateness in the relating of
it.

First of all, their business is to find out where the Bear makes his den
against Winter. He that finds it is said hafwa ringet bioern, i. e. to
encompass the Bear. He usually after this goes to all his friends and
acquaintance with much joy, to invite them to the hunting as to a solemn and
magnificent feast, for, as is before said, this beasts flesh is a great
delicacy. But they never meet before March or April, till they can use their
sliding shoes: at which time he chooses the best drummer among them, and by
his beating consults whether the hunting will be prosperous or no, which done
they all march into the field in battle array after him that invited them as
Captain, who must use no other weapon then a club, on whose handle is hung an
Alchymy ring. Next him goes the drummer, then he that is to give the first
blow, and after all the rest as their office requires, one to boil the flesh,
another to divide it, a third to gather sticks and provide other necessaries:
so they strictly observe that one should not incroach upon another office.
When in this order they are come to the den, they set upon the Bear valiantly,
and kill him with spears and guns, and presently sing in token of victory thus,
Kittulis pourra, Kittulis ii skada tekamis soubbi iaella zaiiti, that is, they
think the Bear for coming, and doing them no harm in not breaking their
weapons, in the singing of which their Captain is the chief Musician. After
celebration of their victory, they drag the Bear out, beating him with staves,
whence they have a Proverb, slao bioern med riis, that is, the Bear is beat,
which signifies he is killed. Then putting him upon a sledge, they draw him
with Rain-deers to the Hut where he is to be boiled, singing Ii paha tolking
gio, ii paha talka pharonis, that is, they beseech the Bear that he would not
raise tempests against them, or any way hurt them that killed him. This they
say by way of jest, unless we will suppose them (as some of them really do) to
imagine the killing of some kind of wild beast portends ill to the hunter.
Samuel Rheen speaks of a different song from this we have mentioned, much to
this purpose, that they thank God for making beasts for their service, and
giving them strength and courage to encounter and overcome so strong and cruel
a creature, and therefore I believe they may join them together and sing both.
That Rain-deer that brings home the Bear is not to be used by Women for a year,
and some say, by any body else. If there be materials, near the place where
the Bear is killed, they usually build up a hovel there to boil him in, or if
not, carry him to a place that is more convenient, where all their Wives stay
to expect them, and as soon as the men come nigh them they sing Laeibi ia tuoli
susco, that is they ask their wives to chew the bark of the Alder Tree and spit
it in their faces. They use this rather then any other Tree, because when it is
bruised between their teeth, it grows red, and will die any thing, and the men
being sprinkled with this, as if it were the Bears blood, seem to have gone
through some notable exploit not without danger and trouble. Then their wives
aiming with one eye through an Alchymy Ring spit upon them: Samuel Rheens
opinion differs only in this, that but one woman spits in the Captains face.
This ceremony is not done in the Hut where the Bear is killed, but at the back
door: for they build two Tents, one for the men where the Bear is to be dressed,
and the other for the women in which they make the feast: where as soon as the
men come in, the Women sing Kittulis pouro tookoris, that is, they thank their
husbands for the sport they had in killing the Bear: so they sit down men and
women together to eat, but not of Bears flesh. Supper ended the men presently
depart into the other house, and dressing the Bear provide another meal: and it
is not lawful for any of those Hunters to ly with his wife in three days
after, and the Captain in five. The Bears skin is his that first discovers him.
They boil the flesh blood and fat in brass Kettles, and what swims they skim
off and put in wooden vessels; to which are fastened as many Alchymy plates as
there are Bears killed. Whilst the meat is boiling they all sit down in order
about the fire, the Captain first on the right hand, then the Drummer, and next
he that struck the first blow; on the left hand first the Wood-cleaver, then
the Water-bearer, and after the rest according to their place. This done the
Captain divides it between the Women and Men. In the division the Women must
have none of the posteriours, for they belong only to the men; neither is it
lawful for a Woman to come and fetch their division, but it is sent them by two
men, who say thus to them, Olmai Potti Sueregislandi, Polandi, Engelandi,
Frankichis, i. e. that they came a great way off, from Swedland, Poland,
England, or France; these men the women meet, and sing Olmai Potti
Sweregislandi, Polandi, Engelandi, Frankichis, Kalka Kauhsis laigit touti
tiadnat, i. e. you men that come from Swedland, Poland, England, or France; we
will bind your legs with a red list, and so they do. But if we believe Samuel
Rheen the Drummer divides the men's part to every one an equal portion. When all
the meat is eaton, they gather up the bones, and bury them together; then the
Captain hangs up the skin upon a pole, for the women blindfolded to shoot at,
they singing all the while Batt Olmai Potti Sweregislandi, Polandi, Engelandi,
Frankichis, i. e. we will shoot at him that came from Swedland, etc. but she
that hits it first gets the most credit, and they believe her husband will have
the best fortune in killing of the next Bear. She is also obliged to work in
cloth with wire as many crosses as there are Bears killed, and hang them upon
every one of the hunters necks, which they must wear three whole days. It is
the opinon of the aforesaid Author, that all the women do the same, and the men
wear them four days: he says also that the Raindeer that brought home the
Bear must have one cross. I cannot as yet find any other reason of this
ceremony, but that they suppose these crosses to be preservatives against all
the damages they can receive from the Gods of the Woods for killing their
Bear: for to this day they are of the opinion that some Gods have taken charge
of some beasts, especially of the Bear, because he in this country is King over
all the rest. After the time of abstinence is exspired, the close of all this
solemnity, is the men's returning to their wives, which is thus; All after one
another take hold of that rope, to which they hang their Kettle, and dance
thrice round the fire, and so run out of the men's Tent into the women's, where
they are met with this song, Todna Balka Kaino oggio, we will through a shovel
full of ashes upon your legs. Samuel Rheen speaking of this custom, says the
men must not go to their wives till it be done, as if it were an expiation for
their uncleanness in killing a Bear. Thus you see with how many Laws and
superstitions they Hunt this Beast, some of which are common in hunting of
others, as the not admitting women to the sport, and debarring them from
touching the prey when it is taken, as also that the men return home through
the back door. And here it is observable that they never carry in Beasts, Birds,
or Fishes, but throw them in before them, without doubt out of superstition
that they may seem to drop from Heaven and be sent by providence: tho most of
them know not the original of such superstitious ceremonies, but only follow
the example of their forefathers. In fine nothing is accounted here a greater
credit or honor to a man then the killing of a Bear, and therefore they have
public marks for it, every one lacing his cap with as many wires as he has
killed Bears.

I come now to their fowling, which is proper also to men, and is alterable
according to the time of year or largness of the fowl, for in the Summer they
shoot altogether, but in the Winter catch in Snares and Springes, especially
the Lagopus called by the Swedes Sniaeriper. They make kind of hedges with
abundance of holes in them, in which they set Springes, so that this Bird being
most upon the ground, and running about, is easily caught in them: as for the
taking of other Birds there is nothing worth a particular observation.

CHAP. XX. Of the Laplanders Weapons, and other instruments of Hunting.
BY the former Discourse it plainly appears that in hunting they use several
Instruments and Weapons, in our next therefore it will be requisite to give
some account of them. The first and most frequent is a bow three else long, two
fingers broad, and an inch thick, being made of Birch and Pine (which by reason
of the resine in it is very flexible) and covered over with Birch bark, to
preserve both from the weather. What Lomenius says of its being made of
Rain-deers bones, must needs be false, since no bone can be so pliable as is
required in the making of a bow; his words are these, Rangiferi asperantur ossa
in cultros and curvantur in arcus congeneribus feris trucidandis, if he had
left out and curvantur in arcus he had spoke more to the purpose: but I believe
he had this, besides many other things, to fill up his Journall from Olaus
Magnus, who among the utensils these People have from the Rain-deers, says the
Fletchers much desire their bones and horns, from whence Lomenius collects that
bows are made of them. But it is evident that Olaus meant not this bow, but a
kind of cross-bow termed by the Germans Armbrust, and the French Arbalestre,
which is impossible to be made of bone, but the handle might be adorned with
it, because in these Northern parts they have no mother of Pearl, which other
Countries perhaps make use of to this purpose. It was then a good plain wooden
long-bow, which would not require an engine to bend it, but might be drawn with
an hand only. And since I told you it was made of two pieces of wood, we will
see next how they were joined together, which is with a kind of glue made of
Perches skin well scaled, that melts in using like ours. They have also
steelbows, which are so strong, that when they bend them they must put their
foot in a ring for that purpose at the head of them, and draw the string up to
the nut, made of bone in the handle, with an iron hook they wear at their
girdle. From their bows I pass to their darts and arrows, which are of two
sorts, either pointed with iron to kill the larger beasts, or blunt without it
like bolts, to kill the smaller. These points are not always made of iron, but
sometimes bones, which are fastened with glue into a hole bored with a hot iron
at the end of a staff, and afterward sharpened with a knife, or on a
whetstone. But besides they use Guns, which they (as hunters do in other
places) with a great deal of superstition enchaunt that they should never miss.
These are made at Soederhambn, a town in Helsingia, famous for weapons, from
whence the Bothnians buy them, and sell them to the Laplanders: hence they have
Gunpowder and bullets, or at least lead to make them: and sometimes Norway
furnishes them with all these. Spears they use only in hunting Bears, and are
so little different from ours that they will not need a description. I come now
to their other instruments relating to this sport, the chiefest of which are
their shoes, with which they slide over the frozen snow, being made of broad
planks extremely smooth; the Northern People call them Skider, and by
contraction Skier (which agrees something with the Germans Scheitter, that is,
cleft wood) and sometimes Andrer or Ondrur or Skiidh. Their shape is, according
to Olaus Magnus, five or six else long, turned up before, and a foot broad:
which I cannot believe, because I have a pair which are a little broader, and
much shorter, and Wormius had a pair but of three else long. And those are much
shorter which are to be seen at Leiden, which Frisius says are just seven foot
long, four inches and a little more broad: and it must needs be so to hold with
Olaus Magnus, and every bodies opinion, that one shoe must be longer than the
other by a foot, as if the man or woman be eight foot high, one must be eight
foot, and the other nine. Frisius says they are both of a length at Leiden,
and Olaus Wormius takes no notice of any difference in his, but I believe then
those were of two Parishes, for my biggest is just such an one as Frisius
describes covered over with resin or pitch, and the shorter plain. But because
the larger is of greatest use, it is no wonder that one or two of them were
sent abroad for a pattern, but since those at Leiden are both the biggest, they
were not made for men so tall as Frisius speaks of, they fitting men of six
foot, which is a stature sometimes met with in Lapland. They are smooth and
turned up before, not behind, as they are pictured in Wormius, not by the fault
of the Author, but the Painter, for the original in his study shows them
otherwise; I have observed in my longer shoe that it is not quite strait, but
swells up a little in the middle where they place their foot. Frisius did ill
in giving a picture but of one, and in that nothing of this bending, I will
therefore describe both, and a Laplander sliding in them.

depiction of a Lapland hunter wearing skis

These shoes are fastened to their feet by a with, not run through the bottom
but by the sides, that it might not hinder their sliding, or wear out with
often using, which is not expressed in Frisius's Picture, this is directly in
the middle, and ti'd to the hinder part of the leg, as you may see in the
figure. That which is often in Olaus Magnus, and set forth by Frisius, is a
mere fancy and figment of an Italian Painter, that could not understand what
these shoes were, but by describing them like long wooden broags turning up
with a sharp point before: which is very idle, because the foot goes into it at
the hinder part, and agrees not with Olaus's other cuts; for if the place of
the foot were there, it could not endure so great a weight before it, or effect
that for which this shoe was first invented: for they must tread firm upon the
Snow, which they could not do if all the weight lay at one end; but when it is
in the middle, that which is before and behind will keep the foot from sinking
in. The way of going in them is this: they have in their hand a long staff, at
the end of which is a large round piece of wood fastened, to keep it from going
deep into the Snow, and with this they thrust themselves along very swiftly.
This way of running they not only use in plain and even, but in the must rugged
grounds, and there is no Hill or Rock so steep, but with winding and turning
they can at last come up to the top, (which Pope Paul the Third could not
believe) and that which is a greater Miracle will slide down the steepest
places without danger. These shoes they cover with young Rain-deers skins,
whose hairs in their climbing run like brisles against the Snow, and keep them
from going back. Wormius says they were covered with Sea Calf's skins, but I
believe he talked of those, that the Siaefinni, or the Maritime people use. And
this is the first instrument of hunting, which they use as well in other
businesses in winter time, for they can pass no other way over the Snow, at
which time they can out run any wild beast. The other instrument they use is a
sledg, which although it is fit for any journey, they use it in hunting especially
the Rain-deeres, the description of which, because it is fit for all manner of
carriages, I shall defer to another place.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Laplanders Handycraft-trades.
BEsIDEs hunting, which is the chiefest, they have many other emploiments
relating to their lives and fortunes, of which Cookery is the first: for what
ever food they get by fishing, fowling, or hunting, the men dress and not the
women. They therefore are quite ignorant of this Art, (which the men are not
very expert at) and never use it but upon necessity, and in the absence of men.

The second is the boat-makers, which they make of Pine or Deal boards, not
fastened with nails but sewed together with twigs, as among the ancients with
thongs, Olaus Magnus and Johannes Tornaeus says with roots of trees, but most
commonly with Rain-deers nerves. When they launch these boats they caulk them
with moss to keep out the water, and use sometimes two, sometimes four oars,
so fastened to pegs in the sides, that one man may row with two.

The third trade is the Carpenters, to make sledges, which are not all of the
same shape, those they travel in, called Pulca being made in the fashion of
half a boat, having the prou about a span broad turned up, with a hole in it to
run a cord through to fasten it to a Rain-deer, and the poupe of one slat board:
the body is built of many, which are fastened with wooden pegs to four or five
ribs; they never go upon wheels, but are unequal and round, that they may roll
any way, and more easily be drawn over the Snow. This description agrees with
that sledg which I have, and the Testimony of Herberstenius, Olaus Magnus, and
Johannes Tornaeus. The fore part of them is covered with Sea-Calfs skin for
about an ell, stretched upon hoops, least the Snow should come in, under which
they put moss to keep their feet warm. These are about three else long, but
those that carry baggage, called ackkio, aj^five, are not covered any where.
The people defend their goods from the weather, according to Wexionius, with
raw flax: but that is not probable, because no flax grows there, and the use of
flaxen garments is unknown, and therefore I believe they do it with skins or
bark. In Olaus Magnus lib. 17. cap. 25. there is a cart painted upon wheels,
the Author describes it in these words, qui domestici sunt Rangiferi curulibus
plaustris aptantur, but what these curulia plaustra signify he does not
explain. And since the Painter has drawn other things according to his own
capacity, and understanding, I do not know whether he has not followed his own
opinion more then Olaus's narration, but it is certain there are no wheel
carts, for what they carry in Summer is put in dorsers upon Rain-deers. These
Tradesmen make their sliding shoes, which because I have described in the
former Chapter, I need not now speak of.

The fourth is making boxes and chests to lay up weapons and other things in,
which are all of an oval shape, of which sort Lodovicus Otto Bathoniensis gave
me one. They are made of thin birch plancks, which are so contrived and bent
into an Oval, that the pegs or twigs, with which they are fastened, are not
perceived. The lids are of one board, and for ornament often inlaid with
Rain-deers bones in diverse figures, which for better illustration you shall
see described at the end of this Chapter in the cut marked with the letter C.

The sift Trade is making Baskets, in which Art no Nation can compare with
them. The matter they make them off is roots of Trees, which they work not as
other people do, for they make them of what bigness they please, and if
occasion require, will be so accurate in their work as to interweave the roots
so neat and close together, that they shall hold water like a solid vessel.
Their shapes are diverse, some round with a cover and handle to carry them by,
and others squares or oblongs. Not only the Laplanders and Swedes use these,
but they are also for their curiosity and strength sent into farther Countries:
the figure B. at the end will give a view of a round one.

Beside these the men make all manner of household stuff of wood or bone; and
particularly spoons, one of which I have with all its Rings and Ornaments, as
you may see at figure A. I have two weaving instruments, a shuttle about two
inches long or more, with an hole at one end D. and a kind of comb or small
Loom in which they weave particular wreaths and ornaments E.

depiction of various handcrafted items, including a spoon, a shuttle, shoes,
boots, gloves, a chest and a woven basket

They make also very neat Tobacco boxes carved with knifes in bone, with many
Rings and other pretty appendages about them, all which being considered will
prove this Nation not to be so dull and stupid as by some it is supposed.

They have also one Art more worth taken notice of, as ingraving flowers and
several Beasts in bone, into which they cast several plates of Tin, and with
these figures the men and women adorn their girdles and other things: the same
way they make their molds for casting bullets. They make instruments for all
emploiments, as Cookery, etc. those for hunting are usually made of bone, and
others are commonly adorned with it. Zeigler mentions tubs, which are rather
cups, or vessels cut out of a stump of a Tree, as traies are: and Wexionius
mentions other vessels made of bark, but I forbear to speak of any more, only I
shall add that they learn their art not from masters but their fathers
according to their capacity.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Women's Emploiments.
HAvING run through the men's emploiments, the women's are next to be considered.
Two trades are most peculiar to them, as doing the work of Tailors and
Shoomakers, for they make and mend all the Clothes, Shoes, Boots and Gloves;
and they have a third the making all those things that join the Rain-deer to
the sledg, as collars, traces, etc. in order to which they learn subservient
arts, as making thread, which is commonly of Rain-deers nerves, because they
have no flax: of this sort I have some by me. Olaus Magnus says ad
indumentorum usum, for the making of shirts, which made Lomenius believe the
women wove this thread into cloth, who I perceive in his short description of
Lapland, has very closely followed his words more then his sense. In the
making of their thread, which is of about 3 else long, the extent of the
Rain-deers nerves, they first cleanse the nerves, then having cut off all the
hard parts, they dry, and hatchell them, and lastly mollify them with fishes
fat. Besides this they spin wool for swaddling clothes, and Hares fur, with
which they knit caps, as in other parts of Europe they do stockins with four
knitting needles, which art the Germans call stricken. These Caps are as soft
as Swans down, and extremly warm. In the same manner they make Gloves, which
are very benesiciall to them in the cold. The work of their sillets is very
curious, for they put in them many figures, as you may see at the end of the
foregoing Chapter, at the figure I. The fourth trade is their covering thread
with tin, which first they draw into wire by pulling it through little holes in
horn with their teeth, which holes they fill half up with bone, that the tin
may be flat on one side, and fitter to be put on thread. The picture of a woman
drawing wire you have in the next page. Then they put it upon the nerves by the
help of a spindle, which does so twist them together that they seem all tin,
and when they have done, they wind it about their head or foot, least it should
entangle and be spoiled. And this is their way of making thread of tin, as in
other Countries of gold and silver, the chiefest use of which is in adorning
their clothes after the way of Embroidery, which is the women's fifth art.
depiction of a woman making wire thread Ziegler adds to this faciunt vestes
intextas auro and argento, that they interweave in their clothes gold and
silver, which I cannot believe, because they do not do so now, and whatever is
spoke of the metal, they weave neither linen nor woollen, but buy it from the
Bothnian or Norway Merchants: so then they do not weave this thread into their
garment, but embroider them with it. Thus they adorn all their vestments, as
gowns called Muddar, boots, gloves and shoes, and she that does it neatest, is
preferred before other women, and had in greater estimation. They do not
immediately put this upon the fur of skins, but lifts of blew, green, or red
woollen cloth. depiction of embroidered accessories, including a pincase, a
knife sheath and scrips Their gowns are embroidered about the neck, sleeves,
breast, and sides; gloves about the tops, shoes; instep and toes; boots, about
the knees; in which work they commonly picture; Stars, Flowers, Birds, Beasts,
especially Rain-deers: and to make their clothes more glorious, they set them
with spangles, fillets, points, and knots of this thread, and wear upon their
head shreds of diverse colored cloth, the pictures of all which you have in the
former Chapter, Boots F, Gloves G, Shoes H. The Rain-deers harness they
embroider in the same manner.

Lastly they have nothing that appears in sight, but it is hereby made very
commendable and ingenious. I have by me men and women's scrips, pincases,
sheaths for knives, very curiously wrought. Of all which, that I might not seem
to give too a large commendation of them, I have put the Pictures in the
foregoing page.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Emploiments common to both Sexes.
THE other buisinesses, which we have not treated of yet, whether they be at
home or in journies, belong to both Sexes, and that they may be the better
undertaken, men and women wear breeches, and as Joh. Tornaeus takes notice,
equally undergo all pains and work excepting hunting: by which words excepta
venatione he does not deny but men and women have peculiar emploiments. In
their travels the master of a family goes first, with his baggage and
Rain-deers after him, and next him his wife with hers, in Summer they both walk
on foot, in Winter both are drawn in sledges, which I have described in the
next page: in these they like children are tied and bound fast with fillets and
cords, especially when in have, having only their hands and head at liberty,
and their back leaning against the end. The Raindeer is not harnessed like an
Horse, but has a strong cloth about his neck, to which is fastened a rope that
goes between his fore and hind feet, to the hole in the prou of the fledge. He
therefore that drew Olaus Magnus pictures was much deceived, when he made
Rain-deers joined to the sledge with traces on both sides, and such a collar
about their necks, as is used in other Countries upon their thillers; and in
another place two yoaked together drawing a cart with wheels, which is a thing
unknown to the Laplanders, and men riding upon them as on a Horse, whereas they
never do so, but walk on foot, and carry their goods only on them in dorsers.
He that is drawn rules the beast, not with a bridle, but an halter made of
Sea-dogs skin tied about his head or horns, fastened to a stick which he holds
in one hand, with which he removes the thong to either side, according as he
would go or turn: with the other he guides the sledge, for it being round at
bottom is still wavering, so that he which rides, must still with the motion of
his body, and hand, take care it overturns not, as you may see in the picture.
When they thus travel in the Winter, the Rain-deers are bravely adorned with
needle work of tin-thred upon diverse colored cloth, about their necks and
back, and a bell, with which they are mightily pleased. They travel in these
at what rate they will; but if upon a remove, always slow, because of the
weight of their goods, in which journies the man and his depiction of a
reindeer pulling a man in a sledge wife go first, and all the family come
after. Ziegler says in 24 hours they can go 150 miles: Herbersternius says
in a day 20 German miles: but it is not to be believed that it is performed with
one Rain-deer in the day of 12 hours, except the ways be good and slippery,
but they ordinarily go 12 14 or 16 German miles in ten hours, which number
doubled will make out Zeigler's opinion: and that not with one Rain-deer which
is impossible to out so long, but that it must die or be left to rest the next
day. In this way of traveling the Women are as expert as the men, and Olaus
Magnus says more. As the men and women travel together, so they help one
another in fishing, and at baiting time to feed their cattle, which is evident
in the Rain-deer, for the women take as much care of them as the men, and
equally take the trouble to milk them: and in fishing it is manifest; for women
in the absence of men, are very intent for some weeks at catching fish, which
they gut and dry up for Winter. Their way of catching them is with Nets, and
other instruments, as every where else. I know not what Paulus Jovius meant,
when he said they have a foolish way of fishing, except he refers to their
hooks which are not of Iron but Wood: they make them of Juniper bent round:
these they fasten to sticks, and throw them into the Rivers, and very easily
take many large fishes. If they fish with a Cane or Whale-bone, the fisher
never knows when the fish bites, but pulls up at a venture. Their way of
fishing alters with the season, in the Summer usually with drag nets, between
two boats, or else with spears like Tridents, but that they have more teeth.
With these they strike pikes, especially when they ly sunning themselves near
the top of the Water: they do the same by Night burning dry wood at the prow,
by which light the Fish are enticed thither. In the Winter time they thrust
nets under the ice to a banck side, and then by a great noise above drive the
Fish to them; all these things the Women often do alone, which is the less to
be wondered at, because every wherein this Country there is a great multitude
of Fish. Besides all these, they carry and cleave wood, and make hedges, with
such like works, which are so inconsiderable as not to be worthy to enlarge our
discourse.

CHAP. XXIV. Of their Divertisements.
HAVING spoken of their ordinary emploiments, it will not be amiss here to
annex something of their Divertisements: where first we may note, that the
people of this Country are generally disposed to idleness, not willing to take
any great pains, unless when mere necessity constrains them to provide against
want. This they seem to derive principally from their Ancestors the Finlanders,
as is elsewhere said. To which as well their cold constitution by reason of the
sharpness of the Air in this Country (that it self is sufficient to dispose men
to laziness,) as the length of their Nights, and indulgence to much sleep. may
contribute not a little. In fine, that I may omit their many other infirmities,
whereby they are incapacitated to undergo any considerable hardship, they are
lovers of sloth and wholly given up to it. But further, to consider how they
bestow their vacant time from business, it is the general and most recieved
account, that making and receiving visits, and familiar conversation become the
greatest part of their recreations. For whereas their manner of life so nearly
resembles solitariness, that each family seems confined to its own hut, they
can take no greater satisfaction in any thing then such mutual intercourse. And
here it may be observed, that in their discourses at these meetings of friends
and acquaintance, usually the most ordinary affairs and daily occurrences have
the chiefest place: as particularly their welfare, emploiments, and the like.
But besides it is their humor to make remarks upon the transactions of all
forreiners, whose names or customs commerce has at any time brought to their
knowledge. And furthermore they can take no greater pride, then either in
traducing the management of their affairs, or imposing drollish Nicknames upon
them. Tho indeed those of the richer sort are used to entertain their visitants
with greater merriment and magnificence. Besides these visits they use some
sports wherewith they recreate themselves, especially in Winter (when for some
space of time they live as scateringly as in Summer, but are more familiar,) or
at their public assemblies in the places of Judicature and Fairs. Again some
sports are looked upon as only peculiar to men, others the female Sex also have
their part in. Of the first sort this is one. They make a line in the Snow, in
place of a goal: behind it at some paces distance they set up a mark, from
whence each person taking a run to the goal, and there taking his rise, throws
his body as far as possibly he can, and he that at one leap compasses the
greatest space of ground, is reckoned the Conqueror. In this first sport they
both leap and run. Another they have where the trial of skill consists in
leaping only, and that too not in length but height; there stand two men
upright, at no great distance the one from the other, and hold in their hands
sometimes a rope, sometimes a pole, now higher, now lower, as is agreed upon by
the combatants, usually at the common height of a man: then each Person attemts
to leap over from a station assigned, and he that performs most dexterously,
gains the applause to himself. A third sort of sport among them is with bow and
arrows. At a convenient place they set up a mark of a very small bigness, and
shoot at it with arrows from any distance prescribed. He that hits either
soonest or oftnest, bears away the bell from the rest. These sports hitherto
mentioned are almost instituted by them merely for the consideration of credit
and renown: yet sometimes they play for prizes such as they agree upon among
themselves, and instantly they lay them down in the place where they keep their
games. Their prizes are seldom money, usually skins, especially of Squirrels,
sometimes one, sometimes more as they see convenient and agree upon it. But in
those sports wherein as well the women as men are plaiers, they commonly play
with a leather ball stuffed with hay, about the bigness of ones fist; whatever
company of men and women is there present, is sorted into two sides, one
whereof seizes on this ground, the other on another opposite to it, and at some
distance off. Then every Person of one side in his turn, beats the ball with a
club thorough the Air, those of the contrary side catching it at the fall; and
if any one chance to catch it in his hands, before it touch ground, then the
order of the play is inverted, and this side strikes out the ball, the other is
fain to catch. Thus play the men and women, the boys and girls together, nor
do the men show thereselves more expert at it then the women. They besides have
another play at ball: in the hard frozen snow they draw two lines at some
distance from one another, then all the multitude both of men and women parting
into two sides, one applies it self to the defense of this, the other of that
line; then they meet in the middle space between their two goals, and fling
down the ball, then each party with bandies and clubs strives to strike the
ball cross the opposite parties line, each party still maintaining the defense
of its own line; but if one side chance to strike the ball with their bandies
over the others line (for it is foul play to fling it with their hands) and so
take their goal, that is accounted the conquering side. The sports as yet
mentioned are such as belong to the younger sort, as well as to those of more
mature age: the next is peculiar to these last and only to men. Their custom is
to separate themselves into two companies, and attacque one another by
wrestling: first each company stands like a file of Soldiers all along in order
to confront the adverse company: then each man catches his adversary by the
girdle, wherewith all Laplanders are always girt, as is elsewhere shown, (their
girdle goes six times round their body, and so is fast and fittest for their
purpose,) so each man having caught hold, endeavors to fling the other down,
which they are not allowed to attempt by craft or deceit, as by any lock or the
like; Any one that is found delinquent in this kind, is branded for a fowl
plaier, and excluded the lists. These are the sports that are almost peculiar
to the Laplanders: besides them they use some, which they borrow from other
places, such is playing at Cards, a sport sufficiently known thorough all
Europe, for even the Laplanders take no little satisfaction in it: they procure
their Cards of the Merchants that trade thither. They use likewise to play at
dice, which they themselves make of wood after the common fashion, with this
only difference, that whereas dice commonly have some number of spots inscribed
on every side, they have a figure made only on one side like an X. he wins in
this sport, that casting two Dies, on the top of either can show the X. their
stakes are usually Squirrils skins, or some small trifles, and in the failance
of these leaden bullets, which they use in their hunting to charge their Guns
withal: and it happens sometimes that a fellow having lost all his bullets, in
hope of repairing his damage by winning again, not only at present will be
sensible of the harm, but being disappointed of his Hunting puts to stake and
looses his future acquisitions and hope of livelihood. These are the usual
ways, whereby the people of Lapland spend their leisure times and divert
themselves.

CHAP. XXV. Of their Contracts and Marriages.
WE have hitherto taken a survey of their ordinary imploiments, and such as are
almost every day in use, as well those peculiar to each Sex, as common to both;
likewise of their Divertisements and sports, wherewith they use to intermingle
those emploiments: It remains that we treat of those businesses, which do not
every day occur, but are singular and solemn, and undertaken upon special
occasions. And first of what appertain to their Marriages; Concerning them it is
most memorable, that whenever any person purposes to marry, it is his first
business, to make search after a Maid well stocked with Raindeers. For the
Laplanders have a custom, (as shall hereafter more particularly be mentioned)
of bestowing upon their Children soon after their birth, some certain number of
those Raindeers, and their increase is accounted of, not as the Parents estate,
but the Child's portion. She therefore, that is best provided of them, is in
most likelihood of meeting with an Husband. Nor have they regard to any thing
else, as either good breeding, or beauty, or other the common allurements of
woers. For they who dwell on a hard and barren soil are generally solicitous
concerning food, which because their Rain-deer afford, every one thinks himself
best secured against want when he is best provided of them. As soon therefore
as the young man has cast about him for a wife, which is usually done at their
public meetings for paying of taxes, or upon the account of fairs; next he
makes a journey to her parents, taking along with him his father, if alive, and
one or two more whom he thinks will be most kindly welcome, but especially one
who may declare his affections, and win the favor of the Maids parents. When
they arrive at the hut, they are all kindly invited in, only the suitor is fain
to wait at door, and bestow his time in chopping wood, or some such trivial
business, till he be summoned in also, for without express permission it is
uncivil in him to enter. When they have drank of the Spirit of Wine, which the
spokes-man brings, he applies himself to the management of his province,
discloses the Suitors affections to the Daughter, and makes his address to her
Father, that he will please to bestow her in Marriage upon him. Which that he
may atcheive with more success, he honors the Father with the greatest titles
and names of renown that he can devise, at every one bowing the knee, as if he
were treating with a prince. He styles him with the High and Mighty Father, the
Worshipful Father, as if he were one of the Patriarcks, the best and most
illustrious Father, and no doubt if they were acquainted with the Roial title
of His Majesty, He would not scruple to call him, the most Majestic Father.
The Wine, that the Suitor is supposed to have brought along with him therewith
to pay his respects to her parents, whom he pretends to, they call either
Pouristwyn (that is) the Wine of prosperous access, or that Wine wherewith he
designs to caress his Father and Mother in Law, that are to be; or else,
Soubowiin (that is the Wine of wooers which it is expedie^ for wooers to bestow,
thereby to procure permission of converse with (...) daughter, and gain the
favor and liking of the future Bride. But we must take notice, that the
business is not proposed to the maid her self first but her parents; nor may
the Suitor have any conference with her without their permission. Nay it is the
usual custom, at this time to dispatch her away upon some sleevless arrand,
either to the Rain-deers pastures in the Woods, or a Neighbors hut, so as
neither the Suitor nor any of his company may have a sight of her; but if at
last either she or some other woman procure leave for Her of her Parents or
kindred, to speak to him, their entertainment finished he gets him out of the
hut to his sledg, and then takes out his woollen Cloth-Garments, (such as they
use to spruce themselves up withal, at their public Festivals, or more solemn
affairs) and what else is requisite to the present business: when he has
trimmed himself up, he makes his address to his Mistress and salutes her. Their
manner of Salutation is by a kiss; in which that they mainly aim at is, that
each not only apply his mouth to the others, but also that both their noses
touch; for otherwise it goes not for a true salute. Next he makes her a present
of the rarest delicacies that Lapland affords, the Rain-deers tongue, the
Beavers flesh, and other dainties, which she refuses to accept of in the
presence of any body; presently after she is called aside to some convenient
place without the hut, then if she profess her self willing to receive them,
the Suitor farther puts it to her, whether she will grant him leave, that he
may take his repose by her in the hut; if she grant it, it is concluded between
them of their future marriage: withal he presents his gifts above mentioned. If
she rejects his suit, she casts them all down at his feet. The Bridegroom
usually carries them in his bosom, before he presents them. The full
approbation of the Parents, and the celebration of the wedding is used
oftentimes to be deferred for a considerable while, sometimes for two or three
years together; and all that while they bestow upon courting their Mistresses.
The reason why their time of Courtship or wooing proves so long, is because the
Bridegroom is necessitated to gratify with frequent presents, the parents and
friends nearest in blood to the Bride, without the leave of each of which he
cannot compass the possession of her. This is expressed by Samuel Rheen in
these words, When any Person pretends marriage to the Daughter of one of the
richer sort, he is obliged to make a present to her parents and nearest
Kinsmen, such as is made for state to Ambassadors or chief Officers, as large
as his means will reach to, which present they call Peck, that is, Pieces;
every piece at least must contain two marks of silver, that is, six ounces,
there are some too, that must contain twenty, forty, sometimes threescore
ounces a piece, such pieces the Bridegroom is bound to bestow upon His
Mistresses parents and her near kindred. In what things these presents
particularly consist, I shall mention hereafter, for they do not give barely
silver, but molded into some fashion, or other things besides; while therefore
the Bridegroom is employed in procuring these pieces, it is no inconsiderable
while that passes.

In this interval he ever and anon makes a visit to his Mistress, to whom while
he is traveling he solaces himself with a Love Song, and diverts the
wearisomness of his journey. And it is their common custom, to use such kind of
Songs, not with any set tune, but such as every one thinks best himself, nor in
the same manner, but sometimes one way, sometimes another, as goes best to
every man, when he is in the mode of singing. An ensampel of one they use in
the Winter season, communicated to me by Olaus Matthias, a Laplander, I here
annex.

Kulnasatz niraosam augaos joao audas jordee skaode
Nurte waota waolges skaode
Abeide kockit laidi ede
Fauruogaoidhe sadiede
Aellao momiaiat kuekan kaigewarri.
Patzao buaorest kaellueiaur tuuni
Maode paoti millasan
Kaiga waonaide waiedin
Aogo niraome buaorebaest
Nute aotzaon sargabaest
Taide sun monia lii aigoamass
Saraogaoin waolgat amass
Ios iuao sarga aoinasim
Kiuresam katzesim
Kulnaasatz nirasam
Katze aoinakaos tun su salm.
The meaning of this Song is this, Kulnasatz my Rain-deer
We have a long journey to go;
The Moer's are vast,
And we must have,
Our strength I fear
Will fail if we are slow,
And so
Our Songs will do.
Kaige the watery Moor
Is pleasant unto me,
Though long it be;
Since it does to my Mistress lead,
Whom I adore;
The Kilwa Moor,
I nere again will tread.
Thoughts filled my mind
Whilst I through Kaige past.
Swift as the wind,
And my desire,
Winged with impatient fire,
My Rain-deer let us have.
So shall we quickly end our pleasing pain:
Behold my Mistress there,
With decent motion walking ore the Plain.
Kulnasatz my Rain-deer,
Look yonder, where
She washes in the Lake.
See while she swims,
The waters from her purer limbs
New cleerness take.


This is a love Song of the Laplanders, wherewith they encourage their
Rain-deers to travel nimbly along. For all delay, tho in it self short, is
tedious to lovers. They use too at other times to entertain themselves with
such Sonners, when at some distance from their Mistresses, and therein to make
mention of them, and extol their beauty. One of this kind I received of the
said Olaus, and seeing we have lit upon this subject, I here set it down.

Pastos paiwa Kiufwresist jawra Orre Iawra
Ios kaosa kirrakeid korngatzim
Ia tiedadzim man oinaemam jaufre Orre Jawra
Ma tangast lomest lie sun lie
Kaika taidae mooraid dzim soopadzim
Make taben sad sist oddasist
Ia poaka taidae ousid dzim karsadzim
Makqwodde roamaid poorid ronaid
Kuliked palwaid tim suteatim
Make kulki woasta Iaufrae Orre Iaufrae.
Ios mun taeckas dzim kirdadzim saeaest worodzae saeaest
Ae must lae saeae dziodgae saeae maina taeockao kirdadzim
Aeka lae Iulgae songiaga Iulgae, akaelae siaedza
Fauron sietza, maan koima lusad
Dzim norbadzim.
Kalle ju leck kucka madzie wordamadzie
Morredabboit dadd paiwidad, linna sabboid
Dadd salmidad liegae sabboid waimodadd
Ius kuckas sick pataeridziek
Tannagtied sarga dzien iusadzim
Mi os matta laedae sabbo Korrassabbo
Nu ly paddae soona paddae, ia salwam route salwam
Kaek dziabraei siste karrasistae.
In kaesae myna, taem aiwitaem punie poaka
Taemae jardaekitaemae Parne miela
Piaegga miela noara iorda kockes jorda
Ios taidae poakaid laem kuldaelaem
Luidaem radda waera radda
Ouita lie miela oudas waldaeman
Nute tiedam poreponne oudastan man kauneman.
The sense of this Song is thus, With brightest beams let the Sun shine
On Orra Moor,
Could I be sure,
That from the top o'th lofty Pine,
I Orra Moor might see,
I to his highest bow would climb,
And with industrious labor try,
Thence to descry
My Mistress, if that there she be.
Could I but know amidst what Flowers,
Or in what shade she stays,
The gaudy Bowers
With all their verdant pride,
Their blossoms and their spraies,
Which make my Mistress disappear;
And her in Envious darkness hide,
I from the roots and bed of Earth would tear.
Upon the raft of clouds I Would ride
Which unto Orra fly,
O'th Ravens I would borrow wings,
And all the feathered In-mates of the sky:
But wings alas are me denied,
The Stork and Swan their pinions will not lend,
There Is none who unto Orra brings,
Or will by that kind conduct me befriend.
Enough enough thou have delaied
So many Summers days,
The best of days that crown the year,
Which light upon the eielids dart,
And melting joy upon the heart:
But since that thou so long have stayed,
They in unwelcome darkness disappear.
Yet vainly do thou me forsake,
I will pursue and overtake.
What stronger is then bolts of steel?
What can more surely bind?
Love is stronger far then it;
Upon the Head in triumph she does sit:
Fetters the mind,
And does control,
The thought and soul.
A youths desire is the desire of wind,
All his Essaies
Are long delays,
No issue can they find.
Away fond Counselors, away,
No more advice obtrude:
I Will rather prove,
The guidance of blind Love;
To follow you is certainly to stray:
One single Counsel tho unwisc is good.


As they come to visit their Mistresses, they are necessitated to bring along
with them some spirit of Wine, as a singular and most acceptable present, and
Tobacco too. But if in the mean while, as it often falls out, the father
intends not to bestow his daughter upon the man that has made pretensions to
her, he seldom refuses them, but defers the positive answer till the year
following, that he may the oftener entertain himself with the spirit of Wine the
Suitor brings along with him. And thus he delays his answer from one year to
the other, till the Suitor perceive himself cheated, and be constrained to
require at his hands his charges made to no purpose. There is then no other
remedy to be taken, then bringing the business before the Judge, where the Maids
Father is sentenced to refund either the entire sum, or half of it, as the case
stands. Where withal we must observe this, that the expenses made by the Suitor
on the Spirit of Wine, at his first arrival, do not fall under this
compensation, but he alone stands to the loss of that. But if after the
downright refusal of the Maid, he of his own accord will show his liberality,
he may try what luck he will have at his own peril. If all things happen
conformable to his wishes, then some set day is appointed for the wedding. The
day before it, all the kindred and Neighbors as well of the Bridegroom as Bride
resort to her parents hut, and the Bridegroom presents them all with wedding
gifts, about which they had agreed, and of which mention is made above.

The Bridegroom is bound to present the Father with a silver cup, to drink in;
this is the first of those they call Stycke. The second is a large Kettle,
either of Copper or Alchymy. The third, a bed or at least hansom bedding. The
presents for the Mother are, first a girdle of silver, secondly a Robe of honor
such as they use to call Vospi. Thirdly a Whisk, which they wear about their
neck, and let it hang down to their breast, interlaced all about with bosses of
silver, and this they call Krake. These are the presents for the Father and
Mother: besides he bestows upon the Brothers, Sisters, and all the near
kindred, silver spoons, silver bosses, and some other such kind of things of
silver, for each of them must be presented with some gift by the Bridegroom, if
he mean to obtain his Bride. These are the presents, which the Bridegroom is
more especially bound to make to his Father and Mother in law that are to be,
and the rest of the kindred. And he makes them in his father in laws hut, in
the sight of all there. The day following the wedding is celebrated, first by
the ceremonious joining of the Priest in the Church, afterward by a set
dinner. The new Wife together with the Bridegroom walk along, both dressed in
the best clothes they can procure at their own charges. For it is looked upon
among them as unhansom to make use of the borrowed cloths of others, unless it
be wool as I have elsewhere shown. They take says Tornaeus so great pleasure in
good cloth of what ever color, that as far as their patrimony will permit, they
procure their extraordinary apparel and festival Garments of that kind: who
declares expressly that their festival apparel, or that which they wore on more
solemn days, was not of skins but rich cloth. These Garments the Bridegroom
girds up with a silver girdle, but the Bride first looses her hair: and the
sillet wherewith she bound it up together before, she gives to the Virgin that
is next a kin to her: afterward, on her bare head, and loose hair she puts a
kind of a silver fillet gilt over, or two, such as is the women's custom to wear
at other times besides, instead of a Garland or Coronet, so that by how much
this fillet is looser, then to environ only her head; so much it hangs down the
more behind: likewise about her middle they put on a silver girdle. This is the
Brides apparel, unless that sometimes they put upon her head something of
linen, instead of a veil, which at other times the women use when they have a
mind to make themselves extraordinary gallant, for as for what appertains to
their garments, we have before observed, that both the Bridegroom and Bride
wear their own, and those their best, and such as on festival days they deck
themselves withal. We have shown in another place, that the women's were called
Volpi, and were made either of wool, or the richer sort of cloth, so that
neither about this does Olaus Magnus in his place a forecited, concerning the
Lapland Bride, sufficiently agree with their custom at this day. They set the
Bride says he, apparelled in Ermins and Sables skins on a Rain-deer. At this
day both dressed very fine are carried to the Church or Priest, to be joined in
Marriage; this was not the custom in old times, if we give credit to Olaus
Magnus, for then they were joined at home, not by the Priests but the Parents,
his words are in Lib. 4. Cap. 7. in which place he treats of the Laplanders
weddings, as the Title of the Chapter informs us. In the presence of friends
and kindred, the Parents solemnly ratify their Childrens Marriages, and that
too by the striking of fire with a flint and steel, particularly there he makes
the Parents joining them, and adds moreover the manner, viz. by fire stricken
out of a flint, which without doubt as some other things, he culled out of
Zeigler, but as for the parents doing it, Zeigler has nothing of that, the
manner of their joining he explains in these words, They ratify their
Marriages, and begin them in a ceremony of fire and flint, so pata conjugal
mystery, that they think nothing can be more agreeable, for as the flint
conceals within it self fire, which by concussion breaks forth, so in both
sexes there is life hid, which by the mutual coupling of marriage is propagated
at last to be a living of spring. And just so Olaus has it, so that there can
be no doubt made but that he followed Ziegler. When they arrive near the
Church, they observe in their procession a certain order, first walk the Men,
the Women follow. The Men are led up by a Laplander, whom they call Automwatze,
or foreman, then follows the Bridegroom, after him the rest. Some number of
Virgins lead up the women's company, after them comes the Bride led between a
man and a woman, next to her follow the rest of the women. It Is here to be
observed that the Bride like one struggling against it, and endeavoring the
contrary, is dragged along by the man and woman that are to wait upon her, and
would seem to admit of her marriage with great unwillingness and reluctance,
and therefore in her countenance makes show of extraordinary sadness and
dejection: so afterward in the Church they are joined together by prayers and
benediction according to the Christian rite. After the same manner does John
Tornaeus relate this business, only that he says the Bride is led by two men,
her Father and Brother, if alive, or otherwise by her two next Kinsmen. The
portraicture of the Bride in her wedding apparel, and with her two leaders you
have in the next page. After the solemnity of the marriage is ended, there
follows a wedding feast, that is made in her Parents hut, and as for the
provision, each of the persons invited contributes his share of the victuals,
tho they bring it not thither just then, but the day before: when the
Bridegroom depiction of a Lapland bride being led between a man and a woman
distributes his presents to the Brides parents and kindred, then every one
brings his victuals that will be serviceable to the feast. But because the meat
they bring is ordinarily raw, they deliver it to a Laplander, on purpose
appointed to that office, viz. to receive it of every Person that brings, and
afterward to boil it, and lastly to distribute it among the guests, tho
commonly the greatest part of the provision be made, by the Bridegrooms as well
as Brides parents. In their sitting at table they keep this order, in the
uppermost places sit the Bridegroom and Bride next to one another, then follow
in order the rest, as the parents, and kindred. At the table no person helps
himself, but receives his meat from the hands of a Laplander, who is both
dresser and carver of it. First of all he serves the Bridegroom and Bride with
their portion, and in order the rest. Now they who by reason of the scantiness
of room in the hut, cannot be admitted to the feast, such are boys and girls,
climb up to the roof of the hut, and from thence let down threads with hooks
tied to them, to which they fasten pieces of meat, and the like, so that they
also enjoy their share of the banquet. The entertainment ended, they give
thanks, as at other times they use, and shake hands one with another. The last
thing wherewith they shut up the merriment of the feast, is drinking Spirit of
Wine, which if they can light upon, they then are sure to buy; first the
Bridegroom drinks, then the Brides parents, then each man shifts for himself,
and so they make merry, but this custom the richer sort only observe, and those
too who have the opportunity of buying, by the presence of those who sell these
commodities; as for the meaner sort they are accustomed to divert themselves
with talk. When the Wedding is over, the Husband may not take along with him
his Wife with her goods and fortune, but must remain for an whole year in
service with his Father; when that time is past, if he sees convenient he may
set up for himself, and turn house keeper; and then the Father bestows upon his
Daughter at her departure, the Rain-deer, which are her due, because given her
in her younger years: he gives her also other gifts besides, and what furniture
will be requisite for the new married couple, particularly he gives for her
dowry an hundred or more Rain-deers, as likewise silver, copper, Alchymy, a
rent, bedding, and other household stuff. And next all the kindred, the Brothers
and Sisters, and whoever have received of the Bridegroom his gifts of respect,
are likewise obliged to return him back again some present, so that he who had
received one or two marks of silver, returns for a gift again one or two
Rain-deers: so that it comes to pass, that the Laplanders, who can gratify the
friends and kindred with numerous presents, if they wed a rich Laplanders
Daughter, come to great wealth in Rain-deer by this kind of marriage. These are
the chief things the Laplanders observe in their contracts and marriages, which
before we quire leave, we may take notice first, that it is unlawful among
them, to marry a wife too near in blood. And they have so special a regard to
the degrees of consanguinity and affinity, that they never request marriage in
the prohibited ones. And again it is unlawful, having one wife to marry another,
or when one is married to put her away, by Divorce. Polygamy and Divorce were
never heard of among the Laplanders, neither in the time of Paganism, says
Tornaeus, nor afterward, but they always observed marriage honestly and like
Christians, yet in former days perhaps they did not altogether abhor the
communicating their wives, whom they permitted to strangers especially and
guests. So indeed writes Herberstenius. But John Tornaeus mentions an instance
of later date, and the Testimony too of a Laplander of Luhla, tho he doubts to
give credit to him. 'Twas reported to me, says he, that in the time of my
Predecessor of Luhla-Lapmark, a certain immodest Laplander, came to lodge with
another, in Torne-Lapmark, a civil honest man, as was his whole family, who
could read books, and lived a pious life, for which he was styled by scorners
Zuan Bishop. Then the Man of Luhla, when he had disordered himself with
drinking Spirit of Wine, addressed himself to his hosts wife, in hope of
debauching her, but because there were there present two officers, who had
Spirit of Wine to sell, the Zuan Bishop called for them, and told them the
fellows design, desiring likewise that they being Ministers of the State, would
apprehend and bind him: they immediately bound him to a Tree, and left him
there for a whole Winter night together, to be frozen with cold. At last he was
forced to regain his liberty with money, and pleaded it as an excuse, that it
was the custom in Luli-Lapmark, that if any person visited another, the
entertainer permitted such familiarity with his wife. Thus says Tornaeus, but
doubtingly, for the fellow might have only framed this for his own excuse, it is
certain no other person has taken notice of it in them of Luhla, and the other
Laplanders are so ignorant of this communion of their wives, that they cannot
endure they should look upon other men. The Laplanders dwelling toward Norway
at the river Torna are so jealous, that if a Woman chance to meet a man, and
speak but a few words to him, they immediately fall into a suspicion of her.

CHAP. XXVI. Of their Childbearing, and the Education of their Children.
NEXT to Marriage it will be expedient to treat of their Childbearing, and
their Children. Where we may note first, that they wish for nothing more, and
that they take no greater pleasure in any thing then fruitful Matrimony. And
hence it is, I suppose, they are so prone to lust, as is elsewhere shown: but
although they desire this so ardently, yet they are very seldom fruitful in
Children, for they can scarce beget more then eight, which number is the
greatest, and usually they beget but one, two, or three. An occasion of this
their barreness, Sam. Rheen imagines their bad diet, as likewise the extreme
coldness of the Country, which I think may be very true. He moreover adds Gods
anger, which he collects from this, because tho they are not worn away with War
or Plague, yet notwithstanding their Country is never the more populous, and
their Nation wastes rather daily. The motive of this anger he supposes to be
their obstinateness in maintaining their ancient impieties. They use indeed at
this very day, not only in Childbearing, but other affairs too, to be
solicitous concerning the events, and to search after them by their
superstitious rites. Their first care is concerning the sex, for as soon as
they perceive the wife to be big with child, they have an opinion that they can
inform themselves whether it will prove a Boy or a Girl, after this manner:
they forthwith view the Moon (for they imagine that a Childbearing woman bears
some resemblance to the Moon, as we shall hear) if there be a Star just above
the Moon, they thence collect that the burden will prove of the male sex, if
below, of the female. But I wonder they make a comparison between the Moon and
a woman with child. For can there be any account given of their resemblance? is
it, that like the Moon, she grows big with her burden, and when that is laid,
lessens again? I rather suppose that these are the relics of their Pagan
superstition, which made the Moon the tutelar Goddess to women with child. For
so most of the Pagans did account other, which opinion being outdated, they yet
pretend some resemblance between them. Their second care is touching the health
or sickness of the child, which thing also they suppose the Moon will inform
them in. For if a Star be just before the Moon, they take it for a sign that
the child will prove healthful, and grow up to be a man. But if it comes just
after her, they thence presage that the child will be a very sickly one, and
not long lived.

The woman with child lays her burden in a hut, but (which any body may
understand) a sufficient incommodious one, especially if the time of her
delivery happen to be in the Winter, for tho they have a fire kindled in the
middle of the hut, yet that can give her but little warmth. After her delivery,
her first restorative and cordial, is a good draught of Whales fat, which they
procure out of Norway, the taste of which is as strong and ill savoured as of a
Sea-calves lard, when dried. The child, as soon as brought forth is washed over
as in other Countries, but it is a peculiar custom of the Laplanders, that
first they do it with cold water or snow, and then afterward dip them in hot
water, when it begins to fetch its wind, and can scarcely draw breath. And also
they use to dip in the water all the other parts of the body, the head only
excepted; They heat water, says Sam: Rheen, in a Caldron, and in that they set
the infant straight up to his neck, but they let no water come upon his head,
before such time as he is baptized by the Priest. The new born Babe is
instantly wrapped up in an Hares skin, instead of linen swaddling clothes.

The woman lying in, has her peculiar place assigned her in the hut where she
lodges, till she recover her health. And it is just by the door usually on the
left hand: there is no other reason given for it then that this part of the hut
is less frequently disturbed by company, and there they have all things
needful for them administered. Tho this seldom resort thither be rather, by
reason of the woman's lying in in that place, either because they would not
disturb her with their company, or, which I rather suppose, because they look
upon her at that time as unclean. But the women of Lapland seldom keep their
beds long after their delivery, and in that while are extraordinary careful
touching the Baptism of their Infants: for after they began more diligently to
be instructed in the Christian Religion, they take the greatest pains
imaginable to have their Children baptized as soon as possibly may be. In
former times it was otherwise, most of them then were baptized very late, and
at their mature age; some deferred it for altogether. Of this Gustavus the
first is a witness, in his Charter, the words whereof I have cited elsewhere.
As touching the former Gustavus Adolphus in an other Charter and Preface,
premised to that which he published Anno 1634, in which the State of the
Religion in Lapland is declared at large; Baptism, says he, is administered
indeed to them but only at Winter. if their young children can live till then,
it is well; if not, they die without Baptism. Some of their children come to
years of Discretion before it, so that with those that are grown up, there is
no small pains to be taken when they are to be baptized. The time of Baptism
being the Winter time, was because they have Sermons then preached to them, and
the Sacrament administered, and that no oftener then twice; once about
New-years-day, and again at Lady Day, of which I have treated in another
place. Before these times there was not so much done as that, but the
Laplanders were fain to come with their Children to the neighboring Churches
of the Swedes in Angermannia and Bothnia, of which Olaus Magnus must be
understood to speak, when he says Lib. 4. c. 17. Once or twice in a year they
visit the Baptismall Churches, and bring along with them their sucking Babes in
Baskets tied to their backs, to be baptized. But at this day those women that
are able, and not impeded by some grievous sickness, carry their Children to
the Priest themselves, about a fourtnight after their delivery, that by him
they may receive Baptism. So much good has building Churches in Lapland done,
and having Sermons there, not in a strange Tongue, but the Laplanders proper
own: and so zealous are they for hastening their Childrens Baptism, that the
Mother scarce lying in above a week or fortnight, after her delivery, will
undertake a most tedious journey, over the tops of Mountains, thorough wide
Marshes and high Woods with her Infant to the Priest; for the women of this
Country are naturally hardy, and able to endure any thing without trouble, and
therefore, tho they feed upon course food in their sicknesses, and drink
nothing else but water, yet they recover again quickly. They carry their young
Infants to the Priest, one way in the Summer time, and another way in the
Winter. In Winter they lay it upon a sledge. In Summer they put it in a Pannier
fastened to the back of a Rain-deer. The Infant is not set upon the back of the
Raindeer, but is tied in his cradle, and fastened to the pack saddle after this
fashion.

depiction of two Laplanders walking, one carrying a bow, the other leading a
reindeer with a child in a cradle fastened to the pack-saddle

Olaus Magnus makes them put in Baskets, as his words before quoted do intimate,
and those Baskets too to be tied at their backs; and the Picture he makes of
them represents not only the woman, but the man too so laden, each with two
Children a piece: so that together they travel with four Children, and with
wooden shoes on their feet; but here I am afraid the Painter followed his own
fancy too much. Certain it is that the Baskets there represented, bear no
resemblance to those of Lapland. The Laplanders are wholly ignorant of this
sort of Baskets, that are carried at ones back. Nor are their Baskets like
wooden square Boxes, such as his figure represents them, but of a round
compass, and one part shut down upon the other, as I have said elsewhere. But
to return to their Baptism, in it they give their Children names, according to
the names of some of their friends and kindred. Samuel Rheen adds that they
affect to put Pagan names upon them, such as Thor, Guaarm, Finne, Pagge; but
that the Priests avert them from so doing as much as possibly they can. And
this is peculiar with them, that they often change their names, and put others
upon them then those that were given them at their Baptism, for the love they
bear to some friend or kinsman deceased, whose memory thereby they desire to
preserve. Tornaeus too avouches the same thing, and if at any time in their
younger years they fall into sickness, then they use the name given them in
Baptism instead of a surname, especially they observe this in boys. But although
the Laplanders wives are hardy, so as to be able to undertake a journey a week
or two after their delivery, and to go about other emploiments, tho they have
made their public appearance, and have been churched by the Priest, yet by
their husbands they are looked upon as unclean, till six weeks be accomplished,
so that they admit of no familiarity or conjugal society with them for all that
space of time. And thus much of their childbearing.

I proceed next to their Education of them, the first thing that occurs here is
their Nursing, which is always by their own Mothers milk, for the Laplanders
make no use of Nurses. And this they do not only for some small time, but
usual for two years, three or four together; but if sickness or any other
occasion happen, so that they cannot themselves suckle their young ones, they
give them the Rain-deers milk, which is grosser and thicker, then they can well
draw out of a suck-bottle, (as at sometimes they are accustomed to do,
elsewhere) and for that reason, if the necessity be urgent they give it in a
spoon. Besides their Mothers milk, they instantly accustom their young Infants,
to eat flesh, for they thrust into their mouths a piece of Rain-deers flesh,
that they may suck the gravie out of it, and so get nurishment.

The rocking the infant in his cradle, follows next, whereby they get him a
sleep. Their Cradles are made of the stock of a tree hollowed, like a boat:
these they cover with leather, and at the head they erect an arched kind of
roof, of leather likewise. In such a cradle they lay and tie in the Infant,
without any linen clothes or sheets, instead of which they lay him on a sort
of soft moss, of a red color, which they dry in Summer, and have great plenty
of it. When the Infant is to be rocked, they let the cradle hang by a rope from
the roof of the hut, and by thrusting the cradle and tossing it from one side
to the other, they lull him a sleep. They use likewise to please their young
children with some certain baubles, for at their cradles they tie some rings of
Alchamy, to make a noise and clinking. To these rings which serve instead of
rattles they moreover add some emblems, wherewith their children may be timely
admonished of their condition and future duty. If it be a boy, they hang up at
his cradle a bow and arrows, and a spear made very artificially out of
Rain-deers horn, whereby they signify, that their children must diligently
practice to be expert and ready in using the bow and spear. If it be a girl;
the wings, feet, and beak of a white Partridge, which they call Smaeripa, and
is called Lagopus having feet like the feet of an hare, thereby implying, that
their Daughters must carefully learn to be cleanly, and like those birds nimble
and active. As soon as the children come to some age, they instruct them in all
necessary arts, the Fathers the boys, the Mothers the girls, for they have no
Schoolmasters among them, but each person is his own childerns Master, and
they are so far put on by their parents as to be able to perform any works in
use among them. Their boys they chiefly teach the Art of Shooting, and hitting
marks with an arrow, because in old time they were necessitated to get their
living by the help of bow and arrows, whereas the greatest part of them
maintain themselves by hunting, and therefore when they have practiced never so
little the use of the bow, the boys victuals are kept from them, till they can
hit a mark with an arrow, and as it was the custom anciently among the
Baleares, and so now among the Laplanders, their boys earn their food every
day by their dexterity in shooting, and thereby at last they prove most
excellent marks-men. Olaus Magnus makes mention of this their practice, and
wonderfully extolls their dextrousness herein, and avers that he himself has
seen some of them who could exactly hit a farthing or a nedle, set at such a
distance off as would just let them see it. On the boys, that they may take
more care to hit the mark, when they have hit it, they bestow a white girdle,
wherein they take huge delight, and sometime a new bow. But as the Laplanders
do look to their children in time to teach them arts requisite to get their
living, so also to provide them means to maintain themselves withal, where it
will not be impertinent to mention, that it is a custom with them to bestow upon
their infant a female Rain-deer, soon after its birth or Baptism, if it be of
female Sex, and upon the horns of it they ingrave her mark, so to prevent all
controversies or quarrels, that may arise concerning her right. She receives
likewise another, when she cuts her first tooth. Which they call Pannikeis,
that is, the tooth Rain-deer. John Tornaeus writes as if these gifts were given
only by women. The Woman says he, that first spies a tooth in his mouth, is
fain to honor him with a present of a Rain-deers Calve. This custom might
probably have its rise thus, because, when the infants have gotten teeth, they
have need of more solid meat, therefore they stock them with Rain-deer as being
their chiefest food. That Rain-deer then, and whatever increase comes of it,
are preserved to the future uses of the child, as may appear by what we have
elsewhere said, in the Chapter of their marriages, and so likewise of the other
Rain-deer which parents give the child besides, for it is usual among them to
superadd one to the former, and this they call Waddom, that is, the given one.
And this is the chief care of the Parents toward their children, but if they
die, instead of them are substituted Guardians, as among other nations, out of
their nearest kindred, who manage all these affairs for them.

CHAP. XXVII. Of their Diseases, Death and Burial.
THO the Laplanders lead a miserable and hardy kind of life, yet they enjoy
their health perfectly well. They have not so much as heard of most diseases,
and are not all infected with those, that elsewhere use to depopulate whole
Countries. There are no acute and burning fevers among them, no plague. And if
any infection be brought among them, it instantly loses its force. Some years
since an infection was brought into Lapland in hemp, but none were burt by it,
besides the women that in spinning chewed it, for the Northern cold easily
dissipates the poisonous vapors. The ordinary and frequent disease among them
is, sore eyes, from whence not seldom proceeds blindness. The cause of this may
be, that from their infancy they for the most part are forced to be in smoke,
wherewith their Huts are filled both in Summer and Winter. Ericus Plantinus
gives the same reason, and moreover adds the light of the fire to be a cause of
it. And this gives them the greatest trouble imaginable, that their old age
usually ends in blindness. They are often troubled also with the Pleuresy and
inflammation of the lungs, stiches in the back, and dizziness in the head. The
small Pox likewise sometimes takes them. Now as diseases are rare among them,
so Physic is altogether unknown. Against all diseases inwardly they use the
root of a kind of Moss, which they call Jereh, or in the failance of that, the
stalk of Angelica, which they call Fadno, and is any where to be found. For
this use they boil the Angelica with the whey of Rain-deers milk, as I said it
was a custom among them before, in the Chapter of their food, and so prepared
it is made use of as a special Medicine. If they feel any pain in their joints,
they apply some fired chips to the place ill affected, that the ulcer then made
may attract the vicious humors, and so mitigate the pain.

They cure wounds with no other ointment or plaster then of resin, which the
trees sweat out: if a member be benumbed with cold, the Cheese made of
Rain-deers milk affords the presentest remedy to it; they thrust a red-hot iron
into it, and with the fat of the Cheese that instantly distills from it, they
anoint the part affected with incredible success. Others apply the Cheese it
self, slicing it thin like a plate or leaf. This Cheese so boiled in milk is
extraordinary good fora cough, and what other distempers, either of lungs or
breast arise from cold, if it be taken so heated. It helps the stomach when
disaffected by their drinking water. Because diseases are so rare among them,
most of themcome to extreme old age. Nay Sam. Rheen says there are some among
them that live to be above an hundred years old, and that most of them usually
reach 70, 80, and 90 years, and at this age he says many of themare still
sufficiently brisk and lively, able to manage their business with expedition,
to take a journey, to course thorough Woods and Mountains, and to perform other
such labor: and lastly that they grow not grey-haired either soon or easily;
so that old age dispatches more of them then diseases do. But if any be so
dangerously sick as to keep his bed, either worn with age, or some distemper,
they first enquire concerning him by their Drum, whither he will recover his
health again or die, as I have in another place shown this to be one of the
uses of the Drum, and Cl. M. Matthias Steuchius in his Letter to me tells us
the same; I remember, says he, I was once told by a Laplander that they can
tell the very hour and manner of any man's death by those their Drums.

When they perceive any one near death, then if there be present any well
disposed persons, and versed in the Christian Religion, they exhort him in his
agonies to think of God and Christ. If they are regardless of Religion, they
instantly abandon the sick person, careful only about the funeral banquet,
which they begin sometimes to celebrate before the person departing is quite
dead. Steuchius confirms this by a Story; There was a rich Laplander named
Thomas, who when he was taken with a dangerous fit of fickness, so as to loose
all hope of recovery, he summond before him his friends and acquaintance; they
when they perceived him to be desperate, they hasted to the Victuallers that
keeps the Inn toward Norway and Jamptland, and of him they bought Ale and
spirit of Wine ready to sacrifice over their friend, whilst he was alive: when
they had spent a whole day in qnaffing, they camme to the sick man's Hut, and by
that time found him quite dead. This is an example of the latest date, that
has happened in these our days, from whence we may learn how just and
reasonable the complaints were, which were premised to the Charter of Gustavus
Aldophus, concerning the Lapland School. Furthermore, it is customary if any
die, of whatever distemper, all instantly forsake the Cottage where the
departed person lies; for they imagine (which is elsewhere shown) that there
survives something of the deceased, such as the ancient Latins called Manes.,
and that that was not always benign, but sometimes hurtful: for this reason
they are afraid of the corpse of the deceased. And if the person departed were
of the richer sort: they wrap his corpse in a linen garment, if a poor mean
man, in a woollen tattered one, so as to cover over as well the head, as all
the other parts of the body, this they call Waldmar. So indeed do they that are
more observant of the Christian rites then ordinary there; as for the others,
they cover their dead with their own vestments, and those too the best they had
when alive, as N. Matthias Steuchius assures me by a Letter, and confirms it
too by a late example that a person worthy to be credited, related to him by an
Inhabitant of Vndersaok, a near neighbor to Lapland. The body of the dead,
says he, they cover with the best garments he had alive, and shut it up in a
Biere. They lay the corpse so wrapped up in a Coffin, or funeral Chest, which is
done by one peculiarly entreated to undertake the employment, and who must
receive of the nearest kinsman to the deceased person a ring of Alchimy, and
wear it fastened to his right arm. Twe reason of so tying this ring is, because
they believe it to be a preservative against the harm the Manes of the deceased
person may otherwise bring upon them, for this reason he is fain to wear this
same ring till the Burial be over, I suppose, because then they think the ghost
may be more quiet, which is the ancient superstition as well of Greeks as
Romans. The Coffin is usually made of the hollowed trunk of a tree, when they
have not wherewithal to make a Coffin, as is common with them that dwell in
the barren Mountains near Norway, they lay the corpse of the deceased on a Carr
or Sledge, which they call Akia, instead of a Coffin. The place of their
Burial in ancient times, before they turned Christians, was the first
convenient place they met withal for that purpose, especially a Wood. As for
them that dwell at a considerable distance from the Church at this day, they
leave not off the custom of burying them any where where they first light, with
the Sledge too, especially if there are only bare Rocks, and no Trees to be
seen. Others on every side beset the Sledge with the corpse too with stocks of
Trees, both above and below, on each side, so as that it may not contract
filthiness or moulder, nor the corpse be torn in pieces, or devoured by wild
Beasts.

There are some besides that lay them in Caves, and stop up the mouths of them
with stones. But what Peucer writes that they dig a hole, and lay their dead
bodies under their hearth, thereby to escape the hauntings of Ghosts, that is
neither known nor heard of by the Laplanders: Whereas says he, they are
strangely frightened and haunted with the Ghosts of their kindred after death,
they provide against that by burying their bodies under their hearths: by this
only remedy they guard and protect themselves against the hauntings and
affrightments of Demons, this if they do, no ghosts afterward appear; if they
neglect to do it, they are perpetually interrupted and infested with the
apparitions of their too officious kindred. They are so far from burying the
corpse under the hearth that they rather remove them to as great a distance as
they can, But it is a singular and memorable passage, that those especially who
are less observant of Christian rites, do use to bury with their deceased,
first an hatchet, and next a slint and steel, of which ceremony they give this
account, that if they ever come to rise again in that darkness they shall have
great need of springing a light; to which the slint and steel may help them, as
likewise there will be occasion for a ready way, wherein they may travel to
Heaven, to which purpose their hatchet may stand them instead, them especially
that are buried among thick Woods, that if any Trees obstruct their passage,
they may cut them down. And this do they themselves at this day affirm, now
they have heard of a last day, and a Resurrection of the dead. But I suppose it
rather to be an ancient superstition remaining still in these Countries, nor
used only by the Laplanders. I my self saw some few miles distant from Vpsal,
raked out of the Sepulcher of a famous person, the great Treasurer of this
Kingdom, M. Steno Bielke, a steel and flint; which that it was a relic only
of Paganism, not the place only, but Tomb over him did sufficiently testify. It
is certain that it was the ancient persuasion of Pagans, that there was no
other way for the dead to arrive at the abodes of the Blessed, but thorough
darkness, which they are the more afraid of, because it is the nature of their
Country to have thicker darkness and of more durance then is usual among
others. As concerning the hatchet, it is no wonder, whereas in other places it
is a received custom to lay by dead People their Weapons, of which the
principal one, among the Laplanders, is the hatchet. As for what appertains to
the modern Laplanders, Olaus Petri imagines that they bury these things with
their dead, because they believe that after the Resurrection they shall take
the same course of life they lead before, and for that reason they furnish them
with the same utensils. Thus do they who are less observant of the Christian
ceremonies, and dwell farthest off from the Christian Churches. The others take
special care to have their dead carried to the Churchyard, which too the
Priests do earnestly request of them. It is said too that some of them, when
they have bin accustomed to bury in such a place are so ambitious as to give
money to have their deceased buried not in the Yard, but the Church.

But here none of the Laplanders will willingly dig up a grave, unless he be
extraordinary poor, such whom the richer of them hire at a considerable rate to
such an emploiment, or some other of Swedland, whom they can procure. So the
deceased person is buried according to the Christian rite, when they have
mourned for him, putting on the worst clothes they have, that is peculiar to
them, that they leave behind them the sledg whereon the course was brought to
the Churchyard and all the vestments wherein the deceased lay during sickness,
these they bring to the Sepulcher, for fear I suppose lest any deadly thing
should cling to them, and that cannot be used by others without harm. So when
the Person is buried, a funeral banquet is provided, the time of it is usually,
the third day after the burial, the banquet is furnished out of the flesh of
the Rain-deer; that drew the person departed to his Burial place. That they
sacrifice in honor of him, and all the kindred and acquaintance feast upon it.
At this feast they take special care, not to loose the bones, but gather them
all up diligently, and lay them in a coffer and bury them under ground; if they
have the opportunity of procuring Spirit of Wine, they drink it about to the
memory of the person deceased, and call it Saligawiin, that is the Wine of the
blessed, meaning, I suppose that they drink it to the memory of him, that is
happy by his departure from earth: however it happened, that those kinsmen of
Thomas the Laplander, as was above mentioned, made this feast before the due
time. They fasten upon the coffer, wherein they shut up the Rain-deers bones,
the image of a man fashioned out of wood, bigger or less in proportion to the
deceased person; thus much of their funeral rites. Only some of the richer sort
repeat the feast every year, in the manner aforesaid, where may note, that the
Rain-deers are not only slain for their business of the feast, but likewise in
manner a Sacrifice, and that the bones are offered to the Manes of the
deceased, at it is more largely treated of in another place. It moreover is
apparent that the Laplanders time of mourning is not used to be short, but of a
long continuance, especially for the loss of married persons or children, and
consists not in ostentation, or appearance, but only in inward sorrow. I come
now to their manner of inheritance and division of their goods, which follows
upon the death of any one, for the Laplanders likewise have their sort of
riches, consisting most in movables as cattle, silver, brass and copper
vessels and the like, but there is nothing for which they are more esteemed
then plenty of Rain-deer. Some of them have a hundred, some a thousand or more;
Olaus Magnus makes mention of but half these numbers Lib. 17. Cap. 28. but what
may be read in the papers of John Buraeus, confirms their number to be much
greater. Oroveen, it is there said, was so rich in Rain-deer, that their number
could not be known. Arent Justinus stole a hundred of them, and yet they could
not be missed. And other things which serve for daily uses, they keep in
public, or else lay up in their cupboards, as I have elsewhere shown, but they
bury under ground either silver plate or money, and the place they call Roggri,
they lay it first in a close box, that in a copper kind of kettle, and that
they cover over with board, and so strew it over with earth and moss, that no
body may perceive any thing to be hid there, this they do so privately, that
neither their wives nor children can tell any thing of it, so that it sometimes
chances, that, when they die suddenly, all these things ly buried and never come
to the heirs, but what come to their hands are thus divided among them, if they
be movables, the Brother receives two thirds, the Sister one, as was appointed
by the Provincial Laws of the Swedes. The two Rain-deers given to the children
in their tender years, the one the Tooth Rain-deer, the other the Parents free
gift, are exempted from this common division, as likewise their increase, which
sometimes comes to a considerable number. If the goods be not movables, as
territories, lakes, mountains and such like, the children of either Sex,
possess them with equal right, and make use of them indifferently, tho this be
not a bare permission, but founded in the division of Lapland, made by Charles
the Ninth, in which to every family were given its own territories, Lakes,
Woods, Mountains, and the like, as has been mentioned in another place, from
whence I suppose it is, that they remain still to each single family, and are not
liable to division or to be distributed among the heirs as other goods; for
these are not their own proper possessions, as other goods are, but only
granted from the crown of Swedland to them to receive the profits, and upon
that score every year they pay a certain tribute, which we have treated of
before, so that there remains nothing else to be added here.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of their Cattle.
AFTER our discourse of the inhabitants of Lapland, their Nature and manners,
something is to be said of other things there remarkable. First of their
Cattle, of which they have some common to other Nations, some proper only to
themselves. They have no Horses, nor Asses, Oxen, nor Bulls, Sheep nor Goats.
The inhabitants do not regard Horses, for the little use they have of them;
Oxen, Sheep, Goats, they procure from their Neighbors, for the provision of
meat, wool, and hides, and they keep them but one Summer, still killing them a
little before Winter. The Beasts proper to Lapland which no other Nation has,
are Rain-deers, Peucerus styles them Tarandi, but without reason, for the
Rain-deer compared with Tarandus as it is described by Pliny, have scarce any
thing a like, the Tarandus having the bulk of an Ox, an head bigger than a
stags, and hair as thick and rough as a Bears, which he can change into any
color, as he shows in his 8th book, but nothing of this agrees to the Raindeer,
as we shall show anon. Likewise Gesner did err in bringing this Animal from
two diverse species. It Is not known who imposed the name; but whatever become of
the Etymology or imposition of the name, tho it seem to be of late times, the
beast it self was long before known. The first that wrote of him was Paulus
Warnefrid: he speaks there of a people which he calls Scritobini, which were
doubtless the Laplanders, for he describes their cloths to be the same with
those which the Laplanders called Mudd, he affirms that the beast of which they
had their hides was not unlike a Stag, which serves to prove that they were the
Rain-deer, for so they are called by Herbestenius, Damianus, and Olaus, who
tells us that they are something taller then a Stag: those which have broad
horns (found most in the North) are less than others. But it is not the same
thing to talk of tallness and bulk; for tho other Stags owe their height to
their long legs, they have less bodies than the Rain-deer. They have 3 horns, 2
branching out backward, the third sprowting down their foreheads (which Olaus
observes is to guard them from the wild Beasts especially the Wolves.) Lomenius
speaks of 4 horns, 2 backwards and 2 forwards, as appears by his picture, in
which the Artist falls short of the matter, as my draught which is more
accurate will show: but Albertus Magnus makes them have three rows of horns,
for so Jonstonus out of him, they carry says he 3 horns, each breeding 2 horns
more, which makes his head seem bushy. Two of these are bigger then the rest,
which answer to the Stags horns, growing sometimes to that bigness as to be 5
cubits high, and are adorned with 25 branches. The Do has 2 short horns, one
being fixed in its forehead which it uses in conflict with other beasts. These
horns are proper only to the Buck, the Do having much less and fewer branches.
They are commonly covered with a kind of Wool, which is most frequent after
they are cast and begin again to shoot; so Olaus. In the spring, they begin to
sprout, tender, but rough and full of blood: when they come to a sufficient
growth, they cast their hair in Autumn. The Rain-deer differ from a Stag, that
their feet are thick like a Bulls; hence Olaus took notice of their round
hoofs: when they walk, the joints of their feet make a noise like the clashing
of flints, or cracking of nuts, which is peculiar only to these beasts. Lastly
their color is different from a Stags, for it comes nearer an Ash: besides they
are white not only on their belly but on their haunches, which Damianus
observes does render them more like Asses then Stags, and Zeigler agrees with
him. But I cannot see on what account Olaus attributes a main to this beast:
they have indeed, especially under their necks, hair longer then ordinary, such
as Goats and other beasts have, but nothing agreeable to an horse main: it is
farther observeable that tho they are cleft they do not chew the cud. Likewise
instead of the bladder for their gall they have a black passage in their liver.
This is the picture of one drawn to the life. depiction of a reindeer

Moreover the beast is naturally wild, and such still abound in Lapland, but
now multitudes are tamed for domestic service; those that are bred of tame
ones, remain so, of which there is great plenty. There is a third sort bred of
the wild and tame, for they use, as Sam. Rheen observes, to set out tame Does
about rutting time, for the better convenience of catching the wild ones.
Thence it happens that sometimes the tame ones breed that third sort, which
they call particularly Kattaigiar or Purach, and are bigger and stronger than
the rest, and sitter to draw Sledges. He says too that they retain something
of their primitive wildeness, sometimes being very he adstrong, and kicking at
him that sits on the Sledge. The driver has no remedy then but to turn his
Cart, and lie under it, till the Beast ceases to be unruly, for they are
strong, and will not be governed with whips. They go a rutting about S.
Matthews tide, in the same manner that Staggs do: if any Buck be killed in that
Season, the flesh stinks like a Goats, which makes the Inhabitants desist from
killing them at that time, but at other times they are good meat. The Does
(which they call Waijar) are big ten months, they calve about May, when they
can recruit themselves with the Sun, and fresh grass. They breed but one a
piece, but are so fertile, that of an hundred there is not ten barren. Those
that have calved are styled Raonae, which become exceeding fleshy, as if they
were farned against Autumn, at which time they are usualy killed.

Those that have young ones never are housed, but give suck without, and in
this case the great multitude breeds no confusion, for each Do knows her
proper Calf, and is known by it; so says Sam. Rheen, who affirms that they
know one another after two or three years absence. When the Calves are grown
they feed on grass and leaves, and what the Mountains afford: their color is
mixed of red and yellow. About S. James tide they cast their hair, which in the
next growth turns blackish. They are at their full growth in 4 years, each year
changing their name: the first, they are styled Namiloppa, i. e. nameless.
Tornaeus calls the Buck Hiroas, but Rheen gives him the name of Herki. When
they are able to work, they are tamed; one sort being condemned to the Sledge,
and thence named Vaijom-herki, others to carry burdens, thence call
Lykam-herki. Those that are designed for labor they commonly gueld, which
renders them more tractable: this is done when they are a year old. Those which
are reserved for breeding, are called Servi. The Bucks are not so numerous as
the Does, of which there be an hundred for twenty, which are profitable for
Milk, Cheese and breeding. Both men and women milk them kneeling, one hand
being employed to hold the pail, and the other the dugg. They milk them
sometimes loose, and sometimes bound to a post, about 2 or 3 of the clock in
the evening, and but once a day, the rest being reserved for the calves: those
which have Calves always yield most milk: the greatest quantity they give at
once is a Swedish pint and half, that is about the fourth part of the ordinary
measure upon the Rhine. The milk is fat and thick, and very nurishing, which is
their chiefest food; that which they do not boil they make Cheese of, which is
thus described by Rheen. The Dairy-Maids first let the milk stand to cream,
when it has stood they take off the cream with a skimmer. When one Cheesefat
is filled, they fill another, and put it on the first, and so till 6 or 8 are
silled, then they turn the Cheesefats, that the lowermost be in the top, and
use not their hands to press the Cheese, but let them press each other. Each
Cheese requires as much milk as ten Rain-deers can spare: their shape is round
about two fingers thick, and as big as a Trencher, which we use at table, their
Milk makes very fat Cheese, but no Butter, instead of which they have a kind of
tallow, as I showed before.

Now the Laplanders having such advantages from these beasts, take great care
in driving them to their Meadows, and defending them from wild Beasts. They are
so concerned for them, that they bring their Wives, Children, and Servants, to
watch them in the pastures, and drive those that wander back to the Herd. When
milking time comes, they drive them into folds, which are spots of ground,
hedged in with hurdles stuck on forks, each fold having two doors, one by which
they enter, the other which carries them out into their Medows. Their meat in
Summer is the best grass the Mountains afford, with leaves of young Trees. They
avoid all hard rough grass, especially where Bullrushes grow. The other Seasons
of the year they feed on a kind of white Moss, which abounds in Lapland: when
the Mountains are covered with Snow, they scrape out this Moss with their feet.
And S. Rbeen observes that tho they get least food in the Winter quarter, they
grow whiter and fatter then at other times, for in Summer the excessive heat
makes them worse. These Cattle too are subject to disseases, which if once
begun, spread and kill the whole Herd, but this very rarely. They are infected
with that more frequently, which Olaus describes. About March worms or wornels
do begin to breed in their backs, which when alive, creep out and make the
Beasts skin, if then killed, full of holes, like a Seive, and almost useless.

The Wolves trouble them, tho they have their horns to defend themselves; but
they are not always so armed, for they cast their horns once a year, which
grow again very slowly. The Does never cast theirs till they have calved. The
Rain-deers use not their horns when they encounter the Wolves so much as their
forefeet, with these they receive them coming on, otherwise their feet defend
them by flight, which they can easily do, if not hindered by Snow. The third
inconveniency is that if they be not very carefully looked to, they will wander
and be lost, therefore the owners put certain marks on them to distinguish them
from others; their marks they put sometimes on their ears, and not their horns,
because they cast them. But if they escape all accidents whatever, they never
live above 10 years.

And thus much for the Rain-deers, which alone supply the want of Horses,
Sheep, and other Cattle. Therefore the Inhabitants apply themselves only to the
care of these, neglecting all the rest; besides Dogs, which faithfully watch
their Houses and Cattle, and are very serviceable for hunting, as I have
mentioned in that Chapter.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the wild Beasts of the Laplanders.
OF all the Beasts in Lapland the Bear is chief: him says Sam. Rheen, they
style King of the Woods, and gives this reason, because in strength and
fierceness he exceeds all the rest. They are very numerous, some fiercer than
others, especially those which are marked with a white wreath about their
necks, many of which are found in the North. These annoy the Inhabitants
Cattle, and overturn their Stores; which they six on the top of a Tree, to
preserve their flesh and fish, and all that concerns provision: but in one
night the Bear destroys all the food they have laid up.

Next the Bear the Elk is remarkable, which Olaus calls the wild Ass, Scaliger
confounds it with the Rain-deer, for he says, tho it had Asses hair, it was
called by the Swedes, Ranger, by the Goths, Rangifer, by the Germans, Ellend,
by the Moscovites, Lozzi, and some Books say that in Norway they were named
Rehen: what Books he means I am ignorant, but I am sure the Elks, which the
Germans call Ellend, were never called Rehen, but Aelg, or Aelgar, which is now
the common name through all the North; neither can I think otherwise of the
Moscovites Lozzi, for it is the same with the Lithuanian Losso, as Herbestenius
observes. That which the Lithuanians call Loss, the Germans call Ellend, and
many in Latin Alce. So that Loss, Lozzi, Aelg, Ellend is the same Beast, but
quite different from the Rain-deer, contrary to what Scaliger thought. For
first it excells the Rain-deers in bulk not a little, being as high as any
Horse: its horns are shorter, but above two palms in breadth, shooting out a
few, tho not many young sprouts. His legs are not round, but long, especially
the foremost: he engages very smartly, and his sharp hoofs enable him to
encounter all Men and Dogs that oppose. He has a long head, and huge thick
lips always hanging down; his color is not so white, but all over his body it
inclines to a dark yellow mixed with ashen: when he walks he makes no noise with
his hoofs as all Rain-deers do; whoever sees both Beasts (as I have often) will
perceive such difference, that he will wonder how any one should mistake. There
is no great breed of these in Lapland, but they have them from other places,
especially Lithuania. Charles the ninth, by a public Proclamation claimed all
the skins of those that were killed for his Exchequer, as I mentioned in
another place. Olaus says that they continue altogether in the South of
Lapland, and are taken most frequently by running them down, or hunting; in
other places they are rarely found: but it is manifest that twice a year they
swim in great Herds out of Carelia, over the River Niva, to wit, in the Spring
to go into Carelia, and in Autumn to return into Russia. Some few Stags have
bin seen in Lapland. S. Rheen mentioning the chief Beasts which have bin found
there, reckons several species of four-footed Beasts, as wild Rain-deers,
Bears, Stags, Wolves, Gluttons, Beavers, Otters, Martins, Squirrels; but these
Stags are but few and little, such as they call Damacervi, or Platicerotes,
which since they have nothing peculiar from those in other Nations, let it
suffice that they are named. To these I may add wild Rain-deers, but because
they differ from the tame ones only in bulk, being bigger, and in color
somewhat blacker, I will likewise pass them over. Sam. Rheen after the Stags
mentions Wolves, of which there is a great number, distinguished from those in
other Countries only by their color, something whiter, whence they are often
called white Wolves: their hair is thicker, longer and rougher. These most of
all molest the Rain-deers, which are armed against them with their horns.

I find in some Papers of Buraeus that the Wolves did never assault the
Rain-deer if it was bound to a stake: the reason may be because he fears some
trap when he sees the rope that binds the Raindeer: for the Wolf is a very
suspicious creature, and thinks every thing he sees to be a snare to catch him.
Besides he may suspect that men lie hidden to kill him, whereas the Rain-deers
are only bound for the better convenience of milking them. Nevertheress, the
Wolves venture not only on Beasts, but on Men and Women, especially those that
are big with child. Travelers are forced to go armed, particularly Women near
their time, for the Wolves take their scent and watch more greedily for them,
therefore no Woman is permitted to travel without a guide assisting her. The
next are the Gluttons, which are frequent here, they have a round head, strong
and sharp teeth, like a Wolfs, a plump body, and feet shorter than the Otters:
their skin is of a very dark color, some of them resemble Sables, only they
have softer and siner hair; this Beast lives not altogether on Land, but many
times in the Water, like the Otter, tho much bigger and stronger: some compare
it to the Otter, but it is far greedier than he, for thence it gets its name.
For Olaus tells us that it is called by the Swedes, Jerff, by the Germans,
Wildfras: but this German name does not denote the Beast to eat much, but to
devour what it finds in the Woods, for wild signifies any thing in the Woods;
wherefore either Scaliger did not understand the word, or else the Printer did
not follow his copy: which appears more plainly, from that the Gulo does not
only infest wild Beasts, but tame (as has bin often known in Swedland) and
Water creatures too, being it self accustomed to the Waters.

There are abundance of Beavers in Lapland, because the Nation abounds with
plenty of Fish, whence they have store of food: Olaus thinks that the plenty of
them proceeds from the quietness of the Waters, which are never troubled with
Ships, as the Rhine and Danow are. I add nothing of these because they are not
distinguished from the vulgar sort, neither are the Otters. Next to these Sam.
Rheen speaks of the Foxes, as being numerous, and of several sorts over all
Lapland. He reckons up, besides the common ones, those that are black, brown,
ash-colored, white; and those that are marked with a cross. The black are most
valued because they are rare: in Moscovy Men of honor and preferment have their
Caps made of their skins, which are sold, as Herberstenius observes, for 10,
sometimes 15 pieces of gold. Those that are marked with a cross, Johnston calls
Crucigerae, and describes them thus: they have from their mouth, over their
head and back to their tail a black streak, another crossing their back, and
down to their forefeet, which two lines do resembleacross. These are preferred
before the common red Foxes, being bigger, and having thicker hair. The
ashen-colored Foxes are those which Johnston calls Isatidae, their color is
mixed of ash and blew, such as is the color of the woad, tho this color is not
spread all over his body, nor is any single hair wholly of this color, for the
longest hairs are black at the end, the shortest white, from both which this
color results. Olaus calls these Celestine, or sky-colored Foxes, where too he
tells us that they are of less worth than the rest, and the white ones too,
because their color is so, without the tincture of any other, such as Conies
use to have. The reason is because their number is great, and their hair not
durable: but that there is such abundance of these skins happens because the
Foxes are more easily taken, not living in the Woods, but on the naked
Mountains between Norway and Swedland.

After the Foxes the Martins are mentioned. These too are frequent in Lapland,
and indeed no Nation does afford more or better skins than this does. But these
differ too, those that have yellow on their throat being preferred before the
white: but this is observable that the Laplanders have no Martins but in the
Woods, and they have also a particular sort of meat, for they feed on Squirrels
and Birds. In the night time, says Olaus, by the advantage of their sharp
claws they can easily climb any Tree, where they make a prey of the Squirrell,
who is quite as nimble, tho not so strong, and therefore can sometimes save
himself by skipping round the arm of a Tree: this the enemy cannot imitate,
especially if the Squirrell leads him up to the top branches, otherwise he
cannot escape, and leap from the top of one Tree to another. The Martin is not
injurious only to the Squirrel, but to both small and great Birds, which he
seizes on as they are at roost: if they be the greater Birds they presently
betake themselves to flight with him sitting on their backs, and persisting to
bite so long, till they drop down dead.

Next are the Squirrels, which are incredibly numerous. These particularly
change their color every year. When Winter draws on they turn from red to
grisle, which color is valued in the skin; this color the further the Beasts
are Northwards, is the purer, and less mixed with red, and is so too the farther
the Season is from Summer, at which time they are never hunted, but all in the
Winter. Tho they do so abound, yet they are wont to go away in such troops,
till there are scarce any left. The reason of their departure is not known:
some think it is because they fear hunger and foresee the want of meat. Others
think it is to avoid the injury of the weather. Rheen and Ol. Pet. describe
their march on this wise. They go to the brinks of a River, where they find the
bark of Pine, or Birch trees, on which they trust themselves, and venture to
launch forth, pricking up their tails for sails. Thus they are carried at the
mercy of the wind till it overturns them and their bark. Their body is of that
nature that it will not sink, but being drowned, is driven to shore, where very
often great numbers are taken up, and their skins, if they are found soon
enough are as sit for use as ever: but tho such an accident, as this, sweeps
away most of them, yet the few that are left preserve the species, and multiply
very soon, for each Squirrel brings forth 4, 5, or more at a time. And those
are all the Beasts which S. Rheen mentions.

But besides these, there are others, such as are the Sables which Olaus Magnus
calls Zabelli, their skins Johnston in his History of Animals commends. Olaus
says that their skins were made use of by the Lapland Women, especially by the
Brides to adorn themselves with them; and that there is but small plenty of
them in these parts. Some make this beast like a weezel, others especially
Scaliger like the Martin, and indeed he seems to be in the right both to the
bulk and shape of it. Their color the nearer it comes to black is the more
esteemed. There are found several all white, such as we have often seen the
Muscovian Ambassadors bring over to the King for a most singular present. By
which Adamus Bremensis in his Scandinavia seems to have understood white
Martins. There are also Ermins which are found only among the Laplanders.
Jovius first wrote of them that they were good exchange for any sort of
Merchandise. These Ermins are nothing but white weezels having the end of their
tails black, Johnston takes notice thereof out of Albertus Magnus, he calls
the beast Erminius, which is the same thing with Armelinus and Hermelinus,
differing neither in bigness nor nature from the weezel, the color argues
nothing, for he has that only in Winter, but in Summer is of a bright yellow.
It is as greedy of Mice as the Weezels are, whence the Sweeds call it Lekat. I
am unwilling to call it with Scaliger a Swedland Mouce. Among these I had
rather reckon a little sort of beast which they call Lemmus, which Olaus Magnus
says the Ermins feed on. Samuel Rheen speaks of a sort of Mice found in
Lapland which they call Mountain Mice or Lemblar, which Wormius describes with
short tails and staring hair, and not unlike a Mouce. I will speak little of
their color, which Olaus says is various, Samuel Rheen affirms it red, who
observes too that they come of a sudden, and cover the ground with their
multitude. Olaus observes that this is always in stormy weather, and thinks
that it rains these creatures, but is all together in a doubt, whether they are
brought thither by the winds, or bred in the clouds. Wormius thinks plainly
that they are bred in the clouds: but the learned Isaac Vossius in his notes to
Pomponius Mela corrects him, and says the reason why these animals are
supposed to fall from the Clouds is because they use not to appear, but
immediately after rain they creep out of their holes, either for that they are
sill'd with water, or because this creature thrives much in rain, which opinion
seems most probable to me. These creatures are very bold, never making their
escape when Passengers come by, but keep on their way, and make a noise like
the barking of a dog: they fear neither club nor sword, but if any one strike
at them, they turn again and bite. It is observable in them that they never go
near or do any mischief in any hut, sometimes they set upon one another, being
divided as it were into two armies, this the Laplanders take to be an omen of
future war in Swedland, and gather whence the enemy will come, by observing
whence those animals first moved that provoked the rest. These creatures have
their enemies too, first the Ermines as I mentioned before, then the Foxes,
which bring a great number of these into their holes: hence the Laplanders have
no small disadvantage, for the Foxes using this sort of sood most, regard not
the baits which they lay to catch them. Thirdly the Rain-deers devour them, and
lastly the dogs which eat only the fore part of them. These creatures never
live, if they chance to eat any herb grown after they had tasted it before:
sometimes they perish otherwise, as being choked in the Hedges or dropping
into water. The last sort of beasts are hares, which are esteemed for their
white skin, especially in the winter, at which time they are as white as the
Foxes; they change their color every year, always turning white toward this
season; for which tho many reasons may be given, I think this is most
considerable, that Nature and Providence designed it, least when the ground was
quite covered with Snow, their color might easily discover them, and they being
equally oppressed by man and beast should be quite destroyed. For which reason
too, probably some birds at that time are white. Olaus Magnus testifies the
same of hares, that immediately after Autumn they begin to grow white, and at
that time are frequently taken half white and half not, but in the midst of the
Winter they are all white as before.

CHAP. XXX. Of their Birds and Fish.
I COME now to the Birds, of which here is great store. Samuel Rheen mentions
these, Swans, Geese, Ducks, Lapwings, Snipes, all sorts of water Birds, and
wild fowl, as Heathcocks, Stock-doves, Partridges, Woodcocks; he makes a
distinction between water foul and those that are bred in Woods, and proves
that they abound with each sort, because the country has so many pools, ponds,
and woods. Of these birds, some are in other countries, some only in these
Northern parts. Swans, Geese and Ducks, are known every where: he means wild
ducks, for they have no tame ones. Olaus Petri takes notice of the same thing.
It is remarkable in these wild soul, that they come from the South into the
North, where they build their nests, hatch and breed up their young ones, which
is not frequent elsewhere. I believe it is because they do not find such
security nor plenty of food in other places. The Snipes I suppose are scarce
found any where else, their back and head are black, and most part of their
wings, white on their breast and belly, red bills, very long, and set with
teeth, short feet and red with skin between their claws, as all water foul
have. As you may see in the next page.

To this we may add that sort of Bird called Loom, which Samuel Rheen omitted,
unless he comprehended them under the water-fowle in general, for there is such
a number of them, and so various, that the particulars would take up too much
time: Olaus Wormius has a draught of this bird, it is no sort of duck, as
appears by its bill, which is not broad but sharp. This bird peculiarly goes
not upon land, but always either flies or swims, it has feet very short for
the proportion of its body, and standing so much back, that tho they are very
convenient for swimming, yet it cannot so poise its body on land as to be able
to go: hence it is called Loome, which signifies lame or unable to go. Of the
wild fowl that which Samuel Rheen calls Kiaeder and we render Wogallon,
intimating the biggest sort, is named Cedron near Trent, if Gesner may be
credited, who describes the rest very probably: but as to the color of the Hen,
which he affirms does differ nothing from the Cock, he is mistaken; for the
color is quite yellow with black specks. The same may depiction of a bird be
observed of the Stock-doves which he calls the lesser Vrogalli, for the hen
differs from the cock, he being all black, and she yellow, like the hen of the
Heathcock, from which she is distinguist by nothing but bigness. Olaus Magnus
because the color was not exactly yellow, called it ashen, for sometimes it is
composed of both these, most enclining to an ash. There are no other sort of
wild cocks, then those the Sweeds call Orrar and the Latins Tetraones or
Vrogalli minores: their combs are the same with the Vrogalli, placed not on the
top of their heads, but above each eye, which the painter not understanding
drew them from his own tame cocks. Some call these birds Pheasants, but whoveer
compares them, will discern two distinct species. Both sorts are found in
Lapland, but the latter not so frequent; nor are the others equally plentiful
every year, for in some there are none. I come now to the woodcocks, which I
think is the right name; the Swedes have a bird which they call Jaerpe, and the
Germans Haselhun, but it is doubted whether these are the same with the
woodcock, for they do not frequent marshes as the woodcocks do, but live
altogether in woods and groves, whence Rheen reckons them among that sort of
foul which inhabit the woods. However, there is plenty of these birds in
Lapland, and they afford good meat for the inhabitants; but no bird abounds
there more then the White Partridge, not only in the woods but on the highest
Mountains, even then when they are covered with Snow. I call it Lagopos which
Samuel Rheen sometimes Fialriipor or Snioeripor, the Germans and especially the
Helvetians term is Schnaehuner, i. e. Snow-hens, or Shnaevoigil, i. e.
Snow-birds, because they delight in Snow and to dwell on the top of the Alps.
They have a kind of hair instead of Feathers, and hears feet, whence they are
called Lagopodes. Samuel Rheen describes them thus, that in the Winter they are
as white as Snow, having not one black feather, but that which the Hen has
under her wing: when spring comes they turn gray like hen pheasants, and keep
that color till Winter Olaus Magnus mentions a sort of snow birds, which
naturally changes its white into ashen, but I can scarce believe he means the
Lagopodes, because he speaks of their red feet, such as Storkes have, whereas
the Lagopodes much differ. Another thing Samuel Rheen observes, that the
Lagopodes never sit on trees, as Olaus his Snow-birds are painted, but are
always on the ground very active, scarce ever sitting still. Their shape is
this. depiction of a bird

The next is their Fish, of which they have incredible store; Zeiglerus says
their draughts are so great, that they are forced to transport some of them
into other Countries. Jovius speaks too of great plenty they reap from the
Seas, because he is describing those Laplanders which live near Muscovy whereas
the rest can have plenty enough out of the rivers. The best sort they have is
Salmon, for which Olaus Magnus says there is not better fishing in any part of
Europe, then in the Bothnic toward Lapland; whose mountains send down vast
rivers of fresh water, against which the Salmons come in such shoales, and with
such vigor, that the Fishermen find them at the head of the river on the top of
the mountains. Samuel Rheen too prefers these fish before all the rest, and
says that they swim up all rivers that they are able, and come down again
about St Matthews tide. And that it is much worse when it returns, then when it
went up, which seems to be, because it is wearied and spent in struggling against
the stream, and engendring; which it always does in those parts of the river
which are most remote from the Sea: when he comes up the river they call him
Salm, at his return lax.

The 2d sort of fish are Pikes, Olaus Magnus speaking of this says, that in
Lapland there are marshes of fresh water, 400 Italian miles in length, and 100
in breadth, in which there is such abundance of Pike and other fish, that they
do not only supply 4 Kingdoms, but are dried and transported farther into
Germany to be sold: these fish always use fresh water, and are every where
known having long heads, the lower jaw hanging out, many sharp teeth, which the
Germans call Hecht. They are found sometimes to exceed men in length. Olaus
affirms, that if they have fresh water and food enough, they will attain to 8
foot in length.

The 3d sort are those which the Swedes call Syck, not much differing from the
Carp; only they have longer mouths, and not so broad, they are commonly not so
big as carps, but in Lapland they are found extraordinary, sometimes weighing
10 or 12 pounds.

The 4th sort is Abbor which is with us a perch: this is very plentiful too,
and frequently of an incredible bigness. There is to this day in a Chapel at
Luhlah, kept one of their heads dried, which is from the top to the under jaw 2
spans thick. There are found water-weezels red and white, chiefly in the pools
near the Sea. Samuel Rheen speaks of 2 sorts which the Swedes call Raeding, and
Aerlax; whether they are any where else found I know not. Rheen thus describes
the first sort. Raeding, has its name from the red color on the lower part of
its belly. The latter is very like a Salmon but not so big. Some take them for
Salmons not come to their full growth, but this is an error, for these fishes
are taken in pools, which are on every side parted from the Sea, and are known
never to have any Salmons. I had rather refer them to the trout, or Trutta,
because it scarce differs in shape, only the Trouts flesh is redder and softer.
Besides these there are many other fish in Lapland, but not regarded, because
they serve not for food, for which reason I pass them over: only Olaus Petrus
gives us this doubtful account of their names, Salario, Cobitis, Barbatula,
Rubellio, Borbocha ocutala, Prasinus, Cyprinus, Cobitis aculeata. This Country
breeds not many reptiles, no serpents: but this is meant of the upper Regions
toward the Norway Mountains, for in the low woody places they are found tho
not many. There are but few insects; as for fleas they are quite unknown; but
they receive much injury from gnats, which infest man and beast, especially the
Rain-deers, which upon that account are driven away to the top of the highest
Mountains. The men arm themselves against them by keeping a continual smoke in
the house. If they sleep, they put a blanket over their body and head: when
they go abroad they put on a garment made of hides, and on their heads cloth
caps. I have bin told by the Natives, that many to defend themselves from this
insect, dawb their faces all over, except their eyes, with refine and pitch.

Besides these, there are great wasps which trouble the Rain-deers, and sting
them so deep, that sometimes they leave marks behind them even when the beast
is flayed: those little holes which they make with their stings the vulgar call
Kaorme. The only remedy for the Raindeer against these, is smoke, which if not
present they dip themselves in water: and let this suffice for their Animals.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Laplanders Trees and Plants.
I descend from their Animals to their Trees and Plants, with which they are
well stored, tho Jovius observes that they have no fruit Trees, as Apple, Pear,
etc. neither have they any wild Trees which will not bear the cold, as Oak,
Beach, which Ol. Pet. takes notice of, but adds that they have plenty of Pine
and Fir, Juniper and Birch, Service tree, and Willow, Alder and Dog-tree, the
Asp and Ollar: but these Trees do not grow every where, for the Mountains
called the Fells, between Norway and Lapland, bear no Trees at all: Pet. Claud.
thinks the reason of that to be the continual storm of wind that is on them,
but perhaps a truer reason may be the extremity of cold. The ground that lies
near the Mountains is thick set with Woods, with this distinction that the
parts next them bears nothing but Birch tree, remarkable for their thickness
and height, and pleasant prospect, Nature having contrived them so regularly
that they seem afar off to be some pleasant Garden. The soil more distant from
those Hills, besides Birch-trees, has Fir and Pitch, which seems like some new
kind of wood, composed of these three sorts.

Besides these, there are very few others found in Lapland. Shrubs, especially
Currants, or Ribes are very frequent, but they regard not these because perhaps
the taste is unpleasant, especially of those which bear Black-berries, which are
more numerous than the others. The Junipers grow thick, being very tall and
comely. This Country yields all manner of Berries, the chief are those which
the Swedes call Hiortron, some Dew-berries, or the Norway Berry, whose species
is the same that grows on Brambles, each Berry being divided as it were into
grains of a pale yellow color, beginning to be red as they ripen. These
commonly grow in marshy places. They creep on the ground, and are sustained by
little props, so that they ought not to be reckoned among shrubs. The Berries
are very wholesome, and are a present remedy for the Scurvy. The Inhabitants
delight to eat them with their flesh and salt meats, as I mentioned before.
They have a sort of black Berries, called by the Swedes, Halton, according to
Olaus Pet. also the thin leaved heath, that bears a Berry, which some call
ground Ewe, the Swedes, Kraokebaer, the lesser black Berries called in Swedland
Lingon, and the lesser black Berries called Blaobaer, all which Olaus Pet.
takes notice of, speaking of their manner of dressing meat, particularly of the
Heath-berries: whence it appears that these Berries were as plentiful with
them as the former. They have all sorts of other Berries, tho the Natives do
not so much value them. This Country affords very useful Herbs, such as are
Angelica, which the Inhabitant value so much that they call it the Lapland
herb, or Samigraes: they are much pleased with it in their meat: it grows with
a short stalk, but thick. In the same place is found Sorrel, which they use too
in their food. Some particular herbs they have which are not found any where
else, as Calceolum Lapponicum, or Brassica Rangiferorum: what sort of herb it
is Sam. Rheen expresses in these words, which, tho tedious, I thought fit to
transcribe that we might have his exact opinion it. There grows (says he) an
herb which they call Calceolum Lapponicum because its flower is like the
Laplanders shoe, it is of a blew color with three rows of seed in the pod, it
has larger leaves than the vulgar cabbage, its stalk is a finger thick and the
root bitter: it grows extraordinary fast, and rises to three cubits in height,
and sometimes more: it is thought a bad and unprofitable herb because no beast
will taste of it. There is another herb very usefel and wholesome, and of great
esteem among them, which Olaus Pet. take to be like a carrot, he says it is
called Mosaraoth, having the taste and flower of Pimpervel growing in marshy
grounds to an ell in height. That Mosaraoth is not a Lapland but Swedish name,
from maosa which signifies marshy places where moss grows, what the
inhabitants call it, I cannot yet learn. And these are the peculiar herbs which
this country has: I have not met with any one that could help me to the exact
shape of them. But although this soil bear some peculiar herbs, yet there are not
many species of them, which Olaus Pet. gathers from the west-Bothnia, which
borders on Lapland, for in that place there are found but very few.

I come now to Moss, which is of diverse sorts. The first is tree Moss, with
a kind of long wool, hanging down from the boughs, especially of the Pitch
tree, and sometimes from others. The 2d. which is very plentiful and affords
food for the raindeers in the winter is ground Moss, of a white color, with
long thin leaves growing a foot high. The 3d. is ground moss, but softer of a
more delicate yellow green: this is pernicious to the foxes, which the
inhabitants cut small and mix with their baits to catch them. The 4th. is also
ground moss, short and soft, of a very fine color, which because it is so fine
they use instead of feathers to lay under Infants new born. I hear of a 5th.
sort with larger and longer leaves, which they call Fathne, good against
fainting if it be bruised and drank in broth, but I doubt whether this be
Moss, I had rather believe it Angelica cut small prepared and boiled under
ground. The last thing which is to be mentioned is Grass, which is of diverse
kinds, the best sort is that which is found in the valleys near the mauntains
called Fells, being short, soft, and juicy; that which grows in other places is
thicker, rougher, and dryer. There is a 3d sort thin and slender which the
inhabitants use for stuffing of their shoes, and gloves, to defend their feet
and hands from the weather. And these are all the trees, shrubs, and herbs of
Lapland.

CHAP. XXXII. Of their Metals.
THat metals grow in Lapland and the outermost parts of Scandivavia, is only a
conjecture of the Ancients, and there is no certainty of it, therefore none of
them make any mention of them. Olaus M. flatly denies that to his age there
were any Iron, Copper, or Silver mines found, therefore they were forced to
fasten their boats with osiers, without any nails because they had no Iron, but
in the 35. year of this age, in Queen Christina's reign, a silver mine was
discovered by the Inhabitants of Pitha near Nasafialo not far from the
mountains which divide Swedcland from Norway, this was the first mine known in
Lapland, found by Loens Person an inhabitant of Pitha.

In the year 1645. The most Illustrious Ericus Flemming L. Baron of Lais, now
Senator of the Kingdom, and President of the company of Mines, first caused it
to be opened, and a melting-house built with convenient necessaries. There is
also a vein of Lead richer then the Silver and easier work't. Rheen says that
the mountain is opened, not with Pickaxes or any Iron instruments: but they
bore a hole, which must be filled with Gunpowder; when the mouth is well stopped
they apply fire through another little hole, which touching the powder breaks the
hardest stones in pieces. But the use of this mine lasted no long time, for in
the war between the Swedes and Danes in Carolus Gustavus his reign about the
year 1958. it was spoiled by one Van Anen the Danish Kings Governor, from
which time no man would go to the expense of cleansing and repairing the mine,
because it would require a vast charge, before they could get any profit by it,
which was too much for men of mean estates to undertake.

The 2d Silver mine is in Luhla-Lapmark named Kiedlkievasi found by Jonan Petri
living in Torpenjaur about the 60. year of this age. It is in the middle of the
Village Torpenjaur, on an high mountain 2. miles from the top, 6. miles from
Raedstad a village of Norway, between Raedstad and Keidlkievasi; there is a
famous high hill called Daorfiael in the road that leads from the mine to
Norway: the foul weather in the winter stops all passage over this mountain.
The mine is rich enough and very broad, continuing the same all over, lodged in
a hard Marcasite. It has this inconvenience that there are no woods near it,
but they are forced to fetch their fuel a mile and a half off: they use powder
instead of digging it, (as before) the melting-house stands 5. miles off in a
pleasant place near the concourse of several Rivers, especially Darijock and
Quickjock, which last gives the house its name. Here is a very spacious wood
and great plenty of shrubs, especially currants, and all forts of herbs. The
river affords abundance of the best sort of fish as Salmon, Trout, Perch, etc.
distant 27. miles from Taorne discovered in 1655. by an nhabitant who was
showing the ore to Ericus Ericsonius who first discovered it. It is very rich
and not drossy, only necessary's are conveyed thither with some difficulty.
There is another 3. miles northward called Wittange, found by a Laplander in
1668. The vein is not so good because mixed with Iron, wherefore they do not dig
it so willingly as the other; from these mines the ore is shipped away to the
melting-house at Koenge to be melted and thence brought to Torna. There are
Iron mines too, one in Torne-Lapmark joining to the Copper mine, another in the
same Lapmark called Junesuando found in 1940. by Laurence an inhabitant there,
about 22. miles distant from Torna, whether it is carried to be beaten into
bars and rods at the forge at Koenge. A 3d vein of the same metal is found in
Pelziwachin at Lulha, but of these the two first only are dug. I heard in
1671. of a Golden mine: but because there was no certainty, I will not insist
upon it. I mention it because there are some that affirm that it was found in
Swedeland in the time of Gustavus the first, but this was divulged by an
uncertain Author, as appears by the event, for to this day nothing more has bin
heard of it.

CHAP XXXIII. Of their Stones, Jewels, and Pearls.
I Come now to their stones, which are very large and many, of an ash color
but rough hard and intractable, not to be reduced by any instrument to shape
for use. Besides these there are others often found on the shores which
represent the shape of an animal. These the inhabitants esteem much and adore
them for Gods, under the name of Stoorjuncare. In Torne-Lapmark near the mine
Junesuando, on the banks of Torno, there are found yellow plain stones of a
circular figure like money, about the bigness of a half crown, which look like
dirt, but are as hard as flints. Dn. Grape in his papers makes mention of them.
I will set down a draught of them marked with the letter B. In the mine it self
there are found stones in the perfect shape of Octaedra, polished and worked by
nature herself, but very small not exceeding the bigness of a nut, and sometimes
less. I have put down their figure with the letter C It is not certain whether
the loadstone be found in this Country, tho Olaus Mag. speaks of mountains
under the pole which some have thought do breed the stone: his words seem to
intimate loadstones as big as mountains, but it is certain he cannot mean
Lapland, for that has none such, yet there are those who affirm that the
loadstone is found there. As for precious stones they have them frequently,
Buraeus mentions jewels, and afterward he adds Diamond, Amethyst, and Topaz.
By diamonds he means transparent stones or Crystal, they are found big and
little sticking up and down upon the rocks and craggs: some are as big as
Childrens heads, such as I saw the Illustrious Gabriel de la Galdie Chancellor
of this kingdom have; they have six sides ending like a pyramid, tho some of
them are imperfect; the color in some is bright and clear not inferior to
Crystal, in other dull and spoiled with flaws, some are pure, others have
veins like cracks branching out every way, they serve the inhabitants for
flints when they have occasion to light a candle, and yield more fire if
stricken with a steel than the flints themselves. I have now in a Lapland pouch
some Crystal which they made use of for flints. The Jewellers polish and cut
their Chrystals with such art that sometimes they are taken for true Diamonds by
those that have skill. I have drawn the greater sort of Crystal in the native
bigness and shape, marked with the letter A. Buraeus mentions Amethysts next,
some of which I saw brought out of Lapland, but so pale and spotted that they
were scarce comparable to those that come out of Bohem^a tho I hear since that
there are much better found, cut rarely. The same thing is to be said of the
Topaz, one of which I have in my study, in every thing like a Crystal, only
the color inclines to a yellow. I am told that none of the rest do shine so
much as those that come from other places, which is the fault of almost all the
jewels of this Nation, not being so apt to bare lively brisk colors as the
eastern jewels do. To this head I reduce all Pearls and Margarites, tho they
be not stones. Some rivers in Lapland produce these, therefore there are
certain inhabitants appointed to dive depiction of various precious stones and
search for them, such as was John Peterson, mentioned by S. Rheen, who first
found the Silver mine at Nasasiael, he is called even diamontzbryeare sampi
partefoekiare i. e. one that finds and cuts pearls. Which (tho out of this
Country) are not contemptible, it cannot be denied but that most of them want
that liveliness which the oriental Pearls have, tho some are found as good, and
in bigness and shape exceeding them. There are found some not come to
perfection, half round and half slat, the round part being bright the other
yellow and dull. I saw one a few years ago brought out of Bothnia, so exactly
round with such fresh colors, that a certain woman offered an 120. crowns for
it, a Jeweller assured me that if he had another as good, he would not sell
both for 500. They are bred not of such shells as are in the east broad, plane,
and almost circular like Oister, but longer and hollower like Muscle shells, and
not in the Sea but in Rivers, as may be gathered from Olaus Magnus. Those that
are not come to perfection stick within the shells, but those that are perfect,
are loose and drop out when the shell is opened.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of their Rivers.
LApland if any Country is well watered with springs and rivers: the most noted
are those from whence the particular marches and regions have their names, as
Umeao, Pitheao, Luhleao, Torneao, and Kimeao, these spring from the Norway
mountains, and are increased by several less rivers, unburdening themselves at
last into the Bothnick Sea. Vindela fills Vmeao, and Skiellefle Pitheao,
Luhleao swallows a less river of the same name, and Kimeao is increased by
Avilaiocki, which it self is no small river, for there are numberless rivulets
which run into it. So Luhleao which has a double stream, the lesser receives
Pyrrijaus Kardijoch, and it is the same case with the greater called
Stoor-Luhleao, and Tornaeo which is filled with the river Kaeungemae Taengeleao
and others. And so it is with all the great rivers, which upon that account are
so impetuous and big, that they yield to few in the world: and because they run
through hilly and uneven Countries, and are stopped by several dams and wears,
they force their way over precipices, with a great noise, and in those places
are not navigable. Such is the sluice at Lughlens, called Muskaumokke, and
another named Sao, likewise Niometsaski i. e. an Hares leap, so called because
the river Lughla runs between two mountains so near that an Hare may leap over.

The like Cataracts are found at Torna, the most remarkable is called terrafors
near the Norway mountains. Next Caengerbrooks-fors then Lappia-fors, then three
more meeting in an head called by one name Paelloforser, next Kettille-fors and
lastly Kukula-fors near Torna. Although these Cataracts are a great hindrance
to sailers, yet they are advantageous to the mettal-melters, and afford an
incredible plenty of Fish. Besides these rivers there are abundance of pooles,
so numerous that but few can be named, one is Lulafraesk by Lughla, by which
Lughleao the greater runs. Next Lugga and Sabbaig all abounding with Salmons.
By the lesser Lughleao are Saggatt, Ritfack, Pirrijaur, Skalka, Sittijock,
waykijaur, and Karra-green which exceeds them all, each affording plenty of
Fish. Pitha has these remarkable ones near it, Hornasvandijaur, Arfussierf,
Pieskejaur, but especially Stoorafuan in which there are as many Islands as
days in the year; but above all Enaresraesk near Kimue. Wexionius says the
Hills and Islands in it are innumerable, and without an hyperbole, for Tornaeus
affirms that never any inhabitant lived long enough to survey them all.

There be some Marshes, little but full of Fish, in that language called Suino
i. e. holy, and they account it a sin to foul them. These marches have two
Channels one above the other: sometimes it happens that the fish leave the upper
and retreat into the lower, upon which account the superstitious natives bring
sacrifice to appease the Damon of that marsh whom they suppose to be angry.

CHAP. XXXV. Of their Mountains.
THeir land which I treat of last, is not in the same condition all over, for
that which is near Bothnia is wholsomer and more fertile for all sort of
pot herbs, as those can witness who have made gardens in both soils. They found
that some places would bear coleworts, raperoots, parsnips, radishes and the
like. In other places by reason of the abundance of rocks and rivers, the
ground is too moist and stony, and sandy in many places, which being scattered
by the wind covers the ground like snow, such are those places near the
mountains of Norway. These sands make a very dangerous passage for travellors,
especially when they are covered with snow, because then they cannot tell what
they are to avoid, sometimes falling in and being overwhelmed. Toward Norway,
are very high mountains which the Swedes call Fiael the Laplanders Tudderi.
Cluverius calls the top of the mountains Sevo which he took from Pliny l. 4.
c. 13. By Adamus they are called Riphaei, but he was to careless in looking
over Pliny, Solinus, and Orosius. But whatever the name is, what Pliny says is
true of the mountain, that it is no less than the Riphaean; the top is
perpetually covered with snow. Moreover the ascent and rise of this mount is
thus described by Pet. Nevren: the mountain which separates Norway from Lappia
begins to rise about Zemptland; thence with continued ascent toward the north
it reaches a hundred miles, till it comes to Titusfiord, which is a bay of the
frozen sea. By this mountain the provinces of Swedeland are divided from
Norway, as by a wall designed by nature herself. But although these mountains are
one continued tract, yet they swell higher in some places than others, called
by these distinct names, which Samuel Rheen mentions. Waesawaari, Skipoive,
Nasawari, Ceruioiue, Kioldawaari, Niottuswagg, Keidtkiwaari, Zeknawaari,
Fierrowaari, Cardawaari, Steikawaari, Skalopacht, Darrawaari, Woggousaari,
Niynnas, Kaskaoiue, Wallawaari, Skieldawaari, Harrawaari, Portawaari, Kafla,
Seggock Vltivis. In like manner there are many other of their names in the
other parts of this Country, but because it is hard to meet with them all, and
not so much to our purpose, we will end now.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
OF the Name of Lapland. Page 1. Of the Situation of Lapland. p. 3. Of the
Temperature of the Air, and soil of Lapland. p. 7. Of the Division of Lapland.
p. 9. Of the Laplanders in reference to the inclinations, temper and habit, of
their minds and bodies. p. 12. Of the Original of the Laplanders. p. 15. Of the
Religion of the Laplanders. p. 21. Of the second, or Christian Religion of the
Laplanders. p. 24. Of some remains of Pagan sm in Lapland at this time. p. 34.
Of the heathenish Gods of the Laplanders, and their manner of worship at this
day. p. 37. Of the magical Ceremonies of the Laplanders. p. 45. Of the
Government of the Laplanders. p. 60. Of the Judicatures and Tributes of the
Laplanders. p. 65. Of the Laplanders Fairs, and Customs in Trading. p. 67. Of
the Language of the Laplanders. p. 72. Of the Houses of the Laplanders. p. 80.
Of the Garments of the Laplanders. p. 87. Of the Diet of the Laplanders. p. 91.
Of the Hunting of the Laplanders. p. 94. Of the Laplanders Weapons, and other
instruments of Hunting. p. 98. Of the Laplanders Handy-craft-trades. p. 100. Of
the Women's Emploiments. p. 103. Of the Emploiments common to both Sexes. p.
105. Of their Divertisements. p. 107. Of their Contracts and Marriages. p. 110.
Of their Childbearing, and the Education of their Children. p. 120. Of their
Diseases, Death and Burial. p. 124. Of their Cattle. p. 129. Of the wild Beasts
of the Laplanders. p. 133. Of their Birds and Fish. p. 137. Of the Laplanders
Trees and Plants. p. 141. Of their Metals. p. 143. Of their Stones, Jewels,
and Pearls. p. 144. Of their Rivers. p. 146. Of their Mountains. p. 147.
FINIS.

