THE Style of Exchanges

Containing both their Law and Custom As Practiced now in the most considerable
places of Exchange in Europe.

Unfolding diverse MYSTERIES, AND Directing every Person, howsoever concerned in
a Bill of Exchange, to what he ought to do and observe, in any case, in order
to his own security.

Translated out of Low and High Dutch, French and Italian-Latine Authors.

The whole being Methodically digested into Chapters and Sections, that by the
help of an Index any particular Case may readily be found.

By John Scarlett, Merchant of the Eastland Company.

London, Printed for John Bringhurst, Printer and Stationer, at the Sign of the
Book in Grace Church Street, near Cornhil, 1682.

THE Epistle Dedicatory.
SErenissimo and Potentissimo, Principi et Domino. Domino friderico-Wilhelmo
Marchioni Brandenburgico, sacri Romani imperji Archicamerario and Principi
Electori, Magdeburgi, Prussiae, Stetini, Pomeraniae, juliae Cliviae, Montium,
Cassubiae and Vandalorum, in Silesia quoque, Crosnae et Carniolae duci;
Burgravio Nurenbergae, Principi Rugiae Halberstadji and Mindae, comiti Marcae
and Ravensbergi, domino in Ravenstein,

Summo Religionis Reformatae Patrono,
Maximo gentis Teutonicae Marti.
Nec non
Mercaturae tam Maritimae quam Terrestris,
Promotori Illustrissimo.
Hunc de Cambjis Tractatum ut obsequii gratitudinisque Symbolum, devotissimo
animi cultu dat, dicat dedicatque

Johannes Scarlett, Anglo-Brittannus, Societatis Balthicae Mercatorum Anglorum
Socjus, Regiomonti in Prusia Residens.

ERRATA.
SOme Faults have escaped the Press by reason of the Author's remote Absence
from London; which the Reader is desired to Correct; some of them are here
inserted, viz.

Preface page 3. line 9. for observe read obscure. Pref. p. 6. l. 27. f. Mala
r. Mali. Pref. p. 9. l. 8. f. Vulter r. Vultur. In the Book p. 98. l. 18. f.
Lessabon r. Lisbonne: And where the word Broger is, read Brocker.

THE PREFACE.
GReat are the Mysteries of Merchants Trading to Foreign Parts; nor was ever
any one Merchant capable of understanding all the Mysteries of every Foreign
Trade; whence it comes, that there are so many several Species (as I may call
them) of Merchants, as Spanish, French, etc. but there are very few Merchants
that have not something to do with Exchanges, either Foreign or Domestic; and
yet of all those that practice Exchanges, how few are they that rightly
understand it! as appears by the multitudes that ignorance of the nature
hereof, of the Rules and Laws hereof, has undone: This to many, if not to most
Merchants, remains a Mystery, and is indeed the greatest and weightiest Mystery
that is to be found in the whole Map of Trade. On this consideration, for the
Information of Young Men especially, I thought my self obliged to translate
this piece, which contains the Practick part of Exchanges, and as they are
regulated and practiced at the greatest Banks for Exchanges, and the greatest
Place of Traffic in Europ: If there be any thing in Merchandise that requires
circumspection, knowledge and prudence, here it is; herein Merchants must be
critical.

To every Chapter I have added what Marius his advice is in this matter;
besides that, many notable things are transcribed out of Latin, German and
Italian Authors, of all whose large Books of Cases, this may be called a
Compendium.

I may perhaps be judged very presumptious in attempting to unfold the Mystery
of Exchanges, when which the whole course of Traffic has nothing more
intricate. But I shall for my excuse say no more than this, That I only tread
in the steps of those that have wanted no opportunities to learn and know the
Practick, as well as Theory thereof; I have but collected what others have
written in Latin, French, Italian, High and Low Dutch, and made them to speak
in a Language that all English Merchants might understand; and this I think I
may assert, That the Authors neither wanted Experience to know the Practice,
nor Learning to know the Laws thereof; and I therefore hope, this small
Treatise will be of great advantage, and tend much to the unfolding of some of
the grand Mysteries of Exchanges.

None will deny, but that the knowledge thereof is as necessary as it is
profitable, and as profitable as necessary, and that to all that are concerned
therein; not to Merchants and Traders only, but to Lawyers, Attorneys, and
others, who must manage, plead and direct the Suits of Merchants about
Exchanges, which they never can effectually do, unless they be well informed in
the customs of Merchants; without this it will be almost impossible to discern
between the justice and injustice, the equity and inequity of these Exchanges.

Intricate and observe, they are, if we respect either matter of Fact or matter
of Law.

In respect of matter of Fact they are so, 1st, Because Merchants (if they may
be called Merchants, or rather griping Usurers and Extortioners) daily study to
make them difficult and obscure, to palliate their unlawful Usury.

2dly, Because many Fictions are practiced and allowed of, and that both of
persons and payments, and such as are not only paradoxical, but contradictory.

3dly, Because of the conciseness of the forms, and the couching of so many
contracts and obligations into so few words that they are scarce discernable by
moderate capacities.

4thly, Because of the variety of unheard of terms of Art, that neither the Law
nor Lawyers do well understand, the knowledge whereof must be learned from the
practice of Merchants, and not from Magna Charta, Justinian, Cook or
Littleton, etc.

And if in matter of Fact they be thus obscure, they must necessarily in matter
of Law; for ex facto jus oritur, what a multitude of artifices Usurers have
invented to palliate their Extortion, can scarce be imagined; they have puzzled
their Pater Confessors, and the greatest Doctors of Divinity, on the one hand
to, salve their cases of Conscience; and on the other, the greatest Doctors of
the Law to manage their intricate Cases; nor indeed can they agree among
themselves about the nature thereof; some will have Exchanging to be properly a
Bartering, others a Borrowing and Lending; some will have it to be Depositing;
others not knowing what to term it, call it, Contractus Innominatus; some will
have it to be a Changing of Monyes for Monyes; others, Contractus Locations;
and some will have it to be a Buying and Selling properly; others again will
assert, That All these are included in it, and appitcable to it; and indeed,
its not a pin matter whether it be all or any of these, if commutative Justice
be but observed, nor shall I further trouble the Reader or my self with these
Controversies.

Nor with Disputes about the lawfulness or unlawfulness thereof, wherewith I
could have filled a large Volumn in Folio, if I would have translated what
Sigism. Scaccia has writ about this; I take it for granted, that its abused by
Usurers and Extortioners, and even so far is utterly Unlawful. But this
notwithstanding, the lawful use thereof, as its most frequently practiced among
Merchants, is not to be abandoned; only by the way, let honest Merchants here
be cautioned, That from the lawful use thereof they be not tempted insensibly
to slide into the unlawful abuse thereof, lest of honest Merchants, they become
griping Usurers; and this caution is so much the more necessary, in regard of
the intricacy of Exchanges, and the difficulty of finding out the Knavery of an
Exchange-contract; for as the Spanish Proverb is, Arca aperta justum ad
peccandum invitat, which is in plain English, Opportunicy makes a Thief.

Nor with the variety of divisions and subdivisions, which diverse Authors make,
according to their own Conceptions, and the Idea thereof that they have framed
to themselves, as into apparently Lawful and apparently Unlawful, and some
Ambiguous, some Pure, some Impure, some Mixed, some Real, some Feigned, some
Wet, some Dry; all which Divisions and Sub-divisions tend more to the obscuring
and confounding the true nature of Exchanges, than to the unfolding of them;
for from all its Qualities and Accidents, it is capable of Divisions,
Subdivisions and Distinctions, wherefore I shall omit these nicities and
curiosities, and only add this, That as of all Commerce, so also of this part
thereof, Equity and commutative Justice must be the Basis, Aequalitas dati and
accepti, must be its Rule, and Honesty must be the Artery under this vein of
Commerce, without which Traffic cannot subsist, or else whatever Reasons be
urged for its lawfulness, and whatever Distinctions be used, it is unlawful, if
not curia exteriori, at least foro fori: But alas! it is to be feared, that
these things are little observed by those who make it their sole Trade to
practice Exchanges. Not but that it is lawful for such as give in Exchange, to
consider the lawful Interest of their Monyes, their great Labor and Expenses,
the Risco that they run, the plenty or scarcity of Monyes or Bills, the
Intrinsic and Extrinsick value of the species of Monyes they must pay, and
again receive (which things, if not considered, there is no equality) but that
which is condemned in Exchanges, (as was said before) is the Extortion and
Oppression, and the Abuse of Exchanges, palliating their unlawful Usury
therewith. So that whatever may be objected against the lawfulness hereof, may
be retorted with this, that they are not vitia artis, but artificis; and let
those Bankers that thus abuse a lawful calling, consider, that usually (as has
by some been observed) these great unlawful Gains have been attended with
greater Losses, and it cannot well be otherwise; for first, Mala parta, male
and cito dilabuntur; secondly, as the Dutch Proverb is, As long as the Covetous
man lives, the Deceiver need not dye for hunger; for the hopes of great Gains
makes them run great Hazards; and thirdly, their greatest Trade being with
(honest) Merchants, whom they credit, these often by divine Providence do
suffer great losses, who often run great Risco's at Sea, and so are made
insolvent, and if some griping Usurers and Abuses of the lawful calling and art
of Exchanges are not concerned, it will be very strange.

That which gives most men an occasion to dislike and disprove of this Mystery
of the Bankers, is this, 1st, That they are observed to be men of very broad
Consciences, they will pretend Honesty as much at any, but they exercise it as
little; and especially, its hard to persuade them that they are in Conscience
obliged to remit part of their Debt to him that cannot possibly pay, who not by
his own, but by others Knavery, not by his own Folly, but by the Providence of
God bath suffered the loss of all that he has; and then, 2dly, They that are
strangers to this Art and Mystery (for so it may well be called) cannot
conceive hom Moneys (which of its self is barren) should so fructify, as if
there were some Alchymistrical cunning used by them, or as if by Superfactation
they could multiply Moneys; they think it strange, that such men, who in
appearance are idle, do nothing but sit and write, dealing in no Commodities,
neither by buying nor selling, should so suddenly acquire so vast Estates, and
gain more than the most laborious and industrous Merchants: Nor, 3dly, can they
understand how Monyes, that is the measure and price of all other things
necessary for life, and which for that end only was invented, should be the
measure and price of it self, and so be mensurans and mensuratum, regulans and
regulatum, and they judge it according to their Logical and Phylosophical
Capacities, that an actio and passio in the same subject is impossible.

But these should again consider, to write is not to sit still, or to be idle;
and to study, and contrive, and correspond is the greatest labor; as also,
that it is only idle Monyes locked up in a Chest, and unimployed, that is
unfruitful and barren, and that there is a mixture of Contracts in Exchanges,
and a buying and selling also, and that the profit thereof does not arise only
from the consideration of time (though according to the longer or shorter time
the course is higher or lower proportionably) but conjunctly from a
consideration of the Labor, Expenses and Risco of the Exchanges, nor do they
always gain by Exchanges, nor can they that observe the lawful Course of
Exchanges know certainly that they shall gain; for posito that the men be able
and sufficient that they deal with; yet such is the variableness of the Course,
that till they have the Moneys in Cash again, which they gave out on Exchange,
they cannot know whether it be to their loss or profit.

But that which renders this Art of Exchanging most suspected, is the Practice
of Re-change, which is doubless unlawful, and I shall not plead for it. But
lest I be mis-understood, I will declare what I mean by Re-change, and what
others take it for; and the Re-change that is condemned, is this, When an
honest Merchant, (or other) standing in need of present Monyes, comes to an
Exchanger, and offers him his Bill for so much Monyes; the Exchanger prying
like a Vulter upon his necessity, gives him so much Monyes, upon good security,
at an high Course, and knowing that the Bills will not be paid, but protested,
he conditions, that the Interest, Charges, and the course of Exchange back
again, shall be added to the Sum, and converted to the Capital or Principal;
this augmented Sum is redrawn upon the poor necessitous Debtor; and if the
Debtor cannot pay, then the Exchanger will probably continue it so long and so
far as the Pledge or Security he has, is worth, always augmenting the Sum, as
before; all which at last he forces the poor Merchant to pay him, though he
utterly ruin him and his whole Family; whence by the way observe, That this
Re-change is always with the same Debtor, by converting the Interest into the
Principal, and that the Creditor knows, that the Debtors Bills will not be
paid, and that therefore many Fictions are admitted of, and that the Creditor
does by violence extort from the poor Debtor, whatever his insatiable avarice
shall prompt him to: And thus they cloak their Vsurous Contracts, and ruin the
poor Debtor; and this is that Rechange that is unlawful. But I shall not
enlarge upon these things, lest I swell the Book to too great a Vollumn.

I shall only here observe, That Exchanges were introduced by the Law of
Nations (as all Commerce was) and was invented for the ease in Traffic, and is
now so necessary an Appendix thereto, that without it Trade can scarcely
subsist, its the soul and life thereof, and is of the very Essence of all
Commerce and Navigation. The variety of Coyns, and their Extrinsick and
Intrinsic Values gave the occasion thereof, and the design was to prevent the
hazard and charges of transporting Monyes from place to place to traffic
with. But now by the Policy of Merchants, its turned to a most profitable
Trade, and its evident enough, that they are now neither Fools nor Prodigals
that will for a small piece of Paper or two, give away so much ready Monyes;
for those Bills of Exchange they receive do usually bring all back again with
Interest; yea, now according to the number of these Bills, men may safely value
their Estates; To which purpose Sigsin. Scaccia tells a pretty story: An
Italian Merchant being in company with some Scholars, they were discoursing of
a certain learned Person that was shortly expected to come to a certain place,
whom highly commending for his learning, they said, he was Omni literarum
genere imbutus; of whom presently the Merchant demands, Quas haberet Literas?
To whom they answered, That he was so and so qualified, had Greek and Latin on
his Fingers ends, etc. Whereat the Merchant lift up his hands, and said, Is
that all? What else should he have? says another. Ho (says the Merchant) if he
has no Letters of Credit, Literas Combij (Bills of Exchange) all the rest is
of no value. But not to detain the Reader any longer here, and leave the Book
to his purusal and approbation, and I question not, but those that shall have
occasion to buy and puruse it, will indeed find that its both useful and
necessary for all Merchants, especially for those that are Young.

John Scarlett.

ADVERTISENENT.
NB, What I have translated for the most part Remitter, is by some called the
Deliverer, in that he delivers Moneys.

And the Possessor of the Bill is he to whom the Bill is payable.

The Acceptant is he to whom its directed.

The Drawer is sometimes called the Taker.

INDEX.
Chap. I. THe definition and multiplicity of Exchanges, page 1. Chap. II. Of
the duty of Mackelers or Exchange-Brogers, p. 7. Chap. III. Of the course of
Exchange, p. 13. Chap. IV. Of the reduction of Exchanges, p. 17. Chap. V. What
a Bill of Exchange is, and what the Drawer, before the delivery thereof, and
the Remitter, before the receipt thereof, must narrowly observe, p. 22. Chap.
VI. Of placing Bills of Exchange to account, p. 30 Chap. VII. Of Letters of
Advice, p. 40. Chap. VIII. Of the payment of the value by the Remitter to the
Drawer, p. 48 Chap. IX. Of negotiating, drawing in or endorsing of Bills made
payable to order, p. 53. Chap. X. Of demanding acceptance, p. 59. Chap. XI. Of
protesting for Non-acceptance, p. 71. Chap. XII. Of acceptance of Bills of
Exchange supra protest, p. 78. Chap. XIII. What the Possessor of a Bill of
Exchange, protested for Non-acceptance, and is not accepted supra protest,
together with the Drawer and Endorser are obliged to, p. 88. Chap. XIV. Of the
time of payment of Exchanges, p. 96. Chap. XV. Of demanding of payment, p. 105.
Chap. XVI. Of the payment of Bills by the Acceptant, p. 109. Chap. XVII. Of
protesting of Bills for Non-payment, p. 121. Chap. XVIII. Of the payment of
Bills supra protest for Non-payment, p. 129. Chap. XIX. What the Possessor of a
Bill protested for Non-payment, and not discharged supra Protest, has further
to do, p. 138. Chap. XX. To what the Drawer and Endorsers of Bills returned
with protest for Non-payment are further obliged to, p. 142. Chap. XXI. What an
Acceptant of a Bill that he has suffered to be protested for Non-payment, and
is returned with protest, is obliged to. p. 148. Chap. XXII. Of subscribing a
second or third Bill, p. 152. Chap. XXIII. Of Exchanging for account, and in
the name of a third Person, p. 155. Chap. XXIV. Of Bills of Exchange drawn on
one place, but payable in another, p. 160. Chap. XXV. Of Exchanges in
Commission, in general, and of Bills drawn on one place over another place, p.
169. Chap. XXVI. Of Drawing in Commission, p. 180. Chap. XXVII. Of Remitting in
Commission, and standing del credere, i.e. being Surety therefore, p. 188.
Chap. XXVIII. Of being drawn upon in commission, p. 199. Chap. XXIX. Of being
remitted to in Commission, p. 205. Chap. XXX. Of Rechange, and continuance of
Exchange and Rechange, p. 210. Chap. XXXI. Of Exchanges to and from Fairs in
general, p. 218. Chap. XXXII. Of Exchanges from Amsterdam to Frankford on the
Main, and vice versa, p. 225. Chap. XXXIII. Of the Leipzig Fairs, p. 231. Chap.
XXXIV. Of the Fair of Lions in France, p. 233. Chap. XXXV. Of Debt-Exchanges,
p. 236. Chap. Chap. XXXVI. Of discounted or rescontred Exchanges, p. 241. Chap.
XXXVII. Of conditional Exchanges, or Bills of Bodomery, p. 250. Chap. XXXVIII.
Of Exchanges pro forma, p. 259. Chap. XXXIX. Of Dry-Exchanges, p. 266. Chap.
XL. Of Bills of Exchange being lost, p. 270. Chap. XLI. Of Letters of Credit,
p. 288. Chap. XLII. Of what is, and is not to be done; or what party concerned
in an Exchange is, and is not obliged to do, in case any that are concerned
therein should fail, p. 293. Chap. XLIII. Some select Cases collected out of
Sigism. Scaccia his Treatise De Camvio and Commercijs, p. 323. Chap. XLIV. Of
the execution of Exchanges, p. 359. Chap. XLV. Of the Par of Exchanges, p. 363.
THE Style of Exchanges.
Rules of Exchange.
CHAPTER I. The Definition and Multiplicity thereof.
Rule I. THE word EXCHANGE in its largest Signification, may be applied to any
kindof Change.

Rule II. In a more restrained and limited sense, it may be referred to all
sorts of Traffic whatever.

III. But that kind of Exchange, that here shall be treated of, is yet taken in
a more limited sense, and only referred to a Trading in, or with Monyes.

IV. From the variety of Coyns, and the manifold distinctions of Monyes (those
Coyns and Allays, that are current in one Nation, being not current in another;
and yet notwithstanding, seeing almost all the world over, all Trade must be
driven with Monyes) did this Trade of, and in Monyes (which we call EXCHANGE)
derive its Original.

V. This Exchange is twofold, viz. An Exchanging of Monyes for Monyes, one
Coin or sort for another; and a giving of Money upon Exchange for a Bill, etc.
The former of these is Petty Exchange, the latter Real.

VI. The Exchanging of one sort or species for another, is also twofold;
either with, or without Profit.

VII. When its done without Profit, it cannot be called a Trade, but is done
merely out of Friendship, and as a Courtesy; and then there is an equal and
just Valuation of both the sorts of Coin, according to their Allay, or their
Price current, or Intrinsic and Extrinsick Value.

VIII. But if Profit by the Exchange, be designed by either Party, then one
Party allows the other a certain Profit upon the certain Species he desires;
and that Profit is called by the Italians Aggio, by the Dutch Opgelt, which we
may call Advance, or Vse-Monyes.

IX. But then, this last kind of Exchange, which is done for Advance or Aggio,
is no free and lawful Trade, save to those only that are permitted by Authority
to use it, who are also obliged to observe certain Rules and Methods in the use
thereof, such are Brogers, Bankers, etc.

X. And to prevent all Confusion, and the too great Advance of any particular
speices of Monyes, the Cities of Amsterdam, Hamburge, etc. have erected a Bank
for the Regulation thereof, according to the true Intrinsic Value of every
Species.

XI. Exchange that is done by Bills of Exchange, consists in a Contract and
Agreement betwixt two Parties, whereby the one Party gives his Bill for the
Payment of a certain precise Sum of Monyes, at a certain and limited time, in
a certain and limited place, for the value of the same Sum already received,
or presently to be paid by the other Party; this is called by Marius, Real
Exchange.

XII. Exchange may again be subdivided, viz. into the Merchants, and the
Usurers Exchange.

XIII. Merchants Exchange consists in a Trading in or with Monyes from one
Place, City or Nation, to another, upon an uncertain Profit; and this sort of
Trade, is by way of Excellency termed, Simple Exchange.

XIV. Usurers Exchange consists in a giving Monyes upon Interest, with
condition to receive the same Sum of Monyes, with a certain Profit, at a
certain time, and in the same place; and this is called by Marius, Dry Exchange.

XV. Merchants Exchange is either actual, and that which is really performed
and accomplished; or only pro Forma.

XVI. The Real Merchants Exchange consists in a real and effectual Contract and
Negotiation betwixt the Drawer and the Remitter, concerning the Course of
Exchange, and the Time and Place of Payment.

XVII. But that Exchange that is only pro Forma, consists only in a Consent,
that the Name of a certain Person be used, as the Remitter, (that the Bill may
want nothing of its Formality) without any real Contract or Negotiation.

XVIII. Again, this real Exchange is twofold, either Certain or Conditional.

XIX. Real Certain Exchange, is, when the Sum expressed in the Bill must really
and certainly be paid.

XX. But Conditional Exchange is, when the Payment of the Sum, named in the
Bill, must first be made, upon the arrival of some Ship, or of some certain
Goods, or upon some other Conditions.

XXI. To the Completing of an Exchange-Negotiation, four Persons are
considered and required, two at the place where the Course, Place, Time of
Payment, and the Sum are agreed on, to wit the Drawer and the Remitter: and at
the Place of Payment are also two, to wit, the Person on whom the Bill is
drawn, who must Pay; and the Person to whom the Bill is remitted, who must
Receive.

XXII. Exchange is again subdivided into Negotiated, and discounted Exchange,
or Rescontred Exchange.

XXIII. Negotiated, is, when the Drawer and the Remitter are two distinct
Persons, betwixt whom there has been an actual Contract and Agreement
concerning the course, etc.

XXIV. Discounted Exchange, is, when the Drawer and the Remitter is one and the
same Person, that at the same time draws and remits.

XXV. Negotiated Exchange, is again twofold; either Pure, or Mixed.

XXVI. A Pure Negotiated Exchange, is, when really Money is given for Moneys to
be received, according to the contract betwixt the Drawer and the Remitter,
whereby the Drawer obliges himself to pay the value he has received of the
Remitter, according to the course in another place, at a certain precise time.

XXVII. Mixed Exchange consists in a contract betwixt Debtor and Creditor,
whereby the Debtor obliges himself to the true payment of the Monyes,
according to the custom of Exchange.

XXVIII. Again, all Exchanges are either for a Man's own, or for some
Principal's account, or in the Name of another.

XXIX. When it is for Proper account, it concerns the Person, that is either
Drawer or Remitter.

XXX. When its for the Principals account, the Factor treats and concludes in
his own Name, but the Sum, etc. is for the Principals account.

XXXI. And it is in the Name of another, when its done only by the full Power
and Letter of Attorney of another.

XXXII. And lastly; Exchange is either directly to a certain place, or
indirectly, and is sent to some other place first, to be negotiated.

CHAP. II. Of the Duty of Mackelers or Exchange-Brogers.
Rule I. EXCHANGE is concluded, either by the Mackelers or Brogers, alone
betwixt themselves, or by bringing the Parties face to face.

II. Brogers, etc. are Persons Sworn and Authorized by the Magistrate, whose
Work and Trade it is, to enquire of Persons that have any Monyes to remit or to
draw, and to argree such Persons concerning the Conditions, acting Impartially
between them both.

III. It is their Duty to be Diligent, Faithful and Private, and not to Cheat
or Overreach either the Drawer or the Remitter, in any wise.

IV. He must be content with that Reward for his Pains and Labor, that the
Magistrate has allowed him, which is called by the the Hollanders COURTAGIE:
He must not exact more of one than another, nor serve any man for nothing.

V. Those Covetous Exchangers that will save the Courtagie, by concluding their
own Exchanges face to face, without the help of the Brogers, on that use to
deduct from their allowance, or that will use Ignoramus's because they will
serve for less than the Allowance, or may be for nothing at all, do sometimes
in the Course of Exchange, pay the Courtagie double and tribble.

VI. A Broger must be very diligent and prudent, and must first of all know of
the Drawer and Remitter, to what certain place they will Exchange; and if it be
to such a place where there is always a certain Vsance observed in the Payment
of Bills, then he has nothing to do, but to treat of the Course or Price of
Exchange. But in case they would Exchange to Places, where no certain Vsance is
kept, but the Bills must be made at shorter or longer date or sight, etc. then
he must be express and certain, as to the precise Time of Payment, and other
necessary Conditions.

VII. When the Mackeler or Broger has concluded with any, then must he tell
the Drawer, to whom he will have his Bills made Payable, and must thereupon
note in his Book, What the Sum was for which he concluded; What time for
Payment of the Bill; To whom it must be paid; From whom the Value must be
received; and At what Course the Exchange was made: Which Memorandum he must
give to the Drawer, that he may accordingly make or endorse his Bills of
Exchange.

VIII. Its the Brogers Duty also, to fetch the Bills, when they are made, from
the Drawer, and carry them to the Remitter.

IX. He is obliged to keep a perfect and true Register of every particular
Bill; and must Note in his Book at home, Who the Parties were, as well the
Remitter as the Drawer; To what Place the Bill was directed, and to whom; To
whom it was Payable; At what Time; and what the Coursewas; And the precise Day
when this was concluded on.

X. And in case of any Difference betwixt the Drawer and Remitter, the Word and
Register of the Broger, that is of known Honesty, will be the greatest
Evidence, and the Best.

XI. No Prudent Merchant will oblige himself to one Broger always, nor prefer
one to another, but allow to any of them their Courtagie (without making any
Difference among them) that shall first offer the Course to him, at which he
resolves to conclude; By thus doing, he disobligeth none of them, but animates
them all to his Service.

XII. Its a great Fault and Abuse for Merchants to Contract with the Broger,
upon hazard, before the Exchange-time.

XIII. Its a great Imprudence in any Merchant that has but little Credit of
his own, when he has occasion to draw, to give Orders to all the Mackelers or
Brogers for it.

XIV. A Broger, in the concluding of Exchanges, must not use his Liberty, or
conclude any thing, either as to the Time or the Course, without Order.

XV. A Drawer has great reason to be Angry at the Broger, when he without his
Knowledge, concludes any thing at a lower or disadvantagiouser Course, than he
gave order for, though the Broger should offer to make good the loss; for his
Credit is therein concerned.

XVI. A Drawer has no less reason to be Angry with the Broger, if he without
his Knowledge or Order, promise the Remitter any Time for the Payment of the
Value.

XVII. A Drawer is not obliged to make his Bills at shorter Sight or Time; nor
is the the Remitter obliged to accept of Bills made at a longer Time of
Payment, or on any other Person than was agreed on by the Mackeler or Broger.

XVIII. Its the Duty of the Broger to maintain the Credit and Reputation of the
Drawer, as much as he can (if it be not contrary to his Knowledge) But it is
not advisable for him to oblige himself for his Sufficiency, which some
Brogers, for Covetousness of the Courtagie, have too late Repented of.

XIX. Unknown Bills of young Beginners, or of those that seldom frequent the
Exchange (who may be sufficient enough) a Broger may freely offer; but it
greatly tends to the Dimunition of his Credit, if he ordinarily offer Bills of
those that are known to be of little Repute or Credit, especially if he
recommend them; yea, it is perfect Knavery in him to draw for any man, whose
Bills he knows will not be answered, or remit for any, who he knows cannot pay
the Value.

XX. Brogers must diligently guard against Lying and Cheating.

XXI. A wise Merchant will not credit again that Broger that has once Cheated
him.

XXII. A wise Merchant will not suffer himself by the Insinuations of Mackelers
or Brogers, to be seduced, in hopes of great Advantage, to act any thing
contrary to Honesty, or the Laws of the Land.

XXIII. He that by a Letter of Attorney, or full Power, will draw in another's
Name, is Bound expressly to signify so much to the Broger, and the Broger must
conclude the Parcel in the Name of the Principal, not in the Name of the Person
that has the Order.

XXIV. The Merchants, both the Drawer and the Remitter, will before they
conclude finally and absolutely, enquire of the Broger of the sufficiency of
each other; and it is the Brogers Duty to inform them as well as he can.

XXV. When an Exchange is concluded, by the help and assistance of the Broger,
it cannot be repented of, without the consent of the Party, and the Brogers
Courtagie must be paid him; besides, it reflects upon either of them, to fly
from their Words.

CHAP. III. Of the Course of Exchange.
Rule I. IN treating about, or Negotiating of a Bill of Exchange, the Remitter
will seek to conclude for his most Advantage; but the Drawer must have respect
to his Credit, and not draw, but at an honorable Course.

II. It is not possible that the Drawer should always get the very height of
the Course, nor are all Bills of one and the same Course; but according to the
Plenty or Scarcity of Monyes, or Bills, the Course alters in a little time;
wherefore Merchants must be curious and exact in concluding an Exchange.

III. When there is plenty of Money and scarcity of Bills, then the Drawer may
hold hard, and delay to conclude; but if the contrary, and if he must needs
draw, let him not neglect nor delay.

IV. In the concluding of a Bill of Exchange, if the Parties and Brogers only
treat about the Course, not mentioning any other Conditions, then the other
Conditions are supposed to be such, as the Custom of the Place, to which the
Bill must be directed, ordinarily allows of, not only in respect of the Time of
Payment, and the Species in which the Bill must be paid, but in all other
respects.

V. He that will remit or draw at longer or shorter time, or will pay or
receive other Species of Monyes, etc. than are usual and customary at the
Places where the Exchange is concluded, or the Bill to be paid, he must before
he conclude, expressly condition for such things.

VI. Exchange is performed either in a Domestic or Foreign Coin.

VII. In a Domestic Coin, when the Bill must be paid in the same Sort and
Species of Monyes, that the Remitter paid to the Drawer for the Value; and
these are usually Inland Bills.

VIII. In a Foreign, when the Bill is paid in another Species and Coin, than
the Drawer received; and so are usually all Foreign Bills.

IX. In all Exchanges, the Coyns in one place, as well as another, are Certain
and Immutable; and the change of the Course, either higher or lower, depends
upon the present Value of the Coin in the Place where the Bill is directed to.

X. It is then called [Pari] when Money for Monyes is Exchanged, receiving
neither more nor less in Value, than the Value received was.

XI. The Drawer is said to Exchange with Advantage, when he concludes for a
Course that is above [Pari.]

XII. The Remitter is said to Exchange with Advantage, when he pays the Drawer
less than the [Pari.]

XIII. He that remits his Monyes, in hopes of Advantage, does not always
advance by his Remises.

XIV. The Exchange of Monyes from London to Antwerp, Amsterdam, Rotterdam, etc.
is made upon the Pound Sterling of 20 s. viz. they give so many Shillings
Flemish for a Pound Sterling; Hamborough the same.

The Exchange from London for France, as Paris, Roan, is valued on the French
Crown, i. e. so many Pence Sterling, for the French Crown.

The Exchange to Venice is made upon the Ducat; and to Legorne upon the Ducat
Piece of Eight.

XV. The Pari of the Netherlands, with the Pound Sterling, is, 33 s. 4 d.
Flemish. Of Hamborough, with the Pound Sterling, 32 s. Flemish, or four
Dollars. Of France, 72 Soulz, or 6 s. Sterling. The French Crown of three
Livers Tournois, the Liver reckoned at 2 s. Sterling, and every 10 Soulz for 12
d. Sterling. Of Leghorne, 54 d. per Dollar, or piece of Eight. Of Venice, 51 d.
Sterling per Ducat.

The Pari between Antwerp and Paris, or Holland and France, is for the French
Crown of 60 Soulz, or 3 Livers Tournois, 89 gross of Antwerp, which is the true
value of that Crown.

CHAP. IV. Of the Reduction of Exchanges.
Rule I. THe Value of a Bill of Exchange is reckoned by reducing the known into
the desired Sum of Moneys, according to the Course agreed upon.

II. In Exchanges, sometimes the Conditions are for Moneys of one and the same
Denominations and Species, and sometimes of different.

III. When Exchanges are made for Moneys of one and the same Denomination and
Species, then usually the Contract runs at so much the Hundred either Profit or
Loss.

IV. And when it is thus concluded on, then it is certain, that as much as the
one gains, the other loses upon every Hundred.

V. When an Exchange is concluded for Moneys of different Denominations, then
the Course is made sometimes in a Domestic, sometimes in a Foreign
Denomination.

VI. To calculate the Pari of an Exchange, in drawing and remitting (na
Ravaglie) at a certain limited Price, this only is to be observed, that when
we are forced to draw at a disadvantagious Course, we must remit at so much the
more proportionably advantageous Course; and when we cannot remit, but at an
Unprofitable Course, we must see to make so much the more Profit by the Draught.

VII. If any order his Correspondent to remit Moneys to another place, where he
has occasion for it, and to draw the Value upon himself, and will calculate to
how much the Remise will stand him, he must add to the Principal Sum, the
Provision for his Factor, and Courtagie for the Broger, which is, for the
Factor, half per Cent, for the Broger, one per Mill, usually.

VIII. If any will calculate whether it be more profitable to order his
Correspondent to draw upon him directly, or by some other way indirectly and
about, he must also consider, that he has both Provision and Courtagie to pay
to his Correspondent, whom he orders to accept, in case he be ordered to
Revalue the same; but if he remit to his Correspondent, then there is only
Provision, and no Courtagie due; yet the Courtagie must be considered in the
Calculation, because the Principal himself has paid it.

IX. If any will calculate, whether it be more Profitable to let his Effects be
remitted directly, or by some other ways about, he must observe, besides the
Calculation and Equalling of the respective Courses to and fro, if the Remises
are not made directly to himself, that he has double or tribble Provision and
Courtagie to allow, and will lose a considerable time before he get his Moneys;
but if the Remise be direct, or he himself, draw his Moneys in, he has but
single Courtagie and Provision to pay or allow.

X. To calculate the Profit or Loss of a remitted and a redrawn Remise, the
Profit must be diminished, or the Loss augmented, with double Courtagie, viz.
for the Draught, and for the Remise; and when any will caculate what is lost or
profited by a Remise, that is now returned, or to be returned, they must from
the Sum remitted, that is elsewhere to be received, substract the Provision
and Courtagie, and the Remainder is the Apoinctee (the Neat Sum) which must be
reduced according to the Course of Exchange; and then they have the Product of
the Rechange: Let this be compared with the Sum that was first remitted, having
added the Charges thereof thereto, and then it will easily appear, what the
Profit or the Loss was by that Negotiation.

XI. In Calculating, according to Proportion, how much by the hundred is gained
or lost by Exchanges in a Year, in Remises, we cannot always strictly account
of the time, seeing its seldom that the day of Payment, and the Expiration of
the Term of the Bill meet together, nor can the Moneys received be always
again remitted the same day; but in drawing, the Time may be precisely
accounted of and calculated, because Draughts most times, before, and at
farthest, on the last day of the Term are again Re-valued.

XII. If a Factor be drawn upon, with order to re-draw the Value again on the
Principal, or elsewhere, he must charge the Value of the Draught with his
Provision and Courtagie, and the Product is the Neat Sum, that he must charge
him with. On the contrary, when a Factor has Moneys remitted to him, with
orders to remit the same to some other Place, he must from the Sum remitted,
deduct his Provision and Courtagie, and the Remander is the Neat Sum, that he
must remit. So also, when a Factor is ordered to remit to one Place, and to
value on another, he must first remit, and then to the Sum remitted, add his
Provision and double Courtagie, and then he receives the Sum he disbursed. But
if he first have drawn a certain Sum, and then will reckon how much he has to
Remit, then he must from the Sum drawn, deduct his Provision and double
Courtagie, and the Remander is the Neat Sum that he must Remit; which Sum, if
the Exchange be made in a Foreign Denomination of Coin, must be reduced
according to the Course agreed on, to the Value of that Coin that must be
expressed in the Bills of Exchange.

XIII. Provision must as often be reckoned in the Calculation, as it is
Exchanged or Remitted, or turned over; but the Courtagie is allowed to no
Factor, unless he do actually Negotiate the same, either by Drawing or
Remitting.

XIV. In Calculating the Charges of Bills of Exchange, that are protested for
Non-Payment, the Course of the Re-change is reckoned, as it were, the Day, or
the Post day after or before the Bill of Exchange was Protested, at the Place
where it was protested, to the Place whence it came, at sight, and to the Sum
is added, half per Pound for Provision, one per Mill for Courtagie, the
Charges of the Protest, and the Postidge of Letters.

CHAP. V. What a Bill of Exchange is, and what the Drawer before the Delivery
thereof, and the Remitter, before the Receipt thereof, must narrowly observe.
Rule I. THe Drawer is obliged to give to the Remitter, Bills for the Sum
Negotiated.

II. The Drawer ought to observe, before he subscribe the Bill, at least,
before he part with it, and the Remitter before he receive it, at least, before
he send it to the Post, or if he redraw the Value, before he endorse it, or
part with it out of his hands, if it be well and truly made, and all the
necessary Requisits fully expressed in it.

III. A Bill of Exchange is an obligatory Writing, containing, (1.) a Time
When, (2.) the Place Where the same is dispatched, (3.) the Sum, (4.) agreed
on, and ordered, (5.) at a certain Day, (6.) To whom it must be paid, (7.) From
whom (8.) the Value is received, (9.) subscribed by the Drawer, with a
Superscription (10.) to him that shall pay it, and satisfy it, and (11.) the
Place where it shall be satisfied. These are the Requisits of a Bill of
Exchange.

IV. 1st, Both the Parties must observe, that the Bill be rightly dated and
clearly expressed.

V. 2dly, That it name the Place where it was made and concluded on.

VI. 3dly, That the Sum be expressed so clearly, both in Words and Figures, that
no Exceptions can be taken against it.

VII. 4thly, That the Payment thereof be ordered and commanded.

VIII. 5thly, That the time of Payment be not dubiously expressed, nor neither
sooner nor later than the time agreed on.

IX. 6thly, The Remitter must especially observe, that the Name of the Person
to whom Payment must be made, be well and truly Spelled; or if it be made to
his Order, that those words be clearly writ.

X. 7thly, 8thly, He must also observe if his Name be therein, and the Value of
him be expressed.

XI. 9thly, He must observe, that the Bill be under-writ by the Drawer.

XII. 10thly, The Drawer must principally look to the Direction and
Superscription of the Bill, that it be well and truly made, and directed to the
right man.

XIII. 11thly, They must both observe, that the Place wherein the Payment must
be made (and the Coin or Species wherein it must be paid) be fully expressed in
the Superscription, or in the Body of the Bill: And if a Drawer draw upon one
that lives not at the place where the Payment must be made, then must the
Remitter observe, that as well the Place where the Person that must pay lives,
as the place where the Payment must be made, be expressed.

XIV. Here follows the Form of a Bill of Exchange.

York, April 23. Anno 1680. pro 1000 Rixdollar Specie.
AT Usance, Pay this my first Bill of Exchange (my second, of the same date,
being yet Unpaid) to Mr. N.W. or his Order, the Sum of One Thousand specie
Rixdollars, the Value received here of Mr. C.K. Make good Payment, and place it
to Account, according to Advice from

Sir, Yours J.S.

To Mr. N.C. Merchant 1. a. in Hamborough.

XV. Sometimes it falls out, that but one Sola Bill of Exchange is made for one
Parcel, but ordinarily, especially when the Places are of any considerable
Distance, two, and sometimes three must be made, and the first is called Prima,
the second, Secunda, etc.

XVI. A Remitter deals imprudently when he requires or accepts of one Sola Bill
of Exchange for one Parcel, though it be to be paid upon sight, if the Place of
Payment be of any Distance considerable, from the place where the Contract was
made.

XVII. The Drawer is obliged to give the Remitter as many several Bills of
Exchange as the Remitter desires, and to proportion the Sums, according as the
Remitter requires; on the contrary, the Remitter is obliged to receive as many
Bills from the Drawer, and to furnish him with so much Moneys as the Sum agreed
on will amount to.

XVIII. The Drawer deals imprudently when he makes more Bills of Exchange than
one, for one and the same Sum, and of one and the same Import. And in case the
Remitter require of him thus much, then let him make one Bill for the Sum the
Remitter desires, and let him for the other Sum make two Bills, all amounting
to the desired Sum, i.e. If the Remitter would have two 500 Dollar Bills at one
time, let the Drawer make one 500 Dollar Bill, and divide the other 500 Dollars
into two Bills.

XIX. The Drawer must especially observe, that for one and the same Parcel of
Moneys, he make not two Prima's or two Secunda's, but he must observe to
distinguish them clearly, as well in the Body of the Bill, as on the
Superscription.

XX. Its Prudence in a Drawer, when the Remitter requires a Secunda Bill, etc.
and the Drawer is not certain whether he has given him a Secunda or not, to
make a Third or Tertia Bill instead of a Secunda, and so instead of a Tertia a
Quarta, etc.

XXI. The Drawer must also observe, that all the Bills that are for one and the
same Parcel, must bear one and the same date, and must be in every respect
alike; only with this difference, that one is the Prima, another the Secunda,
etc.

XXII. A Drawer may direct his Bills to whom he pleases, that has Authority,
and is obliged to accept them, and by the acceptance obliges himself, yea, on
his own Servant, whom he maintains abroad.

XXIII. A wise Drawer will make no Bills payable at sight, nor at so many
Days, Weeks or Months after the sight.

XXIV. Neither shall he, if he can any way void it, make any Bills payable to
him, on whom he draws, unless he be abundantly satisfied of his Sufficiency and
Faithfulness.

XXV. The Drawer is obliged to accommodate the Remitter, by altering the Bills
when he requires it (though already made according to his order) either by
dividing the Sums, or making them payable to another, in case no man else has
endorsed them, if the Remitter will be at the Charges of Postidge of the
Letters, etc. but if the Bills be accepted or endorsed, the Drawer must be very
cautious in altering any thing.

XXVI. A cautious Drawer will be careful to change or alter in both or all the
Bills, what he changes or alters in one.

XXVII. No Remitter is obliged to receive any Bills from the Drawer, which are
made payable by the Drawer himself, except at the great Marts and Fairs.

XXVIII. When in the concluding of a Parcel, the Broger expressly promises to
the Remitter, that the Drawer shall deliver him Bills, that are drawn, endorsed
or accepted by a known sufficient man; then the Remitter is not obliged to
receive the Drawers own Bills, nor unaccepted Bills, nor any other Bills that
are only endorsed by the Drawer.

XXIX. A Remitter must be cautious in accepting or receiving of accepted Bills
of Exchange, which are made payable to the Order of the Drawer, and endorsed by
him, unless he knew the Drawer to be sufficient.

XXX. He must also be cautious of receiving Bills that are made, drawn or
accepted by a known sufficient man, whose Handwriting he knows, if the
Endorser or the Drawer in of the Value be an unknown Man.

XXXI. A Remitter that must have Bills Payable at sight, is not obliged to
receive Bills whose term of Payment are nearly expired, or will in probability
be expired before the Bills can arrive at the place of Payment; and if he be
blameable at any time for this, its then most of all, when he knows the Post is
very uncertain, by reason of the badness of the ways, or other Inconveniences,
unless the Drawer will sufficiently warrant and ensure him, though Payment
should not be demanded before the Term was wholly expired.

XXXII. Marius's Advice is, that the Drawer when he has made his Bill, should
make the Direction on the inside of it toward the left Hand, that there may be
more room for Endorsment, and for a Receipt or Acquittance.

XXXIII. He advises also, That if it can well be avoided, that never any Bills
should be made Payable to the Bearer, nor to any one Person, naming his Name
(but To him, or his Order) for both these ways are dangerous.

XXXIV. The same Marius adds a Case, which I believe seldom happens, viz. That
both the Drawer should forget to direct, and the Remitter not take notice that
such a Direction was wanting, yet in this case he says, If the Remitter advise
his Correspondent, on whom it was drawn, the Possessor may demand Acceptance,
and in Case of Refusal, Protest, and recover the Charges of the Drawer, against
whom he Protests; yet in this case also, if the Acceptant have a Letter of
Advice, desiring him to accept, and he have in hands to answer with, he may
safely accept, though the Bill be not directed; but the Drawer, for his Error
ought to be Corrected, and that by a Protest.

CHAP. VI. Of Placing Bills of Exchange to Account.
Rule I. EVery Individual, that is concerned in a Bill of Exchange, is obliged
to place so much to Book as he is concerned in it.

II. A Drawer must place to Book exactly and distinctly the Contents and
Circumstances of every Bill, before he make the Bills, or at least, before he
deliver them to the Broger or Remitter, he must note, The Day When, The Place
Whither, The Persons, By Whom, and To Whom Payable, For Whose Accounts, From
Whom the Value, The Time when to be Paid, The Sum, and the Course, etc. that
so, if at any time second, third or fourth Bills should be demanded, they may
all of them be made alike.

III. The Remitter should as soon as he receives the Bills, place them to Book,
at least, before he pay the Value to the Drawer, whether he effectually Remit,
or design to Redraw the Value again.

IV. When the Remitter receives not the Drawer's own Bills, but Bills endorsed
by him, he ought narrowly to observe, What Date they bear, From What Place they
come, and By Whom they were first made, The Sum they are for, and When to be
Paid, and To Whom to be Paid, The Course that he agreed upon, and To Whom the
Bill is Endorsed; and then it will manifestly appear to him, if there be any
Deceit or Abuse in the Endorsing of it, or any other Defect.

V. The Drawer and Remitter should also in some convenient place in the Book,
note the Mackelers or Brogers Name to every Parcel, that in case of any Dispute
or Inconveniency (as also the better to account with the Broger) they may know
with what Broger they concluded.

VI. A Remitter that does not effectually Remit, but designs his Moneys to be
Re-drawn, and therefore orders the Bills to be made Payable to himself, or
Order, would do well, at the side, or under every Parcel, to express the very
Day of Payment, and besides, leave the space of an Inch or more, that so he may
note under it, When he Redrew it, or Transported it, To Whom, and By Whom
Endorsed, and From Whom the Value, etc.

VII. When the Remitter sends his Bill to any, to demand Acceptance, he ought
to note, near the Parcel entered in his Exchange-Book, When, and To Whom he sent
it, and When he receives it again accepted; then may he cancel the former.

VIII. And when Bills are sent to any, to procure Acceptance, with order to
detain them, till the same, with the Endorsed, be demanded, this ought also
carefully to be Booked; and he that receives such a Bill should also observe,
and note, From Whence he received it, and To Whom he delivered it; he ought
also to observe, The Day of Payment, that in case the second or endorsed Bill
come not in time, he may by Virtue of the accepted Bill solliciate the Payment,
by offering sufficient Caution to the Accepter, or (Namptiseren) desire him to
pay the said Moneys to the Magistrates, by them to be kept, or protest in case
of Refusal.

IX. So soon as any receives a Bill of Exchange, at least, before he demand
Acceptance, he ought to Book it, and Note, From Whence it came, By Whom
brought, For Whose Account, In Whose Letter, Of What Date, For What Sum, By
Whose Order, When, and to Whom Payable; and in like manner, when it is an
Endorsed, or a Re-drawn Bill, he must observe, When and Where it was first
concluded, and How, and by Whom it came Endorsed to him; and if the Parcel were
remitted to him for his own Account, he must note the Course it was done at,
and for how much he must Credit his Correspondent for it.

X. When the Letter of Advice expresses, That the Bill is to be paid to the
Remitter, or his (or any other Order) the Acceptant ought to leave a space in
his Book, where he notes the Parcel to note, by whom it was presented to be
accepted, and when the Payment must be made: If he find Endorsement upon
Endorsement, before the Payment be made, he ought to specify all the
Endorsements in his Books, besides the Parcel, one after another, till he come
to the Person to whom the Payment is made.

XI. The Acceptant ought also curiously to observe, and note under the Parcel,
that, and when he accepted the Bill, that if the Drawer has been negligent or
mistaken, and has made two or more diverse Bills of the same Tenure, for one
and the same Sum payable to order, the Acceptant may be cautious in accepting,
and must not only note the Endorsements, if any be found on the Bills that are
presented for Acceptance, but also narrowly observe, whether he accepted the
first or the second Bill, and note it in his Book, lest he should accept two
diverse Bills for one and the same Sum.

XII. The Acceptant should, so soon as he gets Advice, that his Correspondent
has drawn upon him, note the same in his Memorial, viz. From What Place, By
Whom, What Sum, What Date, At What Time, and To Whom, or Whose Order the Bill
is made Payable; and so in case the Bill be for his own account, he must note
in his Book, The Course it was drawn at, and the Sum for which he must Debit
him; and this he should do, extempore, not waiting till the Bill be presented
for acceptance, or Payment be demanded.

XIII. Though it be not absolutely necessary, yet it is not reproveable, if the
Person on whom a Bill is drawn, should note in his Memorial, even those Bills
that he suffers to be protested for Non-Acceptance; but then he must also add,
that he suffered them to be protested for Non-Acceptance.

XIV. He that has a Bill of Exchange in Possession, which was not accepted, or
not at the due time paid, though it was accepted, and so is protested for
Non-Acceptance or Non Payment, must also note in his Memorial, underneath the
Parcel, When, and to Whom he sent the Protest, with or without the Bill of
Exchange. And so, in case a third Person, or he himself accept, and pay the
same Bill, in honor of the Drawer, or of any of the Endorsers, he ought
diligently to note, and observe the same in his Memorial, with all the
Circumstances.

XV. He that does not Voluntarily, but supra protest, in honor of the Drawer,
or any other Person, accept and pay a Bill, must at the entering of the Parcel
to Book, note, For Whose Account he accepted the same; and so when the Bill is
drawn in, not on the Acceptant, but on some other that suffered it to be
protested, the Acceptant supra Protest must make a perfect and complete Entry
thereof, as if the Sum had directly been drawn upon him, to wit, When, By Whom,
What Sum, To Whom, At What Time Payable, and On Whom it was drawn, and that he
accepted the same supra Protest, in honor of the Drawer or some Endorser.

XVI. If a Bill be made payable some time after sight, or at Usance (if Usance
be reckoned after sight) the Acceptant and the Possessor of the Bill, must
enter in their Memorials, the date of the Acceptance, to calculate the day of
Payment by; and it is a good and laudable Custom in all Merchants, as well
Acceptants as Possessors of Bills, to enter underneath, or at the side of the
Entry of the Parcel, the day of its being due, whether the Bill be payable
after sight, after date, or at usance.

XVII. If any receive Advice from his Factor, that his Factor has drawn or
remitted for his account, to some other Place, the Principal should also note
in his Memorial, and distinctly specify, By Whom, From Whence, To What Place,
When, What Sum, At What Course, To Whom the same was remitted, or on Whom
drawn, By What Letter, and of What Date he had Advice thereof; and when he gets
further Confirmation thereof, he must curiously observe, if the first and
second Advice agree, or not.

XVIII. So also, when any draws or remits, or is drawn on, or remitted to by
his Correspondent, by order of a third, for account of a fourth, he also must
in his Memorial, specify all at large, that the Book-keeper may know whom to
debit, and whom to credit in the Journal.

NB, The Entries that are here spoken of, in all the forementioned Cases, are
not to be understood of a formal Journal, or leidger Entry, but only of a plain
Entry into the Waste-Book or Memorial, either by the Merchant himself, or any
of his Servants. And from all this appears sufficiently, that a Merchant ought
to be a diligent and careful Writer.

XIX. If any draw on his own account, upon time, or remit, or orders to be
drawn or remitted on, or to his Correspondent residing in some other place, he
ought to enter in his Memorial, When the same is Payable, that against that
time he may make necessary Provision for the Payment, or to order the further
Disposal of it, and to credit or debit his Correspondent for the same in his
Account current.

XX. He also on whom is drawn, or to whom is remitted, should enter in his
Memorial, The Time of Payment, To Whom, For What Bill, What Sum must be
demanded, or be paid; and so when the Bill is made payable to order, the same
must be expressed, that the Possesser of the Bill, against that time, may advise
the Acceptant, to whom the Bill is to be paid, or the Acceptant enquire, to
whom its payable by the Possessor.

XXI. When a Bill of Exchange is to be entered into the Journal, the Book-keeper
must be careful to find out the true Debtor and Creditor; and if the Bill be
for another account, he need but enter the same, that he receives in that
Species, or denomination of Moneys, wherein he keeps his Books; but if the Bill
be for his own account, then the Product must not only be entered in the Species
and Denomination of Moneys, wherein he keeps his Book, but also in that Coin
and Species wherein he keeps an Account with his Correspondent; and in the
posting of the same into his great Book, or Leidger, the Foreign Coins must
be duly expressed in the Factors; My Account current by him in the Lines, and
the Domestic Coyns or Species in the places appointed for them, that so when
he receives an account current from his Factor, he may readily without
returning to his Journal, compare every Parcel.

XXII. It is a great error in some, when they have negotiated Bills for their
own accounts, to credit their Correspondent instanly for the sums they have
drawn or remitted upon time, as also for the principal to credit or debit the
Correspondents account current, when the Correspondent has drawn or remitted
for his account, on time, so soon as he receives advice of its being done,
though the Moneys is not to be paid or received till some Weeks or Months be
expired; for thereby the account current, which should always be clear and
demonstrative, and show how the account stands with the Correspondent at all
times, is rendered very obscure and confused; wherefore it is necessary that the
Book-keeper enter all Parcels and Bills for proper Accounts, in a general
entry, under the Title of Exchange-Accounts, or some other convenient Title,
and at the time of their being due, or when the Moneys is really received or
paid, then to transport them to their proper places. But if the Bills be
remitted or drawn for another account, then no entry need be made in the
Journal at all, till the time of their being Paid or Received, and then is the
Correspondent's Account current to be credited or debited accordingly.

XXIII. Marius's advice is, not only to note in a Book the Name and Place of
abode of him that presents a Bill to be accepted, but also to keep Cop es of
the Bills that he accepts, and also advises him that gets the Bill accepted,
to keep a Copy thereof. But I can see no necessity hereof, if all Circumstances
be so particularly expressed in the Book.

CHAP. VII. Of Letters of Advice, etc.
Rule I. EVery individual Person, that is any way concerned in a Bill of
Exchange, must be very prompt, exact and quick in advising or returning of
Answers.

II. Above all things, its the duty of the Drawer, without delay, by the first
Post, to give his Correspondent, on whom he draws, advice thereof, that the
Bill be not presented for accep tance, before he has advice thereof.

III. The Letter of advice must be full and clear, containing all the
Circumstances of the Bill, as the Date, the Sum, for whose Account, to whom
Payable, and of whom the Value.

IV. If the Draught be for the account of the Drawer, or of a third Person, and
not for account of the Acceptant, it is not necessary that he advise the
Acceptant of the course, seeing the Sum to be paid is expressed in the Bill, in
the denomination and species of Moneys that is well known at the Place where
payment must be made; but if the sum to be paid, be expressed in a Foreign
denomination of Moneys, then is it absolutely necessary to advise of the
course, according to which the Reduction must be made, as well as of the Sum
drawn, let the Draught be for whose Account it will.

V. The Drawer's Letter of Advice to his Correspondent, on whom he draws,
should desire him to take notice thereof, and to honor the Bill, when
presented with Acceptance, and when demanded with punctual Payment, and to
Debit him for it, or to seek his Re-imbursement, if he draw for a third Person,
of him that gave the Order for his Acceptance of it.

VI. Its also usual for the Drawer by the following Post to confirm the
Draught, etc. and if the Bill be at short sight, and for a considerable Sum, he
would do well to give Advice thereof as many diverse ways as possible he can.

VII. He that Remits must also give his Correspondent punctual Advice, For
whose Account he Remits, what Sum, in whose Bill, of what Date, and when
Payable.

VIII. If the Bill be not yet accepted, the Remitter should desire him to whom
he remits, to procure the Acceptance, and for refusal to observe the Custom of
Exchanges, i.e. to Protest.

IX. If the accepted Bill be in the Hands of any (at the place where payment is
to be made) that demanded Acceptance, and the unaccepted endorsed Bill does not
mention in whose Hands it is, then the Remitter ought in his Letter of Advice,
to give notice by whom the accepted Bill lies.

X. The Remitter must be careful to send his Bills to those that will demand
Acceptance, and advise him to whom they are made payable, or endorsed, and
should be careful to enclose such Bills to no other, but to him that must
demand Acceptance.

XI. If the Remitter receive two Bills together (i. e. prima and secunda) for
one and the same Sum, he must not enclose them together in one Letter, nor send
them in diverse Letters by one Post; but send the one by one Post, and the other
by the next, that if one miscarry, or fall into wrong Hands, the other may be
secured and sent to the true Correspondent, to demand Acceptance and Payment.

XII. If the Remitter has but one single accepted Bill, or if the accepted
Bill remain at the place where it ought to be discharged, and so the Remitter
has but one Bill to send, then its necessary that the Remise be confirmed by
the following Post, and clearly and fully expressed in a Letter of Advice, that
if the Bill should miscarry, the Person to whom it was remitted, may by virtue
of the Letter of Advice make his Address to the Person, who should have
accepted and paid the Bill, and forbid him to pay any such Bill to any Person
but himself; and if none appear before the Day of Payment, he then may demand
Payment of it by virtue of the Letter of Advice, and persuade him to pay the
Moneys to him upon caution, etc. or on refusal hereof, Protest against him.

XIII. A Remitter or Drawer, for the account of a third, must also give
punctual and full Advice to him for whose Account a Bill is drawn or remitted,
adding also the Course, and for how much he has Debited or Credited his
Account.

XIV. Its the Duty of the Acceptant, to return an Answer to the Drawer, whether
he will accept of the Bill, when presented, according to the Letter of Advice
he has received; and if he make any difficulty about the Acceptance, he ought
speedlly to give the Drawer advice thereof, and not to wait till the Bill be
returned with Protest.

XV. He that accepts a Bill supra Protest, whether it be the first designed
Acceptant or not, he must speedily, without delay, give advice thereof to him
in whose honor he accepted it, and send him therewith the Protest.

XVI. If the designed Acceptant accept it but supra Protest, its not necessary
that the Possessor of the Bill advise the Remitter thereof; but if the
Acceptance be made by another, then its best to advise him, that it was
accepted supra Protest, and by whom.

XVII. He on whom is drawn, for the account of a third, must also give an
account to him for whose account it is, By whom, What Sum, and at what Time
Payable is drawn upon him, and whether he has or will honor the Bills for his
Account or not.

XVIII. The Person to whom is remitted must also advise him, For whose account
is remitted to him, of the Remise, and of the necessary Circumstances; and
whether the Bills are or will be accepted or not.

XIX. If no punctual Advice can be given, whether the Bills will be accepted or
not, because the Acceptant is abroad, lives not in Town, cannot be met with, or
is suspected, and cannot be found, etc. the remitted ought to give Advice
hereof to the Remitter, and to him for whose account it is; and if afterward
it be accepted, he must advise them both, That it is accepted; yet this last
Advice may be spared, if the fust Advice be full and clear, expressing, That
Acceptance will be demanded; and if not accepted, The Persons concerned may
expect to hear of a Protest; so that if the next Post bring no Protest, they
may both conclude, that the Bill is accepted.

XX. If a Bill be not accepted, but protested, then the Protester is obliged to
give Advice thereof to the Remitter, without delay, and should send him the
Protest. And in case the Bill be payable to order, and comes Originally from
some other place, than whence he received it, the Protester does act prudently,
if he advise the first Remitter thereof.

XXI. When a Bill is discharged and satisfied, for whose account soever it be,
its the Duty of the Payer and Receiver, each of them to advise those that are
concerned therein, respectively, except the Draught or Remise be for the
account of the Acceptant, or the Remitted, then its not usual, though very
convenient it would be, to give advice of the Discharge thereof.

XXII. If any give order to draw upon a third Person, for his account, he ought
at the same time to advise the third Person, That he has given such order, and
to whom, and for what Sum, and desire him to accept the Bills of his
Correspondent; and signify to him, how he must place it to Account, or be
Re-imbursed, by redrawing, etc. This he must do, lest the Bills be drawn before
the third Person have order from the Principal to accept them.

XXIII. He that is fore-advised, that he will be drawn upon, ought instantly to
return an Answer, whether he has taken notice thereof, and will accept and
honor the Bills, or not.

XXIV. In like manner, if any give order to another, to remit for his account,
to a third, he must also advise the same third Person, before the Remises come
to his hands, that he has given such orders (especially if the same are to be
made at short sight) and how he will have them disposed of; and its the Duty of
this third Person to return an Answer, That he has received, and will, or will
not observe his orders.

XXV. If a Factor, Correspondent, or Principal, etc. advise his principal
Correspondent or Factor, That he will accept such and such Draughts, for such
and such Accounts, but afterward refuses to accept those Bills, and returns
them on the Drawer with Protest, it is but just and equal, that he that
promised acceptance, and refused it, should be oliged to make good all the
Loss, whatever it be, and make satisfaction for the Damage done to the Credit
of the Drawer.

XXVI. If the Letter of Advice disagree with the Bill, in respect of the Sum,
or the Sum expressed in Figures in the Bill, with the Sum expressed at length in
the body of the Bill, yet that sum is to be followed that is expressed at length,
according to Marius his Advice; and if the Accepter will not accept for that
Sum, the Possessor may and must Protest.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Payment of the Value by the Remitter to the Drawer.
Rule I. IN Exchanging, Credit must be given; but the Drawer had need observe
to whom he gives credit, that he give not his Bills to him that cannot or will
not pay the value; and the Remitter had need observe, whom he credits, that he
give not his Moneys to one that cannot or will not pay the Bills: so that the
one as well as the other, must be careful, and enquire into each others
Sufficiency.

II. Bills are sometimes given by one, who himself will discharge them;
sometimes are charged on a Debtor, who is to discharge them: Whereof afterward
shall be spoken.

III. The value of a Bill is ordinarily paid in ready Moneys; and if the Drawer
be satisfied with any thing else, it is reckoned for, and as ready Moneys.

IV. All Bills of Exchange, that are negotiated or concluded at Amsterdam or
Hamborough (or any other place where a Bank is erected) are payable in Bank, if
they exceed a certain limited Sum, upon Penalty, that such Bills exceeding
that Sum, not paid in Bank, shall be adjudged as not satisfied, and of
forfeiture of a certain Sum to the Bank, besides by those that act contrarily;
nor must the Brogers suffer themselves to be employed about any Bills exceeding
that Sum, to be payable out of Bank, or to act any thing to defraud or evade
the said Statute and Order, by dividing the sums and lessening them, that they
may be made payable out of Bank, upon penalty of incurring the hazard of being
suspended and deprived of their Office and Employment.

NB, It is but reasonable and equal, that in all places, where a Bank is
erected, all Bills should be paid in Bank; and so long as there was no
difference betwixt Bank and Current Moneys, this order was observed at
Amsterdam, etc. but in regard now at Amsterdam, etc. there is three or four in
the hundred difference betwixt Bank and Current Moneys, in respect of the
Value, therefore it is scarce practicable now for Merchants and Shopkeepers to
observe this order, especially for those that have their Correspondence in the
chief Cities of Holland, Westphalia, in Sweeden, Denmark, or other places on
the Baltique Sea, seeing all Bills to those places are concluded for, and in
current Moneys, because those that are Inhabitants in other places, are only
indebted to their Creditors in Amsterdam current Moneys, and do know of no
Aggio or Vp-Moneys, and would always suspect to be cheated or overreached, if
any thing of this nature should be imposed upon them; but by erecting a Bank
current, this inconvenience might be prevented.

V. Notwithstanding, that ordinarily in Bills of Exchange, its said, that the
Value is received already, yet ordinarily the Value is not paid by the Remitter
to the Drawer, till two or three days after the Delivery of the first Bill,
and may in time enough be paid by the Remitter, at any time betwixt and the
next Post.

VI. But a Remitter must not, cannot delay the Drawer any longer than till the
next Post, unless it were expressly conditioned, that some time should be given
for the Payment of the Value; if he do, then may the Drawer forbid the Payment
of his Bills, and demand satisfaction of the Remitter.

VII. If a Remitter condition for time, for the Payment of the Value, till he
has advice of the Acceptance of the Bills, then is it necessary that he make
those conditions with the Drawer himself, and not rely on the Mediation of the
Broger.

VIII. If a Remitter has conditioned, not to pay the Value, till he has
advice of the Acceptance, he is (if the Bill be protested for Non-Acceptance)
not obliged to pay the Value; but if it be accepted, though but by one, whose
sufficiency is suspected, yet he is bound to pay the Value.

IX. The Payment of the Value of a Bill, drawn by A. as having a Procuration or
full Power from B. must not be made to A. but must in Bank be writ to the
account of B. as the Principal Drawer; and A. must be obliged to make his full
Power appear, and so in the Name of the Principal must receive the Value, and
discharge the Remitter.

X. A prudent Remitter will not pay the Value of a Bill, but upon an
Assignation or Acquittance from the Drawer, expressly signifying, That the same
is in Payment of the Value of such a Bill; and this is to be observed as well
in the Payment by Bank, as in current Moneys.

XI. A prudent Remitter will not offer to pay by Cash, or in current Moneys,
what he is obliged to pay in Bank, without Acquittance or Assignation, because
such Payment is not satisfactory, and contrary to order.

XII. If the Value of a Bill, either in Bank or Current Moneys, be paid to the
Drawer, by any other than the Remitter, for the Remitter's account, or by his
Order, in case it appear not that such Monyes is paid to the Drawer, upon the
Remitter's account, and by his order; the Drawer would act very cautiously and
prudently, if he demanded a Note under the Payer's hand, signifying, By whose
Order, and For whose account he makes such Payment.

CHAP. IX. Of Negotiating, Drawing, in or Endorsing of Bills, made Payable to
Order.
Rule I. ITs unadvisedly done for a Drawer, if he can any way excuse it, to
make his Bills payable to order.

II. And a Remitter for his own account, does not act prudently, that orders
his Bills to be made payable to the order of his Correspondent, or that does
himself so endorse them, if the Correspondent live at the place where the Bill
is to be satisfied.

III. A Remitter that remits for another man's account, does very imprudently,
if he order the Bills to be paid to his own Order, and so endorseth them; for
then he himself stands obliged for the Value, without having any Advantage
thereby.

IV. Also, he that remits for another man's account, should not make the Bills
payable to his own order, and so endorse them; for then he makes them his own
Bills, and is obliged to answer the Rechange, and the Charges, etc. but if he
order the Bills to be made payable to his Principal, or his Order, then he is
obliged for no more than the Sum he received, and may place that Rechange and
Charges to the Principal's Account.

V. He that remits to a third, for the account of another, the third Person
dwelling where the Bill is to be discharged, must not order the Bills to be
made payable to the order of him to whom he remits, unless the Principal has
given express order so to do.

VI. If any remit for their own account, with a design to redraw the same
himself, or order it to be redrawn by some other, in some other place, or for
some other account, etc. then they must observe this, to order the Bills to be
made payable (or so endorse them) to their own order, or to the order of him
that shall redraw them; for none can negotiate or redraw a Bill of Exchange,
except it be made payable to his order who must negotiate it, because a Bill
made expressly payable to any one, must be paid to him, and no other.

VII. In the Redrawing of a Bill, the Redrawer is looked upon, as the absolute
and first Drawer, and the Remitter considered as the first Remitter; so that
the Endorser of a Bill is as strictly obliged as the first Drawer and Maker of
it, and the Possessor thereof has as much Right and Law against him, as
against the first Drawer.

VIII. The Redrawer or the Negotiator of a Bill, does not make a new Bill, but
endorseth the old, in such like words as these, Pay this for me to A. A. (or to
his order) the value hereof in my own hands ( or from B. B. or, etc.) C. C.

IX. By this Endorsement, he to whom the Bill is sent, is the true and right
Possessor of it, and needs no further Assignation, Transport, or any other
Title or Right, neither need he give the Drawer or the Accepter any further
account of it, viz. how he comes by the Bill.

X. And thus, when the Endorsement is made payable to order, he to whom it is
endorsed as payable, may again endorse it, and so may as often be endorsed as
there is room on the Bill for Endorsements.

XI. The Acceptant himself, as well as any other, may freely negotiate those
Bills of Exchange that are by him accepted for his own account, if they be made
payable to order, by the first Possessor or Endorser of them; and he may again
endorse them, and negotiate them, and make them payable to his (the Acceptants)
order, and yet all this time the first Endorsers shall be never the less
obliged.

XII. If the Endorsement have no more than, Pay for me to N. N. and it be not
expressed from whom the Value was received, or was rescounted, then its looked on
as no more than a single order, and the Endorser is considered still as the
Principal Possessor of the Bill.

XIII. In all Endorsements, the place where, and the time when it was done,
ought also to be expressed; and above all, the Endorser must observe to subscribe
his Name.

XIV. He that Antidates an Endorsement, is guilty of fraud and deceit.

XV. A Remitter that has an endorsed Bill put into his hands, must observe if
the Bill itself be well made, and be complete in all its Requisits, as if he
himself were the first Remitter; but especially, he must observe, if in the
Endorsement, the Name of him, to whom it must be paid, be well and truly writ.

XVI. A Redrawer or Endorser does very imprudently, if he deliver into the
hands of his Remitter, with whom he contracted, Bills that he has by him
endorsed in blanco.

XVII. But yet greater is the hazard and folly of the Endorser, to send away
Bills with a blanco Endorsement; and yet greater is the Error, when he that
sends the Bills away, and the Endorser, are two distinct Persons.

XVIII. He also is very careless and ignorant, that sends away a Bill of
Exchange made payable to his order, with a design to redraw the Moneys, or to
demand Payment, and does not first endorse his Bills.

XIX. If an Endorser commit any Error in the endorsing, or has neglected any
thing, so that there is likely damage to follow upon it, then the said Endorser
is obliged to make good the Loss, and neither the Endorsers before nor after
him, are any ways chargeable with it.

XX. The Endorser must bind himself precisely to the tenure of the Bill, both
as to the Sum and Time of Payment.

XXI. If the Endorser cannot meet with a Remitter, for the Neat and precise
Sum, then if he meet with two Remitters, its observed if he has both the Bills
(the Prima and Secunda) in his Hands, that he ought to Endorse them both, on
the one, so much to A. the value of B. and the rest on C. the value of D. and
so gives to B. and D. each one Bill; Or in case he find but Moneys for a part
at one time, and has time enough to keep the Bill to seek for more, then he
endorseth both Bills, to pay so much to E. the value of F. and the rest to his
order, and gives one Bill to F. and keeps the other till further convenience.
But if there be but one Bill in the Endorsers hands, and he negotiates the Bill
with two Persons, then he must endorse that Bill he has, and take the Copy of
it, and endorse it also, so much payable to one, the rest to another; and the
original Bill must be delivered to him that has the greater Sum, and the Copy
to the other, who must receive the rest.

CHAP. X. Of demanding Acceptance.
Rule I. ACceptance of a Bill, may presently, upon the Receipt thereof, be
demanded by the Possessor thereof, except it be only payable at some great
Fair, and then Acceptance is not demanded till the Fair begin.

II. Any one to whom the Bill is entrusted, as well as the Remitter, or the
actual Possessor thereof, may demand Acceptance.

III. Its the Duty of every one, to whom a Bill is sent to procure Acceptance,
instantly to demand it.

IV. Acceptance must be demanded of him only, to whom the Bill is directed. And

V. It stands in the pleasure of him, to whom the Bill is directed, to accept
it, or not; The Principal is not bound to accept his Factor's or Servant's
Bill, unless he will; much less a Factor or Servant to accept their Principal's
Bills.

VI. Though the designed Acceptant has by Letter advised of, and promised
Acceptance, for the account of a third Person, yet the Possessor of the Bill
cannot compel him by virtue of his Promise to accept, if he will not
voluntarily do it: But however, he remains obliged to the Drawer, to make good
all the loss and damage, either in the Exchange and Charges, or in credit of
the Drawer, seeing he drew relying on the Faithfulness and Promise of the
promised Acceptance.

VII. To accept a Bill of Exchange, is to oblige himself to the Payment and
Discharge thereof; and he that accepts must discharge it; for by Acceptance he
makes himself Debtor; and if the Drawer should chance to fail, before it be
discharged, the Acceptant must notwithstanding satisfy it, and can have no
redress on the Endorsers.

VIII. Acceptance is either Verbal, or by Writing.

IX. A Verbal Acceptance is obligatory to the performance, and the Acceptant
must perform his Promise; but in regard verbal Acceptance may be denied,
therefore its safest to have the Bill underwritten by the Acceptant.

X. Acceptance by Writing is done either by a Letter, or by the Acceptants
under-writing the Bill.

XI. If the designed Acceptant do by Letter advise the Possessor of the Bill,
That he will accept, and does accept of it, it is as obligatory, as if he had
under-writ it with his own hand.

XII. The Acceptant, when he accepts, must under-write his Name, and the time
when he accepts, thus; [York, April 28. 1680. Accepted, J. S.] Which if he
refuse to do, the Possessor may protest, as if Acceptance were utterly denied.

XIII. Acceptance of Bills payable at a certain day, or at some time after
date, or at Usance, reckoned at some time after date, and all other Bills thus
reckoned, must have the word [Accepted] but if payable after sight, then some
use the word [ Seen, or shown me] adding the day when, or both, as [Seen and
Accepted.]

XIV. Its customary in some places, that he that demands acceptance of a Bill,
leaves the same in the hands of the designed Acceptant (unless he presently
declare whether he will accept it or not) till he compare it with his Letter of
Advice, and to give his Rosolution, and note it in his Memorial; but then,
before the return of the Post, he demands it again, and a positive Answer; and
in case he refuse Acceptance, in manner and form above, he instantly, without
delay, causes it to be protested.

XV. Bills that are payable per Cash, or in current Moneys, ought presently,
without delay, to be accepted, such Bills ought not to be entrusted with the
Acceptant, especially if payable to order.

XVI. He that receives a Bill, without declaring positively whether he does
accept it or not, and detains the same till there are some evil Reports spread
abroad concerning the Drawer, is obliged to return the Bill to the Possessor
instantly, that it may appear whether he has accepted it or not.

XVII. If a Bill by negligence, or on design, is left in the hands of the
Acceptant, till the day of Payment, or till evil and bad Reports are divulged
of, and concerning the Drawer, and that the designed Acceptant has not
promised Acceptance; in such a case, the designed Acceptant cannot be compelled
to discharge the said Bill, on pretense that he should have returned the Bill,
if he would not have accepted it; for it is the Duty of the Possessor, to take
care for his Bill, and to see that the same be either accepted or protested;
and if the designed Acceptant has not underwritten it, nor promised
Acceptance, he is not obliged, nor can be compelled; but yet it had been
prudence in him, presently and without delay to have returned the Bill to the
Possessor, and declared, that he would not accept it.

XVIII. He that receives a Bill payable at sight, or some days after sight,
etc. and detains the same by him some days, without declaring whether he will
accept it or no, is obliged, if he afterward resolve to accept it, to accept
it from the day that it was presented to him.

XIX. In case a Bill payable at a Month after sight, be presented for
Acceptance the last day of the Month, he may accept it that day, and it will
not be payable till the last day of the next Month.

XX. Though the Acceptant has accepted the Bills drawn on him, yet the Drawer
is still obliged, till it be paid; but he that accepts a Bill of Exchange, is
obliged to the performance, so long till it be satisfied; no length of time,
nor negligence in demanding can weaken, or make void the obligation; and in
that respect, an Acceptant is more obliged than the Drawer; for if the Bill be
not satisfied within the limited time, and the Possessor neglects to protest
for Nonacceptance, he thereby loses the advantage of seeking his Redress on
the Drawer, but not on the Acceptant.

XXI. A Remitter acts prudently, if without delay he demand Acceptance, seeing
delay may breed danger, and suspicious Reports concerning the Drawer being
spread abroad, may cause the Acceptant to refuse Acceptance of his Bills, which
before he would have done, if the Acceptance had instantly been demanded; and
if by Fraud, or some other Abuse one Bill should twice be drawn in, he that
demands Acceptance first, and gets it, shall oblige the Acceptant to make
Payment, whereas the other that has delayed, must seek his Redress on the
Endorser, and the case may be as it will, having once got acceptance, then the
Remitter has two obliged for the Payment, whereas otherwise he has but one.

XXII. It tends also very much to the security and peace of the Drawer, whether
it be for his own or for some other account, that always, especially when the
Bill is payable at sight, or some Days, or Weeks, or Months after sight, or
at usance (when usance is reckoned after sight) the Acceptance be procured
without delay, for otherwise he can make no true account when his Bills are
due, and when payable; and in all cases, the Acceptance is an Obligation and
Security to the Drawer as well as to the Remitter.

NB, That as in most places it is ordered by the Magistrate in how many days
after a Bill is due, it ought to be protested, if not paid, so also it ought to
be ordered in how many days after the offering of the Bills the Acceptance
should be demanded, and when to be protested for Non-Acceptance, and the Drawer
should be advised thereof, upon penalty, that by neglect or delay the Possessor
of the Bill, or the Remitter, should loose the liberty of seeking redress on
the Drawer, as well as for neglect of protesting for Non-Payment till it be too
late.

XXIII. Every Remitter that remits not directly, but designs to draw in the
remitted Sum again, either by himself, or others residing in other places,
ought to send the prima Bill directly to the place where Acceptance must be
demanded; and then, in case he order the accepted Bill to be left in the hands
of the Person that demanded acceptance, he may endorse the secunda Bill, but he
must not forget to advise in whose hands the accepted Bill remains, and of whom
it must be demanded.

XXIV. When the Remitter sends his Bill away to demand acceptance, he ought
expressly to order his Friend, whether he shall keep it by him, or return it to
him again when accepted, or send it to any other Person; or, if he must keep
it, whether he must deliver it to him that shall show him the endorsed Bill.

XXV. A Drawer acts prudently when he fears or doubts whether his Bill will be
accepted or no, that he recommend the same to some of his Correspondents
residing at the place where it should be accepted and paid, to prevent the
dispect and dishonor of his Bill; and if the Bill be made payable to order, he
ought to give the Remitter notice to whom the Possessor shall address himself,
in case the Person on whom the Bill is drawn deny to honor and accept it.

XXVI. When a Bill is presented for Acceptance, the Acceptant should, before he
declare whether he will accept or no, take special heed and care that the Bill
presented be of the same tenure with the Letter of Advice; for he that simply
accepts a Bill must pay it, no exception being able to excuse him afterward.

XXVII. What is once accepted can no way be dissanulled and made void; an
Acceptant is obliged to the Payment, though he never had in his hands, nor
perused the Bill, if it can be made appear that he in words accepted it;
wherefore the Acceptant should be careful, and accept no Bills but such as he
will pay.

XXVIII. As the Acceptant is free to accept, or not accept any Bills, for whose
account soever offered, so its free for him to accept freely, or supra Protest
simply, or with any limitation or condition.

XXIX. But a prudent Possessor of the Bill will accept of no conditional or
limitative Acceptance, whereby either the Payment is prolonged or made
difficult, or the tenure of the Bill any way altered, unless he have express
order from the Drawer and Remitter so to do, but will protest against the
Acceptant, as if he had absolutely refused to accept it; for whoever does
otherwise, and suffers himself to be satisfied with a conditional Acceptance,
must run the risco, and hazard himself.

XXX. If a Bill be drawn to Thomas, John and Richard, they not being Partners,
nor one any way obliged to another, every one must accept for his proportion,
and for as much as he will pay, and so none of them are obliged in solidum, and
the Possessor must be content with such an Acceptance; but in case they
altogether accept not for the full Sum, then he may and must protest against
them all in particular, though one or two of them have accepted for their full
Proportion.

XXXI. An Acceptant should be careful, and not accept any Bills, not having
advice thereof from the Drawer, or at least, not accept any such but supra
Protest in honor of the Drawer, though he have order from a third Person, that
if such a Sum or greater be drawn for his account, to accept of it.

XXXII. Nor should he accept Bills that are of a later date than the Letters of
Advice he has received from his Correspondent the same Post; neither, in case
the Letters do not mention nor confirm such a Draught of such a date, though
the Letter of Advice be delivered him of the same date with the Draught, should
he accept thereof; for the Advice and the Bills should punctually agree.

XXXIII. Nor should he accept of any Bills subscribed by any that pretend to
have Order and full Power from another, unless he know his Seal and
Handwriting, and the Principal has given advice that he has given Order and
full Power to such and such a Person, for such and such ends.

XXXIV. He must also be careful in accepting any Bill, if he suspect or believe
that he has accepted one of the same tenure, and for the same Sum, and must
not accept of the last Bill, but under Protestation, that such his Acceptance
shall be void and null, if it be found that he has accepted another of the
same tenure, and for the same Sum.

XXXV. A Servant must be careful in accepting Bills that his Master draws upon
him; for if he accept in his own Name, he obliges himself Personally, as for
his own Debt, and as if the Bill were for his own account, (though he do no
business but his Masters) but then the effects he has of his Masters in his
hands are obliged for the same, for so far as they reach, and if they are not
sufficient, he must debit his Master for the rest; wherefore let a Servant when
he underwrites Bills for his Masters accounts (accepted for his Masters
account) and then underwrite his own Name.

XXXVI. The usual Formality that Servants use in accepting Bills of Exchange,
viz. that he accepts of the Bill, as having Order and full Power from his
Master to that end, who is the Drawer, will not excuse him, if the Bill be made
for his own account, but if the Bill be made for the account of his Master, and
the Servant accept it on such terms, then that Acceptance would not oblige him,
but his Master only.

XXXVII. If any Factor or Correspondent desire his Principal or Correspondent
to draw a certain Sum of Moneys on him, and promise Acceptance of the said
Bills, but when the Bills come, refuses to accept and honor them, such a
Factor is not only a Knave, let his excuses and pretenses be what they will,
but he ought to be obliged to accept the said Bills, if they be according to
his order, and not only make satisfaction for the loss and charges, but also to
the Drawer for the discredit done to his Reputation, and to be punished
severely for his Knavery besides.

XXXVIII. Marius's advice is, that if a Bill be drawn on two, or more, they
ought all to accept, or upon refusal, the Bill for want of due acceptance, must
be protested.

XXXIX. But if a Bill be drawn on two or more, and it be thus expressed, To A. B.
and C. D. or either of them, its being accepted by either of them is sufficient.

XL. If a Name in the Bill be mended or enterlin'd, the Merchant on whom its
drawn does not well if he accept such a Bill, but if he does accept it, he is
obliged to pay it, and that a Name is mended or interlin'd, is no sufficient
excuse nor legal warrant to refuse the Payment when it falls due.

CHAP. XI. Of Protesting for Non-Acceptance.
Rule I. IF a Bill be presented for Acceptance, and the Acceptant refuse
absolutely to accept it, then the Possessor of the Bill is obliged instantly
without delay to make Protest for Non-Acceptance.

II. If the Acceptant cannot presently declare whether he will accept or no,
but promises shortly to do it, or at the return of the next Post, then the
Possessor of the Bill may without any Prejudice, at the request of the
Acceptant wait some days, or till the next Post day, and need not protest, yet
if he will not wait so long, he is not obliged thereto, but may if he will
instantly protest, notwithstanding the request, pretenses and excuses of the
Acceptant.

III. As the Acceptance of a Bill may be demanded by any Person whatsoever that
has the Bill in his hands, so also in case of Non-Acceptance, any Person
whatsoever may protest, though his Name be not in the Bill, nor in the
Endorsments.

IV. Protest is ordinarily made by a Notary Public in the presence of two
credible Witnesses, either in the presence of the designed Acceptant himself in
any place, or at his House or Lodging where the Notary Public shows the Bill,
and demands Acceptance; and in case of refusal, he protests for all Charges,
Loss and Interest, Exchange and Rechange, etc.

NB, At Venice all protests are made by the Servants of the College of
Commerce, and they are all particularly Registered in a Book for that purpose,
to which every Merchant has free access, which is a very commendable Order,
for by this means many Bills (that otherwise would be returned protested) are
accepted supra Protest in honor of the Drawer or Endorser; and also, by this
means is (many times) discovered the difference that the Merchants have of
their Foreign Correspondents, and in case of Protests for Non-Payment, their
insufficiency, or at least, the baseness of the Acceptant, which tends much to
their advantage, whereby they can regulate their concerns the better; and such
an Order in all places of Exchange would be very profitable and advantageous to
Commerce, as if here in England an Office of Protests were erected, and that
none might make Protests but they that are authorized thereto, and that none
might make full Powers, or Letters of Attorney to any to draw, or accept Bills
in the Names of others, but they or their Order, and should keep Registers
thereof, to which every one should have free access; here also should all full
Powers given by any be revoked, and the time of the Revocation registered; and
here also may Acceptants see if any Bills of theirs made payable to order, be
entered to be protested on the last day of Payment, for Non-Payment, and so come
to know where the Bill is to be found, and who is the Possessor of it, and so
prevent the Protesting of it, under the pretense of the Acceptants having no
order to make Payment, when the reason of the delay is, because he knows not
(...) whom to pay it: These also may be ordered, in case any Bills be protested
for Non-Acceptance, that are redrawn and endorsed by others, etc. to give
Advice thereof to the first Remitter, or the first Drawer, whereby many
Inconveniences and much Loss may be prevented.

V. If the Notary Public meet the Acceptant, and he absolutely refuse to
accept, then its usual for the Notary to demand the Reasons thereof, which
Reasons he is obliged to insert in the Protest.

VI. If the designed Acceptant would not formally affront the Drawer, he may
(and it is usual) give such Reasons for his refusal that tend least to his
discredit, of which the most usual are, Because he has no advice thereof, or
He himself will advise the Drawer of the Reasons, or For want of order from the
third Person, for whose account the Bill is.

VII. Its no lawful Excuse to refuse Acceptance because the Bill is made
payable to order, and is not endorsed, or because the Acceptant will know
before he accept, to whom it is payable.

VIII. Nor is it a lawful Excuse to pretend, That he has accepted the other
Bill, and that he will not accept two Bills for one Sum and Parcel; for the
Acceptance can be made with this condition, That the same shall be of no effect
if he have accepted one of the Bills already.

IX. A Possessor of a Bill may protest against a limited and conditional
Acceptance, as also against an Acceptance without date and Subscription of the
Name of the Acceptant, as if the Acceptance had been absolutely refused.

X. If an Acceptant make any Difficulties simply to accept the Bill, and the
Possessor will accept of no conditional Acceptance, and therefore protests, and
the Acceptant gives for Answer, That he is ready and willing to accept the same
for a longer time, or For a less Sum, or with some other Conditions, he should
do well and prudently to add thereto, On condition the Demander of Acceptance
will instantly and presently declare whother he will accept of such an
Acceptance or not; and in case he be silent to protest formally, that he will
not be obliged to this Acceptance for the future.

XI. If the Notary find not the Acceptant at Home, nor can meet with him in any
other place, then he does his business effectually, if he demand acceptance of
the Acceptant's Wife, or of Father or Mother, Sister or Brother, Man Servant or
Maid Servant, or any other in the House; and if none be at Home, if he relate
the matter to any of his Neighbors, and express the same at large in the
Protest.

XII. If the Acceptant be abroad, and has left no Order, nor given any full
Power to any to accept the Bills that are drawn on him, then the Possessor of
the Bill need not wait till his return Home, but must Protest for
Non-Acceptance at the House of the said Acceptant, or at his Lodgings.

XIII. If the Acceptant is not known, nor can be found, then the Notary ought
to go to the Post House, or some other place where he can conveniently enquire
of him; and if for all this he cannot find him, he must then protest, and
insert in the Protest how diligent he was to find him out.

XIV. If two Persons of one and the same Name live in the same Town, and the
Possessor knows not which of them the Bill is directed to, if they both refuse
Acceptance, he is obliged to protest against both.

XV. A Protest for Non-Acceptance need not necessarily be made at the place
where the Bill is to be paid, but may be made at the place where the Acceptant
lives, and in any place whatsoever where the Acceptant may be found.

XVI. In every Protest, either above or at the end thereof, or in the middle
thereof, the Bill of Exchange that is protested, must be Transcribed and
Copied, together with the Superscription, and all the Endorsements (from word
to word) if there be any, and it must be expressed thus, that This is the Copy of
the Original Bill that is protested, whereof Acceptance was demanded, but
refused; and then what answer the Acceptant further gave to the Demanders of
Acceptance.

XVII. Marius his advice is, Presently upon the refusal of Acceptance to enter
the Protest, at least, there is no necessity of giving three days, or one
hours respit to consider on it, whether the Accepter will resolve to accept or
no.

XVIII. Yet at the request of a known honest Merchant some time may be given,
provided the answer and resolution whether he will accept or no, be given
before the next Post (after the Receipt of the Bill) be ready to depart, that
so the Possessor of the Bill may advise whether he has protested or no.

XIX. If the Party that accepted the Bill dye before it be due at the appointed
time of Payment, the Possessor must make demand of his Executors,
Administrators, etc. at the last dwelling House of the Acceptant; and if they
do not presently pay, then must a Protest be entered, as you would have done if
the Acceptant had been living.

XX. If the Party to whom payable should dye before the Bill fall due, yet
nevertheless the Moneys and Payment must be demanded at the time by one or
other, and if the Party demanding in the Name of the deceased shall offer
sufficient Security to the Acceptant, and it be refused, Protest must be entered
against him.

CHAP. XII. Of Acceptance of Bills of Exchange supra Protest.
Rule I. IF an Acceptant scruple to give Acceptance, for the account of him for
whose account the Letter of Advice says it is drawn; or if for want of advice,
he know not for whose account it is drawn, then he may, if he look upon the
Drawer as sufficient, accept the said Bill supra Protest in honor of the
Drawer, and for his account.

II. Though it is not usual to make a formal Notarial Protest upon an
Acceptance supra Protest, for want of advice, but only clearly to express at
the Acceptance, that it is supra Protest accepted, yet its better, and the
Acceptant acts more prudently and safely, when he is not fully assured of the
Sufficiency and Honesty of the Drawer, that he cause the Bill to be formally
protested, or at least, that he cause a Notary Public to observe and note,
that the Acceptance is not simply given, but supra Protest.

III. When a Bill is made payable to order, and endorsed by a sufficient man
before acceptance be demanded, then if the Acceptant scruple to accept for the
account of the Drawer, or for the account of him for whose account it is drawn,
he may supra Protest accept it in honor of the Endorser.

IV. When the Acceptant does thus accept supra Protest in honor of the
Endorser, he must cause a formal Protest first to be made for Non-Acceptance,
and is obliged without delay to send the said Protest to the said Endorser for
whose honor and account he has accepted it.

V. An acceptance supra Protest obliges the Acceptant absolutely to the
Payment as much as if there had been no Protest, for its all one to the
Possessor of the Bill, for whose account it be accepted, if it be accepted at
all, and the Possessor has his redress and remedy as sufficiently as ever on
all the Endorsers and Drawers, if the Payment be not punctually made at the day
by the Acceptant.

VI. A Possessor of a Bill must be satisfied and contented with an acceptance
supra Protest (for it concerns not him in the least whether the Acceptant give
a simple acceptance, or an acceptance supra Protest, seeing the Acceptant must
pay the Charges to the Notary Public) except he had order from the Remitter,
not to accept of such an acceptance; and then in case of refusal of a simple
Acceptance, he must and may protest.

VII. When an Acceptant has accepted a Bill supra Protest, and the Possessor
of the Bill is not satisfied with it, and by the Notary Public and Witnesses,
demands a simple Acceptance, or upon refusal makes a Protest, then the
Acceptant (if he be resolved not to accept simply and freely) does act
prudently and wisely if he renounce his Acceptance supra Protest, desiring that
it may be inserted in the Protest, and be considered as void and of no offect,
as if it had never been done.

VIII. No man, neither the Possessor nor the Demander of Acceptance, nor any
third Person whatever, may accept a Bill of Exchange unless the Acceptant
refuse, or is not to be found, or has left no order for the Acceptance.

IX. When the Acceptant will not accept at all, then the Possessor himself may,
after he has protested for Non-Acceptance, accept the same supra Protest.

X. This also may a third Person (that is not concerned in the Bill) do,
whether the honor of the same Bill be recommended to him or not, and that
neither in honor of the Drawer or any Endorser, or of the Person for whose
account it is drawn, i. e. he may accept supra Protest.

XI. An Acceptance supra Protest must be done in this manner; the Acceptant
supra Protest, whoever he be, must personally appear before a Notary Public
and Witnesses, (whether it be the same Notary that made the Protest or not,
matters not) and there he must declare that he does accept such a protested
Bill in honor of the Drawer or Endorser, etc. and that he will satisfy the
same at the appointed time; and then he must write under the Bill with his own
hand, That he has accepted it supra Protest in honor of such and such, etc.

XII. An Acceptance supra Protest may be made so, that though it be in honor
of the Drawer, yet it may also oblige the Endorsers, and in such a case the
Protest must be sent to the Endorser; but these too cautious Practices of some
tend more to the discredit of the Drawer than to his honor.

XIII. A Possessor of a Bill is not obliged to accept of the Acceptance of a
third Person supra Protest, whose sufficiency he suspects, seeing the Drawer is
obliged to satisfy the Remitter in case of Non-acceptance; but if the third
Person will offer sufficient security for the Payment of the Bill, then the
Possessor must be satisfied and contented therewith.

XIV. A Possessor of a Bill is not obliged to accept of the Acceptance of a
third Person supra Protest in honor of any of the Endorsers, or of the Drawer,
if the Acceptant supra Protest will re-draw the same on the Endorser or Drawer,
except he declare, NB
that the honor of the Bill was recommended to him by the Endorser or Drawer,
or that he declare, that he has Effects in his hands for the account of the
Endorser or Drawer, whereby he can satisfy the Bill without redrawing on
either the Endorser or Drawer.

XV. When the Possessor of a Bill has accepted of the Acceptance of a third
supra Protest in honor of the Drawer, then the Drawer is not in any wise
obliged to give any further satisfaction to the Remitter. But if the Acceptance
be made in honor of an Endorser, then the Bill in respect of the Drawer is as
absolutely Protested, and he is obliged to give Satisfaction, either to the
Endorser, in whose honor it was accepted, or to the Remitter, as if the
Acceptance supra Protest had never been made.

XVI. When a Bill is for Non-acceptance Protested, and after supra Protest by a
third Person accepted, etc. and the designed Acceptant afterward gets further
Advice and Order, and resolves absolutely to accept and pay the same, then the
Acceptant supra Protest may suffer it, and yet the Possessor shall not be
obliged, to free and acquit him from his Acceptance; but the first designed
Acceptant is obliged to pay the Acceptant supra Protest, Provision and Charges,
etc. because by his acceptance supra Protest, he hindered the Bill from being
returned with Protest.

XVII. Any Man that will may supra Protest accept a Protested Bill in honor of
the Drawer, or any particular Endorser, that was before accepted supra Protest
in honor of some particular, but later Endorser, and the first Acceptant is
obliged to allow of the same, and yet remain obliged for his first acceptance,
but the last Acceptant is obliged to pay and allow Provision and Charges to the
first, for the Reason above: For instance, if there were three Endorsers, and
one man accepts the Bill supra Protest in honor of the last, another may come
and accept again in honor of the first or second Endorser.

XVIII. He whoever he be, that accepts a Bill supra Protest, puts himself
absolutely in the stead of the first designed Acceptant, and is obliged to make
the Payment without any exception, and the Possessor has the same Right and
Law against such a one, as he would have had against the first designed
Acceptant, if he had accepted.

XIX. He that accepts a Bill supra Protest, may lawfully demand a Recompense
for the credit given to him, in whose honor he accepted, as well as Provision
and Postidge, and other charges; and in case the Acceptant should be forced to
Re-draw the parcel on him for whose honor he accepted, he ought truly and
faithfully without contradiction to accept and honor his said Acceptants
Bills, and return him Thanks for his Service.

XX. No Man ought to accept a Bill supra Protest in honor of the Drawer,
unless he has first spoken with the designed Acceptant, and known the Reasons
why he suffers it to be protested; but if the Acceptance be in honor of an
Endorser, this Information is to no purpose.

XXI. When a Bill is protested for Non-Acceptance, though the Drawer and his
Handwriting be never so well known, if the Person for whose account it was
drawn be unknown, and cannot be found, then no man ought to be too free and
liberal in accepting the same supra Protest in honor of the Drawer.

XXII. He that accepts a Bill supra Protest in honor of any Endorser, or of
the Drawer, though it be without their knowledge or order, yet he has his
Redress and Remedy on the said Person for whose honor he accepted (who is
obliged to indemnisie him) as if he had full Orders so to do.

XXIII. If a Drawer or Endorser, in whose honor a Bill is accepted supra
Protest, return an Answer to the Acceptant supra Protest, and approves of the
said Acceptance, then the Acceptant may freely pay the Bill, without any
further Protest for Non-Payment; but if the Persons in whose honor the Bill
was accepted are Quarrelsom, and pretend they gave no such order to him, or if
they answer not at all, then let the Acceptant supra Protest cause a formal
Protest for Non-Payment to be drawn up against the first designed Acceptant;
and if then the Notary return without Payment, and the Acceptant supra Protest
be forced to pay the Bill, then he must order the Action, Right and Law of the
Bill to be ended and transported fully to him, as if he were the true Possessor
thereof, that so he may have his redress on the Drawer or Endorser, in whose
honor he accepted, or on any of the former Endorsers.

XXIV. He that accepts a Bill in honor of the Drawer, has no remedy against
any of the Endorsers, because he only obliges himself for the Drawer.

XXV. He that accepts in honor of an Endorser, has no advantage of any
Endorsers that followed him for whose honor he accepted; but he and all that
were before him, even to the Principal and first Drawer are all obliged to him,
to make him satisfaction.

XXVI. When an Acceptant gets advice that a certain Sum is drawn upon him, and
two first or two second Bills of one and the same Contents, Date and Sum, but
endorsed to be paid to several, be presented, then let him accept neither of
them, neither freely nor supra Protest; and if the one be accepted before the
other be presented, let him protest the latter, and not accept it supra Protest
in honor of the Drawer, unless he has Letters of Advice of each particular
Bill from the Drawer.

CHAP. XIII. What the Possessor of a Bill of Exchange protested for
Non-Acceptance, and is not accepted supra Protest, together with the Drawer and
Endorser, are obliged to.
Rule I. HE that has protested a Bill for Non-Acceptance, whether he be the
true and real Owner of the same, or only a third Person, to whom it is sent to
procure Acceptance, must (if it be not accepted supra Protest) advise the
Person by whom it was given or sent to him, for procuring Acceptance with the
very first opportunity, and send or give to the same Person either the Protest
alone, or both the Bill and the Protest.

II. If a Bill be made payable positively to such a Person, and Acceptance is
absolutely denied, then both the Bill and the Protest must be returned whence
they came; but if Acceptance be delayed, and not absolutely denied, but hopes
are given by the Acceptant that he will accept it the next Post, or very
shortly, he expecting more sufficient Orders and further Advice, and that then
he may accept the protested Bill; then he that has the Bill in Possession must
only return the Protest, and keep the Bill.

III. He that has a Bill protested for Non-Acceptance, which is not payable to
himself, nor endorsed to him, but is payable to the order of the Remitter, or
the Drawer, etc. must only return the Protest, and must keep the Bill in his
Possession till it be demanded of him by him to whom it is payable, and on whom
it is endorsed.

IV. If the Protest be not made in the presence of the Acceptant himself, he
being absent, from home, or not to be found, then ought only the Protest to be
returned, and the Bill must be detained till the day of payment, or till
further order, that if the Acceptant be found, he may demand acceptance of him,
and he may accept if he please; and in case of refusal, its best and prudentest
for the Possessor, or the Person that should demand acceptance, to make another
formal Protest against the said Acceptant.

V. When a Bill made payable to order, that is not sent to the Presenter by the
first Remitter, but by some other, is protested for non-acceptance, then the
Presenter does act prudently, if the Bill be endorsed and drawn in from other
places, if he not only send the Protest to the Person from whom he received the
Bill, but also give Advice directly to the first Remitter of the Nonacceptance,
and that it is therefore Protested.

NB, It would be very convenient and necessary, that it should be ordered, that
all Protests, either for Non-acceptance or Non-payment, as also in case of the
sailure of the Acceptant and his Insolency, when the Presenter cannot send the
principal Act and Protest to the first Remitter, that then the Notaries should
be obliged to send a Copy of the said Protest instantly and directly to the
first Remitter, which might easily be done if some few Notaries were appointed
to that Office, as is before observed in Chap. 11. and Rule 4. this would
prevent much Damage and Loss.

VI. The Remitter is obliged so soon as he receives advice of the Protest of
the Bill to give advice thereof to the Drawer.

VII. A Drawer or Endorser of a Bill is obliged not upon a simple advice, but
so soon as the Protest is shown to him, either with or without the Bill, to
give sufficient security for the Payment thereof at the time and place
appointed, or else for the Principal and Charges and Rechange, in case it be
not satisfied there.

VIII. When the Bill has yet so much time remaining before the day of Payment
come that the Drawer or Endorser can order the Payment thereof at the place
appointed at the day of Payment, then is the Remitter obliged, having got
security to return the Bill, together with the Protest, to the place where
Payment is to be made, there to demand Payment of the Acceptant, or to whom it
was addressed and directed, and if he procure Payment, he must demand of the
Acceptant no more than the Charges of the Protest and Postidge; but if he
procure them not, he must again protest for Non-Payment, and then the Drawer is
obliged to satisfy the Rechange and Charges.

IX. When a Bill drawn at long time, is protested for Non-Acceptance, and the
Drawer has given the Remitter sufficient Security, then the Drawer is not
obliged to cause his Bill to be accepted by the Acceptant or any other; for the
Security for Acceptance is looked upon as if it were accepted.

X. The Drawer or Endorser give sufficient security if they give to the
Remitter other Bills payable to his order, for the same Sum, and due at the
same time, that were drawn or endorsed by any Merchant that frequents the
Exchange, and is by all men accounted sufficient.

XI. The Remitter is not obliged to take such Bills, unless the Drawer promise
to pay the Charges and Postidge of the Protest, and if not all, yet at least
half Provision for this new trouble of the Correspondent, and demanding
Acceptance; but if the Drawer appoint any other at the time and place of
Payment to satisfy his Bill supra Protest, and in the interim give sufficient
security, then he need allow no Provision at all, but only the Charges of the
Protest and Postidge.

XII. The Drawer or Endorser of a Bill protested for Non-Acceptance, must be
very circumspect, and must not give to the Remitter or Presenter of the Bill
any other Bills without the re-delivery of the first Bill and the Protest, or
that the Remitter give sufficient security for the Restitution thereof, or of
the Value, in case the said Bill should be satisfied.

XIII. The Remitter is not obliged, nor indeed is it advisable for him to enter
into such an Obligation, because the Drawer is obliged to procure Acceptance
and Payment of his Bills by the Acceptant, or by some other, and these other
Bills are but the security of the Remitter, which may also contain such a
clause and condition, that the Payment thereof shall only be made for the value
of the Bills protested for Non-Acceptance, and were not supra Protest accepted.

XIV. When the Bill with the Protest is presented to the Drawer, and these two
can agree for the Rechange, then he may freely and safely dissanul the Contract
with the Remitter, and satisfy him upon the Delivery of the first Bills with
the Protest.

XV. When a Bill is returned with Protest for Non-Acceptance, though there be
yet sufficient time for the ordering of the Payment, according to the tenure of
the Bills, yet if the Drawer and Remitter agree to make the Bills and Contracts
void, then the Rechange should be equally adjusted, and that thus it should be
reckoned at the Course that the best Bills on the Exchange were negotiated at,
payable at the same time; and over and above this, the Remitter must demand
half Provision at least, and Courtagie, together with the Charges of the
Protest and Postidge.

NB, It were necessary, to prevent Disputes and Contentions, that a certain
Rule and Method were ordered for the regulating the Course of Re-changes, when
there is occasion for it.

XVI. When the Drawer and Remitter cannot agree about the Course of the
Rechange, and the Drawer or Endorser will not give any security for the same,
but pay it in Moneys instantly, then it is sufficient for the Drawer to return
to the Remitter the value of the Bill that he received, and need not pay the
Rechange till the day of Payment come, and they get advice in what course at
sight the Bills were made that Post or the next, and accordingly the Drawer is
obliged to pay the Remitter how high or low soever it be, and the Remitter is
obliged to be satisfied with it; but then in case the Remitter will neither at
first (at the Payment of the value to him) nor at last (at the Payment of the
Re-change) part with the Bills and Protest, the Drawer may so long detain his
Moneys, till he give security for the Restitution thereof.

XVII. If all the Bills be not to be had, the Drawer must be very circumspect
in his making the contract void, and must not pay any Moneys but upon
sufficient Caution for the Re-delivery of the Bills and Protest, and for all
the Damage and Loss that may accrue thereby.

XVIII. When the time of Payment is so near that the Drawer or Endorser cannot
give other orders for the Payment of the Bills at the time and place appointed,
then the Possessor or Remitter of the Bill are obliged upon sufficient caution
and security offered to them for the Re-change and Charges, etc. to wait till
the day of Payment, and till the Course be known from the place where the
Payment should first have been made.

XIX. Though an Endorser has satisfied his Remitter for the Re-change and
Charges of a Non-accepted protested Bill, yet the Drawer or an earlier Endorser
is not obliged to do the same, but may insist upon giving security in manner
and form as is above mentioned.

CHAP. XIV. Of the time of Payment of Exchanges.
Rule I. IT is ordinary and usual in any place to make Bills of Exchange
payable at a longer or shorer time, as the Parties can agree, no certain and
fixed time being prescribed.

II. But the Time must precisely be agreed upon, and written in every Bill of
Exchange, that the Drawer may certainly know when they fall due; and it were
therefore to be wished that no Bills might be made payable after sight or at
sight, and that a certain time might be limited, in which the Acceptance is to
be demanded, upon a penalty that the Presenter of the Bill, in case of the
refusal of Acceptance, might have no Redress upon the Drawer.

III. The time of Payment is conditioned and agreed on betwixt the Drawer and
Remitter, sometimes (1st,) on a certain sixed and appointed day, (2dly,) at
sight or after sight, (3dly,) at some Days, or Weeks, or Months after the
date, (4thly,) at Usance, half Usance, Usance and half, double and trebble
Usance, etc.

IV. A Bill made payable at a certain day is understood to be payable on that
same day when it comes, that it falls due on, according to the Style of the
place where the Payment is to be made; so that a Bill made at Amsterdam payable
at London or Hambrough the last of November, is not payable till the last of
November, according to the Old Style, which is the account of time that they
observe in those places; and on the contrary, a Bill made at London or
Hambrough payable at Amsterdam the last of November, is payable at Amsterdam
the last of November, according to the New Style, which is the account of time
that they observe there.

V. When a Bill says simply [Pay] without any mention of any time, then its to
be understood that the time of presenting the Bill is the time of Payment, and
that the Payment must be made at sight.

VI. If Bills be made payable at some days, etc. after sight, or after date,
then for reckoning the time of Payment, the first day after the sight, or after
the date, is reckoned the first day, and not the day whereon it was presented,
with which Marius also agrees.

VII. To reckon out the precise time of the Payment of any Bill payable at any
time after date, its necessary to know the difference of the Old and New Style,
if the places from whence is drawn, and on which is drawn observe a different
Style. For better Information herein, these following places observe the New
Style.

Amsterdam, Dordrecht, Harlaem, Leyden, Rotterdam, and all the United Provinces
of Holland, as also Middlebrough, Vlissingen in Zealand, Antwerp, Brugge,
Dornick, Gent, Ryssel, Brussels, Valentan, and all Braband, Flanders and
Artois, Bordeaux, Lions, Marsellers, Nants, Paris, Roan, Rochelle, and all
France, Lessabon, St Hubes, Port a Port, and all Portugal, Alicant, Bayone,
Bilboa, Cadix, Madrid, Mallega, St Sebastian, Sebilien, Valence, and all Spain,
Messina, Palermo in Sicilia, Bari, Bargamo, Bisansone, Bolognien, Florence,
Genoua, Lyborne, Lucca, Mantua, Milan, Naples, Rome, Venice, and all Italy,
Ausburge, Crembes, Lints, Wien, and several places of the Empire, Bolzano in
Tyrol, Bresslaw, and all Silesia, Colne, Dantzick, Konigsburge, Thorn, and all
Poland, etc.

These Places keep the Old Style, England, Scotland and Ireland, Archangle in
Muscovia, Berline, and all Brandenburge, Copenhagen, and all Denmark, Embden,
and all East-Friezland, Frankford on the main, Geneva, and the Protestant
Cantons of Switzerland, Hambrough, and all Holsteyn, Lubeck, and all
Macklinbrough, Leypsig, Magdeburgh, Naumbrough, and all Saxonia, Riga, and all
Liefland, Stockholme, and all Sweeden, Strasburge, and all tho Elsas, etc. All
the Popish Electors and Princes of Germany observe the New, and all the
Evangelical Electors and Princes they continue still the Old Style.

VIII. If a Bill be made payable at some Weeks after sight or date, then the
Weeks must first be reduced into Days, and seven Days reckoned for a Week,
and in accountting, the days of the Almanac must be followed, taking the first
day after the sight or date for the first day, and so forward one day after
another, without excluding either Sundays or Holy Days, and the last day is
the day of Payment, whether in the beginning or the middle of the Week.

IX. If a Bill be made payable a Month or two after date, or after sight, then
the day of Payment falls on the same day of the following Month, etc. that the
Bill was presented or dated, and if the Month it is to be paid in has not so
many days as the Month that the Bill was dated in or shown had, then the day
of payment falls on the last day of the Month. As for Example: A Bill is dated
the 7th of January, and is payable a Month after date, this Bill is payable
the 7th of February (not the 8th) A Bill dated the 30th of January, payable a
Month after date, this Bill is payable on the 28th or 29th of February, being
the last day of the Month; and so in Bills payable a Month or two after
sight, if presented on the 30th of January, are payable on the last of
February, though February has not so many days in it.

X. A Bill dated according to the Old Style, payable a Month after date in a
place where the New Style is observed, does not always fall due a Month after
the date Old Style, but a Month after the date according as there the New
Style was writ at the date of the Bill, and contra. For Example; A Bill dated
the the 25th of April in London, according to the Old Style, payable a Month
after date in Amsterdam where the New Style is writ, does not fall due at
Amsterdam the 25th of May according to the Old Style, which is the 4th of June
according to the New Style, but on the 5th of June; for when the Bill was dated
the 25th of April Old Style, it was the 5th of May New Style, and from that
time must the Month be reckoned, etc. and contra, this must be well observed,
seeing in the Leapyears this makes two days difference, in other years three
days.

XI. In the calculating the time of Payment of Bills payable at Usance,
sometimes Usance is taken for some certain time after the date of the Bill,
sometimes for some certain time after sight, nor is this in all places alike,
wherefore it must be observed that,

Usance from Venice, Geneva, Liborno, all Italy, Spain and Portugal, to
Amsterdam, is two Months after the date.

Usance from Paris, and all France, London, and all England, Scotland and
Ireland, from Antwerp, and all Flanders, and Brabant, from Middleburge,
Rotterdam, etc. is one Month after date, double Usance two Months, half
Usance fifteen days, whether the Month has but twenty eight days in it, or
thirty one days.

Usance from Dantzicke and Konigsburge is one Month after sight, and double
Usance two Months, and half Usance fifteen days, i. e. at Amsterdam. But now
Exchanges from Dantzicke and Konigsburge are seldom made at Usance, but
ordinarily from Dantzicke at forty days date, or after date, and from
Konigsburge at forty one days after date, i. e. at Amsterdam payable.

Usance from Neurenburge, Ausburge, Wien, Franckford, and other places in
Germany, is at Amsterdam fourteen days after sight, half Usance seven days,
double Usance twenty eight days, which is four Weeks, and not an Almanac
Month.

On the Contrary. Usance from Amsterdam to Italy, Spain, Portugal, is two
Months after date, to England, Flanders, Brabant, etc. one Month, to Paris,
according to the new Royal Order, thirty days after date, to Ausburge, etc.
fourteen days, to Breslaw fourteen days, etc.

Usance at London from Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Antwerp, one Month, from Venice
three Months; From Hambrough to London, and from London to Hambrough two
Months after date, i. e. double Usance, but Bills are commonly given at double
Usance.

XII. A Bill dated the 28th of February, payable a Month after date, or at
Usance (and Usance is reckoned there for a Month after sight) and is presented
for acceptance the 28th of February, then it falls due the 28th of March; but
if it be dated ultimo February, then its not due till the ultimo March, and so
in June and July, the one having thirty days, the other thirty one, and this
the Acceptant may alter if he please, if for the 30th of June he write ultimo,
it will not be due till ultimo July.

XIII. In exchanging, the circumspect Remitter will have a regard to the Time,
and accordingly take his measures, and keep his Moneys till such a time as he
knows there will be great occasion for it at the Place where he is, or remit it
to such a place to be remitted again, so also the Drawer must observe to take
such an opportunity to draw in his Moneys, when he knows there is Moneys enough
stirring; for multitude of Bills and scarcity of Moneys advances the Course and
paucity of Bills; and multitude of Moneys depresseth the Course of the Exchange
in any place.

XIV. An Exchanger should know in the places where Banks are kept, the ordinary
times when the Banks are shut, for the making of new Books, and when they will
again be opened; for at such a time there may be some Advantage for the Drawer
and Remitter.

XV. When there is Difference arising betwixt the Possessor or Presenter of the
Bill about Calculating the Time of its payment, i. e. the precise Day, the
Possessor or Presenter, if circumspect, will demand Payment on the Day
according to his own Calculation, and if on the last day of Respit he procure
not Payment, he should and may Protest, and send the same away, but he must
detain the Bill till the day of payment, according to the Calculation of the
Acceptant; and then if he procure not Payment, he must de Novo Protest.

XVI. Bills made payable at two or three days sight, or at sight should not
have the privilege of the respit days, (especially if they be five or six, or
more) but should be paid within twenty four Hours, after the day they fall due,
or be protested, because the reason why Bills are made payable at such short
sight, is because the Remitter has present occasion for his Moneys.

CHAP. XV. Of Demanding of Payment.
Rule I. THe Possessor of a Bill must be careful that the same be sent to the
place where payment must be made timously enough, that payment at the day of
payment may be demanded; and lest the Post should be uncertain, or be detained
any way, he must never keep a Bill till the last Moment, lest before its
arrival the day of payment be past, and respit days expired; for if not
demanded in time, a Protest is afterward insignificant as to recover any thing
of the Drawer.

II. The Possessor of a Bill is obliged, at the day of its becoming due, to
demand the Moneys, and must not give or admit of any delays more than the
respit days.

III. He that takes a Bill from another to demand satisfaction, whether he be a
Merchant, Chashier, etc. and neglects to demand it at the day of payment, and
is not urgent for the same within the days of respit, but lets them pass
without protesting, is obliged to make good the Damage that may accrue thereby.

IV. He that has a Bill in possession, which says only [Pay] without
mentioning the time when, or that is not dated, or that is not clearly and
legibly enough written, payable some time after date, etc. so that the certain
precise time of payment cannot be calculated, must be very circumspect, and
demand the Moneys at any time when he can probably make it appear, or seem to
be become due.

V. He that has a Bill sent him to demand Acceptance, and to keep the same by
him till it be demanded by him who shall produce the endorsed Bill, if the same
endorsed Bill is not produced at the last day of the respit, nor demanded of
him, then he may demand of the Acceptant payment thereof, offering caution and
security for the producing the endorsed Bill, and in case of refusal he may
protest for Non-payment, and such a Protest is of validity against the Drawer;
but yet if he that has the Bill has neglected to demand and to protest, he is
not blameable for so doing, nor any way responsible, but the Detainer of the
endorsed Bill may thank himself for his carelessness.

VI. If a Bill be not endorsed, or the Endorsement not right made, or if there
want any thing in it, yet notwithstanding the Possessor of the Bill is allowed
to demand payment, and the Acceptant is obliged to pay him upon the Delivery of
both the Bills, if he will under his Hand and Seal oblige himself to procure a
third Bill for the same Sum rightly and truly endorsed.

VII. Because many times an Acceptant knows not to whom his Bills are payable,
when they are made payable to order, therefore the Possessor of the Bill is
obliged to give the Acceptant timely notice; and its the Custom at Amsterdam
among Merchants that are of Repute and Credit, and that trust one another, that
the Possessor of a Bill made payable to order, and to be paid in Bank, at the
day of payment to send the accepted and endorsed Bill to the House of the
Acceptant, and desire him to order that the Value be write of in Bank; but
according to a special Order of the City of Amsterdam no Possessors of endorsed
Bills are obliged to give them out of their hands, unless they be already
satisfied; and the Possessors must on the day of payment declare to the
Acceptants that they are to have the payment by virtue of the Endorsements, and
in case of refusal to pay then before the delivery of the Bills, then the
Possessor must bring the Bill to one of the Book-keepers in the Bank, there to
be Registered, whence the Acceptant must fetch them, after he has ordered the
Parcel to be writ of to the Possessors account, and not before, etc.

VIII. A Possessor of Bill payable in current Moneys, either to himself
directly, or to order, is not obliged to part with his Bill before he be
effectually satisfied; and if he suspect the Acceptant, he must not exchange
his Bill for an Assignation, whether on a Cashier or some else, and may with
good reason detain the Bill, till the Assignation be satisfied, in case he will
write on the Bill that he has received from the Acceptant an Assignation for
such a Sum, on such and such a Person.

IX. In the demanding of Payment, especially as well as in the whole Trade of
Exchange, Equity, Credit and Honesty must be observed and encouraged: But
Cheats and Knaves should be severely punished, such as J. Snaw, R. Shaw, Joseph
Fernley, etc.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Payment of Bills by the Acceptant.
Rule I. BIlls must be punctually paid, according to their Tenure and Contents,
yet (in respect of the time when, and the Moneys wherewith) in such manner as
is usual and ordinary at the place where they are to be paid, unless there be
some certain express Condition in the Bills to the contrary.

II. The payment of a Bill must be made to the true and lawful Possessor of it;
wherefore Acceptants in the payment of their Bills must be careful and
circumspect, lest paying it to others they be forced to pay twice.

III. If payment be demanded by any the Acceptant knows not, and scruples
whether he be the true and lawful Owner of the Bill, and the Possessor thereof
cannot demonstrate that he is the Man to whom it is made payable, either
originally, or by the Endorsements, because he may be a Stranger, and has no
Acquaintance, then its most advisable for the Acceptant to delay and defer the
Payment till the last day, if peradventure some other in the mean time may not
demand it.

IV. No Bill must be paid before it become due; if it be paid before, the
Acceptant runs the hazard and danger that may ensue; Yet this does not hinder,
but that if a Bill be made payable to order, it may be Negotiated and Endorsed;
but however the Acceptant must not pay before the same become due.

V. When a Bill is accepted, that is made payable to a certain Nominated
Person, if the said Person desire the Acceptant to pay it to any other, and he
promise to do it, he is obliged thereto, whether the Possessor should in the
interim fail or not; from whence appears that the Possessor of a Bill is the
true Owner. So Marius also says, The Remitter may countermand and forbid the
payment to him that first had the Order.

VI. When a Bill is made payable to a certain nominated Person, he for whose
account the Bill was remitted, (i. e. the Remitter) as the principal Owner and
true Proprietor of the Bill, may Revoke his Order, and cause it to be paid to
another, if his order come before it be paid, and the Acceptant is obliged in
such a case, to deposit the Moneys in other Hands, till such time as it shall
be made appear who of right ought to receive it; or if he has order from the
Remitter he may suffer the Bill to be protested for Non-payment: But when a
Bill is made payable to Order, then the Remitter makes him, to whose Order it
is payable, sole-master of the Bill, who has Power and Authority to dispose of
it as he will, and the Acceptant must pay it to his Order.

VII. Bills that are payable at such a Precise day, as on the last of June,
etc. are paid the same Day by those that are punctual; but if their Day of
becoming due be calculated according to Usance, or after the date or sight,
then the Payment is not usually made till the day after; but yet the Payment
may be made the very same Day, without any the least Prejudice to the Payer.

VIII. Bills payable at sight, or two or three days after, may be paid
presently so soon as presented, without any Prejudice to the Payer; whereas it
may be a great Prejudice to the Possessor of the Bill, to stay for the Moneys
till the Respit days be expired.

IX. All Bills must precisely and punctually be paid within the days of
Respit, after the day of their becoming due: These days of Respit, are in some
places more, in some fewer, and are introduced by Custom, or ordered by the
Magistrates; and any Possessor of a Bill may safely, without any prejudice,
wait till the last of these days, without protesting for Non-payment, yea, is
obliged to wait so long.

X. At Amsterdam six Respit days are allowed, after the day of the Bills
becoming due, inclusive of all Holy Days and Sundays, etc. and if the payment
be made on the sixth day by the Acceptant, its accounted good and punctual
payment, wherewith the Possessor must be satisfied; and if the Bill be payable
in Bank, and the six days of Respit are not fully expired before the shutting
of the Bank (in order for the making of new Books) then the Acceptant may defer
the payment till the third day after the opening of the Bank again, and so in
case the Bill fall due when the Bank is shut; and all this time the Possessor
of the Bill can make no Protest, nor wi^^ his not making Protest be any
prejudice to him.

NB, at Rotterdam, Middlebrough and Antwerp are also (including the Holy Days
and Sundays) six Respit days allowed: But Bills at sight must be paid within
twenty four Hours.

But at Colne, Breslaw, Newrenbrough and Venice the Sundays and Holy Days are
not included in the six Respit days allowed after the day of the Bills
becoming due.

In some places fewer Respit days are allowed, as at London three days, and
no more: At Frankford, out of the Fair time, four days: At Leipzicke out of
Fair time, sive days; and at Ausburge five; and in these places all Bills
payable at sight must be paid within twenty four Hours.

Other places have more Respit days allowed, as Naples eight, Dantzick and
Konigsbrough ten, Paris, Roan, Rochel, Nants Bordeaux ten, and all France. But
in these last, the day of the Bills becoming due is reckoned for the first of
the ten, Sundays and Holy Days are included: Hambrough allows twelve days,
including the day of its becoming due, and in regerd no Protests can be made
there on Sundays or Holy Days, if the twelfth day fall on either, the Protest
may be deferred till the next: Stockholme allows also twelve days, Genua
thirty days, and all Spain fourteen days. But in Italy are no days at all
agreed upon, but the Possessor of the Bill may Protest or not Protest according
to his discretion.

XI. All Bills of three hundred Guilders Flemish, and above, must be paid in
Bank at Amsterdam, notwithstanding any conditions to the contrary, upon pain of
forfeiture of twenty five Guilders, and the Bill to be accounted unsatisfied.

XII. Where a Bank is erected, there all Bills whatever ought to be paid in
Bank, whether for greater or lesser Sums, or for what Species soever they are.

NB, By reason of the difference of Current and Bank Moneys, this is scarce
Practicable at Amsterdam, or in any other place where such a difference is,
unless a Bank Current were erected also, which might be very advantageous every
way: But I refer the Readers herein to the Author, and proceed.

XIII. Bills that are payable to any certain nominated Person that has an
account in Bank, are ordinarily satisfied without demanding the Bills, seeing
the payment thereof does always in Bank remain upon Record.

XIV. The falling or rising of the Aggio of Bank Moneys is to the profit or
loss of the Possessor of the Bill; for the Bills payable in Bank must be paid
by the Acceptant, let the Aggio run as high as it will; and he is obliged to
pay no more than the Bill requires, let it run as low as every it can.

XV. Bills payable in current Moneys out of Bank, must be paid in large (Gross)
Moneys, and not in small pieces, as Stivers, etc.

XVI. The rising or falling of Moneys where the Bill is payable in current
Moneys is also at the hazard of the Possessor of the Bill, as in Rule 14.

XVII. The Acceptant must pay no Moneys upon the simple advice of the Drawer,
though it be expressly said to be payable to a certain Person, unless the Bill
also be presented, and he has accepted it.

XVIII. A Bill payable to order must not be paid to any, but to whom it appears
by the Endorsement that it is payable.

XIX. An Acceptant may pay to him to whom the unaccepted Bill is endorsed,
though the accepted Bill be not endorsed to him; but then both the accepted and
the endorsed Bills must be delivered to him, and he must look well, and see
that the accepted Bill be endorsed to no other.

XX. If a Bill be made payable to A. B. or order, a circumspect Acceptant will
not directly write it of in Bank to A. B. till it appear that he is still the
Possessor of the Bill, and A. B. is obliged at his request to endorse the Bill
upon himself, and to write, The Contents hereof please to write to my account
in Bank, etc.

XXI. When a Bill payable to order is endorsed by diverse, and the Acceptant
will at the time pay it in Bank, then let him observe, that in his Assignation
for the writing it of in Bank, he order the Payment to the Presenter, or to him
that endorsed it last, for him to whose order it is payable. As for Example: A
Bill payable to the order of D. is endorsed by D. to the order of E. by E. to
the order of F. by F. to the order of G. G. demands payment, let him then
assign G. for D's account, who is obliged for all the Endorsers, and is thereby
satisfied, as being made payable to his order.

XXII. A circumspect Acceptant will pay no Bill that is made payable to order,
but upon the delivery of the accepted Bill.

XXIII. When a Bill payable to order is not accepted by him that was to accept,
nor any other, he may notwithstanding pay it at the time appointed to him that
shall present the prima or secunda Bill, if endorsed upon him, and having
satisfied the one, he is not obliged to satisfy the other, though it be made
payable to another, or endorsed upon another.

XXIV. If at the day appointed payment be demanded for two prima and two
secunda Bills, both of one Sum, Date, and to the same Presenter, Possessor or
Order, and payable at the same time, and the Acceptant has only advice from
the Drawer, that he drew but one Sum of him; if neither of the Bills be
accepted, then he must be circumspect in the paying, and may, if they both be
in one hand, satisfy the one, and receive the Bills; but if they be in two
different hands, or endorsed to two several Persons, then its better to suffer
both to be protested, and must upon no account satisfy either of them, but
upon sufficient security for the Restitution of the Sum that he pays, if it be
wrong, together with the Re-change and Charges.

XXV. Though a Bill be made precisely payable to a certain Person, yet without
any Prejudice the same may be paid to the order of that Person.

XXVI. An Acceptant must be careful in paying a Bill that is payable to diverse
and several Persons, and must not pay the same but to them all, or to the order
of them all.

XXVII. No Bill can be discounted, or otherwise satisfied than in Moneys,
without the voluntary consent of the Possessor.

XXVIII. An Acceptant is not simply obliged at the day of Payment to pay the
Bill he has accepted to the Presenter thereof, though it be made payable to
order, unless it be endorsed to him; and in case any thing material in the
Endorsement be awanting, he may demand sufficient security of the Possessor or
Presenter, That none afterward shall demand the same; or he may cause the same
to be writ of in Bank to the account of him who shall afterward produce the
Bill with the formal Endorsements, or do any thing that is equivalent to this.

XXIX. He that has accepted a Bill under any Limitation or Condition, is not
obliged otherwise to satisfy it, than according to that Condition and
Limitation.

XXX. He that has accepted a Bill under Protest, that he supposes he has
already accepted one of the same Contents, and for the same Sum, and that in
case it be found so, he declares, that this Acceptance shall be null and void,
he is not obliged for the payment, unless the other Bill that he accepted
before for the same sum, etc. be delivered to him, and that sufficient Security
be given, that none shall demand any more by virtue thereof.

XXXI. Marius his advice is, never to part with the Bill of Exchange till it be
paid, not to deliver it up upon an Assignation, or any other Bill or Bond, but
first receive his Moneys by Assignment before he give in his Bill, and the
reason is this; In case I do not instantly receive the Moneys upon the
assignment, if I have parted with my Bill, I cannot easily form a Protest.

XXXII. Further he asserts, that though the days of Respit be expired, yet a
Protest may be entered, and the day on which it falls due, is accounted part of
the Time limited by it: But its best, he says, to protest within the three
days of Respit ( viz. only three days being allowed at London) but after it
must also be protested, because without this there is no further course at Law
can be taken, either with the Acceptant or the Drawer.

XXXIII. If a Bill be made positively payable to such a Man, and not to such a
Man or his Order, then an assignment of the Bill will not serve the turn, but
the Moneys in the strictness of the Letter must be paid immediately to that
same Man, and no other, else the Accepter may be forced to pay it twice; nor is
it sufficient that such a Man write his Name in a Blank on the backside of the
Bill, unless the man himself appear in Person.

XXXIV. Every Promise of Payment in Bank is accounted for good and sufficient
Payment.

XXXV. To Discount or to Rescounter is good and sufficient payment, if it be of
a due and liqued Debt.

XXXVI. An Acceptant may after payment at the time, according to the tenure of
the Bill, and if the Possessor will not receive it, nor discharge upon it, the
Acceptant may deposit it; and then though the Possessor Protest, the Drawer
shall have no damage.

CHAP. XVII. Of Protesting of Bills for Non-Payment.
Rule I. THough the Acceptant be absolutely obliged to the payment of those
Bills that he accepts; yet at the day of payment, the Payment cannot be demaned
or exacted with Rigor, if the Drawer or Endorsers be sufficient, and his Credit
untainted: but the Possessor must first try if he can procure the Value, the
Charges and the Re-change from the first Drawer or Endorser peaceably and
quietly.

II. The Possessor has no redress on the Drawer or Endorser, unless he can
make it appear that he made diligent Demands of payment before the Respit days
were expired, and could procure none, and therefore did protest for Re-change
and Charges within the limited time.

III. In all (or most) Towns of Trade, its ordered as a Law, in how many days
after the Bill become due, the Protest must be entered and made, in case the
Possessor will not forfeit his Right against the Drawer or Endorser.

IV. Before any man can protest for Non-payment, demand of payment in the
limited time must be made, and that first simply by the Possessor himself or
his Servant, or some other in his Name, and then if payment do not punctually
follow upon these Demands, he must solemnly demand it by the Notary Public and
two Witnesses.

V. This formal and solemn demanding of payment must at farthest be on the last
of the Respit days, and that so timously (if it must be done in Bank) that the
Acceptant may have sufficient time to order it.

VI. When the last Respit day falls on a Sunday or Holy Day, then its safest to
protest the day before.

VII. Payment of Bills that were not accepted neither simply nor supra Protest,
may be demanded at the day of payment, and if payment be denied, then a new
Protest may immediately be entered for Non-payment, and both the Bill and
Protest may be returned.

VIII. When a Bill that is made payable after date, or at a certain day, is not
presented for acceptance till after the same become due; then if payment be
denied, the Protest for Non-payment must be made on the last Respit day at
farthest (after it became due) and not after it was first presented.

IX. A punctual Payer will discharge his Bills on the second or third day after
they are become due, and they are but Botchers that defer till the last respit
day, under pretense that the last Respit day is the true day of Payment;
whereas these Respit days are allowed the Acceptant not for Wantonness, but
for Convenience as well of the Possessor as the Acceptant himself, that the one
may demand in time, and the other provide in time to discharge his Bills; yet
the Acceptant may if he will defer and delay it till the last day.

X. If the Possessor of a Bill protest not till after the last respit day, he
loses his Right of having Redress on the Drawer or Endorser by his negligence,
except in the case of the shutting the Bank.

NB, The case seems to be very hard when the Bill by any Miscarriage of the
Post, or other Impediment is detained so long (or it may be wholly lost) till
the respit days are expired, and then the designed Acceptant refuses either
to accept or pay: and what is then to be done? its hard that the Remitter
should lose his Moneys, and lose it he must, if the Drawer or Acceptant be
Knavish; for he can in no wise lay any Action against either of them, and yet
it is manifest there is a Debt owing to him; this then being too great an
Encouragement for Knaves, it were to be wished, that some other good order for
preventing loss to Honest and Well-meaning Persons were invented, and enacted
as an unrepealable Law.

XI. The Possessor of an endorsed Bill for the account of the Drawer himself,
is obliged to protest within the Respit days, or he loses his Remedy of the
Endorsers.

XII. In the Protest for Non-payment, the day and date when the Protest was
made must be legally expressed, and it ought also to express, how many days
after it became due it was before the Protest was entered, and also what the
custom of the place is concerning Respit days, that it may appear on the one
hand, how civil the Possessor has been to the Acceptant, and on the other, how
that he has not by his negligence lost his Right.

XIII. When a Bill is protested against the Person of the Acceptant, the Notary
Public ought to know him well, and make himself acquainted with him; and if it
be made against his House, he ought to inform himself well, whether such a
Person live there or not, and if he can neither find his Person nor his House,
nor enquire where he may be found, then he must protest with what diligence and
care he enquired after him, and then protest for the Rechange, Charges and
Damage to be re-paid him by the Endorsers or Drawers, or either of them, as the
Possessor thinks best.

XIV. If the Notary meet with his Person, or any of his House, he must clearly
express what Answer they make to him, and what the Reasons are that he can
procure no satisfaction.

XV. When payment is demanded of one of the same Name with him to whom the Bill
is directed, and he denies that ever he accepted any such Bill, then the
Possessor is obliged to enquire if any other of the same Name dwell in the
place where the payment should be made, and if he can find none, then he must
protest against him, and if he find two or more, and they all deny that they
accepted any such Bill, they must both or all be protested against.

XVI. Its no dispect or discredit to any to suffer a Bill to be protested for
Non-acceptance because it stands in his own free will to accept or not; but to
suffer an accepted Bill to be protested for Non-payment, and returned, (it may
be cloaked as it will) is a great discredit to the Acceptant.

XVII. If the Acceptant pay a part of the Bill, and promise the rest in a few
days, within the Respit days, if he do not within that time satisfy the
whole, the Possessor may protest for the whole, and is not obliged to return
what he has received back again to the Acceptant; but he must observe the Laws
of Exchange, that is, demand of the Drawer, etc. the Rechange and Charges, etc.
for the Remainder that was unsatisfied.

XVIII. If an Acceptant is unable or unwilling to pay his accepted Bill, and
the Possessor is forced to protest against him, and he returns answer, that he
is willing and ready to pay part, and that the Possessor may for the rest
protest and return the Bill if he please; then the Possessor does very
foolishly if he refuse to receive what is offered to him, be it more or less,
but yet he must protest for the whole.

XIX. If an Acceptant of a Bill of Exchange, after he has accepted, should
prove insolvent, or be publicly reported to be failed, so that he absent
himself from the Exchange, or if there be just ground of fear and jealousies
that he may be insolvent before it may fall due, the Possessor of the Bill may
demand better security by a Notary Public, and if that be not given, he may
protest and send the Protest away by the next Post; and when the Bill is due,
if not paid, you must protest again for Non-Payment, so does Marius advise.

XX. The same Marius advises, that all Protests be made in the day time
between Sun and Sun, and if it can be while the Shops are open, or not before
they are open, i. e. between six and six a Clock in Summer, and between Sun and
Sun in Winter.

XXI. If a Bill protested for Non-Payment be returned on the Drawer, and the
Drawer discharge the same, then both he himself and the Acceptant are
discharged from the Remitter and Possessor, or any other, but yet the Acceptant
(if he accepted) is not discharged from the Drawer, but the Drawer has the
same Right and Law against the Acceptant that the Possessor or Remitter would
have had, if the Drawer had not discharged it.

XXII. Acceptants by acceptance simply do so far oblige themselves, and make
themselves Debtors thereby, that if the Drawer fail, they have no Remedy or
Redress against any of the Endorsers; and the case is the same, if the
Acceptant or any other accept supra Protest in honor of an Endorser, or any
other Person, if that Endorser fail and be insolvent before or afterward.

XXIII. If the Acceptant of a Bill fail, the Possessor is not obliged to wait
till the last Respit day before he protest, but may protest sooner when he
pleases, after he knows of his failure, and must presently give advice thereof
to the Remitter, or else the Drawer is not obliged to pay Interest and Charges.

XXIV. Bills of Exchange protested, or to be protested, are liable to no
Arrests or Attachments, but if arrested, the Notary Public may make a Protest,
or if protest, deliver the Protest, or the Copy thereof, and the Bills to the
Possessor, if he demand them, and the Possessor notwithstanding any arrest may
do therewith what he pleases, unless the Acceptant will make appear, that he
either has or will pay the Value according to the Tenure of the Bill.

XXV. There is nor can be any danger by protesting Bills two or three days
before the Respit days are expired; but because the Respit days are not
certain in many places, its therefore surest to protest by times, than to
hazard the loss of the Law by too long a delay.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Payment of Bills supra Protest for Non-Payment.
Rule I. When a Bill for Non-Payment is protested, then any man may freely,
even he that suffered the Bill to be protested, or he that did protest, pay and
satisfy the same supra Protest in honor of the Drawer or Endorser.

II. An Acceptant that has freely and willingly accepted a Bill cannot
afterward satisfy the same supra Protest in honor of an Endorser, because he
as Acceptant is already obliged to the Endorser; but an Acceptant, that has
not yet accepted the Bills, may discharge those Bills in honor of the Endorser
or the Drawer, as if he were a third Person unconcerned.

III. When an Acceptant is drawn upon for the Drawer's account, and the Drawer
has not made Provision for the discharge thereof, and is fearful that he shall
have some trouble in re-imbursing himself, in this case he need not freely and
willingly pay the Bills that he freely and willingly accepted, but may protest
the Bills for Non-Payment, and then he himself, or any other for him, may pay
them supra Protest, causing the Right and Title to be transferred to him to
prosecute the Drawer, by which means he may more easily convince the Drawer,
and prevail with him to make Restitution of the Value he received, than
persuade him to re-imburse what he has paid for him.

IV. No man must pay a Bill supra Protest for Non-Payment, before he has
declared before a Notary Public (either the same that made the Protest, or any
other) in whose honor he discharges the Bill, whereof the Notary, after the
Protest, or in another particular Instrument or Act, must give an account to
the Parties concerned.

V. He that pays a Bill supra Protest, does immediately succeed the Possessor
in the Right and Title thereof, although there be no formal transport thereof,
nor no Cessi^ Actionis from the Possessor to the Payer; yet to prevent all
disputes, its more advisable for the Payer supra Protest, that he cause the
Possessor of the Bill to make a Transport of his Action and Right to him
formally.

VI. The Possessor of a Bill protested for Non-Payment, is not obliged to
accept of the Payment of a third Person supra Protest, either in honor of the
Drawer, or any Endorser, unless he demonstrate and declare, that the honor of
that Bill was especially recommended to him, and then he is fully obliged to
accept of the Payment absolutely, as if the true Acceptant had paid it.

VII. The Possessor of a Bill that accepts of Payment supra Protest, is obliged
to transport his Right to the Payer, as well against the Acceptant, as against
the Drawer, or any Endorser, in whose honor he pays the Bill, yea, and against
all others against whom the Possessor of the Bill, by virtue of that Bill has
any Right.

VIII. But if the Bill protested be endorsed by the Possessor's Correspondent,
by whom the Bill was sent to him, then the Possessor, if circumspect, will
accept of no payment in honor of the Endorsements, but under express
condition, That the Payer shall have no Redress or Remedy against the said
Correspondent.

IX. The Possessor of a Bill, protested for Non-payment, is not obliged to part
with the Bill out of his hands to the Payer supra Protest, before he be
actually satisfied and paid.

X. He that honors a Bill, protested for Non-payment, in honor of the Drawer,
has no Remedy against the Endorsers.

XI. He that honors a Bill, protested for Non-payment, in honor of an
Endorser, has his Redress and Remedy not only against the said Endorser, but
against all that were before him, and the Drawer also, but he has no Action,
Law nor Right against the Endorsers, that follow the Endorser for whom he was
willing to pay the Bill.

XII. When diverse or several Persons present themselves to honor a protested
Bill for Non-payment, then he is chiefly to be accepted that offers to pay in
honor of the Drawer, and next to him, he that offers to pay for the earliest
Endorser.

XIII. When a Bill is paid supra Protest in honor of the Endorser, and the
Acceptant counsels or advises him, that there is another (or he voluntarily
offers himself) that will discharge the Bill in honor of an earlier Endorser,
or of the Drawer, and this before the Payer has re-imbursed himself by
re-drawing, then the first Payer is obliged to accept of the Payment of the
second, and to transport his Right to him, but the second Payer will be obliged
to pay not only all the former Charges, but half Provision also.

XIV. Men ought to be circumspect in accepting Bills or paying Bills in honor
of the Drawer, and yet more circumspect when its done in honor of an Endorser,
and should in no wise accept any Bills or pay any Bills supra Protest, but in
honor of those with whom they are well acquainted, and have had good
Correspondence, and whose Sufficiency and Generosity is sufficiently known.

XV. If the Acceptant be sufficient to pay the Bills, and yet suffers them to
be protested for Non-payment, then he that will pay in honor of the Drawer,
must or should diligently enquire of the Acceptant, what Fundamental Reasons he
has to suffer the Bills he accepted to be protested; for the Reasons may be
such as might dissuade others from paying them supra Protest.

XVI. If the Protest for Non-payment be sent away, then its not in any wise
advisable for any man to offer to pay the Bill supra Protest, though the Bill
be not sent away, unless the Possessor of the Bill will give sufficient
security for the Restitution, in case the Drawer or Endorser have re-paid the
Value and Charges, etc. upon the presenting of the Protest, or otherwise agreed
with the Remitters.

XVII. Circumspection is also required in the Payment of Bills supra Protest,
that are made payable to order, and after some days sight, when there has
been any negligence in demanding Acceptance; and above all, men should be
fearful to meddle with the Payment of any Bills supra Protest, that were not
protested in time, within the days of Respit.

NB, As much Circumspection is here necessary in the honoring of Bills for
Non-Payment as was for the honoring of Bills for Non-Acceptance, whereof we
have treated, Chap. 14.

XVIII. When an Accepted Bill is protested for Non-payment, and the Acceptant
is sufficient, then there can be little difficulty in paying and discharging
the same supra Protest, because if neither the Drawer nor Endorsers will nor
can re-pay the Value and the Charges, etc. yet the Acceptant remains obliged.

XIX. A Circumspect Acceptant resolving, for Reasons known to himself, to
suffer the Bills to be protested for Non-payment, and to return them on the
Drawer, will seek for some known and trusty Friend that shall pay the Bill
supra Protest in honor of the Drawer, and receive the Transport of the Action
and Right from the Possessor, and by him seek his Redress on the Drawer.

XX. If a Bill supra Protest, in honor of the Drawer or Endorser be paid, then
the Payer usually (if he has no effects in his hands) redraws the same
directly on him, for whose account he paid, and he augments the Sum mentioned
in the Bill, with the Charges, Courtagie, Postidge and Provisions.

XXI. When he that pays supra Protest, has Revalued or Redrawn, he is obliged
with the advice of the draught, to send the protested, and by him paid Bills of
Exchange, and the Protest, and the Instrument of his offering to discharge the
same, and the Acquittance for the discharge thereof, to his Friend, to be shown
to the Person in whose honor he paid, and to demand the Acceptance and Payment
of his Bills on that account.

XXII. If a Bill be paid supra Protest in honor of the Drawer, with the
Obligation of any or all the Endorsers, then the Payer is obliged to send the
Protest, etc. to all and as many of them as he will keep obliged to him, and to
advise them, that to spare them trouble, and to prevent the respective Losses
of the Rechange, he has redrawn upon the Possessor, they remaining still
obliged -- But such an honourer of a Bill does distrust the Drawer, and
therefore will get small Thanks for his Pains.

XXIII. The Drawer or Endorsers of a Bill protested for Non-payment, and supra
Protest honored by a known Friend, or not, being Redrawn upon, for the
Re-imbursement, is obliged to accept and honor the Bill with punctual Payment,
or else he is Guilty of the greatest Incivility and Ingratitude imaginable, and
if he should refuse, he may be compelled to it, and to Reimburse all the
Charges and Damage, the Drawer having got a transport of the Right of the first
Possessor to himself.

XXIV. If a Drawer make any difficulty, alleging that his Bill was accepted,
and that therefore the Remitter must seek his Redress on the Acceptant, etc.
yet the Remitter is obliged first to try what the Drawer can do, and then to
look to the Acceptant.

XXV. If a Drawer suspect that his Bill, though accepted, will for Non-payment
be protested, he must look about to procure some that will, in honor of
himself, accept and pay the Bill, and to receive from the Possessor a cession
of his Action and Right against the Drawer and Acceptant, and so by him
endeavor to procure right of the Acceptant; for upon refusal, Execution lies
always ready.

XXVI. He that has accepted a Bill supra Protest in honor of the Endorser or
Drawer, and pays the same at the day appointed, he is accounted also to have
paid the same supra Protest; and its unnecessary to make a new Protest for
Non-payment, though now Use and Custom has brought it almost into Fashion in
some places, that Bills protested for Non-acceptance, must also be protested
for Non-payment.

CHAP. XIX. What the Possessor of a Bill Protested for Non-payment, and not
discharged supra Protest, has further to do.
Rule I. IN case the Acceptant do not discharge his accepted Bills at the day
appointed, then the Bills with the Protest must be returned.

NB, some hold, that its not necessary to send the Bill back again, if the
Drawer live at a great distance, or have no certain place of abode; Others the
contrary. But if the Drawer and Possessor understand one another well, and the
Drawer would force the Acceptant to the payment, then let him give Security to
the Possessor conditionally, if he cannot procure payment of the Acceptant, to
stand obliged for the Sum, and then let him neglect to protest on the last
Respit day, whereby having lost his Redress on the Drawers and Endorsers, he
has only the Acceptant to look upon, and by virtue of the Protest can force
him to the Payment, if he be able.

II. The Possessor of an endorsed accepted Bill, protested for Non-payment, and
not discharged supra Protest, has his Redress on the Drawer and all the
Endorsers.

III. Its usual, that the Possessor of such a Bill, protested for Non-payment,
and not supra Protest discharged, does redraw the value on him, from whom he
received the Bill, whether he be the first Remitter, or any other Endorser; but
if the same that sent him the Bill be not to be found, or be failed, or if it
be more convenient for the Possessor, or to pleasure a later Endorser, he may
well draw the value upon some other earlier Endorser, and demand of him, or of
the Drawer, restitution of the Value and the Charges; and in case of refusal
compel him to it.

IV. But however, the Person from whom he received, or with whom he negotiated
the Bill, is obliged to make Restitution, and he again has his Redress on the
Acceptant, Drawer, or any other earlier Endorser.

V. The Possessor of such a Bill, must not directly demand Restitution from the
Drawer, without first giving notice of the Non-payment and Protest to the
Endorsers, lest he lose his Redress on them.

VI. Its the duty of the Possessor of such a Bill, not only in case of Protests
for Non-acceptance, but also for Non-payment directly without delay, to advise
the Remitter thereof, and to send Copies of the Protest to him, that he may
secure the Restitution from the Drawer.

VII. The Possessor of such a Bill is obliged instantly, without delay, to
demand restitution of the Drawer, or Endorser, or Remitter; nor must he for his
own pleasure, or at the Acceptants request, neglect to send the Protest by the
first Post after, and the Bill by the second Post at furthest.

VIII. In case the last Respit day be on a Post day, and Payment is demanded,
to which the Acceptant answers, that it either is already done in Bank, or will
that day be done, then the Possessor may delay to protest, or having protested,
to send it away by that Post; and on the contrary, if he suspect the Acceptant
or the Drawer, he may protest, and send the Protest away that same Post-day.

IX. The Possessor does not well, if he in such a case, having protested
before, or on the last Respit day, re-draw the same on that day, or send the
Bill with the Protest away.

X. But if the Acceptant, after the last Respit day, or any other third Person
offer to pay the Bill, in case the Possessor has sent the Bill and Protest
away, he is not obliged to accept of their offers, especially if he has
redrawn the Value; though he may have the Bill and Protest yet by him.

XI. No Bills of Exchange protested, or to be protested, can be arrested in the
Notaries hands, and the Notaries may, notwithstanding such an Arrest, (yea, and
must if demanded) deliver the Bill with the Protest to the Possessor to proceed
therein, according to his pleasure, except only that the Acceptant can
sufficiently demonstrate that he has paid the Sum fully, in which case the
Notaries are bound to obey the Arrest.

XII. Nor need the Acceptant arrest his Bill and Protest, etc. it being enough
for him to protest again against the Possessor, and to declare that he has
offered full satisfaction to the Bill, which Protest he must send to the Drawer.

CHAP. XX. To what the Drawer and Endorsers of Bills returned with Protest for
Non-Payment, are further obliged to.
Rule I. THe Acceptant cannot be compelled to the Payment of a Bill unless by
him accepted; nor the Drawer or Endorser to the Restitution, unless the Bill be
returned with the Protest for Non-payment.

II. The Drawer or Endorser is obliged at the presenting of the Protest (if it
be in all the Circumstances rightly made, and in the right time, according to
the Laws and Customs of the place where the Payment was to be made) to give
present and punctual satisfaction, which consists in the Re-payment of the
Value, the Re-change and Charges, as Courtagie, Provision, and for the Protest
and Postidge.

III. When the Value of the Bill is redrawn, augmented with all the Charges,
then the Drawer and Endorser are obliged to pay the re-valued Sum, though the
same were not taken at the lowest Course; and so in like manner when the
Re-valuer or Re-drawer has negotiated a Bill with any other, which is payable
to a third Person, but if he discount the Sum, and make it payable to the
Remitter, then the Drawer or Endorser need pay no more than according to the
Course that day; and if that day the Protest was made, and the Post after there
was no Course made upon sight, but at time or usance, then the Course upon time
must be reduced to the Course upon sight by substracting a reasonable Interest
from the Course upon time, unless the Drawer and Remitter could agree that the
time should run out before the Payment should be demanded.

IV. The Drawer and Endorser are obliged in the Restitution of the Value,
according to the Course of Exchange, though the full Sum of the Bill be not
re-drawn.

V. They are also obliged to re-pay Provision, Postidge, and the Charges of the
Protest, though the full Sum be not re-drawn.

VI. The Provision that the Drawer must pay for a protested Bill of his, is due
half to the Protester, and half to the Remitter, etc.

VII. The Drawer or Endorser are obliged to pay no more than according to the
Course of Exchange, though the Re-draught be at a lower Course than when it was
first drawn or endorsed.

VIII. The Drawer of a Bill payable to order is no further obliged (though the
protested Bill were endorsed in several places, and returned the same ways)
than in the Payment of the Re-draught from the place where the Bill was to be
paid, directly to the place where it was drawn, and at such a Course as it was
at the time of protesting; and so the Endorsers are no further obliged than in
the Course of Rechange from the place where it was to be paid, to the place
directly where it was endorsed by them.

IX. When a Bill is in one place, successively endorsed by several Persons, and
is returned with Protest to the last Endorser, he is obliged to make
satisfaction instantly, either himself or by some other Endorser before him, or
for him; and if he pay, and satisfy it himself, he is not then to demand
Provision or Charges of the other Endorsers or Drawer in the same place, more
than he himself has actually paid.

X. The Remitter or Possessor of a Bill protested for non-payment is not
obliged necessarily to compel the Drawer or Endorser of a Bill to the
Restitution, if he had rather seek his Redress on the Acceptant; and so on the
contrary, he is not necessarily obliged to look on the Acceptant, when he had
rather seek his Redress on the Drawer or Endorser, nor is he obliged to give
them any time for the Payment, but may, when the Payment is not punctual,
proceed against which of them he pleases, by Arresting either their Persons, or
Goods, or both.

XI. No Drawer or Endorser is obliged to make Restitution at the sight of the
Protest alone, nor at the sight of the Protest and the unaccepted Bill, when
one of them has been accepted, but he is obliged to give sufficient caution
and security to the Remitter at the sight of the Protest alone, and to make
Payment when both the accepted Bill and the Protest are presented.

XII. No Drawer or Endorser is obliged at the presenting of the Protest for
Non-payment, made before the last Respit day, when the Acceptant has not
absolutely denied payment, but only desired delay till the last respit day, to
give any caution or security, much less to re-pay the Re-change and Charges,
etc. if he can prove that the Acceptant (or a third Person supra Protest) would
on the last respit day pay the same, and that the Bill had effectually been
paid if it had remained at the place of Payment so long.

XIII. No Drawer or Endorser is obliged to pay the Re-change of an accepted
Bill, if the Protest were not made within the limited days of Respit.

XIV. If the Payment of a Bill be demanded on the day it becomes due, and the
Acceptant is commanded by Authority of the Magistrate not to pay it, yet the
Possessor may protest for Non-payment, and the Drawer is obliged to pay the
Rechange; but if for any Accidental Occurences the Payment cannot be demanded,
(as perhaps a City may be besieged, and the Possessor is not allowed to go in
to make his Demands, etc.) then the Drawer is not obliged to make Restitution,
but the whole Sum runs upon the Risco and hazard of the Possessor or Remitter
of the Bill.

XV. If the Endorser unadvisedly or ignorantly makes Restitution for a Bill
protested for Non-payment after the Respit days, and the Drawer refuses to
make him satisfaction, then the Endorser has no Redress, but to demand
Restitution again from the Person to whom he paid the Value.

XVI. The Drawer, or he that makes Restitution for a Bill protested for
Non-payment within the days of Respit, must remember to demand Cessionem
Actionis from the Possessor against the Acceptant, whom he may compel to give
satisfaction.

XVII. It many times happens, that the Possessor of an accepted Bill, protested
for Non-payment, is by the Drawer, after Restitution made, desired under
pretense and protest of the Drawer's refusal to make Restitution, to compel the
Acceptant to give satisfaction; but it is very unhandsome for a third Person
unconcerned to receive Cessionem Actionis, and seek his Redress on the
Acceptant.

XVIII. When the Drawer has paid the Bill that was returned with Protest for
Non-payment, the Drawer is thereby freely discharged against all Parties to
whom the said Bill was made payable, either immediately in the Bill, or
mediately by Assignments, were they never so many; nor can any one any way
molest or trouble the Drawer, nor can any one of them prosecuted the Accepter
on that account any further; but yet the Accepter is not totally discharged if
the Bill were for the Drawers or any others account, to whom the Acceptant
should be responsible.

CHAP. XXI. What an Acceptant of a Bill that he has suffered to be protested
for Non-payment, and is returned with Protest, is obliged to.
Rule I. IF the Acceptant, at the day of payment, refuse to discharge Bills he
accepted, if the Bills be returned to the Drawers with Protest, to demand
satisfaction, and the Drawers refuse to do it, returning the Bill again, then
the Possessors of the Bills have as much Right and Law against the Acceptant,
as against the Drawer himself, viz. their Persons and Goods may be Arrested and
Attached.

II. Though the Possessor of a Bill has no redress upon the Drawer, if he
after the days of respit cause the Protest (for Non-payment of an accepted
Bill) to be entered, yet this notwithstanding, if the Drawer be yet in credit,
the Acceptant cannot be compelled by Arrests or Attaches, to make satisfaction,
till the Bill, sent with Protest to the Drawer, is again returned on the
Acceptant.

III. A Bill made payable for the account of the Drawer himself, not paid at
the due time, but protested for Non-payment, need not be returned on the
Drawer, but he may instantly without delay, compel the Drawer to make
satisfaction by Arrests and Attaches wherever he finds him.

IV. An Acceptant of an endorsed Bill, protested for Non-payment, cannot be
proceeded against by Arrests and Attaches, if any one, or all the Endorsers
refuse to make satisfaction, unless the Drawer himself also refuse to do it,
and this be proved by good Evidence.

V. The Acceptant of a Bill, returned with Protest for Non-payment, and again
returned on the Acceptant, is only obliged to pay the Exchange and Rechange,
Provisions and Postige, and no other Charges more.

VI. The Exchange is reckoned, according to the course at sight at that time,
and in that place where the Protest is made, to the place where the Payment
must be made by the Drawer, and if it be not paid there, then the sum is again
increased, the Provision and Postige being again added, and then the course is
reckoned again upon the whole sum, according as it shall be at that time and
place upon sight, to the place where the Bill is to be paid, and the Acceptant
is obliged to pay the Rechange, and all the Charges, although the Parcel was
not effectually negotiated and redrawn, i. e. Rechange, Provision and Postidge
must be twice paid, etc. As,

VII. Provision twice for the Exchange and Rechange.

VIII. The Charges are no other than Postidge, and for the Protests, unless the
Acceptant forced (by his delays and excuses) the Possessor of the Bill upon
some unnecessary Charges, which the Acceptant is obliged to pay, but no
extraordinary Charges, as for Traveling, Bribing and Spending, etc.

IX. He is obliged to pay Interest, if he do not presently without delay
satisfy the returned Bill, which is to be reckoned from the day that the Bill
was due upon, to the time of its discharge, and the Possessor may charge his
Account with Interest after the rate of 8 per Cent. per Annum, which any
Creditor may charge his tedious Debtor with, when he pays not punctually at
the time.

X. Though the Notary Public does declare, and in the Protest express, That he
protests for all Damages, etc. that shall accrue, yet no Acceptant is obliged
to make any other Loss or Damage good, but what are above specified, as the
Rechange, Provisions, Protests and Postidge, in manner and form as before
declared; nor can the Possessor with any Equity or Law compel the Acceptant to
make good any loss or damage that he pretends to have sustained for want of
punctual payment, as the frustrating of his Designs, the loss of some
convenient and profitable Opportunity, or any such like thing.

XI. No prudent man will supra protest accept and satisfy any Bill that is
returned unsatisfied from the Drawer, unless he has express order to do it in
his honor.

XII. Though the Possessor of a Bill protested and returned from the Drawer
unsatisfied, has thereby Right and Law against the Acceptant, and may proceed
against him, by Execution, Arrest and Attach, etc. yet he is not necessarily
obliged thereto, but if he will he may, at the Acceptant's request, spare him,
and seek his regress again upon the first Drawer, unless he has express order
to the contrary.

CHAP. XXII. Of Subscribing a Second or Third Bill.
Rule I. WHen the Drawer is not acquainted with the Remitter, or that the
Remitter questions his sufficiency, its then usual for the Drawer to make his
Bill payable to some Friend of his, who will endorse the Bill, with whose
sufficiency the Remitter is satisfied.

II. but in case the Friend will not willingly endorse, or the Drawer for some
Reasons will not desire it of his Friend, then its usual and customary for that
Friend to subscribe the secunda or tertia Bill.

III. He that does subscribe a secunda or tertia Bill, does only subscribe his
Name under the Drawer's, without adding a Syllable more, and thereby he does as
fully and amply oblige himself as the principal Drawer does.

IV. No Mackeler or Broger must promise the Remitter, that any other Friends
shall subscribe the Drawer's secunda or tertia Bill, unless he know for certain
that it will be so.

V. If in the Contract the Drawer simply negotiate in his own Name, and does
not promise that any other should under-write for him, or the Remitter does not
expressly condition for it, then the Drawer is not obliged at the request of the
Remitter to procure any to subscribe his Bills.

VI. By Subscription of a secunda or tertia Bill, the Subscriber does only
oblige himself to the Remitter, and to him to whom he gives the secunda or
tertia Bill, by him subscribed; thus if the Remitter or any other keep the
tertia subscribed Bill, and the Possessor of the prima and secunda unsubscribed
would seek any redress upon him, he cannot for want of the tertia subscribed
Bill.

VII. Because the subscribing of a secunda or tertia Bill is only for security
of the Remitter, and is to the dispect and discredit of the Drawer, therefore
not to lessen the Credit of the principal Drawer, the same is usually
concealed, not divulged, nor ought the subscribed Bill to be sent away to any
other place.

VIII. Because the Bills drawn on Venice must be done directly, and made
payable by some there, therefore some that give and take, remit and draw on one
Exchange time, in one day, make use of this Method, they order their Drawer to
make his Bills according to their Direction, the Value from him received, and
for their security they subscribe the secunda or tertia Bill; but a prudent and
understanding Drawer will judge himself unobliged to make any Bills, but such
as make the Value to be received of the Remitter, to prevent the subscribing of
the secunda or tertia Bill.

IX. The Bills subscribed by another being satisfied, should be again delivered
to the principal Drawer, who in the prima Bill acknowledges to have received
the Value of him, and the Remitter is very imprudent if he pay the Value to the
Subscriber, though he contracted with him, and looks more upon the Subscriber
than the principal Drawer.

X. He that subscribes a secunda or tertia Bill, does wisely if he on the day
of Payment enquire of the Possessor or Remitter, whether the Bill be satisfied
or no, that he for his security may have the subscribed Bill cancelled or
re-delivered.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Exchanging for Account, and in the Name of a Third Person.
Rule I. EXchange is made in the Name and for Account of a third Person when
any one does by the Order, full Power and Authority of another, which is called
among Merchants Procuration; and thus Bills may be drawn, subscribed, endorsed
and accepted, not in the Name or for the Account of him that does draw,
subscribe, endorse and accept, but in the Name and for the Account of him that
authorized him.

II. Great prudence is to be used in giving any man full Power and Authority by
Procuration to draw or accept Bills of Exchange; for he that is credited so
much, is credited with the Credit and Estate of him that appointed him, his
Welfare is in his Procurators hands.

III. A prudent Merchant will be prudent and circumspect in granting any such
full Power to any one, and will advise all his Correspondents (on whom his
Procurator shall have occasion to draw, etc.) with and under his own Hand, that
he has granted to such and such a one such a full Power to draw in his Name
Bills of Exchange, and defire them to give credit to his Subscription, till he
revoke and evacuate his said full Power, or till such a time as he shall limit.

IV. He that by Procuration in the Name of another, Bona side, does negotiate,
draw, endorse, subscribe and accept Bills of Exchange, by under-writing his own
Name, and his Quality, does thereby as effectually oblige his Principal
(himself being in the mean time not in the least obliged) as if he himself had
subscribed.

V. He that negotiates, draws, accepts, endorseth, etc. Bills of Exchange in
the Quality of a full Power and Procurator, in the Name of another, is obliged
at all times to prove his Quality, and if he cannot do that, nor has that full
Power he pretends to, is not only himself obliged to perform all that he has
negotiated with others in the Name of a third Person, but (if I may add my
private Opinion) is liable to be severely punished as a Knave and a Cheat, for
pretending to that which he had not.

VI. If any draw or accept by Procuration, and have not that full Power they
pretend to, they do not thereby oblige the Person whose Name they make use of,
unless it can be proved, that such a Person has given them such a full Power.

VII. A prudent Remitter will receive no Bills, nor a prudent Possessor accept
of no Acceptance that is subscribed by the Wife of the Drawer or Accepter, or
by their Servants or any other, as having full Power, unless he or they produce
the full Power, and Instrument, and Procuration, or be every way as able and
sufficient as the Drawer or Acceptant himself.

VIII. A prudent Remitter or Possessor of a Bill will look narrowly to this,
that the Procurator be sufficiently empowered, and that the full Power be not
antiquated out of date, or recalled; and in this case it were very necessary
and advantageous to all Dealers by Exchange, that every Procurator should cause
his Instrument of Procuration to be registered in some public and known place,
that their sufficiency and continuance may the better be known.

IX. He that does negotiate Bills, etc. as a Procurator, should before he
conclude the Parcel, expressly condition that the Bills shall be subscribed by
him, as having full Power and Authority from the principal Drawer; and if this
be not expressly agreed upon, the Remitter is not obliged to take such Bills,
nor to search into the Validity of his full Power, or the like, but may refuse
to give him Moneys, or receive his Bills, if he so please.

X. The Possessor of a Bill must accept of the Acceptance of a Procurator, if
the Instrument of Procuration expressly declare, that all Bills by him accepted
are for the account of the Principal, or especially, that such and such Bills
as the Possessor has, are for his account; but if the Procuration be not clear
nor express in this, then he is not obliged to accept of any Acceptance from
any that he does not look upon as sufficient.

XI. He that has a full Power to draw simple Bills of Exchange in the Name and
for the Account of a third Person, has also Power to draw in and endorse all
Bills of Exchange that are made payable to the order of his Principal.

XII. Marius asserts, That a Merchant's Word or Letter to his Wife, Friend,
Servant or other, to accept Bills of Exchange, is not sufficient, without an
Instrument and formal full Power, to that end there must be Hand and Seal, and
Witnesses to prove it, if need be.

XIII. But if there be no such Instrument, if the Wife, Friend or Servant in
his absence have formerly usually accepted his Bills, and he, when he has
returned Home, has approved thereof, and this can be proved, it will come very
close to the Matter, and be near upon as good as a legal and formal Instrument.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Bills of Exchange drawn on one Place, but Payable in another.
Rule I. THe meaning of this Title is thus; When he that is drawn upon (or the
Acceptant) dwells not in the same place where the Bill is to be paid, but yet
the Acceptant is obliged to bring his Monyes to that place where the Bill is to
be paid, thus; Bills are drawn on Bristol in London, i. e. the Acceptor dwells
in Bristol, but the Payment must be made in London, against which time the
Acceptant must have his Moneys ready at London. Thus also Exchanges are made on
Vlissingen in Middlebrough, on Enchuysen and other Cities of the Province of
Holland, in Amsterdam, on Brussells in Antwerp, Lubecke in Hambrough, Lions,
Roan, etc. in Paris, Valentia, in Madrid, etc.

II. The Remitter is not obliged to take Bills drawn upon one that dwells not
in the place where the Bill is to be paid, without an Address, especially when
the Bills are made payable at so many days sight, or at Usance (if Usance be
reckoned after sight) except this Condition be expressly by him agreed to.

III. The address of a Bill of Exchange, is a direction, made either by the
Drawer or the Acceptant, simply declaring by whom, and where the Payment shall
be ready, at the time appointed, and to whom the Possessor may address himself
in his absence, as if he were present.

IV. He to whom the Bill is addressed by, the Drawer is not obliged to accept
the Bill, nor he to whom the Acceptant makes the Address to pay, nor to declare
whether he will pay it or no, before the Bill become due, or any way to oblige
himself for the Payment thereof: But

V. He that has the Bill, may demand acceptance of the Person to whom it is
addressed, and in case he has no Order, no Procuration, nor full Power from the
Acceptant, to accept his Bills in his Name, and for his Account, the Possessor
may desire the Person, to whom it is addressed (if a true and trusty Friend and
Person) to send the Bill to the Acceptant to procure acceptance, or to return
it with Protest, which the Person, on whom its addressed, is obliged to, or else
the Possessor may, before the said Person, make his Protest for Non-acceptance.

VI. If the Possessor dare not trust the addressed with the Bill, that he may
demand acceptance, or if the Drawer has not addressed the Bill at all, then its
the duty of the Possessor to send the Bill, or cause it to be sent, to some
that lives at the place where the Acceptor dwells, to demand acceptance, or
upon refusal to Protest.

VII. Its also usual, when the Remitter or Possessor have no Correspondent to
send the Bill to, that lives at the place where the Acceptor dwells, to desire
the Drawer to send the Prima Bill to the Acceptant, to procure acceptance, and
to return it accepted to the Remitter or Possessor, to which the Drawer is not
obliged, yet cannot well refuse, if he be assured of the real Honesty of his
Correspondent, and that he will accept his Bill.

VIII. In case the Drawer do not in a convenient time, return the Bill accepted
to the Remitter, as above, the Drawer is not obliged in such a case, to give
any further satisfaction to the Remitter, but the Remitter must look to it
himself, and send the second a Bill to some other, to procure acceptance, and
to enquire whether the Prima be accepted or no, and if not, then the Acceptant
must accept the Secunda, or a Protest must be entered against him.

IX. But a prudent and circumspect Remitter will not leave Prima Bill in the
Drawers hands to procure acceptance, unless he be sufficiently assured of his
Honesty and Ability.

X. When the Possessor of such a Bill has no Correspondence at the place where
the Acceptant lives, nor any who will take upon them the trouble to send it,
nor dare the Remitter trust the Drawer with it; or if the Bill be payable in a
place where there is no Bank; or if the Bill must be paid in current Moneys per
cussa, and not in Bank, then its usual for the Possessor to advise the
Acceptant by Letter, that he has such and such a Bill on him, and desire him
to return Answer, whether he accept the same to pay it at the time or no; but
if he get no Answer at all, or for answer, that he will not accept it, nor pay
it, then the Possessor is obliged, to carry or send the Bill to that place, and
there formally by a Notary Public demand acceptance, and in case of refusal to
protest.

XI. If the Acceptant be an Out-dweller, ( i. e. dwells in another place than
where the Bill must be paid) then when acceptance is demanded, usually the
Possessor desires him to under-write to whom he must at the time address
himself for Payment. But the Acceptant is not obliged to do this; but on the
contrary, the Possessor is obliged to give the Acceptant timely notice to whom
the Bill must be paid, if it be a Bill that is payable to order.

XII. When a Bill is made payable after sight, or at usance (and usance be
reckoned after sight) by an Out-dweller, then the Acceptant may date his
Acceptance on the day it was demanded of him, if Acceptance be demanded
directly from the place where the Bill was drawn; but if the Bill be first sent
to the place where the payment must be made, then the Acceptance ought to be
dated the day of the arrival of the Bill at that place, and not on the day of
its being presented to the Acceptant in the place where he lives, if the
Possessor will stand strictly and precisely for a day with the Acceptant,
otherwise its no loss or prejudice to the Possessor when the Acceptance be
dated, if within the just time.

XIII. An Out-dweller must take special care that the Bill be discharged at the
day in its due place, and must not wait till the Possessor advise him thereof.

XIV. When a Bill is payable by an Out-dweller to order, and not to a certain
Person, and the Acceptant has not ordered to whom the last assigned shall
address himself at the day of payment, then the Possessor (whoever he be) is
obliged to give the Acceptant timely notice to whom the Bill must be paid, that
the Acceptant may within the Respit days return an answer, and make all due
and necessary preparation to discharge the same.

XV. If the Out-dweller at the time appointed remit to the Possessor of his
accepted Bill, in other Bills due at the same time with the Possessor's Bills,
the Possessor is not obliged to demand Acceptance and Payment of those Bills of
his Acceptant, the Out-dweller, unless he has Provision allowed him, because
he has double Trouble in procuring his Moneys, and is obliged to keep a
Correspondence, and many other inconveniences may follow; but when the
Acceptant does simply address the Possessor to some certain Person, to demand
payment of him for the Bill, to him he is obliged to go to receive his payment,
without any Provision.

XVI. When an Out-dweller has a Bill remitted to him, payable by an
In-dweller, and the Out-dweller desires his Acceptant at the day to send him
his Moneys in Specie, or to remit him the value in other Bills, the In-dweller
is not obliged to do this without allowance of Provision, etc.

XVII. The Possessor of a Bill payable by an Out-dweller, must at the last day
of Respit (if he get no payment) order a Notarius Publicus to enter a Protest
for Non-payment, which Protest, though not made in presence of the Person, nor
at the House of the Acceptant, is valid, and effectual to all intents and
purposes, because the Possessor of the Bill is not obliged to protest against
an Out-dweller at his House or Dwelling, nor to seek him out of the City or
Town where the payment is to be made.

The Out-dwellers of Amsterdam have made use of this Policy, to make the
foregoing Rule and Protest ineffectual on the day of Payment, pretending
Ignorance of the Person to whom the payment is to be made; they at the place
where the payment is to be made address themselves to a Notary Public on the
last respit day, and there declare to him, That such and such a Bill payable to
order, by them accepted, is now become due, whereof none have demanded payment,
they therefore protest for their readiness and willingness to discharge the
said Bill, and accordingly they cause a formal Protest to be drawn up, and send
the same to the Drawer, to make use of the same against any other Protest for
Non-payment; but this slight and cunning might be prevented if one general
Office of Protests were erected, where all Protests should be Registered, and
so every one might see to whom they are to apply themselves.

XVIII. Marius adds, That in case an Out-dweller refuse Acceptance when the
Bill is sent to him, Protest may either be made at the House of the
Out-dweller, by the Person who was ordered to demand Acceptance, or else at the
place of Payment, the Friends Letter that demanded Acceptance being produced to
the Notary is sufficient to ground the Protest upon, and so also in case of
Non-payment.

XIX. Though the Possessor be not obliged to seek for payment of an Out-dweller
in any place than where the Bill is payable, and the Drawer or Acceptant has
addressed it, yet he may, in case of Non-payment Executive proceed against the
Acceptant in any place where he either finds his Goods or his Person. Sigism.
Scaccia.

XX. Scaccia. The Debtor by Exchange is obliged to bring his payment to the
place of payment, though it be both chargeable and dangerous, and the Risco and
Expenses are his own, and if the Debtor request the Creditor to take his
payment in any other place, and the Creditor consent, the Risco and the Charges
must be paid and allowed by the Debtor, as they can agree; but if the Creditor
receive his payment simply, then he takes the Hazard and Charges upon himself.

XXI. So also the Creditor by Exchange is obliged to come to receive his Moneys
at the place appointed, though it be both expensive and hazardous to carry the
Moneys Home, or to any other place where he would have it, but yet the Creditor
can and may seek his Debtor in any place where he will, and there receive his
payment, but then he cannot compel the Drawer to bear the Charges thereof, nor
the Risco. Scaccia.

CHAP. XXV. Of Exchanges in Commission, in General, and of Bills drawn on one
Place over another Place.
Rule I.

EXchange to a place, over a place (or through a place) is, when Bills are not
made payable, or remitted to the place or City directly where the Moneys are,
or where the Remitter would have his Moneys, but on some other place, from
whence the Value is to be re-drawn or re-remitted, to the place where the Money
is to be paid, or where the Remitter would have his Moneys.

Exempli gratia: A Drawer has Moneys lying at London, and would gladly have it
at Dantzick; the Drawer at Dantzick cannot directly draw his Moneys in from
London, but first he draws on Hambrough or Amsterdam, and then orders his
Friend at Hambrough or Amsterdam to draw upon London.

II. The Reason of this kind of Exchange is either, First, Because directly
there is no Course of Exchange, or no Rescount; Or, Secondly, Because it may be
more advantageous and profitable thus to negotiate Exchanges, than directly.

III. Bills of this nature must be made first payable at the place, over or
through which we draw, and to a Person dwelling in the place whereto the
Remitter remits, whether he be Factor, Servant, or any else.

IV. A Factor is one that serves another in Commission, that observes his
Principal's order, and acts according to his direction, for which he receives
Provision.

V. Provision is the Reward the Factor receives from his Principal, placing it
to his account, for his trouble in corresponding and negotiating his
Principal's Affairs, and in Bills of Exchange, hazarding his Credit.

VI. Bills are negotiated for another when the Factor negotiates Bills in his
own Name for the account of another; and by another, when the Bills are
negotiated in the Principal's Name by another in Commission.

VII. Circumspection and Prudence is very requisite both in him that employes,
and in him that serves others in Commission; and a Merchants principal care in
Exchanges (of this Nature especially) is to see that he has a sufficient and
able person to correspond with, whether he draw and charge his Bills upon him,
or remit his Bills to him; and he must not only have respect to his Ability,
but to his Fidelity also; for an Able, but Knavish Correspondent may serve his
own Ends with the Moneys his Principal has provided for him to discharge his
Bills with, and suffer his Bills to return with protest (as Shaw and Snawdon,
two English Factors at Hambrough lately did.) But,

VIII. A Factor that has a Cordial, Real and Able Principal, who does not use
to abridge him of his Provision, is obliged to improve all his Abilities and
Faculties in the true and faithful Service to him, and should seek his Interest
and Advantage as his own, (which the abovenamed Kn -- never did) but if the
Principal will not allow the usual Provision, nor Postidge of Letters, nor
Courtagie, etc. does force his Factor one way or other, in the broad or the
long, to make up his Disbursements, that he be no looser.

IX. Factors are obliged to a due Correspondence, and by the first Post to give
an account what they have negotiated in their Principal's Affairs, with all the
Circumstances thereof, viz. the Sum, the Course, what Conditions, and with whom.

X. A prudent Principal will require of his Factor, though he has credited him
for the Bills negotiated, all the Circumstances thereof, and the Factor is
obliged to advise thereof; and in case he has bought Goods, not only to
declare who is his Chapman, but also in case he has remitted Moneys for his
Principal's account, whereof he has not yet received the Bills, to give an
account who is his Drawer; and so, if he has drawn, who is his Remitter, etc.

XI. The Principal is obliged, as soon as he receives advice of any Negotiation
done for his account by his Factor, to approve or disprove of the same. But,

XII. The Principal is not obliged to approve of all that his Factor does; but
if the Factor has exceeded, or not followed his Orders punctually, though what
he has done were never so prudently managed, and with a good Intent, and in
design for the most Advantage and Interest of the Principal, yet he may
disprove of the same, and if he can make any Damage appear, he may make him
allow of it. But again, on the contrary, if the Factor has followed Order, and
has not transgressed nor exceeded his Commission, then the Principal must
approve of what is done by his Factor, though it turn not to account, but be
greatly to his loss.

XIII. The loss that is by Exchange (or any other concerns) if the Factor has
followed Orders strictly and punctually, must be born by the Principal, for
whose account the Negotiation is. And,

XIV. Such a Factor that follows Orders, does not amiss, though he foresee, if
he should delay, or follow his own Conceptions, it would be more profitable for
his Principal; and because Exchanges are as variable as the Wind, and many
times as if made, do precipitate without any known Cause or Reason; therefore a
Factor must not exercise his Speculative Philosophical Faculty and Reason what
is profitable or not for his Principal, but must follow Orders precisely, if he
possibly can, unless he certainly and absolutely know, that it will be very
prejudicial to his Principal so to do.

XV. So then, Orders must strictly, promptly and punctually be observed; for if
a Factor act without, contrary to, or above Order, and his Principal approve
not thereof, the Negotiation, whatever it was, remains done as for the Factor's
account, and he must bear the loss thereof. Yet,

XVI. That known Rule, Volge Order, and dort Qualick (i. e. follow Order,
though to the Principal's loss) is not always to be observed, if the Factor
see that by following Order he shall infallibly prejudice his Principal; for
else he deals not honestly with his Principal, nor as for himself, but makes it
plainly appear, that if he get his Provisions he cares not whether his
Principal sink or swim, and its therefore best of all in such cases, for the
Factor not to perform the Commission, but wait for second Orders if he can. For,

XVII. A Principal has not always regress against the Factor, for the loss
that does ensue upon the not performing the Commission, although the Facor has
promised to effect his Orders, and could have done it. But,

XVIII. If he act any thing contrary to Order, he is always obliged to make
satisfaction for the Damage and Interest, etc. Sigism. Scaccia. page 391.

XIX. If a Factor exceed his Order, its not in the power of the Principal to
take so much of the Negotiation for his account as his Orders were, and
regulate the Affairs accordingly, but he must either totally approve or
disprove of what the Factor has done, and so either take all or none, as its
done by the Factor.

XX. If a Factor transgress his Limits and Orders, and give advice thereof to
his Principal, and does consent, that in case he disprove of what he has done,
the whole Affair and Negotiation shall be reduced to his Orders, the Principal
must content himself therewith, and be silent.

XXI. The Factor that can and will not act to his Principal's advantage, cannot
have a quiet and peaceable Conscience; neither if he can negotiate his Affairs
under or above the course and limits that he has given (and so more to his
advantage) can he detain the advantage for himself.

XXII. A Factor renders himself suspected if he do not advise his Principal of
the true Course, but makes his Bills in a Foreign Denomination of Moneys. As
for Instance: At Amsterdam the custom is to exchange on Dantzick in Pounds
Flemish, at 216 Groshe Polish Money, or else for a pound Flemish: Now if the
Bills made at Amsterdam be made in Polish Guilders and Groshe, and not in
Pounds Flemish, it presently reflects suspicion upon the Factor, as if he had
clipped the Course.

XXIII. If one Factor has one and the same Commission from diverse Principals,
(whether in Exchange or other Affairs) without any Limitation, and he does
effectually perform the said Commissions, but perhaps in different Courses, or
at several Prices, that he cannot possibly reduce them to an equality, then its
not contrary to Reason that he let that Principal, which to him is (or may
prove) the best, have the most advantage; but yet he is obliged so to manage
the Affairs that one Principal shall not have all the most advantageous, and
the other all the most disadvantagious Courses and Prices; but he must
endeavor to give all satisfaction and content as far as he can, that he may
with confidence answer them all.

XXIV. If a Factor has Orders to one and the same purpose, from diverse
Principals; but one limits him to a Course and Price, the other not; if he can,
and does effect both their Commissions at the limited Price and Course, or yet
more for their advantage, then its but Just that the Principal that gave not
limits should be preferred, if there be any advantage; because if the
Commission could not have been effected at the limited Course and Price, he
must have been content to have stood to and suffered the loss.

XXV. If a Factor has a double Commission from one Principal about drawing and
remitting, he must not effect the one, unless he know how to effect the other
(or if to buy and draw, he must not first draw and then buy) if he do the one
without the other, its but an half effected Commission, and will remain for the
Factors Account, and he must bear the loss.

XXVI. The Factor may, and must place his Principal to account Courtagie and
Mackeleridge, though the Commission was effected without the Interposition of
either Mackeler or Broger: But that Factor that to spare the Courtagie or
Mackeleridge, and place it to his Principals Account, over and above his
Provision, will rather yield to some things in the Conditions of the
Negotiation (as to give more, or take less) does not honestly and truly serve
his Principal as he ought.

XXVII. For Courtagie of Exchanges, whether in drawing or remitting, usually
one per mill is allowed for Provisions for drawing and remitting, each half
per cent; but for accepting and drawing both, but half per cent.

XXVIII. A Factor that is a Creditor of the Principal, cannot detain that
Moneys that the Principal has remitted to him, with orders to remit again, or
otherwise dispose thereof for his Credit, and afterward effect his Order,
value again upon him, or buy upon Credit. Sigism. Scaccia. page 388.

XXIX. If one Partner order another to draw upon him, or upon any other, its
always supposed he may do it either in his own Name alone, or in the Name of
the Partnership. Scaccia.

XXX. If a Principal order his Factor to pay his Bills of Exchange, and place
them to account of a third Person, it supposes that the third Person is the
Drawers Debtor, and if the Factor do accept of the Commission simply, it does
infer an Assignation upon the third, or at least Cessionem Nominis, of whom the
Factor must seek his Re-imbursement. Sigism. Scaccia. fol. 387, and 480.

XXXI. If a Factor has order to pay Bills of Exchange, and to place them to
the Drawer's Account; or if he pay supra Protest for the Drawers Account, if
the Drawer will not Re-imburse him, he may by Attachments and Arrests proceed
against the Drawer. Scaccia.

XXXII. The act of a quasi Factor cannot prejudice the Principal, unless there
can be produced the Principals Order. Scaccia.

XXXIII. No more then half per cent. is due for the Provision, both for the
Labor and the Risco, if the Factor stand del credere. The Italians allow but
one third for both; more than this usually and customary Provision no Factor
can with a good Conscience take or demand, unless it be agreed upon expressly;
and being the Risco cannot be weighed by Ounces and Pounds, and the most hazard
may be when the least appears, and contra, and that he is a Fool that will for
so little Provision run an eminent hazard, therefore its ill to talk of
Provision for the Risco. Scaccia.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Drawing in Commission.
Rule I. DRawing in Commission is either for the account of him on whom is
drawn, who is the Acceptant, or for a third Person.

II. When a Bill is drawn for the account of him on whom its drawn, prompt and
punctual advice must be given him, What Sum (and distinctly in how many Bills)
what Date, to Whom and When Payable, from Whom the Value, at What Course, and
How much he will therefore be credited in the Account.

III. Bills must not be drawn for the account of a third, without special order
from the Person for whose account it is, and the Acceptant should also advise
that he is ordered, and will accept for the account of that third Person,
before the Drawer ought to draw.

IV. When Bills are drawn for the account of a third, punctual advice by the
Drawer to the Person for whose account, and also to the Accepter must be given.

V. The Accepter must be advised, first, For whose Account, and then what Sum,
in how many Bills, what Date, to whom, and when Payable, and from whom the
Value. But to add the Course, is not necessary, unless the Exchange be made in
a Foreign or Imaginary denomination of Moneys, wherein the Merchants of that
place where the Bill is payable do not keep their Accounts, and when the value
of the Bill must be paid, according to the course contracted for; As for
instance, Exchanges are drawn at Amsterdam on Dantzick, Konigsbrough,
Stockholme, etc. in the Pound Flemish, at so many Grosh for the Pound Flemish.

VI. The Principal for whose Account it drawn, must be advised of the Course,
On Whom is drawn, What Sum, at What Time Payable, and the Value that he is
Credited for: But to advise him how many Bills, or with whom is Negotiated, is
not necessary at all.

VII. In the making of Bills drawn for the account of a third, some Drawers
observe this Method, in the concluding of the Bill they say, Make good Payment,
and place it to Account of N. N. naming the Person, or the two first Letters of
his Name and Surname, to prevent and obviate an Exception that the Accepter
may make that he accepted not for such an account, nor does satisfy the said
Bills for such and such an Account, but on the Drawers Account.

VIII. Bills are, and may sometimes be drawn upon another for a third Persons
account, and yet the Accepter not know the Person at all; but such draughts are
always made upon the Obligation and Faithfulness of the Drawer.

As for Example. A. B. is straightened for Moneys, and C. D. his Friend can spare
him none; but he has Credit with E. F. of Amsterdam, and he will serve his
Friend with his Credit; but A. B. and E. F. are utter Strangers one to another,
wherefore C. D. will value on his Friend E. F. such a sum of Moneys for the
account of A. B. as he has occasion for, whereof he advises E. F. and assures
him that he will be caution for the punctual Re-imbursement. This method of
Exchange is also practiced, in case A. B. is Debtor to C. D. and A. B. cannot
conveniently pay the Moneys, whereupon they both agree that C. D. may value on
his own Correspondent, E. F. with order to redraw the same on A. B. the Debtor.

IX. Sometimes Bills are drawn for the account of a third, by the order of a
fourth.

As for Example. A. B. of Antwerp has order from C. D. of Madrid, to draw for
his Account on E. F. of Hambrough, but A. B. of Antwerp finding no Rescounter,
orders G. H. of Amsterdam to value the said Moneys on Hambrough for the account
of Madrid, by the order of Antwerp, which done, he shall remit the Moneys to
Antwerp; or else A. draws on B. with order to reimburse himself, by drawing on
C. for the account of D. but such a Commission B. should not accept of, unless
A. oblige himself; and when he draws on C. he must advise him, that he draws by
the order of A. for the account of D. and also give advice to A. and the
account also; but its not necessary, though this Negotiation be for the account
of D. that B. should correspond with D. about it, to which A. is obliged.

X. When a Drawer in Commission gives his Bills to any that do not punctually
pay the Value, he is then obliged to procure the Value by rigor, and arresting
his Goods and Person, and may not give him any time or delay, but upon his own
risco and hazard; no, not a day longer than till the next Post.

XI. If a Drawer in Commission give the Remitter any time for the payment of
the Value, and has thereby any advantage in the course, and places the
advance to the Principals account; then the Principal upon advice thereof is
obliged by the next return of the Post to approve or disprove thereof, and if
he be not satisfied with the conditions, he must let the Drawer have the
advantage, and answer his Principal according to the price current.

XII. A Factor that has order to draw upon a third at sight, does not wisely
if he draw at any time.

XIII. Above all he should observe, not to draw after sight, but always after
date, or at a certain and fixed day.

XIV. If a Factor has order to draw on a third at price current, he must
follow his Order, though it be to the disadvantage of his Principal.

XV. A Principal must be content with the course his Factor has concluded on,
though it be to his great disadvantage, whether it proceed from the course of
Exchange, or from the Factors little credit.

XVI. Sometimes it falls out, that a Drawer having drawn in a disadvantagious
course to the Principal, does for certain Reasons advise his Principal of a
better course than he got, whereby he loses sometimes more, sometimes less
than all his Provisions; and as this is lawful, so also it cannot be judged
Knavery if the Drawer has got a very high course, if he place his Principal
the price current to account, thereby to make good his loss; but more not.

NB, As this may seem disputeable, so also doubtless its still the best way to
give the Principal an account of the Remgeltam, and not otherwise. For,

XVII. Such a Factor renders himself suspected by his Principal, for whose
account he draws, if he do not advise him the true and right course wherein he
negotiated, as also when he makes the Bills in another denomination of Moneys
than is usual and customary; for by so doing he can reckon the course
afterward as he pleases.

XVIII. Its very advisable for Drawers in Commission, that they procure the
Acceptance of their Draught (especially when on a third Person, and not on the
Principal directly) without delay.

XIX. When a Factor has order to buy Goods, and to draw the Costs and Charges
(or part thereof) on a third Person, and he knows not, or does not much confide
in his Principal, then its usual and customary for the Factor to correspond
with him on whom he has order to draw, and know whether he will accept such
and such Bills for that Principals account, or not; and if he advise that he
will accept, he is not obliged to accept when the Bills come, Nisi rebus sic
stantibus, or that he has effects in hands.

XX. He that has order to draw on one place, and remit to another for the
account of a third, or to remit to one place, and draw on another the said
value for the account of a third, he must not remit before he know that he can
draw, nor draw before he know that he can remit, lest on the one hand he be in
disburse, on the other, in cash for his Principal, not knowing how to dispose
of it, which cannot but displease him; and when he has an opportunity to do
both, he must before he conclude make his calculation, whether he can with the
course answer the designs and limits of his Friend (if he be limited.)

XXI. When a Factor has order to draw a just and limited Sum, then he must
add to the Sum (if it be to concl^ an account, etc.) Provision, Courtagie,
Postidge and other Charges.

XXII. In case (according to Case 19.) the Acceptant in Commission advise the
Drawer in Commission, that he will accept such and such a Sum for their
Principals account, and afterward the Acceptant, on the presenting of the
Bills for acceptance, utterly refuses; if the Drawer has bought and ship't
Goods, there is no reason but the Acceptant should be compelled thereto,
because the Drawer had not bought Goods (or remitted, etc.) but upon the advice
of the Acceptant; and so he, the Acceptant was the occasion of the loss.
Scaccia.

XXIII. But if the Drawer has not shipped the Goods, nor is in any danger of
losing upon that account, then he can demand no more of the Acceptant than
Rechange and Charges (seeing he gave the occasion to the loss) and reparation
of his credit, being he suffers by having his Bill protested. Scaccia.

XXIV. If a Principal order a Factor to draw, and he having disburst Moneys for
his Principal, does draw, the Principal may be compelled to accept his Bills,
and pay them.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Remitting in Commission, and standing Del Credere, i. e. being
Surety therefore.
Rule I. HE that remits in Commission, does either remit for the account of him
to whom he remits, or for a third Person, and he either stands del Credere, or
not for the Remises.

II. Remitters in Commission must take special care, that they order the Bills
to be made payable to whom the Principal gives order; and if he let the Bills
be made payable to his own order, he must not forget to endorse them to his
Principals order, before he send them away.

III. If a Remitter in Commission has ordered the Bills to be made payable
either directly to the Principal, or to his order, or any other, etc. may (if
he think fit) if he has not sent the Bills away, or parted with them out of
his hands, cause them to be altered, and make them payable to any other.

IV. When a Remitter in Commission has sent his Bill to a third Person, by the
order of his Principal, and in his Letter of advice has clearly expressed for
whose account it is; then neither he nor his Principal can alter or recall the
same, to the prejudice of him to whom the Remises are made.

In giving of advice, the Remitter must observe what before was noted in the
preceding Chapter.

V. A Remmitter in Commission, when he remits to one, who lives not in the
place where Payment must be made, should send the prima Bill directly to the
place of Payment, where Acceptance must be demanded, and by Refusal thereof
protested; and thus he also may have speedy advice himself, to secure himself
of the Drawer, from whom he may demand three Bills, and send the two other to
his Principal.

VI. When a Bill is thus protested for Non-payment, and returned to the
Remitter, and he procures satisfaction, with the Rechange, Charges and
Provisions, then the Remitter need not place any more to his Principals Account
on the credit, than what for Disbursements it was made Debt; and as for the
Provision, that is due to the Factor, for procuring of Satisfaction.

VII. Though a Remitter in Commission stands del Credere for the Remises, yet
he does very unwisely to order the Bills to be made payable to himself or
order, and then endorse them; however, this is frequently practiced by the
chiefest Bankers and Exchangers, on purpose to conceal from the Drawer, to whom
they remit; but this is very imprudently done, for these Reasons: 1. The
endorsing may be forgotten or neglected, and thence may follow endless Disputes
and Contests, and great Damage. 2. The Remitter by that means makes himself
liable not only to answer all damages, etc. to the Principal, but also to every
Possessor and Endorser of the Bill after him: For, 3. By endorsing the Bill he
makes it his own Bill, and obliges himself on the account of his Principal,
not only for the Value by him received, but for all other Charges and
Re-changes.


VIII. When a Remitter in Commission does not stand del Credere for the
Remises, then he does very imprudently to order the Bills to be made payable to
himself or order, and then endorse the same; for thereby he stands effectually
del Credere, and has no advantage by it.

IX. A Remitter in commission that stands del Credere, may upon the returning
of a Bill for Non-acceptance, contracting with the Drawer for the Re-change and
Charges, and receiving satisfaction, if he has not endorsed the Bill, not only
be compelled and required to remit the same Value to the same place, to fall
due at the same time, or to give order for the payment of the Sum at the same
time, but he is also obliged to give his Principal the advance of the
Re-change, etc. But in case he has endorsed the Bill, he may absolutely refuse
to give him the advance of the Re-change, and the Principal must be satisfied
and content with it, because by his Endorsement he made it his own Bill, and he
(as well as any other Drawer or Endorser) may cause the Bill to be satisfied at
the time appointed, and take the advantage of the Rechange to himself.

X. A Remitter in Commission, that stands del Credere, is not obliged, in case
a Bill be returned with protest, and the Drawer is not able to make
satisfaction, to make good to his Principal any more than the Value he paid for
the Bill; the Re-change and Charges, if lost, are lost to the Principal,
because the Remitter had Provision for no greater Sum than the Value he paid;
but if he get satisfaction for the Re-change and Charges from the Drawer, then
he is obliged to make the same good to his Principal; but the Provisions that
he receives from he Drawer he may detain for himself, and is no way obliged to
credit his Principals account for them, unless the just Sum with the Provision
and Charges be effectually re-drawn on him, but then he may also place his
Principal Provision to account for his accepting and paying the said Bill.

XI. A Remitter in Commission with del Credere, is at the returning of a Bill
with protest for Non-payment, obliged presently, and without delay to make good
the said Value, or to suffer it to be drawn on him, because he standing del
Credere, does oblige himself not only for the sufficiency of the Drawer, but
also for punctual payment; but then the Interest, Rechange, etc. is all for the
profit and advantage of the Remitter himself, if the Drawer cannot make present
punctual payment and satisfaction, though he afterward will, and gives
security therefore out of his effects, or otherwise.

XII. A Remitter in Commission with del Credere, giving order for the payment
of a Bill protested for Non-payment, may charge his Principal with what he pays
effectually more than the Bill was for, or what he disburses more than the
value was that he paid, on condition he let the Principal have leave to recover
what loss he may have, and the charges from the Drawer.

XIII. A Remitter in Commission with del Credere, making the Bills payable to
the order of his Principal, or to a third, is obliged (though the said Bill be
drawn and endorsed several times in several places, and that therefore the
advice of the Bills being protested cannot come in a long time after protest is
made to his hands) to answer to his Principal the value by him paid, and that
though the Drawer was for some considerable time in credit after the advice
thereof might have come to his hands, if it had been sent directly.

XIV. If any remit in Commission with del Credere, in his own Bills, then is
he, because he is also Drawer, at the returning of his Bills with protest for
Non-payment obliged to make good to his Principal the Rechange and Charges, as
if he had not been the Drawer himself, but a Stranger --

XV. When any remits in Commission with del Credere, and makes the Bills for
the account of him to whom he remits, then the Risco of standing del credere is
ended with the day of Payment; so that in case the Acceptant (suppose he were
also the Person to whom the Remise was made) should fail the very next day
after the Bills became due (or within the usual appointed respit days a formal
protest for Non-payment be not entered) the loss is the Principals, and not the
Remitters in Commission; but if the Acceptant fail before the day of payment,
or does protest against himself for Non-payment within the days of Respit,
then the loss is the Remitters, because he also is the Drawer of him for whose
account the Draught was made.

XVI. When a Remitter in commission has order from his principal to remit to
some other place (to some of his Correspondents, that he looks on as
sufficient) a certain Sum of Moneys with his del Credere, there to wait the
Principals order; if the said Remitter advise his Principal of the Remises, and
to whom he remitted, and the said Sums he duly and truly paid, then the
Remitter (if the remitted beyond all fear should fail) is not obliged to the
Principal, because the del Credere has only respect to the remitting of such
Sums in sufficient Bills, and not to him to whom they are remitted, by whom the
said Sums from the moment of their being paid to him were at the order and
disposal of the Principal, and he having no occasion instantly to dispose of
them, he did trust and credit the same in the hands of his Correspondent.

XVII. A Factor having order to draw on one place, and to remit to another the
said value, or any part thereof, with his del Credere, if it should so happen
that he could procure no satisfaction of the value for his Draughts, he must
suffer the loss, because the del Credere in such a case has respect to the
whole Negotiation, and not to the Remises only.

XVIII. A Factor for an Out-dweller for the sale of Goods, standing del Credere
for the Debts, does not stand del Credere for the Remises that he makes to his
Principal, issuing out of the Debts he has received, unless there be a special
and particular contract concerning it.

XIX. A Remitter in Commission must not remit by anticipation in Rescounter of
the advance that is yet for the account of his Principal not come in (or not
received) but if he do, he must expressly advise him, that the Remises are by
anticipation, without his prejudice, though the Moneys to balance this
particular in his account be not yet come in.

XX. And as a Drawer, so also a Remitter in Commission, with or without del
Credere, makes himself suspected if he advise not his Principal of the true
course of his Negotiation, as also when he makes his Bills (or orders them to
be made) or accepts of unendorsed Bills, wherein the Sum that is exchanged is
expressed in a Foreign denomination of Coin, and not in that Coin wherein the
Bills of Exchange usually and ordinarily are made.

XXI. Because a Remitter in Commission is not obliged to remit, if he can meet
with no Bills within the limits of his Commission, and is no ways obliged to
supply what is awanting; so also on the contrary, he is not allowed when the
course of Exchange is under the limits of his order, to charge his Principals
account with a course that he limited; but if he with his del Credere credit
any that have not gained sufficient credit, or has lost part of it, or that is
not well known, and can contract with such a one under the course (not under
the limits) he may then, taking the hazard of the Bill upon himself, charge his
Principals account, according to the course of Exchange in the best Bills at
that time: But if he stand not de Credere, and his Principal shall run the
hazard of the Bill, then he does him wrong if he do not let him have the
advantage of the course.

XXII. When any has a remitted Sum, or any other Effects to remit again, in a
just and warrantable appointed sum, and would reckon the Provision thereof, he
is not allowed to reckon Provision of the full advance, that his Principal has
by him, but only of the sum he is ordered to remit; for otherwise he will have
Provision of his Provision.

As for Example. When any Factor has 1000 Pound Flemish to remit with his del
credere, then usually per Cent. Provision is reckoned, which makes 40 Guilders,
and one per Mill Courtagie is 6 Guilders, and 5954 Guilders remitted, is in
all 6000 Guilders.

But in regard the Courtagie of the sum Remitted is only Guilders 5. 19 Gr. at
one per Mill, so also the Provision is no more then Ggl. 39.14. which make
together Ggl. 45.13. so that there is 7 Gr. or St. difference, that the Factor
reckons too much in his own Favor.

XXIII. If the Bills of a Remitter, upon his own del credere, be returned with
Protest and he can procure no satisfaction presently of the Drawer, though he
get Security, yet if he be forced to disburse his own, or borrow Monyes of
another at Interest, he may place the same to the Drawers account, and make him
allow the same. Scaccia.

XXIV. He that remits in Commission, and is negligent and careless, dealing
with those that are suspected to be Insolvent, or near failing, must bear the
loss and run the hazard, as if he effectually stood del credere. Sigism.
Scaccia. fol. 411. and 391. Number. 400. and sequentibus.

XXV. He that makes a Remise for the Possessors account, cannot revoke his
Order, with the consent of the Drawer, nor forbid the Payment, but if for his
own account, he may. Scaccia.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of being drawn upon in Commission.
Rule I. ITs the duty of him that is drawn on in Commission, upon the advice of
the Draught punctually and without delay to return answer to the Drawer, and to
advise him, whether he accept or no, on the Conditions, and for the Account of
him for whom it was drawn.

II. And if the Draught be for the account of a third, then the Acceptant must
give advice to him also, for whose Account it is, that such a Sum by such a
Person is drawn on him, for his Account, and is payable at such a Day, as also
that he shall accept the value for the Principals account or not.

III. He that is drawn upon for the account of a third Person, from whom he
has no order to accept, neither is in Cash for his account, neither has order
to redraw the value on the Principal from the Principal, does wisely if he
suffer the Bills to return protested for Non-acceptance, unless he know the
Drawer very well to be sufficient and honest, and will accept for his account
supra Protest.

IV. If any be drawn on for the account of third, whom he will not credit, or
from whom he has no orders to accept any such Draughts for his account, he can
and may if the Drawer be sufficient, accept the Bills supra Protest in honor
of the Drawer; but in such a case he is obliged instantly to advise the Drawer
of such his acceptance supra Protest.

V. He that is drawn on, either for the account of a third, or for the Drawers
account, making a difficulty either freely or supra Protest to accept for the
one or the others account, may accept the same in honor of any one Endorser
supra protest, if he know and dare trust any one of them, and then he is
obliged to give the Drawer, and the Person for whose account it is, and also
the Endorser for whose account he accepts, advice thereof, and to send the
Protest and the Acceptance supra Protest in honor of any Endorser to the said
Endorser, for his use against his Drawer.

VI. When the Acceptant has accepted a Bill supra Protest in honor of the
Drawer or any Endorser for want of advice or order, or Provision from him for
whose account the Bill is drawn, and he shall atterwards receive Orders and
Provision, then he is obliged to free the Drawer and Endorser from their
Obligations, and to advise them that he will pay the Draught for his account
for whose it was drawn, and that he therefore discharges them.

VII. When an Acceptant accepts a Bill with the Drawers Obligation, then he is
obliged at the day of payment to advise the Drawer, whether he for whose
account the Bill was drawn did make Provision for it, or other ways give
sufficient order for paying the same, and that he therefore discharges him
from his Obligation.

VIII. When any is drawn on for the account of a third by one with whom the
Acceptant never had any Correspondency, and therefore knows not his
Handwriting, then must great prudence be used, though the Acceptant has order
from the Principal to accept the same, and must in no wise accept of any such
Bill without a Letter of advice from the Drawer himself, that the Handwriting
in the Bill and Letter may be compared.

IX. He that verbally or by Letter has promised to accept of any Bills drawn
on him for the account of a third, he to whom this promise was made relying
thereon, gives the third Person credit, then he that made the promise is
obliged to perform it, in respect of him to whom he made the promise; but if he
afterward refuse to accept his Bill for the account of the said third Person,
the Possessor of the Bill cannot force him thereto by present execution, but
only in the ordinary legal way.

X. No Acceptant can or must accept for his Principal Bills drawn by another
for his account, unless he has express order so to do, and the Drawer does in
every respect fully and punctually observe his order, if the third Person, for
whose account was drawn, advise the Acceptant thereof.

XI. When a Factor has order from his Principal to accept a certain Sum from a
third, for his account at usance, and the third draws at sight because he could
not meet with any opportunity according to his Principals order to draw at
usance; in such a case the Acceptant may accept the Dranght in honor of the
Drawer supra Protest, and re-value the same upon him, if he has no order from
the Principal how he may be re-imbursed.

XII. When a Factor has order from his Principal to accept of any Draughts at
usance from a third, and the third finds no opportunity to draw the same till
half usance be expired, and then draws at half usance, in such a case the
Acceptant is obliged to accept freely and willingly.

XIII. If any be drawn on in Commission, and is ordered to draw the value again
from some place else, whence he probably can meet with no Moneys, or cannot
draw in the limited course, and finds it is not his convenience to disburse so
much Moneys for his Principals account, then he may, if he cannot do otherwise,
charge his Bills directly on the Drawer, or any other place, even above the
limited course, at the best course for his Principal that he can procure.

XIV. If any be drawn on in Commission, and he has accepted the Bill, and the
payment is not demanded at the day, then he must and may debit the Principal
for the said Value, as if it were paid, because he is still obliged for the
Sum, at all times, and in all places.

XV. The Acceptant of a Bill in Commission, drawn at time on him, may and must,
if the Drawer against the time of payment do again call in the Bill himself,
and pay the Moneys, demand of him his accepted Bill, and the Drawer is obliged
to restore it; but he must before he part with it clearly express and write
upon it, that he himself called in the Bill and satisfied it, and tear or cut
it through with a Knife for a token of its being made void, and the Drawer is
obliged at least to allow the Acceptant half Provision.

XVI. When a Factor is drawn upon to satisfy the Bill out of the Effects or
Goods that he has in his hands to dispose of, then he is always, whatever
happen, preferred to those Goods, and must have his Disbursments out of them
before any other Creditors can lay any claim thereto.

XVII. If any be drawn upon in Commission, and there afterward be found any
difference in their Accounts, as the Sums and Quantities drawn, the Acceptant
is obliged to prove his account by producing the Bills, no other Evidence (for
many Reasons) being Proof sufficient. Scaccia.

CHAP. XXIX. Of being Remitted to in Commission.
Rule I. ITs the Duty of him to whom a Bill is remitted, 1. To endeavor to
procure acceptance. 2. On refusal to protest, if not forbidden, though not
expressly ordered. 3. To advise the Remitter of the Receipt, Acceptance or
Protesting thereof, and to send the Protest to him. And, 4. To advise any other
third Person that is or may be concerned in it; and all this without delay by
the return of the next Post.


II. He that has Bills remitted to him for the account of a third, or to be at
the disposal of a third, cannot place the said Bills either to his own or to
the Remitters account, nor to any others account, but he is obliged to observe
the order of him only for whose account, and at whose disposal the said Moneys
and Bills was ordered and remitted to him.

III. If a Bill remitted for the account, or to be at the disposal of a third,
be endorsed or made payable at first to the Receiver thereof, or to his order,
he that receives the Bill cannot, if he has advised the Person for whose
account, or at whose disposal it must be, that he has received such a Bill for
his account, or to be at his disposal, revoke his Word to pleasure the
Remitter, but must wait for the order of the said third Person; but if he has
not writ nor advised the said third Person thereof, then he may, at the request
of the Remitter (or the Remitter at the request of the Possessor) observe the
last order, or wait for further orders.

IV. When any have Moneys remitted to them in Commission, and the Principal
orders the same Moneys to be remitted further to some other place, or otherwise
to dispose thereof, if the said Person to whom the Moneys was remitted do omit
this order, or neglect it, and detains the Moneys by him, the same is obliged
to make good to his Principal all the loss and damage he can thereby pretend by
the not observing his Order and effecting his Commission.

V. If any have Bills remitted to them, to be endorsed and drawn in from other
places, and the Principal either limits the course at which he would have them
re-valued, or orders them to be sent back; if he cannot negotiate them at the
limited course for want of Moneys, or Rescounter, or Credit, etc. he does then
very unwisely if he send the said Bills back in blanco, or endorsed, payable to
the order of his Principal, because if the Bills were returned with Protest he
would make himself liable to answer for them; but to free himself of the fear
of this trouble and loss, if the Bills be made payable or endorsed to the order
of his Principal, and the Principal endorses them payable to his order, (i. e.
the Factors) he may scrape or blot out that order, and make it illegible, and
so send the Bills back again. But then again, if the Bills be originally made
payable to the order of him to whom they are remitted, the value of the
Remitter, and this can no ways be altered, then its advisable for him to write
on the back of the Bill, that the contents and value was not paid to his order,
but to a later order of the Remitters, is yet to be paid.

VI. When any receives a Remise for account of another, and the Bill is not
accepted, or accepted is not paid at the due time, but protested, then the
Person to whom was remitted, if he has occasion for Moneys for the Principals
account, he may value the Sum on the Remitter (when he returns the Protest and
Bills) together with Courtagie, Provision and Charges for the Principals
account, giving the person he draws on punctual advice.

VII. When any has Moneys remitted to him in diverse Bills, for diverse
accounts, for one more, for another less, and rekoning the Sum total of all the
Bills, and not advising any, which Bills were for this, and which for that, and
which for a thirds account, in case then one of the Remises should be protested
for Non-payment, then the Possessor thereof may at his best convenience
re-value the same on the Remitter, and if he cannot get satisfaction there,
then the loss will fall upon all the Bills, for whose account the Remises were,
and every one must bear a proportion of the loss, pro Rato, of the Sum he was
to have in those Remises, and if the Remitter stood del Credere for any, he
must suffer loss, pro Rato, with the rest.

VIII. If any have Remises made for Draughts that were formerly drawn on him,
and fall due before the Remises do, and so come too late to do the Acceptant
any service in order to the satisfying of those Draughts, then he may, if he
please, reckon Interest for the disburse of his own Moneys for the time, at 6
per Centum per Annum, and for what is more than fourteen days, a full Month
may be reckoned, and half a Month for what the time is less than fourteen
days; but if it be not his convenience to disburse his Moneys for the time, he
may against the time the Draught falls due value the Sum on the Remitter, and
keep the product of his Remises till his further order: But thus to do will
give little satisfaction or content to the first Drawer, and will not be much
for the credit of the other.

IX. A Factor that is remitted to, and then drawn upon, is not very wise, or
else he is easily satisfied, and would gladly work for nothing that will be
content with one Shilling per cent. Provision, especially if he, 1. Must bear
the Charges of Postidge, and dare not place them to the Principal's Account. 2.
Or if the Bills must both or either of them be paid in current Moneys, without
the Bank. Or, 3. If the Draughts come sooner than the Remises, and so by
Consequence he must nakedly credit his Principal. Or, 4. If the Draughts fall
due, though but one day sooner than the Remises, and he must pay the Draughts
before the Remises be received.


X. If a Possessor in Commission protest not in due Time and Form, either for
Non-acceptance or Non-payment, he himself is liable to make good to the
Remitter, or him for whose account it was, the Rechange and Charges, though the
Acceptant is obliged for no more than the Sum that the Bill is for, and the
Drawer, ipso facto, discharged. Scaccia.

CHAP. XXX. Of Rechange, and Continuance of Exchange and Rechange.
Rule I. REchange in its largest Acceptance, is the Value of a drawn or
remitted Sum, Redrawn or Remitted by the Payer, or received of the Value,
either to, or on the Place directly from which was drawn or remitted, or to, or
on any other Place or Fair.

II. But in a stricter Sense, its taken for the Revaluing or Remitting
directly, on or to the first Drawer or Remitter.

III. A true and proper Rechange must also exactly answer the Value of the just
Sum of that Bill, whereof it is the Rechange.

IV. When any Revalues or Redraws in the aforesaid manner, to the just Sum and
Value that he paid, he must add Provision, Courtagie, Postidge, Protest, etc.
and all other Charges that are usually reckoned; and this sum added together,
is the just sum to be Revalued.

V. In Revaluing, the Provision must be reckoned for the sum that is first
drawn, Courtagie for the Sum revalued or redrawn.

VI. In Remitting of the just Sum, both the Provision and Courtagie must be
reckoned, according to the Sum remitted.

VII. When a Factor Remits, and Revalues the just Sum of the Remises, and drawn
a certain Sum, and remits the value to another place, then he must reckon his
Provisions of the sum he remits, and not of the sum that he draws, and
Courtagie for both.

VIII. The Redrawing need not be delayed till after the Draughts are
discharged, but may freely and without fear of a Reproof be redrawn the Post
day before those Draughts fall due; for a Factor is not obliged, nor is it
always his convenience, to disburse his Moneys, though but for a few days.

IX. Neither is it necessary, or can it be required of a Factor to Remit,
before the Remises be received; and if it be done sooner to pleasure the first
Remittent, it must always be done under Protest, to suffer no damage.

X. When a Factor has the advance of the Remises to Remit, he must strictly
observe the Order of his Principal, and may, if he cannot come within his
limits, delay the remitting, and let the advance lie by him undisposed of, till
the Principals further order.

XI. When a Factor has occasion to redraw for the Principals account, for
draughts first drawn on him, he is not so precisely bound to the Order of his
Principal, but can, and may (if he neither will, nor can be in disburse)
redraw, not only according to Order, and within his Limits; but he may exceed
the Order and Limits set him; and if he has no Order, may redraw without
Order, yea, and expressly against Order if need be.

XII. Factors in redrawing, follow their Orders, and observe their Limits, when
the Debtor for the accepted Bill ( i. e. the Principal, for whose account it
was drawn, or for whose account the same was accepted supra Protest) having
ordered and limited the Acceptant, or him that is to discharge the Bill and
Draught for his account, how, and when he may revalue, if the Factor do
accordingly, or to more and better advantage than the Principals orders or
limits were; in this case the Principal has nothing to say.

XIII. But its above order and limits, when thus the Factor re-draws on that
place and person, that his Principal orders, but in a more disadvantagious
course than he limited; and the Principal in this case must be silent and
patient, though it be to his loss.

XIV. And its without order when the Principal and Debtor for the Bill did not
or could not make Provision for the discharge of the Bill, and therefore gave
no order how the Acceptant should be re-imbursed, whereupon the Factor draws on
him, because he cannot be in disburse, or will not, thinking it unadvisable.

XV. And its against order when the Principal has ordered that the Factor
shall draw on another place, or at long time; and being the Factor either could
not or would not draw on such a place and person, nor at so long time, he
therefore draws directly on his Principal at sight, or at shorter time than he
ordered, or redraws on some other place or person, where he can.

XVI. When an Acceptant of a Bill will revalue without or against order, then
its most advisable and best answerable, that he draw directly upon the Debtor
and Principal, rather than on any else.

XVII. He that is Debtor for a Bill, is and remains still (in respect of the
Redrawer) Debtor for the Re-change that his Factor draws on him for the
discount of his Draughts, and this whether he draw directly on the Principal,
or on any other third Person for the Principals account.

XVIII. When any is drawn upon for the account of a third person, and the
Acceptant accepts supra Protest for the account of the Drawer, and does advise
him expressly thereof at the return of the Post, then the Acceptant may (if he
get not sufficient Provision from the Principal, or else sufficient orders for
his Re-imbursement before the Draughts fall due) revalue upon the Drawer, and
is not obliged to seek his Redress first on any third person, for whose account
the Draught was. But if the Acceptance was made supra Protest with the
obligation of the Drawer, then the Acceptant must, if the Drawer require it,
first seek his redress on a third person, for whose account it was drawn; and
yet he is no further obliged in this case than to revalue on the third person;
and if his Bill be protested, or not accepted; nor paid, then he has his
regress upon the Drawer, whose obligation he reserved to the last.

XIX. When Provision for a Bill, drawn for the account of a third, by the
Acceptant accepted supra Protest, with the obligation of the Drawer, is not
made by him for whose account it is drawn against the time that it falls due,
but orders are only given to revalue the same directly upon himself, or on some
other place, then the Acceptant must in this case first consult the Drawer, who
has obliged himself, before he can revalue the same, and advise him, that
this, notwithstanding he will yet remain by his obligation till the Sum to be
re-valued be re-paid.

XX. When the Acceptant of a Bill drawn for the account of a third, but
accepted supra Protest for the account of the Drawer, with the Drawers
obligation, etc. does re-value on a third person at the request of the Drawer,
and the said Acceptants Bills are either not accepted, or if accepted, not paid
in due time, and so are sent back with Protest, then he that discharged the
first draughts, and must also discharge the protested Bills, may re-value the
said Sum, with the Charges, Provisions and Protest on the first Drawer, by
whose obligation he still remained.

XXI. When a Bill is supra Protest for the account, or with the obligation of
the Drawer accepted, and the Acceptant afterward repents, and is jealous
whether the Drawer will really accept of his Re-draughts, then its best that
the Acceptant suffer the Bills to return protested for Non-payment; but first
advise him, that he may take new orders for the discharge of his Bills.

XXII. If any be drawn upon for the account of a third, and the Bill be freely
accepted for the account of that third, such a one at the day of payment has
no regress on the Drawer, and the Drawer is not obliged, if the Acceptant
re-draw, to accept of his Bills, because the Acceptant by his free acceptance
has discharged the Drawer, and is obliged to look for his re-imbursment from
the third Person, for whose account he accepted.

XXIII. But in case the Principal in any of the 11, 13, 14 or 15 Cases
foregoing, will not accept the Bills of the Acceptant redrawn upon him,
because they are without, above or against order, what shall the Acceptant then
do? seeing without acceptance there is no obligation on any to pay a Bill of
Exchange, and the Acceptant was not so wise as to cause or suffer the Bills to
be protested, by which means he could have compelled the Drawer to dance to his
Pipe. My Authors, that I remember, have none of them salved this case; and
though it would seem to be very reasonable and equitable, that the Principal
should, according to the Laws of Exchanges, be proceeded against, Executive;
yet I cannot see that there is any other Remedy for such Factors, but the
ordinary one, and to proceed against their Principals Action, Mandati. Sigism.
Scaccia.

XXIV. Scaccia. If Bills be protested for Non-payment, Re-change is due but
once, though the Remitter or the Possessor can recover nothing of the Drawer or
Acceptant at that instant, and afterward only Interest, till a contract or
composition be agreed upon; otherwise, if Re-change and Interest upon Interest
should be due in Infinitum, the Interest would soon exceed the Principal, and
it would be impossible for the poor Debtor to recover, nor is it once due if
the Monyes afterward be paid in the place of payment in due time.

XXV. Scaccia. Vsura Poenae is seldom or never due (as, if you pay not so much
at such a time, you shall forfeit so much more) for if Interest upon Interest
be unlawful, much more this; for that Interest that does by superfactation, as
it were, produce another Interest, can produce no more than in proportion to
the Capital; but this is usually much more, and is only added to scare the
Debtor, etc.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Exchanges to and from Fairs in General.
Rule I. BY Fairs is meant free and privileged anniversary Fairs, which are
held at certain places and times, sometimes twice, thrice, and oftener in one
year, to which all Domestic and Foreign Merchants are admitted to come and
Trade, and for that time to enjoy such Privileges and Immunities as the
Magistrates have allowed and granted.

II. The most renowned and famous Marts or Fairs in these times in our parts,
are Frankford on the main, Leipzig in Suchsen (or Saxonia) Lions in France,
Modena in Italy, Besonson (or Bisenzon) in Spain, and Bolzane in Tyrol; but at
Amsterdam there is found no course of Exchange but to the three first, as
Frankford, Leipzig and Lions.

III. At Frankford are yearly two, at Leipzig three, and at Lions four Fairs.

IV. And so soon (and sometimes before) as one Fair is ended at one place,
Exchanges are made on the same place for the next Fair; but its seldom that any
Exchanges are made payable at the second or third Fair ensuing the date of the
Bill; yet on these conditions Bills may be made and negotiated, and such
Exchanges are as obligatory as any other, if the precise time of payment be
clearly expressed in the Bills (though some are of another Opinion) and the
Drawer is obliged at the time to perform the contract agreed on, the course,
etc. may be as it will.

V. In the respective Fairs Exchanges are made not only on other Foreign
places, but also on the same place where the Fair is kept, and that not only
between the Fair times for the next Fair, but also for the ensuing Fairs in the
Fair time.

VI. When a man draws simply on such a Fair in such a place, then its to be
understood of the first Fair next ensuing in that place, and the payment must
be made at the usual time of payment in that place and Fair.

VII. Its usual and customary, when Bills are made on a Fair that is not yet
begun, that then the time of payment is expressed thus, At the next ensuing Fair,
etc. but if the Fair be already begun, then they express it thus, At the
present Easter Fair, Michaelmass Fair, August Fair, etc. as the Name of that
Fair may be.

VIII. In Exchanging on Fairs, the Drawer is not obliged to furnish the
Remitter with Bills sooner than about so long a time before the beginning of
the Fair, that they being sent per Post thither, can be there before the Fair
begin.

NB, This is the custom in the Frankford Fairs at Amsterdam, but in the Fairs
of Lions and Leipzig the Drawer must instantly give his Bill; and though some
Merchants have endeavored to introduce this order and custom in the Exchanges
on Lions and Leipzig, yet it could take no effect, though it would tend greatly
to the advantage of the Merchants to have Moneys in their disposal for a little
time, to the lessening of much Provision that is now paid to the Lyoners and
Leipzigers, and to the advantage of the Macklers.

IX. If the Drawer do not presently furnish Bills to the Remitter, then he
ought, as soon as he receives the Value, give under his Hand and Seal a
Writing, specifying the Contract, and obliging himself to the performance of
it, and to deliver the Possessor Bills for the value, against the beginning of
the Fair.

X. He that remits to a Fair, must demand the Bills so timously that he can
send them away to be there before the beginning of the Fair, or at furthest,
within the usual time of Acceptance; for by the late arrival of Bills,
sometimes in the times of Payment great disorders and confusions do happen.

XI. The Acceptance of Bills payable in Fairs, ought not to be done but in the
Fairs, nor need the Acceptant declare whether he will accept or no, before the
beginning thereof; but the Fair being begun, the designed Acceptant must
declare, within a certain fixed precise time, whether he will accept or no, or
else the Possessor must protest for Nonacceptance.

XII. If Acceptance be made before the beginning of the Fair, and the Bill be
payable, then the Aeceptance is Obligatory, though it be against the Order,
Style and Custom of the Fair, nor can the Acceptant repent, (but too late) nor
any way be relieved.

XIII. The discharging and paying of Bills in the Fairs, is for the most part
done by verbal Resconters, whereof those that make Resconters do afterward
make and keep exact and perfect Notes: In some Fairs they use only to note the
Resconter in their Day-Books, or Memorial, or Pocket-Books, that can be blotted
out again: But in other Fairs the Resconters must be clearly expressed on Paper,
written with Ink, in Books for that purpose, called Resconter-Books, that in
case of any Dispute or Accidences, all Frauds may be prevented; and when the
Resconter is once made, its as effectual as if the Bill were paid with ready
Cash.

XIV. If any Payments cannot be made exactly by Resconter for the just Sum,
then on the last day of the Pay-Week, if the time will not permit to tell the
Sum that day in Specie, they give and take from one another (after they have
adjusted the Sum) a Note for the Value that one or the other must pay, and then
they can receive it the Week following.

XV. When on the last day of the Pay-Week, (or of payment) the Acceptant does
not discharge the Bill, neither by Cash nor by Resconter, then the Possessor is
obliged to protest, or else he loses his regress on the Drawer.

XVI. In all Fairs there are but few, at most, and in some but one Notary
Public allowed of, who is to protest, and must keep a Protocal of every
Protest, to which every one must have free access to see and know what Bills
for Non acceptance, and what Bills for Non-payment are protested, that they
may, if they please, in honor of the Drawer or Endorser, accept and pay them.

XVII. All Fairs have also their own proper Judges, (pre Tempore) which usually
are chosen out of the Merchants that frequent the Fair, and are usually three
in Number, one Consul and two Counselors, who after hearing of the partys, do
decide all Differences and Disputes among them; no Lawyers nor Advocates being
admitted to plead, and their Sentence is definitive, and must be executed,
unless the party that is grieved do appeal to the highest Court of Judicature
that is in the place where the fair is kept.

NB, This laudable Custom is in other places obferved, appointing a College of
Commerce to hear and determine of all Controversies, either in Merchandising or
in Exchanges among Merchants, where the Process is short, and without delay;
and every one is himself (some cases excepted, because of the Infirmities of
the partys) obliged to propound and plead his own Cause, and to urge their
Reasons, and exhibit their Evidence, and without any other Formality of a
Process sentence is spoken, from whence an Appeal lies to the highest
Jurisdiction in that place, only and surely this (as also a Court for the
determining of Differences about Sea-affairs) is very necessary and useful in
all places of Commerce, and very advantageous to the Trade of any place: Nor
can I see any Reason, but both these may very well be under the authority of
one Judicature, if every City of Trade would take such measures as these,
questionless they would tend much, 1. To maintain the Credit and Honor of
honest Merchants: 2. To the discovery of many Frauds: 3. To prevent great loss
by tedious and chargeable Processes: 4. To the promoting of the Interest of the
Trade: And 5thly, To the Credit, Repute and Fame of the City it self.

NB, Every Trader to these particular Fairs, will know the Ordinances and Laws
concerning Exchanges there made, so that it will not be necessary to be large
upon these; therefore what the Author has largely insisted on, in the three
following Chapters, I shall abridge, and only hint to some select Cases.

CHAP. XXXII. Of Exchanges from Amsterdam to Frankford on the Main, and Vice
Versa.
Rule I. AT Amsterdam a Remitter can dispose of his Monyes to any place (
Venice excepted) upon time, in Exchange, making the Bills payable to his Order,
and draw the same in again, without having any Correspondent there, at the
place where the Bill is payable, or allowing any Provision at all; and on the
contrary, a Drawer on Frankford at the Fair time, can draw on Frankford, and
can supply, Adjust, Resconter or Prolonge, without having any Correspondent or
Factor there.

II. Because by an old Custom, Bills need not be accepted that are drawn on
Frankford's Fair, till the beginning of the Fair, wherein the Bill is payable;
therefore its not usual to make Bills till against that time, unless it be
otherwise conditioned.

III. Wherefore it were necessary, that the Drawer should give a Bill or
Obligation in the interim; for the furnishing of Bills on such terms as are
agreed on.

IV. When the Drawer on the Fair, does remit with his Remitter to the said
Fair, the Sum, which he before drew, then that parcel does mortify it self; if
he remit with another, then he can assign his Remitter on his Drawer; so also
when a Remitter does redraw the sum he remitted, then he obliges himself to his
Remitter to furnish him with Bills, which when he demands, he assigns him on
his Drawer.

V. He that must have Bills to send to the Frankford's Fair, must take special
notice that it be clearly expressed and named, By Whom, and On Whom, To Whom, and
From Whom the Value is assigned.

VI. The Assignations on the Frankford's Fair, are of the same Virtue and Power
that Endorsments on a Bill are.

VII. And the Possessor of a Frankford's Fair Bill, that protest for
Non-payment, cannot only have his Regress by the first Drawer, but on any of
the Assigners, as if they had been Endorsers, and has over and above this
Privilege, that he may choose which of the Assigners he pleases, to demand
Satisfaction of, being not bound to his man.

VIII. A prudent and circumspect Remitter on the Frankford's Fairs, will not
receive from his Drawer any Bills to extinguish the Sum that the Remitter has
furnished, if they be made by a third, and made simply payable to his Remitter,
or his Order, the value from the first Remitters Drawer, because for such Bills
the first Drawer is not liable to answer to his Remitter; but on the contrary,
the Remitter is made answerable to the Drawer, but the Bills must be made
payable to the first Remitter or his Order, the value of the same from the
Drawer.

IX. On Frankford's (and at no other) Fair, men may treat and condition for the
payment of the Bill at the return from the Fair, that is, instead of delivering
Bills (or negotiating them at Frankford in the Fair time, or discharging them
on the day of payment) to pay the same at the return (or sooner or later, as
the condition is, at a certain fixed day) at Amsterdam, and then according to
the time the course of Exchange is proportioned.

X. The usual times of payment at return are, for the Easter Fair ultimo Junji,
for the Michaelmass Fair ultimo Novembris.

XI. If at any time the Term be prolonged till the return, then the Drawer
ought to cause the conditions to be noted on the back of that Obligation he
gave to his Remitter, whereby he obliges himself to deliver Bills, or make
payment at the Fair, or else to mortify or vacate the old, and make a new
Obligation.

XII. A Merchant that has credit at Amsterdam for the Frankford's Fair, can at
any time, for so short and so long a time, as he pleases; draw upon the Fairs,
and make use of the Monyes as he sees occasion, and can at any time before the
beginning of the Fair remit the same thither, in order to make payment, or he
can prolong it till the return, or vacate the former Bills, and make new ones
on the next Fair, which Negotiation will be of no more loss to him than
sometimes usual Interest is, seeing he has no Provisions to pay, and only
Courtagie for the Mackelers, and is far more honorable and profitable for the
Drawer than any other kind of Negotiation where Factors must be used, etc.

XIII. If any fail in their punctual payments, either at the Fairs, or their
returns, or in delivering Bills according to agreement, and it be sufficiently
manifest, then against such a one (if there be such an obligation) there is the
same Law, as if there were protested Bills of Exchange, viz. ready execution,
with attachment upon his Goods, and arrest upon his Person, and in case of
failing the Re-change is also due, etc.

XIV. At Frankford are two Fairs yearly, the Easter and September Fair, the one
begins fourteen days before Easter, the other on the Sunday that is before or
after, or on the day of the birth of the Virgin Mary, if this day fall on a
Monday, Tuesday or Wednesday, then the Sunday before; if on a Thursday, etc.
then after, if on a Sunday, then on that same day; they each continue fourteen
days, the first Week is called, The Acceptance Week, the latter, The Payment
Week; the times of Acceptance continues from Mondayes in the Morning till
Tuesdayes at nine a Clock in the the Morning, but may be accepted any time that
Week, and so long the Possessor is obliged to stay; but if acceptance be not
made that Week, in the next Week, he may and must protest, though he may
protest sooner if he please, if the acceptance be absolutely denied: All
Acceptances here must now be written; verbal Acceptances are not valid.

XV. If an accepted Bill be not paid on Saturday in the Pay Week before the
Exchange time, or at Exchange time, then the Possessor ought to protest for
Non-payment before the Sun set.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Leipzig Fairs.
Rule I. LEipzig has three Fairs yearly, the New Years, the Jubilate, and the
Michaelmass Fair; on which days, or the days after, according to the Old
Style, the said Fairs begin; they continue but eight days wherein they trade,
and buy, and sell; the first or second days after the Fairs are begun,
acceptance is demanded, but if the Acceptant will, he may delay acceptance till
the Pay Week after the Fair, which continues five days after the expiration of
the aforesaid eight days.

II. The Possessor may if he will protest sooner, but he must not send the Bill
away till the Fair be wholly concluded, but must wait to see if any appear to
honor the Bill supra Protest; no Protests are admitted of after ten a Clock at
Night on the last day of the Fair, and if the Possessor protest not before that
time, he loses his hold that he had of the Drawer; if none appear to make
payment of a protested Bill within three days after the Fair is fully expired,
then may the Possessor with the first Post return the Bill with the Protest.

III. For Exchanges made at Amsterdam on Leipzig, Bills must instantly be
given, but the Acceptant need not accept or declare whether he will or no till
the Fair time; here also Bills that are endorsed are admitted of.

IV. At Naumbrough is also yearly one Fair kept, it begins on Peter and Paul's
day, and is by some called a Fourth Leipziger Fair, in regard all the Leipzig
Traders trade thither, it continues eight days; on the first and second days
Acceptances are demanded, and at the utmost, all the Bills must be paid on the
third of July; but if protested, the Bills are not returned till after the
fifth of July, and after that day, if no payment follow, the Bills and Protests
must be returned with the first occasion.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Fair of Lions in France.
Rule I. AT Lions in France are year four Fairs, the Royal Fair, which begins
the Monday after Epiphany or Three Kings day; the Easter Fair, which begins on
St Nisiers day in April; the August Fair, which begins on St Dominicks day in
August; the St Huverts Fair, which begins on that day in November.

II. Every Fair has its Payments; the Fair Royal has its time of Payments
from the first to the last of March; the Easter Payments begin the first and
end the last of July; the August Payments begin the first and end the last of
September; and the St Huverts Payments begin the first and end the last of
December.

III. At Amsterdam Bills are made payable at the ensuing or present Payment;
but its not usual before one Payment has begun to negotiate on a following,
but on a second or third Payment.

IV. Bills for Parcels, negotiated on Lions, must instantly be given, and that
before the Remitter pay the Value; but Bills made payable at the Fair, are not
payable till the payment of that Fair whereof they are made payable, nor need
they be accepted till the beginning of the times of Payment, and may be
deferred till the sixth day after the beginning of the respective payments, but
no longer, within which time Protest must be made: All Acceptances must be made
in writing.

V. None can by a full Power negotiate or accept any Bills, unless he first
show his full Power to the Judges of the Fair, and cause it to be registered,
which is to be observed in all Fairs as well as at Lions, and without this no
full Power, etc. is of any effect against the Principal; but the Creditors must
look to him who pretended the full Power.

VI. Protests for Non-acceptance need not be sent away before the ending of the
respective terms of Payments, but advice must be given thereof before; the time
of payment begins the day after the aforesaid six days of acceptance are
expired, unless it be a Holyday, and then the day after, and continues to the
end of the Month; none may pay a Bill before the sixth day, but on his own
hazard, and after the last day of Payment the Possessor may refuse, if he will,
to accept of payment, and may return the Bills and Protests, and demand
Re-change and Charges of the Drawer or Endorser; but Protests for Non-payment
may be made any time within three days after the term of payment is ended; if
then not made, the Drawer and Endorsers are not liable to answer.

VII. Possessors of protested Bills must seek their Redress on the Drawers and
Endorsers within a certain and fixed time, viz. all Bills drawn or made within
the Kingdom of France within two Months time; drawn on Italy, Sweitzerland,
England, Holland, Germany, and Flanders within three Months time; Spanish,
Portugal, Polonia, Sweeden, Denmark Bills within six Months time, or else he
loses his Redress on the Drawer and Endorsers.

VIII. All Bills payable in any payment are accounted fully paid and satisfied,
in respect of the Inhabitants, within one year, and of Strangers within three
years after the same should have been paid, and the Possessor of the Bill has
no redress on the Acceptant after such a time, unless he make it appear that he
endeavored to procure payment and could not.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Debt-Exchanges.
Rule I. IN a pure and real Exchange the Drawer receives Monyes of the
Remitter, and gives Bills of Exchange, wherein he promises himself, or by his
order to pay the value he received, according to the conditions in ready
Moneys; but in mixed or Debt Exchanges the Drawer receives no Monyes, but is
Debtor, and gives Bills to his Creditor (who is reckoned and accounted of as
the Remitter) for payment of his Debt.

II. Such Bills are made either for the recovery of old Debts, or else to
assure the Creditor of precise payment for those Goods the Debtor has bought
at time.

III. Whether the Debtor make the Bills payable by himself, or by any other, or
whether the Debtor and Creditor agree about the course of Exchange or not, the
Debt does change its nature, and the Debtor that gives a Bill of Exchange upon
himself, or another, does make himself liable to the Law of Exchanges, and may
upon failure of payment be prosecuted with ready execution, attachment upon
Goods, and arrest upon his Person.

IV. A wise Creditor will at the Receipt of such a Bill from his Debtor make an
absolute agreement and contract concerning the Course, and presently upon the
Receipt thereof, credit his account of Goods, and debit his account current for
the Value.

V. Its not necessary in a Bill to express whether the Value was paid in
Monyes, or was Rescontered, or in Goods, etc. if the Debtor do but effectually
receive the Value, or it tend to the discharging or lessening his Debt.

VI. He that gives a Bill for the payment of an old Debt, or for Goods bought,
etc. he must demand of his Creditor an Acquittance, wherein he acknowledges
satisfaction for such an old Debt, or such Goods, in such and such a Bill of
Exchange received, or for so much of the Debt as the Bill of Exchange reaches
to.

VII. And in such a case the Creditor, if wise, will demand a Recipisse (or a
Note) from his Debtor, wherein he confesses the Receipt of the Value of such a
Bill, either in an old Debt, or for Goods bought, either for the full payment
thereof, or for lessening the said Debt.

VIII. When a Creditor has received a Bill from his Debtor in full, or in part
of his debt, he must not be persuaded by his Debtor in case he at the day of
payment be not punctual, under pretense to lessen the Charges, and not to
disgust the Debtor, not to follow the strict course and law of Exchanges by
protesting, etc. nor should give the Acceptant longer time if he desired it,
unless the Debtor do give him under his own hand, that if he do so, it shall be
no prejudice to him, and this notwithstanding he shall have the Law in force
against himself, as if he had actually protested in due form and course; for
without this the Debtor might disown any such order or request made to the
Creditor, and in case he pay not, set his Creditor at defiance, as having
neglected his time and right, and he the Debtor is therefore not obliged to
answer.

IX. When the Creditor receives a Bill from his Debtor, by him drawn on another
in another place, with request to demand the same, and in case of payment to
place it to his account in full, or part of payment of his Debt, then let the
Creditor speak with the Debtor, whether he shall draw or remit the product, and
also know of him, by whom he shall cause demand to be made, that in case of
loss there may be no dispute.

X. The Bills that a Creditor makes himself upon his own Correspondent, at the
request of the Debtor, when he cannot conveniently pay that which he should pay
at the day of payment, must be reckoned to be mixed or Debt Exchanges.

XI. When it falls inconvenient for the Debtor to pay his Debt at the time, and
he desires a longer time, promising satisfaction for the time, if it also fall
inconvenient for the Creditor to wait, then usually, if the Creditor be
satisfied in the sufficiency of his Debtor, at his request he may draw on his
own Correspondent for his Debtors account, with order to revalue the same at
the day of Payment on his Debtor.

XII. If a Creditor draw thus for the account of his Debtor, he ought (to the
end the Debtor may know what Sum he is to pay for the Re-change) make those
Bills single and apart for the just Sum that his Debtor must pay, or at least
order his Correspondent to keep an account of such a specified Sum apart, and
to revalue the same.

XIII. And to distinguish the account apart, the Creditor or Drawer usually
orders the Acceptant to draw on the Debtor, with his obligation, or upon
himself, for the account of the Debtor.

XIV. Its also usual, that one Friend to pleasure another, draws on his
Correspondent per Cento apart (for a separate account, and to be kept apart)
that the Friend may have the use of the Monyes till the time of the payment of
the Re-change.

XV. In all cases the Acceptant looks upon the Drawer, who must answer for the
Draughts and Re-draughts, but the loss by Exchange, and the Charges must come
to the Debtors, account or to his account whom to pleasure, or for whose
account the Bill was drawn.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Discounted or Rescontred Exchanges.
Rule I. IN a real complete Exchange there is usually four several Persons
concerned, as, the Drawer, the Remitter, the Acceptant, and the Possessor of
the Bill; but in a Discounted or Rescontred Exchange the Drawer and the
Remitter may be one and the same Person, and that in four several cases; As, 1.
When he has to draw and to remit both together, from and to one place, and
both for his own account. 2. When he has to draw for one and to remit for
another. 3. When he has to remit to one, and to draw for another account. And,
4. When he must draw for another, and remit for a thirds account.


II. He that is Drawer and Remitter both for his own account, and draws on one,
and remits to another Correspondent, may make and calculate the course of
Exchange in his Books as he pleases, and need give no man any account thereof;
but he that Discounts for another account either way, must without delay
either advise his Correspondent, or his Principal, or both, the true course of
Exchange, as then it was effectually agreed on at that time on the Exchange,
and in case the Course has either greatly advanced or declined that day, then
in equity he ought to allow his Principal the middle Course.

III. In a discounted Bill, where the Drawer is the Remitter also, he ought to
express the same in these words [The Value in my self] but if he will not that
the Acceptant should know so much, then he may make the Value of any other,
advising the Possessor, that he himself is the Remitter, and the other Name is
but added pro Forma.

IV. If any draw or remit for another account, who is not named in the Bill,
its not necessary to advise that the Value is discounted.

V. He that discounts in himself, and gives advice thereof, whether it be done
with or without a Bill in Forma, neither may nor can re-call the same, without
the consent of those that are concerned.

VI. He that has an opportunity to discount, may place Courtagie to his
Principals account, though he pay none; and so if any stand good for the
Remises, or ordinarily has done, may also place usual Provision to account,
though he run no risco or hazard.

VII. One and the same Person may in diverse other respects, represent two, or
more Persons, in Exchanges; for he can be, 1st, Drawer and Possessor. 2dly,
Drawer and Acceptant. 3dly, Remitter and Possessor. 4thly, Possessor and
Acceptant. 5thly, Drawer, Remitter and Possessor.

VIII. When any makes Bills, payable to himself or order, he is both Drawer and
Possessor of the Bill, till he draw it in or endorse it: Scaccia, The style of
Merchants has introduced this Custom, contrary to the Axiom of the Common Law,
that a man may pay to himself.

IX. But Drawers seldom make Bills payable to themselves, when he they draw
upon is with them, or they themselves with others in good Credit.

X. Great Prudence is to be used in negotiating Bills, payable to the order of
the Drawer, because such Bills are usually drawn on those that begin to halt,
and are accepted before they be drawn in, and the Drawer makes use of them to
furnish himself with Moneys in a necessity.

XI. He that makes Bills payable by himself, and accepts of the same to pay
them, he is both Drawer and Acceptant.

XII. When a Drawer accepts his own Bill, and promises to pay the negotiated
Sum, then he need not accept the same again; But if he direct the Bill to
himself, as if he were a Stranger, then let the Possessor or the Remitter get
him to underwrite, Accepted, etc.

XIII. When a Bill, payable by the Drawer, is not protested within the Respit
days, then the Possessor does not lose his Right, because he as Acceptant, is,
and remains obliged; but he loses his Redress on the other Endorsers, if it
be endorsed.

XIV. When the Respit days of a Bill, payable by the Drawer, are expired, then
the Possessor is obliged to proceed, according to the law of Exchanges, by
ready Execution against his Person and Goods, without being obliged to return
the Bill and Protest, to the place from whence it was done.

XV. When a Remitter orders the Bill to be made payable to himself or order,
then he is both Remitter and Possessor, till he endorse and negotiate it.

XVI. Remitters order their Bills to be made payable to their Orders, sometimes
because they know not themselves to whom they shall be payable, sometimes
because they will not let the Drawer know to whom they remit.

XVII. A Remitter remitting for another Account, does very ill, if he (though
he stand del credere for the same) order the Bills to be made payable to
himself, or order, and endorse the same to his Correspondent; the Reasons are
in the 8th Rule of the 27th Chapter.

XVIII. When the Remitter orders his Bills, to be made payable to him on whom
the Drawer draws, (who is the Acceptant) then is the Possessor the Acceptant,
and the Bills are then made, Pay to your self.

XIX. When any is Possessor and Acceptant of a Bill, and he will not accept of
the same for account of him, for whom it is drawn, then he may and must protest
against himself, as possessor of the Bill, (if the Remittent and the Drawer be
two distinct Persons) as if he the Acceptant were another distinct Person for
Non-acceptance, and send both the Bill and the Protest back to him from whom he
received it, that he may make use thereof against the Drawer. And thus also he
may if he will accept supra Protest, in honor of a Drawer or Endorser, etc.

XX. When any Acceptant is to pay to himself, and he returns Answer that he
has, or will accept the draught, then he cannot repent thereof, nor cannot
afterward, by a Protest for Non-acceptance, or Non-payment, help himself.

XXI. If any be drawn upon in a Bill payable to himself, and he accepts of the
same, in such a case the day of Payment is reckoned to be the very day it falls
due, which past, the Bill is accounted as paid, no respit days being allowed.

XXII. When a Drawer makes Bills, payable to himself, or order, and Resconters,
or finds the value in himself, then is he Drawer, Remitter and Possessor. The
Drawer can also be the Remitter and Acceptant, and Possessor and Acceptant, and
so in three respects, he can represent three distinct Persons; thus also the
Remitter can be the Acceptant, and Possessor and Acceptant, and this all at
once; but these cases seldom happen.

XXIII. In Exchanges, two Persons can each of them have two Relations; As, 1.
One can be Drawer and Remitter, the other Possessor and Acceptant. 2. Drawer
and Acceptant, and Remitter and Possessor. 3. Drawer and Possessor, and
Remitter and Acceptant.


And he that represents two or more Persons, may do all that any of them might
do, if distinct and several Persons.

XXIV. When a Drawer and Remitter, and the Possessor and Acceptant are but two
distinct Persons, each of them representing a double Person, then there is a
double discount, or resconter; and this for the most part happens betwixt
Correspondents, that have open Accounts each with other, and for other
accounts, and one has occasion for Moneys in one place, the other in the
other. But this Exchange can be performed without formal Bills of Exchange,
alone by advice and correspondence, about adjusting the course of Exchange; but
if any third Person be concerned therein, then its most advisable to make
formal Bills of Exchange.

XXV. The advice of the Acceptant to the said Drawer, that he has taken notice
of, and conform to the advice from the Drawer has placed the Draught to
account, etc. does so firmly oblige the Acceptant, (whether a third Person be
concerned therein or not) as if he had accepted a formal Bill of Exchange.

XXVI. When the Acceptant is Possessor of the Bill, and the Drawer is the
Remitter also, and the Acceptant scruples the acceptance of the Draught,
according to advice; in such a case its not necessary for him to protest
against himself, because its enough for him to return the Bill, with advice,
that he is not inclined to accept the same.

XXVII. When a Drawer draws upon himself, and the Remitter orders the Bills to
be payable to himself or order, then the Drawer is the Acceptant, and the
Remitter the Possessor of the Bill; and in this form are usually all
Debt-exchanges made (whereof we treated in the former Chapter.)

XXVIII. It may fall out, but its very seldom, that a Drawer makes Bills
payable to himself, by the Remitter, and then the Drawer is Possossor, and the
Remitter Acceptant of the Bill.

The Remitter may also be an Acceptant, when he has to remit for his own, or
any others account, and negotiates with him, who must draw upon him, which may
sometimes fall out.

XXIX. If the Possessor of a Bill be indebted to the Acceptant, a just and
liquidated Sum already due to him, the Acceptant may discount with him, and
this is good and effectual Payment: But if it be not a liquidated Sum, the
Acceptant cannot discount, nor if the Possessor who procured the acceptance,
have endorsed it to another, unless he can prove that the present Possessor
has paid no Value, and that this was done by them only pro forma, and to
defraud him. Scaccia.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of Conditional Exchanges, or Bills of Bodomery.
Rule I. IN such Bills as these the Drawer does not absolutely oblige himself
to payment, but on a certain condition agreed upon.

II. And in these Bills the condition must be clearly expressed, on which
condition the Acceptant must accept and pay, else not; wherefore if the
condition be not expressed, these kinds of Bills are liable to great Disputes and
Contests.

III. The Acceptance of a conditional Bill obliges the Acceptant (whether he
be the Drawer himself, or any other) absolutely to the Payment, if the
Condition agreed upon be performed, or the Possessor will oblige himself to the
performance thereof.

IV. The Possessor of such a Bill is sometimes obliged to perform the
Condition, sometimes not; Exchanges grounded upon impossible, or unlawful, or
indecent Conditions, are, ipso facto, null and void.

V. When he is absolutely obliged to the performance of the Condition, its not
enough for him to mortify the Bill, and not demand Payment thereof, but he is
obliged to make good to the Acceptant the Loss and Interest that the Acceptant,
or any other concerned therein, for Nonperformance of the Condition, is likely
to suffer.

VI. When the Possessor of a Conditional Bill is not absolutely obliged, then
if any thing happen without the Possessors fault, that may hinder him from
performance of the Condition, this does not always free and discharge the
Drawer or Acceptant, but he is in such a case obliged to pay the Bill, though
the Possessor do not perform the Condition, if he will but make good the loss
to the Acceptant or Drawer.

As for Example: A. lives here, and contracts with B. dwelling at Venice, That
he shall provide him a Pack of Says, which Pack the said A. shall buy for the
account of B. at the lowest Price, but shall send them to Venice on his own
Risco, and shall have for his Provision 2. and for the disburse of his Monyes
and the Risco 15. per Cent. but B. shall be obliged to pay the Costs and
Charges, and the whole Product eight days after the arrival of the said Pack
of Says at Venice. This all agreed upon and done, the Pack of Says is Shipped,
and the account thereof sent, and A. at the same time values upon B. the whole
Sum, and makes the Bill as follows.

Amsterdam, Octobris 23. anno 1680. per Ducat --
EIght days after the arrival of the Pack of Says, No 1. as in the Margent, at
Venice, pay upon good delivery, for the Value of the same, to C. the Sum of
Ducats -- adiea.

A.

To B. in Venice.

Now when B. accepts the Bill, then he is obliged upon the delivery of the Pack
to pay to C. the Sum expressed in the Bill, though the Says should fall
considerably in Price before that time. But if the Says are lost at Sea, and
never arrive, then the Acceptance is null and void, and the Bill is mortifyed;
and if they are damaged only, and do arrive, then B. must receive them, and pay
the Bill he accepted; but he must deduct from the Value, as much as impartial
Merchants shall judge the damage may be esteemed at, because A. is considered
as the Insurer.

VII. Amongst conditional Bills, Bills of Bodomery may be reckoned, that is,
Bills that are made upon the Keele of the Ship, which are accidentially
conditional, in regard its not in the power of the Possessor, but only depends
on Providence, to give a Ship a prosperous Voyage.

VIII. The Bodomery-Bills that are usually made at Smyrna, and other places in
the Levant, wherein the Shipper acknowledges the Receipt of such and such Goods
into his Ship, from A. to deliver the same upon safe arrival to B. and that the
said Goods are encumbered with a Debt of a 1000 Reals, upon Bodomery at so much
per cento, the value received of C. payable ten days after the arrival of the
Ship; To D. for his own Account, 300 Reals. To E. for the Account of F. 300. To
G. for the Account of H. 400 Reals.


This being underwrit by the Shipper, is as much as a conditional Exchange,
which if B. accept, then he is obliged to make good and pay the Sum, and may
receive the Goods, paying the Shipper his Freight and Avaridge; but if there be
extraordinary Avaridge, or if the Goods be damaged, then the Sum of the damage,
and of the extraordinary Avaridge, must be deducted from the Sums that D. E.
and G. are to receive, they being as Bodomerers or Assurers.

IX. They to whom Goods are addressed that are incumbered with Bodomery, are as
little obliged to accept of the Bodomery-Bills, as an Acceptant is obliged to
accept Bills drawn upon him; but if they have once accepted, they are then
according to the Law of Exchanges obliged to make punctual Payment at the day
appointed.

X. If any to whom Goods, burdened with Bodomery, are addressed, refuse to accept
the Bodomery Bills, then the Possessors of the Bills are obliged to make
Protests for Nonacceptance, and then may request the Magistrates to authorize
him to receive the Goods, and to sell them, and dispose of them to him that
will give most, or that they may be put into the Hands of another to be
disposed of, that out of the product of the Goods the value of the
Bodomery-Bill may be satisfied; but they must have a care of acting any thing
in this matter, without the Authority of the Magistrate, nor must they without
his Authority, admit any other to honor the Bills, and receive the Goods, and
dispose of them at his pleasure.

XI. When all this is done by the authority of the Magistrate, as above is
declared, and there is found to be more made of the Goods than was required, to
the discharge of the Bodomery-Bills, then that may remain in the Hands of the
Person that had the Goods in disposal, or be paid into the Hands of the
Magistrate, for the use of the true Owner of the Goods. But if there be short
of what the Sum in the Bodomery-Bills requires, then the Possessors of the
Bills have no Redress upon him, to whom the Goods were addressed, nor upon the
true and proper Owner thereof, no, not upon the Factor or Loader of the Goods,
or the Drawer or Receiver of the Moneys paid upon Bodomery, unless he has by a
special Contract obliged himself thereunto.

XII. Among conditional Exchanges may be reckoned, those Bills that are given
upon account of any Wager made, or for the assurance of things that are yet in
dubio.

XIII. Bills made upon account of a Wager, etc. are either single, or
reciprocal and mutual.

XIV. Single are they, when one gives Moneys, and the other receives it at the
same time, accepts a formal Bill of Exchange, payable to him that gave the
Moneys, for the payment of a greater Sum than he received at the day of
Marriage, or at the surrender of such and such a Belsagured City, etc. or at
any other uncertain and dubious event.

XV. If in the case of Wagers, if Moneys be not given by the one, and received
by the other, the Law allows no advantage against him that gives the Bill; but
if he have received Moneys, then he is obliged to repay the same, with
Interest, and no more.

XVI. Conditional Exchanges for assurance, are twofold; for some tend to the
Security of the Drawer or Remitter, some to the Security of the Possessor.

XVII. Conditional Exchange, that is, for the Security of the Drawer or
Remitter, are such Bills as an Out-dweller makes, or causes to be made, for
the discharge of other Bills by him accepted, which must be paid in another
place, or such as any man makes, to discharge Bills drawn, but protested for
Nonacceptance, or if accepted, for Non-payment, if the Drawer had timely notice
of his Acceptants failure, or that he would not pay.

XVIII. Conditional Exchanges, that are for the Security of the Possessor, are
either such as are for the Security of the Re-payment, and are made after this
manner:

EIght days after the producing of an Acquittance from E. whereby he
acknowledges to have received of D. of Antwerp 200 l. Flemish, I promise and
oblige my self to pay to D. 1200 Ggg. current Monyes, for the Value of the same
Sum.

Yours, A.


XIX. Or else for the Security of requiting some favor and service done, and
then Bills may be made thus:

FOurteen days after I am made Alderman, (or after I have obtained such and
such a Suit of Law, etc.) I promise and oblige my self to pay to A. the Sum of
100 l. Flemish, the Value, etc.

Yours, A.


XX. When a conditional Bill is not accepted, or if accepted, is not paid, then
the Possessor may protest and seek his Redress and the Recovery of his loss by
the Drawer.

XXI. In a Protest of a conditional Bill, whether for Non-acceptance or
Non-payment, the Possessor must look to this, and observe that he insert and
prove that the condition was performed, or else that he was ready and willing
to perform the same, or else the Protest is of no value.

XXII. Sigism. Scaccia, In case the Possessor of a conditional Bill, who is
absolutely obliged to the performance of the Condition, would mortify the Sum,
and will not demand payment, nor perform the condition, then the Acceptant may
compel him thereto, by depositing the Monyes, and protesting against the
Possessor for Nonperformance of the Condition, and for all Damages, and
presently thereupon proceed against him, according to the Law and Custom of
Exchanges, and the reason is, because he, the Possessor, would have done so
against the Acceptant, if he had been tardy.

XXIII. If a Condition, whereon an Exchange-Contract is grounded, were once
possible after the Possessor had procured Acceptance of the Bill (if the
Possessor were obliged to perform it) or after the Remitter received the Bill
from the Drawer (if the Remitter obliged himself to performance) and after
wards should be morally impossible, they neglecting the opportunity, yet they
will be obliged to make good all the Damage and Loss that the Drawer or
Acceptant, or any other concerned, can prove they suffer by it, because this
Condition was the cause of the Contract. Seaccia.

XXIV. But as the Possessor of a Bill is obliged to demand and procure
Acceptance, etc. so in this case the Acceptant or the Drawer, etc. is obliged
to demand performance of the Condition; for, Ebentus Conditionis, non consituit
debitoram in mora, sine interpellatione. Scaccia.

XXV. A Condition may be said to be performed, though it be not actually
performed by the Possessor, if another do it by his order, or if another that
is concerned in it own it as quasi performed, and this will oblige the
Acceptant to pay: As thus; If Titius pay to Sejus, then pay to Thomas, etc. If
Sejus and Titius discount, or if Sejus acknowledge himself satisfied, the
Condition is performed. Scaccia.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Exchanges pro Forma.
Rule I. When any has a Debtor, on whom he would draw, and yet would not run
the hazard of having his Bill returned, he may make Bills pro forma, payable to
the order of his Friend, or to his Servant, and to make the Bill more formal,
he may insert, that he has received the Value of another, though he has not.

II. Another man's Name, in a Bill pro forma, may be used as Remitter, with or
without his knowledge or consent, and sometimes a feigned Name may be used.

III. It may be done without his knowledge or consent, when the Bill is made
payable to a third, or any other Person, or his order; and in such a case a
known or unknown Person may be named as the Remitter, yea, a feigned Name, it
may be what it will.

IV. Another man's Name may be used as Remitter, with his consent, when the Bill
is made payable to him, or to his order.

V. When a feigned Name is used, or any true Name, without the Persons
knowledge, and only pro forma, then the Drawer must necessarily advise the
Person to whom, or to whose order it is payable, that the Value is only set pro
forma, and the Name is feigned, or used without the Persons knowledge, and
therefore he the Drawer sends the Bill himself. But if any man's Name be used
with his consent and knowledge, then usually the Bills are made payable to his
order, whose Name is used, who is Remitter pro forma, and then this said
Remitter pro forma acts as if he were effectually the Remitter, demanding
Acceptance and Payment in his own Name; and thus the Correspondent need not
know but that the Bill is real, otherwise he must know the truth, and that the
Bill was only made pro forma.

VI. There ought circumspection to be used, in consenting to the making use of
a man's Name, in a Bill pro forma, payable to his order; for such Bills cannot
be drawn in, nor will they be paid, but upon the endorsing of the Bill, by him
to whose order its payable; and an Endorsment, if it be only at the request of
the Drawer, and pro forma, does oblige the Endorser to the Possessor of the
Bill really and absolutely, and not formally only.

VII. When a Bill, wherein another man's Name is used pro forma, is made payable
to his order, and is drawn in, or negotiated and endorsed by the same Remitter,
Pro forma, then the Possessor of the Bill must make good the value to the
Endorser, and not to the Drawer, though he know certainly that the Endorsers
Name is only used pro forma, except the Endorser has given an Order under his
Hand, to make the same good to the Drawer, or unless the Endorser be absent,
and at the request of the Drawer had only endorsed it in blanko, and yet then
the Drawer is obliged to secure the Possessor of the Bill from all Damage and
Pretenses that the Endorser may hereafter make.

VIII. He that to pleasure his Friend, suffers his Name to be used pro forma,
as the Remitter, willingly and knowingly, and does draw in and endorse the said
Bill, whether he receives the Value himself, and afterward sends it, or pays
it to the Drawer, or whether he assign the Drawer upon it, and lets him receive
it himself, he ought (though the whole Negotiation concern not him at all) to
take notice thereof in his Books, and formally enter it, at least, in his
Waste-Book for Memories sake.

IX. When a Bill, pro forma, is made payable to any man's order, and is drawn in
and endorsed, the Endorser does most prudently if he receive the Value himself,
or order the Drawer to assign upon him, that the Drawers Assignation may be his
Acquittance.

X. When any draws upon his Debtor, and to prevent Loss by protesting, makes
the Bills payable to the order of any that will, after Acceptance procured,
draw it in, or order his Correspondent to receive it, and pro Forma makes the
Value received, he must observe well whose Name he makes use of, and to whom he
sends such a Bill, that in case the said Remitter, pro Forma, should happen to
draw in the said Bill, and the same should be protested for Non-payment, and
the Endorser should be Insolvent, he the said Drawer should be obliged to pay
the Rechange to the Possessor of his Bill, without having received the Value,
or if the same should be paid, he do not change a bad Debtor for a worse, and
quite lose his Monyes.

XI. When a Drawer dare not draw in the Bill, the Value wherefore he has made
received pro Forma, fearing the Acceptant should not accept, or not pay if he
did accept, and therefore makes his Bill payable directly to some living at the
same place with his Debtor, and does advise the said Correspondent, that for
Reasons known to himself, the Value is made received pro Forma only; in such a
case the Possessor must be prudent, in case the Drawer is not very sufficient
and honest, for he ought not pay the Monyes he has received on that Bill,
unless the Person whose Name is used in the Bill, do order him to follow the
Directions of the Drawer in the disposal of it, or unless the Drawer give him
other sufficient satisfaction.

XII. Among Exchanges pro forma must be reckoned; those Bills that are drawn on
Debtor, but are sent to the Drawers Creditor to be paid to him, or his Order,
the value of the same pro forma, concerning which Bills he makes no agreement
with the Creditor concerning the Course, only requesting him to procure
Payment, and place it (when received) to his account.

XIII. A Debtor that gives such a Bill to his Creditor, may demand a Receipt
from the Creditor, wherein he acknowledges the Receipt of the Bill, and that
his Name, as Remitter, is only used pro Forma, and that he does oblige himself
to demand the same, and when paid, either to remit it or make it good to the
Drawer (or Debtor) according to the course of Exchange; but in case he receive
not the Sum, the Drawer or Debtor shall not put to any further Charge for
Protests, Postidge, etc.

XIV. A Creditor that accepts of such a Bill from his Debtor would do well and
wisely to let the Drawer or Debtor give him a Note under his hand, whereby he
desires the said Creditor to send his Bill to his Correspondent, or to demand
acceptance and payment, that in case the Monyes should be received by the
Correspondent, but not remitted to the Creditor, or being remitted, the Remises
are not paid, or the Creditor not protesting in due manner and form, etc. the
Debtor may have no occasion to complain of his Creditor, and force him to stand
to the loss.

XV. When in such a case the Debtor agrees with his Creditor concering the
course, whether before or after the Acceptance thereof, and does credit his
account current for the sum; or else when another, whose Name is used pro
Forma, agrees for the course with the Drawer, and pays him the Value, then this
Exchange, pro Forma, loses its nature, and becomes real and actual; and in case
of protest, the Drawer is obliged to make good the Re-change and Charges.

XVI. When such a Bill, at the request of the Debtor, is by the Creditor drawn
in, and the Value is made him good in the account current; in such a case the
loss by Re-change and the Charges come to the account of the Drawer or Debtor;
but if the Creditor draw in the Bill without the order of the Drawer or Debtor,
then he himself must bear the loss, if any happen.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of Dry-Exchanges.
Rule I. MErchants Exchanges do properly consist in a giving Monyes in one
place, to receive the Value at a certain course agreed on, in another. Dry
Exchanges consist in a giving of Monyes also, but the repayment is to be made
after a certain time in the same place where the Monyes was given, and such a
sum certain over and above, as the giver of Monyes can get and agree for, which
is Interest at least, and sometimes more. So that the distance of places is a
Substantial or Essential part of Exchanges, and as the Marrow and Soul thereof,
which being awanting in these sorts of Exchanges, they are therefore called,
Cambia Sicca, Dry Exchanges.

II. In this kind of Exchanges, sometimes the Sum to be repaid, for the Sum
received, is fixed, determined and certain, sometimes uncertain and accidental.

III. When the Sum to be re-paid is fixed and certain, then the Giver has a
certain and fixed Profit and Advance, which is also contrary to the nature of
Real Exchanges, and this is properly called the Usurers Ex-change, by which
they may more securely oppress their Debtors.

IV. For usually they have one of these three Designs in their Eye, that
dispose of their Monyes after this manner: 1. That they may be sure of their
Monyes at the appointed time. 2. To get a certain Interest, and to have better
security for their Monyes than the usual Bills, Bonds and Obligations are. Or,
3. To drive an unlawful Trade of unlawful Usury.


V. He that on this manner disposes of his Monyes, can at any time when he
pleases, make himself Master thereof again, if the Bill be made Payable to
himself or order; for he can then at any time negotiate, and draw in the said
Bill with Reputation and Credit, and let it be drawn in from any other place,
which he cannot do with any other Obligations, Bills, Bonds, or Recognisances,
etc.

VI. And such a one does secure his Monyes better by such a Bill of Exchange
than by any Obligation whatever, because if the Bill be not paid at the day
punctually, he has present Execution ready at hand, by Attachment and Arrest,
and he has preferrence before all other Demanders, as if he had a Judgment
confessed.

VII. An Usurer has also this advantage by such Bills of Exchange, that the
Sum to be paid is only mentioned in the Bill, not the Sum that was received, so
that it cannot be known what Interest such a one receives.

VIII. With these kind of Exchanges, the Exchanges upon Frankford's Fair and
Return have a great Affinity, when the Drawer and Remitter do negotiate
together upon the Return, etc.

IX. The Value agreed upon to be re-paid is uncertain and accidental, when in
the bargaining they agree concerning the Course to such and such a Place or
Fair; but the Drawer is obliged to pay his Monyes in the place where he
received it, and in such a Course as shall be at the time of payment, to such a
certain place.

As for Example: E. gives F. 1000 Ggd. on the Frankford's Fair, with condition,
that the Sum shall not be paid at Frankford, but at the return of the Fair at
Amsterdam, and that in such a course as Exchanges shall be made at from
Frankford to Amsterdam, payable at the same time.

This sort of Exchange is very frequent and usual in Italy, and is condemned by
the Papists as unlawful, grounding their Decree against them upon the
unlawfulness and sinfulness of gaining Monyes upon Monyes, or giving Monyes
upon Interest, or to have a certain profit for the Loan, or Exchange of Monyes.
But our common Usurers account this no sin -- Sigism. Scaccia. he only seems to
plead for the lawfulness, and does wisely assert, That if there be Extortion,
or if commutative Justice be not the ground of these Exchanges, they are
Unlawful.

CHAP. XL. Of Bills of Exchange being lost.
Rule I. When any Bills are made for a Sum of Monyes, usually two or three are
made of the same date and tenor, that if one be lost, the Remitter or Possessor
may make use of the other.

II. When the Post goes uncertainly to any place, on which Exchanges are made,
or by Sea, or when the Remitter orders the Bills to be made payable to his
order, with a design to send the first directly to the place, that Acceptance
may be demanded, and to draw in the other some other way by endorsing it, etc.
then three or four Bills may be made, etc.

III. When the Remitter declares to the Drawer, that the Bills he received are
lost, and that he cannot find them, and desires the Drawer to re-pay the Value
to him, offering to secure him from all damage for the future; then the Drawer
does very imprudently if he do it, though the Monyes was for his proper
account, and he could otherwise do it with little inconvenience to himself,
because the Remitter must be content to take new Bills, and cannot compel him
to restore the Value.

IV. And in giving new Bills the Drawer must use prudence and circumspection,
and see that he make his new Bills of the same date and tenor of the former,
only adding this difference, that if he had given a prima and secunda before,
he now follow the number, and give a tertia and quarta Bill. And yet,

V. No prudent Drawer will after the day of Payment of his former Bills, give
his Remitter tertia and quarta Bills, unless the Remitter give sufficient
security to indemnifie the Drawer.

VI. Its the Duty of all Possessors of Bills, to have a special care of their
Bills, and to keep them safe; and a prudent Merchant will, upon the Receipt of
any Bills with blank Endorsments, fill them up, and perfect them, lest he
should lose them, and another find them.

VII. As soon as a Possessor observes that he has lost a Bill, he ought
instantly, at least before the day of Payment, to advise the Acceptant thereof,
that he pay it to none but to him or his order, and if any other come to
receive it, to take notice of him.

VIII. When the prima accepted Bill, which is made payable to Order, is at the
place where the payment must be made, and he to whose order the same is
payable, against the day of payment, when he will draw in the secunda, cannot
find the prima accepted Bill, but has lost it, and has no tertia nor quarta
Bill from the Drawer, nor can get them from the Drawer, he being dead or
absent, etc. yet the Parcel may be drawn in and negotiated, if the Endorser (in
case his Handwriting and Seal be unknown to the Acceptant) do send a full
Power and Letter of Attorney to him to whom he would have it payable, to
receive the same; but if the Endorsers hand be well known, and he himself be to
be credited, then an order in writing to the Acceptant, to pay it to such a
one, is sufficient, he engaging to secure him from all damage, etc.

IX. But then also, a prudent Acceptant will pay no Bill that is payable to
order, though by him accepted, if the same, or another of the same tenor, is
not endorsed as it should be, and shown to him, no, not upon the order of him,
whom the Remitter or Endorser has so empowered, till the very last respit
hour, and not then neither, but upon the delivery and surrender of his accepted
Bill.

X. When the Possessor of a Bill, made payable to him directly in Banco, cannot
find or has lost the Bill, then there is little or no danger to either Party,
for there Bills are paid or writ of, without the demanding or delivery of the
Bills to the Acceptants: But if the Bills are payable per Cash, or in current
Moneys, then a prudent Acceptant will not pay a Farthing till the last hour of
Respit, if his accepted Bill be not presented, and then ouly to the Possessor
himself, or to his order, and upon his or their Security from further damage.

XI. When any has lost his accepted Bill, payable to order, the secunda
whereof unaccepted is orderly endorsed till it come to him to whom its payable;
when he presents the said Bill on the day of payment, the Acceptant is obliged
to pay the same upon Security given, either to deliver up the accepted Bill, or
to indemnifie the Acceptant, and to discharge from all future demands of the
said Sum.

XII. When any misseth his accepted Bill, whether directly payable to the
Possessor, or to his order, and the Possessor thereof pretends to have lost it;
or if the Possessor has advice, that his Remitter has remitted him at sight,
such and such a Sum, in such and such a Bill, etc. and when he opens his
Letter, he finds no such Bills; or if he receives not the Letter, wherein the
Bill was enclosed, but has advice thereof by the next Post, and finds that the
Day of Payment draws near, then he may demand Payment upon his Letter of
advice, offering Security to the Acceptant, to free and discharge him from all
future demands of that Sum, upon the account of that lost Bill; and if the
Acceptant will not then pay it, then he can assign the Value upon him, and if
he pay not then, he may protest for Rechange and Charges.

XIII. When an accepted Bill, protested for Non-payment, is lost, then the
Drawer is not obliged to make good the Rechange and Charges, unless he get
sufficient Security, to indemnifie him, and free him from all future Demands,
with promise to restore the Sum with the Interest, that the Drawer paid for the
Rechange and Charges, in case it be made appear that the Bill pretended to be
lost, should afterward be paid by the Acceptant, or any other supra Protest.

XIV. When an accepted Bill is lost, or cannot be found, then the Remitter or
the Possessor cannot proceed against the Acceptant by present Execution, nor
against the Drawer, but they must make use of the ordinary Means and Methods,
as if it were some other kind of Debt; for a Protest cannot be made but upon an
accepted Bill.

XV. The Security for discharge of those that pay accepted, but lost Bills,
should be limited to a certain time, after the expiration whereof the Security
should be vacated.

XVI. Marius advises, that so soon as the Bill is known to be lost to the
party that had it, that he go instantly to the Acceptant, with a couple of
Witnesses and a Notary, to signify the same to him, and to charge him at his
Peril, to pay it to none but those he shall order.

XVII. And further he advises, that no man that has accepted a Bill should
refuse Payment thereof, because the Bill it self is not to be found, for those
are but flams and sandy Foundations: But he asserts, that Protest being made
for Non-payment, upon the offer of sufficient Security to save him harmless,
he, the Acceptant, as the wilful occasioner thereof, is obliged to make good
all the loss, Rechange and Charges.

XVIII. Suppose the prima accepted lost Bill was made payable to him that lost
it, and the secunda unaccepted Bill, should be made payable to another man,
then the Moneys being really paid at the time, to him to whom the prima
accepted, but lost Bill, was payable; this Payment is good and warrantable, and
the Possessor of the secunda Bill, has nothing to say to the Acceptant.

XIX. Suppose the prima accepted Bill should be found by a Stranger, who
demands the Money in the Name of the party to whom payable, or that the true
Possessor should have assigned it over to another man, and taken up the Value,
yet this all signifies nothing, coming after the time, and the Money being
paid to him to whom it was payable (though without the accepted Bill) and he
having good Security to be saved harmless: But he that is guilty of the Fraud
may come to smart for it.

XX. In case a Bill of Exchange be lost by the Acceptant, with whom it was left
to be accepted, or that he has given the Bill to a wrong party, or if in any
case the party that left the Bill for acceptance, cannot have his Bill again,
neither accepted nor unaccepted. In this case the party that lost the Bill,
must give a Note under his Hand and Seal for the payment of the Moneys at the
day, to the party to whom it was payable, or to his order, upon the delivery of
the secunda Bill, if it come in time, or upon that Note, if it come not in
time, which Note is in all cases to have the Law and Privilege of a Bill of
Exchange; if the Acceptant refuse this, Protest must instantly be made for
Non-acceptance, and then again at the time the Possessor, though he has
neither Note nor Bill, must demand the Moneys, and if not paid, protest for
Non-payment.

XXI. He further advises all Merchants, to keep Letter-Cases, or Paper-Books
in their Pockets, to keep Bills of Exchange in, that they may be the better
secured from losing.

CHAP. XLI. Of Letters of Credit.
Rule I. IN this Chapter we must follow the famous Marius his advice, the
Hollands Author, not taking any notice of Letters of Credit in his whole Book,
which makes up so material a part of the Mystery of Exchanges.

II. Merchants make special use of all their Letters, and do not only safely
keep all they receive, but Copy also all the Letters they send away; and above
all things, Letters of Credit ought to be safely kept by the Receiver, and
fairly copied out by the Writer.

III. Merchants Letters are of several sorts, and accordingly have several
Denominations; as, there are Letters of Commission, which are properly orders
to Buy or Sell, to Freight and Ship, etc. 2dly, There are Letters of advice,
which concern Bills of Exchange, whereof we have treated in one Chapter before.
3dly, Letters of Freight, which may be either Charter-parties, or Bills of
Loading, etc. And 4thly, there are Letters of Credit, which are properly such,
which are written to our Friend, Factor or Correspondent, to furnish Monyes to
a third Person upon Exchange, upon the Credit of the Writer of the Letter.

IV. These Letters of Credit are of great Concernment, and do as much oblige
the Parties that subscribe them, as accepted Bills of Exchange do, in case he
to whom they are writ, upon the Credit of the Subscribers, shall comply
therewith; and the Honor and Credit of the Subscribers is as much concerned
therein, as in Bills of Exchange.

V. It will not be necessary to caution Merchants to be careful and
circumspect, in furnishing any with Letters of Credit, and to advise them to
give none but upon good Security.

VI. Letters of Credit are of two sorts; the one is General, the other Special.

VII. The General Letter is, when an open Letter is given to any, directed to
all Merchants and others, to furnish Monyes unto such and such Person or
Persons, upon that Letter of Credit, whereby the Subscriber does oblige
himself, that what Moneys shall be by them delivered unto the said Party or
Parties, therein mentioned within such and such a limited Time, at such and
such a Course (or at the Course current) to be acceptable and answerable for
the same, to be repaid according to the Bill or Bills of Exchange, which upon
Receipt of the Moneys so furnished, upon such a general Letter of Credit, shall
be delivered for the same.

VIII. If any Moneys be furnished upon such a general Letter of Credit and
Bills of Exchange, directed to the Subscriber, be presented, the Subscriber is
by virtue thereof obliged to accept, and in case he refuse, he may be compelled
thereto, and to pay at the day, by attaching of his Goods, and arresting of his
Person, and that more then the Drawer, in regard the Remitter, in giving his
Moneys to the Drawer, had not such respect to the ability and sufficiency of
the Drawer, as to the Credit and Repute of the Subscriber of the Letter of
Credit, who is in this respect, reputed as the Drawer himself.

IX. Wherefore its very dangerous to give such Letters of Credit, that are
general and unlimitted to any but those that are of our intimate and real
Acquaintance; and also its very dangerous for any to give Moneys upon such a
Letter of Credit, in regard the Drawer may prove Knavish, and take up more
Moneys than the Subscribers are able to pay, so that both the givers of Moneys
may come to loss, and the Subscriber be utterly ruined in a moment, both in his
Estate and Credit.

X. The Special Letter of Credit, is, when a Merchant gives to any other man
his open Letter, directed to his Factor, Servant, or Correspondent only,
ordering him to furnish such and such a Person or Persons with such and such a
limited sum of Moneys, at one or more times, and to charge his Account
therewith, and to take Bills of Exchange or Receipts for the same.

XI. To prevent Frauds, and the jealousy the Factor or Correspondent, to whom
such a special and particular Letter of Credit is directed, may have concerning
the Truth and Reality of this Letter of Credit its expedient, that the Merchant
that gives it subscribe it with his own Hand, and affix his usual Seal; and not
this only, but also, that he advise thereof by Post once or twice, and insert
in the same something or other, that may be as a particular token of the
certainty thereof, at least the Date of the last Letter he writ, and of the
last Letter he received, with some of the Contents thereof.

XII. General Letters of Credit being seldom given to any, by any Merchant, but
upon design of better carrying on his own trade, the Monyes taken up being
employed for his own use, and improved for his own advantage, therefore he
never takes any Security from the Merchant he so credits, etc. But he that
gives to another a particular Letter of Credit, for whose Use and Service the
Moneys is to be employed, he ought, if he be prudent, to have good Security for
repayment of all such Moneys as shall be received by virtue of the said Letter
of Credit, before he do subscribe and deliver the same.

XIII. For the Merchant stands sufficiently bound and obliged to his
Correspondent, by his Letter of Credit, and therefore its but reasonable, that
he that receives the Letter of Credit should give a sufficient Countersecurity.

XIV. There is no difficulty in the form of either the General or Particular
Letter of Credit, wherefore it will be needless to insert one, nor in the forms
of the Bills of Exchange grounded upon this Letter of Credit, wherefore they
are here omitted.

CHAP. XLII. Of what is, and is not to be done; or what Party concerned in an
Exchange is, and is not obliged to do, in case any that are concerned therein
should fail.
Rule I. WHen a Remitter fails before he pay the Value, and the Bill be by him
drawn in and endorsed, or sent away and accepted, the Acceptant is
notwithstanding obliged to pay it at the time, though the Drawer has not
received his Monyes. But in regard, on this manner a knavish Remitter and a
cunning Possessor understanding one another designs, may commit great Frauds,
its necessary that the Possessor prove that he or his Correspondent have
effectually paid the Value, or that the same is remitted to him by the Remitter
for a just and true Debt he had to demand of him. NB Wherefore let the Drawer
never part with both the Bills, till he has received his Monyes.

II. When the Acceptant of a Bill, the Value whereof was not paid to the
Drawer, does at the day of payment refuse to pay, or is insolvent, then the
Possessor may seek redress by the Drawer, and he is obliged to pay the
Re-change, even of that Bill whereof he never received the Value (And NB, by
Re-change here and elsewhere, is meant, the whole Bill which is advanced with
the Re-change, Provisions and Charges, etc. must be paid) and not the bare
Re-change only, which is the Monyes that exceeds the Value of the first Bill;
and this is indeed a very hard Lesson, but yet must be submitted to.

III. Yea, if in such a case the Drawer has drawn for his own account, and to
prevent the loss by Re-change has remitted the Value to his Correspondent, to
discharge his Bill, or has ordered his Acceptant to revalue upon him, whose
Re-draughts he has accepted; and the Acceptant yet for all this, instead of
paying his Bill, runs away with his Monyes, or is insolvent and cannot pay, so
that the Bill returns with Protest; yet notwithstanding this, the Drawer is
obliged to re-pay the Re-change and Charges, and so twice to supply the Value
of that Bill whereof he received no Value at all.

IV. When a Remitter falls before he pay the Value, and the Acceptant get
notice thereof before he accept, and therefore refuses to accept, so that the
Bill returns with Protest, yet the Drawer is obliged to pay the Re-change, if
the Possessor can prove that he negotiated the said Bill, and paid the Value
for it; but if the Bill be made directly payable to any Person, and the
Remitter sends him the Bill in payment of what he is endebted to the Possessor,
then its a great question whether the Drawer be obliged or not, if he has
received no Value, nor the Possessor any otherwise has made good the Value.

V. And though a Drawer in such a case must pay more than the Remitter is
endebted to him for the Value ( viz. the Re-change and Charges) yet the said
Remitter is Debtor for no more than the bare Value, nor can any more be
demanded of him.

VI. When a Drawer for another account receives not the Value, then the loss
comes charged on the account of him for whose account it was drawn, unless the
Drawer stood del Credere, seeing the del Credere has respect to the Remises,
and the whole Negotiation; or, unless the Drawer gave the Remitter some time
for the payment of the Value, and advised not his Principal thereof, or unless
the Drawer had neglected to demand the Value in due and ordinary time, or
unless (I may add) the Remitter were a man known to be insolvent or declining;
in any of these respects, whether the Drawer had any profit or no, the loss
will fall upon his own account, because he credited the Remitter.

VII. When the Drawer fails before the Value be received, then the Remitter, if
he has the Bills yet in his hands, may restore them either to the Creditors of
the Drawer, or to the Curators of his Effects, and if either of these think
that he is obliged to perform the Contract, and that he must pay the Value, and
demand Acceptance and Payment of the Bills, the Remitter is obliged to attempt
the same, but with this Proviso, that the Creditors or Curators that urge him
thereto, give sufficient security for the Rechange and Charges, in case he
negotiate the same, and it be returned with Protest, which they must do before
he is obliged to pay the Value to any of them.

VIII. If a Remitter has conditioned for any time for the payment of the
Value, or if he cannot pay the Value, the Bank being shut, and in the mean
time, at the request of the Drawer, he accepts of an Assignation for the Value,
payable to a third Person after the expiration of the Term agreed on, or after
the opening of the Bank, (whether this Acceptance be verbal only, or written)
the Remitter is obliged thereby to pay the Value to the third Person at the due
time, although the Drawer should fail before that time be expired, etc.

IX. If the Remitter or Possessor of a Bill have been negligent in demanding
Acceptance, and the Drawer in the mean time fails, but the Acceptant not
knowing thereof before acceptance is demanded, if he do accept, that Acceptance
obliges to the payment, though procured after the failure of the Drawer, as
well in respect of the Acceptant himself, or any other for whose account the
Bill was drawn.

X. If the Remitter or Possessor have neglected to demand Acceptance before the
Drawer failed, then the Acceptant cannot be compelled to accept of the Draught,
though the Acceptant has writ to the Drawer, that he would accept such a Bill,
and though he confess, he should have accepted it if the acceptance had been
timously demanded, and before he had knowledge of the Drawers failure.

XI. When any have Bills sent them to demand acceptance thereof, and to keep
the same by him, or to return them to the Remitter, or any other that he shall
order, if they by negligence or forgetfulness delay to demand acceptance, or
suffer the Acceptant to delay and defer the acceptance, and the Drawer in the
interim should chance to fail, and then the Acceptant should absolutely refuse
acceptance, such a one deserves small thanks from the true Owner of the Bill;
but he is not obliged to make good the Value. But on the contrary, if Bills be
effectually remitted to any, and they be urged to procure acceptance and
payment, etc. if they defer and delay to procure the same, if the Acceptant
(being yet ignorant of the feared evil circumstances of the Drawer) declare he
should have accepted, if it had been timously demanded, they are obliged to
their Correspondent who remitted the Bill, to make good the loss occasioned by
their negligence, but further not.

XII. When a Bill is drawn in and endorsed by several Persons before the same
be accepted, and afterward acceptance being demanded, is refused, because the
Drawer is failed, then the loss falls upon the first Endorser, whose duty it
was to have procured Acceptance, wherein being negligent, he can only blame
himself for having no better security, and must hope then on his failed Drawers
recovery.

XIII. When an Acceptant hears of the failure of the Drawer before acceptance
be demanded, he ought not to accept any Bills of his, though he had advice from
the Drawer, that he would draw; and while he was yet supposed to be in bonis,
and returned answer, that he would accept, in such a case he must upon no
account to pleasure the Possessor, or any other, accept thereof, without
sufficient security to be discharged from all and every one that shall make any
pretense or demand thereof, whether the Drawer, his Creditors or Curators, or
his Principal for whose account it was drawn.

XIV. Nor may the Acceptant accept any Bills from the failed Drawer, though the
date of the Bill be before his failure, and the Letter of advice of the same
date with the Bill, whether it come with the ordinary Post or not, because
there is great suspicion (and its but too apparent in this case) that there is
some Fraudulent under-hand-dealing, and that the Bill and the Letter are truly
antidated.

XV. If any be drawn on for the account of a third, and he before the
acceptance has advice of the failure of the Drawer, he ought not to accept the
same, though he promised to the Drawer that he would, because such his
acceptance may tend to his own Prejudice, if he has not effects in his Hands
for the Person for whose account will scruple, and justly, the making good of
the Value; and it will be at least to the Principals damage and Prejudice, if
he has the effects in his Hands to answer to those Bills.

XVI. Especially he ought not to accept any Bills, if the Person for whose
account the Bill was drawn by the failed Drawer, has advised him of the
failure (or suspicion of the said Drawers failure) and therefore has forbidden
him to accept any of the said Drawers Bills for his account, though he had
ordered the Acceptance thereof before.

XVII. When the Drawer fails, the Acceptant is not obliged to make present
Payment, or to give him better Security; but the Possessor must wait till the
day of Payment before he can domand any thing of the Acceptant, and then the
Acceptant must pay, though he accepted for the Drawers account, and he has no
effects of the Drawers in his Hands.

XVIII. The Possessor of a Bill, the Drawer whereof is failed, and payment
being denied by the Acceptant, is not obliged to return the Bill and Protest to
the place whence it was drawn, because its too apparent that the Rechange and
Charges cannot be recovered from the Drawer, but he must instantly without
delay, after the Protest is made, proceed against him, by attaching of his
Goods and arresting of his Person, which no Magistrate should refuse to grant;
and its to be noted, that its one thing when the Drawer is yet in bonis, and
another when he is failed.

XIX. When an Acceptant fails, and absents himself, then the Possessor is
obliged, so soon as he gets notice thereof, though before the day of Payment,
instantly without delay to inquire the truth thereof, and if true, by a Notary
public order a Protest in due form to be made, and send the same with the Bill
to the Remitter, to procure satisfaction from the Drawer, and advice ought to
be given directly to the first Remitter, and not to the last Endorser only,
that the Drawer may, if he please, order another to honor his Bills, and
prevent the loss by the Rechange, etc.

XX. But yet though the Possessor, either out of Negligence or Ignorance of
this Custom, or Ignorance of the failure of the Acceptant, or because the Bill
made payable to order, comes not till after its fallen due, or for any other
cause does not, or cannot, make this Notarial Protest, nor send it away,
neither before nor after its due, till probably on the last Respit day; yet
this Negligence or Ignorance, notwithstanding the Possessor does not lose his
Redress on the Drawer and Endorser, though the Acceptant failed before the Bill
became due.

XXI. When an Acceptant fails before the day of Payment, and the Possessor does
order presently a Protest to be made, then if the Bill be made payable to
order, he does wisely if he send only the Protest away to the first Remitter,
and keeps the Bill till the same fall due, that in case the Drawer order any
other to honor his Bills in time, the Possessor may be ready to receive the
Value.

XXII. If any other offer to accept and honor the Bill, whose first Acceptant
failed, in honor of the Drawer, or any other Endorser, in such case the
Possessor is not obliged to accept of such an offer, if he look not on the
offerer as very sufficient and substantial; but if he be sufficient, or will
give sufficient caution, then the Possessor must accept of his offer, and
cannot refuse it.

XXIII. But none can or may accept such a Bill (whose Acceptant is failed)
safely, without a Protest for Non-payment, declaring the Evil circumstances of
the Acceptant; and such an Acceptant in honor must presently send the said
Protest, together with the Notaries Attestation of his acceptance in honor to
the Drawer, or to him for whose account he accepted.

XXIV. Though it be certainly known, and the Drawer himself must confess, that
the Acceptant of his Bill is failed, yet he is not obliged to give any caution,
security or satifaction to the Remitter till the Protest be produced; but if
the Remitter or Possessor have the Bills returned without the Protest, or the
Protest without the Bills, or both the Protest and the Bills, and shows them to
the Drawer, then he is obliged instantly to give satisfaction or security for
the Re-change and Charges.

XXV. Yet let no wise Drawer make retistution of the value he received, or of
the Rechange and Charges upon the producing of the Protest for the insolvency
of the Acceptant; but upon the producing thereof, being required thereto, let
him give security for the payment thereof at the place where it is payable, if
there be yet time enough, or of the Re-change, when the Bill by his failed
Acceptant, accepted, is produced, which Bill, if it be not produced, he need
not restore or repay any thing, but upon sufficient security to deliver the
Bill, and to discharge him from all future demands, and to make Restitution
thereof with Interest, in case the said Bill be paid to any supra Protest; but
if there be not time enough to order the payment of the Bill at the place where
it was payable, then let the Drawer give security to pay it to the Remitter in
the place where it was drawn, when the time of the Bill shall be expired.

XXVI. A Drawer or Endorser is obliged to the Possessor of a Bill protested for
the failing and insolvency of the Acceptant, as much as if the Bill was
protested for Non-acceptance (whereof see Chapter 13.) and further not.

XXVII. When the Drawer, at the request of the Remitter, has made his Bill
payable to order, and that Bill is afterward endorsed and drawn in from
several places, and should, in case of the failure of the Acceptant, be
returned the same way they came, then the Drawer may tell the Remitter to whom
he may address himself for payment at the day, giving sufficient security for
the payment thereof, which if he do, he is not further obliged to any, nor for
more than the Charges of Protest and Postidge, and the Remitter must accept
hereof, and accordingly order his Correspondent to make his address to such a
Person; but the Drawer must order his Friend not to pay any Monyes but upon the
receipt of, or security for the delivery of the potested Bill, with the Protest.

XXVIII. When any is drawn on and remitted to, in Bills payable to himself, and
he has advised that he accepts of the Draught, if this Acceptant and Possessor
of the Bill should chance to fail before the Bill fall due, then the loss falls
upon the Drawer, or on him for whose account the Bill was drawn, and he is
obliged to make good the Re-change and Charges, though it be not protested in
due form and course; but if he fail on the day of payment, or after, then the
Bill is looked upon as paid, and the loss falls upon him for whose account was
remitted, though it should formally be protested within the days of Respit.

XXIX. When a Sum is drawn for the account of a third, and the Bill is for his
account accepted, if he for whose account is drawn should fail, without making
Provision to discharge the accepted Bill, yet the Acceptant must pay it, and
has no redress on the Drawer.

XXX. If a Bill be drawn by the order and for account of a third, and is
accepted by the Acceptant, if the Acceptant fail, the Drawer must make good the
Re-change and Charges, but yet he has his redress on him for whose account he
drew, and may charge his account therewith, though the said Person has already
made sufficient provision good to the Acceptant, or has accepted his
Acceptants Bills for the Value, and if both the Acceptant, and the Person for
whose account was drawn, should fail, the Bill being accepted, the Drawer may
then come upon them both for satisfaction.

XXXI. When a Bill drawn and accepted for the account of a third, and the
Acceptant fails before he, for whose account the Bill was drawn, has made the
Acceptant sufficient Provision for the discharge thereof, if the Drawer should
also fail, then he for whose account was drawn need not suffer himself to be
persuaded to pay the Bill, and receive it, because it was drawn for his
account, unless the Possessor will give him sufficient security to save him
harmless, both from the Drawer and Acceptant, and their Creditors, Assigns and
Curators, etc.

XXXII. When the Acceptant of a Bill fails before Provision is made to
discharge the same, and the Drawer fails also, then he for whose account was
drawn and accepted, need not discharge the Bill and pay the value, either to
the Acceptant, his Creditors or Curators, unless it appear to him that the
Possessor is satisfied by the Acceptant, or some others for his account, and
does relinquish all pretenses to both the Acceptants and Drawers effects, or
unless he be sufficiently secured from all damage that may accrue upon the
account of the said draught and acceptance.

XXXIII. When the Possessor of a Bill, payable to his order, fails, and to
defraud his Creditors, endorseth the Bill to another, who negotiates the same,
and effectually receives the Value, and does again endorse it to a third, etc.
yet though the Creditors should oppose it and discover the Fraud, the Acceptant
must pay it to him who comes to receive it, if he can prove that he paid the
Value thereof really; but if the failed Possessor had made it payable to any
other directly, he may probably be allowed Provision, but he must prove how and
when he paid the Value, and must Swear, that before the failure of the Endorser
was known, the same Bill, without any Color or Fraud, was delivered to him
before he may receive the Principal; (if the Creditors oppose him) and if he
refuse to do this, he must not receive a Farthing of the Sum, or if he has
received it, he must be obliged to restore it for the use of the Creditors in
common, and must also be obliged to draw in and endorse the Bill that he
received from the failed Possessor to defraud them.

XXXIV. When a Bill payable in current Monyes, is made or endorsed payable to
any Possessor, that is unknown to the Acceptant failed, before the day of
Payment, if he afterward pay the same to him, his failing being unknown, such
Payment is good and vaild; but if he pay to any other, upon order of the
Possessor, and know of the failing of the said Possessor, he does very
unwisely, and runs the hazard of paying it twice.

XXXV. When the Possessor of a Bill fails, and the Acceptant can prove and
demonstrate that the Bill was remitted for the Possessors account, or upon
account of what the Remitter or any other for whose account it was remitted,
was indebted to the Possessor, and therefore he only is the true Owner and
Principal of the Bill, then the Acceptant may pay it to him, and he must credit
the Person for whose account it is for the value. But if the Bill be for the
account of a third, or for the Drawers account, and neither of them have
received any valuable consideration from the Possessor for it; in such a case
it ought to be paid to him, in regard the failed Possessor is not the true
Owner of the Bill, but only the demander of Satisfaction; and the Acceptant
should be obliged at the day of Payment to pay the same to the next order of
the Remitter, or the true Owner of the Bill for whose account it is.

XXXVI. If a suspected Possessor of a Bill should Fraudulently twice draw in
effectually the same Bill, and give the prima Bill to one man, with directions
to find the secunda Bill accepted, and the secunda Bill to another, with
directions where to find the prima accepted, then he only has right and title
to the Monyes that first procures acceptance (he not finding any accepted Bill,
as he was directed) whether it be the first or second Bill that is accepted, it
makes no matter, or whether it were first or last negotiated by the fraudulent
Endorser.

XXXVII. When the Possessor of a Bill that is failed, to defraud his Creditors
or others, conceals it, and they afterward discover that such a Remise must yet
be in his Hands, or such a draught is, or at least was in his Hands, then the
Acceptant is obliged to declare whether he has accepted such a draught, to
which if he answer affirmatively, the Creditors, or any other concerned, may
forbid the Acceptant to pay it, without their or his knowledge and consent; and
if any appear at the day of payment to demand payment, he is obliged to
declare, that he is the true possessor of the said Bill, and prove it; if none
appear, then the Acceptant is obliged to pay the Sum to the Creditors or
Curators of the failed Possessor, they giving security that the Acceptant shall
in no wise be prejudiced thereby, or if he scruple to do it upon their
Security, he may pay it into the Hands of the Magistrate, for the account of
the true Owners thereof; and if the Acceptant refuse this, the Creditors or
Curators may unanimously protest against him for non-payment, and send the same
to the Remitter to procure satisfaction of the Drawer, and if he make no
Satisfaction, then they may compel the Acceptant thereto.

XXXVIII. When a Bill is made payable to the order of any that is failed,
before the Bill be come to his hands, if he receive the Bill and endorse it,
making it payable to any other that demands acceptance thereof, and the
Acceptant accepts thereof, being ignorant of the failing of the first
Possessor, in such a case the Acceptant may, getting knowledge of the failing
of the first Possessor, and that he was failed before he endorsed the said
Bill, not pay the Value to his order, because the failed Possessor, after his
failing, had no power or quality to endorse a Bill of Exchange, and therefore
the Acceptant does wisely to offer to make Payment thereof to his Creditors or
Curators, upon sufficient Security to be indemnified, which if they accept not
of, let him suffer the said Bill to return with Protest.

XXXIX. Its not without suspicion of Fraud when the Debtor of an insolvent
pretends to have a Resconter, because that he at the request of the failed,
when he was yet in Bonis, accepted a Bill, or under-writ a tertia Bill, payable
to some of the failed's Creditors, and that he paid the said Bill he accepted,
or that the Bill, the tertia whereof he subscribed, was protested, and he
forced to pay the Rechange and Charges; for the Debtor and Creditor, or
Possessor of such a Bill, understanding one another, and the condition of the
failed may easily, to the prejudice of the Creditors, make abundance of such
Bills after he failed.

XL. When a Possessor of a Bill has neglected to procure acceptance in time,
and the Acceptant after the failure of the Drawer refuses to accept, then he
has no Privilege or Preferrence more than other Creditors, to the effects he
may have in the Acceptants hands, though the Drawer drew merely upon those
Goods, and would have been accepted, if demanded before the failure of the
Drawer was known.

XLI. Though the Possessor of a Bill, whose Acceptant failed before the day of
Payment, or within the Respit days, has an open account with him, and is
Debtor to him for a greater Sum than the value of the Bill imports; and though
he may now upon the failing of the Acceptant resconter, yet he does more wisely
if he protest for Non-payment, and let the Bill return.

XLII. When the Drawer, or he for whose account is drawn, fails before they
have made good the promised Provision to the Acceptant, then the Acceptant
paying at the time, or if not accepted, or not paid, but returned with Protest,
the Drawer has privilege and preferrence before all other Creditors, upon any
of the effects of the failed that they have in their own Hands.

XLIII. When an Acceptant of a Bill has Remises made to him for Provision, by
him for whose account he accepted, to discharge the said Draughts with, if he
having received the Remises, fails before he discharge the draughts, then
must the Principal answer the Rechange and Charges, and must be content to come
into a concursus creditorum with the rest. But if upon the failing of the
Acceptant, the Remises be yet found by him, and not yet received, then the
Principal that made those Remises must be preferred to them, and they must be
paid to his order; and though the Creditors or Curators have received the same
after the Insolvency of the failed, yet they must repay the same again.

XLIV. The Possessor of a Bill, protested for Non-acceptance or Non-payment,
whose Drawer and Acceptant are both failed, must concur with the rest of the
Creditors, not for the Value only that was paid, but for the Rechange and
Charges, and for the Sum that the Drawer or Acceptant should have paid, if they
had been Solvent.

XLV. If both the Drawer and the Acceptant fail, then the Possessor has right
and title to demand payment of both their Goods and Debts, etc. and he may
choose with which he will first begin, and where he can soonest procure Payment
or Satisfaction, and if ones Effects will not satisfy his Demands, he may then
get as much as he can of the other's, for they are both obliged.

XLVI. And the same right that he has to the Goods and Debts, or whatever
else, either the failed Drawer or Acceptant may have, till he be satisfied, he
has also the like against any, or all the Endorsers, if the Bill be returned
unaccepted, if they come to fail, and if the Bill be accepted, if the
Acceptant, Drawer and Endorsers should all fail, and be Insolvent, then he may
come upon all their Goods for satisfaction.

XLVII. The Possessor may demand the full Sum, with all the Charges out of the
Goods and Effects of that failed Acceptant, Drawer or Endorser, where he first
gives himself on as Creditor, and what he receives there, he may place to
account in part of his Demands, and if not satisfied there, he cannot demand
the whole again of another, but only the remainder, and so from one to another
till he be satisfied fully.

XLVIII. If the Possessor of a Bill, whose Acceptant, Drawer and Endorsers are
all failed, receives something in part of satisfaction of his demands, if the
failed or the Curators do thereupon demand an Acquittance with a Cession of the
Action to him or them, then the Possessor must not acquit, nor transfer more of
his Action to him or them, than for the value he has received.

XLIX. When the Possessor has received of one of the failed, in part
satisfaction of his Demands, and comes to another of the failed to demand the
rest, then he cannot make a Cession of his Action against him, from whom he had
received in part satisfaction at first, because he was there admitted into the
Concourse for his whole demand, and accordingly received his proportion. So
that NB. though a Possessor enter into a concourse with other Creditors, and
take in part of his Debt of one of the failed as much as he can get, and
thereupon does absolutely discharge him; yet for the remainder he may come upon
the other Endorsers or Drawers, till his Bill be fully satisfied, only he
cannot transfer or transport his Action against him whom he has discharged.

L. When a Possessor of a Bill, whose Drawer, Acceptant and Endorsers are all
failed, does first receive, in part of his demands, of one of the failed, for
whose account the Bill was drawn, but has either drawn, or endorsed, or
accepted the Bill for another account, without having any effects in his
hands, then the Possessor must enter with him, who paid him in part, into a
concourse between themselves, and both demand of the others (or any one of
them) that failed, the subla sum, with the Charges.

LI. In case of the failing of Drawers, Acceptors or Endorsers of Bill, many
difficult Questions could arise, whereof some of them are as follow.

1. Suppose either the Drawer or Acceptant should fail, and the other remains
sufficient.

Quaeritur, Whether the Possessor, to pleasure him that is yet sufficient, may
(being not requested thereto) by virtue of of the Bill, enter upon a concourse,
or whether he must look to him only that is sufficient, and leave the other to
take care for himself?

2. Suppose the draught is for account of a third Person, and the Accepant
fails before Provision be made to discharge the accepted Bill, by him for whose
account it was drawn and accepted; suppose also, the Bill being protested for
Non-payment, the Drawer should prosecute the Acceptant, (or any other Possossor
should do it) and at last they come to terms of agreement, and the Acceptant
does then accordingly satisfy the Possessor, whoever he be.

Quaeritur, What right of demand these either of them have one upon another, or
either or both of them, upon him for whose account the Bill was drawn?

3. Suppose the Possessor of a Bill has negotiated to protest within the days
of Respit, and the Acceptant should fail, without having Effects in Hands for
whose account he accepted.

Quaeritur, Whether the Possessor may agree with him, for whose account the
Bill was drawn, and so mortify the Draught; or whether he, for whose account
it was, must fully satisfy the Acceptant, and the Possessor must be content to
engage in a concourse with the Acceptants Creditors?

4. Suppose a Merchant has no other Debts at all, but one only Bill of
Exchange by him drawn for his own account, whose Acceptant failing, he also is
forced to absent.

Quraeitur, Whether the Possessor may seize upon all the Effects of the Drawer,
upon account in part, and for the remainder may be admitted as a Creditor, into
a concourse of the Acceptants Creditors?

5. Supposed, in case of the failure of Acceptant, Drawer and Endorsers, the
Possessor should first make his demands of the full Sum of him who is the true
Debtor, and ought to pay, and the remainder should be demanded (part being
there satisfied) of the Endorsers, or any other concerned in the Bill, that
have only drawn, endorsed or accepted for another account.

Quaeritur, Whether in such a case (this last demand being also satisfied) they
that pay to the Possessor the remainder, may come upon the Person who ought to
pay, for so much as they have paid to him?

6. Suppose that any Merchant should fail, that has three Creditors only, one
demands 600 l. Ster. for Goods sold, another as much for a Bill of Exchange,
drawn by him for his account, whose Acceptant failed, and a third as much, upon
an Obligation, Bond or Bill, for so much Monyes deposited, having no other
Security but his bare Bond. But though there be so much Debt, yet the failed
Debtor has no more Effects then 600 l. Ster. in all.

Quaeritur, 1. Whether this Sum of 600 l. must equally be divided among these
three Creditors or not?

7. Suppose again this being done, the Possessor of the Bill should come upon
the Acceptant for the remaining 400 l. Sterling, and should there be forced to
enter with other Creditors upon a Concourse.

Quaeritur, 2. Whether then the said Acceptant may not pretend, that he paying
so much on the foresaid failed's account, and so becoming his Creditor, that
another division of the foresaid 600 l. ought to be made, and he to have part
thereof, the same may be enquired after, in case the Possessor of the Bond,
etc. had any Security, and he forced then to pay the remainder, whether he
ought not to admit them as Creditors to the 600 l. Sterling?

8. Suppose that Drawer, Acceptant and Endorser are all failed, and have given
their Goods and Effects into the Magistrates, or any Curators Hands, and the
Possessor should in one place give himself on for the full Sum, and receives
there something in part, and so also in another place receives something more;
and after some time be expired, more of their Debts being come in, the
Magistrates or Curators should make a second Division.

Quaeritur, Whether the Possessor of the Bill, at this second Division, must
come in for a proportion, according to his respective Sums he formerly
received, or for what Sum he must be admitted?

9. Suppose that Bills of Exchange are running betwixt two, or more, that are
failed, for one another account reciprocally, and neither of them have open
accounts for one another, neither accounts current, nor upon time, and yet both
have Goods unsold in their hands.

Quaeritur, How then the Composition must be made, and whether what the one
has to debit the other for must be adjusted?

10. If the Possessor of a Bill fail before or after the Bill is due, and the
Acceptant has yet in hands, or sees and knows where to get another accepted
Bill, payable by the Possessor, or a protested Bill for Non-acceptance, drawn
by the Possessor, which will fall due before or soon after the Bill the failed
Possessor had payable by the Acceptant, etc.

Quaeritur, Whether in any, or all, or none of these Cases, and in which
Resconter or Discount has place?

LII. Merchants that fail, not on design to defraud their Creditors, or to
enrich themselves by their losses, neither occasion their own failing by their
negligence, or Riotous living, but have lost their Estates by cross
Providential Dispensations immediately, as by Fire, Water, Shipwracks, Wars,
Pyracies, etc. or mediately by the Knaveries of Wicked Correspondents and
Factors, etc. are greatly to be pitied. and not to be persecuted with the Rigor
of the Law. But those that are Knavish, or have spent their own and others
Estates in profligate and debauched living, deserve to suffer the utmost
Extremity of the Law, as Thieves and Robbers. Scaccia.

LIII. Honest Merchants that fail, will judge themselves in Conscience obliged
to make their Creditors satisfaction, Quando ad pinguiorem fortunam
pervenerint, and will use all endeavors to do it, though they have compounded
with their Creditors, and the Creditors have for part received, wholly
discharged them, and this is the Testimony of their honesty, when they will
pay, though the Laws of the Land cannot compel them. Scaccia.

LIVE. Decoctus says, The Law Est quasi Mortuus, which may be applied to many
cases, in respect of Exchange, and what a Possessor or Remitter are obliged to
do, if the Acceptant or Drawer fail, the same they are obliged to do if they
dye, if they procure not Payment. Scaccia.

LV. If the Possessor of a Bill dye, and there are none that can lawfully
receive Monyes, nor give a satisfactory Discharge, and yet some should appear
as Heirs, or Assigns, or Executors to enter a Protest of Non-payment, then the
Acceptant must advise the Drawer of all the Circumstances, and he must consult
with the Remitter, and give further orders, or he may deposit the Sum in the
hands of the Magistrates, to be reserved by them for the true Owner. Scaccia.

LVI. If the Possessor of a Bill protested, should agree and compound with the
Acceptant, and the Drawer be the Acceptants Debtor for the Sum he accepted,
though the Drawer be thereby discharged from the Remitter and Possessor, and
that Acceptant also, yet the Acceptant can debit the Drawer for no more of that
Bill or Bills than he effectually paid, according to the Composition. Scaccia.

LVII. But if the Possessor has made this Composition with the Acceptant,
without the Remitters order and consent, the Remise being for the Remitters
account, then the Possessor will be liable to answer the whole Sum to him.
Scaccia.

LVIII. If the Drawers or Endorsers being failed, deny that the Bills they have
drawn and endorsed, and the Acceptant has accepted, were for effects of
theirs, that the Acceptant had in his hands, or that they have since or before
acceptance made him provision for the discharge thereof, they must at their
Creditors request prove the same. Scaccia.

CHAP. XLIII.
IN this Chapter shall be added some select Cases collected out Sigism.
Scaccia. his Treatise De Camvio and Commercijs.

Glassema Primum.
Case 1. Whether it be necessary that Bills of Exchange be made?

Answ. Affirmatively; but not because they are de Essentia Contractus, but only
in respect of better Proof of the Contract, and that Execution may more easily
be obtained upon them; Therefore, Regularitur, they are necessary.

Case 2. Whether ought the Remitter to give the Monyes to the Drawer, or the
Drawer give the Bills to the Remitter first, de jure?

Answ. The Remitter, who is as the Buyer, must give his Monyes first; for Good
bought for ready Monyes, need not be delivered till the Monyes be paid. 2dly,
The Bill says expressly [The value received] and there is danger to the Drawer
to give his Bills away before the value be received. But, 3dly, Rather than
there should among Merchants be any dispute about this, let the Drawer give the
prima Bill to the Remitter first, and keep the secunda Bill till he receive his
Monyes.

Case 3. Whether it be necessary to begin a Bill of Exchange (or any other
public or private Instrument) with Laus Deo, or Signum Crucis, as the Papists
usually do?

Answ. No; for it is but a superstition, which the Law takes no notice of,
neither is it of the Essence or Substance of a Bill of Exchange, or other
Instrument; and though it be used by many, and the Italians, as the Author, and
others that he quotes, assert the necessity thereof, as grounded upon Custom,
and as a Note of Distinction betwixt Christians and Heathens, yet its certain,
as the Author confesses, no stress was ever laid upon it; and I am bold to
add, That it is Superstitious, and more a Profaning than an Invoking of the
Name of God.

Case 4. Whether is the Date of a Bill of absolute necessity, so that without
it the Bill is void and of no effect, and here first, whether the Year must be
specified?

Answ. 1. Its not so absolutely necessary de jure, but its yet de consuetudine
(that has obtained the force of Law) absolutely necessary; so that the
Omission thereof does vitiate a Bill of Exchange; besides, in Bills of Exchange
time is de Substantia Contractus.

And 2dly, Whether the day of the Month must be expressed?

The Answer is still the same; for how should Usance be reckoned, if this be
omitted, if Usance be after Date, etc? And if the Bills shall prove for the
Drawer, in his favor the true date must be added, otherwise though the
Possessor should not protest his Bill in time, and the Remitter come and desire
restitution upon that Protest, if the Acceptant was the Drawers Debtor, and
failed, or in any such like case, the Drawer may thank himself, if the Date
were omitted, it will prove against him, not for him, nor can he on this
account refuse to make Restitution. Nor can the Acceptant upon this account, by
the same reason, refuse acceptance and payment, but such Bills may as
effectually be protested as if they were dated. Nor can the Notary Public upon
this pretext refuse to make a Protest, and the reason is this, The date of the
Bill is not de jure, so Essential, that the Omission thereof should make it
utterly void; for the Body of the Bill will prove the Coutract against the
Drawer, and against all else concerned in it, in favor of the Remitter and
Creditor.

And yet, if the Acceptant refuse to accept an undated Bill, he does well, and
cannot be prejudiced, yet may safely accept it, if he please, without any fear
of Prejudice to him; for all the fault is the Drawers: And if the Possessor
refuse to protest such Bills, the fault is his, and he may make himself thereby
liable to make satisfaction to the Remitter, if any Damage should ensue.

Case 5. Whether the Place must necessarily be added in the Date of a Bill of
Exchange?

Answ. In the Affirmative, de Consuetudine, non de jure, Its not enough to know
that such a Bill was done in the World, or in England, Scotland, France or
Ireland, but at least the Name of the City where such a Bill was made must be
expressed; and as he is unwise that will accept a Bill of Exchange any way
deficient in these Circumstances of Time or Place, so also is that Possessor
unwise, that because the Bill is deficient, will not protest upon refusal of
Acceptance.

To this let be added, That if the Acceptant does accept a Bill, and does not
then observe it to be desicient in any of these Circumstances, and afterward
will make such Exceptions to avoid the payment thereof, he cannot thereby be
excused, but must pay.

Case 6. Suppose that this day, the 3/13 of November, Anno 1680. at
Konigsbrough in Pressia, I writ Letters to Hambrough to Robert my Correspondent
there, advising him, that I have drawn on him, of the same date, such and such
Bills, etc. Suppose also, that instead of dating them the 3/13 of Novembris
aforesaid, they be dated the 3/13 Octobris past, or the 3/13 Decembris to come.
These Letters and Bills they arrive at Hambrough by the Post the 11/21
Novembris, on which day the Letter of Advice is delivered, and the Bills for
Acceptance presented; The Acceptant he presently observes the Error, and begins
to scruple Acceptance; if he does accept, he knows not how to place them to
account in his Books, because the Dates, which should be orderly, and one Day
and Month follow upon another in his Books, and it may be he suspects there is
some piece of Policy (or Knavery rather) in the case, and either the anti-dated
Bills should not be paid at all, (suppose they were at sight) till the 13/3
Decembris, or the Post-dated Bills (suppose the term of Payment be expired)
should not be accepted at all; in these Perplexities of Thoughts has states and
fears in the whole, the Design is to trapan him, especially if he has engaged
himself under a Penalty to accept all the Bills of such and such a Person, for
some limited Time and Sums. What shall and must Robert, my Correspondent, do
in such a case?

Answ. Robert not only may, but must accept and pay those Bills, though no
Penalty were annixed. For, First, This pretext of an Error in the date will not
excuse me (the Drawer) from paying the Rechange and Charges, if protested, much
less my Correspondent, who must observe my order, and represents my Person, and
that this pretense will not excuse me, is self-evident, because in respect of
me, Time and Place are not of the Essence of the Bill, by an Error, or the
Omission whereof, the Bill it self should be so vitiated as to be null and
void. Secondly, Suppose an Error in, or Omission of these Circumstances of Time
and Place were of the Essence of the Bill of Exchange, yet though the Bill be
deficient and vitiated, yet the Contract contained in the Bill is valid and
firm. And, Thirdly, In such a case where an Error is so evident and palpable,
respect should be had to the Letters of advice, and if they were also wrong
dated, yet being its impossible that Letters dated at Konigsbrough the 13th
Decembris should arrive at Hambrough (an hundred Dutch Miles off and more)
three Weeks before the time of the date. Thus palpable Error must give way to
Truth, especially seeing the Error is not in the solemnity of the Contract, but
in the formality of the Bill; and these Circumstances are only added as Proofs
of the Contract, not as Parties, and of the Essence thereof.

Case 7. Whether an Error about, or an Omission of the Name of the Place be
Fssentially necessary to be expressed in a Bill of Exchange?

Answ. To avoid Repititions, I refer my self to what has been said concerning
an Error in, or Omission of the time of the date of a Bill.

Case 8. If the Sum expressed in Figures, and the Sum writ at large in Letters
disagree?

Answ. Referred to what was before hinted, Chapter 7. Rule 26.

Glassema Secundum.
At Vsance.
What Usance is, and what other times of payment are usually expressed in Bills,
and all other Questions and Cases concerning them, we refer to what has
already been said in the 14th Chapter foregoing.

Glassema tertium.
Here must be promised Pay.
1. THat Pay, is here modi imperitative and temporis prosentis, and accordingly
has various Effects: 1st, That Bills of Exchange are positive and peremptory,
the Order is absolute and cannot be revoked: 2dly, That the Payment at the time
appointed must necessarily be made, and if accepted, cannot be avoided:
Wherefore, 3dly, Its not according to the Merchant Style, to say in a Bill of
Exchange [Please to Pay] the Style of Exchanges will not allow of such
Complements; not from a Servant to a Master: 4thly, This word [Pay] commands
Acceptance first, in order to Payment, as well as Payment it self.

Concerning Acceptance, which preceeds Payment always, we have spoken
something before, Chap. 10, 11, and 12. and probably shall have occasion to
hint something else afterward; wherefore we proceed to speak to several Cases
concerning the Payment of Bills.

Case 1. What is it to pay a Bill of Exchange?

Answer; To satisfy the Bill, and procure a discharge upon it, that the
Acceptant and the Drawer may be discharged from the Remitter and Possessor; so
that to Pay, is rather to be referred to the substance of the Obligation, than
to the payment of Monyes; and if the Bill be satisfied, its no matter at all
whether with Monyes or Goods, or by Resconter, etc. though ordinarily all Bills
are paid in Monyes: and this is certain, that if the Bill be for Monyes, it
must be paid in Monyes, if the Possessor will have it so; and a Possessor may
as well protest for Non-payment, if Goods be offered instead of Monyes, or any
other Species of Monyes than that the Bill requires, (as to pay per Cash when
the Bill is payable in Bank) as if no Payment at all were offered.

Case 2. How many sorts of Payments are there? And to whom is the Debtor said
to have paid well, and to whom not?

Answer; There are two sorts of Payment, Proper and Improper; Proper is when
the Bills are paid in the precise Species, and according to the tenor of the
Bill, either in Gold or Silver, in Bank or per Cash, in current lawful Monyes,
and such Species as the Bill requires; and such Payment as this does absolutely
discharge the Debtor, because the Obligation is fully satisfied, and the
Creditor need not be much inquisitive, who pays his Bill in this kind, whether
it be the Debtor himself; or 2dly, any other by his order, and in his Name; or
3dly, without his order, supra Protest, in honor of the Bill; or 4thly,
without either Order or Protest (if any be so foolish) the Creditor may from
any of these safely receive his Monyes, and transfer his Action, if he please;
5thly, yea, if any will pay against Order. But on the contrary:

To a full discharge of the Debtor, is required not only a surrender and
delivery, and a Discharge or Acquittance upon the Bill, but he must observe to
whom he pays, and Payment in respect of the Debtor is only good, when it is
made, 1st, To one sufficiently authorized and qualified to receive and
discharge as he is; 2dly, To whom it is orderly last assigned and endorsed; or
3dly, To him with whom the Contract was made (if there be no Endorsments) or
4thly, To him for whose account the Bill is; or 5thly, To a Servant of any of
these, who has ordinarily for his Master received Monyes, and given Receipts,
whereof the Masters has approved; or 6thly, To the Executors or
Administrators; or 7thly, To any that the Remitter and the Drawer shall agree
upon, in case they revoke their first Order, if the Bill be for the Remitters,
or for any thirds accounts; for then, though it be orderly assigned and
endorsed to another, who is only as the Remitters Factor, if the Remitter
forbid the Acceptant to pay him, he must not pay, but upon his own hazard, but
must pay to him whom the Remitter orders; concerning this, see Chap. 16.

To all which may be added, that if the Acceptant pay mala fidei Possessori
ignorantly, that Payment is good, if the Bill otherwise in all its Formalities
be perfect, etc.

Improper Payment has all the Effects and Virtue of a Proper Payment, though
it be not made in a precise Species, nor according to the tenor of the Bill,
yet it discharges the Debtor as effectually, only the Creditor cannot be
compelled to take this, as he may be to take the other, and it must be made
only to the true Owner of the Bill, to one that has his order to accept of
such payment, else it is not good nor sufficient, nor will the Debtor be
thereby discharged, if the true Owners order has only a simple order to
receive Payment, and not positively such payment, because no order of the true
Owner and Possessor of the Bill has power to alter the tenor thereof; whereas
if the true Owner resconter, (or order his Order so to do) or take payment in
Goods, or otherwise in Words declare himself satisfied, or order him to
satisfy any other for the Value, or to Resconter with any other; though there
be in all this no actual payment of Monyes, in Specie, yet the Payment is good.

Case 3. A Possessor has several Bills upon one Person, and they all fall due
near upon one time, part he pays, and the other part he pays not till a day or
two after, (yet within the Respit days) in the mean time he fails, and cannot
pay at all; the Question is, for whose Accounts that shall be that is paid, or
whether the Receiver has power to place it to what Accounts he pleases?

Answ. 1. If the Debtor express and declare on what account he pays, if the
Creditor or Receiver be silent, and so receive it, it must necessarly be for
that account, yea, though there remain another Sum then due, for which the
Drawer had given Security, and so it may seem to be paid in prejudicium tertij;
yea, and though the Creditor had engaged not to act against the Surety, till he
had first excused the principal Debtor; and as on one hand the Surety cannot
justly complain of the principal Debtor for so doing, because it was in his
power to do with his own as he pleased at that time, and so pay for what
account he would; so neither can it on the other hand, in favor of the Surety,
or of the Creditor, be altered, though the Debtor himself consent, because when
once paid, it is no more the Debtors, nor has he any further disposal over it,
nor can it be said, that the payment was made to defraud the security, because
the payment was Real, and upon a real account. But if the Creditor had acted at
Law against the Debtor, and procured execution against him, and so had seized
on his Effects, and exposed them to sale to pay himself, then the case is
otherwise; for then the Debts, for which there are Sureties or Pledges given,
must first be discharged, or else the Creditors do not as they would be done to.

2. If the Debtor be silent when the Creditor says, he receives for such and
such accounts, then such payments must be for such accounts, because its
presumed, that the Creditor herein acts as if he himself had been Debtor.

3. If one of them choose, and the other in that moment contradict, the Debtors
choice must be preferred, and if the Creditor will not receive for those
accounts, he should not receive at all, or if received, he ought to make
restitution, or place it to account, as the Debtor would have it.

4. If both be silent, as to the accounts the the Monyes is paid and received
upon (or if they would defer it till another time to resolve upon, which cannot
lawfully be admitted) then the oldest Debt must first be satisfied; and if they
are alike old, then causa Durioris, must be preferred, because its most
necessary, as if any Surety be engaged for the Debtor; in this case it would be
very hard that he should suffer. Yet,

5. If the Debt be for Interest and Principal, and the Debtor pay any Monyes
upon that account, though the Principal be heavier, yet the Law always
supposes that the Interest must first be paid, because men usually gather the
Fruits before they pull up the Tree. So also,

6. If there be a Surety for one part of the Debt, and a Pledge for the other,
though (neither in this nor the former case) the Debtor nor the Creditor speak
not a word about it, or though they do speak, yet the Law presumes, that the
Monyes paid is first to discharge that part for which there is security given,
and not for that for which there is a Pledge, because the Creditor can sell the
Pledge when he pleases, and so pay himself.

Case 4. Whether Prescription be good Payment? And how soon a Bill of Exchange
may be prescribed?

Answ. Prescription is improper Payment; yet being it has the effect of a Real
Payment sometimes, we must therefore enquire, How soon a Bill of Exchange may
be prescribed? And to this is answered, That accepted and duly protested
Bills, or protested for Nonacceptance, can never be prescribed, if demands be
constantly made; but if a palpable negligence or silence can be interpreted,
for consent, and that out of such a Consent Prescription can arise, especially
the Creditor knowing what the Law in these cases is, and having frequent
opportunities to make demands, or to puruse at Law for Non-payment; or if such
a consent imply a Renunciation, Remission or Satisfaction, then we cannot
suppose that any long time is required to prescribe a Bill of Exchange; and the
Law presumes, That when a Debt may conveniently be demanded, but is neither
demanded nor protested, that then it is paid; and if it were not thus, there
would be no end of Controversies and Disputes among Merchants; for they many
times, when their Bills are paid, either negligently or in confidence of their
Creditors honesty, leave them in their Creditors Hands: And here observe, That
as to the ready Execution that Bills of Exchange are privileged with, when
protested, if not presently, and extempore put in execution, when they
conveniently may, is in so far prescribed, that they then signify no more than
any other ordinary Bills or Bonds, which must be sued for in the ordinary
Methods.

Case 5. If a Creditor upon any pretense, refuse to receive the Monyes due upon
a Bill of Exchange, etc. What is then to be done?

Answ. Deposit the Value in the hands of the Magistrates of the place, or any
other sufficient Persons, upon the account of such a Bill, and this shall be
accounted good payment, and discharge both the Acceptant and the Drawer, if it
be according to the tenor of the Bill.

Case 6. If the value of Monyes be inhanced or depressed, between the making
and dissolving the Contract by Payment, whose shall the Profit or the Loss be?

Answ. The value of Monyes may be inhanced or depressed two ways,
Intrinsically and Extrinsically; As to the Extrinsick value of Monyes, the
loss, without Controversy, is the Creditors, and the Profit also is, as is
asserted in the sixteenth Chapter, fourteenth Proposition.

But as to the Intrinsic value of Monyes; if in this interval of time it be
inhanced or depressed; if it be of a worse or a better allay, of greater or
lesser Prize, then the Debtor must pay according to the value of the Monyes, at
the time of making the Contract; and if any of the old Species of the old value
be to be had, he should pay in that Species, whether it be to his profit or to
his loss, and the reason is clear, If I borrow any Commodity, to pay again in
Specie, both the Extrinsick and Intrinsic Value thereof must beconsidered.

As for Instance: I borrow of my Neighbor ten Quarters of Wheat, the Quarter
being then valued at 40 s. Now when I would pay my Neighbor his Wheat again,
if what I will pay with be not so good, as that which I received, which is the
Intrinsic value, there is no reason, but I should proportionably give him
again more than the ten Quarters, and if my Wheat be better, there is no reason
but that proportionably so much less should be restored, I allowing him the
usual lawful Interest of his Monyes for the time; so also, as to the Extrinsick
value, supposed that the Wheat I will pay with, be as good every way, as that I
received, but what then was bought for 40 s. per Quarter, may now be worth 50
s. or it may be is fallen and worth no more than 30 s. if the Debtor then pay
the quantity, he is discharged, nor respect being had to the Extrinsick value,
the Profit and loss thereof being the Creditors, as before was said; only let
me here add, that we only speak of Bills of Exchange here, which suppose
Punctual Payment; whereas if a Debtor should from time to time put off and
delay Payment, after its due, there is no reason but if there be Loss he should
bear it, and if there be Profit, that the Creditor should have it, because he
himself the Debtor is in fault.

Case 7. If a Creditor of a Bill of Exchange do receive of his Debtor, or of
the Debtors Debtor, or of any other, at the Debtors instance, other Bills of
Exchange, payable at the same time by other Persons; if these Persons pay not,
Whether is the Debtor discharged or no? Or suppose for Instance; I owe you 100
l. Sterling upon Bills of Exchange, and Titius owed me an 100 l. Sterling upon
Exchange also; Wherefore I desire Titius to make and give you Bills of
Exchange, payable at Amsterdam, for the Value which you accept of, and
discharge me. But before these Bills are paid, the Person they were drawn upon
fails; The Question is, whether this Discharge be good or no, and you must only
seek your Regress upon Titius? etc.

Answ. The Discharge is good, and you can only seek your Regress against
Titius; for here is a relinquishing the first Debtor, and a taking of another
in his stead, which is a Novation, which does always extinguish the first
Contract: On this occasion we may speak shortly to five Cases more of this
Nature.

1. I am your Debtor, and Ceulus his Creditor, and I assign you upon Ceulus to
receive your Payment, ordering him to pay you; Ceulus being then absent, you
receive my Assignation, and deliver me my Bill, etc. Am I then discharged if
Ceulus pay not?

Answ. No; for here is but a simple cessio Nominis, and that of one that is
absent, and therefore does not accept of the Payment; and this is not an
Assignation properly, and therefore no Novation, its but an order to receive it
in another place, and is therefore no Payment; and therefore I still remain
obliged, if you have been diligent in demanding Payment, and could procure none.

2. Suppose Ceulus were present, and did then accept of the order to make
Payment, or afterward does accept, and promise to make Payment, and you
consent to take your Payment of him: Am I then discharged if Payment follow not?

Answ. In the Affirmative, because here is an Assignation properly, which is
more than cessio Nominis, because of the consent of the Parties, and is indeed
a Novation, qui delegat solbit in this case, because Dat nomen debitoris in
solutum; and here the first Debtor has no more to do than to prove his Debt,
unless he also obliged himself for his Debtors sufficiency, which condition
does alter the case, etc.

3. Suppose I am your Debtor, and order Ceulus, my Cashier, to pay, who
promises to do it, but before he pay, he fails; am I then discharged?

Answ. The hazard is still the Creditors; for whether the Cashier were my
Debtor, or not, its still an Assignation, which discharges me from you, for
another having undertaken to pay my Debt, and my Creditor being therewith
satisfied; what more can he pretend of me, my Cashier being always supposed to
have ready Cash of mine in his Hands, when he undertakes to pay my Debt, and
the Creditor may blame himself, if he did not timously enough receive it from
my Cashier: But here is an exception; If it can be proved that the first Debtor
was conscious of the designed failure of his Debtor or Cashier, on whom he
assigned, then the Payment is not good.

4. Suppose I am your Debtor, and I order my Debtor to pay you, and he pays
not, but promises to do it; Whether is this my Debtor discharged from me?

Answ. In the Affirmative, and is only obliged to my Creditor till he pay him;
for this is the nature of an Assignation, to loose the Assignor from the assign
and the assigned upon, and the Obligation remains only betwixt him on whom is
assigned, and him to whom he is assigned, to which may be added, the
Considerations in the second immediately foregoing Case, with which the common
practice agrees; and if this Assignation will discharge me from my Creditor,
much more will it discharge my Debtor from me.

5. Suppose I am your Debtor upon a Bill of Exchange, and I cannot pay in
present Monyes, but give you Security in Goods in stead of present Payment,
promising to pay within a certain time, or else that you shall keep the Goods
for Payment, whereof you accept; the time of Payment being come, you not being
desirous to keep those Goods, desire Payment in Monyes, to which I reply, That
I am not obliged to do that, because we agreed, if I paid not within that time,
you should keep those Goods for Payment: Which of these have the better Law?

Answ. Some say the Debtor has the better case, because here is a clear and
expressed Covent and Contract, and these must be observed, besides that, in
alternativis Electio est debitoris, as the Law says. Others say the Creditor
has the better cafe, because this giving of Goods in Payment was only for
Security, in case the Debtor should not be able to pay, and it was the
Creditors Courtisie to accept hereof; or if the Debtor think he did the
Creditor a Courtisie then, he ought not now to make it turn to his Prejudice
and Loss; Besides, its well known, that he that has a Pledge for a Debt may,
if he please, sell the same, and pay himself, if the Debtor redeem it not
within the appointed time. And all this serves to confirm what was before
asserted, Case 7.

Case 8. But if I give you 100 l. Sterling on Exchange, and you make me Bills
of Exchange payable by Peter; if Peter fail before he pay, his acceptance
signifies nothing, and I can compel you to pay me, if I duly make Protest.

Answ. In this case, this acceptance of the Bills has not bim et effectum
solutionis; and this is the common ordinary case, far different from that 7th
Case foregoing, for here is no Assignation or Novation, for this is all this
whole one, and the same Contract; whereas in the other there seems to be a new
contract, destructive of the former; nay, its not so much as Contractus
cessionis, which supposes the Acceptant to be the Drawers Debtor always, and
if it were, yet here is no mention made of any such Contract; wherefore these
Bills are only a bare order to the Acceptant to pay, and the Possessor is in
this as a Messenger and Servant to demand payment only; wherefore this being
consonant to the common and ordinary practice of Merchants, was never doubted
of.

Case 9. Tullius of London gave 100 l. to John and Francis, who gave him Bills
to receive the value at Amsterdam, payable by Francis to Mark; Tullius having
received the Bills, incloseth them in a Letter of Advice, directed to Mark, and
throws the Letter into the Post House; this Letter of advice and Bills were
intercepted by an unknown Person, who in Mark 's Name, having counterfeited his
hand, goes and receives the Monyes of Francis of Amsterdam. Tullius not knowing
whether the Bills were paid or not, and afterward advised, that Mark never
received any such Bills, he sent him other Bills, which he procured of John and
Francis for the same Sum; which received, Mark demands payment of Francis of
Amsterdam, to whom Francis Replys, That he had already paid the first Bills;
whereupon Tullius being advised thereof, demands restitution of John and
Francis, or else order them to be paid. This John and Francis refuse to do,
alleging them to be paid; in this case, the doubt is, whether John and Francis
of London must be alternative condemned, either to make restitution, or order
the Bills to be paid; and whether they remain Debtor to Francis, who paid
before upon their order; or whether Francis must seek his regress on him, to
whom he paid truly; or whether John and Francis of London, and Francis of
Amsterdam are all discharged, only John and Francis must transfer to Tullius,
actionem furtevam against him that received the Monyes?

Answ. John and Francis must alternatively be condemned, as above, and do not
remain Francis of Amsterdam his Debtors for what is paid by him, nor can they
be molested by him, as having paid nothing by their order to their order; so
that Francis of Amsterdam must seek his redress on him to whom he paid. The
Reasons are these: 1. John and Francis are Tullius his Debtors, till the Bills
be paid to him, or his order. 2. Though Francis of Amsterdam will endeavor to
defend himself, alleging that he paid to one, whom he had just ground to
believe was the true order of John and Francis, and that therefore upon his
transferring of the action to Francis, he must be said to have paid well; for
he paid to him that presented the Bills, and did assert, that he was that Mark
nominated in them, and he knowing the Bills to be really the Bills of John and
Francis, he therefore paid bona fide, and it was not for him to suspect the
Bills to have fallen in wrong Hands, the Remitter should have better looked to
them, etc. Yet all this, and as much more, will not excuse him. For this just
ground of believing him to be the true order of the Drawer, will only excuse
the Debtor and Acceptant, if the Debt be of a certain individual species or
thing, not if the Debt be in genere seu quantitate; for he that is indebted any
certain thing, is discharged if the thing be lost, non interveniente dolo vel
calpa, and so also upon the delivery thereof, bona fide facta, but in the
paying of a certain Sum of Monyes its otherwise. Besides, Francis of Amsterdam
was ordered to pay to Mark, not to the Bearer; and by paying to him, he
exceeded the limits of his Commission; nor did he use that diligence, which he
should, and would have done in his own case, seeing he would not but suspect
and know that such cases do often happen, or at least may, and he should not
pay but to a certain and known Person; wherefore he being faulty, his
Negligence can Prejudice none but himself.

Object. But if John and Francis demand Restitution of the Bills, when Tullius
demands Restitution of the Monyes; for Francis of Amsterdam will not part with
them.

Answ. This notwithstanding John and Francis must make Restitution, for the
Bills are in the Hands of their Factor and Correspondent, and he must seek them
there.

Case 10. That an Acceptant may accept supra Protest, either in honor of the
Drawer, or in honor of some Endorser, etc. and thereby oblige him for whose
honor he accepts, etc. is before declared. But suppose Tullius is indebted to
you 100 l. Sterling, and to me as much, and Tullius writes to you, That he will
remit into my Hands the 100 l. for you, and order you to draw the same upon me,
which Tullius also does, and orders me to accept your Bills, whereupon you
value upon me; but though I have received the Monyes to answer your Bills with,
he being indebted to me, I keep the same for my own account, and accept your
Rills supra Protest in your honor: In this case do I oblige you, the Drawer,
for the Value paid by me? etc.

Answ. Yes; this I may lawfully do, though I received the Monyes positively
with that order, to answer your Bills for the Value, which none will deny that
are acquainted with the Merchantile Style, especially if I fear my Debtor may
fail; yet no wise Merchant would thus disoblige two special and sure Friends.
But in this, as in all other cases of this Nature, he that would keep the
Drawer obliged for that Draught (or any other Endorser) he must, after the
Protest is made and completed, write upon the Bill, Accepted supra Protest in
honor of such and such a one. And 2dly, He must pay supra Protest also, or
else it will be judged that he receeded from the first Protest, and accepted
and paid freely and simply. 3dly, A^ the due time he must redraw the Sum and
the Charges on him, for whose account he accepted, if other Provision be not
made before that time. 4thly, None may accept supra Protest, in honor of any,
till the Person on whom the Bill is directed, has absolutely refused both
freely and supra Protest to accept: And here by the way observe ^ 5thly, That
if the Possessor will not accept of the Acceptants acceptance supra Protest,
that he resolves himself freely to accept thereof, and he also must refuse it,
before any third can be admitted. But 6thly, If any man publicly declare and
proclaim, That such and such Bills should not be accepted (having special
Commission for that end) then no man may accept, or having accepted, may not
pay the same, but at his own Peril and Hazard, neither freely nor supra
Protest. For 7thly, If the Drawer be failed, or suspected to be near failing,
if any pay or accept, they do it either in their own, or to the Prejudice of
the Creditors.

Case 11. You at London give to Vivianus 100 l. that he may give you Bills
payable for the value at Amsterdam; Vivianus agrees and gives you open Letters
of Advice, which you send to Peter at Amsterdam, Peter watching an opportunity
falsifyes the Bills, and for 100 l. demands, 2, having made 1, 2, or made the
Ciphers into a 6, or a 9. and so demanded 160, or 190 l. or 200 l. for 100 l.
The Question is, who must bear this Loss, Bergonzus that paid the Bill, because
he paid not well, or Vivianus that did express the Sum clearly enough in fair
Characters, or you who chose such a Knave for your Correspodent?

Answ. Here two Cases must be distinguished; 1st, If the Falsification were
palpable and evident, and easily discernable with half an Eye, then the
Acceptant and Payer must bear the Loss, because he did not diligently observe
those Figures when he paid, and his own Negligence can only Prejudice himself,
not another; yea, if there were but any ground of suspicion that the Figures
were altered, its still the same; but 2dly, If the Falsification were so neat,
that it could not so easily be discerned nor suspected, then the Acceptant pays
well, and will be discharged both from the Remitter and the Drawer, and the
Acceptant may seek his re-imbursment from the Drawer, and the Drawer must seek
his from the Remitter, he making no Objection at the Receipt of the open
Letters, for the badness of the Characters, etc. the Fault is his.

Case 12. As an Objection against this; Suppose then any should Counterfeit my
Hand, and by that means receives Monyes of my Correspondent, as by my order?

Answ. Suppose it be never so neatly done, that no man could discern, no, nor I
my self, that it was Counterfeit, yet I am not obliged to allow my
Correspondent such Payments, because I never desired any such thing of him, nor
never made any such Bills, nor writ any such Letters of Advice; wherefore
Acceptants must be very cautious in paying, and for preventing such Frauds,
Merchants should in all their Letters of Advice, reflect upon something that
has lately past between them.

Case 13. If a Remitter in Commission give Moneys to a Drawer, who gives him
Bills, and afterward before the Bills are paid or accepted, fails; Whose shall
the Loss be, the Remitters, or his Principals?

Answ. If the Remitter remitted, or was ordered to remit upon his own del
credere, he standing good for the Remises, the case is clear that he must bear
the Loss; and though he may object, that he remitted, but not upon his own del
credere, yet it will not excuse him; for he should not have remitted at all, if
not according to express order. But 2dly, If he were only simply desired to
remit, then the Loss will be the Principals, unless, 3dly, The Remitter
contracted with one that was suspected and reported to be near failing, then he
not acting for his Principal, as if he had acted for himself, and he must
therefore bear the Loss; and though there were no other Drawer with whom the
Remitter could contract, yet he ought not to have put his Principals Effects in
hazard; for neitheir thus must an Acceptant pay to one that is near failing,
though the Principal has ordered it, (not knowing thereof) for even the Letter
of Attorney to receive for another is ipso facto revoked, without any other
further intimation thereof; and thus also would it have been if the Remitter
had express order from the Principal to contract with that Drawer.

For other Cases of this nature, we refer to what is before hinted, etc.

Glassema Quartum.
This my first Bill, etc.
Case 1. Whether will an Acceptant be discharged, or may safely Pay when there
is but one prima or secunda Bill presented to him?

Answ. He may and must Pay, though at the day of Payment none but his accepted
Bill be offered to him; for the command is, that the first or the second Bill
should be paid, if neither of them were paid before. 2. They are all (were they
never so many) but authentic Copies of the first, and one paid, the rest are
null and void. 3. The Reason that more then one Bill is made, is only for the
better security of the Remitter, and is no disadvantage to the Drawer, and are
partly for proof of the Contract, if any Bill should be lost or miscarry, and
partly for better obliging the Drawer and Acceptant to pay: Yet all this
notwithstanding, as was before observed, he is very unwise that will pay upon
one Bill, the other being pretended to be lost, unless the Possessor give
Security for indemnifying the Acceptant, or the Drawer, upon account of the
lost Bill, because they are either of them Obligatory, especially he should see
to receive his accepted Bill.

Glassema Quintum.
To Francis.
Case 1. FRancis has a Bill remitted to him by his Correspondent at London,
payable in Amsterdam, where Francis lives, which Bill Thomas of London drew,
and charged upon himself, designing to be at Amsterdam before the day of
Payment, and accordingly he arrives there, and Francis demands acceptance,
which Thomas refuses; Whether may Francis compel him to accept? Thomas
alleging, that he had no contract with Francis, nor is any way obliged to him,
nor is he indeed without acceptance, for acceptance only does oblige the
Acceptant to the Possessor, and where there is no obligation, there lies no
action; though the Bill be made payable to Francis, and Francis has the Bill
in possession, yet he has only order to demand acceptance, and by virtue of
that order he cannot judicially compel Thomas to accept; and from the bare
naked possession of an obligatory Bill, there arises no obligation to the
Possessor, unless he be the party concerned, etc.

Answ. All this notwithstanding, yet in this case he must accept, or may by
ready execution be compelled thereunto, he himself being both Drawer and
Acceptant (though a person that is simply an Acceptant cannot be compelled
thereto) because it would be to no purpose to return the Bill with protest for
non-acceptance, he the Drawer himself, from whom redress must be sought, being
there present; besides, this Drawer in his Bill, does oblige himself to pay to
Francis, and is the principal Debtor, who received the Monyes, etc.

Glassema Sextum.
The Value received.
Case 1. Whether this objection of the value not received may be opposed
against an accepted Bill of Exchange, to discharge the Acceptant from his
acceptance?

Answ. Affirmatively; for, 1st, Though the Bill says expressly, that the value
is received, and in that there seems to be a renunciation of this exception,
yet the custom of Merchants has introduced this practice, that though the
Bills say its received, yet its seldom paid till two or three days after the
Bill is made. And, 2dly, The Acceptant is supposed to accept upon this
condition; wherefore if he make this objection, then 3dly, The Possessor must
prove payment, onus pro Bandi, in actorem transfertur, negatives cannot be
proved. 4thly, If the Bill be protested, the Drawer is out of danger, not
having received the value; for what has the Remitter to demand, having not
paid the value? wherefore the Acceptant need not fear that it will be returned
again to be prosecuted against him, the Remitter being satisfied in his own
hands. But if this objection be made, it must be done before the Bill be paid,
else its ineffectual, and must have order from the Drawer, not to pay;
otherwise, if he do pay, the Drawer may thank himself for the loss, if not paid
before the time. But to prevent these Disputes, let the Drawer not part with
his secunda Bill, if he say [The value received] till he has received the
value (and in this case, its unwisely done for an Acceptant to pay upon one
Bill, though accepted, being the secunda may by the Drawer be detained till the
value be paid) or else let him say [on the value of such a one] and leave it
undetermined whether it be received, or be yet to be received; for else, if it
be expressed as before [The value received] the Possessor will object against
this exception for proof of the payment, the very Letter of the Bill,
containing the clear confession of the Drawer. But here we may note, That this
exception has no place where the Drawer and Remitter is one individial Person,
etc. nor has it place if the Drawer be failed or dead.

Glassema Septimum.
Place to Account.
Case 1. IF these words be omitted in the Bill, may the Acceptant simply
accept, or supra protest?

Answ. To protest in this case, is altogether superfluous and needless; for its
for the Drawers account ^f he does accept, unless the Letter of advice say,
That its for another account.

Glassema Octavum.
To Titus, etc. Merchant in London.
Case 1. BIlls of Exchange being directed by the Drawer, can the Remitter
compel the Drawer to alter the Bills, and give him Bills upon another?

Answ. Not by compulsion, but if the Drawer consent, this may be done, else
after an Exchange-contract is made by the Broger, there is no repentance to
either party upon any pretense: The Remitter contracts with the Drawer, and if
he like not the Acceptant, the Drawer is still the same, and obliged to him
till payment be made, much less may the Remitter alter the direction without
the Drawers knowledge.

I think I need not tell the Reader, that Bills unsubscribed are like Bonds
without Seals, and are not obligatory at all, and can scarce think that any
Acceptant would accept such a Bill; wherefore that I may not swell the Book
with unnecessary cases which seldom happen, I shall summarily hint at some
things that remain, and so conclude, hoping that the Reasons contained in this
Book, and these Cases resolved in it, will direct the understanding and
judicious in any case whatever that may happen to them, whether Drawers,
Remitters, Acceptants or Possessors, or any other way concerned in Bills of
Exchange.

CHAP. XLIV. Of the Execution of Exchanges.
Rule I. PRocesses and Suits of Law, concerning Bills of Exchange, should be
summary, short and quick; Present Execution, that is, attachment of Goods and
arrest of Person, does always attend a protested Bill of Exchange. But,

II. If Bills be returned empty without protest, they cannot be privileged
with this extraordinary procedure, but are only looked upon as ordinary Bills
or Bonds.

III. Though a third person be concerned in a Bill that is protested, and both
the Drawer and Acceptant are failed, yet he is not liable to answer the
Creditors, nor can be molested upon that account; for though he was obliged to
the Drawer and Acceptant, what does this obligation concern their Creditors, he
is no way obliged to them?

IV. Not only the Remitter himself, but his Heirs, Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, or any other by his order may prosecute the Law upon a Bill of
Exchange that was protested, and attach and arrest as if he himself was there.

V. If the Creditor, upon the return of the Bill with protest, do not presently
procure satisfaction or security, nor demand of the Magistrate in some Weeks
the privilege of a Bill of Exchange, viz. ready Execution, he loses the
privilege of a Bill of Exchange.

VI. In the cases of Exchange, there should lie no appeal from one Court to
another, from an Inferior to a Superior, unless the Creditor were put in
possession of his demands first, or at least, that it was secured to him.

VII. Nor can the Judges be guilty of any Praecipitancy in this case; for a
Bill of Exchange is a Bond and Judgment, as good as an Hypotheca, and being
already res judicata, the Execution cannot be suspended.

VIII. For the recognizance of Bills drawn by another in another place, its not
necessary to fetch Witnesses from other places that can Swear they saw him
write them, its enough that by comparing of the Hand-writings it appear that
the Bills are of the Drawers writing.

IX. Bills of Exchange cannot, must not by any Authority whatever be arrested
or detained, because they are introduced and confirmed by the Law of Nations,
i. e. Foreign Bills.

X. In cases of Exchange, the custom of places, and their municipal Laws
concerning the circumstances thereof must be observed, (as concerning the time
of payment, of protesting, etc.) more than the common Law.

XI. If any subscribe a tertia Bill of Exchange, as security for the Drawer, he
is as liable to make satisfaction, if the Drawer fail, as if he were the Drawer
himself, nor need the Remitter first excuse the Drawer.

XII. An execution of payment, or resconter (if a Liquidate Debt, otherwise
not) may be opposed to hinder the present execution upon a Bill of Exchange, as
also an exception of Prescription, deli mals, or that the Bill is not of the
Drawers writing, nor subscribed by him, but a counterfeit.

XIII. If there be one or more Drawers, if all have subscribed all the Bills,
or but one of them, they are all liable to answer in case of Protest.

XIV. If any one concerned in a Bill of Exchange, do not do their Duty, and
what the Courtifie and Custom of Merchants obliges them to, they themselves
are liable to make good all the Loss and Damage that may happen thereby.

XV. By parata Executie, is meant Attachments upon their Goods, or Arrests upon
their Persons, or both; for here the Rule and Maxim of Law has no place, Qui
non habit in aere luat in corpore; i. e. That the doing of one should exclude
the other, etc.

XVI. Not only common Reason, and the general Customs of Exchanges allow this
paratam Executionem, in cases of Bills of Exchange, but also the Municipal Laws
of places of Exchange.

XVII. This Law and Custom is of virtue and power against all that are named in
a Bill of Exchange, so far as they are negligent of their duty, or any way
faulty: But though a third or fourth be concerned in the Bill, if their Names
be not in the Bills, this Law cannot reach them.

XVIII. If any by this ready Execution, do suffer wrongfully, they have their
Regress against the actor, in an ordinary way only, and may recover Damages.

CHAP. XLV. Of the Par of Exchanges.
TO conclude this Work, it will not be superfluous to give a transient view of
the Par of Exchanges; and that I may be compendious in this, I shall omit the
unnecessary Discourses of the variety of Pars, as also directions for the
calculation thereof, referring those that are desirous of information herein to
the Map of Commerce, in English, and to the Book entitled, Vnderricht der
Wissel-handlung, in Hollands and High Dutch, and I shall only here observe what
is the reputed Par, according to the Intrinsic value, or as is generally
received among Merchants. But before this be done, it will be necessary to
premise in what denominations every Country and City do keep their accounts and
make their Exchange, which shall be done in this following method.

LONDON.
All Foreign Exchanges made for England, Scotland and Ireland are made at
London, and accounts are kept there in Pounds, Shillings and Pence, 20 s. makes
a Pound, and 12 d. a Shilling, as is very will known, and so generally, which I
would have noted once NB.
for all, where any Country or City hereafter specified, is said to keep their
Accounts in Pounds, Shillings and Pence, or in Livers, Souls, and Deniers (as
they call them) that they are always divided or multiplied by 12 and 20, so
that 20 Shillings or Soulz make a Liver or Pound, and 12 Pence or Deniers make
their Soulz or Shilling.

London then Exchanges with Italy, as with
Venice Where accounts are kept in Ducats and Grosses; 24 Grosses make a Ducat,
the Ducat is 6 Livers or Pounds, under which denominations some Merchants in
Venice do also keep their accounts; but the course of Exchange is always made
upon the Ducat and Grosses: The Ducat is twofold, either de ovo or banco, which
is par with 52 d. Sterling, or de curranto, which is par with 40 d. Sterling,
in which broken Numbers London always Exchanges with Italy, giving them the
Pence for their Ducats or Crowns, etc. The course of Exchange for Venice from
London is generally 50 d to 51 d. Sterling in circa for their Ducat in banco.

Bergoma The same with Venice, whither England has little Exchanges directly.

Florence Where accounts are kept in Pounds, Shillings and Pence de ovo, but
they Exchange upon the Crown de ovo, which is valued at 7. of their Pound, and
their Crown current at l. 7. and their Pound or Liver may be par with 9 d.
Sterling; their Crown current par with 63 d. their Crown banco or de ovo, with
67 d. Sterling. There is seldom any direct course of Exchange from London
thither, but to

Leghorne There is a course of Exchange at 53 d. Sterling in circa for their
Crown de ovo, being of the same value with that of Florence.

LuicaThe same with Florence and Leghorne.

Rome, Placentia Bollonia Keeps accounts in Crowns, Shillings and Pence de ovo;
one Crown makes 20 Shillings, 12 Pence makes 1 Shilling.

The Crown de Estampi of Rome The Crown de Marchi of Placentia
are of one value 7 s. 6 d. or 90 d. Sterling. The Crown de Estampi is worth 12
Juliers. The Crown current worth 10 Juliers.
The Juliers is 10 Bayocchijs.

England has no direct course of Exchange to any of these places, or very
seldom.

Naples Barry LechieKeeps accounts in Ducats, Tarry and Grani, and exchanges
thereupon, only they make a difference betwixt the Current and Bank Ducat, the
one being called Moneta de ovo, the other Moneta curranto.

One Ducat is 5 Tarry, the par with London is 60 d. or 5 s. Sterling for one
Ducat. One Tarry is 20 Grani; the Tarry is 1 s. Sterling in value. One Crown de
ovo is 6 Tarry, or 6 s. 6 d. or 78 d. Sterling. One Crown current is 5^ Tarry, or
5 s. 6 d. or 66 d. Sterling. One Ducat Exchange-Monyes is 6 Tarry or 6 s. or 72
d. Sterling. One Ducat current is, as before, 5 Tarry, etc.


England has no direct course of Exchanges to these place, or very seldom at
least.

Genua Keeps accounts in Pounds, Shillings and Pence de ovo, some in Pounds,
Shillings and Pence current, but the Exchange is made upon the Crowns or
Shillings de ovo; the current Liver or Pound is valued at 18 d. Ster. the Crown
de ovo is not always at one constant price, but rises and falls, it should
contain 68 s. or 3 l. 8 s. but it rises sometimes to 4 l. 10 s. and to 5 l. of
their Monyes; neither is there here any constant course of exchange from England

Milan Keeps accounts in Pounds, Shillings and Pence, but exchanges upon the
Crown de ovo, which is sometimes and for some places, said to contain 100 s. or
5 l. of their Monyes; and other times, and for other places Qtts 117 s. or 5 l.
17 s. of their Monyes: The Current Monyes is here called, Imperial, the Bank,
de Ovo; the Crown of 5 l. or Livers, is par with 60 d. or 5 s. Sterling. the Crown
of 5 l. 17 s. with 70 d. or 5 s. 10 d. in circa; nor is there any constant
course of Exchange from England to this City, etc.

Palermo Messina Keep accounts in Ounces, Tarry and Grani, and exchange in
Ducats, Carlini, Crowns and Florines or Guilders.

One Ounce Qtts 30 Tarry; the par of an Ounce with London is 12 s. 6 d. One Tarry
Qtts 20 Grani; 1 Tay is 5 d. Sterling. One Tarry Qtts 2 Carlini; 1 Carlini 2 ^
d. One Carlini Qtts 10 Grani; 1 Grani is 1 qr. Sterling. One Grani Qtts 6
Piccollji. One Ducat Qtts 13 Tarry or 26 Carlini, par with England 65 d. or 5 s.
5 d. One Crown curuant 12 Tarry, or 24 Carlini, valued at 60 d. or 5 s.
Sterling. One Florine 6 Tarry or 12 Carlini, valued at 30 d. or 2 s. 6 d.
Sterling.


England has very little Exchange directly to these places.

London Exchanges with Spian, as with

Valentia Barselona Saragoza Where accounts are kept in Pounds, Shillings and
Pence, but they Exchange upon the Ducat, which in Valentia is valued at 21 s.
Saragoza is valued at 22 s. Barselona is valued at 24 s.
of their Monyes.

The current Monyes of these places are Ryals, whereof ten are reckoned to a
Pound or Liver, so that The Ducat of Valentia is 10^ Ryals. The Ducat of
Saragoza is 11 Ryals. The Ducat of Barselona is 12 Ryals.


The Royal is 2 s. in their Monyes.

The Par with London of Valentia's Ducat is 63 d. or 5 s. 3 d. Sterling.

The Par with London of Saragoza's Ducat is 66 d. or 5 s. 6 d. Sterling.

The Par with London of Barselona's Ducat is 72 d. or 6 s. Sterling.

They have also a Crown at Barselona valued at 22 s. of their Moneys. There is
no constant direct course of Exchange to these places from England.

Sevil, Cadiz, Alcala, Madrid, and all Castilia, And in all the rest of Spain,
accounts are kept in Marvedies; but for Exchange they have an imaginary Ducat,
which is always accounted for 375 Marvedies, or one Marvedie more than 11
Ryals, 34 Marvedies making 1 Ryal; their Crown of Gold is valued at 400
Marvedies; they have also an imaginary Coin, which they call, a Castiliano,
with which all their Exchanges for Castilia are only made, valued at 485
Marvedeis.

The Par of the Ducat of 375 Marvedies, with London, is 5 s. 6 d. Sterling, or
66^ d. Sterling. The course is usually 49 d. 50 d. to 51 d. Sterling in circa.

London Exchanges with Portugal, as,

Lisbone The Exchange from London to Lisbone is made upon the Mill Ree, 1000
Rees making 1 Mill Ree, which is about 6 s. 6 d. to 7 s. according as the
Exchange runs.

NB, When I remit Moneys from London to France, Spain and Portugal, etc. where
it is at so much per piece, as 54 d. per Crown, 49 d. per piece 8/8 6 s. 8 d.
per Mill Ree, etc. the lower the Exchange is, the better it is for me, because
if I deliver 100 l. I can have more Crowns at 54 d. than at 55 d. and so when I
draw I must observe the contrary, that the higher it is, the less Exchange I
shall pay. But when I remit for Holland, Hambrough, Ireland, etc. where
Exchange runs at so much per Pound Sterling, or so much per Centum, the higher
it is, the more is my gain; for I had better remit for Hambrough at 35 s. 3 d.
Flemish per Pound Sterling, than at 35 s. And so for Ireland, where Exchange
runs at so much per 100 l. sometimes when I pay 100 l. in London, I shall have
a Bill payable in Dublin for 110 l. and other times but 105 l. according as
Exchange runs.

London Exchanges with France, as

Paris, Roan, Lions, Besanzon, Marseles, etc. BaurdeauxIn all which places
accounts are kept in Pounds, Shillings and Pence Tournois, but their Exchange
is made upon the Crown de or, or Crown of the Sun (as some call it) which is
valued at 3 l. (or Livers) Tournois, or 60 s. (or Soulz) these Crowns are also
divided into 20 s. de or, the Shilling into 12 d. de or.

These Crowns de or, or Crowns of the Sun, at their first Coynage did bear the
true worth and value of 6 s. Sterling, or 72 d. Sterling, but the present
Lewises are not worth above 4 s. 6 d. or 54 d. Sterling.

The course of Exchange from London to any of these places, is about 54 d. a 55
d. Sterling for a French Crown of 60 s. (or Soulz) which is reckoned to be 30.
a 32 per Centum advance, when Moneys is delivered in England.

London Exchanges with the Netherlands, as

Antwerp for Braband Ryssels for Flanders Lille for Flanders Amsterdam for
Holland Rotterdam Dort for Zealand Middleburge etc. for Zealand Colne for
Germany.


In all these places accounts are kept in Pounds, Shillings and Pence Flem. or
in Guilders, Stivers, and Groten Flemish, as the Merchants fancy, but the
Exchange is made upon the Pound Flemish for the most part. For the better
understanding of the Exchanges of this place, it will be necessary to hint
something of their Coyns and Value.

1 Pound Flemish is 20 s. Flemish. 1 Shilling Flemish is 12 d. Flemish. 1
Guilder is 20 Stivers. 1 Specie Dollar is 50 Stivers, or 2 Guilders, or 100
Groten (1 Sitver being 2 Grotes) or 8 s. Flemish. 1 Ducatoon is 63 Stivers. 1
Lion Dollal 40 Stivers. 1 Common Dollar 30 Stivers. 1 Zealand Dollar 30
Stivers. 1 Campen Dollar 26 Stivers. 1 Embden Dollar 23 Stivers.


The Par betwixt London and these places is reckoned generally to be 33 s. 4 d.
for the Pound Sterling. But the course varies from 36 s. 3 d. Flemish, to 37 s.
and upwards.

London Exchanges with Germany, as

Hambrough LubeckKeep their accounts in Pounds, Shillings and Pence Flemish, or
in Marks, Shillings and Pence Lubs, or in Rixdollars, Shillings and Pence, as
the Merchants please; they exchange upon the Pound Flemish, and upon the Specie
Dollar, or upon the Exchange Dollar. For better understanding hereof, note,
that 1 Rixdollar is 3 Marks Lubs, or 48 s. Lubs, or 8 s. Flemish. 1 Mark Lubs
is 16 s. Lubs, 1 s. Lubs is 12 d. 1 Exchange Dollar (whereon Exchanges are made
with Amsterdam and Frankford) is 32 s. Lubs, and is par with 32 Stivers at
Amsterdam, or Marks Lubs.


The Par betwixt London and these places is reckoned to be 32 s. Flemish for 1
l. Sterling; The course is 35 s. 6 d. in circa.

Franckford, Nurenburge, Ausburge, Vienna, Leipzige, Strasburge, Magdeburge,
Berline, etc. London has very seldom any Exchanges directly to any other
places in Germany; but if there be any occasion to remit Monyes to, or draw
Monyes from any other Cities of Germany (as Frankford on the main, Nurenburge,
Augsburge, Vienna, Leipzig, Strasburge, Bermen, Magdeburge, Berlin, or any such
like places) they do it either via Amsterdam, Antwerp or Hambrough; wherefore
it will not be unnessary to observe how the Par of these places bears one with
another.

Hambrough exchanges with Frankford, Leipzig, Augsburge, Nurenburge, and
Breslaw in Silesia, as also with Stetine, Stralsund, and Wismar in Pomerane,
etc. upon the 100 Speice or Current Dollars at so much per Centum; so also with
Berline, Magdeburge, Vienna, etc. and all the places of Germany.

Amsterdam exchanges with Antwerp, 48 Sitvers for 96 d. which in both places
makes a Rixdollar.

Amsterdam exchanges with Paris, 100 d. Flemish for the Crown of 60 Soulz, or
for the Lewis.

Amsterdam exchanges with Venice, 100 d. Flemish for the Ducat de ovo.

Amsterdam exchanges with Frankford 87 d. Flemish for the Guilder, a 65
Kreutzers.

Amsterdam exchanges with Nurenburge 72 d. Flemish for the Guilder, a 65
Kreutzers.

Amsterdam exchanges with Leipzig and Breslaw, and other places in Germany, 50
Stivers for a Specie Dollar; And these are the Pars of Amsterdam.

Amsterdam exchanges with Colne, Ryssel, Rotterdam, Middleburge, Dort, and such
places they exchange upon the Hundred, at so much per Cent. as the time of
payment is short or long.

Amsterdam exchanges with Hambrough upon the Exchange Dollar of 32 Stivers at
Amsterdam, and 32 s. Lubs at Hambrough, which is the Par at both places.

London exchanges with Poland and Prussia via Amsterdam or Hambrough, as with

Dantzick Kenigsbrough Where accounts are kept in Guilders, Grosh and Pence
Polish; 1 Florine or Guilder is 30 Grosh, 1 Grosh is 18 d. Polish; 3 Guilders,
or 90 Gs. make a Rix-currant-Dollar; Specie and Cross Dollars give at present
15 to 17 Grosh aggio: These places draw upon Hambrough upon the Specie
Rixdollar, or so many Dollars banco; the course usually about 102 to 105 Gs.
Polish for 1 Dollar in banco; and being the Rixdollar in current Moneys at
Dantzick and Konigsbrough is valued at 4 s. 6 d. Sterling, therefore the
Merchants usually reckon, that what they get in exchange above 90 Grosh Polish
for a Bank Dollar at Hambrough, is so much profit and advance by the exchange.

When Dantzick values upon Amsterdam, Merchants reckon, whatever they advance
above 216 Gs. Polish for the Pound Flemish in banco, is so much profit to the
Drawer; for 216. Gs. Polish is reckoned to be par with 1 l. Flemish in current
Moneys. The course betwixt Dantzick and Amsterdam at present is 254 Gs. in
circa. But (NB.) as Corn advances in price, the Exchange falls, so that I have
known it sometimes under the Par.

The same may be said of Konigsbrough, with this exception, that it values
always on Amsterdam in current Moneys; the course at present may be about 242
Gs. for a Pound Flemish.

Dantzick and Konigsbrough exchange one with another at so much in the hundred;
the course at present is par.

Dantzick exchanges with Breslaw in Silesia, at so much per Cent. there being
very little difference in the value of the Moneys.

London Exchanges with Sweeden, as

Stockholme Which exchanges for all Sweeden, properly so called, via Hambrough
or Amsterdam.

Sweeden keeps accounts in Copper Dollars, whereof five are reckoned to be
worth (and par with) a current Rixdollar, or 3 Guilders Pollish, or 4 s. 6 d.
Sterling.

They have a Stiver Dollar, which is called, the Sweeds Rixdollar, and is in
value but half a current Rixdollar of Germany or Poland, or 2 s. 3 d. Sterling;
in this specie the customs of all exported Goods must be paid, and its divided
into 32 Ore, as they call them.

The Dollar in which the customs of all imported Goods must be paid, is the
Sweedens Copper-Plate Dollars, which are in value twice as much as the other,
viz. 90 Gs. or 3 Guilders Polish, or 4 s. 6 d. Sterling, in their Copper-Plate
Dollar are reckoned 48 Ore.

They have also Silver Mark or Guilder piece, that are of the same value with
the Marks Lubs and Polish Guilders, viz. 18 d. Sterling, being the one third of
a current Rixdollar.

But they exchange with Hambrough (whereon the greatest part of their exchange
is made) upon a certain Mark, whereof 20 are reckoned to be par with the specie
Dollar in Bank; and the course is sometimes 24 a 25, and upwards, per Specie
Dollar; sometimes exchange may be made directly upon London, and then though
they reckon 20 Copper-Dollars to be par with 20 s. or 1 l. Sterling, yet the
course is frequently at 28 a 30 Copper Dollars per 1 l, Sterling; but this is
regulated according to the course of Trade.

London exchanges with Liefland, as

Riga, Revel, Narva, But not direct, only via Hambrough and Amsterdam, as
before was hinted of Sweeden and Prussia (and to these we may add Narva in
Ingria, or Ingermanland in Russia, which is also under the dominion of the
Sweeds) at these places accounts are kept in specie Dollars and Groshes,
reckoning 90 Gs. for a specie Dollar; Riga exchanges with Hambrough and
Amsterdam upon the 100 Dollars, at so much per cent. sometimes par, sometimes 5
or 6 per cent. loss; Revel and Narva may probably use the same method in
Exchanges, using Coyns of the same value; but if they are not the same with
Riga, they will doubtless be the same with Stockholme, whither be referred.

Further, for conclusion observe, that 1 Specie or Rixdollar is valued at 4 s.
6 d Sterling. 8 s. Flemish, or 50 Stivers. 3 Mark Lub, at Lubeck and Hambrough.
3 Guilders Polish. 3 Livers French. 6 l. 10 s. Venice. 24 good Grosh at
Leipzick. 6 Mark, or 96 s. Danish; 1 Slight Dollar is 4 Mark Danish. 6 Mark
Pomerish, as Stralfund. 20 Mark Sweedish. 8 Spanish Ryals, or Marvedies 272. 30
s. or Regsers Grosh in Breslaw in Silesia. 36 Marien Grosh, Luneburgs and
Brauns Wickes. 2 Marks Bremers, or 6 Kopfstuck. 4 Tarry at Naples. 30 s. or
Keysers Grosh at Ausburge and Nuemburge. 90 Kreutzers at Ausburge and
Nuemburge. 18 s. or Batzen in Frankenland and Switzerland. 90 Kreutzers at
Strasburge and Frankford. 30 Keysers Groshes at Vienna, etc.


FINIS.

