SEPARATION YET NO Schism: OR NON-CONFORMISTS NO SCHISMATICS: BEING A full
and Sober VINDICATION of the NON-CONFORMISTS, from the Charge and Imputation of
SCHISM. IN Answer to a Sermon lately Preached before the Lord Mayor By J. S.

Isaiah. 66.5. Hear the Word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his Word; your
Brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my Names sake, said, Let the
Lord be glorified, but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed.

London, Printed in the year, 1675.

To the Reader.
Reader,
IF thou would have a reason of publishing these sheets, the Author will tell
thee, That it is now about four years since the People he pleads for (among
whom he believes there are thousands in the Land, that are Worshippers of God
in Spirit and Truth, according to the Gospel) have through the good Providence
of their great Shepherd the Lord Jesus Christ, and through the granted license
of an indulgent Prince, enjoyed a sweet and blessed Calm. But observing lately
the Clouds again to gather, and to have begun to discharge themselves upon many
of this People about England; and withal lately meeting with a Sermon, wherein
this People are not sparingly charged with Schism, and the penalties where with
the laws threaten them, are pleaded for as very innocent harmless things, that
Sober men (as he says) may be ashamed to call persecutions; I could not but
thence conclude, that the Authors drift was to stir up and encourage the chief
Magistrates of the City (for to them the Sermon was preached) to a rigorous
Execution of those gentle punishments, which are but such little things as
banishing, or imprisoning, or spoiling them of their Goods, and so undoing them
and their Families, which are very trifles in his account. Now what can
probably be the consequents hereof (except the Magistrates as David prove wiser
than their Teachers) but that this people must needs be smitten, impoverished,
scattered, and as to their outward concernments ruined. But if this shall come
to pass (and who knows what their God may permit for a time for their trial?)
what will they have left to support and comfort them under such pressures,
except the innocence of their Consciences, and the Righteousness of the cause
for which they suffer. And this I say, whether their cause be good or bad, does
not as to the determination, depend upon the mere dictates of any Mortals; and
I am very verily persuaded, it is not prsedtsdih be bad by all this Author has
said, although he ha oved to cour and reasoned against it, as if (in his
conceit) he had spoke nothing but demonstrations, which I should now have
immediately begun to reply to, but that I thought it most expedient, first to
give the Reader a view of the case and cause of the Non-conformists, for which
they are charged of Schism, and are thought to have deserved all those
severities which the law threatens.

The Non-Conformists case is this,

There are some hundreds of true Ministers of Jesus Christ, commissioned by him
to Preach the Gospel, and to administer the Sacraments, (for so all true
Ministers are) those according to their commission do Preach, and there are
many thousands likewise of visible professors of Christianity, do willingly
hear and join with these Ministers in the Worship of God, and in a
participation of Sacraments as the Gospel requires.

These meet in dictinct Congregations, separate from the legally established
Congregations in the Land, with whom they Will not, because they Cannot hold
Communion.

Because they thus separate and refuse Communion they are charged with Schism.

The reason why they thus separate and refuse Communion, is, because they
cannot have it with them; I say, they Cannot have it, because they cannot or
ought not to sin; or to speak modestly, because they cannot do such things
which they extremely suspect to be sinful, and if they do but strongly suspect
them it is enough, for no man can be bound to act against a doubting
Conscience, and herein I have the suffrage of the Apostle, which every good
Christian ought much to prefer before any other who may presume to
Philosophize to the contrary, who says, Romans 14. he that doubts is damned if
he eat, because he eats not of Faith, for whatsoeover is not of Faith is sin.

If it be demanded, what those things are which this people suspect as sinful.
It may be answered, they are too well known, as that any among us should stand
in need of an information: but briefly, those that are Ministers, either they
suspect the sinfulness of admitting a reordination, or of abjuring, or of
assenting and consenting to the use of all and every part of the Liturgy, and
therein of every Ceremony. Now this I say, though the Friends of these
impositions shall, with the highest confidence, affirm the lawfulness of them
all, yea and endeavor with a thousand arguments to prove them such; yet if
those Ministers herein concerned, upon a serious weighing of these arguments
find them too light, and after much prayer to God for a resolution, yet find
themselves to doubt, in this case they ought not, upon the Apostles rule now
named, to yield to any such impositions against their doubting Consciences.

If it be here replied, why do they not then degrade themselves, or quietly
suffer themselves to be degraded of their Ministry, and in the condition of
private Christians Communicate with this Church, for so they may do and free
themselves from these impositions?

It will be answered, that this is an imposition they suspect as sinful as the
rest, for so long as they are persuaded that their mission is originally from
Christ, they cannot believe that it is either in their own Power, or in the
Power of any other Inferior to Christ, to give them a discharge from executing
this their Office, except it be for Heresy or obstinate scandal against some
known laws of Christ, and then indeed Christ has left an order, not only for
excluding them from their Office, but also from the Church, but neither of
these latter are in the least pretended, and therefore it is they cannot
without suspicion of sin, either degrad themselves, or quietly suffer
themselves to be degraded. And still I add, if any reasons be urged for the
lawfulness of this degradation, but such that are short of their conviction, so
that still they doubt, it will continue yet their duty to serve the Church as
Ministers, and not to list themselves among private Christians; as is advised.

If it be asked, but may not supreme Magistrates (if they cannot divest
Ministers of their Office) may not they within their Dominion suspend some of
them from the exercise thereof, when they conceive it is for the Peace of the
rest?

It will be answered, that that Lord of Lords who gives the Office and the
Commission, and has by diverse Providence designed the men thereto, has
certainly with the Office designed them to the exercise thereof, (for else
verily the Office is in vain) and has therein placed, not only the Office, but
the exercise thereof above the restraint of any Powers whatever, that hold of
and under him on Earth, so long as the exercise thereof continue to be
regulated by the laws of Christ. But if any men on Earth shall appoint new
Laws, different from those of Christ's, and impose them on Ministers as
conditions to be obeyed, without which they will restrain them the exercise of
their Ministry, as being disturbers of the Peace; in such a case it is evident,
that such Ministers may continue to Preach according to the Laws of Christ, but
are restrained only by the Laws of men; whilst then their Consciences lie
under a superior obligation to Preach, than that by which they are restrained
from Preaching, it is casie to conceive what they will or ought to do, i. e.
whether they will or ought to Obey God or man.

If it be said, such Ministers are mistaken about the nature of such imposed
Laws, as if they were different from, or contrary to the Laws of Christ, when
they are no other but what Christ has entrusted them with a Power of
appointing, for the Peace of his Church.

It will be still answered, that this People are persuaded of the contrary; and
that Christ has not entrusted any men with such a Power, but do believe that
they are things rather destructive of the true Peace of the Church. And this I
say, whilst they are so persuaded (though they should be mistaken) they ought
not to go against their Consciences; for as the Apostle says, he that doubts
and eats is damned. So that from the whole it is evident, the reason why
these Ministers cannot conform and why they yet continue to Preach, is, because
they cannot do the one, nor forbear the other without sin; which is a just
ground of their separation, and of persevering in the exercise of their
Ministry, and therefore separation in this case (as to them) is no Schism. Some
will be ready to say, but what is all this to the common People? they are
Schismatics without doubt; for they have no such impositions upon them.

It may be answered, that if the Ministers now named are yet true ministers of
Jesus Christ, and that the exercise of their ministry has not been according
to any Law of Christ restrained, it will follow, it can be no sin in the
Disciples of Christ to own them whom their Lord owneth; or to hear them whom
their Lord has commissioned to that end, and by no Law of his are restrained
from acting according to that Commission.

Again, in as much as Christ is supposed to continue his Commission to these
ministers to Preach, it necessarily follows, that Christ has a People to whom
he sends them: for it is absurd to conceive, that Christ should send his
ministers to preach to no body; if then they may preach, it cannot be unlawful
for the people to hear them, no nor to partake of any ordinance from them,
which as ministers they may administer.

Yet again, multitudes of the people did own them as Christ's ministers, and did
join with them in all Ordinances, as such, and this for several years together,
and certainly during those times they could not be esteemed Schismatics, for
so doing, since there were no other ministers ordinarily to be found. If then
they were no Schismatics, how come they to be so since? if it be said the Law
of the Land makes them such: it may be answered, that since Schism (of which
we speak) is a sin peculiar and proper to a Church, it is a wonder how a Law of
a Land, that is perfectly extraneous to a Church, can make that at one time a
Schism, which at another time cannot be said to be such. Nor do I think, that
those that now think themselves the Church, and that all that separate from
them are Schismatics, in case they had a Law of the Land to establish
Presbytery, or Independency, or Anabaptistry, would conceive of themselves as
Schismatics if they continued in that way they are in, and refused to hold
Communion with that the Law established: and in Truth I cannot possibly
conceive how that may be said justly to day, that it is no Schism, and yet to
morrow it may be justly called so, merely because of an intervening humane Law.

Lastly, as for the people, it may be further answered, that though they be not
under the same impositions as their ministers are, yet they are not altogether
free from impositions which they extremely suspect as sinful: as that they
cannot enjoy Baptism for their Children without the Cross; nor receive the
Lords Supper without kneeling; to name no more. If you say these are not
sinful; it is answered, suppose they be not, yet in case they suspect them
vehemently as such, and all your arguments cannot resolve their doubts, it is
evident they would go against, and wound their Consciences, in case they should
submit to the one, or the other.

If therefore these people shall, for these reasons, join with those ministers
in all Ordinances, I see no ground to charge this people with Schism, no more
than their ministers.

Thus having, with as much brevity as I could, stated the case and cause of
this people, we shall now come to take an account of Mr. J. S. his Sermon
before the Mayor, which contains an impeachment of Schism, and a pretended
proof thereof against this people. They are now upon their trial, and say, not
guilty, and offer themselves to be tried by the Laws of Jesus Christ, which are
the only Laws of his Church.

The Sermon of Mr. J. S. Examined.
THE design of that Sermon, one would be apt to think, was to promote Peace
among the Protestant professors in England; whose differences are Universally
acknowledged, to be about matters of no fundamental concernment, as to the
Doctrine of Christianity. His text, Romans 14.19. was well suited to that
purpose, Let us follow after the things which make for Peace. And doubtless if
he had prosecuted this his design, by the same means and methods as the Apostle
there does, viz. not so much by setting himself to resolve their controversies,
or to determine which side held the truest opinion; as to silence their
disputes, and to allay their bitternesses to each other, by showing that they
had nothing to do to judge or censure their brethren, because they were Gods
Servants, and to him only they stood or fell: and rather for Peace sake, to
forbear doing that which they might lawfully do, than by any undue use of their
liberty to cast a stumbling block before the weak uninstructed dissenters: This
he confesses page 1.2. was the way the Apostle took, and certainly if he had
followed so great an example, he had (like a man of Wisdom as well as of Peace)
prosecuted an excellent end by most excellent means: but instead thereof he
takes a quite contrary method, for instead of persuading Christians to lay
aside their Controversies, he himself raises them; instead of dissuading them
from censuring their brethren, as being to stand or fall to a higher Master, he
censureth them as guilty of Schism; obstinately maintained page 7. And instead
of persuading them to forbear doing those things (which some think) they may
lawfully do, (as the making use of prescribed Prayers and Ceremonies) least a
stumbling block should be cast before their weak brethren, he falls page 5.
into Encomiums of the excellency of the present Church Government, the easiness
of the Terms of Communion, the Lawfulness of the use of the public Service,
and Antiquity of the Ceremonies, and then does conclude that Sober men should
be ashamed to call the penalties which the Laws inflict on those that separate
from the Church in these things, Persecutions. The plain English of all this
is, that the great Apostle and this Person are of two minds concerning these
things which make for Peace, the Apostle is for not judging the Lords Servants,
and he is for judging them: The Apostle is still for holding Communion,
notwithstanding those differences remain, but he is for forcing them to say and
do as the Church does, or else for punishing them with fines, imprisonments as
the Laws require. But certainly, as he herein leaves the Apostle, so the
Apostle leaves him, and in this deserted Condition as we find him I hope it
will be no presumption to call his reasonings about this matter to an account.

The strength of what he has said to justify his charge of Schism against
this people he has comprised in five Propositions, which we shall examine in
order.

His first Proposition begins page, 10. which is this.

That every Christian upon the very account of being so, is a member of the
Church of Christ, and is bound to join in external Communion with it where it
can be had. I answer, this Proposition is very obscurely laid down, nor is it
releived by any light afforded in the after explication: and certainly if it be
to be understood according to the proper meaning of the words and phrases
therein contained, (as it ought to be;) I shall not scruple to call the Truth
thereof into Question, For.

First, If we consider a Christian upon the very account of his being so, which
is the Subject of the Proposition; who can think but thereby as you phrase it,
you intend to affirm nothing of him as such, but what does necessarily and
essentially belong to him, without which he could be no Christian, and
consequently if he be a Christian he must necessarily be a Member of Christ's
Church, in the sense of [Church] in the Proposition which is such as therewith
an external Communion may be held.

If this be your meaning, as I suppose it is, because in your explication of
this Proposition you seem to hold, that Christ died primarily for his Church,
and but in a secondary sense for individual Believers, so that it seems to
follow, that none can be true Christians or in a salvable state, but as they
are considered incorporated into, and so made one of this Church, so that
Church-Member-ship is es^ential to them. If this I say be your meaning, then
give me leave to take the boldness to deny the Proposition, for I cannot
understand that a Christian as such, includes any essential relation to a
Church in your sense.

That I may clear up this matter a little, give me leave to tell you that this
term Christian may fall under diverse considerations, as first, by a Christian
we may understand a man whose Nature is changed by the Preaching of the Gospel,
so as thereby he is of an ignorant Infidel and wicked man, made an intelligent
Believer, and a good man; certainly in this sense it is easy to understand a
Christian without any such correlate as a Church, so that in this sense a
Christian as such, is no more related to a Church, than a man considered as a
man, speaks any Relation to a Kingdom or Commonwealth: and therefore your
Proposition in this scence cannot be true.

But because this change of Nature, cannot be wrought in any man but by the
Power of God co-working with the Gospel: and since this exertion of Power is
called Regeneration, upon this account a Christian is to be considered as a
relative viz. as a Son of God. the correlate is God his Father, and the
Foundation of this Relation is Regeneration. But here a Christian is not
considered as any ways related to a Church, but only as realted to God, and who
is not able to understand a Christian as well as Adam to be a Son of God
without any Relation to any Society of men whatever.

But since it is certain that God has exerted this Regenerating Power to more
than one, and that he has many Sons and Daughters, hence it is that every Son
of God stands in an other Relation, and that is to all the rest that are in the
same manner born of God, which in conjunction make up Gods family or Church.

But them I say, that the Church here is to be taken for the invisible Church
for the Father or Head of this Family is the invisible God, and the Children
are Members who considered as to their Regeneration, that is the Foundation of
the Relation are also invisible; and therefore neither in this sense can the
Proposition be true, for every Christian upon the account of his internal
Membership is not therefore a Member of a visible Church, for there may be 7000
such invisible Members in Israel, when there was no appearance of a visible
Church as to them, where any external Communion was held; and yet this is that
the Proposition drives at, that every Christian as such, is a Member of such a
Church with which external Communion may be held, which is in this sense
apparently false.

Yet again all these internal Members of God's Family, may be considered as
outwardly professing their Faith and associateing together as they can, for the
Worship of God: among whom creep in many Hypocrites, by professing the same
Faith and joining in the same Worship with them, which together make up the
Catholic Visible Church, in this sense I grant that every professing Christian
may be reckoned as a Member of the Catholic visible Church.

But yet I deny, that this relation is essential and necessary to him, upon the
very account of his being a Christian; for he might be a Believer and a Son of
God, and internally related to all invisible Members without this Catholic
visible Membership, nor does he indeed deny it, for in case (says he) that no
such visible Church can be found, or in case they be scattered by extreme
Persecution, or in case of an unjust excommunication, Christians may be
Christians without being members of Christ's visible Church, which indeed are
concessions that overturn the Truth of his Proposition; for if a man may be a
Christian without being a Member of Christ's visible Church, then it can not be
true that every Christian upon the very account of his being so, is a Member of
such a Church: for if it be true that Peter may be a man without being
incorporated into any civil Society, then it must be false to say, that Peter
upon the very account of his being a man must be a member of such a Society.

But let us now come to examine the other part of the Proposition, and his
sense of it; which is what may be there meant by the Church of Christ, of which
he says, every Christian upon the very account of his being so, is a member;
and that he is bound to join with it in external Communion. By Church (as may
be gathered out of his explication of this Proposition) he understands a
Society of particular Persons, gathered out of mankind and formed into a Body
Politic of which Christ is the Head. This I confess is somewhat, but not
sufficient to give us his determinate sense thereof, for as he has here
described it, for ought we know, he may mean only an internal invisible Church,
which is an internal invisible body Politic, of which the invisible Christ is
Head, and those that are internally united to him by a true and living Faith,
are invisible Members. This certainly is an invisible Church, for not only the
Head is invisible as to us, but so likewise are the Members considered as true
Believers, for no man can see the Truth of another Faith clearly and certainly.

But methinks he should not take [Church] in this sense, because first, he
speaks of a Church wherewith every Christian is bound to seek external
Communion, but no external Communion can be had with a Church considered as
invisible. And secondly, because he speaks of Communion with such a Church
where Communion is hazardous, as is employed by his supposition (if it can be
had,) now certainly there is no hazard in obtaining an internal Communion with
Christ the Head and all true Believers, for that may always be had when an
external Communion cannot.

But if he by Church means the Catholic visible Church consisting of all
individual professors of the Christian Doctrine thoroughout the world, united
to Christ their Head, which is most likely to be his meaning, then the sense of
the Proposition is this,

3. That Christ the invisible Head in Heaven, being joined to his invisible
Professors on Earth make up a Body Politic (whether he will call this Body
Politic visible or invisible I know not, but sure I am, the Head thereof which
is the more principal part in invisible.) But this he says, that it is the
Duty of every particular Christian to join with this Church in external
Communion if it may be had.

To this I say, it is well he puts in (if it may be had) for another reason
besides what he imagined when he inserted that clause, and that is, because no
such Communion external can be had with such a body Politic as he calls it.

First, Because it is very improper to say that any one is obliged to hold an
external Communion with a Politic body, where no Head is owned but what is
invisible; for since the principal and essential Member of a body Politic is
the Head, and that no external Communion can be had therewith as invisible, it
cannot be truly said that we may have, or are bound to seek such an Eternal
Communion therewith as a body politic. I wonder who ever talked at that rate,
as to say every man as a Creature was bound to seek an external Communion with
mankind, as making up a body Politic under the invisible God the Creator and
supreme Governor.

Secondly, I say no such external Communion can be had, because of the vast
numbers of professing Christians scattered at such great distances upon the
face of the Earth, that no such Communion can possibly be obtained, so that it
is as possible to conceive how an external Communion may be had by every
individual man with all mankind, as how it may be had by every Christian with
the whole body of Christians throughout the World:

This is so evident that he cannot but confess so much page 14. we cannot
(says he) Communicate with the Catholic Church, but by Communicating with
some part of it.

But I say, by Communicating with some part of it, we do not therefore
Communicate externally with the whole, for who ever said that a man by holding
a Communion with one City or Corporation that thereby he held an external
Politic Communion with all mankind, and what is it that you can say for the
one, but I can say much alike for the other.

Do you say, but all Christians are united under one Head the Lord Christ, so
(say I) are all mankind united under one God who is their Head and Governor.

Do (you say) all Christians Communicate in some external privileges, so (say
I) do all mankind, they are enlightened by the same Sun, breath in the same air,
feed on the Fruits of the same Earth.

Do you say, but they have not the same Laws as Christians have, which are
necessary to unite them in one body Politic. I answer, but if all mankind had
the very same Laws, yet if the publication and execution of those Laws were in
different Kings hands that had jurisdiction over each other, this were not
enough to speak them all of one external Politic Communion; no more do the
same Laws amongst Christians (since the publication and execution thereof, is
in the hands of different visible Church Governors, that have no jurisdiction
over each other) speak any external Politic Communion among all Christians.

Thus have I shown, of what words and phrases, of an uncertain and undetermined
sense, the parts of the Proposition consist, and how hard it is, to give any
tolerable sound sense of the whole; we shall now further enquire of the
interpretation given, whether it can afford any further light to understand it
better.

For the clearing of this (he says) you may be pleased to consider that the
primary design and intention of our Savior in his undertaking for us, was, not
to save particular Persons without respect to a Society, but to gather to
himself a Church in the form of a Body Politic, of which himself is the Head,
and particular Christians the Members, and in this method through obedience to
his Laws and Government to bring men to Salvation.

If I understand the force of these words with respect to the Proposition, it
is this that you would prove; that every Christian upon the very account of his
being so, must needs be a Member of the Church, because Christ intended not to
save particular Christians but under the consideration of being Members of the
Church.

I confess if this was as true as I suspect it to be false, there would be
weight in what is said: But let it be tried.

You say that Christ primarily designed to save his Church, and but secondarily
individual Christians, as incorporated in this Church.

I pray tell me, do you take Church here, as you do in the Proposition?
certainly you ought so to do; why else do you call this a clearing of that? now
it is evident you take Church in the Proposition, for the Catholic visible
Church existing in the World, with whom you say an external Communion is to be
sought, as has been before showed. But how absurd is what you say if you take
Church in this sense! For,

First, you hereby say that Christ did primarily design to save this present
existing Catholic Church; what can be more absurd? did not Christ, think you,
as primarily design all those parts of his Church that in their past
Generations did once exist here on Earth, and does not he alike design to save
that part that is yet to be born? Again, you herein say, that Christ primarily
designed to save the Catholic visible Church, which is evidently false; for
Christ never designed to save his visible Catholic Church, much less
considered as visible, and therefore cannot be said Primarily to design Their
Salvation: for Christ's design was to save only a part of his visible Church,
and that part not considered as visible, but as invisibly united to himself by
a livving Faith.

Yet again if the quite contrary be true, viz. That Christ first designed the
Salvation of particular Christians and but in a secondary sense the Church that
is made up of them, then what you say must needs be false, viz. that Christ
designed Salvation to the Church primarily, and to particular Members
secondarily, as in Union with the Church. The former of which I affect for
these reasons.

First, Because all individual sincere Christians have all qualifications that
are absolutely necessary to Salvation, antecedently to a visible Church state,
as actual Faith and Repentance if they be adult; or the promise of the Covenant
upon their Parents Faith if they be Infants, which are Foundations of, and give
Title to a visible Church State. Therefore our Savior primarily designed to
save them as such, and as for his designing such to be admitted into a visible.
Church State by Baptism, it was but to Seal that Salvation to them, and to
promote and carry on that Salvation that was antecedently secured to them by
the Covenant, upon their Repentance and Faith in the Lord Jesus: the very Truth
is, Christ did not intend at all to save men as visible Church Members, but
only as true Believers, for the fundamental saving Doctrine of the Gospel does
not run thus, he that is a Member of the visible Church shall be saved, but he
that Believes shall be saved, and he that Believes not shall be damned.

If it be objected, But does not the Apostle Peter, Preach not only Repentance,
but likewise Baptism as necessary to Remission of sins; and consequently to
Salvation: when he says Repent and be Baptized every one of you, for the
Remission of sins? And is not Baptism an Ordinance of admission into a visible
Church State? Acts 2.30.


I answ. they are both indeed commanded, but not as equally necessary, for
Repentance gives the fundamental title to remission, Baptism does only give
the Seal; the former is so necessary that without it no remission can be
obtained: the other is but for the more comfortable assurance of that
privilege to the penitent; but not absolutely necessary as the other: and this
our Savior most clearly intimates when he says, Mark 16.16. He that Believes
and is Baptized, shall be saved; but he that Believes not shall be damned. Men
shall be damned merely upon the account of their unbelief, and not merely for
want of Baptism, provided they have Faith. And yet Baptism has its great use,
as I have acknowledged, but as I said not absolutely necessary, for if men only
Believe and never have an opportunity of being Baptized, and so of being
admitted into a visible Church state thereby, then Salvation is not at all
hazarded.

My next reason is this, It cannot be true that Christ only designed to save
particular Christians as Members of the visible Church: because it were
impossible then that any Christians that were not visible Church Members should
be saved, for if it must fare with particular Christians, with respect to this
body Politic (as he is pleased to call it) the Church, as it does with the
Members of the natural Body, where it is confessed that God by his Providence
only intends to give life to each Member, and likewise the continuance of Life
as united together in one body, it will certainly follows that if any Member of
the Church be separated from the Church it must necessarily perish, as if a
hand or a foot were separated from the natural body it does certainly perish.
But by his leave this is very false, as to particular Christians with respect
to the Church: for, first all Christians do not spring out of the Church as the
Members of the natural body do out of that body, for when Infidels belive, they
spring out of the World or Mass of mankind, and not out of the Church; and by
believing are first united to Christ, and then as Saul converted, they essay to
join themselves to the Church, so that first they are internal members of a
Church, or are fit matter to be made members of, and afterward making a
profession of Faith, are made formal Members of a visible Church, which is
solemnized by Baptism. Secondly, and if it so happen that by unjust
excommunication any true Christian be cut off from the visible Church, yet it
keeps its Life, as no Member in a natural body can do. The conclusion is this,
that if Christians are in a salvable state before Union to a visible Church,
and if they may be in a salvable state, when wrongfully cut off by
Excommunication; then it cannot be true, that Christ did but in a secondary way
intend the Salvation of particular Christians viz. as united to a Church.

My third and last reason is this, I say Christ did not primarily design to
save his Church, and but secondarily particular Members as he asserts: which I
thus prove. That respect which individual men have to civil Society, as
Kingdoms or Republics; that respect have particular Christians to the visible
Church of Christ, according to his own notion of a Church which he considers as
a body Politic. Now I say, God in making the World, did not primarily design
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, but he primarily designed the giving of particular
men their existences: and secondarily, Kingdoms and Republics for their better
accommodation; Men were not made for Kingdoms, but Kingdoms for Men. Therefore
so did Christ, he first designed the putting of particular men into a State of
Salvation by giving to them Faith and Repentance and Remission of sins, and
then designed, as a consequent thereof, to collect them into a Society or
Societies, under Governors of his appointment, to be ruled by Laws of his own
Ordination, for the building them up in their Faith and comforts to his Glory:
so that this Society or Societies, of Church or Churches, with the Laws and
Ordinances thereto belonging, are but for the sakes and subordinated to the
welfare of particular Christians, and therefore it is necessary that Christ
should first intend the welfare or Salvation of particulars, before the mere
associating them into Church or Churches under government, which is but a means
to that great end of saving particulars. For certainly, that which is more
excellent in the Nature of things, is primarily designed by every rational
Agent, before that which is less excellent: so certainly is the restoration
of particular Persons, in giving them renewed Natures, Remission of sins, and a
Title to Salvation, before that mere order that ought to be amongst them for
their security and comfort, which is acquired by associations or Church
Government.

If it yet be not clear, give me leave to illustrate this matter yet further by
this similitude: Let us consider Christ as the general of an Army, who is by
the Apostle called the Captain of our Salvation, and the Church under him as an
Army under several Officers, for their better Order and Government; and all
particular Christians as so many particular Soldiers. Now let us consider the
several ends which a general has in gathering his Soldiers into an Army, and
which end is more principally intended, and which end less principally or
subordinately intended. His first end is to subdue his Enemies, to the Praise
of his Justice and Valor: the next end intended is the preservation of his
Soldiers, without which the more principal end cannot be obtained; and that
which is an end subordinate to both these, is the keeping his Soldiers in
Union and Order under their several Officers, for without this Union and Order,
the particular Soldiers cannot so well be preserved: so that here it is
evident that the uniting of his Men and keeping them under Discipline, is
subordinately intended for the preservation of particulars. In like manner God
in Christ designing to save sinners, First, he intends the Praise of his
Glorious Grace; Secondly, he intends the Salvation of particular sinners, by
Regenerating and pardoning of them: And lastly, he intends the Collection of
them into a body or bodies under Discipline, for their better safety and
security; this last is not principally or less principally, but that which is
subordinately intended to both the other. The conclusion that arises hence is
this, that this Author is much mistaken when he says, that Christ did
primarily intend the Salvation of his Church, and secondarily the Salvation of
particular Christians; cujus contrarium verum est; as I have showed.

We shall now further consider what he has said for the confirmation of this
his nation, concerning Christ's primary intention to save his Church, etc.

This (says he) is no more than what is the sense and Language of the Holy
Scriptures, wherein, whatever Christ is said to have done and suffered for
mankind, he is said to have done for them, not as scattered individuals, but as
incorporated into a Church. Thus Christ saved the Church, Ephesians. 5.25. Act.
20.25. Ephesians. 5.23.
and gave himself for it. Christ Redeemed the Church with his own precious
Blood. Christ is the Savior of his Body.

The plain consequence from hence is (says he) that every person so far as he
is a Christian, so far he is a Member of the Church; and by virtue of that
Relation to the Church it is, that he has any Relation to Christ, or any Title
to the Privileges of the Gospel.

I answer it is a wonder to me, to see the Author, otherwise a Person of good
abilities, so strangely misled into the confidence of a conclusion that is
raised upon such palpable mistaken principals.

He says that what ever Christ has done and suffered for mankind, he has done
it for them; not as scattered individuals, but as incorporated into a Church.

I perceive by this that the Author is not for Universal Redemption, as some
of his brethren are; for I cannot see how Christ dying for all, is consistent
with Christ's dying for men, considered as incorporated into his Church, for it
is certain, that the greatest number of individuals that has been, or are in
the World, were, or are not like to be so incorporated. Yet further, certainly
the Author does run himself and his Reader into much confusion for want of a
Regular stating of the several Aspects, which Christ's sufferings have to
mankind, as they fall under diverse considerations. As first, if mankind be
considered as lapsed into a state of sin and death: so they are said to be
Enemies to God and Righteousness, Dead in Trespasses and sins, without God,
without hope. I hope the Author does not take men so considered as in any
Church state, and yet it is certain that according to Scriptures, Christ's:
suffering was with Relation to men as such, Romans 5.8. God commends his Love
toward us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ died for us. So Col. 1.21.
And you that were sometime alienated and Enemies in your mind by wicked works,
yet now has he reconciled in the Body of his Flesh through Death. In these
Texts it is evident that Christ's death, respected men as incoporated in the
corrupt Mass of mankind; and not as incorporated into a Church.

Secondly, Christ's sufferings respects men, considered as such, that de futuro,
were to partake of the benefits of Christ's Death: which benefits, are either
of an absolute, or of a Relative and Politic Consideration.

Those that are absolute, are such as the changing of men's Natures, Remission
of Sins, Faith in Christ, Repentance from dead Work; these are all given and
bestowed on en with respect to what Christ did and suffered for them. Here men
are to be considered absolutely as individual Christians, and not as any
members of a Society or a Church, for I can, as any man else may easily,
consider a man as a Believer, as a Penitent, as in favor with God, without
considering him under any Politic Relations: as we may conceive of men as
wise, just and innocent, without conceiving them as Citizens or Subjects. There
are other benefits that are likewise the purchase of Christ's death, and they
are of a relative and Politic consideration; and here it is that the Communion
of the Saints, or church Fellow-ship has its place, which Communion is either
internal, and this is a privilege peculiar only to that Church of Christ,
which every Member is considered as really and sincerely united to Christ; by a
true Faith: and to each other in a love unfeigned, or external; which properly
belongs to Christians co-united together in an external profession of Faith, in
associating for public worship and submitting to Christ's Discipline.

Now of all these benefits, some are more principal, some less, some are of
absolute necessity to Salvation; others not.

Those that are of a more principal consideration, and of absolute necessity to
Salvation; are such that belong to Christians as individuals, such as Faith and
Repentance, Remission of sins, and such like, which they have by virtue of
Union with Christ, without any respect to any Politic Union with one another:
as for those benefits which are of a Politic or relative consideration, they
are less principal and not of that necessity to Salvation, such are the Love
of all Saints and their mutual Prayers for each other. Such are worshipping
together, and the benefits of Christ's Discipline, now though these are
excellent in their kinds, yet much inferior to those of Faith and Repentance
and Remission of sins, as being not so absolutely necessary to Salvation, as
these are.

Now I would fain know of the Author, whether it be more true to say, that
Christ by his death did primarily intend to save men as Believers, as Penitent,
as Renewed and pardoned, which belongs to Christians considered as individuals,
which is what I affirm: or to say he primarily intended to save men as hearing,
praying, praising and receiving the Lords Supper together, and likewise by
being under Discipline; which are the privileges that belong to Christians as
falling under a Politic consideration: which is what he seems to affirm. If
the former be true, then the latter which he has asserted is false; for both
of them cannot be primarily intended. Now I conceive the former true, because
it is every where affirmed in Scripture, that he that believes, he that
repents, he that is regenerate, he that is pardoned, shall be saved.

But it is no where promised, that those that pray and praise, etc. with the
Church, that they shall be saved, except it be with respect unto Faith and
Repentance, which as I have said, belong to Christians as individuals, and not
as Members of a Church.

But he says, that herein he speaks but the sense and Language of the Holy
Scriptures: and here he quoteth three texts, as Ephesians. 5.25. Acts 20.28. Ephesians.
5.23. well! what does he gather thence? Hence (says he) it is plain, that
Christ died primarily for his Church, and for individuals not as scattered but
as incorporated into his Church.

But by your favor here is more in your conclusion, than is in those premised
Texts: indeed I read there, that Christ gave himself for his Church, and that
he redeemed his Church with his blood, and that he is the Savior of his body
which is his Church. But I find not a word there, of dying primarily for his
Church, and but secondarily for individuals as incorporated into his Church.

If any shall say, all this is employed if not expressed. I say, who ever so
thinks is obliged to show how, and which way it comes to be implied, but to
save them the Labor, I am bold to affirm the contrary, that there is no such
thing employed; my reason is this, because Church in each of those places is
taken for a collection of particular Christians, considered primarily as true
believers, as true penitents, and but secondarily as in Union one with another,
and as in Fellowship in Church Ordinances.

My reasons are, first because there is nothing in the words or context that
can force a contrary interpretation. Secondly, because the nature of the thing
spoken of in these verses will bear no interpretation, but such as I give.
Because the intents of Christ's dying must be measured according to the Nature
of things, so that what is more excellent must be intended before that which is
less excellent, now men's being particularly united to Christ by Faith, their
having their Natures changed, and their sins pardoned, are more excellent than
their Union and Communion with each other in external Ordinances, that are but
inferior Ministeries subservient to their Faith, and their renewed Natures, and
the edification of them therein; therefore Christ must intend his death
primarily for his Church as Believers: now as I have formerly said, Believers,
as such, are not Members of a Church, for Faith speaks a relation to Christ,
but no relation immediately to any other Christian or Christians whatever.

Again under what qualification, and for what reason Christ is said primarily
to be Savior of the Church, his body; under that qualification, and for that
reason, Christ is said primarily to dye and shed his blood for his Body. But
Christ does not save his Church under the qualification, or for that reason
primarily, because they are united in external Acts of Worship and Discipline,
and upon that account it is they are of your visible Politic body or Church,
but because its particular Members are Believers and penitent, but Christians
quatenus Believers or penitent are not consider as Members of a Church, for
indeed Faith and Repentance speak no relation immediately to any but God and
Christ, that of Church Membership comes in as a consequent thereof, to which
privilege Faith gives the Title. Therefore Christ did not dye to save his
Church quatenus a Society, united for worship, etc. but quatenus its Members
are true Believers and no further, and for this cause I assert, that the
primary end of Christ's death was to save individual Believers and but
secondarily to save his Church, so far as it consisted of such and no further.

Yet again if Christ intended primarily to save men because they were Members
of a Church: Then certainly, the first thing that the Gospel should press upon
sinners is, that they should first unite themselves to the Church, which to say
it does is both false and absurd: its false, for the first cry of the Gospel is
to men considered in a state of sin and Death, and it is that they would repent
of their sins and believe in the Lord Jesus, upon the doing of which it
promises remission and a Title to Salvation, and till this be done there is no
mention of any command obliging them to become a Member of a Church: and
reality or profession, men are no more capable of being Members of a Church,
than a Hog or Horse are capable of being Citizens of London. He that considers
what has been said, may soon see what little help those Scriptures he mentions
afford his notion, and upon what slender grounds he builds that confident
conclusion of his, viz. That by virtue of that relation to the Church it is
that a Christian has any relation to Christ.

He adds, Agreeable to this notion, it is (says he) very plain, that Baptism
which is by all acknowledged to be the Ceremony of initiating us into
Christianity, is in Scripture declared to be the Rite, whereby we are entered
and admitted into the Church, this St. Paul expressly tells us, That we are all
Baptized into one Body, again that Christ has sanctified, i. e. has separated
his Church by the washing of Water, and the Word.

I wonder that the Author should say that these Scriptures are agreeable to his
notion, that Christ intends the Salvation of no particular Christians but
considered as members of a Church.

I answer, they are ever just so much agreeable to his notion as the texts
before-named.

He says all acknowledge, that Baptism is a ceremony initiating us into
christianity.

I wonder who acknowledges so in your sense? I am sure not all or but very few:
for Christianity objectively is the doctrine of Christ subjectively the same
Doctrine as believed by us with a resolution to obey it, but assuredly the
Doctrine of Christ is first preached and heard and believed, and a resolution
taken up to obey it, and all this is antecedent in the adult to baptism, or
ought to be so. As for Baptism, it is but a professing sign of my being a
Christian, or a seal of the promises that God has made to me, as such, and is
not a Ceremony that makes me a Christian, or gives me my Christianity. Abraham
was a Believer, and a Friend of God, and justified by his faith antecedent to
circumcision, and so are the seed of Abraham, they are believers, friends of
God, justified by their Faith in Christ, antecedent to Baptism.

But it is added, does not Paul say we are all by one Spirit baptized into one
body?

True, he does so; But I deny your consequence thence deduced, that therefore
Christ died primarily for his Church, and but secondarily for the individual
members thereof, or that we have primarily a relation to the Church and but
secondarily to Christ, i.e. by virtue of the former relation. There is not one
word or syllable in the text tending that way. For First, what is there in
these words, we are baptized into one body, to signify a priority of our
relation to the Church, any more than in those Romans 6.3. where it is said we
are baptized into Christ, to signify a priority of our relation to Christ, and
by him to his Church? reconcile these if you can to the sense of your
consequence, and give us some evident reason why we must needs understand, that
thereby is meant we are baptized into the Church primarily, and into Christ
secondarily: But I shall be bold to tell you such an interpretation is
evidently absurd, as is manifest in several instances in other kind of
relations. Whoever said that King Charles the 2d was only related to Charles
the First, as he is related to his brother James Duke of York and the rest of
the Royal Family? certainly as he is the Elder Brother his relation to his
Father was first both in nature and time to any relation he stood in to his
younger brethren. Or whoever said that the individuals of a Kingdom cannot be
considered in relation to their King and Sovereign antecedently to their being
considered as fellow subjects? when certainly the relation of fellow subjects
does arise upon the supposed relation of those individual subjects to their
sovereign; for the formal reason why you and I are fellow subjects is, because
we are individually related to the same King, and therefore relation to him is
antecedent to our relation to one another as subjects.

The sense of this text now urged, so far as I understand is only this, that
all that are baptized upon a just title are supposed to partake of the
sanctifying operation of the Spirit, of which the washing of the water of
baptism is a sign, by which they are declared to be animated by one and the
self-same Spirit, as all the living members of Christ are, and consequently
that they are one with them, and that therefore they ought all of them to be
both internally and externally as useful and helpful to each other as
possibly they can; But how you can draw such a conclusion hence that therefore
these individuals are no ways related to Christ but as they are thus united to
one another I cannot understand for the reasons before given.

The other text is Ephesians. 5.22. where it is said, that Christ has sanctified (or
separated) his Church by the washing of water and the word,

Very well! what of this? we grant you, that every Church member, if adult, is
converted by the word, and afterward (if it may be) ought to be baptized; upon
this account it is said that the Church is separated by water and the word,
because all its individual members are, or ought to be so converted and
baptized. Therefore says he, every individual Christian is saved as
incorporated into the Church. I deny the consequence, for conversion by the
word is antecedent to Baptism or to a Visible Church State, and of it self
gives a title to Salvation, though never any such visible Church state by
baptism follows; But if Baptism follows, I say again, Christians are not
saved primarily as baptized and as externally Church members, but primarily as
true believers and internally united to Christ. And certainly a believer, as
such, speaks no necessary relation to any Church or visible society whatever,
and therefore it could not possibly be the Apostles intendment in that place,
or the other, to signify that Christians had no relation to Christ, or saving
interest in him but what they derived from a participation of Baptism and a
conjunction with a visible Church,

Having thus finished his proof, that all Christians are members of the
catholic visible Church: he proceeds to the proof of the second part of the
proposition, which is, that therefore every Christian is bound to join in
external communion with the said Church. This he thinks is clear upon two
reasons, First because without such a conjunction the ends of Church society
cannot be obtained, which ends are the solemn worship of God, the public
profession of our religion, and the mutual edification one of another.

Secondly, Because without such a conjunction in external communion with the
Catholic visible Church, we cannot be made partakers of the benefits and
privileges that Christ has made over to the members of his Church, such are
the pardon of sin, and the grace of the holy Spirit, and so he concludes, we
have no promises of spiritual Graces but of those means, so that in order to
the partaking of them, there is an absolute necessity laid upon us, of joining
and communicating with the Church. Thus far he.

I answer, first, whereas he says that he has made it evident, that every
Christian, upon the account of his very being so, a member of the catholic
visible Church, that I have already denied, and upon what grounds and reasons I
have denied it is before shown, as for his consequence that therefore every
Christian is bound upon the very account of his being so, to join with the
Church catholic visible in external communion: That I have also denied and the
reasons why I have showed, as First, there is no such external communion to be
had with that vast body as the catholic Church is, besides if there were, it
might be unlawful, because if communion could not be had but upon sinful
conditions, or without a manifest hazard of my salvation, or in case one were
wrongfully excommunicated, there is in these cases no obligation on a Christian
as such to any such external communion, but a Christian may be still a
Christian without it. But let us see how he proves his consequence: His first
reason is, because without such a conjunction the ends of Church society cannot
be had, which are solemn worship and mutual Edification.

Ans. What? not without a conjunction with the catholic visible Church?
certainly meetings for solemn worship and mutual Edification are not terms
wherein Christians hold communion with the catholic visible Church, for they
are proper only to particular worshipping congregations. I wonder in what
Assemblies do the Christians in England, and the Christians in Prestor John's
country meet for solemn worship and mutual Edification? I know he thinks the
matter if salved, by telling us, that Christians meeting in any congregation in
England, for worship and mutual Edification, do thereby hold external
communion in those things with the whole Church throughout the world. But I
conceive this will not serve his turn, without the could equally imagine how a
man by holding communion with the City of London might be said thereby to hold
a civil external communion with all mankind, which I think is so wild a conceit
as no man yet ever asserted, for he must remember he is speaking of such an
external communion that is proper to a politic visible Body, to the
constituting of which kind of communion it is not enough to have the same laws,
the same customs, no nor the same kind of solemn meetings for worship, to
speak all visible Christians to be of the same external politic communion; for
suppose in France they had the same laws and customs, the same kind of
officers, as Constables, Justices, Parliament, and a King, as we have in
England, and all under the Government of the very same invisible God, it does
not follow so long as there is no dependence of these Kingdoms each on the
other, that therefore the people of England are of the same external politic
communion with those in France. Yea further, though these two Kingdoms may
mutually in times of peace advise with each other for their mutual profits, and
in case of differences betwixt them, they may forbid trading or converse with
each other, which is a kind of civil excommunication, yet for all this they may
not be said to be of the same external civil politic communion, and why?
because their respective Magistrates are independent and have no jurisdiction
over each other. Upon the very same ground I deny any such thing as an external
Politic Communion betwixt the Members of the Catholic Church: for though they
have all the same Laws, the same Sacraments, the same kind of solemn meetings
for Worship, and all under the same kind of visible Governors, and all this
under the same invisible Head the Lord Jesus, though so far as they can, and
the distances of places will admit) they may advise with each other for their
mutual good, and in case that any prove Heretics they may, so far as may be,
disown or refuse Communion, as in the instances before said, yet all this no
more proves them to be of the same external Politic communion, than the like
agreements might speak the Kingdom of France and that of England of the same
politic civil communion, and why? but because Christ has left no visible
politic Head to have jurisdiction over the rest.

If you say this notion speaks a good word for the Headship of the Pope.

I Answer, no such matter, for there is no need of such a Head, nor of any such
external Politic Communion in the Church no more than in the World, God has
well enough Governed the World without any such Universal civil Monarch, and
does as well govern the Church without any such Universal visible Head.

And now let us see what of force then is in his second reason, which is this,
such a conjunction in external Communion with he Catholic visible Church is
necessary, else we cannot possibly partake of the privileges that Christ has
made over to this his Church, as the Remission of Sins, and the Graces of the
Holy Spirit.

I Answer, He says that Christ has made over the privileges of pardon of sin
and the Graces of his Spirit to the Church primarily, and that before any
particular person can partake of pardon of Sin and the Graces of the Spirit, he
must join with the Church in external Communion. But how absurd is all this! by
Church he here means the Catholic visible Church, but I wonder how it can be
truly said, that pardon of sin, or the Graces of the Spirit can be said to be
made over to the visible Church, as privileges, when as it is very certain
that Christ never made over such privileges to the Church as visible?

But I perceive he understands it ministerially, that is to say, that a man is
pardoned, or partake of the Graces of the Spirit, but by the Ministry of the
Church: well! let this be granted what will thence follow? I am sure that will
not follow which you say does follow, that therefore we must first be made
Members of the Church before we can be pardoned or sanctified by the Spirit:
for suppose the Church meets for solemn worship, and the minister is Preaching,
and there comes in one or more Infidels for curiosity to see and hear, I hope
you will not say that these Infidels because they are in the same place with
the Church, that therefore they are joined as Members with the Church; suppose
now these Infidels are by the Sermon convinced and perfectly converted to a
true Faith in Jesus Christ.

I now demand, These men that thus are converted, do they believe without or
with the Grace of the Spirit? again so soon as they have believed, are they
pardoned or are they not? I say they could not have believed without the Grace
of the Spirit, and that so soon as they truly believed they were pardoned: and
you dare not (I think) say the contrary. Now I pray you is not this Grace of
the Spirit, and pardoning of sin Communicated before these men were joined to
the Church as visible Members. How then can you say that men are obliged to
join with the Church as Members, else they have neither Grace nor pardon? the
very Truth is, the primary reason of Christ's institution of visible Church
Membership, was not for the giving of the first Grace of the Spirit, or giving
pardon, but it was appointed as a means of conveying further degrees of Grace,
and clearer assurance of pardon visible Church Membership does suppose the
Grace of conversion (in the adult) and pardon, but does not give or Communicate
it.

I had now done with his first Proposition, but that for two inferences he
draws from a consideration of the whole; as first (says he) therefore their
position is untrue, who maintain that our obligation to Church Communion
arises from a voluntary admission of our selves into some particular
congregation.

But I say, notwithstanding all he has said that position may be true, for he
has been all this while speaking of the Universal visible Church. But they
that hold that position, maintain it only with respect to a particular Church,
and I hope there is no contradiction, for one that believes and is Baptized to
be nessarily a Member of the Universal Church, and yet to be voluntarily a
Member either of particular Worshipping Congregation either in England or
Holland.

His second deduction is as wild, for (says he) hence we may see how
extravagantly they discourse that talk of Chrstianity at large, without
relation to a Church or Communion with a Society.

This I say is strangely inferred, as if we could not discourse of men, as men,
without relation to Cities or Kingdoms, and certainly we may with a very good
reason sometimes discourse of Christians, as Christians, without relation to
any Church whether particular or Universal, and this without any extravagancy.

His second Proposition.

That every one is bound to join in Communion with the established national
Church to which he belongs, supposing there be nothing in the Terms of its
Communion that renders it unlawful for him so to do.

This (he says) is plain, because external Communion cannot be had with the
Catholic Church but by externally Communionicating with some part of it.

To this I have already answered, that there is no such thing as an external
Politic Communion to be had with the Catholic Church neither immediately
which himself confesses, no nor mediately by Communicating with some part of
it, as I conceive I have made evident in my answer to the former Proposition.

But in case any such Communion could be had immediately or mediately, yet I
would have it remembered, that this sort of Communion is not to be sought by
every Christian upon the very account of his being so, but upon the account of
his being a visible professing Christian.

And how let us come to some Issue, we will grant you that every Christian,
considered as visible, ought to endeavor to join with some part of the
Catholic visible Church, for public Worship and the edification of himself
and others, but why this particular Church must be national, I do not
understand, I am sure there is no need it should be national, for I do as truly
declare my self to be a visible Member of the Catholic visible Church, by
joining in external Communion with one single visisible Congregation, as if I
was united a Member to a National Church. But in very Truth, I do much doubt
whether any such thing is to be had as an external Communion with a National
Church, any more than with the Catholic visible Church: for you place the Acts
of external Communion to consist in meeting together in solemn worship, and in
mutual Edification.

Now I would fain know where any Nation of Christians do meet together for
solemn Worship, true if you could find any Nation of Christians that did often
meet at one place to Worship God, and to rejoice before the Lord together, as
the Tribes of Israel used to do when they came up to Jerusalem to keep the
Feasts of the Lord, I should not stick to call such a National Church united
external Communion, but to speak of a joining with a National Church of
Christians in external Communion, where Millions of the Members of the supposed
National Church, never perhaps came nigh one the other for scores of Miles,
especially so as to Hear, or Pray, or receive the Supper together, or to Edify
each other, is to talk without any solid ground.

If you say, but if we join with any one Worshipping Congregation in external
Communion, we do thereby join with the whole Nation of Christians in external
Communion.

If you say so, I think you say more than you can prove, for I do not
understand that because I Worship God with a Congregation in London, that
therefore I Worship God with a Congregation at York. True, by my Worshipping at
London I do declare my self to be of the same Faith with those that Worship at
York, and I am therefore bound to account of them as my brethren, and so to
love and Pray for them as such, by which means an internal Communion is
maintained as among Members that are supposed and hoped to be united to Christ,
but yet I am to seek how this external Communion can be had, when perhaps we
shall never see each other as long as we live.

If you say that all the Christians in a Nation may hold an external Communion
in being all under one Discipline, the management whereof being deposited in
the hands of one visible Head, as was the High Priest to the Church of the Jews.

This indeed were something, if it could be proved that Jesus Christ did ever
appoint such an Officer for the Government of all his Disciples in each Nation,
but if it be made to appear that all Ministers or Pastors of particular
Worshipping Congregations, have equal Power to Govern their respective Churches,
and that they have no Power of jurisdiction one over another, and that there is
no instituted Officers appointed by Christ Superior to them, with any Power of
jurisdiction over them. Then I say, there can be no such external Communion of
all Christians in a Nation under the jurisdiction of any such High Priest, and
that therefore there is no such thing as a National Church of Christians,
wherewith an external communion can be held. You know well who they are that
are for an equality of Pastoral Power.

Many more things may be said of this matter, but I shall at present wave them,
and proceed to consider what he further says.

He has already said, that every Christian ought to join in external Communion
with a National Church, that thereby he might hold Communion with the
Catholic. But presently he starts an Objection.

But it may be said, that there may be several distinct Churches in the place
where we live, there may be the fixed regular Assemblies of the National
Church, and there may be separate Congregations, both which are or pretend to
be parts of the Catholic Church, so that it may be all one as to our
Communicating with that, which of these we join with, supposing we join but
with one of them, and consequently there is no necessity from that principle
that we should hold Communion with the Assemblies of the National Church. So
far he --

Answ. Very good! now let us see how he answers it, which part of the Argument
in the Objection does he deny? does he deny such separate Congregations to be
parts of the Catholic Church? or does he deny that in joining with any part of
the Catholic Church we thereby join with the whole? he denies neither: Then I
say he grants the whole, for these two being granted, the conclusion follows,
that they who join with those separate Congregations do thereby preserve the
Catholic Union; and therefore there is no need of joining with a National
Church to attain the end proposed, What says he now? He seems not to deny
this, but tells us that notwithstanding if we separate or refuse Communion with
them, that we do not preserve the Unity of the Body, so far as in us lies,
which the Fundamental Laws of Society, and the express precepts of
Christianity require of every Member.

Answ. I would now fain know of him what are those Fundamental Laws of Society,
as suppose of Kingdoms or Corporations, that oblige its Subjects or Citizens
to seek the Unity and Peace of those Societies or Citizens to seek the Unity
the known Laws of the said Kingdoms; and the orders of Corporations regulated
by the Charters granted by their Princes? but if any inferior Officers of
Kingdoms or Corporations, shall impose Laws upon the Subjects or Citizens, that
are not agreeable to, but rather seem contrary to the Laws of the Kingdom, and
the Power granted in those Charters, if such Subjects or Citizens oppose and
refuse subjection, and will not communicate in those things; who dare say that
such do not seek the Peace of Kingdoms and Corporations as much as in them
lies? or as much as is fit?

And let him likewise tell us what are those express precepts of Christianity,
that oblige its Members any further to seek the Unity of the Church, than to
believe, do, and observe those things which Christ the Head of his Church has
commanded. Christians then seek the Unity of the Body, (so far as in them
lies,) when they seek it according to a Gospel rule; for it does not lie in
their Power to seek it any other ways.

But (says he) to separate from Congregations with whom we may lawfully
Communicate, is not to seek the Unity of the Body, so far as in us lies.

Answ. This is not universally true, for what if one shifteth his Habitation to
another Parish, for the benefit of the Labors of a more pious Minister? here
is a separation from an established Assembly, and yet no breach upon the Unity
of the Body.

But suppose one still abides in the Parish, and yet constantly Hears and
Communicates with a Church of an other Parish, as I suppose some of your own
do, how can you say such (so long as they continue Communion with your National
Church) seek not the Union of the Body as sar as is fit or needful.

If you say but neither of these are the cases of those you speak of, because
they hold Communion with you to be sinful.

Very true; and you deny not, that in case they could not Communicate with you
without sin, but that they may lawfully separate without being guilty of any
breach of union.

If you had here proved they might hold Communion with you without sin, or what
they extremely suspect to be sinful, you had said something: but since you have
reserved your pretended proof thereof to the fourth Proposition, I shall
therefore refer my answer thereto.

His third Proposition.

That the being a Member of any Church, does oblige a man to submit to all the
Laws and Constitutions of that Church. I Answer, if by Laws and Constitutions
he understands such that Christ, either by himself, or his Apostles has
ordained, such as to meet together to Pray, Praise, Preach, Hear, Baptize, or
Eat the Lords Supper, or to Admonish, Comfort, Reprove, or cast out the
Obstinate: so I grant the Truth of the Proposition.

But if by Laws and Constitutions he means such that are merely of men's
devising and imposing under the penalty of Excommunication, without any command
from Christ for so doing: of which kind are the Observations of Days,
Abstaining from Meats, Crossing in Baptism, Kneeling at the Supper, Reading
Prayers, and that in a Surplice; without the use and observation whereof it
shall not be lawful for men to Preach the Gospel, or partake of the Sacrament,
but for refusal shall be cast out and not esteemed worthy of the name of
Christians. In this sense I say the proposition is very false.

And whereas he says, that this Proposition is in the general so
unquestionable, that no sober man will deny it: I on the contrary say, that in
the general (without a sound limitation) it is so mischievous that no sober man
but may be ashamed to assert it. For who will deny but that our Savior with
his Apostles were of the Church of the Jews and who dares say, that either
Christ, or they thought themselves obliged to observe the humane Laws, and
Traditions of that Church, either in washing before Meat, or in not Healing on
the Sabbath Day, which Traditions they made no scruple to transgress, and to
justify such Transgression, to the shame and confusion of their Imposers.
Again, who knows not that the Rulers of the Jewish Church had agreed, and so
made it a Constitution of that Church, that if any confessed Christ he should
be cast out of the Synagogue: and what Christian has the Forehead to say, that
all the Members of that Church were obliged thereby not to confess Christ, or
to bear any part in casting out such (as did confess him) from their
Synagogues.

He adds, this is the Basis upon which all Societies are founded, and by which
they do subsist.

He means that the Truth of that Proposition is at the bottom of all Societies,
whether Civil or Ecclesiastical; but I pray how is it the Basis of Kingdoms
which are civil Societies. Thus far I grant, that all the just Laws Enacted by
the supreme Power in such Kingdoms, do oblige all the Subjects. Answerably, all
the Laws and Constitutions in the Church, that are Enacted by Jesus Christ its
supreme King and Governor, do bind all the Members. But in civil Societies, if
the Inferior Magistrates, as suppose the Heads of Corporations shall Enact
Laws and make Constitutions and bind them on the Subjects so as in case of
refusal to submit, they shall be deprived of the right and privileges of
Subjects, and that without any Authority from the supreme Power for so doing; I
say in this case, that this Proposition is so far from being the Basis of these
Societies, without which they cannot subsist: that I say, it is the Basis of all
Confusion to such Societies, answerably, if any Officers of Churches shall
presume without warrant from Christ, to make Laws and bind them on the
Disciples necks, upon the penalties of depriving them of the rights and
privileges of Christians, as they do by excommunication, I say this is a mere
usurpation of the Regal power of Christ, and tends directly to run Churches
into confusion and all manner of disorders as the sad Effects thereof do
clearly demonstrate. And whereas he says, To suppose a Society, and yet to
suppose the members of it not under an obligation to obey its Laws and
Government, is to make Ropes of sand, and to suppose a body without sinews and
ligaments to hold the parts together. I Answer, That it is confessed, that the
just Laws of the supreme Authority of any Society, are Sinews and Ligaments of
that society; But if the Laws be either unjust or imposed by any Authority
inferior to the Supreme, such Laws are not the natural sinews in any
Government, but are certain Monstrosities in the body politic, as such kind of
Sinews or Ligaments in the body natural are reputed, which are not necessary
or useful but are Impediments to a regular motion of the members, and of this
kind are the Laws and Constitutions of Churches about which we contend.

Well, but let us see how he clears this, he further says page 16. It must be
acknowledged in the first place, that the Church must (as all other Societies)
be entrusted with at least so much power over her subjects as is necessary for
the securing of her own welfare and preservation: For to think otherwise is to
suppose God to have founded a Church and Intended the well being and
continuance of it (which are things that every one must grant) and yet to
suppose he has denied her the use of the means without which the well being
and continuance cannot be attained; which is monstrous and contradictious.

It is plain, that the Author speaks here of a particular Church, as may be
seen by a review of the proposition, where he speaks of a membership with any
Church, i. e. with any particular Church, and now I answer, First,

This Argument proceeds upon an Hypothesis, that is not necessarily true, as
the Author imagines, viz. that God in causing this or that particular Church
to be planted, must needs Intend its continuance; for many such Churches have
been planted but not continued, and certainly when it has so happened, it has
not been besides the intention of God.

Perhaps you will say, that was through their own fault by not making use of
that power that God gave them to preserve themselves, say you so? what then say
you to the Church of Christ first planted at Jerusalem? we read, Acts 8.1.2.
that a great persecution arose, and they were all scattered, and none left at
Jerusalem except the Apostles. (And it is as easy to conceive that the
Apostles might have been scattered as the rest:) I ask now, was this Church
continued? or if it was not, was it because they made not use of that power,
that God entrusted them with for their preservation? what would you have had
them done? what, repelled force with force? I know you believe no such power
was entrusted with them, and yet it is certain that this dispersion was not
besides the intention of God, therefore it is not necessary as you suppose,
that God must always intend the preservation of every particular Church he
causes to be planted.

But in the next place let us grant your supposition, that God intends the
continuance of every Church he causes to be planted, what then? you say then,
he must needs entrust the said Churches with so much power, that is necessary
to preserve themselves, or else he is wanting to them.

I deny your consequence, because since a Church may be broken and so
discontinued, as well by Armed Force from Persecutors, as by Intestine Broyls
arising from Heresies and Schisms: God must then necessarily have provided
every particular Church with an Army, Superior to all the power of Persecutors,
or else have engaged himself to work miracles for their preservation, or else
according to you, he must be thought wanting to his Churches, But since God
has neither provided the one, nor engaged himself to the other, it is certain
your Consequence taken universally cannot be true.

Perhaps you will say if the Consequence be not universally true, yet it is as
to the particulars of Heresies and Schisms that arise out of the Church: For
if God had not provided the Church with so much power as is necessary to
suppress those evils, he must be wanting in providing means for the Churches
preservation. I Answer, that will be soon seen, if we consider all that power
that God has truly given his Churches to keep them from these evils, which are
so far as I understand, the Bible, and Ministers, and the promise of the
Spirit, to guide them that sincerely Implore his Aid and Assistance. Now its
true these means are sufficient, and as much in their kind as is necessary, yet
they are not of themselves sufficient, except Ministers and People make a good
use of them. For in case either the one or the other do sinfully neglect the
studying of the Bible, and praying earnestly for the guidance of the Spirit; it
is very possible and easy for either of them to lapse into Heresies and
Schisms, as many Churches have done, and yet when they so do, the have not to
blame God for not intending their continuance, nor for not affording what means
are in their kind sufficient for their continuance. For the fault is their own
in not making a due use and improvement of the means afforded.

I know the Author is dreaming of other sorts of means Entrusted with the
Church for the preventing the destruction thereof by Heresies and Schisms, and
that is of a power of determining Controversies in points of doctrine, and of
making Laws and Ordinances for the suppressing Schisms, so at least as to
oblige the members to acquiesce, which are different from studying the Bible,
praying for the Spirit, and to add a Living up to what they know.

But by his leave, I will be bold to tell him, that such a power of determining
controversies, is not a sure means of it self to prevent Heresies, for what if
the Pastors themselves, by a neglect of those means I named, should lapse into
Heresies, it is certain if they came to determine, they would Establish
Heresies, and not root them up. Nor is that power of making Laws and Canons to
oblige all members to acquiesce in any sure means to prevent or to put an end
to Schisms, for except the members of the Church, are assured that what their
Pastors determine in doctrine, and what they would be Cannon oblige them to, in
matters of worship, be agreeable to the word of God, they may justly make no
scruple to dissent in the one and the other. True indeed, if Governors of
Churches could make out such a power they pretend to, that they have received
it from God, and that they are infallibly guided, as the Pope and Quakers
pretend in all their determinations, then somewhat indeed were spoken to the
purpose, and the People would see some ground to take them for Oracles, and to
stoop to their determinations, but till then it is best for Governors of
Churches to leave the People to their Bibles, and to press nothing upon them
as necessary, but what they find to be Evidently there written and commanded.

But no more of this as yet, for I have herein almost prevented my self in what
I have to say as to that which follows.

He proceeds thus, That since the preservation of a Church cannot be secured,
but by a providing for a due and orderly performance of the worship of God, and
by maintaining peace and unity among its members, it necessarily follows in
General, that whatever power over her subjects is necessary in order to either
of these things, all that at least must be supposed to be Lodged in the Church,
that is to say, in those that have the Government of it.

I answer, If you mean hereby that Jesus Christ has by directions and precepts
provided what is necessary for the due and orderly performance of Gods worship,
and likewise for the preserving his Churches in peace and Unity, and that he
has in a special manner entrusted those directions and precepts with the
Pastors of Churches, to teach and command the Churches to worship God according
to these directions, and to keep unity among themselves, and likewise to
reprove and censure the obstinate, according to the said directions and
precepts; so I yield the whole of what is said. But if you mean thereby that
Christ has entrusted the Governors of Churches with an Arbitrary power, to
institute such things for a pretended due and orderly worship, which neither
were in use with Christ and his Apostles or those first Churches, or that are
no ways necessary in themselves, but are at least seemingly contrary to the
Genius of a Gospell-worship, which is Eminently spiritual, and to press these
under the penalties of Excommunication, as if the Churches could not duly and
orderly worship God, and be kept in unity without them. In this sense I deny
that any such power is to be supposed to be Lodged in the Governors of the
Church, for it is a power altogether useless and impertinent, and in the
consequence destructive: For Christ and his Apostles, and those first Churches
worshipped God, and kept unity in a more excellent manner than we do, and yet
without the use of these humanely invented things that you Impose.

He goes on, From hence (says he) it is plain that the Church has a power to
restrain the exercise of her Subjects Liberty, as to oblige them to all such
Laws, Rules, Orders, Ceremonies, as she shall Establish for the ends aforesaid.

I answer, When you have either better proved the necessity or real usefullness
of the laws, rules, ceremonies to the ends aforesaid, or that Christ has given
any such power to the said Governors which hitherto you have but merely begged,
then I will yield to what you say as true, But otherwise it is but a poor naked
Lanck Assertion that stands by it self unproved, and so I leave it.

But as to what he adds, And if it be Questioned whether her Appointments do
indeed conduce to that end; of that she her self is to be Judge, her members
being no farther concerned therein than only before they obey her Impositions
to see that they be not repugnant to the known Laws of God.

I Answer, First let it be considered, that he grants a Judgment of discretion
to the people, antecedent to, and a ground of their Obedience to such Laws,
upon this I say it will follow, that if the members upon searching the
Scriptures, and praying to God for his Spirit to direct them, are left after
such a search under strong persuasions that the very making such Laws, and
appointing such Ceremonies, and binding them on the disciples necks, under the
penalties of Excommunication, is a mere usurpation, and that those Ceremonies
themselves are of such a low, carnal, beggarly consideration, extremely ill
suited to the manly State of the Church, and the Spirituality of a Gospel
worship. I say if upon these and other considerations they continue strongly
persuaded, that both the one, and the other, are thus repugnant to the Will and
Law of Christ, it will be the members duty in such a case to disobey. It will
not here be sufficient for you to say, but they are mistaken, there is no such
real repugnancy as they Imagine: For since you leave them to be Judges, whether
there is or is not, it is but equal that those you leave to be Judges, that
they should be left to act according to their judgments in such a case as this
is, which you yield to fall under their cognizance. And the truth is, if you
will not yield such a Liberty of judgment as this is, you must bid them put out
their eyes, and follow their Leaders in a blind Obedience, and in case their
Leaders be blind also you would there in direct them to an excellent expedient
how they may come all to fall into the Ditch.

He Infers again, Hence it will follow that the Church must be furnished with a
power, to end and determine controversies of Religion, that arise among its
membmers, that is to say, to give an Authoritative decision of them as that all
parties are bound to acquiesce in it, else she could not preserve her self in
peace and unity.

What you say here, may be differently understood, according to the nature of
the points about which the controversy is, if the matters of difference or
controversy be such as may be held by both sides, without any considerable
damage to either of their Solutions, then I grant (that if Church Governors
determine as the Apostle you confess page 1. does) that those differing
parties should remember each other as brethren, and Communicate with each other
as such, forbearing to censure each other, as being the Lords servants to whom
they must stand or fall, that the members ought to acquiesce in this their
determination.

But in case that Church Governors shall side with one party, and with them
shall (contrary to the said rule and practice of the Apostle) endeavor to
force by their determination, the other party to do and say as they do, or else
to excommunicate them; I say in this case, these Governors usurp an Authority
to themselves above and beyond what the Apostle had, or thought fit to
exercise. And Likewise that it is not the Duty of the party so Imposed upon, to
submit contrary to what they conceive to be the Will of God in that case. For
he that does or says any thing against his doubting Conscience, is in the same
Condition of Damnation, as he that doubts and eats, which the Apostle
Instanceth in. If the points of Controversy be about such matters where those
that hold on one side do Espouse such doctrines or ways of worship that are of
very dangerous Consequence to the Salvation to their Souls, (such are they that
are espoused by Arians, Socinians, Papists) I say In these instances, if Church
Governors determine on the right side, according to the plain Revelations of
Gods word in Scriptures; the Members are bound to acquiesce therein, but not
merely because of their determination, but because their determinations are
sounded on the Revelations of God, but in case the said Governors should,
contrary to the said Revelations, determine on the wrong side, that is to say,
for the Socinians, Arrians, Papists, I say then, the Members were not obliged
to acquiesce in these determinations, notwithstanding all the pretenses of
Unity and Peace that may be obtained thereby.

The Author being sensible that what he last said, if taken in the utmost
extent of its signification, would be dangerous, begins to limit his sense
thereof; and indeed it is but high time he should.

Here (says he) it may be taken notice, that this Power of ending
Controversies, which we ascribe to the Church; does not imply any Authority
over our Judgments, or that in virtue thereof she can oblige us to give an
inward assent to her determinations, any further than she gives us evidence for
the Truth of them; which is that extravagant Power the Church of Rome does
challenge to her self.

So far we are agreed; he adds, but our practices that she can oblige us to
submit so far to her definitions, as not to act any thing contrary to them:
this is absolutely necessary to prevent the over running of Heresies, and the
embroyling the Church in infinite quarrels and Controversies to the destruction
of the public Peace.

I answer, first by concession I grant according to this, here is good
Provision made for the Purity and Peace of the Church so long as the Governors
determine on the right side; But in case they determine on the wrong, it is
then so bad an expedient to prevent Heresies that I do not know a more
effectual tool, for the overspreading the Church with them than this is, for
in case they determine for Socinians, Arrians, Popery, you say that the Members
are obliged as to their practice though not as to their Judgments to Acquiesce
in the said determinations. I confess herein you have showed a great care of
preserving a Peace, but what a Peace is it? not a Peace of the Church of
Christ, but the Peace of a confederacy or conspiracy against the true Church of
Christ.

But if this were true, then in the times of the predominancy of Arianisme,
when some hundreds of Arian Bishops met in Council and determined wickedly
against the Deity of Christ, in that point to himself, and never to have
declared against that abomination, for fear of disturbing the Peace of the
Church; and as for Wickliffe, Husse, Hierome of Prague, and afterward Luther,
they were all Peace breakers, in declaring against the abominable opinions and
Antichristian Faith of the Church of Rome, they ought all of them to have kept
their Judgments to themselves, and so to have acquiesced in the determinations
of that wicked Church: Or when Jeroboam Apostatized and set up two Calves at
Dan and Bethel, and commanded the people there to Worship; they ought only to
have kept their judgments to themselves, but other wise to have conformed in
outward practice to the instituted Worship, which to say, is contrary to the
Judgment of God in that case who commended his 7000 in Israel that bowed not
the knee to Baal, the commendation was, that they neither conformed in
Judgment nor practice.

If it be said, that the Author only meant that such determinations only
obliged the practice, Negatively; that is to say, that the Members are thereby
bound not to practice any thing contrary to them.

Very good let that be his meaning, now I would fain know what are those acts
wherein Members may be said to practice contrary to such determinations? what
if they withdraw and refuse Communion with such a Church that holds to such
determinations; is this to be reputed a practicing any thing to the contrary?
if it be, then so did those 7000 Israelites and yet are commended for so doing:
if so to withdraw may not be thought to be an acting contrary, inasmuch as the
Peace may be kept notwithstanding such a withdrawing, then do you ill
(according to your own principles) to compel under penalties, all dissenters
to conform to you, since the Peace may be preserved notwithstanding their
Nonconformity and withdrawing.

But yet again, may a public declaration by word of Mouth or writing, be
judged an acting contrary to such determinations? I doubt not but you think it
so to be.

Then I demand, when the People of Israel met together at the trial by
Sacrifice, whether God or Baal was the true God, says Elisha to them, why halt
you betwixt Jehova and Baal? if God be God, follow him; if Baal, follow him.
Here the people were left to their choice, to conclude upon the Worshipping of
which God they were convinced to be the true God, by that trial. In conclusion,
the People being thoroughly convinced by a miracle that Jehova (and not Baal)
was the true God: They publicly by word of mouth declared Jehovah he is God,
Jehovah he is God. I ask, was this declaration an acting contrary to the
established Worship of the Land? if it was, then according to you, it was
unlawful and contrary to the Peace of that corrupt Church, for they ought to
have stood mute, and kept their Judgments to themselves for fear of disturbing
the Peace of Baals Worshipers.

Perhaps you will say this was an extraordinary case, for a miracle was here
wrought by a great Prophet, which gave a virtual warrant to the People for such
a declaration, though contrary to the Peace of the Church. I answer, the
immediate reason of this acclamation was the conviction of their judgments
that Jehovah was the only true God; the remote cause was the miracle wrought
by the Prophet, which was the cause of the conviction, so that the immediate
warrant for that acclamation, was their conviction; the remote warrant for it
was the miracle: now I ask you if there be the same degree, or a sufficient
degree of conviction in any other people, that this or that decision of
Governors of Churches be clearly against the mind of God, though the reason of
the conviction be not a miracle wrought in their presence, but a consideration
of what is evidently declared in the Bible, that in its time had the
confirmation of many miracles wrought by a greater than Elisha, even by the Son
of God; whether this conviction so wrought gives not as good and ample
Authority to either Ministers or People, to declare by Word of Mouth or Writing
against such decisions of Church Governors, which have determined evidently
against plain Revelations, as this People of Israel had for this their public
declaration? which if granted, then I say, there is no such obligation that
lies upon Church Members to acquiesce in the unrighteous decisions of Church
Governors, so as not to act or practice contrary there to, which you have
affirmed, and I have denied, and let the Reader judge which has the better
reason of his side for what either of us say, and thus have I answered to the
third Proposition.

His Fourth Proposition.

That we can have no just cause of withdrawing our Communion from the Church,
whereof we are Members, but when we cannot Communicate with it, without the
Commission of sin. In this Proposition he speaks of Christians as supposed to
be in actual Fellowship with some visible Church; by Church he understands
either some particular Worshipping Congregation, or a National Church, as for
this latter notion of a Church when he has showed us, that it was, or is the
will of Christ, that all the Christians in every Nation should after the manner
of the Jews, be united under the same visible Head of High Priest, and that the
great body of the Nation should meet by his command, at one place, as the Jews
at the Temple of Jerusalem for public Worship, then I confess he will have
some color for asserting of National Christian Churches, and of a National
Membership therein, but till then I shall take the boldness to deny that any
Christian is capable of any such National Church Membership.

But if he does here mean by Church a particular Worshipping Congregation, such
are the parochial Churches of England, and such are the Congregations of
Non-conformists, then we shall consider what he further says, which is this,
That no Christians can have just cause of withdrawing Communion from the Church
whereof they are Members, if we should understand it indifferently of
Non-conformists Churches as parochial, the meaning would be, that no Member
that either is joined to the one or the other, have just cause to withdraw
Communion from either of them, but when etc.

If you say that the parochial Churches are the true regular Churches, because
established by the Law of the Land; and all other are Schismatic: I answer,
this is sooner said than proved, for did the regularity or Schismaticalnesse of
a Church depend on such an external fickle consideration as the Law of the
Land, then might one and the same Church be Regular or Schismatical as often as
the wind of the Legislative power might chance to Change; so that an Act of
Parliament, that makes the Episcopal Churches regular to day, the very same
Churches by a change of an Act might be made Schismatical to morrow; and so if
the Legislative Power pleased, both Episcopal, Independent, Presbyterian,
Anabaptistical Churches may be regular and Schismatical in their turns.

Lastly, when you say no Communion may justly be with drawn from, but when it
cannot be continued without the Commission of sin, here again, I desire to know
whether by sin you mean such that may be evidenced to be such, to the
conviction of the imposers; or only such that is evidenced to the conviction of
the Consciences of those that withdraw? you cannot in reareason require the
first, except you will run y our selves upon these straits, either to turn
Papists, or undertake to convince the Papists, that the reason why you came off
from them and their Worship, was because you could not Communicate with them
therein without sin, we know you tell them so, and give yours reasons why you
say so, but notwithstanding all you say they are not convinced, but yet persist
to call you Schismatics. But what then? are you moved with their censure? no,
for if your reasons will not convince them: yet they satisfy your own
Consciences, and therein you rest, and so you may very reasonably do.

I desire now but the like equity for the Non-conformists, and that is, that if
they have reasons sufficient to convince their own Consciences, that the things
imposed are sinful though their reasons convince not their imposers, that you
would give them that liberty of Acquiescing therein, as you take in bearing up
your selves against the Censures of the Papists.

But yet further, What though the things Imposed be not clearly evidenced to
their own Consciences, but only so far as to leave them under strong
suspicions that they are sinful? it is sufficient to justify their
withdrawing; for what if the things Imposed on the Non-conformists were such as
they might as lawfully do or practice, as the Christian Jews might have eaten
of the once-forbidden meats? yet so long as their doubts remain, if they should
so practice they would sin, as the Jews would have done if they had eaten so
long as their scruple remained: And so that unquestionable Casuist, the
Apostle, determines in the case Romans 14, 14. For I know, and am persuaded by
the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean in it self, yet to him who thinks
any thing unclean, to him it is unclean. So again, He that doubts and eats
is Damned. And if it were not to light up Candles while the Sun shines, I would
tell you, that a mere suspicion of a sin, is a sufficient ground for
withdrawing Communion, in the Judgments of other very great men.

So says that universally admired man, Mr. Hales, of Schism, page 8. says he,
In these Schisms which concern Fact, nothing can be a just cause of refusing
Communion, but only to require the execution of some unlawful or suspected
Act. For not only in Reason, but in Religion too, that maxim admits of no
release. Cautissimi cujusque preceptum quod dubitas nefeceris, To load, says
he, our public Forms with private fantasies, (upon which we differ) is the
most Sovereign way to perpetuate Schism unto the Worlds end. Prayer,
Confession, Thanksgiving, Reading the Scriptures, in the plainest and simplest
manner, were matter enough to furnish out a sufficient Liturgy, though nothing
either of private opinion, or of Church Pomp, of Garments or prescribed
Gestures, of Imagery, of Music, or of many other Superfluities which creep
into the Church under the name of Order and Decency, did interpose it self. To
charge Churches and Liturgies with things unnecessary, was the first beginning
of all Superstition; and when scruple of Conscience began to be made, or
pretended, there Schism began to break in he goes on, If the spiritual Guides
of the Church would be a little spareing of incumbering Churches with
superfluities, etc. there would be far less Cause of Schism or Superstition,
and all the inconveniences were likely to ensue, would be but this, they should
in so doing yield a little to the imbecility of their Inferiors, a thing
which St. Paul would never have refused to do, Mean while I pray mark this,
wheresoever false or suspected opinions, are made a piece of Church Liturgy,
he that separates is not the Schismatic, for it is alike unlawful, to make a
profession of known or suspected falsehood, as to put in practice unlawful or
suspected actions,

And of this mind is Dr. Stilling fleet, a Person no whit inferior to the
other, whose words are these, in his Iren. p. 117.

Where any Church retaining purity of Doctrine, does require the owning of, and
conforming to, any unlawful or suspected practice, men may lawfully deny
Conformity to, and Communion with that Church in such things, without incurring
the guilt of Schism; which because I know it may meet with some opposition,
from those men who will sooner call men Schismatics than prove them so; I
shall offer this reason for it to consideration; if our separation from the
Church of Rome, was therefore lawful because she required unlawful things as
conditions of her Communion, then wherever such things are required of any
Church, Non-communion with that Church in those things, will be lawful too:
and where non-communion is Lawful, there can be no Schism in it.

If it be said here, that the Popes power was a usurpation, which is not in
Lawful Governors of Churches, it is soon replied, that the Popes usurpation,
mainly lies in imposing things upon men's Consciences as necessary, which are
doubtful or unlawful: And wherever the same thing is done, there is an
Usurpation of the same nature, though not in so high a degree; and it may be as
Lawful to withdraw Communion from one, as well as the other. If it be said,
that men are bound to be ruled by their Governors, in determining what things
are Lawful, and what not: To this it is Answered, first, No true Protestant
can swear blind obedience to Church Governors in all things: It is the highest
usurpation, to rob men of the Liberty of their Judgments. That which we plead
for against the Papists, is, that all men have their eyes in their heads as
well as the Pope, that every one has a Judicium privatae discretionis, which
is the rule of practice as to himself, and though we freely allow a Ministerial
power under Christ, in the Governors of the Church, yet that extends not to an
obligation upon men to go against the dictates of their own reason and
Conscience, etc. A man has not the power over his own understanding, much
less can others have it. Nullus credit aliquid esse verum quia vult credere id
esse verum, non est in potestate hominis facere aliquid apparere intellectui
suo verum quando volucrit. Either therefore men are bound to obey Church
Governors in all things, Absolutely, without Restriction or Limitation, (which
if it be not usurpation and dominion over others Faith in them, and the worst
of implicit Faith in others, it is hard to define what either of them is) or
else if they be bound to obey only in Lawful things, I then enquire, who must
be Judge what things are Lawful, and what not? if the Governors still, then
the power will be Absolute again, for to be sure whatever they command, they
will say is lawful, either in its self or as they Command it. If every private
person must judge what is Lawful, and what not, which is Commanded, (as when
all is said, every man will be his own Judge in this case, in things concerning
his own welfare) then he is no further bound to obey, than he Judges the thing
to be Lawful which is Commanded. The plea of an erroneous Conscience takes not
off the obligation to follow the dictates of it, for as he is bound to lay it
down, supposing it Erroneous, so he is bound not to go against it, while it is
not laid down.

These testimonies are so clear, and backed with such unanswerable reason, that
I shall now not scruple to qualify the proposition under consideration thus,
that where the commission of sin, (so says he, I add or the doing any thing
that is suspected to be sinful,) is required as the condition of Communion,
there a withdrawing is Lawful and not at all Schismatical.

Having thus given an account of these different scenes, in which both he and I
do understand the several parts of this proposition, I shall now come to
examine what he has said for the confirmation thereof,

There are (says he, p. 19.) but two cases wherein it can be Lawful to
withdraw Communion from a Church; one is, when the Church requires of us, as a
Condition of her Communion, an acknowledgment and profession of that to be
truth, which we know to be an error; the other is, when she requires of us the
joining with her in some Practice which we know to be against the Laws of God.

Though I will not be so confident to say with this Author that only in these
two cases it may be Lawful to withdraw Communion, for there may be a third and
a fourth, which neither he nor I may at present think of. Yet so far I agree
with him, that these two cases mentioned are just causes of withdrawing
Communion. But whereas he says, that the error must be known to be such, and
the practice known to be against the Law of God, to that I say, that knowledge
implies certainty. But I say if the errors and practices be but suspected, so
as the Conscience does but doubt, it is sufficient: as I have proved from the
Apostle, and the testimonies and reasons of Mr. Hales, and Dr. Stillingsleet.
This being premised, I shall now proceed to a Consideration of those grounds
which he supposes Non-conformists plead as sufficient causes of their
separation, as they are Enumerated and Affirmed by him to be insufficient.

First, he says, Unscriptural impositions can be no sufficient cause to
warrant a Separation from a Church.

Answer, By unscriptural impositions (he supposes as he tells us) is meant, no
more than what is neither commanded nor forbid in Scriptures, neither by
Particular or General Rules. Thus when he has by a false supposition fashioned
and erected a man of Straw, he then pushes him quite down with the horns of a
Dilemma, and Fancyes to himself a great victory, for from that supposition he
thus argues, Those unscriptural impositions which are neither commanded nor
forbid, by any general or particular rules in Scripture, are eitherin
themselves Lawful or unlawful, if unlawful, then they are against some
Particular or General scriptural rule, and so cannot fall under the notion of
unscriptural Impositions, which are supposed to be against neither of these
Rules, if lawful, then it cannot be imagined how their being commanded, can
make them unlawful, so that in this case there is no sin in yiedling
obedience, and consequently no just cause of withdrawing our Communion. This is
the strength of what he has said to this first case.

My Answer is this, I wonder which of his dissenters gave him ground to suppose
that ever any of them took unscriptural Impositions, for such things that were
neither Commanded nor Forbid, by any General or Special Rule in Scripture; if
thus you care not upon what Sandy premises you build your Conclusion, who can
help it?

But I pray be pleased to let me tell you what we our selves mean, by
unscriptural Impositions.

They are such things, the religious use whereof is imposed upon Christians, in
the Worship and Service of God, under the penalties of depriving Ministers of
their office, or the exercise thereof, and of depriving both them and private
Christians of the liberty of enjoying Gospel Ordinances or the Privileges of
a Visible Church state, by the censure of excommunication, which are things
that are not either Commanded, or directly Forbidden in Scripture, in any
express terms; for we confess that there is not the word Surplice, or sign of
the Cross, etc. so much as named in Scripture, and upon this account, we allow
them the name of unscriptural. But we say moreover, that the religious use of
these things in the Worship of God, and much more the impositions of them as
necessary Conditions of Communion, are against General Rules, and Instances in
the like kind dis-allowed in Scripture, from whence we by deduction gather the
unlawfulness, and sinfulness thereof, and upon this latter consideration, I
call them antiscriptural, as being religious Customs and Usages contrary to
these General rules, etc.

Thus having given you our true sense and meaning, of unscriptural Ceremonies,
now I answer to your dilemma.

Either you say, these things thus imposed are in themselves lawful or
unlawful.

I answer, Your argument as you form it, is trivial and not to the purpose; for
it speaks not to the Question under Consideration, for the Question is not
about the nature of the things imposed, taken Absolutely; but about the
Religious use of those things in the worship and service of God. Thus then your
argument ought to proceed: Either the religious use of these things imposed in
the Worship and Service of God, is lawful or unlawful.

I answer Now directly, the Religious use of them is unlawful, and this
antecedently to the imposing of them, and therefore the imposing of them cannot
make them lawful.

Here had been a fit place for you to have shown your strength, (if you had
any) in Convincing us, that the Religious use of these things in Gods Worship,
is Lawful antecedently to the Imposition. But we have not a word hereof, and
therefore since I find no more opposition therein, I might justly dismiss this
first thing without any further Reply.

Yet if any shall ask for what reason is it, that we say that such a use of
them is unlawful? I answer, our reasons are ready, and they are such that do
at least Convince our Consciences so far as to doubt and really suspect their
use to be unlawful; Which is sufficient to make their imposition a warrantable
ground of withdrawing (though the Evidence thereof be not so great, as to
Convince our Gainsayers; no nor possibly to demonstrate fully the unlawfulness
thereof to our own Consciences) as has been already proved. If I be yet urged
to show our reasons of this our persuasion or supposition; Methinks it were
reason enough if I only told such, that these things imposed, are only the
productions of a humane spirit, and are beholding for their Continuance in
being, to the Traditions of men; and so hold in no respect of Christ the head,
which is sufficient, not only in my opinion, but in the judgment of the Apostle
Paul, to give members of Churches Caution against the reception of them, Col.
2.8. Beware lest any man make a prey of you through Philosophy, and vain
deceit, after the Traditions of men, after the Rudiments of the World, and not
after Christ. Whoever pleases to see an excellent paraphrase upon this verse,
let him read it in Mr. John Dale in his exposition on this Epistle, which has
the Imprimatur Tho. Tomkins Ex Aed. Lambeth, and therefore I hope the testimony
of this excellent person may obtain some repute; his words are these,

The Scriptures calls those doctrines, Traditions of men, which have men only
for their Authors; which come from men, and not form God, these with the
errors of Philosophy, of which the Apostle speaks immediately before, may bear
the same name, since they both flowed from the spirit of men, and had no other
source but this imagination. A little after he says, Whence it does appear,
that no productions of an humane spirit, are receivable in Evangelicall
Religion, neither those that are supposed by some pretended reasons, nor those
that are sounded upon Use and Antiquity; they are all of them nothing but solly
and vanity in the sight of God, with what Color soever they be painted over;
And though men boast of their utility, they are extremely hurtful, as
pestering Consciences, and busying them about things which God has not
ordained, and turning them aside from his pure service to matters of naught.

Accordingly you see that our Lord Jesus Christ rejects, and roughly thrusts
away all the Traditions of the Pharisees, how much esteemed soever they were
for their Antiquity and pretended Use: reproaching them that by holding fast
those Traditions of Men, they did let loose the Commandments of God. Applying
to them those words of the Lord in Isaiah, In vain do they Honor me, teaching
for doctrines the Traditions of men. As indeed it is an unsufferable
presumption, that men should attempt to prescribe the form of Gods service,
especially after the declaration which himself has vouchsafed to make of his
holy will, nor is there one among men that would endure his servant should
treat him in that manner, and instead of obeying his Orders, and causing others
to dispatch them; fall a Philosophising in his house, and giving his Family a
new Rule to observe, as if he were wiser than his Master. I know well the
Authors of these Traditions, and those that follow them, are not without fine
reasons, to palliate their temerity; but it is Evident that they do the very
same for Substance, Neither is it to be doubted, but a Servant that should be
culpable of such a vanity, would allege likewise his motive and designs, to
any that would give them audience. But Common sense dictateth to the meanest
capacities, that such undertaking Spirits, merit not so much as to be heard,
especially where God is concerned, in Comparison of whom, they with all their
sufficiency are but poor worms of the Earth. Hold we firm therefore this
Foundation of the Apostle, that the Traditions of men ought to have no place in
Religion, it concerns me not to inform my self of their age whether they be the
Traditions of Men Ancient or Modern, it suffices that I know they are
Traditions of men, having the Apostles advertisement we should not be moved
with any reason, or splendour, or antiquity they may come clothed with; if you
would have me receive them, show me that they are prescriptions of Gods,
institutions of his Christ, Doctrines of his Scriptures; without this, However
specious you make them appear to me, I shall never believe it; it is but to
make a prey of me, and your diligence shall have no effect but the making me
suspect them so much the more.

Thus far you have had the Judgment of as great Divines as the Church in this
last age has produced, and who ever thinks there is not reason enough in this
discourse to give Foundation sufficient to tender Consciences, at least to
suspect, if not to be confident of the unlawfulness, of the Religious use of
these things in the service of God: I know not what such will yield to be
sufficient, nor would I wish such any greater punishment for their being
otherwise minded, than that they were obliged to give a more rational account
of this verse of the Apostle; and likewise to enervate the force of this
Authors reason here produced.

In confess such is the vanity of man's mind, that whilst he either not at all,
or very negligently has regard to that Jealousy that God has over his
Worship; (as is frequently taken notice of in Scriptures) is apt to think of
these fictitious Ceremonies of Worship as very indifferent and harmless
matters; for who could of a sudden think there is any good ground of making
such a business about a Surplice, and the sign of a Cross in Baptism, etc. as
is made among us? nor is it matter of much wonder to me, to see some well
meaning Men, yea, and in other things Wise and Learned, when they hear of the
plausible pretexts for their institution, to be persuaded into a conceit of
their usefulness: and why not? when I find Nathan in a like case highly
deceived, 2 Samuel 7.8. When David acquainted him with his purpose to build a
house for God, says Nathan go, and do all that is in thy Heart, for the Lord
is with thee: here was a well meant proposal, and a very sudden and rash
answer, as appears by that sudden check that the Lord that very night put to
it, v. 4. and it came to pass that night that the Word of the Lord came to
Nathan the Prophet, saying, go and tell my Servant David, saying, Shall thou
build me an House for me to dwell in? again, v. 7. Speak I a word with any of
the Tribes of Israel, whom I commanded to feed my People Israel, saying why
build ye not me an house of Cedar? it is evident from hence that though both
David and Nathans meaning were good, yet the work designed by the one, and
approved by the other; had it been set upon and finished, had been evil,
because there was no word of the Lord to warrant it, which is employed in the
answer, God makes. That we are not singular in giving this Interpretation, see
Pools Synopsis Critic. on the place, thus, vade, fac. hoc dicit sensu humano
erravit Nathan, quia Deum non consuluit, mirum est sum ita temere pronunciare,
quia Dominus tecum est] est Paralogismus a secundum quid and Simpliciter. Ver.
4. In illa nocte,] Deus non patitur suos diu decipi cum videat eos Simpliciter
errare. v. 5. Numquid tu aedificabis?] qu. cur David retrahitur and Judaei in
Hag. 1. Arguuntur quod non aedificent? Respond. quod David non haberet verbum
Domini, Judaei autem haberent. cui praecepi ut pasceret populum,] voluntas
Davidis bona fuit, and placuit Deo, sed in eo erravit quod non haberet verbum
Dei, a quo expectare debuit, and Locum, and tempus, and peculiare mandatum. The
sum of the whole is this David's will was good, but to have done the thing
willed, had been evil; because there was no command from God for doing it: the
case here is much alike peradventure the will of those that first invented the
religious use of these things might be good, and yet the use of them might be
bad; for the very same reason because they want the word of the Lord for their
warrant.

Thus have I given you some further account, why at least we suspect the
Religious use of these things in Gods Service to be unlawful, antecedent to any
imposition. If you will still call for more of our reasons, I tell you they are
ready, and you should have them, but that I fear the swelling of the book
beyond the ordinary readers patience and purse: but I wonder what you can say
that amounts to as good reason for their lawfulness, as has been already given
against their lawfulness. As for that text so commonly monly urged, let all
things be done in decency and order, it will do you little Service in such like
cases as we have instanced in, for the Apostle does there speak of such a
decency and order, that does arise from the Nature of things, and not of such
that have their result only from the arbitrarious Fancies of Men, of the
former kind of order and decency the God of Nature is the Author, of the other
man's imagination; for the undecency and disorder there reproved, is such as
speaking in a strange Tongue to the Church met together for edification, which
sometimes none understood but him that spoke, or else paradventure the speaking
of more than one at one time, which could not but breed confusion or be
unprofitable, or such as consisted in some Women's forwardness to teach and
instruct the Church, which consisted much of men, which was contrary to that
order where in God had placed that Sex in Subjection to men, and therefore were
very unmeet to be employed as their instructors. But what is there in these
Ceremonies, or in the Nature of them, abstracted from man's imagination, that
has any thing of this natural order and decency, for whether you think it or
not: yet certainly, it is a very disorderly thing for a Minister to speak a
Sermon of Greek or Latin, to a Church that only understand English; or for
many to be speaking together, but lay aside Imagination and I wonder what
indecency is in praying without a Surplice or Administering Baptism without the
sign of the Cross?

So that it is evident these Ceremonies fell not under that kind of order and
decency of which the Apostle speaks, and therefore there is no warrant from
that text for their Institution or their use.

In Truth their pretended decency, is much like that decency that David
imagined, which was the reason of his contriving for God a house, thus he
reasoned; shall I dwell in a house of Cedar, and is it decent or comely that
the Ark of God should dwell within Curtains? one would have thought his reason
from decency was good, but as you have heard God answered his reason and
reproved his humane Judgment therein, so that an argument from decency in such
matters is very falacious: yet again, I have seen some men arguing thus, if it
be not lawful to use things religiously in the service of God without a warrant
from the Word, why then do we Religiously make use of Churches to meet in,
Pulpits to Preach in, Communion Table to eat the Lords Supper on? are not all
these things Religiously used in the Worship of God, or have we an express
word for them? Or why do we admit of the dividing of the Bible into Chapters,
and the addition of the Contents, and dividing the Chapters into Verses? or why
do we admit of the turning David's Psalms into Meeter, and singing them in such
Tunes that are made for them, have we any express word for these?

I answer, as to the use of Churches, Pulpits, Tables, I confess they are used
as convenient circumstances of the Worship of God, but then I say, their
convenience arises from the Nature of the Acts of worship, and a natural
necessity of such kind of things for the performance of these Acts of worship
conveniently, and are not the results of mere phantasy and imagination; for
certainly it is more than a phantasy to say, it is convenient that when the
worshippers meet together for worship, they should have a capacious house to
meet in, to shelter them from the injuries of the weather, or it is more than
bare fancy to say, its convenient that the Preacher should stand above the
people, both to ease him of the inconveniency of the crowd, and that he may be
better heard, and so it may be said of the Table, how can the Lords supper be
conveniently administered without a Table to put the Bread and the Wine upon?
but as for your Ceremonies, there is no necessity at all of them, but they are
the only births of an Arbitrarious vain Imagination, for the ordinances may be
well enough administered without them.

Besides I answer, that these things now named are used as circumstances
convenient, and in some sort naturally necessary to the Acts of worship, yet I
deny, that ever when they are so used, that they ought to be Religiously used;
a thing is then Religiously used, not barely when I use it in worship, (for so
I use my Cloak and band in worship which yet I used not Religiously) but to use
a thing in worship religiously, is when I use it for religious ends, as to the
pleasing of God, and the edifying of my self and others in religious matters,
now when we meet in a Church, or stand in a Pulpit, or cat the Lords Supper on
the Table, we do not think that there is any thing in those places that render
us or our worship any whit the more pleasing to God; for if we met on a
Mountain, or on a Sea shore, and taught out of a boat, or in case of necessity
by reason of persecution, did eat the Lords Supper upon the grass, provided we
did all in Spirit and Truth, our services were every whit as acceptable as in,
from, or on the other places; and it is a mere Idle superstitious conceit to
think otherwise: but now as for these Ceremonies, either you think to please
God by them and edifye the Church, or you do not; if you do, then you fall
under the like reproof of God to David, when did god bid you do such things? or
when did he tell you that then he was pleased with them? if not, they are
altogether impertinent and useless, for as I have showed they arise not out of
the Nature of things, but merely out of phantasy and therefore ought to be let
alone, for assuredly man does not, much less does God care to be trifled with,
in matters of Worship; as to the other things instanced in, as dividing the
Scriptures into Chapters, and giving the Contents thereof, to that I say though
there is not a particular express command for it, yet there is a general
command to those that are Ministers of Christ to explain the whole Council of
God to his people, and such addition now named, with the giving of the Contents
of each part, any Minister of the Gospel has a warrant to do by virtue of the
said general command given to Ministers; and upon this account those that did
divide them, did well and warrantably, for it is one of the commanded works of
Ministers, to divide the Word aright.

As for the digesting the Chapters into verses, the direct and immediate design
thereof was only to help the Memory, nor do those that read Scriptures make
any other use of them; I never understood that any used those figures with any
conceit, as if they pleased God more with reading the Word with them, than they
should do if they read it without them, or as if they thought they were any
direct helps to their Faith or devotion; and as for Singing Psalms, there is a
Word that gives Foundation to that Ordinance, as there is none for humane
Ceremonies, and as for the Melody that there is made, that likewise has its
Foundation in the word; so then there is nothing done by digesting David's words
into Meeter, but only a putting them into a posture fit for to be sung, which
the Nature of that duty makes necessary, and therefore gives warrant thereto.
But as for the Ceremonies contended for, They have no such original, but as I
have said only depend upon men's imagination, for there is nothing in any Act of
worship that needs or calls for them.

Having thus shown you some of those grounds we have to suspect the lawfulness
of the things imposed, and likewise laid naked the weakness of some of your
reasons from which you think them lawful, before I conclude my answer to this
first part of your charge against us; a little to try the force of your
consequence: let us therefore for once suppose that the things imposed were
such that might be lawfully used, for Religious ends, in the worship of God;
what then? you say it then follows that they do not become unlawful because
imposed.

I Answer, first by concession it is true, were they lawful to be done, I
cannot say that the command would alter the nature of these things to make them
unlawful, but yet I say, this will not excuse the imposer, nor him that obeys
the imposition, from sin; not the imposer, for he usurps a power over another
Lords Servants, in things that do not concern him: and secondly, if the imposer
injoyns those little and suppose lawful things under severe penalties, such as
deprivation, excommunication, banishment, etc. in the one he sins as a usurper
of Christ's Authority, in the other as cruel; nor is he that obeys the
imposisition, Innocent; but I do not lay his guilt upon doing the thing
supposed lawful, but inasmuch as by his obedience thereto he does seem to own
such an usurpation, and to acknowledge the imposer his Master in such matters,
wherein Christ only is his Lord; and upon this account I say, he sins, inasmuch
as he transgresses that Command of Christ, Let no man be called Master or
Father, that is let none be owned as your Master or Father, in these matters of
Faith and Worship, for in such matters ye have but one Master even Christ,
Math. 23.8.10. Thus I have said what I conceive is a sufficient answer to your
first charge when you say, that our separation upon the account of unscriptural
Ceremonies imposed, is not sufficient to excuse us from Schism.

Secondly he says, That the Church requiring from us any doubtful or suspected
practices, as Conditions of her Communion, is not a just cause of Separation.

I have proved the falsehood of this Proposition already, from the testimonies
of the Apostle Paul, who is a far bettter Casuist than the Author, who has
declared that Christians are under the Obligations of obeying the dictates of
their Consciences, or not acting contrary thereto though their Consciences be
under a mistake. And besides I have given you in the testimony of Mr. Hales,
and the reasons of Dr. Stillingfleet against this position of the Author,
which I think will be long enough before he solidly answer.

But because the Author of this Proposition does essay to give a reason of
what he here asserts, I shall not be so uncivil as not to take notice thereof,
but will return him a fair answer.

That is no just cause (says he) for we must at least have as much certainty
of the unlawfulness of the Action enjoined, as we have of our Obligation to
the Authority that enjoynes them, before we withdraw our obedience to it;
otherwise we do not proceed upon safe grounds: but now we are absolutely
certain that God has commanded us to obey them that have the rule over us, but
we are not certain that the Actions we here speak of, are any where forbid by
him, for if they were they would be no longer doubtful or suspected, they would
be certain sins; so that if we will follow the surer side, as all Christians in
these cases are bound to do, we must continue our obedience to the Church,
notwithstanding we suspect or doubt of the lawfulness of her commands, Thus far
he --

I answer, this Argument (notwithstanding the prittiness of its contrivance is
certainly falatious; for ex vero nihil sequi potest nisi verum, for the rule
there laid down of always obeying the Church Rulers, where the Conscience is in
doubt, is in many instances a ready way to involve many a weak Conscience in
damnable guilt. For suppose there had been many a doubtful Conscience among the
Israelites in Ahabs time, as it seems there were, who halted betwixt the
Worship of Jehovah and Baal; suppose yet a little further, that the
Consciences thus doubting were rather inclined to believe Jehovah the true God,
and Baal but an Idol, but yet were not absolutely certain; what say you now?
what Council would you have given such an one, if he had asked your advice? do
but look how ill-favouredly such an answer as this would seem; true might you
say, according to your rule, I do believe that Jehovah is the only true God,
and Baal but a Devil, and that your worshipping a Devil is a damnable sin; but
as for you, you are not so certain hereof as I am, yet your Conscience is
inclined to believe as I do; my advice therefore is this, that since your
Rulers have commanded you to worship that Devil, I Counsel you so to do, till
your Conscience be better resolved; and why? because you are certain God has
commanded you to obey your rulers, but you are not yet so certain that Baal is
a Devil; I dare say you abhor such a resolution of the case, and yet I see not
but you must be forced to give no better, if you follow the rule laid down in
this argument; I might instance in other like cases, as if a Jew in the days
of Messiahs being in the Flesh, had been inclined to believe in him as the
Messiah, but yet was not so absolutely certain thereof, as he was of this
command, thou shall obey the Rulers of thy people; according to you, he must go
against the inclination of his doubting, Conscience in disowning and rejecting
Christ that he might yield obedience to his Rulers, who command, him so to do;
in like manner, if a poor man were inclined to believe the Mass Idolatry, he
must go on in that sin against his doubting Conscience till he comes to be as
certain it is Idolatry, as he is that God has commanded us to obey our Rulers.

From what has been said, it is evident there is a fallacy in your Argument;
and now to show you where it lies, give me leave to tell you, it lies in your
arguing from particulars to an Universal, vel a dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter. That because I am sure that God has Commanded me to obey my
rulers in some things, therefore I am sure that God has Commanded me to obey my
Rulers in every thing, yea, in such things which I suspect to be sin: Do but
you make this Evident, that in that very Command which I suspect to be sinful,
that I may be sure that God has Commanded me to obey, and then I will give up
the Cause. But this you can never do, for upon those very arguments, upon which
I suspect the sinfulness of the Command, upon the same Arguments I suspect
whether God has given them Authority to Command, or whether God would have me
to obey; for I can never be sure, that God has Commanded me to obey my Rulers
in such instances where I suspect my Rulers Command me to sin. So that, whereas
your Argument supposes that a Doubting conscience may be more certain that God
has Commanded him to obey his Rulers, than he is of the thing he doubts; and
so he is therefore to take the surer side, and so to obey his Rulers against
his Conscience. I have made the contrary appear, by showing that a man can
never be sure that God has Commanded him to obey his Rulers in such cases
where he suspects they Command him to sin. So that in obeying them he does not
take the surer side. Thus is the strength of this Argument, and so the strength
of his second (Charged upon the Nonconformists) broken, wherein he has been
endeavoring to prove, they have no just Cause of Separation, though it be upon
the account of avoiding what they suspect to be sinful which is made the
Condition of Communion.

Thirdly, says he, Neither can it be true that Errors in a Church, as to
matter of Doctrines; or Corruptions, as to matter of Practice, (so long as
these Errors and Corruptions are only suffered, but not imposed) can be a
sufficient Cause of Separation: The reason is, because the things are not sin
in us, so long as we do not join with the Church in them.

I Answer, First, I would fain know what kind of Errors of Doctrines, or
Corruptions of Practice, you do here mean? for they are of diverse sorts and
kinds, and accordingly what you here say may be either True or False.

If by Errors of Doctrine you mean, such that are consistent with the holding
of Christ the head, or such that touch not upon the Fundamentals of the
Christian Doctrine; some such were those in the Apostles days, that related to
the Abstaining from meats, and observation of days; in such cases doubtless
Christians ought without imposing to bear with one another, and to continue
Communion with each other, notwithstanding such differences, which was the
Apostles counsel in that case; in this sense, what you say is true. Or if by
Corruptions in Practice, you should mean such infirmities, that all Members of
Churches are subject to more or less, (for who can say, that he is without
sin?) in this sense you are right; or if you mean by errors and Corruptions,
such that are of a more Gross, and Heinous nature, which are not publicly
known, or of which the Members cannot have sufficient proof, for the conviction
of themselves, that those that are accused are really guilty, so also I grant
what is here said; for till it be evident by some overt Act, that Judas has a
Devil, and is a Traitor; he ought to be looked on as an Apostle, and might be
heard.

In like manner, if the Governors of the Church, were with many of the
Members, Arrians or Socinians in their judgments; but not known evidently to be
such, it may be the Duty of sound Christians not to withdraw Communion from
them.

But if it shall so fall out, that the Governors of a Church, and a great body
of the People be so erroneous, and this sufficiently known, and though
reproved, yet they abide obstinate maintainers thereof; I say in this Case it
is sufficient ground for sound Members to withdraw, and save themselves from so
dangerous a Society: and why? because I may not lawfully join with such a
Church, where possibly I may, every time I join the Lord Christ and the Holy
Ghost, Blaspheme; whose Deity is denied by these Sects: nor may I join, lest I
endanger my Faith; for evil words do not only Corrupt good manners, but have a
direct tendency to corrupt a sound Faith; and certainly the safety of a Soul is
of greater worth, than the preservation of a Corrupt Peace, or Unity of a
Corrupt Church.

And what I have said upon a supposition of such gross errors in the Rulers,
and many of the people of a Church; the same may be said of either Idolaters,
or grossly profane practices; for if Ministers, or many of the Members, should
degenerate to a Popish Idolatry; or should prove Common Drunkards, or
Whore-mongers, or Opposers, etc. and being admonished thereof, should deride
the admonition as Precise, and fanatical: or if the Members only were Commonly
so, and the Rulers wittingly Connive thereat, and seek not their Cure, by
Reproofs and Censures, as Christ has commanded in such cases; I say again, it
is a sufficient ground for the sound Members to withdraw (especially if a more
pure Church may be had) yea though neither these errors or practices are
imposed; and that first, lest under the pretense of Peace, they should be
guilty of the greatest uncharitableness, and that is, the hardening and
encouraging, them in their abominable Impieties. Again, because the sound
ought, by the law of God and Nature, to provide for their own safety. Certainly
if there be a Contagion in evil words to corrupt good manners, there is much
more in wicked Practices; and therefore they cannot but be in apparent danger
by Communicating with such, and certainly in so doing, there is nothing done
contrary to the Fundamental reason of Christ's Instituting discipline in his
Church, which as I conceive was for the Cure of the unsound, and for the
preservation of the sound, from the infection of the unsound: Now if no care be
taken for the cure of the same, but that infectious Crew is kept in the Church
to the palpable endangering of the sound, it is apparent that the Foundations
of discipline are rooted up, and in effect there is no discipline at all, and
that therefore every good Christian may seek his safety as he can, since he
cannot obtain it in a Church by the means of the Gospel Discipline, which
through the Corruption of the Rulers, and the swaying part of the Corrupt
Members is made void.

But no more of this till by and by, when I shall have a fresh occasion to
speak further to this point.

At present let us again return to inquire into a full sense of his Proposition
if by any means we can find it out.

You say in general terms, without any Limitation, that errors in Doctrine,
and Corruptions in practice, when found in a Church, but not imposed, is no
just ground of separation.

I Answer, Methinks by this general way of Expressing your self, that you are
not afraid of your Readers understanding this Proposition without any
Limitation.

I pray tell me, what if Socinian or Popish Errors and Corrupt practices, were
got into the Rulers of a Church, and a great body of the People, and that they
should only tolerate them, but not impose them on any, what hinders (if what
you here say be true) but that every sound Christian may, yea and ought to
Communicate with such a Church? especially if Providence had cast him into such
a place; where no other could be had: so that one of a Protestant Faith, might
lawfully join with a Popish Church, not only in hearing their Friars Preach,
but likewise in receiving the Mass of them; provided they would (...) him to
profess their Errors, or to Practice the Super^ (...) Idolatry in the Mass: but
permit him to receive it in both (...) in his own sense, though he knows the
Priest delivers (...) the rest of the Communicants receive it in the Popish
sense

I would not be so unmerciful to charge you as holding this, but this I say,
that so much seems to follow Clearly from this your Position, if taken without
any Limitation; and I can discern none in this Paragraph.

If you say, that there is enough said by you, page 22. concerning the Popish
Church, to clear you in this particular: I Answer, It is true, you say there,
that the great and general Corruption of the Church of Rome, both in Doctrine
and Practice, does endanger the Salvation of such as Communicate with her; and
that therefore a total separation from her, and an erection of new Churches
may be Lawful.

I say notwithstanding all this, yet I doubt whether you there mean, that her
Errors and Corruptions in themselves, or of their own nature do so far endanger
men's Salvation, that though they were not imposed, yet we were bound to a
total separation: or do you mean, they therefore so endanger our Salvation
because imposed, as to warrant such a separation.

If your Proposition there, may be understood in the sormer sense; then what
you say here (taken universally) must needs be false; for if the very being of
some sorts of Errors and Corruptions in a Church, (though not imposed) are so
dangerous as to warrant a separation; how can it then be universally true (as
you seem here to assert) that Errors in Doctrine, and Corruptions in Practice,
(so long as they are only suffered, but not imposed) cannot be a sufficient
Cause of separation? but if you are there to be understood in the latter sense,
that is to say, that the Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome, only as
imposed are so dangerous to men's salvation, as to warrant a separation; then
that which I even now suggested is true; that Christians may Lawfully here be
Baptized, go to Mass with the Church of Rome: Provided they were not forced to
make a Profession of believing their Errors, or had leave to receive those
Sacraments with all the Superstitions thereto belonging, in their own sense;
though it was well known, that they administered them in an other. I will not at
present (as aforesaid) charge this opinion upon the Author: though it seems to
be a consequence rightly inferred from this, and other principles of his in
this discourse, because he says page 31. A man may believe a proposition, and
not believe all that follows from it; So that at no hand are we to charge such
Consequences upon him, unless he does explicitly own them, but whether you will
explicitly own them or no, I am not certain: Yet this I know, that I have heard
a Minister of the Church of England, not scruple to profess that he would, for
Peace sake, use all the Popish Ceremonies of Cream and Spittle in Baptism, as
well as the sign of the Cross, provided his Rulers did impose them, but so as
that he was left to his liberty, is not to use them to the Popish Superstitious
ends: But why such an one may not upon the same pretense of peace, practice
most, if not all of the Ceremonies and Gestures pertaining to the Mass;
granting him the liberty of a mental abstraction of them, from their
Superstitious and Idolatrous ones, I cannot yet understand; and what wonder is
it, if there be of such persuasions among you, when it is evident, that there
are not a few of your Church, whose Ambition it seems to be, to run as nigh to
the Romish Rights, as they may be suffered; not only in adoring, by bowing of
the knee in the act of receiving of the Supper; but in erecting the Communion
Table in the form of an Altar; and not only in bowing toward it, but being
ready to kiss the very steps that lead up to it. But if this were your mind, I
can prove the contrary.

But I know he will say, all this is nothing to our present case, for there are
no such errors or idolatrous Practices in the Church of England, and therefore
cannot be pleaded as a cause of our separation.

I Answer, It is very difficult to know what the Church of England is; and how
they shall we be able to understand what are the Truths or Errors she
maintains, or what are her Practices?

If you should take it to consist of all the Christians in England, whether
Ministers or People, so the Church of England would Comprehend all
Non-conformists Churches as well as others.

If you take it for such Christians only who are of the Faith in Doctrinals
with those that hold with the 39. Articles; here the Non-conformists come in
for a share also, who are of your Faith therein: excepting those which respect
Discipline and Ceremonies. But if you will take in, and own such Christians in
England to be only of your Church, that agree with you in Ceremonies, and a
certain form of Service and Discipline which Christ never Commanded, and
without which many of Christ's Churches have and do subsist and flourish, to say
no more, I wonder then, by what Gospel Rule you presume to constitute a Church
only of such, as exclusive of all others, however sound in Faith and
unblameable in life.

Or shall we take your Church only to consist of its officers; how shall we
then Judge of your Faith, and Doctrinals? when so many of your Ministers are so
contrary one to another. Some are for the doctrine of Predestination, and
others against it: some are for Justification by Imputed righteousness, others
not: some for a difference betwixt Grace and Morality, others oppose it: Some
for the divine right of Episcopacy, others that the Magistrate may appoint what
form of government he pleases: in a word, some write or approve of such a book,
that others of you think (as I have heard) fit to be burnt. Which of these
shall we understand to be your Church?

If those only, that meet by authority, in your Consistory, to advise of what
is fit for the rest to believe and Practice; What then becomes of the Church,
when that Consistory is dissolved and sent home.

But what if a Consistory concludes of the 39. Articles, and the Preachers when
all is done preach the quite contrary in several weighty points (As it is
conceived many of yours do) and these are not only tolerated but encouraged by
preferments, and consequently owned by your selves? but you have a salve for
all this, for you tell us, let some (and why not many or most?) preach
Doctrines contrary thereto, yet your Church is very sound in Doctrine so long
as the XXXIX. Articles remain to be her Doctrine. But I wonder how these
Articles may be called your Doctrines, if but for fear, your Ministers or
People shall believe them, according to the true intent and meaning of the
Compilers.

But in the mean time, what a sad Condition must the poor People be in, when
such corrupt Teachers shall be imposed on them, if they are bound (for fear of
Schism) to sit under their corrupt Doctrines to the endangering of their
Faith, and consequently of their Salvation, yea though they be errors contrary
to the Doctrine of your own Church.

If you say, the people have liberty (in this case) of complaining.

I Answer, but to what purpose? when such errors are publicly professed in
Printed Books, and no course taken for the correcting or ejecting of the
Authors, which shall hold their places with encouragements?

If you say they may then withdraw, and join with other Pastors, provided they
be of the same Church of England.

I Answer then, what is become of your propositions, that errors only
tolerated, are no just ground for separation?

If you say, they may be just ground of separation from a particular
Congregation, but not from a National Church.

I Answer, but what if the whole National Church should beguilty of the same or
like errors: what, is it a just ground Then to withdraw? if you say no, I
demand for what reason? I can not think of any, except these two: that to
separate from a Particular, so we join with another of the same National
Church, does not run us upon the same danger, as if we separated from the
whole; for the latter leaves us destitute of all public advantages to our
selves, which the other does not. Beside, the public honoring of God in his
Worship, which is every Christians Duty, would be neglected.

My further reply is this, that if the honoring of God in public, and my
Souls safety, are the only reasons that are to sway in this matter, then in the
pertaking with Churches, though Non-conformists, where both these may be
obtained, the separation will be lawful, and consequently it will be lawful to
separate from a Church upon the only cause of its having corrupt Doctrines in
it tolerated, though not imposed. If you say there is a law of the Land that
makes it unlawful to join with a Church separate from the National:

I answer, then the question will be only this; whether the Law of a Land, or
the security of my Faith (and consequently my Salvation) ought more to be
regarded? which I think is very easy to determine.

From what has been said, it is evident, that some sort of errors in a Church,
though but tolerated, may be a just ground of withdrawing; though I do not
charge the Church of England with any such errors, nor had I ground, provided
her Ministers did honestly believe those Articles that they have professed to
believe; which (as is conceived) several of them do not. So that what as to
this point I have said, is pleadable only by such private Christians whose lot
it is to fall under the Teaching of such Conformists, who are such
Non-conformists to the Doctrines of the Church of England, as that they dare
deride some sober Christians under the notion of being acquainted with the
Person of Christ, or that dare Teach there is no difference betwixt Grace and
Morality; or that there is no special Grace exerted in the conversion of a
sinner, or that the Holy Ghost is of no further use in the Conversion of men,
than as he first inspired those that delivered the Doctrine of Christianity in
Scriptures, and enabled such to confirm the Truth of it with Miracles, so that
men are left in the working out of their Salvation, to their Bibles and the use
of their natural Faculties, exclusive of any other operation of the Spirit;
either to their illumination or sanctification. I say, if the People withdraw
from such Teachers or Congregations, where such Doctrines are owned, for
securing their Faith or Salvation, there so doing is justifiable; because the
law-of self preservation, is to be regarded before any positive law of visible
Church Union; and I hope there is no true Son of the Church, that has any zeal
for the purity of their Church Doctrine, will be my adversary herein: and thus
much shall suffice to be said concerning your Doctrines, and of the lawfulness
of separating from some of the particular Congregations, in case the Teachers
do grossly pervert Some of the weighty Doctrines of your own Church.

We shall in the next place consider what you have here offered as to corrupt
practices, which you say is no just ground (if only tolerated, but not
imposed) of withdrawing, especially if they be no worse than are found in the
Church of England.

I Answer, first, if all the corrupt practices in your Church were only
tolerated but not imposed, you would have much more reason of your side
against us, than you have, because several things which you enjoin to be
practiced, we in our Consciences believe to be unlawful; and we cannot, must
not, have Communion with you except we comply therein, so that should it be
yielded, that unimposed corruption in a Church, is no just ground of
separation, yet is it of no force against us, because some of these we conceive
to be corruptions, are imposed.

But to come close to the case as it stands related to this Proposition,
suppose no imposition of any of those things that are in controversy between
us; which is the supposition in the Proposition: what will follow, but first
that all the Ministers of Christ in England, would be capable of places? for
they are Impositions that are the principal reasons why they are kept out.
Secondly, it would follow, that those that are for the use of the Liturgy and
Ceremonies, and a promiscuous Communion withal that had but the name of
Christians, in the Sacraments, might therein act according as they saw fit, and
as for other Ministers they might freely exercise their Ministry without
Liturgy or Ceremonies, and might exercise Discipline toward their rerespective
Members according to Christ's direction in the case.

The question now arising can be only this; whether it would be lawful for a
Member of that Congregation where the Liturgy and Ceremonies are in use, and
Discipline neglected that conceived these things to be corruptions, to separate
and join with another; free from these conceived corruptions. I say he might
first, because were there is no imposition, there can be no law of Superiors
binding him to a Communion with such a conceived corrupt Church: so that your
great reason (ordinarily produced in this case) would be of no force here.
Secondly, because that it is much safer for his soul to be joined to a pure
Church than a corrupt, and self preservation is founded on a law Superior to
that of visible Church-Union, to this or that particular Church. David might
eat of the Shewbread to save his life, which had not been lawful; if positive
laws were not to give place to natural.

Thus have I examined the third position, both generally, and as it
particularly respects our present differences; and shown both its unsoundness
in the former, and impertinency as to the latter; I have only one word to say
to the Reason given, upon which the supposed Truth thereof is founded, and so
shall dismiss it.

The reason why he says that Errors in a Church, as to matter of Doctrine; and
corruptions, as to matter of practice; if but suffered and not imposed, is on
just ground for separation: because these things are not sins in us, so long as
we do not join with the Church therein.

I Answer, if he mean that other men's Errors or Corruptions are not properly or
formally mine by being in their Company, and joined with them in things lawful,
I grant it. But yet it follows not, that therefore I may join with them if I
can otherways help it; a man may buy and sell, and eat and drink with
Fornicators, or other unclean and Debauched Creatures, if he cannot trade and
get provision for his body but in their Company. But certainly, if a Trade
might be as well managed with sober men, and that Meat may be had in better
Company, it would be sinful then to Trade and Eat with such; and why? because
the law of self preservation warranteth me in the former, but not in the
latter: I may not neglect the preservation of my life by eating, nor geting a
lively hood by trading, which is ordinarily necessary to the preservation of my
life, and present being, A mere occasion of hardening others in sin, or
scandalizing weak Brethren; but when no such necessity does lie on me, then the
preventing of a scandal, or giving occasion to the hardening others in the their
sin, and the safety of my self from their contagion, are reasons of force to
bind me from such Societies.

In like manner, if the Word of God could be no where heard, or Communion in
Sacraments no where enjoyed, but only in such Churches that were so corrupt as
yours is conceived to be; it might be Lawful, yea and a Duty to join with you,
so far as possibly Christians could without sin. But if other Churches may be
had, which are regular according to Gods law, and only irregular according to
man's, then it is a Duty to withdraw, to prevent scandals, and hardening a Church
in its Corruptions, together with the preservation of themselves from the
danger of being infected with those Corruption, which are reasons of another
nature, than that only one which you give; for though (as I said,) by joying
with such, I make not their sins formally mine, yet I sin therein, upon other
accounts now named which may justify my withdrawing.

I come now to his fourth which is this.

That the enjoying of a more profitable Ministry, or living under a more pure
Discipline in an other Church, is no just Cause of forsaking the Communion of
that whereof we are members. Because we are not to commit the least Crime, for
the attaining of the greatest good in the World, now it is a Crime to for sake
Communion with a Church of which we are members, where we may continue without
sin.

I Answer, Whatever may be thought of this position, I am persuaded that the
reason annexed, is too weak to bear the weight of it: for the reason supposes
that which is not to be supposed: that is to say, that to withdraw from a
Church, for the benefit of a more profitable Ministry, is a Crime. You call it
a crime, because you suppose it is a transgression of the Law of visible
Communion, with some particular Church; but I say that the Laws of Visible
Communion, with this or that Particular Church are but positive, and therefore
subordinate to laws more natural and necessary, such is that wherein we are
commanded to take care of our souls and salvation. So that if Christians do
shift particular Churches for the obtaining of very apparent advantages to
their Salvation, above what they could have had where they were, I see therein
no crime at all committed, except such an one wherewith the Pharisees charged
our Savior, as the Breaking of the Sabbath, that he might heal the sick.
Certainly the cure and Salvation of sick Souls, as of sick Bodies, is of
greater account with God than keeping to Parish Churches, or the observation of
a day.

Sure I am, that very many Souls, that have for many years lain Blind and Dead
in trespasses, under their Parish Ministers. (I speak not partially as to those
only that are now in place, but formerly when the Non-conformists held their
places) but upon changing of their Minister, received their conviction, and
real Conversion, I dare say it would be a very hard Task to convince such of
the sin of separation in so doing.

I have much wondered that men should think it but reasonable that every man
should be permitted to choose his own Physician, and who will blame one that is
sickly if he (waveing the advice of his Neighbor, though a Physician) shall
apply himself to the most skillfull and successful that he can hear of for his
health; and yet that it should be accounted so criminal to use the same care
for a man's salvation. And what though the Physician I speak of, be not of the
College, nor can be suffered to be thereof. because perhaps he will not swear
to the truth of all the Aphorisms of Hypocrates, or the truth of all and every
part of the Colleges dispensations: who think you, will stand upon such a
Nicety, if he yet believes him exceeding skillfull and successful in the cure
of such distempers under which he groaneth? and certainly when you have writ
your self a weary to prove the contrary, yet men herein will follow the Conduct
of their Reason, and the instinct of Self-Preservation: which is not only seen
verified among the Non-conformists, but among your selves. What else is the
reason, that some of your own Churches are thronged with auditors, when in
others, the People sit thinly scattered, like the gleanings ofter Harvest? and
I think it almost as easy to stop the Sun in its course, or the Sea in its
flowing, as to prevent these concourses of the People to such Ministers that
are eminently most able and successful. Thus much I have said concerning the
Reasonableness of forsaking Communion with one Church, for the obtaining a more
profitable ministry in another. The next thing to be examined is, that which
you have said concerning the unlawfullness of for saking one Church, to enjoy a
more pure Discipline in an other. To this I say it must be confessed, that a
regular execution of Church Discipline, as it was ordained by Christ for great
ends: So, when so executed it is found of very great use and benefit to the
Church, for thereby is there a means provided to inform the ignorantly sinning
members, to correct the Wilful, to reclaim Apostates, to establish and confirm
the sound, that their Souls may be saved in the day of the Lord Christ. And
certainly, a neglect of this Discipline, must be a very dangerous consequence
to a Church, and to the Salvation of its members. And therefore if Christians
withdraw from such a Church where this Discipline is next to wholly neglected,
to join with another where it is exercised to the great advantage of its
members; I see no sin therein, as this author imagines. For shall I say, the
Law of Self-preservation, is superior to the Law of Visible Union to a
Particular Church, and therefore must firstly be obeyed. May Parents Lawfully
Change a School for their Children, where the Scholars by connivance, are
suffered to Curse and Swear, etc. and yet are kept in the School, especially if
great Men's Children: perhaps some poor man's child, for some one of these sins,
may now and then be cast out but readmited upon very slender satisfaction. I
say, may Parents in this case, (tendering the Souls of their Children) remove
them to another, and yet be blameless? I wonder then why it should be so
Criminal for a Christian to remove from such a Church, where such sins are in
like manner tolerated; for the benefit of a better Disciplined Church.

True, if Learning was as necessary as Christianity, and if no other School
could be had; it were better their Children to be kept in such a School, than
to be suffered to run about the streets to their more certain ruin. For the
Rule of Practice to every Christian in this case, is, of two evils to choose
the least: But as things stand with us in England, there are more pure
Disciplined Churches to be had, and therefore no Christian can be thought to be
in such straits. If ye say, these more pure Disciplined Churches are irregular,
as not having the Establishment of an humane Law: I answer, it is not
necessary; For the Constitution of Churches, and their Establishment; is
founded on a Law of Christ, and not on Humane Laws. Christ's Ministers have a
right to Preach the Gospel, and Gather Churches, and Govern them by his Rules;
without the leave of any Magistrates. The powers of the Earth may be Nursing
Fathers to the Church, but as such, they neither give them their Being or
Constitution. When Christ sent the first Preachers of the Gospel, to
Discipline Nations, and gather to him Churches, he did not direct them first to
ask the Governors of those Nations leave so to do: for his own Commission was
warrant sufficient without their License: but when God is pleased to stir up
the hearts of Princes to give leave and encourage the work, it is a great
Blessing; which Christ's Ministers are to pray for, and to be greatly thankful
when they have it.

Yet again, I answer, that those Churches are most Regular that are Taught and
Governed with the greatest conformity to the Rule of Christ, and if those of
the Non-conformists prove such, I know not why any should be blamed for joining
with them upon the account of their irregularity.

Thus have I answered this Fourth position of yours, and have showed how far an
unprofitable Ministry and Corrupt Discipline in your Church, gives ground of
separation from you.

His Fifth and Last Proposition.

That though we have a just Cause to refuse Communion with the Church whereof
we are members, in some instances; yet we are not therefore to proceed to so
total a separation from it, as to Erect a New Church in Contra-distinction to
it, or to join with those that do. The Reason he gives is, because we are bound
to obey as far as we can, but at no hand to disturb the Peace. To the Reason I
Briefly answer, that these Ministers and People obey as far as they can, when
they by obeying neither commit sin, or what they suspect to be sin, or when
they neglect not some known duty; Daniel might not obey when he was forbid
praying for some days to the true God: But for the Ministers of Christ not to
go on in their Ministerial work, and for the People not to enjoy all
ordinances, is to neglect known duties, in some things only, and not in these
they suspect, and therefore such a separation is Lawful, notwithstanding his
Reason, and now I answer to the Proposition: I may very well doubt whether this
proposition be universally true, when this very Author, himself grants it is
not, For if a Church be so greatly and generally Corrupt in Doctrine and
Practice, as the Church of Rome, so that the Salvation of those that
Communicate with her be endangered, it is then not only lawful to separate,
but to Erect a new Church: this he confesses in a very few lines following.
Thus he has provided wisely good shelter for himself and his, from the first
charge of his proposition with respect to the Church of Rome, whilst he has
left the poor Non-conformists to shift as they can with respect to their own
Church; but by his leave I shall make bold with his own evasion, for a covert
to them also from this storm, for what though the Corruptions and Doctrines and
Practices be not so great and so general in an other Church, as theirs in the
Church of Rome? yet if they be but so many, and so great as to endanger their
Salvation, it is sufficient to warrant such a separation.

And now (if you will give me leave) I will tell you how these People concieve
their Salvation is endangered, through your corruptions. If they should not
separate as they do, I say then, These outed Ministers (do not wonder) if they
conceive it is by reason of the corruptions, that many hundreds of them have
been cast out and silenced as much as in them lies: and why? because they will
not swear and forswear, assent and consent to all that they would have them, by
reason whereof they are reduced to these straits, either to swear and do as you
would have them, and that against their Consciences: or else to wrap their
Tallants (through slavish fear, like slothful Servants) in a Napkin; and
forsake the work of the Ministry, which their Lord has entrusted them with: if
they do the former, they like wicked Hypocrites will go against their own
Consciences, and so will endanger their Salvation, or else like false and
treacherous Stewards, must desert their masters work and so incur the doom of
such Stewards; so that let them look on the right hand or on the left, they see
nothing but damnation; what then is left for them to do but to go on in their
work as now they do for their own safety, that is to Preach, Teach, Father and
Rule his People, which you are pleased to call the erecting of new Churches,
which (as I said) is no more than to do the duty of Christ's Ministers, and
therefore cannot justly be charged on them as their sin. You call these erected
Churches new, and what if they be new in respect to the time of their rise,
that is not their fault, but if you consider them with respect to their rule,
either of their Worship or Government, so they may be more Ancient than your
own; for such Societies of Christians that meet with Christ's Ministers to
worship God according to the way of the Gospel Churches. without imposed Forms
of Prayer, or without the use of any superstitiously imposed vestments, or when
they meet, to Administer Sacraments without any impertinent superstitious use
of the sign of the Cross, or to Eat the Supper in a Feastival posture, as
Christ and his Apostles did, or such Churches that are governed by Christ's
Officers, (and such Presbyters unquestionably are) not by lay Chancellors,
unheard of in the first Churches, where nothing is imposed on the Members, but
what Christ by command has made necessary, and nothing censured as scandalous
and threatened with Excommunion, but that that is an evident transgressors of
Gods laws, as Drunkenness, Whoredom, Swearing are in a manner connived at, or
if at any time censured in some poor People, the censure is upon very slight
grounds taken off, upon a very slight and formal Repentance, or the payment of
a few groats. But where the transgression of a Ceremonious law, or a Tradition
of the Elders, is dealt with as a sin unpardonable, fines, imprisonments,
silencing, banishments, Excommunications are punishments all thought little
enough for so great a scandal. Let now any man well consider both these sorts
of Churches, both as to their way of Worship, Administration of Sacraments, or
way of Government, and then tell me whether of them are more conformable to the
Ancient Apostolical pattern, and so which of them deserve the name of old, and
which of new Churches. But notwithstanding all this, peradventure you will say,
that we have broke the Unity of the National Church, which we ought to have
preserved.

I Answer, we have but broke it by accident, and you perceive but by accident,
for no man can be said to sin, or to be a Peace-breaker when he is but doing
his duty; and I conceive it has been proved that we do no more: Elijah was
charged with being the troubler of Israel, and the Apostles with turning the
world upside down, and yet they were faultless. But you rather are breakers of
it per so, for do but you impose no more up-us than Christ our Lord has done,
either by Himself or his Apostles, as necessary conditions of Communion, and be
but you willing to receive these as Ministers and Members which Christ receives
and owns, and I dare say we shall soon enjoy a blessed Peace, and that upon
Righteous Foundations which Christ would certainly bless and cause to last; but
if you will drive us to such straits as that either we must wound our
Consciences by a sinful compliance with you, at least, with such a compliance
that we suspect sinful, or else live in the neglect of our known duties and
without the enjoyment of some Ordinances. I beseech you blame us not for what
we do, for you your selves have made it necessary: this I think is a sufficient
answer to your fifth and last proposition, which being all you have said that
directly concerns us, I shall take the boldness to conclude with your own
words, I am verily persuaded that I have said nothing in this my reply, but
what is very agreeable to Scripture and reason, and the sense of the best and
Antientest, i. e. Apostolical Christians and Churches.

FINIS.

