A SERMON Preached before the KING AT NEW MARKET April 2. 1676.

BY SAMUEL SCATTERGOOD M. A. Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge.

Published by his MAJESTY'S special Command.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by John Hayes, Printer to the University, 1676.

Job 28.28. And unto Man he said, Behold the fear of the Lord that is Wisdom,
and to depart from evil is Understanding.


THere is nothing that Man does more earnestly pursue and hunt after then
Wisdom and Understanding; and there is nothing that God is more desirous that
he should obtain. And yet such is the obstinacy of our will, and the
perverseness of our Nature, that when God shows us the true wisdom and the way
to it, we will not follow his directions, but seek for it according to our own
fancy, where it is never to be had: And then no wonder if in the end we prove
such fools, as to reap no other fruit of our labor but shame and repentance:
no wonder if we meet with death where we expected life, and find destruction in
those things wherein we sought for happiness. For it has ever been the devils
policy, even from the very beginning of the world, so cunningly to counterfeit
this inestimable Jewel, that if we have not constant recourse to Gods Word, to
try every thing we take for wisdom by that unerring touchstone, and weigh it
carefully in the balance of the Sanctuary, we may easily be deceived with a
worthless trifle instead of this pearl of great price; we may embrace a shadow
for a substance, and court ignorance and folly instead of Wisdom and
Understanding. Thus he overthrew our first Parents, by persuading them to
aspire to a greater measure of Knowledge then God had thought fit to bestow
upon them; and he has all along made use of the same temptation to the ruin
of their Posterity. He found it successful then, and it has been so ever
since; and among all his wiles and stratagems he has none by which he can so
easily inveigle us as this; no bait so fair, so taking, and so universally
prevalent among the Sons of men as this of Wisdom and Knowledge. Nay I may in
some sense say that he has no temptation at all by which he can move us but
this alone. For did he not persuade men into a good opinion of themselves, and
that their wicked actions were wise and prudent, he could never induce them to
embrace his temptations: and therefore he suits them to every particular man's
humor and disposition. He offers not the ladder of Honor to the Sluggard,
upon which he knows the ambitious man will venture his life and fortunes; but
he brings a pillow to the one, and a scepter to the other: he propounds ease,
and idleness, and sleep to the former, and persuades him that wisdom shall
court him in a dream; and he shows the latter all the kingdoms of the World
and the glory of them, and tells him that Wisdom is to be found no where but in
the highest honor and most splendid preferments. He tells the Miser that it
consists in riches, and that he must hoard it up in his coffers, he tells the
Glutton that he shall find it in a dainty dish, and he bids the Revenger drink
it up in the blood of his enemies.

But above all other persons, those who one would think should be the best able
to resist his temptations (I mean the Learned) are often times most easily
foiled by him. Their great learning and parts, most excellent endowments, which
might be very serviceable to Gods glory and the good of his Church, he
persuades them to abuse in the maintaining of wrangling Disputations, and
unnecessary (and sometimes dangerous) Controversies. By which means he rents
the seamless coat of Christ, divides the Church into Schisms and Factions, and
shakes all into disorder and Confusion. He tells them, that to know Christ and
him crucified is but a mean piece of knowledge, fit only for men of weaker
capacities to rest content with. But as for them, he would have them fore
aloft, and employ their time and study about deeper contemplations: examine
what God was doing before he created the World: scan all the intrigues of his
Providence: sound the fathomless abyss of his unsearchable Decrees: rifle, if
it were possible, his most secret closet, and curiously pry into those things
which are concealed from Angels. This says he, is Wisdom, and this is
Understanding worthy to be acquired by men of Parts and Learning.

And this vain and wicked Curiosity, this unlawful thirst after that
Knowledge, which is hidden from us, was the occasion of these words of my Text,
and indeed of this whole Chapter. For Jobs three Friends were very bold, and
foolishly positive in their assertions concerning Gods Decrees. They thought it
was altogether inconsistent with his infinite Goodness to suffer either the
Righteous to be in adversity, or the Wicked to prosper in this world. And
therefore when they considered that their friend Job, who but a while before
had been a mighty Prince, was all of a sudden reduced to most extreme poverty;
and as it were in a moment, by unparalleled disasters, deprived of his whole
Estate, his Children, his health, and brought down from a Throne to a Dunghill,
they stood all amazed and astonished at his unexpected calamity; and instead of
performing the duty of Friends, and comforting him in his affliction, they most
unfriendly and uncharitably censure him. And as if they had been of Gods privy
Counsel, had stood by him, and thoroughly understood the whole design of his
Providence in afflicting so severely his servant Job, they presently conclude
him to be a most grievous sinner; and that whatsoever specious and fair shows
he had made of Righteousness and Integrity, yet they were all false and
counterfeit, and that God had now unmasked him, and by his heavy judgments
plainly discovered to all the world that he was a most notorious Hypocrite, and
that he had marked him and set him up as a Butt against which he would shoot
all the Arrows of his fury and indignation.

All this Job hears and endures with patience. He was sensible enough that God
had afflicted him, and he knew too that it was not for his Hypocrisy, but for
some secret end best known to his infinite Wisdom: and therefore he enquires
not after it, but labors to perform his own Duty, and to receive evil from the
Hand of God, if he sends it to him, as well as good, and patiently to bear
whatsoever burden he lays upon him; as one that was well assured that though
in a little wrath he hid his face from him for a moment, yet with everlasting
kindness he would have mercy on him.

This is all the wisdom he aspires to, he meddles not with Gods secret
counsel, nor searches after the Knowledge which he knew was too wonderful for
him. And what he himself practices he advises his Friends here to practice too,
and blames them for pretending so fondly to give an account of the actions of
Gods Providence, and for thirsting after that Wisdom which they can never
attain to. It Is the subject of this whole chapter, in which he sets forth most
eloquently the impossibility of ever acquiring this Wisdom, which God has
reserved to himself as his own peculiar prerogative. For when he has made a
careful enquiry after it throughout all the world; ransak'd the Air, the
Earth, the Sea; nay even hell it self, and yet not found it: he concludes in
the 23 Verse of this Chapter that God understands the way thereof, and he knows
the place thereof.

God understands it, and he only understands it; and he will have none else to
understand it, or meddle with it. He has ordained another sort of Wisdom for
Man to seek after, which though it will not satisfy the fond curiosity of
every inquisitive Brain that is still longing for the forbidden Fruit, yet it
will be sufficient to make every one that attains to it wise unto Salvation.
And this is the Wisdom which is here recommended to us in my Text with this
emphaticall word Behold before it, to command our attention and to make us
rouse up our spirits, and turn away our eyes from those Vanities and that false
Wisdom which we are too ready to follow after, and fix them upon the true. And
unto Man he said, Behold the fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom, and to depart
from evil is Understanding.

In the handling of which words I shall endeavor, First to show what is here
mean by the Fear of the Lord. Secondly, what it is to depart from evil. And
thirdly prove that to depart from evil in the Name and Fear of the Lord is the
greatest wisdom that Man is capable of. Of these in order.

And First of the fear of the Lord. There is a fear of the Lord which is not
Wisdom, nor Understanding: nay it is Folly, it is Madness, it is Sin. I mean
such a fear as is peculiar only to wicked men; a fear that represents God to
them frowning; armed with thunder, and ready to take vengeance on their crimes:
a very unwelcome guest in their Breasts, which shows them as it were Hell in
epitome, and gives them a taste here of those eternal torments which shall be
their portion hereafter. This is the evil spirit from the Lord which troubled
Saul. This is that fear which loosed the joints of Belshazzars loins, and smote
his knees one against another, when he beheld the handwriting against him upon
the wall: that fear which made Cain a fugitive and a vagabond in the Earth; and
drove Ahitophel and Judas to desperation. This is so far from being a blessing,
that it is a curse, a vexation, a tormenting Fury which wicked men labor all
they can to chase out of their hearts: but alas it is all in vain; it haunts
them still, and will never depart from them, till they depart from evil. Indeed
perhaps it may sometimes give them a little intermission: but yet it returns
again with the greater violence. No place is secure from it where wicked men
can come; but it follows and pursues them every where; embitters all their
joys and pleasures; torments them day and night, and affrights them even in
their dreams. This is one fear of the Lord; but not that fear which is here
meant in my Text: for if this be all the wisdom man can attain to, surely then
of all creatures he is the most miserable.

But we may go a degree further still, and yet come short of the true Fear of
God. For there are some men that so fear Him, as that they will endeavor to
abstain from gross and scandalous sins: but not out of any true love they have
for God, or any hatred they bear to sin; but merely out of Self-interest, that
they may (if possible) escape that vengeance which they know will one day be
executed upon the Ungodly.

I will not say that this fear is in all men a sin: for it is in some a Virtue;
and if it be not the Wisdom here in the Text, yet it is at least a good step
toward the obtaining of it. For as it is a true Maxim, that no man can all of a
sudden become a most notorious sinner: so it is as true one the contrary, that
no man that has been a sinner (and such we are all by Nature) can, without
such a miracle as was wrought at the Conversion of S. Paul, in the twinkling of
an eye become a Saint of the first Magnitude. No, we must be content to acquire
this perfection by degrees; we must creep, before we can go: be Babes in Christ
before we can be strong Men. We must pass from strength to strength; from grace
to grace, before we can appear before God in Sion. For certainly God would
never have set before us Life and Death; never have propounded to us in his
word Rewards and Punishments; nor have told us of a cursed and a blessed
Eternity, if he did not allow us to fear the one, and to desire the other.

Nay this fear of Gods wrath is so far from being unlawful, that it is
absolutely necessary. We must receive the Spirit of Bondage to fear, before we
can have that of Adoption to cry, Abba, Father. We must be affrighted by the
severity of the Law, that we may be sensible how great need we have of a
Savior. Our wounds must be cleansed with a Corrosive before we pour in Oil;
and they must first smart with the Waters of Marah, before they be refreshed
with the Balm of Gilead. We must fear God as an angry Judge, before we can love
him as a tender Father; and we must tremble at his Terrors before we can adore
his Mercy.

But although this fear be good in those Persons who are careful to improve
it, and make it a step to further Graces: yet it is sinful and wicked in all
those who rest content with this, and never aim at any higher Perfection; but
think that they are good Christians, if they abstain from some sins merely out
of hopes to escape damnation; though they never had (nor intend to have) any
zeal for the Glory of God, nor any hatred for Sin: nay though indeed they love
it at their heart, and could wish that there were no God to condemn them, nor
Hell to torment them, that so they might have a license to commit wickedness
even with greediness; to drink iniquity like water; and securely gratify all
their lusts and corruptions. This is a second degree of the fear of God; or
indeed it is rather the fear of Hell; or to speak most properly, it is the love
of our selves.

I come now to show you what the true fear of God is, that fear which the Text
tells us is Wisdom. And this is such a fear of God as proceeds from love; nay
indeed it is nothing else but love; not of our selves, as the former fear, but
of God, as the only object that can deserve our affections; as the greatest,
the only Good, and the sole author and fountain of all our Happiness. So then
this Grace may be styled indifferently either Fear or Love. And it is no
mystery neither, Fear being ever an inseparable companion of Love. For he that
loves fears nothing more then to offend the person whom he loves: and if he
have the ill fortune to do it, is ready to submit to any terms that will
procure him a reconciliation. So it is with the Saints: they love God if not
with an infinite, yet at least with an ineffable love, far above all the World.
And by how much the greater their Love is, so much the greater is their Fear
too. So that if their Love be infinite (and it is so in respect of its Object,
which is infinitely glorious and infinitely good) then the fear also which they
have of miscarrying in their Love, and displeasing that infinite Majesty which
does so well deserve their Love and Adoration must be infinite too.

This is that Fear which supported Job under his mighty afflictions; enabled
him to baffle all Satan's designs; made him triumph over the fury and malice of
Hell, and transported him to that incomparable expression of the confidence he
reposed in his God, Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. He knew that so
long as he retained his integrity, however God seemed for the present to frown
upon him, yet he would not cast him off for ever. He knew that this storm would
ere long blow over, and that the sunshine of Gods favor would again enlighten
him, and break through this black cloud, which for a while seemed to intercept
it. But come what will on it; whether he live or die, he is resolved both to
live and to die in the Fear of the Lord. This is his Load-star, by which like a
skillful Pilot he steers through the tempest. And though his riches have made
themselves wings and are fled from him: though his children be all slain in a
moment: though his friends brand him for an Hypocrite, and the wife of his
bosom rail against him, and give him that desperate and hellish counsel, to
curse God and die: though he is become a laughing stock to those Persons whose
fathers once he would have disdained to have set with the dogs of his flock:
though he be thus forsaken of all the world, destitute, afflicted, tormented,
and in all outward appearance forsaken even of God himself too, and made a
ruefull spectacle of his wrath and indignation; yet he sins not for all this,
nor charges God fooli^^^^^^, nay he cleaves to him the closer, well knowing
that notwithstanding he seemed to be his enemy, he was still in reality his
greatest, his only friend. And therefore he worships him as well when the days
of affliction have taken hold on him, as when God preserved him, and made his
candle to shine upon his head. He adores him as much on the Dunghill as on the
Throne; praises his Name as well when his head is covered with ashes, as if it
wore a Diadem; and gives him thanks, when he has left him nothing but a
potsheard to scrape his sores, as heartily as when he made him the greatest of
all the men of the East, and crowned him with loving kindness and tender
mercies.

This I say is that fear which carried Job through such a sea of troubles;
armed him against the strength and policy of Satan, and made him a glorious
Conqueror over Principalities and Powers. A fear which is as comfortable, as
the former is terrible. That represents God to us as the greatest evil, and
drives us from him as from a consuming fire: this makes us long for him (as in
reality he is) as the greatest Good, and wish that we had wings like a Dove
that we might fly into his embraces. That is a fear of his Justice, and this of
his Mercy; that a fear of punishment, and this of sin. In a word, that is a
flash from Hell fire, and this is a glimpse of the joys of Heaven. This then
is the true fear of God which is here meant in the Text, and that fear which
every man must get into his heart, as he tenders his eternal Salvation. I do
not say that every man shall be damned that attains not to that Seraphick
Perfection which was in Job, and S. Paul, and many others of Gods most eminent
Saints: but certainly this I may fasely say, that whosoever does not either
actually attain to it, or else heartily be wall and lament his want of it, and
earnestly beg of God that he would bestow it on him, is very far from the
Kingdom of Heaven.

And now what I promised to show you in the next place, viz. what it is to
depart from evil, I have in some measure performed already: for this is a
necessary consequence and fruit of the fear of the Lord. I shall therefore tell
you only in a word what this evil is which we must depart from; and that is
sin: which, if we consider it aright, is the only thing in the world which we
can properly call evil. For every thing is good that God has made, and God
has made every thing else but sin. That he utterly disclaims; it is the work of
the Devil and Man, and not of God. Nay it is so far from being a work of his,
that it defaces and destroys his work. It Is a burden which wearies the whole
Creation; yea and the Creator himself too: for the Scripture tells us that
because of this it repented the Lord that he had made Man on the earth, and it
grieved him at his heart. The whole earth had been one continued and universal
Paradise until this day, had not sin turned it into a Desert. It Is this which
has made the Heaven over our heads to be Brass, and the Earth under us to be
Iron, and caused it to bring forth thorns and thistles instead of wheat and
barley. There had been no sickness, had not sin cursed the very food we put
into our mouths, and made us eat our poison. There had been no death, had not
sin armed him and sharpened his sting. There had been no Devil, had not sin
blackt him; and there had been no Hell, had not sin kind led Gods wrath, and
blown up that flame which never shall be quenched.

It remains then that sin, which is the cause of all this, is the only true
and real evil in the world. And if so then surely to depart from such an evil
must needs be Understanding, which brings me to the third and last particular,

Which is this, That to depart from this evil of sin in the Name and Fear of
the Lord, is the greatest wisdom that Man is capable of. But then we must be
sure to do it in the fear of the Lord. For otherwise though we have never so
ardent an affection and love for Virtue; though we depart from vice with never
so much care and vigilance (for wholly depart from it no man can) we shall
still be but fools in the end. To fear god and to depart from evil are
inseparable companions: they are constantly joined together in Scripture; and
what God has joined let not Man put asunder. Job was perfect and upright,
says the Text, one that feared God, and eschewed evil. By the fear of the Lord
men depart from evil, says Solomon. And if we will perfect Holiness, S. Paul
will tell us that it must be done in the fear of God. These two are like Soul
and Body; one cannot be complete without the other. Fear the Lord aright we
cannot, except we depart from evil: and we cannot depart from evil, except we
fear the Lord. This crowns all our actions, and makes our weak and imperfect
endeavors after Holiness to be accepted of in Heaven, through the merits of
Christ.

And now that thus to depart from Evil is our greatest Wisdom, what need I
spend many words to prove? Methinks, there should be no man so destitute of
reason as not readily to acknowledge it. But though we have all reason enough
to discern the excellency of this Wisdom: yet in most men that is but a slave
to their lusts, which tyrannize over them, and lead them captive with open eyes
to meet their destruction. The ambitious man knows what a Kingdom is prepared
for the Saints from the foundation of the World; and yet he will forfeit it for
the breath of the Multitude. The Miser knows that it would be better for him to
lay up for himself treasures in Heaven then upon Earth; and yet for all that he
will have his inheritance on this side Jordan, and sell his Soul that he may
enrich his Heir. The Swearer knows that everyone that swears shall be cut off;
and yet he prefers this gentile and modish embellishment of his discourse
before all the Anthems and Music of the Heavenly Chore. The Voluptuous man
knows that the love of Christ to his Church passes the love of Women; and yet a
smile from Beauty will move him more then all the melting entreaties and
passionate importunities of a wooing Savior. Thus though our reason
acknowledges this Wisdom, yet our lusts disavow it; and most of us I fear, are
as careless in the practice of it, as we are apt to be loud in its
commendation. Seeing therefore that we have all by Nature such a propensity in
us to gratify our lust rather then to obey our reason; I hope as I shall
encourage all those wise and happy Souls that have found this inestimable
Treasure, to the careful keeping of it; so I shall not deterr those unhappy
Persons from seeking it that have hitherto despised it, if according to my
ability I endeavor to evidence the worth of it briefly in these three
following particulars. First, it will deliver us from the greatest Evil.
Secondly, it will procure for us the greatest Good. And Thirdly, all other
Wisdom without this is but mere folly; but this of it self alone, without the
help and concurrence of any thing else, which the world calls Wisdom, is
sufficient to make us happy.

First, This departing from evil in the fear of the Lord is our greatest
Wisdom, because it will deliver us from the greatest evil both here, and
hereafter; from Sin and Hell. This Fear secures us from all other fears
whatsoever. He that fears not God fears every thing; and so long as he has the
Creator for his enemy, thinks (as well he may) that the whole creation is
armed against him for his destruction. There is nothing so mean and
contemptible, but it can make him tremble. He is jealous even of his own
shadow, lest it should be some Imp sent to devour him. He sympathizes with
every shaking leaf he hears, and flees (as Solomon speaks) when no man pursues
him. His heart misgives him at every thing, and he has such a continual
faintness upon him, as God threatens to send upon the rebellious Israelites. He
finds no true satisfaction in any thing; has no comfort in any of his actions,
nor in any of his hours: but in the morning he says would God it were evening,
and in the evening, would God it were morning. All the remedies he makes use
of, so long as he neglects this one in my Text, are but like water given to one
that is sick of a fever; so far from healing, that they augment and enrage his
distemper. His Friends, his merry Companions, and his full Bowls however they
may seem for a while to mitigate his pain, to deafen the cries of his guilty
Conscience, and stave off that worm which gnaws him; yet he will find in the
end that he takes his measures false, and that he drinks his Poison instead of
his Antidote. For Conscience will still cry, yea and cry the louder too, the
more he endeavors thus to silence it. And that Worm, though perhaps it forbear
a little; yet it will return again more fiercely then ever, and bite with a
greater fury, with a sharper appetite.

What folly then, what madness is this, to harbor such an implacable enemy in
our bosom, as will suffer us to enjoy no peace, nor comfort in this World; yea
and will follow us into the next World too, and there torment us to Eternity!
And if it be the greatest folly to run into such an unconceivable evil as this;
then certainly on the contrary, it must needs be the greatest wisdom imaginable
to avoid it: or if we be fallen into it, to make a speedy escape out of it
again. And to do this no other course can be taken but that which my Text here
prescribes to us, To fear the Lord, and to depart from evil.

But secondly, as this Wisdom delivers us from the greatest evil, so it
procures for us also the greatest good. To rescue a man from danger, and
afterward to take no further care of him, is no extraordinary kindness. But as
Pharaoh did by Joseph, to exalt a man from a Prison to a Palace; to knock off
his iron shackles, and put him on a ring of gold; not only to give him his
freedom, but to make him Ruler over a mighty Kingdom, is a favor beyond all
expectation. But this, and much more, does this Wisdom do for us. If it had
only rescued us from that everlasting misery to which we are all obnoxious; it
had then been no common Benefactour: but it does more for us then so. It does
not only deliver us from Hell, but it entitles us to Heaven. It does not only
free us from the bondage and tyranny of Sin and Satan; but it advances us also
into the glorious liberty of the Children of God. It does not only pluck us
from the jaws of that roaring Lion; but it lodges us safe and secure in the
arms of our Savior.

And now as he that has not this Fear of God before his eyes fears every
thing; so he that has it fears nothing else, but God alone. This Fear arms and
fortifies him against whatsoever appears to other men formidable. He cares not,
though the whole world be his enemy, while God is his Friend. He is not to be
won by its enticements, nor daunted by its threatenings: but he stands firm and
unshaken upon this rock, exalted above its frowns and smiles.

Conscience, that is so terrible an enemy to him that fears not God, is his
most faithful friend (and it is as comfortable a friend, as it is a dreadful
enemy) It always joins with God, it is his Viceroy to pronounce that sentence
on Earth which he passes in Heaven. While this therefore tells him that God is
his refuge and strength; he may say with the Psalmist what follows, I will not
fear though the Earth be removed, and though the Mountains be carried into the
midst of the sea. This will enable him to comport and demean himself like a
Child of God in all conditions. It will teach him with S. Paul, in whatsoever
state he is therewith to be content. This will sweeten every bitter cup. This
will lighten the burden of his affliction. This will make all his bed in his
sickness. This will fill him with joy even at the hour of his death, and enable
him to deliver up his soul into the hand of God with comfort, and full
assurance of a blessed Resurrection. And then in that great and terrible day of
the Lord, wherein the Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat; when the whole World shall tremble, and
neither Heaven nor Earth be able to abide the dreadful approach of that great
Judge, but both shall pass away and be consumed before him; when the Wicked
shall call in vain to the Mountains and Rocks to fall on them, and all the
tribes of the earth shall mourn: Then shall Conscience show it self to be a
most faithful friend; embolden him to lift up his head with joy; plead for him
against all his Accusers, and through the merits and mercy of Christ acquit him
at that grand Tribunal: Then shall this Wisdom as it has freed him from the
greatest evil, from sin and hell; so also confer upon him the greatest Good,
and invest him with eternal Holiness and Happiness.

Thirdly and lastly, All other Wisdom without this is but mere Folly; but this
of it self alone, without the help and concurrence of any thing else which the
world calls Wisdom, is sufficient to make us eternally happy. For in what else
shall we place Wisdom, if not in the Fear of the Lord? Shall we place it in
pleasures? Alas there are none to be found any where, but at Gods right hand.
The pleasures of this world are but torments: they seem perhaps to delight us a
little for the present; but soon after they sting us to the heart. Shall we
place it in Riches? They are but fading and perishing enjoyments, and must
shortly leave us: and if they should tarry with us never so long, the wise man
tells us, that they profit not in the day of wrath. Shall we place it in
Honor? there is nothing more uncertain then that: for though it be never so
splendid and glorious for a while; yet it must ere long be laid in the dust.
Indeed Honor and Authority is so far from being an ordinary and indifferent
thing; that if we consider it aright, it is perhaps the greatest temporal
Blessing that God has to bestow upon Man: and Kings and Rulers have this
happiness above the rest of Mankind, that they have power to do more good in
the world, and to bring greater glory to God then inferior persons, and
consequently may procure for themselves a more honorable Throne, and a
brighter Crown in Heaven. All shall be there full of glory, and every one
perfectly satisfied and content with his own condition: but yet there shall be
a difference; and while some shall but twinkle as the Stars, others shall shine
as the Sun. The meanest Subject that has been loyal to his King, and obedient
to his God, shall at the last day be rewarded with an incorruptible Crown; for
we shall all be Kings and Priests unto God. But I know not any thing in
Scripture that does not freely permit a godly and religious Prince to hope to
be as highly advanced above his Subjects in Heaven, as ever he was here one
Earth, if he manages his Scepter with this Wisdom here in my Text, which will
be sure to establish his Throne, and make his Crown to flourish. Again, shall
we place Wisdom in Learning? This also, if it be sanctified by Grace, is a very
great Blessing: but without that it is as great a Curse; without Grace it will
but enable a man to sin more powerfully: insomuch that he that has a learned
head, and an unsanctified heart, may almost stand in competition with the Devil
himself, who should be the Master worker of iniquity, and gain most Proselytes
to the kingdom of Darkness. The ignorantest Pesant may make a sorry shift to
grope out his way to hell, even blindfold: but the learned Atheist sees so many
roads to it, that he will pick and choose his way so discreetly, as to be sure
to provide for himself one of the hottest places. S. Paul had continued a
Persecutour to his dying day, notwithstanding all that Learning that he got at
the feet of Gamaliel, had he not also learned Christ. And therefore he
professes this to be the only true Wisdom: for, says he, I count all things
but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, Phil. 3.8.

But to rise yet one step higher then Learning can advance us. Suppose God
should endue us with the Spirit of Prophecy to foretell things to come; or
with a power to work Miracles and to cast out devils; yet we should be never
the nearer to Heaven for all this, without the Wisdom here in my Text. For one
of these faculties was bestowed on Balaam; and yet, for all his good wishes
it is probable that he died not the death of the Righteous: and the other on
Judas; and yet himself was a Devil. Alas what were we the better, if we knew
the hour of our death; if we knew too that from that hour our everlasting
punishment should bear its date? What would it profit us, though we knew the
minute when the Archangel should begin to sound his Trump; if we knew withal
that that sound should summon us to hear the Sentence of our eternal
condemnation? Such Wisdom as this would be so far from making us happy, that it
would antedate our misery, and torment us before the time. All other things
then, so long as we want this one thing which is needful, will be but weak
Advocates to plead our cause before Christ's Tribunal.

And as all the Wisdom of the world will profit us nothing without this, so
this of it self alone is sufficient to make us happy. He that has never been
either at Rome or Athens; nay though he knows not so much as one letter of the
Alphabet, is wise enough, if he has but learned the Cross of Christ. He that
is never so poor, has wealth enough, if he be but rich in Faith; and though he
appear to men as having nothing, yet possesses all things. The Brother of low
degree, that is never so mean and contemptible in the eyes of the world, if he
has but this Wisdom in the Text, is highly honorable in the sight of God.

But to what purpose should I spend any more words in illustrating the
incomparable worth of this Wisdom, which as it deserves all, so it needs no
commendation? I will therefore detain you no longer, but conclude all in the
words of the Prophet Jeremiah, cap. 9. v. 23, 24. Thus says the Lord, Let not
the Wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the Mighty man glory in his
Might; let not the Rich man glory in his Riches. But let him that glories glory
in this, that he understands and knows me, that I am the Lord which exercise
loving kindness, judgment, and righteousness in the Earth: for in these things
I delight, says the Lord.

FINIS.

