A DISSERTATION CONCERNING Patriarchal and Metropolitical AUTHORITY In Answer
to what Edw. Stillingfleet DEAN of St. PAVLS Has written in his BOOK OF THE
BRITISH ANTIQUITIES.

By Eman. a Schelstrate S.T.D.C.L. And Prefect of the Vatican Library.

Translated from the Latin.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Turner at the Lamb in Holbourn. MDCLXXXVIII.

TO JAMES the II. OF Great Britain, etc. KING. DEFENDER of the FAITH.
CONQUEROR. TRIUMPHANT. PEACEMAKER.
THE Immortal God, Supreme Governor of Kings, and Ruler of the World, has by
his Providence ordered it, as auspicious to the Catholic Faith, That in these
times, wherein other Christian Princes are restoring the Kingdoms of Hungary
and Greece to the Church, Your Majesty should ascend the British Throne, and
invite the renowned English Nation, to embrace the true Religion by your Royal
Example. It is by the conduct of Divine, not Human, Wisdom that Kings reign,
Prove 8.15.
and Lawgivers decree Justice. Which being spoken of all Princes in this
World, cannot but be understood of Your Majesty, who governing the British
World in Justice, reign so happily, that You seem to have ravished the hearts
of all your Subjects with Love, and the Eyes of all Strangers with Admiration.
It is a Maxim of the Ancients, and the Oracle of Wisdom it self, that the Love
of the People is the Princes chief Safeguard. Which made Pliny the second say,
in his Panegyric to Trajan, that the Kings Palace is no where better secured,
than where Love keeps the Court of Guard. And Themistius, the famed Grecian
Orator, has given this excellent Admonition, that it is far better to allure
Subjects by Love and Favor, than to awe them with Fear and Terror. By Love
Men's minds are united and made to agree in one: and by Agreement Empires
cement, as by Discord they fall asunder. Which Your Majesty very well
understanding, presently quelled the dissension, that in the beginning of your
Reign, threatened destruction to all Britain: and, when you had cut off the
Principal Conspirators, Victorious and Triumphant, You either entirely pacified
or wholly restrained the minds of the rest by Sweetness and Love. Being
excellently well read in the tempers of Men You knew, that he is in vain armed
with dread who is not fenced with love and affection. Having therefore freed
your Subjects from terror and fear, You won their hearts by your serene
Countenance and affable Conversation; who the more freely acknowledge they owe
the Public Safety to Your Majesty, the more other Nations look upon it with
admiration. O thrice happy Prince, who whilst you embrace your People with
Kindness gain Veneration at home, Renown abroad, and are purchasing with God a
blessed Eternity. I will not speak here of that Frankness with which you
receive all, of that Clemency, which makes you easy to be entreated, of that
Liberality wherewith you relieve the Needy and Miserable, of the indefatigable
Industry wherewith you manage the Affairs of your Kingdom, of that firm
Constancy which enables You to undertake the most difficult Enterprises. For
these and many other gracious Endowments, wherewith the Great God of Heaven,
has richly adorned your Royal Mind, might here be highly extolled: But, since
they would be too copious a Subject for a short Epistle, I shall only entreat
this Favor, that not being mindful of Your Majesty, but my meaness you would
so far condescend, as favorably to receive this small Treatise concerning
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, which I have put forth in Answer to an English
Author, and to protect it with the Patronage of Your Great Name. Nor can any
one induce Your Majesty to believe, That I seek to shelter Novelty under the
Protection of Your Royal Name: for in this small Book I do not undertake to
defend an Error lately invented, but a truth anciently received. I treat
concerning the Roman Patriarchate, which the Catholic Kings Your Predecessors
acknowledged for the space of Thirteen hundred years; and which, even since the
Schism, Your Grandfather King James of Illustrious Memory has, not obscurely,
asserted. For in the Apology for the Oath of Allegiance, which he sent to
Rudolphus the Emperor, to the Christian Monarchs, and to both the Catholic and
Protestant Princes, Jacobus Augliae Rex, in apologia pro juramento fidelitatis.

Scio, inquit, Patriarchas in Ecclesia primitiva extitisse, and institutionem
illam ordinis, and discriminis causa amplexor: sed and inter illos de
Principatu magna contentione certatum est: quod si in eo quaestio adhuc
verteretur, meo libens suffragio primum locum Episcopo Romano deferrem: Ego
Occidentalis Rex Occidentali Patritarchae adhaererem.


I know, says that Prince, That there were Patriarchs in the Primitive Church,
and I embrace that Institution for Order and Distinction Sake: there was also
great Contention amongst them, who should be Chief: but if that were still the
question, I would freely give my suffrage, that the Bishop of Rome should have
the first place: I being a Western King would adhere to the Western Patriarch.
That which King James the First, a Prince of the same name with Your Majesty
here asserts, I explain more clearly in this Dissertation; and prove from the
Testimonies of the Ancients, and the Decrees of Synods, that the Authority of
the Roman Patriarchate extends it self over all the West. So that I may use
almost the same words which Honorius did (when he exhorted the Emperor
Theodosius to preserve the Privileges long before granted to the Roman See)
that the Roman Church may not lose under a Catholic Prince what she ought not
to have lost under other KIngs who fell into Schism. Honorius Epist^ad Theod.
Suffer therefore, Most Gracious Prince, that this small Treatise may come
forth under your Protection; in which the only thing, I earnestly contend for,
is that the Roman Church which is the special Head of all the Western Churches,
and the Principal Head of all the Churches in the World, may not be disturbed,
because from thence the Rights of admonishing others issue forth all over the
West, as well as over the whole World. Written from Rome by

Your Majesty's, Most humble and most obedient Servant Emanuel of Antwerp in
the Low Countries

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Know not, Courteous Reader, how it came to be my Lot: in one years time this
proves my second Contest with Adversaries that write in the Language of their
own Countries. At the beginning of this year I had to deal with Maimbourg, who
set forth a Treatise in French concerning the Roman Bishops Supremacy over the
Universal Church. Now toward the end of the year I must fall to work with the
Dean of St. Paul's, who has published a Book in English, wherein he calls in
question the Bishop of Romes Patriarchal Power over all the West. The former
Authors Work, though it ought not to have been written in French, did not
create me any difficulty, because I understood that Language: But the second,
in English, although the Idiom in some things agrees with the Dutch, yet gave
me so much trouble, that I was forced, to make use of an Interpreter for the
understanding of it. That therefore which I could not understand by my self, I
learned by the help of a Learned English man; and when he had translated the
principal Places, which relate to the Patriarchal Authority of the Bishop of
Rome, into Latin; it plainly appeared, that the Author did not only write
against me, but also against other Catholics, who either in this present Age,
or in former Times, had treated upon this Subject. He has therefore taken upon
him to confute, for Italy, Baronius the Parent of Annals, and Lucas Holstenius:
For France, Cardinal Perron, Petrus de Marca, Johannes Morinus, Jacobus
Sirmondus, and Johannes Garnerius: Christianus Lupus, and me, the least of them
all, for the Low Countries. Of these, such as did not understand English, if
they were yet alive, would, as I conceive, join with me in this request to the
Author, that if he should hereafter write of Ecclesiastical matters, he would
either forbear to impugn our Writings, or else express himself in a Language we
could understand. But since none of the forementioned Writers, besides my self
are now living, and our Authors Book, sent out of England, was brought to me by
a Noble Person, that I might return a brief Confutation of it; I thought it
necessary to examine some of his Allegations. I shall not here Answer all the
Objections he has thought fit to make: for since he has written against those
things which I had deduced from ancient Testimonies, concerning the Patriarchal
Power of the Roman Bishop over the West, in my Book entitled, Antiquitas
illustrata, I will refute what he has writ in answer to it, when I publish my
Book de Antiquitate, etc. with the addition of three or four Ages to it, I had
been for some months time diligently bestowing my pains about this Work, when
our Authors Book called me off, and required a Confutation. And about the time
that I began to examine it, little thinking that I should ever have any dispute
with Catholic Writers concerning this Point, lo another Book comes to my hands
entitled, de Disciplina Ecclesiae, which was divided into seven Dissertations,
the first whereof, treats, de forma and distributione Ecclesiarum; and Sect. 6.
the Question is put, whether either Metropolitical Authority, Card. Perronius
in responso ad Jacobum Angliae Regem cap. 30. fol. 171. and seq.
or Patriarchal Dignity were instituted by Christ or his Apostle, Cardinal
Perron, that great light of France, had showed that the Patriarchal Dignity was
of Apostolical Institution; Petrus de Marca, Archbishop of Paris, had asserted
the same concerning Metropolitical Authority, in his Book, de concordia
Sacerdotii and Imperii, De Marca lib. 1. de concordia Sacerdotiy and Imperij,
cap. 3. 7. and seq.
against the Innovators of this our Age. A late French Author contends, that
neither of them proceeded from the Apostles, and has recourse to the Arguments
of Heretics and Schismatics, to prove (what no Catholic to this very day ever
yet durst) that both these Authorities were introduced by a later Custom; and
the Patriarchal Dignity was first enlarged by invading the Rights of others,
and established by the Synodical Decrees of the fourth and fifth Ages. This is
the opinion of that Author, which being repugnant not only to the Canons of the
present, but also to the Monuments of the ancient Church, he has not been
ashamed to wrest the Sanctions of the Councils, which do not favor his purpose,
to a perverse sense, to ridicule the Writings of the ancient Bishops that do
not please him, to elude the eminent Testimonies of the Fathers that overthrow
his Opinion, by his cavils, lastly, to tax the Practice of the peresent Church
as novel, because it suits not with his humors.

In the year 1662. Launoy a Divine of Paris set forth a small Treatise,
entitled de recta intelligentia Sexti Canonis Nicaeni; in which, after the
Disputes of Sirmondus, and other Catholics against Salmasius, and the Heretics
that were his followers, he proposes two principal things, which he thought
gave most light for the finding out of the true sense of the sixth Canon of the
Council of Nice. One was, that it did not treat of Patriarchs, and their
Rights. The other, that it only referred to Metropolitans, and the right which
they have in the Ordination of Bishops. He has many Arguments to this purpose,
and that, as be there forespeaks, saving the Authority of the Apostolic See,
which the Heretics impugn'd from this Nicene Canon. Henricus Valesius Dissert.
de Canone 6. Nicaeno. Tom. 2. Hist. Eccles. post. Socratem and Zosomenum.
But in France he was opposed by Henricus Valesius; who showed from the Decrees
of the Synods, and the Writings of the Fathers, that the sixth Canon of the
Council of Nice, was to be understood of Patriarchs, and could no ways be
interpreted as referring to Metropolitans only; so that the Patriarchal
Authority of the Bishop of Rome, depended very much upon the true sense of it.
This Dissertation of the Learned Valesius displeased Launoy: he therefore, in
the year 1671, sets forth a Defense of his Treatise, in which he so admits of
Patriarchs at the time of the Nicene Council, that he has plainly showed them,
though against his will, to be a more eminent sort of Metropolitans, Hadrianus
Valesius treats of this Book of Launoy in the life of Henricus his Brother,
which Guilielmus Batesius lately set forth at London amongst the lives of
Choice men: and he attests that Launoy made a sort of cavelling answer, which,
says he, Valesius would not have to be read to him, Hadrianus Valesius.
affirming that there was no further matter for a dispute, and being fully
persuaded, that his Writings could no ways be confuted, or invalidated by
Launoy. Valesius therefore despised the Answer of Launoy, accounting it a mere
Cavil. William Beverege the English Writer, did not so esteem of it, but the
year after [Tomo 2. Pandectarum in Annotationibus ad Canonem Sextum Nicaenum]
undertook to defend Launoy, and answer the Arguments of Valesius. The chief
reason that moved Beverege was the Schism of the English Church; which,
hitherto unjustifiable, seemed now to have some foundation from the opinion of
Launoy. England acknowledged no Power superior to that of a Metropolitan; and
because this Error might easily be confuted from the sixth Canon of the Council
of Nice, in which the Dignity of the three Patriarchs is explained; Beverege
undertook to defend Launoy's Allegation, and lays it down for a Truth, that the
Institution of Patriarchs was after the Nicene Council. For thus the English
Church had a President for Ecclesiastical Hierachy in the three first Ages, to
defend their modern Schism, Launoy was yet living, when Beverege's Work was
published; and seeing the Hereties drew a far different consequence from his
Opinion then he thought they would have done; being moved, as, I suppose, at
the indignity of the thing, he desisted from writing, and there was none
afterward found in France, to maintain the Cause, till of late the Author of
the Book [de Disciplina Ecclesiae] started up; who [Dissertatione 1. Part.
ultima] says, indeed, that he defends Valesius's Cause against Launoy's,
whereas in reality he impugns and rejects it. He understands the sixth Canon of
the Council of Nice as referring to the Suburbicarian Churches only, and
restrains the bounds of the Roman Patriarchate within the limits of the Cities
Vicariate; thinking it most probable, that only those Regions which were
subject to the Vicariu Urbis, were the Suburbicarian Churches, to which the
Patriarchal Right of the Bishop of Rome extended and to no others. He denies
Germany, Spain, France, Britain, Africa, Illyricum, and a great part of Italy
to have been subject to the Jurisdiction of the Roman Patriarchate in former
times; and as if it had been but a small matter to shake off the Yoke of
Patriarchal Authority, he has endeavored to destroy the Papal Power, and to
reduce the Primacy of Peter to a mere Dignity of Order amongst equals.

I am ashamed to think of those things which this Author deduces from such like
Principles as these: I shall treat of them in another place, if I shall think
it worth while. In the mean time it will be enough to observe in brief, that
they are so absurd, and disagreeable to the Doctrine of the Church, Julius 1
Epist. Synodica ad Orientales Antiochiae congregatos.
that they run the same Fortune, as Julius the first tells us befell the
Eusebian's Letters: that all were so full of admiration that they could hardly
be induced to believe, such Writings should proceed from a man, who desires to
seem a Catholic. The Eusebians contended, that the Sentence of the whole
Eastern Synod could no ways be retracted by the Bishop of Rome: and when the
Church was offended at that Error, Julius the first wrote thus: That it was
better, according to the Gospel, that a Millstone were hanged about his neck,
and so he were drowned, then that one of these little ones should be offended.
What then would that great Prelate say, if he lived in our times, and heard it
maintained that not the Eastern Church only, but the Bishops of one Diocese,
the Synod of one Province have Supreme Authority; and that their Sentence
cannot be invalidated by any other Judge. Dissert. 2. ca. 1. Sect. 1 p. 97.
What would he say, if he should hear that not only the Causes of the Eastern,
but likewise of the Western Bishops were to be exempt from the Jurisdiction of
the Sea Apostolic; and that it is but a feigned story that an Apostolical
Authority was so given to Peter that it might descend to his Successors,
whereas it was granted to the rest of the Apostles only for their time? This is
fictitious, Ibid. Sect. 2 p. 96. and Seq
says that Author, because we have no reason, nor testimony from Scripture or
Tradition to prove, that the Power of Peter's Apostleship, descended down to his
Successors, and that the rest of the Apostles did not; seeing that the Bishops
of the Apostolical Churches are equally said to be the Successors to those
Apostles by whom their Churches were founded; nay all Bishops are esteemed
Successors of all the Apostles. These are the consequences of this man's
Principles, which if they might take place, farewell the solicitude which in
Obedience to the Divine Precept, the Bishop of Rome has had over all Churches
of the Catholic Communion throughout the whole World; and which he still has as
becomes the Primacy of his See: although Quesnellio, Dissert. 1. p. 79.
a late Author invents another story concerning the Churches of France,
supposing according to his Opinion, that the Bishop of Rome has not the
Gallican Churches under his charge.

I am unwilling to insist any longer upon this expostulation, but before I
conclude this Preface, two things are to be observed: the former whereof has
relation to the favorable Reader; whom I would not have to suspect, that the
Errors of this Book are to be ascribed either to the Sacred Faculty of Paris,
or to the most Illustrious Gallican Clergy. For although the Author calls
himself a Doctor of Paris, and is a Frenchman, yet it is not at all credible
that this Work of his will either please the Sacred Faculty of Paris, or the
most Illustrious Gallican Clergy. It Is rather to be believed, that all those of
the French Nation, that are eminent for Learning and Piety, will judge it unfit
that Book should ever have been published. The ancient Religion of the Gallican
Church, which never withdrew its subjection to the Apostolical Sea, and has
often professed it never will, obliges me to believe this. It would be temerity
therefore to censure the most Illustrious Gallican Church for the publishing of
this Book. Far be it from Men eminent for Learning, far be it from Doctors
educated in the Communion of the Apostolic See, far be it from a Clergy and
Bishops that maintain the Catholic Faith, whilst they are earnestly
endeavoring to root out one Heresy, to consent to the Principles of another:
not remembering that saying which St. Avitus Bishop of Vienne, St. Avitus
Viennen. Episcopus in Epist. ad Faustum and Symmachum Senaeores.
in the Name of the Gallican Church, has 1160 years since consecrated to the
memory of Posterity: If the Papacy be called in question, not a Bishop but
Episcopacy will seem to shake. Si Papa Urbis vocatur in dubium, Episcopatus jam
videbitur, non Episcopus vacillare.

The second thing concerns our English Author, whom I would not have to boast
that he has found a Patron for his Cause amongst Catholics. For, since he is a
Minister of the English Church, and acknowledges a Metropolitical Authority; he
must necessarily own, that the French Author is no less an Adversary to him
than to us. For since that Author not only denis Patriarchal Authority to be of
Apostolical Institution, but Metropolitical also; that the Dean of St. Readiness
may be able to defend the Hierarchy of the English Church to be of Apostolical
Institution, he ought to exclude out of it not only Patriarchs but
Metropolitans also, and first to constitute a Church consisting only of Bishops
and their inferior Clergy. This, I say, he ought to do, if he follow the
judgment of the late French Author; which notwithstanding we will never
subscribe to. For we shall ever oppose those Opinions by which we see the
Rights of Churches are destroyed, the received Sanctions of Synods perverted,
the approved Writings of ancient Bishops ridiculed, the venerable Testimonies
of the ancient Fathers despised, and the solid foundations of Ecclesiastical
Polity subverted: And never admit Principles of Division and Schism to be Rules
of Catholic Religion. And so much concerning the Treatise of a late French
Writer; now I proceed to show the Errors of the English Author, which are here
summed up, together with the Truths by which they are confronted, that the
Reader may observe them all at one view.

THE ERRORS, Which are Confuted in this DISSERTATION ARE Here set down together
with the TRUTHS Confronting them.
ERRORS. TRUTHS.
ERRORS. 1. THat Peter rather Preached the Gospel in Britain than Gaul, depends
upon slight Testimonies viz. Those of Simeon Metaphrastes, the Legendary
Writers, or the Monkish Visions. Origines Britannicae chap. 1. p. 45.

TRUTHS. 1. That St. Peter preached the Gospel in Britain depends upon the the
Testimonies of Eusebius, Innocent the first, Gildas the Wise, John the V.
Kenulphus King of the Mercians, and Metaphrastes, chap. 1, and 2. Of this
Dissertation.

ERRORS. 2. That St. Paul declared the Faith to the Britains, is had from the
Testimonies of Clemens Romanus, Eusebius, Theodoret, and St. Jereme, who in his
Commentary upon the 5 chap. Of the Prophet Amos says, that St. Paul having been
in Spain, went from one Ocean to another, and that his diligence in Preaching
extended as far as the Earth it self. chap. 1. p. 37.

TRUTHS. 2 The Testimonies of Clement Eusebius and Theodoret either relate not
at all to Paul's coming into Britain, or else may be equally understood of
Peter and Paul's coming thither. St. Jerome, upon the 5. Chapter of Amos, says,
that Paul was called by the Lord to go from Jerusalem even to Spain, and to
take his course from the Red Sea, and even from Ocean to Ocean, which does not
signisie that he preached the Gospel, from the Spanish Ocean to the British
Ocean, but from the Arabic Ocean, which is adjacent to the Red Sea, to that
Ocean which washes upon the Spanish Coasts. chap. 1. number. 4.

ERRORS. 3. When Sulpitius Severus asserts, that Martyrdoms were first seen in
Gaul in the time of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, the Christian Religion being
more lately received beyond the Alps, he relates the former of these things as
certain, the latter as doubtful. chap. 2. p. 55.

TRUTHS. 3. Sulpitius Severus [lib. 2. Historiae] says: that the fifth
Persecution was carried on under Aurelius the Son of Antoninus, and that then
Martyrdoms were first seen in Gaul, the Christian Religion being more lately
received, beyond the Alps. He relates both these things as equally certain,
neither does he doubt more of the latter than of the former. chap. 1. number. 6.

ERRORS. 4. Lucius King of the Britains sent his Ambassadors to Rome as to the
place, whither, as Irenaeus argues in the like case, resort was made from all
places, because of its being the Imperial City, so says our Author. chap. 2.
p. 69.

TRUTHS. 4. St. Irenaeus [lib. 3. cap. 3.] asserts, not of the Roman
Imperiality, but of the Roman Apostolical Church: that it is necessary that all
Churches, that is, the Faithful from all parts, resort to it, by reason of its
more powerful Principality. So that King Lucius sent his Ambassadors to Pope
Eleutherius at Rome, by reason of the Principality of that Church, and upon no
other account. chap. 1. number. 9.

ERRORS. 5. The Council of Arles in their Synodical Epistle to Pope Sylvester
have writ: who hold a greater Diocese. For so that place is to be read.
chap. 2. p. 83. and chap. 3. p. 130.

TRUTHS. 5. The Council of Arles in their Synodical Epistle to Pope Sylvester,
set forth first by Pythaeus, afterward by Sirmondus from the Gallican, M. S.
S. say: who hold the greater Dioceses, and so that place is to be read.
chap. 4.

ERRORS. 6. It is doubtful, whether the distribution of the Empire into
Dioceses were made by Constantine at the time of the Council of Arles, and it
seems more probable not to have been done in the time of the Council of Nice,
Dioceses not being mentioned there, but only Provinces, Chap. 3. p. 130.

TRUTHS. 6. In the time of the Nicene Council, Constantine in his Epistle to
all the Churches makes mention of the Pontic and Asian Dioceses, so that it is
not probable, but plainly false, that, in the time of the Council of Nice,
there was no mention made of Dioceses. For in the time of the Synod of Arles
the name of Greater Diocese was known, as even our Author himself confesses,
whilst he affirms that instead of Greater Dioceses, we ought to read Greater
Diocese, Chap. 4.

ERRORS. 7. The Authority of publishing Easter Day in all parts, which the
Council of Arles in its first Canon allowed as the right of the Bishop of Rome,
was taken away from him by the Nicene Council, which committed this Affair to
the Bishop of Alexandria Chap. 2. p. 84.

TRUTHS. 7. The Authority of publishing Easter Day in all Parts was not taken
away from the Bishop of Rome by the Nicene Council: the burdensome charge of
computing Easter Day was laid upon the Bishop of Alexandria by the Nicene
Fathers: the Authority of proposing the certain day to the Churches was left to
the Roman Bishop. Cyril Patriarch of Alexandria, in the Preface to his Paschal
Cycle says, that the Patriarch of Alexandria ought to intimate Easter Day every
year by his Letters to the Roman Church, from whence by Apostolic Authority,
the Universal Church might know, without any further dispute, the determined
day of Easter, throughout the whole World. Which Rule seeing they had observed
for many Ages, etc. Chap. 4.

ERRORS. 8. The Council of Nice in the fourth and fifth Canons has established
the Authority of Provincial Synods as Supreme, the Securing of which the
Fathers have provided for in the sixth Canon, neither did they acknowledge any
Authority to be above that of a Metropolitan, Chap. 3. p. 100. etc.

TRUTHS. 8. The Council of Nice in the fourth and fifth Canons never so much as
dreamed of the Supreme Authority of Provincial Synods, and has acknowledged in
the sixth Canon, that the Patriarchal Power of the Bishops of Rome, Alexandria,
and Antioch was Superior to that of Metropolitans, Chap. 5.

ERRORS. 9. The sixth Nicene Canon decrees, that the Bishop of Alexandria has
Power over Egypt, Libia, and Pentapolis, because the Bishop of Rome had a like
custom. But the likeness did consist in this, that as the Roman Patriarch has
no Metropolitan under him, so there was no other Metropolitan in all Egypt,
but the Metropolitan of Alexandria, Chap. 3. p. 104.

TRUTHS. 9. Before the time of the Council of Nice there were Metropolitans
subject, not only to the Patriarch of Antioch, but likewise to the Patriarch of
Alexandria. S. Athanasius, and S. Epiphanius declare Meletius to have been an
Archbishop before the Nicene Council, so that the parallel between the
Patriarchs of Alexandria and Rome mentioned by the Nicene Council, did not lie
in this that neither of them had Metropolitans under them, Chap. 5.

ERRORS. 10. That the Patriarchal Power of the Roman Pishop was confined to the
Suburbicarian, or Neighboring Provi^ces, and that the Roman Bishops First
began to Usurp the Provinces of Illyricum, by constituting the Bishop of
Thessalonica as his Vicar, after the Second General Synod had given the Second
place of Dignity to the Constantinopolitan See, least the Bishop of
Constantinople should encroach upon these Illyrican Provinces, Chap. 3. p. 114.
etc.

TRUTHS. 10. The Metropolitical Authority of the Roman Bishop was limited to
the Suburbicarian Provinces as the Author Terms them: his Patriarchal Authority
extended to the Greater Dioceses of the West, after the Constantinopolitan
Council Damasius first constituted the Archbishop of Thessalonica, Vicar of the
Patriarchal See of Rome, in the Provinces of Illyricum, that the Bishop of
Constantinople might not encroach upon them. Before the time of Damasius, the
Roman See had a right to exercise Patriarchal Power by it self, or by its
Legates, as appears, in that Legates were sent by Clements the First to
Corinth, at the end of the First Age; wherefore Honorius the Emperor did
require that the privilege of the Roman See, which was long since established
by the Fathers, and confirmed by the Canons should be preserved in Illyricum,
and Theodosius the Emperor commanded the Ancient Apostolical Discipline, and
Order, by which the Roman Bishop presided over Illyricum, to be kept up, Chap.
3.

ERRORS. 11. When Perigenes the Bishop Elect was rejected at Patrae, and put
into the Sea of Corinth by the Bishop of Rome without the consent of the
Provincial Synod; the Bishops of Thessaly, amongst whom the Chief were,
Pausianus, Cyriacus and Calliopus, look upon this as a notorious invasion of
their Rights; and therefore in a Provincial Synod they appoint another person
to succeed there, Chap. 3. p. 116.

TRUTHS. 11. Perigenes the Metropolitan of Corinth in the Province of Achaia
was one Person, Perrevius Bishop of a See in the Province of Thessaly, not well
known to us, another. Pausianus, Cyriacus, and Calliopus, Bishops of the
Province of Thessaly, had no Jurisdiction ever Perigenes the Metropolitan of
another Province, neither does Bonifacius the, first testify that they acted
against him but against Perrevius that was lawfully ordained, who appealed from
their Sentence to Rome, and was restored to his See by the Sentence of the
Roman Bishop, Chap. 3.

ERRORS. 12. The British Church did not acknowledge any Authority Superior to
that of a Metropolitan during the Six First Ages, so that when Augustine the
Monk was sent to them at the beginning of the Seventh Age, Seven British
Bishops who were found there, and many other learned Men of the Monastery of
Banchor refused to be Subject to the Apostolic See, or to acknowledge
Augustine, but remained under their own Metropolitan. So it appears from Bid
and some Monuments set forth by Spehnan, which last although the Author does,
not think them necessary for the proof of what is above mentioned yet he
declares that he approves of them, Chap. 5. p. 357. etc.

TRUTHS. 12. The British Church acknowledged an Authority Superior to that of a
Motropolitan in the Six First Ages; and this is so manifest, that the Pests of
the World Pelagius and Caelestius, who were born in Britain, confessed this
very thing, whilst they either permitted their causes, which had been decided
in the Provincial Synods, to be referred to the tribunal of the Apostolic See,
or did by their own proper Appeal refer them thither. What Spelman cites out of
the English Monument, concerning the Monks of Banchor is Supposititious. What
Bid Relates does not show that the British Bishops acknowledged the
Metropolitical Authority as Supreme, and if it did show this, it discovers that
their Error was reproved by Miracle from Heaven; so that those who persist
obstinately to defend this Error, are guilty of a double fault, of resisting
the Truth, and being shameless, Chap. 6.

THE HEADS OF THE CHAPTERS OF THIS DISSERTATION.
CHAP. I. THat the British Church was instituted either by St. Peter or his
Successors. Page 1 CHAP. II. That the Bishop of Rome is Patriarch of the West,
and therein even of England: and that this follows, from the British Church's
having received her Institution either from him or from his Priests, as is
proved by the Testimony of Innocent. p. 16 CHAP. III. Although the British
Church had not received its Institution from the Roman, yet it is showed from
the Example of the Illyrican Church, that by ancient Custom time out of mind,
it might be subject to it, and moreover that it ought to be so. p. 36 CHAP. IV.
Concerning the Greater Diocesses attributed to Pope Sylvester by the Council of
Arles. p. 57 CHAP. V. Whether the Nicene Canons establish the Metropolitan
Dignity as Supreme, and what is decreed in the Sixth of these Canons,
concerning the Patriarchal Authority. p. 76 CHAP. VI. That the British Church
acknowledged an Authority Superior to that of a Metropolitan, from the time
that the Christian Religion was first planted there, till such time as it was
again restored by Augustine the Monk, under Gregory the Great. p. 91
Imprimatur, si videbitur Reverendissimo Patri Magistro Sacri Palatii
Apostolici. 19. Octobris 1686.

Pro Eminentissimo Cardinali CARPINEO Vicario

H. Cardinalis CASANATE.

Imprimatur. Fr. Dominicus M. Puteobonellus Sacri Apostolici Palatii Magister,
Ordinis Praedicatorum.

A DISSERTATION Concerning the AUTHORITY OF Patriarchs and Metropolitans.
ALthough there is something spoken, in the Preface to the Reader, concerning
the Occasion and Design of this Dissertation; yet it is so little, that I think
it will not be amiss, if, at the entering upon it, I give you a more full
Account of the Occasion of it, and add something for the more clear
Understanding of its Design. This Dissertation has its Origin from what I had
written in the first Part of Antiquitas Illustrata, Dissertation the Second.
For when I had there showed from many Monuments of the Ancients, that was true
of the whole West, which Theodosius Bishop of Echinus in Thessaly said, above
eleven hundred and fifty years since, before Boniface the Second in the Roman
Synod, concerning the Churches of Illyricum, viz. that the Roman Bishops,
besides their Principality over the Churches of the whole World, more
especially claimed to themselves the Government of the Western Churches; this
special Authority of the Roman Bishop over the West did not please a Modern
English Writer that styles himself Dean of St. Paul's, and Chaplain in Ordinary
to His Majesty; and he took it ill, that the English Church, which is rent from
the Communion of the Apostolic See, should be concluded by me within the Bounds
of the Western Patriarchate. He explains his Sense of the thing in a Book
entitled Origines Britannicae, or The Antiquities of the British Churches,
which he set forth at London, Anno 1685. wherein, as a Minister of the English
Church, he takes upon him its Defense, and contends, that the Hierarchy of the
English Church, which since the Schism has owned Subjection only to Bishops
and Metropolitans as the Superior Clergy, is conformable in this to the Ancient
Church. Therefore he endeavors not only to show that the English Church was
Acephalic, that is, without a Head; but also Autocephalic, that is under its
own proper Jurisdiction only, and subject to no Patriarch, from the time that
the Faith first began to be planted there, till the coming of Augustine the
Monk.

There are therefore two things which the Author has undertaken to prove
against me: one, that the Bounds of the Roman Patriarchate ought to be
restrained, so as not to extend to Britain; the other, that the Hierarchy of
the English Church, which acknowledges no Authority Superior to that of a
Metropolitan, is Ancient. It Is chiefly for the Proof of these things, the
Author has made use of his utmost Endeavors, Industry, and Ability; not
treading in the Footsteps of the Ancients, but walking in new Paths which lead
from the Truth, as I shall endeavor briefly to show in this Dissertation. For,
whereas this Author has brought those things for the Proof of his Opinions,
which have been lately invented, partly by him, and partly by Launoy. I thought
it might be profitable to lay them before you, and to show, in the following
Discourse, how far different they are from the true Discipline of the Church,
from the Judgment of the Ancient Fathers, from the Decrees of Councils, and
from the Sense of all Antiquity. I shall therefore divide this Dissertation
into six Chapters, in the four first of which, I shall alledg those things
which relate to the Origin of the British Church, and the Patriarchal Rights
over it; in the two last I shall examine those things that the Dean of St.
Paul's has written, to prove that the Metropolitical Authority is Supreme, and
confute them by the Testimonies of those very Authors which he alleges. He
thought that the Patriarchal and Papal Authority was unknown to the British
Church in the six first Ages, and that this was manifestly proved from the
Answer of Dinoth the Abbot, and the Sayings of the Monks of Banchor. I shall
show that there was no doubt at all made concerning the Supreme Authority of
the Bishop of Rome; but that Britain did venerate the Authority of the
Apostolic See, from the time that King Lucius First embraced the Catholic
Religion, till the breaking in of the Saxons, and the coming of Augustine the
Monk. And when I shall have made this appear from several Monuments of the
British Church, and by the Histories of that Nation, I shall conclude with an
Exhortation to the Ministers of the English Church, in which I shall plainly
show them, how far those Err from the Truth, who think that the Church failed
thoughout the whole World, and was afterward found by a few Persons in a
narrow Corner of the Earth. I shall bring the Testimony of Optatus Milevitanus,
wherein he reproves the Donatists for the like Error, because they heretofore
reduced the Catholic Church to a small number, and confined the large Extent of
Kingdoms, as it were to a narrow Prison. I shall bring other Testimonies of the
Ancients, by which it will appear, that the true Church is to be found diffused
throughout the whole World, because it is Catholic; and that it is one, because
it agrees in the Society of one Communion under One visible Head; and that none
can obtain Salvation, who is either divided from that Head by Schism, or
separated by Heresy: So that St. Jerome did not write by way of Exaggeration,
as a certain Person of late has rashly given out, but truly to Pope Damasus;
I, says he, following none but Christ in the first place, do consociate in
Communion with your Beatitude, that is, the Sea of Peter; I know the Church is
built upou that Rock. Whoever eats the Lamb out of this House is profane. If
any one is not in the Ark of Noah, he shall perish when the Deluge reigns.

CHAP. I. That the British Church was instituted either by St. Peter or his
Successors.
1. The Opinion of an English Author, who contends that the British Church was
instituted by Paul rather than Peter. The Testimony of Gildas the wise is not
alleged by him, it may be, because he foresaw that it proved the Institution
of the British Church by Peter. 2. The Testimony of Eusebius brought out of
Metaphrastes; by which it appears that the British Church owes its Institution
to Peter. The same thing is proved by Metaphrastes, asserted by John V. and
affirmed by Kenulphus King of the Mercians. 3. The Testimonies of Eusebius,
Theodoret and S. Jerome are produced; out of which the Author is confident he
shall clearly prove that the Islands situated in the Ocean were first
instructed in the true Faith by Paul. 4. The foresaid Testimonies of Eusebius
are weighed, the two former of which make nothing for Paul's coming into
Britain, rather than Peter's, and the third of Jerome intimates not that Paul
preached the Faith from the Spanish to the British Ocean, as our Author
believes, but from the Arabic to the Spanish Ocean, which is nothing at all to
the purpose. 5. The Testimony of Clemens Romanus is cited, in which it is
asserted, that Paul came to the Borders of the West, it is not said that he
came to Britain. 6. The Opinion of Launoy, who questions the Authority of this
Epistle of Clemens is disapproved of, and the Testimony of Severus Sulpitius is
brought, wherein it is said that the Religion of God was received more lately
beyond the Alps, and the distinction of our Author for avoiding the difficulty
moved from the Testimony of Severus is rejected. 7. Venerable Bede agrees with
Severus Sulpitius, whilst he puts us in mind that King Lucius was converted to
the Faith, about the time Sulpitius tell us, that the Faith was received beyond
the Alps; with whom Tertullian seems to concur in Opinion, who lived almost at
the same time that Luclus King of Britain was converted under Pope Elcutherius.
8. Other Testimonies of the Ancionts concerning the Conversion of King Lucius,
are brought; likewise the Opinion of our Author concerning the Embassy that
Lucius sent to Pope Eleutherius at Rome, viz. That this Embassy was sent to
Rome, because it was the Imperial City, as he asserts out of Irenaeus. 9. The
Testimony of Irenaeus is cited, and it is showed, that our Author
miss-interprets him. Irenaeus asserts, that all the Faithful ought to consent
to the Roman Faith, not because of the more powerful Principality of the Roman
City, but of the Roman Church. The Emperor Honorius 's Testimony concerning the
Principality of the Imperial Seat, and the Principle of Priesthood's being
established at Rome, the Authority of Augustine is added, who tells us, that the
Principality of the Apostolic See ever prevailed at Rome; which when our Author
denies, he opposes a manifest Truth.


IN treating concerning the Antiquities of the British Church, its Primitive
Institution is to be enquired after, which Modern Writers have attributed to
diverse Apostles and diverse Disciples of Christ. I have not leisure to recite
all their Opinions in this Dissertation; but shall only weigh that of our
Author, who, to exclude the Opinion of Baronius, That the British Church was
instituted by Peter, ascribes it to Paul the Apostle, and is confident he can
prove it clearly. But before he sets upon the Question, he rejects the Opinions
of some Authors, who thought that other Disciples of Christ passed over the
British Sea, Gildas in Ep. de Excidio Britanniae, Sect. 6. vide number. I in fine.
and contends that Gildas the wise does not make for their purpose, who in his
Epistle De Excidio Britanniae, thus writes, In the mean time Christ the true
Sun first indulged his Rays, that is, the knowledge of his Precepts to this
Island, shivering with Icy-cold, and separate at a great distance from the
visible Sun, not from the visible Firmament, but from the supreme everlasting
Power of Heaven. For we know that in the latter end of the Reign of Tiberius,
that Sun appeared to the whole World with his glorious Beams, in which time his
Religion was propagated without any impediment; that Prince against the will of
the Senate, threatening Death to all that should inform against the Soldiers of
Christ. Which Precepts, although they were coldly entertained by the
Inhabita^^^ yet some received them entirely, others more imperfectly, till the
time of the nine years persecution of Dioclesian the Tyrant, in which the
Churches throughout the whole World were subverted. There are some who gather
from this Testimony of Gildas, that the Gospel was preached in Britain about
the last year of Tiberius, which our Author deservedly rejects, and shows that
they did not understand the Testimony of Gildas. For he says that Gildas makes
a distinction between the Preaching of the Faith through the whole World, and
the promulgating the Gospel in Britain. He acknowledges the first to have
happened at the end of the Reign of Tiberius, at which time, as Eusebius in his
Chronicle testifies, Pilate made a Report to Tiberius of the Divinity of
Christ, and the Persecution of the Christians in Palestine, and Tiberius, as
Tertullian in his Apologetic testifies, referred it to the Senate, who denying
their Suffrage for giving Christ place amongst their Gods, Tiberius,
notwithstanding, continued his former Opinion, threatening Death to those who
should persecute the Christians. For then the Gospel might have been every
where freely Preached, as Gildas in the beginning of the forecited Testimony
most clearly says it was. The other, concerning the Preaching of the Faith in
Britain, Gildas asserts to have happened almost at the same time; which
Testimony our Author might have urged above the rest, for the Apostles
Preaching of the Gospel in Britain, had not he perhaps foreseen, that Gildas
might be cited rather for Peter's coming into Britain, than for Paul's. Indeed,
in one place of that Epistle, Gildas reprehends the Manners of the British
Clergy, saying, That they usurped the Sea of Peter the Apostle with unclean
Feet. Sedem Petri Apostoli immundis pedibus usurpare. Gildas Sapiens.
Which Place, when our Author, toward the End of his Treatise, had objected
against himself, he answers, That the Sea of Peter mentioned by Gildas, makes
nothing to the purpose; of which, if you ask him the Reason, you shall obtain
no other but this, That the Sea of Peter the Apostle, which Gildas places in
Britain, when he says it was usurped by the British Clergy with unclean Feet,
does not please our Author. Gildas Sapiens.
The Testimony of Gildas admits of a twofold Sense: the first is, that Peter
was in England, that he there instituted an Episcopal See, and that he ordained
Deacons and Priests, which is historical, and proved by more than Gildas. The
second, that the British Clergy owe their Institution to Peter's See, which
sense is admitted by others. Neither of these Senses pleases our Author, and
therefore he thinks that Gildas is not to be thus urged amongst those who have
treated of the Institution of the British Church.

2. Eusebius apud Metaphrastem: Simonem Petrum duod^^m quidem annos esse
versatum in Orient; viginti autem and tres annos transeg^sse Romae, and in
Britannia and in Civitatibus, quae sunt in occidente.
But Eusebius in Metaphrastes confirms the former Historical Sense of the
English Church, being instituted by Peter in these Words: Simon Peter was
conversant in the East twelve years, he spent twenty three years at Rome, and
in Britain, and in the Cities which are in the West. Armagh relates this
Testimony out of Metaphrastes ad diem 29. Cumque Ecclesias constituisset,
Episcopos, and Presbyteros, and Diaconos ordinasset, duodecimo anno Caesaris
Neronis rursus Romam reversum esse.
Metaphrastes, who in his Commentary concerning Peter and Paul, at the 29th.
Day of June, affirms also of Peter, that he tarried a long time in Britain, and
converted many Nations, not named, to the Faith, and when he had constituted
the Churches, and ordained Bishops, Priests and Deacons; in the twelfth year of
Nero Caesar, he again returned to Rome. To these may be added John V. who 900.
years since, in his Epistle to Ethelred and Alfred English Saxon Kings, in
Malbur. Lib 3. tells us, that he rejoiced to see the Fervor of Faith in them,
Joannes V. Quam ex praedicatione Principis Apostolorum, Deo vestros animos
illuminante, accepistis, and efficaciter tenetis.
which, says he, you received by the preaching of the Prince of the Apostles,
God enlightening your minds, and still efficaciously retain. And 850. years
since, Kenulphus Merciorum Rex: Vnde tibi Apostolica dignitas, inde nobis fidei
veritas innotuit.
Kenulphus the King of the Mercians in his Epistle to Leo III. had these Words,
From whence your Apostolical Dignity was derived, from thence the verity of
Faith was made known to us.

3. Now the Testimonies are to be produced, by which the Author endeavors to
vindicate the Right of Paul, rather than of Peter to this Province. And the
first Testimony which he brings is that of Eusebius Caesariensis, whom he cites
as having writ in the Third Book De Demonstratione Evangelica, Chap. 7. That
after the Conversion of the Romans, Persians, Armenians, Parthians, Indians and
Scythians, the Apostles past over the Ocean (...). Theodoretus in Fsal. 116.
to those which are called the Eritish Islands. The second is that of
Theodoret, who in the first Tome upon Psalm 116. asserts that the Faith was
preached by Paul,not only to Spain, but also to the Islands that lie in the
Ocean. Therefore says the Author, in all probability the British Islands are
understood by him. Concerning which, the same Theodoret Tome 4. Sermon. 9. writ,
That our Fish rmen and Publicans brought the Evangelical Laws amongst them. To
Theodoret he adjoyns Jerome; who, upon the fifth Chapter of Amos, writes
concerning Paul, That he bent his Course to Spain, and went (from the Red Sea)
and from one Ocean to another, imitating his Lord the Son of Righteousness, of
whom we read that his going forth is from the end of Heaven, and his Circuit
unto the ends of it. Hieronymus in cap. 5. Amos.
To this Testimony of Jerome's, he adds another taken out of his Book De
Scriptoribus, where he says, That Paul after his Imprisonment preached the
Gospel in the Western Parts, by which, says the Author, the British Islands
were especially understood, and that, says he, appears by the Testimony of
Clemens Romanus, Epist ad Corinth.
Clemens Romanus, who says, St. Paul preached Righteousness through the whole
World, and in so doing went (...), to the Bounds of the West, which Passage, he
thinks, will necessarily take in Britain, in which, Venantius says, that Paul
preached; for so he testifies of Paul in the Life of St. Martin, Lib. 3.
Transit and Oceannm, Venantius Fortunatus.
vel qua facit Insula Portum,
Quasque Britannus habet Terras, quasque ultima Thule.


4. But he that diligently observes these Testimonies of the Ancient Fathers,
will easily perceive that it does not certainly appear from them, that Britain
first received the Faith from Paul. The place of Eusebius which the Author
mentions is to be set down entire, for when he makes his Discourse concerning
the twelve Apostles, and the seventy Disciples of Christ, he writes thus of
them, Eusebius vid. Number. II.
And some of them were distributed into the Roman Empire, and into the Imperial
City it self; others into the Persian, others into the Armenian, others into
the Parthian Country. Others went to the Scythian Nation, some also to the
utmost Bounds of the habitable World, and to the Indian Regions, moreover
others crossed the Ocean to those which are called the British Islands. For we do
not learn from these Words that Eusebius testifies that one, and not more, that
a Disciple rather than an Apostle, or of the Apostles, that Paul rather than
Peter, came to the British Islands; so that if by the word, others, Apostles
are to be understood, saving Euscbius's Testimony, not only Paul, but Peter
also, and that too before Paul, might have preached the Word of God in Britain,
as we have heard Eusebius say before out of Metaphrastes. Theodoretus Tom. 4.
Piscntores nostri and Publicani, Sutorque -- leges evangelicas intulerant.
There is another place in Theodoret Tom. 4. Sermon. 9. wherein he reckons the
Britains in the number of those Nations, amongst whom our Fishermen and
Publicans, and a Stitcher introduced the Evangelical Law. But neither do we
from hence learn that the Britains were taught the truth of the Gospel by Paul
rather than by Peter. It is not to be made out from the other Testimonies of
Theodoret, that Paul came into Britain; neither can this be demonstrated from
the Citations out of St. Jerome and Clemens Romanus. For St. Jerome,
Hieronymus, in cap. 5. Amos vid. Number. III.
upon the fifth Chapter of Amos the Prophet, writes, That Paul being called by
the Lord, was sent out over the face of the whole World, that he might preach
the Gospel from Jerusalem salem to Illyricum, that he might build, not upon
another Foundation, where there had been preaching already, but that he should
go to Spain, and from the Red Sea, and even that he might take his Course from
Ocean to Ocean, imitating his Lord the Sun of Righteousness, of whom it is said
his going forth is from the end of Heaven, and his Circuit to the ends of it;
and that Countries to whom he should preach might sooner fail him than his
desire of preaching. From which Words we cannot gather that Paul the Apostle
preached the Gospel from the Spanish to the British, which is but one and the
same Western Ocean, but from the Ocean which is adjacent to the Red Sea, to the
Ocean which washes the utmost Coasts of Spain. Paul tells us in the Second
Chapter to the Galatians, Ad Galatas, Cap. 2.
that he went through Arabia preaching the Word, and that three years after he
returned to Jerusalem, so that it may be believed that he came as far as the
Coasts of Arabia, which border upon the Arabic Ocean. Therefore St. Jerome
said, that Paul preached the Gospel from the Red Sea or, rather from the Ocean
adjoining to the Red Sea, Theodoret in Epist. ad Philippenses, cap. 1.
to the Ocean adjacent to Spain. So that Theodoret, upon the First Chapter of
the Epistle to the Philippians, might well write, that Paul went from Rome to
Spain, and after he had delivered the Heavenly Gospel to the Spansh Nation,
Gregorius Magnus, lib. 31. moralium cap. 22. vid. Number. IV.
that he returned again and then was beheaded. Neither does Gregory the Great
in his 31th. Book of Morals, Chap. 22. mention that Panl preached any where
else in the West, than in Italy and Spain, when he speaks after this manner:
Did not Paul show that he was an Eagle, when he now went to Judea, now to
Corinth, now to Ephesus, now to Rome, now to Spain, that he might preach the
Grace of Eternal Life to those who lay dead in Sin?

5. Neither are we concerned that St. D. Hreronymus, Labro de Seriptoribus.
Jerome in his Book de Scriptoribus affirms, Paul after his being freed from
Prison, to have preached the Gospel in the Western Parts, for although our
Author rightly concludes, that Britain is situated in the West, yet he must be
forced to confess, that there are many Regions in the West, Dpist. ad Romans,
cap. 15. mon. 24.
and that Paul did not preach the Faith in them all. Paul indeed promised that
he would go into Spain, but Baronius doubts whether he fulfilled his Promise,
although St. Jerome, who makes mention of none of the other Western Regions,
affirms it. The same Answer may be given concerning the Citation out of Clemens
Romanus, C^em^ns Eprsi. ad Com^^^.
who in his Epistle to the Corinthians, according to the Edition of Patricius
Junius, vid. number. V.
has these Words concerning Paul. That, preaching the Word both in the East
and West, his Faith had an Illustrious Fame; that instructing the whole World
in Righteousness, and coming to the Borders of the West, and suffering
Martyrdom under the Emperors, he so left this World. I read indeed here that
Paul came to the Borders of the West, that he came into Britain I cannot
understand. For Clemens Romanus does not testify that Paul came to all the
Western Coasts, for then he should have come to Flanders, Holland, Denmark, and
the rest of the Northern Seacoasts; he attests that he came to some of the
Western Borders, which was verified, if he only went through Spain, stopping at
its utmost Borders toward the Sea. And what is brought out of Venentius,
proves nothing, because it proves too much. Venantius. Quas Britannia habet,
and ultima Thule.
This Author says, that Paul in his Preaching past through those Territories
which Britain contains, and Thule the most remote. Now it is not at all likely,
that the Apostle went to the furthest part of Britain, which heretofore was
called Caledonia, and now Scotland, much less that he made a Voyage to Iceland,
the most remote of the Northern Islands, Tacitus: Hane or am novissimi maris
tunc primum R^mana classis circumvecta, insidam esse Britanniam aff^rmavit, ac
simul incognitas ad id tempus insulas, quas Orcadas vocant; invenit, demuitque,
dispecta est and Thyle, quam hactemis nix and hyems abdebat.
which Tacitus in the Life of Agricola is believed to have called Thyle,
neither is there extant in Antiquity, any Testimony of this.

6. These things being premised, I cannot sufficiently wonder with our Author,
what should move Joh. Launoy a Parisian Divine, when he was pressed by his
Adversaries with the forecited place of Clement, for the deriving of the
Antiquity of the Gallic Church from the time of the Apostles, to reject
Clement's Epipistle, when saving its Authority, he might have defended his
Opinion of the Gospels being first preached in France after the time of the
Apostles. It is not my Intention to defend Launoy's Opinion, who would not have
the Gospel to have been preached either in France or Britain in the time of the
Apostles; but when our Author had said that he could certainly prove the
contrary concerning Britain; it was allowable for me as I conceive, to expose
to the View of the Reader the weakness of those Arguments by which he thought
to have manifested the truth of this his Assertion. And it will be allowed me,
if I am not mistaken, to propose a Testimony which the Learned have brought to
prove that France received the Gospel long after the time of the Apostles.
Which is that of Severus Sulpitius, Severus Sulpitius, Lib. 2. vid. number. VI.
who after the beginning of the fifth Age, wrote, Lib. 2. Historiae Sacrae,
that, the fifth Persecution was carried on under Aurelius the Son of Antoninus,
and that then Martyrdoms were first seen in Gaul, the Christian Religion having
been more lately received beyond the Alps. Here are two things which Severus
testifies. One, which has relation to France, that before the time of
Aurelius, the Son of Antoninus, there were no Martyrdoms seen in France. The
other, which seems to have reference to England also, that the Christian
Religion was more lately received beyond the Alps. This latter, because it
thwarts his Opinion, our Author eludes by a Distinction, for he thinks fit to
distinguish between the thing, which is asserted by Severus, viz. that
Martyrdoms were then first seen: and the reason of the thing which follows,
because the Catholic Religion was more lately preached beyond the Alps. He
tells us that Severus was certain of the first, but doubtful concerning the
second, but there is no body but sees that this is feigned by the Author,
against the express Testimony of Severus, which confirms both these things to
be of the same certainty. He says that Martyrdom was first seen in France in
the time of Aurelius, and he says further, that the Christian Religion was more
lately received beyond the Alps. Both these things he tells as Truths, of
which he intimates himself to be equally certain; since therefore Britain is
situated on the further side of the Alps, it follows according to the
Authority of Severus Sulpitius, that the Christian Religion was more lately
received there.

7. Severus was by Nation a Gaul, and wrote about the Year 420. to whom, if we
will join an English Writer, we have Venerable Bede, who composing an
Ecclesiastical History of England above 1000. years since, has recorded that
the Christian Religion was in Britain about the very same time that Severus
tells us it was received beyond the Alps. You may read the History of
Venerable Bede, and you shall find nothing in it of the Gospels being preached
by the Apostles in Britain. The first mention that he makes of the Christian
Religion, has relation to the time of Pope Eleutherius. Venerabilis Beda, Lib.
1. Hist. Gentis Anglorum. vid. number. VII.
In the Year of our Lord 156, says he, Marcus Antonius Verus, the Fourteenth
from Augustus, reigned together with his Brother Aurelius Commodus, in whose
time, when the Holy Man Eleutherius was Pope, Lucius King of Britain sent an
Epistle to him, beseeching him, that by his Authority he might be made a
Christian, and soon after this, his Holy Request obtained effect, and the
Britains peaceably retained the Faith they had received inviolate and entire,
till the time of Dioclesian the Emperor. Martyrdoms were first seen in Gaul
under Aurelius the Son of Antoninus, Severus Sulpitius.
as Severus testifies. Bid, venerable for his Antiquity and Holiness,
testifies that the Christian Religion was received in Britain under Aurelius;
to which Testimony Tertullian seems to have shown the way, who lived near the
time of Aurelius the Emperor; and in his Book contra Judaeos, has declared,
that the Places heretofore inaccessible to the Romans, Tertullianus ^^ntra
judaeos. Brtrannorum, inquit, inaccessa Romany l^^a, Christo ve^e sub^^ta.
were subject to Christ. The places of the Britains inaccessible to the Romans,
says he, were subdued to Christ. As if he should have testified, that, the
Britains received the Faith of Christ, not long before the time he wrote; which
very well agrees with their having embraced the Faith in the time of
Eleutherius, seeing that Eleutherius, under whom Lucius was converted to the
Faith, lived not long before the time that Tertullian wrote.

8. Venerable Bede therefore rightly places the conversion of Britain under
Lucius; which is confirmed by a Manuscript History of the Kings of England,
Manuscriptus Codex Bsbl. Vat. Lucius m^sit litteras Ercutherio Pap^e pro
Chr^stianitate suserpienda, and abtinuit.
kept in the Vatican Library, in these Words; Lucius sent a Letter to Pope
Eleutherius, that he might be made a Christian, and he obtained his Request.
The same thing is testified not only by all the Writers of that Nation,
together with Marianus Scotus, but also by the German Writers, the French, the
Italian: Among which Sigebertus Gemblacensis in Chronico, Hermannus Contractus
in Chronici Compendio, Ado Viennensis in Martyrologio, may be consulted,
Anastasius B^bhoth, in Pontisicati.
as also Anastasius Bibliothecarius in Pontificiali Romano, where he testifies
concerning Pope Hic accepit epistolam a Lucio Britanico Rege, u^ Christianus
efficeretur per ejus mandatum.
Eleutherius; That he received a Letter from Lucius King of Britain, that he
might be made a Christian by his Command. This is taken out of the Catal^gus
Romanorum Pontificum tempore Just^iani imperatoris conscriptus.
ancient Catalogue of the Popes, that was writ in Justinian the Emperor's time,
which is extant in the Library of the Queen of Sweden, where under Eleutherius
the very same Words are found; so that there can be no doubt made of the
Conversion of Lucius under Pope Eleutherius, concerning which all agree;
although they do not so well agree about the Persons by whose means Lucius
desired of Eleutherius to be instructed in the Faith, and by whose aid
Eleutherius did not only convert Lucius, but also most of the Britains to the
Faith, and instituted a Church in that Country. Our Author admits that Eluanus
and Medroinus were sent by Lucius; and he gives this Account of the Embassy;
Eluanus and Edwinus were British Christians themselves, and therefore sent to
Eleutherius, Page 68.
having been probably the Persons employed to convince King Lucius; but he
knowing the great Fame of Rome, and it being told him, not only that there were
Christians there, but a Bishop in that City, the twelfth from the Apostles, had
a desire to understand how far the British Christians and those of Rome agreed;
and he might reasonably then presume, that the Christian Doctrine was there
truly taught, at so little distance from the Apostles, and in a place whither,
as Irenaeus argues in this Case, a resort was made from all Places because of
its being the Imperial City. These were reasonable considerations which might
move King Lucius, and not any Opinion of St Peter's having appointed the Head
of the Church there, of which there was no imagination then.

9. But since our Author confesses that Ambassadors were therefore sent by
Lucius to Rome, that they might perform that which the Faithful from all parts,
as Irenaeus testifies, were then used to perform, I would know this one thing
of him, where he finds, that they observed this by reason of the Principality
of the Roman City? Certainly he could not find this in the Words of Ireneus,
Ireneus Lib. 3. Cap. 3. Ad hanc enim Ecclesiam, inquit, propter potentiorem
principalitatem necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam.
which he mentions, and which are taken out of his third Book, Chap. 3. where
this Holy Bishop of Lions directs all the Faithful to the Roman Church. For to
this Church, says he, it is necessary that all Churches resort, by reason of
its more powerful Principality. But where in that place does Ireneus say, that
there must be resort made to Rome, because of its being the Imperial City? The
Author here find that in the Words of Ireneus, which that Father never in the
least meant by them. For Ireneus writes, not that the City, but the Church of
Rome, which was consecrated by the Blood of Peter and Paul, was to be consulted
in Controversies of Faith, and that all the Faithful under Heaven ought to
agree with the Roman Church, because of its more powerful Principality, not
because of the Principality of the Imperial City; its necessary, says Ireneus,
that resort be made to this Church by all other Churches, that is, by the
Faithful from all parts, because of its more powerful Principality. Therefore
the Supremacy of the Ecclesiastical Principality at Rome was the cause of
Lucius's sending an Embassy thither, not the Principality of the Imperial
City. For in the City of Rome, that I may use the Words of Honorius the
Emperor, not only the Imperial Seat was planted, but the Principle of the
Priesthood. And there also, as Honorius Imperator Epist. ad Theodosium
Augustum. In urbe Roma, non solum Romanum Principatum Domus Augusta obtinuit,
sed Principium quoque Sacerdotium accepit.
Augustine, Epist. 162. affirms, The Principality of the Apostolic See ever
prevailed. This Principality over the Church Christ gave to Peter, and Peter
left it to his Successors in the Roman See, which when our Author denies, he
opposes a Truth, which Peron the Glory of France, in his Answer to James King
of England, Chap. 23. proves from very many Canons of the Church, and
Testimonies of the Councils and Ancient Fathers. I should cite more of them,
were not the present Question chiefly concerning the Roman Bishops Patriarchal
Authority over the West, not his Supremacy over the Catholic Church; Divus
Augustinus Epist. 162.
therefore that we may keep close to that which we have undertaken to treat of,
let us conclude with our Author, that Lucius sent Ambassadors to Eleutherius,
that they might be informed of him in Matters of Faith; and let us acknowledge
with Ireneus, that the Britains no less than the Faithful in other parts of the
World, ought to agree with the Roman Church, because of its greater
Principality: to which let us add, with English Writers, that Eleutherius the
Roman Bishop made use of his Authority, when he ordained those Legates, who
being sent into Britain, baptized Lucius, settled Churches, and consecrated
Bishops; and from hence we may conclude, that to be true which I have in the
Title of this Chapter, taken upon me to prove, viz. That the British Church was
instituted either by St. Peter, or by those whom his Successors ordained
Priests.

CHAP. II. That the Bishop of Rome is Patriarch of the West, and therein even
of England: and that this follows, from the British Church's having received
her Institution either from him or from his Priests, as is proved by the
Testimony of Innocent.
1. The Roman Patriarchate over the whole Western Church, which is asserted in
the 17th Canon of the Eight General Council, our Author, likes not, His words
are recited. 2. He says that the way of proving the Patriarchal right from the
exercise of it, and the exercise fromthe right is ridiculous, although he
confesses that it is of force against de Marca and other Catholics, who admit
that the Pope is Patriarch over the whole West, against whom only I have used
that way of proof, so that it cannot be ridiculeus, as I use it. 3. Against
such Heretics who deny the Bishop of Rome to be Patriarch over the West, I have
not used that, but another way of proof, viz. the perpetual Tradition of the
Ancients, which the very Schismatic Greeks themselves have not been so bold as
to deny. 4. One of the ancient Testimonies, which I have brought for that
Tradition, is out of S. Augustine, who has plainly delivered, that Innocent
the First had not only a Supremacy of order and dignity over the Western Church
but also of Jurisdiction. 5. Another of them, is that of Innocent the First
himself, who relates that Churches were Instituted through all France, Spain,
Africa, Sicily, Italy, and the interjacent Islands, by Peter only, or his
Successors, or else by those whom they ordained Priests, and affirms that all
these Countries ought to acknowledge the Apostolic See as the Head of their
Institutions. 6. How Paul having preached at Rome, and it may be in other of the
Western parts proves nothing against this, is showed from Paul himself, who
reckons only such Churches amongst those which were instituted by his
Preaching, whom himself first taught the Faith, of which sort the Roman is not,
as having been planted by Peter before Paul's coming into Italy; the same may be
said of other Western Churches, supposing that Paul Preached in them. 7. Two
things are objected by our Author, the first in relation to matter of Fact,
whilst he denies that the Churches in the West, and especially in Britain, were
instituted only by Peter, or by Priests which had their mission from the
Apostolic See. The second to invalidate the reason alleged by Innocent, viz.
That there is no connection between the Institution of a Church and its
Subjection, and so that a Patriachal right over Churches does not accrue, from
the instituting of them. 8. The first Objection is answered, and it is showed
that we ought rather to believe Innocent, then the Author, about this matter of
Fact. For Innocent tells us that Churches were Instituted in the Islands, that
lay between Italy, Africa, Spain, and France, by Peter only: Now Britain may be
reckoned amongst these Islands, since it is not only adjacent to France but
interjacent as to some part; moreover it ought to be accounted in the number of
these, since it is made to appear that a Church was instituted in Britain, if
not by Peter, yet by the Priests that were sent by Eleutherius Peter's
Successor. 9. The second Objection is answered, and the reason drawn from
matter of Fact is made good; also the connection between the Institution of a
Church and its Subjection is showed, since a Church can be instituted by none
but him that has a true mission, and that has jurisdiction, which properly
appertains to a Superior, so that Innocent does rightly call the Apostolic See
the Head of the Institutions. 10. It is showed, that what is objected by the
Author coucerning Churches being instituted through all Bavaria, and Rhetia by
King Lucius, depends upon weak Testimonies, which if they were true, would make
nothing for the Authority of the English Church, over Bavaria and Rhetia,
unless it could be made out that Lucius was sent into those parts by Authority
of the English Church, and that he ordained Bishops by the same Authority;
which will never be proved. 11. For the Subjecting of Bishops of a Country to
any Patriarch by virtue of their Ordination, it is sufficient, that their first
Bishop be Ordained by this Patriarch; as is proved from the the example of
Frumentius the first Bishop of Aethiopia, the Testimonies of Nicolaus the
first, Gregory the Great, and the eighth general Council.


1. HAving treated in the foregoing Chapter, of the Origin, or first
Institution of the British Church, we are now to treat of its Subjection to the
Roman Bishop as Patriarch of the West, concerning which our Author in his Third
Chapter states the Question against me in these words: Author. p. 112.
The present Keeper of the Vatican Library -- having endeavored in a set
Discourse, to assert the Popes Patriarchal Power over the Western Churches, I
shall here examine the strength of all that he produces to that purpose. He
agrees with us in determining the Patriarchal Rights, which, he says, lie in
these three things: (1.) In the right of Consecration of Bishops and
Metropolitans. (2.) In the right of summoning them to Councils. (3.) In the
right of Appeals. All which he proves to be just and true Patriarchal Rights
from the Seventeenth Canon of the eighth general Council. And by these we are
contented to stand or fall. So this Author in the very beginning of his
Disputation; who if he would hear the Rule of the Eighth general Council might
plainly be showed to have been vanquished before he began to fight. For that
Canon was made to renew the Bishop of Romes Patriarchal authority over the
Metropolitans in the West; which does not at all promote our Authors design,
but quite overthrows it, as we shall see hereafter.

2. In the mean time let us proceed to the Authers Pleas, by which he contends,
I have not rightly proved that the three Patriarchal Rights above mentioned
belong to the Roman Bishop over all the West. For when I had confirmed the
Right from the use of those Countries, in which the Roman Bishop had exercised
it, I showed from the Right it self, that the exercise or use thereof did
belong to him, even in those other Regions of the West, where by reason of some
certain privileges granted them, he often abstained from the exercise of this
Right. But our Author complains of this as an absurd way of arguing For this
way of proving, says he, is ridiculous; viz. Author. p. 119
to prove that the Pope had Patriarchal Rights, because he exercised them; and
then to say, though he did not exercise them; yet he had them and so prove that
he had them because he was Patriarch of the West. And, as it follo^s, Author.
p. 12^
this way of proving may be good against de Marca, who had granted the Pope to
be the Western Patriarch: but it is ridiculous to those that deny it. Here
again the Author stumbles, and makes himself a laughing stock, whilst he
endeavors to expose me as so, for the way of proof which I have used. He
confesses that the way of proof which I have taken is good against de Marca,
and all those that call the Pope the Patriarch of the West, which all Catholics
did until the year 1678, wherein I published my Book entitled, Antiquitas
Illustrata, although all Catholics did not agree that there was a perpetual
exercise of the Patriarchal Jurisdiction in all the Western Provinces, I did
therefore treat, [ Disert. 2. Antiquitatis Illustratae, cap. 4.] in three
Articles, concerning the threefold Patriarchal Right above mentioned, against
those Catholics, who allowed the Roman Bishop to be Patriarch of the West, but
notwithstanding contended, that he ought not to exercise a Patriarchal
Jurisdiction in all the Western Parts, using that way of Proof, which the
Author himself confesses of force against them, so that it cannot be at all
ridiculous.

3. And I know not upon what account he can object to me, that this way of
arguing is not of force against him who at this time undertakes to deny the
Bishop of Romes Patriarchal Right over the whole West. For, to speak the truth,
could I divine seven years since, that six years after that, an English Author
should oppose the Roman Bishops Patriarchate, which James King of England,
Jacobus Rex Anglie.
[In Apologia pro Juramento Fidelitatis,] plainly admitted. I know, says he,
that there were Patriarchs in the Primitive Church. And afterward; there was
great contention amongst them for the Supremacy: then he adds. But if the
Question were still about this matter, the Roman Bishop should have my suffrage
for the Precedence. I being a Western King would adhere to the Western
Patriarch. Here both the former and the latter words of King James are to be
observed. He affirms in the former that there were Patriarchs in the Primitive
Church, that is, when a Church began first to be propagated: in the latter,
that if the Question were now put, concerning the chief Patriarch, he would
adhere to the Roman, as being Patriarch of all the West. Which is expressed in
those words: I being a Western King would adhere to the Western Patriarch.
Which having been written many years since, by a King of famous memory, in that
work of his which he set forth on behalf of the English Church; could I foresee
that the Dean of London a Minister of the same English Church, when the
Question was about Patriarchs, would deny the Western Patriarchate. It may be
he will say that all Catholies do not agree in the thing, as appears from the
Book of a late Author [de Disciplina Ecclesiae.] But I ask again, could I
foresee, that on the fourteenth day of November in this Year 1686, at which
time I had not only finished this Discourse, but had likewise printed the first
sheet of it, a Book lately published would come to my hands, in which the
Author, being tainted with the itch of novelty, should deny the Roman Bishops
Patriarchate over the West, which all France, even till that time, had
undertaken to defend against Schismatics and Heretics? which Perron, Sirmondus,
de Marca, and other Writers of the Gallican Church had defended against the
Heretic Salmasius, and against his ringleaders or followers, besides whom, no
body in those times denied the Popes Patriarchate over the West. Against these
therefore I employed my Pen, not using the former, but another way of Proof,
and demonstrated the Roman Patriarchate to extend it self over all the West.
For besides the Question against Catholics, concerning the exercise of
Patriarchal Jurisdiction, I stated another against Heretics, concerning the
Patriarchal Right it self, which belongs to the Bishop of Rome over all the
West: and that I proved by the perpetual Tradition of the Ancients, which was
so well known to the whole Christian Church, before the rise of modern Heresy,
that the Schismatic Greeks themselves maintained this truth, insomuch, that not
only Nilus Bishop of Thessalonica has written, Nilus Thessalonicensis: Romano
Episcopo hoc datum esse, ut Occidentalibus praesit. Barlaam Monachus:
Occidentales E^clesias Papae Gabernationi a Sauctis Patribus fuisse commendatas.
That it was granted to the Roman Bishop to Preside over the West, but also
Barlaam the Monk [ cap. 2. libri de Primatu Papae] has openly professed that the
Western Churches were by the Holy Fathers commended to the Government of the
Pope. I have alleged many of those Authorities, [ in Dissert. 2. Antiq.
Illustratae,] which Barlaam commends, without the recital of the Names of those
Holy men that wrote them; I am not at leisure now to repeat them all: I shall
only cite two of them at present, one of Augustine, the other of Pope Innocent,
who at the same time, though in different Regions, adorned the Church with
their Sanctity and Learning

4. Augustines Testimony is [ lib. 1. contra Julianum cap. 2.] where, having
cited the Testimony of some of the Fathers, viz, Cyprians of Africa, those of
Ireneus, Hilarious, and others of France, and St. Ambrose's of Italy, he thus
expostulates with Julian the Disciple of Pelagius the Britain: D. Augustinus:
An ideo contemnendos putaes, quia Occidentaiis Ecclesie s^mt ^nnes, nec n^^ut
in eis often commemoratus Ortentis Episcopus? Quid ergo faciemus, cum the Gre^^
sint, nes Latini? puto tihi came partem Orbis suffice^^ dehere, in qua prim^m
Ap^^olo^um s^orum v^^uit D^minus gl^ri^sissimo Mar^^rio c^^nari chi E^^^^^a
pr^^sidente^^ B. Lu^ce^^ium si ^^dire vol^^^es, sam ture po^^^ui^^am
^^ventutern tuam Pelagianis laqueis ex^^^^es.
do you therefore think that they are to be contemned, because they are all of
the Wesiern Church, and no Eastern Bishop is mentioned amongst them? What
therefore shall we do, says Augustine, since they are Greeks and we Latins? I
think, that part of the World ought to suffice you, in which our Lord was
pleased to have the chief of his Apostles crowned with a most glorious
Martyrdom; if you would have heard St. Innocent the President of this Church,
even then your dangerous Youth might have avoided the Snares of Pelagius. Thus
speaks Augustine of Innocent the first, whose Presidence as special Head of the
Western Church could not have been expressed in more clear words. For although
our Author would have it, Author, p. 131.
That Augustine only thereby shows the Order and Dignity of the Roman See, but
does not own any Subjection of the Western Churches to his Power, since no
Church did more vehemently withstand the Bishop of Romes Encroachments, than
the Churches of Africa did in St. Augustine's time. Yet there is no body but
may see, that this subterfuge was invented merely to elude the force of this
Testimony; for it is false, that the African Church was exempted from
Subjection to the Roman, neither do the contests of the African Church for a
short time, about the exercise of some particular Jurisdictions, which were
ended after they had owned the Canons of the Council of Sardica, evince this.
St. Augustine gives his Testimony for the Patriarchal Right, by which the Roman
Bishop especially presides over the Western Church: neither can it be said,
that Africa was not reckoned by him amongst the Western Churches. For Cyprian
accounts the Primate of all Africa to be of the number of those Bishops, which
he affirms to be Western Bishops, and discinguishes them from the Eastern.
Therefore Africa appertaind to the Western Church; over which Churches Innocent
Presided, and that the President of it, when he, not by virtue of his Order and
Dignity, but by his Authority, condemned the Pelagian Heresy, ought to have
been heard by Julian, is here signified by Augustine; as also the whole African
Church had heard him, after they had referred the matter of that Heresy to him,
as their Head. For when aster the referring of the cause, they had received
Rescripts back from the Apostolic See: Now concerning this matter says
Augustine, [ de verbis Apostoli, Sermon. D. Augustinus. Jam de hac causa due
Concilia mi^sa sunt ad sedem Apostolicam, inde etram rescripta venerunt, causa
si nita est, error utinam finiatur.
2.] two Councils have been sent to the Apostolic See, from thence also
Rescripts have been sent back, the Cause is determined, would to God the Error
were extinguished. Thus Augustine shows that to be false and erroneous, which a
late Author [de Disciplina Ecclesiae] has rashly uttered, viz. that the
Africans did acknowledge no Patriarchal Jurisdiction of the Roman Bishop over
their Province, and that nothing further could be collected from Augustine,
then that the Roman Bishop had a Primacy amongst the Western Bishops.

5. We have heard Augustine, now let us hear Innocent himself, whom Augustine
extols. For that most holy Man does not only claim to himself, as Bishop of the
Universal Church, a Power to determine in the Cause of the Pelagians, but also
challenges this as of special Right too, belonging to him, as he was the Head
of the African, and the other Occidental Churches, in his Epistle (ad Decentium
Eugubinum Episcopum) in these Words: Inoncentius I. vid. in. p. 24. Vidnum.
VIII.
For who does not know, or not consider, that what was delivered by Peter the
Prince of the Apostles to the Roman Church, and is kept till this very Day,
ought to be observed by all, and that nothing is to be superadded or
introduced, which either has not Authority, or may seem to take Example from
elsewhere? Especially since it is manifest, that none have instituted Churches
in all Italy, France, Spain, Africa, Sicily, and the interjacent Islands, but
those which the venerable Apostle Peter or his Successors have ordained
Priests. Or let them search, whether any of the other Apostles is found, or
read to have taught in those Provinces; if they do not read this, because they
no where find it, they ought to follow that which the Roman Church observes,
from whence, no doubt, they had their Original, least in giving themselves
selves up to the Assertions of Strangers, they may seem to wave the Head of
their Institutions. This Testimony of Innocent the First, is very considerable;
by which it appears, either that St. Peter, or those whom he or his Successors
made Priests, instituted Churches through all Italy, France, Spain, Africa,
Sicily, and the interjacent Islands, and therefore that these ought to
acknowledge the Roman Church as their special Head. For this he expressly
declares in those last Words: Least in giving themselves up to the Assertions
of Strangers, they may seem to wave the Head of their Institutions.

6. Neither is there just cause why any one should object to Innocent, that the
Apostle Paul preached two years at Rome, and that this appears from the Acts of
the Apostles which were writ by Luke, Paul's inseparable Companion. For the most
Eminent Cardinal Baronius in his Annals ( Tome 1. ad An. 4) makes answer, that
under the name of Peter, Paul also is to be comprehended; and if the answer of
this Parent of Annals do not fully satisfy you, let us interpret Innocent's
Mind by his own Words, and show that Peter only preached in the West, in that
sense, wherein the most Holy Pope asserts him to have preached. Innocent speaks
in the Place before cited, concerning that Apostolical Preaching by which
Churches were instituted in the Western Regions, not of that which the Churches
had after they were once constituted; after the same manner that Paul the
Apostle himself, in the Epistle to the Romans, Chap. 15. spoke concerning the
Churches that were instituted by him: From Jerusalem and round about to
Illyricum, Romans 15.
I have fully preached the Gospel of Christ. Yea, so have I strived to preach
the Gospel, not where Christ was named, lest I should build upon another man's
Foundation, but as it is written, to whom he was not spoken of. From which
Words it is plain that Paul reckons no Church in the number of those that he
had preached to, wherein the Gospel was preached before; which being so, and
evidently so, from his own Words, the Roman Church is not to be reckoned as one
of those which were instituted by Paul; for that was instituted before his
coming to the City, as is plain from his Epistle to the Romans; which, as the
very Words of it show, was written before he came to Rome; and yet he asserted
that even then when he wrote there was a Church instituted at Rome, because
Chap. 26. he sends his Salutation to many of the Faithful at Rome, and Chap. 1.
he derects his Epistle to all that be in Rome, beloved of God, called to be
Saints, and expressed, their Faith was spoken of throughout the whole World.
Therefore Paul does not suffer us to reckon the Roman Church among those which
he by his preaching, instituted; which Innocent the First knowing of, declared
that Peter only preached at Rome, because he had found that the Roman Church
was instituted by Peter before Paul came to that City: the same may be said of
Spain, and the other Regions, if any shall believe that Paul at any time
preached in them; for there was a Church founded in them before, either by
Peter, or by those Priests which Peter had ordained and sent to those Parts; so
that the preaching of Paul was no Argument against Peter's instituting those
Churches, which way of preaching, and no other is here meant by Innocent,
whilst he attributes the Institution of the Occidental Churches solely to
Peter, or to the Priests that were sent either by him or his Successors.

7. These things therefore being premised for the better understanding of the
Testimony of Innocent, we are now to answer the Authors two Objections, the
former of which impugns the Matter of Fact, the latter, the reason of the
thing, deduced from the Matter of Fact. Both which Objections, he proposes in
these Words: But the Matter of Fact, says he, Author, p. 132.
is far from being evident, for we have great reason to believe, there were
Churches planted in the Western Parts, neither by Peter, nor by those who were
sent by his Successors, yet let that be granted: what connection is there
between receiving the Christian Doctrine at first by those who came from
thence, and an Obligation to be subject to the Bishops of Rome in all their
Orders and Traditions? The Patriarchal Government of the Church was not founded
upon this, but upon the ancient Custom and Rules of the Church, as fully
appears by the Council of Nice. -- And, as to the British Churches, this very
Plea of Innocent will be a farther Evidence for their Exemption from the Roman
Patriarchate; since Britain cannot be comprehended within those Islands which
lie between Italy, Gaul, Spain, Africa, and Sicily, which can only be
understood of those Islands which are situate in the Mediterranean Sea.

8. These two Objections which the Author here joins together are to be handled
distinctly. And in the first place, that we may speak to that which concerns
Matter of Fact, the Author says that all the Churches in the West were not
instituted by Peter, or those whom the Apostolical See ordained. Innocent
testifies the contrary of Italy, Africa, France, Spain and the interjacent
Islands; which of these shall we give credit to? an English Writer, who upon
his own Authority denies this, when many hundred Monuments of Antiquity are
lost in sixteen hundred years time; or the most Holy Pope, who lived above one
thousand two hundred and seventy years since, and had the Opportunity of seeing
many Monuments of Antiquity, in the Registry of the Apostolic See concerning
this Matter, and constantly affirms it? If we ask the Opinion of our Ancestors,
as well those who lived in England, as in the rest of the Western Parts, adhere
to the Testimony of Innocent, since, from the time of Dionysius Exiguus, they
have received it as authentic, and have placed it amongst the Decretal
Epistles, religiously venerated by the whole Western Church. It appears then by
the Testimony of Innocent, which has been approved by the Judgment of all the
West for almost twelve Centuries, that no one has instituted Churches, either
in Italy, Africa, France, Spain, or the interjacent Islands, but Peter the
Apostle, or those which he or his Successors have ordained Priests; so that
it is in vain for our Author to presume that England, after so many Ages,
teaches otherwise, and to affirm that this Testimony of Innocent does not
comprehend the British Churches. De Marca understood Innocent quite in a
different sense, supposing that the British Islands were understood by the
Islands mentioned by Innocent: the Reason is, because Innocent did not mention
by name, those Islands of the Mediterranean Sea, which lie between Italy,
France and Africa, but only mentions the interjacent Islands in general, under
which the British Islands adjacent to France, and partly interjacent, might,
and, if we will believe ancient Writers, ought to be comprehended. For from
them it appears, as is before proved, that the Churches in the British Islands
were instituted, if not by Peter the Apostle, or by Preachers sent by him, yet
at least by the Priests which his Successor Eleutherius constituted.

9. Thus have I answered the Objection concerning Matter of Fact; and now
proceed to the Second, which the Author urges against the Reason drawn from the
Matter of Fact. Innocent so manifestly concludes from the Institution of the
Western Churches, that they ought to be subject to the Roman Patriarch, that
our Author confesses it cannot be denied. Yet says he, let that be granted;
what connection is there between receiving the Doctrine at first, by those who
came from thence, and an Obligation to be subject to the Bishops of Rome in all
their Orders and Traditions? He asks the Reason of this Connection, let him hear
it from Christ, who would not have his Apostles to preach through the World,
unless they were sent; for being about to ascend into Heaven, he spoke to them
in these Words, [as we find in the last Chapter of Mark] Go ye into all the
World, Mark. Chap. Last.
and preach the Gospel to every Creature. And let him answer the Apostle Paul,
thus asking, in his Epistle to the Romans; For how shall they preach, unless
they are sent? Epist. to the Romans.
Does not the Apostle here affirm, that Mission is necessary in order to
preaching of the Gospel? Ought not all to acknowledge that there ought to be a
special Authority, when Churches are to be instituted by preaching, and Priests
and Bishops to be ordained? So the Apostles having received Power from Heaven,
undertook to instruct the World by their preaching, and dividing amongst
themselves the Regions of the whole Earth, instituted Churches, of which, those
only obtained Patriarchal Dignity, in which, Peter, either by himself, or by
Mark his Disciple, had placed Sees. He himself presided at Antioch, where he
erected a See, which governed the Eastern Patriarchate. He sent Mark the
Evangelist his Disciple to Alexandria, whose See there erected constituted a
Patriarchate, which in St. Athanasius's time extended its Borders as far as
India interior. Carolus a S. Paulo in Geographia Sacra.
For as Carolus a S. Paulo [in his Geographia Sacra] truly observes: This
Custom prevailed amongst the Ancients, that the Provinces which were converted
to Christianity, should remain subject to that Patriarch, by whose Industry and
Vigilance they were first converted: and so Aethiopia and India interior
appertained to the Sea of Alexandria, because Frumentius being sent thither by
St. Athanasius, preached the Gospel, instructed the People in the Faith, and
ordained their Bishops, as Ruffinus testifies, he had learned from Aedesius. So
that it ought not to seem strange to us, that the Sea of Rome should have
obtained the Patriarchate of the West, since the Prince of the Apostles chose
that City for himself, and instituted Churches throughout the West, and no
other Apostle ordained Bishops or Priests there, but he reserved this Power to
himself and his Successors. This therefore is the Connection between the
receiving of their Doctrine from those which were sent from Rome, and the
Subjection of such who were converted by them, which had their Mission from the
Apostolic See; because those Churches owe their Institution to the special
Authority of the Roman Bishop; so that Innocent the First rightly said, that
the Churches which had their Institution from the Apostolic See, ought not to
attend to the Instruction of Strangers, but to consult the Roman Bishop, Ne
caput Institutionum videantar omittere.
least they might seem to omit a chief point of their Institutions.

10. The Author obviates this argument, [ p. 68] by asserting from ancient
Tradition out of Notkerus, Notkerus Balbulus. 8 Calend. Junii. Author. p. 59.
that Lucius after he was converted leaving his Kingdom, converted all Rhetia
and part of Bavaria to the Christian Faith, by his Preaching and Miracles. If
so, says our Author, -- the British Church on the account of King Lucius his
converting their Country, has as much Right to challenge Superiority over
Bavaria and Rhetia, as the Church of Rome has over the British Church on the
account of the Conversion of Lucius by Eleutherius. The first words of the
Author here, are to be observed, [If so,] says he, so that he seems very much
to doubt of the truth of the thing. Neither can it be said that the matter of
fact is evident: for whether we consult Regino Abbas Prumiensis, Hermannus
Contractus, Sigebertus Gemblacensis, or other German Historians; Or Galfridus
Monemuthensis, Mattheus Westmonasteriensis, and other English Writers, these
latter write that Lucius died in Britain; the former do not tell us that he
Preached the Gospel in Germany, and there suffered Martyrdom. And, if we look
into the more ancient Martyrologies, we shall not find one word in them, of
Lucius his dying in Germany. Venerable Bede may be consulted, who has nothing,
either at the Third of November or any other day, concerning this matter. Also
a more ancient Martyrology of the Western Church attributed to St. Jerome,
lately Printed at Lucca makes no mention of Lucius his being buried in Germany.
An old Martyrology set forth by Rosweidus since Baronius died, no where makes
mention of Lucius King of England, his being the Apostle of Bavaria and Rhetia.
Nor is he remembered in the Martyrologies of Rhabanas Maurus, Vsuardus, and Ado
Viennensis; And Notkerus is the first of all men, who has made mention of the
Apostleship of Lucius in a Martyrology; who notwithstanding doubted, whether
Lucius King of England were the Apostle of Bavaria and Rhetia, or some other
Holy man named Lucius. Whether, says he [ ad 5. Kal. Jun.] it was he that was
heretofore King, or whatsoever servant of God it was. So that the thing was
doubted of in Germany it self where Notkerus wrote, Notkerius in Martyrologio.
Sive Rex, quondam ille, sive quicunque servus Dei fuerit.
even in Notkerus his time. And if it were another Lucius, and not the King of
England, who was Apostle of Bavaria, if I mistake not, our Authors argument for
Englands Authority over Bavaria falls to the ground, which indeed could not
have been urged by him to any purpose, though he had been sure that King Lucius
had Preached to Bavaria and Rhetia: unless he could first have proved, that
Lucius his Mission was by the Authority of the British Church, and that his
Episcopacy owed its Original to the British and not to the Roman Church, which
he will never be able to prove, it being as easy to contradict this as to
assert it.

11. But the better to clear this matter, we are to take notice, that, for the
subjecting a Province to any certain Patriarchate, it is not required, that its
Bishops should be always ordained by the Patriarch, but it suffices that they
owe their Original institution to him, that is, that the first Bishop of such
Region, by whom others were afterward ordained, Ruffinus.
was instituted by this Patriarch. So, as we have seen above, Aethiopia was
^dd^d to the Patriarchate of Alexandria, in the time (...) ^^stantine the
Great, because, as Ruffinus (...) ] Frumentius was ordained first, as (...)dom,
by St. Athanasius: For (...) of Aethiopia from that time, did not go to
Alexandria for Ordination, Nicolaus 1. number. 73. epist. ad Bulgar. Vid. number. IX.
yet they all remained Subject to the Patriarch of Alexandria, to whom they owe
the Original of their Episcopacy: and so Nicolaus the first answered the
Bulgarians when it was put to him, [ number. 73.] this order is to be observed by
you, you are now to have a Bishop consecrated for you by the Prelate of the
Apolic See, who, if the number of Christians are increased through his
industry, may receive from us the Privilege of being an Archbishop, and so at
length may constitute Bishops himself, who may choose a Successor to the
Archbishopric, when it shall become void by his death: and he which is new
elected, needs not come hither to be consecrated; because the journey would be
long; but let the Bishops which were consecrated by the late Archbishop,
assemble together and constitute him: who notwithstanding is not to be
inthronised, neither to consecrate any thing but the body of Christ, before he
receive the Pall from the Sea of Rome; as it is proved to be the practice of
all he Archbishops of France, Germany, and other Regions. Nicolaus the first
speaks here of the Bulgarians newly to be converted to the Faith, who he was
assured ought to be subject to his Patriarchate. Now he did not think that it
was requisite, in order to this, that their Bishops should be perpetually
ordained by the Roman Prelates but reserved to himself only the Ordination of
their first Archbishop, and required, that his Successors, as an acknowledgment
of the Patriarchal Authority, should, as in duty bound, only receive the Pall
from the Roman See, as he testifies it to have been the custom not only of the
Archbishops of France and Germany, but also of other Countries. Amongst which
Countries Britain was so to be reckoned, Venerabilis Beda.
as Venerable Bede confirms [ lib. 1. Ecclesiast. Histor. Gentis Anglorum cap.
29.] where he recites the Epistle of Gregory the Great to Augustine Legate of
the Apostolic See in Britain, Gregorius Magnus, Epistiad Augustinum Monachum.
Londinensis Episcopus semper in posterum a Synodo propria debet consecrari,
atque honoris pallium a Sede Apostolica accipere. Honorius 1. Epist. ad
Edwinum. Vid. number. X.
to whom that most Holy Bishop gave Power to ordain the Archbishop of London,
and his twelve Suffragans, so, notwithstanding, that ever for the future the
Bishop of London was to be consecrated by his own Synod, and to receive the
honorary Pall from the Apostolic See. He writes, that the Archboship of York
was to be instituted after the same manner, if so be that the Catholic Religion
should at any time be further propagated; which having come to pass in the time
of Honorius the first, this Pope being sent to by Edwin King of England wrote
back in this manner: We have directed two Palls to Honorius and Paulinus
Metropolitan Bishops, that when either of them shall be called out of this
World to his Creator, the other may by virtue of this our Authority substitute
another Bishop in his place, which as well by reason of your affectionate
Charity, as because of the length of the journey lying through so many large
Provinces, as are known to be between you and us, we are invited to grant, that
we may concur with your Devotion in all things, according to your desire.
Venerable Bede [ cap. 18.] commenting upon these words, tells us, that
therefore a power was indulged to one of the British Archbishops to consecrate
the other, that they might not be always under a necessity of taking toylsom
journey's to the City of Rome through so long spaces both of Land and Sea, for
the Ordaining of an Archbishop. So that from these times it has been
sufficient to acknowledge the Authority of the Patriarchal See by receiving the
Pall: neither did the eighth General Council require any more, Venerab. Beda.
Vid. number. XI.
decreeing [ Canon 17. according to the version of Anastasius Bibliothecarius]
that the ancient custom was to be observed both in old and new Rome, Canon 17.
Sonodi Generalis 8. Vid. number. XII.
that their Prelates should have power over all the Metropolitans which are
promoted by them, and that receive confirmation of their Episcopal dignity,
either by imposition of hands, or by delivery of the Pall, viz. to call them to
a Synod, if need require, as also to restrain and correct them, if it happen
that fame accuses them of any offenses. According to which Canon the
Metropolitans of Britain, who received confirmation of their Episcopal Dignity,
by virtue of the Pall sent from the Patriarch of old Rome, are declared to be
subject to his Power, and that according to the judgment of the Nicene Fathers,
who, in their Sixth Canon, have acknowledged the Patriarchal Power of the Roman
Bishop: for so the Eighth Synod has interpreted that Power, as believing it to
be ownd by the Susception of the Pall from thence: whence it is plain, that our
Author, if he will understand the Nicene Canon according to the interpretation
of the Eighth General Synod, has lost the cause, and that he has nothing to
produce, whereby he can prove that Britain is exempted from the Roman
Patriarchate.

CHAP. III. Although the British Church had not received its Institution from
the Roman, yet it is showed, from the Example of the Illyrican Church, that by
ancient Custom time out of mind, it might be subject to it, and moreover that
it ought to be so.
1. The Distribution of Churches under Patriarchs, had not its Original only
from the Ordination of their Bishops, but also from ancient Custom; the
beginning of which not being known, is believed to have been from the time of
the Apostles: from which Principle De Marca shows, that although Innocent does
not mention the Illyrican Churches as instituted by Peter, yet that they were
subject to the Roman Patriarch. 2. The Epistles to the Bishops of Rome, to the
Bishops of Thessalonica and Illyricum, which the Legates of Adrian the Second,
and Nicholaus the Frist have made mention of, were not set forth in the time of
De Marca Archbishop of Paris, but have been published since his Death by Lucas
Holstenius. 3. Out of these, the Testimonies of Innocent the First to Anysius,
Caelestine the First to Perigenes, Sixtus the Third to the same; as also to the
Synod of Thessalonica, are produced; from whence it is made to appear, that
Theodosius Echiniensis has rightly concluded for the Roman Bishop's
Patriarchal Authority over Illyricum. 4. Now least any one should conclude from
the foresaid Testimonies, that the British Churches were equally subject to the
Roman Patriarchate, with those of Illyricum, the Author strives to prove, that
the Bishop of Thessalonica was first made Vicar of the Apostolic See in
Illyricum, that it might the better withstand the Bishop of Constantinople, who
took upon him to hear the Cause of Perigenes; and that Pausanius, Cyriacus and
Calliopus Bishops of Thessaly, opposed Pope Damasus in this thing, and were
therefore condemned by Bonifacius. 5. Against which it is showed that the Cause
of Perigenes was one thing, and the Cause of Perevius another, and that the
three forementioned Bishops of Thessaly were not excommunicated because they
withstood the Pope in the Cause of Perigenes, but in that of Perevius, who had
been rightly ordained. 6. The Cause of Perigenes is another thing, and there
might a Controversy arise, by reason of this, between the two Churches of New
and Old Rome, because the Bishop of New-Rome had assumed to himself the
deciding of it, and had obtained a Law from Theodosius the Emperor to justify
this his Usurpation. 7. The Law of Theodosius was made, not against the
Patriarchal Right of the Bishop of Rome, but against the Usurpation of the
Bishop of Constantinople, and supposes the ancient Roman Patriarchal Right over
Illyricum; which also Bonifacius has not omitted to urge against the
Usurpation of the Bishop of Constantinople. 8. Bonifacius desired nothing
against the Usurpation of the Constantinopolitan See but what was agreeable to
the Canons, and according to the ancient Order; as appears by the Epistle of
Honorius to Theodosius, and is confirmed by the Rescript of Theodosius, wherein
he revokes his above mentioned Edict. 9. It may be proved from the Example of
Illyricum, that Britain is subject to the Roman Patriarchate, although it had
not been first instituted in Christianity by the Bishop of Rome; for besides
the Institution of Churches, there is an ancient Custom, which, since we are
ignorant when it first began, is believed to have been derived from the time of
the Apostles, as is proved by the Testimony of Leo the First. 10. Upon this
Apostolical Institution is founded the British Churches Subjection to the Roman
Patriarch, of which Agatho the Pope, a hundred and five Western Bishops, and
all the Eastern Prelates, in the sixth Synod, made no doubt when they admitted
the British Synods to be subordinate to the Patriarchal Synod at Rome. Which
Justinian the Emperor has showed before Pope Agatho 's time, affirming that
the Roman Patriarch was the Primate of all Hesperia; and long before Justinian,
the Synod of Arles said the same; as shall be showed in the following Chapter.


1. I Have showed in the last Chapter that the English Church appertains to the
Roman Patriarchate by Right of Institution. In this Chapter I am to show that
it is subject to it, although it had not received its first Institution from
the Apostolic See; for the Confirmation of which Truth, we are to observe, that
the Argument for the Subjection of Churches, is not only drawn from their
Institution, but also from the ancient Custom of the Church, which, since we
know not the first beginning of, is believed to have proceeded from Apostolical
Prescript. A great part of Illyricum was converted to the Faith by the
preaching of Paul the Apostle of the Gentiles, who instituted Churches, and
ordained Bishops there, from whence it comes to pass that Innocent has not
reckoned the Provinces of Illyricum amongst those which were instituted by
Peter or his Successors: notwithstanding, the Illyrican Diocese was not
exempted from the Jurisdiction of the Roman Patriarchate. For it may be
collected even from Innocent himself, though he has not named the Illyrican
Church amongst those which were instituted by the Apostolic See, yet that it
was subject to the Roman Patriarchate. According as De Marca Archbishop of
Paris has collected [ Lib. 1. de concordia Sacerdotii and Imperii, Cap. 4.
Number. 3.] where having related the Testimony of Innocent concerning the Churches
in the West, that were instituted by the Apostolic See: De Marca.
The Diocesses, says he, of the Illyrican Church are only wanting to our
Account, which Innocent has not made mention of in this place. It is
notwithstanding certain, that these, no less than the rest of the Western
Provinces, did obey the Apostolic See, and honored it as the Head of the
Churches. Do not take the thing upon my Credit. Let Innocent speak for himself,
in that Epistle which he wrote to Rufus Bishop of Thessalonica, (which was the
Metropolis of Illyricum) and to the rest of the Bishops of Macedonia;
Innocentius Epistola ad Rufum. Adverti sedi Apostolic^e, ad quam relatio
tanquam ad caput Ecclesiarum missa currebat, aliquam fieri injuriam, cujus
adbuc in ambiguum sententia duceretur.
when he answered their Letters, which were brought to him by Vitalis the
Archdeacon. I have taken notice that there has been some Injury offered to
the Apostolic See, to which there came an Appeal, being sent to it as the Head
of Churches, concerning which Injury the Sentence was yet accounted ambiguous.
And moreover in another place, Innocent exercised the Patriarchal Authority in
retracting the Sentence of Bubalius and Taurianus Illyrican Bishops; so that
there can remain no doubt, but the Patriarchal Authority of the Bishop of Rome
extended as well to the Illyrican, as to the rest of the Diocesses of the West.

2. De Marca writ forty years since, when other Epistles of Innocent, and many
other Roman Bishops concerning the Power of the Roman Patriarchate over
Illyricum were not yet set forth; of which, the Legates that were sent by
Adrian the Second to Constantinople, in the Dissertation against the Vicars of
the Orientals, who contended that Bulgaria did not appertain to the Ordination
of the Roman Church, Apud Anastatium Biblioth. Legati Adriani II. Vid. number.
XIII.
have made mention: The Apostolic See, say they, as you may learn from the
Decretals of the most Holy Roman Prelates, has from ancient time canonically
ordained and exercised Authority over both the Epiruses, viz. the New and the
Old, all Thessaly and Dardania, in which the City Dardania is now to be seen;
the country in which it is, being now from these Bulgarians called Bulgaria.
Nicholaus the First gives us the Names of those Roman Bishops, which the
Lagates sent by Adrian the Second to Constantinople, makes mention of without
reciting their Names [ Epist. 2] Nicholaus primus Epist. ad Michaclem
Imperat^r^m. Vid. ^um. XIV.
when he wrote to Michael the Emperor concerning the Illyrican Diocese: Which
was in the time of our Ancestors enlarged by the Sacred Dispositions of the
Holy Popes, Damasus, Siriciu^, Innocentius, Bonifacius, Coelestinus, Sixtus,
Leo, Hilarious, Simplicius, Faelix, Hormisda. Whose Institutions, signed by them
in those Parts, we have taken care to direct to your Imperial Majesty by our
Legates, to the intent that you may know the truth of this Matter. And the
Decretal Epistles of these Popes which were extant in the times of Adrian the
Second, and Nicholaus the First, are those which De Marca never saw, and which
the learned Men of his Time lamented the loss of, as a great Damage to
Ecclesiastical Learning; the Apostolic See it self not being able to produce
them: Because it had lost those Decretals, formerly kept in its Registry, as
either burnt or torn upon the Incursion of Enemies, or spoiled by the Injury of
Time. Wherefore they were to be fetched from some other place, were they any
where to be found, as Lucas Holstenius really did near thirty years since, who
having made search amongst the Manuscripts of diverse Countries, found the Acts
of the Roman Synod under Boniface the Second, in which it is related, that
Theodosius Bishop of Ecchinus cited many of the Epistles of the foresaid Popes,
which manifestly demonstrated the Roman Patriarchal Power over Illyricum.

3. I omit the Epistles of Damasus and Siricius, and begin with those of
Innocent the First, whom I before mentioned; in that which is fourth in order
according to Holstenius, he makes mention of his Predecessors in these Words;
To you, says he, speaking to Anysius Bishop of Thessalonica, Innocentius
primus Epistola inter Holstenianas 4. Vid. number. XV.
Vicar of the Apostolic See in Illyricum, Such, and so great Men my
Predecessors heretofore in this See, that is to say, Damasus, Siricius, and the
above mentioned ( viz. Anastasius) of blessed Memory, have showed so much
deference, that they have given your Holiness, who are most just, a Power to
take cognizance of all things that were done in those Parts; I give you again
to understand, that I, the least of them, am of the same Judgment, and desire
the same thing. Which is also confirmed by Innocent in his Epistle to Rufus
Successor to Anysius, and by Caelestinus, who writing to Perigenes, Reynatus,
Basilius, and other Illyrican Bishops, told them that he did not appoint any
new thing: Neither, says he, Co^le^^inus primus, Epistola 13. mere Holsten.
Vid. number. XVI.
is this Care new, which the Apostolic See takes of you; this Experiment we
make use of has been often ordered by our Ancestors; the watchful
Superintendence over you, was ever given in charge to the Church of
Thessalonica. And afterward: there are some Faults, not of a light nature,
which being innate to those Provinces, cannot come to us who are at so great a
distance, or all being now so remote, they are not related unto us, after some
space of time, as they were first acted. All which, by the Intercession of our
Brother and Fellow-bishop Rufus, whose Experience, it is clear, has been
approved in all Causes and Acts of his Life, our Will is be rescinded. To whom
we have delegated our Authority over your Province, that to him, most dear
Brethren, all your Causes may be referred; let none be ordained without his
Advice, let none enter upon his Province without consulting him, let them not
presume to call an Assembly of Bishops without his Consent; if there be any
thing to be referred to us, let it be done by him. Sixtus the Third, in his
Epistle to Perigenes, confirms the same to Anastasius Successor to Rufus,
testifying, that he knew of no new thing that was granted to him, but that,
says he, Sixtus III. Epist. ad Perigenem inter Holsten. Vid. number. XVII.
Ejusdem ad Episcopes Illyrici inter Holsten. Epistola 17. Vid. ibid.
which our Predecessors delegated to his Predecessors, having regard to
Ecclesiastical Discipline, is now again constituted. He confirms the same
things in his Epistle to the Synod of Thessalonica, as also in his Epistle to
all the Bishops of Illyricum, where he says thus: All the Illyrican Churches,
as we have received from our Ancestors, and we our selves have confirmed, are
now under the charge of the Archbishop of Thessalonica; that by his care he may
determine those Controversies which sometimes arise amongst his Brethren, and
that all things which are done by any particular Priests may be referred to him.
Let there be a Council called when it is needful, and as often as he, having
regard to emergent necessities, shall order it; that the Apostolic See being
informed by his Relation, as in good reason it ought to be, may confirm its
Acts. And these things, if I am not deceived, do plainly show, that Theodosius
Bishop of Ecchinus did speak truth, Synodus Romanus sub Bonifacio. Vid. number.
XVIII.
when, in the Roman Synod before Pope Boniface, he said, it was manifest, that
although the Apostolic See justly claims the principality over all Churches in
the whole World, it was necessary that to it alone Appeals should be made in
Ecclesiastical Causes; yet that the Venerable Bishops of the Roman See did in a
more especial manner claim a Jurisdiction over the Illyrican Churches.

4. That Illyricum was subject to the Roman Patriarchate, is so manifest from
the above cited Testimonies, that no body can deny it; seeing therefore that
the Illyrican Churches had not their first institution from Peter or his
Successors; some may deduce from thence, that it is not at all necessary for
the asserting of the British Church's Subjection to the Roman Patriarchate,
that it should have been instituted by Peter or his Successors. Our Author
therefore foreseeing this, since he could not deny the Testimonies of the
Decretals above mentioned, resolved to oppose them, asserting that the Roman
Bishops who wrote those Decretal Epistles, were guilty of Innovation and
Usurpation over the Rites of Metropolitans: Let us hear his feigned Stories,
which since they abound with Errors, are to be exposed, to the end that they
may be confuted. Writing therefore concerning the Power of the Roman Patriarch
over Illyricum, as delegated to the Bishop of Thessalonica by the Decretal
Epistles above mentioned, He says, that Leo himself, in his Epistle to
Anastasius, Author, p. 115.
derives this Authority no higher than from Siricius, who gave it to Anysius
Bishop of Thessalonica, certa tum primum ratione commisit, ut per illam
Provinciam positis, quas ad disciplinam teneri voluit, Ecclesiis subveniret.
Siricius immediately succeeded Damasus, who died, according to Holstenius, 11.
Dec. 384. three years after the Council of Constantinople had advanced that See
to the Patriarchal Dignity; which gave great occasion of Jealousy and
Suspicion to the Bishops of Rome, that being the Imperial City as well as Rome;
and Socrates observes, That from that time Nectarius the Bishop of
Constantinople, had the Government of Constantinople and Thrace, as falling to
his share. This made the Bishops of Rome think it high time to look about them,
and to enlarge their Jurisdiction, since the Bishop of New-Rome had gained so
large an Accession by that Council; And to prevent his farther Encroachments
Westwards, his Diocese of Thrace bordering upon Macedonia, the subtilest Device
they could think of, to secure that Province, and to enlarge their own
Authority, was, to persuade the Bishop of Thessalonica to act as by Commission
from the Bishop of Rome: So that he should enjoy the same Privileges which he
had before. And being backed by so great an Interest, he would be better able
to contest with so powerful a Neighbor as the Bishop of Constantinople. And if
any objected, That this was to break the Rules settled by the Council of Nice:
They had that Answer ready; That the Bishop of Constantinople began: and their
Concernment was, to secure the Rites of other Churches from being invaded by
him; By which means they endeavored to draw those Churches bordering on the
Thracian Diocese, first to own a Submission to the Bishop of Rome as their
Patriarch; Which yet was so far from giving them ease, which some it may be
expected by it, that it only involved them in continual Troubles, as appears by
that very Collection of Holstenius. For the Bishops of Constantinople were not
negligent in promoting their own Authority in the Provinces of Illyricum, nor
in withstanding the Innovations of the Bishop of Rome. To which purpose they
obtained an Imperial Edict to this day extant in both Codes, which strictly
forbids any Innovation in the Provinces of Illyricum, and declares, That if any
doubtful Case happened, according to the ancient Custom and Canons, it was to
be left to the Provincial Synod, but not without the advice of the Bishop of
Constantinople. The occasion whereof was this, Perigenes being rejected at
Patrae, the Bishop of Rome takes upon him to put him into Corinth, without the
Consent of the Provincial Synod: This the Bishops of Thessaly, among whom the
chief were, Pausianus, Cyriacus and Calliopus, look upon as a notorious
Invasion of their Rites; and therefore in a Provincial Synod they appoint
another Person to succeed there. Which Proceeding of theirs is heinously taken
at Rome, as appears by Boniface 's Epistles about it, both to Rufus of
Thessalonica, whom he had made his Legate, and to the Bishops of Thessaly, and
the other Provinces. But they make Application to the Patriarch of
Constantinople, who procures this Law in favor of the ancient Provincial
Synods, and for restraint of the Pope 's Encroachments, but withal, so as to
reserve the last resort to the Bishop of Constantinople. At this Boniface shows
himself extremely netled, as appears by his next Epistle to Rufus, and
incourages him, to stand it out to the utmost; And gives him Authority to
excommunicate those Bishops, and to depose Maximus, whom they consecrated
according to the ancient Canons. But all the Art of his Management of this
Cause, lay in throwing the Odium of it upon the Ambition of the Bishop of
Constantinople: And this the Contention between the Bishops of the two Imperial
Cities proved the Destruction of the Ancient Polity of the Church, as it was
settled by the Council of Nice.

5. Thus far our Author, affirming some things contrary to the Decretal
Epistles, which he cites, and falsely explaining other things, without any
Testimony from Antiquity. But that we may not seem to have said these things
without good ground, they are to be proved; and I begin with those things which
he alleges contrary to the Decretal Epistles; where, I pray, does he find
that the Bishops of Thessaly, among whom the chief were Pausianus, Cyriacus,
and Calliopus did oppose the Election of Perigenes Metropolitan of Corinth?
Where does he read that they looked upon the Inthronization of Perigenes, as a
notorious invasion, and put Maximus in his Place lawfully, according to the
Canons? The Author hints to us that he had these things out of Bonifacius's
Epistle to Rufus: Let us see what the Epistle it self, which is the Eighth
amongst those set out by Holstenius, says. Bonifacius in this Epistle to Rufus
Bishop of Thessalonica, has these Words: Bonifacius Epist. inter Holsten. 5.
ad Rufum. Vid. number. XIX.
We require your Charity, convening our Fellow-bishops above named, by whom
Perrevius our Fellow-bishop complains he has Injury done him, diligently to
try the Cause, of which he has given us an account in the Libel he has sent
us, informing us that the Prelates his Brethren are very vexatious, so far as
to think he should be expelled his Bishopric. Then that they may be given to
understand, that whatever they have done contrary to the ancient Custom, is in
the first place to be made void, having diligently examined the whole Matter,
let your Charity send us a speedy account of it, to the end that the Judgment
which your Brotherhood shall give, may be confirmed by our Sentence. I would
have you take notice what we have written in the Epistle to our Brethren of
Thessaly, that Pausianus, Cyriacus, and Calliopus are utterly to be deprived of
our Communion, so that they may know the only remedy they can have must be your
favorable Intercession. As for Maximus, who, as your Charity has informed us,
is not rightly ordained; we judge it meet that he be wholly deprived of the
Dignity of Priesthood. This is taken out of the Epistle to Bonifacius, which
our Author has mentioned, neither is there any other extant, in which Boniface
makes mention of Cyriacus, Calliopus, and Maximus. But Boniface does no where
here intimate that Maximus was chosen in the place of Perigenes by Pausianus,
Cyriacus and Calliopus Bishops of the Province of Thessaly, according to the
ancient Canons; which our Author might have been easily fatisfied of, if he had
been well acquainted with the ancient Canons. For what had the three forenamed
Bishops of the Province of Thessaly to do with Perigenes the Metropolitan of
the Province of Achaia? Could the Authority of constituting another Bishop in
the room of Perigenes, whereof the Author deprives the Roman Bishop and his
Substitute in Illyricum, belong to the three Bishops of Thessaly, according to
the Canons? Is it not decreed in the Canons that no Authority belongs to the
Bishops of one Province over the Metropolitan of another? which if the Canons
ordain, as it is certain they do, how can our Author impute the Transgression
of the Canons in the Cause of Perigenes, to Boniface, who never so much as
dreamed of the Cause of Perigenes, when he mentioned the three Bishops of
Thessaly? But it was a foul Mistake in our Author, to read Perigenes instead of
Perrevius. For Boniface in the Place above mentioned, does not speak of
Perigenes the Metropolitan of Achaia, whom the Bishops of Thessaly had no
Power, either to Ordain or Consecrate; but of Perrevius, Lucas Hoistenius in
notis.
whom Lucas Holstenius in his Notes upon this Epistle has concluded from the
Subscriptions of the Council of Ephesus, to have been Bishop (...): and I will
prove from the very Acts themselves, that he was of the Province of Thessaly.
For since Perrevius is supposed to have been lawfully elected, and duly
ordained, and afterward for some fictitious Crimes, to have been deposed by
his Fellow-bishops of the Province of Thessaly, I cannot but think he belonged
to the Province of those Bishops who gave Judgment concerning him, from which
their Sentence Perrevius notwithstanding appealed to the Apostolic See.
Boniface committed the Care of perusing the Heads of this Appeal to Rufus
Bishop of Thessalonica, his Vicar in Illyricum; which being duly examined by
him and sent to Rome, Boniface thought fit that Perrevius should be restored to
his See, and that the three Bishops above named who deposed Perrevius, should
be excommunicated: and so he made use of that Authority, which belonged to him
over Illyricum, and confuted by the exercise of his Power, all these fictions
of our Author before they were framed.

6. Now let us clear the cause of Perigenes, in which our Author mixes
falsehood with truth, and explicates many things untruly without any testimony
of the Ancients. It is indeed true that in the year 352. Nectarious in the
second General Synod [ Canon 3.] obtained, that the Church of Constantinople,
which heretofore was a Suffragan, should have Priority of honor after the
Roman Church, because Constantine having translated the Imperial Throne to that
City, it became the Sea of new Rome. It is also true, that, from this Canon
unlawfully made, the Bishops of Constantinople took occasion by degrees to
extend the bounds of their Jurisdiction, and that having taken in the three
exarchates of Thrace, Pontus and Asia; they began to take upon them the hearing
the causes of the Eastern part of Illyricum, which then was divided from the
Western part. Let it also be granted true, that the Bishop of Thessalonica had
the Authority of the Apostolic See over Illyricum first delegated to him by
Pope Damasus, that he might the better withstand the Usurpations of the Bishop
of Constantinople: yet it cannot be denied, but that it was upon the occasion
of the Bishop of Constantinople's drawing the cause of Perigenes before his
Tribunal, that there arose a Controversy between the Bishops of Rome and those
of Constantinople; Lex Theodosii Junioris. Vid. number. XX.
upon which Theodosius junior, Successor to Arcadius being circumvented by the
Bishop of Constantinople in the year 421, made a Law which is found [in the
Theodosian Code lib. 16. leg. 45. tit. de Episcopis, and in the Justinian Code,
lib. 1. tit. 2. de Sacrosanctis Ecclesiis leg. 6.] to run thus: Lex Theodosii
Junioris. Vid. number. XX.
We command, that all innovation being laid aside, the ancient custom, and the
Ecclesiastical Canons which have been in former ages instituted and held in
force till this very time, be observed throughout all the Provinces of
Illyricum: and if there arise any doubtful cause, that be reserved to the
Sacerdotal Synod, and Sacred judicatory, not without the knowledge of the most
Reverend, the Prelate of the Sacred Law, who holds his See in the City of
Constantinople, which enjoys the Prerogative of old Rome: Dat. pride. Idus
Julii; Eustathio and Agricola Coss.

7. Hitherto we have recounted those things which are true, now let us proceed
to show what falsehoods the Author has intermixed with them. And in the first
place it is false that the forementioned Law was made against the invasion of
the Roman Bishop: for it was not made against the invasion of the Bishop of
Rome, but to further the unlawful Usurpation of the Bishop of Constantinople.
They had not here regard to the Authority of Provincial Synods for the
determining certain and undoubtful causes, but to doubtful cases, such as was
that of Perigenes, which could not be determined by the Synod without the
judgment of the Patriarch. Now there was no Controversy about a Patriarchal
Power over Illyricum in the time of Perigenes; the only question that was
moved, was to which of the Patriarchs it belonged. Illyricum, even to the time
of Valentinian the Second, had belonged to the West: but the Empire being
divided between Arcadius, and Honorius, after the Death of Valentinian, the
Western part of Illyricum was distinguished from that of the East, and the
Eastern part fell to Arcadius the Emperor of the East; from whence the Bishop
of Constantinople took occasion to persuade Theodosius, the Son of Arcadius,
who was of an easy nature, that he would make the Churches of the Eastern
Illyricum Subject to the Constantinopolitan See, which Theodosius so effected
by making a new Law, as plainly to show, that there was no question concerning
a Patriarchal Power over Illyricum, but only a difficulty started, viz. whether
this power should, for the future, appertain to the Roman Bishop or to the
Constantinopolitan, Theodosius his words are to be observed: Theodosius
Imperator.
Then if there arise any doubtful case, that must be reserved to the Sacerdotal
Synod and Sacred Judicatory, not without the knowledge of the most Reverend the
Prelate of the Sacred Law, who holds his See in the City of Constantinople,
which enjoys the Prerogative of Old Rome. You hear, that therefore the judgment
in doubtful cases was reserved to the Bishop of Constantinople, or New Rome, as
it was then called, because it enjoyed the Prerogative of Old Rome. Therefore
before the Prerogative was Translated to the Constantinopolitan See, Bonifacius
Epist. ad Ru tum inter Holsten. number. 8.
Old Rome enjoyed the Prerogative of Superiority over Illyricum. And this is
the Authority which the Roman Bishops contended, that the Roman See could not
be deprived of; according to what Bonifacius the first told Rufus Bishop of
Thessalonica: that new attempts, which can be of no force, ought not to lessen
the Authority of the Roman See. And speaking against those who appealed to the
Bishop of Constantinople for the determination of the causes of the Illyrican
Diocese: Restrain, says he, the Violators of the Canons, Vid. number. XXI
and the Enemies of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, through the assistance of God,
who always frustrates such men's wishes, exercise also that Authority which is
grantd you over the rest of the contumacious. For you see we have left no stone
unturned. Which last words are therefore added by Boniface, because he did not
only exercise his Apostolical Authority, but made use of the assistance of
Honorius the Western Emperor for the obtaining of Theodosius, that the Law
might be revoked.

8. There is extant in Lucas Holstenius a transcript of the Epistle which
Honorius sent to Theodosius the Emperor, wherein he writes thus concerning this
matter: Without doubt the Church of that City from whence we received the Roman
Principality, Honorii Epist. Theodosium. Vid. number. XXII.
and the Original of Priesthood deserves extraordinary veneration. For as much
as the Legates that were sent to us, have desired nothing from our Piety, but
what is agreeable to Catholic faith, discipline, and equity: for they require
of us, that those privileges, which having been established long since by our
forefathers were preservd till this time, may ever remain inviolable: and
afterward, Wherefore we desire your Majesty, that being mindful of that
Christian temper which the Divine mercy has infused into our hearts, you would
consider of our Pious discourse; and that removing all these [usurpt Rights,]
which are said to have been gained by the private designs of diverse Bishops,
you would command that the ancient order be kept: that so the Roman Church may
not lose under Christian Princes what she preserved under other Emperors. Hence
it is clear that when Boniface the Pope desired that the Patriarchal right over
Illyricum might be restored to him, he asked nothing which was against the
Canons or the ancient Order: which was not only acknowledged by Honorius the
Western Emperor, but also by Theodosius Emperor of the East, as appears by the
Rescript whereby he revoked his Law in these words: Setting aside all that the
Bishops over Illyricum, Theodosii Rescriptum. Vid number. XXIII.
by their Supplications, have surreptitiously gained, we command that to be
observed, which the Apostolic discipline and the ancient Canons declare.
Concerning which thing, we have sent our Orders in writing to the Illustrious
Praefecti Praetori over Illyricum, according to the form of the Oracle of your
perpetuity, that all which has been surreptitiously obtained by the Bishops
being laid aside, they would cause the ancient Order to be especially observed;
least the venerable Church of that City which has consecrated to us a perpetul
Empire of its own name, should lose the most holy privileges which were settled
by the ancients. These words of Theodosius are observable, in which, setting
aside what the Bishops by their Supplications had surreptitiously gained over
Illyricum, he commands, that to be observed which the old Apostolic Discipline,
and ancient Canons declare. This Rescript was concerning the Patriarchal power;
which Theodosius at length acknowledged to belong to the Bishop of Rome from
the old Apostolic Discipline confirmed by the determinations of the ancient
Canons. So that it appears to be plainly false, that Innocent the First and
other Bishops endeavored to gain a Patriarchal power, which they had not
before, over Illyricum, by appointing the Bishop of Thessalonica to act as by
Commission from them; which notwithstanding, after our English Writer the
Author of the Treatise [De Disciplina Ecclesiae] has endeavored to obtrude
upon the World. Indeed it ought not to seem so great a wonder, that this should
have bin said by one that was not of the Communion of the Roman Church, since
something is to be indulged to the Prejudice of a disturbed mind: But I know
not how it came to pass, that a man who professes himself to live in the
Communion of the Apostolic See should rashly utter those things, which I can
hardly relate without blushing.

9. Now since the Illyrican Churches notwithstanding they were instituted by
the Apostle Paul, yet belonged to the Roman Patriarchate; what should hinder
the British Churches from being subject to the Roman Patriarchate, although
Paul, and not Peter, had first instituted them, as our English Author makes it
his main endeavor to prove. He ascribes the Institution of Patriarchates to
ancient custom, Canon 6. Nicaenus.
which the Nicene Council has made mention of in the Sixth Canon, commanding
the ancient custom to be observed concerning it in Egypt, because the Bishop of
Rome has a like custom. But did this ancient custom, and these Primitive
Rights of the Church spring up like Mushrooms, or gained force without any
reason. Before the times of the Nicene Council the universal Church was not
governed by written Canons, but by Tradition and Custom, D. Augustinus lib. 5.
contra Donatistas cap. 24. and alibi.
now Tradition and Custom of which any other Original was unknown, according to
the Rule of the Great Augustine, was to be held as coming from the Apostles; so
that we are to believe that these very Apostles anciently erected
Patriarchates, since no other Original of them is to be found. Leo the Great,
in his Epistle to Anastafius Bishop of Thessalonica, treating of the
institution of Churches, says: that it was provided by the wisdom of the
Apostles, that there should be One in every Province, who should have the first
Vote amongst the Bishops of his Province. Now who can believe, that the
Apostles who so accurately observed order in the Provinces, had no regard to
the greater Dioceses? Since it was provided, Leo primue Epist. ad Anastatium
Thessalonicen. Vid. number. XXIV.
by the wisdom of the Apostles, says Leo, [ Epist. 54.] that there should be
one in every Province, who should have the first Vote amongst the Bishops of
his Province; again, some were appointed in the greater Cities, who should take
upon them a greater Charge; by whom the Care of the Universal Church might be
carried up to Peter 's single See, and none in any place dissent from their
Head. These were the Reasons why the Sea of Antioch had a Patriarchal Authority
over all the East, and the Sea of Alexandria over all Egypt. And for these
Reasons also, a Patriarchal See was erected at Rome, to the care of which the
Churches of the West should of special Right appertain.

10. The affixing the British Church to the Roman Patriarchate depends upon
this Apostolical Institute, and upon this account it was that Pope Agatho
reckoned the British Bishops amongst those that appertained to the Council of
the Roman Patriarchate. There is an evident Testimony, not only of Agatho, but
likewise of a hundred and twenty Western Bishops concerning this Matter, which
is read in the Synodic Epistle to the sixth General Council, Synodic. Romana
Agathonis Papae.
in these Words: Agatho Bishop of the Servants of God, together with all the
Synods which are subject to the Council of the Apostolic See. And in the
Epistle it self, the Synods which are subject to the Roman Council, are said to
consist of the Western Bishops, the multitude of which extended themselves even
to the Regions which lay upon the Ocean, viz. those of Lombardy, Sclavonia,
Franconia, Gaul and Britain. In my Judgment, Pope Agatho and the hundred and
twenty Bishops could not have said, that the British Churches were subject to
the Roman Bishop as Patriarch of the West, more clearly than they have done.
Neither could the Bishops of the whole Eastern Church, assembled in Council at
Constantinople, have any way more manifestly confirmed this Truth than by their
approbation of the forementioned Epistle of Agatho, and inserting it into their
Synodical Acts. The Western Bishops sent this Epistle to those of the East, and
which is chiefly to be here considered, the British Bishops made it their own
by subscribing to it. And all the Eastern Bishops gave their Approbation to it,
by inserting it into their Acts. So that all who contradict this Epistle, may
be said to oppose the Judgment both of the Eastern and Western Bishops; and
that the English, whilst they deny its Authority, recede from the Judgment of
their Ancestors, and affect to be wiser than their Forefathers. Neither is the
Authority of Agatho's Epistle of the less force, because it was written after
Augustin's coming into England; for there is no Innovation in that Epistle, but
the ancient Custom of the Church is kept up, according to which, Justinian the
Emperor declared before Agatho's time, that the Roman Patriarch had presided
over the whole West, and so consequently over Britain, as appears from his
109th. Novel, in which he mentions five Patriarchates, and the Roman as the
only Western Patriarchate, the rest as Eastern: Justinianus Imperator. Totius
O^bis terrarum Patriarchae seilicet Hesperiae, and Romae, and hujus Regiae
civitatis, and Alexandriae and Theopole^^ and Hierosolymorum, and omnes, qui
sub eis constituti sum, Sanctissimi Epis^^pi Aposcolicam praedicant fidem,
atque traditionem.
The Patriarchs, says he, of the whole World, viz. of Hesperia and Rome, and
of this Imperial City, and of Alexandria, and Theopolis, and Jerusalem, and all
the most Holy Bishops that are constituted under these, preach the Apostolic
Faith and Tradition. The whole World is here by Justinian divided into five
Patriarchates, four of which were said to preside over the various Eastern
Diocesses, only the Roman over Hesperia, that is, the Western Diocesses, and
their most Holy Bishops; so that the British Bishops which are contained here,
as being in one of the Western Diocesses, did belong to the Hesperian or
Western Patriarchate, as the first Synod of Arles, long before Justinian, has
consecrated to Posterity, which we shall see in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Concerning the Greater Dioceses attributed to Pope Sylvester by the
Council of Arles.
1. The Fathers of the Council of Arles in the year 314. did not only refer the
first Canon concerning the observation of Easter, but also all the rest to
Sylvester, whom they have affirmed to hold the Greater Dioceses, not the
Greater Diocese, as our Author would have it. 2. A Diocese of old signified a
Tract of several Provinces under the administration of one; as is shown from
the Notitia Imperii which was written before the time of Honorius and Arcadius,
so that when the Fathers of the Council of Arles wrote that Sylvester held the
Greater Dioceses, they signified thereby that he presided over the Dioceses of
the West, to avoid the admission of which, the Author Substitutes the the word
Diocese in the place of Dioceses. 3. Our Author shows the reasons which moved
him to do this, and this among the rest, because the Empire was not only not
divided into Dioceses by Constantine at the time of the Council of Arles; but
also because the name of Diocese does not seem to have been known at the time
of the Council of Nice. In the latter of which his great mistake is proved from
the Epistle which Constantine sent to all the Churches in the time of the
Nicene Council, since in that Epistle there is mention made of the Pontic and
Asian Dioceses. 4. Although it might so fall out, that in the time of the
Council of Arles the Empire was not as yet divided into thirteen Dioceses under
four Praefecti Praetorio by Constantine; yet it does not follow from thence,
that the name of Dioceses was not known before. Onuphrius Panuinus affirms that
the Provinces were known by the name of lesser Dioceses from the time of Adrian
the Emperor; so that there is no reason why those might not have been called
Greater Dioceses, which Sextus Rufus, and the Fathers of the Council of Arles,
contradistinguished from the lesser Dioceses. 5. Although our Authors seem in
words to deny that the Fathers of the first Council of Arles had any knowledge
of the Greater Dioceses, yet he in effect proves the thing whilst he affirms
that the words Greater Diocese should be inserted in the place of Greater
Dioceses. 6. The Fathers of Italy, France, Africa, Spain and Britain, being
assembled at Arles, in the first Canon, refer the Decree for the observing of
one and the same day for Easter throughout the whole World, or according as
others read it, throughout every City, to Sylvester, that he might Send Letters
to them all; by which Decree they acknowledge him to be their Superior. 7. Our
Author is of opinion that the Authority of declaring when Easter day should be
observed, was taken from Sylvester by the Nicene Synod, and given to the
Patriarch of Alexandria. But the grossness of his Errors is discovered from the
Testimony of Leo the Great and Innocent the Third. 8. Although it be granted
that the first Canon of the Council of Arles says that Sylvester ought to have
given notice throughout the whole World, on what day Easter should be observed;
yet it is made good from the Testimony of Cyril, Patriarch of Alexandria, that
the Popes Power was not at all diminished in the Council of Nice; since from
that Testimony it appears that the computation of the Paschal Solemnity was
committed to the Bishop of Alexandria, but the publication of it was left to
the Bishop of Rome. 9. It is therefore false to say that the Nicene Synod did
at all detract from the Pontifical Authority, which Victor long before
exercised upon the occasion of the celebration of Easter; as appears from that
part of the Synod of Palestine which is left us, and by the Testimony of
Polycrates the Ephesian. 10. Victor either endeavored to Excommunicate, or did
indeed Excommunicate those of Asia who refused to obey his command concerning
the observation of Easter Day: from whence his Pontifical Authority is evinced;
which that it extends it self over the whole World, as likewise his Patriarchal
does over the whole West, our Author, even against his will, is forced to
acknowledge from the first Canon of the Synod of Arles.


AMongst the various Monuments of Antitiquity, which make proof of the
Patriarchal Authority of the Roman Bishop over all the West, that is not of
small moment, which the Fathers of the first Council of Arles have consecrated
to the memory of Posterity. For when they were Assembled together from France,
Spain, Britainy, Africa, and Italy, at the very beginning of the flourishing
state of the Church; they made twenty two Canons: in the first of which they
treat concerning the observation of the Feast of Easter upon one and the same
day in all parts of the World; and adds, that Pope Sylvester ought according to
Custom to direct his Letters to all concerning that matter; from which Canon it
is inferred, Canon. 1. Council. Arelat.
that the Fathers of the Council of Arles did refer the Decree concerning the
observation of Easter day to Sylvester; as likewise it appears from their
Synodical Epistle that they referred the rest of their Canons to the same Bishop
in which Epistle they write in express words: Epistola Synodica Patrum
Arclatensium.
Placuit etiam, antequam a te, qui majores Dioeceses tenes, per te potissimum
omnibus insinuari. The Learned have often noted that these words, which are
cited are not entire but that there are some wanting; they have therefore
bestowed their pains and industry in restoring of them, as I have showed in the
second part of [ Antiquitas Illustrata, Dissert. 1. cap. 7. art. 4.] where I
have produced the following emendation of Cardinal Peron and of Francis
Archbishop of Rouen: Peronius, and Franc. Rothomagensis.
Placuit etiam haec juxta consuetudinem antiquam a te, qui majores Dioeceses
tenes, and per te potissimum omnibus insinuari: It has seemed good unto us,
that, according to the ancient Custom these things should be intimated to all
from you, and chiefly by you who hold the Greater Diocese. There are two things
which these most Learned men correct in the forementioned Citation, one of
which has relation to the Adverb antequam, before, the other to the words per
te, by thee: and they have showed us that there was question made only
concerning those words which were either depraved or omitted in the foresaid
Authority, and not about those which seemed to be truly delivered. But we find
that our Author has a different sense of the thing, whilst he thinks fit also
to correct those words which are truly written: for, page 83. he asserts that
it was true which the Fathers of the Council of Arles said, that the Pope had a
larger Diocese; where he alters these words, Qui majores Dioeceses tenes, who
possess Greater Dioceses, and instead of majores Dioeceses, Greater Dioceses,
puts the word Dioecesis, Diccese, in the Singular number, contrary to the
Testimony of the Synodical Epistle.

2. Indeed the altering of this one Word might seem to be of small moment, had
it not changed the whole sense of the Words, and overthrown the Power of the
Roman Patriarch over many Diocesses of the Roman Empire, which was acknowledged
here by the Fathers of the Council of Arles. For the Confirmation of this
Truth, we are to call to mind, that that was wont to be called a Diocese in old
time, in the Roman Empire, which contained several Provinces, according to
which account, the ancient Notitia Imperii, was written before the time of
Arcadius and Honorius, relates that there were five Diocesses under the
Praefectus Praetorii of the East, viz. those of the East, Antiqua Imperii
notitia ante Arcadii and Honorii tempus conscripta.
of Egypt, of Asia, of Pontus, and of Thrace; two viz. of Macedonia and Dacia,
under the Praefectus Praetorii of Illyricum; three, viz. Italy, Illyricum and
Africa, under the Praefectus Praetorii of Italy; lastly, three under the
Praefectus Praetorii of Gaul, viz. Spain, the Seven Provinces, and Britain.
From whence it plainly appears, that the Roman Empire was divided into thirteen
Diocesses under four Praefectus Praetorii, five of which Diocesses appertained
to the East, the remainder to the West: But whether the Fathers of the Council
of Arles had well perused this Notitia Imperii, or whether they had an account
of the Diocesses elsewhere, they wrote from a Western Council to Sylvester
Patriarch of the West, in these Words, Patres Arclatenses Epist. Synod ca.
Qui majores Dioeceses tenes, who hold the greater Diocesses, to signify,
that he did not preside over one Diocese, but many Diocesses; to wit, all those
which were comprised within the bounds of the West. And since the Matter is so,
who does not see that this might have displeased our Author, and given him
occasion to change the Text. For since his Opinion concerning the restriction
of the Bounds of the Roman Patriarchate is overthrown by this one Testimony of
the Council of Arles; it is likely he was desirous to read only Dioecesim,
Diocese, instead of Dioeceses, Diocesses, that so he might infringe the force
of this Argument. For so, he who as presiding over many Diocesses, did extend
his Patriarchal Authority even to Britain, obtaining by this means only a Power
over the Diocese of Italy, would be restrained within the bounds thereof.

3. And that this is that which our Author has endeavored to obtrude upon his
Party, by changing the Text of the Council, Page 130.
he sufficiently discovers when he again mentions the Synodical Epistle of the
Fathers of the Council of Arles. But as to the Expression of Majores Dioeceses,
it is, says he, very questionable whether in the time of the Council of Arles,
the distribution of the Empire by Constantine into Diocesses were then made,
and it seems probable not to have been done in the time of the Council of Nice,
Diocesses not being mentioned there, but only Provinces; and if so, this Place
must be corrupt in that Expression, as it is most certain it is in others; and
it is hard to lay so great weight on a place that makes no entire sense. But
allowing the Expression genuine, it implies no more than that the Bishop of
Rome had then more extensive Diocesses than other Western Bishops, which is not
denied. Our Author here clearly explains his Mind, who, that he might some way
or other prove the Text to be corrupt, brings some reasons for his way of
reading of it, which must be here weighed. And first he hints to us, that the
Empire was distributed into Diocesses under Constantine the Great, before the
time of Arcadius and Honorius; yet that this seems to have been done after the
time of the Nicene Council, so that the Fathers of the Council of Arles could
not make mention of the Greater Diocesses: It is very questionable, says he,
whether in the time of the Council of Arles, the distribution of the Empire by
Constantine into Diocesses were made; and it seems more probable not to have
been done in the time of the Council of Nice, Diocesses not being mentioned
there, but only Provinces. But our Author is greatly mistaken, adding one Error
to another; and whilst he speaks in this manner, plainly shows that he has not
well perused the Acts which were published in the time of the Nicene Council.
For in the Epistle of Constantine, concerning the Observation of Easter on one
and the same Day throughout the whole World, which he wrote at the very time of
the Nicene Council; there is mention made not only of diverse Provinces under
the Name of one Region, but likewise the Diocesses of Pontus and Asia are
expressly named, (...), Constantinus Magnus Epist. ad omnes. Ecclesias.
The Asian, says he, and Pontic Diocese. What is more clear? What is more
express than this? How could Constantine have writ more plainly in this case?
It is certain therefore that there were Diocesses in the Empire at the time of
the Nicene Council, which betrays our Authors Ignorance, and discovers his
great Error about this Matter.

4. Secondly, He says that it is doubtful, when Constantine distributed the
Empire into Diocesses, which relates nothing to the Question in hand; since
there were Diocesses in the Empire before its being distributed under four
Praefecti Praetorio; so that the Fathers of the Council of Arles might have
used the Word Diocesses in their time, as no body yet has made any doubt but
they did. They attribute Diocesses to Sylvester, therefore there were then
Diocesses in the Empire, under the Name of which, the Fathers expressed the
Amplitude of Patriarchal Jurisdiction. Onuphrius Panuinus giving an Account of
the Division of the Provinces as it stood in the time of Hadrian the Emperor,
amongst other Titles, presixes one to the Provinces of Italy, by which he
asserts, Onuphr^^ de Imper^^ Roman^.
that there were seventeen Provinces or Diocesses in Italy, and in the Islands
which belong to it. Now although it does not appear to me, by what means he
knew that the Provinces were then called Diocesses; yet I can make no doubt,
but that he found this as also all the other particulars which he there relates
in ancient Monuments: let us therefore lay it down for a certain Truth, that
the Name of Diocese was attributed even to the Provinces from the time of
Hadrian himself; and then no body can deny, but that the Provinces were lesser
Diocesses, in respect to the greater; of which Sextus Rufus has made mention
in his Breviary, Sextus Rufus in Breviario. Constantinus M. Epist. ad omnes
Ecclesias.
where we read, that in the Diocese of Macedonia there were seven Provinces
constituted; and of which Constantine the Great has made mention in his
Epistle to the Churches, calling to mind the Pontic and Asian Diocese, at the
time of the Nicene Council. Therefore that the Fathers of the Council of Arles
might give us to understand that they meant such sort of Diocesses, they
opposed the greater Diocesses to the lesser, Patres Arelatenses in Epist. Synod.
and told us that the greater Diocesses were held by St. Sylvester. Sylvester
therefore held Diocesses at the time of the Celebration of the Council of
Arles, and so he did not preside over a few Provinces only, which constituted
the lesser Diocesses, but over many Tracts of the World, which made the greater
Diocesses, and in these he obtained a Patriarchal Authority.

5. Thirdly. Our Author says, that since the Nicene Council does not mention
Diocesses but Provinces, it follows, that this place must be corrupt: -- but
allowing the Expression genuine, it implies no more than that the Bishop of
Rome had then more extensive Diocesses than other Western Bishops, which is not
denied. But before I answer to this last particular, I shall with the Author's
good leave, make some few Observations concerning the acception of the Word
Diocesses at the time of the Council of Nice. He says that the Name of
Dioecesis was unknown to the Nicene Fathers; and so, as we have heard before,
that the Fathers of the Council of Arles could not have made mention of more
Diocesses; therefore that the place is corrupt, and that instead of Majores
Dioeceses, greater Diocesses, we ought to read Majorem Dioecesim, greater
Diocese. But in what ancient Book, I pray, does he find this manner of reading?
Out of what old Author has he discovered this? If he has learned this from no
Manuscript, no Author, it must necessarily follow he has feigned it, and was
the first that ever dreamed of such a thing. Again, if we are to substitute the
Words greater Diocese, and our Author believes the place is to be thus read,
then the Word Dioecesis was not unknown to the Council of Arles, as he,
contradicting himself, says it was. He supposes indeed, that, admitting this
Authority not to have been corrupted, it follows, that the Roman Bishop has a
Diocese of a greater extension than those of other Bishops; whereas it really
follows from hence, that he has not one Diocese only, but many; for so the
Fathers write to St. Sylvester, Qui majores Dioeceses tenes, who hold the
greater Diocesses. If therefore the place be sincere, as it is testified to be,
as to these Words, by those Manuscripts, out of which first Pittheus,
afterward Sirmondus published the Epistle in France before our time; from
thence it is deduced, that Sylvester held many of the greater Diocesses, and
that the late Author de Disciplina Ecclesiae is greatly mistaken, when,
commenting on the Words of the Council of Arles, upon his own Authority,
without any Testimony from Antiquity, he says, Author de Diser^^ina E^clesiae
Dissert. 1.. 11. Page 41.
The word Dioeceses is not to be taken strictly here for the Diocesses of the
Empire, but rather for those several Provinces which the Roman Bishop governed;
so that the sense is, you, who preside over the greater Churches of the West,
shall, by your Letters, signify to others, on what day Easter is to be
observed. Thus says that Author, being plainly ignorant of what he writes. For
where will he find those greater Churches of the West within his Suburbicarian
Bounds? Indeed he will find the Roman Church; but this is but one, and not more
Churches. Moreover, the Council does not say, greater Churches, but greater
Diocesses; which if you inquire after, the Fathers themselves plainly point
them out to you; since being assembled together out of the Diocesses of Italy,
France, Africa, Britain and Spain, they refer their Decrees to Pope Sylvester,
and affirm not only in their Synodical Epistle, but also in their first Canon,
that he ought to promulgate them.

6. Canon. I. Concilii Arelatensis 1. Vidmum. XXV.
I shall cite the Canon, which Sirmondus has set forth in these Words.
Concerning the Observation of Easter and the Lord's Day, that it may be
observed the same Day and Time throughout the whole World, and that you may
direct Letters to all, according to the Custom. So Sirmondus delivers it, to
whose reading of the Words all the ancient Manuscripts do not agree; for that
which is kept in the Library of the Queen of Sweden, Codex MS. Bibl. R^ginae
^ucciae.
being six hundred years old, instead of per omnem Orbem observetur, that it
may be observed throughout the whole World; runs thus, Per omnem Vrbem a nobis
observaretur, that it may be observed by us throughout every City. The
Manuscript in the Vatican Library, which is nine hundred years old, and of the
greatest Authority, has it thus: Codex MS. Bibl. Pa^a^^^.
Per Vrbem omnem a nobis observetur, that it may be observed by us in every
City. From which Books it may be gathered, that the Fathers of the Council of
Arles sent their Decrees to Sylvester, that he might publish them throughout
Africa, Spain, Britain, France and Italy, according to the ancient Custom;
which shows a special Authority of Sylvester over the forementioned Diocesses
of the West; acknowledged by the Fathers in their Epistle to him; since they
would have their Decrees chiefly divulged to all, by him, who held the greater
Diocesses. Here indeed our Author moves some difficulties against Baronius,
Baronius. A. D. 314. n. 68.
who concluded from this referring of the A^^s of the Council to Pope
Sylvesler, that the Pope has a Power of confirming the Decrees of Councils.
Baronius, says the Author, had good luck to find out the necessity of the
Pope's Confirmation here, whereas they plainly tell him, they had already
decreed them by common consent, and sent them to him to divulge them; i. e. as
Petrus de Marca says, Pet. de Marca de Concord. l. 7. c. 14. n. 2.
as the Emperors sent their Edicts to their Praefecti Praetorio. Was that done
to confirm them? Thus says our Author, admitting de Marca's Interpretation,
which seems not well to agree to this place. Yet supposing it to be true, did
not the Emperors acknowledge some special Authority to have been committed to
the Praefecti Praetorio over the forementioned Diocesses when they entrusted
them with the Promulgation of the Laws through these Diocesses of the Empire?
Since no body can gainsay this, how can our Author deny that the Roman
Patriarch had a special Authority over the Diocesses of the West under his
Charge, through which the Fathers of the Council of Arles offer him the Decrees
to be published? Could this be done without acknowledging any greater Authority
in him? If Sylvester had no Jurisdiction over the Diocesses of the West, then
why did not the Council commit the Publication of the Decrees to the several
Metropolitans? Why did it not send Letters concerning them to all the
Provinces? Why did it make this Sylvester's Business? Do not the Fathers
declare in the first Canon, that they did this, because it was according to
ancient Custom?

7. Our Author cannot deny this; but he objects, Page 84. that the Authority of
declaring on what day Easter should be observed, was taken away from the Bishop
of Rome in the Nicene Council. The Council of Arles, says he, decreed Can. 1.
as to Easter Day, that it should be observed on the same Day and Time
throughout the World; and that the Bishop of Rome should give notice of the Day
according to Custom. But this latter part was repealed, as Binnius confesses,
by the Council of Nice, which referred this Matter to the Bishop of Alexandria.
But I wonder how our Author could cite Binnius for the repealing of this Canon,
who does not at all write that it was repealed. For Binnius only says, that the
Office of computing Easter Day, was committed to the Bishop of Alexandria by
the Council of Nice, and that he should tell the day to the Bishop of Rome: But
he does not say that the Bishop of Alexandria had any thing to do in the
publishing this day, Leo Magnus Epist. 64. ad Marcianum. Vid. number. XXVI.
by sending his Letters through the Western Diocesses. Let us hear what Leo the
First says in his 64th. Epistle to Marcianus the Emperor, concerning this
Matter: For the Feast of Easter, in which the Sacrament of Man's Salvation is
chiefly contained, although it be always to be celebrated in the first Mo^^,
yet the Course of the Moon is so changable, that for the (...) part the
Election of that most sacred Day is doubtful. Hence, what should not, most
commonly comes to pass, that all Churches, which ought to be as one, do not
observe it at the same time. The Holy Fathers therefore have made it their
endeavor to take away the occasion of this Error, by committing the whole care
of this Matter to the Bishop of Alexandria; because the Skill in this
Computation seemed to be received amongst the Egyptians from ancient
Tradition, by which Skill the Apostolic See was to be informed on what day the
aforesaid Solemnity fell out yearly, that the Knowledge thereof might be
generally conveyed to the Churches more remote. The last Words of Leo are to be
taken notice of; for from these it plainly appears, that the Knowledge of the
Day, communicated to the Apostolic See by the Patriarch of Alexandria, was yet
to be published by the Apostolic See in the Churches which were more remote
from Alexandria, as the Western Churches were. Leo the First, in his 9th.
Epistle to Ravennius Bishop of Arles, writes that this did belong to his own
Charge, by Divine Institution, and by the Tradition of the Fathers; Innocentius
I. Epist. 2. Vid. number. XXVII.
and we have an eminent Testimony of this Truth in the second Epistle of
Innocent the First to Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, wherein he writes thus. I
have writ this Epistle to you beforehand, concerning the Computation of
Easter Day for another, (I mean the next) Year: For whereas almost the
sixteenth Moon (for it is something less) is reckoned before the eleventh day
of the Kalends of April, and also the twenty third comes sometime before the
fourth day of the same Kalends, I judged that Easter was to be celebrated the
second day of the said Kalends, because we know no Easter Day before this, ever
to have happened on the twenty third Moon. I have explained and set forth the
Tenor of my Opinion. Now it will be your Wisdom, my dear Brother and Consort,
to treat of this very thing in the most Religious Synod, together with the
unanimous our Fellow-priests, so that if there be nothing to be altered in our
Disposition, you may write fully and plainly to us, to the intent that we may
now prescribe the determinate Day of Easter by our Letters beforehand (as the
Custom is) to be kept by all at the proper time. You see that the Computation
only belonged to the Bishop of Alexandria, and that this was to be confirmed by
the Judgment of the Bishop of Rome; and if his Opinion was approved, the
Publication of it in the Western Diocesses appertained to the Bishops of Rome,
and therefore is used by him also to be prescribed through Africa. The Words,
ex more, according to Custom, are to be taken notice of; implying that the same
Custom which had been in the time of the Council of Arles was continued in the
time of Innocent the First without any Interruption: So that what our Author
has writ, that the Council of Nice brought in another Custom concerning this
Matter, is false.

8. It is true indeed, that our Author, together with Sirmondus, does not read
the Words of the Canon of the Council of Arles after this manner: Canon 1.
Arelatensis.
Per omnem Vrbem a nobis observetur, that it may be observed through every City
by us; but, Per omnem Orbem, throughout the whole World, as it is in most
Manuscripts, and especially in that of the Vatican, which is eight hundred
years old, with which the Synodical Epistle agrees, Censemus ergo, Epistola
Synodica Patrum Arelaton^^^.
Pascha Domini per Orbem totum una die observari, We therefore think fit that
Easter be observed on the same day throughout the whole World. But what will
our Author deduce from this way of reading the Words, in favor of his Opinion?
Perhaps that in the time of the Council of Arles, it belonged of right to
Sylvester, to publish Easter Day throughout the whole World, and that at the
time of the Council of Nice, this Prerogative of Papal Jurisdiction was taken
from him. But the Nicene Fathers were so far from correcting any thing in
reference to this Publication, that the same Authority which the first Canon of
the Council of Arles shows the Roman Bishop to have used about the Publication,
the same he continued still to use according to the Canons of the Council of
Nice, as St. Cyril, Patriarch of Alexandria testifies in the Preface to his
Paschal Cycle, which Bucherius [in Appendice ad Doctrinam temporum] first
published from the Manuscripts. It is decreed, says Cyril, Cyrillus
Alexandrinus praefat. ad Cyclum. Vid. number. XXVIII.
by the consent of the Synod, of the Holy Fathers throughout the whole World,
that, because there was such a Church found to be at Alexandria, which was
eminent for their Skill in finding out on what Day of the Kalends or Ides, and
in what Moon Easter ought to be celebrated; this Church should every Year by
their Letters intimate this to the Roman Church, from whence by Apostolic
Authority, the universal Church might know, without any further dispute, the
determined day of Easter, throughout the whole World. Which rule being they had
observed for many Ages, and no one believed any writing concerning it, etc. so
says Cyril, who having been Patriarch of Alexandria from the Year 412. could
by no means be ignorant of what the Nicene Council had eighty seven Years
before determined, and enjoined to his Predecessors, in the said Patriarchate,
concerning the observation of Easter. He testifies therefore that the
computation of Easter was by the Nicene Council committed to the care of the
Bishop of Alexandria, and that he did yearly intimate the day to the Roman
Church; but that the Catholic Church throughout the whole World was to know the
day not by the Authority of the Bishop of Alexandria, but of the Apostolic See.

9. It is false therefore, that the Nicene Council did any ways detract from
the Roman Bishops Authority of publishing the Feast of Easter to be celebrated
by all upon one and the same day. The Council of Nice, even after the
computation was committed to the care of the Bishop of Alexandria, left this
Prerogative entire to the Apostolic See; and that the Roman Bishops did for
many ages make use of it, is affirmed by Cyril, and taught by the Synod of
Arles: and Victor, Pope and Martyr, about the end of the second Age, shows this
in several Epistles: in which he owns that the care of celebrating the Feast of
Easter on the same day in all places belonged to him. It Is to be lamented
indeed that those Letters are lost, but I cannot but think it a special
Providence of God, that an abstract of some of them has been preserved for us,
by a Priest of the Church of England, who lived long since, viz. Venerable Bede, Fragmentum Synodi Palestinae apud Bedam. Vid. number. XXIX.
who [ Tomo 2. libro de Paschatis celebratione] gives us a certain fragment of
the Synod of Palestine, in which are these words: Then Victor Pope and Bishop
of the City of Rome, directed his Authority to Theophilus Bishop of Caesarea
and Palestine, that in that place wherein our Lord the Savior of the World
conversed when he was in the flesh, there might be an useful order made for the
Churches, how Easter should be rightly celebrated by all Catholics. The
foresaid Bishop therefore having received this Authority, assembled all the
Bishops not only of his own Province, but also from diverse other Regions;
Where, when that multitude of Prelates were convened, Theophilus the Bishop
produced the Authority that was delegated to him by Victor the Pope, and showed
them what was given him in charge to do. So that here we have an evidence from
one of the Epistles of Victor, wherein he enjoined Theophilus Metropolitan of
Caesarea in Palestine, to call a Council, in which the Question concerning
Easter should be discussed, and that Polycrates Bishop of Ephesis obeyed the
Authority of Victor, appears by his writing back to him in this manner:
Polycrates Ephesinus Epist. ad victorem.
I could likewise make mention of the Bishops, who are with me, whom you
required me to assemble together, as I have also done. This Testimony of
Polycrattes is extant in Eusebius Caesariensis, who [ lib. 5. cap. 24.] says
that Victor, after Councils had been celebrated in several parts of the World,
set forth a Decree for the observation of Easter upon the same day every where,
and that he would have Excomunicated the Asiatics who refused to obey this
Decree.

10. Things being thus carried, says Eusebius, Eusebius lib. 5. histor. cap.
Vid. number. XXX.
Victor Bishop of Rome forthwith endeavors to cut off from the Catholic
Communion all the Churches of Asia, and the neighboring Provinces, as
dissenters from the right Faith; and, by the Letters which he sent, interdicts
all the Brethren which were there, and pronounces them to be wholly aliens from
the unity of the Church. The Letters, which Eusebius has here mentioned, are
lost to the great detriment of Ecclesiastical Learning. For if they were
extant, it is probable it might be Collected from the very words of Victor, how
by virtue of his Supreme Pontifical Authority he Excommunicated Polycrates
Bishop of Ephesus, and other Asian Bishops, or at least terrified them with the
Sentence of Excommunication. But whethersoever of these is ascribed to Victor,
it is certain, that he exercised the Authority of his See, concerning which no
Catholic Bishop did then contend with him. For Irenaeus and other Western
Bishops did only exhort him, that he would abstain from denouncing the Sentence
of Excomunication, or at least revoke it after it was denounced, as I have
showed elsewhere from Eusebius. And let it suffice to have said thus much
concerning the first Canon of the Council of Arles; which is read two several
ways in the Manuscripts: in some thus, that the Fathers of the Council of
Arles, refer the Decree to Sylvester, for the celebration of the Feast of
Easter upon one and the same day, per omnem Vrbem, through every City; in
others, per omnem Orbem, through the whole World. Our Author may make choice of
which of these Readings he shall think fit; for he cannot reasonably deny but
that the Patriarchal or Papal Authority is proved from hence: nay if he be
wise, he will admit of the Patriarchal Authority over the whole West, and of
the Papal Authority over the whole World. For it is evident from Testimonies of
the Primitive Fathers, which none that is prudent will despise, that the Roman
Bishop did prescribe the day whereon Easter was to be observed to the Primates
and Metropolitans in the West, and by these to the Suffragan Bishops, as Leo
Magnus testifies; and he exercised the supreme Authority of the Apostolic See
over the Eastern Churches, whilst he defined, that the day for the Celebration
of Easter, which the Bishop of Alexandria used every year to compute, Cyrillus
Alexandrinus. Vid. number. XXXI.
should be observed by all the Oriental Bishops, whence Cyril says, by
Apostolic Authority he knew the determinate day of Easter throughout the whole
World, without any further dispute.

CHAP. V. Whether the Nicene Canons establish the Metropolitan Dignity as
Supreme, and what is decreed in the Sixth of these Canons, concerning the
Patriarchal Authority.
1. Our Author is of Opinion, that the fourth and fifth of the Nicene Canons
favor his Cause, and interprets them to establish a Supreme Authority in
Provincial Synods. 2. The Nicene Canons do not decree what the Author would
have them. The Egyptians acknowledged an Authority Superior to that of
Metropolitans before the time of the Nicene Council, when they brought the
Cause of Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, before the Tribunal of Dionysius
Bishop of Rome. And Eusebius rightly affirms, that the Cause of Paulus
Samosatenus was brought before the Bishop of Rome by Aurelianus the Emperor. 3.
And that the Eusebians acknowledged a Superior Authority in Julius the First,
before they grew Schismatical, is apparent from the Embassy they sent to
Julius the First, and from the Testimonies of Pope Julius himself; whence it is
manifest, that, according to the ancient Custom, which was confirmed by the
Nicene Canons, a Cause, that had been defined in Provincial Synods, might be
referred to the Judgment of the Bishop of Rome. 4. The Author says, that the
sixth Canon of the Council of Nice, which attributes a Power to the Bishop of
Alexandria over Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, because the like Right belonged
to the Bishop of Rome, is to be so understood, as if the likeness consisted in
this, that both of them indeed did preside over several Provinces, but that
neither of them had Metropolitans under him. 5. Our Author therefore thinks,
that before the time of the Nicene Council, the Bishops of Rome and Alexandria
were only Metropolitans, though over several Provinces, as is shown from his
Words. 6. It is shown how false it is that there was no Bishop in the Church
Superior to a Metropolitan at the time of the Council of Nice, from the Example
of the Bishop of Antioch, who had under him the Metropolitan of Caesarea, as is
manifestly proved from Theophilus Bishop of Caesarea, and from the Case of John
Bishop of Jerusalem, of which S. Jerome makes mention. 7. The Sixth Canon of the
Council of Nice likewise makes mention of the Bishop of Antioch; so that it is
certain, that a Patriarchal Authority, as that is Superior to the
Metropolitical, was acknowledged by the Nicene Fathers. 8. That the Bishop of
Alexandria exercised an Authority over all Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, is
clear from the Testimonies of St. Athanasius and Epiphanius, concerning
Dionysius, Alexandrinus, and Peter, who was Bishop of the same City. 9. St.
Epiphanius says, that Miletius having the Pre-eminence above other Bishops of
Egypt, yet was inferior to Peter Bishop of Alexandria; by which words he
acknowledges Meletius to have been a Metropolitan, as he in another place
expressly terms him, as he is also termed, in St. Athanasius's Breviary of
Bishops, by John Bishop of Memphus. 10. Since therefore Meletius was an
Archbishop, and even before the time of the Council of Nice ordained. Bishops
in one of the Provinces of Egypt, over which he presided; it appears to be
false, that the Parity between the Bishop of Rome and Alexandria consisted in
this, that neither of them had Metropolitans under him.


1. OUR Author, having in his second Chapter mis-interpreted the Council of
Arles, endeavors afterward in his third Chapter to wrest that Sense from the
Nicene Canons, which the Fathers of that Council were wholly Strangers to. He
therefore takes upon him to interpret three of the Canons, which he believed
most favorable to his Cause, the first of which is the fourth in the Order of
the Council, which shows that there was a Metropolitan in every Province, and
determins, that the confirmation of those things that are done in each
Province, Concilium Nicenum Can. A. Confirmatio autem little, quae in unaquaque
Provincia geruntur, tribuatur Metropolitano.
must be reserved to the Metropolitan: So that, as our Author says, Page 95.
the Rights of Metropolitans, as to the Supreme Ecclesiastical Government of the
several Provinces, are hereby secured. The second Canon is the fifth in the
Order of the Council, in which it is provided, that no Person, either of the
Clergy or Laity, excommunicated by one Bishop, should be received into
Communion by another. But if any one complained that he was unjustly
excommunicated, his Cause was to be heard in the Provincial Synod, which was to
be held twice a year, before Lent, and about the time of Autumn: which, says
our Author, Page 99.
Page 99. was confirmed by many other Canons. And at these all such Causes were
to be heard and determined, and Persons excommunicated were to be held so by
all, unless the Provincial Synod repealed the Sentence. And although the Case
of Bishops be not here mentioned, yet the African Fathers, with great reason,
said, it ought to be understood, since Causes are to be heard within the
Province, and no Jurisdiction is mentioned by the Council of Nice beyond that
of a Metropolitan.

2. Thus this Author wresting the Nicene Canons to a Sense, not that which he
learned from the Fathers of that Council, or received from the Masters of
Venerable Antiquity; but which the Itch of Novelty has invented, and he
thought most proper for upholding of the English Schism. That the Metropolitans
governed their Provinces with supreme Authority, and that there was no Power
Superior to that of a Metropolitan, in the Church, before the Council of Nice,
savors of Novelty, which the Egyptians under Dionysius Alexandrinus were
ignorant of, when they accused him of Heresy before the Bishop of Rome: Some
Ecclesiastical Brethren, says St. Athanasius, Athanasius de Sententia
Dionysii. Vid. number. XXXII.
concerning the Opinion which Dionysius held against the Africans, being
Orthodox indeed themselves, yet not having inquired of him what was the meaning
of his Writings, came to Rome, and there accused him before Dionysius the Roman
Prelate, that bore the same Name with him. Would therefore the Egyptian
Bishops, whom Athanasius calls Orthodox Brethren, have brought the Cause of
Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria to Rome before Pope Dionysius, if they had
judged that the Authority of a Provincial Synod had been Supreme? Would not
Dionysius Alexandrinus himself have answered to his Adversaries, that his Cause
ought to have been heard before the Bishops of the Province; if he had believed
that every Province was to be governed by its own Synod as the Supreme
Authority? Dionysius Alexandrinus was so far from thinking this, that having
heard he was accused, he made it his Request to the Roman Prelate, that they
might give him a Copy of his Accusation, which having received, he published a
Treatise, Entitled, Elenchus and Apologia, as St. Athanasius testifies in the
Place before cited. Why should I call to mind what was done in the Cause of
Paulus Samosatenus, Bishop of Antioch, in the time of Aurelianus the Emperoror?
Eusebius [ Lib. 7. Cap. 30.] tells us, that he, after Sentence past in a former
Synod at Antioch, was in a second deposed; and that Domnus, who was chosen in
his stead, would have taken upon him the Government of the Church of Antioch:
But says Eusebius, Eusebius Caesariensis lib. 7. cap. 30. Vid. number. XXXIV.
when Paul would by no means depart out of the body of the Church, Aurelianus
the Emperor, being appealed to, rightly determined the matter, commanding the
Church to be delivered to those, to whom the Italian Prelates of the Christian
Religion, and the Roman Bishops should write. Aurelianus the Emperor would
never have sent the cause of Domnus and Paulus Samosatenus to have been tried
by the Bishop of Rome, after it had been adjudged in the Synod of Antioch; if
he had not learned of the Catholic Bishops how Controversies ought to be
determined in the Church: neither would Eusebius himself, who was present at
the Council of Nice, and subscribed to its Canons, have commended this act of
Aurelianus as most right, if he had believed the judgment of the Synod of
Antioch to have been Supreme.

3. But if it appears by what has been said, that before the Council of Nice
the Oriental Synods that were celebrated, not by the Metropolitans of one
Province only but of many, had not Supreme Authority in the Church; what shall
we say concerning the Authority of simple Provincial Synods? The Eusebians
themselves in their Conventicle at Philippopolis did not defend the Authority
of these as Supreme. For when the Great Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria
being condemned by Eusebius of Nicomedia in the Tyrian Council, fled to Julius
Bishop of Rome, the Eusebians submitted their cause to the judgment of the same
Pope: but, observing that they were like to be condemned they began to impugn
the Authority of the Pope, whom they could not gain to their party: and were
the first that ever contended, not that the Sentence of one single Province was
of so great Authority, that from it no Appeal could be made to a higher
Judicatory, as the Author of the Book [ de antiqua Ecclesiae disciplina,
dissertation. 2.] has lately feigned: but that the Eastern Church was distinct
from the Western, as in Name, so also in Jurisdiction; and that the Bishop of
Rome was not to judge in that matter concerning which an Eastern Synod had
given sentence: For which cause Julius the first accuses them of rashness and
innovation, making answer in his Epistle to the Eusebians, Julius Primus Epist.
ad Orientales Antiochiae congregatos. Vid. number. XXXV.
that the Western Bishops, who were with him, being struck with astonishment
could hardly be induced to believe, that such things could proceed from them:
and says, that the Apostolical Canons were to be followed, and that the Decrees
of the Nicene Bishops, which permitted that the acts of a former Synod might be
revised in a latter, ought to be attended: For, says he, if there was of old
such a custom, and the memory of it be renewed, and committed to writing in the
great Synod, and yet you will not suffer it to prevail amongst you, you do
indeed a thing that is very unseemly; for it is very unjust, that a custom,
which has once obtained in the Church, and been confirmed by a Synod, should
be abrogated by some few persons. This was the judgment of Julius the first, a
most moderate Prelate, and of all the Bishops of Italy, who assembled at Rome
in Athanasius's cause: which three hundred Western Bishops in the Council of
Sardica judged to be so true that they excommunicated the Eusebians and
determined against them, [Canon. 3.] that the memory of Peter the Apostle was
to be honored, and declared [ Canon. 4. and 7.] that Appeals might be made
from the Eastern Councils to the Bishop of Rome. What has been alleged is
sufficient, if I mistake not, to confute the Forgeries of the Conventicle of
Philippopolis; although not only the English Writer approves them, but also a
late French Author maintains them to be so true, that he is not ashamed [ in
Dissert. 2. c. 1. Sect. 2. to endeavor to fasten them upon St. Ambrose. For
having cited a certain place out of Ambrose, he says, that this Father
supposes, that the affairs of the East ought to be administered by the Eastern
Bishops, and that it did not belong to the Western Bishops to judge the Eastern;
which Constantius says in his Epistle to the Council of Ariminum, as also the
Eusebians in the Council of Philippopolis. Thus this Author, not scrupling to
affix the new whimsies of an Arian Emperor, and the dreams of the Conventicle
of Philippopolis, upon St. Ambrose. But I must not insist upon these things,
since they do not deserve an Answer.

4. Let us therefore proceed to our Authors Commentaries upon the Third Canon,
which is the Sixth in order among the Nicene Canons; for the things which he
relates here are new, and scarce ever heard of. The Canon, Canon 6. Nicaenus.
Vid. number. XXXVI.
of which we treat, runs thus according to the Version of Dionysius Exiguus:
Let the ancient Custom be kept through Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis, that the
Bishop of Alexandria have jurisdiction over all these, because the Bishop of
Rome has a like custom. Likewise in Antioch, and other Provinces, let the
privileges of their Churches be preserved. But this is generally clear, that,
if any one be made Bishop without the consent of the Metropolitan, the great
Synod has defined that he ought not to be a Bishop, etc. There is one thing in
this Canon, which our Author, because it destroys his design, interprets after
a strange manner. He follows the opinion of those, that acknowledge no
Authority superior to that of a Metropolitan: now because the Nicene Canon
ascribes an Authority to the Patriarch of Alexandria over all Egypt, Lybia and
Pentapolis, and has expressly declared that the like custom had obtained at
Rome and Antioch, that their Bishops presided over many Provinces: our Author
following the Error of Beverage, has asserted that there was no Metropolitan
in Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis in the time of the Nicene Council; and so he
would make the Bishop of Alexandria to be a Patriarch as to the extent of his
Authority, and a Metropolitan only as to the administration of it.

5. If the Reader will not believe me, let him consult the Authors own words,
which are these: In this Canon there are three things principally designed.
(1.) To confirm the ancient Privileges of some of the greater Sees; as Rome,
Alexandria and Antioch. (2.) To secure the Privileges of other Churches against
the Encroachments upon them. (3.) To provide for the quiet establishment of
Metropolitan Churches, which last is so plain that it will need no farther
discourse; But the other two are of great consequence to our design. Thus the
Author; first of all confessing that the Nicene Fathers did confirm the ancient
privileges of some of the principal Sees, in which they had gained to
themselves a more ample Power than that of a Metropolitan only; by which means
the Bishop of Alexandria had Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis under his
jurisdiction, over which he exercised the Patriarchal Authority of Consecrating
Bishops, calling Synods, and judging in the greater Ecclesiastical causes. Now
least any one should from hence infer that the Bishop of Alexandria had
obtained a greater Power then that of a Metropolitan; he asserts, that he had
then no Metropolitans under him in those Provinces; and that the rite of
Patriarchal administration was co-incident with the Metropolitical at the time
of the Council of Nice, and so different from that which was afterward
introduced. Therefore he confesses that there was something that was singular
in the case of the Bishop of Alexandria: For says he, all the Provinces of
Egypt were under his immediate care, which was Patriarchal as to Extent, but
Metropolitical in the Administration. And so was the Jurisdiction of the Bishop
of Rome at that time; which is the true reason of bringing the custom of Rome
to justify that of Alexandria. For as it is well observed by Christianus
Lupus, the Bishop of Rome had then no Metropolitans under him within the
Provinces subject to his jurisdiction; and so all Appeals lay immediately from
the several Bishops to him. And therein lay the exact parallel between the
Bishops of Rome and Alexandria.

6. Therefore our Author asserts, that the Patriarch of Alexandria had no
Metropolitans under him; and that in this lay its likeness to the Roman
Patriarchate. But before we come to enquire, whether it be true that the
Patriarchs of Rome and Alexandria had no Metropolitans under them, let us first
see briefly whether no Metropolitans were subject to the Patriarch of Antioch
before the Nicene Council. For our Author confesses that the sixth Canon of the
Council of Nice does reach him also. The Church of Antioch was the principal
Church of all the East, and had under it fifteen Provinces, which the Notitia
Imperii reckons to be comprised under the Eastern Diocese: and since the East
was first enlightened with the Christian Faith, and the name of Christians, as
St. Luke testifies, was first heard at Antioch, it is very probable, that that
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy first took place there, which is described in the 35th
of those Canons which are attributed to the Apostles, to wit, that there were
Bishops constituted in the Cities, and that a chief Bishop was placed in the
Metropolis of every Province, to the end that the Bishops of every Nation might
know who was their Chief. So that Tarsus being the Metropolis of the chief part
of Cylicia, the Bishop of this City might as Metropolitan subscribe in the
first place, to those Letters, which the second Synod of Antioch set forth
against Paulus Samosatenus. So was also Caesarea the Metropolis of the chief
part of Palestine; in which, it so manifestly appears that there was a
Metropolitan Bishop long before the time of the Council of Nice, that there can
be no doubt made of the thing. For when Pope Victor had writ to Theophilus
Bishop of Caesarea, to call a Council for the determining of Easter day,
Fragmentum Synodi Caesariensis apud Bedum.
the Bishop having received this Order (as the Acts of this Council recorded in
Venerable Bede inform us) summoned all the Bishops not only from his own
Province, but also from diverse other Regions. What is more clear then this?
There is a distinct Province assigned to Theophilus Bishop of Caesarea as
Metropolitan, out of which he summoned the Bishops to Council: therefore he had
his own proper Province, over the Bishop whereof he presided. This is farther
evidenced from the fact of John Bishop of Jerusalem, who had referred the
Debate concerning the Error of Origin to the Patriarch of Alexandria, and is
for this cause, reprehended by St. Jerome in these Words: You, who seek for
Ecclesiastical rules, and make use of the Canons of the Nicene Council -- tell
me, D. Hieronimus Epist. ad Pamachium. Vid. number. XXXVII.
what has Palestine to do with the Bishop of Alexandria? If I mistake not,
this is what that Council has determined, viz. that Caesarea should be the
Metropolis of Palestine, and Antioch the Metropolis of the whole East:
therefore you should either have brought your cause before the Bishop of
Caesarea -- or if you were to go far for a determination, you should rather
have directed your Letters to Antioch -- you chose to be troublesome to one who
had his head full of business already, rather then to pay to your Metropolitan
that honor which was due to him. Thus says S. Jerome [in his 61. Epistle to
Pammachius] plainly asserting that, according to the Nicene Canons, the Bishop
of Jerusalem was to submit to the Bishop of Caesarea as his Metropolitan, and
to the Bishop of Antioch as his Patriarch: whence it manifestly appears, that
the Patriarch of Antioch had, at the time of the Council of Nice, the
Metropolitan of Caesarea under his Jurisdiction, even in Palestine it self.

7. This being so, what answer can our Author make? what can he invent, what
can he dream of, to elude this verity? Will he say, that he did not speak
concerning the Patriarch of Antioch, but only concerning the Alexandrian and
Roman Patriarchs; that the Nicene Canon only declares there was a likeness
between these two? In Prudence he will never answer thus for he has
interpreted the Nicene Canon so as to make it comprise the rights of the three
principal Sees, and therefore those of Antioch amongst the rest. Since
therefore it is manifest from what has been said, that the Sea of Antioch had
under it more Metropolitan Bishops then one, is not that apparently false which
our Author imitating Beverage has feigned, viz. that the Council of Nice, in
its Sixth Canon, has acknowledged no Authority superior to that of a
Metropolitan? Is it not manifestly proved that he imposes an Error upon the
English Nation, when to defend the Metropolitan Power as Supreme, he asserts
that all other Jurisdiction superior to this was unknown to the Nicene Council?
I judge that what has been said ought to besufficient to make the English open
their Eyes, and forsake and detest the Error they have imbibed, concerning the
Supremacy of the Metropolitcal Authority.

8. Thus far enough of the Patriarchate of Antioch; Let us now speak of that of
Alexandria. It is confessed that the Bishop of Alexandria had a power over many
Provinces before the time of the Nicene Council; which the Sixth Canon of Nice
plainly declares, whilst it ordains that the ancient custom should be observed
according to which the Bishop of Alexandria exercised a jurisdiction over
Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis. This is expressly commemorated (of Dionysius, who
governed the Church of Alexandria Sixty years before the Nicene Council) by St.
Athanasius [ lib. de sententia Dionysii contra Arianos in these words: D.
Athanasius de sententia Dionysii. Vid. number. XXXVIII.
In Pentapolis of the upper Lybia some of the Bishops embraced the opinions of
Sabellius, and their fictions did so much prevail, that the Son of God was
scarce any more Preached in their Churches. Upon the discovery of which,
Dionysius, to whose charge those Churches belonged, sent Legates to withdraw
the Authors of these things from their false opinions. Therefore according to
the testimony of Athanasius the Churches of upper Lybia, Epiphanius Haeresi.
68. Vid. number. XXXIX.
or Pentapolis, as also other Churches distributed through the rest of the
Provinces of the Egyptian Diocese were under the charge of Dionysius, as St.
Epiphanius informs us [ Heresi. 68.] where he detests the Original of the
Meletian Schism: Meletius, says he, and the Martyrs, especially Peter
Archbishop of Alexandria, were then in bonds: and Meletius, though he excelled
the other Bishops of Egypt, yet was second to Peter in dignity, as being his
Suffragane, yet subject to him, and referring Ecclesiastical Causes to his
Jurisdiction. For it is the Right of the Archbishops of Alexandria to
administer Ecclesiastical Affairs throughout all Egypt, and Thebais, Mareotis,
Lybia, Ammoniaca, and Pentapolis. From these ancient Testimonies, the
Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Alexandria over all the Provinces throughout
Egypt, is clearly proved; neither do I see that any doubt can be made of this;
it remains therefore for us to consider whether there was at that time no
Metropolitan Bishop to be found in any of the Provinces of Egypt.

9. This our Author denies, as to the times before the Nicene Council; but upon
what ground I know not. For Meletius held a Bishopric in Thebais before the
time of the Council of Nice, and St. Epiphanius in the place above mentioned
has recorded, that he in the time of St. Peter Bishop of Alexandria, who was
crowned with Martyrdom, about fourteen years before the Nicene Council,
excelling the other Egyptian Bishops, was the second to Peter in Dignity. Now
how could Meletius then have obtained the second Place to Peter? by what Right
could he have excelled the other Egyptian Bishops, unless he had been a
Metropolitan? If you would have a farther Confirmation of the thing, consult
St. Athanasius, who tells us that Meletius ordained Bishops in Egypt, and, in
the Breviary of the Bishops consecrated by Meletius, names John Bishop of
Memphis in the last place: (...): In Memphis, B^^^^^um E^^^coporum a Meletio
or^^nat^um.
John commanded by the Emperor to be together with the Archbishop. Meletius
therefore was an Archbishop, to whom John, Bishop of Memphis, was by the
command of the Emperor, to be an Assistant: and this St. Athanasius expressy
affirms [ Haeresi 69.] where he tells us that Arius drew to his party, Secundus
Bishop of Pentapolis, together with some others, and that all this was done
without the knowledge of S. Alexander, until Meletius Archbishop of Thebais in
Egypt, D. Epiphanius.
and again, until Meletius Archbishop in Egypt, and subject to Alexander, had
informed Alexander of the whole Business; Thus Epiphanius twice calls Meletius
Archbishop, (...), and affirms, that he was subject to Alexander Bishop of
Alexandria, so that there is no question but the Patriarch of Alexandria had a
Metropolitan under him before the time of the Nicene Council; and whereas our
Author owns no Metropolitan to have been in Thebais, this proceeds from his
Ignorance in Ecclesiastical History.

10. Since therefore these things are so clear that they cannot be called in
question, let our Author now say, that the Parity between the Patriarchate of
Alexandria, and that of Rome lay in this, that neither of them had
Metropolitans under him: For since it has been showed that there were not only
many Provinces, but likewise several Metropolitan Bishoprics under the
Patriarchs of Antioch and Alexandria before the time of the Nicene Council;
since the fixth Canon of the Council of Nice decrees, that the ancient Custom
should be observed, viz. that the Bishop of Alexandria should have Authority
over Egypt, Lybia and Pentapolis, because the Bishop of Rome has a like
Custom, hereby the Authority of the Bishop of Alexandria, not only over
Bishops, but also over Metropolitans, is confirmed from the Example of the
Roman Patriarch, who consequently must have a Jurisdiction over Metropolitans.
Neither has any one reason to allege the Paraphrase of Ruffinus, concerning
the Suburbicarian Regions, against us, and to affirm with Salmasius that these
were confined within the space of a hundred Miles from the City, or within the
Bounds of the Lieutenancy of the City, as a late French Author would have them
to be. All which, I shall refute at large, in the second Edition of [Antiquitas
Illustrata] and show to be erroneous. In the mean time, who will not admire
that there should be such Men to be found, who, notwithstanding they may
plainly see that the Bishop of Antioch had fifteen Eastern Provinces, and the
Bishop of Alexandria six Provinces of Egypt under their Jurisdiction; yet can
have the confidence to affirm, that the Patriarchal Authority of the Bishop of
Rome was confined to the narrow space of a hundred Miles, or but few more from
the City? If the Bishop of Alexandria obtained a Patriarchal Jurisdiction over
a larger Diocese of the Empire, because the Roman Bishops had the like Custom;
then we must of necessity allow the Roman Bishop to have obtained a
Jurisdiction over at least a like Diocese of the Empire. But the first Council
of Arles, ten years before that of Nice, expressly declared, that Sylvester
Bishop of Rome held not only one, but many greater Diocesses; nor is it any
where read, that these Diocesses were taken away from Sylvester in so short a
space of time; it must then be held for certain, that he retained them all at
the time of the Council of Nice, and consequently, that the Popes had not only
a Patriarchal Jurisdiction over the Provinces that were near the City of Rome,
but also over all the rest of the Western Provinces, amongst which the British
are to be reckoned.

CHAP. VI. That the British Church acknowledged an Authority Superior to that
of a Metropolitan, from the time that the Christian Religion was first planted
there, till such time as it was again restored by Augustine the Monk, under
Gregory the Great.
1. Our Author has conjectured from a certain Answer made by the British
Bishops and the Monks of Banchor to Augustine Gregory 's Legate, that Britain
did acknowledge no Authority Superior to that of a Metropolitan, till such time
as Gregory the Great was Pope; which he endeavors to prove from Bid, and
Spelman from an ancient English Manuscript. 2. The Manuscript set forth by
Spelman, and approved of by our Author, is suppositious and lately invented.
The English Church, from the time of its first planting, has acknowledged an
Authority Superior to that of a Metropolitan in the Roman Bishop; as is showed
from the first Council of Arles, wherein three British Bishops were present. 3.
The same thing is proved from the Canons and Epistle of the Council of Sardica,
wherein St. Athanasius mentions the British Bishops to have been present. 4.
Pelagius, a Britain, discovered this, when after his Heresy was condemned in
an Eastern Synod, he would not only have his Cause brought before the Tribunal
of the Roman Bishop, but sent also a Book, wherein he gave an Account of his
Faith, together with an Epistle to Innocent the First, as appears from the
Testimony of Augustine and Osorius. 5. Celestius the Disciple of Pelagius, being
of the British Nation also, acknowledged this more clearly; whilst, being
condemned for his Heresy in the Council of Carthage, he thought fit to appeal
from the Sentence of the Synod to the Tribunal of the Bishop of Rome, as Marius
Mercator testifies. For 'twas his Duty to prosecute that Appeal, as Paulinus,
Deacon to St. Ambrose, asserts. 6. The Mission of Bishops into Britain from the
Apostolic See, and their Reception there, confirms this same thing, as St.
Prosper tells us from Germanus Antisiodorensis, whose Testimony in this case
ought not to be contemned 7. Venerable Bede testifies the same thing concerning
Palladius the Apostle of the Scots; and Mattheus Westmonasteriensis of St.
Patrick the Apostle of Ireland. 8. This is likewise manifestly proved from what
Gregory the Great did for the Restoration of the Catholic Religion in Britain.
For he sent Augustine as Legate of the Apostolic See, that he might institute
Churches, ordain Metropolitans, and Consecrate Bishops in the Island, who
should be all bound to obey his Authority. 9. Neither did the Monks of Banchor,
or the British Bishops oppose the Popes Authority at the time when Augustine
was Legate there. For the Manuscript containing the Answer of the Abbot of
Banchor, set forth by Spelman, is supposititious, and the Acts recorded by
Bid, only hint to us, that a Question rose amongst them there, concerning some
particular Rites, but not concerning the Primacy of the Pope. 10. But supposing
that the Monks of Banchor had contradicted the Popes Primacy, this Opposition
can be no Proof against it, since Augustine showed, that what they held was
false, by a Miracle which gave Divine Testimony to the Truth which he asserted.


1. OUR Author, in the Conclusion of his Book, proposes these things which are
supposed to be spoken by the Monks of Banchor, and the British Bishops upon the
occasion of Augustine's being sent amongst them; concerning which he has these
Words: Page 357.
Augustine being furnished with such full Powers, as he thought, desires a
Meeting with the British Bishops, at a Place called Augustinsac, as Bede says
(in the Confines of the Wiccii and the West Saxons) -- but at this Place the
British Bishops gave Augustine a Meeting; where the first thing proposed by him
was, that they would embrace the Unity of the Catholic Church, and then join
with them in preaching to the Gentiles; for, says he, they did many things
repugnant to the Unity of the Church; which was in plain terms to charge them
with Schism, and the Terms of Communion offered, did imply Submission to the
Church of Rome, and by consequence to his Authority over them. But the utmost
that could be obtained from them, was only that they would take farther Advice,
and give another Meeting with a greater Number. And then were present seven
Bishops of the Britains, and many learned Men, chiefly of the Monastery of
Banchor, where Dinoth was then Abbot; and the result of this Meeting was, that
they utterly refused Submission to the Church of Rome, or to Augustine as
Archbishop over them. So far our Author observing that the Truth of this
History did not only depend upon the Testimony of Bid, but likewise upon the
Authority of a Manuscript set forth by Spelman, in which Dinoth the Abbot of
Banchor is reported to have said, that he knew not who that Pope was whom they
called Father of Fathers, Patrem Patrum.
to whom Augustine would have the British Bishops pay Obedience. And although
he confesses that this Manuscript was by some judged to be supposititious, yet
he brings Spelman's Authority for it; Page 360. Ex Tomo 1. Conciliorum
Spelmanni.
who, says he, sets it down at large in Welsh, English and Latin, tells from
whom he had it, and exactly transcribed it, and that it appeared to him to have
been an old Manuscript, taken out of an older, but without Date or Author, and
believes it to be still in the Cotton Library. Here is all the appearance of
Ingenuity and Faithfulness that can be expected, and he was a Person of too
great Judgment and Sagacity to be easily imposed upon by a Modern Invention, or
a new found Schedule, as Mr. Cressy phrases it.

2. It may be easily collected from these Words of the Author, that although he
makes use of Bede's Authority as the chief support of his Cause, yet he does
not deny the Authority of the Manuscript set forth by Spelman, which ought to
be rejected as a modern Invention, as may easily be shown. For it is not at all
probable, that Dinoth Abbot of Banchor should speak those things concerning the
Power of the Bishop of Rome, which he is reported to have done in that
Manuscript: For the Pope's Authority was no News to the British Islands.
Neither was the Roman Bishops Patriarchal Authority over the British Churches
any modern Invention. Whoever shall peruse the ancient Records of the English
Church, will, as I suppose, easily find these things are not to be denied. For
if they had been new, and lately invented, why then should Eborius Bishop of
York, Restitutus Bishop of London, Adelphus Bishop of the Coloniae Londinensium.
London Colony, and others of the British Clergy, being present in the Council
of Arles at the beginning of the fourth Age, have sent the Acts of that Council
to Sylvester, that he might publish them to all? Patres Arelatenses epist.
Synodica.
How could they have acknowledged that he held the greater Diocesses? How could
they have written that the Apostles daily sat in the Roman See, if they had
not believed an Apostolical Authority had still remained in that See?

3. It is manifest, that about the middle of the same Age, the British Bishops,
who, as St. Athanasius testifies, were present at the Council of Sardica,
opposed the Eusebians, and contended that Athanasius was rightly absolved by
Julius the First; that they permitted Appeals to be made to the Apostolic See,
from all Provinces of the Christian World, and that they declared the Memory of
Peter the Apostle was to be honored in the Roman Bishop. For so the British
Prelates, who together with the three hundred Bishops assembled at the Council
of Sardica [ Canon 3.] have decreed: Let us honor the Memory of St. Peter the
Apostle, Canon 3. Sardicensis. Vid. number. XL.
that those who have examined the Cause may write to Julius the Bishop of Rome;
and if he judges it should be heard again, let it be again heard, and let him
assign the Judges; but if he upon trial find the cause to be such that it ought
not to have a second hearing, what he decrees in this kind shall stand firm.
Whereupon the same British Bishops, after the Canons were established, in their
Synodical Epistles [ ex Cresconii collectione, and Hilarii fragmentis, Tom. 2.
Conciliorum apud Labbeum edita.] wrote to Julius the First, Epistola Synodica
Sardicensis. Vid. number. XLI.
that it seemed best and most congruous, that the Chief Priests out of every
Province should refer their Causes to the Head; that is, to the Sea of Peter
the Apostle. What could the British Bishops have written more plainly than
this, that the Roman See was the Seat of Peter, and the Head of the whole
Church, to which the Bishops throughout the whole World ought to refer Matters?
as in the Council of Sardica, they referred the Condemnation of the Eusebians,
concerning whom, they thus wrote to Pope Julius: Vouchsafe to admonish all our
Brethren, Ibid.
and Fellow-Bishops by your Letters, that they do not receive their Epistles,
that is, their Communicatory Letters. In which thing the British Bishops agreed
with St. Ambrose, and the Italian Bishops, who in the Synodical Epistle of the
Council of Aquileia, in this very same fourth Age, Concilium Aquileiense Epist.
ad Gratianum Imperatorem. Vid. number. XLII.
wrote to Gratian the Emperor, that the Roman Church was the Head of the whole
Roman World; from whence the Rights of venerable Admonition flow to all.

4. There is an eminent Testimony of the Popes Primacy, which is taken from the
very Enemies of the Roman Faith, born in Britain. Pelagius a Britain being
first accused of Heresy, by Osorius a Spanish Priest, at the Synod of
Diospolis, and afterward by those of the West, in an Eastern Synod under
Theodotus Bishop of Antioch, did not only suffer his Cause to be referred to
Pope Innocent, but he also directs Letters missive to to him, wherein he gave
an account of his Faith. Osorius gives Testimony of the Act of the former Synod
[ in Apologia pro liberate arbitrii contra Pelagium.] telling us, that John
Bishop of Jerusalem did at least pronounce this Sentence in the Diospolitan
Synod, that the Brethren and their Epistles should be sent to St. Innocent the
Pope of Rome, Osorius Apologia prolibertate arbitrii. Vid. number. XLIII.
and that all were to stand to his Determination. St. Augustine makes mention
of the second Synod, affirming, [ Lib. 1. Contra Julianum, Cap. 3.] that
Theodotus Bishop of Antioch presided in it, and that he had the Letters by him,
which that Bishop, and Praylus Bishop of Jerusalem sent to Innocent concerning
this Matter. D. Augustinus, Lib. 2. de grat^a Christi. Cap. 2.1. De Libro fidei
quem Roman^ ipsis litteris misit ad eundem Innocentium.
Lastly, that Pelagius presented a Treatise containing his Faith, to Innocent
the First, St. Augustine [ Lib. 2. de Gratia Christi Cap. 21.] informs us in
these W^rds, concerning the Treatise of his Faith, which he sent to Rome,
together with Letters to the same Innocent. Would ^elagius have suffered that
his Cause should have been removed from the Synod of Eastern Bishops to the
Tribunal of the Bishop of Rome, and have been Solicitous to clear himself
before Innocent in the Treatise of his Faith which he sent him; if Innocent's
Authority had not been at all valued in Britain, the Place wherein Pelagius had
his Birth and Education? Would not he rather have declined the Sentence of the
Apostolic See, and rejected the Judgment of the Roman Church in this Point?

5. It was so far from this, that Celestius the Disciple of Pelagius, and a
Scotch-man, being accused of the same Heresy in another part of the World, by
Paulinus Deacon to St. Ambrose, and condemned in the Synod of Carthage in
Africa, thought fit to appeal to the Bishop of Rome for his Trial. This we find
to be written by Marius Mercator [in Commonitorio:] Marius Mercator in
Commonitorio.
from which Sentence he thought fit to appeal to the Examen of the Bishop of
Rome. Could he judge him to be appealed to, whom he thought to have no
Authority to Judge? Paulinus declared himself of another Opinion, in the Libel
he offered to Pope Zosimus, speaking in this manner concerning Celestius; he,
Paulinus in libello Zosimo Papae oblato.
that had made his Appeal to the Apostolic See was absent, who ought to have
maintained the Merits of his Appeal. St. Ambrose's Deacon could not more
evidently have asserted, that the Sea Apostolic had a Right to receive Appeals,
and that Celestius ought to have pleaded the Points of his Appeal before the
Roman Bishop, as his Superior. But although Celestius, neglecting his first
Appeal, fled into Bsia and Thrace, yet being driven thence, Marius Mercator in
Commonit.
he made all the have he could to the City of Rome, in the time of Pope Zosimus
of blessed Memory, as Mercator testifies; and there, after his Tergiversations
and Errors were detected, he and Pelagius were condemned by Pope Zosimus of
blessed Memory; concerning which Epistle of Zosimus, sent throughout the whole
World, was confirmed by the Subscriptions of the Holy Fathers, as we are told
[in Commonitorio,] above mentioned: with which St. Prosper agrees, asserting,
that the Decrees which were made against ^elagius and Celestius were brought
out of Africa to Pope Zosimus; S. Prosper in Chronico.
which being approved of, the Pelagian Heresy was condemned throughout the
whole World. As far therefore as we can collect from the management of the
whole Cause of Celestius and Pelagius, it was so certain in the time of
Innocent the First, that it belonged to the Tribunal of the Roman Bishop as
Superior, that not only the Eastern and African Councils freely acknowledge
this, but Pelagius and Celestius, the very Pests of Mankind, durst not deny it.
Moreover, when the Epistle of Zosimus, which condemned the Pelagian Heresy,
being transmitted through every Church under Heaven, came at last to Britain
there is no doubt to be made, but that Heresy was condemned by the
Subscriptions of the British Fathers. Whence Venerable Bede observes, that the
Pelagian Heresy came late into Britain, and was first brought thither by
Agricola, the Son of a Pelagian Bishop, about the time of Pope Celestine: for
it appears from Bid, that Britain was free from that Heresy during the whole
time that Innocent and Zosimus were Popes; which cannot be thought to proceed
from any other Ground than this, viz. that they had received the Decrees of
Innocent and Zosimus.

6. But when Agricola spread the Pelagian Heresy in Britain, the Apostolic See
making use of its Authority, sent Bishops into Britain; whom Britain received,
and by their help, was not only converted from Heresy in those parts where
they were Christians, but likewise from Infidelity in the Parts where the
Christian Faith was extinguished. Indeed Venerable Bede relates [ Lib. 1. Hist.
Gentis Anglorum, Cap. 17.] that the Britains implored the Aid of the French
Bishops against the Pelagian Heresy, and that Lupus Bishop of Troies, and
Germanus Bishop of Auxerre came into Britain from France, whence our Author,
Page 89. deduces, that the Authority of the Roman Church was not acknowledged
by the Britains. But whilst he cites Bid, let him also consult that Writer,
from whom Bid might have borrowed his History, viz. St. Prosper, who [ ad
Consulatum Florentini and Dionysii] gives us an account of the Matter of Fact
in these Words: S. Prosper in Chronico. Vid. number. XLIV.
Agricola the Son of Severianus a Pelagian Bishop, being himself also a
Pelagian, corrupted the British Churches by the Insinuation of his Doctrine;
but Pope Celestine being solieited by Palladius the Deacon, sends Germanus
Bishop of Auxerre, as his Legate, and having expelled the Heretics, he
instructs the Britains in the Catholic Faith. Thus St. Prosper, who for his Age
might have seen and spoken with Palladius Deacon to Pope Celestine, who was
also at Rome under Leo the Great, Successor to Celestine, and Notary to the
said Leo, and so might have read in the Registry of the Roman Church the
authentic Instrument wherein Germanus was constituted Delegate of the Apostolic
See for Britain; so that there can be no question made of the Authority of this
Fathers Testimony. Nor imports it, that Bid says, Germanus came together with
Lupus into this Island at the Instance of the Britains; and that they were
chosen by the Council of Verolam to dispute with the Pelagians: For, as
Baronius the Parent of Annals rightly observes, this does not at all hinder,
but that Pope Celestine made Germanus Bishop of Auxerre his Delegate, at the
Instance of Palladius the Roman Deacon^ and that Germanus relying upon the
Apostolical Authority came to compose the differences of the British Church,
and went out of his own proper Diocese into the Dioceses of others, which as
the Monuments of those times inform us, was a frequent practice.

7. S. Prosper Vid. number. XLV. Venerab. B^da lib. 1. cap. 133. Vid. number. XLVI.
Matthaeus Westmonasteriensis. Vid. number. XLVII.
For Prosper relates, that two years after the mission of Germanus
Antisiodorensis, Bassus and Antiochus being Consuls, Palladius was ordained by
Pope Celestine, and sent the first Bishop to the Scots who believed in Christ.
Venerable Bede tells us the very same thing lib. 1. cap. 13. asserting at the
Eighth year of Theodosius junior: that Palladius was the first Bishop that was
sent by Celestine Bishop of the Roman Church to the Scots believing in Christ.
After Palladius Matthaeus Westmonasteriensis mentions St. Patrick as sent by
the same Pope, in these words: Pope Celestine, after he had heard of the death
of Palladius, Theodosius and Valentinian being Emperors, sent Patrick to
display the Banner of the Holy Cross to the Gentiles, who when he came to
Britain preached the word of God there, and was kindly received by the
Inhabitants of that Island: Then going into Scotland he preached Gods word,
which could not be restrained. Indeed he adds, that he was advanced to the
degree of a Bishop by Matthew Archbishop; and this also might be done by the
command of Celestine, in the same manner as we shall see anon, Augustine was
ordained by the Bishop of Arles, upon the Order of Pope Gregory; Moreover
Marianus Scotus, asserts that St. Patrick was ordained Archbishop of Scotland
by Celestine, and that all Ireland was converted by him, for which we have not
only the testimony of Sigebert, and other foreign Writers, but likewise of many
English Authors, as the Bishop of Armagh has observed p. 838 etc.] where he
cites their testimonies; and amongst the rest that of Joceline the Monk, who
has placed St. Patricks life at the latter end of the Twelfth Age which
Henschenius puts at the 17th day of March; and does not only mention that St.
Patrick was created Bishop by Pope Celestine, but likewise that he came again
to Rome in the time of Pope Hilary to give an account of his mission, who,
Jocelinus in v^^^ S. Patricii. Vid. number. XLVIII.
says he, giving him power to act in his stead, and constituting him his
Legate, by the Sanction of his Authority confirmed all that he had done,
constituted, or settled in Ireland. From all which it is clearly proved that
the Apostolic See did make use of its Authority in governing the British
Churches by its Legates; and that Britain did acknowledge this Authority till
the Invasion of the Saxons, which was after the time of Celestine.

8. After that, upon the coming of the Saxons into Britain, the Churches had
been demolished, the Altars broken down, and the Priests dispersed, Gregory the
first sent Augustine the Monk to restore the Catholic Religion gone to decay in
the chief Provinces, under the Tyranny of the Heathen Princes, for a long
series of years; and Britain received and honored him as their Apostle.
Venerable Bede [ lib. 7. cap. 28.] testifies that Augustine was ordained
Archbishop of the English Nation by Etherius Archbishop of Arles according to
the commands he had received from the Holy Father Gregory. Venerab. Bid lib.
1. Hist. c. 28. Auctor vitae Gregory Magni. vide number. XLIX.
Augustine was therefore ordained by the command of Gregory the Great, because
Gregory being the chief Bishop in the whole World, presided over those Churches
which were long since converted to the true faith, as Spelman relates [ Tomo 1.
Conciliorum Angliae, ad anum Christi 597. ex vita Gregorii lib. 2. cap. 2. per
Bedam conscripta.] Also at the beginning of the Sixth Age Augustine the first
Bishop of Canterbury, when he made it his business to restore the Discipline of
the English Church, consulted Gregory, who by virtue of his Apostolical
Authority gave Rules, according to which the Discipline of the English Church
was Established. By virtue of this Authority, Gregory commanded Augustine to
create two Metropolitans, the one at London, and the other at York; together
with twenty four Bishops, and ordered that they should be subject to Augustine,
so long as he continued as his Legate. All which is a plain evidence that the
Bishops exercised a supreme Apostolic Authority over England, and that not only
the ancient Britains, but also the Saxons, as soon a^ they were Converted to
the Faith, acknowledged this with due veneration.

9. And so much of some ancient Monuments, from whence we have deduced, that
the British Nation did acknowledge the Popes Authority in the first Ages. It
now only remains, that we return an Answer to the Objections raised from the
Manuscript set forth by Spelman and the Acts of the British Synod, which our
Author cites out of Venerable Bede. And first as to the Manuscript set forth by
Spelman, it does not seem to be so ancient, but that it might have been written
since the Schism. But says Spelman, at what time this Manuscript was written,
Spelmans Tom. 1. Conciliorum dugliae.
or by what Author, I cannot learn, either from the Manuscript it self, or by
any other means; but I believe the Book may be found in the Cottonian Library.
Spelman tells us that he had no certainty concerning the Author of this
Manuscript. But on the contrary plainly intimates, that he was in great doubt
concerning the matter, moreover since he confesses he was ignorant of the time
when this Manuscript was written, we may easily gather from hence, that it was
not ancient: Nay the Style manifestly discovers that it is modern, and could
never have been Penned in the time of Augustine the Monk, and of Gregory the
Great. Lastly it is there affirmed, that the Britans, and Dinoth the Abbot
answered Augustine, that they would own no Subjection to him, Monumertum
Anglicanum supposititium.
because they were under the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Caerleon upon Usk.
Whereas it is manifest that there was no Archbishop of Caerleon upon Vsk at
that time; and that the Metropolitan Jurisdiction had for above a hundred years
before been transferred to Menevia. As to the acts of the Synod which the
Author cites against us out of Venerable Bede others have heretofore made
answer, that there was no dispute between Augustine and the British Bishops
concerning the Primacy of the Bishops of Rome; but only about some Traditions
of their Church; concerning which Augustine argued in this manner with the
Bishops: Indeed, says he to them, Venerab. Bed^^ lib. 2. Hist cap. 2. Vid.
number. L.
you do not only act contrary to our custom, but likewise to that of the
Universal Church, in many things; and yet if you will comply with us in these
three things, the observation of Easter at the right time, the administering
Baptism in which we are regenerated to God, according to the Rite of the Holy
Roman, and of the Apostolic Church; and in the joining with us to preach the
Gospel to the English: we will bear with you in all other things wherein you
act contrary to our custom. But they made answer that they would not do any of
these things, nor accept of him as their Archbishop. Thus far Bid; from whose
words it is apparent, if I mistake not, that the question was not concerning
the Primacy of the Roman Bishop, but about Augustines Metropolitical
jurisdiction over them; and that the British Bishops only contended, that they
ought not to pay subjection to Augustine as their Archbishop. And although upon
this account they refused to receive some other things that were of
Ecclesiastical Tradition, yet in this they did not oppose the Roman Church
only, but the Churches throughout the whole World; where they were said to act
many things inconsistent with Ecclesiastical Unity, concerning which Venerable Bede in his Second Book above mentioned, gives us this relation. Ibid. Vid.
number. LI.
When after a long disputation held they could not be brought either by the
supplications, persuasions or reprehensions of Augustine and his Companions to
give their assent, but rather chose to prefer their own Traditions before those
of all the Churches which agree with one another in Christ throughout the whole
world besides; The Holy Father Augustine put an end to this long and troublesome
contention by saying thus: Let us beseech God, who makes men to live in
unanimity in their Fathers house, that he would vouchsafe to discover to us by
a sign from Heaven, which Tradition is to be followed, and which way we ought
to take to arrive at his Kingdom, let some Person that labors under an
infirmity be brought, and let his faith and works be believed to be devoted to
God, and be followed by all, by whose prayers he shall be cured. Which when his
Adversaries, although with reluctance, yielded to, a certain blind man of
English Race was brought; who being offered to the British Priests for a cure,
and obtaining none by their Ministry, at length Augustine as obliged upon so
just an occasion, bends his knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
beseeching him that he would restore the sight of the blind man which he had
lost, and by enlightening the body of one man irradiate the minds of many
Believers with the light of spiritual grace. The blind man forthwith had his
sight restored, and Augustine is by all proclaimed a Preacher of Divine light.
Whereupon the Britains confessed they had plainly found that way of
Righteousness to be true which Augustine taught. Thus far Venerable Bede who no
where mentioned any Controversy about the Popes Supremacy, but concerning
Traditions, viz. the observation of Easter, and some certain Rites in the
administration of Baptism, as is above remarked.

10. But though these things are true, and confirmed to be so by the Testimony
of Venerable Bede; yet let us suppose, that amongst other things the Bishop of
Romes Primacy was also controverted; who sees not that the acts reorded in
Venerable Bede fully confute our Authors Plea? The acts testify, that the
Britains contended about Traditions, which they preferred before all Churches,
which agree amongst themselves in Christ over the world, so that if the
question was, concerning the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome, it is manifest that
all the Churches in the World did then ackowledge the Primacy of Peter's
Successor; as Gregory the Great also testifies, Gregorius Magnus lib. 4. Epist.
32. Vid. number. LII.
[ lib. 4. Epist. 32.] writing to Mauritius: For it is manifest says he, to all
that knowthe Gospel, that the care of the whole Church was by the word of our
Lord committed to S. Peter the Prince of all the Apostles. Therefore in the
time of Gregory the Great, all that were acquainted with the Gospel, knew the
Successor of Peter the Prince of the Apostles, whom the faithful from the very
first Ages of Christianity, styled the Bishop of Bishops; so that the Britains
opposed his Primacy against the judgment of the whole Catholic World. Supposing
therefore that the Britains, amongst other Traditions, rejected also that of
the Primacy of the Roman Bishop; what could be gathered from hence, but that,
as Baronius the Parent of Annals has observed, after the Saxons had broken in
upon them, they deserted the Doctrines and Rites of the Catholic Church, and
receded as Schismatics from the center of Ecclesiastical Communion? What else
can we conclude but that God was willing to show the falsehood of the
Schismatical Church of Britain by the Miracle which he wrought upon Augustine's
intercession? Do not the Acts of the British Synod recorded in Bid testify,
that Augustine did by so manifest a Miracle demonstrate the truth of those
things which he proposed to the Britains, that they were forced to confess it
was the true way of Justice which Augustine Preached? If these things cannot be
denied, as it is most certain they cannot, what do the modern English Authors
mean, when they object against Catholics the answer of the Britains and the
Monks of Banchor? Will they not at length be convinced, that they oppose
nothing but their own Errors, which are the vain Forgeries of Men, against that
Truth which has been confirmed by a Divine Testimony; and that the rest of the
Church has just reason to condemn them for having lost both Truth and Modesty
at the same time? I am weary of vainly spending my time in matters so clear, so
manifest, so perspicuous; and of being again forced, when Religion is the
subject, to bring a new Evidence of that Truth, which all the English Writers
of former Ages, all men that have been eminent in Britain for Sanctity and
Learning, and lastly even the Bishops who have been present in the several
Councils that have been held in England, Scotland, and Ireland, have
acknowledged and defended. I will therefore conclude my Discourse with the
following Exhortation.

AN EXHORTATION TO THE MINISTERS OF THE English Church.
WHen Philo the most Eloquent of the Hebrews addressed his Oration to Caius the
Emperor, Philo in Oratione pro Gente Hebraeorum ad Caium Caligulam.
and the Roman Senate: How long, says he, shall we old Men be Children, as to
the Body gray indeed through Age, but as to the Mind, through want of
Knowledge, very Infants, whilst we believe Fortune, the most inconstant thing
in the World, to be stable, but Nature to be unstable, whereas it is most
constant. Pardon me, I beseech you, most excellent Ministers of the English
Church, if I make my Address to you in the Words of Philo, tho somewhat
altered. How long will you, who are ancient in Body, be Children in Minds, and
mere Infants for want of knowledge of Religion; whilst you think the Catholic
Church unstable, which is yet most constant, and your own, which is rent from
the Body of the Catholic Church, will be stable? You have changed the true
Estimate of things; attributing that to a part, which is only the Property of
the whole, and imagining with your selves that the Catholic Church is
defectible, Matthaei 16 cap. 1. ad Timoth. 3.
which the eternal Truth has promised shall never fail, and which the Doctor
of the Gentiles has called the Pillar and Ground of Truth. You thought that
the true Faith was lost in the Catholic Church spread over the Face of the
whole World, but found again by you in England; little considering how truly
that Objection might be made against you, which Henry the Eighth your King, in
the Age before this, made against Luther; that, like the Donatists, you reduce
the Catholic Church to a very small number, whispering of Christ in a Corner.
It was the Judgment of the great Augustine, and of St. Optatus Milevitanus,
Optat. Melcvit. Lib. 2. contra Parmenianum. Quasi in carcerem latitudo Regnorum.
that the Church was not to be shut up in some Corner, but to extend it self to
the utmost Bounds of the World, the latter of these Holy Fathers, [Lib. 2.]
reprehends Parmenianus, the Chief of the Donatists, for endeavoring to make
void that Promise of God the Father, of giving to the Son the uttermost parts
of the Earth for his Possession; whereas he had confined the large Extent of
his Dominions, as it were to a narrow Prison. Then he asserts, the Church that
it may be Catholic, ought to be extended to all parts of the World, and that
the first Mark to distinguish it by was Unity, which consists in the Communion
it holds with St. Peter's See, which is but one, and this he believed, so
manifest, that he thought Permenianus himself could not deny it. Negare non
potes, inquit loco supracitato, Stire te, in Vrbe Roma Petro Primo Cathedram
Episcopalem esse callatam, in qua sederit emnium Apostolorum Caput Petrus, unde
and Cephas appellatus est: in qua una Cathedra uni as ab ^m^^bus servaretur, ne
caeteri Apostoli singulas sibi quisque defenderent: ut jam schismaticus and
peccater esset, qui contra singularem Cathedram alteram coll^caret. Ergo
Cathedra unica, que est prima de dotibus, sedit prior Petrus, cui successit
Linus (and enumerata longa Romanorum Pontificum serie usque ad Siricium, sub
quo scribebat) Siri^^us, inquit, hodie, qui noster est Sociu^, cum quo nobis
totus Orbis commercio formatarum in una Communionis Societate concerdat.
You cannot deny, says he, in the place above cited, but that you know, that
the Episcopal See of the City of Rome was granted to Peter as the Chief; in
which, Peter the Head of all the Apostles sat, from whence he was called
Cephas; in which one See Unity was to be preserved by all, least the rest of
the Apostles should claim a Superiority to any of their Sees: So that now he
would be a Schismatic and a Sinner, who should set up another See in opposition
to this peculiar See. Therefore in this one See only, which is its chief Dowry,
Peter first sat, to whom Linus succeeded; and so reckoning up a long Series of
Roman Bishops, till he came to Siricius, (in whose time he wrote) who, says
he, is our Fellow-Bishop, with whom the whole World agrees as we do, in one
Society of Communion, by intercourse of Communicatory Letters. There was then a
true Church in time past, which diffused throughout the whole World, made
Peter's one See the Center of its Unity; and communicated with the Roman
Church, as a Sign of one Faith and Religion, by Communicatory Letters. This was
the Sentence of Optatus Milevitanus, and the rest of the Fathers; which because
the Donatists durst not deny, they had constituted a Bishop of their own, in
the City of Rome, who, as St. Augustine tells us, was called Rupensis and
Montensis, a Rupe, vel Monte, from the Rock or Hill wherein he concealed
himself. If therefore the Popes Authority was so manifest in former Ages, that
the Schismatical Affricans themselves could neither be ignorant of it, nor deny
it; how comes it to pass that you in England now do not at all acknowledge it?
was perhaps the Knowledge of it so obliterated in the latter Ages, that it
could not be discovered by your Ancestors, when they separated from the
Communion of the Apostolic See? Henricus Octavus libro de 7. Sacramentis contra
Lutherum.
But it cannot be denied, said Henry the Eighth at that time, but every Church
of the Faithful owns and reverences the Holy See of Rome as their Mother and
Primate. If every Church did allow of this in the time of Henry the Eighth, if
they all recognized this one See of St. Peter; what Reason, what Right, what
Equity could this very Henry, the First, of all the Kings of England, have to
set up another See against this peculiar See, and offer to restrain the Bounds
of its Primacy? I know indeed that your Author, against whom I have hitherto
written, has made the same Answer to this, that Luther did in the time of
Henry the Eighth; that the Pope had not obtained a Power so great, and of so
large an Extent as this, by the Command of God, or by the Consent of Men, but
had usurped it to himself. But because he agrees with Luther in opposing the
Popes Power, it is but reasonable he should hear what Answer Henry the Eighth
has made to him in the Person of Luther: I would have him to tell me when it
was that he entered forcibly upon this large Possession? The first beginnings
of so immense a Power could not have been unknown to us, especially if they had
happened within the Memory of Man. But if he shall say that it is an Age or two
since the thing was done, let him give us an account of it from History. Or
else, if it be so ancient, that the Original of it, although it be so
considerable a Matter, is obliterated; he knows it is the wise Provision of all
Laws, that when the Right to any thing is so far beyond the Memory of Man, that
it cannot be known what a beginning it had, it should be presumed to have had
legitimate one; and it is plainly forbidden by the consent of all Nations, that
those things should be unsettled, which have for a long time continued in a
settled State -- I very much admire how he could ever hope to find Readers
either so credulous or so stupid as to believe an unarmed Priest, all alone,
having no Guard to attend him, no just Right to support him, nor Title to rely
upon, could so much as hope ever to obtain so great a Dominion over so many
Bishops that were his Equals, in so many different and far distant Countries.
Much less can any one believe, that all People, Cities, Kingdoms and Provinces,
were so prodigal of their Concerns, Rights and Liberties, as to give a Priest,
that was a Stranger to them, and to whom they owed nothing, so great a Power
over them, as he could scarce dare to wish for. These things are manifest, and
the more remarkable, because written by that King of Great Britain, under whom
your English Church separated from the Roman, for a Reason which I am ashamed
to relate, neither is it fitting for you to hear it; and contrary to the
perpetual Tradition of the Ancients, contrary to the Faith of your Ancestors,
contrary to the Consent of all Catholics, broke into open Schism, and fell from
Schism into Heresy, and from Heresy into the Abyss of those Errors which are
now fresh in the Memory of Men, and which Posterity will ever have cause to
lament. Of these Errors I need not make a Catalogue, or produce any Testimony,
since you are too well acquainted with them; only, I should indeed think my
Pains very well bestowed, if I could by any means recall you from Heresy and
Schism, which are the Sourses of so many Evils, to a sound Mind, and move you
to repent whilst you have time.

After the Darkness of Schism, the Light of Truth shone forth to you under the
Reign of Mary your Queen, which Britain calling to mind its ancient Faith,
received with due Veneration. After the Night of Heresies, into which Britain
fell back under the Reign of Elizabeth, Faith like the Morning seems to rise
again, under the Government of a Catholic Prince; whence we may hope the Light
of Truth, which your Ancestors enjoyed for so many Ages, will break forth among
you into open Day, and again recover that Place from whence a hundred Years
since it was forced into Banishment. This is what all those Churches, with whom
you have formerly held Communion, earnestly desire. This is what Spain,
Portugal, France, Germany, Bohemia, Poland, Dalmatia, Italy, Sicily, and the
other Western Regions, in which the ancient Religion now flourishes with so
much Splendour, continually pray for. This is what the Churches, still remaining
in Greece, Asia, Palestine, Mesopotamia, Persia, Armenia, and all the East, will
joyfully entertain. This the vast Provinces of the new World, inhabited by so
many People, so many Nations, so many Families: This the far distant
Inhabitants of China, many of which, have in the former, and in this present
Age, embraced the Christian Faith: This innumerable Islands, scattered every
where up and down in that Sea we call the ocean, will receive with joyful
Acclamations. This will be most acceptable to Rome the Mother Church, which
first brought you forth to God and Religion; neither could any thing be more
delightful to Her, than to receive You, as a kind Parent, amongst so many
others which at this time are returning to Her from Heresy and Schism, and
cherish you in her Bosom. All the other above mentioned Churches throughout the
World, are subject to this Roman See, and all these joined together constitute
the Catholic Church, from which none can be separated, who desires to be one of
the Faithful, and would attain Salvation. Would to God therefore that you would
look after the Salvation of your own Souls, whilst the Catholic Church spread
over the Face of the whole Earth, waits earnesily for your Conversion; that you
would return to the Communion of that Church, out of which there is no
Salvation. Epist. ad Ephesians. c. 5.
There is one Lord, and one Faith, says Paul. That Faith is found in the
Church, which is but one; D. Ambrosius in cap. 4. Lucae.
as the Apostles in their Creed have taught us. This Church is the House, that
I may use St. Ambrose's Words, of which as Damasus was at that time Rector, so
Innocentius is now. D. Hieronymus, E^^st^ad Damasum.
Whosoever eats the Lamb out of this House, says Jerome, is Profane; and
since he is not in the Ark of Noah, he shall perish when the Deluge reigns.
Julianus Cardinalis apud Pium 2. in Bulla ad Vniversitatem Colomensem.
Latinerum and Graecorum Doctorum una vox est: salvari non posse, qui Sanctae
Romanae Ecclesiae non ^enet unitatem.
Nor is this the Sense of Jerome only, but of the rest of the Fathers: for as
Julianus, President of the Synod at Basil rightly observed: The Latin and Greek
Doctors say all with one Voice, that he cannot be saved, who lives not in Unity
with the Holy Roman Church.

Testimonia, in Idiomate quo ex Authoribus in hoc Libro citantur, hic
conscripta reperiat LECTOR.
NUMBER. I.
GIldas sapiens in Epistola de excidio Britanniae: Interea glaciali frigore
rigenti Insulae, and veluti longiori Terrarum recessu soli visibili non
proximae, verus ille non de firmamento solum temporali, sed de summa etiam
Caelorum arce tempora cuncta excedente Universo Orbi praefulgitum sui corruscum
ostendens (tempore ut scimus, Summi Tiber^ Caesaris, quo absque ullo
impedimento ejus propagabatur Religio, comminata, Senatu nolente, a Principe
morte dilatoribus militum ejusdem) radios suos primum indulget, id est sua
praecepta Christus: quae licet ab incolis tipide suscepta sunt, apud quosdam
tamen integre, and alios minus usque ad persecutionem Diocletiani Tyranni
novennem, in qua subversae per totum Mundum sunt Ecclesiae. Vide in Versione
Anglica hujus Libri, supra. Page 2

NUMBER. II.
Eusebius. Demonst. Evang. l. 3. c. 7. p. 113. (...) Page 7

NUMBER. III.
Hieronymus in cap. 5. Amos Prophetae: Quod Paulus vocatus a Domino effusus sit
super faciem universae Terrae, ut praedicaret Evangelium Hierosolymis usque ad
Illyricum, and aedificaret non super alterius fundamentum, ubi jam fuerat
praedicatum, sed usque ad Hispanias tenderet, and a Mari Rubro, imo ab Oceano
usque ad Oceanum curreret, imitans Dominum suum Solemn Justitiae, de quo
legimus: a summo caelo egressio ejus, and occursus ejus usque ad summum ejus,
ut ante eum Terra deficeret, quam studium praedicandi. Page.7

NUMBER. IV.
Gregorius Magnus, lib. 31. moralium cap. 22. Pauius, cum nunc Judeam, nunc
Corinthum, nunc Ephesum, nunc Romam, nunc Hispanias peteret, ut in peccati
morte jacentibus aeternae vitae gratiam nuntiaret, quid se aliud quam esse
Aquilam demonstrabat? Page 8

NUMBER. V.
Clemens Epist. ad Corinth. (...) Page 9

NUMBER. VI.
Severus Sulpitius, lib. 2. Sub Aurelio Antonini filio persecutio quinta
agitata, ac tum primum intra Gallias Martyria visa, serius trans Alps Dei
Religione suscepta.

NUMBER. VII.
Venerabilis Beda, Hist. gentis Anglorum lib. 1. Anno, inquit, ab Incarnatione
Domini centesimo, quinquagesimo sexto, Mercus Antonius Verus, quartus decimus
ab Augusto, Regnum cum Aurelio Commodo fratre suscepit, quorum temporibus cum
Eleutherius Vir sanctus Pontificatui Romanae Ecclesiae praeesset, misit ad eum
Lucius Britanniarum Rex Epistolam, obsecrans, ut per ejus mandatum Christianus
efficeretur, and mox effectum piae postulationis consecutus est, susceptamque
fidem Britanni usque in tempora Dioclesiani Principis inviolatam, integramque
quieta in paee servabant. Page 12

NUMBER. VIII.
Innocentius I. in Epist. ad Decentium Eugubinum Episcopum: Quis enim nesciat,
aut non advertat id, quod a Principe Apostolorum Petro Romanae Ecclesiae
traditum est, ac nunc usque custoditur, ab omnibus debere servari, nec
superduci aut introduci aliquid, quod aut auctoritatem non habeat, aut aliunde
accipere videatur exemplum? praesertim cum sit manifestum, in omnem Italiam,
Gallias, Hispanias, Africam, atque Siciliam, Insulasque interjacentes nullum
instituisse Ecclesias, nisi eos, quos venerabilis Apostolus Petrus, aut ejus
Successores constituerint Sacerdotes. Aut legant, si in iis Provinciis alius
Apostolorum invenitur, aut legitur docuisse, qui si non legunt, quia nusquam
inveniunt, oportet eos hoc sequi, quod Ecclesia Romana custodit, a qua eos
principium accepisse non dubium est, ne, dum peregrinis assertionibus student,
caput institutionum videantur omittere. Page 24

NUMBER. IX.
Nicolaus I. number. 73. Epist. ad Bulgar. Hunc esse ordinem observandum, ut a
Sedis Apostolicae Praesule sit nunc vobis Episcopus consecrandus, qui, si
Christi plebs ipso praestante crescit, Archiepiscopatus privilegia per nos
accipiat, and ita demum Episcopos sibi constituat, qui ei decedenti Successorem
eligant: and propter longitudinem itineris non jam huc consecrandus, qui
electus est veniat: sed hunc Episcopi, qui ab obeunte Archiepiscopo consecrati
sunt, simul congregati constituant: Sane interim in throno non sedentem, and
praeter corpus Christi non consecrantem, priusquam pallium a Sede Romana
percipiat, sicuti Galliarum omnes, and Germaniae, and aliarum Regionum
Archiepiscopi agere comprobantur. Page 33

NUMBER. X.
Honorius I. Epist. ad Edwinum: Duo pallia utrorumque Metropolitanorum, id est,
Honorio, and Paulino direximus, ut dum quis eorum de hoc saeculo ad Auctorem
suum fuerit accersitus, in loco ipsius alterum Episcopum ex hac nostra
auctoritate debeat subrogare: quod quidem tam pro Vestrae Caritatis affectu,
quam pro tantarum Provinciarum spatio, quae inter nos, and vos esse noscuntur,
sumus invitati concedere, ut in omnibus Devotioni Vestrae nostrum concursum,
and juxtra vestra desideria praeberemus. Page 34

NUMBER. XI.
Venerabilis Beda, cap. 18. Ne sit necesse ad Romanam usque Civitatem per tam
prolixa terrarum, and maris spatia pro ordinando Archiepiscopo semper fatigari.
-- ibid.

NUMBER. XII.
Canone 17. Synodi generalis 8. Ita ut earum Praesules universorum
Metropolitanorum, qui ab ipsis promoventur, and sive per manus impositionem,
sive per pallii dationem, Episcopalis dignitatis firmitatem accipiunt, habeant
potestatem, videlicet ad convocandum eos, urgente necessitate, ad Synodalem
conventum, vel etiam ad coercendum illos, and corrigendum, cum fama eos super
quibusdam delictis forsitan accusaverit. Page 35

NUMBER. XIII.
Apud Anastatium Biblioth. Legati Adriani II. Seeds Apostolica, inquiunt, juxta
quod Decretalibus Sanctissimorum Romanorum Praesulum doceri poteritis, utramque
Epirum, novam videlicet veteremque, totamque Thessaliam, atque Dardaniam, in
qua, and Dardaniae Civitas hodie demonstratur, cujus nunc patria ab his
Bulgaris Bulgaria nuncupatur, antiquitus Canonice ordinavit, and obtinuit. Page
39

NUMBER. XIV.
Nicolaus primus Epist. 2. ad Michaelem Imperatorem. Quae Antecessorum
nostrorum temporibus, scilicet Damasi, Siricii, Innocentii, Bonifacii,
Caelestini, Sixti, Leonis, Hilarii, Simplicii, Felicis atque Hormisdae
Sanctorum Pontificum sacris dispositionibus augebatur. Quorum denique
institutiones ab eis illis in partibus destinatas per nostros missos, ut rei
veritatem cognoscere queatis, vestrae Augustali potentiae dirigere curavimus.
Page 40

NUMBER. XV.
Innocentius primus Epistola inter Holstenianas 4. Anteriores tanti ac tales
viri Predecessores mei Episcopi, id est, S. memoriae Damasus, Siricius, atque
supra memoratus vir (Anastasius nimirum) ita detulerunt, ut omnia, quae in
illis partibus gererentur, Sanctitati tuae, quae plena justitiae, traderent
cognoscenda, meam quoque parvitatem hoc tenere judicium, eamdemque habere
voluntatem, te decet recognoscere. Page 41

NUMBER. XVI.
Caelestinus primus, Epistola 13. inter Holsten. Nec nova haec, inquit, Sedis
Apostolicae cura de vobis est, statutum nostris saepius experimentum hoc, quod
nos agimus: Thessalonicensi Eeclesiae semper esse commissum, ut vobis
vigilanter intendat. and infra: Sunt culpae aliquantae non leves, quae illis
innatae Provinciis ad nos, cum simus longius, non possunt pervenire, aut jam
semotis omnibus, non ita, ut sunt acta interposito temporis spatio perferuntur:
quas omnes nos intercessione fratris ac Coepiscopi nostri Rufi, cujus
experientiam comprobatam esse in causis omnibus, and vitae actibus liquet,
volumus resecari. Cui vicem nostram per vestram Provinciam noveritis esse
commissam, ita ut ad eum, Fratres carissimi, quidquid de causis agitur,
referatur, sine ejus consilio nullus ordinetur, nullus usurpet eodem inconscio
commissam illi Provinciam, colligere nisi cum ejus voluntate Episcopos non
praesumat: per eum etiam ad nos, si quid est, referatur. ibid.

NUMBER. XVII.
Sixtus III. Epist. ad Perigenem inter Holsten. Sed id, inquit, quod ejus
Decessoribus nostri Decessores detulerant, habita consideratione disciplinae
Ecclesiae constitutum. Page 42

NUMBER. XVIII.
Synodus Romanus sub Bonifacio. Constare venerandos sedis Romanae Pontifices,
quamvis in toto mundo Seeds Apostolica Ecclesiarum sibi jure vindicet
Principatum, and solam Ecclesiasticis causis undique appellare necesse sit,
specialiter tamen gubernationi suae Illy rici Ecclesias vindicasse. Page 42

NUMBER. XIX.
Bonifacius Epist. inter Holsten. 5. ad Rufum: Perrevii Coepiscopi nostri
negotium, cujus nobis libellus ab codem destinatus fecit indicium, cui
consacerdotes sui molesti nimis esse dicuntur, ita ut eum Ecclesia sua
crederent esse pellendum, diligenter audire tuam volumus charitatem conventis
supradictis Coepiscopis nostris, quorum se vim sustinere deplorat. Tunc demum,
ut intelligant, si quid a se factum est, contra consuetudinem prius esse
cassandum, omnibus vestigatis ad nos tua Charitas refer maturet, quatenus
probatum a tua Fraternitate judicium sententia nostra valeat roborari. Sane in
Epistola Thessalis fratribus destinata id a nobis scriptum volumus recognoscas,
Pausianum, Cyriacum, atque Calliopum a nostra Communione penitus summovendos,
ita ut remedium solum interventionis tuae gratiam se habere cognoscant. Maximum
autem, quem male tua Charitas retulit ordinatum, in totum Sacerdotii censemus
honor privandum. Page 46

NUMBER. XX.
Lex Theodosii Junioris: Omni innovatione cessante vetustatem, and Canones
pristinos Ecclesiasticos, qui nunc usque tenuerunt, per omnes Illyrici
Provincias servari praecipimus: tum si quid dubietatis emerserit, id oporteat
non absque scientia Viri Reverentissimi Sacrosanctae legis Antistitis Urbis
Constantinopolitanae, quae Romae veteris praerogativa laetatur, Conventui
Sacerdotali, sanctoque judicio reservari. Dat. pride. Idus Julii; Eustatio and
Agricola Coss. Page 49

NUMBER. XXI.
Bonifacius Epist. ad Rufum, inter Holsten. 8. Violatores Canonum, inquit,
atque Ecclesiastici Juris inimicos, Deo auctore compescet, qui talium mentium
semper vota frustratur. In caeteros etiam contumaces jus concessae potestatis
exerce. Nullum etenim locum vides a nobis otiosum relictum. Page 50

NUMBER. XXII.
Honorii Epist. ad Theodosium: Procul dubio illius Urbis Ecciesia Speciali
nobis cultu veneranda est, ex qua and Romanum Principatum accepimus; and
principium Sacerdotium. Siquidem nihil aliud a pietate nostra postulaverit
missa Legatio, nisi quod Catholicae fidei, Disciplinae and aequitati concordet:
petit enim, ut haec privilegia, quae dudum a patribus constituta usque ad
tempora nostra servata sunt, inconcussa perdurent. and infra: Under Majestas
tua recensitis nostrae pietatis affatibus Christianitatis memor, quam
pectoribus nostris misericordia caelestis infundit, universis remotis, quae
diversorum Episcoporum subreptionibus per Illyricum impetrari dicuntur,
antiquum ordinem praecipiat custodiri. Ne sub Principibus Christianis Romana
perdat Ecclesia, quod aliis Imperatoribus non amisit. Page 51

NUMBER. XXIII.
Theodosii Rescriptum: Omni supplicantium Episcoporum per Illyricum subreptione
remota statuimus observari, quod prisca Apostolica Disciplina and Canones
veteres eloquuntur. Super qua re secundum formam oraculi Perennitatis tuae ad
Viros illustres Praefectos Praetorii Illyrici nostri scripta porreximus, ut
cessantibus Episcoporum subreptionibus antiquum ordinem specialiter faciant
custodiri: ne venerabilis Ecclesia Sanctissima Urbis privilegia a veteribus
constituta amittat, quae perenne nobis sui nominis consecravit Imperium. Page 52

NUMBER. XXIV.
Leo primus Epist. 54. ad Anastasium Thessalonicen. Apostolica discretione
provisum esse, inquit Leo Epist. 54. ut in singulis Provinciis singuli
constituerentur, qui inter Provinciae Episcopos primam sententiam haberent,
rursus quidam in majoribus Urbibus constituti fuerunt, qui sollicitudinem
susciperent majorem, per quos ad unam Petri Sedem universalis Ecclesiae cura
conflueret, and nihil usquam a suo Capite dissideret. Page 54

NUMBER. XXV.
Canon 1. Concilii Arelatensis 1. De observationibus Paschae and Dominicae, ut
uno die and tempore per omnem Orbem observetur, and juxta consuetudinem
litteras ad omnes Tu dirigas. Page 66

NUMBER. XXVI.
Leo Magnus Epist. 64. ad Marcianum. Paschale etenim festum, quo Sacramentum
salutis humanae maxim continetur, quamvis in primo semper mense celebrandum
sit, ita tamen est lunaris cursus condition mutabile, ut plerumque
Sacratissimi diei ambigua currat electio. Et ex hoc fiat plerumque, quod non
licet, ut non simul omnis Ecclesia, quod non nisi unum esse oporteat, observet.
Studucreque Sancti Patres, occasionem hujus erroris auferre, omnem hanc curam
Alexandrino Episcopo delegantes, quoniam apud Aegyptios hujus supputationis
antiquitus tradita esse videbatur peritia, per quam qui annis singulis dies
praedictae solemnitatis evenerit, Sedi Apostolicae indicaretur, ut hujus
scripti ad longinquiores Ecclesias judicium generaliter percurreret. Page 68

NUMBER. XXVII.
Innocentius 1. Epist. 11. Has ergo litteras de ratione Paschali alterius (dico
futuri) anni praescripsi. Nam cum ante diem undecimum Kalendarum Aprilium pene
Luna 16. colligatur (nam quidpiam minus est) itemque cum in ante diem quartum
Kalendarum earumdem veniat 23. existimavi 11. Kalendarum memoratarum die festa
Paschalia celebranda, quoniam in vigesima tertia Luna nullum Pascha unquam,
ante hoc Pasca factum esse cognoscimus. Sententiae meae exposui atque edixi
tenorem. Jam prudentiae tuae erit, consors mihi Frater, cum unanimis and
Consacerdotibus nostris hanc ipsam rem in Synodo religiosissima tractare, ut si
nihil dispositioni nostrae resultat, nobis plenissime aperteque scribens, quo
deliberatam Paschalem diem jam literis ante (ut moris est) servandam, suo
tempore praescribamus. Page 69

NUMBER. XXVIII.
Cyrillus Alexandrinus, praefat. ad Cyclum. Sanctorum, inqu^^ Cyrillus, totius
Orbis Synodi consensione decretum est, ut, quoniam apud Alexandriam talis esset
reperta Ecclesia, quae in hujus scientia clareret, quota Kalendarum vel Iduum,
quota Luna Pascha debeat celebrari, per singulos annos Romanae Ecclesiae
litteris intimaret, unde Apostolica authoritate universalis Ecclesia per totum
Orbem diffinitum Paschae diem sine ulla disceptatione cognosceret. Quod cum per
multa secula pariter custodissent, nullamque inde scripturarum quispiam
crederet, etc. Page 71

NUMBER. XXIX.
Fragmentum Synodi Palestinae apud Bedam. Tunc Papa Victor, Romanaeque Urbis
Episcopus direxit auctoritatem ad Theophilum Cesareensis Palestinaeque
Antistitem, ut quomodo Pascha recto jure a cunctis Catholicis celebraretur,
Ecclesiis utilis fieret ordinatio, ubi Dominus Salvator Mundi fuerat in carne
versatus. Percepta itaque auctoritate praedictus Episcopus non solum de sua
Provincia, sed etiam de diversis Regionibus omnes Episcopos evocavit, ubi cum
illa multitudo Sacerdotum convenit, tunc Theophilus Episcopus protulit
auctoritatem ad se missam Victoris Papae, and quid sibi operis fuisset
injunctum, ostendit. Page 72

NUMBER. XXX.
Eusebius lib. 5. Histor. cap. Victor quidem Romanae Urbis Episcopus illico
omnes Asiae vicinarumque Provinciarum Ecclesias tamquam contraria rectae fidei
sentientes a Communione abscindere conatur, datisque litteris universos, qui
illic erant, fratres proscribit, and ab unitate Ecclesiae prorsus alienos esse
pronuntiat. Page 73

NUMBER. XXXI.
Cyrillus Alexandrinus: Apostolica auctoritate universalis Ecclesia per totum
Orbem diffinitum Pasche diem sine ulla disceptationc cognoscebat. Page 75

NUMBER. XXXII.
Athanasius de sententia Dionysii: Quidam ex Ecclesia fratres recte quidem
sentientes, sed tamen cum ipsum non interrogassent, ut ediscerent, quo pacto
scripsisset, Romam ascenderunt, ibique eum apud Dionysium ejusdem nominis
Romanum Praesulem accusaverunt. Page 79

NUMBER. XXXIV.
Eusebius Caesariensis lib. 7. cap. 30. Sed inquit Eusebius cum Paulus ex domo
Ecclesiae nullatenus excedere vellet, interpellatus Imperator Aurelianus
rectissime hoc negotium dijudicavit, iis domum tradi praecipiens, quibus
Italici Christianae Religionis Antistites, and Romanus Episcopus scriberent.
Page 80

NUMBER. XXXV.
Julius primus Epist ad Orientales Antiochiae congregatos: Qui secum erant,
admiratione plenos vix induci potuisse ut crederent, ea ab ipsis profecta
fuisse: dicit Canones Apostolicos sequendos esse, and Episcoporum Nicaenorum
Decreta, quibus prioris Synodi acta in alia Synodo examinari permittebantur,
attendi debuisse: nam, inquit, Si istiusmodi consuetudo olim fuit, ejusque
memoria renovata est, and scripto prodita in magna Synodo, eamque apud vos
valere non sinitis, rem profecto indecoram facitis. Morem enim, qui semel in
Ecclesia obtinuit, and a Synodo confirmatus est, iniquum est a paucis abrogari.
Page 81

NUMBER XXXVI.
Canon 6. Nicaenus: Antiqua consuetudo servetur per Aegyptum, Lybiam, and
Pentapolim, ita ut Alexandrinus Episcopus horum omnium habeat potestatem, quia
and Urbis Romae Episcopo parilis mos est. Similiter autem and apud Antiochiam,
caeterasque Provincias suis privilegia serventur Ecclesiis. Illud autem
generaliter clarum est, quod si quis praeter sententiam Metropolitani fuerit
factus Episcopus, hunc magna Synodus definivit Episcopurn esse non oportere,
etc. Page 82

NUMBER. XXXVII.
D. Hieronimus Epist. 61. ad Pammachium. Tu, qui regulas quaeris
Ecclesiasticas, and Nicaeni Concilii Canonibus uteris -- responde mihi, ad
Alexandrinum Episcopum Palestina quid pertinet? ni fallor, hoc ibi decernitur,
ut Palestinae Metropolis Caesarea sit, and totius Orientis Antiochia: aut
igitur ad Caesareensem Episcopum refer debueras -- aut si procul expetendum
judicium erat, Antiochiam potius dirigendae litterae -- Maluisti occupatis
auribus molestiam facere, quam debitum Metropolitano tuo honorem reddere. Page
85

NUMBER. XXXVIII.
D. Athanasius de sententia Dionysii. In Pentapoli superioris Lybiae quidam
Episcoporum sententias Sabellii amplectebantur, tantumque eorum commenta
invaluerant, ut vix ulterius filius Dei in Ecclesius praedicaretur. Re cognita
Dionysius, ad cujus curam eae Ecclesiae pertinebant, Legatos misit, qui
Authors harum rerum ab illis pravis opinionibus retraherent. Page 87

NUMBER. XXXIX.
D. Epiphanius Haeresi. 68. Meletius, inquit, cum Martyribus ac praecipue Petro
Archiepiscopo Alexandrino tum in vinculis habebatur: atque ille quidem caeteris
Aegypti Episcopis antecellens secundum a Petro dignitatis locum obtinebat,
utpote illius adjutor, sed eidem tamen subjectus, and ad ipsum de causis
Ecclesiasticis referens. Hic enim mos est Alexandrinorum Archiepiscoporum, ut
per totum Aegyptum, ac Thebaidem, Mareotidem, Lybiam, Ammoniacam, Mareotidem,
and Pentapolim Ecclesiastica negotia administrent. ibid.

NUMBER. XL.
Canon 3. Sardicensis. S. Petri Apostoli memoriam honoremus, ut scribatur ab
his, qui causam examinarunt, Julio Romano Episcopo: and si judicaverit,
renovandum esse judicium, renovetur, and det Judices: si autem probaverit talem
causam esse, ut non refricentur ea, quae acta sunt, quae decreverit, confirmata
erunt. Page 95

NUMBER. XLI
Epistola Synodica Sardicensis: Optimum and valde congruentissimum videri, si
ad caput, id est, ad Petri Apostoli sedem de singulis quibusque Provinciis
Domini referat Sacerdotes. Page 95

NUMBER. XLII.
Concilium Aquileiense Epist. ad Gratianum Imperatorem: Totius Orbis Romani
caput Romanam Ecclesiam esse. Unde in omnes venerandae Commonitionis jura
dimanant. Page 96

NUMBER. XLIII.
Osorius Apologia pro liberate arbitrii. B. Innocentium Papam Romanum fratres
and Epistolae mitterentur, Universi, quod ille decerneret, sequuturi. ibid.

NUMBER. XLIV.
S. Prosper in Chronico: Agricola Pelagianus Severiani Episcopi Pelagiani
filius Ecclesias Britanniae dogmatis sui insinuatione corrupit, sed ad actionem
Palladii Diaconi Papa Caelestinus Germanum Antisiodorensem Episcopum vice sua
mittit, and deturbatis Haereticis Britannos ad Catholicam fidem dirigit. Page 99

NUMBER. XLV.
S. Prosper: Ad Scotos in Christum credentes ordinatur a Papa Caelestino
Palladius, and primus Episcopus mittitur. Page 100

NUMBER. XLVI.
Venerab. Beda lib. 1. cap. 13. Palladius ad Scotus in Christum credentes a
Pontifice Romanae Ecclesiae Caelestino primus mittitur Episcopus. ibid.

NUMBER. XLVII.
Matthaeus Westmonasteriensis: Audita vero morte Palladii Patricius Theodosio
and Valentiniano imperantibus a Papa Caelestino ad parts occiduas missus est,
ut vexillum S. Crucis Gentibus praedicaret. Cumque ad Britanniam pervenisset,
praedicavit ibi verbum Dei and a Genti-incolis gratanter est susceptus. Deinde
ad Scotos se conferens praedicavit verbum Dei, quod non potuit alligari. ibid.

NUMBER. XLVIII.
Jocelinus in vita S. Patricii. Illique, inquit, vices suas committens, atquen
legatum suum constituens, quaecumque in Hibernia gesserat, constituerat,
disposuerat, auctoritatis suae munimine confirmavit. Page 101

NUMBER. XLIX.
Auctor vitae Gregorii Magni. Gregorius cum primum in toto Orb gereret
Pontificatum, conversis jamdudum ad fidem veritatis esset praelatus Ecclesiis.
ibid.

NUMBER. L.
Venerab. Beda, lib. 2. Hist. cap. 2. In multis quidem nostrae consuetudini,
imo Universalis Ecclesiae contraria geritis, and tamen si in tribus his mihi
obtemperare vultis, ut Pascha suo tempore celebretis, ut ministerium
baptizandi, quo Deo renascimur, juxta morem Sanctae Romanae Ecclesiae and
Apostolicae Ecclesiae compleatis, ut Genti Anglorum una nobiscum praedicetis
verbum Domini: caetera, quae agitis, quamvis moribus nostris contraria,
aequanimiter cuncta tolerabimus. At illi nihil horum se facturos, neque illum
pro Archiepiscopo habituros esse respondebant. Page 103

NUMBER. LI.
Ibid. Qui cum longa disputatione habita, neque precibus, neque hortamentis,
neque increpationibus Augustini ac sociorum ejus assensum praebere voluissent,
sed suas potius traditiones universis, quae per Orbem sibi in Christo
concordant, Ecclesiis praeferrent, Sanctus Pater Augustinus hunc laboriosi ac
long^ certaminis finem fecit, ut diceret: obsecremus Deum, qui habitare facit
unanimes in domo Patris sui, ut ipse nobis insinuari caelestibus signis
dignetur, quae sequenda traditio, quibus sit viis ad ingressum Regni illius
properandum. Adducatur aliquis aeger, and per cujus preces fuerit curatus,
hujus fides and operatio Deo devota atque omnibus sequenda credatur. Quod cum
adversarii, inviti licet, concederent, allatus est quidam de genere Anglorum
oculorum luce privatus, qui cum oblatus Britonum Sacerdotibus nil curationis
vel sanationis horum ministerio perciperet, tandem Augustinus justa necessitate
compulsus flectit genua sua ad Patrem Domini nostri Jesu Christi, deprecans, ut
visum caeco, quem amiserat, restitueret, and per illuminationem unius hominis
corporalem in plurimorum cordibus fidelium spiritualis gratiae lucem
accenderet. Nec mora, illuminatur caecus, ac verus summae lucis praeco ab
omnibus praedicatur Augustinus. Tum Britones confitentur quidem, intellexisse
se, veram esse viam Justitiae, quam praedicaret Augustinus, etc. Page 104

NUMBER. LII.
Gregorius Magnus lib. 4. Epist. 32. Cunctis enim Evangelium scientibus liquet,
quod voce Dominica Sancto, and omnium Apostolorum Petro Principi Apostolo
totius Ecclesiae cura commissa est. Page 105

THE INDEX.
A.
WHat Provinces there were in Egypt, and to whom they were Subject. p. 87. The
Egyptians did, in the third Age, acknowledge the Authority of the Roman Bishop
as Supreme. p. 79 Aethiopia appertains to the Sea of Alexandria, because
Athanasius sent a Bishop thither, who planted the Aethiopic Church. p.30 The
Epistle of Agatho showing, of what Bishops the Patriarchal Synod of the Bishop
of Rome consists. p. 54 Agricola first brought the Pelagian Heresy into
Britain. p. 98 The Bishop of Alexandria had the care over all Egypt committed
to him. 82. The Nicene Council entrusted him also with the Computation of
Easter day. 68. He had Metropolitan Bishops under him. p. 84 The Bishop of
Antioch had also Metropolitan Bishops under him before the time of the Nicene
Council. p. 84 Appeals to the Bishop of Rome, as being Successor to Peter, are
to be admitted of. p. 81 It appears from the Testimony of the Council of
Aquileia that the Roman Church is the Head of the whole Roman World. p. 96. The
first Canon of the Council of Arles is recited from several Manuscripts. p. 66
The Council of Arles refers the determination of Easter day to Pope Sylvester.
59. How the defect in the citation, concerning the publishing of the Feast of
Easter, is to be supplied. p. 59 The Testimony of Augustine the Bishop
concerning the Roman Patriarchs Authority over all the West. 22. Augustine the
Monk was Gregory the Great's Legate. 101. he institutes Metropolitans by
Authority received from the Apostolic See. 102. he proves the truth of Catholic
Religion by miracle. p. 105
B.
What Testimonies prove Britain to have been converted to the Faith by Peter.
4. Severus Sulpitius affirms that Britains first Conversion to the Faith was in
the third Age. 11. Bid and Tertulian testify the same. 12. Britain was longer
preserved from the Pelagian Heresy than the other Western Regions. 98. Faith
and Discipline were restored in it by Augustine the Monk under Gregory the
Great. The Acts of the British Synod, concerning those things which Augustine
wrought for the restoring of Religion in England. p. 103. The British Bishops
did acknowledge in the Council or Arles, that the greater Dioceses did belong to
Sylvester the Bishop of Rome, and that the Apostles did daily sit in the Roman
See. 94. They professed in the Council of Sardica that the Memory of Peter was
to be honored. 95. They acknowledged that they appertained to the Patriarchal
Synod of the Bishop of Rome. 55. When they began to deviate from truth, and
Ecclesiastical Discipline. 101. How bad a cause they endeavored to defend
against Augustine Legate of the Apostolic See. p. 106
C.
The Bishop of Caesarea being Metropolitan of the Chief part of Palestine was
Subject to the Patriarch of Antioch. p. 85 Pope Caelestine sent his Legates
into Britaem. p. 99 The Catholic Church is the Pillar and ground of truth, the
Faith of which Church never fails. p. 109 The Testimony of Clemens Romanus
concerning Paul the Apostles Preaching. p. 9 Caelestine was of opinion that
appeal was to be made from the judgment of the African Synod to the examen of
the Roman Bishop. p. 97 The Fragments of the Council of Palestine concerning
Easter. p. 72 The 8th. general Council has taught us, in the 17th. Canon. that
the Metropo itans of the West did appertain to the Roman Patriarchate. p. 35
The Council of Arles, etc. See Arles, etc. What Customs were introduced by the
Apostles, and how they may be known to have been so. p. 53 The Church was
chiefly governed by Custom before the time of the Nicene Council. p. 53 The
Testimony of Cyril of Alexandria concerning the Computation of Easter Day. p.
71
D.
Pope Damasus constituted a Vicar in Illyricum, and why he did this. p. 48
Which were the greater and which the lesser Dioceses. p. 60, 61 The name of
Diocese was known in the time of the Nicene Council. p. 62
E.
The Bishop of Rome published Easter day after the time of the Nicene Council.
p. 69, 71 The charge of computing Easter day was imposed upon the Patriarch of
Alexandria by the Nicene Synod. p. 71 Pope Eleutherius received an Epistle from
King Lucius. 13. Britain was Converted to the Faith under him. p. 12 The
Epistles of the Bishops of Rome concerning the Roman Patriarchal Power over
Illyricum. p. 40, 41, 42. The Testimony of Eusebius showing where the Gospel
was Preached by the Apostles. p. 7 The Eusebians vainly attempted to draw
Julius the first to their party. 80. they were the first in the World that ever
dreamt, that the judgment of the Eastern Council was supreme. p. 80, 81
F.
France, vid. Gaul. Frumentius Bishop of Aethiopia had his Mission from
Athanasius. p. 32
G.
Gaul when converted to the Faith. p. 10 The Catholic Writers of Gaul defended
the Roman Bishops Patriarchal Authority over the West against the Heretics. p.
21 Germanus Bishop of Auxerre came as Vicar of Pope Celestine into Britain. p.
99 The Testimony of Gildas the Wise concerning the Preaching of the Gospel in
the time of Tiberius. 2 his Testimony concerning Peter See in Britain. p. 4 The
Schismatic Greeks acknowledge the Bishop of Rome to be Patriarch of the West.
p. 21
H.
A very clear Testimony of Henry the Eighth concerning the Popes Primacy. 111.
he was the first King of England that fell into Schism. p. 111 The Epistle of
Honorius the Emperor to Theodosius, concerning the preserving the privileges
of the Apostolic See. p. 51
I.
What James King of England believed concerning the Institution of Patriarchs,
and concerning the Roman Patriarchate in particular. p. 20 The testimony of
Jerome, concerning Paul's preaching the Gospel from Ocean to Ocean. 8. his
testimony concerning the Authority of the Patriarch of Antioch over the
Metropolitan of Cesarea. p. 86 Illyricum though converted to the Faith by Paul
the Apostle, was notwithstanding Subject to the Roman Patriarchate, as appears
from many Epistles of ancient P. P. p. 38, etc. The testimony of Ireneus,
concerning the more powerful Principality of the Roman Church. p. 14 Iuiius
the first reprehends the Eusebians for declining the judgment of the Ap^stolic
See. p. 81 Justinian the Emperor acknowledges the Roman Bishops Patriarchate
over the West. p. 55
L.
Launoy opposes the authority of Clements Epistle to the Romans without any
ground. 10. he gave occasion to the Ministers of the English Church to defend
their Schism with the greater obstinacy. See Preface. Lucius was the first King
of England that was Converted to the Faith. 12 he sends Ambassadors to Pope
Eleutherius. 13. Whether leaving his Kingdom he went into Germany, and
converted Bavaria to the Faith. p. 31
M.
The English Manuscript set forth by Spelman is of no credit or authority. p.
102 Meletius was Second in dignity to the Bishop of Alexandria in Egypt. 87.
he was a Metropolitan under Alexander Patriarch of Alexandria. p. 88 The
Metropolitical Authority was instituted by the Apostles, Preface. It is not
suprem. p. 78 The Metropolitan of Cesarea was in ancient time subject to the
Patriarch of Antioch. 85. the Institution of Metropolitans in Britain in the
time of Gregory the Great. p. 34 It is necessary that those who plant Churches
should have a true Mission. p. 29
N.
The 6. Canon of the Council of Nice. 82. it does not treat of the authority of
Metropolitans as Supreme. p. 86
O.
The Testimony of Optatus Milevitanus concerning the Roman Church. p. 110 How
the Ordination of Metropolitans belonged to the Patriarchs. p. 33
P.
The Pall when first received and by whom. p. 33 There were Patriarchs in the
Primitive Church. p. 20 They had their Original from Apostolical institution.
53. there are three Patriarchal rights. p. 18 The Patriarchal right over
Illyricum. p. 50 S. Patrick Legate to Celestine I. p. 100. Where Paul the
Apostle preached the Gospel. 8. he was not the firft Planter of the Roman
Church. 25. whether he Preached in Britain. p. 6 It was most just that the
cause of Paulus Samosatenus should be removed to the tribunal of the Bishop of
Rome. p. 80 Pelagius consented that his cause should be brought before Innocent
the first, after it had bin heard in the Eastern Synod. 96. how his Heresy was
condemned by Zosimus and the censure, that Zosimus passed against it was
approved by every Church under Heaven. p. 98. Who determined in the cause of
Perigenes, and when. p. 48 etc. The cause of Perrevius different from that of
Perigenes. p. 47 Peter head of the Apostles. 109, 110. his memory to be
honored. 81. he instituted three Patriarchal Sees. 30. he and his Successors
instituted all the Churches in the West. 24. he had instituted the Roman Church
before Paul came to Rome. 26. his See in Britain. p. 4, etc.
R.
The Roman Church has the more powerful Principality, for which cause it is
necessary that every Church should have resort unto it. 14, 15. the whole World
has intercourse with it by communicatory Letters. 110. the Principality of the
Apostolic See always prevailed in it. 1^. as the imperial Seat had its
Principality, so likewise had Priesthood its Principle in it. ibid. The Roman
Bishop is Patriarch of the West. 89. he had Metropolitans under him. 89. he is
the Head of the Institutions in the West. 30. Britain appertains to his
Patriarchate. 38. the Roman Bishop had always the right of promulgating Easter
day. 72. his Authority is showed from those things which happened concerning
Easter in the time of Victor. 73, 74. all Provinces are to refer their Causes
to him as Head of the Church. p. 95.
S.
The Testimonies of the Council of Sardica for the Primacy of the Bishop of
Rome. p. 95 The Authority of Severus Sulpitius for the preaching the Gospel in
Gaul in the third Age. p. 12 Diverse Errors of Stillingfleet Dean of St. Paul's
set down Prolegom. p. 7. 9. 11. 14. 19. 20. 27. 43. 45. 46. 48. 60. 61. 64. 68.
77. 78. 79. 82. 83. 84. 92.
T.
Theodosius junior being circumvented by the Bishop of Constantinople withdraws
Illiricum from the Roman Patriarchate. 48, 49. he repeals the Law that he made
concerning this matter. p. 52 Thule an Island in Iceland. p. 9
V.
Pope Victor judged that the Question concerning the Feast of Easter was to be
decided by him. 72. he terrifies the Astatic Churches that withdrew their
Obedience with the censure of Excommunication. p. 73
FINIS.
Postscript.
SInce this Dissertation, which the Author, not being acquainted with the
English Tongue, was obliged to write in Latin, is an Answer to what the Dean of
Paul's has Written in English, 'twas thought convenient it should be
Translated, that both Writers might appear in the same Language. And it was the
part of the Interpreter to render the true Sense of the Latin Treatise, which
he has carefully endeavored to do; Leaving it now to the Reader to Judge of
the Works of these two Authors, and Entreating him either to Excuse or Correct
some Errata of this Impression in the manner following.

Some Errors Corrected.
REad Venantius, page 9. Pausianus, p. 36. Nectarius, p. 48. ad Theodosium, p.
5, in margin, Anastasium p. 54, in marg. Dieceses, p. 60. Praefecti Pretorio,
p. 61. Chap. V. p. 89. Britain, instead of Great Britain, 112. etc.

BY HIS MAJESTY's Letters Patents under His Great Seal of England dated the
tenth day of November in the 3d. Year of his Majesty's Reign, there is Granted
to Matthew Turner of Holborn Bookseller and his Assigns only, full and sole
Power, License, Privilege and Authority to Print and Reprint either in Latin,
or English, and also to Utter and Sell at any Place within His Majesty's
Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, the
several Books Following, viz.

I. The Canons and Decrees of the Council of Trent. II. The Works of Lewis de
Granada. III. The Works of S. Francis de Sales. IV. The Devotional Treatises of
St. Augustine. V. The Works of Thomas of Kempis. VI. The Devotional Treatises,
of St. Bonaventure. VII. Father Person's Christian Directory, or Book of
Resolution. VIII. Father Person's Treatises of the Three Conversions of
England. IX. A Journal of Meditations for each day in the Year By N. B. X.
Meditations used at Lisbon College. XI. The Christians Daily Exercise by T.V.
XII. Paradisus Animae Christianae. XIII. The Key of Paradise. XIV. Stella's
Contempt of the World. XV. The Works of Hieremias Drexelius. XVI. The
Devotional Treatises of Cardinal Bona. XVII. Beda's Ecclesiastical History of
England. XVIII. Turbervil's Manual of Controversies. XIX. Vane's Lost Sheep
Returned. XX. The true Portraicture of the Church. XXI. The Catholic
Scripturist. XXII. Historical Collections of the Reigns of Henry the Eighth,
Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, and King James. XXIII. The
Devotional Treatises of Cardinal Bellarmin. XXIV. The Question of Questions.
XXV. The Works of Lewis de Puente. XXVI. The Works of Alphonsus Roderiguez.
XXVII. The Poor Man's Devotion.
As by the said Letters patents does more fully appear.


