The Schedule containing the Draught of the Charter mentioned in the Commission
to which it is Annexed and whereunto the same has Reference.
WILLIAM and MARY, By the Grace of GOD, of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, King and Queen, Defenders of the Faith, etc.
To all to whom these Presents shall come, Greeting:
Whereas, in, Recital of the Act.
and by a certain Act lately made in Parliament, (Entitled, An Act for
Granting to Their Majesty's several Rates and Duties upon Tunnage of Ships and
Vessels, and upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors, for securing certain
Recompenses and Advantages in the said Act mentioned, to such Persons as shall
voluntarily Advance the Sum of Fifteen Hundred Thousand Pounds toward carrying
on the War against France) It is (amongst other Things) Enacted, That for and
during the Term of Four Years, Commencing from the first day of June, in the
year of Our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and Four, there should be
throughout the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, Raised, Levied, Collected, and paid for, and upon the Tonnage of all
Ships and Vessels, wherein at any time or times, and for every time during the
said Term of Four Years, there should be Imported any Goods or Merchandises
into this Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed,
from any Parts, Places, or Countries in the said Act mentioned; or wherein,
during the said Term there should be carried Coastwise, from any Port, Member,
or Creek, in the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, unto any other Port, Creek, or Member, within the same Kingdom,
Dominion. Port, or Town, the several and respective Rates, Impositions, Duties,
and Sums of Money in the said Act mentioned; And that from and after the
Seventeenth day of May, which shall be in the Year of Our Lord One Thousand Six
Hundred Ninety and Seven, there shall be throughout the said Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, and Town of Berwick upon Tweed, Raised, Levied,
Collected, and Paid unto Us, Our Heirs and Successors, for Beer, Ale, Syder,
and other Liquors, certain Additional Rates or Duties of Excise in the said Act
particularly Expressed; And that Weekly, (to wit) on Wednesday in every Week,
(if it be not an Holiday) and if it be, then the next day after that is not an
Holiday: All and every the Moneys arising by the Rates and Duties by the said
Act Granted, should be paid into the Receipt of the Exchequer, under certain
Penalties therein mentioned; And that yearly, and every year, reckoning the
first year to begin from the First day of June, in the year of Our Lord One
Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Four, the full Sum of One Hundred and Forty
Thousand Pounds, by, or out of the Moneys to arise by the said several Duties,
upon the Tunnage of Ships and Vessels, and by the said Rates and Duties of
Excise, or any of them, and to be brought into the Receipt of the Exchequer by
Weekly Payments, as aforesaid, (in case the said Weekly Payments shall extend
thereunto) should be the whole and entire yearly Fund; And in case the said
Weekly Payments should not amount to One Hundred and Forty Thousand Pounds per
Annum, then the said Weekly Moneys, or Payments, so far as the same will
extend, should be part of the yearly Fund, for and toward the Answering and
Paying of the several Annuities, and other Purposes in the said Act expressed;
And in Case the said Duties upon the Tunnage of Ships and Vessels, and the said
Rates and Duties of Excise, or any of them, should at any time or times appear
to be so deficient or low in the produce of the same, as that within any one
year to be reckoned as aforesaid, the Weekly Payments upon the said Rates or
Duties, or any of them, shall not amount to so much as One Hundred and Forty
Thousands Pounds, or to so much as shall be sufficient to Discharge and
Satisfy the said several and respective Annuities, and other Benefits, or
Advantages, by the said Act intended or appointed to be paid within, or for the
same year respectively; That then, and so often, and in every such Case, the
Commissioners of Our Treasury, and the Under-Treasurer of the Exchequer now
being, and the Treasurer, and Under-Treasurer of the Exchequer, or
Commissioners of the Treasury for the time being are thereby strictly Enjoined
and Required, by Virtue of the said Act, and without any further or other
Warrant to be Sued for, had, or obtained from Us, Our Heirs or Successors in
this behalf, to cause every such Deficiency to be made good, by applying,
issuing, or paying so much of any Treasure or Revenue, belonging, or to belong
unto Us, Our Heirs or Successors, (not being Appropriated to any particular Use
or Uses, by any Act or Acts of Parliament) toward the Discharging or Paying of
the said Annuities, or other Benefits or Advantages appointed to be paid by the
said Act, as together with the Moneys, which shall have been brought into the
said Receipt, of, or for, the said several Rates or Duties shall be sufficient
to pay off, and Discharge, and shall completely pay off and Discharge all the
Moneys which within the same year respectively shall be grown due, or ought to
be paid upon the said Annuities, or other Benefits or Advantages, according to
the true intent and meaning of the said Act: And it is thereby further Enacted,
That it should and might be Lawful, to, and for Us, by Commission under the
Great Seal of England, to Authorize and Appoint any number of Persons, to Take
and Receive all such voluntary Subscriptions as should be made, on, or before
the First day of August, in the year of Our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred
Ninety Four, by any Person or Persons, Natives or Foreigners, Bodies Politic
or Corporate, for, and toward the Raising and Paying into the Receipt of the
Exchequer, the Sum of Twelve Hundred Thousand Pounds, part of the Sum of
Fifteen Hundred Thousand Pounds in the said Act mentioned; And that the yearly
Sum of One Hundred Thousand Pounds, part of the said yearly Sum of One Hundred
and Forty Thousand Pounds, arising by, and out of the Duties and Impositions
aforementioned, should be applied, issued and directed, and is thereby
appropriated to the Use and Advantage of such Person and Persons, Bodies
Politic and Corporate, as should make such voluntary Subscriptions and
Payments, their Heirs, Successors or Assigns; And that each Weekly, or other
Payment, arising by and out of the said Duties and Impositions, should by the
Auditor of the Receipt of Exchequer, from time to time, as the same shall be
paid in, be separated and divided into five seventh parts, and two seventh
parts; And that the said five seventh parts of the said several Payments,
arising by, and out of the Duties and Impositions aforesaid, and so set apart,
shall be Appropriated for, and toward the Payment and Satisfaction of the said
yearly Sum of One Hundred Thousand Pounds, and shall from time to time be
issued and paid, as the same shall come into the said Receipt of Exchequer, to
the Uses and Advantages of such Subscribers and Contributors, their Heirs,
Successors or Assigns, as should Subscribe and Contribute, for, and toward the
raising and paying into the said Receipt of Exchequer, the said Sum of Twelve
Hundred Thousand Pounds; And that it should and might be lawful for Us, by
Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, to limit, direct, and appoint,
how, and in what manner and proportions, and under what Rules and Directions
the said Sum of Twelve Hundred Thousand Pounds, part of the said Sum of Fifteen
Hundred Thousand Pounds, and the said yearly Sum of One Hundred Thousand
Pounds, part of the said yearly Sum of One Hundred and Forty Thousand Pounds,
and every or any Part or Proportion thereof, may be Assignable or
Transferrable, Assigned or Transferred, to such Person or Persons only as shall
freely and voluntarily accept of the same, and not otherwise; And to
Incorporate all and every such Subscribers and Contributors, their Heirs,
Successors, or Assignees, to be one Body Corporate and Politic, by the Name of
The Governor and Company of the Bank of England, to have perpetual Succession,
and with such Privileges and Powers, and to be under such Rules as are therein
mentioned, subject nevertheless to a certain Proviso, or Condition of
Redemption in the said Act contained; And it is thereby further Enacted, That
in Case the said whole Sum of Twelve Hundred Thousands shall not be advanced
and paid into the Receipt of the Exchequer, before the first day of January,
which shall be in the year of Our Lord One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and
Four, that then the Subscribers and Contributors, for, and toward the Raising
and Paying of the said Sum of Twelve Hundred Thousands Pounds, part of the said
Sum of Fifteen Hundred Thousand Pounds, their Heirs, Successors and Assignees,
shall only have and receive so much, and such part and proportion to the said
Sum and Sums so respectively paid and advanced, as shall be after the rate of
eight Pounds per Cent. per Annum; And for the better and more speedy payment of
the said yearly Sum of One Hundred Thousand Pounds, the Commissioners of Our
Treasury, and the Under-Treasurer of the Exchequer now being; and the
High-Treasurer and Under-Treasurer, or Commissioners of the Treasury for the
time being, are thereby strictly Enjoined and Required, by Virtue of the said
Act, and without any further or other Warrant to be Sued for, had, or obtained
from Us, Our Heirs or Successors, to direct their Warrants yearly for the
payment of the said yearly Sum of One hundred thousand Pounds to the
Contributors of the said Sum of Twelve hundred thousand Pounds, in such Manner
and Proportions as are therein Directed and Appointed; And the Auditor of the
Receipt of Our Exchequer, and all other Officers of the Exchequer, now, and for
the time being, are thereby Directed and Enjoined to issue the said Moneys, so
set apart for the Uses aforementioned, from time to time, without any Fee or
Reward, and under such Penalties as are by the said Act to be inflicted. And in
the said Act is contained a Proviso, That in case the whole Sum of Twelve
hundred thousand Pounds, or a Moity thereof, should not be Subscribed on or
before the First day of August, One thousand six hundred ninety four aforesaid,
that then the Powers and Authorities in the said Act for Erecting a Corporation
as aforesaid, should cease and determine. And it is further Enacted, That any
Moneys payable to any Person or Persons upon, or by Virtue of the said Act,
shall not be Charged or Chargeable with any Rates, Duties, or Impositions
whatsoever, as in and by the said Act of Parliament (amongst diverse other
Matters and Things therein contained, relation being thereunto had) may more
fully appear.

And whereas, in pursuance of the said Act, Recital of the Commission.
We did by Our Commission or Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England,
bearing Date at Westminster the Fifteenth day of June now last past, Nominate,
Constitute, Authorize, and Appoint Sir William Ashurst, Knight, Mayor of our
City of London; Sir John Cope, Sir Thomas Littleton, Sir John Shaw, Sir Walter
Young, Sir Josiah Child, Names of Commissioners.
Sir John Morden, Sir William Cooper, Sir John Huband, Sir Francis Lawly,
Baronets; Sir Robert Cotton of Cambridgeshire, Knight, Sir Robert Clayton, Sir
Patience Ward, Sir James Houblon, Sir John Houblon, Sir Edward Clearke, Sir
Richard Levett, Sir William Gore, Sir William Hedges, Sir Thomas Abney,
Aldermen of our City of London; Sir Charles Caesar, Sir Edward Abney, Sir
Benjamin Newland, Sir John Werden, Sir John Bucknall, Sir Peter Vandeput, Sir
William Cranmer, Sir Henry Furnes, Sir Isaac Rebow, Sir William Scawen, Sir
John Buckworth, Sir John Eyles, Sir John Chardin, Knights; Mordecai Abbot,
George Pit, Thomas Pit, Master in Chancery; William Dorington, Brook
Bridges, Robert Bristow, Charles Fox, Thomas Felton, James Chadwick, Dr. George
Oxenden, Charles Williams, Henry Cornish, Edward Clark, Colonel Henry Cornwall,
William Gulston, Charles Godolphin, Esquires; John Germain, Charles Godfrey,
Thomas Howard, Thomas Hall, Nathaniel Herne, Robert Henly, John Jefferies, John
Knight, Richard Hutchinson, Charles Duncombe, Joseph Haskyn Styles, Francis
Scobell, John Morris, Thomas Mawle, Thomas Papillon, Phillip Papillon, Francis
Parry, William Palms, Esquires; Nathaniel Tench, Francis Tyssen, Samuel
Travers, Thomas Western, Senior; Samuel Western. Thomas Western, Junior;
Robert Atwood, Peter Ducane, William Desboverie, John Duboise, Peter Delmee,
William Disher, James Dufay, Francis Eyles, Barrington Eaton, James Bateman,
William Bridges, Linnen-Draper; Samuel Bulteele, Charles Ball, Esquires;
Bartholomew Burton, Gent. Bartholomew Beale, George Bodington, Peter Burrell,
John Bellamy, Scrivener, David Becceler, William Fawkner, James Fowlis, Samuel
Foot, Junior; Bartholomew Fillingham, John Carter, Gerrard Conyers, Richard
Carey, John Cook, Linnen-Draper; Charles Chamberlain, William Coward, Francis
Gosfright, Thomas Goddard, Michael Godfrey, Peter Godfrey, Francis Gell, Lewis
Gervaice, Thomas Guy, Peter Houblon, Junior; Abraham Houblon, Gilbert Heathcot,
Samuel Heathcot, Edmund Harrison, Matthew Humberston, Dr. Thomas Hobbs, Daniel
Hayes, Edward Haistwell, Thomas Hancock, Robert Raworth, Samuel Rawsterne,
George Richards, Hillary Renew, Benjamin Rookeby, Matthew Raper, Theodore
Jansen, Walter Kent, William Knight, John Kendrick, John Lordell, Robert
Lyddall, Samuel Lock, John Lloyd, William Lowndes, Timothy Lannoy, James La
Bretoniere, Thomas Scawen, Obediah Sedgwick, Samuel Sheppard, John Smith,
Silkman; Robert Mitchel, John Nicholson, Foot Onslow, Samuel Ongley, William
Paterson, Peter Paggen, Arthur Shallet, Stephen Seignoret, John Sherbrook,
Humphry Sympson, Henry Spencer, John Smith in Beauford-Buildings; Maximilian
Western, Joseph Tyley, Francis Tierens, Henry Tate, Jasper Vandebush, Gerrard
Vanhuitsen, John Ward, John Woolfe, Robert Whittingham, Richard Mulys, Robert
Yate, John Ellis, Thomas Edwards, James Vernon, William Ash, Edward Herris,
Hugh Squire, Edward Littleton, Richard Cheyney, John Holland, William Sedgwick,
William Jarret, John Shipman, and Constantine Vernatty, Esquires, to be Our
Commissioners to Take and Receive all such Voluntary Subscriptions as should be
made on or before the said First day of August, in the Year of Our Lord One
thousand six hundred ninety four, by any Person or Persons, Natives or
Foreigners, or by, or for any Body Politic or Corporate, for, or toward the
raising and paying the said Sum of Twelve hundred thousand Pounds, part of the
said Sum of Fifteen hundred thousand Pounds in the said Act mentioned, with
Power and Direction to them, or such, or so many of them as are thereby
Authorized and Appointed, to take such Subscriptions, and to do and perform
such Matters and Things in Relation thereunto as are thereby Enjoined.

And We did in and by the same Promise and Declare, That in Case the whole Sum
of Twelve hundred thousand Pounds, or the Moiety, or any greater part thereof,
should be Subscribed on the said Act, or in pursuance of the said Commission,
on or before the said First day of August then next ensuing, that then We, Our
Heirs or Successors, should and would immediately after the said First day of
August, or so soon as Twelve hundred thousand Pounds should be Subscribed, as
aforesaid, which of them should first happen, Grant and Make forth Our Royal
Charter or Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, and thereby
Incorporate all and every such Subscribers and Contributors who should be then
living, and who should not have Assigned their Interest in their said
Subscriptions; And in Case any of them should be Dead, the Heirs of such
Subscribers; And in Case any of the said Subscribers should have Assigned their
Interest in their said Subscriptions, in all such Cases the Assignees of such
Subscribers to be one Body Corporate and Politic by the Name of The Governor
and Company of the Bank of England, with such Powers, Capacities, Privileges,
Benefits, Liberties and Advantages, and under and subject to such Rules,
Restrictions, Power of Redemption, Provisoes, Limitations, and Clauses as are
therein mentioned, or referred unto; And We did thereby for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors Declare, Limit, Direct, and Appoint, That the whole Sum or Amount of
all and every the Sum and Sums of Money as should be Subscribed and Paid as
aforesaid, should be, and be Called, Accepted, Esteemed, Reputed, and Taken a
Common, Capital, and Principal Stock; And all and every Person and Persons,
his, her, and their Heirs, Successors, and Assigns, according, and in
proportion to the Sum or Sums of Money by him, her, or them respectively
Subscribed and Paid thereunto, should have and be deemed to have an Interest or
Share in the said Principal Stock, and of and in the Yearly Fund granted by the
said Act of Parliament, as aforesaid; And that such Interest or Share, or any
part thereof, should be Assignable and Transferrable, and should and might be
Assigned and Transferred by any Person or Persons Entitled thereunto, to any
other Person or Persons, and so over as fully and effectually as any other
Interest whatsoever is by Law Assignable, so as such Assignments or
Transferrances should be made in Writing, and be Entered or Registered in such
manner as is hereafter mentioned: That to say, all Assignments or
Transferrances which should be made on or before the said First day of August
next ensuing, or the full and complete Subscribing of the said 1200000 l. which
should first happen, and before the granting of these Presents were thereby
directed to be Entered or Registered in the Office of the Auditor of the Receipt
of Our Exchequer, within 6 days after the making of the said respective
Assignments; And all Assignments or Transferrances which should be made after
the Granting of this Our Charter of Incorporation should be Made, Entered, and
Registered in such Form as should be prescribed in these Presents. And in the
said Commission are contained several other Powers, Directions, Agreements,
Clauses, Matters and Things, as in and by the same, relation being thereunto
had, more fully and at large appears.

Recital of the Duplicates transmitted into the Auditors Office.
And whereas it appears by Duplicates transmitted into the Office of the Auditor
of the Receipt of Our Exchequer, under the Hands and Seals of Five or more of
Our said Commissioners, being a competent and sufficient number for that
purpose, and made in pursuance of Our Directions in the said Commission
contained, that several Sums amounting in the whole to the Sum of (...) have
been Subscribed, and the first Fourth part thereof paid to Our said
Commissioners, or some of them, pursuant to the said Act of Parliament, on or
before the (...) day (...) last past by (...)

Recital of the Assignments.
And whereas it also appears by the Entries of several Assignments made and
entered in the said Office of the Auditor of the Receipt of Our Exchequer,
pursuant to the Directions contained in Our said Commission, That (...) Are by
mean Assignment or Assignments severally and respectively Entitled to the
Benefits of the Subscriptions which were severally made by the said (...)

Incorporating Clause.
Now, know ye, That We being desirous to promote the Public Good and Benefit of
Our People (which in these Presents are chiefly designed and intended) as well
as the Profit and Advantage of all such as have Subscribed and Contributed
according to the said Act of Parliament, and Our said Commission thereupon
issued, their Heirs, Successors, and Assigns respectively, and in pursuance as
well of the Powers and Clauses for this purpose contained in the said Act of
Parliament, as of Our Gracious Promise and Declaration made in, or by Our said
Commission, or Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, whereby the
Subscriptions and Contributions on the said Act have been promoted or
encouraged; And by Virtue of Our Prerogative Royal, and likewise of Our
Especial Grace, Certain Knowledge, and Mere Motion, have Given, Granted, Made,
Ordained, Constituted, Declared, Appointed, and Established, and by these
Presents for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, do Give, Grant, Make, Ordain,
Constitute, Declare, Appoint, and Establish, That the said (...) And all and
every other Person and Persons, Natives and Foreigners, Bodies Politic or
Corporate, who, over and above the Persons before especially Named, have at any
time or times before the making of these Presents, Subscribed and Contributed
any Sum or Sums of Money toward the said Sum of (...) pursuant to the said
Act, and Our said Commission, and have paid the Fourth Part thereof upon their
said Subscriptions, and who are now Living or Existent, and have not Assigned
their Interest in the said Subscriptions; And all and every the Heirs and
Successors of any of the said Original Subscribers, who are now Dead, and have
not in their Life-times Assigned their Interests in the said Subscriptions, and
the Heirs and Successors of such of the said Assignees who are now Dead, and
did not in their Life-times Assign or Depart with their Interest in the said
Stock and Annual Fund, and all and every Person and Persons, Natives or
Foreigners, Bodies Politic and Corporate, who, either as Original Subscribers
of the said Sum of, (...) and not having parted with their Interests in their
Subscriptions, or as Heirs, Successors or Assigns, or by any other lawful Title
derived, or to be derived from, by, or under the said Original Subscribers of
the said Sum of (...) or any of them now have, or at any time or times
hereafter shall have, or be Entitled to any Part, Share, or Interest of, or in
the Principal or Capital Stock of the said Corporation, or the said Yearly Fund
of One Hundred Thousand Pounds, granted by the said Act of Parliament, or any
Part thereof, so long as they respectively shall have any such Part, Share, or
Interest therein, shall be, and be called one Body Politic and Corporate of
themselves, in Deed and in Name, by the Name of The Governor and Company of the
Bank of England; and Them by that Name, one Body Politic and Corporate in Deed
and in Name, We do, for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, Make, Create, Erect,
Establish, and Confirm for ever, by these Presents, and by the same Name, They
and their Successors shall have perpetual Succession, and shall, and may have
and use a Common Seal, May have a Common Seal.
for the Use, Business, or Affairs of the said Body Politic and Corporate, and
their Successors, with Power to Break, Alter, and to Make anew their Seal from
time to time at their Pleasure, and as they shall see Cause. And by the same
Name, May Purchase and Hold.
they and their Successors in all times coming, shall be Able and Capable in
Law, to Have, Take, Purchase, Receive, Hold, Keep, Possess, Enjoy and Retain to
them and their Successors, any Manors, Messuages, Lands, Rents, Tenements,
Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, Hereditaments, and Possessions whatsoever,
and of what Kind, Nature, or Quality soever; and moreover to Purchase and
acquire all Goods and Chattels whatsoever, wherein they are not restrained by
the said Act. And also to Sell, Grant, Demise, Alien, or Dispose of the same
Manors, Messuages, Lands, Rents, Tenements, Privileges, Franchises,
Hereditaments, Possessions, Goods and Chattels, Sue and be Sued.
or any of them. And by the same Name, they and their Successors shall, and may
Sue and Implead, and be Sued and Impleaded, Answer and Defend, and be Answered
and Defended in Courts of Record, or any other Place whatsoever, and before
whatsoever Judges, Justices, Officers and Ministers of Us, Our Heirs, and
Successors; and in all and singular Pleas, Actions, Suits, Causes, and Demands
whatsoever, of what Kind, Nature or Sort soever, and in as large, ample, and
beneficial Manner and Form as any other Body Politic and Corporate, or any
other the Liege People of England, or other Our Dominions, being Persons Able
and Capable in Law, may, or can Have, Take, Purchase, Receive, Hold, Keep,
Possess, Enjoy, Sell, Grant, Demise, Alien, Dispose, Sue, Implead, Defend, or
Answer, or be Sued, Impleaded, Defended or Answered in any manner of wise, and
shall, and may do, and Execute all and singular other Matters and Things by the
Name aforesaid, that to them shall, or may appertain to do, by Virtue of the
said Act or otherwise; Subject to Redemption.


Subject nevertheless to the Proviso and Condition of Redemption in the said
Act mentioned. And to all and every other Clauses, Provisoes and Conditions in
the said Act contained. Subscribers and Assigns shall be Members of the
Incorporation.


And we do hereby declare, that all Persons, having any Interest or Part in the
Capital Stock or Fund of the said Corporation, either as Original Subscribers,
or by Assignments, or as Heirs, or otherwise, shall be, and be esteemed Members
of the said Corporation, and shall be admitted into the same without any Fee or
Charge whatsoever.

Subscription Money called Stock.
And We do hereby, for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, declare, limit, direct and
appoint, that the aforesaid Sum of (...) so subscribed as aforesaid, shall be,
and be called, accepted, esteemed, reputed and taken, The Common, Capital, and
Principal Stock of the Corporation hereby Constituted.

Subscribers to be interested in the Stock and Fund.
And all and every Person and Persons, his, her, and their Heirs, Successors and
Assigns, according, and in proportion to the Sum or Sums of Money by him, her,
or them respectively subscribed as aforesaid, shall have, and be deemed to have
an Interest or Share in the said Principal Stock, and of, and in the Yearly
Fund of One Hundred Thousand Pounds, granted by the said Act of Parliament.

Directions to the Treasury.
And We do hereby, for Us, Our Heirs and Sucessors, authorize, enjoin, and
require the Commissioners of Our Treasury, and Under Treasurer of Our Exchequer
now being, and the High Treasurer, Commissioners of the Treasury, and Under
Treasurer of Us, Our Heirs and Successors for the time being, without any
further, or other Warrant to be had, or obtained from Us, Our Heirs, or
Successors to direct their Warrants and Orders, according to the said Act, for
the Payment of the yearly Sum of (...) by, and out of the Five Seventh Parts
(the whole into seven equal Parts to be divided) of the Moneys arising by the
Rates and Duties granted by the said Act, and thereby appointed to be kept
apart for the Payment of the said Yearly Fund of One Hundred Thousand Pounds to
the said Governor and Company of the Bank of England, and their Successors for
ever, under and subject nevertheless to the Payment of the Issues, Fines,
Amerciaments and Debts upon Judgments against the said Corporation, according
to the Purport of the said Act. The first Year to be reckoned to begin from the
first day of June, in the Year of Our Lord Christ, One Thousand Six Hundred
Ninety and Four. And We do hereby direct and enjoin the Commissioners of Our
Treasury, and the Treasurer, Commissioners of the Treasury, and Under Treasurer
of the Exchequer, and the Auditor of the Receipt of Our Exchequer, and all
other the Officers of the Exchequer, of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, now, and
for the time being, from time to time, to Issue and Pay the said Five Seventh
Parts of the Moneys arising by the Duties granted by the said Act, or so much
thereof as shall be sufficient for this purpose, to the said Governor and
Company of the Bank of England, and their Successors, by Weekly Payments, or
otherwise, as the same, or any Part thereof, shall from time to time come into
the Receipt of the Exchequer, for, and toward Satisfaction of the said Yearly
Sum of

And in case five Seventh Parts of the Weekly Payments in the said Act
mentioned, and intended to be the Yearly Fund for the Recompense of the said
Subscribers shall not amount unto so much as the yearly Sum of (...) which is
the Annual Fund thereby established for the said Corporation to Receive. Then
We do hereby, for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, Grant, and Agree to, and with
the said Governor and Company, and their Successors, that Five Seventh Parts of
the said Weekly Moneys or Payments, so far as the same will extend, shall be
part of the said Yearly Fund of

And in case the said Duties, by the said Act granted, or any of them, shall at
any time or times appear to be so deficient or low in the Produce of the same,
as that within any one Year, to be reckoned from the first Day of June, as
aforesaid, Five Seventh Parts of the Weekly Payments upon the same Rates and
Duties, or any of them, shall not amount to so much as (...) within, or for the
same Year respectively, That then, and so often, and in every such Case, We do
hereby authorize, enjoin and require the Commissioners of Our Treasury, and the
Under Treasurer of the Exchequer now being, and the Treasurer and Under
Treasurer of the Exchequer, or Commissioners of the Treasury for the time
being, of Us, Our Heirs and Successors, forthwith, and without any further or
other Warrant to be sued for, had, or obtained from Us, our Heirs, and
Successors in that behalf, to cause every such Deficiency to be made good, by
applying, issuing, or paying so much of any Treasure or Revenue, belonging, or
to belong to Us, Our Heirs, or Successors (not being appropriated to any
particular Use or Uses by any Act or Acts of Parliament) toward the
Discharging or Paying of the said Yearly Fund of (...) as together with Five
Seventh Parts of the Moneys which shall have been brought into the Receipt of
the Exchequer, of, or for the said several Rates or Duties by the said Act
granted, shall be sufficient to Pay off and Discharge, and shall completely Pay
off and Discharge the said Yearly Fund of (...) according to the true Intent
and Meaning of the said Act, and of these Presents.

The Constitution of the Company.
And for the better ordering, managing, and governing the Stock and other
Affairs of the said Corporation, and for the Making and Establishing a
continual Succession of Persons to be Governor, Deputy Governor, and Directors
of the said Corporation. We do by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs and
Successors, grant unto the said Governor and Company of the Bank of England,
and their Successors, and do hereby ordain and appoint, that there shall be
from time to time, for ever (of the Members of the said Company) a Governor, a
Deputy Governor, and Twenty Four Directors of, and in the said Corporation;
which Governor, Deputy Governor, and Directors, or any Thirteen or more of them
(of which the Governor or Deputy Governor to be always One) shall be, and be
called, a Court of Directors for the Ordering, Managing and Directing the
Affairs of the said Corporation, and shall have such Powers and Privileges as
are herein after mentioned.

First Governor.
And we do hereby Nominate, Constitute, Ordain and Appoint, That (...) who is
chosen for this Purpose by a Majority of the said Subscribers, having Five
Hundred Pounds each in the said Capital Stock, pursuant to certain Clauses in
our said Commission contained, shall be the Present, and First Governor.

First Deputy Governor.
And that (...) who is chosen in like manner, shall be the Present, and First
Deputy Governor.

First Twenty Four Directors.
And that (...) who are severally chosen in like manner by a Majority of like
Subscribers, shall be the Present, and First Directors of the said Corporation.

Continuance in their Offices.
And the said Governor, Deputy Governor, and Directors, shall continue in their
respective Offices until the Five and Twentieth Day of March, which shall be
in the Year of Our Lord, One Thousand, Six Hundred, Ninety Six, and until
others shall be duly chosen in their respective Offices, and Sworn into the
same, unless they, or any of them shall sooner dye, or be removed, as is herein
after mentioned.

Power to Assemble.
And We do further by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, Give
and Grant unto the said Governor and Company of the Bank of England: And We do
hereby Ordain, Will and Appoint, that it shall, and may be lawful to, and for
all and every the Members of the said Corporation, or Body Politic from time
to time to Assemble and Meet together at any convenient Place or Places for the
Choice of their Governor, Deputy Governor and Directors, and for the Making of
Bylaws, Ordinances, Rules, Orders, or Directions for the Government of the
said Corporation, and for any other Affairs or Business concerning the same,
Public Notice thereof being first given by Writing to be affixed upon the
Royal Exchange in London, Notice of General Courts.
two Days at least before the Time appointed for such Meeting.

And that all the Members of the said Corporation, or so many of them as shall
be so assembled, shall be, and be called, a General Court of the said
Corporation, which Court shall Meet and Assemble at such Times, and in such
Manner as herein after is directed.

Election of succeeding Governor, Deputy Governor, and Directors.
And that all succeeding Governors, Deputy Governors, and Directors of the said
Corporation, shall from, and after the Five and Twentieth Day of March, in the
Year of Our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred, Ninety Six, be yearly and
successively Chosen for ever, out of the Members of the said Corporation, on
some Day or Days, or Times, between the Five and Twentieth Day of March, and
the Five and Twentieth Day of April in each Year, by the Majority of Votes, of
all and every the Members of the said Corporation, having then each of them
Five Hundred Pounds or more Share or Interest in the said Capital Stock and
Fund of the said Corporation, and who shall be personally present at such
Elections, each of them to have and give one Vote and no more; which succeeding
Governors, Deputy Governors and Directors so Chosen, shall severally and
respectively continue in their respective Offices to which they shall be
severally Elected for one Year, and till others shall be duly Chosen and Sworn
into their Places respectively.

In Case of Death.
Provided nevertheless, that in case of Death, Avoidance, or Removal of the
Governor, Deputy Governor, or any of the Directors of the said Corporation for
the Time being, the Survivors of them, or the Majority of those remaining in
their Office, shall, and may at any time Assemble together the Members of the
said Corporatio, in order to Elect other Persons, By-Members, qualified to Vote
in manner aforesaid, in the Room of those then Dead, Removed, or avoided; and
that every Deputy Governor (in the Absence of the Governor) shall have the same
Power as a Governor. Governor absent.


Qualification of Elector.
Provided nevertheless, and We do hereby Will and Ordain, Constitute, Appoint,
and Command, that no Person or Persons shall be, or be esteemed, quantified, or
capable to be an Elector to Vote, or shall give any Vote at any General Court,
or otherwise for an Election of Governor, Deputy Governor or Directors, or any
of them, or for or concerning the making of Bylaws, or in any other matters
relating to the Affairs or Government of the said Corporation, who shall not at
the time of such General Court, have in his, her, or their Name, and Right, and
for his, her, or their own Use and not in Trust for any other, Five hundred
Pounds or more, Share or Interest in the said Capital Stock of the said
Corporation: And who also shall not at the time of holding any such General
Court, take the Oath hereafter mentioned, if required thereunto by any Member
or Members of the said Corporation then present, having each Five hundred
Pounds Share or Interest, at least, in the said Capital Stock, before the
Governor, or Deputy Governor, or any two or more of the Directors of the said
Corporation, viz. I A. B. do Swear, Oath of Electors.
that the Sum of Five hundred Pounds or more, of the Capital Stock of the
Body-Politique, called by the name of the Governor and Company of the Bank of
England, does at this time belong to me in my own Right, and not in Trust, for
any other Person or Persons whatsoever.

None to have above one Vote.
And We do hereby Constitute, Ordain, and Appoint, That no one Member of the
said Corporation, shall in any Election of Governor, Deputy Governor, Director
or other Officer of the said Corporation, or in any the Business or Affairs of
the said Corporation, have, or give, any more than one Vote, whatever his Share
or Interest in the said Capital Stock shall be.

Proviso for Quakers.
Provided nevertheless, That any Person or Persons, commonly called or known to
be Quakers, who at the time of holding such General Court, as aforesaid, shall
have Five hundred-Pounds Interest or Share, or more in the said Capital Stock,
and shall then (if thereunto Required by any Member or Members of the said
Corporation then present, having each Five hundred Pounds Share or Interest at
least in the said Capital Stock) make and Sign the following Declaration, to
wit, I A. B. do sincerely and solemnly Declare in the presence of God, That the
Sum of Five hundred Pounds or more of the Capital Stock of the Body Politic,
called by the name of the Governor and Company of the Bank of England, does at
this time belong to me in my own Right, and not in trust for any other Person
or Persons whatsoever, shall be Capable of having a Vote at any General Court
of the said Corporation.

Power to Administer the Oaths and Declaration to Electors.
And we do by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, give full Power
and Authority, to the Governor, or Deputy Governor, or any two or more of the
Directors of the said Corporation for the time being, to give and Administer
the said Oath and Declaration to the said Members: And do hereby Order and
Direct them to Administer the same accordingly: Provided farther,

Qualification of Governor.
And we do hereby for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, Constitute, Ordain, and
Appoint, that no Person shall at any time be capable of being Chosen a Governor
of the said Corporation, unless he shall at the time of such Election, be a
Natural born Subject of England, or Naturalized; and shall also then have in
his own Name, in his own Right, and for his own Use, Four thousand Pounds or
more, in the Capital Stock of the said Corporation.

And that no Person shall at any time be capable of being chosen
Deputy Governor of the said Corporation, Qualification of Deputy Governor.
unless he shall at the time of such Election, be a Natural born Subject of
England, or Naturalized, and shall also then have in his own Name, in his own
Right, and for his own Use, Three thousand Pounds or more in the Capital Stock
of the said Corporation.

Qualification of Directors.
And that no Person shall be capable of being chosen a Director of the said
Corporation, who shall not at the time of such Choice be a Natural born Subject
of England, or Naturalized: And shall also then have in his own Name, in his
own Right, and for his own Use, Two thousand Pounds or more in the said Capital
Stock.

Office vacant by lessening Stock.
And that no Governor, Deputy Governor, or Directors, shall continue in his or
their respective Offices, longer than the continuance of such their respective
Interests and Stocks, in their own Names and Rights, and to their own Uses
respectively: But upon parting with, or reducing, his or their respective
Share, or Interest in the said Capital Stock, to any lesser Sum or Sums than as
aforesaid, the said respective Offices or Places of such Governor,
Deputy Governor, or Directors, so parting with, reducing, or diminishing their
said Shares, or Interests, as aforesaid, shall Cease, Determine, and become
Vacant, and others to be chosen in their rooms, by a general Court of the said
Corporation.

Oaths to be taken by Governors.
Provided also, and We do by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors,
Will, Ordain, and Appoint that the said hereby Nominated to be the first
Governor, or any Person hereafter to be Chosen to the said Office or Trust of
Governor of the said Corporation, shall not be capable of Executing or Acting
in the said Office or trust of Governor at any time, until he respectively
shall have taken the Oaths, appointed to be taken by an Act made in the First
Year of Our Reign, Oath of Allegiance.
Entitled, An Act for the Abrogating of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance,
and appointing other Oaths, and shall not be capable of Executing of, or Acting
in the said Office or Trust of Governor, at any time or times hereafter, until
he respectively shall have taken the Corporal Oath following, To wit, Oath for
Stock.
I A. B. do Swear, that the Sum of Four thousand Pounds of the Capital Stock of
the Body Politic, called by the name of the Governor and Company of the Bank
of England, whereof I am Appointed or Elected to be Governor, does at this time
belong to me in my own Right, and not in trust for any other Person or Persons
whatsoever: And likewise another Oath in the form, or to the effect following,
That is to say, I A. B. being Nominated or Elected to be Governor of the
Company of the Bank of England, Oath to the Company.
do Promise, and Swear, That I will to the utmost of my Power by all Lawful
ways and means endeavor to Support and Maintain the Body-Politique, or
Fellowship of the Governor and Company of the Bank of England, and the
Liberties and Privileges thereof: And that in the Execution of the said Office
of Governor, I will Faithfully and Honestly demean my self, according to the
best of my Skill and Understanding: So help me God.

Oaths to first Governor, to be Administered by the Lord Keeper, Chancellor of
the Exchequer, Chief-Baron. Oath to succeeding Governors. How Administered.
And to any future Governor, shall and may be Administered by the Chancellor of
England, or Keeper of the Great Seal of England, or by the Chancellor of the
Exchequer, or Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer, of Us, Our Heirs, or
Successors, for the time being, or by the Governor, or Deputy Governor of the
said Corporation, for the last preceding Year; Or (in case a Deputy Governor
shall be then Sworn into his Office) then by such Deputy Governor. And We do
hereby, for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, Direct, Authorize, and Appoint the
Chancellor of England, and Keeper of the Great Seal of England, Chancellor of
the Exchequer, and Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer, or any of them for
the time being, or such preceding Governor, or preceding Deputy Governor, or
such Deputy Governor, so qualified, as aforesaid, to Administer the said Oaths
to every or any such Person Appointed or Elected to be Governor of the said
Corporation, as aforesaid.

Provided also, and We do hereby for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, Will, and
Ordain, The like Oaths for the Deputy Governor.
and Appoint, that the said (...) hereby Nominated, Constituted, and Appointed
to be the first Deputy Governor, or any Person hereafter to be chosen to the
Office or Trust of Deputy Governor of the said Corporation, shall not be
capable of Executing or Acting in the said Office or Trust of Deputy Governor,
until he shall have taken the like Oaths (mutatis mutandis) as are before
prescribed to be taken by the Governor.

How Administered.
Which Oaths to the first Deputy Governor, abovenamed shall and may be
Administered by the Keeper of Our Great Seal of England, or by the Chancellor of
the Exchequer, or Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer, or by the first
Governor of the said Corporation, after himself shall be first Sworn, as
aforesaid.

Oath to succeeding Deputy-Governors. How Administered.
And to any future Deputy Governor, shall and may be Administered by the
Chancellor of England, or Keeper of the Great Seal of England, or by the
Chancellor of the Exchequer, or Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer, of Us,
Our Heirs, and Successors, for the time being, or by the Governor, or
Deputy Governor of the said Corporation, for the preceding Year: And they are
hereby respectively Authorized and Directed to Administer the said Oaths to any
Deputy Governor accordingly.

Provided also, And We do by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors,
Will, and Ordain, and Appoint, That none of the said hereby Nominated,
Constituted and Appointed to be the first Twenty four Directors of the said
Corporation, or any other Person or Persons hereafter to be chosen to the
Office or Trust of a Director of the said Corporation, Oath of Directors.
shall be capable to Execute or Act in the said Office of a Director, until he
or they shall respectively have taken the Oaths Mentioned and Appointed in and
by one Act made in the First Year of Our Reign, Entitled, An Act for the
Abrogating of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and Appointing other
Oaths, Oath of Allegiance.
nor shall be capable to Execute or Act in the said Office or Trust of a
Director, at any time or times hereafter, until he or they respectively shall
have taken the Corporal Oath following, to wit, Oath for Stocks.
I A. B. do Swear, that the Sum of Two thousand Pounds of the Capital Stock of
the Body-Politique, called by the Name of the Governor and Company of the Bank
of England, whereof I am Appointed or Elected to be a Director, does at this
time belong to me; in my own Right, and not in trust for any other Person or
Persons whatsoever. And likewise another Oath, in the form, or to the effect
following, Oath to the Company.
viz. I A. B. do Swear, that in the Office of a Director of the Corporation or
Company of the Bank of England, I will be indifferent and equal to all manner
of Persons: And I will give my best Advice and Assistance, for the support and
good Government of the said Corporation. And in the Execution of the said
Office of Director, I will faithfully and honestly demean my self, according to
the best of my Skill and Understanding: So help me God. Which Oaths to the first
Twenty Four Directors herein Nominated, How Administered to the first Directors.
and every of them respectively shall and may be Administered by the said Keeper
of Our Great Seal of England, or by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, or Chief
Baron of Our Court of Exchequer, or by the first Governor or Deputy Governor
herein before Named, so as such first Governor, or Deputy Governor, (in case
they or either of them, do Administer the said Oaths, to the said Directors or
any of them) be first Sworn, as is beforementioned.

Oath to succeeding Directors, how Administered.
And the said Oaths, to any future Director and Directors, shall and may be
Administered by the Chancellor of England, or Keeper of the Great Seal of
England, or by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, or Chief Baron of the Court of
Exchequer, of Us, Our Heirs, or Successors, for the time being, or any of them,
or by a Sworn Governor, or Deputy Governor of the said Corporation for the time
being, or by the Governor or Deputy Governor for the preceding year: And they
are hereby Authorized and Required, to Administer the said Oaths to all and
every such Director and Directors, from time to time accordingly.

Oath of Electors.
Provided also, and We do by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors,
Will, Ordain, and Appoint, that all and every the other Members of the said
Corporation, having each Five Hundred Pounds or more Interest, or Share, in the
Capital Stock of the said Corporation, before he or they severally shall be
capable to give any Vote in any General Court to be held for the said
Corporation, shall take the said Oaths appointed, in, and by the said Act of
Parliament made in the first year of Our Reign, Entitled, Oath of Allegiance.
How Administered.
An Act for the Abrogating of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and
appointing other Oaths, before the said Governor or Deputy Governor of the said
Corporation, for the time being, who are hereby respectively Authorized to
Administer the same; And also the Oath in the Words, or to the effect
following, that is to say, Oath to the Company.
J. A. B. Do Swear that I will be Faithful to the Governor and Company of the
Bank of England, whereof I am a Member; and in all General Courts, when, and as
often as I shall be present, will, according to the best of my Skill and
Understanding, give my Advice, Counsel, and Assistance, for the support and
good Government of the said Corporation; so help me God.

Proviso for Quakirs.
Provided nevertheless that any Person or Persons, commonly called or known to
be Quakers, having each Five Hundred Pounds, or more Interest, or Share, in the
Capital Stock of the said Corporation, before they shall be capable of Voting
in any such General Court as aforesaid, shall and may instead of the Oaths
hereby prescribed to be taken by the respective Members, having each Five
Hundred Pounds or more, as aforesaid) before the said Governor or
Deputy-Governors, solemnly Promise and Declare, as in the presence of God in
Words, or to the same effect, (Mutatis Mutandis) with the said Oath last herein
prescribed to be taken by the Members of the said Corporation, having Five
Hundred Pounds or more Interest, or Share, in the Capital Stock of the said
Corporation, and shall severally Subscribe the same, together with the
Declaration appointed for such Dissenters as scruple to take Oaths, by another
Act made in the first year of our Reign, Entitled, An Act for Exempting Their
Majesty's Protestant Subjects, Dissenting from the Church of England, from the
Penalties of certain Laws; which Declarations and Subscriptions, the said
Governor and Deputy Governor for the time being, or either of them are hereby
Empowered and Required, to take and Administer.

Power to Administer Oaths to Officers.
And furthermore, Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby, for Us, Our Heirs
and Successors, Ordain and Appoint, That the said Court of Directors shall have
Power and Authority to Administer an Oath to all the Inferior Agents or
Servants, that shall be employed in the Service of the said Corporation, for
the Faithful and due Execution of their several Places and Trusts in them
Reposed, in the Words, Oath to Officers.
or to the effect following, that is to say; J. A. B. being Elected into the
Office or place of Treasurer, to the Governor and Company of the Bank of
England, do Swear, that I will be True and Faithful to the said Governor and
Company, and will faithfully and truly Execute and Discharge the said Office,
or place of Treasurer, to the utmost of my Skill and Power; so help me God: And
the like Oath to the other Agents and Servants, Mutatis Mutandis.

Neglect or Refusal of Oaths.
And in case any Person hereby Nominated, or hereafter to be Elected, Governor,
Deputy Governor, or Director, as aforesaid, shall for the space of Ten days,
after such Nomination or Election, neglect or refuse to take the respective
Oaths hereby appointed to be taken as aforesaid, or shall refuse or neglect to
take upon him, his, or their Offices, that then and in every such Case, the
Office and Place of every such Person so neglecting or refusing, shall become
vacant, and others be chosen in their Places by a General Court of the said
Corporation.

Dividends how made.
And We do hereby further Will and Appoint, That no Dividend shall at any time
be made by the said Governor and Company, save only out of the Interest,
Profit, or Produce arising by, or our of the said Capital Stock, or Fond, or by
such Dealing, Buying, or Selling, as is allowed by the said Act of Parliament,
until Redemption by Parliament, of the said yearly Fund of One Hundred Thousand
Pounds; And that no Dividend whatsoever, shall at any time be made without the
Consent of the Members of the said Corporation, in a General Court qualified,
to Vote as aforesaid.

Four General Courts every year.
And We do hereby Will and Appoint, that the said Governor, or in his Absence,
the Deputy Governor for the time being, shall from time to time, and are hereby
Required, upon such notice to be given as aforesaid, to Summon and Appoint Four
General Courts at least in every year, whereof one to be in the month of
September, another in the Month of December, another in the Month of April, and
another in the Month of July; And we do further Will and Appoint, that if at
any time or times, there shall be a failure of holding a General Court in any
of the said Months, by the default of the Governor, and Deputy Governor, or
either of them, that then, and so often, and in every such case, any three or
more of the Directors of the said Corporation, shall and may Summon and call a
General Court, which shall meet and be holden in the Month next coming after
the Month in which the same should have been holden upon the Summons of the
Governor or Deputy Governor, as aforesaid.

And moreover, We do by these Presents Will, Direct and Appoint, that the said
Governor, or in his absence the Deputy Governor, for the time being, shall from
time to time, upon Demand to be made, by any Nine or more of the said Members,
having each of them Five hundred Pounds or more Interst or Share in the said
Capital Stock, within ten Days after such Demand Summon and call such General
Courts to be held of the Members of the said Corporation, qualified for
Electors, as aforesaid, A General Court to be Summoned at any time on demand.
and in default of the Governor, or Deputy Governor to Summon and call such
Court, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Nine, or more Members,
having each Five hundred Pounds Stock, as aforesaid, upon ten Days notice in
Writing, to be fixed upon the Royal Exchange in London, to Summon and hold a
General Court, and there to do and dispatch any business relating to the
Government or Affairs of the said Corporation, and to hear and debate any
Complaint that shall be made against any Governor, Deputy Governor, or
Directors, for mis-management of his, or their respective Offices.

And if such Governor, Deputy Governor, or Directors, shall not clear him or
themselves of such Complaint to the satisfaction of the Major part of the
Members of the said Corporation, Misdemeanor of Governor, Deputy Governor, or
Directors.
in the said General Court assembled, That then within ten Days, another
General Court shall be called and held, as aforesaid, of the Members of the
said Corporation, qualified to Vote, as aforesaid: Finally, to determine the
same by the Majority of their Votes, as aforesaid, who may remove or displace
all or any the said Governor, Deputy Governor, and Directors, for such
Misdemeanors or Abuse of their Offices, and Elect and Chose others in his or
their rooms, in the same manner, as the said Elections between the Five and
Twentieth Day of March, and the Five and Twentieth Day of April, are herein
before directed to be made.

In case of Death of Governor, Deputy Governor or Directors.
And in every case, where any Governor, Deputy Governor, or Directors, shall
happen to dye or be removed, or his Office shall otherwise become void before
the Expiration of the time, for which he shall have been Elected, the Major
part of the Members of the said Corporation to be Assembled in a General Court,
and being qualified as aforesaid, shall and may Elect and Choose any other
Member or Members of the said Corporation, qualified as aforesaid, into the
Office of such Governor, Deputy Governor, or Director, that shall so Die, or be
removed, or whose Office shall so become void, which Person so to be chosen
shall continue in the said Office until the next Usual time hereby appointed
for Election, and until others shall be duly Chosen and Sworn.

How the Governor, Deputy Governor, Directors shall Act, and the Power given to
them.
And for the better Ordering and Managing the Affairs of the said Corporation,
We do by these Presents, for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, Grant unto the said
Governor and Company of the Bank of England, and their Successors: And we do by
these Presents, Will, Authorize, and Appoint, That the said Governor,
Deputy Governor and Directors, for the time being, or any Thirteen or more of
them, (of which the Governor or Deputy Governor to be always one) shall and may
from time to time, and at all convenient times, assemble and meet together at
any convenient Place or Places, for the Direction and Management of the affairs
and business of the said Corporation, and then and there to hold Courts of
Directors for the purposes aforesaid, and Summon General Courts to meet as
often as they shall see cause. And that the said Governor, Deputy Governor, and
Directors, or the Major part of them so assembled, (whereof the Governor or
Deputy Governor is to be always one) shall and may Act according to such
Bylaws, Constitutions, Orders, Rules, or Directions, as shall from time to
time be made and given unto them, by the General Court of the said Corporation:
And in all Cases where such Bylaws, Constitutions, Orders, Rules, or
Directions, by or from the General Court shall be wanting, the said Governor,
Deputy Governor, and Directors, or the Major part of them so Assembled, whereof
the Governor, or Deputy Governor is to be always one, shall and may direct and
manage all the Affairs and Business of the said Corporation, in the borrowing
or receiving of Moneys, and giving Security for the same, under the Common Seal
of the said Corporation: And in their dealing in Bills of Exchange, or the
buying or selling of Bullion Gold or Silver, or in selling any Goods, Wares, or
Merchandises whatsoever, which shall really and Bona Fide be left or deposited
with the said Corporation, for Money Lent and Advanced thereon, and which shall
not be redeemed at the time agreed, or within three Months after, and in
selling such Goods, as shall or may be the produce of Lands, purchased by the
said Corporation, or in the lending or advancing any of the Moneys of the said
Corporation, and taking Pawns or other Securities for the same: And to choose
and appoint the Agents or Servants which shall from time to time be necessary
to be employed in the Affairs or business of the said Corporation, and to allow
and pay reasonable Salleries and Allowances to the said Agents and Servants
respectively, and them or any of them from time to time to remove or displace
as they shall see Cause. And Generally to act and do in all matters and things
whatsoever, which by the said recited Act of Parliament shall or may be done,
and in all matters and things whatsoever, which they shall Judge necessary for
the well ordering and managing of the said Corporation, and the Affairs
thereof; and to do, enjoy, perform, and execute all the Powers, Authorities,
Privileges, Acts, and things, in relation to the said Corporation, as fully to
all intents and purposes, as if the same were done by the Governor and Company
of the Bank of England, or by a General Court of the same; Subject nevertheless
to such Restrictions, Limitations, Rules, or Appointments as are contained in
the said recited Act of Parliament, for or concerning the Trade, Business, or
Affairs of the said Corporation, or otherwise relating thereunto.

Power to General Courts to make Bylaws.
And We do hereby, for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, give full Power to all and
every the said Members qualified for Electors, as aforesaid, in their General
Courts or Assemblies, aforesaid, by Majority of their Votes, as aforesaid, to
make and Constitute such Bylaws and Ordinances, for and relating to the
Affairs and Government of the said Corporation; and the Imposing Mulcts and
Amerciaments upon Offenders against the same, as to them shall seem meet, so
that such Bylaws be not Repugnant to the Laws of this Our Kingdom, and be
Confirmed, and Approved, according to the Statutes in such case made and
provided.

Mulcts and Amercements shall be to the use of the Company.
All which Mults and Amerciaments shall and may be received and recovered to the
only Use and Behoof of the said Governor and Company of the Bank of England,
and their Successors, without any Account, or other Matter or thing to be
therefore rendered to Us, Our Heirs, or Successors.

General Courts to allow Salleries to the Governor, Deputy Governors, and
Directors.
And also to allow such Sallaries or Allowances to the said Governor,
Deputy Governor, and Directors, as to them shall seem meet. And we do hereby
for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Ordain and Appoint, That the first General
Court for the said Corporation, shall be held within the space of Twenty eight
days next after the Date of these Presents. Day of first General Court.
Directions for Assignment of the Stock and Fund.


Provided always, and for the ascertaining and limiting how, and in what
manner, and under what Rules the said Capital Stock and yearly Fund of 100000
l. shall and may be Assignable and Assigned, transferable and transfered by
such Person and Persons as shall from time to time have any Interest or share
in the same; We do hereby direct and appoint, that there shall be constantly
kept in the public Office of the said Governor and Company of the Bank of
England, a Register, or Book or Books, wherein all Assignments and Transferrs
shall be Entered. And We do hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, pursuant,
and according to the Power given unto Us, by the said Act of Parliament, Order,
Limit, Direct and Appoint; that the method and manner of making all Assignments
and Transfers of the said Capital Stock, and yearly Fund, or any part thereof,
shall be by an Entry in the said Book or Books, Signed by the party so
Assigning or Transfering in the Words, Form of Transfer.
or to the effect following, viz. Memorandum, That I. A. B. this (...) day of
(...) in the year of Our Lord (...) do Assign and Transferr (...) of my
Interest or Share in the Capital Stock and Fund of the Governor and Company of
the Bank of England, and all Benefit arising thereby, unto (...) his Heirs,
Executors and Assigns. Witness my Hand (...) Or in case the Person Assigning be
not personally present, then by an Entry in the said Book or Books, Signed by
some Person thereunto lawfully Authorized, By Letter of Attorney.
by Letter of Attorney, or Writing under Hand and Seal, attested by Two or more
Witnesses, in the Words, or to the eflect following, viz. Memorandum, That I A.
B. this (...) day of (...) in the year of our Lord (...) and (...) by virtue of
a Letter of Attorney, Form of Transfer, by Letter of Attorney.
or Authority under the Hand and Seal of (...) Dated the (...) day of (...) in
the said year (...) do in the name, and on the behalf of the said (...) Assign
and Transferr (...) of the Interest or Share of the said (...) in the Capital
Stock and Fund of the Governor and Company of the Bank of England, and all
Benefits arising thereby, unto (...) his Heirs and Assigns, Acceptance.
Witness my Hand. (...) Under which transfer the Person or Persons, Bodies
Politic or Corporate, to whom such Assignment or Transfer shall be made, or
some other Person by him or them lawfully Authorized thereunto, shall Sign his
or their Name or Names, attesting that he or they do freely and voluntarily
accept of the same. And that the Entry Signed, as aforesaid, and no other way
or method shall be the manner and method used in the Passing, Assigning, or
Transferring the Interest or Share in the said Capital Stock or Fund, and such
Transfer or Assignment shall be good and available, and Convey the whole
Estate, and Interest of the Party Transfering, or Ordering the same to be
Transfered.

Provided always, that any Person having any Share or Interest in the said
Capital Stock or Fund, Diviseable by Will, attested by 3 Witnesses. Entry of
the Devise in the Companies Books Governor or Deputy, (in his absence) not to
Vote in general Courts, unless in Cases of Equality of Votes
may dispose or devise the same, by his last Will and Testament, attested by
Three or more credible Witnesses. But however, that such Devisee shall not
Transfer the same, or be entitled to receive any Dividend, until an Entry or
Memorandum of so much of the said Will, as relates to the said Stock or Fund,
be made in the Book or Books, or some other Book or Books to be kept by the
said Governor and Company for that purpose.

And We do hereby Will and Appoint, that the said Governor, or in his Absence,
the Deputy Governor, shall not have any Vote in a General Court or Courts of
Directors, Save where there shall happen to be an Equality, or Equal Number of
Votes.

Provided nevertheless, That all matters and things which the said Governor,
Sub-Committees.
Deputy Governor, or Directors, shall in manner, as aforesaid, Order and Direct
to be done by Sub-Committees, or other Persons appointed under them, shall and
may (by Virtue of such Orders) be done by the said Sub-Committees, or other
Persons so appointed.

And We do for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, Grant and Declare, Non-obstante.
That these Our Letters Patent, or the Inrollment thereof, shall be, in and by
all things Valid, and Effectual in the Law, according to the true intent and
meaning of the same; and shall be taken, construed, and adjudged in the most
favorable and beneficial Sense, for the best Advantage of the said
Corporation, as well in Our Courts of Record as elsewhere; notwithstanding any
Non-recital, Mis-recital, Defect, Incertainty, or Imperfection in these Our
Letters Patent.

Without Fee in the Hanaper.
And Our Will and Pleasure is, That these Presents to the Governor and Company
aforesaid, under the Great Seal of England, shall be in due manner made and
Sealed without Fine or Fee, great or small, to Us in Our Hanaper, or elsewhere
to Our Use therefore, any ways to be rendered, paid, or made.

Covenant to grant further Power.
And We do hereby, for Us, Our Heirs, and Successors, Covenant, Grant, and
Agree, to and with the said Governor and Company, and their Successors, That
We, Our Heirs, and Successors, shall and will from time to time, and at all
times hereafter, upon the humble Suit and Request of the said Governor and
Company, and their Successors, Give and Grant unto them, all such further and
other Powers, Privileges, Authorities, Matters, and Things, which we or they
can or may lawfully grant, and as shall be reasonably advised and desired by
the Council learned of the said Governor and Company for the time being, and
shall be approved by Our Attorney, or Sollicitor-General, on Our behalf. (...)
In Witness, etc.

CHVTE.

FINIS.

