POPERY DISPLAYED In its Proper Colors.

WHEREIN ITS Nonentity and Nullity Is Demonstrated by UNDENIABLE ARGUMENTS.
WITH SEVERAL Remarkable Passages Relating to the PRESENT TIMES.

Humbly offered to the Honorable House of Commons.

By J. S. Gent.

LONDON: Printed by G. Larkin for Benjamin Harris, at the Stationers Arms in
the Piazza under the Royal Exchange. 1681.

To the Honorable House of Commons, ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT.
THis Kingdom, whereof God, your King, and Country have made you Keepers, as
well as Preservers, cannot but see that nothing is wanting on Your Part. I do
here but publish, Crier-like, the Unanimous Sense of all well-affected
Protestants all over the World. Worthies, you are now engaged in a way of such
Heroic Designs, as Posterity cannot but set the Stamp of Never-dying Honor
upon You. Go on, and manifest your Zeal for your Religion, and the Name of
Christ, and he will not fail to manifest Love to your Souls. Your Acts are
National and Just; Execute Judgment, and defend the Truth: Fear not the cruel
Papists, nor all their barbarous Adherents: And let happen what will, say, Malo
cum Christo ruere, quam cum Caesare stare; I had rather fall with Christ, then
stand with Caesar. God and your King has called You for such. Your Call is
high, your Work is hard, your Difficulties many, yet Faith will carry You
through all. You know why you have been born, not for your selves, but for the
Benefit of many; Non sibi se, sed multorum utilitati esse natum.

You are our Deliverers, not only from Popish Idolatry and Superstitious
Foppery, but also from several other heavy insufferable Burdens. Believe it,
most Noble and Renowned Worthies, all the Treasure of this World is no way
comparable to your Pious and Just Designs. Yet I hold it not only fit, but
necessary, that your Liberties, Laws, and Goods, should still be precious in
your sight; but be sure in point of Care, to exalt the Name of Christ (not the
Pope) above your Liberties, his Gospel above all Humane Laws and Devices, and
your Religion above your Lives and Fortunes: Otherwise the Son will be angry,
as well as the Father; and so great is the wrath of the Lamb, that the greatest
of men cannot withstand it, Rev. 6.15, 16.

The Great Council of Jerusalem, when they sat, exercised most part of their
time in Regulating matters of Religion, and in securing of it; such has been
your Endeavors, such has been your Desires in all your Sitting. It is
Ingratitude therefore in any Degrees of Men not to serve You. We acknowledge
the Infinite Mercy of God in calling You together at this time, when no less
then our Laws, Liberties, and Religion, lies at stake. Your Work, I confess, is
Hard, and Great, but yet it is Honorable. Whoever would not endeavor to save
his Country and Religion, is no more worthy to live in it, than the man that
seeks the destruction thereof. The Papists have, dare, and will venture our
utter Ruin and Destruction; and shall not we venture as far to save our Selves
and Religion? Had men but Public Spirits they would do it. The very Heathens
have so minded the Public Interest, as that they forgot Themselves: Publius
Decius, the Roman Army being brought low, rushed into the midst of the Enemies,
demanding Safety for his Country, Death for Himself, and so occasioned an
unexpected Victory. There is no reason therefore that your Spirits should
faint, or your former Intentions slacken, in fear of the issue. You are on the
Right, and on the Rising Side; and in a Work that will Improve it self: In the
Work of Preserving our Lives, Liberties, and Religion; in the Work of Uniting
all His Majesty's Protestant Subjects, though the Endeavors of many are so
mighty to oppose, and their Tongues so malignant to disgrace it. But while You
are faithful to God, Loyal to your King, and True to your Country, resolve to
go on in Gods Name; knowing You must pass through Evil Reports, as well as Good
Reports. The Lord make all Great Mountains that lie in your way, as Plains
before You: Which is and ever shall be the Prayers of

Your most Obedient Servant, J. S.

THE NONENTITY or NULLITY of Popery, Demonstrated by UNDENIABLE ARGUMENTS, etc.
SInce a Shadow cannot produce a Shadow, and that by reason of Inherency there
is a necessary Reference in every Accident to its Subject, so that if the
Subject be wanting, it necessarily follows, that the Accident is also
wanting, as losing its Inherency, becomes nothing. This Assertion being as
undeniable as two and two makes four, I proceed with reference to the more
ignorant Protestants, not in a School dialect, (being Extra sphaeram
activitatis) but in that method, whereby the most Illiterate may easily
comprehend what Popery is, whose high Flight and infallible Power is maintained
with the outward appearance of Sanctity, and the dread of the Inquisition, with
the power and greatness of some Temporal Princes, which violently carries
(where Popery Reigns) all things before it, with the impetuous stream of its
own Torrent, teaching Sedition, Rebellion and Murder, for Apostolical Doctrine;
having no other reality of Being to support their Profession (not Religion)
composed of mere imagination and humane Invention, endeavoring to enamel and
guild over their wicked Principles with many distorted and misapplyed Texts of
Scripture. Nevertheless certain it is, that whosoever will balance and weigh
Popery with and by the Authority of Scripture, will soon perceive, not only the
fading splendour of Popery to resemble the light of a Glowworm, which the
nearer one comes to it the lesser it appears, till in the end it wholly
vanishes away; but a Profession, most blasphemously presuming to Create and
Annihilate two Acts proper to God alone.

Some Popish Authors say, that the Priest by the power of Consecration draws (I
will not say with a Rope) or invites the Body and Blood of Christ from Heaven;
which is as ridiculous and as impossible, as it is to affirm the Priest to have
power to Create a Corporeal Body at his pleasure, (I mean Christ's Body)
contrary to the express words of St. Paul, who says, The Heavens must contain
and receive him, until the time of Restitution of all things, Acts 3.20. And he
himself says, I leave the World, and go to the Father, John 16. The poor ye
have always with you, but me ye have not, in another place, Matthew. 29.11. What
a horrible and prodigious Monster is this pretended Religion, that affirms
Christ's most glorious Body to be at the beck of the most licencious Priest, to
be given and eaten by the most wicked, in a hundred thousand places at once.
The same Apostle tells us, In the last days false Prophets will come, that
shall say, Christ is here or there, and that he is in secret Chambers, Matthew.
24. Believe it not.

Now that I may the better show this, the Romish Faith and Divine Faith to be
as incompatible as God and Nothing, I must (since the Definition of every thing
is the Touchstone wherewith men^^try what other things can truly come within
the Orb or Compass of the thing defined, and what not) lay down before you the
Definition of Divine Faith, as the Apostle left it upon Record to Posterity,
Heb. 11.

Faith is the Substance of things to be hoped for, the Argument of things not
appearing: This Definition shows, that Faith is a supernatural Virtue, (and
not a coactive Romish power) and that the object thereof is that, which through
its own abstruseness and sublimity, cannot be apprehended or conceived by
Natural Reason. To exemplify this, Faith teaches that in Trinity there is one
peculiar Nature in three different Persons; no man's natural Understanding can
apprehend how this Individuality of Nature can be in three Persons, without
Distraction or Multiplication of the Nature, because every one of these Persons
is identified really and formally with this nature, in the strictest union: In
like sort, touching the Incarnation, man's Reason cannot lay any true level to
conceive, how one Hypostasis or Person can be in two Natures, or how this
Hypostasis or Person is identified; for between Man's Capacity and the Nature of
supernatural Faith, the proportion lies certainly and only in disproportion in
matters of Faith: Reason dictates to us to believe things above reason, but
never against reason, as the Papists affirm.

This Supernatural Faith has a necessary reference to two things: The First is
Prima veritas Revelans, which is God, who reveals all Truths and points of
Faith: The Second is the Authority of the Church, to reveal all those things
and nothing more, which God has revealed either by himself or his Apostles.
Now let us examine, whether these two points so necessary to true Faith, do
accord to the Papal Faith or not: As to the First, Prima veritas revelans,
which is God, I freely appeal to themselves, whether their Principles of Faith
be either revealed to each particular Pope by God, or found in Scripture;
(namely, every Papal Decree to be as essential to True Divine Faith, and as
necessary to Salvation if Revealed by God, Purgatory, Adoring and Worshipping
Images made of Gold, Silver, Stocks and Stones, in the nature of a God, praying
to Saints and the Virgin Mary, with more zeal and eagerne^s than either to
their Maker or Savior, teaching Sedition, Rebellion, and Murder, as
meritorious Acts) if neither, who will believe or say, but that Popery is a
mere Nonentity, or a bare Intentionality.

As to the Second Point, which is the Authority of the Church, in propounding
to her Children the things by God revealed, we know and affirm, that the Church
of Rome dare not publicly own to have received either from God or Scripture
(though daily practiced by Her and her Emissaries) the aforesaid Principles;
the verity of this we have not only from Scripture, but from the ingenious
Confessions of their most Learned and Ancient Authors. Mark withal, how these
false Prophers, to serve as certain Veils or Curtains, to hide their hellish
and wicked Principles from the eyes of the Ignorant, do forbid under pain of
Excommunication the Reading of holy Scripture, the infallible Guide to
Salvation.

Thus far to demonstrate, both from the definition of Faith set down by St.
Paul, and from the Points necessarily concurring for the causing not only of
true Faith, but of Salvation; that Popery, in regard of its wanting these two
necessary Points, is but an absolute Nullity of Faith and Religion.

For every thing that has a real Existence or Being, may have its Nature
explicated by the Definition of it, which consists of two parts, that is
Genus and Differentia: The Genus does comprehend the Essence of the Thing
defined, the Differentia does more particularly Constitute the thing defined,
and distinguishes it from all other things. For Example, A Man is defined to
be Animal Rationale, a Creature enjoying Reason; the word Animal demonstrates
the Essence of Man; Rationale, that is, Rationality, does Constitute man in
definition, and makes him to differ from all other sublunary Creatures. A
Definition extends it self not only to the Existence, or want of Existence in
things corporeal or material, but also to the Being or not Being in things
speculative and immaterial; I mean in Do^^rines and other such Theories of the
Understanding. Now Popery, which in it self truly implies an absolute
Contradiction, cannot be thus defined, and is undenyably compounded of several
Contradictories, and opposite Doctrines and Tenets, can have no being but
intentionally, for whatsoever implies a Contradiction, supposes a Being and a
not Being of a thing, and all at one and the same time: From, whence this
Absurdity must needs follow, that is, if such a thing could be, then could a
thing be whose Being should consist in a not Being, consequently a Nullity.

This is Popery.

But to Contract this Point, I will particularly insist (as most conducing to
the Subject in hand, and the time that Protestants can now afford or set apart
to read, there being so many Pamphlets abroad) that the Reader may easily
discern what mutual Recrimination, and what irreconciliable Repugnancy there is
between the Papists themselves and this, even in matters of the greatest and
highest consequence; witness the many Books they have written, and the acerbity
of Style one against another, even intimating thereby, that the different
Doctrines differently maintained by them, were truly Contradictories,
containing and defending different Tenets, so repugnant and contradictory one
to another, that even by the Law and Nature of Contradictories, the one side
must ever want a real and subsisting Being. Several Books written and allowed
of in Rome, wherein many Principles of Faith, and the civil Power of
Magistrates were controverted, with many Heretical Decrees, were by order of
the Bishops and Councils of France, burned by the Hangmans hand; they also
decreed, that the Church of Rome do vary from the sincere Doctrine of the
Scriptures, and yet now adays all are good Christians and Papists that oppose
Protestancy, or cut Protestants Throats.

Now I close up this point, referring to the judgment of the learned Reader,
how deadly Popery is wounded, not only by the Pen of Popery, but also by its
Hellish and daily Practice. For the nature of true Faith (and true
Christianity) exacteth, that it should be complete, entire, and perfect in it
self, like unto an Action morally virtuous, which is accomplished by the access
of all due conducing Circumstances, but vitiated through the absence but of any
one. Many other contradictory Points by them maintained as Evangelical and true
Popery, I here pretermit till better opportunity, and assure the Reader that
Popery is no true Faith, but in respect thereof an absolute Irreality, or an
intentional Name or Word.

Thus much for the Nullity of Popery, and we say with the Prophet David, Thou
have saved us from our Enemies, and have put them to shame that hated us: In
God we boast all the day long, and will praise thy Name for ever, Psalm. 44.7,
8. We are not only to praise him with high praises, with one heart and voice,
and with the best of our Members, but also to pursue and strive to set up his
Name far above all blessing and praise, by praising him perpetually, by
perpetuating his praises unto Posterity; and by laying up such a stock and such
a method of Praise, as may be of great use and importance to our posterity,
when they shall both see and hear what great things the Lord of hosts has done
for this our Church and Kingdom. Gods wonderful Providence toward the safety
of this Nation, and in keeping out Popish Idolatry, will undoubtedly, by some
good pious man, be treasured up in one Volume, and transmitted to Posterity, as
a lasting Monument of Gods praise and Providence, as a method of Thankfulness
from Generation to Generation, and as a true Record of Popish Villainy, that our
Posterity may say with the Faithful in former times, We have heard with our
Ears, our Fathers have told us what work thou did in their days, in the times
of old, Psalm. 44.1.

Now as to the Remarkable Passages.
NEver was Action more conducive to the safety of this great Metropolis, the
City of London, and the whole Kingdom, than to look back and remind the woeful
days of Queen Mary, and the burning of London to ashes, the bloody and fatal
effects (never to be forgotten) of these two, are to be attributed only to
Popery, and to that Man of sin that exalts himself above all that is called
God, (the Pope of Rome): wherefore it is the hopes of A. P. a Member of the
Church of England, whose Liturgy and Rites are worthy of admiration, that all
Protestants of what persuasion or interest soever, unanimously conclude and
agree to abolish Popery, as well Root as Branch. Several have proposed their
Expedients for the abolishing of this hellish and venomous Root Popery;
therefore I hope I may take the same liberty, and throw in my Mite also, being
thereunto induced by the affection I bear my King and Country, as in duty bound.

The present State and the great fear of the Nation, of being overrun with
Popery, and so brought to Beggary and Slavery, exacts an Angelical Spirit which
appears the same as well in the dark as in the light, (qui vult capere capiat)
and a Herculean Courage which is never to be daunted, and this (attributed to
English men formerly) that you act upon all necessary occasions unanimously, in
the preservation of your King, your Religion, and Property, like good
Christians and English men. I say English men, because English men, when they
embrace Popery and reject Protestancy, they lose their courage, (like our
English Mastiffs when sent beyond the Seas) and in lieu thereof receive all
manner of Villainy. This needs no further proof, than the Reading the
Transactions of the last time when Popery Reigned amongst us; then our Divines
were butchered by the Name of Heretic Dogs, our Houses plundered, our Wives
and Daughters ravished, our Churches erected for the true worship of God,
abused, and converted into the Temples or Places of Idolatry and Superstition,
to the great dishonor of Christ and scandal of Religion: Nay many of our Laity
were torn to pieces, and tied to a Stake in the midst of flames at Smithfield,
and other places. Can we then be so infatuated as to expect any better
entertainment than our Predecessors? No certainly: For besides that dreadful
and barbarous entertainment which our Predecessors had from that Hellish and
Popish power, we see and will mind that our apparent ruin is not only aimed at,
and that without mercy, but that we are only secured during the life of one
man, the Life of his Sacred Majesty, whom God long continue with this happy
Parliament, whose Interests and ours are the same, and so united, that our
Resolutions are the same. If the Plot takes effect (I mean the killing of the
King) or the Plotters make a head, as in all probability they will, (being
disappointed in taking away the Kings life) and if in the interval of
Parliaments they happen to take off the King, we have nothing more to do than
to destroy the whole Popish blood, who with all ingratitude and baseness
attempted the Life of our Prince and all his Protestant Subjects.

Here we are to observe and believe, that there is no such thing as an English
Papist who is not in the Plot, at least in his good wishes; and that it is a
Maxim (nay a Principle of Faith) with all Papists, and especially with such as
are in power, never to keep their words or promises with Heretics: (Some may
here object, that some do keep their promises with Heretics: I answer, that it
is for Interest or Fear, and not out of Conscience;) Therefore whosoever
credits a Papist, be he never so plausible in his Religion and Conversation, is
never to be pitied when thus precautioned. Observe likewise, how the French
King, a Popish King, levyes Arbitrary Taxes at his pleasure, and imposes
several other Tyrannical Oppressions at his pleasure. Now lest any should be
ignorant, that any such like Distemper may not be much easier prevented at
first, than when it has once got a head; it is sufficient to tell you, that the
Pope and Papists are your mortal Enemies, and would fain Reign and Domineer
over this Kingdom in the same nature as the French King does in France. These
are the men who exclaim against our Parliaments proceedings, and prevail with
many others, not much better than themselves, in relation to the Plot: these
are the men that endeavor to amuse as well his Sacred Majesty as his good
people; alleging that there is no Plot, but rather 40, and 41.

I must acknowledge that there is some coherence between 40 and 41, and this
present time; for as well then as now, the Popish and French Faction were the
chief, nay the only Incendiaries which promoted and caused all the mischief of
40 and 41, which is well known to many, and especially in the Rebellion of
Ireland, where so many thousands of Protestants were killed by (a counterfeit)
Commission. Here they intended no less, but God frustrated their design, and
ensnared them in their own Net. The Papists in 40 and 41 as well as now, have
allured many lukewarm Protestants to their assistance, which in great part
supported their hellish machinations on foot ever since Queen Mary's days.
Methinks this and this present hellish Plot, should be a sufficient caution to
all Protestants, and chiefly to all such as are in Power, not only to avoid and
shun the Company of Papists, but also to abhor the very Name and Interest of a
Papist, and say with the Holy Patriarch, O my Soul, come not thou into their
Secrets, unto their Assembly my Honor be not thou united, Genesis 49.6. I would
have all true Protestants say thus, and profess with the Prophet David to
Almighty God, that He was a Companion to all them that feared him, and of them
that kept his Precepts, Psalm. 119.63. What credit then can a Protestant propose
to himself in keeping company with a Papist, much less in promoting or
maintaining his Interest? For no Protestant can be so infatuated (if not deeply
concerned in the Plot, or very ignorant) to believe that a Papist fears God, or
keeps his Precepts: But since they are not all Israel which are of Israel (as
St. Paul said) nor all Protestants that come to Church, as I wish they were,
and there really appear what they are as well internal as external, and not lie
sheltering themselves within the pale of our Church, and under the wings of
Protestants promote the Popish Interest: But they are easily known, for what
our Savior said of the Wolves in Sheeps clothing, is eternally true; By their
Fruits ye may know them, Matthew. 7.16. Having this infallible mark and Divine
Caution, besides several late past Passages (if well observed,) nothing more
does concern all Protestants, than to United and Act as the Protestants did in
Q. Eliz. time: The Papists forelaw they could do nothing, unless they could cut
her off, therefore all their Plots and hellish Designs were calculated against
her life as they are now against his present Majesty (whom God long preserve:)
The Protestants foresaw that there was no end of their Plots and hellish
Designs, till they would have cut her off, and consequently extirpate the
Protestant Religion, if by some extraordinary means they did not prevent it;
upon which they did by an universal and unanimous Assent, enter into an
Association, by which they mutually promised to each other to repair to their
Arms, and stand by and assist each other with their Lives and Fortunes in these
three cases. 1. In case of the Queens death. 2. In case of a Foreign Invasion.
3. In case of any Popish Insurrection. Besides, they obliged themselves one to
another, whenever the Queen fell by any untimely end, they would revenge her
death upon the Papists. This immediately put a stop to all their Plots and
Designs against her; for when they saw the Protestants were unanimously agreed
on that point, (which is to be wished for now) and that taking away the Queens
Life, was their total Ruin and Destruction, the Papists had soon done with
their (Plottings: This, never to be forgotten Act of Queen Elizabeth's
Protestants, and in an interval of Parliament, was so universally approved of,
that she her self in the next Parliament confirmed it, and made it Law.

Now it is to be admired, how one Protestant calls another Rogue and Rebel, for
subscribing or promoting a harmless Petition for the Sitting of Parliament, to
redress the Grievances of the Nation: The Parliament having already stigmatized
these horrid Abhorrers and strange kind of Protestants, never to be forgotten,
and not worth my while to decipher their Popishly affected Crime, it being
daily to be seen and read in their faces: I only tell them, that I am sorry
that such are permitted amongst Protestants, for they can make as good Papists
supposing Interest, as they are now Protestants.

These are the men that prosecute Protestant Dissenters, and if Popery were
turned Trump, would willingly destroy all that would not conform to their
Livery and Superstitious Levies, as they did in the days of Queen Mary; for it
is very well known, that the professed Papists were no more able then than they
are now to destroy they Protestants: No, it was the Protestant Abhorrers, that
wicked Crew, the worst wretches, that turned Papists, and spilt the blood of
all true Protestants, as they thirst to do with ours now: Of such Abhorrers as
these, I would have all honest minded men and true Protestants, to shun and
avoid their Company, and scorn their Society, with a juster indignation than a
known professed Papist; from a known Papist you can guard your self, but from
these miscreant Wretches you cannot; for they walk and converse with you as
Friends, like deceitful and bloody men, and lie in the bosom of the Church till
they sting her to Death, as they did in the Marian Days.

Now is the time, not to Dispute or debate much about a Plot (which is so
evidently demonstrated and confessed by all, except those that are therein
concerned) but to Act, and that with speed and universal Assent against Popery,
and all its Adherents; otherwise England's Religion, Liberty and Property is
lost. In this our Gracious King neither is or will be wanting, as he assured
this present Parliament in his Royal Speech to them. Popery and all its
professors, 1. Are Enemies to God by their setting up and worshipping of Idols
as God, contrary to his express Command: (Truth hates Competitors.) 2. To
Christ by their new found Mediators, and especially the Virgin Mary, whom they
style Salvatrix Peccatorum. 3. To Scripture, by their many corrupt Traditions
and humane Inventions, in imposing a belief upon all their Proselytes, not only
to deny their Reason, but all their other Senses, to the great detriment of
their Souls, and the dishonor of their God and Savior. 4. To all Opposers by
Fire and Faggot. 5. To all Government that will not subject to their
Antichristian and Imperious power, by Plots, Assassinations, Poisoning and
horrid Massacres; these to be Popery's usual and common steps to worldly
Advancement, to its support and propagating, is notoriously known, especially
to this Nation, whom Popery (the common Enemy of Mankind) has so often
attempted, our ruin, and at several times has been at the very point of
effecting it; has once more with that great violence attempted our utter ruin,
which I hope will be so ordered as to be their last Attempt; and if not, we are
not to be pitied. The great Undertakers and Encouragers of this Hellish Plot,
some have had their deserts, some are fled from Justice, and promise themselves
good success in their Design; not because of the many thousands of Masses that
are daily said all over the Papal World, for the prosperity of their Design;
but because they have Friends in Disguise amongst us, as they most impudently
assert, in our Courts, in our Armies, in our Navyes, (which I would not have
believed, had not some late passages happened: Their Design is not to convert,
but to kill, burn, and plunder; it being just and meritorious to extirpate
Heretics Root and Branch.


But Blessed, be God, their chief Aim, the Killing of the King, whose only life
is our safery, has failed, and so confounded them, that they afterward
resolved to surprise us and make a Night-work of us, as they did in France,
Piedmont, and Ireland, in those most bloody and barbarous Massacres of poor
innocent Protestants; but God notwithstanding the multitude of our sins has
hitherto preserved us (though designed many a time to a total destruction) and
discovered this impious and hellish Conspiracy, to the great confusion and
shame of the Conspirators; he has also beaten up our Quarters, and given us the
Alarm, if we will take it, as we ought, all things considered: We have been
told, that not only our Forts, our Militia, but Scotland and Ireland were at a
Papists beck.

Besides the great danger of being stabbed as we walk in the Streets, and of
being burned as we sleep in our houses; witness that horrid murder of Sir
Edmondbury Godfrey, the barbarous Assassination of Justice Arnold, and the
dreadful Fire of London and Southwark, to which let us add, their unanimous
assent and design in extirpating all Heretics (as they term them) root and
branch, by cutting their Throats, having no other way to propagate their
Profession, that has nothing of Religion but the Name: therefore Gratitude nor
Countries sake restrains not men of this stamp, their Principles know no
Kindred, no Love, no Obedience, no Obligation to a Heretic but through blood,
as the Murder of Sir E. G. can testify. O wonderful! that ever supposed
Christians should be so much the Children of the Devil; as first to Murder,
then charge it upon the innocent soul Murdered, as the Papists most Impudently
did and do; in him all Protestants were Massacred, no man is sure of his life a
day or night; the choice is only what death we shall dye, whether be Stabbed,
Strangled, Burned or Poisoned; this Consternation, in security, and danger of
our Lives, must needs obstruct not only all Commerce betwixt man and man, but
also deter Officers of Justice from their Duty and Obligation, and in fine
dissolve all humane society, and reduce the world into misery.

How much then does it concern all Protestants, nor only with unfeigned
Repentance to turn to the Lord, and beg of him that these Conspirators should
be either Confounded and ensnared in their own Nets, or diverted from their
hellish designs: Not that this is sufficient, but we, ought as in duty bound,
to preserve our King, whom the Conspirators assert (blessed be God) is not for
their turn; and make our humble Supplication to this worthy and English
Parliament, to Vote an Adresse to the King, to Banish all Papists and all
Popishly affected, as well out of his Army and Navy, as the Cities of London
and Westminster; whose Villiany and Cruelty, one would think, sufficiently
rendered them as incapable of serving in our Armies, as in keeping humane and
Common society with Protestants, whilst poor and Innocent and dissenting
Protestants are daily molested and pilledged for the sake of their peaceable
Consciences, and Popish Rebels sheltering themselves under our Roof: is this to
Maintain the Protestant Religion? No certainly, it is insupportable.

Therefore call for the Conspirators, look thoroughly and strictly into their
hellish Actions; fiat justitia: fear nor favor no man, but fear Cod; do what
you do as in his presence, to whom you must render an account; nay, or every
idle word; it is the chief and most applaudable Action of your Life, to
di^charge your Trust; that is, (if you will quit your selves like Men and good
Protestants) preserve the Being, Liberties and religion of those who have
entrusted you, by throwing out Popery after the Bill, the only Tormentor and
Plague of this Nation: as you desire to see God in his Glory, and secure your
selves from Popery, Tyranny and Slavery, neglect not this Opportunity which God
has so wonderfully cast into your hands unexpected; be not Despi^ers of his
Care and Providence over you, neither be you careless or fearful of Improving
and Showing your Power: Now is the time; for had they you (or ever will) at the
same advantage, you nor yours should not long continue; therefore what before
you would scarcely have done, is now become your Duty: Let not the Life of that
Grand Traitor and Popish Courtly Secretary, who Traitorously communicated the
secrets of our King and Country to all Popish Courts in Christendom, nor the
Lives of five or six bigoted Jesuits, pass as satisfaction for this horrid and
(never to be forgotten) Hellish Conspiracy: Not that I desire more Blood, but
Justice, Security, and future safety as well for our Posterity as for our
selves; otherwise it may be truly said of us, They saw and would not see.

You know that Popery marks all Protestants of what persuasion soever out for
the same end, and esteems them as one body of Heretics, equally deserving the
Slaughter, as Bellermine affirms: All Heretics are to be destroyed Root and
Branch, if it can possibly be done: De Laicis, lib. 3. cap. 22.

Besides, all Heretics are solemnly Cursed once a Year in Rome, and thereupon
the Papists in the several Kingdoms where the Protestant Religion rules, are
not only discharged from all Allegiance to their Prince, but all are obliged by
the strictest bond of Conscience, and under the penalty of the utmost hazard of
their Souls, to depose such Heretical Princes; and that they are so far from
being Guilty of Murder if they kill any of them, as Urban the Third, Pope,
says, that they are bound to exterminate all Heretics, as they would be
esteemed Christians themselves; Mariana says, When the Commonwealth cannot
otherwise secure and preserve its own peace and safety, it may by a right
inherent in it self, declare the King to be the common Enemy, and then destroy
him with the Sword. Leshius says, that such a Prince ought to be deposed, and
thereupon it may be lawful to attempt any thing against his Person. Pope Paul
the fifth did not only Excommunicate and Damn Q. Eliz. and all her Protestant
Subjects, but also Cursed all the Papists that should give any Obedience to
her, or her Laws. All this one would think, should not only rouse us to
Self-defence, Brotherly love and Union betwixt all Protestants, but also to
determine, that whosoever opposed such, may be Judged to love Popery better
than Protestancy, consequently an Enemy to the King, the Protestant Religion
and the Government.

In reference to Self-defence, after a true Union is once settled among all
Protestants, it is most necessary that our Militia Officers, all standing
Officers, Judges, and all Justices of the Peace should be strictly examined,
whether they be men Popishly affected or not: if popishly affected, they are
the most dangerous to be trusted, and the ready way to introduce Popery: the
first have our Lives in their hands, and may cut our Throats at will; the
second will never put the Penal Laws in Execution (if not against Protestant
Dissenters) which is no less than to cheat the Government, and Invalidate the
King and his Laws. Popery, and men Popishly affected, (or in Masquerade) fear
nothing more than such strict Enquiry: Be not slow in this, (we will never
leave you) for such ever since the Reformation, were our greatest Enemies, and
chief Fomentors of Plots and Conspiracies. If you read of the Massacre of
Paris, Piedmont and Ireland, with the Transactions acted upon this our English
Stage within these few years, you will find this confirmed and much more, (too
long here to insert) to your great satisfaction, and the Confusion of many
great Courtiers, who for Interest have betrayed God and their Country:
wherefore, if now after all these great Discoveries, Justice were not done on
this wicked and bloody Generation, who since they could not cut off the King by
their Buliies, nor the Worthies of the Nation by a Meal-tub Plot, intended no
less than a public Massacre, had not the Wisdom of God, the Courage of the
Parliament, who ever loved and honored their King, their Country, and the
Protestant Religion more than their Lives and Fortunes, detected their Villainy,
and put themselves with undaunted Courage between them, his Majesty's Life and
the Protestant Religion, to the great Terror and Confusion of all Papists in
the World:

A Generation who put themselves into various Forms and Shapes, though never so
Monstrous, to carry on the good Cause, and all tending to one and the self same
end, the Destruction of the Protestant Religion; though the Villainy and
Debauchery of some is such, as to reckon every one either a Presbyterian or a
Fanatic that appears more than ordinary active against these Papists: There is
a duty and a great obligation incumbent upon all true lovers of the Protestant
Religion, to Unite and Join with one Voice; and observe the words of Abraham to
Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, for we are
Brethren, Genesis 13.8. Are we not Brethren? Undoubtedly the Papists Rage is equal
against us, why should we Quarrel then with our Brethren, who the Papists would
destroy because they are Protestants? therefore we ought to own and preserve
them as such, and to give them all the Demonstration that can be, both of love
and of laying aside all Prejudices and Animosities that either Papist or Devil
can suggest to persecute our Brethren, who truly labor in the Vineyard, and
Exhort to give Caesar his due, and to submit to every Ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto
them that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, 1 Pet. 2.13.

This infallibly will put a stop to all Popish Operations, though their
Villainies are of such a reaching magnitude, as if they were laid in the very
depths of Hell, as undoubtedly they were.

The Romish Emissaries here in England do not only operate by distilling
Notions in Religion, but also in affairs of State (which is well known in all
Courts in Christendom) and chiefly in the Court of England: witness the last
unhappy War, that happened between the King and the Parliament, they were the
chief cause and Fomentors of it, notwithstanding their great and pretended
Loyalty to King Charles the first, which they so confidently Boast of; nothing
will appear more ridiculous, if you consider,

First, their commencing that bloody Rebellion in Ireland, where so many.
Thousands of His Majesty's Protestant Subjects were butchered, for which they
pretended to have a Commission under the Great Seal: this caused and increased
the Fear and Jealousy of all the Protestants in England (as well it might)
that the like might be designed against themselves: they also renounced all
Allegiance to His Majesty, and owned the Pope as their Supreme King. This
obliged the Parliament to request of the King, such and such things as they
thought most convenient and most conducing to his safety, their own and the
Nations. The King finding it not fit or necessary to grant all that they
demanded, proved to be one matter, and in part cause of the last War, and the
fatal ill consequences of it; in which the Papists at first were very active
for the King, well knowing that the foundation and only cause of the War, was
only in opposition to their Party, so that their Loyalty and Service to the
King was merely in their own defense, not out of any true Loyalty or Principles
of Religion; for their Religion commands and teaches the contrary, as their
practices, as well then as now, confirms, and leaves no color of denial; so
that I much fear that they will, as well now, as then, run the hazard of a War,
thinking thereby to establish their Foppery.

Secondly, Their Fidelity and Loyalty to the King in the latter end of the War;
when many of them revolted, and took part with Oliver; others laid down their
Arms, made their peace with Oliver, and told the King they would never fight a
stroke for him or his, is very well known. When the War was ended, and the King
overcome in the Field, it is evident that the Jesuits and Priests stirred up
those Sons of Belial to Murder His Sacred Majesty; the Jesuits and Priests did
also endeavor to incline the People to a Commonwealth, and was at the same
time very earnest with Cromwell to accept of the Crown, and offered him all
Obedience and Allegiance imaginable, but Cromwell knowing, full-well, that their
Religion taught them, that no way was to be refused or slighted, though never
so unlawful, whereby they might promote or advance the Church of Rome, slighted
them, and kept them out of all places of Trust, and so much under, that they
could never attempt any thing against him, or at least, they would not, though
a Traitor to His King.

Now their Loyalty to this present King, evidently appears to the World in
their many Attempts upon his Sacred Life; in their Hellish Designs; in
subverting his Government, burning his Cities, and murdering his Subjects, and
all this according to the Principles of their Religion: What Villainies will not
these Monsters attempt? what Interest or Right will not they invade? what so
Sacred that they will not violate? what can limit them if they find opportunity
to accomplish their desire? Miserable must that Nation be that will be subject
to such inconveniences and poisoned Positions, not only destructive to Public
Safety, but also to the Honor of God and the Glory of his Church: In declaring
this, I do, in effect, also declare, That what has been these many years, and
now is acting among the Papists, is an old Play newly revived. What the Papists
did in the late times was laid upon the Phanatiques, the like was to have been
done at this time: Just before the discovery of Dr. Oats they seized upon one
Mr. Claypole and imprisoned him, for having (as they pretended) a design to
Murder His Sacred Majesty, thinking thereby to convince the World, that Mr.
Claypole, and some of the old Party had a Conspiracy to take away the Kings
Life, that in the mean while, the Papists themselves might with safety do it,
and lay it upon the Nonconformists, who in all truth and sincerity own their
safety and peace to His Majesty only; for when Dr. Oats first discovered the
Plot, Mr, Claypole was not only released, and his pretended Crime forgotten,
but the Parties, called Nonconformists were the most active, and are to this
day, both in the preservation of His Majesty's Life, and the further discovery
of the Plot, as is too apparent: Such another Sham-Plot as this, undoubtedly
was the last Rebellion in Scotland fomented and moved by Papists, disguised
Priests and Emissaries, who make it their only business, first to insinuate to
the Common People some Erroneous Principles in Religion, who, as soon as they
are tainted by those Delusions and poisonous Notions that are daily distilled
by disguised Priests amongst them, thinks themselves illuminated by divine
Light, and so led captive, being never well principled in Religion, to believe
any thing for Religion from these disguised Priests, who assures them that the
Bishops are Papists, that the King of England is a Heretic, and not their true
King, and that he has broken the Covenant both before God and Man, and that
they ought not to obey nor observe his Commands, nor the Commands of any
appointed by him; but at all times oppose him and his, and defend themselves
and the Kirk, as they hope to see the Kingdom of Heaven.

Secondly, These disguised Priests possess the Common People with a Belief,
That they are bound by the Laws of God and Man to unite and take Arms against
any that oppress them: and all this, to encourage the poor People to Mutiny
amongst themselves, and so give it the name of a Presbyterian Plot. But if the
last Rebellion were fomented and encouraged by Presbyterians or Fanatics, how
comes it to pass that many of the Officers and Soldiers who were disbanded a
little before this Rebellion, had notice to keep their Horses, and to be in
readiness, for that they would soon have occasion to use them? And so it
happened, for within a fortnight after the Disbanding, the Rebellion broke out
in Scotland. Certainly, no man can imagine that the Presbyterians or Fanatics
of Scotland did ever send word to these Officers and Soldiers, either to keep
their Horses, or be in readiness; sure it is then, that they must have it from
the fomenters, the Papists, for to them only it was advantageous, in respect it
had the name of a Presbyterian Plot: for thereby they hoped to bury their own
Popish Plot, and to have all dissenting Protestants disarmed, the chief thing
at that time aimed at, and a matter worthy all true Englishmens Observation.

And also, That respect and kind usage the French King and his Catholics
treated His present Majesty with, when they banished him their Country,
notwithstanding, even to the Destruction of our selves, the Protestant
Religion, as well as home, as abroad, have we espoused the French King and his
Catholics quarrel? But why? His slighting and banishing our gracious King, his
Popery, Foppery, Idolatry and Arbitrary Power, could nor ought not to be the
Motive; much less his transmitting several Sums of Money to Coleman to bribe
our Parliament: What then? I know not, but the Parliament (if not the Reader)
can. Yet I cannot but remind you, how we have with all eagerness imaginable,
assisted the French in their Conquests, as if we had desired nothing more than
Arbitrary and Popish Government, two things inconsistent with the Laws of the
Nation, and the Humor of all true Protestants, who can expect no more mercy
from the French, or a Popish Successor, than a Mouse from a Cat; witness the
Marian days: for the greater number of Heretics they kill, the greater is
their Merit.

Let these things be considered before it be too late, for a Popish Successor
holds it as a Duty incumbent, and counts it his Glory, and the greatest Glory,
to destroy Protestantism, as pestilent Heresy; for his Religion teaches not
only, that it is a deadly crime to favor Heretics; but also, That if a Prince
should solemnly engage his Faith, and give as much Security as any can give by
Oath, yet when in the Throne, he is bound to destroy all Heretics: for the
greater the Sacrifice, the greater will the Value and Merit of it be. So that
the greater any wickedness is, or the more prodigiously Bloody and Inhumane it
is, the more powerful Motive the Church of Rome has for its encouragement:
Thus the Spirit of Popery and Delusion would fain persuade us, That the most
horrid and barbarous Design that ever the Devils helped any of their
instruments to contrive, is so transcendently both meritorious and just: This
is not a private Spirit or a private Opinion, but that by which the Church of
Rome is generally inspired. I confess, when I think of this, and how faithful
and serviceable we have been to the French King in his Late Wars, and
altogether unkind and destructive to those of our own Religion, as well abroad
as at home, to the great Wonder and Amazement of the most part of the World, I
cannot but ascribe our present Troubles and Calamities, rather to our
undertaking to advance the Power and Greatness (than either to Folly, Reason or
Goodnature) of him, I mean the French King, who endeavored by all Arts and
Stratagems imaginable, to subdue us to Arbitrary Power, Popish Idolatry and
Foppery; to compass this the easier, he bribed and paid Pensions to several
about our Courts, as Lewis the Eleventh did to all Persons whom he thought had
any power with King Edward; he was easily prevailed with to do any thing, being
a Papist; but blessed be God, our present King, whom God preserve, gave the
World sufficient Testimony, as well while he was amongst them, as since His
Blessed Restoration, of His contemning and abhorring their Tyrannical Power,
their Superstitious Idolatry and Fopperies; for he knows full-well, and cannot
but be satisfied, That no Religion or Government can be so much for His
Majesty's Advantage, both in respect of Eternity, and this Worlds enjoyment, as
this Religion which is now professed (Protestancy) in England. Although His
Majesty would by Popery be made Absolute over his Subjects, yet His Slavery
under so Tyrannical a power, would be so great and so insupportable, that as
well Liberty as his Revenues, would be much less than now ( Peter Pence must be
paid, Licenses and Indulgences for this, and that, must be had, and paid for;
especially in case of Women) Whoever pleases to read our Chronicles, will soon
perceive, That no Servants have been (so much kept under) greater Slaves to
their Masters, than many of our English Kings were to the Pope; and those who
were above his Discipline, the Romish Church ever found some way or other to
cut him off, either by setting his People against him, as they did by King
John; or by some Popish Poison, or by some bloody Godfrey Dagger. king Edgar
for his Incontinency was enjoined by Dunstan Abbot of Canterbury, not to wear
his Crown for Seven Years, to which he was forced to submit. To Expiate the
Murder of Thomas Becket, King Henry the Second (though unknown to him,
committed by his Courtiers) was forced to walk barefooted three Miles to visit
his Shrine, and then to receive seven Lashes from the Monks. King John for
opposing Pope Innocent the III. was (after interdicting the Kingdom for Six
Years and Three Months) forced to render his Crown to Pandulphus the Popes
Legate, for some time; yet all this did not satisfy the Ambitious Prelates
Malice, but he caused him to be poisoned in Swinsted-Abbey, by one Simon a
Monk. Be pleased now to observe, That in the time of Popery Princes lived not
so peaceably, nor with that safety, as now they do. As for Example: The Emperor
Henry the VII was Poisoned in receiving the Popish Sacrament from his Priest:
This present Emperor, about some nine Years ago, was like to be Poisoned by
his own Chaplain, who when he was giving the Eucharist to his Master the
Emperor, his hands and body trembled in so unheard-of-a-manner, that the
Emperor being thereat somewhat amazed, asked, What ailed him? the Priest not
having power to speak, stood still like a Stock; some of the Courtiers
observing all, came up toward the Priest, and forced him to eat his
Superstitious God, upon which he dyed upon the place. Henry the III of France
was Stabbed by Clement the Monk. Henry the IV of France was Stabbed by
Ravilliac a Jesuit. But to come home, (though I could give an Hundred
o-Examples of this Nature, and of the Popes themselves, who often poisoned
several of their Cardinals.) I say, that betwixt the time of William the
Conqueror, and the beginning of this our Blessed Reformation, Seven of our
Kings were murdered, Viz. King John, Richard I. Richard II. Edward II. Edward
V. Henry VI. and Richard III. Now, What interest Princes can propose to
Themselves or their Subjects, by introducing or favoring Popery, I know not;
unless they desire to be thus Murdered or Governed by the Pope, till destroyed
by his Caterpillars: From which, Good Lord (and the best of Parliaments)
deliver us.

I must confess, that some Princes are of so good a nature, and of so great
Clemency, that it makes them not only not to expect, but also, not to think
that any of those to whom they have been both kind and very indulgent, should
any way prove treacherous and false to them; but Experience for undoubtedly
such, as having more easy and free Access to their Prince, and consequently,
more opportunities to betray their Prince then others, are the Men over whom
the Prince and the Whole Nation ought to have a more wary and steadfast, Eye,
for all Plots and Conspiracies are generally begun by such as are most familiar
with their Prince, and most in his Favor: whosever pleases to read History
will find, that many Princes have been destroyed by their greatest Favorites,
and too too often, by their impatient Heirs; even sometimes by Their Own Sons
and Brothers. Did not Cain kill Abel? And was not Joseph sold into Egypt by his
own Brothers? Had not Agrippina her Sir G.W. by whose power and advice she
poisoned her Husband Claudius? was she not her self afterward killed by her
own Son Nero?

Now if a little love, or a little animosity, or a little interest in the
World, makes the Wife kill her Husband, makes a Brother kill a Brother, and the
Son the Father, what will not the interest of this World, and the enjoyment of
Heaven do, which is far more prevalent, and daily promised to any that will
kill and destroy the Vpholder or Supporter of Heresy (the Popes own terms) I
cannot therefore believe that a Prince (nay any one) can think himself secure,
whilst he has a Popish Heir or Relation, within sight. That Popery was to be
introduced by the Kings Death, is past denial; and how any one could be privy
to This, and not to the Means to Effect it, I leave the Reader to judge.

That the Papists had a Design, not only to introduce Popery, but also to
murder the King, what is more certain? How many Princes have been murdered by
Popish Conspiracies? How many Hellish Attempts have they made upon our Kings,
and to introduce Popery into this Nation? Why then are we so slow in bringing
these Vipers to condign punishment according to Law? Our neglect and tardiness
herein, is the greatest encouragement imaginable to the Papists, as their
several and frequent Attempts demonstrate, notwithstanding their being so often
frustrated and defeated in their Hellish Machinations and Horrid Designs. The
introducing of Popery should not seem to us improbable; for their Principles
are still and ever will be the same, their Hopes are as great now* as ever;
they gain three Plotterr, for every one they lose, and such as Stafford
procured ( Goal-Birds, Pick-pockets, Horse-stealers, Cheats, Popish John, and
Apostates, all little to his credit) to confront the Kings Evidence, who had
several Gentlemen both of Worth and Quality, to confirm their Evidence: To all
which, I was Eyewitness at the Trial of Stafford: though not at his First
Trial, for he was before tried for his Life in Germany, for Sodomy, and there
condemned to die, had not Money and Friends procured his Pardon, as I hope
neither will now; he deserving rather to be Racked to Death, then to have the
favor of Cutting off his Head; notwithstanding his great Asseverations, That
he never so much as thought of killing the King: A Popish Equivocation! For he
knew the King was Excommunicated at Rome, and consequently No King in his
Opinion. And further, to murder one that bears the Name of a Heretical King,
especially where there is a Popish Successor) is a most meritorious Act; nay,
the greatest of all Merits, by reason of the vast advantage that will thereby
acrue to the Popish Religion; not doubting but that the rest of the Kingdom
will (Regis ad exemplum) soon after turn Papists. This, and the wonderful
Discovery of this Plot, our Deliverance from utter Ruin, (wherein undoubtedly
Gods great Providence appeared very remarkable) and the many and great
Discouragements the Kings Evidence and this Plot met withal, (but from whom?
from those certainly that are in the Plot, or that wish it may take effect,
whose Principles we know are sufficient to undertake any Villainy) may well
assure us, That all the favor His present Majesty (whom God long preserve) can
show them, will not satisfy that great Expectation which they have from a
Popish Successor.

These Observations (most worthy Parliament, and true English Patriots) I have
presumed to offer to your Considerations: First, In respect you are the only
Persons capable of Preserving the King, our Lives, Liberties, and Estates.
Secondly, You are the Persons, if ever the King should be taken off by
violence, (which God in his infinite mercy prevent) that must Revenge his
Death; the whole Kingdom is ready, and will assist You. God preserve the King,
and give a happy Conclusion to all your Consultations, which is an ever shall
be the constant and hearty Prayer of

Your most Obedient, and most Faithful Servant, J. S.


