A Scheme for a Public Academy, some Reasons for its Institution, the Common
Objections answered, with the Easy Method of its Support; designed by a Private
Person, and humbly submitted to both the Honorable Houses of Parliament;
whereby always forty Scholars, Sons of Gentlemen, are for Three Years to have
their Lodging and Commons Gratis, and a Free Education in Languages, Arts and
Exercises. Also Annual Pensions for Three Years after they have left the said
Academy.
SInce in most Eminent Citys abroad there is an Academy, or Schola Illustris,
supported and distinguished by Authority, it has bin often wished and desired,
that such a Constitution were improved, and established amongst us, in our
famous City of London, where in one Place, beyond the nature of Foreign
Education, or the narrow Compass of Grammatical Schools, our English Youth,
with better safety of Religion, Life, and Manners, might be bred at home in
Languages, Arts and Exercises; and praepar'd with more Expedition and Certainty
for their last Accomplishment in our Universitys, and the different services of
the Public.

This Noble Design was considered some years ago, but then War was the
Impediment; it being advised to expect success, when our Great Monarch had
secured out Peace; wherefore in this Auspicious time it is attempted; and for
its Performance these Circumstances are thought necessary.

1. That a larg House be provided, with Ground convenient for this Purpose.

2. That two skilful Masters be appointed for the distinct Parts of Education,
who being rewarded by a good stipend, are to teach a separat aequal number, yet
with affection, and mutual regard to the whole; by which New Method, a Constant
and Friendly Aemulation arises between Masters and Scholars, to the greater
Glory, and Improvement of the Charg.

3. For the infallible Obligation of this honest Ambition, and Progress in
their Studies, there is to be every first Monday of the Month a Public
Challeng, or Disputation between both Parties before their Masters, in a Larg
Auditorium, where any Person may be admitted to make his Observation, and
adjudg the Praemium allotted for the Victors.

4. That there be Two Chief Masters for Graec, and Latin, and under their
Inspection and Direction Two Masters for French, Two for Mathematics, Two for
Writing and Accounts: Who are to teach Graec, Latin, French, History,
Chronology, Geography, Astronomy, Geometry, Navigation, Arithmetic, Merchants
Accounts; and after two years Industry in these Studyes, the Student may, by
the Orders of the Place, have liberty for Dancing, Fencing, and Riding the
Great Horse; from which Latitude of Instruction, according to his Genius, he
may be qualified to serve himself and Country in any of its best Capacitys.

5. That a Prudent, and Learned Rector praeside over this Academy, who is to
choose and govern these Masters, to observe their diligence, and punish the
Society, by Statutes drawn up for the Regulation of the same.

This Academy cannot in reason raise any Scruple in our Universitys, since it
is not to meddle with Logic, or other Parts of Philosophy peculiar to a
College. Besides, to consult their Interest, Exhibitions are to be allowed from
Hence to some of its Scholars, whose Learning being superior to their Fortune,
shall merit for their Exemplary Virtu and Ingenuity such Reward to assist them
in our Universitys.

Nor can any Public Schole be praejudic'd by this Institution, which admits
only those into the Foundation who are advanced in the Latin and Graec Tongue,
about 14 years of Age, or Commoners who have so lost their time, as not to be
Polished by the Practice of our Grammar Schools.

The Author of these Proposals, having had long Experience, and no small Credit
in this Scholastic Life, with the opinion of his Learned Friends, believes this
Full, and Comprehensive Education praeferable to any yet Extant, and being
desirous to do what Good he can, by promoting the benefit of Mankind, and the
honor of his Country, does profer to lay the first Corner Stone of this
Academy, out of his own Moderat Fortune, to incite Persons of greater Quality,
and Estates, for the mighty advantages of their Familys, to assist him in
carrying on this Useful Undertaking.

He therefore will give for the Accommodation of this Academy a very valuable
larg Brick-House, with spacious Ground, and Outhouses, well wal'd about, situat
in an open Healthful Air, in the Parish of St. James Westminster, which cost
him above 2000 l. building, where the Rector, Masters, 40 Scholars, and
Servants, have their Lodgings already fitted for such a Foundation.

He will erect a Capacious Auditorium, 60 feet long, 20 high, and 30 broad, for
the Reputation of this Academy, where the monthly Exercises are to be performed
before a Public Audience, also Masters, and Scholars may eat their Commons
together in a Collegiat manner.

He will undertake to be the First Rector of this Academy, and is inclined to
settle a considerable Estate upon the same, if he finds a suitable
Encouragement.

The Scholars, in reference to his thoughts, are not to excede the Number of
60, 40 of the Foundation, with 20 Commoners; and their weekly Management is
already digested into a Rational and Easy Course, tho for brevity omitted in
this Paper; whereby it is proved, that Languages, Arts, and Exercises, may very
well be acquired by such a select Number, under one Tuition, in one Place.

After such Generous Zeal from One of an Inferior Station, it is praesum'd that
some Great, and Public-spirited Persons, to whom He has the Honor to be well
known, and has made his Application, may procure his Majesty, with the two
Honorable Houses of Parliament, to extend their Patronage, and Favor to this
Undertaker, that he might prosecute his good Intentions, by conferring upon him
as Rector, and his Successors, an Employment, which for several years by a late
Law was thought necessary; and since its Expiration is again very much wanted,
and required, which upon no account can be so well applied, as by Information
may plainly appear.

Upon which Grant, confirmed by Law, He does not doubt a Fund may be fixed to
support and maintain a Rector, 14 Masters, 13 Servants and 40 Scholars, Sons of
Gentlemen, who are to have their Education, and Commons for Three years Gratis;
and Annual Pensions for Three years after their Removal from this Academy.
Moreover, the Undertaker is ready to declare other ways, and means, to produce
a surplus for Greenwich Hospital, or what may seem most proper to the Wisdom of
the Parliament.

An Easy Method of supporting and maintaining a Public Academy: also of
producing a Surplus for other great services to the Nation; humbly proposed to
the consideration of both Honorable Houses of Parliament.
THat they please, for this general Benefit, and other good Reasons thereunto
moving, to establish a Register for the Entry of al single Papers, Pamphlets
and Books whatsoever, before they are Printed; Except Gazettes, Proclamations,
and Papers published by the Kings Authority.

That now One only Register be orderd for entering al sorts of Papers, Pamphlets
and Books, in all Facultys whatsoever, who is not to read the Paper or Book,
whereby he may hinder the Liberty of the Press, but to enter the Title of the
Book, with the Booksellers or Printers Name; one of which shall be obliged to
bring the same to be enterd. And that no Paper, Pamphlet or Book be printed
without this Registers Entry and Imprimatur, under a Penalty.

That the Bookseller or Printer bring and give one Paper, Pamphlet or Book to
the said Register, for the advantage of a Library to this Academy, as soon as
it is printed, and for a Certificate of a true Payment.

That the Rector of this Public Academy be by Act of Parliament appointed
Register of the Press, according to such an Establishment, and that his
Authority extend to al Presses in England, with the sole Privilege of Printing
and Publishing al Advertisements whatsoever; the Power of the Gazette only
excepted.

That no other Person praesume to Print any Notification, or Advertisement
whatsoever, as of Houses, Estats, Goods of all sorts, Carryers or Coach bills,
Auctious, al Bills of Games, Prizes, Plays, Shows, etc. Al Papers or Forms with
Blancs to be used in any Branch of his Majestys Revenue, or in any matter
relating to his Majestys service.

That every other small Paper, half or whole Sheet, pay at this Office for its
Entry one shilling as often as it is printed. But each Pamphlet or Book to pay
from 1 Sheet to 5 inclusive five shillings, from 5 to 10 ten shillings, and so
forward to 100 Sheets, or more, as often as the Book is printed or reprinted.

The small charg of which Entry, without considering its Excellent Service to
the Public, cannot in truth be supposed an Imposition by any Author or
Bookseller, who paid more for Civility and Expedition to former Licencers; nor
ought each Individual Book affect either Buyer or Seller, to raise the Price of
any Book, as by this Scheme does demonstratively appear.

An Author, or Bookseller, often prints 1500 Books at one Impression, commonly
1000, for the most part in octavo, which makes 16 pages to one sheet; in quarto
8 pages; and these two Volumes being most in use, shall therefore be here
proposed.

A Manuscript of 20 sheets is brought to this Office, and pays 20 s. if printed
in quarto makes 160 pages, in octavo 320. The Impression consisting of 1000
Books, each Book upon Division does not pay for itself one whole Farthing; for
1000 Farthings make 1 l. 0 10 d. and the Manuscript pays but 20 s. and
containing 320 pages is a large Volum.

According to which Insensible Rate, We are not to aestimat each Book of 5
Sheets at the 4th Part, of 10 Sheets at 2 Parts, of 15 Sheets at 3 Parts of a
Farthing: thus by Progression each Book of 80 sheets, which complets 640 pages
in quarto, and 1280 in octavo, and never to be bound up in the last Volum, pays
not a full Penny for the Impression of 1000, and if 1500 be printed, a third part
of the said Rate is to be deducted.

Which sufficiently proves, that this Beneficial Act can by no ways or means be
thought praejudicial, yet may perform the support of this Public Academy, and
produce other Advantages to the Nation.


