isochuma lencho: OR, A Check given to the insolent Garrulity OF HENRY STUBBE:
IN VINDICATION OF My Lord BACON, and the AUTHOR; With an Assertion of
EXPERIMENTAL PHILOSOPHY: ALSO Some Practical Observations exhibited for the
Credit of the true CHEMICAL SCIENCE.

Lastly, A brief Contest between the Thomsons and the Merrets, who are the best
PHYSICIANS.

By George Thomson Dr. of Physic.

Qui me commorit, melius non tangere clamo.
Horat. London, Printed for Not. Crouch at the Cross Keys in
Bishops-Gate-street near Leaden Hall. 1671.

VERA. EFFIGIES. GEORGY THOMSONI. M. D. Aetatis. Suae. 50. W Sherwin ad viu.
faciebat


A Vindication of the Lord BACON, and the AVTHOR; with an Assertion OF
EXPERIMENTAL PHILOSOPHY: Against The Obloquies of H. STVBBS.
UPon the occasion of a visit given to a worthy Friend, a Learned Doctor of
Physic, it came to my Ear that he read my Name in a Paper lately published,
written by Henry Stubbs, where he conceived I was much vilified in my Credit. I
no sooner heard this, but I hastened to get a view of what I found really true.:
After a cursory perusal of this Learned piece of Ignorance, the Title
Campanella seemed excellent well to suit with such a sounding vessel endued
with a Brass-like Front. And however the Author pretends to be very zealous for
the Protestant Religion, I am easily induced to believe upon sufficient Reasons
that he either is a Prevaricator therein, or of none at all; which any having a
discreet eye may apprehend ex fructibus: for indeed it is impossible that a
Galenist, who being no whit conscientiously tender of the Life of Man,
continuing an Active Deceiver for sinister or secular Respects, resolved not to
be convinc^d by his Senses, Experimentally, should be any other than a ^lose
Atheist, or Papist: being assure^ (upon the account of the later) he shall
receive a Pardon or an Indulgence from his Holiness (o horrid Blasphemy!) for
his wilful Homicide in Physic. I shall omit to insist upon the Religious
absurd Quarrels of this Stentor with the Virtuosi, also his sharp Taunts
against the^r most commendable undertakings, and hopeful procedures; accusing
them of insufficiency, Ignorance, and gross Mistak^s in their Experiments. I
doubt not but they are able to stand up in defense of themselves touching
Essays of their more nice Minute Curiosities^ it is enough for me to wipe off
the dirt which this rash Wording Attemptor throws upon my self, the Lord
Bacon, this most Essentially useful Art of Chemistry, and the Learned
Professors thereof; also to indicate that the sole means to make an
accomplished Physician, is by Pyr^technical Trials, set upon with our own
hands, often iterated, discreetly managed (all circumstances duly observed) to
the depth of which a merely Sermocinal self-conceited Dogmatist, pluming
himself with the gay outside of various Languages, quaint huffing Terms,
Rhetorical Expressions, Sophistical Disputations, Histories of Antiquity, etc.
shall never attain.

Now to make this good, I shall thus begin with this Hypocritical, Critical
false Impeacher, who maliciously coupling me in page 21. of Campanella with Mr.
Odowd, accuses me as a mere Emperick; and hopes the Physicians, i. e. the
Dogmatical Coll^giates would consult their common interest (that is the Devil
that hinders them from subscribing to Physical Truths) in Opposition to the
Thomsons and Odowdes. Marry that they have done to the utmost very
slanderously, by means of their Pseudo-Chymist Johnson, one of such a kind of
Genius as your self; but 'twould not do: for in time of the Plagu^^ he and the
Colleges Spiritus Antiloim^ides, an arrant Imposture, both vanished together
in fumo; so may you perhaps ere long for all your Learning, if you do not
repent of your obstinate Aristotelian Antithesis to the direct Cure of Man. So
prevalent is Truth. He then proceeds; And act with that Moderation which became
Wise men, which were tender of the Renown of their Faculty, which would
suddenly devolve into the hands of Empericks. Moderation (say you?) is there
such a superlative endowment existent amongst the Galenists? Certainly they can
but arroga^e it, not deserve it; this Qualification is to be appropriated to
Virtuoso's indeed, not to a company of Vitioso's, who debauch the manners of
the Nation with their Bleeding and Purging, who can do little else but dispute
pro and con of imaginary Excellencies. The Candid Spagyro-S^phi^ts can chiefly
observe this Canon, who by this means know best how to preserve the Sanity and
Life of Man, which consists in Moderation. As for the Dogmatists they are still
erring either on the right or left, because they are to seek in the true
Constitutives of Health and Sickness.

This advice of Moderation had been given very seasonably when our G^lenists
were ^o transported with the ambitio^s desire o^ engrossing all the Practice o^
City and Country into their own hands, when they tran^gressed all the bounds
and limits of Moderation, S^briety, Prudence, and Discretion. Had their subtle
extravagant Stratagems, for the demolition of virtuous Actions in Physic then
taken place, I should soon have bidden Adieu to my Country, not enduring to
see it made a prey without control to the immoderate lusts of Anthropolethri,
those that delight in exhausting the Vital Blood, the Medium between Body and
Soul^ In this, as in several other instances, I dare firmly aver, they were
neither Wi^e nor Pious men, to undertake a business of such moment, and to be
so deservedly, yea, shamefully baffled by their Creatures Apoth^caries: neither
did the design savor of any fear of God before their eyes, therefore they
prospered accordingly. Had these Myso-Chymists intended faith^ul respect to the
Renown o^ their Faculty, they would never have taken such a cour^e to
prostitute the Credit and Honor of so Divine a Science, by ^recting a swarm of
Ap^thecaries, ordained to foment their Laziness, Pride, and Covetousness, to be
a covert for their Ig^orance, to instruct them in Materia Medica, to contract
with them, yea, to constrain them sometimes (if the poor men would get a
c^mpet^nt living) to be Pimps, Bawds, and Panders to fetch in Practice,
allowing them a considerable share of Gains, by accumulating not only
non-n^cessary, but also a noxious quantity of Physic, to the great detriment
of the Patient: was this for the Renown of the Faculty, to expose to the File
in a public Shop, to promulgate and make cheap Arcana Apollinis, the Mysteries
of our Science, in such a profane manner, that any Apothecaries boy might
ther^by take opportunity to transcribe and set to sale p^^haps ^or a ^mall
piece of silver your vulgar Recipes? Was this for the Renown of the Faculty, to
compile a common Pharmacopaea, thereby to give advantage to one of your
Ministers, to translate it into English, and make Comments thereon deserv^dly
ridiculous on your behalf, whereby your gross absurdities in the preparation of
your Medicaments were brought to light, to your grand disgrace, and the
Conjuring up of innumerable Quacking-pretenders to the Art, such as you call
Emp^ricks in the worse sense, amongst whom your m^st slander^is foul Tongue is
pleased to reckon me one? That w^ may the better deal with this G^^ndiloqu^us
boasting S^ribe, and show the World his vacuity in the true Therape^tick part
of Physic, which ought to be the Summum bonum of an honest able und^rtaker
therein; because it is Ens Reale v^rum, and should be the main scope and drift
of all our great Endowments and Acquirements, in which if any be very
deficient, all his Philology, Physiologie, Antiquary, Mathematical and Critical
Knowledge is little significant or pertinent, Quatenus Iatros, a Healer. We
shall ^xamine the Origin^l derivation of the word Empirick, which arises from
(...) experior, vel exploro, to try, assay, or prove, to review or ^ind out any
thing by diligent searching: so then (...) is but an Experimental Ph^sician,
one of a S^ct very well allowed of by the Antien^s: Qui Medicina ab usu tantum
and experimen^tis norit, and tractat non ex causis naturalibus; who as Celsus
delivers, has acquired the knowledge of Physic only by Use and Experiments,
so he t^e^ts of it, not able to give a Natural Cause ther^of. Such an one was
Quintus, Master to G^len your Master, whom ye so closely follow, as he did
Quintus (according to his own confession) in most things pertaining to Physic.
I wish ye would be so Ingeni^us as your Tutor, to confess the greatest
knowledge ye have obtained in the Iatrical part of late, has been delivered to
you by such Empi^ic^s as ye abusively nominate me: Then would you not be ^o
horribly ungrateful, to malign, slight, and spitefully entreat (contrary to the
Candid M^r^lity of Galen) those who indefatigable in their Manual Labour^ have
hazarded their lives to give you wholsomer advice, for the far better curing of
infirm man, than that honest Heathen could instruct you: this Doctrine
doubtless would soon have been embraced by you, if ye were not obstinate and
stupendiously perverse, resolved (non persuad^ri, etiamsi quis persuaserit) not
to be convinc^d, hating this Pyrotechnical Empirical way, though ye are plainly
con^uted it is true, because it does not suit with your peculiar Interest,
Laziness, Gain, and Grandeur. Hoccine Christiani? is this Henry Stubbs his
Religion he makes a foul quoil^ about to no good candid and? Then let me rath^r
be a Charitable virtu^us Ethnic, willing to be taught (as Galen) even by an
Empirick, in what may conduce for the good of the Body and Soul of my infirm
Brother, ut sit men's san^ in corpore sano; than a malicious, vicious,
cruel-hearted Physician, who like the Priest and L^^ite, either slightingly
passes by, or runs quite away from the Sick without aff^ctionate regard to the
sad wretch wounded by a Pestilential Arrow; so that being wilfully ignorant
(because he scorns to learn) he slubbers over the Medical business in haste
perfunctorily, and being conscious to himself of his own defection, assigns the
Cure over to the Apothecary, not caring what may be the ^vent, so that he can
but escape the ^ontagion himself.

When in the mean time the poor Experimental Chemical Samaritane, carrying some
Balsamical Remedy about him, pours it in with his ^wn finge^s, taking care of
the Patient to purpose. Such an on^ I prof^ss my self, but yet not an Empyrick
according to H. St. vilifying sense; for I am certain, I can give (in the
presence of intelligent Inquisitors after truth) better Rational accounts of my
Cures, and the (...) of such Morbous Effects as they relate to their Gauses (be
it spoken without Xenodoxie) more satisfactorily than you, or all the
Ari^totelian Physicians in Europe.

If this be verity undoubtedly to be maintained by me, I know no Reason why I
may not more really deserve the Title of an Authentic Doctor, than any of you
all^ since it has pleased the Omnipotent to water with the Dew of Heaven my
honest endeavors^ so far, that they are grown up to such successful an height,
that if the Magistrate be pleased fairly to permit me, I can certify him that
those languishing persons which you are not able to succor in the least, may
receive benefit by me.

As for Mr. Odowd (with whom you out of bas^ Odium to Truth couple me, as if I
had any design to destroy Literature, which the Eternal knows never yet entered
into my thoughts, it being Diametrically r^pugnant to my concerns:) I confess I
had a civil ^espect for the Gentleman, hoping that having the Kings Ear, in
reference to the Chemical Process^s he might prevail with his Majesty so ^ar,
that the garr^lous Dogmatists Mou^hs might be stopped, when they should be
for^ed to take a certain vi^w of some Curative in^tances and practices produced
by me, which I was then a^^ured they could never accomplish. Neither was Mr.
Odowd such an impious hurtful Empirick for his time, that all such Successors
should be opposed, as y^^ (...) for if I am not mis-infor^^ed^ (...) ^ome
remarkable Cures above you or your Sociates Capacity for some Persons of
Qua^ity, which did so far ingratiate him with the King, that he encouraged him
to proceed, and he would protect him against your inveterate Oppositions to his
Empirical Cures, which you were never able, nor would study to perform your
selves.

Herein your cross-grain Genius is lively deciphered by the Dog in the Manger,
which neither would eat Hay himself, nor suffer the Horse. Had not the
Contagion (in which for the safety of his Country he vent'red far, and
therefore to be mentioned with more respect than the fugitive Galenists, that
left the City of shi^t for themselves in greatest streits) cut off immaturely
the thread of this Gentleman his life, I am fully persuaded that this
contemptible Empirick (as you represent him) would have proved a thorn in the
sides of your Associates (which your iterated Phlebotomy would never have
cured) for as much as he had advantage equal to yours to insinuate himself into
the favor of Great Personages, who had no small kindness for this Empirical
Courtier, sensibly beneficial to them. Now rail, as I expect (because I utter
truth in the behalf of this Empirick) thou Learned ignorant Aristotelian, who,
as likewise the rest of thy Tribe, have been outdone in refe^ence to
Hygiasticks by several mere Empiricks, whose ^ame in this Nation has been
every way equivocal with yours, and every whit as deserving as yours,
accordding to the Vulgar sense, (whose applause ye principally aim at, th^r^in
resting your selves satisfied right or wrong) y^a, some of those Practitioners
might have attained great Estates proportionable to yours, and purchased
Titular Honors, had they not less regard^d such transitory things, been more
gen^rous free-hearted, and Charitable than your selves.

Therefore in brief, If I may deliver my thoughts without interruption, under
favor of more virtuous able Judgments; I conceive a laborious Empirick of an
intelligible capacity, whose fortune (for want of friends or Money)
disappointed him to be brought up in the Schools a Grammarian or a Logieian;
who^e streams of affections run toward Experimental discoveries, with a
sincere intent of Doxologie to the highest, and the relief of Ad^m's sickly
Posterity: I say, this ingenious Labourer, though no profound Clerk, having for
a long time made multitudes of Observations and Essays (arising from his own
Pharmacopaea or factures of Remedies) at length arrived at a competent
knowledge of applying and appropriating Medicines, may deservedly weigh down,
as to Real, Useful, Beneficial worth in his Employm^nts ( quatenus (...) a
Healing Man) the most Learned Academick in Europe, who studies Words more than
Works, a Library more than a Laboratory; to get a vogue by a fair outside,
rather than keep the inside clean; who for his ease and pleasure negotiates in
the behalf of the Life of his Patient, with an extraneous Factor, a vendible
Ap^thecary and his Boy.

Upon this I am put in mind of the great Breach lately made between the Doctors
and Apothecaries, which H. Stubbs strives to compose, that Fratres in malo may
persevere to hold together hand in hand, whereby the Chur^h-yards continuing to
be made fertile by these Inhumane Inhumations, they may jointly persist to reap
the sweet fruits of Riches, Ease, and Dignities. O sweet life! who would not
love it? What an Incogitant man was I ^hus to be overseen, not to begin 23
years past with this delightful Methodical way, which in a short time would
have brought me to the possession of the Goods of Fortune? then might I, as
learnedly Ignorant as any of them, been reputed some Body in the World; as for
defects of Bona Animi, Real Worth, a Good Conscience, and Vprightness had I
been of their mind) I might have easily got a DISPENSATION or an Indulgence;
then needed I not to have moiled, toiled, and drudged like a Collier for the
acquisition of salutiferous Remedies, when others dipping their pens in a
vitriolate pr^paration, and scribbling a little therewith, could ^traight
command a multitude of Medical Implements, which although they knew not what
they were, Good or Bad, when, or how made, yet it was sufficient to do their
Business, to make them famous Doctors, it matters not how deservedly.

This beloved delicious life of some of the more Ignoble Galenists, who by this
means have best feathered their nests, desiring to acquiesce therein, are very
loath to part with (can you blame them?) although the most ingenious of the
Nation decry i^ as a most insufferable Cheat, and the greater, because it
reflects dangerously upon the Lives and Souls of Patients: Wherefore these
Merchants in Physic have solicited this Hector-like Stubbs to defend their
Good Old Cause (as they would intrude upon the Credulous) and to plead most
deceitfully, that its Antiquity may be deduced from the time of Hippocrates,
i.e. two thousand years ago; whereas it is certain, this subtle device of
practicing by Apothecaries, is not much above one Century and half standing.

To this end he falls foul in the general upon the Vi^tuos^'s, because they
have intimated this praescribing fashion to be an abominable Imposture; for
this he cavils and carps at their Experiments, accusing them absurdly, that
they were upon a design of introducing Popery, wh^reby he might deter al
upright Zeteticks of knowledge, from going upon any such truly Noble
Phil^sophical Attempts; yea, he arrives to such an height of malice, that he
bitterly inveighs against Experiments themselves, unless made by a Disciple of
Aristotle, who I can assure shall never, as long as he closely adheres to his
Masters Axioms, ever aspire to the Fundamental knowledge of Physiologie, for
the benefit of diseased man: Yea, I aver that this cunning Disputant (whose
Positions in this are contrary to this great Dictators mind, who grants all
knowledge of Natural things to be purchased by means of Senses) shall never
without Helmonts Experimental Doctrine be ever able to make any discovery
tending to the most desired radical Cure of any great Disease.

In particular this zealous Agnostick Peripatetick flies fiercely at the face
of Doctor Merret, accusing him of intolerable Ignorance, for setting out the
late Book against the Frauds and Abuses of the Apothec^ries.

I shall so far stand up in the behalf of Dr. Merret's Book (though no friend
to me, quatenus an Enemy to Phlebotomy, which he and his Adherents do so
frequently exercise, to the destruction of miserable Mortals) that I openly
declare, it contains much true Practical Knowledge, but I could wish it had
never been bought at so dear a rate; for questionless this Experimental Science
of his (which he must pardon me, if I should be loath to have actually
patronized) has cost many thousands of Lives: It had been better for him if he
had appeared only a sorrowful Spectator, as I have been, no^ so Iocund an Actor
of such Tragical Histories, which did very much mis-become him: if he had
consulted 20 years past, I could have told him according to the Pr^logue, what
would certainly be the Epilogue of such di^eful Scenes, that nothing could be
expected but a most deplorable Catastrophe of such unreasonable doings, to the
great prejudice of this Divine Science, and the Professors thereof, who ought
to be (...), created by God, whose Justice will never suffer such sandy
foundations to stand long. I have heard that Dr. Merret at first was by fair
pre^ences allured or wheedled into this Society, not without some regret or
disgust on his part^; but afterward bewi^c^ed with the Syrenian Enticements of
their carnal pleasures, he suffered himself to be plunged into many Essential
Errors, deviating from them in Minutis, c^rtain Punctilio's in Physick^
However, Nunqu^m sera est ad bonos mores via: he far surpasses those who
wittingly and willingly yet continue in the mire of these unclean ways. I hope
this Proselyte a^ length addicted to the Manufacture of Remedies (...) (in
which I have been versed about twenty odd years; therefore needs must I know,
according to ^is own Positions more savingly than himself) will now suffer his
eyes to be opened, that h^ may s^e his Errors, and abhor his former indiscreet
S^nguimission; which i^ he please, I shall heartily visibly indicate to him as
most p^rnitious to the whole Nation.

Notwithstanding all this downright Truth I have delivered relating to D^.
Merr^t, it will not at all counte^ance your Sa^yrica^ disparag^ment of this
Ingenious Learned Person, disreputing and falsely estimating his pa^ts, and
taxing him as ig^orant in the Rudiments of his Science, nor able to State a
Case therein, because he is jus^ly now fallen off from his wonted illegitimate
course of sending Bills abroad, in way of Traffic for men's lives, and fully
resolved to make his own Medicines, also advising others to do the like; laying
open to the World, as one best acquainted with them, the Frauds and Abuses of
Apothecaries; wherein you and your Sociates being very much interested, and
conscious to your selves what unhandsome Actions ye have put your Substitutes
upon, do most unreasonably and irreligiously take upon you to ^u^tifie.

For without Controversy, ye first suggested and instituted this way for their
livelihood, fomenting them as long as they pleased you; but after that becoming
numerous, they were forced to take another course to live, not able to subsist
in a competent manner by your Insufficient, Ridiculous, Aphilosophical
Praescriptions, (which now many of the more serious perspicacious sort do set
no better estimate upon, than to put to common use: so that should they so far
condescend, as to lay aside their more sure Card of exerting that faculty of
Practice, which their seduli^y, Pharmacopaean Inspections, Officiousness to the
Sick^ more frequent, and better Optical Trials of Effects of Medicines of their
own Manual praeparation, than ye would study to attain to) have disciplined
them in: Add moreover, their propensity first to embrace Chemical Remedies,
which ye then renounced and openly detested against.

Witness Mr. Job Weal an Apothecary on Ludgate Hill, whom the Galenists
prosecuted with Vatinian hatred, as I have often heard him tell the Story, for
preparing Lac Sulphuris, an effectual, and no whit perilous Medicine; which
the Collegiates having entered his Shop, threw into the streets: (are not these
rare Supervisors?) declaring against him as guilty of a most horrid crime, for
making, and perhaps giving (what then should he not use that Talent ye wanted?)
so dang^rous (as ye falsely laid to his Charge) a Chemical Mineral Powder, for
the succor of those Patients, when your Cacostomastick, drossie Compositions
could not in the least relevate.

Should, I say, Apothecaries, I mean, the best endowed Philo-Chymists, having
through your supine voluptuous Folly got the better end of the Staff, resign it
up again into your hands; I Question whether or no ye would be able to maintain
them and their Families: so great an ha^red does daily increase among the more
cautious Scrutators of things against your lethiferous way of transmitting your
formal Physical Bills to be made up by your Deputies, that I scruple not to
declare openly, the complete Spagyrick Philosopher will in a short time run you
dow^ ^n despite of all your Davus-like Tricks, or Vulpones Counterfeit Plots,
to wit, the owning your selves ^ictitiously among the Vulgar, to be the true
Chemists, and boasting that no Salve safe for any Sore but what your Method
shall secure; scribbling and promising great things, but not daring to stand to
any equal Experiments, for the right determination of Medical Truth. Now your
imperious Government drawing to an end (as appears by certain Signs) you catch
at this or that poor beggar^y shift, to keep it up for your lives; then what
care you? let it fall, no whit troubled that your Names will stink worse than
your Carcases in the Nostrils of all deserving Graceful Persons; for as much as
ye would not through headstrong passions, and sordid affections, subscribe at
this day, when the Truth of things appear more clearly, to a Legitimate
powerful way of Healing.

As this Hen. Stubbs has slanderously abused Dr. Merret, for vindicating in
equity the Confection of his own Remedies, and for not persevering in the
former mortal beaten tract of Practice: Moreover, as he likewise disallows of
any Apothecaries to Practice, though endowed with such gifts which may justly
entitle them to a capacity to opitulate or relieve any woefully wounded wretch,
by virtue of a Balsamical sulphurous Powder, which formerly they condemned to
the Kennel, but now approve it; yet know not how to make it a right, or not
duly to administer it: So this shameless, and no less unskilful Censurer, first
debases, then rashly, but unjustly reproves that not easily to be match^d
Hero, the Honor of our Nation, the Lord Bacon, in that he gives so weak an
account of the Sweating Sickness; so that he esteems this brave Experimental
Philosopher, worthy to be laughed to scorn by every understanding Physician;
because the shallow Brain of this Medicaster, s^uffed full of superficial
Traditions and Notions, was never yet able to dive into the Central Causes of
Diseases.

The Noble Indagator of Truth, pronounces these words, (as they are cited page
28. of Hen. Stubbs his Specimen) accurately describing the Sweating-Sickness
thus:

It was a Pestilent Fever, but not seated in the Veins and Humors, for that
there followed no Carbuncle, no Purple, or livid Spots, or the like, the mass
of Blood being not tainted, only a malign vapor flew to the heart and seized
the Vital Spirits, which stirred Nature to strive to send it forth by an
extreme sweat. Who but such a profound Searcher into Nature as my Lord Bacon,
could at that time have given such an Essential Character of the
Sweating-Sickness? which is reputed by this Putationer as a thing ridiculous.

I shall with as much brevity as I can, examine every particular Phoenomenon
belonging to the foresaid Disease, expounding the Genuine sense of his
Lordships words. The material Cause of this truculent Disease proposed by him
is, a Malignant Vapor, i. e. Gas Sylvestre, an incoercible Spirit, which by
reason of its subtilty resembling the Vital Spirits, could readily mix it self
with them; forthwith infecting the same, especially those about the Heart;
whereby the Plastic power of the Archeus, as an efficient cause, the perfect
Idaea, or image of this specifique Disease is pourtrayed; part of the Vital
Spirits, being as it were tinged by the intermixture of these Contagious
particles, and part remaining in its integrity, being exasperated at the
presence of such an hostile Intruder, stirs up Nature, i. e. musters up all the
faculties, forces, or strength belonging to the (...), or Arc^eus, and withal
summoning the Latex or Lympha to be assista^t to the ablution and ablation of
this fermenting malignant impurity, which is sent forth by an extreme sweat.
The inward procuring occasional excitative cause was, a Pestilent Venom, a
tabefying matter, immediately lodging in the degenerate Juices about the
Stomach and Spleen, Helmonts Duumvirate) not in the Veins or Fictitious Humors)
which sending forth foetid putrefactive particles annoying the Archeus, caused
an indignation or fretting disposition at presence of that which is altogether
exotic and incongruous with Nature: whereupon it thus put upon a stress,
exerts all its powers and faculties to the expulsion of such a virulent Guest,
performed most conveniently by large Sweats, before which there must
necessarily precede a Fever, from the Collision, conglomeration, tumult, and
confusion of the vital Spirits thus assaulted; as is frequently observed to
fall out, when any thing extraneous to life gets into the flesh, to wit, a
thorn or splinter: so that the Fever is but a consequent of the fury and rage
of the Archeus, and a praecedent of the expulsion of the (...), the matter of
the Disease.

The Argument which this knowing Lord uses, that the Hyperidrotick or
Sweating-Sickness was not primarily in the mass of Blood, i. e. the purest,
called Sanguis; because there was no eruption of a Carbuncle, Purple, or Livid
Spots, which shows, says he, it was not tainted: which Reason did very well
become him; for in reality, the effects of this Anomalous poison was most
eminent in the Serum or Latex, a concomitant of the Blood, a great depraved
quantity whereof was at that time collected in the Body, through the then
unaccustomed ill natural texture of the Air, loathsome exhalations lurking in
its magnale or porosities, arising from the influence of the Celestial
Luminaries; unwholesome Esculents or Potulents; as likewise a peculiar
Idiosyncrasie, Disposition of the Body, capable to be at that time above others
thus affected; not omitting, that certain exorbitant Passions might generally
disturb the Vital Economy of this Nation. Now by means of these Procatarlick
Causes, an absolute Poison was hatched up by degrees in the Stomach and parts
adjacent, whose Fermental Emanations polluted the Latex chiefly; making also a
colliquation of the Chyme or Cruor; to be rid of which, the stomachical Archeus
principally strains it self; the vital Spirits of the whole (as yet undefiled)
co-adjuvating, being well fortified by Art, to throw out by large Sweats, the
contaminated products of a specific Poison, centrally latitant, exceeding
active at first by its spreading Odor, but in a short time becoming effete and
languid, if all things were ordered aright. In which work, if nature were
assisted by fitting Alexipharmacie, and the ambient Air intercepted, that the
virulent Atoms might have free vent, all things succeeded well; if otherwise,
it seldom fell out, but that the sweating Person miscarried.

As for the Opinion of Polydore Virgil, and Hollinshed, which H.S. cites with
great applause, it is in real truth not only ridiculous, but also pernicious; to
wit, That a Deadly burning Sweat so assailed their Bodies, and distempered
their Blood with a most ardent heat, that scarce one of many hundred that
sickned did escape with life. Let any good intelligent Person judge
indifferently who comes nighest the very formal definition of the aforesaid
Calamity, our Lord, or these Aristotelick, rarely qualified Humorists, who
sound nothing else to us, as to a Cure, but Burning: Sweating, Temperaments;
very Hot, Hot: Death at first in the Pot, and Death at last; and so it was, and
ever will be, as long as this wretchless credulous Age gives so much
countenance to such wilfully ignorant Torturers and Executioners of Mankind, as
I dare verify by fact, this Stubbs, and all his Copartners to be. I am sure I
can assert from a thousand Experiments, that the fore-quoted Authors knew
nothing of the Immediate Intrinsecal Cause of that Pestilential Malady; for
what they describe, are Relollaea, mere Symptoms, Effects, Products, Outward
Appearances. As for the prime Morbifick Agent, which sets all on work, and the
Nest where all the Mischief is brooded, that they leave altogether untouched.
These men are like to Cure Diseases well, who are so egregiously to seek in
their Fundamental Causes, and yet (forsooth) they go about boldly to affirm,
that they are the only Philosophers, because they can Prate and Tongue it
Rhetorically and Logically, hereby gulling silly Auditors, who are led by these
Ignes fatui at length into the pit of Destruction.

You cavil at our Lord, because he says, Nature did strive to send forth its
virulencie by an extreme Sweat: Whereas your beloved Authors tell you, all that
recovered, were recovered by the continuance of a moderate Sweat. This (say
you) Experience and Observation taught them; (but 't was but Galenical, and
that may be certainly verified of you to be the Mistress of Fools:) for, (...):
None but a Pyrotechnist can explore, as he ought healingly. I pray Sir, what
but Nature should strive to send forth the virulencie? Does not Hippocrates
tell us what is infallible, Naturae, i. e. Vitales Spiritus sunt Morborum
Medicatrices; which you ought to imitate in Deed, and not as you Word it; then
the Quarrel would quickly be at an end between us. But the Extreme Sweat (it
seems) stumbles you: But why should that? An Extreme Disease must have an
Extreme Remedy: this Hipp. does also dictate, in extremis Morbis extrema
exquisite Remedia sunt optima. Malo Nodo, malus Cuneus. But let us know a
little strictly what is meant by an Extreme Sweat, and a M^derate, in relation
to this truculent Plague: The extreme Sweat, i. e. very large, was according to
the Story, Mortal; the Moderate, Salutary; which I deny, (...), quateuus mere
Swea^s; for according to my observation this 23 years, all malignant
p^stilential Fevers, the Pest it self, and the Griping of the Guts, which
holds a fair proportion with the Sudor Anglicus, did all receive a most certain
and exp^dite Cure, b^st by extreme large Sweats, if the s^rength were kept up;
otherwise no Sweat more or less is of any significant Benefit. Quiequid fit
vir^ute, Naturae fit, (...) non autem (...). Wha^so^v^r Evacuation is attempted
by Nature robust, directly supported, is performed plentifully, impetuously,
and incontinently, not driblingly by piece-meals.

In this feral Calamity there was at the first onset a strong resisting
Enormontick or impulsive Motion of Nature to eject with all speed that
malignant Vapor couched about the Hypocondries (that flew at the heart,
infecting the vital Spirits thereof; also those about the mouth of the Stomach,
which the Ancients called (...); likewise sending a miasme to the aqu^ous
Liquor; colliquating the Chyme or Cruor) by extraordinary extre^e Sweat, which
became Mortal, because the vital Spirits were quickly tired for want of due
support from without, and in that they were not fortified at first by lusty
spirituous liquors, which those Humorists thought at first in those days to be
too hot, and therefore enjoined Posset-drinks made perhaps after the mode of
one of our Modern timorous Colleagues in time: of the Plague, with Ale and
Water, or Barley-water, Iulebs of Rose Water, and Pippin-posset, thin
W^ter-gruel, lest the Blood should be inflamed, and the party over-sweat
himself: Whereas the Common people left in those days to themselves, being
better Experimentator^, taught those Learned Doctors a more salutary Method of
curing this Anom^lous Plague, after the same sort as our Seamen of late years
have instructed our Society of Physicians, if they would lea^n to any good
purpose. For since they left those scurvy Qualities of Heat and Cold (as they
were taught by those Aristotelian, Impertinent, Non-sensical Doctors) they have
given with admirable success to the miserable Sick-Souls (afflicted with the
Calentures and S^urvy) suffering intolerable thirst, and restlessness, Brandy,
Rack by it self, or made into Punch, and other strong Liquors, whereby the weak
Tone of the Stomac^ has been confirmed, the Vitals elevated, and the Disease
car^^ed off by Sweat and Urine; so that now having rid themselves in greatest
part of this Deadly cooling Doctrine, they can make their Voyages loosing few
or no men: on the other side, before, as long as they walked according to your
D^structive Rules, their men dropped away like rotten sheep, having scar^
Mariners enough left alive to r^turn their Sh^p home. Thus the plain People of
those days being sadly cut off in great numbers by this Atrocious Mortality,
upon this strait began to make some Rational Trials of their own, and found out
at length that a draught of strong Ale, Aqua-vitae with Saffron, a little Sack,
if they could get it, and some Confection or Cordial, as Mith^idate, Treacle,
etc. did, if they kept themselves covered, reli^ve and cure them, which these
scrupulous, m^^r Opinat^rs, did in the beginning, either totally forbid, or
gave (as they usually exhibit at this day other good Remedies) in too small a
Quantity, left they should over-heat their Blood, and further their extreme
Mortal Sweats.

Thus these congruous Remedies empowered the Animals to get the better of this
peculiar Poison (the principal intrinsecal occasion of all outward appearances)
by hindering its F^rmental Odor, taking away its ^abefying colliquating
properties, by repressing this Malign Vapor, or M^phitical exhalation (which
had still recours^ to the heart, aiming at the extinction of its Light) than by
exterminating it, and the contaminated Latex first by extreme sweat, whereby the
infected person being carefully kept from the Air, may soon be brought into a
moderate sweat, that more leisurely discharged the relics of the polluted
juyces, and hereby effectually restored the Patient: the fountain of this (...)
being stopped, the Accidental evacuation being altered to a Substantial, the
Symptomatical to a Critical. Well then, the sum is, that the extreme sweats,
either spontaneously happening, or procured by Art, were mortal, as you relate,
because upon the fresh Access of this sudorifique misery, the whole burden
rested upon the shoulder of Nature extremely overpowred: withal finding no
redress by that Vain, Gross, Clogging, Weak, Miserable Opitulation or
Assistance they pretended to give them, being worse than you now administer to
poor Languid Souls at this day, which I am certain is bad enough. How then was
it possible but that upon the first invasion of this cruel ^vil, those Sweats
must needs prove fruitless, ineffectual, and extremely mortal; since their very
Dietetical ^raescriptions and Medicines could deserve no better Title,
suffering Nature to be horribly worri^d by a dom^stique Enemy, till such time
the Plebeian taught them better things? I could produce a multitude of
Instances to make good what I have here published, but one belonging to my self
shall serve for all; the whole story is set down at large in Loimotomia, out of
which I shall only excerp what may be most apposite to my purpose:

After the Dissection of a Pestilential Body, Anno 1665. out of a serious
Inquisition, not a vain presumption, as Zoili tax me, I was smitten with a
Pestilential Arrow, which entering through my hand, dabling incogitantly in the
Cadaverous gore, pierced to my Central parts, the Stomach and Spleen; where the
Active Poison settled, ejaculating virulent black E^sluviums at my heart and
head, causing a dizziness in the one, and a tedious oppression in the other.
Finding my self struck, I was resolved while I was Compos mentis, to use the
best of my Medicines, and that in large quantity, which I was certain by
iterated trials were Safe and Effectual: I was experimentally instructed, as
likewise sensible by no small number of reddi^h Spots (one or two being livid
forthwith appearing) that a great part of my Blood was coagulated in facto
esse, the rest in fieri, if not suddenly prevented by the congelative power of
^his poison: I pursued to the atmost the taking of those Remedies which never
failed during the Contagion, to rest^re to health any one tractable and capable
thereof. My greatest Design was to get a large sweat, such an one as you call
extreme, which with much ado I attained in an hour or two, promoting it
continually with a vast measure of Diaphoreticks, (...), M^dicines pregnant
with particles of ^ighest affinity with the Vital (...) or Blas, which the
Aristotelians or Galenists would have protested against as worse than the
Plague, because in their Dogmatical Fancies, too Hot and Burning. In the space
of two or three hours, after the first assault of the Pest, I attained a very
great moisture all over my Body, which trickling continually down after an
excessive manner, was for many hours, yea days, wiped off by those then
present. In this condition of extreme sweats sliding down my skin for six days
and nights, I remained well covered, not permitting my self to put my hand out
of the B^d; upon the seventh day I arose, able to foot it (I believe a mile;)
and the ninth I went down, walking lustily about the House. Thus did I act with
several of my Patients at that fatal time, promising and performing the same.

By the extract of this Tran^action Hen. Stub. may understand, unless he be
desperately perverse, that a man cannot sweat too much in any malignant
Disease, supposed the vigor of the Stomach and Archeus be sustained and
repaired with what is lively. The same Matter, Means, Quantity, and Method I
us^d often for the Cure of the Pest, with known happy success at that time. I
also proposed the same Remedy before and after that exigence, proportionably to
any whom a pestilential Fever had seized, according as the individual Patient,
Magnitude of Sickness indicated. Neither do I find any difference at all in the
happy fruits of my Medicaments, whether the Poison be more Congelative and
Concretive as at that season a while past, or more Colliquative, turning the
Juyces, as it were, into a melting grease, and invading the thinnest Liquors,
as doubtless was the effects of that Venom which reigned some score years
past, being the main Reason why (as our Noble person says) there followed no
Carbuncle, no Purple or Livid Spots, because the inquinated matter was disposed
to be carried away by abundant of Sweats, without any residue of any
puncticular curdled Inhaesion or restagnation of Corrosive, putrefactive, filth
in the skin. Therefore the Argument used by this great Pirastick, or Explorator
of Natural Causes, is very Authentic, that it was not in the mass of Blood, or
your Imaginary Humors, but only, i.e. Essentially, in the Vi^al Spirits,
because there followed no Purple or Livid Spots, or the like. For had it been
primaril^ in the blood, it could not have been otherwise but that the
colliquative dissolutive Poison must needs have made a Synthesis, Coagulation,
and Grumosity in the Blood; at the same time it caused a preternatural (...),
or a corruptive rarefaction thereof: for according to an approved Philosophical
Maxim, Omne solvens eadem opera qua solvit etiam coagulatur. Dissolving parts
of every common Menstrum, are in that very Act coagulated: so that after this
sense, had the tabid matter only possessed the Blood as its chief Subject for
its residence, there would have been after this enormous Sweating a Caput Mort,
or some gross matter remaining behind, which would undoubtedly have caused
before or after some eruption in the skin. Wherefore without Controversy, this
most subtle Hetoroclite Venom took up its chief Mansion in the Vital Spirits,
especially in the Archeus of the Stomach and Spleen (so do all Diseases, as I
can both by Reason and practical fruits testify) where for some time it lay
lurking in the bosom of Nature, not much heeding at first this grand Enemy of
Life; then having conspurcated part of the Animal Spirits through a traitorous
pretense of affinity with them, at length offering violence to them, put them
quite besides the track of salutary Imagination, upon the framing of deformed
Idea's, suitable to the condition of the tabid Poison. Hereupon the regular
Actions of Natural solutions, and moderate concretions requisite for
sanguification performed by kindly Ferments, were quite changed into an
extravagant Operation of tabefying and turning the Chyme into a putid, Olid,
Loathsome Liquamen, or I^bor, by means of preternatural Ferments, receiving an
Impress, a Commission or Power from the incensed raging Archeus, to act
according to that type and figure it had made in it self analogical to the
intoxicating matter. The Consequent then is, that naught but the Vital Spirits,
the only seat of this truculent Calamity, at the presence of which they were
exceedingly disturbed, could by their inordinate Ferments produce such a
profuse quantity of stinking Excrements, sending them packing through the skin,
without any settling, curdling, or dregs left behind. Wherefore the Cr^^or, o^
cruder part of Blood was but secundarily affected in this as in all other
malignant Evils, which at one season is only colliquated, at another
coagulated; sometimes both, according to the specifique energie of the
Malignity, causing this or that peculiar form of a Disease in the Spirits. By
this we assuredly conclude those prodigious filthy melting Sweats, accomp^nied
for the most part with affliction in the Stomach, pain of the Head, and
Dark-colored, ill-savoured Urine; one while also an excretion of Bl^od through
the Bladder; at another time, through the Nose, Eyes, and E^rs, all spr^ng from
one fountain, the Stomachical and Visceral Archeus, dislocated in its
Functions, and through discontentent enervating, melting, and marring the
fundamental matter of pure Blood. I d^ny not b^t this Sweating Sickness was,
(...), and its V^nome unwonted, and of a peculiar Essence, diff^rent from
others, because it was altogether Colliquative.

For as to^ching what Hen. Stubbe expostulates, Whether it be necessary
whenever there is a Pestilential Fever, affec^ing the mass of Blood, that
then there must be some Cutaneous Eruption by both Carbuncle or Spots: I aver
as I am informed by these 23 years and upward of my Practice, I never saw
either a high Pestilential Fever, or the Pest firmly radicat^d in the Body
ever cured of late years as it ought, but by the protrusion of some cutaneous
Efflorescence, as Spots, Pustles, Blanes, Bubo's, Carbuncles, Erisypilus, or
the like, except once when in the Plague of fresh memory, my Brother having
imbibed the contagious Sickness, sweat it out ^wice; the first in the space of
six days; the second being a relapse during five days, without the least
Germination of any congealed excretion throughout his whole Body; which if all
Circumstances were duly considered by sober men, might be reckoned a rarity,
esp^cially if it did belong to our Learned Society. Touching the Natural Reason
of this effect (lest you should call me Empirick, which handsome Title I am
sure you will never deserve, as long as you degrade your self, adhering
contumaciously to your Master Aristotle) I shall thus satisfy you: (Suppose
the Heathenish Doctrine has not intoxicated you, that you are not able to
receive truth) that my Brother conversant with me, beholding, and sensibly
convinced of the happy fruits of my Remedies, withal having recourse to some of
them at his pleasure, took so great a quantity thereof himself, besides what I
tendered him, that although he going along with me oftentimes to visit my
Patients, sucking in their virulent Breath, and upon this occasion was
frequently tainted therewith, yet could not those deletery staining Corpuscles
so far prevail, as greatly to coagulate or condense his Blood, because
notwithstanding the Vital Spirits were apt to receive Idea's or Impresses of
the Poison, yet were these by penetrating congruous volatile Salts, and
luminous Sulphurs, either expunged in their Oval Lineaments, or Those so far
advanced in their strength and courage, that they were able straight to take
off and crush any exotic fermental Malignity, setting upon the curdling of the
Blood, whereby the Venal and Arterial Current being maintained, there was an
incontinent Aporhaea, and a liberal effusion of the contaminated Juyces,
without the least Cataract or stop in the skin.

I hope I have not been too tedious in the Vindication of this Noble Virtuoso
from the Crime falsely laid to his charge of teaching his said Disciples such
absurd Doctrine in reference to the precious life of Man, that he should
deserve Sarcasms, Taunts, or Scoffs, as this ^nviously ignorant person H. S.
suggests. Believe it who will, if I can give any Judgment of the verity of
things as they are really in themselves, there has not lived in England many
Centuries a greater Natural Philosopher than our Lord Bacon; for although his
Secular Employments did much take him off that he could not attain to what his
aspiring Genius lead him to, yet has he given us such testimony of his
endowments, and his indefatigable search i^^o the tr^e Fundamental Cause of
these sublunary Essences, withal setting us in the right way, even indigitating
the means how we may acquire knowledge so that we are obliged never to suffer
his Name to be ill spoken of, or his works to be calumniated, unless we incur
deservedly the sin of horrid Ingratitude.

Moreover, I have amplified my thoughts the more upon this Subject because upon
the right conception of the ^ormal definition which this Architector of
Physiologie has given, the fontal Cure of all Pestilential Fevers, y^a, the
Pest it self depends; for I protest openly, it is not possible that that Man who
is to seek in the right Sanation of the Pest, should ever plainly, securely and
efficaciously eradicate any fixed Calamity. Let the Adv^rsary clamor never so
much against it: for all Diseases aim at the Destruction of the Vital Spirits,
which stir them up to send out the Nosopaean Matter every way, especially by
Sweat, the most appropriate sluice through which it is with greatest Benefit
expelled. Now if the Vitals fail, all is ago: How sollicitous then ought all
honest Experimental Physicians to be in the chase of Zoticks, Paregoricks and
corroboratives, which may so animate the Spirits, that thereby they dare to
cope with any intruding Enemy, and make a vigorous ejection thereof. How
deficient Dogmatists are herein, any who has the least capacious apprehension
of things may discern, by their running away from, or slightly passing by their
Brother, not long since wounded with a Pestilential Arrow: And however they
make the credulous think they are able to Conquer by their Art our more Gentle
Sporadical Malignant Fevers; yet can I verify optically by Practice, that
these formerly cried up Galenists, are most insufficient as to the Technical
Extirpation of any stubborn Fever; yea, that when they seem to bring to pass
any Cure, it is rather Accidental than Substantial, more by hap, than any good
cunning; like good old women.

And indeed how can it be otherwise, since (as that excellent Adeptus, and true
Chemical Phi^osopher Doctor Acton in his Letter to a Myso-Chymist, aptly
declares:) The Galenists are totally ignorant of Chymistry^ or only acquainted
with the Vulgar, such as that of Crollius, Hartman, Beguin: so rigid Opposers
of the more^ occult Philosophy, as Hermes, Raymund Lully, Basil, Valen,
Paracelsus, Van Helmont, that they cannot but protest against all their
Scholars and followers as Heterodox. Albeit it comes to pass that these men
denominate themselves Chemists, making the world believe they are verily so as
they seem, yet I can prove that an Ape may as well deserve the name of a man,
as the Title of a real Philosophical Spagyrist ought to be appropriated to a
Galenist.

This I proceed to make good by their silly conjectures of the issue of any
grief: for the right Prognosis in what space any Infirmity may be cured, how
and when it will terminate, whether there will be a Metastasis, or
transmigration of it into another Disease, and whether they can promise to keep
off, o^ quickly to rid any secundary Calamities, is generally so mere a
guessing business with them, that I even blush to hear how they titubate,
blunder, and mistake therein, to the great disparagement of this Art, which is
really Scientifick, but for want of Judicious praescience (which principally
depends upon a Legitimate Pharmacopaea) is at this day miserably dedecorated.
For the confirmation of what I have delivered, I would beg but this one Boon of
his Majesty for all my constant service and sufferings under his Royal Father,
that these Myso-Chymists, who like Jugglers and Cheats, call themselves the
true Chemists, may be brought to laudable just Experimental Discoveries, some
whereof I have proposed in Galeno-pale: Others I shall start afresh, and accept
the like from them if equal; then I doubt not but it will manifestly appear,
whether these Opinative Pretenders to Chemistry, be not better Politicians than
Physicians; more apt to Equivocate than Prognosticate; rather versed in
Aristotle's Sophismes than Hipp. Aphorisms; whether they be not more foolishly
Superstitious in their Physical attempts, than discreetly judicious: lastly,
whether they do not generally palliate, rather than eradicate our Miseries. To
this end I shall commit to the consideration of all true-hearted, virtuous,
intelligent Disciples of our Lord Bacon, some few Medical Observations or
Animadversions (intending to publish them h^reafter more at large) emerging
from my Practice, confirmed by long faithful Experience; to the truth whereof I
shall urge no man to adhere farther than I can demonstrate them.

1. That the Enormon Archeus or Vital Spirits are the Principal, Fundamental,
Efficient cause of Health, of all Diseases and their Cures.

2. A True son of Art looks strictly upon the Preservation and Augmentation of
the Vital Spirits, as the most preheminent Indication which is to steer a^igh^
all his intended Sanative Actions.

3. A sincere Assistant of Nature is, to observe its Motion, likewise the
Orgasm or Inclination of the degenerate Matter, whether to be discharged ^est
through this or that Emunctory or Passage, still ^urthering the carrying off
(as Hipp. dictates) the Nosopaean Matter, by no means disturbing the Ferments,
or wholesome Iuyces.

4. The most certain Effectual and proper way to dismiss the Morbifique
occasional cause of all Diseases, especially Fevers, is through the Universal
Membrane, wherein consists no small Artifice of a Physician so to gratify the
Praecordial Archeus, that it may both ablegate Excrements toward the skin, also
command by its Influence an apertion of the Pores, that they may give free
passage for the Egress of the polluted Lutex likewise at the same time, to keep
out the incursion of any Noxious Atoms in the Ambient Air.

5. For the bringing to pass the aforesaid design, nothing more conduces then
to free the Stomach and the parts circumjacent from those impurities which have
incroached into the privy-Chamber of the sensitive Soul, which ought to be
effected, not by their vulgar Vomits, but by such an one as I have deciphered
in Haem^tiasis.

6. Bleeding ordained for removing Infirmities upon the account of Evacuation
as it relates to too great a Plenitude of Blood; likewise ^or the Reason of
Revulsion, indicated from the confluxion of any Cachochymick matter, is either
Insignificant, Palliative, accidentally Curing, or Destructive.

7. Phlebotomy used out of an intent of Derivation of the Cruor, crude Blood,
or any foul matter banished out of the Protection of Life, for as much as it
immediately lets out what is depraved, ought to b^ approved; for this Reason
the vigorous promotion of a deficient Excretion of Blood through the
Hoemorrhoidal and Menstruous Vessels, is very salutiferous.

8 As the Purging Compositions of the Shops to which the Dogmatists trust in
the carrying off Impurities, are altogether uncorrected, containing more or
less poisonous Properties in them, whereby the Tone of the Parts are
discomposed, the Spirits depa^perated, the Chyme colliquated, and the Ferments
damnified; so a perpetual succession of Morbisick matter is often regener^ted,
in li^u of what was thereby evacuated. Whosoever receives b^nefit by these
Catharticks, is beholding to an Accidental or Contingent success, not to any
direct praenotional Judicious susception therein.

9. The chief Cordi^ls Analepticks, or Corroborating Iuleps belonging to the
Lo^don-Dispensatory come very short of that true validity they ought to have,
and which Chemical Philosophers make with their own hands^ for these are
volati^ized, and highly purified, b^ing v^ry active and sa^e; but those are in
comparison terrestrial, flat, foeculent, impertinent, and so dangerous.

10. Physicians ought to make their own Medicines, for thereby they shall
prepare them with a satisfactory Elegance and Exactness improve them to the
greater Advantage and Gradation; understand their Virtues more clearly;
administer them with the more discretion, and acquire a far greater confidence
of their success; th^n may he styled (...), an Officious Physician indeed;
otherwise he can deserve no other than a mere Trif^er in his Function, acting
(...), carelessly, perfunctorily, and cruelly.

11. The best Chemical Remedies contained in the Vulgar Pharmacopaea, are
insufficient, dangerous; yea, sometimes pernicious, therefore to be rejected by
an Helmontian, who is thoroughly acquainted with his own Manufacture of Remedies.

12. Issues may be connived at in some, since they rid in part some superfluity
of crude Blood, which in ^very Lunar Revolution is prone to be generated
through diverse extri^secal and intrinsecal occasions: however they do but
palliate or play the Parasite with a Disease, Eliquating or draining the
Rivulets or Pro^d^cts, not touching the Fountain of a Disease.

13. Vesica^or^es or Blisterings by Cantharides or the like Poisonous
Materials, are to be rejected; for they cause an indi^nation in the Archeus,
whereby the good Juyces ar^ melted into a sharp Ichor or Tabum; the O^conomie
of the Body put into a disorder, the cons^quents wh^r^of are a great pain,
inqui^tude^ wa^ching, and sometimes a stopping of the Vrine^ th^r^fore if a
prosperous event b^ attributed to these virulent Epistpasticks, it is a mee^
Accident, and mistake of the Cause.

14. I positively assert, and can prove, that the Dogmatists are ignorant in
Aitiologie, Prognostication, and Therapie of Diseases, i. e. they are totally
out of the way in the Cure of Man.

15. If any desire to attain to be very excellent in the Therapeutick he must
often take into his own body his new-minted Medicines, that th^reby he may be
expres^y acquainted with their Operations, approving or disproving them as his
own Stomach informs him^ ^or thus he shall express his tender affection he has
for his Patient^ and arrive at the knowledge of greater Arcana than his
Patients by th^mselves will ever direct him to. He that will not run the hazard
of this, or cannot, ought to deplume his high thoughts, and demean himself the
more humbly, observing his Station and Class, forbearing to carp enviously at
another on whom this gift is bestowed.

16. The Method of Curing which the Galenists have used above these ^ixteen
hundred years, is most tedious and protracting; contrary to the Original of the
word in the best sense; but in the worse, it is an absolute Imposture.

17. The upright Philosophical Chemical way of Healing, is performed knowingly,
manifestly, speedily, securely, pleasantly, and effectually.

18. A sincere Artist always carries about him Polyacaea's, or Remedies of an
ample endowment, which upon emergent occasions he forthwith exhibits to any
suddenly surprised with sickness; or afflicted with violent Paroxysmes,
r^freshing the Patient long before an incongruous, invalid connection of some
pitiful stuff can be prescribed, made up by the Apothecary, and sent.

19. He that cures Diseases by Contraries, takes a clean contrary way to cure
them: so for that Reason to give Cooling things in a high Feav^r, as small
Beer-Posset-drink^ Barly-water, ^lat, dull Iuleps, is the direct way to cool
the sick person into the Grave.

20. The genuine means to stop all spontaneous excessive Evacuations, is by the
ablation of the Cause, not by forcibly keeping in, or constraining its ill
effects^ fruits, or products; which is commonly acted by Cicatrizers, those
that skin over Sores, being rotten at the bottom.

21. Many long Diseases have in them a peculiar Poison as Scorbute, Lues Ven.
closely couched in the Body, which depraves the Natural Ferments, and
conspurcates the Latex; which Venom if it be not destroyed, the Ferments
reduced to their integrity, and the Latex purified and sweetened, all the
pumping, purging, and draining of Excrements is in vain.

22. In the oblation of Medicines, singular care is to be had that Injury b^
not offered to the Stomach^ for this N^ble part having an influence upon the
whole Body, as it does relish and accept of what is i^ge^^ed; so favorably
communicates the virtue of the same in^o all parts with a Passport or Impre^^,
that it is efficacious to assist Nature, and resist the Disease: neither is it
to be valued whether the Palate disgust it, abhorring it as too Hot, inflaming,
strong, seemingly bli^tering^ fretting, or corroding, as the Galenists (whose
sensual Judgments in Chemical Matters are as much vitiated, as their Patients
tastes in Feav^rs) have falsely censured my Stomachical Essence, whose Virtues
are faithfully described in Haematiasis; I say, it signifies naught what the
trayteterous Palate s^ggests, suppos^d the Stomach ^mbraces it as a real Friend.

23. Sale and Sole nihil utilius in Medicina, i. e. of Salt and Mineral
Sulphurs are made the best Remedies both for pres^rvation and sanation: Now
that ought to be brought to a volatility adaequant with the Vital Spirits, with
which it is straight Identified. This must be exquisit^ly puri^ied and exal^ed,
that it may illuminate and indulge the Anima^s with their comfortable Rays,

24. Those Medicin^s of nice Limits and narrow Latitude in their dose may
justly be suspected, which the Author o^ them d^re not give in double, tr^b^e,
quadrup^e, quin^uple; y^a, sometimes a decuple Quantity with benefit: for I
usually ae^timate that g^neral curiosity of ponderating Mixtures to be an
Argument that they are neither safe nor suffici^nt.

25. When a Physician insists in long Diseases too busily upon Culina^y
preparations, and a very strict Diet^ it p^ainly discov^rs such an one his
weakness in the Art of Healing; for c^rtainl^ that means will never conquer any
great M^lady, which cannot dispense with petty ab^rrations in Drinking or
Eating some food, ^^ough not to be prai^ed comparatively, yet earnestly d^sired
of the Stomach, still supposing the ferments of the Stomach be not extre^ely
deficient, and Moder^tion rule the Roa^t.

26. In all Malignant Fevers, I disallow of any Flesh, solid food, broth,
Gellies, sm^ll B^er, Posset Drink made with fla^ Liquors, Barly-water, etc. but
I highly comm^nd good spirituous Liquors, well-brewed s^rong Beer and Al^, the
best Spanish or French wine: the Reason is plain^ for the former Cadaverate,
turn into a putriligon^us stinking febrile matter, not easily to be discharged,
subv^rting the Stomach more and more, wher^by a double injury is offered to it
from within and without. The later, i. e. strong Liqu^r, corrobor^tes this
Noble Membrane, invigorates the Vital Spirits, whereby they are enabled to
oppug^ the Dis^ase, and to expedite the procuring Cause thero^ through all
convenient passag^s, no considerab^^ c^og of such a potabl^ being left b^hind.
Neither let any one be d^ferred from such Liquors, supposing they are too H^t,
for this is b^t a Galenical childish Bugbear Opinion, suitable to the rest of
their pernicious Doctrine, which I have elsewhere sufficiently re^uted.

27. That Physician which is a Phil^sophical Oper^tor cannot but attain great
knowledge in Chyr^rger^, yea, and in difficult cases do that in reference to
^^stula's, Cancers, Herpes, Esthiomenes, Phagaedaenick and Cacoethick Sores,
which no mere Chyrurgion in England shall perform.

28. He that desires to keep himself in h^alth, let him endeavor by all means
so to volatilize and ratify his Blood, that it may be continually carried off
sensibly or in^ensibly without any Caput-Mort, or foeculence left behind. To
this purpose good Air, and well regulated Diet to exceedingly conduce.

29. An Acide matter, the Evident Instrument of Digestion, is only proper to
the Stomach; from which if it deviate, lodging in unde^ent places, multiplied
and much perverted, then it becoms the irritating and fermenting cause of
Fevers, and multitude of Calamities.

30. The Philosophical Chemist dar^ engage to cure a Pleurisy, judici^usly,
speedily, radically, and securely without fear of Relap^e, a Succession o^
other Calamities of a frequent incidence into the same Disease to which any one
was ^ormerly p^one; which I d^ny any Galenist in England can undertake and
consum^ate Providently and experimentally.

Let Hen. Stubbe and all his Confederates ioyn their heads together in
Opposition to these Practical Epilogisms or Annotations ^stablished
Experimentally: but I shall urge them to oppose me according to equal Terms,
(...), i. e. to make the contrary of what I have here asserted appear so
according to sound Reason, Operation, Judgment, and Experiment; otherwise I
shall still conclude, as they have hitherto behaved themselves, that they still
continue a company of Equivocators, Rixators, Sophi^ters, and Impostors in
their Faculty: neither do I value it a rush that they are Helluones Librorum,
reputed great Scholars, Travelers, complete Gentlemen; for these endowments,
very commendable of themselves, pertain nothing to the Controversy in hand.
All that I expostulate with them is this, that their Method of Curing is false;
that thousands of Orphans and Widows are her^by made; that the thread of Princes
lives is often untimely cut off, under pretense of their Learned, but false
Documents; which they are resolved still to follow, so long as Gain, Ease, and
Honor lead the Van.

For this Reason they hate Ciniflo's, as they have abusively termed them, who
labor to get noble Remedies for the preservation of Man; because it is against
their COMMON INTEREST, which Hen. Stubbe hopes they will consult, it matters
not for the Interest of the Commons: if so, I conceive the Advice in Campan.
page 21. (most unjustly vilely given by this Miso-Chymist H. Stubbs) against
the R. S. may lawfully be put in Execution against the Aristotelian Galenical
Company: That it behoved all men to combine against them, the tendencie of
whose designs were so fatal and Malignant. All things considered, let any one
capable judge who deserves to be opposed and combined against for their fatal
and Malignant Designs, either the actually intelligent Virtuosi of the Royal
Society, the Thomsons, or the Opinionative Galenists, Pseudo-Chymists of a
College little significant as to Vital Benefit, and the Stubbs. Those are
charged with scandalous, false, malicious, undeserving defamations, which can
no ways be made good.

To these nothing here Criminal is objected, but what I Will undertake to verify
by frequent apparent Practic^, backed with solid Reasons: the one is accused as
nocent upon frivolous Iealousies and Suspicions; the other off^red to be ^ound
culpable upon Evidence and D^mo^stration. You bitterly inveigh against the
Royal S^ciety, as Insolent, Impertinent, Fools, C^xcombs^ Iacendiaries^
Plagiaries, poor Devils, Dete^^^ble, Ignorant, V^faithful, guilty of Errors,
and Chea^s, and all this is Gratis Dictum, without bringing things ^qually to
t^st, by summoning in a Legal manner hon^st^ Witn^sses to prov^ the Charge.
What you have declared in an opprobrio^s style against the true Disciples of
the Lord B^con, I protest as merely feigned wit^out just cause, and am r^ady if
occasion ^e^ve, to certify from facts and Occular T^stimoni^s, that those
unhandsom^ Epithets and Obloquies may be better appr^pria^^d to your self, or
any Confederates who wi^^ second you as their Champion. And since '^is so^ as I
^ave vindicated the Lord Bacon and myself from your vilifying Language by
Arguments su^ficient to convince any upright knowing person; so I must come
hom^ to you, resolved never to desist till you and I put an and to these
Physical Controversies by active En^^rpris^s^ and legitimate Experiments,
obvious ^o be apprehended by any meanly Judicious. For o^^erwi^e we may both
scribble and pr^^^ till Doomsday; yea, sco^^d like Bil^ings-gate women without
any solid satisfaction or happy conclusion on (...) side, if we do not, laying
aside Animosity and inordinate Passions, come to the Touchston^ of A^ting: It Is
Works, not Words; Things, not Thin^ing; Pyr^technie, not Philologie; Operation^
no^ m^^rly Speculation, must justify us Physicians^ ^o^b^^r ^h^n hereaft^r to
be so wrongfully Sa^yri^^l against our Noble Experimentators, who questionless
are entered into the right way of detecting the Truth of things. Repress your
scurrilous Terms against able Practitioners; wave your threats of attaching
Medela Medicinae and Mainwaring, Authors, who deserve Titular Honor above your
self, although your Malignant Tongue dare call the former expressly
Quack-salver, and the other so implicitly. If Learning, Philochymie, and ten
years practical Exercise, which the Author of M. Med. can plead for, be not
sufficient to make a man deserve a better Title than a Quack-s^lver; I pray
then what meritorious Dignity can you, or the Collegiates assume to your
selves? I confess I did reprove him sharply in Loimotomia for his male-practice
in that particular, not undeserved^y: yet I wish your Miso-Chymical Brethren
were but half so Guilty in the general in their Medical deportments, as it
relates to the Life o^ Man. As for Doctor Mainwairing, you deserve severely to
be corrected for your poor mean regard of him, having past through his Degre^s
ex condigno, and highly to be praised in that he left your pernicious Method in
the Infancy of his Practice many years since; continuing a great Defender of
Spagyrical Truth against all your Aristotelian Opponents. I apprehend Doctor
Mainwaring able to stand in Defiance against the attach of your Pen, having his
Bail in readiness, or any Undertaking of yours to oppose him. And I hope he is
so far from being induced to Retract any thing of Verity, that h^ scorns to
Apostati^e in the least.

It is the unhappiness of this Noble Science of Chemistry to want a competent
number of Learned Patrons to assert their Medical salutiferous Positions. For
the pa^city of such gives no small Advantage to you still to keep up your
d^structive tract of Curing. Had it pleased the Om^ipotent to have spared the
life of that acute Py^otechnical Philosopher Doctor Starkey, to whom England is
infinitely beholden for his candid communication of Arcana's; yet was his good
Genius a little too open to some such supplanters of the Art as your self.
Likewise had Doctor Dey survived the Pest, I rest assured we had so
incontinently clawed away, and so closely pursued the Discovery of your
Aristotelian, Galenical, and Galeno-Chymical Quirks, Juggles^ and Tricks, that
he must have been forced ere this to have laid down the Cudgels, cried for
Quarter, humbly invited us into the College (as you formerly did Doctor
Starkey) placing us above the Honorarii (without paying a sum of Money) silence
only requested, and that on Condition you would engage to comply with us in all
things. However, let the state of affairs be never so cross, I am fully decreed
for my part to extend all my N^rves, Membranes, and Fibers for the Vindication
of those Physical Verities, which all the Powers of Darkness are not able to
destroy. Neither doubt I, but I shall upon the account of this learned Content,
receive aid and supply from some Learned Men, who have openly declaimed against
the fraudulent and truculent Designs of a Company of Self-seeking, Lazy,
Tyrannical, Usurping, Erroneous Dogmatical Semi-Chymists: yea, I question not
but some brave Philanders and Philalethean Spirits, (who as yet live obscure)
will, if occasion serve, manifest their zeal for the subversion of these
intolerable Miso-Chymist. Neither is there any fear that the Concernments of
the Church of England, the two Universities, and all Artizans, as Hen. St.
intimates, will hereby be damnified. For I look upon (...) presumptuously
Ignorant Aristotelian Physicians who have these many hundreds of ye^rs been
passively guilty of the Blood of Myriads, through a supine subscription to
their Masters Ordinanc^s and D^crees without Experimental scrutiny into the
same; and still persevere to be super-J^daically obstinate, in not retracting
their transverse Essential Crimes in practice, respecting the very Life and
Soul of Man; when ^air practical Demonstrations and evident Facts have been
tendered to confute them. I say, I am fully persuaded, th^se desperately
resolved Anthropoctoni are very scandalous to the Church of England, Men of
Religion and good manners. For this Reason (the rest of their Moral Actions
being suitable to their Physical Tenants, they are generally reputed no better
than Atheists, whereby the most horrid evil example of these Learned Superiors
do infinitely debauch and corrupt the manners of the people. Moreover, I
a^firm, being taught by multitude o^ Observa^ions, that these Dogmatical
Galenists^, some whereof do now pretend to Chemistry, yet do persecute it with
Vatinian hatred, which is a Paradox, have been no small cause that the Morality
of a great part of the English comes much short of the Goodness of the Turks;
and that we are more prone to diversity of Opinions in Religion than formerly,
because they have exercised such frequent Sanguimissions, and putrified the
good Juyces by their deletery Purgations, since the S^urvy, Venereal Plague,
small Pox, Meazels, and many malignant Fevers have reigned among us; for by
this means the Vital Spirits being exhausted, the Tone of the Stomach
enervated, the Ferments depraved, Indigestion increased, a Disparity in the
strength of parts introduced, the foresaid Diseases get strength, becoming more
difficult to cure, and a multitude of Calamities of Body and Mind hatched up;
so that poor Mortals and their Posterity suffer a double mischief from the
M^lady, and the pretended Remedy. Hereupon the Organs or Instruments of the
Soul being thus spoiled and deprived of their Genuine use, it is impossible that
regular Actions should be executed: thence the mind possess^d with Melancholy,
black, discontented thoughts, incapable to receive truth, becom^s froward,
peevish, careless of virtuous Actions, desperately bent to follow for
divertisement, a voluptuous sensual life, or to contrive Innovations, Heresies,
Schisms, and factious Rebellions, and what not?

All things rightly weighed, my Prospect plainly discovers the Nation wants
good store of true Philosophical Physicians to purify the Blood, to invigorate
the Archeus, to corrobate the Stomach: then that exorbitancie in Religion and
evil Manners, which an Indirect Method of Curing has brought upon us, might
sooner be rectified. For this Hen. St. is quite mistaken in his thoughts, that
a Society of Experimentators should at all debauch the world, since they can
best detect the Fountain of those enormous evils which have been perpetrated in
Church and State, through the mis-apprehension of crasie Brains, and dislocated
fancies; which these (...) in the I^trick Science have procured, by
overthronging the sound constitution of Blood and Spirits, never to be reformed
but by those Adepti, or the true Sons of Helmont.

Neither are the two Universities like to be impaired in their splendour by this
most satisfactory way of inquiring into the Cause of Natural things, unless
they ende^vor to k^ep us still hood-winked, and by Paralogisms, subtle
Arguments, deceitful Sophistry to dispute us out of Truth, persuading us out of
our Senses; proceeding to in^use and season tender youth, easily to be seduced,
with d^structive Principles; which being radicated in them by Custom,
Education, and Authority, are very difficultly afterward unlearnt. In this
case they may ^hank themselves if Omnipot^nt Veri^y Eclipse them. Assuredly
thus much may be feared, if they do not cast out their Aristotelian Sophismes
and Fallacies, and seasonably entertain the Helmontian most veriloqu^us
Authentic Philosophy, that Tiro's or Novices may be better instructed and
initiated in the fund^mental Elements of Physiologie, that they may to a
purpose improve their Studies for the preservation of miserable Man. Some will
scruple to send their Sons to the Academies so erroneously to be disciplined;
whereas after they have acquired some co^petent knowledge of the Latin and
Greek in the common Schools, they will think it better by far to k^^p them at
home to the Reading of Helmont and some other sound Author, who can teach them
Re^l Entities, not suffering them to spend their pr^tious time about many
useless App^arances which Univ^rsiti^s may put them upon. However, for my part,
I shall n^v^r be wanting to keep up that high Repute and honorable Regard due
to Universities, so ^ar as solid active truth will permit; and further (I hope)
no Intelligent man will urge me.

Lastly, How Artizans can any way suffer a detriment by the Genuine Disciples
of the Lord Bacon, I do not at all understand, certainly they must rather be
much advanced in their Mechanics, when many Technical Discoveries shall be
made apparent or hinted to them, whereby the most ingenious will be highly
pleased to see some Daedalian Artifice^ brought to light: for, Ars habet
neminem inimicu^ praeter ignorantem; neither need they question, bu^ the more
curious the Inventions are, and of greates^ Novelty, the more Lucriferous they
will be: Quaev^^ Terra alit Artificem; the Handy-craft shall reap the fruit of
their Labors, which refined Wits will communicate, being not born to make a
Trade thereof themselves for Lucre.

Indeed I confess the College of Physicians are like to go by the Lee, as long
as Pyrasticks flourish, because they will not bear a Chemical Test; therefore
they find it best to acquiesce in (...), slighting (...). They are persuaded
Experimentally the old way is the best, to sit in their Chair disputing,
scribbling Medicines, while others are making them; this suits best with their
Ease, Riches, and Grandeur^ Away, say they, with these new-fangled-Devices of
Questioning by Fact such famous men as we are; whether we kill or Cure; why we
Bleed and Purge: it is enough we have tried again and again, it will bring in a
Fee secundum Artem. But let me tell these Antipirasticks, it is a Black Art
brought in by an evil Angel, which must ere long, do what they can, return to
the place from whence it came: it is no wonder if many of those unsound,
seemingly expert Dogmatists, who at first were compelled for their Credit-sake
to mix themselves with the soundest of the Lord Bacons Disciples, do now grow
cold and indifferent whether they hold on, being conscious to themselves they
are not Chemical proof. I wish heartily the Royal Society were totally rid of
them; then perhaps the most truly virtuous Legi^imate Sons of our Noble
Philosopher would listen to those most essentially fructiferous Experiments of
mine against the Miso-Chymists or Pseudo-Chymists Method of Bleeding and
Purging: then I should hope the voice of Haematiasis would be heard, and Doctor
Willis should either be forced to answer me Logically and Practically, or his
mouth for ever stopped from subtly pleading, and his Hands bound from wily
writing in the behalf of such a lethiferous Operation as Phlebotomy, which
according to the matter stated by me, I am ready by Works to testify before
their faces, (without any nice, curious Optics to behold them) how it
damnifies the Life of Man, either sensibly or insensibly, for the present or
the Future. I do not a little admire that those who own themselves followers of
our Noble Arch-Explorator, should be so back^ward in promoting this Experiment
of Anti-Phlebotomy, of general benefit to Mankind, tending to the intimate,
solid, profound Cure of Griefs: which Essay if seriously considered, and
closely followed, is of such substantial use and excellent validity for the
Melioration of Body and Soul, our Divinity and Morality, that I dare positively
affirm it may truly be said to super-ponderate a thousand of affected, delicate
Micrologies, or Periergies. He that puts his hand to the plough, ought not to
look back, out of sinister respects of fear, or over-tender kindness to any
party interested therein; but to proceed in matters of greatest moment in
Nature, with a Generous, Magnanimous Resolution, to indulge and assert the
Truth fervently wheresoever it resides; although it should disoblige never so
many Universities and Dogmatical Colleges of Physicians. I have reason to be
persuaded that the Great Conditor of all things has justly suffered this Hen.
Stubbe to rail at you, to sugillate and sharply apprehend your more
inconsiderable Experiments, because ye have been hitherto so cold in the
pursuit of that practical Verity urged by me, so material, of such high
Concernment, to wit, that the G^lenical Bleeding is destructive to Nature,
which I have offered (...), to indicate ab Ac^is and Agendis, from what I have,
or ^in atchieve judiciously: It was unhappy ye ever entertained any Galenist or
Pseudo-Chymist into your Society; for I doubt not they have been the greatest
Remora^s to the beginning and progress of your better intended D^signs, without
Prosopolepsie, mutually curing one the other, or sordid partiality. Assuredly
it was never the main scope of that Illustrious Person who gave you the
Prototype, that puny matters in Physic, which ought to be inquired into
Parergos at more leisurely Opportunities, should take place of Grand weigh^y
Emoluments, for the safety of Humane Life; without the enjoyment of which, all
rare Inventions and Discoveries^ signify but little as to make a man happy.
Imitate therefore the foot-s^eps of your knowing Lord, who has set you a copy
in^tant in the detection of the Nature of the Sweating-Sickness, how we may
acquire an infallible Diagnos^s of the Materi^l, Efficient, and Intrinsecal
Caus^s of all Dise^ses; that upon these Fundamental Notions, Physicia^s may
directly and ad^quately begin and con^ummate their Cures: then will all pious,
honest^ ingenious, true-hearted Philo-Chymists applaud you, and forthwith join
with us for the proscription and abolition of this de^ilitating ^anguimission:
colliquating delet^ry Catharticks, their poor incongruous Cordials, and droslie
mixtures. But if you sti^l postergate and procrastinate to endeavor (...) this
most n^c^ss^ry Reformation of this p^rnitious practice of the Galenists, for
some p^culiar interest of some reserved by-ends, you will give advantage to the
W^l^-wishers of your Ent^rprises to susp^ct what Hen. St. intimates, That your
Exp^rimental Philosophy was never well model^ed, discreetly managed^ nor
Questions of great^st concern rightly stated: yea, the most p^rspicac^ous will
be re^dy to say, you deviate and d^generate from the int^nt and will of your
Exp^rimental T^stator, who doubtl^ss in his Ess^ys h^d a ch^ritable end in his
^ye, principally the relief of Distressed, sick^y Mortals; then to Cure whom
faith^ully and prop^rly^ nothing can b^ more ^atisfactory and Divine. When y^
have once established this (...), by a cong^uous, commodious, judicious,
speedy, sa^e, and ^ff^ctual Method suggested to you an^optical^y, that a man
may be (...) his days exhi^era^ed and prolongated; Tum vacat exigu^s, then you
may expatiate your selves in the acq^ i^tio^ of the Exp^rimental knowledge or
those pertinents, Ad^uncts, Accidents, extraneous Helps which may conduce to
the addition and advanc^ment of his present Happin^ss of Health^ Wherefore I
con^ure you as you are (...) if ye have any reverence of a Deity, believe your
Souls Immortal, Honor his Majesty, seek aft^r Truth sincerely^ have any Bowels
of compassion for your Country and Neighbor, bear any Cordial respect for your
^ict^t^r: If you desire to prosper in all your und^rt^^ings^ and in conclusion
to receive a sweet Reward, as the ^ruit of a^l your Labors; Stand up then as
it becomes Royal Zealots for the truth, virtuous indeed; behold with an
indifferent Eye those Experimental Demonstrations I can produce against
Phlebotomie and other indirect Courses of the Miso-Chymists, and
Pseudo-Chymists: listen not to those that halt between two Opinions, Lukewarm
Physicians, Semi-Chymists intermingled with you, who strive if it be possible
to divert you from being Spectators of those Instances and Operations which
will force you to acknowledge that the means used of Healing is on the one side
to be censured impostorious, and insufficient; and on the other to be approved
upright, honest, judicious, effectual and Lawful.

For the final decision of our Hypostatical Controversies in Physic, I shall
try to the utmost whether Hen. St. has any spark of true Religion in him as he
pretends; whether he will make his Faith appear by his works of charity and
humility; by declaring he thinks not scorn to learn that his weak Brother may
b^ restored and confirmed in sanity.

For this end I shall earnestly charge him to accept of those several equal
Experimental Exercitations proposed in Galeno-pale and Hoemati: and if he
scruple to accept, or cavil against those as unreasonable Trials put upon them,
as he alleges in Campan. 22. let him offer to me any other, which just persons
shall allow of as Reasonable and determinable by Facts; I shall forthwith
entertain them, though it be with disadvantage on my side: yea, I will give
great allowance to the Opponent for his encouragement, rather than such an
eminent Enterprise (wherein the lives of Princes, Nobles, and Plebeians are
concerned) should fall to the ground. Let an equal division (...) the miserable
sick people of the Hospitals be made; the Phlebotomist shall have the
privilege to take his choice of one partition which he pleases, leaving the
other to me; let him exert his Method of Curing what possible, I shall do the
like as to mine^ then will it plainly appear upon repeated Explorations and
Essays by w^y of this Mysocomie, who in right deserves the Title of Empiricke
in a good or bad sense; that is, who kills, and who cures Experimentally, or on
whom the opprobrious name of a Quack-salver may be more fitly ^astned, i. e.
one who does little else but scribble, prate, vaunt, and Quack, but seldom
does, unless by Accident (as many good women) exhibit any proper Salve for the
Radical Cure of any dangerous malignant Sore. Hereby it will be made manifest
who is the Agyrta, ab (...), one, which juggles and cozens their silly
credulous patients of their lives and Money, or ab (...), one who lures the
people together into a Theater by a pretty plausible Knack, thereby to get
applause and practice.

Moreover, I shall proceed, and plainly show Hen. S. or any of his Fraternity,
that B^eeding according to the premises tends to the ruinating of Man's H^alth,
Prosperity and Life; that I dare oppig^orate or oppose twenty to ten of a large
sum of Money, to cu^^ without Bleeding a Pleurisy intrinsecally to ^he (...)
in the space of twelve hours, with confidence that the party shall not fear to
fall into a Relapse, any long debility, or have a proclivity as before, to be
trou^l^^ with a calamity of the same Species. I shall also demonstrate to him
the vast difference between Chemical and Galenical, or Pseudo-Chymical
Cordials, Alexiteries, preservatives and restauratives of the Vitals,
Eustomachicks and Cacostomachicks; the effects of those purging Medicines which
purify the Blood electively with Euphorie, manifest ensuing ease and strength
and those which tabefie the wholesome Juyces, carrying off good and bad
promiscuously, leaving the Body often in a worse condition, more debilitated
than before. Besides, I shall discover how the best Remedies the Galenists or
Pseudo-Chymists enjoy, are borrowed from the Protopeirie, or Infantile
exercitations of Spagyricks; withal how ignorantly and unjustly they measure
and censure the learned Experimental Philosopher, according to those mean
pr^parations of the lowest Class, which they principally depend upon; how
absurdly, presumptuously they arrogate to themselves the Name of Chemists, yet
oppose, detract, and abuse the Legitimate Sons of Hermes; likewise continue
Bleeding, Purging, Blist^rings, cutting holes impertinenently insignificantly
and cruelly in man's skin, quite contrary to the Original rules and stable
Axioms of our veriloquous Science.

Lastly, I shall declare the immediate, Primary, Efficient cause of all
Diseases, Judicious prediction of their progress, transition, termination, and
their direct Medullary s^nation, has hitherto lain hid from the Aristotelian
Dogmatists; and that they are either passi^ely or actively most notoriously
ignorant herein. If (...). St. pretends these matters of so great moment
p^off^^ed to be demonstrated upon a penalty to be unreasonable Trials and
Impertinencies suggested to them, I must urge him to tell me without the least
Collusion or subterfuge, what may be termed a Rational Experiment which may
come more home to the purpose. Assur^dly I will kiss his hand if he will teach
me better things actually; otherwise his importunate garrulity will not at all
prevail with me, or any well versed in the Optics of Pyrotechny, that we would
retract those Animadversions arising from our Senses (the organ, Medium, and
object being duly modified) or that we should look upon our Medicaments as
delusory, which have so many years upon thousands of Subjects proved so
faithful: No certainly, it behooves those Guessers in Physic, whose Tongues
consult not with the Intellect, regulated by the effects of their Hand, who are
by Custom addicted to prescribe and subscribe right or wrong to the Delusion
of infinit^ numbers; such I aver ought to renounce, detest, abhor and retract
their former Delusory ways. To which if now they should at length (...),
(hardly otherwise) condescend; there is no man in the world (would be) more
ready than my self to promote them as to Iatrical Verities for the succo^^ of
miserable Mortals. I confess it is to be lamented that some of excellent parts,
rare endowments in o^ther things, should be thus deficient in t^^ main (...)
salutiferous knowledge of what they profess. It (...) a shame for any to be a
Bungler and inexpert in a Tr^de or Mechanical Occupation he takes upon him,
although perhaps he may boast to be endued with many brave Accompli^hments
besides. How much more does he eclipse and depreciate his Worth in other
enterprises, who makes it a color and a cloak to cover his gross inexperience
in that Faculty which Princes have esteemed an Honor to own? and were not this
a willful Amathie, a perverse, stiff-necked ^gnorance it were in some measure
to be conni^ed or excuse: Ignorare malum est, sed pejus nolle Doceri.

It Is this which aggravates their Crime (...) making them incapable of the
least Apology, in that they may and will no^ learn better things: they ar^
inwardly persuaded with her in Plautus, Quae lo^ueris vera sunt, sed ignavia
Avariti^, Libido, and Superbia cogunt sequi Pejora. They are as it were led
Captive like so many slaves by their Lust and bewitching sensualities, that
they choose spontaneously to make themselves Blind lest they should behold
Experimental Truths; thus (...), they follow each other like to like with sweet
content. Et mulus mulum scabit; sooth up one another in their resolved pleasing
folly, not caring qua e^ndum, sed qua itum ^st; what may now be learnt in
verity, but what has been taught them by Antiquity. Well, Rode caper vitem,
tamen hinc tu stabis ad Aras.


There may come a day of reckoning which will pay for all. If you still
persevere so refractory, either ^ot to be Ocular witnesses of that direct
Chemical method of Curing, which may be represented to your Senses, or not to
assign to our Rational Philosophical As^ertions against Phlebotomy; We shall
Petition His Majesty that we may have right done us herein; that you may either
be forced to admit of an Experimental Confutation, or to make an ingenious
Confession and Recantation of your most dangerous Errors in Physick^ and I hope
His Majesty will be so soon pleased to listen to one who has been a great
Sufferer for that Incomparable Prince his Father, and studi^s the preservation
and prolongation of his own Regal Life; as to those who formerly stood Neuters,
to the effusion of Monarchical Blood; indifferent who was Victorious, supposed
they might but keep up the Credit of their pernicious practice.

Postscript.
AFter a tedious delay of getting my Papers printed, I had no sooner corrected
two Sheets, but there came to my view a Reply made by Doctor Merret to the
Postscript of H. Stubbs, showing his many falsities in matter of Fact. Now this
Fact being the Basis or Bottom on which true Chymic^l Philosophy is built, I
greedily fell to reading it, ^xpecting great matters^ but Parturiunt montes,
nascetur ridiculus mus; instead thereof I found a great deal of wrangling
against a Wrangler, but little delivered for the betterment of Man's Health and
Life. It was my hopes once that this Declaimer against the Frauds and Abuses
committed by Apothecaries, pretending that to be a Reason why he deserts them,
would have become absolutely reformed himself, made his public Recantation
with contrition of Soul; abominated his former Actions with dejecti^n of
Spirit, that he should thus be bewitched to continue in so fraudulent a way for
so many years contrary to the dictates of his own Reason, the secret checks of
his own Conscience, the debasement and demolition of the Noble Science of
Physic; to the overthrow and bane of thousands of Lives; sed quanta de spe
deoidi, this Dr. Merret is not the man I took him for; for I perceive he is
still led by Interest and Secular Respec^s; and so blinded with Honors,
Rights, Privileges, Statutes and Votes of his Soci^ty, that he is no more able
to behold the Truth with an intent sincere prospect, for the preservation o^
miserab^e Man, than weak ^yes are ab^e fix^dly to behold the Sun in a clear
day: I am a^raid it may be said of him, Qui semel est, semper sumitur esse
ma^us.

This supposed Re^ormer o^ the Method of Physic thinks it enough to have
lashed the Apothecaries to have proclaim^d their abuses to the World, as if
this were enough to expiate his Crime, and the rest of his Ma^e-practical
Br^thr^n^ endeavoring to make ^ome silly people believe that they had not be^n
chi^^ Actors of those odious Misdemeanors: th^s he thinks to come off fairly,
wiping his mouth w^^h the W^or^ in the Proverbs, saying, What have I done?
laying all the fault and miscarriage in their Art upon their p^ocur^d Servants:
when in real truth, as Di^genes ^^r^ck the Father when the Son swore, ^^cause
^e taught him no better; So ought Doctor M^rret and all those Galenical,
Pseudo-Chymistical Copartners of his, to do penance for making a ^rade of Man^
Life, for p^rpetuating th^s long a fallacious, and no less pernicious mode or
form of practice, never brought to light un^^l of late years, expressly to be
condemned in it self. For I op^nly rep^at, that it is impossible for any man to
di^charge his Duty in his Function aright, w^o makes not his own Medicines with
his own ^ingers; yea, he ought also (if he can) to take them often into his own
Body. Of this I ^hal hereafter speak more at large, if God spare my life, to
put ^orth practical Observations in Latin, that the world may the better
understand the verity of these things.

Obsequium Amicos veritas odium parit.
I took Mr. Stubbe for one of the greatest Enemies of Physical Truth but now I
am persuaded you outvie him according to your own Confession, as appears by the
words, page 11. of the Reply: I have acted also many y^ars together, for what
he hopes ^or. In page 21. That Physicians would consider their Common Interest
in opposition to the Thomsons.

Now have I good grounds to believe that such a s^y stickler as your self for
the Good Old Cause, might be the Father of that Spurious Brat Agyrto-M^stix,
which Johnson your Pseudo-Chymist did own, and publish against me, ^ull of
Scur^ilities and falsities. I wond^r with what face you can declare your self a
Chymi^t, an Experimentator, one of the Lord Bacons Disciples, and thus oppose
me so scornfully and unfaithfu^ly; either you your self giving me (less
deserving than any of your College) this term of a Mountebanck, Empirick, etc.
or countenancing, ab^tting, wilfully conniving at, and encouraging any one who
shall fasten such dirty Language upon me. It is i^possible that you should be a
candid Spagyrical Philosopher, and hate the ways of direct Healing, which I Will
engage to indicate to you. Can you be one of the Legitimate Offspring of the
Lord Bacon, and thus incon^inently p^rsist to let out the Vital Blood,
d^p^^ving the Pati^nt of his strength, which alone can cure him? also
magnifying Doctor Wil^is, against whose destructive Course of Sanguimission I
have written; offering to make good the Ration thereof by Operation and
Demonstration: for all this Petrus dormit securus, ye rest your selves
satisfied, soothing one another up in the delusory Event and favor of Great
Ones, on whom ye impose by your Authority of Learning, most notorious untruths,
to the loss of the lives of the most Illustrious in the Nation.

Ye fraudulently and craftily make the World believe you slight or scorn to
answer me, but re vera, you are not able to make any solid veridical Reply,
that may be satisfactory to any sober, upright, scrupulous Inquirer into the
Reason and Effects of Phlebotomie. You say in p. 31 of the Reply, Physicians
daily do, and lawfully may speak in general, that such a man was killed by such
an Apothecary by not letting him Blood. But I will prove it by Fact, that such
a Physician wrongs the Apothecary, and unlawfully charges him with Homicide for
omitting that which you putting in ex^cution make your selves guilty. Wherefore
i^ the Magistrate would be pleased to understand the sad products of this
Bleed^ng, ye ought according to Law, if ye obstinately go on in your
lethiferous courses, to be dis-enfranchised, and in stead of a superficial
Phlebo^omical company of unlawful de^troyers of Mankind, a substantial,
Philosophical, justly Chemical Society to be advanced. And it had ere this been
brought to pass, had not some cra^ty Prevaricators belonging to you, and
scandalous illiterate fellows intruding themselves among us, betrayed that
enterprise; which I believe a Learned Helmon^ian Spagyrist will in despite of
all your underground dealings attain, and make evident the Thomsons which you
zealously and knowingly oppose (which heightens your iniquity) are able in
their Art to do more than all the Merr^ts in Europe. Neither do they fear your
prosecution (as you proudly relate) although out of superlative malice you
implicitly rank me among the Odowds and Triggs, the last whereof I have reason
to believe did more positive good in one Month (for I desire to give the devil
his due) than you and all your Phlebotomical fellows did in a whole year.
Moreover, the Thomsons deride your boasting in Compounding Medicaments better
than the whole Company of Apothecaries; since you are very ignorant of the
Ar^ana of Paracelsus and Helmont, as is manifest by your Actions; otherwise you
are a most notorious counterfeit. As for your METHOD, which you say you
understand; I am ready to make it appear tedious and impostorious, therefore
not to be insisted upon. To^ching the stating a Case in your Science, I know
you are very expert ther^in, being a cunning Sophister^ but we must tell you,
your Fundamentals are rotten, and in this Case, uno absurdo dato, mill
consequuntur. As for your Degrees and admission into the College twenty years
ago; also their choosing you Censor to read public Anatomy with applause, are
nothing significant, unless you were more sound in the Phi^osop^ical
Principles, and could arrive to the degree of Curing without Bleeding, which is
absolutely inconsistent with a Physician thoroughly acquainted with his Art. Now
because you and your Copartners glory in the knowledge of Anatomy, I would
that Ingenious men take noiice that I have Reason to speak something for my
self, being as well versed therein as most of you; yea, I have performed one of
the most remarkable Operations in Europe, i. e. Splenotomy: the complete
Experiment of cutting the Spleen out of a Dog, whose life afterward was
prolonged to above two years; then loosing it by accident. Having accomplished
this Anatomical Manufacture, I addressed my self to Doctor Harvey, who was
exceedingly a^fected with the novelty of the Experiment; I also communicated
the manner of the Dissection and Accidents coming upon it to a noted vapouring
Anatomist among you, who at first admiring and commending the fact, putting me
to the trouble to bring the Dog up to London, ploughed in the interim with my
H^ifer, congregating some of the Chirurgions (who, as I was told, would have
laid an hundred pounds it could not be done) and working according to my
directions, made an exection of the Spleen; so that before I returned to London
(about a Month after the Relation) a Dog called Asplenos was running up and
down his house. The Marquess of Dorchester, who sent to me to meet him in
Greys-Inn-Garden, that he might confer with me about the matter, can testify
that I was the first who made this Experimental Dissection to a purpose. To
confirm it the more, Squire Boil offered to give (as Docto^ Currer told me)
five pounds for the Dog; but was forthwith taken off by your Splenetick
aemulation. Doctor Tern likewise requested me that he might enjoy the use of my
Asplenical Dog, and the two Cholick stones (which Doctor Harvey ^eheld with
admiration, urging me to repose them in his new built Fabric, that he might
expose them to public view in the Anatomical Theater: which I granted, on
condition he would do me right; but this design was quickly laid aside and
quashed, after he had consulted with his Colleagues, lest I should get too much
Credit and Practice by this Agyrtising mode. I hope all this is sufficient to
prove that I was the first Author of this Splenotomical Transaction; although
like a Company of unworthy Plagiaries ye have usurped the Honor and Repute of
this rare Experiment, endeavoring to rob me thereof. Well, see^ng you b^ag and
vaunt, I know not why I should not be a little vain: 'twas one of these
Thomsons which you so lightly set by, who Dissected a Pestilential Body, with
strict Insp^ction and Observation, having written a Treatise thereof for
present and future bene^it, when such an Hectoring person as your self, and
most of your Sociates, like so many Cowards ran away in times of greatest
necessity; for which you ought to be animadverted: yea, those that ta^ried had
as good have been absent, they did their business so negligently for fa^^ions
sake, without any true-hearted zeal for their Country. Indeed this was no more
than what I pr^dicted in Galenopale: certainly these and many more
circumstances considered, they who have any insight into the Intrinsecal worth
of things, cannot but judge the Thomsons capable to merit as well, if not
better than ou^ pragmatical self-conceited Merrets, who make a great noise, but
act little to Noble ends.

I understand by your words page 39. that you are one of the great promoters
and Indulgers of some Papers written 1664. It is likely you might have a finger
in the Pie, for you are a busie-body, and praecipitate to condemn and vilify
all that cross your own Interest; so that I cannot think but you prompted the
Author sometimes, as in page 32. where ye most scurrilously and vilely inveigh
against Geber, Lully, Paracelsus, Helmont, those brave Souls, to whom you
deserve not to be laborers. In those papers, like Momes and Zoils, ye carp and
cavil at the terms of those Philosophers, which your un-intelligent Heads, and
un-experienced Hands were never yet capable to apprehend. But what pitiful
Stories are those, how shamelesly absurd are ye, to rail at and impeach those
Philosophers, quarrelling about their Words, and yet refuse Experimental
Explanations of their meaning by Facts oftentimes tendered to you by their
Disciples.

To contract all to a period, since you have undertaken to oppose the Thomsons,
the Thomsons are resolved to oppose you and all your adherents; neither do they
value you a rush, supposed they may have fair play: as for your
Gun-powder-plots and secret und^rminings to blow us up, we shall be as wary of
you as possible. However, other magnanimous Philosophers will presently succeed
us by virtue of the powerful Magic of Omnipotent Truth.

Pretend not then this or that poor beggarly shift or excuse, but accept of (as
you profess your self an Experimentator) what one of the Thompsons has
proposed to Hen. St. or Doctor Willis; otherwise offer him any equal
Experiments tending to the determination of our Physical Controversies, for the
upright Radical Cure of Man. And doubt not but I will forthwith embrace them.
In the mean time I shall study to debar your backbiting, undervaluing, close
slanders, detraction, and debasement of my Medicines, without suffering me to
show the Innocence and efficacy thereof, as one of your Galenical Colleagues,
a sly cunning Gamester at winning and undervaluing whom he pleases, did very
lately put in execution against my Stomachical Essence, whom I may in good time
take to task; as likewise a spruce Finical Gentleman of yours, whose skull
being fairly^ adorned without, is ^tuffed full within with Italian Stories,
applause of his Travels, with a noise of his great Patients, his Chemical
Notions, how he breaks Glasses; yet I will maintain he is not able to
consolidate a Cut-finger as he ought, although me thinks he should have some
knowledge herein Iure Haereditario.

Besides this, I may have leisure to examine the Impertinencies, scomma's,
falsities, and malignities of C. T. his Papers, when I am fully satisfi^d who
the Author is, for therein lies couched a notable Story.

Lastly, one of these Thompsons will have at your Iuncto, that Conclave where
most of the Mischief against poor Innocent Philosophical Chemists are hatched.
I must now desist, although my fingers itch to make a further Discovery of your
frauds and abuses in Physic. But be assured there are those who are resolved
to vindicate Paracelsian and Helmontian Chemistry from your bespattering
Invectives: yet I shall give this Advertisement to our Opposers, if they become
Converts, rejecting this Sanguimission, so Hostile to the Welfare of our Lives,
as I shall demonstrate, withal forbear for the future to abuse or vilify
Helmont and his Genuine Disciples, we shall be ready to comply with them in all
Heroic Enterprises: If otherwise, let them take what follows.

From my House in Dukes-place nigh Aldgate.


