A LETTER Sent to Mr. Henry Stubbe, WHEREIN The Galenical METHOD and
MEDICAMENTS, As likewise BLOODLETTING in particular, Are offered to be proved
ineffectual, or destructive to Mankind; by Experimental Demonstrations.

Also his ANSWER thereunto by Letter; On which Animadversions are made By GEO.
THOMSON, Dr. of Physic, By whom is added A Vindication of his STOMACK-ESSENCE,
or ALEXI-STOMACHON, And other really-powerful REMEDIES, From the malicious
Slanders and active Ignorance of the GALENISTS.

LONDON: Printed for Nath. Crouch, in Exchange-alley, over against the Royal
Exchange. 1672.

A LETTER Sent to Mr. Henry Stubbe.
SIR,
HAd not one Affliction upon the neck of another (like Waves of the Sea) rushed
in of late upon me, to the obscuration, yea even almost subversion of the
Intellectual Faculties of my Soul; I had ere this retorted to your Reply, and
by a Chemical trial discovered your malicious, scurrilous, false aspersions,
cast upon this noble Science of Curing Directly, and the true Professors
thereof.

Now since it has pleased the Omnipotent to give me an extraordinary Evasion
out of the greatest Calamities I ever yet sustained, being restored in some
measure to my former Health, and a more composed Mind: I am firmly resolved,
if you stand not to the Test, as to make good practically what you have
divulged against me in your Epistolary Discourse, to publish your sophistical,
impertinent, frivolous Arguments of Bloodletting: Your distortion of the solid
genuine sense of those Reasons I have declared against it: Your omission of
answering to purpose that which I most insist upon, for the Confutation of the
Galenical Hypotheses in the Radical Cure of Diseases: Your implicit
concessions, or subtle compliance, with some Objections I bring against
Phlebotomy, yet a wrangling opposition made by you against the same: Your
useless cavlis about punctilio's or words, when you neglect the reality of the
main matter in Controversy. Lastly, your raillery and abusive language against
those whose actions deserve not the least opprobrious speech from you.

1. Be assured it is not your artificial, wily Disputations, the copious
citation of Authors of the same opinion with your self, your Rhetorical Terms,
your Philologie, or rather much babbling, to the confusion of the thoughts of
those who desire to be duly informed concerning the Nature of Things; your
confident mercenary scribbling undertakings in the behalf of a company of
disingenious Galenists, shall ever run me down (as you brag) or dispossess me
of the Truth of that Science, in which my own and multitude of others senses
have experimentally instructed me.

Till you convince me this way by Medicinal Actions deliberately entered upon,
performed judiciously, you will never prevail with upright understanding
Persons so far as to harbor any other belief, but that you and your Abettors
aim at your own unworthy interest, rather then the fundamental Cure of Diseases.

Wherefore, if in this particular ye desire to clear your selves (of what is
yet deservedly laid to your charge) let me supplicate you and the Incensors of
your hired Pen (as ye have any kindness for your King and Country) to give me
leave practically to exhibit before your eyes the legitimate sincere way of
Curing, by having regard to efficient central Causes of all Diseases, without
this circumcising Bloodletting, as I have stated it.

If then you will vouchsafe heartily to see what may be done solidly beyond
your botching method, by those whose Souls after they were taught better things
(by a plain search into Nature) abhorred to commit the facture of Remedies
(which principally belongs to the Physician) to mere lucrifick Apothecaries, we
may have great hopes there will be an end put to these Heats and Animosities
between us.

For it is not your Malignant Accusation you lay to the Lord Bacon as
Flagitious, can invalidate his experimental Philosophy; nor that effeminate or
childish allegation against Van Helmont, to wit, that his Neighbors in the
same Street knew him not, when he was enquired after by Dr Kraft, (perhaps such
a crafty -- as your self) will move any one intuitively intelligent, to
disesteem so noble a Philosopher, beloved of Heaven above others; to whom was
granted the greatest inspection into Nature, above any we are this day
acquainted with, as I can make evident if need be.

In truth, these Hypochondriack flatuous outrages of yours do not at all
obscure these Heroes, yet they much Eclipse your own parts. Indeed you are
herein to be pittyed, that you should suffer your self thus willingly to be
hurried away by your pestilent inordinate Passions, to the prejudice of your
better part, the disparagement of Learning, and the evil contagion of others.

This alone was a sufficient Testimony to me, that you was obstinately bent to
oppose me (right or wrong) as soon as I heard (some months before the Edition
of your Papers) by a faithful friend (having expostulated this Matter, withal
reproved you for calling me Mountebank, as likewise reprehended your design to
write against my Physical Assertions) what your excuse was (your own heart
being conscious of unhandsome dealing in the thing) that you were put upon it
to gratify your (Hyperbolically extolled) Patron, and so could not avoid it.
Is this worthy of a Philalethes to become a Mercenary, to betary the most
precious things existent, in hope for this obedience to acquire some Secular
preferment or recompense?

Certainly Mr. Stubbe, you cannot but know your large Talent was concredited to
you for more illustrious Ends, then chiefly to gain a Temporary felicity here.

However, although you have adventured upon an unjust Cause (as I conceive) by
the Instigation of some Misochymists, yet admit but a Pyrotechnical Trial, that
the most ingenious of men may be assured who of us is mistaken: I Will engage
(should you be worsted) to pass by all your Obloquies, yea, to solicit those
whom you have wronged by your virulent Tongue, to do the same upon your serious
Resipiscence, which will infallibly bring you in a greater reward then your
Patron will ever purchase for you, how specious soever pretenses may be made.

Neither let your inconsiderable thoughts you entertain of me, take you off
from the direct experimental Indagation after sanative verity; since you who
have bestowed so much time and study in the Theory for the verbally refelling
my Arguments (so that you are forced to confess ridiculously (pretending your
self not able to comprehend my language) you never under-went a more difficult
Task in your life) should not methinks shrink back in driving home and making
good all your Reasons really by matter of Fact to my final Destruction, which
might (if your abilities do permit) be effected with far less Reluctancie,
Constraint or Penance, then the late Work you undertook, considering till then
the wiser sort will look upon you as a company of only wording Physicians,
destitute of wholesome Works.

One thing is very observable through your whole Discourse, that whenever you
are every way beset by solid Truths, in so much that no way is left to get out;
then you fall into scurrilous, abusive terms, as Baconface, Ignoramus,
Mountebank, Quack-salver, Canting, and the like Sarcasmical expressions; as if
to call one all to naught, were enough to make me guilty, though never so
innocent: I wish these rude Appellations were only fastened on them who most
properly may lay claim to them.

But among all your malicious Obloquies, I wonder with what face you can
pronounce me a pretender to Physic and Chemistry, or illiterate, since none
unless some abominable slanderer, could ever justly tax me of serious
premeditated dissimulation in my Religion, Profession, Manners, or
Conversation. This candor and charity of spirit has been not a little
disadvantagious to me, as to a secular profit, which the Galenists prefer
before all. This one of the Society (if he would confess it) knows to be true (
i. e. Dr. Tern) who was pleased sixteen years retrograde from this time, to
applaud me publicly for a very Able Physician; although now he seeks closely
to discredit me, and declaim against my Remedies as too Hot and Strong.
Notwithstanding, thus much I must be bold to tell him, that this weak, frigid
opinion of his concerning my Medicaments, arises from an imbecility of his
sight, not able to penetrate into the Causes of Natural Things; which infirmity
(his beloved interest will hardly ever suffer to be cured. Thus the blind
leads the blind, and so the people will have it (as they say.)

Moreover, my grand enemy your Patron (in obedience to whom you wrote this
Polylogical Treatise, without any proportionable improvement of the Readers
Intellectuals) testified of me to his Apothecary above thirty years past, that
I was a very good Scholar for my time: for having not long before left the
common Schools, finding an inclination to the study of Physic, led by Divine
Providence, I directly pitched upon this most eminent Art, having neither
before nor after affected any other Vocation.

Thus making some progress in this Medicinal Study, Mr. Dowtie (in whose house
we had Winter-lodgings) willing to oblige my Father, told him that (seeing I
was desirous to acquire knowledge in Physic) he doubted not but his
Brother-in-Law, your new Protector, would for his sake instruct me to that end.

But alas, I came short of what my friend intended: for I found this Phoenix of
a Doctor (as you proclaim him) endued with such a haughty mind, that I could
not by any means endure his imperious deportment a little above a Fortnight.

Wherefore according to Dr. Read's advice, who then lay Bedrid in the same
house, I betook my self to private studies: The troublesome times, and my
Fathers death, not permitting me to go to our Universities at that present; yet
afterward coming out of France, I steered my course for Weymouth, intending
for Oxford, but by the transverse Marching of the Earl of Essex, I was driven
the quite contrary way into Cornwall; from whence returning after the Victory
there obtained by that good King, I was (according to Fate) taken Prisoner at
the last fight at Newbery by the Parliament-Forces; afterward I was brought up
to London, and clapped up in the Fleet, where I continued immured up some Months,
five Weeks of which I was dangerously sick. All this while I in no wise
neglected to follow my Study in Physic, as opportunities would permit.

At length having attained a competent knowledge in Physiologie, I addressed my
self above twenty three years ago, to be examined by the College of
London-Physicians, Dr. Clark being then ordained President, Dr. Prujean, Dr.
Hamey, Dr. Micklethwait, Censors; who approving my abilities to practice, told
me that they would confer upon me a Testimony thereof, if I paid such a sum of
money demanded by them for my License: which excessive demand, when I saw them
so ridgidly insist upon to the utmost farthing, considering what little
advantage I should reap by this Commission from them; I entertained the counsel
of one of their Seniors and so with all speed betook my self, according to his
advice, to Leyden, where I had been formerly conversant (where my Friend and
diverse Collegiates had been graduated) to obtain a Degree ex condigno,
purchased upon better terms then many of our Philosophasters and Medicasters
acquire it here.

Thus performing all things decently, and in order, for the credit of my
Profession (so far as my ability would allow) still keeping within my breast a
loyal and honest Soul in the height of temptations, giving every one his due
without constraint, abhorring to join with any Faction to magnify or depend
upon a rebellious politic Patron for my own base ends, to the injury of my
King and Country: I made a constant proceedure in that Philosophy I conceived
most useful or beneficial for man's life, without applying my self to the
gratifying those Praeco's, who measure the worth of Physicians, according to
the numbers and length of Bills prescribed.

In this manner I lived obscure fourteen or fifteen years, always detesting to
prostitute my self or the Art to those Sollicitors or Procurers of Practice,
whom I knew, if I would feed often with a long Bill (as other Practitioners
did) they would cry up my name aloud; neither should I then be in danger of
incurring the fate of Van Helmont, not to be known where in what street soever
I lived: Neither could I dispense with time-serving Humors, as most of the
Galenists did for their sordid gain.

However, I was always sedulous to observe the kindly effects of Galenical and
Chemical Remedies, some of which I made with my own hands, before I entered upon
public practice, others were recommended unto me by an honest sufficient
Physician, my very loving friend, formerly an accurate Apothecary; but at
length forced to give over his Trade, by reason of the persecution which the
Collegiates brought upon him for making Lac Sulphuris, a safe Prevalent
Medicament, as he ordered it.

Having made many repeated Experiments concerning the virtue of the Galenical
and Chemical preparations, weighing all circumstances belonging to each
indifferently; I was satisfactorily convinced that the last, though of the
ordinary Class, did far surpass the former in all Contumacious Diseases.

I ingeniously confess, I had great kindness (upon my first Hiatrick onset) for
Bloodletting, esteeming it most powerful to rid away the Morbifick Matter,
according to that Doctrine (but false) of the Schools I had imbibed. At length,
being clearly convinced by experiment often made upon my self and others of its
treacherous effects, I totally rejected it upon the account of Evacuation and
Revulsion.

Hereupon I was strongly induced, through the importunate Dictates of my Soul,
to dissuade others from this fallacious, yea, pernicious way of Curing; also to
excite those who are cordially sollicitous for man's health, to put out
themselves to the utmost in the search after better means, far more able to
extirpate Maladies then Sanguimission, without any considerable imparing the
strength (as I can indicate.)

For this Reason you unworthily detract from me, reviling me with taunting
language, without any further scrutiny into matter of Fact; which I must court
or urge you to, that I may clear my self, and certify who is illiterate (as to
the knowledge of things) conducible to our better State (for that is the
principal end of Language) or who of us is the pretender to the Art of Physic
or Chemistry, that ingenious men may understand the meaning of those terms,
which you (like a cunning Gypsy, hoping thereby to suggest to the Reader, that
no matter of Moment is contained in the whole Tenor of my words) call Canting:
The Efficacy or Inefficacie, the Innocence or Nocence of the Stom. Esse.
alias, styled by you Pepper-drops, which you maliciously, ignorantly vilify,
to gratify the Apothecaries, and their poor-spirited Doctors, who are forced
in this Exigence to truckle, to close in, and to carry fair with those whom I
am certain they cordially hate.

Neither shall I at present use better Arguments to instigate you to this
laudable Galeno-Chymical trial, then those proceeding from your own mouth; thus
declaring: It is a saying in the Civil Law, Plus valet umbra Experti Senis quam
Eloquentia Juvenis; and those Philosophers which would upon certain prejudicate
Opinions and pretenses of Reason determine of Medicinal cases, are exploded
even by Galen. Nothing is firm in Physic, but what is confirmed by a happy
experience. And it is an Imbecility in judgment (says the great Stagyrite) to
desert Experience, and adhere to Reason. I assure you, Sir, if you lay aside
your Multiloquie, your boasting of particulars, rarely happening instances or
examples of Cures past; if you wave your mustering and summoning in Authors
like to like, insignificant as to confute any sagacious Philosophers senses: If
you forbear your raillery, (which I fear will hardly be done, being so natural
to you) and adhere to several equal Experiments which you or my self shall
propose; I protest I will kiss your hand, and altogether expunge out of my
thoughts any Animosities you have given me cause to harbor against you.

Wherefore I shall endeavor what possible to stop all your starting holes,
leaving but one passage, which will undoubtedly lead us in the direct way of
Truth, and speedily decide our Controversies. In the first place, I courteously
offer to you some Essaies, tending to the discovery of the Efficacy or
Inefficacie of Bloodletting, according to those suppositions you have set down
in your Epistolary Discourse.

Choose you one of a full Athletick habit of Body, afflicted with an Acute or
Chronick Disease; order him according to your Method, by a previous
Sanguimission: Let us hear before your first attempt of a hopeful Cure, what
immediate solace or real asswagement introductory to a sound future recovery
from this or that sickness (barring Opium) you can promise, in what time you
can judiciously engage the danger of the Disease to be past, likewise secure
(seldom erring) the Patient from any tedious infirmity, as Ague, Dropsy,
Scurvy, Consumption, commonly ensuing an Accute Grief.

Be pleased in like manner to destinate to my share one equally Plethorick
also, every way affected as your aforesaid sick person, so nigh as we can deem,
whom I shall undertake to handle (without the emission of Blood) so as to give
you some speedy Alleviation to a purpose (without offering him any Papaverous
preparation.)

I shall also deliver a satisfactory prediction concerning the event of the
Malady; then let indifferent Judges censure us according to the performances of
such, who takes the right Method of Curing by moving the Cause of the Disease
radically, and by preserving the strength proportionally. Thus will we proceed
to reiterated Probations.

I once again earnestly press you to accept of the just and strict division of
the Hospital sick wretches into two parts (the privilege of the Election of
one half being allowed to you) then will we fall to our Work, demonstrating who
according to your great Stagyrite is guilty of imbecility of judgment.

Moreover I conjure you, if you have any Piety, Honesty or Sobriety in your
Actions, to entertain some of those equitable experimental Proposals, described
in Haematias. Page 117, 118, 119, 120, 121.

Thus omitting an empty noise of vainglorious bragging of those Experiments we
have perhaps, like good old Women, achieved in reference to the Cure of poor
Mortals; we will conclude to be tried judiciously whether we are able to
undertake and accomplish our Cures, with as much certainty as an expert
Mechanic can oblige to make a good Watch, or the like Engine, being seldom
mistaken therein.

By this means it will be detected, whether Bloodletting does for the most
part, hit the mark of Sanation according to Election and Discretion; or whether
it be introductory (as you have asserted) for the extirpation of Diseases,
which in despite of all Opponents I can maintain to be generally seated in the
Stomach, Spleen, or parts adjacent.

Hence it will appear whether it be any whit proper to let out the Vital Juice
in the Plague; which that you, or any late Fugitives, should stand up for being
altogether a stranger sensibly to its Nature, argues transcendent Ignorance,
and superlative Impudence.

Hence we shall finally discuss, whether letting out the Blood in the Small Pox
be not far more dangerous and less effectual for a fundamental Cure, then the
keeping it in; and so rather to trust to excellent Medicaments, which may
safely discharge the Stomach of Impurities, sweeten Acidities, allay a
super-Fermentation or Ebullition of the Blood, hinder its Coagulation, mortify
the Malignity, scatter a great part of the Peccant Matter insensibly, keep up
strongly the Vital Spirits, withal cause the less Scars to ensue in the Skin.

I hope I shall hereby vindicate my Remedies from your virulent Slanders, in
particular, the Stomack-Essence, scoffingly called by you Pepper-drops, which
being full of Salt, the unsavory Galenists stand in great need of (although
their pride will not suffer them to make use of it) for the preservation of
their suspected Fame from an ill Odor.

This Remedy I question not to protect, maugre all oppositions, as the most
innocent, prevalent Remedy in Healing, above any preparation which may be
purchased at so easy a rate in England.

In this civil, most commendable, reasonable, useful, practical Contest, it
will come to light whether the Galenists can in any Adequate Measure overcome
those Atrocious Calamities of Body, which at this day rage among us, without
the help of Chemical Medicaments; the Oblation of which they oftentimes make
secretly to their Patients, attributing the happy success coming upon them, to
their feculent Galenical Mixtures (yet railing against publicly, and
condemning the former, being the best flower in their Garden, ready to help
them at a dead lift.)

By this means it will be made evident what a vast difference there is between
Ol^um Vitrioli, Sulphuris, Mercur. Dulc. Praecipi. Rub. and Abb. Turb. Miner.
Croc. Metallo. Spiri. Sal. vulg. the use whereof I have many years ago quite
left off, for as much as they are justly suspected as hazardous, in comparison
of others Philosophically handled, as Essent. Stomachi, Pil. Polycre. nost.
Pull. Pestifug. Tinctur. Emetic. Pulv. Emeto. Cathar. Pil. Emeto. Cathar.
Tinctur. Polyace, Potio nostra Cardia. Tinctur. Alexiter. etc.

We shall hereby detect whether Van Helmont ought to be esteemed an Intelligent
person in Physic, a person of credit, or a man of practice; although you
rashly impeach him of the contrary.

Add to this, whether I can make an Experiment (against which your bare
Negative will never prevail) that you are a most egregious notorious --

Lastly, it will be disclosed, who (the Galenists, or true Philosophical
Chemists) properly deserve the scurrilous names you throw upon us, as
Mountebanks, Quack-salvers, etc. If you fly to poor shifts, or trivial excuses,
obstinately refusing these prudential, sober, serious and candid ways of
informing our selves and others experimentally for the ease of their Griefs: If
you Apostatize from what you have positively expressed in Page 22. before
recited, and several other places of your Discourse; I have advisedly
determined to put your Reply into a Retort, severly to prove what Metal the
Brethren of the Good Old Cause are made of, whether they be not over-valu'd by
opinionated persons, who oftentimes respect a glittering gilded outside, rather
then an intrinsecal value. Hereupon I shall make known if so be multitude of
Patients be any solid Argument (as you would have it) that Ergo the Galenists
must needs be the best Practitioners in Physic, since then Sir Richard Barker
and others such like, frequented by a numerous company of all sorts of sick
people, must by necessity of the same Reason be reckoned amongst the best
Physicians.

In conclusion, we shall by the Magical Power of this Pyrotechnie find out who
are worthily censured Pretenders to this excellent Art. Farewell, may you so
prosper as you favor this Heroic Experimental Enterprise.

The POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,
IF you please to forbear your Viperous words till an opportune season of
procuring Vipers, and then to admit that we fall to our Work of making
Experiments, who of us can most skilfully and expeditely Cure himself bitten by
a Viper; afterward to proceed to Essays in the like manner upon others:
wherein if you get the Victory after frequent repetition of this kind, I shall
freely acknowledge your relation of the Effects of the biting of a Viper, and
the Cure thereof, to be taken notice of as Strange; otherwise I shall esteem it
so vulgar, that an old Woman, any whit versed herein, would scorn to have
suffered the sad symptoms (of this poisoned Poor Man to continue so long) or
new and strange ones to appear some days after.

From Dukes-place in Shoomakers-row nigh Alga^e. Geo. Thomson.

An enclosed Note sent with the Letter.
SIR,
I Expect a speedy Answer from your voluble Pen, either that you will retract
your falsities you have venditated against this Noble Chemical Science, and the
faithful Assertors thereof, or that you will give way that I may demonstrate by
real performances the verity of our Philosophical Tenants: And look what
measure of Ingenuity, Candor, Sincerity, or Civility I receive from any
Galenists, the same I shall endeavor to retribute to him duplicated: If you
deny me this becoming modest request, then blame me not if I seek for a Remedy
where I can best find it.

Yours G. T.

Mr. Stubbe's Answer.
SIR,
SInce I have been so happy as to meet with your Letter as soon as it arrived,
and that my present leisure is such that I may read it over, and employ an hour
in answering it, lest my self should create in you an opinion of my incivility,
or furnish your arrogance with materials for an imaginary triumph; If you
consider the language you have used indefinitely against those Physicians,
called Galenists, and that method of practice which the Edicts of so many
Emperors assure us to have been heretofore beneficial, and which the happy
experience of so many judicious persons during so many Ages, and the
successfulness whereof in my own practice has endeared unto me, under the
Character of the prosperous as well as rational: If you consider this, you
cannot complain of any incivility in my Writings, nor complain of any indignity
put upon you, since your general deportment, and particular contumelies against
me, do sufficiently vindicate me to any indifferent persons.

If Mr. Dover told you, that he expostulated with, or reproved me for any thing
in relation to you; I conceive our discourse is represented otherwise then it
really was: I remember no such passages; nor did he express himself as your
friend, but as your acquaintance. I did tell him (though I cannot set down the
particular words) that I would not have written against you now, but that I was
importuned thereunto by some eminent Physicians of the College, who had
rendered me so considerable a support against the malice of those most
disingenuous and barbarous Vertuosi, that I ought not to refuse them so small
and inconsiderable an acknowledgement: He might have told you with what
contempt I looked on your book against me; I thought my self unconcerned in
that Rhapsody made up of Ignorance, Impertinence, and Untruth: As little did I
value your Treatise of Phlebotomy, wherein as I was not particularly
interessed, so I thought the public Method of Physic could receive no
prejudice by such a despicable Pamphlet, the language whereof was not to be
comprehended by the illiterate, nor the sense by any mortal. Upon this account
it was that I expressed my unwillingness to meddle with you, and no other: But
the judgment of more intelligent persons did over-sway me; they told me of the
growth of the Helmontian principles amongst the ignorant and indiscreet
Novellists; that some Vertuosi did abet the opinion which disswades Phlebotomy,
and that even Truth was sometimes overborn by noise and a crowd: and I my self
thought it an illegal and intolerable procedure, for you to advance the
Baconical Ignoramus's to a Judicature wherein our Law has placed the prudent
and learned College of Physicians.

You see now that there is little of advantage to be derived unto you from my
unwillingness to encounter you: and I must tell you, that I was no way hired or
mercenarily engaged to do what I did: All that know me, can ascertain you that
I am not a man of such principles: and this is an untruth, which if Glanvile,
or any other Virtuoso suggested unto you, you did ill to believe so notorious
Liars. It is also necessary that I tell you, that Sir Alexander Frasier neither
incited me against you, nor knew of the undertaking, nor understood of the
Dedication, until he saw the printed Book: the Epistolary Treatise was writ
unto another, though afterward entitled unto that excellent and learned
Physician.

What Truth there is in the account you give of your self, I know not: all that
I can collect from the Character my learned Patron gave you, is, that you were
once a proficient in Literature, during your being at School; and if Dr. Terne,
or any of the College had ever any favorable opinion of your abilities, as I
know not the grounds they went upon, so I may be excused from concurring with
them in that Judgment, when I am certain they must have changed it, or have
other motives to continue it, then what your writings do suggest; and till I be
acquainted with them, I must be excused for adhering to my present convictions.

What is meant at Leyden by a Doctorate ex condigno, I do not comprehend: it is
enough to justify all I say, that you purchased it, whatever it be: If it be
more then a Diploma, you did your self wrong, not to inform the World better:
and let the thing import what you please, you do not acquaint me yet, that you
performed any Exercise for it: As little does it appear that ever you were
competently acquainted with the Galenical way; it is not a practice to be
learned out of one or two Books, especially such as are in vogue: I know not
whether you were sufficiently instructed in that Physiology whereon our
Practice is established: I know not, if you understood our Diagnosticks,
Prognostics, and Method: and if you did not (as I dare presume you never did)
your censures of the Galenical way, your desertion of it, and your adherence to
the Helmontians, signify nothing, except when you harangue it amongst the
Populace.

I pass by how you were mistaken in your defense of the Lord Bacon, whose
ignorance in many subjects whereupon he descanted, and whose falsehood in
relations and experiments, I could demonstrate by a thousand instances. In the
point of Phlebotomy, you cannot with any confidence say but that you understood
not what were the effects of Phlebotomy, and what we designed in that
Operation; except you likewise grant that you were false to your own thoughts:
for your Writings are full of palpable mistakes upon this subject. I have not
injured you in the repeating of any Argument of yours, to my knowledge: I am
sure I never intended it: and I think my Replies are so full and plain, that
none can except against them, but such as are swayed by their Will, not Reason:
I have taken up no precarious principles against you, nor supported weak
Argumentations with Authorities: I justify matter of fact, by the depositions
of unblameable Witnesses, the truth of whose Testimonies is warranted by all
judicious Practitioners of this Age; and which you may see verified in the
Hospitals at Padua, Auspurgh, Paris, and wheresoever the true Galenists do act.
If I thought there were any higher degree of Moral Assurance then I deduce from
the Principles I lay down, I would relinquish my present sentiments: but I
speak it upon trial of both Methods, and upon the use of as generous
Medicaments as most of the Chemists do boast of, that the most secure and
beneficial course to the Patient, is that which the Galenical Physicians
pursue, and which the Laws encourage. I add this last Clause, to let you know
the danger you run in your Arcana; for if you do not adhere in your Cures to
the Traditiones Artis, it is as certain that you must answer with your life
according to Law for the death of any expiring Patient, as it is certain that
Chemistry, and that your Chemistry has no Traditiones Artis; nor has the
practice of your Predecessors been so successful as to give that Immethodical
rash procedure the name of an Art. Inform your self from the determination of
the Civil Magistrates in all Europe, what repute your Chemists are in: Are they
not pr^scribed in Denmark, and Germany, as Impostors, and persons of a most
unhappy practice? If you will have but patience till Spring, I hope to find
leisure, so as to write the History of the Galenical Physicians, and their
renown; and the History of Mountebanks and bold Experimentators, with their
infamy: you shall there see how unfortunate Paracelsus and Phaedro, nay, even
Hartman and Severinus Danus were: and even the modern Decrees against such as
had a better Laboratory, then Mr. Johnson found yours to be. You understand not
your own Writers, what they have taught; and must be your own Author: and I am
not able to distinguish betwixt the Testimony you give of your self, and what
Odowde or any such of your fraternity* do aver in their behalf.

I shall conclude with this asseveration, that I have writ nothing in reference
to the Plague, Smallpox, etc. but what I am persuaded in my conscience to be
true: and I will inform you now more then I had opportunity to learn before,
that Phlebotomy in the Smallpox, even after they are come out, is the old
English practice, directed by Johannes Anglicus de Gadesden in his Rosa
Medicinae, and Gilbertus Anglicus, almost three hundred years ago; and their
directions are as positive and ample, as those I cite out of Avicenna* and I
have spoken lately with many that have been blouded in the Smallpox with an
immediate alleviation thereupon, and have been, as you would phrase it,
radically cured.

You are mightily pleased with your way of challenging us to a public essay of
Skill; but in that you render your self ridiculous, since you are so
inconsiderable: For my part, I accept no more thereof, then I would do of a
challenge from an Idiot, or an inmate of Bedlam: and certainly you would think
I had little wit, to make a journey to London from Warwick; or little to do, to
answer you in such a Quarrel. We are in possession of our repute, our patients
depose for our happy cures; and if you atchieve any, you cannot evince that
they which recover are more radically cured, or longer-lived, then others under
us. Were things as you represent them, we could not continue in vogue; the
advantages your Patients would have over ours, would reduce the most obstinate
and prejudicate persons to your party; the Court, City and Country would be
your Theater, and not a Stage in Smith-field or Tower Hill: your party has not
been out-talked, but outdone: and the Cures of Erastus in the most difficult
Diseases, transcended* those of Paracelsus. Things certain and unquestionable
are not to be brought to a trial; and the petitions or demands of infamous
lying Chemists are not to be listened unto: and the Laws for ensuring the lives
of the Kings liege-people when they are sick, are not to be infringed
publicly: since you practice by Arcana, and illegal Methods, the Coroner or
the Civil Judge ought to sit upon you; and you must expect such a sentence, as
is conformable to the sense of those who are legally to approve or condemn your
Method and Medicaments: and to them I leave you. I hope to see all our Faculty
under a prudent regulation ere long; but you must never hope to see me tempt
God Almighty, by enraging an Adder, and suffering him to bite me: I wonder with
what conscience you should invite me to such a trial: besides, you may inform
your self that Adders do not bite so dangerously after they are taken, much
less when they have been kept, as when they are free and wild abroad: But I
find my self wearied with the length of this Letter, and so dull an
entertainment as your papers give me: if you have any occasion for them again,
you may command them at any time from me, who shall be to that purpose

Warwick, Nov. 4. 1671. Your humble servant, Henry Stubbe.

Animadversions on Mr. Stubbe's Answer.
IF any ingenious candid person please considerately to peruse without any
partiality the solid contents of my Letter, and this Sophisters slight Answer
thereto; I have reason to expect this Verdict from him, that my Adversary is no
other then an empty Tub, or sounding-Brass.

Those ungrateful disingenuous Galenists (who always resisting the truth, set
this Brazenface on work deceitfully to oppose Haematias.) contrived heretofore
a scurrilous Pamphlet against a veriloquous Treatise of mine, (namely A
Chemical trial of the Galenists) and enjoined Johnson their Pseudo-Chymist to
patronize it. However that stratagem would not take: for the great Defender of
Truth destroyed both that Setter or Trapanner, and the Spiritus Antiloimoides
published every week in the Newspapers by those Mountebank-like Runaways in
time of that most raging Plague.

Next they procured Dr. Knap, an able Scholar, but as precious -- as England
affords, one of the Galenical-Tribe, to contest with me experimentally. For his
part, he cheated the Impostors who employed him, not daring so much as to
appear before me, though expected by a throng of Apothecaries and others, till
after he had recovered of the Plague by my Remedies ( ex confesso, according to
his Letter now in my custody) he came to give me thanks for the Food (Physic)
I sent him in his great distress: Notwithstanding I still suspected this
wretched Galenical Sycophant (relieved by me upon the account of Christianity)
would hardly change his treacherous nature implanted in most of that Sect
(although he asserted quite otherwise, as his Epistle imports) which, according
as my mind gave me, fell out, to the shame of that party.

Lastly, now in this great exigence of theirs (having been disappointed
hitherto by their former Emissaries (not able to run me down) they have raked
up and down to find out this clamorous Tub, who makes a great noise to no true
purpose, yet sufficient (as they think) to amaze and disturb vulgar Heads. This
is one of the Serpentine Generation, worse then that in his Relation, etc.
either always closely supplanting the Truth, or openly resisting it: One of
John Lilburns Pedigree or Race, who would quarrel even with himself, for want
of an Opponent; perhaps the spawn of some Jesuit; for such an one he should be,
if we may judge by his hot, restless, litigious, sophistical, cavilling, wily
Brain.

I confess it has pleased the Donor of all things to bestow upon him notable
endowments; but it had been better he had never enjoyed them, rather then thus
to have resigned the use of them to the Father of lies.

It Is pity but that the circulation of his evil designs (even to the secret
animating and justifying Regicides) had ere this according to Justice been
maturely stopped, by virtue of that Plant duly prepared, which infallibly cures
such Botches, Blains and Soars of the Nation.

Regium est cum benefeceris male audire. Is it likely his Asp-like tongue
should afford a good word for any virtuous action, that could utter no language
of elaudation for so gracious a King? Although he seems to be a Convert now, we
have reason to think it is only out of a Sycophantical temporizing design:
Aegrotat demon Monachus, etc. Well, let him be as he is: I shall now make some
Animadversions on his impertinent Answer, no whit satisfactory to that
principal thing I insist upon, for the vindication of Physical Truth.

-- Stubbe upbraids me in limine, as guilty of Arrogance and imaginary Triumph;
of which that I may acquit my self, I shall condescend submissively to any
equal proposals made by him or his Impulsors, tending to the solid and real
detection of Medicinal Truth, without the least fantastical boasting therein;
incident to all Dogmatists.

The Arguments -- Subbe infers signifies nothing to bear me down, that I should
not complain of any incivility in his Writings: If, says he, you consider the
language you have used against the Galenists, and method of Physic approved by
the Edicts of Emperors, the experience of judicious Persons, and
successfulness in my own practice, etc.

Indeed I confess I have been downright in my expressions ( quatenus veridical
in the principal) to the Galenists, for which they hate me mortally; Veritas
odium parit: However, I am ready to maintain the Truth thereof demonstratively;
which Stubbe like a Tergiversator refuses, using the liberty of his slanderous
Tongue unworthily against the Art and my self. If I have called him, or any
other of that Society --, and offer to make it perspicuous practically (that
it is no improper language I use) neither will they admit the evidence for the
benefit of King and Subjects, I ought not to be reputed as guilty of
contumelies either general or particular. Yet if they use scurrilous terms
against me and the Science, neither will vouchsafe to prove that we deserve
them; I have good cause to complain of their incivility or indignity.

It Is the unhappiness of Emperors to be deceived by these Sophistical Wits,
and too much to countenance them, frequently to the shortning the thread of
their Lives. For all this, Rodolphus the Emperor had a greater inspection then
ordinary into Physical Truth; for he invited Van Helmont to be his Physician,
likewise gave him a rich Wife. Also Lully was for good reason highly favored
by Edw. 3. Moreover, Butler the Author of that rare Stone was exceedingly
valued by King James. Likewise our present Sovereign has to his glory
countenanced Chemists, and will, I hope still, for the preservation and
prolongation of his own life, encourage and protect the true Helmontian, which
if ever he stand in need, must be the Physicians can succor him, not the
Galeno-Chymists, mere Calophants, Mimicks or mock-Chymists.

The success he vaunts of is not worth a rush, unless he can make it good for
the future, which he rejects. Careat successibus opto quisquis ab eventu facta
notanda putat: Were they really experienced Physicians, they would give us some
proof of their Skill; which when I allure or urge them to, they presently fall
into abusive language, conscious to themselves of their own weakness.

The name of the Author -- (perhaps forged) Stubbe cites, is not the person
that expostulated and reproved him in relation to me; therefore his extravagant
discourse tends nothing to what I aim at in predicting what fell out.

As for the contempt of my Book (Misochymiae Elenchus) directed against him,
calling it a Rhapsodie made up of Ignorance, impertinence and untruth; also his
vile esteem of Haematiasis as a Pamphlet (though licensed) is no more a
conviction that it is so, then the bare saying of the Countryman, Thou lie,
was a sufficient confutation of Bellarmine. One comfort is, that black tongue
of this Brazen-face is with discreet persons accounted no slander.

As despicable as that Pamplet is (thus nicknamed by this Scurra) all the
Nerves that -- Willis or his Associates can exert, shall never be able to
invalidate the experimental verity of that Book, which shall endure, when his
trimly polished Writings (the Fundamentals whereof were filched out of
Paracelsus, and Van Helmont, without the least acknowledgement of the Authors)
shall become reprobate, and vanish into nothing.

Note what Serpentine undermining Wits, and eminent ones too, as I foresaw, the
Vertuosi have fomented in their Bosoms. These are the cunning Dogmatists that I
verily thought would supplant and put attick upon the Royal Society, by
spitting in the foul mouth of that --, and clapping him on the back, that he
might open more wide in his raillery against them.

Those Helmontian Principles shall in despite of Vatinian Malice flourish,
when the Name and Writings of the Galenists shall perish; although their Study
has been, and still is, to deprive the World of such brave Souls by infernal
devices, exercised by slanders, persecutions, poisons, etc. which to report
exactly, will require a large History hereafter to be set forth.

I Will depose -- Stubbe is unawares in the right, as to this particular, That
Truth is sometimes overborn by a noise and a crowd; otherwise the Galenists,
and their destructive errors, had ere this been trodden under-foot, never to
rise again.

Those Baconical Ignoramus's, if they catch this Brazen-face within their
Precincts, will make him know they are no such men, and pump more civil
language from him, yea Stercorate such a durty person, that he may fructify
the better hereafter.

The Epithet Prudent is ill appropriated by him to the College: for had they
not been Improvident and shallow in the knowledge of the issue of things,
Physic had never been thus prostituted by that illegal Method (severely to be
censured by the Magistrate, if the sad effects and products thereof were but
clearly discovered) and intolerable fraud of prescribing.

-- Stubbe affirms, he was no way hired nor mercenarily engaged to do what he
did, yet in the words foregoing he confesses, he was oversway'd, and could not
refuse them so small and inconsiderable an acknowledgement. So then we may
aptly collect, that he underwent the most difficult Task in his life (as he
confesses in his Discourse) and labored for a dead horse, having received his
reward beforehand. This negation of his, and what follows, does not cohere,
neither is this Scene handsomely laid by him, therefore of ten times less
credit then the account I give of my self; which if he please, he shall receive
from the mouth of honest Witnesses: Neither do I desire this perfideous enemy
of Truth to believe any Writings of mine, farther then my works testify of me.

What a quoil does this silly Thraso keep about a Doctorship! Let those Asini
Phalerati septum Artium, call me what they please: For I had rather hear Good
morrow Thomson cum Art, then Salve Doctor sine Scientia Medendi. I wish the
World could but see some of our grand Doctors uncased, 'twere as good as an
excellent Comedy to behold what pitiful, simple, empty, ridiculous things (in
relation to the Art of Healing) they would appear. Notwithstanding, I am so far
for Degrees, Orders and Titles, where they are rightly placed, that to
establish them, I have been a greater sufferer then most of our Galenical
Doxosophists: yea, if any of them had been plundered, imprisoned, and left
naked as I was, I question whether ever they could (having so small assistance
from without) purchased a Degree ex condiguo, according to the merit of that
exercise I under-went. Whereby, if this Infidel-like Stubbe please, he may be
satisfied by my Theses (now to be seen) de Apoplexia, printed, published, and
disputed pro and con, An. 1648. Iul. 14. hora locoque solito, that I very well
then understood the Galenical Physiologie, Diagnosticks, Prognostics and
Method, to the injury of Mankind, my own repentance, and difficulty of
unlearning the same. Although it is true, I was enforced to know the Wrong
before I could comprehend the right way of cutting; yet by my damage others
will receive advantage, when they shall be ascertained that the Galenical
course is plainly fallacious, so far from deserving an Universal survey, that
it ought in the very Preface to be exploded.

My adherence to the legitimate Helmontians, placed upon the Stable foundation
of clear experience, is so firm, that the Father of lies, and his beloved
darlings, shall never be able to separate me therefrom till death.

Moreover, I must plainly declare, that Van Helmont (whom these
stupendiously-ungrateful Galenists do vilify and disown) has taught them a
far more effectual Method of curing (which some of them in a clandestine manner
put in practice, yet will they not acknowledge it (which aggravates their
unworthiness to the highest pitch expressible) then that useless bulk of
innumerable antiquated Authors.

For the maintenance of whose reputation this Sophister minces, mitigates and
allays those their mortiferous Actions of Bloodletting, by certain exceptions,
cautions, and provisions never intended by his ancient Predecessors.

Upon that account this Terentian Davus would make the World believe that I
understand not the effects of Phlebotomy, and what they designed in that
Operation; intimating as if they had some Areanum therein (yet generally they
renounce any such thing in their practice) if so, then I may very well be
excused, as mistaken concerning the effects of Phlebotomy: Since I cannot
possibly be acquainted with their secret implicit intentions in that
Operation, which they have enrolled so politically in the Treasury of the
Monuments of their invisible Cures.

I am sure I have, according to those Traditiones Artis, as he calls them,
published by their Authors, stated the Case so justly, that let him do his best
to ward my Arguments, I shall demonstrate that Bloodletting, as to the scope
of evacuation or revulsion, is either palliative, injurious, or destructive to
Mankind.

For his Petulant, taunting, reflection upon so worthy, really honorable a
Person, the Lord Bacon, he ought severely to be animadverted: And herein he
shows his graduated impudence with his profound ignorance, in offering to
demonstrate by a thousand instances (as he delivers) the falsehood in the
relation and experiments of that intelligent Philosopher, eternally separated
from us; yet will not vouchsafe to accept of by me, here present, any one
determinating sensible Essay or demonstration for the conviction of him and his
abettors, that this perspicacious Lord was in the right Conception concerning
the nature of the Sweating-sickness. Thus a Cynick Genius dare insult over a
dead Lion, whose vain fear of tempting God, and a pretense of conscience, or
rather a base Pusillanimous spirit, will not suffer him to touch experimentally
a living Viper; whether wild or more tamed, that is not pertinent.

What follows this Thrasonical language against this noble Lord, is abominably
false, as I shall instance in one particular (omitting the rest, to avoid
Prolixity). I justify (says he) matter of fact, yet flies from it when I
present it to him, as the Galenists from the Plague, or himself from a Viper.
What Hocus pocus equivocation is this? he will, and he will not:
notwithstanding all this is not to be admired as strange, since this Satyrist
can breath hot and cold at the same time, affirm and deny the same thing in a
Moment, with applause of a Galenical College.

(...), if you please, farther; then will you find his matter of fact turned
into matter of faith: For this Mountebank-like (...) now for the defense of a
bad Cause upon the depositions of unblameable-Witnesses (whose credit is valued
no more by me then a Knight of the Post, till I see something done prudently)
the truth (quoth he) of whose Testimonies is warranted by all judicious
Practitioners of this Age.

It Is strange I should not in so many years Physical Occurrences meet with
these judicious Galenical Practitioners, who are able to warrant what they
undertake for the life of the Patient. For my part, I cannot be otherwise
persuaded by my senses, that they are any other then Good Guessers in Physic
(as that virtuous King of late denominated them) So far are they from being
judicious, as to the Prognostics or prescience of the exit of Diseases, that
it is very rare (...) they aim and hit the mark right in their predictions or
promises how the Disease will terminate, or whether they are able to cure it or
no in such a space: If they at any time touch the scope, it is rather by hap
then any good cunning; witness their judicious Medicinal carriage toward Mr.
Colvile a Gold smith (attended constantly by three of their most eminent
Physicians, from nigh the very first rising of his Disease, to the setting of
it and his life together) who was pronounced by them to be past all danger upon
the fourteenth day of his sickness, whereas he dyed the next.

Their judgment is also notoriously appparent by two of their eminent
Colleagues, one whereof frequents Lime-street, who kept their Sister-in-law,
Mrs. Hill, about a year and half in a languishing condition, by means of their
Feculent, Fraudulent Medicaments and flat Liquors; then at length (when they
were mistaken, both in the kind of her Grief, as likewise the direct
prediction of the conclusion thereof) she was in her great distress forced to
send for me, to hear my Advice; who after a due examination of the nature of
her sickness, forthwith promised (upon an engagement of the loss of the price
of those Remedies I should exhibit, of no reward for my labor, and the hazard
of my credit) to restore her perfect Health, if she would condescend to be
ruled. Upon this she listened to me in a tractable manner, till when I offered,
among other Chemical preparation, a Vomit, she then seemed to refuse it,
saying. Her Brothers did not dare to give her one for an 100 l. To which I
replied, If you will not trust my experience, follow your course. Whereupon she
assented to take several of my Vomits, with ease and congratulation of her
Friends. Now wanting nothing but a convenient space to complete the Cure, I was
prevented; a discovery of my person being made (for want of a watchword from
the servants) by one of the Brothers, who presently thereupon caused such a
disturbance and discord in the Family (for admitting me (a Physician so Hostile
to them) in this deplorable condition) that she was constrained to renounce my
self and Medicaments, as too hot and strong. Hence she remains uncured to this
day, three years past; but had, undoubtedly ere this perished, had she not
according to my counsel betaken her self to the drinking of strong Liquors; by
means of which, as she acknowledges, she receives comfort. The History, as
very remarkable, I may hereafter set down more amply, but here I must study
conciseness.

To justify how judicious these Galenists are, one of them living not far from
Leaden-hall-street, got into his clutches (by means of one of their ignorant
Plebeian advocates swarming in every place) a Patient, continuing in my hands
less than forty eight hours, one Mr. Viner, a Gentleman of the age of twenty
eight years, endued with a most singular constitution, then lying sick of an
Acute ill-conditioned Fever at Stepney, in the House belonging to the
Bowling-Green, whom I engaged to restore to his former strength, if he would
have been ruled by me. At the same time within the same Walls lay also sick
another Gentleman, Captain Catesby, forty years old, tired out with adversity,
sorely afflicted with a malignant Fever, and a Patient of the aforesaid
Galenists for the continuance of four or five days, who not daring to give him
a Vomit, in his great straits implored my help, which I refused till his
Physician could in no wise relieve him, apprehending him in a most dangerous,
if not mortal, state. In this difficult case I obliged my reputation for his
recovery from his Pestilent Fever, withal promised, if he would be governed by
me, to preserve him from relapse, or subsequent infirmities; which I brought to
pass judiciously in deed. The other Gentleman, kept to fulsome Cacostomachical
Doses, and flat dull Liquors, mouldred and dwindled away about three quarters
of a year after; which had never been (as I can undertake, also effect in the
like form of sickness twenty times) if he had listened obediently to me. Note
this sly Galenist was so effront to attribute (as I heard) the death of his
Patient to my hot Remedies given him at first.

A Servant of a Noble Person had his Leg destinated to be cut off by these
judicious Galenists, which by my Chemical Remedies was preserved with the whole.

An ingenious Citizen tired out by a long and a grievous Disease for the space
of a year and half, having spent nigh fourscore pounds upon these judicious
Physicians, who put him to run the circle of their tedious, fruitless method,
again and again to no purpose, was in a short space restored by Remedies
Philosophically prepared, as Mr. Stringer the Apothecary knows.

One of those Doctors gravelled in the aforesaid long malady, bled a
Pleuritical person twice in four or five days, without either judgment or
mercy upon the poor Gentlewoman: when he attempted to let out the vital Juice
the third time, I intercepted him, warranting upon solid grounds to cure her
Chymically, which was done effectually.

Multitude of such instances of their weak judgment I could produce, which I
must defer to a more happy opportunity, lest I incur prolixity. It Is well known
to some who have an eye upon my Method and Medicaments, that I every year cure
with discretion those whom the Galenical Judgment can in no wise alleviate. If
they have achieved, or can do the like for the future, let them declare it
practically with sober and serious prognostics.

How Mountebank-like does -- Stubbe boast of his generous Medicaments, yet
dares not bring them to light, that we may see the probation of them
judiciously; which I offer and frequently tender to them, but am still
repulsed: Veritas non quaerit Angulos. Although the Galenists are not such open
Mountebanks as those frequenting Smith-field or Tower Hill, yet are they as
close sly ones as any in the World: and had I time and leisure, I should
manifestly show how they are coincident, and directly suit one with the other
in diverse accidents and circumstances.

I hope some brave Zealot for truth will publish a Narrative of the Galenical
Mountebanks, and their infamous disingenuous ways, about the same time when --
Stubbe writes a History of Chemical Mountebanks and bold Experimentors, as he
threatens. For my part, I am equally disaffected to both ( there being in
neither Barrel better Herring.) Touching this lying Brazen-face his twitting me
with the impudent actions of Mr. Odowd, I do protest that I never approved his
illiterate rash presumptuous undertakings; neither did I ever countenance or
favor him in any company, otherwise then civilly in relation to his Majesty,
who was pleased to give him a kind aspect, from a consideration of some
notable Cures (as was reported) attained by him, which those eminent Galenists
could not accomplish. Dr. Sermons had (for such a Reason) his Majesty's Serene
influence, and Sir Richard Barker was perhaps honored upon the same score. If
the King is pleased to cast an eye of Grace upon those vulgar inferior
Chemists, who have sometime Outdone the Galenists; what would he do (if he
were rightly informed) for the Chemical Philosopher, who can and has (if
opportunity be not lost) opened a passage for relief, when the best of the
Galenists were in a straight, knowing not what to do more? Witness the Cure,
not long ago, of a great Lady of the Court, performed by Dr. Godhard (I mean
not that Ambidexter, or Affectator of Chemistry) who in all likelihood lost his
own life to save his Patients.

How the Galenical course can be secure and beneficial, if we may judge of a
Tree by its Fruits, I do not in the least understand: forasmuch as I can make
evident before any Judicature whatsoever, that the Method and Medicaments of
these opinionated Galenists, are either positively or privatively dangerous. If
I make good this (as I doubt not) then the obstinate Professors of such a false
Traditional Art, contrary to the institutions of Nature, ought to be indicted,
and receive suitably a condign mulct. For according to the Law of God, he who
does venture, ludere cum Corio Humano, sporting and applauding himself, as if
he had done a brave exploit, to kill a man with the best Method in the World,
is bound to make good skin for skin. Assuredly, seeing the Law of man either is
or should be grounded upon the Law of God, and an execution thereof ought to be
made on those who often violate the same; how severely will a wise, righteous
Judge or Jury censure those, who plead innocence ex dicto, but dare not
justify it ex facto, respecting the future as well as what is past?

If any repute (as this Brazen-face affirms) Chemistry no Art, he ought to be
looked upon as one of a crasie brain, or desperately malicious, who will say
any thing for his own interest* a mere terrae filius, who only applies his
study to the Art of Imposture of getting money, preferring Traditiones hujus
Artis, before the Institutiones Dei and Natura. Those Anomalous Methodists (who
declaim against this Mistress of Arts) exercising an Art to make and spin out
Diseases for their lucre, ought legally to be proscribed, as the Romans once
did for five hundred years; and the true Methodical Chemist, who observes a
speedy order (without sordid respects) in Healing, deserves to be entertained,
encouraged and cherished. We hope Princes will not reject that Art, and the
legitimate Professors thereof, which is the best support of their life. If any
abuse this Profession, I readily subscribe that they may be punished: but let
not those be Judges, who ought of all first to be reformed, and animadverted:
for Iustum ab Injustis petere insipientia est. Neither let paucity or scarcity
of able Professors damnifie the truth of this Science.

The Laboratorie I then had, which that Emissary and Trappanner Johnson
represented in a disguised contemptible manner to his Masters, I avow he never
saw. Albeit, granting what he related should pass for current, any sober man of
knowledge will commend me, rather for offering and executing greater things by
so contemptible Instruments, then those who boast of their Magnificent
Elaboratory, yet fall off from vindicating the happy Fruits and Products
thereof Experimentally.

Concerning what he means, that we shall see how unfortunate Paracelsus,
Severinus Davus and others were, I confidently presage will be most gross Lies.

Against his silly moth-eaten Authors he cites of three hundred years standing,
I object that in this particular their Authority is out of date, neither are
the oldest always the wisest. Moreover, the Scene of our truculent Diseases act
different to what they did in former times, being much more graduated, in their
virulencie complicated, become degenerate into others of a mixed Nature, and
confounded in their Symptoms, able to deceive even the very Helmontians.

As to his pitiful story of those who have been blouded (as he reports) in the
Smallpox, with immediate alleviation: I reply as he did, who viewing the
Monuments of those in the Temple of Neptune having escaped shipwreck, demanded
where the Monuments of those were, who were cast away. Were it possible those
three illustrious Souls could come from the intelligible World, and appear here
unto us, they would tell St^^ibe another Story quite different from the former.

The Injunction I have from Divine Writ to contend for the Truth, does please
me (I confess) to challenge those Thraso's to an Essay of Skill, who coming off
with so pitiful an evasion that I am Inconsiderable, makes them plainly
ridiculous, worthy to be hissed at. For let my self be never so inconsiderable,
yet any Sage Sceptick will allow Truth to be never the worse, though clothed
in rags. Saepe sub att^ita latita^ sapien^ia Vest. A wise humble man will not
think it amiss to be instructed from his very enemy never so mean; Fas est ab
Host doceri. All things duly considered, Invitatus ad haec aliquis de Ponte
negabit; none but one of the Spirit of a Beggars brat, would flight what I
offer for an universal benefit.

These poor excuses run directly parallel with a braving Hector, denying a
Challenge into the Field, sent him from a modest wise man abused by him.

Although the Philosophical Chemist can work no miracles (as some foolishly
fancy and expect from him) yet it may be reckoned one of the Wonders of the
World, that the Chemical Art should get so much ground on its Adversaries in so
few years, merely by its own worth; considering what a Vogue the Misochymists
have had formerly among the multitude; also what an infinite number of all
sorts, if interested persons, have contumaciously pleaded and defended their
unjust Cause: so that Divisum Imperium cum Jove Demon habet.

For all that, it is plain they have lost a great part of the former possession
of their Coemeteries; and many intelligent persons daily fall off from them;
yea, I question not, but at length they will quite be thrown out of all,
although they pretend to have eleven points of the Law on their side.

What Stubbe describes that our Party has been, not only out-talked, but
outdone by theirs; as likewise, that the Cures of Erastus transcend those of
Paracelsus, is Decumanum Mendacium. For as to his first assertion, I am ready
to offer to contradict and outdo them; which they dare not put to trial.

Touching the second, the Bishop of Salisbury has sufficiently informed us by
an Epitaph of a Catalogue of Diseases (reputed by the Galenists incurable)
overcome by Paracelsus Arcana.

Stubbe threatens a prudent Regulation of their Faculty; I wish I could see it,
but I suppose it must be done (if ever) by the Authentic Chemist. I also hear
a rumor of a new Dispensatory coming to light; I hope some Culpeper will not
be wanting to correct and comment upon it. I wish their new Fabric be laid
upon the Basis of Righteousness; which I much doubt, since the groundwork
thereof is too much placed upon Galenical principles, a most sandy foundation.

Pardon me, courteous Reader, that I have insisted so long upon the sharp
reproof of the vanities and untruths of this Adversary of the Chemical Science.
I should not question to have made you amends, could we but have drawn this
Mountebank-like or Quacksalvering-Galenist to an experimental S^ake. It would
make rare sport to see how the Chemical Mountebanks and Quacks would hate him,
if he could not make good his Hypotheses for Bloodletting.

Wherefore seeing I cannot, at present, bring him to any handsome terms, so
that a Specimen of his activity of Curing (he glories in) might be manifested:
I leave him to those like himself. So let them fight Dog, fight Bear, when they
meet one with another.

I shall only add this Caution, that those Plagiaries would desist for the
future, to steal useful verities out of Paracelsus and Van Helmont, yet
ungratefully and disingenuously to detract from, and disown them, neglecting to
commend the Style or Bridge they pass over. For it is an infallible truth, No
fixed great Disease can be cured, but by the Method and Medicaments
proportionable to what that great Philosopher has delivered.

A Vindication of the Authors Stomack-Essence, and other effectual Remedies,
from the slanders and active ignorance of the Galenists.
THat the greatest enemies (which have hitherto calumniated, yea, at this day
do defame, supplant, and hinder the advancement of this beneficial most useful
Chemical Science, as likewise eclipse the credit of the true Philosophical
Defenders of the same) are the merely interested, obstinate and wilfully blind
Galenists, is a truth as clear as the beams of the Sun no way intercepted.

The pretty pranks these sophistical Wits have played out of a designment to
suppress the happy progress of the Helmontian Doctrine, would make a man
sometimes laugh with Democritus: To look no farther then their ridiculous
Apologies, Excuses and Pretenses, if at any time they are provoked to fair
Trials for making good the Axioms of their Art: To contemplate their childish
evasions, when they are Non-plust in their natural Philosophy, not able to
satisfy any Intelligent person: To observe their Vulpone-like windings,
intrigues and nimble diversions, when physical Truth follows them closely at
the heels: To hear them chatter like Magpies, without any savory, solid,
practical information to the Hearers: To discover their Stellionated and
counterfeit Devices, in making the World believe, that they are the only true
Chemists; yet they renounce and rail against the best endowed Artists: To hear
them magnify their Bleeding and Pharmacie, yet to leave the City in
Plague-time to shift for themselves; would make any Splenetick Person break
forth into a profuse laughter. But to weigh seriously their Mortiferous
Bloodletting, their Poisonous Purgations (melting and reducing poor Mortals
too soon to their first Principles, whereby their very souls are sometimes
damnified): Their way of weakening Nature, and strengthening Diseases: their
crucifying, torturing, Butchering, yet ineffectual course, by Issues,
Blisterings, Scarifications, etc. their endeavors to stifle any good Remedy,
if it square not with their own particular vile respects: To apprehend
affectuously how many thousand poor Orphans and Widows are yearly made by these
perverse Sectaries of Galen, one who I believe was far more ingenuous than his
Disciples: to ponder, I say, these things from the very bottom of the
intellectual part, were sufficient to cause one to lament and weep bitterly
with Heraclitus.

How these Misochymists have opposed all virtuous actions in Healing, how they
have still kept down, by their usurped authority, those who would willingly and
up for the health of the miserable sons of Adam, is not easily to be expressed
by the tongue of any Mortal.

All their study has principally been, to defame, detract and traduce those
Worthies, Paracelsus, Van Helmont, the Lord Bacon, etc. to wrangle with them,
to pick holes in their coat; to examine with strict inspection their humane
failings, but slightly to pass by and disregard their extraordinary gifts, and
manifestation of Arcana's zealously communicated to posterity; by which these
ungrateful Persecutors of this Science are enabled to do something
extraordinary covertly, for the keeping up their tottering Credit. Yea, so
malicious are the haters of physical ingenuity, that they would, if possible,
stifle any generous Medicament (not squaring with their filthy lucre, laziness
and grandeur) which the Wise Disposer of all things has bestowed, as he
pleases, upon those inconsiderable (in their Blear-eyes) and contemptible
Chemists, for greater benefit to mankind, then the huge Pile of an ignoble
insufficient Dispensatory, contrived by vulgarly admired, over-valued Doctors.
So full of rancour and malice are the Galenists against the upright
Pyrotechnists, that a Jew never hated a Samaritan more then they do these; yea
such has been the desperate ill-favored designs of a Dogmatist against a
Chemist, that ((...)) many a generous Philosopher has for the stable avouching
the Virtues of Chemical Remedies made of Tartar, etc. been in danger to be sent
packing to the Tartarean-shades: Yea, so Cynick-like envious are they, that
imitating the Dog in the Manger, they will neither labor to do good
themselves, nor suffer others.

If an honest Mr. Job Weal, a singular Physician, and accurate Apothecary, have
by his industry acquired the knowledge of an efficacious preparation, (as Lac
Sulphuris) they presently cry out of it as Poison, fitting to be thrown into
the Kennel.

If Dr. Godhard, one of their former Sociates, obtained the happiness to have
revealed to him the powerful Operation of some Volatile Alkalies, which Cure
beyond their weak non-sensical Method and Medicaments, they presently
excommunicate and endeavor to outlaw him.

If a Learned Dr. Starkey prepare an Anodyne Pill, or any Arcanum to lenifie
poor Mortals grief, they and all their Clients are presently in an uproar with
Occlamitations, that he is a dangerous Physician, either quickly killing or
curing.

Now it has pleased the Omnipotent Philanthropos to impart to the meanest of
his Servants the knowledge of this helpful Remedy, the Stomach Essence (and
several other not vulgar Medicines) they are ready in ambush upon all occasions
to backbite, disesteem, carp, cavil and condemn them, as too hot, strong,
dangerous and violent. All which they will have simply believed, without
farther probation: In the same manner, as if one of the same Trade should
depretiate, vilify, or debase another Shopkeepers Commodities, yet refuse to
justify, by the Touchstone of sensible examination, before a lawful
Magistrate, the disrepute falsely brought upon another Wares; certainly none
ought to deny, but that he who does deal so unworthily in this kind, deserves
to be forced in a legal way, to give satisfaction to the wronged party.

This is all in chief I expostulate and demand of the Galenists, that they
would forbear unhandsomely to impeach my Medicaments according to their own
perverse Opinions, Suppositions or Phansies, and crazie Conceits of their
Populars, without a right, judicious, visible, legitimate proof: That
whenever they injuriously call me Mountebank, or Quacksalver, or animate the
more ignoble sort of Apothecaries, (for some of the gentlest, ablest, best
Artists, are more civil and handsome toward me) so to do, they would in
earnest reflect upon themselves, deliberately pondering who has most aptly
purchased these scoffs and taunts? They who in time of the Plague ran away,
leaving Spiritus Antiloimoides (to which they did not dare to trust themselves)
(a very insufficient Medicament, as I am ready to demonstrate, against such an
Atrocious Disease) (as it plainly appeared by its effects, upon their
Mock-Chymist, Johnson and others) to be published in the Weekly Intelligence,
as if it were some rare Arcanum working Miracles; whereas it was but a mere
Meteor, so vanished away, never to be heard of by them, or seen to this day: Or
this inconsiderable Baconist, who with confidence, and utmost care, attended
all infected persons that came or sent unto me, poor as well as rich;
administering with my own fingers such appropriate Remedies (without hanging out
a Bush, or setting any one to make an outcry of their Hyperbolical Virtues)
which at this day I patronize (as they are described in Loimotomia, or Pest
dissected) ready to produce them for their vindication experimentally from the
malice or ignorance of all Opponents.

Let those also who have got the best of their practice by means of a
Theatrical concourse of Vulgars, make a query in cooler Blood, when at any time
in their furious passion they vent against me the foresaid invective undecent
language, an de Ipsismet fabula narretur, whether they may not rather take
themselves by the Nose, setting the Saddle upon the right Horse, then mount --,
get up and ride openly into Smithfield or Tower Hill, and forbear to go any
more into A -- Corner.

Let them moreover canvase who of us have been the truest friend to the sick
man, keeping up the honor and reputation of Physic; the Doctors, who have
vilely venditated it by their profane prescriptions; yea, have suffered to be
put into a Frame, or pasted up, and to be publicly exposed to all Passengers,
Medicaments (perhaps so trivial and mean, as the foresaid Spirit. Antiloimoid.)
approved and licensed under their Seal; Or G.T. who has always been prudently
tender to bring any such Infamy upon Physic.

All things thus duly premeditated, I know no reason but I may without scandal
to this eminent Science, bring to light decently for the solid benefit of my
distressed Countrymen, some noble Remedies, especially this comfortable
Stomach-Essence, declaring sincerely the singular endowments thereof for the
health of man, as I have by manifold repetitions of trials found to be true.

The Virtues hereof I shall transcribe out of Haematiasis; setting them down
here more plainly, that meaner capacities may understand the use or application
of this Remedy, which although one of my lowest rank, is able explicately to
baffle diverse of H. S. Quacking generous Medicaments.

Notwithstanding, first I must give warning to all intelligent men, that the
ignorant, rash, envious censures delivered by -- Stubbe, and the rest of the
Galenical Tribe, with all their Sticklers, to wit, that Ess. St. is
Preternatural, or effectively too hot, strong, dangerous and violent; are
absolute untruths, to be discovered by the Test of offered experience. If then
they refuse the probation of its innocence, the Father of Lies ought to be
believed as soon as such his Disciples.

Wherefore I signify that it exceedingly strengthens the Stomach, helps its
Digestion, increases and makes active the Vital Spirits, and their instruments
by which they work (called Ferments) rectifies the Spleen, scatters and expels
Wind, Vapors, or any wandering wild Spirit, which flies in a moment from one
place to another, vexing the parts. It sweetens in some measure the sharpness
of the thin liquors in the body, which oftentimes causes pains, fevers, etc. It
subtly enters the Veins and Arteries, being carried about with the Blood,
which it very much cleanses. It carries off to the outside whatsoever is
impure, causing a kindly breathing in the skin. It also causes Urine,
conveying Gravel from the Kidneys, hindering that it may not be engendered and
fixed. It is helpful in difficulty and pain of making Water, coming forth
sometimes by drops. It Is of great service against pains of the side; the
Colic; Griping of the Guts. It is a very great Cordial, preserving from
fainting, and restoring those who are surprised with loss of Vital Spirits. It
is very effectual to keep one from, and to cure Surfeits. It is very powerfully
good against the Scurvy, or any poisonous ill-conditioned infectious evils. It
prevents and helps to cure all kind of Fevers. It quenches the thirst to an
admiration, above all supposed cooling things whatsoever: (So that a Gentleman,
Mr. Sa. Wainwright in Yorkshire, has given it under his hand, that he was
perfectly cured by means of this Stomack-Essence of a strange preposterous
thirst, troubling him twenty five years after Meat; which he could never before
conquer, for that it came Hereditary from his Father and Grandfather,
afflicted therewith all their lives time, especially toward night.)

It brings Preternatural heat or coldness to a due moderation, by removing
the efficient Cause thereof, reducing the parts to their former strength. It is
available against Fits of the Mother; the Whites. It dissolves congealed,
curdled Matter; ripeneth Raw Juyces, bringing them either to a better condition
for the use of Nature, or preparing them to be sent packing out of the body, by
convenient ways and medicaments. It abates a nauseous Disposition or Vomiting,
by confirming the Membranes of the Stomach, and by promoting the throwing off
that which disturbs it. It cutteth and cleanses away slimy Birdlime-like
Phlegm, giving ease in difficulty of breathing, mitigating the violence of the
Tissick. It is admirably useful against Melancholy imaginations, passions from
the Spleen, etc. called Hypochondriack: an evil state of body arising for want
of proportionable Nutriment, or from Galenical Medicaments. It avails against
the Dropsy, or Consumptions. The frequent use thereof strengthens the Brain,
Sinews, Loins, Memory, and all the Senses.

Stom. Ess. outwardly applied, challenges noble effects: For it is very
Healing, Balsamical, curing green Wounds and plain Soars, being often touched
therewith. I have hitherto found it constant in happily curing Burnings,
Scorchings or Scaldings; some drops being frequently distilled thereon, and
forced inward by the bottom of a smooth Glass.

I cannot but experimentally commend it as one of the best asswagers of the
pain of the Teeth, I have hitherto met with. It is also of great force to
preserve them from corruption, likewise in part to restore them; resisting the
putrefaction of the Gums.

Neither is it be contemned for the mitigation of the pains of any part,
strengthening and quickening the Vital Spirit thereof.

With many more laudable properties is Stom. Ess. or Alexi-stomachon endued,
which the frequent use thereof, and a longer strict observation, will bring to
light.

One odd Operation I have found in this Stom. Ess. that by accident it
sometimes causes Vomiting, etc. upon an account that it powerfully
corroborates Nature to discharge foul matter, which before kept it under
subjection.

A Patient of Quality did within a few days hence relate to me, the strange
effects in this kind it had upon him: Being brought to the Gates of death, and
tired out with a Galenical course of Dyet-drinks, Salt of Steel, purging
Medicaments of Mercury, etc. he took some few drops of this Alexis. six or
twelve hours after which, he was freed from abundance of filthy Excrements,
both by Stool and Vomit. Thus continuing to take more freely of the same
Medicine, producing for many days the same effect, he was in great measure
restored from the sad impressions of those Cacostomachical preparations.

The quantity to be given, is measured by the greatness and stubbornness of the
Disease: for sometimes ten or twenty times as much as the common portion, ought
to be offered: neither is it to be feared that any hurt will arise therefrom.

The ordinary Dose, or extent of giving it, is twenty, thirty, forty, fifty,
sixty drops in a draught of any strong Liquor, as Beer, Ale, separate or mixed;
sometimes Wine, as Sack, or whatsoever does best relish with the person. It may
be taken at any time when the Stomach is out of order, troubled with
Indigestion, Wind, Pains, Gripes, or any of the foresaid vexations; then let
them take liberally thereof. He that constantly takes every morning thirty or
forty drops, shall prevent many mischiefs in reference to his Health.

I doubt not but the Galeno-Chymists or Pseudo-Chymists will like Apes
endeavor to imitate and counterfeit this experienced Essence (which before I
am convinced by Fact, I shall presume to prefer before any Medicament of its
rank, yet visibly extant among us). Of such I shall advise my Countrymen to
beware, for these Adulteraters will but disgrace and degrade it; for I am sure
none can find out the true way of making it, unless he be a knowing
Philosopher, working with his own hands, and taking Preparations into his own
Stomach. Thus much I advertise; He that dexterously can volatilize Salt of
Tartar, may do something tending to this purpose, otherwise not.

He that desires to be farther instructed concerning the defense of the Virtues
of this Essence, and the disproving of what is spoken against it by
Malevolents; let him read with integrity the just commendation of it in
Haematiasis, etc.

Indefatigable perseverance in opening Bodies by the Fire, and the repeated
Assumption of what was thence produced, has brought me to the knowledge of a
Pill I call Polychrest, which consists of three Golden Sulphurs from Minerals
well purified, and friendly to Nature; whose innocence, as well as effectual
Operation, is remarkable, and upon trial to be justified by any who understands
a good Remedy. They are conducible in most Diseases. They act by cleansing,
opening, corroborating and purifying the Blood, without leaving the least ill
impress behind, for they contain no laxative so noxious as Sena or Rewbarb.
They are of great force to conquer the Scurvie: also prevalent against the
Dropsy. They prevent the Stone, and carry off Gravel. They sweeten sharp
Liquors in the Body. They overcome the Venereal or foul Disease, if taken a
considerable time: neither is it to be suspected, that one may be weakened by
the long frequent use of them; for they, contrary to other purging Concretes,
make one more lusty and vigorous, as I have found in my having taken above a
thousand of them with an advancement of my strength. They reform the Spleen;
help to cure Fevers, prevent Relapses and long Maladies.

They may be swallowed at any time of the day or night; neither will they cause
injury, but rather benefit, if they loosen not the body in twenty four hours,
which is rare, for usually they give a stool or two in that space.

The Dose is two or three Pills a little before Supper, or early in the
Morning. The Patient proceeding thu^ for three or four days, and resting a day
or two, and then repeating them.

Tinctur. nost. Emetica, is profitable in all Malignant Fevers, in the griping
or looseness of the Belly, difficulty of Breathing, pain of the Sides, Headache,
Diseases of the Stomach and Spleen. It leaves the Vitals more cheerful and
active. It matters not whether it work or no by vomit or stool; however, it
will do good by breathing sweat, or causing urine, if the party be capable. It
may be given a week together, at any time of the day or night. I often give it
in bed.

Pull. Emeto Catharticus is profitable in many Diseases (as Emetica Tinctur.) It
searches out the Morbifick matter, leaving wholesome Juyces untouched: when
other Vomits are given in vain, this profits.

Pil. Emeto Cathart. are useful for the same Diseases, as Pulvis Emeto, Cathar.
Polyacea, Tinctura Solaris or Balsamica, are great supporters of Nature, and
tamers of Malignant Fevers; they go into all parts, illuminate and augment
their Archeus or Vitals. They carry off by Sweat, Urine and Expectoration.
There are few Diseases which will not somewhat yield to these Cordials, if
exhibited in a just proportion.

Elixir. Proprietat. nost. resists Putrefaction, opens the Spleen, helps
Digestion, purifies the Blood: It is very cordial, expels the Menstrua stopped,
and gives a check to them flowing excessively. It is most efficacious to cause
an easy and speedy delivery in difficult labor of Women. Its Dose is from ten
to an hundred drops or more in strong Liquor.

With several other salutary Remedies could I acquaint the World; but now I
must desist, hoping God may spare my life till the Edition of my Physical
Observations: the History, Cause, and Cure of three Cholick-stones, of a vast
unwonted magnitude: also the History of the Ex^ction of the Spleen out of a
Dog, that lived two years and a quarter after very lively and well; with
sufficient reasons to back the experiment: The Diseases of the Spleen, with
preservative and Curatory Instructions of the same. Lastly, a Synopsis, or
Abridgement of Loimotomia, the dissection of a Pestilential Body; all in
Latin, wherein Materia Medica and its Philosophical management shall be more
amply examined. I intend likewise, when I have vacant hours, to put -- Stubbe
his Reply into a Retort, etc. and if he put me to it, to write a Narrative of
the tedious and absurd Method, Medicaments, and Imposterous Cures of the
Galenical Mountebanks.

From Queens-street, formerly called Soper-lane, nigh Cheapside, in Well-court;
being lately removed from Dukes-place.

