LOIMOLOGIA.

A Consolatory Advice, And some brief OBSERVATIONS Concerning the Present Pest.

By GEO. THOMSON, Dr of Physic.

LONDON: Printed for L. Chapman, at his Shop in Exchange-ally. 1665.

To the Ingenious and Industrious IATROCHEMIST, Dr GEORGE THOMSON, In
Approbation of this his Work and Design.
SIR,
UPon your Communicating to me the substance of a design you had in hand for
the public good, in offering some things to consideration for the prevention
and cure of this Pestilence which God in judgment has sent upon us, let me
assure you, and by these lines I desire to certify all whom it does or may
concern, that I embrace your design (utrisque ulnis) and willingly desire, and
God assisting shall endeavor to further it in my practice, and hope all that
are true Chemists will be of the same judgment, and confirm it to the world by
effectual deeds, that their mind is so resolved and fixed. God prosper your
design, and bless your endeavors, preserve your person, and encourage your
spirit, and increase the number of able Iatrochemists, of your mind; which is
the hearty prayer of

Your Cordial friend and Brother, GEORGE STARKEY, M. D. and Philosopher by the
fire.

Tria Pharmaca Loimo-Sychaia: OR, A Ternion of Powerful Chemical Remedies
AGAINST The present PEST.
Scire tuum nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat alter: Si sciat hoc alter, scire
tuum nihil est.
AS it is the duty of the Divine to communicate what he knows to another,
otherwise his knowledge is given him in vain: so it behooves the Physician to
conceal the Mysteries of his Art, and to be cautious how he lays open those
Arcana's he possesses, lest they be vilified and disesteemed by the vulgar, who
are ready to spurn at, and tread upon the most precious things: yet withal he
is obliged not to put his candle lighted under a Bushel, but to expose it to
open view, that it may illuminate those that are in darkness, without Eclipsing
the Honor and credit of the noble Science of Pyrotechnical Philosophy.
Wherefore seeing Ignoti nulla Cupido, no man can value any thing unless he be
acquainted with the worth of it; I have condescended to the persuasive
Arguments of my friends, to divulge some Active Chemical Remedies, (yet much
inferior to the best I am Master of) in these Contagious times, which (being
duly taken) will (through a blessing from above) be powerful in preserving
from and curing this Heteroclite and feral disease the Pest, from which (to
their infinite shame) the Ablest of the Galenists cowardly and unworthily run
away, leaving this great City destitute of their Help, when it most stands in
need of it; causing others through their detestable example to Despond, and to
become faint-hearted, who otherwise by confidence and resolved Magnanimity, the
best preservative in Nature (forasmuch as none was ever infected by the Pest,
but either from an Idaea or Image of Hatred, Terror and Diffidence in the
fantasy of the individual Person, or in the Archeus, the Innate Spirit of
every part of the body, as Helmont has proved) might withstand, exclude and
conquer, so truculent, sell and cruel an Enemy. Needs must the common people,
who always look, non qua eundum, sed qua itum est, be possessed with Pannick
fear, and precipitately betake themselves to their heels, when their principal
Leaders that should stoutly conduct and animate them, become Tergiversators and
fugitives. If Straglers, Desertors, and Runnawayes in an Army (when they are to
go upon service) ought to suffer loss of life and Estate; I see no reason why
these men, whose function obliges them to stand out to the last, should deserve
less punishment if they deliver such a vast populous City to the fury of so
implacable a Foe, a Sickness (...), without striking a stroke against the one,
or defending the other to the utmost of their power. For my part, although I
could enjoy my ease, pleasure, and profit in the Country, as well perhaps as
any Galenist; yet I would rather choose to loose my life, then violate in this
time of extreme necessity, the band of Charity toward my neighbor, and
dedecorate that illustrious profession I am called to, in hopes to save my self
by a speedy discession, a remote procession, and a leisurely recession,
according to that infamous, and infidous advice which Galen has given his
Disciples. Far be it from me: I shall rather follow heroic Helmont, who has
taught me better things; and shall by my personal presence, and best Medicines,
put out my self to assist any one whom God shall afflict in this kind. I
therefore shall recommend to the world this Ternion of Effectual Chemical
Remedies, in the certain experience of whose singular virtues in malignant
Fevers, I am well instructed, and am assured by some late instances, that they
are Preservative and Alexipharmacal; and taken in opportune time, Therapeutical
and Sanative.

The name I appropriate to the liquor, is Tinctura Polyacaea, from the
excellent virtue it has of preventing and healing many Maladies, according to
my long observation of it. It Corroborates the Stomach and its ferment;
enliveneth and invigorates the Archeus, the vital Spirit, being circulated with
the blood into all parts: It mortifies malignant Atoms, enabling nature to
profligate and expel the poison of the Plague by sweat, cleansing away the
morbifick matter by Expectoration and Urine.

It may safely be exhibited at any time, in any place, to persons of whatsoever
Age, Sex, and Constitution, according to these instructions following. For
prevention, give to Children of half a year to two, to the quantity of a
spoonful or two: from thence to six years, to two or three spoonfuls; to elder
persons three, four, five, six, or more spoonfuls, morning, noon, and night, or
Pro re nata, as as occasion requires.

If any find himself discomposed in his body, let him go to bed, and take one
paper of this powder, which I call Pulvis Pestifugus, in a spoonful of Beer and
Sugar, drinking strait after a third part of the glassful of Tinct. Polya. and
another part three hours after, and so the third: let the party sweat being
moderately covered, and let him not think much if he be sickish after the
taking thereof. A third part or half of this Powder may be given to those that
are under ten years. It is to be repeated twice or thrice, or oftener, with
Tinct. Polyac. according to the magnitude of the Disease. Let Children infected
take every half hour or an hour a spoonful of Polyacea.

The Chemical pills which I call Tutelares, are to be taken a little before a
light supper, one, two, or three, according to the age and strength of the
person; immediately after, three or four spoonfuls of Tinct. Polyac. and as
much the next morning. They are very preservative, opening the Spleen,
cleansing the Kidneys, purifying the blood, resisting corruption, Expectorating
and Diaphoretick, causing sometimes a stool or two in twenty four hours; if
not, they are very safe and profitable. They are to be taken two, and sometimes
three nights together, ceasing two or three days, and then repeating them.

Whosoever he be that makes use of these Chemical Remedies to a purpose
according to my Rules set down, will I am certain have cause to be Grateful to
the most High, and to give that respect to true Chemistry which it deserves.

As I find these present Medicines applied to the welfare of mankind without
abuse; so I shall be encouraged publicly to expose ( Salvo Honor Artis
Spagyritae) better things for the benefit of my countrymen, whom I plainly see
are deceived and wronged on every side, both by Galeno-Chymists, and likewise
Pseudo-Chymists.

If any desire to be accommodated with these or more noble Chemical
preparations in this sad time of Contagion, let him repair to the Place of my
Abode without Algate, nigh the Blew Boar Inn.

Some Observations made in reference to the present PEST.
Diverse of the Learned have narrowly enquired into and descanted upon the cause
of this feral truculent Disease, many accusing the Air, some Mephitical,
noxious, fracedinous odours from the Earth, others condemning our Food; most of
the Galenical gang (seduced by Astrologers) attribute the universal cause of
the Pest to the Heavenly bodies the Stars, who (as they say) through their
malevolent Aspects, pernicious light and motion, dart an Epidemical poison into
the Air, and so infect it with a Tabiferous corruption; hoping hereby to excuse
their fugitive desertion of their Patients, and gross Ignorance in Physic,
from an impossibility of curing this grievous calamity. Wherefore consulting
with the Augures Coeli, those uncertain conjectural Prognosticotors of our
times, they have most of them made good the more certain prediction I made in
Galeno-Pale without Astroscopie, a good space before this Pelt brake out among
us, that they if some Epidemical contagious Disease should reign in the City
(according to their Master Galen's dictates) would quickly run out of it.
Certainly this last opinion is most absurd and ridiculous, not unlike the
Physicians that patronize it: for 'twere in vain for them to shelter themselves
in the Country at any time from this raging Disease, if it depended upon an
universal cause, so that the Air were generally conspurcated and defiled by the
Stars according to their sense.

I grant that the Air is Topically hurtful, by reason of those expirations
arising from certain limited places, abounding with corrupt, filthy, foetid
matter, which contracting a venomous serment, and exhaling, may very well annoy
and infect the Spirits; but to impute this to the innocent Stars, such glorious
creatures, is only worthy of such noxious Galenists, who frequently argue a non
Causa pro Causa.

If I may freely give my judgment, I shall under correction deliver it thus.
It Is well known to all Physicians that have been strict investigators of the
nature of Diseases, that none has been more frequent and predominant among us,
then the Scorbute, being very grassant at this day, omnia transformans sese in
miracula mundi, disguised in a thousand forms, counterfeiting any disease, even
those that it seems to have very little relation to, as I could instance at
large. Now sometimes contemplating the strange diffusive nature and increase of
the Scorbute, the high degree of malignity it did aspire to, and how it
crucified and vexed poor Mortals, making a mere mock at the Trivial Medicines
of the Dogmatists, I could not be persuaded but that in process of time it
would at last cause (upon outward irritating occasions) some Tragical
Catastrophe among us, and express in a direful manner, the grievous effects of
that subtle Poison which lay coached and linking in the body.

Seeing then there has been in man's body such a previous Scorbutic Malignity,
and still is, being now graduated and exalted to a high pitch of virulencie,
from several occasional causes from within and without; and since it is (...),
as it were an Ape imitating most effects, I conceive it no great Paradox or
absurdity to assert, that this present Pest has principally derived its being
from this Scorbutical Disease with whose nature it much symbolizes, most of
whose symptoms are parallel to each other.

It is undoubted that they are both Malignant, Poisonous, and Contagious,
possessing and affecting the same parts alike, the Duumvirate, that is, the
Stomach and Spleen, as appears by the Symptoms and Products common to both, as
great oppression about those parts, suspicious respiration, Cardialgie,
Nauseousness, Vomiting, extreme pain in the Head, Vertigo, Swimming, Agrypnie
or want of Sleep, Lethargical dullness, profound sleep, Lypothimy, Palpitation
of the Heart, Fainting, Sudden debility of the parts, unreasonable fears,
terrors, despair, and confusion, Dyspnaea, irregular and difficult breathing* a
violent flux of the belly, various Tumors, Erysipela's, virulent Ulcers,
Sugillations, black and blew strokes, Spots red, black, and blew; all which
Accidents may be distinguished from other diseases, but are so co-incident with
the present Pest and Scurvie, that they seem to differ but only secundum magis
and minus. These are both Anomalous and Heteroclite from other diseases,
arising, (as I said) from an absolute Poison in their kind, which making an
Idaea or Character in the Archeus or vital Spirits, play a miserable Tragedy
in this Microcosm, now concise and expedite, then Taedious and prolix,
according as the venom is wound up to a high or low strain, by a strong or weak
preternatural ferment.

Now the occasional causes remote and more immediate, are multifarious, that
concur to the production of this virulent matter in man's body, initiated,
promoted and consummated, by the Archeus irritated, debilitated, and put by its
scope through several outward cross contingents from those things without
which we cannot subsist, which as they are menaged, modified, habilitated, and
used, so affect us to our preservation or our ruin. For the Archeus, the
principal instrument of the Soul, is never idle, but is always acting what may
tend to the welfare of the whole, unless it be extimulated, interrupted, and
debarred by any thing that is Hostile to it, so that when it cannot bring to
pass what it would, it forthwith delineates the figure of that, which a strange
Exotic matter endued with a seminal power represents to it: hence emerge and
appear the different Idaea's of the Poison of a Mad Dog, Tarantula, and
Scorpion, each of which do express inseparable uniform Symptoms, that any
judicious man may discover, and with confidence conclude, that that venom came
from one, and this from another kind of Animal. It is well known, that, where
there is an Affinity, concordance, and proximity of Substance, there is an
easy conversion of one into another. Now since this nearness of Kin plainly
appears between the Scorbute and the Pest, we have very good reason to
conceive, that the former has hitherto been in its Minority, and that now it
is come to Majority, or full ripe years, and acts its part with that unwonted
celerity, suitable to its Magnitude, disposition of the Air, and season of the
year, and may not incongruously be termed Pestis Scorbutica, they being
promiscuously joined with each other; whence come those Phaenomena's and signs
that I have observed in this modern Pest, discrete or discernable from the
Ancient. It Is certain the Pest is Morbus peculiaris suae speci^i, and had an
existence before the Scorbute was known commonly among us; yet we are forced to
grant that there is at this day a strange Complication, Connection, mutual
Contexture, Transmigration, Degeneration, and Transplantation of Diseases,
insomuch that the cause of the first eruption of the Lues Gallica revealed in a
vision to the Laick Helmont mentions, seems to me not very improbable, that
some prodigiously, transcendently lecherous Soldier at the siege of Naples,
where this disease came first to light, copulated with a farcy Mare, whose very
vas Naturae or Vulve was overrun with purulent and carious Ulcers. Hence this
holy man conjectures that the reason why this monstrous Plague (that is truly
called Flagellum Scortatorum) never appeared before, is, because the like
portentous horrid fact ( in expressis terminis) was hardly ever committed since
the Creation. Now that there is a notable Alliance of Symptoms between the
venereal Pox in Man, and the Farcy in a Horse, is well known to those that are
acquainted with the nature of them, being both cured by Mercury. Wherefore upon
such an unspeakable unkindly Coition, it is no wonder if there was a transition
of the virous Contagious ferment of the Mare into Man's body, upon which
followed a Gonorrhaea, venereous Bubo's, Nodes, and many stinking Ulcers, quite
of another Tribe and Family from those that are Ordinary.

Thus may Seeds and ferments of a different kind variously mixed and blended
together, produce something of an irregular, Heteroclite, unusual and
Hermaphroditical nature, which afterward subsisting by themselves, may
possibly propagate their like. Thus it is not dissonant to reason, that some
salacious Seaman, whose sperm was tinged with some foul filthy disease,
exercising venery with a nasty Leprous-like Putrilaginous Harlot, did in some
short space after, lying with a wholesome woman, infect her; and so grafted
upon her Issue that then unknown Plague we call the Scorbute, which in length
of time did spread abroad and diffuse its Miasm, or infection, being at first
fomented and quickened by Maritime unwholesome exhalations and fogs, and is now
Rampant and grassant in all places in these parts remote from the Sea,
extending its self like a Gangrene, sending out subtle Aporrhaea's or
effluvium's into the Air, that contaminate those that take them in, either by
the pores of the skin, or inspiration. One thing is very remarkable, that the
Symptoms of the Scorbute at this day are of a discrepant and diverse face from
those of former times: and withal it is to be taken notice, that it lies
dormant and latitant in the body, not easily to be detected or manifested but
by a Physician accurately versed therein. Therefore it ought not to seem
strange, if such a Sly, Close, insinuating, Treacherous, Proteus-like disease
does easily shake hands with the present Pest, to which it is so nearly allied.

This presupposed, (and I hope I may live to demonstrate it more clearly) may
instruct us, that Scorbutical remedies mixed with anti-pestilential and
Alexipharmacal, are very convenient and effectual in this present Pest, as I
have found by some experience; and that it is a great vanity to trust to those
fruitless dull Medicines of the Galenists, as Theriac. Londin. Mithrid.
Diascord. Theria. Venet. Elect. de Ovo, etc. if some Active Chemical
preparations can be procured, which I perceive some few honest knowing and
ingenious Apothecaries labor after, with their own fingers, who are to be
trusted and encouraged ten to one before a Sophisticating, ignorant, Dull,
Pseudochymist, employed by a company of idle Lurdans, A sort of Men they call
Galenochymists.

Moreover, I observe that the doctine of Helment has much truth in it, that
never any one had the Pest, but the Soul framed a Character or Idaea thereof in
the Archeus, through an Imagination of Hatred, Terror, and Horror, joined with
a strong credulous conceit that it had received the Contagion.

Wherefore I infer that the principal preservative and cure of the Pest, is, to
fortify the Archeus or vital Spirits, and to expunge that Idaea of detestation
and fear which caused it foolishly, credulously, and timerously, to give way to
the Pestilential impression.

In this case, all those things that generate Audacity and confidence in the
Spirits, are of high concernment and efficacy; but whatsoever diminish,
Enervate, and Elumbate them, are to be avoided. Wherefore those Nations are
highly to be commended, that forbear to mure up in too severe, solitary and
doleful, manner those that are infected; which imprisonment being tristissima
mortis Imago, is enough to make one despair, to be out of heart, and to become
Heautoutimoroumenos, to destroy that which might otherwise be preserved.

To visit, relieve and exhilerate any one whom God has wounded with this
Pestilential Arrow, is the part of a trulyreligious Samaritan; as to fly from
him, or keep aloof, when he may preserve or do him good, is only proper to
some distrustful wicked Priests, Levites, and Galenists. The Mahumetans may
justly reprove and shame us Christians, who conceive themselves obliged not to
omit general acts of Charity for fear of some particular nocument or damage. I
humbly conceive, with submission to the higher Powers, that it might be more
conducible to the body Politic and* Natural, if this rigid course of enclosing
the Infected so strictly within so narrow a compass were mitigated: for hereby
intercourse of Trading might be kept alive, and so miserable Poverty prevented,
which has always an Equipage and Train of sad Calamities and Plagues attending
upon it; and magnanimity and undauntedness of spirit procured, which
questionless would in some measure both exclude and master this Pestilential
Poison. Certainly none but such an Heathen as Galen would have given his
disciples such impious and uncharitable Advice, as to leave poor distressed
wretches to a Lord have mercy on them, when their presence ought to comfort,
and their Medicines (if they had them) to heal their grievous sore.

Well, I hope there will be now a seasonable discovery made how perfidious and
miserable Comforters these Galenists are in time of greatest exigence; and
hereby the world will be rid of a Plague far worse then this present. For I
believe none but those that are stupid, blind, partial, interested, and
wilfully accessory to their own destruction, will ever look upon for the future
with a favorable eye, such basely* pusillanimous, and such
egregiously-unskilful Physicians. Now it appears perspicuously, that they are
no better then a Crumenaemulga natio, a Purse-milking generation, as one says.
I wish they were not Sanguini*mulga, and had not only exhausted the Purse, but
also the Veins of their miserable Patients, leaving them at length in the lurch.

It were not amiss for the Magistrate to force these Fugitives to return to do
their duty, and compel them to visit the sick, and to take (as well for Cure as
Prevention) those unnecessary Antidotes they have left behind according to
their wise Directions. Upon my word, if our Governors be so pleased, I will
without presumption take any of them by the hand, and draw them to some
infected Patients, to feel their Pulses, to peep into Urinals and Close-stools,
view their Tongues, as they boldly used to do at other times, when there was
least need of them. Yea, and because they boast they are such excellent
Anatomists, we will dissect together a Pestilential body, that they may (if
they can) inform me better where the subject of that Disease is: and for
Prevention and Caution, they shall take their Preservatives and Sanatives, and
I mine; and then let the world judge whom God favors most, and who fares best.
If they refuse to condescend to this, I hope the sage Magistrate will be
pleased hereafter to favor signally the true Artists, and to reject these
counterfeit and useless Doctors, making them (as they really deserve) Mundi
Iudibrium, a Laughing Stock and a Byword to the world. Which if the Higher
powers be pleased to listen to, some other Chemists and my self will be engaged
to convince by undeniable Instances of fact, that there is means to be put in
practice, which may (through a benediction of the Almighty) be prevalent to
preserve many in this vast City from the jaws of this unsatiable Monster, which
otherwise are like to be devoured by it.

Lastly, I cannot but take notice how that effectual means (not to be refused
by any wise man, according to Solomon) which the good Creator (who is
Philanthropos) has ordained, is slightly, superficially, supinely, and
perfunctorily exercised and pursued, both in reference to the Physician, and
likewise those excellent Medicines that have of late been discovered, in some
measure appropriate, suitable and proportionable to the grand diseases that are
regnant among us.

Who, but those that are bewitchedly blind, wilfully cross and contradictory,
beyond a most obstinate Jew or Fanatic, would still persist to feed upon
husks, achorns, and other trash, when they may be satiated with the finest
Wheat-flour, prepared in a most exquisite manner?

I think some have in them the perverse Genius of the wild Irish, that would by
no admonitions and entreaties whatsoever be dissuaded and warned from tying the
Plow to the horsetail, out of a superstitious observation and reverence to that
old Custom of their forefathers; although an infinite better way was made
appear to them.

I have, I suppose, (if some refined Wits understand any thing) ripped up, and
sufficiently anatomized, usque ad Sceleton, (so far as a short Treatise would
permit) the huge deformed bulk of the monstrous, mutilated Galenical body;
insomuch that the most wise and acute Spectators and Auditors of this Nation,
(who have taken the freedom to deliver their Judgment as the thing is in it
self) have concluded that it was high time for such an unweildy, lazy,
cumbersom, goodfor-little, voracious, animal Sarcophagum, Cruorem consumere
natum, a devourer of more then Bell and the Dragon, having surfeited himself
with blood and humors, should now expire or breathe out his last, and become
food for the birds of darkness.

Yet I perceive there are some of the Spawn or Issue of this Polyphemous Giant
left, that (according to the Proverb, Cat to its kind, What Is bred in the
bone, will never out of the flesh) are hunting up and down for their prey; and
rather then fail of it, will feed upon Pestilential bodies, which they much
loathe and detest, being afraid to come nigh them, were they not necessitated
to it. These Minorite Phlebotomists and Cathartists (being the small remainder
of those many considerable ones that are vanished and gone I know not whither
in a trice, (I wish into Utopia) who are still hankering after the food they
were first nursed up with, have gone about to persuade the world (some part
being so mad to give credit to them) that they are able to do something
extraordinary for the Prevention and Cure of this present Infection. Wherefore
an inconsiderable number of the inferior rank, (left behind that large Drove
which is gone to seek out fresh and more wholesome green Pasture) out of I know
not what desperate despiteful humor to the Spagyrists, to keep a little while
above water their now-ready-to-sink reputation, will venture to trust to that
very wise Directory, a Legacy their learned departed forefathers have left the
City, included in their last Testament, wherein they manifest they are no
longer willing to breathe in this unsanctified impure air, and upon this
account have commended to them some of their Pupils dignified with the title of
Honorarii, (how well deserving, let them look to it.) These, in hope at least
to save themselves, if not their Patients, especially if they can but
surreptitiously get some Chemical Medicines from us, will at a hazard, upon
this pinch, try what a dry fume of Gums will do, a costly Pomander, a
composition of Figs, Rue, and Walnuts, (a ruful Medicine to trust to, if all
were known) Mattbias Plague-water, or Aqua epidemica, (I wonder they forgot S.
Luke's Water, for more credits sake) an Electuary of London-Treacle and
Wood Sorrel, (I am persuaded a Leg of Veal and Green-sauce is far better)
Bole-Armeniack (no whit better then Tobacco-clay, but that't is dearer, and
farther fetched) the eating of Sorrel for a breakfast in the Summer, (for fear
of heating) and Barberries in the fall of the leaf, (to keep them upright.) If
these avail not, if they light upon rich Families, (let the Poor shift for
themselves) then they will provide for them (taking a share with them) Pearls,
Hyacinch-stone prepared (after their gross way) Bezoar-stone of the East,
Unicorns horn, (equivalent to Hearts horn) Lignum-Aloes, (strange they omitted
Gold, but that I believe they mean to put that into their own purse) made into
a Dredge-powder, (or rather a dreggie powder) or they will make them up into
Lozenges, and give them the name of Manus Christi, (though, be it spoken with
reverence, he never had the least finger in it, nor without doubt ever allowed
or approved the prescription of the forenamed Concretes for the preservation or
cure of the Pest.) If these fail, they have Aq. Theriacalis Stillatitia, (which
indeed every Nurse knows is the best thing (though sluggish enough in
comparison) they possess;) yea, and Ambergreese dissolved in spirit of Sack (to
make them lusty.) Nay, they will ascend one step higher, to Balsamum Sulphuris,
Elixir Proprietatis, either of which if they can make perfectly right, I will
be bound to kiss their hand, had they a Plague Sore upon it. Had I not spoken
of a Sore, I should have forgotten their Fontanels or Issues, by means of which
they hope, if the infection enter in at one hole, it will run out at another.

Lastly, they tell us they have three great Remedies (to be magnified I am sure
only for their mischievous effects) Bleeding, Purging, and Vomiting, which
rarely (they say) have plate in the Plague, but are generally dangerous:
(that is truth in all diseases whatsoever, menaged by them) and therefore not to
be used, but (I assert, not at all) upon some extraordinary urgent indicant or
just Occasion (when I pray is that more visible then in the Pest, when a Man's
life is most in danger?) and with the greatest caution (equal with catching the
Contagion) which only an able Physician (I would fain see such an one among the
Galenists) can judge of. I plainly smell the Reason of that: they would fain
have their fees, but they are loath to fetch them, (and truly by my consent
they shall never be sent to them) and therefore no Advice in General, (nor in
particular by them) can be given. And what then signifies your three great
Remedies? no more to be trusted to then broken Reeds, being so far from
relieving and supporting a poor Wretch, (that vacillates and staggers up and
down, intoxicated with this venomous Disease) that they penetrate and wound him
to the Heart, throwing him quickly flat on the ground. If these your great
Remedies, be not to be trusted to, how shall any venture upon your small ones?
I wish ye had carried them all along with you, both great and small, and we
should have had a fair and happy riddance both of such useless Doctors and the
like remedies together. Then perhaps this populous City would have given an ear
to those Physicians and remedies, which are neither generally nor particularly
dangerous, as they were formerly falsely accused by you.

It is one of the greatest Riddles in the world to me, that some men, very
perspicacious and knowing in other things, should suffer their lives to be thus
trifled and squandred away by these Galenists, the best whereof dare not
confide in their own three great Remedies, and withal deter others from the
use of them, being conscious to themselves that they are not really worthy of
the name of Remedies, or any way to be trusted to for the cure of this fierce
Sickness.

We supplicate the immense God he would be pleased to give the worthy
Magistrates of this City an understanding heart, that they may consult, and
forthwith execute, what may be efficacious for the preventing the Depopulation
and ruin that is like to be from this Contagion.

Wherefore we shall humbly propose that there may be a competent number of such
able Chemical Physicians employed, that may visit the infected in this City,
take them by the hand, cheer them up by courageous Expressions, giving them
those Active Medicines, that will ( Auspice Den) if the Poison have not too far
seized upon the Spirits, mortify and expel it; using all industry whatsoever
to preserve the rest of the family from Contagion; to purify the Air, to
cleanse the utensils of the house to purpose from any venomous Odor: which we
will undertake to perform, depending upon the bounty and free gift of the
Magistrate as we may deserve, (only we desire we may have Commission,
encouragement and countenance from him) without contracting for a Stipend in a
higling manner, as the Galenists of late insisted upon, and a certain Chemist
too much a Suffenus postulated, when his Majesty out of his gracious care for
the Town of South-Hampton, commanded an election to be made of an able
Spagyrist to be dispatched away forthwith for the stopping the raging infection
in that place. The person whose fortune it was to be chosen, could not rest
himself satisfied with the Kings royal word and pleasure (which would have been
reward enough to a truely-ingenuous man) but he must stand upon stipulation,
upon a contract and mercenary terms, with the most potent Prince in
Christendom, to the great prejudice and disgrace of this noble Art, and the
disrepute of the Learned professors thereof: which unhandsome Action I for my
part declare to the world, utterly to disowne, and shall always renounce the
subscription to such dirty things: and to take off any aspersion upon my self
in this particular, I openly protest that it was done without my consent or
knowledge, having not been at their Convention this half year. For I am resolved
never to join with some men that carry an Enterprise to bring a black cloud
upon learning, and a vile estimation upon Schools of sound Education; and shall
always defend Decency, Eutaxie, and good Government in the Church and State:
although the Galenical Gastri-mytho's, those deluding Whisperers, have
otherwise (but falsely) represented me to the world, by the mouth of that paltry
fellow Johnson. Yet thus much I profess* that I shall not be wanting to give
due Respect to the meanest Chemist whatsoever in his Station, supposed he be
Philomathes, a well-wisher to Literature, Industrious, Conscientious, and
Honest in his way; and shall also join with him (as it becomes me) for the
promotion of the Spagyrical faculty, and give thanks to him for the least mite
of knowledge he shall cast into this vast Philosophical Gazophylacium, wherein
are contained profound pyrotechnical Secrets.

After this little digression, let us return and address our selves to the
prudent Senators of this great City, to whom we humbly tender our service in
our Profession for the good of the distressed Nation, not in a precarious
manner, for want of Employment, or a lucriferous design for our own Interest
and selfends (which we scorn and detest, not unwitting that merx ultronea
putet, offered Ware stinks) but really and cordially for the relief principally
of our Calamitous Neighbor, whose Skin is daily Sacrificed to Moloch.

If we receive an Auspicious and serene Influence from Authority, we shall
plainly demonstrate, that (imploring a blessing from the Father of Lights) we
are able to save those who would otherwise perish in the hands of the
Galenists: and then we doubt not, deserving well herein, our generous
Covernours will show themselves grateful to us, and will in some proportion
recompense us according to our merits: if not, ipsa quidem virtus sibimet
pulcherrima merces; we shall rest our selves contented that we have done what
becomes honest and knowing Physicians: and that no Exceptions may be taken at
us by a company of merely Titular Pharisaical Chrysalides or outsides, some of
us here nominated do declare without cracking ostentation (common to our
Antagonists) that we can vindicate our selves Graduates, having taken the
degree of Doctors ex condign^ as in right we deserve it, not as a company of
unworthy Medicasters, Asini Phalerati, that have acquired it by Custom, Money,
or the intercession of Friends; whose nakedness would become shamefully
ridiculous and contemptible to the world, if they were stripped of their Doctoral
Gowns. For our parts, we had rather be what we ought, then seem to be: and to
this I doubt not but most (if not all the persons here mentioned) will
subscribe.

Chemical Doctors. Chemical Students and Practitioners. Dr John Friar. Mr
Thornly. Dr Ios. Dey. Mr Tho. Norton. Dr William Currer. Mr Mar. Nedham. Dr
Thomas Troutbeck. Mr Tho. Odowd. Dr Ever. Maynwaring. Mr Tho. Williams. Dr P.
Massonet. Mr Iere. Astel. Dr Spranger. Mr Ed. Cook. Dr Horsington. Mr Horsnel.
Dr Geo. Thomson. Mr Febure. Mr Tho. Smart. Mr Kefler. Mr Tho. Tillison. Mr
Wilson.

Elogium Sulphuris: A brief Commendation of the admirable Virtues of SULPHUR.
Since many of our unfavoury Galenists, whom 'twas high time to lay aside, are
become on a sudden Mercuries, ('it is strange by what art, considering their
Dullness, and corpulent indisposition) and have taken their flight from us,
(certainly Timor addidit Alas) we know not whither, perhaps into the New world
in the Moon; Farewell Frost: Better lost then found: and we hope we shall never
see them more.

However, we are very glad they have left us Sulphur behind: truly no thanks
to them; for in promptu causa est, the reason is plain: it is too divine and
pure a thing, according to the Greek Etymon, for such terrestrial, foeculent
Humorists to meddle with. Yet perhaps they would have attempted to have
deprived us of it, if their departure had not been vel^cior Euro, being hurried
away in Post-haste: and Needs must be go the devil drives. Withal, I call to
mind, they do not much care for fire and brimstone, forasmuch as it is of too
hot a temperament, and puts them in mind of another world, where the Causos or
Burning Fever much reigns. Thus far Comically. To be serious.

We have great cause to magnify the Pantocrator and wise Disposar of all
things, who has bestowed upon poor unworthy Man so choice and rare a thing as
the common Mineral Sulphur in so plentiful a measure.

It is deservedly called (...), divine, from its excellent endowments, and
eminent Medicinal properties. There is reckoned two sorts of it.

One (which is the best) is called by Hippoc. (...), because it has not gone
through the torture or trial of the fire: it is named in the Shops, Sulphur
vive, Graec. (...), in that it being set on fire, burns all away, without
leaving any considerable caput niort or dross behind.

The other sort, that is usually made up into Magdaleons of a Cylindrical
figure, is extracted out of Pyrytes, the Copperstone, and other Marchasites.
This is justly counted the worser sort, having something Arsenical in it, a
kind of poisonous fume arising from the Pyrytes.

Now the Sulphur vive was that Hippocrates made use of inwardly and outwardly,
with which he provoked (as Helment sets down) large Sweats in the Plague,
impregnating or filling generous Wine with the Gas or Spiritus Sylvestris, a
most spirituous substance of Sulphur, set on fire after this manner: He took an
indifferent large narrow-mouthed Glass, putting into it a Match made with
Brimstone, set on fire; with which after he had sufficiently filled the Glass
with fumes, he stopped it close, suffering it to stand till such time the
foresaid fume fixed to the sides of the Vial; and then poured so much wine into
it, that filled about a third part thereof: and stopping the mouth of the Glass
very close, he shaked it notably, so long, till it had imbibed or taken up all
the Gas, or subtle fume of Brimstone: and this Sulphurated wine did the good
old man give often with a little Fluxed Salt, for prevention of the Pest, and
promotion of the Cure. Which preparation I cannot but highly commend to the
world, being ascertained of the excellent virtue thereof in resisting Contagion
and Corruption, having in it something Antidotal adaequately proportionable to
such an Exquisite Poison; being easily mixable with our Archaeus, and thereby
mortifying the invisible Atoms of the Pest, it rectifies the pernicious odor
thereof. Needs must that which so powerfully preserves bodies from
fermentation, acidity, and putrefaction, be a prevalent Remedy against this
contagious disease. It is very remarkable, that any liquor or juice well
satiated with this fume, will keep forty times longer then it would do
otherwise, as I have often tried in several various humid bodies. Moreover, I
know not a better Antidote against the poison of a putid Slut; for her
nastiness shall hardly offend a man, if the utensils and what she prepares have
a sufficient Tang from this purifying flame. It kills most Insects, especially
Lice, if the Linen and Woollen Clothes be thoroughly and to a purpose
sulphurated therewith, that the fume may penetrate them. Now this is not to be
done carelessly and slightly, as I generally observe it is ordered. For as good
never a whit* as never the better.

He that desires to reap the benefit of this divine Concrete, ought to put the
quantity of a Walnut or more into an earthen pint-Poringer, setting it over
quick coals till it take fire, placing it in the middle of a room, or the foot
of the stairs, that every nook and corner may be delibuted and tinged with its
odor, doing thus four or five times a day. For preventing or taking off any
infection from Clothes, set this porringer with the Sulphur kindled, into a
Paile or Firkin, and lay upon the mouth of it your Garments, turning them with
discretion. If any thing be well filled with this Sulphurous spirit, the
contagion will hardly take hold of it: if infected, it may easily be carried
off by some repetitions of the ascending fume. Take notice that there ought not
to be added or mixed with Brimstone any thing extraneous, as Pitch, Tarr,
Rosin, or the like; for thereby you do but castrate or geld it of some part of
its virtue, as some Adulterators commonly do, that they may the better cover
over their imposture of selling it at an excessive rate: thus* suffitibus sua
Apocrypha annexuit Satan, Most divine things are polluted by humane Inventions;
but let it be sincere and pure without fraud.

What an excellent Treasury of rich endowment the great Creator has infused
into the Sulphurs of all Concretes, acute Helmont has plainly discovered: for,
says he, In Sulphur sunt fermenta, fracedines, odores, sapores specifici
seminum, ad quasvis transmutationes.

These are mysterious Stories to the Galenists, every whit as strange to them,
as Regeneration was to Nicodemus: Wherefore I shall leave them to their
wilfully-desired ignorance, without pity, or further instruction: for I see
they are best affected with a nihil scire, so it be lucriferous in their
profession, and that is to them amabilis Insania, and mentis gratissimus Error.

Yet what mundified Sulphurs can perform, I shall in part satisfy the more
ingenious, by the benefit that may accrue to Mankind from the use of the three
forementioned Remedies of the inferior Tribe, which principally consist of
Vegetal and Mineral Sulphurs well purified.

To conclude, my advice is, that who desire to preserve themselves from this
present Pest, do drink every morning either Sulphurated Wine, Strong Beer, or
what Liquor they please, wherein has been steeped a large quantity of
HorseRadish-root, with five, six, seven, eight, nine or ten drops of good
Spirit of Salt; and no doubt they will find a far better effect, then from a
Galenical Electuary of London-Treacle and Wood Sorrel.

FINIS.

