ortho-mithodos iat^-chemike OR THE DIRECT METHOD OF Curing Chymically.

Wherein is contained the Original Matter, and Principal Agent of all Natural
Bodies.

ALSO The Efficient and Material Cause of Diseases in General.

Their Therapeutick Way and Means.

I. Diaetetical, by Rectifying Eating, Drinking, etc. II. Pharmaceutick. 1. By
Increasing and supporting the Vital Spirits. ^. By Pacifying and Indulging
them. 3. By Defacing or Blotting out the Idea of Diseases by Proper Specificks.
Lastly, By removing the Extimulating or Occasional Cause of Maladies.

To which is added, The ART of MIDWIFERY Chymically Asserted.

The CHARACTER of an ORTHO-CHYMIST, And PSEVDO CHEMIST.

A Description of the Sanative Virtues of our STOMACH-ESSENCE.

Also, (...): or a Just Complaint of the METHOD of the GALENISTS.

By GEORGE THOMSON, M. D.

Plurimi Morbi cedunt per Simplicia: ^st ubi Morbus in Gradum surrexit altiora
exiguntur Remedia.

V. Helm. London, Printed for B. Billingsley at the Printing-press in Cornhill,
and S. Crouch at the upper end of Popes-Head-Alley. 1675.

The Epistle Dedicatory
To the Most Illustrious PRINCE RUPERT, DVKE of Cumberland, EARL of Holderness,
KNIGHT of the most Noble Order of the Garter, and one of His MAJESTY 'S most
Honorable Privy Council, etc.
May it please your Highness,
IT was once my Happyness in the late Wars to be under the MARTIAL CONDUCT of
your Renowned BROTHER, PRINCE MAVRICE, Beloved by all Loyal Generous Spirits
for his Valor and Prudence. Now I bless the Heavens that promise me the
Benevolent Aspect of your Candid Mercurial Genius upon these Chemical Labors,
which I humbly present to the View of your Piercing Eye, most able to make an
In pection into the Verity of Things arising from Pyrotechnie and Manufacture.

My Thoughts did heretofore seem to be settled never to Dedicate, for the
future, a Writing of mine to any whomsoever: yea, I had continued in that mind,
to expose Truth abroad solitary to shift for it self (conceiving it best able
to maintain her own Propriety) but that hearing it frequently discoursed in
most Company I met with; how ardently your Highness was devoted to serve the
Nation for Public Good: What a Philomathes and Philalethes, Sincere Lover and
Defender you were of Essential Truths and Ingenious Arts in General, especially
Mechanical Pyrotechnical Operations, an Assertor of Experimental Optical and
Sensible Effects, Fruits and Products of things, and that for this Reason you
had an extraordinary Kindness for our most Excellent Philosopher Van Helmont,
your Countryman; I fortwith, affected with these Rare Endowments, altered my
former Intentions, resolving now to make my Address to such a Mecaenas (for the
discussion of these our Chemical Problemes by Fact) whose Head is known to be
endowed with Subtle Inventions, Indefatigable Inquiry after Rarities and
Arcana's, whose Heart is full of Integrity, Heroic Designs, Magnanimity, and
Hands most active in contriving Exquisite Works, and Daedalean Mechanics.
Wherefore, Truly Noble SIR, be pleased to accept of this Oblation, which has
its chief Original from Pyrotechnie; And according as you find it bear the Test
Entertain or Reject it. The Sum of this Physical Tract is a Practical Discovery
of the Notable Errors of the Galenists, Avouching that their Principles in
Physiologie are False; that they are Ignorant of the Quiddity, Essence, or the
True Radical Essential Cause of all Diseases: That they are grossly to seek in
the Direct Method or shortest Way of Curing them: That the Indications or
Measures they take from Heat and Cold, applicating upon that ground (according
to the Rule of Contraries) their Indicata or Remedies are both Fraudulent, and
Pestilent to Mortals. That their Unacquaintance with the Synth^sis or
Constitution of the Vital Spirit, the Cause of its Rage and Perturbation from
something very offensive to it (wherepon the Image of a Disease is delineated)
is the Reason why they thus neglect to support Nature as they ought, to allay
its Tempests, to deface Morbisick Idea's by Specificks. Lastly, being
altogether Occupied about the Cutting off the Accidents Qualities, Epigenomena,
Symptoms and Products of Evils, by Bleeding and Purging, they are insufficient
to Cure Directly, Immediately and Radically any great Malignant Fever,
Pleurisy, etc.

The Boon I beg of your Highness is, not to suffer the Truth to be abused
through the Collusions, Sophistical Evasions, Equivocations, Supplantations,
Scurrilous Language and Affronts of our Antagonists: but that there may be a
plain Judicious Determination of these Controversies according to the clear
Evidence of Fact, and the Reality of Experiments: For which the Genuine
Professors of this Philosophical Chemical Art will be bound to Celebrate your
Praises to all Posterity.

Your Highness Faithful Servant, George Thomson.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Dear Countryman,
IF thou be a hearty Lover of truth, and a Solid Genuine Englishman, no
Fantastical Affecter of the Levity of this Age, enter upon the Reading of this
Treatise without Prejudice or Partiality: Having perused it, give the World
freely thy Judgment concerning it. Object what thou can (like a Candid
Philalethes, no Caviller, or Wrangler) but still let thy most rectified Reason,
and firm Experience be as inseparable as Hippocrates his Twins, always giving
place to the Latter. If thou censure me harshly, not giving me leave to clear
my self by the assured Evidence of Action, I shall absolutely deny thee to be
one, called a Virtuosi pretend it never so much) or a Friend to the Lord Bacon.

Here is no Hot, Fruitless Disputation about things Indifferent in Religion. No
subtle Pleading by Covin, or Collusion, as often happens in the Law. Nothing
Historical, or Traditional to be subscribed to for Antiquity, or Authority
sake. Here is no deceitful Conclusions, or Captious Argumentations fitting for
the Schools: Nor Acribology an exact discussion of Matters, (...) little
Serviceable or Useful in the General, becoming some Virtuosi at this day. No
Logomachie, an Idle Velitation, or Contention about Words, the Exercise of
Pedanticks: But in this Enchiridium is cortained that which will Teach you
directly to enjoy Health of Body, and, Consequently, more Integrity and Clarity
of Mind: For, Animi Actiones Spirituum Synthesin, Eupathiam vel Dyspathiam
Eutoniam vel Atoniam sequuntur. By this means you will Learn to be Cautious,
how you impair Nature, either for the present, or future, by the false Method
of Bleeding, Caco-stomachick Purging, etc. If you be capable to receive this
Doctrine, not only your self, but your Posterity will fare the better. By
Virtue of this Goddess Sanity, thou may Atchieve Noble Exploits, either
keeping off, or bearing more Courageously all the Adverse strokes of Fortune;
enjoying hereby a far more Happy Life in the Lowest Condition, than they in the
most Prosperous State, Tormented with the Stone, Gout, etc.

In this Paper I Counsel thee to keep up thy Spirits (the Principal Efficient
Cause of Health and Sickness) by multiplying them with what is most nigh their
Texture, by Pacifying their Rage and Fury with pleasing Objects, indulging
their frowardness, gratifying their Ardent Appetite, Illuminating their
obscurity. Next, I put thee upon the search of proper Specificks, having a
Dowry bestowed upon them able to fully, mar, or quite expunge the Idea, or
Image of a Disease. Lastly, I give Directions how to Banish, Exterminate,
Exclude through the Proper door with Euphorie, and Benefit succeeding that
Irritating, Aculeating, Peccant Matter, which causes those manifold Tumults and
Disorders in the Archeus of the Microcosin. All which is to be performed
without wronging the Ferments, or Altering the Instruments of any shop of
Digestion, especially the first.

In avouching these substantial Verities, thou may, perhaps conceive, I have
too severely reprehended the Galenists, to the Eclipsing the Illustrious Fame
of such Learned Clerks, whom both Great and Small in all Ages have Admired. To
which I reply, I am fully satisfied within my own Breast, that I have in no
wise wronged them (although they have me oftentimes) in laying to their Charge
what they are not guilty of, being ready upon all fair Opportunities, to
demonstrate what I have here declared. Besides, so weighty and Precious is the
Praedicate, or Subject we handle, that it would be an Offense more heinous in
me above others, Indangering my Immortal Part, if Conscious what Slaughter of
Mankind is daily made by their Pseudo-Method of Curing, I should be silent,
Indulge, Connive at, Extenuate, or Palliate such Capital Crimes: This
considered, with their delight in the darkness of Galenical Falsities; also
their Active, Obstinate Ignorance: Now, when the splendid Beams of Chemical
Truth appear, they deserve to be handled with far greater Rigor than I have
expressed. I wish my Antagonists would behave themselves as Heartily, and
Ingenuously to me as I to them, they would soon find me alter from an Acid to
an Alkali Nature; from a Tart, to a sweet Disposition. If they would please to
put me to the Trial, they will find me really what I profess, a Lover of my
King and Country, upon the Foundation of Verity and Virtue; a Hater of Vice,
Debauchery, Lewdness, all Irreligion in any whatsoever; a Resolute Promoter, to
my Power, of all good Arts and Sciences, especially that of Healing Man's
Infirmities; a Defender of Learning, and an Admirer of great Abilities and
Integrity.

Farewell, expecting, as soon as I can get it well Printed, a Tract in Latin,
viz. (...) De Splenectomia. Lithocolo and Loimotomiae Synopsi.

November. 4. 1674. From my House at Soper-Lane, alias Queen Street, in
Well-Court, nigh Cheapside. Geo. Thomson.

An Explanation of Some Terms of Art.
Chemist, is one who imitates Nature in the Separating the Pure Juice from the
Dross and ^ilth for the use of Medicine Mechanics, and the ^dvancement of
Metals, Spagyrist is the same.

Therapeutick, i. e. a Healing Faculty. Iatrical, pertaining to Physic,
Healing.

Chymicophant, one who seems to be a Chemist, but is not really. Philomathes, a
Lover of Learning. Philalethes, a Lover of Truth.

Caco-stomachick, hurtful to the Stomach.

Pyrotechnist, in general any Workman by the Fire, in particular, by way of
Excellency a Chemist.

Pharmaceutick, Physic which Cures by Medicines. Ortho-method, a direct
upright short way.

Ortho-chymist, the True Artist. Pseudo-chymist, the ^alse.

Physiologie the Reason of the Nature of Things, and a Searching into their
Cause.

Idea, the Figure, Seal or Pattern of things conceived in the Imagination.

The Idea of a Disease is the Essence of it.

Archeus of Paracel. and Enormon of Hippo. is the Seminal Vital Spirit, the
Principal Impetuous Agent, or Spiritual Contriver and Supporter of every Thing,
the Arch Preeminent Author of Health and Sickness.

Gas, is a wild invisible Spirit, not to be imprisoned or pent up, without
damage of what conteins it, arising from the Fermentation of the Concourse of
some Bodies, as it were eructating or rasping this untamable Matter.

Thermologists and Psychrologists, are they who principally treat of Heat and
Cold, neglecting Essential Properties.

Ferment (according to Van Helm.) is a Formal Ens, neither Substance, nor
Accident, but Neutral as Light, Fire, etc. stored or laid up from the beginning
of the World in certain determinate places, for the preparing and exciting the
Seeds o^ Things. It carries some Allusion or Similitude wit^ the Leaven or
Ferment, Bakers or Bruers use, which is of a Contagious Diffusive Odor,
Rarefying^ Dissolving Nature, rousing up the Spirit to fall t^ action, to
Digest and make Separation.

Alkali, is properly a Salt from the Herb Kali^ Potash. any Lixjviate Salt
extracted by Calcination^ or whatsoever Volatile Salt, having Concordanc^ or
affinity with the former.

Alcohol Vini, is its Spirit totally deprived of Phlegm

Xeuexton, an Amulet against the Pest. Relollaeu^ is a bare Quality without a
Seminal Being. Liqu^ Alcahest is the Universal Dissolvent preserving the Seed
of Things inviolated.

Nosopoietick, that causes a Disease. Anadrom^ a running back. Phenomenon,
Appearances. Epig^nomena, supervenients, whatsoever succeed.

ERRATA
PAge 10. line 15. read Helmontian p. 12. l. 5. r. Provocati^^ p. 16. l. 5. r.
Signature. p. 17. l. 8. r. Stomach chiefly. p. 18. l. dele the. p. 26. l. 11.
r. quot. p. 3. l. 3. r. be careful. p. 32. l. 6. r. Dig^^stions. p. 33. l. 7.
r. Those. l. 8. are. p. 35. l. 18. r. to the. p. 39. l 25. r. de^^ceent. p. 38.
l. 6. r. draining. p. 38. l. 22. r. light p. 42. l. 30. r. Assista^^ p. 49. l.
2. r. and rest. p. 47. l. 6 r. Acids. p. 60. l. 24. r. Concrete. p. 65 (...) 9.
r. Channel. l. 13. r. Contraction. p. 67. l. 24. r. Theorems. p. 68. l. ^^ r.
Pyrotechnical. p. 69. l. 17. r. Pyrotechnicos. l. 29. r. Balsamical. ^^ 72. l.
^^ r. Acid Meliorated. p. 72. l. 8. r. Philalethes. l. 20. r. Physio^^ger. p.
73. l 2. r. iterated. l. 14. r. dulcifie. p. 80. l. 11. r. Salsi. l. 21. r.
^^tyrous. p. 88. l. 30. r. miss. p. 9. l. 29. r. imbued. p. 103. l. 12. r.
Tritu^^^tion. p. 110. l. 15. r. of by the. p. 111. l. 4. r. Extermination. p.
21 (...) l. 9. r. Rutilating. l. 21. r. and being. l. 23. r. Empyical. p. 116.
l. 27 (...) Idealium. p. 118. l. 1. r. defaecated Sulphurs. p. 125. l. 16. r.
found (...) p. 139. l. 27. r. Empyical. p. 152. l. ult. r. Corrector. p. 157.
l. 26. r. (...). ps 166. l. 4. r. (...). p. 173. l. 6. r. Intestinal. p. 174.
l. 15 (...) (...). p. 181. l. 8. r. Learned Chemical.

THE DIRECT METHOD OF CURING Chymically.
CHAP. I. A Brief Examination of the Original Matter of Natural Bodies, with
their Dissolution.
I Shall first declare what Nature is, according to our Philosopher; viz. A
Power implanted in the Creature, to act in such a manner and measure according
to the will of the Creator, for ends best known to himself. The Course and
Order of producing Effects suitable to the first Seminal Cause, is constant,
unless hindered by cross Accidents intervening, or by some extraordinary stop
put thereto by Him, who is the chief Mover of all Essences. I look upon the
Materia Prima of Aristotle as impossible, a mere Chimaera. Galen and his
Sectaries are much mistaken in delivering the Four Elements: Earth, Water,
Air, Fire, the Material Cause of all things: which being (as they say)
variously mixed and tempered by power of an Active Form, bring forth Bodies of
different Shapes, and Kind, one from another.

The late Chemical Philosophers reject the former Opinion, and being frequently
conversant in Opening all sorts of Bodies by the Fire (which they will by no
means allow to be an Element) and meeting frequently with Salt, Sulphur,
Mercury, have confidently taught, that these are the Beginning Matter of all
things tangible. Others add two more; i. e. Water and Earth: all which (as is
Asserted) they can at their pleasure demonstrate, or lay open to View when they
make Separations.

This Discovery by Fire indeed seems far more plausible, and favorable for the
Foundations and Principles of all Bodies, than the former Conceit; yet, upon
severe Search, it will not hold true. For as I have published in Haemati.
directed by Helmonts Doctrine, these which they call Principles, are made by
the Fire, not actually existent before in the Compound Body: Neither can Salt,
Sulphur, Mercury be extracted by any Art whatsoever out of all things
tractable. Moreover, their unsteadfastness shows them to be no Principles, for
they are easily changed one into another, contrary to the Nature of what ought
to be the Beginning of things. Wherefore Dr. Willis his Doctrine taken from
Bened. Valent. or Paracelsus, and trimly polished for Sale, is to be rejected,
as being not only false in the first Instructions concerning Nature, but also
dangerous and destructive if made use of, according to what he has delivered
for the Cure of Diseases.

Learned Helmonts discovery of Acidum, i. e. Sharp, of a binding rough
Condition, and an Alkalie of a lixiviate smooth Nature, either volatile or
fixed, having a property to scour or loosen, is by Tachenius, and some
excellent Philosophers owned to be the best of Sensibles; whereby we can most
experimentally, and effectually, derive the nighest Origination of all things
endewed with a Corporeal Being: into which Acidum, and Alkali, Art is able to
bring back the same. Besides these two Luminaries in Physic, afford the
clearest Directions for the Cure of the worst Maladies; the only chief End, for
which the upright Physician is to put out himself: notwithstanding these (how
specious soever Principles reputed) are not really so; for they as well as the
former may be reduced into Water, which by the Authority of Acute Van Helmont,
and my own Proof in some measure, I set down as the Principle, and Ultimate
Matter, the Beginning, and End of all Elementarie Bodies.

For according to the diversity of Ferments, the Activity of the Seminal
Spirit, and the peculiar Image delineated by it, this Liquid Matter is molded
into those infinite number of various kinds of Creatures. This is that Abyss,
or Deep on which the Spirit of God moved at first, now successively the Spirit
of the World, which out of this never failing Treasure of Water, frames those
innumerable Kinds of things obvious to our Senses: Now of all Tangible
Essences, Nothing is more similar or freer from Alloy and Mixture than Water,
nothing more capable of impress, nor susceptible of a Seminal Spirit, and so
easy to be brought to this or that Form.

Hence it is manifest, there is not any thing chiefly more requisite for the
production of all Corporeal Beings, than this Material Subject, namely Water:
and an Efficient cause, viz. a Spirituous Seed working (by means of Ferments,
or a certain Volatile, Spreading, Swelling, Chafing Scent) according as it
frames that Idea, or Picture of the thing it intends to bring by degrees to
Perfection: till which time, the same Agent (if not impeded by some Accidents)
which began makes a constant progress, till the whole be finished, bringing it
to the highest State; from whence, by little and little it declines, at length
returning to that, from which it took its first Being.

What I have here delivered, The sensible Seed of Animals, Plants and Minerals
Confirm: for they all consist of a Jelly-like Substance, easily to be brought
into Water.

The Corporeal Seed of all Animals are as it were a Mucilage, or the White of
an Egg: the Seed of all Vegetables may by digestion be turned into the like
Consistence.

As to Minerals, The best Inquirers into them affirm, that a certain green,
glutinous, slimy Water flowing in peculiar places of the Earth, gives them
their first Birth.

So that an able Chemical Philosopher has no reason to doubt what Helmont has
set down; to wit, that all Bodies have their Beginning from Water; that he
could by means of his Liquor Alkahest, cause them to return again to the same.

This is that Proteus which being altered by an odorous Ferment peculiarly
inherent in the Seminal Matter, or the place where it resides, invites such a
portion of the universal Spirit (according as it is capable) to mould it by
degrees into such a Species, or individual Being, proportionable to the
Platform laid at first. (All outward Conveniences concurring.) Withal, as
Concretes or Bodies are generated from Water, so are they likewise chiefly
nourished thereby: For the Experiment of our Philosopher confirms it thus.

He took an Earthen Vessel, filling it with 200 weight of Earth dried in an
Oven, in which, moistened with Rainwater, he set the Stem of a Willow of five
pound weight. This being for the space of five Years irrigated, was nourished
only with Rain or distilled water as there was need, (the vessel being covered
over with a Plate of Tin full of holes lest any dust from without should fall
into it) after five years growth the Plant put into the Scales, weighed 169
pound, besides the quantity of Leaves four years every Autumn left out. Then at
last he weighed the foresaid Earth dried, and it wanted of the former weight
not above two ounces: upon this account 164 pound of VVood, Bark, and Root
sprang from Water alone. This Experiment of Van Helm. did that excellent
Searcher into Nature, the Lord Bacon confirm, by the increase of a Shrub kept a
considerable time in Water. The same Water feeds 40 distinct Plants growing
on one bed.

Also diverse Animals do plainly arise from a waterish Matter: they are likewise
preserved Principally therewith. In the Stomach of the Salmon is seldom any
solid matter found: neither can the Sturgeon take into the Stomach any gross
matter for nourishment, the passage belonging thereto being so small, that
scarce any thing but Water can enter.

Some Men and Women have been reported to live with Water alone for many
days.

That Precious and Viler Stones are generated by Water, and increased by the
same, is manifest, according to the Trial of Van Helmont. Touching those
Existents which the Chemists call Principles, they are not really such; for
they have their rise from Water, and may be specified, yea although they seem
to be Singular, yet may they be severed into diversity of parts. E. G. Sulphur,
which to the eye appears to be all of one Frame, may be brought into a sharp
corroding Liquor: the same also may be brought into liquid Balsome, or into an
Earthy Powder. Out of Sallad Oil a Corrosive Liquor may be made; besides, it
may without any difficulty be altered into Water. Salts may be turned into an
Oily Substance, then after become Insipid: Mercury does (as Van Helmont, and
Experience testify) consist of a double Sulphur Inward, and Outward; This
being capable to be separated from it by Art*

CHAP. II. Of the Efficient Cause, or Primary Agent of all Sublunary Bodies.
THe Best Philosophy teaches us, that al^ Constitutes have their Material
Beginning from Water. How this Liquor comes to be diversified into innumerable
kind of Substances, is further to be enquired.

The first alteration of this fluid Body is made by a Sulphurous Ferment,
giving a Hogo to it, whereby a Seminal Spirit is excited to dispose and mould
the Matter into a Form agreeable to that Image or Type i^ has laid.

That which does chiefly occasion and further the Fermentation of Water is,
some secret Acide, or Sharpness proceeding from the Air, or elsewhere. This
insinuating closely, unites with the Alkali in the Water whence arises an
Agitation or VVorking commonly observed, when these two meet together:
consequently the Watery Particles are exceedingly rarefied, acquiring a certain
peculiar scent, which they carry along with them, infecting the whole Mass,
wherein they reside: hereupon the Archeus or Vital Spirit breaks forth into
Act, containing in it the true Seminal Idea, or Picture of the thing capable to
receive its Form, and Perfection.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Aitiologie, Efficient, Immediate and Material Cause
of all Diseases.
WHat the Ancients generally, and some at this day call the Conjunct, or
immediate Cause of Diseases, I shall (with most knowing Helmont) assign to be
the Occasional, Provoking, or Incensing. Forasmuch as, whosoever desires to
enquire into the Nature of things aright, ought to be informed, concerning the
very Being of the same, as it relates to that which made it so.

Now no Disease can have any Subsistence, Mansion or Lodging place, but in a
Body endued with a Vital Spirit (albeit in the Dead the Four Humors of the
Galenists, and the three Principles of the Chemists be not wanting.) For this
Reason the Archeus or Spirit must of Necessity be the nighest Fundamental
Beginning of all Maladies whatsoever. For as our Health depends upon this
Living Spirit, when it is in all respects duly constituted, without any
considerable defect in it; so Sickness arises when the same Preserver of
Strength, is depraved or estranged from that Clearness, Proportion, and
Regularity, which ought to be in it. Those Degenerate, or Bastard Juices
engendered through manifold Errors in the Helmontion six Digestions, especially
the First, are only means to put the Living Spirit into Perturbation, Vexation,
and Inordinate Motions, whereby it frames Images of Evils, according to the
Condition of the Troublesome, Abusive Intruding Guest: So that in short, the
Seed of this, or that Disease, with an absolute Pattern how it is to be acted,
is planted in this first Founder of the whole Fabric: the Grief being as
inseparable from the Vital Spirit, as Life it self; yea it is even concentrated
or seated in the very middle point thereof, and never to be separated
therefrom, till the Kernel, wherein this Diseased Image is drawn, be extinct,
and quite abolished.

This Doctrine may seem strange to those, who are unacquainted with the
Writings of our Profound Philosopher; however so great is the Truth thereof,
that it is impossible any one should either Prevent or Cure Diseases to a
purpose, unless he be well Disciplined in this Solid Knowledge. Hence it is
that Opinionative Doctors do so often blunder and mistake in Healing any Rooted
Infirmities; because they either insist upon their four Aristotelian Elements
and Humors, Analogous to them, as Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy, Blood, with the
Distemper coming from thence, or take their false Measure of Curing from the
Principles (I mentioned before) borrowed of the Chemists, which some will have
to be the next Cause of Diseases; whereas they being present, only vex, gaul,
bring into diverse Passions, the Archeus: whereupon that which before did
perform all things requisite in the Body, decently and in order, is now become
tumultuous, acting in an inconvenient preposterous manner. By this means the
Ferment or Dissolvent in the Stomach produces many Raw Juices, Fretting
Liquors, which congeal the Blood, or melt it into filthy Matter, then follows a
detention of Excrements, or a profuse indiscreet throwing out good and bad;
also a Specific Poison is created proportionable to those without: hence a
Crowd of sad Symptoms appear. Wherefore I repeat, the great cause why the
Galenists have been so unsuccessful in their Curing is, because they did not
truly distinguish between Prevocative, Occasional, and the Essential
inseparable Cause between the Concomitants, Accidents, Products, and
Consequents of Humane Calamities.

For while they conclude a Fever to be principally Heat, they have thereby
taken a false Indication or Instructions, to free the Body from that
Affliction; neglecting to blot out the Image of the Sickness, to appease the
enraged Vitals, and to remove the Vexatious, Thorny, Degenerate, Dead Juices,
without empairing Nature, wronging the Stomach, or offering any Violence to any
shop ordained for Digestion. They may plainly perceive (if Sordid Gain did not
blind them) it is labor in vain to Purg Bucketfuls of Choler, and Melancholy,
(which they suppose to be the Conjunct united Cause of the Evil) to let out
great quantity of Blood from the Limbs for the Cure of the Scurvie, etc. since
generally the Patient is more weakened, and his Evil oftentimes more confirmed
hereby. Assuredly did they set Nature upon her Legs, when she is either
sitting, or prostrate under any Calamity, she would soon conquer her Enemy,
which kept her in Subjection. Would they but follow Hippocrates, who taught
them that Naturae sunt Morborum Medicatrices, they would speedily renounce
Bleeding, and Feeble, Hurtful Purgatives, to be looked upon as Contrivers, and
Factors of filthy Matter, which the Expulsive Power stirred up, casts out with
the Poison: So that in reality, the Common Way of Purging is only like Pumping,
without stopping the Leak. For as Hippo. delivers, it is not how much, but what
is cleansed away does good; the Occasional, Exciting, Peccant, Fermenting
Matter being often very small as to its bulk.

Humane Sickness has a Spiritual beginning, Progress, State, and Declination,
arising from a Seed, as all other things; therefore they have a Real Entity,
consisting of an Efficient and Material Cause, both seated ^n the Spirit of
Life, Active and Passive in Contriving its own Ruin, when at any time it is
disturbed through any outward Accident. When any thing very injurious to Nature
approaches from without, or is engendered within our Bodies, the Archeus, or
Vital Air takes notice of it, and being incensed, it frames in it self some
Ill-favored Dark Images, agreeable to the Cause Offensive. According to this
Model or Proportion it Acts, never ceasing to follow the Copy or Draught of the
Malady made by its own Activity, in a certain determinate quantity of it self,
even to its own great damage and destruction, unless the Character of the
Disease be blotted out, or the Archeus pacified; and diverted by some pleasing
Object, or the External Vexing Occasion removed.

Those Defunct Excrements, or Superfluities separated from Life, never to be
rconciled to it, are most tedious and noisome to the Vital Spirits: wherefore
becoming impatient, they Rage, Fret, Chafe at the presence of so unwelcome
Guests. Hereupon they stir upon the Ferments, or Instrumental Transfigurators,
to become disordered, sometimes to cause a Confusion, Tumult, Boiling, and
Huffing in the Juices, whereby a Fever is kindled; sometimes to produce
Congelation of the Blood, otherwhile to turn it into sharp gauling Liquor,
causing many long Calamities.

Now the Filth or Dregs lodging in our Bodies, are not Diseases themselves, but
stir up the Archeus to create those Evils, we are liable to. These are either
Antecedent Causes of our Maladies; or they are Products, and Consequents,
stirring up Secondary Calamities, accompanied with various Symptoms, Accidents,
Dispositions, and Alterations. Moreover, the Miseries of our Bodies, do now and
then begin from an Invisible, Immaterial Occasion, imprinting in our Phansies,
a lively Character of a Disease, which converting the Good Juices into Bad,
both Foment the present Evil, also excite the Vitals to procreate more
Mischiefs through the Contagion of a Seed implanted in the Life.

That the Fancy can out of a Non Ens, or Nothing, frame Hoc Aliquid, or
something of this or that Species, is evident in Women with Child, who upon
earnest longing after Fruit, etc. or some sudden Terror, make the Idea, or
Figure of what they greatly Covet, or are terrified at in their Spirits, which
conveied to the Womb, is absolutely conformed in that part of the Child, which
answers to the place, the Woman at that instant touched, when she was so
passionately affected. Withal, this Plant or Living Creature pictured in the
Skin, shall express all those remarkable Alterations, Defections, Vigor, and
Maturation that the Real Type, or Example of what is shaped is subject to, at
certain times of the year.

Thus it is plain, that the Spirits being exalted, excited, or put into a
vehement Motion, through any notable Passion can fashion that, (bringing it to
visible Light on the Superficies of the Skin) which before lay hid within.

Wherefore I doubt not there is as perspicuous a Signaturi of every Disease in
the Spirits, as the Platform of the Plant to be produced in a Bean divided. The
Principle Difference being, that the one is more Spiritual, the other Corporeal.

The Seminal Figure then of all Diseases made in the Spirit of Life is, the
only Efficient, Active Cause of their Being.

Likewise some Degenerate Portion of the Spirit, wherein the Calamity is as it
were stamped (separated from that which remains in its Integrity) becomes the
Material Subject thereof.

That it is the Blast of Life which conceives and brings forth all manner of
Evils is most evident, seeing no Dead Body is capable of Sickness; this being
the true only Reason to be given, that the Principal Contrive^ thereof, viz.
the Archeus or Vital Spirit is wanting.

For the Forbidden Fruit which Adam took into his Stomach, having a Power
inserted into it of stirring up Lust, or Concupiscence (The Omnipotent for that
Reason giving Advertisement to Man not to meddle with) was appropriated; and
applicated by means of the Animal Spirits to the Immortal Soul; whereby it
presently sets up Images of filthy Diseases, forthwith entertaining the Sensual
Soul common to all Beasts; being then, so continuing to this day the
Fundamental Cause of all Calamities.

I assert; the Irregular Imagination of the Living Spirit of Man in the
Stomach, chiefly the Brain, and every Part besides, does first set on work
every Infirmity seizing upon us; which at first seems very inconsiderable, but
in process, through the uncessant Motion of the First Mover, it arrives to a
great Height of Malignity, as appears by various sad Symtoms, Accidents, and
Products to be distinguished precisely from the Substantial Being of Diseases.

For Example, A Stone in the Kidneys, Bladder, or elsewhere, likewise any
congealed Matter, or Cancrous hollowness are not Diseases, but the Products,
Effects, or Fruits thereof. The Petrifying Imaginary Seed, closely seated in
the Archeus, is that which first laid the Foundation of the Stone, carrying the
same on, as it began, to full growth: so that although the Stone be removed out
of the Kidneys, as long as there remains that stonifying Seed, or invisible
Beginning, the Person before rid of this hard Concretion, may ere long (if the
Idea, the Principle of the Congealing be not absolutely brought to naught, or
blotted out) be vexed, tortured or crucified with the like deformed Matter
again.

That the Archeus should be put into such a disturbance or Passion through any
disorders in Diet, etc. as to frame within its own Bowels such a dreadful,
unhandsome Substance, is to be lamented, but that the Seminal Character of the
Stone should be contrived, fomented, born with us, taking deep root, as we grow
up, is far more deplorable.

For Diseased Seminal Ideas derived from the Matrice are hardly to be razed
out: they are so incorporated with our Constitutes, challenging as great
privilege to act their part upon the Stage of this Little World in an uniform
Manner, and Dress; though depraved, as Nature in its Integrity, directed by
wholesome Images, performs all things orderly, according to just proportion and
approved Rules of Sanity.

At that very time, when the chief Author moulds the Seed, containing the
shadowed Likeness of what is to be made capable of a perfect Form, does the
same Workmaster draw the Pourtraiture of those manifold Mischiefs, which happen
to Body and Mind many years after. So fixed are those Hereditary Miseries, that
although the whole Mass of every Numerical Part of the Body be changed again
and again, yet the Radical Tincture or dye of the Congenite Disease shall
remain, ready to put forth it self, flourish, spread into various Branches, and
Fruits, when the full time is come that it meets with an Outward Cause to stir
it up.

This is demonstrable in the Gout, the Stone, Consumption, Madness, Small Pox,
etc. whose Images for some years lie as it were asleep, till they be roused up
through some Provocative Occasions.

The Idea's of Evils, which the Archeus contrives when we are come out of the
Womb abroad in the open Air are flitting, may easily be blurred, wiped off by
a stronger Figure: these often interfeering each other, at length clash
together, and both become annihilated.

Infinite are the Number of Idea's or Representations made by a Working
Fancy, some of which are no sooner framed, but strait vanish, becoming Non
Entia: for they are momentany, and easily thrust out by the next Successor.
But when any Object shall often savourly and seriously affect us; then the
Representation of the same does take deep Roots in the Spirit, altering the
Texture of the Blood, Latex or Lympha; so that according to the Species of the
Immoderate Passion, and the Picture thereof drawn either in the Innate Archeus,
or that continually repaired, different Accidents, Symptoms, Signs and Effects
arise.

That all Diseases have a Type, Copy, or Example set, (according to which the
Archeus that first molded it, acts) may be confirmed by the Uniformity,
Regular Motion, Inseparable Appearances or Signs belonging to them, from which
they receive a Name proper to their Nature: Those tell us of what kind the
Sickness is, insomuch a Judicious Physician is able as well to make
distinction, between one Malady and another, as between a Pippin and a
Pearmain; an Almond and a Chestnut; likewise to sort them into several Kinds,
Classes, Forms, Degrees; a thing never to be done, if there were not a certain
Director, Informer, o^ first Mover, that laid a Platsom of whatsoever Grief,
depending upon an Efficient and Material Cause, as all other Sublunaries.

Again that the Archeus does first make a draught of the Evil in self, working
afterward accordingly to its own Hurt or Destruction, may be proved by that
Intermission, Silence, we find in Fevers, Falling Sickness, Gout, Stone,
Convulsions Tissick, etc. which as it were sleep for some time, then awake,
repeating their former Tragical Act exactly. Certainly if there were not an
Agent lead by a strict Rule, it were impossible such a constant Mode and Method
could be observed in the Beginning, Progress, Height, Declension, and
Determination of Maladies.

Briefly therefore the true Efficient with the Material Cause of all Diseases
is, not any Distemper of the Elementary Qualites, not any of the supposed four
Humors derived from the four Elements, not Salt, Sulphur, Mercury, etc. not
any thing merely Excrementitious, Vexatious, Ambient: but the Vital Spirit
stirred up to Indignation, Fear, etc. by some loathsome tedious Object present:
whereupon it makes the very shape, planting the Seed of the Malady in some
Portion of that Aetherial Blast, separated from that in Integrity: upon which
Matter, as a Patient, the Seminal Ideal Agent works shooting forth those
Manifold Fruits or Appearances in Sickness.

CHAP IV. Of the Therapeutick, or Healing Method.
1. Of Diet in General, respecting the Prevention, and Sanation of Man's
Infirmities.
THe Immediate Undoubted Cause of all Diseases made Manifest, their Cure will
become more Easy, to the Purpose, Speedy, with less Danger, and Loathsomness.

There are two Capital principal Indications, Ends or Marks, which ought to
direct us in the ordering our Diet as well as Pharmacy.

1. The Support of the Strength or Vital Spirits.

2. The Declining, or Eschewing whatsoever is an Enemy to Nature, that
Incenses, and puts it into inordinate Passions.

Laudable Diet then both Supports the Vitals, increasing them, also Clarifies,
Pacifies, and Diverts them from making Hurtful Images; yea in some proportion
Duls, Defaces, and Eclipses those already framed.

Now by Diet are comprehended all those Necessary Succors, Requisites, or
Concomitants, without which, the Life of Man cannot Subsist. Namely,

1. Ingestion or taking into our Bodies, whatsoever is Alimental, or
Nourishable.

2. The Egestion, or Discharge of Superfluities arising from our Food, and the
Retention of what is agreeable to our Nature.

3. The Rectification of the Air.

4. The right ordering of Rest and Motion by Turns, in due Measure and Time.

5. A just Allowance of Sleep and Watching.

Lastly, The Moderation, or Regulation of the Passions, aed Perturbations of
the Mind.

In the first place, the direct way to uphold, increase the Spirits, to keep
them Clear, Bright, and free from unreasonable, Sickly, Turbulent, Melancholy
Idea's, or Impressions, is to have an especial Care of the Fountain, from
whence these subtle Particles spring, i. e. the Stomach. This Noble Part is
with Care and Tenderness to be respected above any other: for this purpose
nothing is to be taken, offending it, either in Quality or Quantity. Neither is
the Substance and Quality of any Nourishable, to be insisted upon so much, as
the just Quantity we are to observe: for if the Stomach earnestly desire what
is generally Reputed to be hard of Digestion, or to afford bad Aliment;
notwithstanding if there be an eager Appetite to the same, this Noble Part is
to be indulged, or favored in such a Case; only allowing a lesser Quantity.
Doubtless this most sensible Membrane, of Exquisite Gust does for the most part
best prompt u^ to what is for the Good of the whole: so that giving a Repulse
or Check to a vehement Appetite, hunting after any thing eatable, or drinkable,
we oftentimes cause a cloudiness, dullness, sullenness, and darkness in the
Vital Spirits, bringing them into such a disorder, that they Coin many foul,
black Images, whereas, if the Archeus of this eminent Ventricle were gratified
and humoured, in what it extremely desires, there would be a serenity and
luster in the Spirits, and then al^ Actions executed with more strength.

The severity of some Physicians in forbidding their Patients to eat that to
which their Appetite is exceedingly addicted, has caused no small
discommodity. Neither do they less offend who strictly impose upon them such a
Diet, as they, according to some general Rules, apprehend most fitting, derived
from bare Qualities of Heat and Cold, etc. not considering that in all
Diseases, especially those of long duration, enquiry ought to be made to what
Diet the Sick is most naturally inclined to, and accustomed, what his Gust does
best relish, then according to that account to grant him some small Portion of
what he eagerly covets, although usually reckoned amongst Food of hard
Digestion, of ill juice, of bad quality, or very Hot, etc. For none can give
better Arguments of a Diet, more proper for the satisfying the Appetite, than a
Man himself, especially if he be of years, carefully taking notice what does
most agree with the Genius of his Stomach.

I have known Posset Drink, out of an intent to cool, prescribed by some
Doctors, Humorists, (without farther Examination of an Antipathy thereto) even
to the endangering the Life, in Malignant, ill-conditioned Fevers. Such
Darkness has forthwith seized upon their Spirits, and such Loathsome foul
Shapes have been delineated thereby: that they have approached the shadow of
Death, undoubtedly perishing, had not prevalent Art blotted out speedily those
deformed Figures. So hazardous it is to withhold what Nature does most
Sympathize with, or to offer what it bears an inbred Hatred to. This certainly
is to be known by a Man's own Experience, whether he have an absolute dislike to
Honey, an Egg, Sider, any Spice, etc.

For this Reason (methinks) it is great vanity in those, who will undertake to
be Magisterial, and overruled Persons in Diet, more able to judge of this
Matter than Physicians: who presume, no less ridiculously, than ignorantly, to
enjoin John, Thomas, William, the same Food, Order, Season, and Measure, of
taking it alike, without having respect to any Individual or Peculiar Stamp
made upon the Spirits in the Womb, whence Qot Homines, Tot Diaetae observendae:
As many Men as there are in the World, so many inseparable Properties are to be
indulged as to the election of Eating and Drinking this or that.

If our Galenical Physicians (who stand so much upon their bare Qualities of
Heat and Cold in the Cure of Griefs, according to the Rule of Contraries,
directing them as they say, but upon false grounds, to extinguish one by
another) did rather aim at the Cancelling and blotting out these perverse,
deformed, crooked Impresses or Characters born with us, and in process growing
up to such a height, insomuch that they become unconquerable, Mortals would
certainly enjoy both a sounder Body and Mind, be free from Melancholy, enjoying
far more clearness of Spirit.

I am Confident that the Stomach, whose Digestive properly is utterly estranged
by a Fever, or long Imbecility, being whetted by a strong affection may alter
a Red-herring, Oysters, a Lobster, etc. better than Veal, Chicken, Broth,
Gellies, or any such contrived Cookeries. Therefore to urge the Sick to Eat
Sodden, when he lusts after Roasted; or Liquid, when he requires Solid, is to
cross Nature, supposed either can be made fit for nourishment.

In all those states wherein I find the Infirm Person's Stomach incapable to
make a formal chang of the Food, for want of a kindly Ferment or Dissolvent (as
for Example, in all Fevers, and very ill habits of Bodies) there I generally
enjoin the best Liquors, abounding with good Spirits, easily to be altered into
the Vitals, leaving no considerate foulness or dross behind (the watrish part
entering into the Vessels carrying off some Superfluities it meets with, by
Urine and Sweat) so that my Practice has taught me many years what Hippo. has
delivered, Facilius est refici potu quum cibo. The Vital steam is with more
speed refreshed, and longer maintained by Spirituous Liquors, than by Flesh, or
its Juices, which for want of, a Living Dissolvent, requisite for this chief
Cook-room, become Degenerate, Dead, and stinking; whereupon a Fever is added
to a Fever, the Archeus being increased in its Fury, makes Idea's of Weakness,
Despair, and Confusion, according to the Truth of the Old Man, Siquis in febre
cibum de derit, valenti Robur Aegrotanti Morbus. Yet the custom and Authority
of Malepracticants is so powerful, that the Sick thinks he must be weakened, if
he eat not Broth of Flesh, Caudels, Water Gruel, etc. which those Diet-mongers
have justified (contrary to the Aphoris.) will turn into Nourishment whereas
the Stomach hereby becomes more weakened, Excrements engendered abundantly, the
rage of the Archeus advanced hence arise Misty, Gloomy Representations,
eclipsing the Sun of Life, raising as it were a filthy fog in the Archeus, so
that it cannot see how to rectify its Erroneous Idea's, suffering them to
become more fixed.

No less Mischievous is the Galenical Doctrine of Cooling Liquors in Fevers,
viz. their Maukish, Spiritless, Dull, Flat Posset Drink, Small-beer,
Barly-water, loathsome Decoctions of cooling crude Herbs, Pippin Liquors, and
the like, which starve the Vital Spirit, bringing a numness upon it, that it
cannot do any thing effectually for the expulsion of its Enemy: They likewise
wedge in the ill Juices, so that either Nature is totally oppressed, yielding
to its Fate, or led Captive by a long Disease, the Common Event of their
Mortiferous Method.

Whosoever then falls into a Fever, or any other Calamity, I advise him (upon
Fundamental Trials made many years) to avoid the aforesaid poor Starvling
Liquors, to apply himself to the drinking of that, which will enable the
Archeus strongly to resist its Enemy, to frame benign, clear, lightsome
Imaginations tending to Health, to subdue the detestable filthy Matter, holding
no communion with Life, by Sweat, Urine, Spitting, Vomiting, or Stool: Yet
still let Moderation be the Guide in all things, for the most Commendable
things may be abused, witness those to whom I allowed to drink now and then a
Glass of Sack in a high Fever, who unadvisedly fortewith poured down a whole
Quart-bottle to their Prejudice.

As I never forbid any in a Fever good Strong Liquors, to quench Thirst, to
strengthen the Stomach and Spirits: So I admonish all to make use of
Temperance: Neither do I prohibit Broaths, Collises, Eggs in any Malady, etc.
upon any other account, but that they become corrupt in a Stomach, whose
Ferment cannot turn them into a nourishable Juice.

He that will take a course to obtain Iuventutem in Senectute, to be young and
cheerful when Old, must have respect to Senectutem in Iuventute, careful to be
Temperate, Sober, and Discreet, as some Old Men are.

Could we but know our selves aright so far, as to command our greedy Appetite,
not to devour more than the Ferment of this (...) is able to conquer, we should
frustrate the Common Saying; Plures Gula quam Gladius: Multitude of Evils of
Body and Mind might be prevented and remedyed.

For since Natura paucis contenta est; it is far better in Eating and Drinking to
subsist on this side the Golden Rule of Mediocrity than to transgress beyond:
that being more easily corected.

A peculiar Robust Constitution; the course of Life we follow; the Exercise we
use; the Region or place we inhabit; the Air we suck into our Lungs; the
Agility or Dullness; the Alacrity or Indisposition, we find the morning
following the foregoing days Diet, Dictate what Quantity of Food, of what
Quality, and at what time we ought to Eat: thus accordingly we are to Regulate
and Reform what is amiss.

One of an Athletick Body laboring hard, living in a Mountainous, Clear,
Temperate Air, or much conversant at Sea, Lively, Airy and Spiriteful after
Sleep, may justly challenge a greater share of Aliment than a Weakly, Lumpish,
Drousie Habit, addicted to a Sedentary Studious Life, in a Populous City, or
any Fenny Foggy Country, remote from the Sea: For I find* generally that, Aqua
praecipue Marina promovet Digestionem. The Agitation of the Body by Neptune's
Ebullition, the Recentation of the Air, those Copious Volatile Particles of
Acid and Alkali in the Ambient, do powerfully corroborate the Ferments of
Digestion, carry off insensibly any Recrements without any Coagulation or
Dreggy Settling left behind: so that many can eat without Discommodity
Quintuple the portion at Sea, above that at Land.

Large Morning Draughts are for the most part very injurious, likewise frequent
Drinking between Meals; for the kindly Dissolution of the Food is retarded
hereby, the Fibers of the Stomach by degrees made Flaccid, and the Tone
Debilitated. One Meal a day discreetly modefied, and with one or two short
snaps beside, may (...) very well suffice most men, using but gentle Motion,
and living in places where the Air is saturated with abundant Exhalations.

Let him beware to eat unless his Appetite invites him, then not till he be
glutted; Commedat non quidem ad repletionem cavitatis Stomachi* nec ad
voluptatis sive gustus dictamen. It Is the misery of many to have better
Appetites, than Nigestions, which is the frequent cause that many raw Juices
are contracted, the Body becoming more clogged, ponderous and indisposed to
stir; for if no more Food be taken in than can be thoroughly altered
(Excrementitious Superfluitie^ being sent packing insensibly) one will continue
the same weight, or little different many mornings togehter: if otherwise any
Caput Mort or Dreggy substance remain behind indigested, the Spirits become
Dull, Cloudy, and Obscure, and the whole Mass Lumpish and Heavy.

Mastication an exact chewing of what we eat, does exceedingly avail to a happy
Digestion: for he that hastily gobleth in his Food, had need to have a
Cormorants or an Ostritch's Dissolvent in his Stomach.

Variety of Dishes is a Lure to make us Eat more than ordinary, and a means to
pester the Stomach with more than it can Digest, to make a confusion in the
separation: so that which is raw being blended with what is duly changed, both
are thrown off without Distinction. The plainest simple, Homebred Food is
generally to be preferred for holsomness, before the fine, pampering,
curiously-dressed, far-fetched Dainties. Beef, Mutton rightly prepared before
Partridges, Pheasants, etc. Brown Bread Leavened before White.

That Tyrannical, Severe. Overbusie Precepts the Galenists enjoin their
Patients, is to be rejected, for misere vivit qui medice vivit. To be rigidly
kept from what is Lawful and Useful (for want of fitting Remedies) is little
better than a Turkish Slavery.

Celsus his Rule, Not to be much solicitous or curious in Diet (supposed some
measure be observed) is to be embraced by every man who enjoys a competent
Health: Yea since they who are oppressed with any great Sickness (Nature
becoming prostrate, subject to the Dominion of the Enemy) can never be cured by
the strictest Government in their Food: Therefore even those (when the Malady
shall meet with Remedies able to over power it, ought to take liberty to
gratify their Appetite, and sometimes to indulge their Genius more liberally
than ordinary, with what it is greatly affected: For how often has it been
known the thing the Physician has sternly forbidden upon pain of Death, that
the same being either secretly stolen by the Patient, or privately offered by
the Nurse, or some Friends, has proved the unexpected Means to make Nature
Mistress of the Disease, the Vital Spirits hereby highly exalted at the
presence of that which does so match their Inclination and vehement Longing, in
so much that they have taken Courage, and scattered those black clouds of
mischievous Idea's, entertaining instead thereof, clear, bright Images tending
to health. It is no small prudence in a Physician, to examine to what Diet the
sick person has accustomed bimself, for says Hippo. Quarum rerum inveteravit
Consuetudo, quamvis deteriores sint illae, minus tamen insuetis male afficiunt.
Aphor. 5. lib. 2.

In this case we ought sometimes not so punctually to stand upon what is
Wholesome, as what is Customary: nor is this any Argument to allow of Poison,
Chaulk, Tobacco, Tiles or Coals which some to Admiration have frequently
devoured in great quantity, without a mortal Event. But the question is what
Indifferent Food may be commended, dispensed, and afforded to the Infirm in
relation to custom, and a strong desire, with a capacity of digesting it: for
these Considerations laid aside, it were by no means to be granted.

In Conclusion I advise that Curiosity, Severity, Nicety in Diet be laid aside;
that the Physician, as well as the Patient, insist upon what the Importunity of
the Appetite dict^tes, the Custom of any Food does urge, and the largness of
Digestion may permit: ^or what is earnestly desired, does conduce to ^ better
Alteration; what is well Altered, does increase the Vitals, otherwise it does
^ut strengthen the Disease and weaken Nature.

It is as possible that flesh thrown into the ^ennel should not corrupt lying
there long, ^s that food taken into a stomach deprived in greatest part of its
Dissolvent or Ferment, should not Cadaverate or Putrify; whereupon the former
Calamity is augmented by another. Not how much we eat, but what is accu^ately
prepared in this Vital Kitchen, is chief^y to be considered. Veins, Arteries,
Nerves, Ligaments, Gristles, Bones are all beholding ^he Blood and Spirits for
their happy subsist^nce, and those to the Stomach. Wherefore (...) any aim at a
comfortable life, ut sit men's sa^a in corpore sano, let him avoid excess in
^o^d and liquid Diet, but especially the first. ^et him endeavor so far to
understand himself, or be governed by those who are know^ng her in* that no
more ought to be put in^o this Membranous Body, than what it is able ^o convert
into a laudable substance for the ^ood of the whole. Neither let any one ^hink
to be rightly instructed by the Galenists, since they prescribe a Diet according
to false Suppositions of Heat and Cold, Recollae^ nowhere active of themselves
in the producing any vital Ens: But let the upright Philosophical Chemist be
heard, who gives Counsel according as the Spirits and their Instruments shall
dictate. Hereby no considerable Eerror can be committed in the Superstructure
as long as the Foundation is so strong.

CHAP. V.
THe next thing Diaetetical to be considered, tending to the been esse, or
Welfare of man's life, is Evacuation of what is Superfluous or Excrementitious,
and the Retention of a Salubrious and Friendly Matter, for the Sustentation of
a commodious prosperous Health. That all Foulness (in no wise to be taken into
the custody of the Vitals) may be discharged, Secretion or Separation is to be
made of Good from Bad, of Pure from Impure, by the Active Separator the
Archeus: for when any thing rejectaneous is thrown off promiscuously with any
laudable Sudstance fitting to be conserved, many inconveniences follow, as is
frequently observed by the more acute Physicians in Haemorrhagies, or Fluxes,
both natural, and Artificial; for what can be more absurd than ^o cast away the
Wheat with Chaff, the Spirit of Wine with the stinking dreggy Sulphur.

Now Superfluities the more they are rarefied, and volatilized by kindly
Ferments, the ^ooner they are difflated or sent packing by Respiration, and
Transpiration through the habit of the Body, without the least remainder of a
gross Dregg, in which if it fail, there forthwith follows a declination from
Integri^y, a brisk sound constitution of body, becoming, according to Statica
Medicina, a little more dull and ponderous; if then a considerable quantity of
this filthy settling be accumu^ated, the occasional cause of a disease is
hatching, which if not timely prevented, breaks forth actually, disturbing the
Economy of ^his admirable Frame. Wherefore due caution is to be taken that we
ingest not any thing not capable to be digested, that Excrements be strictly
egested, or voided by Stool (for ventris torpor omnium confusio) Urine,
Expectoration, sometimes easy Vomiting or Universal Cutaneous Breathing: For
the promo^ion of which, where Nature is difficient, Art ought to supply. A
Soluble Belly, and easy transpirable Skin does much conduce to a Healthful
Life. For want whereof, Pil. Polychrest and Tinctur. Polychrest, not omitting
sometimes Glysters, and Bathing, do much conduce. In Women the Monthly Terms
ought to have their just course: If they come short, Elix. propri. Sulphur.
Mar. Philosophically prepared do much avail. Also the Inward Haemorrhoides or
Piles opened are to be indulged: for the draning of these, a gentle frication
to and fro with a Tuft of Grass, when the Fundament is open, is of singular use
where there is any propensity in Nature to evacuate foeculent, fretting blood,
from the Mesentary or Spleen; I look upon this as a most noble Emunctory to
disburden each. Neither ought a supurfluity of Seed to be kept too long in
peculiar Bodies, especially if there be danger it may contract an ill odor to
the Annoyance of the Kidneys, Spleen, Head: for seeing the Testicles have no
small influence upon the parts tending to their happiness, if they be in their
right Tone, certainly then if out of order they dart hurtful beams to the
notable damage of that Organ where they lights. Have a care of transgressing
herein too much, for that confounds all.

One thing I must by the way urge, that Physicians have a special care, how
they make a Retention of any Degenerate, Malignant Impurities by Astringents,
or Opiates, without removing the Cause, from whence they flow. The only way to
perform this aright, is to pacify the Arci^^s, to amend the exorbitancy of the
Ferments, to strengthen Nature to carry off at the same time that in a larger
quantity with succeeding ease, which before came away by little portions, in a
dribling manner, without any redress to the debilitating the Vitals. Then no
doubt the Fibers of the Stomach, and other parts, will be corroborated, (the
Morbisick occasion of their weakness being sequestered.)

To cleanse away every morning with a Linen course cloth any cl^mmy soulness
from the three notable Emunctories, as the Groin, Armpits, Neck, does somewhat
help to preserve from Sickness. The scraping the tongue fasting, ridding it
from a viscous impurity, does not only profit for the keeping from a Squinsie,
but also other Inconveniences.

Salt of Pot-ash calcined, mixed with five or six times the quantity of Almond
Cake poudred fine, does scour the Mouth, if a little thereof be taken with
three or four spoonfuls of water gargarized and rubbed with the Finger. Note
sharp Liquors are offensive to the Teeth, but Alkalies friendly to them.

CHAP. VI.
THe third Diaetetical necessary Supportter of a happy life, and Restorer of it
when impaired, is good Air, which if congruous to the Lungs is as welcome to
it, as some Food to a rightly disposed Stomach. What Famous Cures wholesome Air,
with Mineral Waters, have effected, is well known to those, whom the Galenists
have left as desparate: for whereas they at first upon a false Supposition that
the Air did chiefly conduce to the cooling of the Heart, and explosion of
Fuliginous Particles generated from excessive Heat, did take their Indication
of cooling more or less according as any Febrile Disease did invade the Patient
(but all in vain having exhausted both the Strength and Purse of the Sick
Person) thus missing a sanative End, they at length study to find out some pure
Air, to which they commit the Patient, although often too late to be Cured)
yet is he sometimes beyond expectation revived (even to their astonishment) who
are ignorant of the true cause thereof. For those Coagulations, dreggy grosness
in the Blood (rather augmented than diminished by faeculent Medicaments Enemies
to the Stomach) are by the subtle Ambient dissolved, rarefied, volatilized and
sent packing without any filthy settling left behind. Hereby the Stomach
recovers its Digestion, and the Blood runs freely in its proper Channels, so
powerful is the Air with the Ferments to refine the Juices, attenuating all
tenacious Matter residing in them, or lurking about the Spleen or Stomach,
whose Appetite and Digestion are much advanced or depressed, according as the
Ambient is Thin or Thick, Defaecated or Dreggy. This great Separator of
Moisture does in some places so rarefie and consume the solid Nutriment of Man's
Body, that although he eat plentifully, Quadruple to what he does at other
times in some Regions, yet shall he continue in perfect health, obtaining the
same weight of Body, he had some weeks before: (few visible Excrements in
comparison of those insensibly dissipated to be discovered.)

This is the happy effect of subtle, fresh, well clarified, often changed,
cold, piercing Air, grateful to the Lungs: on the other side, where this
Ambient is gross, restagnant, stuffed full of foul corpuscles, to which one is
confined, misty or foggy, many discommodities of Health ensue, as dull
Appetite, In digestion, crudities, contamination of the of the Blood, flatness,
heaviness of the Spirits, depravation of the Ferments, whence troops of
Diseases invade us.

Where the Atmosphere is well qualified, and constituted, men enjoy length of
days, as well as at present a sound Body, where it is otherwise disposed, the
thread of Life is shortened.

In general, the Air destitute of Noisome Exhalations from the Earth and
endued with Benevolent Influences from the Heavens is profitable for the Lungs.
In particular, that Air chiefly concerns the preservation from Sickness, and
the Restoration of Sanity, which does best agree with the Individual, whose
approbation comes from Experience. For there is a Natural appetite in the Lungs
of some, to embrace this or that Air above another, as it is inhaerent in the
Stomach to be affected with certain peculiar kinds of meat.

Where the Air is culpable, Art ought to amend it, which is done by imitating
Nature, ventilating it when restagnant, heating and subtillizing it by good
Fires when it is cold or gross, consuming or putting to flight stinking
Particles by the diffusion of acceptable good Odours. If the Air abound with
excessively Acid, or foul Nitrosulphurious Atoms it is to be rectified with the
breath of the most refined Askali's and the Fumes of well corrected Sulphurs.
By this means many Diseases may be prevented, and in some sort cured.

CHAP. VII.
THe fourth Assistanting to a Comfortable Life, is Exercise and Rest, which
ought to succeed each other by turns, Quod caret alterna requie durabile non
est. Now Motion is previous to Rest, for the first Symptoms of Life arise from
a Loeo Motive Faculty.

We shall not here examine Aristotle's Definition of Nature, i. e. The Principle
of Motion and Rest; but rather insist upon the Modification or Regulation of
Motion, as it tends to the Health of Man. Of so great use is Motion or
Exercise, that the Wise Creator ordained Respiration, and Pulsation to continue
constantly for our Vital pre^ervation through the whole course of our Life; so
that we Live no longer, when the Heart and Lungs do quite give over the faculty
of Moving. Every one then ought to take singular care that Circulation of the
Blood may be in no wise intercepted, nor free Breathing be intermitted: for
that purpose the Exercise of the Muscles of the Limbs, gentle and sweet
Recreation of the Mind do avail.

Moderate Equal Diaphoretick, Alterative and duly Excitative Labor joined with
pleasant, variable, admirable, rare and desirable Objects does Expand and
Dilate the Lungs and Arteries, whereby the Breast becomes (...), the Arteries
Emicant.

Nothing promotes these Actions better than cheerfulness or temparate Joy,
constant love of what is truly amiable, never to be repented of, A probable
hope of some good not long to be deferred, at length a sweet enjoyment of that
which is durable, and capable to usher in better things: For I am of a very
brave Man's Opinion; The Comfort of our whole Life depends upon expectation of
better things. Also Magnanimity or Courage founded upon Virtuous Enterprises,
aspiring to Noble Designs, for a Public as well as Private Interest, do
sweetly enlarge the Spirits, quickening the Ferments, causing an expulsion of
Superfluities: Yea just Indignation, kept within its due Limits, facilitates
Respiration, Transpiration and Pulsation.

On the contrary, Fear, Sorrow, Melancholy, Hatred, Jealousy, Envy contract
the Diaphragme, and the Muscles of the Breast, hindering legitimate breathing,
occasioning an Immature Importunate Systole, or a Supine Connivence in the
Arteries.

It is not amiss sometimes to be transported beyond the common bounds of
Moderation; to be agitated with some Extraordinary passion of the mind, and to
sustain tedious Labor, that the sweeter composition of Mind, and most
delightful rest of Body may follow; since one constant strict tenor pertaining
to Diet is hardly to be obtained, without greater damage, whenever we offend,
not to be avoided by any Man, who has a Public Employment, or a secular
Interest to look after: so that it is better to be accustomed to any Exercise
or labor of Body and mind voluntarily, least we be surpised unawares
unwillingly to our notable hurt.

I advise those parts should undergo most gentle Exercise, which are weakest;
to walk oftener upon the lower Limbs when they are somewhat feeble; to move
rather the Arms and Hands when incident to a debility, lest the stronger by
motion defraud the weaker, and so Alogotrophia or disproportion in the
nourishment of parts follow.

I approve Frication of all parts, especially three noted Emunctories; the
Groin, Armpits, and Neck with a course Cloth, without curious superstition of
rigtht oblique or transverse Directions.

Combing the Head every Morning is an exercise profitable for the Brain and
upper Limbs increasing their vigor and opening the Pores for the emission of
Excrements engendered in the sixth Digestion, which is not a little depraved by a
superfluous covering, so that the Brain through too much Heat becomes
Effeminate, Soft and Imprudent.

Let every man make choice of that Exercise or Recreation he is most inclined,
most agreeable to his Constitution, whereby he is most relieved.

CHAP. VIII.
THe fifth inseparable Companion of our Life nearly related to Exercise and
Motion is Sleeping and Waking. These make almost a Divident of the Life of this
Microcosm: And happy it is for Man, that the first was Instituted, since great
are the Cares of miserable Mortals, that he has reason to bless his Creator
that he can fall into a sweet Lethean Sleep, which, like a short Death,
deprives him of Sorrow and Anguish of Spirit. Pax Animi quem cura fugit. Albeit
great is the comfort of a moderate Sleep, as to the refreshment of Body and
Mind, whereby they are enabled to execute their Faculties and Offices more
vigorously awake; yet no small are the Discommodities brought upon us by excess
therein, as an Indisposition to follow Ingenious Arts or Sciences, a Stupidity
to comprehend the Truth of things, Forgetfulness, Supinity, or Indifferences
what becomes of our future State, leaving Affairs in a confused condition,
Indigested and Desperate. It heaps up Crudities, flats the Archeus, hinders the
Expulsion of Superfluities, makes the Body Woman-like, Delicate, Tender,
Wanton, unfit for any Noble Enterprise, accumulates Excrements, yielding
abundant Matter for all sorts of Diseases, etc. Excess also in Waking is
accompanied with multitude of ill Consequents, Impovrishment and Distraction of
the Spirits, Absurd Idea's, Indigestion, an Augmentation of A-aids
Hypochondriack Fits, Melancholy and Madness.

CAAP. IX.
THe last Inseparable Concomitant of Life to be Insisted upon, whereby our
condition is made better or worse, according as we govern them well or ill, is
our Passions; which, if they move regularly, produce a sweet Tranquillity in the
Mind, and a Salubrity in the Body: but if extravagant, flying out beyond their
bounds, they confound the whole Economy of this Admirable Frame. The Stoics
seem to endeavor to deprive themselves of a Sensitive Life, when they would
have a man to be (...). This is all one as not to take notice of any thing
adverse to Nature: for it is impossible for a Man Apprehensible and Imaginable,
not to be moved by the Object, he apprehends or Imagines; as it is pleasing or
distastful, so he desires it, or abhors it, the Affections hereby set on work,
great reluctance, effervescence perturbation arise in the Spirits which
sometimes strangly alter the Texture and Crasis of the Blood. The Idea's or
Images of Sorrow, Fear, Anger, Joy, Jealousy, Hatred, Emulation are sometimes
so fixed in the Animals, that they become indeleble: hence vain Imaginations of
the whole Man, Dotage, Melancholy and Fury are Emicant: neither do the absurd
Conceptions, and vain Imaginatiors of the whole Man only cause disturbance in
the Stomach or Brain, Storms or Tempests in the Universal Archeus, but likewise
the Spirit of every part frames particular Images of Indignation, Fear, etc.

Any Spinous, acculeating, or pricking Matter in any particular part, presently
puts the Vital Spirit there into a passion, the Archeus of the Eye is forthwith
put into an indignation, when an Extimulating Fretting Liquor is either
injected into it, or engendered in it, through a fault in its peculiar
Degestion: whereupon the Lympha, Latex, or the Wheyish Humor is lured or
summoned for the Ablution of this Blot, or Defect, which when it cannot
perform, the Ocular Water, as well as the Nourishment thereof, is depraved,
through the ringing Attrition of the Sensitive Spirit, which ought by all means
to be pacified. The like Perturbation is observed to be raised in the Archeus
of the Ear, Nose, Windpipe, etc. when any troublesome cause arises there. It Is
certainly true, Omne Vivens Mortui impatiens esse solet. Whatsoever is
alienated from Life, engendered either within, assumed or injected from without,
brings, sometimes sooner or sometimes latter, the Custos of the Whole or Part
into an Inquietude. For this reason Cantharides applied, raise Blisters in the
Skin of a Living Body: from the same cause do virulent Animals, Vegetables or
Minerals, taken inwardly, Purge violently; for as much as the Sensitive Spirit
falls into an indignation at the presence of that it abhors, so makes a
confusion of the wholesome Juices by Colliquating, and Putrefying them. Hereupon
so little benefit arises from things merely loosening the Body: the Principal
Agent being exasperated by what is contrary to its Texture and Nature. After
this rate did I begin my Practice, being taught no better, than to give many
Stools or Vomits, without indulging or pleasing this great President, which, as
I have often proved, is the Supreme cause of Sanity and Infirmity. But
afterward instructed by a far more able Tutor, than the Schools, I began to
correct my former Traditional Error, following the sure Thread of repeated
Experiments; so that at length I never gave any Solutive not fitting to
Corroborate the Stomach, not friendly to the Ferments and Vitals. Before I took
this course, all frequent Laxatives were fruitless, because they did anger and
enrage the Archeus, stirring up Storms and Tempest in the Microcosm, instead of
a sweet Tranquillity. By this means the Idea's of the Fantasy ingeneral were
rectified and clarified, after that the Spirits in particular places were
composed aright. He that desires to be free from absurd Melancholy thoughts,
furious passions and perturbations, let him take Eustomachical Benign,
Benevolent Remedies, sufficient always to cleanse away Impurities, without
causing Hatred, Frowardness or high Displeasure in Nature, whose genuine course
is to be observed without putting her to any violent stress, or compulsion.

CHAP. X. The Pharmaceutick, or upright Method of Curing Diseases by Medicines
in general.
HOw the Galenists have been mistaken concerning the Four Elements, their
Mixture for the Composition of Bodies, their Contrarieties, Qualities,
Complexions, deduced from thence, how falsely they have delivered them to be
Principles of Natural Existences, and the Causes of Sickness and Health, has
been perspicuously detected by our Philosophical Pyrotechnist: upon this
foresaid rotten Foundation have they raised their Stately and Pompous Fabric
of Curing, Obstinately endeavoring still to keep it up.

The Rule of Contraries derived from Imaginary Supposition of the Hostility and
Reluctance of the the Four Elements (whence they say all Concretes have their
Original by which they chiefly act, for the end to debellate Man's Infirmities,
has been the bane of many Myriads. Where they find any notable heat in a
Fever, they presently take Indication to cool the Body, in a degree
proportionable to its Antagonist, in hopes thereby to reduce the Body to an
Eucrasie. but still with unlucky success: For neglecting the Radical Cause, and
aiming at the Abolitions of Accidents, Products or Symptoms, how can it be
otherwise, but that they must needs miss the Mark, unless they hit it by
casualty? A Faithful Knowing Physician is unconcerned and indifferent whether
the Patient be Hot, Cold, or Temperate (as to the touch) in a Fever; whether
Thirsty or no. For as much as he understands the same Agent that sends forth a
hot Blas, does also send sometimes a Cold from the same Matter. He also
frequently observes a Cold dead Splinter or Thorn does Vex, Gaul, Fret the
Archeus of the Finger in such a manner, that the Pulse becomes above measure
Magnified, the Color Rubified, the Blood incensed, the Heat Exalted: All which
arise from the Material cause of the Thorn impacted: Likewise the Eye waters,
smarts, abhors the Light, looks red or inflamed, from a mote or a small
fragment of Glass, etc. Cold things; by reason of the Passion of the Ingenite
Spirit, much provoked at the presence of the Guest so unwelcomed to life.

Moreover, a spark of fire, Essentially Hot, lighting upon the hand or elsewhere
causes a sudden shivering Coldness all over the Body. What is more frequent
than to sustain a grievous Rigor or Coldness, even to chattering of the Teeth,
from the abundance of a supposed humor called Choler, analogous to Fire (as
they will have it) Hot and Dry. On the other side, how Hot and Dry have I known
some Phlegmatic Bodies in Fevers, even beyond Choleric? In this Case, how,
without contradiction to their Theorems, can they without lethiferous Mistakes,
give cooling things, for the increase of Phlegm, and Hot for the advancement of
Choler: were not this to augment the cause of the Disease? Is not this rather
the very strait course to relieve the misaffected, to exempt the Thorn or
Splinter out of the Finger? the Mote and Fragment of Class out of the Eye by
proper Instruments? also to attenuate, rarifie Phlegm, to mitigate, Edulcorate,
Retund and alter Choler, by what is adaequated operative, for the ablution,
abstersion, and carrying away both. Sospite Stomachi ac Naturae robore, through
all the most requisite Sluices of the Body. This done (like a true Philosophical
Artist) a sweet Tranquillity appears in the Vitals, all evil Symptoms of Heat,
Cold, etc. forthwith or in a very short time vanish. Neither in this case is it
of Moment, whether the Remedies bringing this to pass be Hot or Cold, since as
substracting the Fuel from the Fire it will quickly be extinguished; so
removing the occasional Matter of Heat, this is soon annihilated.

Did the Schools rightly comprehend, how Fire may be procured by the Rapid
Collision of two cold incombustible solid Bodies, as Stone and Steel, or by the
long attrition of an accensible Matter, no whit hot to the touch, or by the
Fermentation, Agitation, Conglomeration or Compression of Acids and Alkali's:
also by Concentration of Light into a Cone, or Minute Compass, they would be
better acquainted with the Cause of the Aestuation, Effervescence, and
Accension of the Vital Spirits in Fevers; hereby suitable Remedies might be
provided.

When at any time the Genuine, Domestic Spirits of the Microcosm, and a Wild
Exotic Gas meeting together do strike or grate one upon another in a confused
whirled manner: there strait breaks forth a preternatural heat, to be corrected
by Pacifying the Vitals enraged, and enabling them to profligate or subjugate
this hardly tameable, both subtle Wild Spirit, and the matter from whence it
emerges; which is never to be accomplished by Cooling Prescriptions, but by
that which pleases the Archeus, indulging it exceedingly.

If degenerate Salts, Acid or Alkali couched in a rotten Matter, create Thirst,
or excessive Heat by framing a Tumult in the Animals, whatsoever does correct
the same is to be embraced indifferently whether hot or cold. It Is enough if I
can attain my Grand Intention, the ablation of the Nocuous Thermopoietick
Matter, the Substance on which all Qualities, Accidents depend. If I can
compass this Fundamentally, why do the Galenists wilfully blind, cavil and rail
at my Elaborate Preparations, as violently Hot, Burning, Drying, Inflaming,
when they cannot but be informed that I, spurning at their Silly, Insignificant
Qualities of Heat and Cold (as to Essential Cures) I Extirpate all Fevers by
amotion, and abandoning the Original Exciter thereof: But in this state I
renounce all Dreggy, Drossy, Indigested, Extimulating, Fretting Saline,
Unclean, Malignant, Virulent Medicaments which frequently given by them,
certainly do often positively disturb the Stomach, procuring unkindly Heat.

It Is not that seeming to be Hot (because it penetrates, rarefies, and affects
the parts by its glowing, Spirituous Particles, as if something fiery were
applied) is rashly so to be censured in Effect: But what is Impure, Corrosive,
or Venomous, is to be Condemned, as Burdensome caco-stomachical, Clogging,
Fretting, Vexatious, Spinous, absolutely Hostile to our Principles,
Putrefactive, and so Consequently, Thermopoietick.

It Argues great Incogitancy in any, to Judge of the Inward Energie of an
Elaborate Pharmacon by the Taste, or outward apposition before the Ingredients
be rightly understood; and the exquisite Manufacture discovered: Some things
either taste not at all, or pleasantly, yet procreate Dyscrasies, deadly
Intoxicating Consequents; there is also that whose Sapour, harsh, nauseating of
an Excelling Gust, notwithstanding Vivifick, Alexitery, Salutary, Eucrate in
Operation.

It Is the Calamity of our Art, that the World knows not how to distinguish
between the Adulterate and Legitimate Tractation of Chemical Works. Hereby
Opportunity is given to the Enemies thereof, lying in Ambush, to Sally out
opportunely, and Charge it fiercely, with those Crimes that their own and
Vulgar Pseudochymical Medicaments are guilty of. Because the Officinal mixtures
are inexpertly entered upon, ill-contrived, slubbered over, indiscreetly
fabricated, for that respect are too Hot, Violent, hurtful to the Stomach,
leaving sad Impressions behind of an Inflaming, Colliquating, Tabefying
Condition; ought upon this Score, our Philosophical Polyacea's acquired by
Sweat, long Experience, and true Sophy of Pyrotechnie, be Sentenced as Vile,
and Pernicious? Certainly, the best Sack is not ere the less to be Reckoned a
Noble Cordial, because some Vintners sell Sophisticated, depraved Liquor. What
is more Common at this day, than to counterfeit the best in its kind, through
Idleness, Self-love, Avarice, and wilful Inexperience?

If the Galenists would take pains themselves, not fearing the choking fumes
of Charcoal, nor the Arsenical Spirits of Minerals, taking the Fruits of their
Labor into their own Bodies, before they tendered them to their Patients:
Would they spare no Cost to the purchasing the best Materials; or be willing to
learn of those who are able to Instruct them, then would they soon be convinced
of their Folly, that what I offer the Diseased, is neither too Hot, Dangerous
or Injurious to Nature, though taken in a Quintuple Dose. Assuredly were not
the Galenists most disingenuous beyond Expression, they would never discover
their active Ignorance thus perpetually, to contradict, oppose, and malign the
Method which they cannot but be Canscious, is the Downright, Clear, Safe,
Concise way of Healing by Suppressing, Taming, and Profligating what is really
the Occasional Matter of the Disease, according to Hippocrates, Acide, Austere,
Bitter, Pontick, not Cold or Hot. Those being altered and discarded by means of
powerful, effectual, Arcana, an Eutaxie, Eucrasie, and Symetrie in the
Microcosm follows.

The Good Old Man also tells us of (...) in Diseases, which I find common to
all great Fevers containing a venomous Nature more or less, acting in an
Extraordinary Irregular manner, different from mere degenerate Matter, as Acid,
Bitter, etc. This sometimes if not maturely prevented, stabs the Heart a^ it
were with a Cryptick Dagger, no manifes^ Reason derived from the Elements to be
alleged. So Spiritual, graduated Poison is hatched in our Bodies, that it
pessundates, or knocks down Animals in the twinkling of an eye.

Dares any Humourist undertake by means of Heat or Cold to overcome Arsenical,
R^algar, Aconital, Opiate, Sardonian, Taxea^, Cicutarie, Viperine, Scorpionian,
Tarantula like Poisons forged by the continually moving Archeus, and specified
according to its Fancy?

What a Childish Conceit is it to wave the oblation of what has an Antidotal
Virtue implanted in it sufficient to mortify the foresaid Properties, least
they be too heating? What grand Do^age, yea Madness even to Homicide, not to
permit a Cure for the scruple of an Idle, Vain Quality.?

Does any but a Dolt fear to give Aqua-Vitae, or any Spirituous Liquors to a
Lipothymical Person whose Vitals Wanze and Wain, imagining it may heat too
much. Were our Lukewarm Physicians but as well experienced as Sea Surgeons,
yea even as some of the more knowing Mariners, they would extirpate Fevers
here, as Calentures at Sea, by ^ubtil Spirits, corrected with better Judgment
than their Punch. For I know no solid ^eason why our Seamen should so
frequent^y miscarry in their long Voyages heretofore ^^so that hardly a
competent number were ^eft to bring home the Ship) unless this, that ^hey take
and give in Causons or Burning Feavors, apply likewise to Inflammations,
Spiritous Liquors, a thousand times to be preferred before their Flat, Dull,
Vapid, Mor^iferous, Cold Juleps, and other Insipids. If these Spirits too Hot
(as they will have them) do good beyond their (...) Spiritless Prescriptions,
what will they perform in the hand of an Adeptus, who knows how to correct and
free from Impurity, Acrimony, Tenacity, too much Famelick Praedatory faculty
(the Real Cause oftentimes of the indignation, consequently the excessive Heat
of the Archeus) the best of their Spirituous Preparations. This demonstrated ex
facto without frivolous Controversies or Cavils, one would think should take
these Humorists or (...) from their Jejune, Cold, Torpid, Barren Opinions, that
this or that is too hot, because it seems so to their Plebeian Rustic Taft:
whereas in very deed it is only endued with a highly defecated Spirit,
rectified beyond their vulgar Art, not able to free from a Cacostomachick
dross, or Fretting, Coagulating, Spinous, Salt and Malignant, Venomous Sulphur,
the occasional Causes of all Praeternatural Heat in the Body.

Let these Philosophical reasons suffice for the confutation of their
Accidental Way of Curing, by Heat and Cold, and that Calumniating Objection
that the best Chemical Remedies are too Hot.

Now shall I proceed in short, to detect how Maliciously as well as ignorantly,
they impeach our Salutary Manufactures of Danger of Evil Consequence, of sad
Impressions left behind, causing (...) Antedating the Life, and bringing it to
an Immature Period.

I confess what they make the World believe in relation to our Instruments of
Healing, may be fitly applied to the Medicaments of their Dispensatory: for
they are either clogged with Nauseating, Dirty, Foeculencies, abound with
Impure, Acrimonious, Corrosive Salts and Sulphurs, or endued with some Deletery
(...) Ill-conditioned, Intoxicating Concretes, very adverse to Nature.

The Chemical Preparations which they formerly inveighed against as (...)
Lethiferous, or dangerous, the Galenists have of late entertained into their
Ill-compiled, Worse-managed Exemplar.

This Rhapsodie of Chemical Pharmacy tran^cribed out of the more Trivial
Authors, is (...) Rude, Indigested, so slightly handled, more fitting the
Laick, than any Sophical Clark, so uncertain, yea perilous in their ^ffects.
Some whereof are Virulent, leaving many times Stigma's of their Malignity
be^ind, so that no Adeptus but will conclude: The greatest part of them ought
to be ex^unged, with a supply made of better things, and what remains to be
more discreetly ordered in their Manufacture.

How do the Galenists impose upon us, first ^o Cry down most Satyrically, even
to the Persecution of certain Honest Ingenuous Friends to this Art, those
Meaner sort of Pa^acelsian Remedies, now to make use of them ^o the detriment
of many a Patient, as well ^s to the keeping up the Credit of their Tot^ering
Dogmatical Structure, which must of ^ecessity have fallen ere this to the
ground, ^ad they not closely foisted in upon a pinch ^ome Spagyrical active
Preparations stolen from us, at that time, when their most Dull Mixtures would
take no place: then boast^ng they tell the Credulous that their own gross
Compositions had the greatest share in ^he Cure, whereas in reality, they did
no other than hinder it.

Upon this account how subtly do some pretend to be Chemists, stealing
Theorem^ and Chemical Notions out of Van Helm. di^^guising, putting them into
an Elegant dress concealing the Authors Name. Thus (...) these Plagiaries own
that filched from him, whom in public discourse they either condemn or slight:
were they any whit candid, they would blush to do so. This Crime may justly be
imputed to the Author De Fermentat. De Febri. and others, who make a great
noise about Lac Sulphur. Spir. C. C. Spir. Vitri. Ens Vene. etc. enough (they
think) to make them cried up for rare Chemists; whereas were these Men, with
their Prescriptions, brought to the Test of Practice, they would easily be
discovered to be but smatterers in this Philosophical Science: then would their
egregious Defects be obvious to any knowing Person. Hereby the Safety,
Innocence and Vital Preservation of Manufactures would appear, as much
transcending theirs in excellent Endowments, as a Torch in its Bright Beams
surpassing a small Tallow Candle.

Moreover, we are able not only to justify our Operations beyond theirs; as
free from hazard or dangerous Consequences: but we dare maintain what we give
to the Sick, conduces to their future Welfare, and lengthning out their Life,
according as Divine ^^ovidence is pleased to allow of the means (...) that end.

Having thus by solid Reasons offered to be ^^nfirmed by the true Touchstone of
Expe^^ence, acquitted our Chemical Pharmacy from (...) Slanders of our Enemies,
viz. that our ^ateria Medica is so ill handled, that it is ^o Hot, Burning,
Dangerous, etc. I shall ^ow describe the direct Method of Curing ^ifficult
Diseases by help of a sincere Chymi^^l Legitimate Learned Art.

The chief Indication or Scope, which the Well-instructed Physician ought
continually (...) have an eye upon is, to keep in vigor, ^lso to pacify,
indulge, gratify the Archeus (...) Vital Spirit, the Achitectonical contriver
^f our first Being, the constant Conservator ^f our Well-being, the Author of
our Health and Sickness, Weal and Woe.

This (...) of Hippocr. by its Impulse ^ets all the Wheels going. If a
Dysphonie happen in the Sphere of this Vital Air there a^iseth forthwith a
jarring in the Inferior Orbs of the Microcosm.

The Second Principal Indication is the Ab^^tion of the Inward Efficient Cause,
and the Outward Occasional Irritating Matter which ^isturbs the Archeus putting
it into Enor^ous Passions and Perturbations.

These are the two Legs, by which Therapeutick or Healing Faculty is moved.
(...) that is wanting in one of these is certainl^ Maimed.

Whatsoever increases the Eutonie o^ Strength of the Vital Spirit, ought to
have Similitude of Nature, and Symbolize wi^^ the same Spirit, seeing Like does
readily ^^nite with Like, embracing each other in^^^mately. That we may find
out a Compe^ with the Archeus, the Essential knowle^^ thereof is to be enquired
after.

The Vital Spirit is a most thin Aehere* Breathing, arising from the Blood,
perpet^^ally circulated in the Veins and Arteries ill^minated, framed by Virtue
of a Vital Fe^ment in the left Ventricle of the Heart, of a Saline, Balsamical
Constitution, by means o^ whose Bright Beams all Spirits generated a new,
diffused through the whole body receive their Light and Vivacity.

The Original of this Ruddy Juice where the Spirits first begin to flash and
glister is from the Stomach, where every thing ingested is dissolved (by power
of a Ferment, partly ingenite, partly derived from the Spleen or Arteries) into
a Whitish Acide Chyle; This passing through the Pylorus or Nether Orifice of
the Ventricle into the Guts called Duodenum, Iejunum, Ileon is there converted
(by a Lixiviate like, property of the Gaul, mixed with the Acid into a saline
Texture denominated Chyme. The more refined part of this Juice is conveyed
through invisible Pores of the Guts into the Venae Lactae or Milky Vessels,
both trained by them, and likewise impelled by the Peristaltick Motion of the
Guts. These Venae Lacteae carry the Milky Juice into the Liver Pancreas cava,
through whose Channels it runs Rubified into the right Ventricle of the heart,
thence it is driven out into Arteria Pulmon, divaricated into the Lungs, by
means of the Centraction of the Heart, then taken up by the Vena Pulmonica, it
falls into the left Ventricle, where it is Flavefied by the Vital Ferment of
the Heart: by the force of whose Systole, this Spirituous Liqor springs into
all parts designed for Nutrition, Procreation, Sense and Motion.

Since then it is plain that the first Foundation of the Blood is laid in the
Stomach according to whose (...) or (...), upon whose good and bad action
future digestions depends: so that if the Chyle be once depraved in the first
shop the Chyme and Milky Juice cannot be made in every respect approved in the
second or third Laboratories: Consequently very laudable Blood and Spirits can
never be Fabricated. For as the Chyle is, such is the Chyme, Lacteous Liquor,
Latex, or Lympha, Cruor, Sanguis and Spirits. Since then there is such a
Concatenation, Connection, continued File of the Albified Mass in the Stomach,
to the rubified Balsome in the Heart, and so to the extreme parts: every,
knowing upright Physician ought to be sollicitous about the discreet Economy
or Order of this Noble part* that defaecated Blood and Spirits may be created.
Wherefore that thing ought not to be taken into the Body, which is any way
offensive to the Archeal Ferment of the Stomach, or the weakening of its Tone.
Whatsoever is Dull, Flat, Dreggy, Fretting, Rank, Corrosive, or Virulent must
be avoided. Things Active well purified (...) in a just proportion (...)
exquisitely mixed, endued with an (...) fragrant smell, Sympathizing with the
Constitution of this Membrane, Benevolent, and Antidotal are to be assumed,
that Clean, Bright Spirits may be multiplied springing from this Vital Balsame.

Well-rectified Spirits of Strong Liquors I have always found to perform much
tending to that end before proposed. For no sooner are they received into the
Stomach, but part of them are rapt into the Vessels, being suddenly carried
into the Heart and Brain, whereby the whole Body is invigorated, the Vital
Spirits in a Moment increased and illuminated: hereupon the Peccant Matter
disturbed is profligated by Sneezing, Expectoration, Sweating, or
Transpiration: by some Effloresence or Eruption in the Skin, as Pimples, Spots,
Botches, etc. by Stool or Urine. The Truth of this, as I said before, is
confirmed by those who making long and dangerous Voyages, recover of grievous
Maladies, as Calentures, Scurvie, etc. by force of a quickening Drink called
Punch, made of Rack or Brandy: whereas formerly they were turned off as fast as
rotten Sheep, through that Nonsensical Method of Healing, which the Doting
Galenists taught the Credulous World, by Cooling, and Moistning Juleps. In such
sort has the Authority of these Dogmatists Domineered over Mankind for many
Ages past; yea does yet endeavor to uphold the same amongst us, that Millions
have perished by this Absurd Doctrine of Heating in Cold Diseases, as likewise
Cooling in Hot. However many Intelligent Subtle Wits do discover the Falacy of
their Corrupt Theorems, or Axioms in Physic, casting away their Slibbersauces,
do rather choose to trust to Wholesome, Well-made Strong Liquors in Fevers, than
their Ill-contrived Insalutiferous Weak, Drossie Mixtures or Compositions. I
heard a Learned Gentleman of Note declare, that he was Cured of a Malignant
Fever by means of Brandy Wine well construed taken in a large quantity, when
the Methodical Doctor of the College, threatening his Ruin thereby, caused him
to desist, but for one day, and take his more Temperate Prescriptions, which
had like to have cost him his Life, if he had not fallen to his former
Spirituous Liquor again.

For my part I am of this Judgment, that it is better (for the most part) to
Cure Fevers after the Maritine Mode, than to walk in the Customary Road of
Exhibiting Medicines according to the supposed Qualities described in the
London Dispensatory.

I Will maintain Hippocr. (...), constant, moderate sumption of Strong Liquors
(omitting Broth, Gellies, Water Gruel, Spiritless Pos^et-crink, etc.) shall be
more prevalent to rid away Fevers in general, than that (...), Hodg Podg of
Supernumerary Ingredients jumbled together without Discretion, or serious
consideration of the congruity of each one with another, without seperating the
precious from the vile by a Pyrotectnical Analysis of every Concrete, whereby
the violent Ferine powers of some things are mitigated, cicurated, and made
Friendly to our Constitution: also the singular Medical Dowry of other
Concretes are explicated, exalted, graduated, the clog of their Terrestrial
Impurities discharged, hindering their Activity.

Who that is experimentally Intelligent, would not in a sudden Lipothymie or
Defection of the Spirits, rather confide in the Analeptical or Refocillating
Efficacy of good Wine, or well Distilled Brandy, than in Diascordium, Venice
Treacle, London Treacle, or any of their Confections Elect. or diverse of their
Potions?

I cannot otherwise believe but that the Benign Creator, pitying the sad
Condition of Man, made worse by the Doctrine of Galen (who never saw Aqua
Vitae; therefore delivered to Posterity, this Gross, Fulsome, Fruitless Means
of Curing) has in this later Decrepit, Infirm Age of the World, detected by
the mouth of Mariners and Rusticks, the use of those excellently well Distilled
Spirits, which these Thermologists, and Psychrologists (a company of Delirous
Disputants about Hot and Cold Diseaseases, requiring, as they say, Instruments
of a contrary quality thereto to be applied, neglecting the Essential Nature,
and Radical Cure of Diseases) have Suppressed, to the Infinite Detriment of
Mortals, for many Centuries of years.

Now can the Indigent Sick-man without fear of over-heating his Blood,
threatened by these Thermologists, confidently swallow a due Portion of
vegetable Spirit potent to augment sometimes to admiration the paucity of the
Animals, enabling them to exclude some part of the Spurious Juice offending the
Body like a Thorn in the side Now both Countrymen, as well as Sea Men, take
these Spiritouus Liquors, without scruple that they may quench their thirst
assuage Burning Fevers, keep off a fixe^ Delirium, and procure rest, to the
confusi^on of the rotten Precepts of these Ignorantly Learned Galenists. Away
then with these idle fopperies of taking directions of curing from Heat and
Cold: hereby fancying ap^plications contrary to those Accidents will prevail;
seeing it is perspicuous, all those endeavors come to naught, unless the vital
Spirit be animated to exterminate the occasional extimulating cause of Heat and
Cold.

It being then demonstrable, that Spirits are best multiplied vigorously by
Spirits, with which they symbolize; we ought to be solicitous concerning their
preparation with a proportion to be allowed to the Archeus.

I find it frequent among the vulgar Chemists to boast, how they can make
vinous Spirits, that in a considerable quantity will all burn away to the
accension of Gunpowder in the bottom. Having attained thus far in this
process, they think, there remains nothing more in our Philosophy* For all
this, if any study earnestly to (...) as an able Physician, those Spirits made
according to the common tract, seeming to be re^ned contain in them an occult
Impurity^ some clandestine discommodity with some di^gustful tang, sensible by
the taste of our Vitals. Although it be hard for the Plebeian to distinguish one
from the other, yet an expert Distiller knows the difference, and happy effect,
of that which is really mundified, above what seems to be so. That Spirit of
vegetables may be handled knowingly, it behooves the Naturalist to anatomize it
pyrotechnicoos, that he may understand of what parts it consists, and how
useful it is.

According to our Philosophy, an Aquavitae may be extracted out of all
Herbaccous Plants, i. e. Grass, Blade, Leaf, Weed, etc. which contains an
Alkali; a Sulphur and some particles of an occult sub-acid Salt, easily to be
converted into Vineagar, when it floats with a Tartareous Matter. The vinous
Alkali and Sulphur together exalted, become a Balsamical Spirit of great force
to preserve things from corruption. Taken into our Bodies it is immediately
changed partly into a vital Spirit, suddenly conveyed by the Vessels to the
Head and Heart, part becomes Acid in the Stomach, for the recreation, or
emendation of the Innate Ferment; as likewise for a previous Disposition, in
order to a future alteration in the Intestines into a volatile Alkali, by the
eliquating, or scouring faculty of the Gaul^ afterward transmitted to the
Kidneys, it is turned into a Urinous Salt, by a peculiar Ferment there
implanted. Lastly some portion runs into an Insipid Liquor, called Latex or
Lympha. Thus is Salt and Sulphur of Plants, which make up one Spirit pliable,
subactil, or mutable (above other ingested things) into this or that form,
according as the Ferments of every shop of digestion please. Moreover the
Spirit of Plants, if dexterously exercised, is capable to be assimilated into
all parts Continent and Containing, leaving little or no excrement behind:
cherishing, yea., in some measure, reducing aright exorbitant Ferments. The
Digestive Fermenting Accid, in the Stomach, as well as the Alkali in other
parts, (the Instruments of formal Transmutation) are exceedingly meliroated,
and the Spirits forthwith augmented by the access of this seemingly Homogeneous
Liquor.

That this completely purified Liquor so acceptable to the Vitals may be
obtained, the prudent Artist is to make itirated Ablutions with what is of a
saponary condition that the viscous clammy gummous matter may be purged away.
Secondly, he is frequently to Distill it with a convenient heat: Addition being
made of those things, which in the bottom of the Glass detain ungrateful
(...), inebriating, noxious Sulphur, letting out what is pleasing to Nature,
Innocent, strengthening the Head, Membranes, and Sinews. There is also to be
injected that which may retund, or dulifie any Secret, unkindly Acid, lurking
in the Spirit, can lenifie, or introvert, any fretting quality latitant in the
Alkali, tame the Gas Sylvestre, entangle or fetter it, that it may not too
nimbly aspire: to laevigate, as it were Polish, any roughness in it. Whosoever
has acquired this Spirit, can tread under his Feet, all those slanders,
back-bitings, malicious reports of the Galenists, that the Spirits of
vegetables are too Hot, Inflaming, Consuming the Radical moisture, causing
Delirium, shortning the life; all which I am sure is verified, concerning some
of their rude preparations of Aquavitae.

Poor Ignorant Souls (though Learned Men) that should be unacquainted with the
right Manufacture of a Liquor so vulgarly known to be useful, sold in trivial
shops, etc. How is it likely these vain Thermologists, i. e. Busibodies about
Heat and Cold, shoull Judge of the Effects or Operations o^ Chemical
Enterprises, since they ar^ unwitting of the due tractation of Spirit o^ Wine. I
appeal to any intelligent Philale^thes whether they are like to fabricate, o^
hammer out the remedies of a Superiou^ Class, who are thus egregiously to seek
i^ those of an Inferior. It Is no wonder they are so timorous, in the offering
to the Sick any thing of thin parts, Pungitive, Penetrating, or Exciting the
natural faculties, for fear they should be overheated: for as much as they give
the foul with the fair, the Realger with the Mineral, the poisonous Sting with
the Honey; whereas a faithful well grounded Physiologer Sequesters, the Evil,
reserving the Good; which he can securely tender the Infirm (without curious
observation of measure, or weight) from one to ten or more. The greatest misery
I know accrewing to Man worse than the Plague, Sword, Fire, etc. is from these
Galenists running upon false suppositions, to wit that their Galeno Chemical
Pharmacy is sufficiently instructed with all endowments becoming complete
Medicines.

This they rather wilfully than unwitting^y suggest to the World, most
abominably ^mposing upon the credulous, even For^unes Favorites (by whom they
are too zealously imprudently protected to the damage of Mortals) that they
are the most expert Chemists, vilifying all others, be they never so Legitimate
Sons of Art. These are the Spurious Chemists, who I will maintain are
overwhelmed in Clouds of Darkness arising from their Covetousness, Ambition,
Malic^, Laziness, Self-love, etc. that they cannot see the right way of making
a complete vegetable Spirit.

Having purchased according to the best Rules of our Pyrotechnical Philosophy,
a complete Aquavitae: the next care, is to dispense it aright, to minister such
a measure thereof proportionable to the Individual Crasis, Custom, and Course
of Life, of the sick Body, the defection of Vitals, magnitude, and duration of
the Disease, the good or bad, condition thereof: Here by the way, I am bound to
reprehend the Busiebodies about Heat and Cold severely, who miserably titubate
and express extreme weakness in the just quantity of their own Remedies: For a
president of the Galenists did not heretofore dare to prescribe above five
Grains of Antimonium Diapho, in a Fever: another of the same Society was
doubtful whether he might with safety give four or five Grains of Bezoar.
Orient. or above ten Grains of Coccus Baphic. Cochin. above two drops, of
Spirit of Hartshorn, for fea^ of overheating, etc. What is the reason of all
this supercilious Nicety, but mere Igno^rance of the true principles of Nature
mistakes in the causes of our Calamities, in discreet manufacture of Materia
Medica* fitting to subdue them. Did they tak^ pains with their own Fingers,
they would quickly learn the amplitude of the Por^tion of a well adorned
remedy, that one small quantity of proper analepticks, or re^stauratives will
do good, yet the same multiplied to five six, or seven, to twelve parts* or
rates, will really do no harm, but make a far greater improvement of natural
vigor. For if they would be taught: These Malevolents would not so unworthily,
rashly censure my Stomach Essence, my Elixir Balsamic Tinctur. Polyacea etc.
to be preternaturally Hot, etc.

Thus it evidently appears that none but an Adeptus, one that as his undoubted
Right can say (...) i. e. I have found it out, can define and adaptate a just
scantling, weight and Measure of meet Remedies to the languishing Spirits,
enabling them to destroy the Strongholds of a Disease.

Wherefore a Patient having an Aversati^n to Vinous Liquors, ought to be more
^ndulged, to be suffered to imbibe the less, and that mixed and disguised with
something ^ore grateful. He that has accustomed himself to smaller drinks,
ought not to be ur^ed to assume so much, as one used to fre^uent compotation of
Wine, etc. Above all, ^et the Physician give liberally these Vegeta^le, Active
Particles to the sick, whose spi^its are weak, and the Malady strong, very
malignant, etc.

Five or ten times the portion of a reviving Medicine is but sufficient in some
cases, when in another state, a single exhibition ^oth help Nature to throw its
Enemy spee^ily out of doors. Long fixed evils are to be ^ollowed close with
large quantities, often ^epeated; likewise the Plague, Pestilential Fevers,
whatsoever grief has in it, much of the (...) of Hippo. i. e. a poisonous
condition. In all respects it is better to propose more copiously, than
niggardly, when ^he Instruments we work withal are safe, admitting an extension
not easily culpable. Or^inary strong spirits are not to be taken without
notable caution plentifully, and that well corrected by some Adjuncts, as
sugar, and with grateful Acids, for they contain much intoxicating stinking
Sulpur, mixed with a fretting Salt injurious to the Stomach Nerves and
Membranes, producing preternatural Heat: so that in conclusion, it is no the
pure, well corrected Spirits of Plants that causes those great discommodities,
as excessive Heat, Inflaming, etc. which these Thermologists lay to their
charge; but their heedless Preparation by A philosophical Idiots in our Art, as
likewise the rash pouri^g into the Ventricle, much more than is fitting.

From Vegetables there may be Extracted; besides an Aqua-Vitae, certain
Essential Salts holding close concordance with the Vitals, some of which
harbor Specifik Gifts for the Cure of certain kinds of Griefs. In general,
these Salts absterg glutinous Excrements, attenuating Viscosites, sweeten
preternatural Acidity, animate the Archeus, help Digestion, and strengthen all
parts; causing Urine, Sweat, Expectoration. Now these ought to be accurately
framed for Medical use, otherwise they will come short of what we expect. I
find it the most Compendious Effectual way to Separate the Sulphurious or Oily
part from the Concrete, than to change it into a pure volatile Alkali: This is
done by Ablution, Digestion, repeated Distillation.

Thus much concerning the Iatrical Virtue of Spirits and Salts fetched from
Vegetables, ^s they have Affinity with our Vital Principles: now I shall
proceed to show what pro^inquity there is between the Vital Spirits and
Alkali's obtained from Animals.

I find, according to Pyrotechnical Trials, that all parts of Man, even his
Excrements, ^bound with Urinous Alkali's, especially the Bones, Blood and
Urine. Each of which afford in Stilling an Alkali or Urinous Salt much alike,
yet different in their Effects: for according to Van Helm. Spirit of Blood
avails against the Epilepsie. The Spirit of Urine is of no force thereto.
Likewise I find Spirit or Salt of Bones to Operate that which the other two
fail in: yet may they all be so prepared, that neither Taste, Smell, Color
shall distinguish them.

I have for many years much toiled with my Head and Hands, to find out what
might directly match the Principal Agent in our Body, the only (...), Contriver
of both Health and Sickness. After often and serious Contemplation, with strict
Examination of diverse Concrets by optical Analysis, I find nothing more like to
do my business, than those subtle saline particles, drawn out of the Horny,
Bony or Dental Concretions of certain Animals, or got out of the Dung of some
Creatures, abounding with Volatile Salts: But above all I found at length
Volatile Salts or Spirits, allured out of diverse Po^tions of Man's Body, were
most to be prefe^red; for the Augmentation, Vigor of the Archeus, to this I
was induced by the u^doubted Authority of the Maxim in Phio^sophy, Simile
simili gaudet, also Iisdo^ nutrimur quibus constamus. Besides, my p^^pose was
confirmed by the Essential Consi^tution of the Vital Spirit; viz. Saline
a^cording to our Philosopher: Est ipse Spirit^ Vitae de Natura Salis volatilis
and Salst. v.^ 136. Sextup. Digest. The Vital Spirit is of (...) nature of a
Volatile Alkali. Moreover, (...) Blas Humanum, p. 113. Per motum nempe (...)
Sanguinis non quidem Acidi sed Salsi exte nutio, neque ideo in pinguedinem sive
Butyru^ vertitur, sed in Spiritum Vitalem de salis ad^oque de Balsami natura.
Certainly by Motion the Blood is rarefied into a Saline not Aci^ Spirit:
neither is it changed into a Fatty Bu^tynous Substance, but into a Vital Spirit
o^ the nature of a Sal, for that reason it is Balsamical. Also Pa. 443.
AuraVitae. Estque ide^ Spiritus Vitalis Salsus, viciniorque Spiritui lo^tij
quam Sali-petrae. The Vital Spirit is a Salt of nigher affinity to the Spirit
of Urine than Saltpeter. Membro semel stupefacto, si sensus redierit, id sane
cum sensibilibus stimulis and punctionibus fit quae and verae salsedinis sunt
indicia. If at any time a member benumbed, recovers its perfect sense, there is
felt prickings, and thorny shootings, which are infallible signs of a salt
matter.

From the consideration of the saline Texture of the Vital spirit, I labored
about the Alkali's of this Microcosm: diverse parts whereof I Dissected,
fetching out by Pyrotechnie their Volatiles, which I studied to nobilitate by
frequent scouring, iterated distillations, even to ten or eleven courses,
adding every turn a fitting Mundifier, keeping them in digestion three weeks or
a Month: I then proceeded to correct any harsh, Acid quality lurking in them by
that which blunts, lenefies, or mollifies the same by feeding their hungry
appetite with a pleasing Nutriment, that they may not so eagerly prey upon the
Body, to entangle and clip their Wings, that they may not ascend too high, or
fly away too nimbly to exalt them, and advance them to a more lofty virtue, by
the intermixture of some small portion of Salt of Tart. volatile, united with a
pure vegetable Spirit.

Having thus prepared the highest clarified Liquor, I have found it to carry an
admirable conformity with the Vitals, to symbolize with our Constitutes, so
that the (...) taking it up greedily, forthwith strengthened, musters greater
Forces for the expulsion of the Enemy that has Invaded its Teritories. This is
really a Polyacea: if further graduated it may come nigh a Panacea. No sooner
do the most defaecated Atoms in this active, fluid Body, arrive in the Stomach,
but some portion is strait absorpt, or lickt up by the Archeus for its own
Corroboration* Part is made use by the natural Archiater for the banishment of
those burdensome, aculeating, strange Apostate Juices, absolute enemie^ to
Life, through all the cleansing passages convenient Quo natura vergit, whether
she pleases by the Kidneys, Intestines, through Mouth, Ears, Nose, through the
Pores of the Skin, o^ by a vigorous extermination of some malignant cadaverous
Excrements lodging in the Center, to the utmost bounds of the Body. Add to this
the Archeus enabled makes use of this symbolizing Alkali, as an Instrument to
edulcorate what is Acid, to make slick any roughness, to mitigate any biting,
or fretting Liquor, to suppress, reduce to regularity or explode exorbitant
wild Spirits, to correct the defects, or obliquities of the Ferments, that they
may not continually engender the like vitiosity, to deobstruct the Vessels
stuffed with any congealed Blood or viscous, calculous concrete, or Phlegm, by
attenuating, dissolving, scouring away the same: lastly to polish and confirm
the Tone of every part.

Thus can Nature Act rare feats, when it is animated by a Second, when it meets
with that which is of the same Pedigree with it self: i. e. those saline
particles first framed in the Stomach, and Intestines afterward more refined
are destinated for diversity of uses in this mass of flesh. Now it is not the
common Alkali's used by the Galeno-Chymists, that are sufficient to satisfy an
able Chemist for the attaining the foresaid end. Although I acknowledge the
best remedies they possess are volatile Spirits, drawn out of Hartshorn,
Armoni. Ivory, etc. Yet I must tell them withal, if they would desire to be
instructed in the Art as it is Scientifick indeed: I can demonstrate that their
Spirit of Hartshorn and Sal. Armoni. are neither rightly Corrected nor
Clarified as they ought: for that reason not so well embraced by the Vitals. It
is not without cause then that some pronounce it to be overheating, etc.
Therefore to be given Scrupulously, seldom above a Scruple at a time: whereas
if it be prepared by the hand of a Legitimate Chemist, it has no ill property,
but is fitting to be administered without the least danger in a large quantity,
to the debilitating strong, Acute, and Long Diseases.

For the confirmation of what I deliver, if Doctor Willis, who trusts much to
this volatile, or any other, would please to be so Ingenuous to make the
experiment thereof, I shall order Spir. C. C. so Technically, that without
measuring or weighing it, I will undertake to cure Languid Person with more
speed, security, and pleasin^ gust, wholly trusting to this Alkali (al^though I
have for many Years laid it aside Remedies of more excellent Form coming to my
Possession) than they with their ow^ unpolished, imperfect, Distilled Spirit o^
the same kind.

The Alkali out of Man's Bones, I mus^ commend as an admirable Medicine, usefu^
both for Inward and Outward griefs of the Body, if construed by a Philosophica^
hand. Yet I have rarely met with any so completely regulated according to those
Rules before described, but brought to the Test, it has not been altogether so
safe insisting upon an Ample Quantity, nor so efectual respecting the Quality,
or singular Analeptick property, with which such volatiles ought to be endued.

Spirit of Sal. Armoniack, if elegantly prepared, that it move in the middle
Sphere, not soaring wantonly too high; if its hungry Appetite be in some
measure allayed, if freed from any impurity, if married intimately to a
Vegitable Spirit, with which it has similitude, abounding with an abstersive
Salt, may challenge no small privilege in strengthening and increasing the
Vitals. That Volatile Alkali's do match the Texture of the Animal Spirits above
any besides is certain. However Acid Spirits, if handsomely framed, want not
their eminent use in refreshing the Archeus; wherefore their keen corosive
particles, are to be made blunt supple, their foul Sulphur cleansed, their fair
extraverted, what is gross in them to be rarefied, whatsoever is extraneous
savoring of an unkindly, Mineral condition, ought to be rejected, their ill
odor to be amended, all dross to be separated from them; and lastly, to be
copulated by frequent Distillation with a defecated Alkali.

Such an Acid avails much in healing, for it is grateful to the Stomach raising
a kindly Appetite: it reforms a preternatural Ferment, cherishing what is
genuine; By it, rotten, stinking, spurious saline matter in the Stomach,
producing extreme thirst is tamed, altered, and cleansed away. The Vitals
having Allured to themselves the Alkali Atoms the Acid Corpuscles are stamped
into another Form in the second digestion, where they become by the transmuting
faculty of the Gaul injected on them, another Juice, loosing their Acidity,
withal assuming an abstersive Salt, which easily passing through the Kidneys
puts on an Urinous Nature, producing plenty of Urine In other shops they
purify the Blood and L^^tex, penetrating deep, carry off superfluity through
the whole skin.

I admire the Galenists who proclaim them^selves Chemists should dare to give
suc^ Ill-prepared Acids in their Juleps or other Mixtures, such as are so far
estranged from the constitution of the parts continent an^ contained, that they
carry no concordanc^ with them. Of this sort are Oil of Vitriol Sulphur, or
what they nominate (...) Spirits of the same: for those are fretting gnawing,
biting mortifying: These merely acetous, rough, harsh, stiptick, un^pleasant,
flat, dull, unprofitable Liquors* plainly detecting, that they were never made
by a knowing Philochymist, as intended for that use which our Dogmatical
Scribes put them to: For hereby they think to take of^ Heat and Thirst in
Fevers upon the account of their supposed cooling quality, attributed to them
by these Thermologists: not considering, that those effects of a few drops;
eatting a Woollen or Linen Cloth quite through in a very short time, cannot
possibly arise from a cold Temperature, or any other primary quality; but from
the abundance or conglobation of acute saline ponderous Particles as it were
connexed in a Cone, which thus concenterated tear, and rend in pieces any
subject capable: wherefore as long as these Salts continue in this position or
Texture, I cannot allow them fitting to be exhibited by an able Healer: for
being Salts colliquated or melted, then forced over by a strong fire, they
retain much of their pristine Original, easily prone to be reduced into Salt of
a nauseous unpleasant taste.

He that desires to procure a Spirit of Vitriol or Sulphur of a grateful smell
and taste, welcome to the Ferment of the Stomach, capable without difficulty to
be altered into an Alkali, apt to discharge ^mpurities through all convenient
sluices, must extravert the Sulphur, so then by a strong fire dilate their fiery
beams, that they may become Luminous, not burning; must farther take off their
sharp edge, by intervening particles readily closing in with them, whereby
their heavy corpuscles are allevated, their opacous consistence made nitid:
hereby our Spirits comprehend them with joy.

Moreover, the Spirit of Salt so much disscoursed of, also applauded by some as
made so Artificially, I find very deficient, scarce deserving the name of
Spirit: for that vulgar Liquor abounds with Phlegm, little Saline Matter, and
that far from a genuine Spirit, since it may by evaporation be brought to a
corpulent Sal. What is really a Spirit is so volatile that it flies away
(unless very closly stopped) incontinently: Distilled i^ leaves no gross
residue, it is delectable to the taste, of the Stomach alike as to the Palate:
hence it is very Medicinable. This requires labor with discreet Analysis of
the Body of the Salt by a Golden Sulphur and an Alkali.

I shall here opportunely reprehend our Galeno-chymists, who affuse Oil of
Sulphur to those three Species the matter of Elix. Propri. supposing hereby
both to open their Body, correct any ill property, and advance their virtue,
whereas they make by this means the excellent dowry contained in them more
concluse, hardly to be communicated to their very homely Menstruum, they
increase the biting acride fretting quality of the Aloe or Myrrh whereupon
follows a Dyscrasie in the parts, geld or mutilate the Species, instead of
raising them to be more masculine and complete.

If we contemplate this rude Manufacture of Elix. Propr. it is no wonder those
botching Chemists mist of their drift in curing by such imperfect Instruments.
It Is no wonder they complain they are too Hot, unsafe, causing Cephalalgie,
etc. Thus taking measure by their own deformed Practice, the Reason is plain
why such Contumelies and disrespect is daily offered to this Salutary way by
these Chymicophants, continually buzzing Falsities in the years of the Rich as
well as the Poorer sort, unstable, credulous, admiring the Authority of a
company of Outsides, who have nothing to plead for their Errors but Antiquity.
They have Impudently, Fictitiously suggested that the best Chemical Remedies,
although fabricated by a most accurate Vulcan, are dangerous, excessively Hot,
leaving a Sting behing, not to be prescribed but by the most precise Rules of
their Method, exactly weighing or measuring them. Thus these Praevaricators
impose upon the Simple, persuading them that they possess well-prepared
Medicines above others: when in truth I can prove them to be but mere
Philosophasters in our Sophy: that they are miserably involved in Darkness, not
only to the handy work of the best Innocent means, but also in what belongs to
the Oblation of them to the Patient, in a just quantity and time. These
Chymicophants certainly (did they rather choose to be, than seem) would
uncessantly make a severe Scrutiny by Protechny into the Essence and quiddity
of Concretes, that having extracted their pure parts, they might advance them
by adjuncts agreeable to Na^ture, avoiding all hurtful Acids, circumci^sing or
empairing their Goodness. Where^fore the Mass of Aloe, Myrrh, Saffron being
recluded by a proper Alkalizate Liquor, will by digestion freely communicate
its more re^fined particles, to a Spirit symbolizing with ours, of great
efficacy in curing Dangerous Maladies if given proportionably to their degree
of Malignity.

Note some Acids, wherein certain concretes pulverized very fine are infused,
seem to dissolve them radically, to draw out high Tinctures in so much the
Loborator is much affected therewith supposing he has obtained his wished
desire: when at length upon a stricter test, it is really only a disguise in
the Liquor arising from the piercing Salt of the Dissolvent, obsorbing the
tenuious Corpuscles of the Dissolutum, which closely combined, produce this
color. These Salts keeping in a FIux, the particles of the Matter infused hide
them that they are not discerned: till the activity of the Salts be somewhat
exhausted or grown languid through Expiration, or a matter injected, suddenly
embracing the Dissolvent, makes forthwith a separation of it and the
Dissolutum, whereby a palpable Powder is precipitated to the bottom, and the
color of the Liquor reduced to what it was before.

This I made trial of in Zwelfer his Spirit, of Venus pouered upon Crabs eyes,
seeming to be brought into a Mucilage, their primum Ens, till upon the
coalition of an Alkali they returned to their former shape of a Powder. The
same deception may be discovered in Spirit of Bread affused to red Coral, as
likewise in several other Acid Dissolvents.

This may suffice to show that vulgar Acids do neither heartily deal with us,
in dissolving Concretes radically, neither do they prefer them to higher
dignities of efficacy in Healing.

Van Helmont's advice is therefore strictly to be observed to endeavor to make
the fixed Alkali of Tartar volatile, for the separation, and improvement of the
better part of Bodies. Doubtless that great Segregatour of all Concretes into
Salt, Sulphur, Mercury, that the precious may be separated from the vile, and
yet it self kept in its integrity without any diminution of its virtue, has
its original from an Alkali combined with pure Mercury: It behooves then every
Physician to make a daily inspection into these Salts, both friendly to the
Nature of Man, and so prevalent in the unlocking Materia Medica, that so we may
carry away what is sanative, and leave the destructive.

CHAP. XI.
AS the Vital Spirits are to be multiplied by their like, that they may be
lusty to conquer their Enemy: so are they likewise to be pacified, lulled
asleep, diverted, treated gently, to be gratified with harmless Anodives,
Sedatives, delightful Speculatives, the most lucid Objects, and most beautiful
Idea's.

This Renowned Design is to be accomplished by Vegetable Animal and Mineral
Sulphurs. Nothing in this kind acts better than Mineral Sulphurs brought to an
height of Entelechie; for no sooner are they taken into the Stomach, but the
Vitals are refocillated by their bright Rays, a sweet composure follows, their
fury and rage taken off, black deformed Images of Mortality defaced, bright
lovely Idea's of Health taking place.

Vegetable Sulphurs afford us excellent virtue in Healing, if freed from an
Empyreumatick Tang, elaborated from an unkind Acid lurking in them, either to
be altered to a sweetness by what is apposite, or abstracted from them by
curious Art. Add to this, if they abound with store of volatile Alkali's, and
of good odor: otherwise they put the Ferment of the Stomach to difficult
labor, ^n removing their unctuosity, that they may become fitting for
sanguification.

Those volatile Salts which harbor a stinking Oleous Odor can never be
grateful to the Vitals. Odores Oleosi abstracti a suis Concretis, inquinando
potius afficiunt quam materialiter in Arterias subeant. Helm. de F^br. p. 90.
Wherefore I admire how some of our Learned Chymicophants can pretend to be so
knowing in our Sophy, yet know not how to rectify, or to give a better Odor
to Spirits of Hartshorn, Soot, etc. that they may be more acceptable to the
Animals. As long as any relic of faetid Oil lies couched in the saline
Particles, it must needs contaminate the more elegant Crasis: Although some
allege the Medicine is robbed of part of its Medical endowment if this
unpleasant hogo be sequestered: yet dispensing with the frequent employment of
about some Graveolents, as likewise, what may be requisite in Historical
Affects without Controversies (...) Been Olents are most agreeable to the
Synthesis or Constitution of the Vitals: witness the Essential Oils of Cinnamon,
Clove, Mace, Nutmegs, etc. which being odorous plentifully imbued with Saline
Particles, immediately Refocillate, Illuminate and Compose Nature.

All caution therefore ought to be used, that the Fire may not give Vegetables
or Animals an ill odorous Impress, scarce sometimes to be expunged: also to
exercise (...) manner of industry that the foul Sulph^^ may not rise with the
clean Spirits or Sal^ or if it so happen, it may by digestion and ma^nifold
distillation with proper Adjuncts (...) divorced, at least much diminished.

There are several Sulphurs, Balsams o^ Oils extracted out of Vegetables, of
good con^cernment in Healing, as Aromatic and ma^ny fragrant Plants: Oil of
Aniseed, Fennel^ Marjoram, Rosemary, Thyme, Lavender, Sassafras, Lemons, etc.
are to be commended as they are if nitide and thoroughly polite (by reason of
the auspicious benevolent aspect on the Archeus) yet if they shall be converted
into benign Spirits or Salts, they far transcend the former, working strange
Cures.

Oil of Terebinth spiritualized by a right Spagyrical hand will get a Physician
credit by its splendid effluviums, but Oil of Amber made serene will do better
things: also Balsam Peruvian, and Balsam Capiviae, Arbor. Vit. rarefied, or set
at liberty from their grosser matter, then changed into a sublime, Ethereal
substance, will send forth some bright beams for the enlightening this microcosm.

Oil of Guaicum and Box Distilled without ^aetid, unsavory, fiery smell, or
taste, afterward exalted to a highly volatile Spirit are delightful to the
Archeus, and far to be approved before any Diet-drink bochet, etc. offered by
the Galenists for the cure of the Lues Venerea, or other stubborn Diseases.
Note, that we ought to be very studious in the hebetating, or withdrawing the
Acid latitant in most Oils, whereby their virtues may become more explicated,
as likewise more capable to embrace Mineral Sulphurs, and fixed Alkali's, for
their more easy transmutation into a spirituous Liquor. what a happy Comodity
arises from the enjoyment of Oil Olive separated from its Acid is known to most.

The Sulphur of Wine changed into a saline nature serves for multitude of
excellent uses, both as preparative and sanative. Oil of Tartar Distilled
dexterously that it may not be so graveolent, next altered into a volatile
Saline Liquor, affords prosperous effects in grievous Calamities.

The essential Oil of Myrrh, Aloe, Saffran intimately united with a pure
volatile Alkali deserves worthy applause in curing a Quartane, and other
tedious Griefs* for it rarely Composes the disorders of the Archeus.

Observe that Oils or Sulphurs so graduated, that they harbor good store of a
kindly well Clarified Salt colliquated i^ them, are more profitable for all
intention of curing outward Affects then being so^litary. Hereby great Dolors
are allaied pains mitigated, Aciditie in the part edu^^corated, Asperities
levigated, Contracti^ons exporrected, Tumors discussed, o^ maturated,
Inflammations qualified, Node and Schirrous concretions dissolved, Corruption
and Malignity in Ulcers mortified* but above all: the Archeus exceedingly
delighted with the application.

Certain sulphurous Juices coagulated, as Aloe Opium Scam. Ixia, etc.
artificially handled, and duly corrected, that their Poisons may be destroyed,
solace the Archeus, enabling it to profligate the deseased matter, according as
an orgasmus thereof directs. Gums and Resins used as Topics afford great
comfort to the part aflicted: yea some hung about the Neck emit a splendid
virtue for the recreation of the Vitals.

CHAP. XII.
NExt to Vegetables, let us contemplate the efficacy of Animal Sulphurs, as
they please indulge, and compose the Spirits; These are acquired from the parts
of Living Creatures inward or outward contained within the verge of Vitality,
or excommunicated therefrom.

A great part of our Aliment is taken from the Sulphurious Juices of Animals,
best maintaining Man in vigor, affording a very Robust Nutriment for
Augmentation and Procreation. I find generally the most able Bodies,
Magnanimous Souls, and the stoutest Soldiers to be Sarcophagi: and the nigher
of Consanguinity the Sulphurious Food is to the Crasis and Constitution of our
Bodies, the more effectually it Corroborates. For this reason Swines Flesh does
copiously nourish, increasing the strength of those in Health, and quickly
restoring those who are emaciated, if the Ferment of the Stomach be by proper
means rectified. The Broth of Pork, as I am informed, has done notable things
for the reparation of the decayed Strength of some, who have suffered an
Atrophy for many Months. Doubtless were it by the Authority of Diaeteticks
brought into more frequent practice, many would be better cured of Consumptions
by help hereof, than by those Gummous, Clogging Gellies, and Lacteous
Excrementitious Prescriptions of the Galenists. Anthropophagi or Cannibals
earnestly covet Man's flesh, esteeming it most delicate Food, pitying us as
Ioh. Le^rius the Burgandian declares, that we in thi^ part of the world are
unacquainted with suc^ dainty meat, for as much as they find thi^ Humanum
Sulphur so nigh kin to their ow^ to be earnestly coveted by the Appetite,
de^lectable to Nature: therefore easily convert^ed into their own substance.
Hereby Sanity and longaevity are advanced.

Creatures of a Musculous Robust Constitution, though (more than others) remote
from our Nature, yet through custom, and seminal participation become
familiar, and most grateful: so that the Sulphur of the Flesh and Blood of
Horses, yield strong Aliment to the Tartars whereby they are made more Fierce,
Hardy and Valiant.

In general, the Sulphur of the Inward parts of Living Creatures are prized
more for nourishment than Physic: yet some are not wanting to do us great
service, as those taken from the Gaul, whose singular gifts in healing are
often recorded. The Sulphur of the Liver and Gaul of an Adder or Eel expedite a
slow Birth. The Gaul of some Fishes clarify the Eyesight, remove a Fistula,
Pin, or Web off the Eye: It kills Worms, it opens, cleanses, attenuates
gross matter. The Sulphur of the Blood of a Cat profits in the Rickets; of a
Goat, in a Pleurisy; of a Mouse in the suffocative Cough.

The exactly purified Sulphur of the bones of certain Animals, are conducible
for diverse Diseases: did not their foetour annoy us, we should by often taking
them find them far more profitable.

The Dung of Creatures, although proscriled from having a share of Vitality,
yet do their Sulphur afford us great relief in sickness: Horse dung against a
Pleurisy whose acute dolor is assuaged thereby: Peacocks Excrement against an
Epilepsie: Goose dung against the Jaundices, etc.

The Sulphur of the Outward parts of Animals, as the horns, hair, skin, hoofs,
nails, teeth, testicles, also various superfluous excrescences of Living Bodies
is to be had in estimation for Physical use. All these if they be so ordered
that no igneous stinking taste offend, nor any clammy viscous impurity remain
in them, if withal their seminal virtues be preserved, are of notable force to
allay in some measure the tempest of the Archeus.

CHAP. XIII.
ABove all, the Sulphur of Metals and Minerals challenge the greatest regard
from us for their singular endowment i^ Healing.

Mettaline Sulphurs are Solar, Lunar Mercurial, Saturnal, Jovial, Venereal, an^
Martial.

What the Sulphur of Gold can act in diffi^cult cases is well known to all
Legitimat^ Philosophers. But hic labor hoc opus est: how t^ fetch it out
aright; not every Aurum potabile which some so boast of, ought to be repute^
the Anima of this glorious Metal. For tho i^ may, after the example of Van
Hell. be brought into the minutest Atoms by grinding it fine with Cinnaber, and
Salt, afterward by often distilling it with Sal Armoni. Stib. and Mercu^
Subli. be turned into a red Oil. Notwithstanding the tearing of this solid,
ponderous most fixed body into the smallest particles possible, yet may it be
easily reduced again to Gold, the same in every respect as before.

It Is no wonder then that we are so frequently disappointed of the happy
effect, which this Solar Sulphur might afford us, seeing so few are able to
attain a Key fitting to unlock the Cabinet, wherein this precious Jewel is
contained.

By reason of ignorance herein, those at first great applauders of Van Helmont,
for his profound knowledge in Metallurgie, have Apostatized from his sincere
Doctrine of Curing the most Contumacious Maladies, by those compact Sulphurous
Bodies, vaunting that they were furnished with Vegetable and Animal
Preparations every way able to conquer the most Monstrous Diseases in Nature
with as much certainty activity, as the best instituted Metaline, or Mineral
Sulphurs. This the Author of Vita Sana and Longa (I heard) asserted to the
great disparagement of this Science, and to the discovery of his evident
weakness in Pyrotechnie.

We dare Practically affirm for the defense of our Philosophy, that the exalted
Sulphurs, derived from these most solid Concretes, do generally far transcend
in Iatrical excellency, either Vegetable or Animal, whenever any fixed
Disease comes to be eradicated, able to elude the best parts extracted out of
Plants or living Creatures: yea I aver (challenging any one of a contrary mind
to the test thereof) that the Provision we make for the Cure of our Griefs, by
means of this Materia Subterranea, is every jot as safe, but of far more
generous Issue than any desumed from the superficies of the Earth.

Well then, if this be true, let us in especial manner put out our selves in
the indagation of that precious Pharmacy which Nature has with great care shut
up in these close solid Bodies. Qui vult nucleum nucem frangat.

This Solar Sulphur no vulgar Aqua Regi^ will reach, neither will the milder
and corrosive touch. They may make momentany Separation and rarefaction of the
massy, close hard, firm Constitution of Gold taking into their bosom, and
there obsconding from the eye, those small Pulviscles: yet for as much as no
real dissolution is made, the dissolvent upon the contact of what is more
desired, leaves the lacerated particles of Gold to it self, easily capable
without the loss or diminution of its Substance, to be reduced to the same
ponderous solid constant matter it had before. Now the reason why it is so
difficult to separate a pure Tincture from Gold, arises from the Ignorance of
destroying it; quod, qui novit Aurum destruere, noverit itidem construere,
says Van Helmont.

All these alterations it undergoes by usual Corrosives, moist, or dry, are but
disguises put upon this Solar Concrete. It Is not a harsh, boisterous,
precipitate course, can make it yield a Tincture, but a calm, mild, mollifying,
indulging, familiar means, carrying a parity with it is Nature, will so work
upon this Solar Genius, that it is prone to expire it is Soul or Sulphur.

The Menstruum to be made choice of, must be of a Sulphurous Nature, upon
which Gold has a Friendly aspect. This Liquor can insinuate into the close
Compage of this Metal sweetly Elicitating a splendid Tincture.

I have always found well Mundified and Gold to Embrace each other intimately,
which has prompted me to Marry them, and keep them in a warm Bed together till
a most Noble Issue has come from them, of Excellent use to Compose the
disorders in this Microcosm, and to heal its grievous Sores. The way of
reserating the Body of Gold by long Triturtion, that the Acid Air may insinuate
into it, and dissolve, is a rare Invention.

In the same manner I have dealt with Luna, though Inferior to the former (yet
because more tractable) has recompensed my Labors with Medicines Polycrest,
whereby the Tempest of the Archeus is allayed.

Of Mercury, that fluent Metal, made nitide, I acquire by frequent
sublimations, a Sulphurous Powder altogether fixed, serving upon all Occasions
to rally the Spirits, when brought into a Confusion, by the Assaults of
Morbifick Enemies, whereby Advantage is given to Nature to dis-possess them of
their strong holds.

Of all the Manufactures belonging to Mercury, I could never yet see the like,
being so admirably grateful to the Vitals, and s^ safe in its Happy Operation.
Three or fou^ Grains of this Ruddy Powder strengthens the Stomach, pacifies
inward uproars, Causes sweet Rest, attenuates gross Matter, opens Obstructions,
sweetens Acidity, mundifies the Blood, by profligating the Hostile Matter every
way according to the impulse, Inclination of the (...) and the Commodity of the
passages. This it Executes without leaving the least evil impress behind.

There are several laudable Preparations of Mercury, as Spirit of Mercury;
Vigo's Powder in some measure to be made fixed. Although our Philosopher
detests the praecipitations, Vitrifications, of Mercury: Yet for want of that
which is truly fixed, the use of some of them handled dexterously, may be
admitted. But I by no means allow of Ordinary Praecipitates and Sublimates of
the shops, since they are generally made merely for Lucre, not for Cure. I
admire our Galenists (otherwise very scrupulous and over-cautious in
prescribing any thing, but what is very safe, as they pretend, endeavoring
upon that account to bring an Odium upon all Remedies in general Chymically
framed, unless Instituted according to their Method, dare give Scamony,
Colocynth, Elaterium, etc. very Poisons: Yea, offer to Children, for the Worms,
in a large Portion, Mercur* dulcis, than which they know nothing better against
the Lues Venerea, exhibited by them seldom with Happy event of totally
Conquering the Malady, but often, with manifest Misery to the Patient. Would
these Chymicophants contemplate how carelessly, rudely, this sweet Sublimate is
forged, what mischievous mistakes have happened thereby; how at the best it is
none of the most Generous Remedies, known to true Pyrotechnists; how easily it
is remeable into running Mercury, they would lay aside this, and other of their
In-sufficient, dangerous Chemical Medicaments, leaving them to Quacks, and
Mountebanks, and entertaining the safe, prevalent, spagyrick Instruments worthy
of a True Philosopher.

For my part, I have for many Years ago ablegated those Plebeian Workman-ships
of Mercury, being conscious to my self how they did delude me, and my Patients,
although I had then, yea, now possess some of the better sort, as Mercury
Praecipitatus per se, cum Auro, cum Argento.

The Splendor, Purity, Homogeneity, Fugacity of Mercury, Unity, or Amity,
Gravity, Duration, Indestructibility, Multifarious Variety; yet a facile
Retrogadation to the very same Numerical thing indu^ces us to believe, that
there are Transcendent Iatrical Excellencies in it.

I am fully persuaded that great Dissolvent, the Liquor Alkahest, is Fabricated
by means of Mercury bereaved of its outward Sulphur, whereby it becomes
Immortal, no^ afterward to be laid hold of Radically, by any Sulphur. Reperitur
namque Mercurius postquam est Spoliatus isto Sulphur nullo igne mutabilis,
says Van Hell.

The most Simple, pure, nitid, indivisible, Primo Enti Metallico similis,
embryonated Mercury, is that which is drawn out of Metals, according to our
great Philosopher. E Metallo eductus ita simplex and indivisibilis ut sit
impossible ex eo seperare salem and Sulphur.

Of are made those singular Arcanaes of so general Use, as Diaphor. vel Aurum
Horizont Corallat; which I ingeniously confess, I imitate, but not exactly
match: every Atom of those Mercurial Polyacea's, send forth Lively Illustrious
Beams wonderfully affecting the Archeus, being infinitely delighted with the
intuition of them, so that it lays aside all morosity, Melancholy,
Exhorbitant Passions, and the Entertainment of deformed Ideas: Then
re-collecting strength, it puts to flight whatsoever does annoy the Life.

The Spirit, Oil, or Sulphur of Saturn made Philosophically, applied outwardly,
or taken inwardly, gives much content to the Vitals.

Jupiter, or Tin, contains a double Sulphur, the Cause why it is lighter than
any other Metal: The one is Oily, the other Harbors in it is bosom an odd kind
of Salt, enclining it to be Coagulated. The Aporhaea, or Effluvium of which
entering any Metal (except Lead) makes it frangible and friable. The Sulphur of
tinges a Diamond, says our Philosopher.

If so, doubtless the Beams coming from such a Sulphur must needs exhilarate
the Vital Spirits in an extraordinary manner.

Out of Venus is got a Glorious Sulphur, Called Ens Veneris: I mean not the
Plebeian Sublimation of Salt {sal ammoniac}, and the Caput Mort of Vitriol, but
the Philosophical adeption of a Golden Sulphur out of Venus by means of a
benign dissolvent, and a Menstruum Sympathizing with it is Solar Narure.

But of Venus, floating in it is proper Corrosive, I extract by means of an
Alkali, a sweet Sulphur, most acceptable to the Archeus.

Mars affords an Illustrious clarified Sulphur which does not only please the
Animals by illuminating them, purifying the Blood, sweetning Acidities, but it
also prepares many good Remedies: for those, not to be used of themselves with
safety and efficacy, it nobilitates; so that they may be assumed in larg^
quantity with happy success. This Sulphur takes off the corrosive properties of
Concretes, mortifies their poisonous condition, extraverts their benevolent
Sulphur, that they become (...) Catharticks, without offering violence to the
Vitals.

Amongst Minerals, none is to be had in greater estimation than Antimony, for
yielding a bright Sulphur: either merely Diaphor. (...) altering, illuminating
the Microcosm (...) a pacifier of the fury of the Archeus. (...) a destroyer of
morbifick Idea's, according as you handle it that it may be made very sweet,
nitid, splendid, free from cacoethie, any malignant property; or only gently
purging (...) and (...) what is digested, separated, Orgastick, and Hormetick,
quo maxim natura viam affectat, which way Nature pleases (...) through
commodious Conveyances: otherwise it desists, acting in another pleasing
manner, opening the passages obstructed, digesting, attenuating, crude, gross
matter, carrying off Peccant Atoms, profligating evil Spirits insensibly,
without the least offense to the Ferments or Vitals.

The Cordial Diaphor. Sulphur of which does difflate, scatter, alter bad
Juices, casting a luster upon the Spirits is extracted out of it by
Calcination, Distillation, Sublimation, By Calcination is made Diaphoret. which
although an ordinary Medicine, I wish it were Fabricated technically, for it is
either inperfectly fixed, crude, harboring some portion of a foul Sulphur, or
some exotic matter: otherwise it is not thoroughly exempted from the Peter,
perhaps containing many impurities in it self, so left behind in the Antimony:
If these or the like Errors were corrected, it would appear one of the best
Chemical Manufactures, the Galenists possess in their shops; and would perform
great things for the Cure of Malignant Diseases, Acute and Chronic, supposed
they would be persuaded to give it in a large quantity, which they might do to
a quintuple portion if made aright. The best in this kind, is that made by
praecipitating the matter calcined, although more difficult to be acquired, yet
much to be preferred before the other.

Out of the Oar of is expedited by Calcination, and praecipitation, a
Sulphureo^^ Powder, of an Orange, or red Color. Th^^ digested a considerable
time in a Spirituo^^ Liquor, then combined with the Sulphur (...) become a
bright Body, wherein the A^cheus takes pleasure to reflect it self. It
clea^^seth the blood powerfully.

Antimonie turned by Calcination into (...) Glass, of a Purple color,
according to B^^silius Valentinus's Directions, affords a fit Su^^phurious
matter for distilled Vinegar to wor^ upon, that a Splendid deep colored
Tinct^ure may be communicated to a genuine Me^^struum for exhilarating and
quieting the Sp^^rits. The dry Calcination of by the beam^ of the Sun makes it
disposed to yield an Anodyne Sulphur for the settling the disorde^ of the
Archeus.

A Regulus made out of, especially signed with a Star, by means of a dry
Calcination is previous to the extraction of a very clean Sulphur, which
brought to a Diaphoretick Powder, or an Elegant Tincture delights the Vitals
exceedingly.

A Regulus of and exceed the former* But the Electrum, i. e. conflated with and
other Metals is to be chiefly valued, as matter most fitting for the
Elicitation of a clear Sulphur, much vivifying the Animals.

By the power of a moist Calcination with Praecipitation, is made Bezoard
Mineral, ^olar, Lunar, Jovial, Sulphurous Reme^ies, which accurately handled,
compose ^he Archeus, animating it to the Extermi^f stubborn Maladies.

In a Humid way the Sulphur of is ex^racted by penetrative Corpuscles of diverse
Corrosive Liquors, whereby it is made capable to impart its most defaecated
portion to ^ Menstruum grateful to Nature.

The Flowers of prepared by a plain ^imple Sublimation, are a Subject on which
^ good Artist working, is able to draw out ^n approved Tincture, for the
sufflaminating ^he (...) when it is precipately hurried by immoderate Passions.
It also expunges ^oxious Imaginations.

Cinnabar of concreted in the neck of the Retort in distillation of the
Butyrum, contains a Sulphur, whose finer Particles Enucleated by an amicable
humid Substance, does eminently clarify the vital exhalation of the Blood.

These Flowers having imbibed a sublime Alkali elixerated, afterward united
with the undefiled Sulphur of, cleanse the Body by Spitting, Urine, Sweat,
causing the Spirits at the same time to Triumph.

Out of is separated by Sublimation a Sulphur, not unlike to the Common, only
has somewhat a greenish cast. This exqu^^sitly refined, maturated, then
radically dis^solued, gives an odorous, pleasant, glorious high-colored
Tincture to an Alkali imbue^ with Salt of Tartar volatile. This Remedy seldom
deceives my Expectation in curing truculent Diseases. It sweetly condenses the
Spirits, entertained by them with great delight, finding thereby repast, after
many toilsome hours: It helps Nature to dissipate peccant Matter, to thrust it
out vigorously every way, it resists Poison, abates Inflammations, breaks
Abscesses, heals them, alters bad Juices to the better. It leaves no place
unrigged or unransak'd, sweeping every corners, making the whole Body polite
and trim.

By the Art of Distillation, a Sulphurous Oil of is forced over of excellent
use in Topical Applications, to assuage the dolours of the Archeus, to mortify
the Corruptor in an Ulcer, to dissolve coagulated Matter, to discuss Tumors in
the beginning. The same liquid Sulphur graduated may be taken inwardly with
good success.

From united with distilled is brought to light a Gummous Liquor, called Butyr.
Antim. a commodious Matter in the hands of a Philosophical Pyrotechnist for
Processes, leading to noble Remedies, favorable to Nature, bearing discord
with the Morbifick Excrements.

There are multifarious Manufactures of Antim. besides what are set down, upon
which the Archeus does smile, whereby it is quickened to take heart, to
subjugate Potent, Malignant Griefs. But what I have mentioned here may suffice
to justify a Physicians Diploma, if he be Industriously capable, likewise
gratify the Patient, if he be obedient.

Cinabaris Nativa, called of Paracelsus Metallus Primus sive Masculus
comprehends, a most Radiant Solar Sulphur. This brought into a red Oil,
afterward into a Mercurial Juice, named Vinum vitae, or dissolved in some
Aromatic Oil, Circulated with an Alkali in Spirit of Wine, does not only
cleanse away, banishing what is hurtful in the Body, but also renovates the
Strength, ^mpaired in the whole, reducing the Tone and Vigor of every part to
a just proportion and Equal Action. Hence it is deservedly conducible for the
protelation of Life.

The Sulphurous Particles of Lapis Haematites extraverted by Sublimation, send
forth a most fragrant smell like Saffron. These Flowers immerged in a
Benevolent Menstruuum, digested, often Distilled, give a Tincture no whit
different to a dissolution of Gold. Great is the Power hereof to please the
Vitals, to Illuminate the dark Corners of the Microcosm.

Out of Bismuth. Zink, Talk, Ludus Paracel. and diverse other Marchasites are
extorted good Sulphurs, which Elaborately Refined, United with Symbolizing
Liquors, afford Remedies fitting to allay the perturbations of the Archeus.

There are also certain Precious Stones; as the Emeral'd Sapphire, Granat, etc.
whose rutilating Sulphurs, although they are fast locked up, yet may be
recluded by means of penetrating Dissolvents, whereby (their shining Dowries
being diffused in a Friendly Diaphanous Bath) the Rigor of the Archeus may be
made supple, compliant, and enlightened, when at any time it is obnubilated. For
if Precious Stones be reputed to have a Happy Influence upon the Vitals, by
those bright Beams darted outwardly: Certainly they will perform it much
better, when that Light imprisoned shall be set at Liberty from the grosser
part, being United, as it were, in a Cone, shall be received into a fluid
serene Matter, so taken inwardly.

Those Luminous Concretions Nature seems to have taken extraordinary pains
about, to free from Heterogene^ty or Alloy, namely, Unions, or Pearls,
indigitate to us by their Clarified Signature, that such* shining Sulphurous
Remedies may be fabricated by Analysis of them, which the Archeus may esteem as
Vitae Deliciae, Feasting upon them with admirable delight. Now, this Dainty
Morsel for the Archeus to Banquet on, is not to be acquired by a trivial
affusion of Vinegar, (which does only imposie upon our Eyes, representing them
as truly dissolved, whereas indeed they are no otherwise than Masked, no better
than pulverized: Moreover does likewise fleece them, castrating these splendid
Concretions of their real eminent Luster they had before; but by means of such
a dissolvent, able to make them retire to their Ens primum. This is verily a
great Cordial sweetly imbibed by Nature, worthy to be called Elementum sive lac
Margaritarum, because it is a great Restorer of what is impaired, a disperser
of those black Meteors darkning the Spirits.

Thus I have, I hope, pro modulo, confirmed one Leg of this spacious Body of
Therapeutick Physic, viz. the (...) or Indication dedueed from the Necessary
support, Augmentation, (...) Placation, Moderation, Applause, Photism of the
Vital Spirits.

CHAP. XIV.
THE other Leg to be insisted upon, or principal immediate Indication to be
Considered, is the ablation of the Inwar^ Efficient Cause of a Disease, and the
Ou^^ward Occasional, Irritative, Morbifick Matte^*

That the Archeus is the Prime Author (...) all Sickness, is an undoubted
Truth. Nether can any Malady Seat it self any where* but in the Life, as it is
proper Subject; for the Body once extinct, all Diseases vanish.

Now, this Ens morbosum, as all other things, arises from a Seminal Principle,
the Quiddity, or Activity of which necessaril^ depends upon an Idea impressed
upon the Spirit.

As soon as this Idea is formed by the Ar^cheus, invested therewith, it
forthwith falls to Action, uncessantly Laboring to pollute part of the Vitals;
hereupon an unkindly Foreign Ferment emerges, which the Archeal Idea makes use
of, to alienate the Life more and more from it is Integrity.

Thus from an Invisible Beginning a Real Morbous Ens, is Created, defined by
our Philosopher, Vitalis Potestatis Actus Idealis, Efficiens, induens sibi
Vestem ex Ideali materia; atque a^quirens formam Vitalem and substantialem,
juxta differentiam Tarditatis and Celeritatis seminum I Would alum.

That this depraved Efficient Act of the Vitals may be hindered, frustrated, and
deprived of Ideal Matter to clad it self; so be disappointed from arriving to,
or continuing in a Vital Formality; the Ideal Seed is to be defaced, blurred,
and extinct by all means possible.

To bring this Intention home to a purpose Immediately, and speedily, requires
the best of Van Helmont's Arcana: Yet I doubt not but some of those Medical
Instruments, I have before proposed, will by Degrees in some reasonable space,
at least Cancel, if not totally deface those black Preternatural Ideas, that
the Archeus (disturbed with irregular Passions) has delineated in the very
Essence of Life.

Certainly when a supreamly clarified Salt and Sulp. shall be taken into the
Body, then Conducted into the very Bedchamber of Life, showing the Archeus, as
in a Looking-Glass, the ugly shape of the Disease Pourtrayed; it cannot but
after some Re-collection Repent of Former Errors, exceedingly contented at the
presence of so beautiful an Object offered to the view, whose salutiferous Idea
causes a Composure in the (...) whereupon it falls to razing out the deformed
Image of Mortality, instead thereof limns though rudely at first, the Picture
of future Sanctity.

Pulv. noster Bezoard. vel Pestifugus. Tinct. Bals. Solar. Polya. Sulp. and,
most defaecated, destroy in some sort, Diseased Ideas, producing luminous
instead of Caliginous Images.

I question not but there are Remedies to be purchased, as Active in framing
Health^ful Characters on the Spirits, as there ar^ things noxious framing (with
admirabl^ Agility) deadly Impresses.

Did we not too much acquiesce upon Traditional Notions, prone to be rathe^
Credulous through Idleness, than to make a narrow Indagation into the formal
Essen^tial Virtues given to Concretes, we should without Question, be better
Instructed concerning the specific Properties of Animals, Vegetables, and
Minerals: we should more directly understand what is to be adapted adequately
immediately, for the abolition of contumacious, long Maladies: whose difficulty
of Curing consists in fixed Ideas, the (...) of which would quickly make a
Cure. It Is, I say, for want of the knowledge of the seminal Endowments of
Creatures, able to wash away the foul Tinctures, or black Ideas of Evils, and
in lieu to ting the Body with a Vital Balsom, Creating good Images in the
Spirits, that our Calamities are so Grievous, and long.

How Vainly then, Foolishly, Obstinately, yea, deceitfully, do the Galenists
obtrude upon their m^serable Patients: Faint Cordials, Insignificant Juleps,
Destructive Bleeding, Pernicious Solutives, together with outward Butcheries,
as Vesicatories, etc. for the Conquering those Radicated Maladies, whose
Essence principally depends upon a Spiritual Morbifick Idea, which once
expunged, salutiferous Images come in place, Nature flourishes, it is Enemy
shortly withers.

I grant the Dogmatists own the use of Specificks, affirming that they
substantially, and formally resist the Evils of Life: For all that, it is well
known to the Faithful Philosopher, how little they trust to them, being
conscious to themselves how ieiune, and barren they are therein, never
profoundly to a purpose examining this Ideal Doctrine, or putting it to the
Test of Solid, Learned, repeated Experiments, as they ought, but rather
trusting to what Good-wives have Taught them (who Happily deprived of their
false Methods, slighting their Hodg podg, Bolmong Non-sensical jumbling
together of multitude of Ingredients, looking Ninety nine ways at once, but in
no wise at the right Mark) led by their own Genius put to some difficulties,
moved to pity their Neighbors Languors, simply looked upon by them with a
sincere Eye of Healing, without that chief Sordid, Mercenary End, our Galenical
Hucksturs or Ingrossers drive at) have been by Divine Providence conducted to
the knowledge of those Specificks, that have beyond expectation made a
Metamorphosis of the Infirmity into Sanity. To the Rude contingent Essays of
the Plain, Candid, Immethodical People, are our Fine-finger'd, Disingenuous
Methodical Galenists beholding, hardly affording a Mantissa of their own
Experimental Discoveries, to the weight of Direct Immediate Scheme of Curing.

This is the Reason we have so few Patterns of Antidotes in this kind,
sufficient to annihilate those Venomous Characters, made by multitude of daily
Occurrent Occasional Causes: such is the Laziness of these Antichymists, that
they will neither labor themselves, nor encourage Industrious men. Their Main
study is to disguise themselves, that they may rather seem, than be truly
Philosophical; wherefore like the worst of Thieves, stealing Precious Truths
out of Van Helm. or his Legitimate Disciples, they conceal them by dressing
them in a strange Habit, thus bring them upon the Stage of the world to be
Admired, as the Offspring of their own Head and Hand: whereas indeed they are
but merely Surreptitious, for which they ought severely to be animadv^rted,
especially for Cavilling, and Carping at this Noble Philosopher, to whom they
owe what Orthodox Knowledge they have. Of this Crime I know some, cried up by
the Ignorant for great Spagyrists: who (as I can expressly show) has pillaged
our Philosopher of Substantial Physical Verities, changed their Name, cut out
their Mark, put on a larg fine Coat of Rhetoric, to make them look more gaudy,
so exposed them to Sale at the Fantastical Fairs of this Foolishly Affecting,
willingly to be deceived World.

Now let us find out (if possible) some Rare Gifts Instilled into the Creatures
by the Conditor of all things.

These are fitly to be divided into three Monarchies or Republics, each one
bound to act according to that Power they are subject to, viz. Animal,
Vegetable, Mineral, to which is added Marine.

CHAP. XV.
AMong the Tribe of Animals with their Parts, the Spirit of the blood of Man
blots out the Idea of the Falling Sickness, which the Spirit of Urine (in every
respect besides equal with the former) cannot effect.

The Powder of the Skul of a Man strangled, is reputed a Specific in the
Epilepsie. The Spirit of the Brain is valued after the same rate.

To drink his own Urine preserves from the Image of the Pest.

The repeated Potation of Urine, cures the Tertian, and makes the Seminal
Character to fade away.

The Uterine Blood of a Childbed Woman drank, has an excellent faculty to
stop immoderate Fluxes of the Womb, arising from a furious Idea.

The Blood flowing from the Nose, stops excessive Haemorrhagies, Menstruum
Virginis extinguisheth Erysipelas.

Blood Extravsated or quitture has a Sympathetical Sense, diffusing Beams at a
great Distance toward the Vital Blood, causing Idea's Sanative or Corruptive
in Wounds or Ulcers, according as Moderate or Violent Impresses are made upon
the Matter removed from the Body.

The Gaul of Man corrects Deafness.

The Mumy of Man's Body duly prepared, acts strangly upon the Innate Spirits,
Ferments and Idea's, for, says our Philosopher: Nec etenim tutum est satis
Mumiarum ad invicem connexum and concordantiam exprimere: inde nempe tota
dimanavit Necromantia veterum. A man may presume to dive too far into this
abstruse Philosophy to his own prejudice, imitating the Necromancy of the
Ancients. Without Controversy, the true Mumy operates notably upon the
Morbifick Seal, enabling the Spirits to abolish it, to make salutiferous Images
in place of the former. But it is not to be purchased sincere at this day, nor
a succedaneum thereto: for that liquor as it is described, was of a thick
Mellaginous consistence, of good Odor, of singular Efficacy, proceeding from
the Balsome of Myrrh, Aloe, Cinnamon, with which they seasoned Man's Body. Ours
at this day is of a different form to the right: Being only a Cadaverous
Liquamen, or a piece of Flesh Condited, and dried, very little significant for
the cure of any great Disease.

The Fat of Man wants not its worth as a Topic, in removing weak, troublesome,
tormenting Marks made on certain parts of the Body. The Fat of Man enters into
the Weapon Salve for the advancement thereof.

To what Nefarious, Impious uses, Witches put the parts of Man's Body, for the
execution of their horrid Enterprises, is known to those who have enquired into
Natural Magical Causes of things.

The same parts of Man differently handled, may destroy their wicked villainous,
Bewitching Idea's, by introducing Good Moral Divine Religious Representations.

It Is vulgarly known how Fasting-spittle does take off some Griefs, not so much
by power of a volatile Salt in it, as by a gift conferred of spoiling the
Stigma in the part affected. Ear-wax comes not short thereof in Energie.

The Spirit of Hair applied, causes Hair to grow.

Man's Dung is reported to be an Adaequate Antidote for mortifying the terrible
Idea of some Poisons.

The great Tooth of a Dead Body placed upon an aching Tooth, causes it to fall
out by bare contact.

Van. Hell. affirms, Morientium sudor mirificas vires mortificandi Haemorrhoides
and excrescentias possidet. p. 233. The Sweat of a Dying Man destroys the form
of the swelling of the outward Piles, and other Excrescenscies. A Dead-mans
hand caused to stroke the same, acts in like manner.

Lice swallowed alive diminishes (as is confirmed by some experimentally) the
Tincture of the Jaundice, and sometimes totally removes the steps thereof.

Intestinal Worms dried, poudered, taken inwardly, destroy the Figure of living
Worms. Lice are said to rid away Lice.

Some declare the Stone of the Kidneys and Bladder, prudently Ordered by an
Expert Pyrosophist, marreth the fashion of the Duelech, loosening the Compage
thereof, making it become Retrograde to the Principle of it is first Concretion.

There are some who have such an Idiosyncrasie, or peculiar Constitution of
Body, that upon Contact, Palpation, or stroaking another Living Body they
change the Texture of the same, alter a valetudinary Melancholy stamp, to a
wholesome, Cheerful Image. And I doubt not but some Infected with the Venereal
Poisonous sting of a foul Woman, have, making use of one peculiarly wholesome,
found them Antidotarie, giving interchangeably better for worse Ideas.

Thus great is the Benignity of the good Creator, who has not suffered Man to
be destitute of Excellent Remedies contained in his own Body, for the
mitigation, pessundation of the sad Calamities, he has, and does daily bring
upon himself through his Exorbitant, Lustful Fancy.

He has also destinated other Creatures to be at his Service, to regulate,
sufflaminate, amend, consolidate, purify, and persanate his wandering
Precipitate, Maimed, Corrupt, Crasie, Absurd, Filthy, Mad Imaginations, turning
Body and Soul continually off the Hinges.

I wish those Specificks I deliver upon trust, were thoroughly explorated, and
approved by Learned Authors, who, I fear, have taken up some of them too
credulously for Truths, as they came from the mistakes of the Plebeian, without
Examining them by the Test of Judicious iterated Trials.

I shall exhort therefore all hearty Lovers of Verity, that they would make a
severe scrutiny into some of those Concrets, supposed to have a Gift bestowed
upon them, of Acting in a Spiritual manner upon vitiated Ideas.

For my part, had I leisure; were I not Importunately turmoiled with the
accurate facture of Pharmacie, I should, long e're this, have given a more
satisfactory Account of the Operation of things, sympathizing with our Nature,
preserving good sound Imaginations, bearing an Innate hatred to those that are
Morbous, Crasie, Vitiated, extinguishing them.

I have thought none more fitting for this Work, than those we call Virtuosi,
if they would lay aside their wanton, little significant, somewhat Impertinent
(as to the main matter of Sanity, without which nothing can be done aright
(Periergies, or over-busie Curiosities, seriously settling themselves, (for the
Welfare of their Neighbor) to the Inspection and Anatomy of Essential
Energies of Spirits, lodging in diverse Bodies, as they delight, or are
displeased when they meet with those of their own Texture, nearly related, or
strangers thereto: In that regard exert respectively their Ingenite Faculties
producing Characteristical Effects of Health and Sickness.

If they will not vouchsafe to do this themselves, let them encourage others
thereto, making a Collection of such Observations, as other Practical
Philosophers have really found true, being ready to exhibit plain Specimens
thereof to their Senses.

This were the direct way to advance the Sophical Tractation of Materia Medica,
and to rid us of that Lumber of Fruitless, Farraginous, Absurd Compositions,
which do but aggravate our miserable Condition.

Having shown what Excellent Properties are comprehended in the Parts of Man,
for the Regulation of Noxious Phansies: I shall now make a Progress of the
Matter in hand, Mustering such Animals with their Continents and contents,
reported either to sully, deface, blur, or quite abolish the Idea's of
Diseases, whose Action in this kind is called Specific, being destinated ab
Origin, for that End, to produce such an (...) or Effect, no Rational
Computation of which can be given from the Praedicament of mere Qualities.

The Spiritual Endowments flowing from Animals, Vegetables, and Mineral
Concrets, as they are simply, plain, rudely, or curiously prepared: I shall set
down as most of them are delivered to me, ex fide, trusting to the bare
Traditions of some, to the Authority, and Integrity of others.

Therefore let no man think all the Ingenite Virtues, attributed here to the
Principal Triple Commonweal of Bodies, to be altogether Authentic; but let
them take notice of my Grand Design, viz. That they may come under (a certain
Modification with all Circumstances observed) the Examination of Ingenious
Experimenters, who are able to testify the falsity, or verity of the same, as
they find them.

Swallows are commended as Powerful to obliterate by degrees the Falling
Sickness: Also an Elks Claw, Castoreum. The Gaul of a Sucking Whelp.

The Liver of Froggs prepared. Castoreum. Blood of a Turtle Dove. The stone in
a Carps Head, are Specific in the Appoplexie, and Palsy. Likewise Fox Grease.
The smell of a Fox. Water Distilled from Ants.

The Dung of a Black Cow taken while it is hot, then Calcined, and given to
Infants newly Born, to half a dram, preserves them from Convulsion Fits, and
the Epilepsie.

Peacocks Dung conduces against the Vertigo or Diziness.

The Brain of a Swine avails in a Frenzy and a Weak Memory.

A small Bone found in Snails without shells, profits in Convulsions.

A Toad stops great Fluxes of Blood; also the Hair, or Downie substance about
the Tail of a Hare, taken in March, blown into the Nostrils. Cats Tail, Asses,
or Hogs Dung are used for that purpose.

The Fat of a Pike applied to the Temples, Composes the Fancy to Rest. A
Succedaneum to it is the Water drawn out of the Worms found in the spongy Balls
of sweet Bryar.

The Juice extracted out of the Liver of a Weasil, instilled into the Eye,
removes the Idea of a white spot, or Cloudiness in the Eye. The same is
declared of the Gaul of a Weasil, or Hare. The Blood of a Mouse. And Water
Distilled out of man's Dung.

The Inward Skin of Egg-shells newly Hatched, Powdered, and Applied, takes away
the venomous Impress of a Cancer in the Eye.

Scarabees, or Beetles dried, and pulve^rised, repose the starting out of the
Eye.

The Chrystaline Humor of the Eye o^ an Ox Distilled, Corrects the Infirmities
o^ the Eyes.

The Gaul of a Pike mortifies a Fistula.

The Gauls of most Fishes, instilled into the Eyes, change the dark Character
of Blindness, into the Luminous bright Image of Seeing. The Gaul of a Pike is
most famous for that End.

A Headless Fly rubbed upon a Wheal, or Mattery swelling of the Eyelid Cures
it.

The Juice of Periwinckles instilled into the Ear, profits against the
Impress of Deafness. The like is attributed to the Gaul of a Hare, mixed with a
little Honey.

The Claw of a Toad, well dressed, and held to the aching Tooth, charms the
dolorous pain. The Tooth of a dead Dog, Acts in the same manner, as they say.
So does (as some affirm) the Gum of Ivy and a Snakes Skin.

The Powder of Lizards put upon the Teeth, makes them to fall out.

The Blood of a Cocks Comb rubbed on the Gums of Children breeding their Teeth,
causes them to break forth the sooner.

Oil of Toads blot out Pimples and Wheals of the Face. The Menstruous matter
performs the like.

An Egg boiled hard laid to the Crown of the Head, takes off the flaccidity and
hanging down of the Uvula.

The Grease of a Pike rubbed into the Soles of Childrens Feet, afflicted with a
tedious Cough, puts a stop to it.

Creatures fresh killed, applied to the Head, have a Specific Virtue to
mitigate pains and watchings.

Crabs, Dogs Dung. Swallows, and Swallows Nest. Boars Tooth, mar the
strangulatorie Image of the Quinzie.

Goats Blood, Mumy, Crabs Eyes, conduce to the amendment of that deformed
Figure of a Phthisis. The Heart, Liver, and Lungs of a Calf, distilled, are of
some Use for that purpose (as they say) Vipers, River Crabs, Pearls
Philosophically handled, are doubtless of great Force. So are Snails.

Ants Distilled with Honey in Spirit of Wine, afford an Excellent Liquor,
appropriated for an Atrophie, or Consumption; to be used both inward and
outward. It Is delivered by some, that a New laid Egg boiled in the Urine of a
Consumptive Body till it be hard; then perforated with a sharp stick, that
abundance of holes may be made, reaching to the Yolk; afterward this very Egg
boiled again in the same Urine, till it be quite evaporated: At length, buried
in an Ant-Hill, is available in an Atrophie; for as it is consumed by the Ants
eating it, so is the Idea of the Consumption of the Body obliterated, and the
strength restored. That frothy, slimy Water slipping out of the mouth of
Horses, when they are Drinking, being taken inwardly, repairs decayed Nature

Millepedes Cheslips. Bezoar Orient. Crocus. The broth of an Old Cock, are
accounted powerful to assuage an Asthma, or Tissick.

The Heart of a Partridge abates the Passion of the Heart. The Heart of a Bird,
called a Wag-tail, the Congelation of the Spirits.

The Arterial Blood of a Goat, the Pizzle of a Stagg, or Bull. Boars Tooth
often given, cross out the sharp pointed Character of a Pleurisy. Also the
bright shining Pictures in a Peacocks Tail, cut into small pieces, and given to
Drink. The foresaid spumous slippery Liquor, gliding through the Horses mouths
in Watering, imbibed, does strangly alter the Pleuritical Impress.

The Skin of a Wolf, Vulture, Swan, worn for a Stomacher, help, as they say,
Digestion.

Hard Eggs are reckoned for a Specific in (...) the Dogs Appetite.

The Powder of a Secundine of the first Born, is recommended for prevention of
mischief in the Pica, a strange Idea of Longing in Women with Child.

A stone found in an Oxes Bladder of Gaul, wipes off the Tincture of the Yellow
Jaundies. Goose-dung, Earth Worms have the like Property. Outwardly a Tench
applied alive to the Navil till it dye. Likewise a Spider enclosed quick in a
little Box, hung about the Neck upon the pit of the Stomach till it dye.

The foresaid stone in an Oxes Bladder of Gaul prevails against Sadness.

The Spleen of an Ox is a Specific against the Evils of the Spleen.

The Worms in Dog Rose mortify the Worms in the Belly.

A Living Toad applied to the Region of the Loins, cancels the Character of the
Dropsy in the Kidneys.

The Gut of a Wolf dried, and the powder taken, lulleth asleep the Torment of
the Cholick. The same is reputed of the Inward Ventricle of a Hens Craw, and
whiter part of Hens Dung. Likewise the Testicles of a Horse. The powder of the
Inward skin of the shell of Eggs. Portion of the Navil string of a Child new
Born, carried about, certainly prevents, or mitigates the Torture of the
Cholick.

The Blood of a Hare Cures the Dysentery or Bloody Flix.

Crabs Eyes. The Jaw Bone of a Pike, deface that ugly Petrifying Image in the
Kidneys. Scorpions are applauded by some for that purpose.

Cheesils, Goats Blood produce the same Effect in the Stone of the Bladder.
Crystal Glass often heated red hot, quenched in very pure Water, Acts rarely
in this kind.

The Egg-shell of a Hatched Chicken powdered, profits in the stopping of the
Urine. The Urine of a Lynx, or spotted Beast, give Relief in the Strangury;
also Oil of Wax. The like is said of the Pith in a Goose Quill. Anima Halecis.
Goats Tallow put into the Navil. Urine of a Goat. Earthworms.

The Juice of River Crabs disturbs the Formal Cause of an Inflammation of the
Kidneys. Not Inferior to the former is the Urine of a Goat newly made.

The Dung of a Yellow Colored Hen, mortif^es an Ulcer in the Bladder.

The Windpipe of a Cock torrefied. The Bladder of a Goat. A Fish found in the
Belly of a Pike. Invigorate the Retentive Faculty of the Bladder, hindering the
involuntary coming out of the Urine.

The Pizzle of a Bull, or Stag, corroborates the Atonie, or Flaccidity of a
Man's Yard, stirring up Libidinous Images. Boletus Cervinus, or Stags Mushrom.
Scincus, or Land Crocodile, promote Venery.

The Ashes of Horse-Leeches. The Ashes of a sucking Leveret, are apprehended
powerful to Cure the Rupture of the Guts.

A Cuttle Fish bone. The Roe of a Red Herring are of force for the Running of
the Reins.

Beetles infused in Oil of Lin-seed, stop the Exorbitant Flux of the Piles, and
the Falling down of the Fundament. Mumy has the like Credit.

Sponges growing in Bathing places, The Ashes of Mouse-dung, Purple shellfish
calcined, applied to the Fundament, reform the misshapen knaps thereof, Warts,
and other Vexatious excrescences.

The powder of the Matrice of a Hen helps Conception.

The Fume of a Dead Tooth of Man, destroys the Idea of Sterility.

The Liver and Gaul of an Adder or Eel dried, and taken in Drink, causes
speedy Delivery in Childbed. A Girdle made of an Adders Skin, worn about the
Loins, has the same Virtue.

The Secundine torrefied and drank, wonderfully discharges the Afterbirth.

Powder of Cockle-shells, Powder of Mother of Pearl, Crabs Eyes, Spiders Web, A
Fish, called a Tench, do all help to raze out the Image of Fevers.

The Spawn of Froggs technically Ordered, appease the pain of the Gowt.

Swines Blood, River Crabs, take off in some measure, the Impress of a Hectic
Fever.

Sal {sal ammoniac} seven times Sublimed, Powder of Vipers, The Heart of a
Hare, spoil by degrees the Figure, or Type of a Quartan. To that purpose
conspires a Living Spider, Imprisoned in a little Box, placed about the Stomach.

A Red or Pickled Herring eaten, cures Hydrophobie from the Biting of a Mad Dog.

A Toad, rightly prepared, is a true Xenexton, Preservative, or curative in the
Plague, mortifying Pestiferous Phancies. A Wolf's Tongue is extolled by
Paracelsus, as endued with the same Virtue.

A Lizard assists Nature to kill the Venom of a Carbuncle.

The Fat of a Wolf obliterates the Picture of a Disease, called a Wolf, in Man's
Body.

Vipers Flesh frequently assumed, does overcome that filthy Species of a
miserable calamity, the Leprosy.

The Blood of a Hare extinguisheth the fiery shape of an Erysipelas. The Fat of
the same Creature extracteth a Thorn out of the Flesh.

A Living Worm applied close to the finger, afflicted with a Whitflaw,
dissipateth it. The Blood and Skin of a Mole performs the same.

The Mouse, called a Shrew, or Ranny, cut up alive, forthwith put to the part
bitten, heals the Wound.

Honey, or the Be it self, cure the sting of Bees.

The Liver of a mad Dog eaten, is an Antidote against his Poison.

The Head of an Adder is Alexiterie against it is biting. A Scorpion against
it is sting. A Toad stone agafnst the Venom of a Toad.

CHAP. XVI. The next Class of those things which make (...) are Vegetables, as
follow.
THE Root of Male Piony, Missletoe of the Oak, A shrub of Elder growing on a
Willow, taken Inwardly, or worn as a Periapton, are very prevalent for the
deletion of the deformed, Venomous, Epileptical Image.

Lilly conval, the Flowers of Linden, or Teil Tree, Black Cherries, Southern
wood, Valerian, Oil of the Wood of Hazel, Balsam of Palestina, Spirit of
Tobacco, Spirit of Camphire, are according to tradition, Specificks against the
Epilepsie, Appoplexie, and Palsy.

Balm, Black Hellebore prevail against mad Phancies.

White Poppy, Nutmeg, help to abate great Watchings.

Serpillum, or Wild Thyme, Vervein, Regulate the Disorders of the Head.

The Flowers of Succory. Rochet, applied to the Nape of the Neck, Celandine,
the green leaves of Tobacco, mitigate the Inflammation of the Eyes.

Hieracium i. e. Hawkweed, Eyebright, Fennel, strengthen weak Eyes.

Wormwood, Vervain, diminish the tingling noise in the Ear.

An Onion, Pellets of Common Raddish, put into the Ear, have a property to help
the difficulty of Hearing.

The Root of Gentian amends the Idea of an Ulcer in the Nose.

Majoram, Hors-mint, Restore the decay of Smelling.

The Juice of mil-foil, the mushrom of a Birch tree, the Flowers of Daisie the
lesser, restrain Haemorrhagies, Flowers of Benzoe, stalks of Nigella Romana, or
Gith, Dissolve Congealed Blood.

Oil of Box, the Root of sharp pointed Dock, Burdock, are reckoned appeasers of
the Tooth ach: the Fume of Henbane kills Worms in the teeth.

A Decoction of Veronica mas, i. e. Fluellin the male, is said to Cure the
Aphthae, the Thrush in Sucking Children.

The Root of Aron, Bryony, Valerian, are Specified against Diseases of the
Lungs.

Ground Ivy is powerful to do good in those who are Empical, i. e. have Corrupt
matter gathered in the Chest: the Seed of Roman Nettle, and the Root of
Comfrey, are also proper.

Horse-tongue, Ladies Thistle, appease the pains of the Side.

Wild Cresses take off the mark of Hoarsness upon the Lungs. Zizipha lenifie a
Cough. Henbane-Seed, the Root of stinging Nettle, Fluellin, Bistort, Comfrey,
Burnet, Sanicle, check spitting of Blood.

The Lesser Housleek is of great force against a Quinzie.

English Saffron, Scabious, Garlic, Horehound, Spirit of Tobacco, Benzoe,
deface the Character of the Tissick.

The Root of Mullein (before it comes to Flower) hinders the Impetuous Flux of
the Latex to any part. The like Virtue is attributed to mother of Thyme and
Groundpine.

Zedoarie, Balm, Anacardium, give redress in Lipothymie, or Fainting Fits. Oil
of Cynamon in Palpitation of the Heart.

Hemlock, Gum of Juniper, afford succor in the Inflammations of the Breast:
Likewise Rhaeas or Wild Red Poppy, Daisie Roots, and Flowers.

The Juice of Ground Ivy, the Flower of St. John's Wort, reform the misshapen
figure of a Phthisis or Ulcer of the Lungs.

Hemlock, Mint, the Root and Seed of Fennel, hinder an overplus of Milk, and
its curdling.

The greater Dragon, Aron, spoil the filthy shape of a Cancer.

Burnet, Bryony Root, Water of Vine branches, abate the Fantastical Longing of
Women, hindering the mischief which commonly coms upon it.

Zedoarie is applauded as an excellent proper Stomachick.

Essence of Bread helps Digestion admirably well.

The Seed of Columbine, Crocus, Horehound, Strawberry Leaves and Root, alter
the Dye or Stain of the Yellow Jaundice.

Elder Berries lenefies the vehemence of the Bloody Flix.

Essence of Persicaria is excellent against the Diseases of the Mesentery.

Gladiolus, Sword-grass, Fox-glove, are of great importance in the King's Evil.

Black Hellebore, Tamarisk, Garlic, Fern, Epithymum, Polypodium, Seed of Roman
Nettle are accounted Remedies for the Spleen.

Gratiola does good in the Dropsy, Anasarcha, Tapsus Barbatus in a Tympany.

Garden Scurvy Grass well prepared, Brooklime, Lesser Celandine, Horse-Raddish
Herb two Penny, the leaves of Pine, or Firr, help to Cancel the virulent Idea
of the Scurvy.

Rupture wort, Hippoglossum, Pilosella, Semen Sophiae, Filicula, Perfoliata are
appropriated for the Cure of a Rupture of the Guts.

Herb Paris reduces the Inflammation of the Scrotum to an Eucrasie.

The dead Nettle, Terebinth, Ebulus, much conduces in a Gonorrhaea.

Satyrium, Boletus Cervinus, Cubebs, the Root of Dogs stone, Umbilicus Veneris,
quicken Veneral Phancies.

Oil of Rue abates the Priapism.

Sweet Bryar Balls, Alkekeng, Juniper Berries, Saxifrage, Lignum Nephriticum,
Peach stones, Lachrima Job, the Liquor of Birch, drawn from the Tree in March,
are commended for the stone in the Kidneys.

Decoction of Red Ciches avails* in the Strangury.

Agrimony, in Pissing of Blood.

Figg leaves, Juice of Onions, Aloe, open the Piles.

Linaria, the Ashes of Vine Branches, remove the Warts and knubs of the
Fundament.

Black Hellebore quilted with Cotton in form of a Girdle worn, stops the
Excessive Flux of the Piles.

The Root of Sloe bush, restores the Falling down of the Fundament.

Down upon Quinces, Maidenhair, Thapsia cause the Hair to grow.

Storks Bill, called Gratia Dei, Unites broken bones.

Persicaria, Celandine, the lesser Bryony, take away black and blew strokes.

Hypericon, Persicaria, are excellent vulnerary Herbs.

The Root of Bryony steeped in Water with Oak Ashes, destroys Worms in the Skin.

Gladiolus applied, fetches out Thorns and Splinters.

Mushroms of an Oak mortify Carbuncles.

Strawberries are accounted a Specific against the Leprosy.

The Bark of Birch, Bladders on Elm leaves cleanse away Freckles.

A Bath made of Osier leaves, refreshes Consumptive Limbs.

Lunaria is a special Remedy for a Cancer.

An Apple applied to Warts, and buried under ground, mortifies them.

CHAP. XVII. Lastly, Mineral and Marine Substances Act upon the Idea's of
Diseases, by defacing, or expunging them.
THE Legitimate Spir. of Vitriol Amber, Terra Sigillata, Red Coral, Natural
Cinnabar. Cinnabar of. The Emeral'd, scatter those black Clouds arising from
the horrid Spectrums of the Appoplexie, Epilepsie, introducing instead thereof
a brightness and splendor in the Spirits. Our Bezoartick powder with does
notable things to this purpose. It operates rarely well in Comatous Evils and
Watchings.

Balsam of Saturn appeases the furious Commotion of the brain.

The Sulphur of Vitriol Cures the Vertigo or Diziness.

The pure Tincture of Tutia respects the Good of the Eyes, causing the Species
of Objects to be seen more plain.

Sal Punella, Flowers of Brimstone, made as they should be, are doubtless, of
commendable use in the Quinzie, and Tissick.

Tincture of Mars, Lapis Haematites, and Vitriol, stop excessive Bleeding.

Antimonium Diaphoreticum is conducible in Imposthumes of the Lungs. The
Flowers of fixed, are so prized in an Empical Condition.

Bezoar, Mineral, dissolves blood congealed, and is of great validity in a
Phthisis; but above all, the Anodine Sulphur of Vitriol is to be preferred.

Coral Revives the Vital Image in Lipothymical Persons.

Powder of Crystal increases Milk.

Spirit of amends the defects of the Stomach.

Emeral'd, Coral, Sulphur of are magnified for good Remedies in Cholera and
Dysenterie.

Mars, Saccharum Clarify the Spleen, Reforming it is peccant Idea's.

The Lodestone applied to the Navil, causes Cholick pains to cease by
destroying the Image of the Disease.

The Sea Spong, Sal Gemm, is much commended in Schrofulous Affects.

Sal Gemm Artificially prepared, is extolled in Bubonocele and Enterocele,

Mercury destroys all sorts of Worms.

Essence of Amber, Venice Borace, Revives the Image of Virility, extinguishing
the ill-favored type of sterility.

Ludus Paracels. reduces the Stone of the Kidneys or Bladder to it is first
Principles.

Spirit of Mercury causes the Corrupting Impress of the Sore in the Kidneys or
Bladder to fade away; revocating a Healing Faculty.

The true tincture of Coral, purified Sulphur of puts a stop to Diabetes.

Antimony fixed, restrains the virulencie of a Gonorrhaea.

The Emeral'd Red Coral, well ordered, gives succor in Pissing Blood.

Crocus Metallorum, eases the blind Piles* but above all, Van Helm. Ring.

Aetites, or Eagle stone placed in the upper parts above the Navil, hinders
Abortion; Situate below about the Thighs, cau^seth timely Delivery.

Osteocolla, or Lapis Ossifragus taken Inwardly, helps to Unite broken bones.

Vitriol heals Wounds at a distance.

The Stone, called a Sapphire, wonderfully brings to naught the Poisonous form
of a Carbuncle.

Arsenick after a peculiar manner, Cures Ulcers. Antimony the eyes.

If Hydrophobus be soused in Sea Water, the Image of the Dog pourtrayed in the
Phancie of him, who is bitten, becomes annihilated.

Crystal dug out of the Earth, resists the Malignity of Arsnick, Auripigmentum,
Sandaracha.

Thus far have I pointed at that Pharmacy, which having a Gift of Healing
implanted in it, strikes immediately at the inward Efficient Cause of our
Infirmities.

In the next place, I shall make a progress in Removing the Outward Occasional,
Irritating, or Exasperating Matter, which provokes, enrages the Archeus,
causing it to fall into inordinate Passions, and Perturbations, whereby
Diseases break forth, are increased, become tedious, or lethiferous, if not
timely prevented.

CHAP. XVIII.
THere is not any Faculty, or Profession has more imposed upon the Credulity
of Mankind, than Physic, considering how precious the Subject is to be
handled, likewise how easily we might be Convinced of the grand Errors, and
abominable Abuses, thrust upon us, to the loss of our Lives, yea, our very
Souls, were we not obstinate, self-conceited unspeakably Idle, and Malicious.

In a Comedy, called the Cheats, an address is made to a Reverend Learned
Doctor, a Galenist, for advice in a difficult Disease; who no sooner views the
Urine, but forthwith gives Council to Bleed and purge. I wish this were only
Comical, and were not indeed Tragical.

What Cruelty, Tyranny, Torments has been Exercised by the Galenists ov^r
Mankind? What Butcheries and (...) has been made of poor Mortals (...)* by
bleeding, and purging, is practically known to all Perspicacious Physicians
every Week, yea, every Day.

How indirectly do these Men assume to themselves privileges, who, I Will
maintain to their Faces demonstratively, are not able to Cure any great Fever
Radically, with Judgment worthy of a Philosopher.

Can any deliberate, well advised Man think, that it was ever the intent of any
Prince, to set up a Company of Men to destroy their Subjects, or at least, to
suffer them to enjoy any Royal privilege, if they perversely, against the
perspicuous Light of Reason, and clear testimony of Fact, should persist in
their male-praxis, their Active, wilful Homicide, at this day, when Van Helm.
like a Prometheus, has by means of Fire (blown up by a Heavenly Benediction)
Discovered, and taught the World the Cure of those truculent Calamities, which
that Epimetheus, or Protoplastes, by opening Pandora's Box, has brought upon
it.

I have in Haematia, offered Dr. Willis, or any other Semi-Chymist, or
Chymicophant, to make it appear by Solid Experiments, that Bleeding (as there
stated) is an indirect way to overcome any Grand Disease. Se^ surdo narro dum
sibi plaudunt. It Is all one, as if I should vociferate to Neptune that he would
forbear to swallow up Ships, Passengers, and Treasure, since it is the Nature of
the Ocean agitated with the Fury of a Tempest, to Execute such mischief. So it
is equally in vain, for me to cry aloud (if I had Stentor's Voice) that
Dogmatists would forbear to destroy their Contrymen; for as much as Nature,
Education, Voracious Appetite of Gain, and Honor, hurry them to that End.

However I shall always discharge my Duty in reprehending their vicious Method,
detecting how mischievous it is to the Life of Man. As I have deservedly
declaimed against Phlebotomie, with Arguments, and Experiments, sufficient to
persuade any intelligent Person, that it is a Reprobate means of Conquering any
great Infirmity. So I shall at this time make manifest for the satisfaction of
the Senses of all Judicious Men, that the common Instruments the Galenists use
in Purging, or carrying off the Occasional, Provoking, Morbisique Matter are
unworthy to be prescribed by those, who own themselves Learned Doctors.

That I may therefore justly reprove those (...) who keep Men in Purgatory,
without Expiation of the Errors of Life.

I shall (besides most clarified Reasons depending upon long Experience)
allege the Authority of Hippocrates, and Galen, for the Countenancing what I
deliver.

That brave Hero Hippocrates has delivered to Posterity two Aphorisms, worthy
to be Written in the Frontispiece of every Honest Able Physicians House.

The Sense of the first is mentioned five several times in diverse places; as
Aphor. 2. Lib. 1. (...) etc. Also Lib. 1. Aphor. 23. (...), etc. Again, Aphor.
25. of the same Book, (...), etc. Likewise Aphor. 3. Lib. 4. the same words are
repeated. And Aphor. 2. of the same Book, (...): Intimating by these
Repetitions, that Physicians ought to have a singular care what they purged out
of the Body.

The Second most useful Rule he gives, is Aphor. 21. Lib. 1. (...). Denoting
that in all Evacuations we ought to Observe the Motion, Orgasm, Inclination of
Nature, and most convenient passages for that purpose.

If these Catharsists were Legitimate Disciples of a Master so excellently well
Versed in Healing, they would never thus promiscuously exclude good and bad
Juices, by their colliquating Solutives, without any Euphorie or Profit to the
Sick Man; giving Purging and Vomiting Medicines so often repeated, that their
Patients have complained they have emptied upward and downward 500. times; yea,
some a Thousand, yet have found no melioration of their Health, but a decay of
their Vitals.

Nothing is more Common than to meet with those, who (when for their Redress, I
commend Vomiting, or Purgative Physic) presently Reply, they have undergone
too much of that, desiring me to forbear: When some, upon promise of Safety,
and Efficacy, have taken my Emetick Tincture, Emeto Diaphoret, or Emeto Cathar,
Powder or Pill with benefit: Yet having found little sensible Evacuation, they
have murmured, fearing lest the Physic lay in their Body to their future hurt;
supposing the same malignity to be in mine, as in the Galenical Solutives; and
that we were to judge of the Patients Restoration according to (...) the
largeness and number of Sieges.

The miserable Experience of Colliquating Purgatives, taken into my own Body,
the space of Seven or Eight Years, without any solid Cure, taught me that the
uncorrected Catharticks of the Dispensatory oftentimes carry off peccant
Juices, without profit, making as much as they discharge, wronging the
Ferments, weakening the Tone of the Stomach, forcing Nature to move a way
contrary to the stream of her own (...) and the (...) of the Morbifique Dross.

And when at any time there succeeds any Redress after plentiful Evacuations by
this means, it is by Accident in Robust Bodies, where the Disease is trivial,
Nature standing upon her own Legs, the Vessels permeable; also an Impetuous
motion in the Matter attenuated, ready upon an easy Irritation to be sent
packing. However this Exploit will not Nobilitate a Physician, or his Art,
seeing (take one time with another) this way does double the mischief to the
Good. Neither is he upon this account able to promise the Radical Cure of any
great Infirmity, very rarely, when (...) is sitting, but never when she is
jacent. Then truly this is no more than the good Old Woman can perform by her
simple Method; wherefore for Satisfaction of Ingenuous Lovers of Knowledge, let
us a little contemplate a Beadrol or Register of their stronger and weaker
Solutives, with their Correctiors.

Can any one, who knows what belongs to poisons, believe that Gum Arabic,
Tragacauth, Bdellium, are in any proportion fitting Mortifiers of the poison of
Colocynthis, which has proved Death in the Stomach of many a Man?

Is Vinegar sufficient to amend the virulency of the Roots of Esula, Laurel, or
Mezereum, etc. Can Milk tame the Cacoethie of Elaterium, the Acid Gas of
Sulphur, Scamony? Or the Juice of Quinces the Root of black Hellebore? Or Water
wash away the Realgar of Lapis Lazuli? I could never find yet by repeated
Essays, that Sanders, Violets, Ginger, Mastick, Anniseed, Cinnamon, Saffron,
Daucus Seed, Almonds, Penidia, Pepper, Spikenard, with several Gums, have any
power to take off, to a purpose, the Deleterie Nature of Grand, boisterous
Catharticks; neither do they otherwise than Disguise the more gentle Poison of
Minoratives (as they call them) as Manna, Cassia, Reubarb, Sena, Agarick,
Myrobal, Carthamus, Mechoa, Sultan, Turbith.

I grant some have now and than a present ease by uncorrected Purgatives; but
it is no other than what happened to the Doctors Servant, who, upon eating two
or three Spiders, discharged her Stomach, had a stool or two, so was for a
while freed from her Grief.

For all that, let me give a Caution to those, who without scruple swallow down
Intoxicating Compounds, Electuaries, Potions, Pills, or Powders (far worse than
a simple Spider) that at length by frequent sumption of the same, they make not
an Indeleble Character or Impress upon the Stomach, never to be razed out by
any Art (as I have known) the Thread of their Life being cut short (according
to Humane probability) half in half: withal what they enjoyed had much
feebleness and irksomness in it.

How can it indeed be otherwise, forasmuch their Oracle, Galen says very true
in this: Omne purgans Naturae Inimicum. Certainly, Naturae bellum infer
Odiosum. He that Offers violence to the Vitals, takes a course to dissolve the
compage of his Body the sooner.

Neither do I charge their own proper Emeticks, or Catharticks, as Malefactors,
but I moreover accuse those they have borrowed of the vulgar Chemists, viz.
Infusio Croc. Metal. abusively called Vinum Benedictum, Vit. dull Sublimat, dull
Praecipit. Turpet Miner. Vinum Antimo. Vinum Rubel. These are their scandalous
Chemical Medicines, as bad, if not worse, than those which Mountebanks,
cheating Astrologers, or those Quacks, who with their Ominous Bills, make a
most doleful noise in the streets, and every corner, worse than scritch-Owls,
or Night Ravens.

It Is not strange then that the common sort of People, yea, even those of
better Quality, know not how to distinguish between Chemical Preparations,
Real, or counterfeit; those safe and Hazardous: between Efficacious and
Fruitless, Elaborately defaecated, Philosophically handled, and those slightly
contrived, or rudely flubbered over.

Herein lies the cheat, that the Galenists assuming to themselves the Name of
Chemists; Incogitant, unwary Persons take it for granted (by reason of the
Authority, prevailing credit, they have gained among Persons of Degree, by
seeming to be what they are not) that Men of so many Letters, must needs be the
only Legitimate Sophi in our Science; whereas through want of Integrity,
Industry, Difficult Labor with their own Hands, Magnanimity, Arnauty, a Design
of Noble Enterprises, it is impossible they should arrive to any pitch of
Knowledge in Pyrotechnie.

So weak are the Judgments of some of our Academicks, even those who Rank
themselves among Scholars of the higher class, that I am ready to blush,
observing what (...) is in their Understanding, how dim sighted their minds
are, to make a right Distinction of things, and to value them as they are in
themselves.

These are they, who assent that Dr. Willis, with certain others, are able
Chemists, because having stolen a platform of more refined Philosophy out of
Van Helmont, they have made a large spacious Rhetorical superstructure, most
part Sermocinal, little practically Salutiferous.

Let me tell those, who covet to Learn, it is not a vast Library, profound
speculations in a Closet, an Eloquent Tongue, a dexterity in Writing Elegantly,
a pretty slight in prescribing after the manner of their boasting Method, a
concourse of multitude of Patients, the Applause of Great Men, Professors of
the University, Virtuosi (who of all Men methinks, should be most cautious how
they acquit Dogmatical Physicians) nor the Vogue of certain altogether
Interested Apothecaries, Surgeons, Midwives, or Nurses, can justify a Man
as an Authentic, Philosophical Chemist, unless he walk plainly, according to
Helmontian Principles, viz. Renounce Phlebotomy altogether, according to the
Indication of Evacuation or Revulsion; laying aside all ill-conditioned
Vomiting, and Purging Instruments, Praedatorie Diaphoreticks, (...) Grating,
Fretting Diuretics, and diverse torturing palliating ways.

He then that will rid the body of those cadaverous, Foul, Outlawed, Fretting
Excrements, like Thorns or Splinters extimulating the Archeus, to make sundry
Ideas of Calamities: Let him hunt after those Remedies that the Vitals have a
pleasing Gust for, which Obsecundate and follow the Genius of Nature in the
propulsion of Impurities, wheresoever sited, what way soever tending, withal
obtain a Faculty (...) to turn by mere contact any thing depraved in the Body
to a better condition.

Seeing it is most difficult to attain, Paracelsus his, or our great Philosopher
Van Helmont's Arcana's, e. g. Tinctur Lili ab Electro Minera. Mercur. Vit
stibii proles Integra. Tinctu Lili Antimon. Mercurius Diaphore. Element. Ignis
e Cupro, Corallat, etc. Let him put out himself to the utmost, using all means
possible to purchase such a Pharmacy, agreeable to the Doctrine of our
Philosopher, Fabricated according to his Rules ingeneral, endeavoring (...) to
imitate his Illustrious Spagyrical Secrets, so by degrees let him aspire to
greater things.

Let him study to defaecate thoroughly the Sulphur of, that it may be at the
Command and beck of Nature, exterminating whatsoever annoys without blemishing
the Ferments.

Let him Marry the well purified Sulphur of, to the sweet Sulphur of a
Vegetable, entertaining both into a delectable Bath.

He ought also to digest with an Alkali; afterward to extract a high Tincture,
subservient to Nature, in cleansing, sweeping away filth or dregs in the Body,
making a Happy alteration in the Texture of degenerate Juices.

The Red and Citrine Sulphur of made by praecipitation, well sweetened with the
Alcohol of Wine, afterward intimately joined with a Solar Sulphur, fulfills the
dictates of Nature, in proscribing per loca Commoda, without damnifying the
stomach, whatsoever is Rebellious, Conspiring against Life, stirring up the
Archeus to Indignation.

Bezoard, Mincra, Solar, Luna, Jovial, may be so coined, and such a stamp set
upon them, that they may safely, and effectually agitate the Morbifique Matter,
Hunting, Chasing it every way, without offering Injury to the Noble parts, or
leaving an Evil Tang behind.

The Yellow Sulphur of like the Common, likewise it is Cinnabar, worked upon
Philosophically, will bring to pass the former End powerfully.

Out of the Flowers, Regul, Glass of, may be extracted harmless, gentle
Emeticks, Cathart, Diaphoret, Diureti. always leaving an Euphorie and Euphrasie
behind.

Well nigh fixed with or does assist Nature to disturb, Ferret, profligate,
vicious, lentous, stubborn, coagulated foulness, (...) with Relevation.

Our Emetocathar, Emeto Diaphore Powder, or Pill; our Bezoar Powder, as I can
fabricate it by the Adjunct of or take part with Nature to help it to Conquer
great Evils, excluding the Nosopoietick Thorns and Briars, those Goads in the
sides of the Archeus, extimulating it to Extravagant Passions, through the
Sluice, or Outlet most patulous and Convenient: Withal they sweeten (...), any
extreme Acid, mortify malignant Idea's of the Scurvy, etc. taming great acute
Griefs safely, generally affording Solace. This they Act whether they Vomit,
Purge or no, keeping in it is Integrity, what is sound, and meliorating what is
depraved.

Our Emetick Tincture is endued with the same Excellency with the former, but
Operates more insensibly, and with somewhat more Advantage to the Vital
strength.

Our Pil. Polychrest causes an Eutony in the stomach, helps Digestion,
purifieth the Blood, dilates Coarctations, or Constrictions, opens Passages
Obstructed, damned up with gross congealed stuff, which it attenuateth,
abstergeth. It allays, Edulcorates sharp fretting Liquors: It sweetly
discharges any thing noxious through the Intestines, Kidneys, Gullet,
Windpipe, and Skin, with Augmentation of the strength, without impairing the
Ferments, or Offending the Parts. He that possesses this Pill, need very
seldom prescribe a Glyster. I my self have taken many Thousands, and given
multitudes of them to others, to the diminution of that stubborn Infirmity the
Scurvy, the Advancement of the Vital Faculty much suppressed thereby.

Common Sulphur Sublimed with is no contemptible cleanser away of Impurities,
Lodged about the Hypochondries, (...).

Colocynth. Scamon. Elateri. The Root of Esul, Hellebo. Alb. digested with a
most refined Mineral Sulphur, and Salt of Tart Volati; so that their Poisons
become introverted, evade Friendly Catharticks, Diaphoret, Diureti, sufficient
to assist the Archeus to subjugate Ferine Refractory Diseases.

Syrma Ortho Chymicum. (...) THE ART of MIDWIFERY Chymically Asserted.
WHat Calamity, Exorbitant Passions, and dreadful Pains of the Womb succeeded
the depravation of the Stomach by Lustful Fruit: How at this day each
Membranous Body darts Benevolent, or Malevolent Aspects one upon another
reciprocally, according as they are well or ill affected, is known to the
Theological Physician. These two Membranous Vessels contain the Seminal Cause
of those innumerable Infirmities belonging to Womankind double to Man; since
according to Plato, she harbors, as it were, (...).

To find out Remedies adequately effectual to amend the Irregularities and
Extravagant Motions of this Uterine Animal, requires a most expert Philosopher;
but to appease or tame sometimes it is furious Raging Commotions, will put one
upon the search of something Magical. He that thinks any Galenist (...)
professing Midwifery, Exercising a Function herein to be sufficiently furnished
with Abilities for that purpose, is merely led by the Opinion of the World, not
by solid Reasons, and Repeated Experiments. For I can prove it in the General
Impossible ex Facto (if I were put to it) that any but the Legitimate Chemist,
can Relieve, or Cure Uterine Calamities safely, gratefully, effectually, and
speedily. The truth of what I here deliver time will make perspicuous.

When I was first called to this Science of Physic, I was Advised to apply my
Studies in especial manner to the Art of Midwifery, which I easily listened to,
being captivated with considerable gain amounting thereby, apprehending it
principally a Manual Operation not difficultly to be attained. But my modesty,
and second thoughts of aspiring to a more ample Knowledge in Physic, took me
off. And well it so happened according to Divine Providence, since had I
insisted upon that Subject, I had neither been any whit an Experienced
Physician, nor skilful in the Feat of obstetricating. For I plainly discovered
afterward, that to one (...) in Childbed Labor, who justly called for the
Hand of any Man with his Chirurgical Instruments, upon the Account of a Dead
Child, or the preposterous indirect Position of the Living, Hundreds required
the help of a Learned Chemist; affording proper Remedies for the Assistance of
the Vitals of the Mother and Child, to the End, that this great Work of Happy
partitude or Delivery might be performed as it ought.

Wherefore the accomplished Chemist, who can Vindicate his Analeptica,
Antipyreta, Antihysterica, and Anodyna far transcending the Galenical
Preparations in all stubborn Maladies whatsoever, ought to be especially
consulted with, when sorrows of bringing forth infest the Miserable Woman. Many
remarkable Histories to this purpose could I relate, the space of Eighteen
years, wherein I have observed a constant redress of those grievous
unprofitable pangs, to follow the Oblation of our Pharmacie, without the
production of preter-natural Heat, or any other bad Symptom. Moreover, most
Parturients, or Child-bed-Women Miscarry, by reason of Irregular Diet, through
Malignant Fevers arising from the Scurvy, retention of the Lochia, rash
restriction of Enormontick sweats, indiscreet Management of the Milk, as
happened to my own Wife, who after the Pestilential Fever was Mastred by
proper Antidotes, was destroyed by the Ignorance of a Midwife, applying to the
Mamillary Emunctory a Topic, which in a dozen hours caused a total Anadrome of
the virulent Milk toward the Center, whereupon a great Coagulation of the Blood
followed, Haemoptysis the privation of a commodious Universal Sweat, Dyspnaea,
and other direful Accidents. In all these Exigents the Learned Iatrical
Chemist, not the Noso-Poietick Galenist, ought to be sought unto for Advice.

Had I Opportunity to enlarge, which I may hereafter, I could demonstrate how
insufficient these Galenical Opinionative Men-Midwives (as they call them) are
to prevent Abortion in Gravids; to remove the deep Impressions of Futious
unbridled Passions and Perturbations, the evil consequences of Bruises by
Falls, or Strokes; to rectify the depraved Appetite, to prescribe a
Salutiferous Diet, before, and after Lying in; to Administer competent
Corroboratives for the welfare of Mother and Child, and the Auspicious
promotion of her bringing forth. I could also make it apparent by our Theory
and Practice, how Ignorant the Galenical Obstetricatio^s are of the Right
Method and Means of Curing the manifold Diseases incident to poor Infants; how
Thousands of Children have suffered through the unadvised Administration of
Diascordium, and other Opiats. But studying concisenes I must desist at
present, being ready upon all Occasions to maintain by Fact what I have here
asserted.

The Character of a Legitimate Ortho-Chymist.
THE Legitimate Philosophical Chemist has laid his Foundation in Learning. The
Institutions, Notions, Axioms, and Theorems in Natural Philosophy delivered to
him, he does not take up on mere trust, without a severe scrutinie into the
Truth of the same by the Test of Experience. His Theory, and his Practice, His
Ratio and Exploratio go hand in hand.

He is able to give an Account of the Beginning, Progress, Entelechy,
Declension, and Retrogradation of Physical Bodies; the Aitiologie of the
Defections, Interpositions, Eclipses, Alterations in Nature, principally of the
Infirmities, and Maladies belonging to Man's Body, according to whose
Indications, Phenomenon, Symptoms, Fruits, and Products, he finds out, and
applicates appropriate Remedies. He works with his own hands, taking into his
own Body first for trial (...) his Manufactures, that he may understand whether
they be Authentic, or Apocrypha before he dares offer them to his Patients. He
is furnished with some prevalent Polyacea's, which he carries along with him
whithersoever he goes, ready to be exhibited upon all Occasions, either for
the sufflaminating, or putting a stop to the full Carreir of an acute Disease
(till a more eompleat provision of Medical Instruments can be brought forth) or
for the forthwith breaking the Egg, and suffocating the Embryon of any Ferine
Calamity.

His most preheminent Intentions in Curing is to uphold Nature, to pacify the
fury and perturbation of the Archeus, to expunge Morbifique Idea's, for which
purpose he studies by all means to remove the Occasional cause of all Griefs,
without annoying the Ferments of the shops of Digestion.

He is not deficient in a competent necessary knowledge of Anatomicks and
Botanicks, so far as they manuduct him to the Cure of miserable Man (being
satisfied that the Life of Mortals, if it were far longer, is too short to
Anatomize Materia Medica, that the Essential Virtues of Concrets may be
Elicitated) but he deservedly sets at naught, and derides the Galenical
Theatrical periergies, Curiosities, in dissecting Bodies of little use, unless
for Ostentation, to get Practice and Applause among the Ignorant Vulgar.

He Operates not according to the express Letter of a Tyrocinium Chymicum, nor
gives credit to it further than General Philosophical Rules; his own Intellect
and former Iterated Experiments direct him.

He claims, as his just Right, the Cure of outward, as well as inward corporal
Evils. He is seldom but as a Man mistaken in the Prognosis, or Prediction of
Life and Death. His promises and performances generally accord. He stands not
gaping for a Critical day, but forthwith falls to his business of Animating the
Vitals, for the Expulsion of the Enemy without Truce.

He hates to do any thing wilfully as unworthy of a good Moralist, and an
Elected Physician; but studies by all means possible, to keep up the Credit of
the Art, without prostituting it to Lucre or Lust; and he is indifferent
whether he enjoy the favor of Great Men, unless out of a candid respect for
Truth; choosing rather to be then to seem a Healer of Man's Infirmities
Fundamentally: Wherefore he detests an Hermaphroditical Chemist, and his
Linsey-Woolsey Texture halting (for his unworthy by-Ends) between two Opinions,
one that by surreptitious means raises his Fame, adorned like the Jack-daw,
with other Birds Feathers, making the World believe they are his own by
Birthright. His Integrity makes him daring, the precious value of the Subject
he works upon zealous, the thoughts he entertains how far short he yet comes of
the height of this unlimitted Science, makes him humble, ready to Learn of any
who offers a Demonstration: Neither does himself desire to be Credited farther
than Reason and Sense shall induce.

He rather diminishes, than enlarges the Virtues of his Remedies, by no means
attributing to them what they are not able to effect, brought to the
Touchstone of Iterated Trials; neither does he magnify those as Elaborate
Medicinal Arcana's, Mustering up a long Scheme of them, when in all probability
not one deserves that Title. He is ready to meet any one of Literature to
confer with him about the welfare of a Patient, to be informed what is most
fitting to be done, supposed all Animosity, and all confused Passion be laid
aside, withal allowing Matter of Fact to determine the controversy. He hates
to supplant another Physiitian, by using unworthy means to get a Patient out of
his hands, or to pass a censure more than he can prove: yea, were not the
Contest about matters of the highest importance, whose indifferent lukewarm or
Conniving Defense would endanger the Soul, he would scorn to hurt or attaint
the Fame, Reputation and Honor of his greatest Antagonist: however, upon a
cordial resipiscence would be the first would cover his Lapses, and set him
right.

A Character of the Pseudo-chymist or Counterfeit.
THe Pseudochymist is an Upstart thing, as it were a Mushrome, suddenly sprung
up, receiving, for the most part, his Seminal Being from the Public
Prescriptions of the Galenists, their disrespect to the Chemical Orthomethod of
Healing, and their gross Ignorance in handling Materia Medica.

Hereby this Fungus animated, having by Accident, Contract, or another By-way
purchased some ordinary Medicaments, which he prodigally giving without any
precise Method at a venture in difficult Diseases, becomes more cried up for
his notable feats in Physic by the Multitude than the Dogmatists, both
conspiring alike to ruin man. Thus farther emboldned, he rusheth in at the
backdoor disguised, strait falls to act his part on the Scene of this
Microcosm, with a full design to cheat all that he can draw to him. Then from a
Mechanic, as a Gunsmith, Tailer, Shoemaker, he is by the bewitching Tongue of
Nurses Midwives, or the like Gang perhaps ravished with his juggling
Astrological Prodictions metamorphized into a Formal Doctor, who created by the
rabble at first, and clambring higher by vulgar steps, at length insinuates by
his Imposture, Wiles, Craft, Impudence, and Flattery into some great Men's
Favor: upon this he forthwith passes current for an approved Chemist;
although, if he should be put to the Test, he would turn all into dross. To
advance his base enterprise the more, he has in readiness, his Emissaries,
whom he hires or Bribes to trumpet out, magnify, and extol his rare Cures: he
endeavors to prostitute this Chaste Art, to make it a very Whore to his Lusts,
Pimp or Pander to compass his vile Ends. He is Impudent beyond expression, and
because Stupid and Ignorant, a most sworn Enemy to Learning: yet will admire
Van Helm. although he never read him, nor is in least able to understand him,
though Translated into his Mother Tongue. He boasts of his Specious Furnaces:
but seldom handles a retort himself, yet will tell you what Herculean Labors
he has undergone; what he has achieved: making comparisons with the Best. He
and the Galenist are herein well met for Subtlety, for like Apes, they know how
to take Nuts out of the fire with the Paw of the Cat. This Foul Bird such as
the Poet speaks of ( contactu omnia foedans) has a strange faculty by the
enchanting melodious Tune of his Long Bill, setting out his wonderful Cures, to
draw one into his Net, hiding the rest of his ugly body, till he has picked
your Pocket, wronged your Health, or mortally wounded you.

He Counterfeits the true Chemist (as the Hyaena a Man's voice) tempting unwary
people to come unto him, and then worries them. He, and the Chemical Galenist,
like Davus, confound the whole World, so that few know how to choose the Right,
and leave the Wrong Way of Curing. He is still sowing his Pseudochymical Tares
so thick, that Orthochymical Wheat is in danger to be strangled thereby.
Although he be really of no Religion, yet sometimes he, as well as the
Galenist, will profess to be of some Congregational Church, or of some
Fanatical Conventicle, to the end, being changed into an Angel of Light, he may
set a specious gloss of Piety upon his fraudulent ways, hereby gaining more
reputation amongst the Brethren, he may cozen his Patients more plausibly. At
his first entrance upon Pseudochymical Devices, he pretends to be a great
Astrologer, thereby to determine whether the Sick shall live or die: yea to
make him more notoriously famous, he undertakes to tell Fortunes, to instruct
the people how they may come by their stolen Goods again, whether Mariners
shall make prosperous Voyages, whether men shall meet with good or bad success
in Marriage, Women with the like, etc. But afterward having pretty well
feathered his Nest, by plucking those Credulous Gulls who have stooped to his
Call, also now his Art of casting Figures becoming more and more suspected,
likewise conscious to himself the Heavens will not suffer any longer his
Impostures; he begins to lay aside Ouranoscopie, thinking it best non altum
sapere, since quae supra nos nihil ad nos, and betakes himself to Ouroscopie,
where he fixes, pretending to be a notable Pispot Prophet, to tell by bare
inspection of the Urine, without farther enquiry, what is the Disease, whether
the Party may recover, and how long, etc. To this Hocus Pocus Women of all
Sorts and Degrees flock to know whether they be with Child; yea supposed
Maidens to be resolved whether their Tympany be Intestineal or Uterine, how
they may be rid of the last with privacy, whose expectations he says, upon good
Terms, he is ready to satisfy to all intents and purposes, by means of a
secret knack he has attained.

I could acquaint my Countrymen if I had leisure, with multitude of Gins,
Traps, and Snares this Bastard Chemist lays to catch the simple harmless man,
that he make a Prey of his Body and Purse.

In short, he is a most Pestilent Animal, no more fitting to be tolerated by
the Magistrate, than Wolves and Foxes amongst Sheep.

A Short Description, or Explanation of the Happy Efficacy, and Sanative Virtue
of Our STOMACH ESSENCE.
THE Grand Opposers of the Ortho-Chymical way did put me hard to it at first,
by reason of the Implicit belief most Men have Supinely, and in a blind manner
of Obedience (without further Scrutinie, yielded to their Authority and
Antiquity) to preserve this most Useful, Florid, Splendid Remedy, Ess. Stom.
from being blasted, or extinguished by their malignant Breath, more mischievous
to the Truth of Direct Healing than any Mephitical damp to the Life of Man.

However (...) crescit sub pondere Virtus, the more they have endeavored to
suppress it by fastening false weights of Defamation to it, viz. that it was too
hot, inflaming, burning, too strong, violent, consuming the Radical moisture,
shortning the Life, withal under-valuing it, that it was no better than Pepper
drops, and that it might be made in half a dozen hours, which Dr. Merret
unworthily Reported behind my back, who (when I came to face him offering to
give it under my Hand presently to be bound to reward him with a Hundred pounds
the next Morning, if he would teach me to make it in twenty four hours) replied
by way of Collusion, that he could counterfeit it in that time. I say, the more
these Chymicophants have labored to sink down this Noble Remedy, the more it
has sprung up, and flourished to their grand shame: Yea, I dare averr upon
Reasonable Experimental grounds, this Polyacea will be esteemed by Posterity
one of the best Medicines for it is general Utility to the Life of Mortals,
Innocent Nature, Pleasant Gust, and easy purchase that ever yet came to light.
He that will may read the just Vindication of it, Published formerly, none of
my Adversaries daring to oppose it openly, unless a tergo sneakingly below a
Generous Man.

What Excellency I have here Attributed to it, rather comes short, than
transcends it is desert. This Medicine is not with little Labor Fabricated,
being brought over in Glasses above twenty several times, and digested many
days. It consists of three pure Volatiles, United, fetched out of the
Storehouse of Animal, Vegetable, and Marine Substances, which produce these
Salutary Effects following.

It exceedingly strengthens the Stomach, helps it is Digestion, increases and
makes Active the Vital Spirits, and their Instruments by which they work
(called Ferments) rectifies the Spleen, scatters and expels Wind, Vapors, or
any wandering wild Spirit, which flies in a moment from one place to another,
vexing the parts. It sweetens in some measure the sharpness of the thin Liquors
in the Body, which oftentimes causes pains, Fevers, etc. It subtly enters
the Veins and Arteries, being carried about with the Blood, which it very much
cleanses. It carries off to the outside whatsoever is impure, causing a kindly
breathing in the Skin. It also causes Urine, conveying Gravel from the
Kidneys, hindering that it may not be engendered and fixed. It is helpful in
difficulty and pain of making Water, coming forth sometimes by drops. It Is of
great Service against pains of the side, the Colic, Griping of the Guts. It is
a very great Cordial, preserving from fainting, and restoring those who are
surprised with loss of Vital Spirits. It is very effectual to keep one from,
and to Cure Surfeits. It is very powerfully good against the Scurvy, or any
poisonous, ill-conditioned, infectious Evils. It prevents, and helps to Cure
all kind of Fevers. It quenches the Thirst to an Admiration, above all
supposed cooling things whatsoever.

It brings Preternatural heat or coldness to a due moderation, by removing
the Efficient Cause thereof, reducing the parts to their former strength. It is
available against Fits of the Mother; the Whites. It dissolves Congealed,
Curdled Matter; ripeneth raw Juices, bringing them either to a better Condition
for the Use of Nature, or preparing them to be sent packing out of the Body, by
convenient ways and Medicaments. It abates a nauseons Disposition, or Vomiting,
by confirming the Membranes of the Stomach, and by promoting the throwing off
that which disturbs it. It cutteth, and cleanses away slimy Birdlime-like
Phlegm, giving ease in difficulty of Breathing, mitigating the violence of the
Tissick. It is admirably useful against Melancholy Imaginations, passions from
the Spleen, etc. called Hypochondriak: an evil state of body arising for want
of proportionable Nutriment, or from Galenical Medicaments. It avails against
the Dropsy, or Consumption. The frequent use thereof strengthens the Brain,
Sinews, Loins, Memory, and all the Senses.

Stom. Ess. outwardly applied, challenges noble effects: For it is very
Healing, Balsamical, curing green Wounds and plain Soars, being often touched
therewith. I have hitherto found it constant in happily Curing Burnings,
Scorchings or Scaldings; some drops being frequently distilled thereon, and
forced inward by the bottom of a smooth Glass.

I cannot but experimentally commend it as one of the best asswagers of the
pain of the Teeth, I have hitherto met with. It is also of great force to
preserve them from corruption, likewise in part to restore them; resisting the
putrefaction of the Gums.

Neither is it to be contemned for the mitigation of the pains of any part,
strengthening and quickening the Vital Spirit thereof.

With many more laudable properties is Stom. Ess. or Alexi flomachon endued,
which the frequent use thereof, and a longer strict observation, will bring to
light.

The quantity to be given, is measured by the greatness and st^bborness of the
Disease: for sometimes ten or twenty times as much as the common portion, ought
to be offered: neither is it to be feared that any hurt will arise therefrom.

The ordinary Dose, or extent of giving it, is twenty, thirty, forty, fifty,
sixty drops in a draught of any Liquor, as Beer, Ale, separate or mixed;
sometimes Wine, as Sack, or whatsoever does best relish with the person. It may
be taken at any time when the Stomach is out of orde^, troubled with
Indigestion, Wind, Pains, Gripes, or any of the foresaid vexations; then let
them take liberally thereof. He that constantly takes every morning thirty or
forty drops, shall prevent many mischiefs in reference to his Health.

I doubt not but the Galeno-Chymists, or the Pseudo-chymists will like Apes
endeavor to imitate and counterfeit this experienced Essence (which before I
am convinced by Fact, I shall presume to prefer before any Medicament of its
rank, yet visibly extant among us.) Of such I shall advise my Countrymen to
beware, for these Adulterators will but disgrace and degrade it; for I am sure
none can find out the true way of making it, unless he be a knowing
Philosopher, working with his own hands, and taking Preparations into his own
Stomach. Thus much I advertise; He that dexterously can volatilize Salt of Tart.
may do something tending to this purpose, otherwise not.

He that desires to be farther instructed concerning the defense of the Virtues
of this Essence, and the disproving of what is spoken against it by
Mal^volents,; let him read with integrity the just commendation of it in
Haematiasis, etc.

Indefatigable perseverance in opening Bodies ^y the Fire, and the repeated
Assumption of what was thence produced, has brought me to the knowledge of a
Pill I call Polychrest, which consists of three Golden Sulphurs from Minerals
well purified, and friendly to Nature; whose innocence, as well as effectual
Operation, is remarkable, and upon trial to be justified by any who understands
a good Remedy. They are conducible in most Diseases. They act by cleansing,
opening, corroborating and purifying the Blood, without leaving the least ill
impress behind, for they contain no laxative so noxious as Senna or Rewbarb.
they are of great force to conquer the Scurvie: also prevalent against the
Dropsy. They prevent the Stone, and carry off Gravel. They sweeten sharp
Liquors in the Body. They overcome the Venereal or foul Disease, if taken a
considerable time: neither is it to be suspected, that one may be weakened by
the long frequent use of them; for they, contrary to other purging Concretes,
make one more lusty and vigorous, as I have found in my having taken many
thousands of them with an advancement of my strength. They reform the Spleen;
help to cure Fevers, prevent relapses and long Maladies.

They may be swallowed at any time of the day or night; neither will they cause
injury, but rather benefit, if they loosen not the body in twenty four hours,
which is rare, for usually they give a stool or two in that space.

The Dose is two or three Pills a little before Supper, or early in the
Morning. The Patient proceeding thus for three or four days, and resting a day
or two, and then repeating them.

Tinct. nost* Emetica, is profitable in all Malignant Fevers, in the griping
or looseness of the Belly, difficulty of Breathing; pain of the Sides, Headache,
Diseases of the Stomach and Spleen. It leaves the Vitals more cheerful and
active. It matters not whether it work or no by vomit or stool; however, it
will do good by Sweat, or causing Urine. If the party be capable, it may be
given a week together, at any time of the day or night, I often give it in bed.

Pull. Emeto Catharticus is profitable in many Diseases, (as Emetica Tinctur.)
It searches out the Morbifick matter, leaving wholesome Juyces untouched: when
other Vomits are given in vain this Profits.

Pil. Emeto Cathart. are useful for the same Diseases, as Pulvis Emeto, Cathar.

Polyacea, Tinctura Solaris, or Balsamica, are great supporters of Nature, the
tamers of Malignant Fevers; they go into all parts, illuminate and augment the
Archeus or Vitals. They carry off by Sweat, Urine and Expectoration. There are
few Diseases which will not somewhat yield to these Cordials, if exhibited in a
just proportion.

Elixi. Proprietat. nost resists Putrefaction, opens the Spleen, helps
Digestion, purifies the Blood: It is very cordial, expels Menf^r^a stopped, and
gives a check to them flowing excessively. It is most efficacious to cause an
easy and speedy delivery in difficult labor of Women. Its Dose is from ten to
an hundred drops or more in strong Liquor.

With several other salutary Remedies could I acquaint the World; but now I
must desist, hoping God may spare my life till the Edition of my Physical
Observations: the history, cause, and cure of 3 Cholick-stones, of a vast
unwonted magnitude: also the History of the Exection of the Spleen out of a
Dog, that lived two years and a quarter after very lively and well; with
sufficient reasons to back the Experiment: the Diseases of the Spleen, with
preservative and Curative Instructions of the same. Lastly, a Synopsis, or
Abridgment of Loimotomia, the dissection of a Pestilential Body; all in Latin,
wherein Materia Medica and its Philosophical management shall be more amply
examined.

From Queen Street, formerly called Soper^ lane, in Well-court, nigh Cheapside.
(...): OR A just Complaint of the Deceitful, Dangerous and Pernicious Method
or Way of Curing, obstinately insisted upon by the Galenists at this day, when
a far better means is found out by the Philosophical Chemists: Also the
Advantage or Benefit arising from a Legitimate Learned College established by
Authority: Moreover, an Invitation to the Galenists to become Ortho-Chymists.
TO offend, when a man, neither knows nor is taught better, deserves Pity. To
act amiss through an Importunate Imperfection, with an earnest desire to
reform, argues Ingenuity, and a Noble Spirit: But wilfully to persist in a
Capital Error, to the Ruin of aur Neighbor, when one is Advertised thereof,
and may have better things indigitated to the Senses, makes one guilty of
abominable Wickedness.

The time was 26 years past, that following those Dogmatical Rules received
from Antiquity, I did help for two or three years to fatten the Churchyard,
howsoever with many anxious thoughts, much regret and checks of my Soul, that I
neither did, nor could tell how to perform my Duty with more ability in this
Weighty profession. So disquieted was I night and day upon consideration (how
being sent for in the beginning of an Acute Evil I suffered a young Man in the
very (...) or Flower of his Strength to be cut off for want of due Medicinal
Provision) that I resolved to take some other course of life, to get a
Subsistence, rather than thus Conscious of my own Insufficiency, to be
accessory to the Death of my Patients: Yea I did believe, persevering in this
common road of Malepractice, I might contract the guilt of plain Homicide, to
the utter undoing my Soul. Thus, after many an Agony or Conflict of Spirit, I
fell off by little and little from that great Dictators Method and Pharmacie
(reputed by me at first Oracular.)

Having acquired some Furniture of ordinary Chemical Medicaments, I exhibited
them though with a trembling Hand and Heart (partly through Prejudice, partly
through fear of being Adulterated) to those tired out with long Sickness, as
the Scurvie, Q^artane, Hypocondriak Passions, etc. yet with a success happy
beyond my expectation.

The Galenical Doctrine becoming at first suspected, and at length less
reputed, incited by my Tutor and another Friend, an excellent Chemist, I was
fully bent without wavering to purchase Van Helmont (one formerly slighted by
me for inveighing without cause as I foolishly thought against the Schools) to
read him entirely, impartially with a single Eye, and a Marginal Note.

In the upshot, after a serious rumination of those Physical Verities relating
to the Radical Essence and Cure of Diseases communicated by this incomparable
Searcher into Nature, I forthwith took out a new Lesson of Theory and Practice,
renouncing my former mistakes, imploring an Influence from Heaven that I might
be farther informed.

Wherefore nauseating a Hundred Treatises of Fevers and other (...) nothing
but Cramben millies coctam, the same obsolete stuff over and over, I rid my
self of the Impediments or luggage of a fruitless Library, wholly addicting my
self to the Lecture of Initia Physicae inaudita, and other of the most
Authentic Authors, coadjuvant to the understanding of the more obscure places
delivered by our Philosopher. Then according to his Advice I bought Glasses,
erected Furnaces, fell to labor with my own hands, prepared according to his
general direction the Materia Medica, which I first took into my own body for
Trial, afterward tendered it to my Patients. In this manner making a progress
twenty years complete from that time to this.

Having maturely received a farther Illumination and Confirmation of the solid
Principles of Chemical Physiologie, and the rotten Foundation of the Galenical,
abominating Bleeding (as rightly stated) uncorrected Purgatives, etc. I have
with convincing predictions been able, Auspice Deo, to relieve the Calamities,
Languors, and grievous Wounds of poor Mortals, to the infinite satisfaction of
my own Spirit. A proof whereof I have tendered to Dr. Willis, Dr. Merret, Dr.
Goddard, and diverse others of our London College; and am now ready to make
good by Fact in a public Hospital or private Families, that the Galenical
Design of Healing is Fraudulent, Dangerous and Deadly: As likewise that our
rightly Instituted Fabric of Pharmacy, with the Method of dispensing and
distributing it, is Upright, Safe and Sanative: withal, that those Allegations
of excessive preternatural Heat, Virulency, Violence, consuming the Humidum
Radicale, or shortning the Life, imputed to our Remedies, are Malicious
Slanders, False Accusations, Detractions, Cavils, and subtle Devises contrived
by these Traders in Men's Skins, on purpose to keep up their Interest, though
Myriads perish.

Any but one obstinate, rash, self-conceited, will judge Charitably of my
proceedings in this kind, since deserting the Galenical usual manner of
prescribing I incurred the displeasure, yea, hatred of most Apothecaries, a
dis-repute among the Galenical Surgeons, because I condemn Phlebotomy, and
the common way of Healing Wounds, Sores, etc. The rash, Incogitant censures,
and Raillery of Midwives, Nurses, or such like Creatures, with the Huffings,
s^ibs, tepulses of Fortunes Favorites; and the Abuses, Sarcasms, opprobrious
Language of the ruder sort. Moreover, hereby I have lost my Ease, outward
Applause, Riches and Honors, and many secular Respects, laid hold by the
Galenists in Oliver's Days, and since, without the least touch or scruple of
(...).

Besides upon Consideration, that had I then played my Game Craftily (which I
could easily have done as well as the best of them) I should have enjoyed no
less Temporal Advantages than they. But seeing I had more sublime thoughts,
esteeming nothing too dear, so that I might attain the Gift of Healing, as I
ought: Therefore in all Equity and Reason I ought to be listened to, who request
nothing more than that the Helmontian Doctrine (which I assert) may be
accepted, so far as I can make it appear true by repeated Experiments.

Once more I shall entreat those Learned Galenists, they would be pleased, out
of Respect to their own Souls, Commise^ation to miserable Mortals, for the
Dignity, Glory, and Promotion of this Divine Science, to put a stop to their
profuse Effusion of Blood, Consumption of the strength of the Body by tabefying
Purgations, withal to abandon fruitless, cooling Julebs, Pusillanimous
Cordials, Poisonous Vesicatories.

If the Galenists (whose Estimation I should abhor to blemish, did not the Life
of Man stand in Competition) still persist to deny me this kindness, of
explaining things as they are in themselves, they will constrain me to set
forth a Catalogue of those Patients, with the Names of the Physicians attending
them, whom (as I Will make appear by Analogism, Examples, or Instances agreeing
(in every respect possible to the Type of the Disease Ordered by them) they
have sent packing into the other World. If they can as justly accuse me,
producing the same Evidence, that I am guilty of such indirect Practice (these
16 years I have here resided in London) I shall willingly submit to be severely
Animadverted. Moreover, I shall detect what a Considerable number of Sick
brought to the brink of the Grave by their Galenical Orders (some whereof I
have urged to try further, if they were able to relieve them) utterly
despairing of their Recovery, Divine Goodness has Cured by his weak Spagyrical
Agent.

I hope his Majesty, for the Love he bears to Chemical Truth, the Benefit
redounding thereby to himself, and his Subjects, out of a kindness to one, who
sincerely and Constantly suffered for his Royal Father, will indulge this
Honest, Profitable Enterprise so far, that if I can make good to the Senses,
that our Philosophical way is able (according to Judicious Providence and
Predictions) to preserve his Subjects in Health of Body and Mind, to prevent
mischiefs to come, and to restore them to Sanity, better than formerly, for
many Centuries past: Withal if it can be proved plainly by iterated Essays,
and Equal Trials, that the Galenical, and Galeno-Chymical Method is an
Imperfect, Palliating, Treacherous, and Pernicious means to overcome, or
eradicate any great fixed Malady, will be pleased to Erect a Learned Chemical
Society, which may be a President to Foreign Nations to imitate; for which,
present and Future Ages will be bound to bless him.

The admirable Commodity and Benefits accr^ing to Mankind by this Heroic
Enterprise of a Chemical College, are sufficient to move the Magistrate to
force these Anti-Chymists to desist from their Evil Practice.

1. Religious. 2. Moral. 3. Political. 4. Medicinal. 5. Mechanical.

I should not question by means of wholesome Chemical Physic to make Men of
more sound (...) Religion. Atheism, Hypoctisie, Profaneness, Debauchery, might
in some measure be lessened, quailed, and restrained, by power of a Mastring
Discipline of the Intellectual Soul made more apt to understand the Truth of
things, by means of the Organs of the Body, Blood, and Spirits well Clarified.

By Virtue of our Hermetick Physic, the Head, Heart, and Hands of Hierophants,
might be purified* Their Exemplary Dumb and Deaf Preaching up of Vice
throughout all the World, be Corrected* Circumstances and Punctilio's in
Religion lovingly, calmly proposed, debated, and Accepted* And those fierce
Eager Altercations about Adi^phora laid aside.

By the powerful Operation of this (...) Quakers, Catabaptists, Independents,
Separatists, Schismatics, and multitudes of Phanaticks, might be brought to
more Integrity of mind in Religion, be reclaimed far better than by any rigid
Persecuting-Course whatsoever.

We should Entertain more frequent serious Contemplation, or Divine Idea's of a
Future World, were not our Bodies consequently our Souls clouded by black
Hypochondriack Me^eors, and depraved by bad Physic.

In my Minority I have been a little amazed to hear the Religion of Physicians
indifferently, yea, slightingly, Ironically spoken of: So that I have not
without some indignation, Vindicated it; persuading my self, that there were
many, who, like Dr. Brown, were able to assert it practically. But coming to
greater Maturity in the Observation of Things, I found, for the most part, that
really True, which before I apprehended was precipitately spoken by the vulgar.
For I dare averr, if a Man may judge of a Tree by it is Fruits, or of the Nature
of any Corporeal Existent by Signatures, Impresses, and Accidents, Products,
Phenomenon, and Effects; so certainly may a Man censure most of the Galenical
Tribe, sitting to be Ranked among Plato's Classes of Atheistical, Hypocritical
Wretches; not only Poisoning others by their Deletery, virulent, intoxicating
Physic, but also by their (...) their Profane, Loose, voluptuous, Intemperate,
Covetous, Proud, Blasphemous behavior, both in word and deed, and most
Obstinate, Active, Perseverance in their Lethiferous Method of Curing.

How in Truth can it be otherwise, since their Minds are Corrupted by their
malignant Physic, Through the want of a True Benign mundifier of their Vitals.

Besides, how is it possible they should be acquainted in the least mith a
Deity, who are so grossly ignorant of the Aitiologie of things in Nature. Needs
must they be stone Blind as to any right apprehension of an Omnipotent Creator,
a Wise Supporter, Disposer; and Governor of all things: Since their
Understanding is so extremely to seek concerning the Material, Efficient Cause
of all Corporeal Beings. How can they who are so much mistaken concerning the
Essence of Fire, approach him infinitely transcending any consuming Fire.) How
is it possible they should have any Understanding of the Father of Lights, who
know not whether Light be Accident or a Substance. Had they been better
acquainted with Nature, the first Mover of all things, would have Communicated
himself more clearly. Now, since they have wilfully blinded themselves through
Vile Interest, at the presence of that which is obvious to the Senses, it is but
just they should continue in Cimmerian Darkness, without the true Discovery of
things invisible. It has been a Curse upon the Galenists 1600 Years, not to be
capable to Cure Radicated Diseases, because they slighted him who is the great
Healer of all our Infirmities, Nam Deus creavit Medicum non Homo. This
considered, it is no wonder they are thus accused of Atheism.

If so, the only way to make them Religious Proselytes, and to bring them to
(...) is to convince them of their Errors in Philosophy, to demonstrate how
miserably they are out of the way of Curing their own, as well as others Evils.

What imperfect, yea hurtful means they use to remedy their own Laesam
Imaginationem by Bleeding, Tabefying, Colliquating, Carharticks and duil
Cordials, etc. and to indicare to them Ortho-Methodus fanandi Chymica, that
there may be an (...) in the Stomach, Spleen and other parts, (...) a purity in
the Blood, and an (...) a firm Activity in the Spirits: thus the Soul obtaining
complete Organs, will act as it ought (for aceording to Galen, Animi Actiones
sequntur temperamentum Corporis, which is verified of the Spirits.) Thus when
the Doctor is convinced, many Discidles will follow his Example: this will be
the most assured way to make a Reformation in the World, and to take us off
from unprofitable Disputes in Religion.

The Abuses and extravagant Practices in Divinity, and Physic being Chymically
redressed, the Corruptions, Prevarications and unjust Dealings in the Law are
like to be quickly voted out of doors: For the Irregularities in Divinity and
Physic confound the whole world. Moreover, I have observed more Ingenuous
Favorers of Chemical Philosophy among the Students and Practicers of the Law,
than any other Profession whatsoever, therefore more inclinable to be taught
better things.

Next our Ethics or Morality may by wholesome Chemical Physic be meliorated:
One Reason why we are at this day so depraved in our Manners, may with
plausible reason be attributed to New feral Diseases, which rage among us as
the Scorbutum, Lues Venerea, single and complicated: likewise to the increase
of the Cacoethie, or Malignity of former Diseases now graduated, and guarded
with more cruel Symptoms, aggravated by Cacost^machical Medicaments. Hereby our
Offspring is born Valetudinary, sickly in Body, and vicious in Mind, the
Seminal Idea of those Infirmities which lay couched in our Body being imprinted
Iure Hereditario on the miserable Infants.

It Is not to be admired, why we are at this day so Melancholy, Discontented,
Distracted with inordinate Passions and Perturbations, so Malicious,
Perfidious, Falshearted, dishonest, full of Hatred, Pride, Vainglory,
Hypocrisy, Covetousness, Faction, Rebellion, Lightness and Fantastical
Aemulation of Foreign Nations, unworthy of an Englishman: For as much as most
of the Galenical Compositions (...) corrupt Body and Soul.

Again, it is singular Policy in the Magistrate to promote and cherish this
Chemical Method of Curing: for his own and the peoples sake. He being by this
means enabled to enjoy sounder Body and Mind, to Govern long, making Good Laws;
and his Subjects hereby multiplied will be ready to embrace them and obey him:
both using a direct way to clarify the Organs of the Soul for the Reception of
Truth, and the right discretion or election of what is best. By virtue of this
Art, his Subjects will be more Magnanimous, Valiant, empowered the better to
defend him and his Territories, to vindicate his Rights, to make enquiry abroad
for New Plantations, and Colonies, to prevent Sicknesses incident to the
Climate, to oppose any Enemies stoutly that shall invade us, to heal their
Wounds, to save many Limbs from being mutilated or cut off. Doubtless had his
Majesty been thoroughly acquainted with the excellent Efficacy of the Stomach
Essence in Healing both Inwardly and Outwardly, injoyning a large Quantity to
be made for the use of his Fleet against the Dutch, many Hundreds of those
brave Men might have been preserved, who perished for want of true Chemical
Remedies. Neither would this or the like have only Cured their Scorbutical
Infirmities, Healed their grievous Soars, but also have maturated their
Stratagems, magnified and animated their Spirits for the execution of far
greater Actions.

Were there not some among us, who envy that the Nation should enjoy such a
time of Iubilee, or Halcyonian days, wherein the state of Body and Soul might
be amended, they would suggest to his Majesty the extraordinary Emolument or
Commodity would arise to Him, His Posterity and the People, if this Enterprise
were set on foot.

It would appear Honest and Noble Policy to Purg the Schools by Paracelsian
Physic from Capital Galenical Errors, at this day predominant in Physic, to
eradicate those Corruptions so deeply grounded tam frequentes foedasque in
Philosophia nundinationes (as an Ancient Academical Antesignanus of Learning
expresses) those unworthy respects of conferring Degrees on those who deserve
to be termed no better than Philosophastri, Theologastri, Idiotae, Nugatores,
Sycophantae, Otiateres, Compotores, Indigni libidinis voluptatumque ministri,
Hinc Rude vulgus, Inops, Sordidum, Leve, Melancholicum Rebelle, Contumax,
Refractarium ac Miserandum.

If the Magistrate be pleased to cause the Helmontian Institutions to be
introduced into the Academies instead of Aristotelian, according as one shall
be found experimentally true, and the other false, the whole Kingdom will by
degrees be brought into a far more flourishing Condition than formerly:
Hereupon Able Physicians will be sent into all parts to keep men in Sanity (the
direct way to Prosperity in the General) which before was empaired by
Galenists, Mountebanks, Quacks, who giving Medicaments noxious, as Hemlock
instead of Parsley, have made the Nation Brainsick, Fantastical, Scorbutical,
Unconstant, Rebellious, Idle, full of Beggars, Querulous, prone to extremes,
Innovations, affected with Outsides and Appearances rather than solid Worth.
Thus the trading for Men's Skins might be abolished, Physic, Surgery and
Pharmacopoie united, Materia Medica better improved, better attendance given to
the Sick in time of the Plague, and a prevention made of Fugitive Physicians in
our greatest extremity, whose Courage may be increased by appropriate Antidotes
against so great a poison.

Let us but turn over to the Chemical Page; His Majesty will always enjoy
Virtuous, Prudent, Sage, Valiant, Upright Counselors: Good Men will still be
encouraged with just Rewards, and Evil punished; those who have Real
Intrinsical Worth preferred, those making an Outward seeming show rejected: for
assuredly the reason why we do not esteem things as they are in themselves,
proceeds from Laesa Imaginatio, a crasie Fancy to be corrected principally by
powerful Chemical Physic.

Moreover, the Consideration how ready at hand our Remedies are upon all
occasions, safe and effectual, may plead for their protection by the
Magistrate: Suppose a Prince or any Great Man be surprised with a Lipothymie,
Epilepsie, Lethargy, Vertigo, in a place remote from any Appothecarie,
certainly he may himself, or his Physician attending him, carry a few light
Paracelsian Remedies, which may in a moment relieve him; whereas should he send
a Prescription so far as the unsupportable bulk of an Apothecarys Pharmacy
resideth there to be dispensed, this Noble Person might in the mean time
perish. I add to this, it is no small politic Satisfaction to a great Man, who
prizes his Life, to see a Physician, or any other in Health, to take some
Chemical Arcana without any Nocument, which is tendered to the Patient for his
Restoration, which I Will undertake to make good upon my own Body, or another.
I shall not omit how satisfactory it is to one, who in his Prosperity, loves to
breath in this Atmosphear, to hear a plain comfortable Prediction from an
Adeptus, that he is capable of Recovery, or if not, that he may settle his
Affairs, while he has Mature Judgment.

In the mean time the Dogmatical Guessers, boggle, blunder, juggle, speak as
amphibologically, as the Orac^e of Old at Delphos, or else are quite mistaken,
altogether over-shoot themselves, as appeared by their Prognostic, in Mr.
Colwel, the Great Banker, his Case, and many other, whom I shall make mention
of, annexing a large Comment on the miscarriages of these Improvident
Galenists, if they do not forthwith endeavor (...) to forsake their
destructive paths.

Lastly, Princes encouraging Pyrotechnie may obtain far more Active Antidotes
against poison, than has hitherto been known, whereby the thread of their Life
may be protracted; they may also discover how, not only vain, but injurious the
Common Catharticks are in stubborn Maladies, studying to avoid them as Poisons
either manifestly hurting at present, or privily shortning their days for the
Future.

4. The Medicinal Profit, Advantages, and Service that will attend a Chemical
Society, established by Law, is most remarkable, which the Reader shall find
described in Ortho-Methodus Iatro Chymica.

That Catalogue of Incurable Diseases, given in by the Galenists, will be
Cancelled, and an appropriate means found to Remedy the most Truculent
Sickness, and Atrocious virulent Malady. Deus Omnes Nationes fecit sanabiles.
The Powerful Benign Father of every good and perfect Gift has Created a Salve
for every Sore; only ungrateful, sloathful, supine Man will not exert his
Faculties, for the Indagation, or narrow search of such precious latrical
Pearls to be valued above any thing in this World; yea, so indifferent he is,
so Paralytical in his desires toward the Summum Bonum, Sanity of Body, and
Soul, so wilfully miserable, that he is loath to put out his Hand to receive so
great a favor, though he may have it gratis, rather Envying, retarding, than
furthering those who labor for a public good.

Were this Iatro Chemical Exploit indulged and quickened by those in Authority,
such Polyacea's might be brought to light, enriched with Virtues abundantly
sufficient to Conquer, and quite cut off those complicated Evils, which like
Hydra's Heads elude the Vulgar Medicaments.

If Artists were animated, the Epilepsie Appoplexy, Gout, Quartan, Lues
Venerea, Scorbute Radicated, yea, and the Itch (which I wondered they omitted
amongst the List of their Incurable Diseases, for I am sure their Method cannot
Cure Directly) would not thus Tyrannize in this Microcosm. An Adaequate
Lithontribon might be detected Potent to dissolve the Stone in the Bladder
without Cruel, uncertain Lithotomie.

Were the World furnished with Complete, Learned Pyrotechnists, no Man would
fail to be Cured in due time of a Pleurisy, by Anti-Pleuriticks, (not
Bleeding) expeditely, radically, without relapse, or future danger of being
obnoxious to the like pungitive vexation again. All Fevers might in a few days
be strangled. The Measles and Small Pox might be Cured without Scandal, in the
same manner as other defaults in Nature, to the Contempt of Ignorant and
Presumptuous Nurses, Midwives, and the like Gang, who in this stare fear to
meddle (not without just Reason) with Opinionative Physicians, having been so
notoriously un-successful in the management of this Malignant Disease: Neither
let any one think that their Method is more prevalent to Cure other malignant
Fevers, no such Matter; only their unlucky dealing is more obvious to the
common People in this Cutaneous affect, who cannot in more obscure passages so
easily pry into their egregious Imperfections.

Were there frequent consultations of Philosophical Spagyrists receiving mutual
Assistance one from another; the Liquor Alkahest and Butler's stone might in
all probability be enucleated, and set on work for Mortals Good: The Magical,
Magnetical, and Sympathetical Mystery of Healing might be improved and
confirmed.

The Feat of Obstetrication might be far more advanced, to the Grand disgrace
of certain Men, who profess it; and to the Regulating of some self-conceited,
rash Women.

Surgery made appear to belong principally (setting aside Manual Operation)
to the Skilful Chemists, who have in their Custody such mortifiers of the
Idea's of Cacoethick Sores, Fistula's, Cancers, Herpete's, etc. Such Vital
Balsoms, and Sanatives to be taken inwardly and outwardly, that the Surgeon
should be forced to confess, that in most Cases the Physician is to be sought
to; and that in long Voyages, none are to be compared to Spagyrical
preparations, for duration; with which being accurately Fabricated, he and the
Apothecary should be furnished upon Occasions: A Legitimate, Substantial,
Efficacious Pharmacy being introduced, the Supposititious, AAdulterated,
Trivial, Insufficient Factures rejected.

Then will the promiscuous, indifferent, confused comprehension at this day, of
the Counterfeit, and Real; the Apish, and Manly Chemical Exercitations be made
plain to mean Capacities: How our Colluding Galenists have imposed upon the
World, by owning themselves the best Chemists, though worse than the greatest
Adulterators of Sack, for which none can plead but the impudent Sophisticator,
or Compounder.

Then will the Thermologist be either ashamed so much as to mention Hot and
Cold for the cause, or C^re of Diseases* Or if he should, he might, perhaps, be
ridiculously discarded by the Friends of the Patient, to his detestable shame,
as a singular Fool.

If once the Omnipotent incline the Hearts of our Governors to cherish, and
resolutely protect this Divine Science, cutting holes in the Skin will grow out
of fashion: Epispasticks, Blysterings, Scarifications will be thought fitting
for none but Malefactors: Common Purgation and Bleeding, with their dreggy
Decoctions (little better than Drenches) will be confined to the Cure of Horses.

If Prometheus Fire were thoroughly kindled among us, our eyes would be opened
that we might understand, how those very Galenists who have declaimed
undeservedly, railed at and condemned Chemical Remedies in General, have been
forced at length (unless they ventured to come off with unsufferable disgrace)
to minister closely the same slight Preparations of the Shops, altogether
renounced by the Spagyrical Sophist. Yea, it will appear, how in time of their
greatest Ignorance they have advised their Patients to the Sumption of Mineral
Waters, thereby implicitly and tacitly denoting against their wills, that
Natute taught them to be Chemists, if they had not been obstinately blinder
than Bats and Owls.

Lastly, if such a Philosophical Chemical Company be Authorized and
Countenanced, Mechanics will be much promoted, their Manual faculties will be
more dexterously carried on: The Art of Gilding, Painting, Writing, Artillery
may be wound up to a higher pitch. Metals might be more intimately purged,
refined, volatile made more fixed, the terrestrial parts more sublimed, their
color and sound exalted, those friable made Ductile, the Ignobler provected,
and Generous augmented. Mercury precipitated, coagulated, etc. then combined
with multiplicity of Bodies with which it will show variety of Shapes useful
for diverse Mechanical Factures.

Antimony likewise technically prepared might be employed for the advancement
of many Handycrafts,

Sulphur Anreum Fulminans might be made in greater quantity and cheaper for the
achievement of many rare Designs.

Such Electrums might be made which would perform Stupendous things. A clearer
Light of the Lapis Chrysopoeus might be given. Doubtless Artificers would find
that the complete Learned Spagyrist would be able to instruct them for the
contriving of several Mechanies to his advantage, never to be attained by
Ideot-Chymists.

I hope these Important Motives and Persuasive Reasons will excite the
Magistrate to Constitute with all Expedition, such a Learned Society of
Ortho-Chymists, that they themselves, and these Nations may gather the
delicious fruits thereof, and Foreigners may be lured to follow their good
Example. Withal, I Supplicate the Omnipotent to put it into the Hearts of the
more Generous and Refined Spirits of the Galenists, to take for the future
Right Measures for the Cure of Humane Griefs, to wave (when they are to aim at
Essential Sanation) those Childish Fopperies of Heat and Cold, and to abdicate
and proscribe their indiscreet, either secretly noxious or openly lethiferous
Bleeding, Purging, etc. to lay down those Pernicious Instruments, and to take
up Salutary.

If the Juniors (leaving the Old Doting Fellows to themselves, as a very
Learned Man calls them. who will no more be brought to learn better things in
Healing, than an Old Dog to Fetch and Carry) will courageously, and resolutely
bend their endeavors to carry on this Heroical Pyrotechnical Enterprise, they
shall find me ready to serve them (according to that little Talent I have) in
the detection of those Physical Verities which have cost me nigh 30 years
Labor of Brain and Sinews, besides the Hazard of my Life by Assassinating
Realgars of Metals and Minerals, together with the treacherous Gas of Charcole*
also the dangerous Essays I have made upon my own Stomach, for the discovery
of the Operation of my own Manufactures: add to these the continual Opposition,
the Obloquies I have sustained, Abuses, Slanders, Disrespects thrown upon me
undeservedly, enough to deter any man from being a Sceptick in Physic, or to
digress from the Common Road of Healing.

I shall, I say, communicate Real Arcana to a certain number of Literate Candid
Persons, fitting to lay the Foundation of a Salutary College. Then for my part
I shall be willing to sequester my self out of Secular Tumults, Uproars and
Turmoils, thinking it the happiest Condition in the world to live privately.

I question not but other Ortho-Chymists will follow this Pattern, and
contribute to the Honor and Enlargment of such a Scientifick Society.

The POSTSCRIPT.
IF the Galenists find any Substantial remarkable Errors in this Syntagm, or a
late Tract, Called Epilogis. Chymic. I am willing to be Rebuked as sharply as
they please, but not scurrilously: However, I ought to be convinced by Matter
of Fact, as well as Reason, which those of the Royal Society are bound to grant
me, without Favor, Affection, Partiality, or Obligation to each other. This
denied me, they still persisting to set at naught Essential, Medical verity,
back biting and vilifying us and our Remedies: Let them be assured I shall in
general publish in lively Colors a Character of them. Next in particular I
shall attack J. G. J. K. J. B. H. B. T. C. H. G. D. W. J. L. J. D. W. D. T. C.
All reputed Learned Doctors, whom I can undoubtedly Charge ex Facto, with an
Indirect Method of Curing.

Moreover, the Cause of the Death of Mr. Colwel, the great Banker, Mr. Edw.
Viner, Mr. Parker, Mr. Scot, Sir George Viner and his Lady, Lord Conwallis;
yea, the Reason of the shortning the Life of diverse other Great Persons ought
to be strictly Examined, and a History of the management of their Sickness to
be exposed to Public view for Caution to others. I shall especially take to
Task Dr. C. M. who deserves to be handled according to the Rigor of the Law,
for positively slandering me; That I had Killed three Patients in one House:
Neither will his bare denial serve his turn, since I have sufficient Witness to
cast him, upon Oath.

I shall in good time match the Cock of our Anatomical Boasters, who accused me
of Presumption, for cutting up a Pestilential Body, when they, for want of a
stock of Powerful Prophylacticks, and Therapeuticks, never attempted it but
with loss of Life.

I shall farther Vindicate (as the first) the Credit and Propriety of
Splenectomia, i. e. the cutting the Spleen out of a Dog (the Animal surviving
the Operation two years and a Quarter) Usurped by Dr. C. S. appropriated by the
Virtuosi, now set down in the List of their Transactions.

I shall, in convenient time, call to a Reckoning a Galenical Doctor (whose
Name is Consonant with Stults, a proper Etymon for an Ignorant Physician)
Correcting him to a purpose, for maligning my Practice, and offering abuses to
this Innocent Art.

I may likewise, in time, comment, and make Animadversions on Pharmaceutice
Rationalis sive Diatriba, and instruct the World concerning the Authors great
mistakes, relating to the Aitiologie of Diseases, Method and Instruments of
Healing.

FINIS.

