A FUNERAL SPEECH UPON The Death and Burial OF CHARLES DYMOKE, Esquire. LATE
CHAMPION To the King and Crown of ENGLAND.

Who dyed at Oxford, in July 1643. and was interred at Scrivelsby in
Lincolnshire, September the 6th, 1652.

By R. Thornton.

London, Printed in the Year 1653.

A FUNERAL SPEECH UPON The Death and Burial OF CHARLES DYMOKE, Esquire LATE
Champion to the King and Crown of England, etc.
IT was a heavy case, when the dead bodies of Gods Servants were given for meat
to the Fowls of the air, and the flesh of his Saints to the beasts of the
field; when their blood was shed like water on every side of Jerusalem, and
there was no man to bury them. If this (as yet) be not our case, who thereby
must not think them greater sinners then our selves, it is Gods doing in the
midst of judgment to remember mercy, and it is mavelous in our eyes, for
these wretched times have already seen many holes, no graves, many graves, and
no burials, but thanks be to God, and praise thou the Lord O my Soul, and all
that is within me praise his holy name, as for all other blessings, so in
particular for this public and pious meeting in that we are now come to the
last period of a sad and solemn Funeral long since begun, and ever since not
more expected by any, then desired by those whom it most concerns And now least
any here present should mistake the meaning of this solemnity, or report it for
a dumb show, give me leave to ask them in our Saviors language, What went ye
out to see? Torches, Mourners, Escotcheons, the Hearse, the Grave; all these
are but silent expressions of his condition and mortality, to whom such
Obsequies, justa funerum, do of right belong.

But since by his death and this employment. I may say (with Job,) My Harp also
is turned into mourning, and my Organ into the voice of them that weep: suffer
me a little from a troubled fountain, renovare dolerem, to pour a few tears
upon his dry bones; though I cannot revive, yet I may bewail his worth, -- his
worth, who dying amongst the schools of the Prophets above nine years since,
and being there imbalmed with sweet Odours, and all this while preserved in a
College Chapel, the very place of his former education, and that under such
state as became a Person of his quality, is thus brought hither to his resting
place, his long home, the ancient Sepulcher of his Fathers.

Where now you may behold a Sceleton, a glimpse of that body, which (being
alive) was the Cabinet of a religions soul, a deep understanding, a sound
judgment, a noble mind, a high and commanding spirit. Hence he became wise in
his designs, obedient in his principles, just in his actions, valiant in his
resolutions, and temporate in his whole life and conversation; which (being
adorned with comeliness of person and behavior, with affability of carriage
and a courtly presence,) made him a companion for Princes at their pastimes,
for Magistrates at their Benches, for armed men at their weapons, for learned
men at their books, for holy men at their prayers and devotions.

These were the virtues of a son, whose father dyed in his childhood.

These were the virtues of a child, brought up by his mother in her widowhood

These were the virtues of a young man, the only son, the only child of his
Parents.

These were the virtues of one, who by ancient worth and descent was a Champion.

And these be the virtues of a Champion, who by his place and title had no
equal, no sharer, not one like him in the whole Kingdom: Nay, the hazard is
too great, there will never be the like again.

The subject was such without all question, the virtues may be questioned
unless they be further justified.

And yet we may behold the^ bred (as it were) in the bone, nursed up in the
Cradle, and flourishing in his youth, such as (no doubt) had brought forth
abundance of fruit in due season, had his strength of body, and the command of
his fortunes, been answerable to the courage and magnificence of his spirit;
Nay, all these virtues (though springing like himself to a great height) were
yet enlightened, not consumed, by the flames of these times, these unhappy times
made them more beautiful and exemplary, in that he was not carried away with
every wind of doctrine, but upon mature deliberation, and consultation too,
settled in the ways of truth and soberness, so that in the midst of these
divisions and distractions, I do not wonder to see him dye as he lived, not by
the sharpness of the sword, but subject to infirmity and sickness, a
crystal vessel soon broken by divine providence; Nay I consider it (with
others of like merit, vessels of honor) taken away from the evil to come, as
being fitter for the glory of a new Jerusalem, which is at unity in it self.

Only (methinks) this rich Cabinet of flesh and blood wanted an exchange to set
it forth, (I mean) an exchange of like nature and quality, a conjugall society,
that so a living representation of it self might have commended it, from
generation to generation.

For my part I labor not to advance his worth, beyond the reach of envy: as
being himself more virtuous then to escape it.

Nor will I say, but amongst so many Flowers of note, there might be now and
then some spotted leaves, to obscure a little the luster and brightness of his
proceedings; He may well die without a friend, who lives without a fault.

Only I cannot say, God speed the plough, which ploughed upon his back, and
made long furrows, as though he also were earthly minded, and (there by) stood
in need (like his land) to be tilled himself, and turned upside down; whence
perhaps it came to pass, that whilst some thought him not so careless of his
fortunes, as their craft could wish: others thought him not so open handed, as
his condition, or their necessities required; and so the report stuck close to
him, (of sticking close to himself) a report which some others made too common
by their credulity, thus tearing in pieces that reputation, which they could
neither write nor read: But if we may judge by way of comparison, and every one
set forth in their proper colors, the ploughers (no question) had not then so
much mistook their soil, as (now I presume) they did, for, ex melioriluto,
experience found, he was not a greater Heir of land, then discretion how to use
it, had he but lived to see (by the faithfulness of his servants) as much
experience of the one, as of the other.

The truth is, his predecessors freedom became afterward a heavy burden upon
his shoulders, which (together with other men's harms, and a wise example) made
him seem a little partatueri, willing to know his own estate, and by knowing to
preserve it, answerable to that wisdom of Solomon, Be diligent to know the
state of thy Flocks: and might not this be well done for example sake, the
better to show himself careful, and to make others the more industrious, for
how can a man think to find his kindness worthily accepted, or his friend
sufficiently thankful, who knows not himself what he gives or grants?

Sure I am this body wanted not (as many do) a free and bountiful hand, when
either the honor of his reputation, his love of learning, or his patronage
required it. Instances of this nature might once have been drawn from the
breath of our Nostrils to the soles of his Feet, (being like that precious
ointment, which from the top of Aarons head, ran down to the skirts of his
clothing) but now the poor man's box, and the legacies which he gave his
servants, are the best witnesses, together with his care and readiness not to
pull down but repair Churches, this by name, as being the place designed by
himself, for a more lasting monument of his predecessors being, his own
well-being, and devotion.

Here (methinks) before I go hence, I could willingly call to your remembrance,
the riches of his Library, the glory of his buildings, the orders of his
family, and the provisions of his house; were it not, that when the Qu. of
Sheba came, and saw the wisdom of Solomon and his building, the neat at his
table, the sitting of his servants, the attendants of his Ministers and their
apparel, it is said, there was no more spirit in her. So I fear a relation of
this nature, though qualified with all respects of civility and discretion,
would make some spirits droop or raise up others beyond their due proportion.

But let it suffice, time was when I might have told you in the day time, he
had the favor of his Prince, the loyalty of a subject, the prayrs of the
Church, and the decent burial of a good Christian; burial did I say? yes,
that is past already: a burial not daubed with untempered mortar, but solemnly
performed according to the public service of the Church of England, upon like
occasion; from which form of divine service, we now only borrow this echo,
Earth to Earth, Ashes to Ashes, Dust to Dust, and so we cover him with his own
mould, the bowels of his Ancestors, a noble and renowned family.

Thus then in a word you may see and apply too, he who once was clothed in soft
raiment, is now wrapped up in sheets of lead, and he who was so frequently
brought up in Kings houses, and loved them too, is now ex congruo, lodged in
one of Gods houses, the blessing of a goodly heritage, his own patrimony; where
we leave him with this memorial, worthy to be written in letters of gold, He
died Champion to the King and Crown of England, and now (like his title) lies
in the dust expecting a speedy and glorious Resurrection, which that we may all
obtain, The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the
Fellowship of the Holy Ghost be with us, and let all the People say, Amen.

FINIS.

