ARTICLES, For Regulating of the JUDICATORIES, etc.

Set down by the COMISSIONERS Thereunto Authorized by HIS MAJESTY, Under the
GREAT SEAL: WITH His Majesty's APPROBATION thereof prefixed thereunto.

C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms of
Charles II

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
MAjESTY, 1670.

HIS MAJESTY'S APPROBATION OF THE ARTICLES FOLLOWING.
CHARLES R.

CHARLES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Scotland, England, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith; To all Our good Subjects whom these presents do or may
concern, Greeting. We having perused and considered the Report underwritten,
with the Articles, Rules and Orders made by the Commissioners entrusted by Us
for regulating the Judicatories, and the prices of all Writs relating thereto;
We do hereby Allow, Ratify and Approve the proceedings of the Commissioners,
with all the Articles and Orders after set down, and Ordain the same to be duly
observed in all time coming; And for that end, that they be recorded in the
Sederunt-Books of the Session, and in the Books of Adjournal, and printed and
published, that none pretend ignorance thereof. And We do recommend to Our
Commissioners entrusted in this affair, to be careful to see these Rules and
Articles punctually observed, and the contraveeners severely censured: As also,
to take the whole affair into their further consideration, that what, by the
shortness of time, is not yet determined, may with all convenience be done; And
their Judgments of the remanent Judicatories and whole matter, not as yet
settled, may be returned to Us, that We may thereupon give such Orders, as We
shall think fit.

Given at Our Court at Whitehal, the fourth day of June, one thousand six
hundred and seventy, and of Our Reign the twenty two year. By His Majesty's
Command, LAVDERDAIL.

THE REPORT OF THE COMMISSIONERS APPOINTED FOR THE Regulation of the
JVDICATORIES.
Edinburgh, 2. of March, 1670.
FOrasmuch as it has pleased the Kings Majesty, by a Commission under His
Great-Seal, of the twenty one of September last, to authorize and empower some
Noblemen and others of His Privy Council and Session, to consult concerning the
Judicatories of His Majesty's Privy Council, Session, and Justice-Court, and
the Regulating of the same; And for redressing and preventing all abuses that
are already, or may probably arise, or creep into the said Judicatories; And
to consider the best, most summar and equal way of bringing in, and calling of
Processes for Dispensing of Justice; And for shortning and abridgeing the long,
chargeable, and tedious dependancy of Pleas: And to settle such Rules and
Orders as they shall judge necessary for these ends, and to do every thing for
making effectual His Majesty's Royal and Gracious Intention, that His Subjects
be relieved and secured against oppression and exactions; and that Justice be
administrate unto them with expedition, and as little trouble and charge as may
be. And that the said Commissioners return to His Majesty an account in Writ
of their Proceedings and Conclusion, that His Majesty may take such course
therein, as in His Royal Wisdom He shall think fit. Likeas, the Kings Majesty,
with advice and consent of His Estates of Parliament, did by another Commission
of the twenty third of December last, empower the Commissioners
abovementioned, to consider and regulate the Commissar Courts, the
Sheriff-Courts, and all other inferior Courts within the Kingdom; And so set
down Rules and Orders for regulating the same, and the Forms of proceeding
therein, and the prices of all Writs, Fees and Dues to be taken any manner of
way by any Persons in, or relating to the said Judicatories. In obedience to
which Commissions, The Commissioners having had several meetings together, and
consulted upon the best and readiest way for the prosecution of His Majesty's
Royal Intention, for the good and ease of His Subjects: And finding the same to
be a matter of great importance, and deserving most serious consideration, and
a longer time to make a full settlement therein; Yet, being desireous, that
as soon as is possible, His Majesty's Subjects may find the fruits and effects
of His Majesty's Royal care over them: Have at present agreed unto, and
condescended upon the Rules and Articles after-following; Which they do humbly
offer to His Majesty as their Judgment, in order to the present Regulation of
the Judicatories; Without prejudice always of what upon further consideration,
they shall hereafter offer, for a full settlement therein.

Concerning the SESSION.
1. Seeing a great part of the trouble and expenses of the Liedges, in obtaining
of Justice in their Causes, is occasioned through the uncertainty of their
attendance upon Processes, depending before the Lords of Session; Whereby not
knowing any certain time, at, or about which their Processes will be called:
They are necessitat to wait on the most part of the time of the Session, during
the dependence of their Processes, or otherwise to be absent when the same are
discussed. That therefore, all Processes shall be discussed and determined as
the Parties are in readiness, and do call for Justice after the same have been
seen by the Defenders Advocates, and are returned by them; And that according
to the date of the Returns which are set down, and signed by the Defenders
Advocate upon the Process it self, that no Parties be preserred in obtaining
Justice to any other who was ready, and calling for it before. And that Books
of Enrollment be made for enrolling the said Processes, according to the dates
of the Returns; that thereby notice may be timeously given to all Parties
having intrest in the Process, how far the Lords of Session are advanced, in
discussing and determining Processes according to the said Rolls, that the
Parties may be present when their Processes will fall in to be discussed and
determined, in their course as they stand in the Rolls; and may in the mean
time rest quiet and secure, that their Rights and Interests will not be decided
when they cannot know to be present, which cannot be attained, unless all
privileges whereby any cause can be called, otherwise then according to its
due course in the said Rols, be laid aside; Excepting only the Causes
belonging properly to the Kings Majesty (and not to Donators or others) which
may be called at any time when his Majesty's Advocat pleases, upon either of
the two next Sederunt-dayes after the Process is returned; or if the same be
not called on either of the said two days, at any time thereafter, upon
fifteen days advertisement to the Defenders Advocats, that they may acquaint
their Clients to be present.

2. That the Book of Enrollment for the Outer-house be kept and made up by the
person appointed, or to be appointed by the Lords of Session, who shall attend
in the Session-house each Saturday in Session-time, from two a clock in the
afternoon, till four, and shall take up a note of all Processes shown to him,
containing the names and designations of the Pursuers and Defenders, and the
name of the Cause, whether it be Advocation, Suspension, Declarator, Reduction,
or any other having a special name; or otherwise under the name of Lybell'd
Summonds, and contain the date of the return, signed by the Defenders Advocats
upon the Process; and by the said note shall insert in the Book all that is
produced that day, according to the dates of the returns, expressing in the
Book the day of the month of the uptaking, before the Causes taken up that day,
and also expressing the day of the month of the return, before the Causes
returned each day, and shall interline nor insert no Cause in the said Book,
but set them down in order as they were presented, according to the date of
their returns; and shall receive for inserting of the said Causes in the Book,
and for affixing Rolls upon the Wall conform to the said Book, for every
Process four shillings Scots and no more, although the said Process should
continue to be Enrolled several weeks, until the Ordinary have called and
heard the same; which Book of Enrollment shall always remain in the
Session-house, and be patent to the Liedges, that thence advertisements may be
given to all parties having interest; and for showing whereof, the Keeper of
the Book shall exact or take no money or gratification.

3. That the Keeper of the Book of Enrollment for the Outer-house affix a Roll
of Processes each Monday upon the ordinary place of the Wall of the
Outer-house, in all things conform to the said Book of Enrollment, expressing
the day of up-taking; and that the day of the month of the several Returns be
set before the Processes insert each day, and each subsequent weeks Roll shall
in the first place contain what remained undiscuss'd by an Act, Decree, or
Protestation, or not delet by the Ordinary, upon the Pursuers not insisting.
And where Processes are delayed to a day, till the Parties see, or something be
produced or done, which requires not an extracted Act, the same shall remain in
all subsequent Rolls, in the same day that it was in the first Roll, that after
the day to which it was delayed, it may be called by the Ordinary till it be
discussed or delet: And for that effect, the Ordinary shall on the Margent of
the Roll, mark at that Process, to what day it is delayed, which shall remain
so marked in the subsequent Rolls, till the Cause be discussed.

4. That the Keeper of the said Books of Enrollment for the Outer-house, do
exactly and punctually observe the Rules and Orders aforesaid, and that he give
his oath every Session for that effect; and if he transgress the said Rules,
the Lords shall deprive him of his Office, and otherwise punish him as they
see cause, and appoint another in his place, who, and his successors, shall
always be liable for observing the premises.

5. That in like manner there be a Book of Enrollment of Processes to be
discussed in the Inner-house, containing Causes proper for the Inner-house; as
the discussing of reasons of Reduction of Heretable Rights of Lands, or
Annual-rents, Declarators of Rights thereof, Probations of Tenors of Writs
destroyed or lost, Cessiones bonorum, which Book shall be kept by a person
appointed, or to be appointed by the Lord Chancellor, who shall insert the
said Processes as they are in readiness to be discussed in the Inner-house,
viz. Reductions after the Production is closed, and Declarators, Tenors, and
Cessiones bonorum, after the Dilators are discussed in the Outer-house, and a
great avisandum made by the Ordinary in the Outer-house, who is to proceed no
further therein; and that according to the date of that great avisandum, as it
stands written upon the Process by the Clerk of the Process: And where the
Lords, upon report of Dispute from the Outer-house made by the Ordinary, shall
for the importance, intricacy, or preparative of the points reported, ordain
the Cause to be heard in presence of the whole Lords, the said Process shall be
insert in the Roll of the Inner-house, according to the date of the Lords
deliverance, appointing it to be heard in their presence.

6. That there be a Book of Enrollment of concluded Causes, whereof the
probation is to be advised by the Lords, to be insert according to the date of
the conclusion of the Cause, as the same shall be presented by the Clerks of
the Process, to be kept by the Keeper of the said Book of Enrollment for the
Innerhouse.

7. That the Keeper of the said Books of Enrollment for the Inner-house, shall
attend in the Session-house each Saturday from two to three a clock in the
afternoon, and shall receive and insert all Processes which shall be offered to
him in either of the said Books, according to the Order foresaid; and shall
receive thirty shillings Scots for each Process to be insert in the Book of
Causes to be discussed, and twelve shillings for each Cause to be insert in the
Book of concluded Causes; and shall exact or take no more for himself or his
servants: and shall make the said Books patent to all the Liedges freely, and
shall affix a Roll both of Processes to be discussed in the Inner-house, and of
concluded Causes, in all things conform to the Books, upon Monday, als often as
need beis; and shall add to the Causes in the said Roll for subsequent weeks,
in the same manner as is appointed for the Rolls of the Outer-house, and both
in the Books and Rolls shall express the day of up-taking the Process, and the
day of the great avisandum or Ordinance of the Lords for hearing the Cause in
their presence, subjoyning thereto the Causes each day, both in the Books and
Rolls of Causes to be discussed, and the like for the Book and Roll of
concluded Causes, according to the date of the conclusion of the Cause.

8. That the Keeper of the said Books of Enrollment for the Inner-house
observe the premises punctually, under the pain of deprivation, and being
further censured by the Lords, as they shall see cause: And that the beginning
of every Session, he shall make faith to observe the premises in all points.

9. That the Lords both in the Inner-house and Outer-house shall proceed to the
discussing of Processes, in order as they stand in the said Rolls respective,
without passing over, or anticipating any Cause; and that each Process shall be
still called in its order, until it be brought to an Act, Protestation, or
Decree; and if it be delayed till something be produced or done which requires
not an Act extracted, that after the day to which it is delayed, the same shall
be called till it be discussed.

10. And where at the calling of any Cause in the Inner or Outer-house, the
Pursuer insists not, the Process shall be delet out of the Roll, and
Protestation shall be granted to the Defender, without any other solemnity, but
the demanding thereof at the calling of the Cause, whereby the Defender shall
not be oblidged to answer until he be summoned of new, and the
Protestation-money paid, that he be not oblidged to an uncertain attendance at
the Pursuers pleasure. And incase at the calling of any Process in the
Outer-house, any Parties Advocat be in the Inner-house, the Ordinary shall call
the Cause the next day thereafter, if he be desired upon a Ticket to be given
to him before he go to the Bench; but that no Advocat make interruption by
calling otherwise over the Bar.

11. That the Lords by no importunity alter the order of the said Rolls by any
Deliverance or Warrant, except it be for discussing reasons of Reduction of
small difficulty and importance in the Outer-house, before they be Enrolled in
the Inner-house, which shall be Enrolled in the Roll of the Outer-house,
according as they shall be presented to the Keeper of the Roll, in the same
manner as other Processes.

12. That if any Cause be called by anticipation, out of its due place, the
Pursuers Advocat may refuse to insist, or the Defenders Advocat to answer, and
it shall be a sufficient defense that he is not oblidged to answer before its
due course in the Roll: And although neither parties Advocats should object,
seeing others who were anterior in the Roll are prejudged, the Clerks are
prohibit to write on any such Process called out of its own course, or to
extract any Act or Decree thereupon.

13. That the Lords of Session, every Session, go near the discussing of all
Causes enrolled that Session; and that as they see their work by the Books of
enrollment, they meet the sooner in the morning, and also meet in the afternoon
for taking in Reports from the Outer-house, which requires not the attendance
of Advocats, and which consumes much of the time both in the Inner and
Outer-house in the forenoon; and also for advising of concluded Causes, which
of all other should be least delayed.

14. That if any Act, Decree or Protestation be stopped, either by the
Ordinary, or by the Lords, the same shall be heard by the Ordinary who heard
the Cause before, until the same be discussed, delet, or Protestation granted
in manner foresaid, and that the same shall not again be brought into the Roll.

15. That no Bill be presented to the Lords for stopping or rectifying any Act
or Decree past in the Outer-house, until the Party first make application to
the Ordinary who heard and pronounced the same; and if he refuse to hear the
Party upon any new matter condescended on, or in case of doubtfulness, to
report at least upon consignation of an Amaund: In that case, the Party may
give in a Bill to the Lords, expressing his application to the Ordinar, and his
refusal to hear or report, as said is, and expressing the special matter which
he desires in the Process, and no otherwise.

16. To the effect, the Lords of Session may be in better capacity to discuss
the Processes which come before them, not being overburdened with small and
inconsiderable Causes, That all Causes, not exceeding the value of two hundred
Merks Scots, be in the first instance carried on before the inferior Judges;
And that no Summons be raised upon Bill, or otherwise for Causes of less
importance, for which the Clerk of the Bills and Writers to the Signer are to
be answerable at their peril; except there be such reasons condescended on in
the Bill, as would be sufficient to procure an Advocation of the Cause from the
inferior Judge, in behalf of a Defender, and competent Instructions thereof;
And that such Bills do not pass of course, but be specially presented and read
to the Ordinary, and that the deliverance on the back thereof bear, Because the
Lords have found suficient ground, for which the Cause ought not in the first
instance to be pursued before the inferior Judge Ordinar, but before the
Lords: Excepting also, the Causes belonging to the Members of the College of
Justice, and except Sums due to Merchants, Cooks, Vintners and others in Burgh,
for Furniture taken off from them, by such as dwell not within the Shire where
the Furniture was taken off.

17. That where Causes are begun before inferior Courts, no Advocation thereof
shall be past, being of no greater importance then as aforesaid, otherwise
then is provided by the Act of Parliament; And that the Clerk of the Bills be
answerable therefore, not to present, pass or write on any such Bill at his
peril.

18. That where Decreets are past before inferior Courts, and craved to be
suspended, if the reasons proceed not on iniquity, but upon alledgiance, that
the Decree was in absence, so that the craver of the Suspension has never
appeared, or has not continued to defend while there was no injustice done:
Then and in that case, he shall be obliged at the passing of the Bill of
Suspension, to consign in the hands of the Clerk of the Bills, such sums for
the expenses of the Party, as the passer of the Bill shall appoint, according
to the importance of the Cause and the distance of the Party, which shall be
given up to the Charger, if the Suspender has not compeared, or continued to
defend before the inferior Court, as said is; and that immediately at the
calling of the Cause to be discust, when the compearance in the Decree may
appear, unless the Suspender improve the Executions of the Summons whereupon
the Decree did proceed.

19. That Decreets, in foro contradictorio, before the Lords of Session be not
again suspended, upon reasons competent to have been proponed, or which were
repelled in the former Decree. And to the effect it may be known, with the
least expense, what Decreets are in foro, That the Keeper of the Minute-book
make up a Book of the Decreets in foro, according as the same shall each day be
given in to him by the Clerks, expressing the names of all the Defenders for
whom there is compearance; And that the Clerk of the Bills from time to time,
call for and receive a double of the said Minutebook of Decreets in foro; And
when any Bill of Suspension is to be presented by him, that at his peril he
write on no Suspension of any Decree in foro, contained in the said Book,
until it be presented to the whole Lords in time of Session, and to three met
together in time of vacance, the deliverance bearing, that they were met
together. And where there is once compearance for any Party and Defenses
proponed, the Decree shall be holden as done in foro, and all the Dispute
proponed by the Advocats shall be insert therein, albeit the Advocat thereafter
past from his compearance; And that the first Protestation shall not be
suspended, but upon consignation of thirty pounds, and the Suspension thereof
shall bear that it is the second Suspension: And so forth, all the Suspensions
that shall be obtained thereafter, shall bear that the same is the third or
fourth Suspension; and that no Suspension shall pass of the second
Protestation, but in presence of the whole Lords in time of Session, and by
three of the Lords met together in time of vacance, the deliverance bearing as
aforesaid; and that the Clerk of the Bills write upon no Bill of Suspension
otherwise, as he will be answerable at his peril; and that the second and
posterior Protestations shall be insert in the said Book, with the said
Decreets in foro.

20. That where Processes are kept up un-returned by the Defenders Advocat,
longer then six days after the out-giving thereof, which is the time allowed
for seeing of Processes, That upon complaint given in to the Lords thereanent,
the Ordinary upon the Bills call the Advocat who keeps up the Process, and fine
him in three pounds Scots for ilk day he has kept up the same, from the time
that the Process was required from the Advocat, or his principal Servant
personally at the Advocats Chamber, by way of Instrument under a Nottars hand,
unto the day that the complaint was given in, and six pounds for every day that
the Process shall be detained by him, after in-giving of the complaint: And
that one of the Macers be ordered to exact the fine, under the pain of
deprivation; and to that effect, that he be warranded to exclude the Advocat
out of the House, and not to suffer him to enter the Outer bar until he make
payment; and that he return the money so exacted to the Ordinary upon the
Bills, whereof the one half is to be put in the Poors Box, and the other half
to be paid to the party pursuer, if he desire the same, otherwise, that the
whole be put in the Box.

21. But where there are more Defenders then one called in a Process, and
several Advocats compearing for them, That the Advocat who takes up the
Process to see for the Party principally concerned, in whose house the same is
appointed to be seen, shall be allowed only four days for seeing the Process;
and in case he do not return the same within that time, that he incur the
penalties contained in the former Article: And that after the Process shall be
returned, the same shall remain in the Clerks hands six days before it be
called, during which time, any Advocat compearing for any other of the
Defenders, may see the Process in the Clerks hands, and write thereupon for
whom he compears, and subscribe the same; and may also borrow the same up from
the Clerk for the space of twenty four hours, upon his Receipt and consignation
of an Amaund, according to the importance of the Cause: And in case he do not
reproduce the Process within the said space of twenty four hours, upon
complaint made thereof, he is to lose the Amaund, and to pay six pounds for ilk
day he keeps the Process after the said space of twenty four hours; and the
like execution to be used therefore, as in the former case of the Defenders
Advocats not returning Processes given out to them by the pursuers Advocats.
And likewise, if any Advocat, during the said space of six days, be desirous
to see the Process for any other Party having interest, who was not called in
the Process, that upon production of the Parties interest in the Clerks hands,
he be allowed to see in manner foresaid, he always consigning and subscribing
for whom he compears: And incase of failzie, to re-produce, being liable as
said is; and that the Advocat shall not be heard when the Cause is called, if
he has neglected to see, in manner foresaid, whether he be compearing for any
Party called in the Process, or compearing for his Interest.

22. In respect it is a great obstruction to the dispatch of Processes, That
when Causes are called, Defenses sometimes are proponed upon Writs, which being
neither produced nor seen by the pursuers Advocats, all that is ordinarily
done, is to ordain the Writs to be produced: Therefore, wherever the Defenders
Advocat is to found any Defense upon Writ, that at the returning of the
Process, he also produce therewith the Writs whereupon he intends to found any
alledgeance, otherwise no respect is to be had to the alledgeance to be founded
on these Writs which were in any of the Defenders Advocats hands, Or which, or
any Copy thereof were seen by the said Advocats, which the Pursuers Advocats
shall be obliedged to return within four days after they receive the same:
Otherwise complaint may be made against them, as against Defenders-Advocats,
for keeping up of Processes: And incase any other Writs come to their hands,
after the returning of the Process, upon which they will found; That in like
manner they produce the same to the Pursuers-Advocats before calling of the
Cause, under the same certification.

23. That the Suspender at the out-giving of the Suspension, produce therewith
all his Verifications; And that at the calling of the Cause, if he have kept
up the Verifications, and offer then to produce the same, That the Ordinary
shall give Decree, because the Reasons is not verified conditionally; That if
with the Verifications the Suspender produce in the Clerkshands twelve pound
Scots, two parts thereof to be paid to the Charger, and the third part to the
Poor, the same shall be received, and the Parties heard thereupon, without
Enrolling of new: And therefore the Ordinary shall mark upon the Cause, Decree
Conditional, to such a day; And if betwixt and the said day, obedience be not
given, the Decree is to be Extracted.

24. That the Suspenders Advocat be not allowed to propone any new Reason of
Suspension at the Bar, which was neither lybelled, nor contained in the eikit
Reasons of Suspension given out to, and seen by the Chargers Advocats, unless
therewith they consign in manner foresaid.

25. That because Processes are very much lengthned, by the long running of
ordinary and incident Diligences and Terms, for production in Reductions and
Improbations: For remedy whereof in time coming, there shall only be two
Diligences against Witnesses, one by Horning, and another by Caption; And there
shall be no Incident-diligence sustained upon Acts, but where the fame is
craved, and allowed at the pronouncing of the Act, and expressed therein; which
shall proceed against the alleged Havers of the Writs, first by Horning,
charging them to compear and produce upon Oath, and next by Caption incase they
do not compear and depone: And that there be only one Term for Production in
single Reductions, and two in Improbations: And that the Clerks insert no
Reservations in Acts for Production, but that all Exceptions competent before
Production, be discussed before assigning of Terms.

26. That no more Advocats be employed, or marked in any Cause for a Party, but
only three in the Inner-House, and three in the Outer-House at most; And that
only two be allowed in the Inner-House to speak one after another upon one
side, before the other Party make an Answer: And that the Lord-Chancellor, or
President, keep the Advocats closs to the Point; And that no Advocat be allowed
to speak above half an hour together, at most at one time.

27. Seeing there is great clamor and complaint of the Exorbitant-allowance of
late given to Advocats for Consultations, far exceeding what was usual in
former times; That for remedy thereof, the allowance of Advocats in time
coming, be regulat according to the quality of the persons who employes them,
and the Eminency of the Advocats employed, in manner following, viz. That for
every Consultation, pleading thereupon, and drawing Bills upon any
Interloquitor thereanent altogether, there be given at most to any of these
Advocats, who ordinarily plead in the Inner-House, by Noblemen, eighteen
pounds; By Knights and Barrons, fifteen pounds; By Gentlemen and chief
Burgesses, twelve pounds; And by all the rest of the People, nine pounds: And
to the rest of the Advocats by Noblemen, only twelve pounds; By Knights and
Barrons, nine pounds; By Gentlemen and chief Burgesses, six pounds; And by all
the rest of the People, four pounds: And that nothing be allowed for drawing
Informations to be given to the Lords after Disput, but to one Advocat only;
and that the allowance therefore, be only the half of what is allowed for the
Consultation.

28. That the Parties Pursuer and Defender, do give in with the Process, a
Declaration under their hands, bearing, That as they shall answer to God, they
have not given, nor shall give any more to any one Advocat employed by them in
that Process, for every Consultation comprehending as aforesaid, then the
foresaid allowance; which Declaration is to be given in by the Defender at the
return of the Process, and by the Pursuer before the Process be called; and
incase of the Clients minority, his Tutors, or Curators; and incase of his
absence, or that he has employed another to disburse the money for him; the
Person so employed, shall give in the foresaid Declaration upon Oath, which
shall bear, that he being the only Person employed to disburse money to Advocats
in that Process, he has not given, nor shall give any more then as aforesaid.
And likewise, that all who are already admitted Advocats, before they be
allowed to plead, shall give their Oaths that they shall always observe the
said rates; and that no Advocats be admitted hereafter, till they give that
Oath.

29. And because by the Act of Parliament, one thousand six hundred and twenty
one, the rates of Writs are ordered conform to an Act of the Lords of Privy
Council and Lords of Session, in Anno, one thousand six hundred and six, the
effect whereof has been frustrate, because nothing thereby is provided to
Clerks Servants: And in respect the rates of all things are much increased
since that time, Therefore that the rates of the Clerks of Session be as
follows, viz. That the same rates be observed which are contained in the said
Act of Parliament, except as to Acts, Decreets, Protestations and Diligences,
for which there shall be only paid to the Clerk and his Servants, three pounds
Scots for each Sheet, written in the same manner as they are now accustomed,
conform to a Pattern to be signed by this Commission, and kept by the Lords
of Session: And that the Clerks or their Servants take no money for production
of Writs, or giving up of the same again, minuting of Disputes, or booking of
Acts and Decreets, all which shall be paid by the said Extracts; but that
there be allowed to them two Merks for taking a Parties Oath, and one Merk for
every Witnesses Deposition, and thirty Shillings Scots for calling of every Act
in presence of the Ordinary. And that the Clerks or their Servants do not mark
upon any Process, Calling or Compearance, or the calling of any Act, but what
was publicly done by a Macer, that the Advocats may have timeous notice to
satisfy the conclusion of Acts; and that no Decree be pronounced
conditionally, but simply, according to the Act to be extracted twenty four
hours after the same is read in the Minute book; and that every Sederunt-day
the Minute-book be read out fully, that the Lieges be not delayed or necessitat
to attend: And that the Clients shall, in the same manner as in relation to
Advocats Allowance, give their Oaths, that they have kept and shall keep the
said rates, which shall be contained in one paper, with their Declaration in
relation to Advocats; and that the Clerks and their Servants give their Oaths,
that they shall always observe the said Rules and Rates, and that no Clerk be
admitted hereafter, till he give that Oath; excepting Acts and Decreets of
contentious dispute in presence of the Lords, which are to be at the discretion
of the Party, conform to the Act of Parliament.

30. And anent the Clerk of the Bills and his Servants, that the rates in the
said Act of Parliament, one thousand six hundred and twenty one, be in all
points observed, and also the rates for Allowance of Comprisings, contained in
the Act of Parliament, one thousand six hundred and sixty one; with this
alteration, That whereas that which is allowed by the said Act, one thousand
six hundred and twenty one, for the Acts of Caution, with the relief which
comprehends the Bills of Suspension, is too low for the Clerk and his Servants,
That there be allowed to the said Clerk and his Servants therefore, three
pounds and one merk Scots, and no more; and that the Clerk of the Bills and his
Servants give their oaths, in the same manner as the Advocats and Clerks of
Session, that they shall observe the said rates. And in case there be more
persons contained in the said Bills of Suspension then one, that every such
person, except the chief person, shall pay six shillings eight pennies, until
they come the length of ten persons; and no allowance is to be granted for any
exceeding that number, nor for a Community more then the said number of ten:
And for Relaxations, six shillings eight pennies for every person more then
one, until they come to the number of ten persons, and no more to be taken for
any greater number or Community; and that this be in satisfaction of all that
is to be given in that Office, both for Master and Servants.

31. In respect several persons, being neither Advocats nor Advocats Servants,
do take upon them, under the name of Agents, to meddle and negotiate in
Processes, who are found to be of no use, but burdensome to the Lieges; That
hereafter all these Agents be debarred the House, and not permitted to
negotiate in, or manage Processes; and recommends to the Lords of Session to
see the same punctually observed.

Concerning the JVSTICE-COVRT.
Seeing Causes Criminal are of the greatest importance, and may extend to the
Lives and Liberties of any of His Majesty's Subjects, and their Persons and
Fortunes: And seeing the punishment of Crimes is of the greatest consequence for
the safety and security of His Majesty's Person and Authority, and the Peace
and Quietness of the Kingdom; And therefore, Matters Criminal ought to be
determined in the most solemn, exact and regular way, that the Loyal and
Innocent may be in full security, and Offenders may be punished either in the
most public places of the Kingdom, or in the places where the Crimes have been
committed, to terrify others from the like: That whereas formerly Assessors
from time to time were appointed to the Justice-General, in matters of
importance, which being ambulatory, cannot be so convenient, as if all the
Members of that Court were settled and chosen by His Majesty of fit persons, who
might make it their work to make a just and constant procedure in Matters
Criminal.

1. For that effect, that the Office of Deputes in the Justice-Court be
suppressed, and that five of the Lords of Session be joined to the
Justice-General and Justice-Clerk, and all of them invested with the same and
equal Power and Jurisdiction in all Criminal Causes; That the Justice-General
being present preside, in his absence the Justice-Clerk, and in absence of
both, that these present elect one of their number to preside, four of the
whole number being always the Quorum of that Court, except at the
Circuit-Courts.

2. That they be appointed to meet each Monday at nine of the clock in time of
Session, and oftener if business so require.

3. That the persons to pass upon Assizes be listed, and their Names and
Designations insert in an Roll to be signed by the said Judges or their Quorum.

4. That for the splendor of that Court, all the Judges sit in red Robes faced
with white, that of the Justice-Generals being lined with Ermine, for
distinction from the rest.

5. That once a year, in the Month of April or May, Circuit-Courts be kept,
two of their number appointed to go and keep Courts at Dumfries and Jedburgh,
two at Stirling, Glasgow and Air, and other two at the Towns of Perth, Aberdeen
and Innerness, the Justice-General being always super-numerary in any of these
Circuit-Courts.

6. That it be left and recommended to the Judges of that Court, to regulate
the inferior Officers thereof, and order every other thing concerning the said
Court.

7. That a convenient Room be appointed for their meetings, Benches for the
Judges, a place for the Justice-General, more eminent then the Seats of the
other Judges; That the Advocats, Clerk, Assize and Pannels have distinct places
appointed to them.

8. That the Clerk of the Court, nor no other person, be present with the
Assize after they are enclosed.

9. That the Chancellor of the Assize mark what way every individual person who
is upon the Assize shall vote, whether condemning or assoilzeing, and that on
the same Paper wherein the Verdict of Assize is written, which after the
pronouncing of the Verdict, is to be closed and sealed with the Seals of the
Court, of the Chancellor of the Assize, and of so many more of that number, as
the Chancellor shall think fit, and never to be opened again, but by order of
the Judges: With certification, if the Clerk who shall have the keeping of the
said Verdict, do make open the same without warrant, he shall be deprived of
his Office, and otherwise punished as the Judges shall think fit.

10. That in all Criminal Pursutes, the Defender or his Advocats be always the
last speaker, except in cases of Treason and Rebellion against the King.

11. That when any Criminal Libel or Summons of Exculpation are given and
execute against any Party, that at the same time, Lists of the Witnesses to be
adduced for proving of the said Libel and Summons, and of the persons who are
to pass upon the Inquest, be also given to them; to the effect, the Party may
know what to object against the said Witnesses and Assizers, and may take
forth Diligences for summoning of Witnesses for proving of their objections,
why any contained in the said Lists should not be admitted to be a Witness, or
upon the Assize.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Evan Tyler, Printer to the King's most Excellent
MAJESTY, 1670.


