The Treasures of the Sea.

A SERMON TO THE MARINERS UPON

DEUTERONOMY. XXXIII. xviii, xix. And of Zabulun, he said, Rejoice Zabulun in thy
Ports, and Issachar in thy Tents.

They shall call the people unto the mountain, there they shall offer
Sacrifices of Righteousness: For they shall suck of the abundance of the Seas,
and of Treasures hid in the Sand.

Terra parum fuerat: Terris adjecimus undas;
Fortunae varias auximus art vias.
LONDON, Printed for Robert Kettlewell, at the Hand and Scepter over against S.
Dunstans Church in Fleet street. M DC LXXXIII.

Reader,
THis Sermon was occasionally Preached upon Mr. William Harrington's (that
famous and successful Engineer) recovering the lading out of the Katherine,
sunk unfortunately in the Downs, many fathoms under Water. The good man
therefore having been prosperous beyond expectation, in a concern of so high a
value, viz. 14000 l. and upwards, was willing to return his thanks to God, and
therefore made choice of me to perform that Religious Office, which after the
Service of the Church, I did solemnly in this following Sermon.

Leigh in Essex, Nov. 21. 1682. William Thomson.

TO THE Right Honorable and Right Reverend Father in GOD, HENRY Lord Bishop of
LONDON.
My Lord,
SOme Philosophers tell us, That all the great and goodliest Natures display
their Excellencies in three things, Light, Heat and Love. The more Light dances
in Precious Stones, the more is their worth: Heat raises Eagles above Worms,
and those Palms are held the Noblest, which have the most Love and Inclination
to their Fellows. I need not tell the World how eminent those Qualities are in
your Lordship, whose Understanding daily assists the best Monarch and the best
Church in the World, with its Lights and Counsels, whose vigor and activity of
Spirit, mingled with the Nobleness of your Blood, has worthily advanced you to
the best Office in the Church; and whose Candor and Bounty triumphs over so
many Hearts.

But it is these Virtues, that make all us especially, who have the Happiness
to live under your Lordships care, to study all possible ways to give testimony
of that Honor and Duty we owe you. Among the rest I have put in my Mite, and
with your Lordships leave, will hereafter endeavor to mend both the coin and
the sum. I would not fill your Lordships left hand with a Letter, and
therefore humbly begging your Blessing, I rest,

Right Honorable and Right Reverend Lord, Leigh, Nov. 21. 1682. Your Lordships
most Dutiful Son and Servitor, THOMSON.

To the HONORABLE GEORGE LEG, Esquire; Master of the Ordance to his Majesty
CHARLES the Second, and c.
Noble Sir,
THis Discourse is due to you, upon the account of your favors to Mr.
Harrington: And therefore as he was pleased to make me the Orator of his thanks
to God, so am I also the Messenger of his thanks to You. I am a great Admirer
of your Honors unshaken Loyalty, and other your great Virtues; and I am as
devout a Beedsman for your lasting Prosperity. That therefore Heaven may bless
all that Wisdom, Conduct and Integrity, which shines so gloriously in you above
most others, is the daily Orison of,

Noble Sir, Leigh in Essex, Nov. 21. 1682. Your Honors in all Duty and
Observance, THOMSON.

To the Right Honorable DANIEL Lord FINCH, one of the Lords of His Majesty's
Most Honorable Privy Council, and c.
My Noble Lord,
YOur many favors oblige me, and your high Concerns in the Admiralty,
encourage me humbly to offer this Discourse, such as it is, at Your Lordships
feet. I can say little of its suitableness to a Person of your great Quality,
and less of its Worth: But if your Lordship shall please to accept of these
Prolusions, I will hereafter endeavor something more worthly your Lordships
notice, that I may at once give testimony of my thankfulness for the favors
already received, and demonstrate how much I am,

Noble Patron, Leigh in Essex, Nov, 21. 1682. Your Honors most obliged
Servitor, THOMSON.

To the Worshipful SAMUEL HARE Of LEIGH, Esquire.
Worthy Sir,
THE daily Experience I have of your Zeal to Religion, your Loyalty to the
Government established, and your Kindness to me, has emboldened me to present
the following Sermon to your view, which however imperfect (as the rest of my
Productions) may yet retrieve to your Memory what you have already heard from
the Pulpit. There is variety of Inductions from the words, and such as have led
us through some of the most important points of the Christian Faith. It may
therefore serve at once for a Sermon and System of Religion. Accept it
therefore (if not upon these accounts, yet) as it is intended for an
acknowledgement of the many obligations by you conferred upon,

Good Sir, Leigh in Essex, Nov. 21. 1682. Your most Humble and obliged
Servitor, THOMSON.

DEUTERONOMY. XXXIII. xviii, xix. And of Zabulun he said, rejoice Zabulun in thy going
out, and Issachar in thy Tents.

They shall call the people unto the mountain, there they shall offer
Sacrifices of Righteousness: For they shall such of the abundance of the Seas,
and of Treasures hid in the Sand.


HOwever some men, wedded to Cowardice and Sloth, have declaimed against the
dangers and roughness of the Sea, looking upon every storm as a Trumpeter of
Death, and every Wave as a Winding Sheet: Yet if we shall but seriously inspect
the nature of the Watery Element, we shall find her as calm as any of the rest,
and no less advantageous to humane Nature: For whereas the greedy Earth, when
she shakes, spares neither Men nor Cities, and the mutable Air insects us with
unhealthful blasts, and the Fire scorches our Blood; Old Neptune is of a more
tractable disposition, and if his angry Sister ( Juno, the Air) will but let
him alone, never fails to be favorable to the concerns of the World. So that
Tertullian, though in the commendations of other things plentiful enough of
words, yet in the praise of Water, flows with an Eloquence worthy himself and
the subject, telling us that it is the ancientest of all the Elements, and that
none of them has so many Patronages of Nature, so many Privileges of Grace, so
many solemnities of Discipline, nor any so highly advanced in the mysteries of
Religion. De Bapt. Thales asserts it the principle of all things; and later
Chemists assure us that it is productive of whatever the skilful Operator
pleases; that all Art is nothing but an imitation of the great process of God
Almighty in the Creation of the World, who having out of nothing called a
confused, (and, as seems from the Text, a liquid) matter, the Spirti of God
moved upon the waters, Genesis 1. 2. giving motion to the fluid Mother of all
things, who being warmed by that agitation, brought forth the succeeding parts
of the Universe in their Order. Whence Marius Victor,

Et sacer extensis impedens Spiritus undis
Altrices animabat aquas, dans semina rerum.
And agreeable hereunto the Stoics made this Element the food of the Stars, as
judging it the part of a Mother to suckle her own Infants; which if so, the
taking away the staff of Water, Isa. 3. 1. may not only prove the dissolution
of the little, but also of the greater World.

All Nations from the observation of its cleansing quality have adopted it into
the Ceremonies and Mysteries of their Religion; and the Platonists have not
only made it Purgative here, but Cathartick hereafter, sending humane Souls to
be washed in the next World from the stains they had contracted in this.

-- Aliis sub gurgite vasto
Infectum eluitur scelus.
But it is of infinite advantage to us, that we may be washed by a more easy
and purifying Sacrament, when the stains of our Nature and the Errors of our
Lives are cleansed by the Waters of Baptism, through which so many graces of
God descend upon us as in a shower, according to the Prophetic Doctrine of
that Ocean of Scripture, and Labyrinth of the Mysteries of God, Ezekiel. 36. 25.
Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean: from all your
filthiness and from all your Idols will I cleanse you. Which though we should
interpret with the Jews, to signify an abundance of Temporal Blessings,
increased and refreshed with the dews of Heaven, it could not be
disadvantageous to the Ho^nour of our Subject: But if with S. Aug. de doct.
Chr. c. 34. we understand it of those many graces, which shall, as it were,
distill through the Holy Font upon the Christian Church, it will much more
ennoble this fruitful spring of all Virtues, which gave not only blessings to
the Church, but a Name and Title of Honor to Christ himself, who, Cant. 4. 15.
is called a well of living waters. And truly the same Prophet has made use of
this Symbol, Ezekiel. 47. to denote the whole fate of the Chruch, from a beginning
so small and inconsiderable till Christ should have dominion from Sea to Sea,
and from the River unto the ends of the Earth, Psalm. 72. 8. But S. Gregory
understands it of the different degrees and progresses of Christian life,
washing first the feet and Epithumetick Organs, and then growing by degrees of
good works and an holy life, till we come to be swallowed in the unfathomable
Ocean of Divine Contemplations.

But it is time, after so long a Voyage, to make for the Havens of Zabulun, to
survey the strength of her Ports, and the Riches brought in by the Sea, which
were so considerable, that they were esteemed a reward worthy those who should
be the great Preachers and Examples of Religion, who should call the people to
the Mountain, to offer the Sacrifices of Righteousness.

We will therefore begin with the History of these two Tribes from the
Benediction and (...) of their great Patriarch Jacob, and then proceed to
considerations more practical, and to be deduced from the following words of
the Text.

1. Rejoice, O Zabulun, etc. Genesis 49. 13. Zabulun shall dwell at the Haven of
the Sea, and he shall be for an Haven of Ships, and his border shall be unto
Zidon. So that though he was but the tenth Son, yet is he preferred before his
Seniors, perhaps for that Christ was to be conceived in Nazareth of that Tribe.
And therefore he has a prerogative, the first, which the Holy Text mentions
given to man, ( viz. a Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, Genesis 1. 28.) And
accordingly his portion was allotted in the Agrarian Laws of Joshua, Josh. 19.
10, 11. And indeed in such a place too, where his Neighbors, the Tyrians and
Zidonians, pretended to a chief Admiralty in the Sea, as the first Inventors of
Navigation. For though a man would think Adam could not well exercise his
jurdiction over his watery Subjects, without the assistance of shipping, and
wonder more the world should be so dull, that in sixteen hundred years no
commerce should be used at Sea (especially if it were as well peopled before
the Flood, as in the like number of years after;) yet there is no positive
account of any Naval Architecture till the days of Noah, who by divine
direction prepared his Ark of Gopher, against the general inundation.

Afterward, several Nations pretended to be the Authors of this most useful
Art, (and perhaps it might be found out by several people, who had yet no
commerce one with another, necessity being ingenious under all Climates.) But
the Phoenicians put in the fairest, who as they are accounted the Authors of
Arithmetic and Astronomy, so also of Navigation, whence is that of Tibullus:

Prima ratem ventis credere docta Tyrus. They were the first that took the
observation of the North Star, in suppliment to the Naval mystery. But
Herodotus complains, that these Phoenicians, who came with Cadmus into Greece,
as they civilized the people, by their Sciences and Literature, so they
exceedingly debauched them by their Luxury and insatiable avarice, which
together with their Merchandise they first imported thither. The Greeks call
them Phoenicians, but the Hebrews Canaanites. Their Country is the Seacoast of
Syria and Tyrus, the maritime Metropolis thereof bordering upon the Tribe of
Zabulun, whose Trade and Commerce was so great and remarkable in the days of
Ezekiel, that two whole Chapters are spent in the description of her vastness,
and judgments. Ezekiel. 26 and 27. She is there styled a Merchant, whose Ships
were made of Firr, their Masts of Cedar, their Oars of Bashan Oak, the Hatches
of Ivory, the Waste-cloths, Vanes, Flaggs and Pendants of Purple and Scarlet.
The common Mariners were the Zidonians, and Inhabitants of Arvad, their Calkers
were the Ancients of Gebal, and their Pilots the Wisemen of Tyrus. Near unto
such ingenious and thriving Neighbors was the lot of Zabulun. But they had
also Havens of their own, upon the Sea of Galilee, Capharnaum, Bethsaida and
Tiberias, where probably they took in the Oil, the Wine and Corn of their
Brother Issachar. So advantageously were they situated, both for the advantages
of the most ingenious and useful conversation, as also for the advancement of
their Trade and Commerce. And it is very like, they much improved themselves
hereby: For in the Song of Deborah, we read of those of Zabulun to handle the
Pen of the Writer, Judge. 5. 14. And it might not be improper they should handle
the Pen of the Law, who were to be the Trumpeters of the Gospel.

2. And Issachar, etc. The Text gives a character of Issachar, like that which
the Poets usually give of the first and best men of the World, that is, that he
finding a rich Soil, was content to labor for his living, to pay his Gabel, to
enjoy, through the sweat of his Brows, the Treasures of the Sands, and the
productions of the Earth, containing himself within his own bounds, without
encroaching upon the Lands or Havens of Zabulun, which seem strangely to break
the square of his Portion and Inheritance. And though the Heraldry of the ninth
Son of Jacob, promise no great effects either in Arts or Arms, yet in the Wars
of Saul and David, 1 Chronicles. 12. 32. the children of Issachar were assembled for
David, under the command of two hundred Captains of their own Tribe, who were
men that had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do. To
teach us that the wisest men do not always descend from Kings, from Priests, or
from Consuls; but sometimes creep from under the humble shades of poor Tents
and innocent Cottages, to confound the pride of the Great and dissolute, to sit
in counsel with Princes, and to determine the great affairs of War and Peace,
or to administer relief and justice, deliverance and comfort to the oppressed
world.

We might add hereunto, that the Countries of Zabulun and Issachar have been
the Cradles of many great and deserving Princes, as well as the scenes of
glorious actions. But, to omit all other how considerable soever, let us cast
our eyes upon our Savior, who honored Nazareth with his conception, Mount
Tabor with his Transfiguration, Capharnaum and the Seacoasts of Galilee with
his Doctrine, his Miracles, his Conversation; and vouchsafed from thence also
to choose his Disciples, to call the people out of the valley of the shadow of
Death, unto the Mountain of light and life, to offer the Sacrifices not of
Bulls or of Goats, but those of an humble and contrite spirit, which through
the merits of that one unspotted Sacrifice, which was once offered up for us
all upon the Cross, become Sacrifices of Righteousness, holy and acceptable
unto the Lord. Wherefore rejoice, Zabulun, etc.

2. They shall call the people, etc. From this prophetic Benediction of the
good Patriarch we may observe,

1. That the surest foundation to lay the hopes of a future prosperity, is true
piety. The doctrines of all good men, the examples of all Ages, both of the
good and bad, and even the dictates of reason it self astipulate for this
doctrine. If we look back as far as the Laws of Moses, we find that great
Conductor of Gods people ever pressing this doctrine, as the only means to
obtain their promised Land, and possess it, when attained. Deuteronomy. 6. 18. Thou
shall do that which is right and good in the sight of the Lord, that it may be
well with thee, and that thou may go in and possess the good Land, which the
Lord swear unto thy Fathers. It is this Song, which so often exercises the harp
of David. Psalm. 34. 9. O fear the Lord, O ye his Saints: For there is no want
to them that fear him. And after all his experience and observation, he assures
us, Psalm. 37. 25. I have been young, and now am old, yet never saw I the
righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging their bread. The wisest of men tells
us, Prove. 10. 27. The fear of the Lord prolongeth life. And it is very
observable what Epiphanius remarks concerning the former ages of the world,
namely, that there was not one example of a Son, who died before his Father,
till Terah, the Father of Abraham, taught the people a false Religion to make
Images of Clay and worship them, and concerning him it was first said, Genesis 11.
28. And Haran died before his father Terah, in the Land of his Nativity.
Pointing out to us that it was the Impiety of men, which brought all the evils
into the world, and hastened the slow necessities of Death. But to what purpose
shall we multiply examples? St. Paul plainly tells us, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness
is profitable unto all things, having the promise of this life, and that which
is to come. This doctrine he had received from the fountain of truth, as it is
now recorded, Mat. 6. 33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. In short, then it
was piety that carried Joseph to all the honors of Egypt, that gave victory to
David, and riches to Sol^m^n; that brought the wicked Head of Holofernes into
the lap of Judith, and threw Esther into the embraces of the mightiest Prince
then upon earth. But it is not necessary to stand upon the success, that has
always attended particular devotion: It were beyond our Arithmetic to number
them. All those Kingdoms, which have been founded in piety and religious Laws,
have ever flourisht with a lasting prosperity. Upon this basis, was laid the
Jewish Synagogue, which endured to the amazement of the World for so many
Generations; and if there were any sad Contingences, that befell it, it is
nothing but the due reward of their wickedness, and revolting from God. And the
Christian Church was built upon the Mountain of piety, to be the glory of all
Ages, the honor of Kings, the desire of all the World, To suck of the
abundance of the Seas, and c.

But there are two vices opposite to a well grounded and solid piety, and
consequently to a firm and well established prosperity, and those are a too
rapacious Avarice, and an overhasty Ambition.

1. Avarice. Job tells us there are those, that build their houses as a Moth,
Job 27. 18. And how does it build? Easy observation shows, that this little
creature harbored in some piece of Cloth, gnaws perpetually to cover himself,
till his greediness has devoured the walls of his house, and so he discovers
his own nakedness instead of hiding himself. Thus does every Covetous man: He
wracks himself and torments others, to raise a Monument of his greatness or
security: But this goodly building composed of Injustice, Rapines and
Oppressions, cemented together with the Sweat and Blood of the poor, crumbles
into ruin; and when this comes into the judgment of God, this foolish Moth,
who has so gnawn, to feed and cover himself; finds himself naked, hungry and
extremely miserable. So true is that of the Prophet Hab. 2. 9, 10, 11. Woe to
him that covets an evil covetousness to his house, that he may set his Nest on
high, that he may be delivered from the power of evil. Thou have consulted
shame to thine house, by cutting off many people, and have sinned against thy
Soul. For the stone shall cry out of the Wall, and the Beam out of the Timber
shall answer it. So that instead of sucking the Treasures of the Sand, their
portion is only those of the Snow, which God speaks to Job of, ( Job 38. 22.
Have thou entered into the treasures of the Snow?) And of which one of the
Fathers makes a very useful Moral, telling us, that the Treasures of the Snow
are Wordly Riches, which covetous men rake together, as children do Snow, which
in their folly they roll into heaps, with no little pains and hazards of their
health, efforming them into Horses, Giants, Houses, fansying strength,
usefulness and safety in these more feeble works of their feeble hands; but the
next shower wa^shes away all their labors, leaving nothing behind, but the
mother of those white fleeces, which foams a while upon the pavement, and
presently sinks into the bosom of the earth. So slippery are all the acquists
of covetousness, that they scarce ever stay so long with us as to be enjoyed,
never so long as we expected, nor at all to satisfy us. But as for the man
that fears the Lord, that delights greatly in his commandment, blessed is
he. His seed shall be mighty upon earth; the generation of the upright shall be
blessed. Wealth and Riches shall be in his House, and his Righteousness
endures for ever. Psalm 112. 1, 2, 3.

2. An overhasty ambition. Have you ever seen a bubble rise in a moment, and
take a dance or two in the lap of the Wave, his Mother, and then burst asunder,
and immediately shrink again into his first principles? Then have you seen the
emblem of an ambitious man, who rising from almost as great a weakness, swells
bigg, and fetches a caper, or two, and perhaps breaks two or three more
bubbles, that float in his way, and by and by some heavier drop of adversity
falls upon his head, and crushes him into his first Original. This is
exemplified to us in the adventures of the Consul Bibulus, who swelling in his
triumphant Chariot, was killed by the accidental fall of a Tilestone before he
could reach the Capitol. Or in the great Favorite Sejanus, whom the same day
saw attended by the Senate, and torn to pieces by the people. Or in the Sacred
History, where we find Absalom impatient of the long and (as seemed to him)
more than humane age of his Father, and thereupon sets all his engines at work
to bring the Crown upon his own head: But the event was only, that having by a
restless ambition disturbed the Court of his aged Father, every hair of that
busy head became a snare to him, and an Executioner of the Divine Justice. So
infallibly does ruin follow Pride and Rebellion.

Put all into this L'envoy, and it amounts to this, That fortunes raised upon
unjust ambitions, or covetous exactions, are as houses built upon sands, which
wash away with every storm, scarce leaving behind them the name of their ruins,
while exemplar pieties found their prosperities upon Rocks, which no winds, nor
rains can move from their place. And the reason of it is, Because Religion puts
us under the protection of God, without whose blessing nothing is safe, nothing
is successful. Wherefore it becomes all those, who imbark themselves in the
dangers, and employments of the world, to secure the blessings of Heaven, and
the favors of God by zealous devotions, and constant piety. For then the Stars
shall fight in their courses, the winds shall blow, the Sea shall spread her
self as a carpet, the earth shall open all the Magazines and Riches of her
Entrails: And they shall suck the abundance of the Seas, and Treasures, etc.

Why is it then that we see so many fruitless, so many fatal Voyages? Why does
the Sea so often raise her Waves, as the Mountains of Ararat, and then open her
unfathomable Womb, as if she meant to disclose the Entrails and Center of
nature? Why does the Air so often become the emblem of Hell, rending all things
with the fury of its lightnings, and by and by hide the ruins made, in
darkness, thick, as that of the infernal Abyss? How comes it to pass, that
Fleets fraught with the Riches of the East and of the West, so often split upon
Rocks and wreck upon sands? How comes so great wealth to be a prey to the
Ocean, and so many bodies of men to be food for Sherks and Dolphins? Why is
Heaven so deaf in the midst of these tempests, that neither Tears, nor Vows,
nor Prayers can move it to mercy? Why; it is because men carry along with them
into the Deep their Intemperances, Adulteries, Blasphemies, Oaths, Curses,
Rapines, and the whole Mafs of their Sins unrepented of. This is that accursed
Cargo, that Anathema, that makes the Seas to swell, and the Winds to roar, that
stops the ears of Heaven to their call, and makes an eternal shipwreck of their
souls, bodies and estates. So intolerable a weight does sin add to the
calamities of men, and so backward is God in redressing the miseries of the
wicked. This brings to my remembrance a story, which Diogenes Laertius reports
of Prias of Priene, who being at Sea in a storm with some wicked Passengers,
and they calling upon their Gods for relief, the wise Philosopher advised them
to silence ((...)) lest the Gods should be aware of their passage. The
vengeance, not the mercy of the Divinity always pursuing the ungodly. Which
should teach us above all things to learn the Golden Verse of Orpheus, ((...),
and c.) to make Religion the first, and last, and all our cares, that we may be
preserved from all dangers, or secured in them by the Divine Protection; or
rather that of a more Divine Poet, Psalm. 91. 2, 3, 4. I will say of the Lord,
he is my refuge and my fortress; my God in him will I trust. Surely he shall
deliver thee from the snare of the Fowler, and from the noisome pestilence. He
shall cover thee with his Feathers, and under his Wings shall thou trust, his
truth shall be thy Shield and Buckler. Thou shall not be afraid for the terror
by night, nor for the Arrow that flies by day; nor for the pestilence that
walks in darkness, nor for the destruction that wastes at noon day. A thousand
shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not
come nigh thee. For he shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in
all thy ways, v. 11. His favor is the best policy and firmest Insurance.

But there are those (and particularly S. Ambrose de bendict. Patriarch.) who
have more advantageously, and more worthy a Prophetic Spirit, discourst this
subject, referring the Doctrine to Christ and his Apostles, and telling us that
out of Zabulun Christ sent them to call the people to the Mountain, and c. (i.
e.) to the Church, who sucked the abundance of the Seas, and Treasures hid in
the Sand, when the bounty of Kings, converted to the Faith, enricht the Church
with the abundance of their Donations: Which happy and pious Interpretation
gives us occasion to handle Doctrines the most useful, and mysteries the most
profound. And

1. We observe what improbable Instruments, in the eyes of men, God chose to
call his people to the Mountain: He fetches no Disciples out of the Schools of
the Pharisees; he sends not to the Walls or Porches of Athens, but calls a few
Fisherman to give Laws and Religion to all the Nations, and all the Ages of the
World: Of which Origin cont. Cells. l. 1. gives the reason, telling us that if
Christ had chosen the wise and eloquent, it might have given suspicion, that
like the Gentile Philosophers, he had raised his Sect, not by the Grace of God,
but by the Arts and Elocution of his followers. But when we see a few Publicans
and Fishers convince the obstinacy of the Jews, and baffle the learning of the
Greeks, what can we say else, but that the Prophecy of Jeremy is fulfilled?
Jer. 16. 16. I will send for many Fishers, and they shall fish them; and the
call of Christ become effectual to the Salvation of the World, Mat. 4. 19.
Follow me, and I will make ye Fishers of men. All which S. Paul very well
expresses 1 Cor. 2. 4, 5. My speech was not in the enticing words of man's
wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power: That your faith should
not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. Go then, busy
Statesman, lay the uncemented bulk of thy future designs upon the tottering
Basis of thy own Wisdom: Devise Laws, join Interests, oppress thine Enemies,
plot against whom thou suspectest, cajoul thy Friends, and remove all the
possible obstacles of thy greatness: All this while thou do no more, than
what the trifling fancies of men usually practice upon a Cloud, making Dragons,
Chimaera's, and Armed men, fighting according to their own conceits, and
presently the Wind drives them away, and all that they beheld with admiration
in the Heavens, falls down in Water upon their Heads, and makes Mortar under
their feet. All our wisdom is folly, all our strength is weakness; it is God
only that can manifest his power in our infirmities, and turn all our
imperfections to his Glory. It was he alone, that upon the weak foundation of
these poor Sons of Zabulun (weak indeed in the eyes of men, but what can be
weak that is supported by the Arm of God?) built his Church to continue the
admiration and glory of all the world till time shall be no more. It was he
alone that could strengthen the most abject persons in the World to go through
all the oppositions of humane wit, or strength, or malice, to drive the Oracles
from their Stools, and the false Gods from their Temples, placing in their
rooms the Doctrine and Cross of Jesus. It was he that by the preaching of these
silly Orators united together people of Nations so distant, of natures so
unlike, of manners so different, and in Religion so disagreeing, to serve him
for ever in the Communion of the Catholic Church, giving some Apostles, and
some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers; for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ: Till we all come in the unity of Faith, and of the knowledge of
the Son of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. Why then do the Heathen rage, and why do
the people imagine a vain thing? The Kings of the Earth stood up, and the
Rulers took counsel together against the Lord, and against his anointed. Yet
for all this have I set my King upon my Holy Hill of Sion. Ps. 2. O
unfathomable abyss of the Divine Wisdom and Power! that out of the mouths of
Babes and Sucklings have ordained strength, that thou might still the Enemy
and Avenger; that by such contemptible means have dashed to pieces the strength
and polity of the World, like a Potters Vessel, to advance the trophies of thy
on, and to show us that nothing is too weak to accomplish the ends of God.

But if we shall search into the History of this sort of men, we shall find
them to have had the first hand in the greatest transactions of the World, as
if God had on purpose chose always to make use of Fishermen to give the first
motion to those Wheels, that should set all the rest agoing. For if, as S.
Basil observes, ( Bas. Hexam.) Adam first exercised his faculties, where God
gave him his first Dominion, he was first a Peter man, and the Sea the earliest
Scene of Humane action. And yet the Jewish Traditions run far beyond this,
telling us that God in the fifth day of the Creation formed the Behemoth and
Leviathan, and finding them too big for one Element, pickled up the one to be
the food of the Elect in the time of the Messiah. And though this story
grounded upon that passage 2 Esar. 6. 49. may seem to some a fable more
ridiculous than the Whale of Lucian; yet if this mighty Whale, which no Element
can contain, be but the (...), and Fish of the Sibyls, then is this Parable
such as contains the greatest mystery of the Christian Faith, (...) and tells
us in plain English, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and the Savior of
the World, that he is the Bread of Life, and the food of the Elect. Which may
illustrate, or at least enlarge our contemplations upon those words of our
Savior, Mat. 7. 10. If he ask a Fish, will he give him a Serpent?

Moses was drawn out of the Waters, as his name imports, Exodus 2. 10. to lay
the foundation of the Synagogne, which like his Ark built of Bulrushes, Bitumen
and Pitch, moral, ceremonial and politic Laws, floated its Votaries upon the
uncertain Waves of a troublesome World, till the Kings Daughter should receive
them into the favors and honors of her King. Ita nos pisciculi secundum (...)
nostrum Jesum Christam in aqua nascimur, nec aliter, quam in aqua permanendo,
salvi sumus. Tert. de Bapt. c. 1. Let Infidels and Heretics, like Asps and
Vipers, draw poison from the dry and barren Sand, Water is the Element of Fish,
and Regenerate of God.

The Gentiles too owe much of their Religion, and much of their knowledge to
the Hebber-men of Coos, who at one lucky draught brought up the famous Tripos,
whose ternary of Feet denote the full perfection of knowledge, the great
prerogative of Apollo: So that while Janus keeps the Storks off from behind,
and blindly peeps forward to future events, the God of Delphos glories in the
knowledge of all Tenses, past, present, and to come. And truly this Oracle did
so strangely inchant the spirits of men, given over to superstition, false
fears, and unreasonable hopes, that he grew famous through the Universe: Kings
and Counselors, the greatest and the wisest men upon Earth, sent to him in all
doubtful affairs, (to perplex them the more) as willing to be cheated with the
ambiguity of his Answers. In this reputation he flourisht for many Ages, till
the Hebrew Boy packt him from his Altars, and sunk him into a darkness, like
that of his Responses.

Then it was that God sent the true Fishermen, the Apostles, with the true
Tripos and mystery of the Eternal Wisdom of the Father, the expectation of the
past, the glory of the present, the hopes of the future, and Salvation of all
the ages of the World. Fraught with this Wisdom, these poor Idiots failed
through the World, stopped the mouths of the Philosophers, silenced the Oracles,
destroyed the false Gods, banished Satan out of his Kingdom, converted the
Nations; and maugre all the malice of Hell and wicked men, planted the Doctrine
of Jesus Christ over the most famous Kingdoms of the Universe: And as S.
Chrysostom observes, it was no obstacle to their proceedings, that they were
few or unlearned, or private persons, or that they preached austere and unwonted
Doctrines, or that mankind was prepossest with old Laws and old Customs. But
the previous grace of God took away all these hindrances, turning their
infirmities into strength, their ignorance into wisdom, their stripes into joy,
their imprisonments into liberty, and all their impediments to the advantages
of Religion. Insomuch that they daily converted multitudes in every Nation from
false principles and dissolute lives; from the slavery of Sin and Satan, to
serve the living God in soberness, righteousness and godliness. So plentiful
was the draught of Fish, when God commanded the Net to be let down.

And now what more useful Application can we make of all this, than that which
Syracides observes, Ecclus. 3. 19. Many are in high place, and of renown; but
mysteries are revealed unto the meek. Their minds are the freest from the
perturbations of passions and unruly affections, and therefore the fittest
receptacles of the Divine Truth. And as S. Basil in Praef. in Isa. discoursing
concerning the diversities of gifts, tells us, that a mind stained with sin,
like an abused Looking-glass, renders but a broken and confused Image: And as
we cannot see our faces in any matter but in such only as is smooth and
pellucid; so there is required a meekness and clearness of Soul for the right
perception and reflection of Heavenly verities. Hence it is that we see so many
of the learned World Artheistical in their principles, so many great men
dissolute in their lives, and so many people every where ignorant or careless
of their Salvation. Not that they are incapable to apprehend the Doctrines, or
unable to practice the duties, but because they have sullied the purities and
clearness of their Souls with the lusts and evil habits of their Bodies, and so
rendered them unfit for Holy Mysteries. A man might measure the motions and
distances of the Stars, might act in the most important affairs of the World,
muster Armies, fit Navies, pitch Battles, though he came from his last nights
surfeit, and his eyes were yet red with Wine; but a man can never say his
Prayers, or serve his God till his passions are becalmed, and his mind brought
to a certain frame and evenness. Nay, it will be hard to receive, or long to
retain any true Idea of God or his Religion, so long as our Lusts, his Enemies,
are our Masters, as is visible in the Gentiles, who when they knew God,
glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened, Romans 1. 21. Till by the
meekness of the Gospel, this Prodigal was brought to himself. And I am apt to
think that some meek and humble Cottagers have better notions concerning God
and his word, than any proud inflate Philosopher. And this might be the reason
of our Saviors great rejoicing in Spirit, Luke 10. 21. I thank thee, O Father,
Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise and
prudent, and revealed them unto Babes: Even so, Father, for so it seemed good
in they sight.

2. They shall offer the Sacrifices of Righteousness: S. Chrysostom recounts
ten Sacrifices, not enjoined by Law, but such as become the Evangelical Grace.
The first is that Spiritual and Mystical gift, mentioned by S. Paul, Ephesians. 5. 1.
Be ye followers of God, as dear Children, and walk in love as Christ also has
loved us, and given himself for us, an offering, and a Sacrifice to God for a
sweet smelling savor. The second is the blood of the Martyrs, or the virtues
and holy life of the mortified. Romans 12. 1. I beseech you therefore, Brethren,
by the mercies of God, that ye present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, boly and
acceptable to God, which is your reasonable service. The third that of Prayer,
Psalm. 141. 2. Let my Prayer be set forth before thee, as Incense, and the
lifting up of my hands, as the evening Sacrifice. The fourth is the pleasant
warbles of Hymns, and the grateful returns of Praises to the Divine Majesty,
Psalm. 116. 17. The fifth is Justice, which the noble Prophet calls upon the
people for with so much Zeal, Isa. 1. 17. Cease to do evil, learn to do well,
seek judgment. The sixth, Alms and mercy, according to S. James c. 1. 27. Pure
Religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit the Orphans
and Widows in their affliction. The seventh is the Jubilee and exulation in the
Victories and Glories of Christ, as the Prophet speaks Isa. 26. 1, 2. In that
day shall this Song be sung in the Land of Judah, We have a strong City:
Salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks. Open the Gates, that the
righteous Nation, which keeps the truth, may enter in. Then it is that
Zabulun shall rejoice: Then shall he suck of the abundance of the Seas, and
treasures hid in the Sand. Then shall the Daughter of Tire be there with a
gift, even the rich among the people. Instead of thy Fathers thou shall have
Children, whom thou may make Princes in all Lands. And we will remember the
name of the Lord from generation to generation, and all the people shall give
him thanks world without end, Ps. 45. The eight is the Sacrifice of an humble
and contrite Spirit, which however despicable in the eyes of men is more
acceptable to God than a thousand Holocausts. The ninth is the preaching of the
Gospel, whereof S. Paul so often glories, and particularly Rom 15 16. exults in
the Grace of God, by which he was called to be a minister of Jesus Christ to
the Gentiles, ministering the Gospel of God, that the sacrificing up of the
Gentiles might be acceptable to God, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost. Happy
S. Paul, who with thy fiery Tongue did burn so many reasonable Sacrifices to
God! Happy S. Chrysostom too in this Sacrifice, who first offering to God the
Calves of thy Golden Lips, did afterward present so many willing Holocausts
of Converts unto the Eternal Majesty! Happy the Gentiles in a Doctor to preach
the mysteries of the Eternal Word, to convert Nations, to convince Heretics,
to reduce wanderers, and bring all men into the paths of Salvation! And thou
once happy City of Constantine! while thou did cherish the most eloquent of
men, who sanctified all the Learning of the Grecians by the Holiness of his
mouth, and offered to God so many the most acceptable Sacrifices, the Spirits
of Proselytes, won by the irresistible charms of his Oratory, and mortified to
the severities of Repentance, and the Doctrine of the Cross. Glory be given to
God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who gave such gifts unto men. May
there rise in every generation such persons as may imitate their Sanctity, Zeal
and Industry, and being blessed by thy goodness, may bring many Souls to thee,
and maintain True Doctrine and Holy Discipline in thy Church, till the second
coming of Christ our Savior. The tenth is Charitable beneficence to the
household of Faith, as witnesses S. Paul, Phil. 4. 18. I received the things
that were sent, an odor of a sweet smell, a Sacrifice acceptable to God.

But the first is that alone which can make the rest acceptable before God, and
without which the Prayers of the most devout, the blood of the Martyrs, the
alms of the most Charitable, and the Religion of all mankind were ineffectual
to their Salvation. It is by this Sacrifice alone our sins are washed, our
natures purified, our duties rewarded, and the Christian Faith secured of the
glories of Eternity. O blessed Jesus! O Eternal Son of God! Who can
sufficiently admire this mystery, or adore thy goodness? Who can sufficiently
extol thy incomprehensible love, who gave not thy Wealth, not thy Brethren,
not thy Kindred, not thy Angels, but thy self, God and Man, for us Sinners and
Enemies? Pious Devotions have been carried into many admirable raptures in the
contemplation of this sublime Mystery; but none seems to have gone higher than
that of Origin, who urges this great High Priest to have offered himself not
for man only, but to have tasted death (...), extending the merits and efficacy
of his passion to the Stars, otherwise impure in the sight of God, and
therefore in need to be cleansed; that so all things might be restored to the
Kingdom of the Father. Orig. in Evang. Joh. And which S. Paul seems highly to
favor in that famous place of Col. 1. 19, 20. For it pleased the Father, that
in him should all fullness dwell, and (having made peace through the Blood of
his Cross) by him to reconcile all things unto himself; by him, I say, whether
they be things in Earth or things in Heaven. If this be so, we need not break
the Glasses of Galiloeo; the spots may be washed out of the Sun, and total
nature sanctified unto God that made it. However this may be, it is safest for
us to attend to Holy Scriptures telling us, Heb. 9. that the Son of God
offered, through the Eternal Spirit, this Sacrifice upon the Cross, to purge
our Consciences from dead works to serve the living God: And he is not now
entered into the holy places made with hands, but into heaven it self now to
appear in the presence of God for us. Which is to say in effect that Christ
offered himself a Sacrifice upon the Cross, which because it was perfect, and
infinitely meritorious, could be but one, and that but once; but because the
needs of the World should last as long as the World it self, it was necessary
there should be a perpetual Ministry established, whereby this one sufficient
Sacrifice should be made for ever effectual to the several new arising needs of
all the World. To this end Christ was made a Priest for ever, not that he
should offer himself often: For then must he often have suffered since the
foundation of the World, Heb. 9 25. But being ascended into Heaven, he there
represents and exhibits to the Father the great effective Sacrifice (which he
offered on the Cross) to eternal and never failing purposes.

And as Christ is pleased to represent to his Father that great Sacrifice as a
means of atonement and expiation for all mankind, and with special purposes for
all the elect, all that serve him in holiness: So he has appointed that the
same ministry shall be done on Earth too, in our manner, and according to our
promotion. And therefore he chose first the Fishermen of Galilee to offer the
Sacrifices of Righteousness, and has ever since preserved in his Church an
order of men, who by showing forth the Lords death by Sacramental
representation, may pray unto God after the same manner that our Lord and High
Priest does, that is, offer to God, and represent in this most solemn Prayer
and Sacrament, Christ as once for all, offered already upon the Altar of the
Cross: So sending up a gracious instrument, whereby our Prayers may for his
sake, and in the same manner of Intercession be offered up to God in our
behalf, and for all them for whom we pray, to all those purposes for which
Christ died.

And as the Holy Priests do in a Sacramental manner present to God the
Sacrifice of the Cross by being Imitators of Christ's Intercession: So the
people are Sacrificers too in their manner: For that besides in saying Amen,
they join in the Act of him that ministers, and make it also to be their own:
So when they worthily receive the Holy Eucharist, they receive Christ within
them, and therefore may also offer him to God, while in their Sacrifice of
Obedience and Thanksgiving, they present themselves to God with Christ, whom
they have Spiritually received, that is, themselves with that, which will make
them gracious and acceptable. The offering their Bodies and Souls and services
to God in him, and by him and with him, who is his Fathers wellbeloved, and in
whom he is well pleased, cannot but be acceptable to all the purposes of
blessing, grace and glory. And this is the Sacrifice of Righteousness, the
Mincha purum, spoken of by the Prophet Malachi 1. 11. From the rising of the
Sun, even unto the going down of the same, my name shall be great among the
Gentiles, and in every place Incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure
offerring; For my name shall be great among the Heathen, says the Lord of
Hosts. Wherefore let us all exult in that mystical expression of the Son of
Barachiah, Zech. 9. 17. How great is his goodness, and how great is his beauty?
Corn shall make the young men cheerful, and new Wine the Maidens.

3. They shall suck of the abundance of the Seas, and of Treasures, etc.

Those (as has been noted before) how study mystical senses of Holy Scripture,
refer all this to the Doctrine of Christ and the calling of his Apostles: For
in these parts he was not only much conversant himself, but also chose many of
his Disciples and Followers, who though in their own persons they did not suck
of the abundance of the Seas, or treasures of the Sand, (i. e.) the Riches and
Emoluments of the two Elements; yet they did in the Body which they built, and
in the persons of their Successors, the Bishops and Pastors of the Church. For
when Emperors and Kings became Proselytes of the Gospel, they became kind to
the Church, and she became rich by their Donations. The wealth of all Seas
flowed into the bosom of the Church, and the Treasures of all Lands was laid
at the feet of the servants of Jesus. Then was fulfilled that of the Prophet,
Isa. 60. 4, 5. Lift up thine eyes round about, and see; all they gather
themselves together, they come to thee: thy Sons shall come from far, and thy
daughters shall be nursed at thy side. Then thou shall see, and flow together,
and thine heart shall fear and be enlarged; because the abundance of the Sea
shall be converted unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee.
As if he had said, Look about thee, little flock; fear not: All this strength,
these Arms, this wealth of Sea and Land, all this Wit, Learning, Arts and
Sciences, and whatever thou beholdest now, so obstinately set against thee,
shall all come in and prostrate themselves at thy feet, for thy defense,
support and ornament: For as the same Prophet, chap. 49. 22, 23. Behold I will
lift up mine hand to the Gentiles, and set up my Standard to the people, says
the Lord, and they shall bring my Sons in their Arms, and thy Daughters shall
be carried upon their shoulders. And Kings shall be thy nursing-fathers, and
Queens thy nursing-mothers: They shall bow down to thee with their face toward
the Earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet, and thou shall know that I am the
Lord: For they shall not be ashamed that wait for me. Happy Monarchs, to be
made the Parents of a Religion so holy and so salutiferous to men! May the
Eternal Jesus, the Prince of Peace, bless your Persons, unite your Counsels,
strengthen your Arms, that Religion may daily spread it self under your
conduct, over all the corners of the World: May the Enemies of God (if any)
seel the force of your Weapons, and see the Trophies of your Valors; but being
at unity amongst your selves, may we (who profess the name of Jesus) ever serve
him in the beauty of Holiness, in the decency of Order, in the protections of
Peace, and if possible, in the blessings of Unity. But above all, may thou
ever be happy, Great Defender of the Faith Apostolic, ever triumphant over the
Enemies of thy Peace and ours: May thy reign never cease, O Breath of our
nostrils, but having long protected us in Peace, and the enjoyments of a most
happy Religion, may thou be translated to the Kingdom of Jesus, to reign with
him for ever. And may all the outward advantages of Religion serve only for her
defense and comely ornament, for the suppression of Heresy, Schism, and all
ungodliness and licentious disorder: but never minister to our Covetousness,
Pride, Lust, or other enormities; that so we may ever worship the Divine
Majesty in the profession and practice of that truth and holiness, which
becomes the redeemed of the Lord Jesus. And in order hereunto, the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, by his Eternal Spirit make us all faithful in
our Ministry, devout in our Prayers, powerful in our Preaching, pure in the
administration of his Holy Sacraments, charitable in good works, temperate in
our lives, meek and humble in our conversations, and bring a plentiful Harvest
to his Kingdom by our labors.

There is also another sense of these words, which, though far more remote, is
yet of greatest advantage to Zabulun and Issachar, and indeed unto us all; and
that is, Christ himself shall the most happily accomplish this benediction: He
shall, to the eternal purposes of Salvation of his Elect, suck the abundance of
the Seas, and treasures bid in the Sand, when the last (...) shall call up
those that groan under the Waters, in the houses of the Giants, and awake them
that sleep in the dust, to meet their King in the air, to be with the Lord for
ever. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. For they indeed are the true riches of the deep, and
treasures of the Sand. Other things, how strong or precious soever, shall yield
to the fury of the devouring Element, and the same power that brought them out
of nothing, shall reduce them thither again. But the Bodies of his Saints and
their separated dust, after so many Pilgrimages and Transformations into the
parts of Minerals, Plants, Animals, (which the natural order of things must
necessarily carry them into) shall return to their primitive shape, and join
again to their primary and predestinate forms. And as at the Creation, there
was a Separation of that confused Mass into its species, so at the destruction
thereof, there shall be a Separation into its distinct Individuals. Which great
Truth, though perplexed with some nice curiosities, is more fully explicated
unto us. than any other mystery of our Faith. For seeing, as most aver, our
Salvation consists in the knowledge of three principal Articles, the Trinity,
the Incarnation with its effects and consequences, and the Resurrection:
Whereas the other two do sometimes, like the top of Olympus, hide themselves in
clouds and darkness; yet in this, God disposing himself more to our ends than
his own, has more abundantly explained the point than any other, as an arcle
most relating to our peculiar felicities. For it is well enough known, that
having afforded the Ancients but very obscure knowledges of the Trinity and
Incarnation, he has proclaimed the Resurrection by the Law of Nature, by the
order of the World, by the publications of the Law Mosaical, and more fully by
the Evangelical Word. In Nature there is not a flower, a grain, a plant, which
preaches not this Homily; and Art, its great Imitatrix, will drive old Proteus
through a thousand forms, and when they please, bring the Prodigal back again
home to his Fathers house, and fix him there in the embraces of his Kindred. In
Mundane affairs we see Governments are born, and grow up to a certain maturity,
and decay and die, and rise again. The fancies, genius's, fortunes of the dead
rise daily, and fall again to be imitated by after generations. Humane Nature
is not capable of more variety than may be seen in a few Ages, and therefore
Providence has been kind to make our days so few, lest we should too often
behold the resurrection of our own follies and miseries. Job a man before all
Letters, all Doctors, all Schools, cries out in a condition the most forlorn: I
know that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon
the earth; and though after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh
shall I see God, whom I shall see for my self, and mine eyes shall behold, and
not another. Job 19. 25, 26, 27. The eternal Truth pronounced himself in the
Law of Moses, Exodus 3. 8. The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob; which himself interprets to signify a relation to the Resurrection,
Mat. 22. In the Evangelical Dispensations, besides the passages of S. Mat. S.
Joh. and S. Paul, our Savior after his Resurrection conversed forty days upon
Earth, and was seen of five hundred people at once, to ingraft this mystery in
the hearts of the Faithful, That he who is the first fruits of the dead will
sanctify the whole lump. What Riches, what Pearls may we imagine shall then be
found in the deep, what Treasures, what Stones in the Sands to build up the
great City, the Heavenly Jerusalem? Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; put an end
to our sins and miseries: Let us enjoy our long expectations, call the Sea to
deliver up her dead, and the Earth to set free her Prisoners, that we with all
them that are departed in the true Faith and fear of thy most Holy Name, may
have our perfect consummation and bliss, both in Body and Soul, by entering into
the full fruition of the face and excellencies of the most adorable Trinity.

Now as we have given different senses of the words, so shall we also in
correspondence thereunto make our Applications. And first to the adventurous
Mariners, that they do above all things labor to secure the favor and
protection of God by an Holy Life. And truly if they shall but seriously
consider the condition thereof, they will find themselves to lie under many and
extraordinary circumstances, that call them thereto, as,

1. The wonders and mighty works of God, which they behold, as the Psalmist
speaks, They that go down to the Sea in Ships, and occupy their business in
great waters: these see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep.
Psalm. 107. 23. The several climates, the different rising and setting of Stars,
the diverse temperatures of the air, the various commodities of all Countries
call upon you to praise and adore that God, who has disposed all things in such
a wonderful order, and so various a manner for the benefit of the whole.

2. The dangers of Storms, of Rocks, of Shelves, of Sands, make your
preservations miraculous, and consequently require the greatest and most
constant Devotions to God for your safeties. Pacuvius gives us a description of
a Tempest, sufficient to allay the courage of the most valiant, and it is this:

-- Inhorrescit mare,
Tenebrae conduplicantur, etc.
The Sea roars with horror, the darkness becomes palpable, the blackness of
the night and storms is a perfect blindness, the Lightning flashes through the
Clouds, and Heaven trembles with the Thunder: Hail and rain mixed together fall,
it is hard to say in greater plenty or violence; the Winds break out from all
points, as if they would not only destroy themselves, but all the World, and
the Ocean rages with the Tide. Now how can thou expect to be preserved in
such concussions and strugglings of Nature? How can thou expect that God
should becalm this Tempest, assuage the fury of the Elements, and stretch out
his almighty arm to save thee in dangers so great, if thou daily provokest him
to anger by thy sins? No, worship him all the days of thy li^e with a pure mind
and a chaste body; and then call upon him in the needful time of trouble, and
he shall hear thee at large: He shall still the raging of the Sea and the
storms when they arise: He shall preserve thee in a thousand dangers, shall
bless thee in thy going out and in thy coming in, and bring thee safe and
prosperously into the Haven, where thou would be, so that thou shall rejoice,
like Zabulun, in thy Ports.

3. The great Profits and Emoluments which accrue from your employment is a
third obligation to your Piety. Navigation is that which makes the Riches of
the World common, and the Merchant may truly be said to suck the abundance of
the Sea, and treasures hid in the Sand. It is he that mingles the manners and
wealth of all Nations together, that makes good the poverty of one place with
the riches of another. Navigation is certainly the greatest and most useful Art
humane nature was ever master of: And whatever there is of Wit, whatever there
is of Manners, whatever there is of Riches, whatever there is of Glory, nay,
whatever there is of Religion in the World, is in great measures owing to the
professors thereof. Go then, happy Mariner, fear thy God above all things, and
he shall bring the Winds out of his Treasures to fi^l thy Sails with gales of
Prosperity: Go spread thy Religion, thy Laws, thy Manners and Customs through
the Universe, and for thy reward reap the harvest of the River, sack the
abundance of the deep, and Treasures hid in the Sands.

4. The great Influence that good example has upon others, calls upon you,
especially to a circumspection in your manners, that no Profaneness, Injustice
or Intemperance appear in you to the scandal of others, or the disparagement of
our Religion. For it is not deep Mysteries, multitude of Laws, or Rational
Discourses that will convert Nations. Holy Examples move beyond Precepts, and a
conversation void of offense is the most effectual Sermon to bring those that
are without, into the fold of the Church. In vain therefore, poor Christendom,
do thou expect the coming in of unbelievers, while they see thy wickedness at
home, and thy profaneness abroad. Learn then all, and especially those who view
foreign and unconverted Nations, a conversation suitable to the doctrine ye
profess. Learn that most useful lecture of our Savior, Mat. 5. 16. Let your
light so shine hefore men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
father which is in heaven.

2. The second of our Applications shall be to us all, but especially to the
true Zabulonites, that we learn highly to esteem this Religion we profess: A
Religion which has overcome so many difficulties, been confirmed by such
Miracles, continued by such a wonderful Providence through so many Ages: A
Religion that glories in so many Martyrs, Doctors, Pastors, Bishops, and Holy
men of the clearest Spirits, and greatest accomplishments in the World: A
Religion that corrects our Errors, that bridles our Passions, that sanctifies
our Natures, and gives us the greatest assurances of Gods love to us here, and
the most infallible revelations of a future and eternal felicity. What if some
little Spirit blown up with a system, an experiment, a fantastic song, or some
giddy vortex in his Head, make now and then a fally out against this Truth; Is
it reasonable for this, think you, to waver in our Faith, or grow neglective of
our duty? No; we have a Law delivered by the Word it self, which millions of
Martyrs have signed with their Blood, which the best of mankind professes, the
wisest heads of the World have illustrated with the lights of their Writings,
and for whose defense Heads and Pens, the most able, labor daily. But alas!
that ancient Zeal which brought the Church to so great Glory, and so vast
extent, seems much decayed; and instead thereof the Spirit of Atheism, Heresy,
Schism and luke warmness has succeeded. So that the state of Religion runs low,
the Word of God wants its due belief, the holy Priests that reverence that
becomes persons who handle the mysteries of God, the Churches the decency of
holy places: And in short, God is defrauded of that Glory which all beings owe
to the Majesty of Heaven, and we all want those comforts of Religion our wiser
and more zealous Ancestors enjoyed. The Lord in his due time restore that
devotion and prudent Zeal which was so remarkable in the early Christians, 2
Cor. 9. 2. that many may be provoked to the same Repentance, Faith, and good
works; may suck the abundance of the Seas, and treasures hid in the Sand, (i.
e.) the secrets of the Law, and Mysteries of the Gospel.

3. Let us all prepare for that account we must give, when Christ shall seize
the heritage and benediction of Zabulun and Issachar; when the Sea shall give
up her dead, and the Earth restore the Bodies committed to her charge, that so
whatever our condition is in this World, our Souls and Bodies may be happy in
the next: For They that be wise shall outshine the brightness of the Firmament,
and they that turn many to righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever, Dan.
12. 3. And as S. John teaches, 1 John 3. 2. Beloved, now are we the Sons of
God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that when he
shall appear, we shall be like him: For we shall see him as he is. This is that
vision alone, which can terminate all our desires in the enjoyment of that
essence, whose boundless goodness shall fill us with the perfection of himself.
For in his presence is fullness of joy, and at his right hand are pleasures for
evermore. Psalm. 16. 11.

FINIS.

