Captain Thorogood His Opinion of the Point of SUCCESSION, To a Brother of the
Blade in SCOTLAND.
Dear Jack,
AS I covet nothing so much as to see the Exorbitant Power of France reduced to
its ancient bounds; so I am sensible no Nation upon Earth can stop the rapid
Course of their Victories but Ours, whose Valor still fills their hearts with
no less fear then their late Successes have done with ambition: But I confess
the consideration of Ourpresent unhappy differences makes me dread losing the
opportunity of rescuing enslaved Christendom from their Tyrany, and Our own
Glory from the stains of Infamy, contracted b^ ^he overlong repose of our
Arms. This fear I look upon to be well-grounded, since no less a thing is said
to be in agitation then a change in the very Fundamentals of our Government,
which like a distemper that seizes the noble Parts, must (after the long
struglings and conflicts of the contending parties;) extremely weaken. if not
absolutely destroy it, as is evident by the no less impious then doleful
examples of all Ages; And if that should once happen, (which God in his Mercy
prevent,) who would be able to resist the mighty Force of France? or what could
England (which alone, if united, is capable to prevent it,) expect but with the
rest of Europe, (and upon harder conditions then any other Nation) be swallowed
up in the Universal Monarchy? To prevent which, since nothing can more
effectually contribute then a firm and lasting Union among Our selves, which is
morally impossible to be attained, if once the ancient and fundamental form of
Government, under which this Nation has (to its Immortal Renown, and its
Enemies Terror,) flourished so many Generations, be now abolised. I thought fit
in a Soldierly manner, and en Cavalier, to show you that the just exclusion of
His Royal Highness from the Imperial Crown of this Realm, (in case the King
should die without Issue) is absolutely impossible; and this I do on no other
account, but because I believe it may do my Country good, whose Interest, as
well as Glory, it will be, to have a Prince of Martial Spirit Reign over Us, by
whose Valor Our almost withered Laurels may once more be planted in
French-ground, moistened and made fat with the Blood of our implacable Enemies,
and nourished and reared up to that Strength and Vigor they formerly enjoyed
by the Courage and Conduct of our Ancestors.

You know it is the common Theme of the Town-Scriblers, than Monarchy is a mere
Humane Institution, alterable in Part; or in the Whole, as often as the
Governor and Governed shall think it necessary for their common Safety. That
the King for the time being is the Supreme Governor, and the whole Aggregate
of People the Governed. That these being not otherwise easily to be assembled,
are some personally, and the rest by their Representatives in Parliament. That
whatever Law or Sanction, the King, with the advice and consent of his People
so convened does Enact, binds the whole Nation; and that consequently it is in
their Power to exclude His R. H. the Succession, or, which is the same thing,
to turn the Hereditary Monarchy into an Elective.

This Position, (how injurious soever to a Successor,) is more dangerous to a
Prince Regnant, who if weak, easy, or inconsiderate, may, through hope, or
fear, be prevailed upon to yield to his own dethroning, and exchange his actual
Royalty for an Annuity or yearly Pension; whereas the other loses only a
possibility of a Crown, with this further advantage, That most Men will think
him worthy of wearing it, because not the want of Courage and Magnanimity, but
of Interest and Power creates his Misfortune. Whatever then shall be said to
show the impracticableness of this Position here in England, is as much
intended to secure the Possession of His most Sacred Majesty, or any other that
shall lawfully fill the Throne, as the possibility which His R. H. now has, or
any other Heir Apparent may have in after Ages. It is indeed a Royal Cause, and
as such to be maintained by the Swords and Pens of all good Subjects, of which
number I profess my self to be one, and in evidence of my Loyalty say,

1. That since England is de facto a Hereditary Kingdom, and every King for the
time being, with the help of his Parliaments entrusted with the Government of
it as such; it follows, that as he cannot alien or subject it to another Crown
or Person, because the alienation of a Kingdom is so far from being
comprehended in the Government of it, by him (to whom first committed) and his
Heirs, that it is directly repugnant and inconsistent with it, so he cannot
alter the course and order of Succession, which is a kind of alienation,
because it transfers the Title to one who (without such an Act) would have
none; and consequently any Monarch attempting the Destruction of the very Form
and Essence of such a Government, may be thought rather to frustrate in some
measure part of the Trust reposed in him, and stray from his Duty, then vitiate
his Successors Title to the Kingdom.

2. If both Houses of Parliament should be allowed to have a share in the
Government in a coordinate manner with the King, then the King and they
(having the Supreme Power of Governing a Hereditary Monarchy committed to their
Charge, and nothing else,) have no authority to alter or destroy it; because a
Power to support and maintain a Government, and change and dissolve it, is
absolutely inconsistent with it self.

3. This great trust was reposed in them either by God or Man; if by God, then
it is certain it cannot warrantably be altered without his possitive command
infallibly known as such; If by Man, we are under the disability until his
express Will and Pleasure be made known to us, in a plain, evident and
indisputable way.

God has not yet revealed us his Will or Desire to change our Government, nor
are we to look for such extraordinary Injunctions at this time, when the light
of the Gospel has sufficiently cleared all the Errors and Doubts that might
hinder our Duty; And it is an act of equal Folly and Impiety to attempt an
Innovation upon the supposition of being able to know certainly and
unquestionably the Will of Man, since that knowledge will (to any that
seriously considers the Constitution of this Kingdom) appear absolutely
impossible. For if by Man we understand (as we must) the whole Complex of the
People, or the Governed, we cannot possibly be satisfied of their being after a
full and mature deliberation, desirous of a Change, because we have, or at
least will use no other way of knowing their minds, but by their
Representatives in Parliament; and these whom we commonly call Representatives
are either not so at all; or if they be, do not derive their Power from a third
part of the Nation, and consequently cannot impart a knowledge to us, which
they themselves never had, or execute an Authority which was never given 'em,
according to the old Maxim, nemo dat quod non habet; The reason why they may be
thought to be no Representatives at all, is, because if the ultimate and last
result of Power, such as is doubtless the disposing of the Crown, be in the
King and Parliament only, it cannot rationally be said, That the Parliament is
the People which is always to be the party Governed; it being as impossible
that they should at one and the same time, and in the same respect, be both
Governors and Governed, as it is for me to be Master and Servant, in regard to
my self singly and alone. But to wave this, which may possibly be looked upon
as a subtilty or strained Notion; I say that the Parliament as now usually
Elected, is not at all the Representative of the People; I mean so as to have
such an actual or virtual Deputation or Commission from every individual
person, as may enable them to exercise all the Acts relating to Government, as
arbitrarily, and without control; as if all the People were personally
present, and consenting to such Acts. For none have Votes in Elections, but
Freeholders of at least forty Shillings a Year, and Citizens and Burgesses,
and consequently all Lessees for Years, Grantees of Annuities for Years: Men
that live upon the Interest, and Product of their Money: The greatest part of
the Clergy, all Soldiers, and Seamen in general, most of the young Nobility and
Gentry, who besides their possibilities of Romainders, seldom have any thing
for their maintenance but their Parents allowances; And in fine, the whole
number of Laborers, Servants, Artificers, and Tradesmen, not residing in, or
at least free of Cities and Boroughs, are totally excluded, and consequently no
more represented by the Parliament, then the Attorney you authorized to appear
for you this Term in a Suit at Westminster, is warranted by the Authority you
gave him, to appear likewise for me without my knowledge or privity; And what
can be more unequal, not to say unjust, then that a numerous and upon due
computation the far greatest part of the Nation, that are Passengers in the
great Ship of the Commonwealth, as well as the rest, should be debarred their
right of choosing a Master or Pilot, to whose Skill and Care they commit their
common safety? Have they not their Liberty, their Property, their Religion; and
in a word, the present enjoyments of this, and in some measure the hopes of a
future Life to be secured or hazarded by the good or ill Conduct of their
Governor? And must this, all this be left to the Arbitrary Power and
Discretion of such, as by chance, perhaps more then merit, have acquired the
Possession of some Land, or are free of Boroughs and Cities? If a Freehold of
forty Shillings per annum, intitles one to as a great a share of the
Legislative Power, as that of five thousand Pound does another, what show of
Reason can there be, why one whose Goods and Chattels amount to ten times the
value of such a Freehold, and has peradventure a Stock of Reputation, Honesty
and Wisdom as many degrees beyond him, should not be equally concerned in the
Government?

But allowing Freeholders, Citizens and Burgesses, some Mysterious and Sacred
Right, exclusively of all others, of delegating the Representatives, and
irrevocable Attorneys of the whole Kingdom; yet surely there should be such a
proportion and equality between them, as would render this mighty Power vested
in them, agreeable to Right Reason, and the very nature of Government; But we
see no such thing for the meanest Borough; For Example, Old Sarum deputes as
many men to serve in Parliament, as the greatest County in England, with equal
Authority, not only of consulting and debating, but likewise of giving their
determinative and decisive Voices in all matters and things whatsoever.

Cornwall which is the two and fiftieth part of the Kingdom, makes above an
eleventh part of the House of Commons; and yet London, Southwark. and
Westminster, which in the Power of Men and Riches, is judged to be a sixth of
the whole Nation, is in the Representative but the sixty fourth part. And this
Solecism alone in the very constitution of the Government will make it for ever
impossible to have the People Represented in any just and rational manner;
unless perhaps such course might be taken, as is practiced in Holland, where
each Province sends as many Deputies as it pleases, with power of proposing and
debating, but not of resolving by the Votes of the Persons, but of the
Provinces.

It may be here objected that our present Constitution has appointed no other
way for choosing Representatives; and that therefore we ought to acquiesce: To
this I Answer, that it may very well fall our, that nothing may be a clearer
and greater hinderance to our having a true and evident knowledge of the
Peoples Desires and Inclinations by their Representatives, then our very Laws;
For example, at present the Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, and the Test, are
to be taken by all the Members of both Houses of Parliament; But if in this, or
any after-age, almost the whole, or the far greater part of the Nation, should
become true Presbyterians, who abhor our Royal as much as the Papal Supremacy,
or Quakers that indeed scruple all Oaths, or Papists that cannot well be
supposed willing to renounce the whole substance of their Religion; could the
few, (who by taking such Oaths, would then be rendered capable of sitting in
Parliament,) be properly accounted the Representatives of a Nation, that could
not otherwise look upon them, then as men wicked, irreligious, and perjured,
and consequently more forward to heighten then heal their Miseries; To which
end no man can be rationally supposed to depute another? No sure, and therefore
when Laws which are made for the People, (and not the People for the Laws) do
cross and thwart the Right and Interest of the major part of the Society, they
then not being able to effect what they were designed for, become useless, and
die.

A further Objection will be, that the constant opinion of all Ages has put it
beyond doubt, that the Parliament is the Representative of the People; and that
all the Acts they pass, do virtually include the consent and agreement of every
individual person in the Kingdom: To this I would very readily agree, provided
it would be allowed me on the otherhand, (as appears b^ all our Law Books,)
that Monarchy is Jure naturae, and unalterable without apparent Violence by any
Humane Power whatsoever; But if the arrogance or malice of some will carry them
so far as to trample upon all the Positive and Fundamental Laws of the Land,
and publish daily in Print, to the manifest hazard of the State, that all Forms
or kinds of Government, are changable at the Will and Pleasure of the People,
into that Species which shall by them be thought the most agreeable, to their
Natures and Inclinations; I hope it will not be looked upon as a Crime in me,
if following the way they chalked out for me, and waving the common received
opinion, I likewise speculatively pry, into the very Constitution and Frame of
Parliaments, thereby to show the impossibility of altering the Succession, But
to clear all Objections as far as possible, I say, That the supposition, of the
Parliaments representing the People, is a fiction of Law, well devised by the
Wisdom of our Ancestors, for quieting and appeasing the minds of all particular
men, who could not have a stronger Motive of Submission, or of not believing
themselves injured then their being accounted parties and privy to all Acts of
Parliament; But this fiction of Law cannot reach the Actual Legislators, as
such, since they cannot be supposed to wrong themselves, though they might
those by whom commissioned. The Parliament, then when it alters or repeals
Laws, lops off the exuberancies and excrescencies, which by the design or
heedlesness of the Managers, grow up in the Government, curbs the Pride, A
varice and encroachments of great Persons bounds and limits reciprocally the
Princes Prerogative and Subjects Liberty; and in fine lends its healing hand
toward the removing any thing that is dangerous or noxious to the Body
Politic as first constituted, then, I say, it may well enough for its greater
Strength and Authority, be allowed the Representative of the whole Body of the
People: But if instead of applying fit remedies for its preservation and
continuance, they should go about to annihilate or dissolve it, which must
inevitably be attended with violent concussions and universal calamities, it
cannot, as I said before, be accounted their Representative; because the
consequence of such an Act must immediately influence every individual Member
of the Society; and it is but reason that the common concernment of the ruin or
happiness of all; should be left, not by fiction of Law, but in reality, to be
weighed by their own Judgment: For if (as some would have it) the Power of
Dominion was originally in the People, and by them transferred on one, few or
many of themselves, it is evident that as every one was actually aiding by his
choice and agreement in erecting such a Dominion, so it is necessary he should
by the same means concur to its change and destruction.

If it should be said that our Government was first established not by the
Votes of Individuals, but by Representatives in the Nature of Parliaments, as
now constituted; I Answer, that it could not be, because of the inequality of
the choice, which is certain was not in the beginning; (for until the 8th. year
of Henry the 6th. as is plain by the Statute then made, the Electors of Knights
of the Shire were not under a necessity of having forty Shillings per annum to
expend) or if it was, let our Adversaries prove when and where it first began;
if they cannot, but confidently and positively affirm it was so, and we as
confidently and positively deny it, then it is evident; we being in possession,
that the advantage will be of our side, for in equali jure melior est conditio
possidentis.

4. Having thus far endeavored to prove that the Parliament is not the
Representative of the People. I further say, That allowing them to be so, yet
it is certain they assemble not of themselves, but by the King's Writ, which
sets forth the occasion of their being called, viz. to advise and consult, etc.
D^arduis and urgentibus negotiis Regni, of the great and pressing Affairs of
the Kingdom; Now the Kingdom being Hereditary at the time of issuing forth the
Writ, and they summoned to appear and give their advice concerning the good
Estate and Defense of it as such, it is plain they cannot change, alter or
destroy it, no more then a Physician sent for, to remove the Pains and
Oppressions of Sickness, can lawfully stab or poison his Patient, who through
rage or folly may yield his assent to his own destruction. It Is ridiculous and
foolish to think that even the very Country would not with high Indignation
resent such an attempt, since they know full well that the Election of Members
to constitute the Body Politic of a Parliament, was never intended to destroy
the Head and most essential part of it, I mean the Hereditary Kingship, which
abstractedly from this or that man, who may give an ill President, and
therefore is not entrusted with an absolute disposal of it, is the very Life
and Soul of the Government, and without which it must infallibly crumble into
pieces.

5. We all know that a Body Politic, which is the Work and Creature of Man,
has many resemblances with the Body Natural, which is the Creature of God; for
as this aims always at its ease, happiness and long preceptions of the
pleasures of this Life, and consequently dreads and abhors Death or Dissolution
which puts an end to all, so the other is constant and unwearied in the pursuit
of the like ends to that degree, that by its very constitution and essential
form we attribute to it a kind of Immortality, whence comes the known Maxim
received into our Laws, That the King never dies, that is, that Kingship, not
the Persons to whom it is inherent or annexed for this, or that time, is beyond
the reach of Fate and Time that puts and end to all things. This then being so,
we cannot rationally conclude that our present Sovereign has Will or Power to
destroy himself, that is, Hereditary Kingship, which made him what he is, and
is as essential to the Politic Capacity he is in, as Supreme Governor, as the
rational Soul is to his natural Capacity, as man. To say or judge otherwise,
would be no less, then to put him to break all the sacred ties of Love which
bind him so strongly to himself, and suppose him capable to be in some measure
his own Executioner, and a Felo de se of Monarchy, then which there can be no
greater Indignity offered to the Majesty of a Prince whom we all know to be
Just, Merciful and Generous to others; and who therefore must so much the more
signally practice those Virtues toward himself, by how much self-respect
exceeds that due to another.

6. And lastly, It Is evident by several Statutes, that all Knights' of the
Shires, and their Electors are to be Inhabitants and Residents in the
respective Counties the day of the Writ, and that likewise the Citizens and
Burgesses are to be men resident, dwelling and free in the Cities and Boroughs
for which they are to be chosen; And right reason teaches us that none ought by
sinister and unjust means to (...) into Authority, if therefore any one be
previously disabled ahd incapable to exercise Power by a positive Law, or
openly by deceits, calumnies or corruption thrust himself into the Seat of
Justice, it is certain all his Proceedings and Sanctions do carry a nullity and
insufficiency in themselves, and affect none, besides the Maker, who by
endeavoring to exercise a Legislative Power against Law and Reason, makes his
violation of them so much the more manifest. This often happens in choosing of
Parliament Men in our days, when those that live in the North are chosen for
the South, and men that never saw the Cities or Boroughs before the time of
Election made their Representatives, with this further addition of disability,
that they gain Votes by Bribes, Treats, and many unlawful Artifices, as by
loading their Competitors with the most odious calumny of being Courtiers,
Pensioners, Papists Atheists, and what not? though they know them to have more
love for their Country and their Religion then themselves. I know nothing that
can more effectually frustrate the Decrees and Resolves of Lawmakers then
this, and therefore leave it to impartial and indifferent men to judge whether
such a practice, if it should intervene, would not exclude any Society of Men
from excluding another from his Right.

Upon the whole matter then the present Monarchy is so founded, that neither
the King nor the Parliament can possibly alter the true and essential form of
it; and consequently his R. H. cannot be barred his Right of Reigning over us,
if he survive his Brother, whose Life he values beyond the Crowns and Kingdoms
he can leave him, whom God long preserve in Peace and Plenty, and the unfeigned
affection of his People.

As for the Examples which are alleged to evince the contrary, and urged so
confidently by the Gentleman that is the Author of the Word without Doors they
do not at all scare me, for the Question is not whether de facto, but whether
without violation of Justice and the Principles of right Reason, our Monarchy
may be changed? For no man ever doubted but Power, Rebellion and Faction with
the concurrence of timorous and easy Princes did often turn things into
Tragical Confusions, and unhinge the whole frame of Governments, but far be it
from us to ground the lawfulness of our Actions upon so weak a Topic as that
of Example, since we know that no Crime can be perpetrated, no Usurpation
introduced, no Violation offered even to Heaven it self, but will be all
warrantable, if their being subsequent to a like practice of former Ages frees
them from Guilt. Rebellion is as ancient as the Creation, it first divided the
Court of Heaven, and deprived Lucifer and his Accomplices of their Glory, and
then threw Man out of the Garden of Eden, and the state of Innocence into a
rough tract of the Earth, and yet rougher anguishes and perplexities of Sin. An
obedience to God's Command to increase and multiply was not long paid, when of
the few Inhabitants of the World, one, and he the most harmless too, fell a
Sacrifice to his Brothers envy and makers affection. Idolatry (the Jews only
excepted) was the common Worship of Mankind, and whatever Species of
Christianity was first planted in this Island, it is certain that Popery not
many Years since was the legal and known Religion universally embraced by the
People; yet God forbid we should now pretend Rebellion, Murder, Idolatry and
Popery to be all lawful because we find ancient times memorable for such
impicties. It Is no plea in Divinity to allege the prescription which sin has
gained upon us, as an excuse.

The alterations successively made in the Jewish Commonwealth are nothing
pertinent to the matter for whose proof they were brought, for they were either
by a previous command or subsequent approbation of God manifested to his
Prophets introduced and continued for their respective portions of time, and
when we have such visible dispensations of the divine Will imparted to us, we
will then be as active in our Obedience and Submission to God as the Authors of
such Pamphlets are in their Malice and Disloyalty to their King; but till then
we hope no man will expect that, because God who is the Sovereign Author of all
Governments, and knows the ways and methods that are most suitable to their
happiness, has often changed the form he prescribed to the Jews; Therefore we
Men, that are possessed with Interest, Passion, and Ambition may do the like
upon Motives no ways certain or evident.

His Example of Don Sancho, who by the approbation of the three Estates took
the Crown which was the right of his Nephews, is no less impertinent to his
purpose, for he himself allows in the 4th. page of his Pamphlet, that in Spain
the next Heir cannot succeed but by the approbation of the Nobility, Bishops
and States of the Realm; If so, is not that Kingdom in a manner Elective? and
what parity is there between it and ours, where the next Heir is actual King
without the Ceremonies of Coronation, or the consent, choice or agreement of
any? He is yet more unfortunate in the Case of Hugo Capetus, who by the choice
(as he says) of the States of France invaded the Throne, to the prejudice of
Charles Duke of Lorrain the next Heir; For whereas his Position was in the
beginning, That any Government was alterable or ammendable by the mutual
consent of the Governors and Governed, he now very learnedly proves this, by
saying that the States alone did exclude Charles of Lorrain; which surely are
not tho absolute Governors, at least without the lawful King at the head of
'em, in any Hereditary Government in the World: If they be, an actual Prince
may be deposed with as much Justice as an Heir can be excluded the Succession,
and so (for ought we know) his R. H. being once removed out of their way, the
next attempt will be against His Majesty.

His Story of William Rufus and his Brother Henrie's successively enjoying the
Crown is to as little purpose as his Foreign Examples; for as it is certain
that neither of them had any right whilst Robert Duke of Normandy was living,
so their being admitted Kings by the consent of the Realm (that is, I suppose,
of a Parliament) gave them no Title at all, by this Gentleman's supposition,
who says that in such Cases the Will of the Governors and Governed must
concur. The same Answer serves to defeat the pretended Legality of all his
other examples, and therefore I leave him to bemoan his Ignorance, or plead
Drunkenness (for his Discourse was delivered in a Tavern) as an excuse of his
impertinencies. And I hope none of us will be so Unchristian or Impolitick as
to think, that because by the Treasons and Conspiracies of ambitious, disloyal
and designing Persons, the Crown was now and then transferred from one Family
to another we now must do the like, when the occasions of such innovations are
perfectly taken away, not only by the conjunction of the White and Red Roses,
but likewise by the meeting of the Blood Royal of the three Kingdoms in the
Person of our present Monarch. To attempt this, were to bring all the evils
upon the People to which the unsteddy course of Humane Affairs can possibly
subject them; For where a gap is once opened to Ambition and snatchings one
from another, the most bloody Commotions imaginable succeed, in which necessity
obliging the parties to the practice of promiscuous Violences, Depredations and
Slaughters, the People at last wearied with the Cruelties and Calamities of
War, and to purchase quiet at any rate, often give up their Liberty to the
Conqueror, and make the public Desolations of their Country its Grave; so
terrible an Example of which we had in the late Troubles, that surely none, but
such as are Betrayers of the English Liberty, or destined for Slavery, will
venture the like Transgression the second time.

It will be said, that his R. H. has embraced the Papal Religion, which will be
as destructive to the Temporal and Eternal Welfare of the whole Kingdom, in
case he should come to the Crown, as it is to his own Soul, and therefore, to
prevent so universal a mischief, it is necessary his particular Interest should
be sacrificed to the public. To this I Answer,

1. No man ever yet gave any particular convincing instance of his being a
Papist, besides his not conforming to the Religion now established by Law, or
not taking such Oaths as would make him capable of enjoying all the great
Offices of the Kingdom, to which his Birth and Merit without them might justly
entitle him; But this Nonconformity is agreeable not only to all the Classes
and Subdivisions of Protestantism, but to all the other Forms and Modes of
Worship in the World, and his unwillingness to swear, proceeds, for ought we
know, rather from a belief that all Oaths are unlawful, as not only many of old
Christians, our present Quakers, but the most refined and ingeniously learned
of all Modern Sects the Socinians, maintain, than that he thinks the matter of
those the Law now requires to be Damnable or Heretical, and therefore we may as
well say that he is a Presbyterian, Independent, or Quaker, or Socinian; or,
which is yet worse, a Turk or Jew, as that he is a Papist: and to speak Truth
our too much curiosity, and strict scrutiny into this matter, is far less
warrantable than his concealing his opinion; for Who art thou that judge
another Man's Serva^t? To his own Master he stands or falls; yea he shall
be holden up, for God is able to make him stand.

Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will
bring to light the hidden things of Darkness, and will make manifest the
Counsels of the hearts.

2. If he be a Papist now, who can tell but the powerful operations of the Holy
Spirit may by changing his Sentiments concerning Sacred things remove those
jealousles and fears with which we are now so strongly possessed, and add to his
future happiness the temporal blessings we so much dread to lose? Faith is the
Gift of God, and he being most just and merciful, will we hope bestow it where
it may have the kindest reception, and bring forth its Fruits in greatest
Plenty, that is on a Prince whose natural Endowments and moral Virtues are so
eminent as, (if enlivened by true Faith as we hope they are) to enable him when
a King to conquer the Atheism, Irreligion, Debauchery and other swarms of
Evils, with which the Age abounds, by his Example, as well as the Enemies of
the Crown by his Valor; It Is our Duty then to wait the leisure of Providence,
and not by a rash, not to say a wicked attempt, endeavor to deprive him of his
right, and our selves of the happiness his enjoying the Religion, as well as
the Kingdom, of his Ancestors, may possibly secure unto us; nor do I see any
satisfactory reason, why he should be so severely used, allowing no hopes of
his Conversion or Return to the Church of England, for our Religion is
sufficiently guarded by several Acts of Parliament, which he can never repeal;
And besides, His present Majesty is (thank God) Strong, Active, and Vigorous,
and likely enough either to outlive his R. H. or leave him so old and crazy as
to want briskness answerable to his zeal, to attempt any notable change or
innovation in the Government.

3. Popery in the single Person of the Prince, whatever is said to the
contrary, is consistent enough with the Welfare of the Subjects, though of
another Persuasion, as appears in Germany, where in many Places the Body of the
People are of the Reformed, and the Prince of the Romish Religion, without
diffidence or fear, or the narrow Spirit of Persecution of eitheir side.

4. By the Principles of the Church of England, no Prince can be deposed, or
forfeit his Right to the Sovereignty, purely upon the score of Religion; and as
long as that Church is in being, and the rule and management, next after the
King, of all things as well Spiritual as Temporal, is by the Laws of the Land
in its hands, and the hands of such as are Members of it, and obedient Children
to the Practice and Discipline of so pious and charitable a Mother, it is
evident that none else can be proper Judges, or have cognizance of the point
now in debate, but they; and therefore his R. H. appeals to them, and is not at
all concerned at what others can do, who doubtless have as great a desire to
dethrone the King as to bar the Succession, could it be done with as much
security and safety; For as he who intentionally and deliberately would destroy
an Infant in the Mothers Womb, by causing an abortion, would never scruple the
bringing of him to an untimely end after his coming into the World, did not the
Law appoint Death for the Punishment of this, though not of the other. So he,
that on the account of Religion, would exclude another from the possibility he
has to a Crown, would make no conscience of discharging an actual Prince, from
his Royal Function, upon the same or other motives, were not his possession
fenced and guarded by the Law, which makes all such attempts High Treason, and
so exposes him to all the evils attending so great a Crime.

But after all, why so much rancor, hatred and aversion against his R. H: who
of all men living is the most passionate Lover of his Country, and under whom,
if ever it should be his lot to wear the Imperial Crown, it would undoubtedly
be as happy as under any that swayed the English Scepter since the Conquest;
having so many Princley Qualities, though now clouded and kept concealed from
the eyes of the Nation, by the artifice of his Adversaries, as would fill the
hearts of all true Englishmen with Love and Respect, and those of his Enemies,
whether Domestic or Foreign, with Fear and Confusion; For he is a Prince of a
Noble Presence and affable Behavior, with a mixture of pleasantness in his
Words and Actions, that wins powerfully the affections of all that approach
him. His discourses are always pertinent and solid, free from Flourishes and a
vain and empty Ostentation of Wit, which sorts better with the levity of
mimical Heroes, upon a Theater, then the true Grandeur of real Princes in a
Court.

He is of a most high Spirit, and invincible Courage, of mature Wisdom, and
singular Industry and Application to business, wary in Council and quick in
Execution; He hates above all things a perpetual fluctuation and unsteddiness
in the Measures and Politics of Government, because it makes it a Riddle to it
self as well as to all other Nations, and forces it to wander and stray from
the proposed Ends, having no clue of reason to guide it through so many
Labyrinths of Confusions, and therefore is constant and inflexible in his
Resolutions, whilst suitable to she true Interest of the Nation, which often
created him great and dangerous Enemies, every one hoping in the uncertainty
and variety of Councils to be able to get the Ministry into his own hands, and
therefore looking upon him with an Eye of Envy, as the hinderance and main
obstacle of their ambitious purposes.

He is true and firm to his Friends and Servants, whom not chance or fortune,
but parts and merit, with a long and unstained reputation of Honesty, places in
his Favor; and as his love is not to the Persons, but their Virtues, so his
hatred extends only to their Vices, and ends as soon as they begin to give any
visible signs of their Repentance; and whatever is said to the contrary by some
of his Enemies, who would scare the rest, and harden them in their wickedness,
by putting them into a despair of forgiveness, he is not of a vindicative
Spirit, for none ever yet fell otherwise then gently by his means, or smarted
any longer under his indignation, then they continued obstinate and wilful in
the pursuit of his and the Countries disquiet, as might be proved by a thousand
instances too tedious to be here recounted. In short, he is of a Martial and
Souldierly Temper, patient of cold, heat, hunger, thirst and all the toyls and
fatigues naturally incident to War either by Sea or Land; his Valor is
sprightly, but not rash; his Conduct wary and secure, and the events of his
Battles and Engagements still Fortunate and Succesful, all which would
certainly make the English Nation (for whose Genius Providence has fitted him)
readier to shed their Blood to acquire him new Crowns, then deprive him of
those Nature has already entitled him to, after the Death of his Brother, had
not the inveterate malice of some restless and Factious Spirits possessed them
with an opinion of his having designed for so many years to involve them in
Blood and Slaughter; the falsehood of which will easily appear, to any that
consider his actions all along since his and the King's Return from their
Exile, to which such Practices as are now a foot drove them.

I. AS it is doubtful whether he renounced the Religion, wherein he was
Educated, and embraced Popery more then Socinianism, or any other form of
Christianity distinct from the National Worship; so it is certain, that he
always adhered to the True Interest of England: I mean the Glory and
Preservation of the Monarchy, which His Royal Father consigned to his
Posterity, Sealed with his Blood, shed by Men out-doing in Practice (though not
in Principles) the Modern Reformers.

II. He has made it his Business to free his Majesty's Subjects from their
Fatal Longings after a Commonwealth, to which the Contagion of the late Times
had Enslaved them; And by his Addresses, Solicitations, and Preferments, with
which he was able (when in Power) to Reward such brave Souls as signalized
their Loyalty to his Father or Brother in the Disorder of their Affairs; He
has brought that Virtue in fashion again, and made more Converts to the Royal
Authority, than all the Orthodox Clergy with their Preachings and Arguments,
(how Learnedly and Industriously soever handled,) were able to do.

Quis enim Virtutem amplectitur ipsam, Praemia si tollas? -- The Truth of this
will appear easily to any, that will take the trouble to consider, how notably
the Reverence due to Majesty is impaired, and how Universally the
Anti-monarchical Principles are spread within these Seven or Eight Years, since
upon the misconceiv'd Jealousies of the People, He declined the Influence He
had upon the State, by his Great Employments.

III. Through the Power, which his Fidelity and Ability gave him over the King,
He has procured the chiefest Places of Strength in the Nation; And most of the
great Trusts, as well Civil and Religious, as Military, to be conferred upon
known Royalists, and sworn Enemies to such, as under the specious pretense of
securing our Liberties, would again involve Us in the same Calamities, from
which, Providence has so lately Delivered Us.

IV. He has been by his Advice and Influence over the great Ministers the
Principal Opposer of all the French Agents, who in subservience to Their
Interest, were often tampering for promoting of an Arbitrary Government, and of
making the Kings Interest both distinct from, and opposite to that of his
People: And this He has done in Obedience to the Fundamental Laws, for which
he always testified a great Veneration, and to prevent the ill Effects
constantly attending such Pernicious Councels: For He well knew from the
History of some of his Progenitors, that an Attempt to remove the Ancient
Boundaries and Landmarks of Government, never misses opening a way of Discord
and Confusion; Of which, Ambitious Men taking Advantage, by their wheedling
Practices, often persuade the People that are Heady, Valiant, and Jealous of
their Liberty, to run into Rebellion; which as it generally terminates in the
Ruin of the Prince, or Subject, so it often Enslaves both to the Power of a
Foreign Enemy; For which Reason He always held the Constitution of the Kingdom
as Sacred and Inviolable, in reference to the People, as He now does in regard
of his own Right.

V. It was This Active and Vigilant Prince, that (possessed with Flames of Love
toward the City of LONDON, as violent as those that reduced it to Ashes,)
exposed his Person to a Thousand Dangers, to Rescue it from Destruction. He
bufied those Hands (destined for Managing of Scepters) in Breaking open Pipes
and Conduits for Water, reached Buckets as nimbly as any of the Common People;
cleared the Streets from the Throngs and Crowds, that hindered the carrying away
of their Goods, Appointed his Servants and Guards to Conduct them to secure
places: And in fine, for several Nights and Days, (without Sleep, or rest from
Labor,) was seen in all parts, giving the necessary Orders for preventing the
further spreading of the Conflagration, as if Love (which usually works
Miracles,) had Multiplied him, or rather given him a kind of Ubiquity. And this
He did, partly to show his Gratitude to his Beloved Londoners, whose Minion He
was, but chiefly to save the Magazine of the Strength and Treasure of the
Kingdom from Desolation and Ruin.

VI. Whatever is said of his Inclination to Popery, or the Humor of the French
Nation, it is Evident, He understands, and pursues the Interest of England so
well, that to check the Torrent of their Victories, by creating them work at
home, he forwarded (as much as possibly he could) an Alliance, which Monsieur
Rohux, a French Gentleman proposed to His Majesty for the Securing of Foreign
Protestants; And it had in all probability come to a very happy Issue, had not
Monsieur Rovigny Leiger, Ambassador from France at this Court, prevented it, by
corrupting one Monsieur de Verax, That after the Insurrection in the Vivarets,
fled hither, and rid some time in the Guards; who (through Necessity, or
Frailty,) made Sale of the whole Secret, (and with It, of the Safety of his
Friend, and the Protestant Religion in France,) for Two Hundred Pistols. Upon
notice of which Treachery, Monsieur Rohux retired into Switzerland, where being
Seized by a Party of French Horse, he was conveyed to the Bastile; and after
some times Imprisonment, broken upon the Wheel at the place of Execution.

VII. It was against his Will that the first and last Dutch Wars were
commenced, yet the resolution being taken, by those, whose Will is a Law, in
sheathing, or unsheathing the Sword of the Subjects, he valiantly, and for the
Glory of the English Nation, in the First, with many Thousands of their
Soldiers and Seamen, sunk a great part of their Fleet, blew up their Admiral,
and with him the very Reputation of their Naval Power, thought before
Invincible, and by Sacking of Scheveling made proud Amsterdam tremble, for
which great Services, as England shall ever be indebted, so the Parliament,
then sitting, was pleased to vote him 100000 l. as a small acknowledgement of
his Merit, and their Affections; and London, and all other Places, entertained
him with Acclamations of Joy. Thus you see the vicissitude of Humane Affairs,
and how Fortune, which then opened the Hearts and Cities of the Kingdom, for
his Reception, now shuts them, and all the Avenues to the Crown against him,
which may serve as an Example to Perkin Warbeck, who never did any thing to
recommend him, besides the effect of Chance, his being a Protstant, how little
reason he has to rely upon the Affections of a Multitude, that so easily
forgets the real worth of their Darling Prince. -- Nor did he less deserve the
hatred of his Enemy, and love of his Country in the last War, in which, though
with the many notable Disadvantages of the Wind and Tide, being at Anchor when
set upon, and the succeeding Mist, he yet behaved himself with that Gallantry,
as made De Ruiter own us to be Invincible, and more than men, and particularly,
that His R. H. exceeded all the Admirals in Christendom, as much by his
Bravery, as he did by his Birth. having, in the heat of the Engagement, (when
Re-fitting, would lose the Benefit of his Orders, and Action,) changed Ships
oftener than Great Generals at Land, have done their Horses.

VIII. It was this Zealous Prince, for the Honor and Safety (of England, that
advised the forming of the Triple League, which was the wisest Conjunction, and
most for the Glory of the King's Reign, and the Preservation of His Dominions,
that ever he entered into. And this he did, not only to curb France, whose Power
he saw was already overgrown, but to save all the weaker Parts of Christendom
from the Attempts of the stronger; For he knew that while that League continued
firm, the King of Sweden, and the States of Holland, would have construed all
Designs upon us in England. as done against those of the same Interest with
themselves, and in favor of whose Security, they had entered into that Alliance.

IX. He was so great a Stranger to the breaking of the Triple League, and
seizing the Dutch Smyrna Fleet, that Sir Edward Sprag, who was known to be his
Creature, was not thought fit to be entrusted with the Secret, which occasioned
the Miscarriage of the Design, and the Eternal Glory of his Highness.

X. He has not only mantained Correspondence with Foreign Princes, by His
Majesty's approbation, for securing the welfare of the Nation, but likewise
endeavored to draw them into an Alliance with us, to oppose the French
particularly, or any other Foreign Enemy, that by Counsel, or Action, would
endeavor the overthrow of our Legal Government. And besides many evidences of
this, which are needless to mention at present, the secret Counsel, which, by
His Majesty's Consent, he gave to our several Ambassadors abroad, and are yet
to be seen, together with the many Letters he wrote to the same purpose, do
uncontrollably demonstrate it.

XI. It was He, that when the late Expedition into Flanders, was thought really
Designed against the French, put all his Equipage into a readiness, and vowed
to retrieve the Reputation of England, by Death, or Conquest. But a Great Man,
then at the Helm, (now for his many Villainies confined to the Hold,) thought
fit by his Advice to make a Mock-General, for a Mock-Army, not daring to put
such a great Indignity upon any, that had Sense to understand, or Courage to
revenge it, which occasioned that Imposition of Peace, under which all the
States of Christendom do, more or less, feel the heavy pressures of the French
Insolence, whereas, had not that Mercenary Lord put a stop to the Parliaments
Proceedings, and the Duke's Resolutions, Europe had in a few years been
restored to its Tranquillity.

XII. He was so far from consenting to, or cooperating in any part of the
Popish Plot, that Oats and Bedlow, (the two Poles on which the whole Frame of
it has its motion and circumgyration) did solemnly clear him, as appears by
their several Depositions, and the Journals of both Houses of Parliament.

XIII. It was the Duke, who, when Father Bedingfield brought him the
Treasonable Letters concerning the PLOT, immediately showed them to the King,
that so the Conspirators and their Papers might be seized, and the Truth sifted
to the Bottom.

XIV. It is he, who this Summer, at Windsor, facilitated the Treaty of
Alliance, made between This and The Crown of Spain, for the Common Security of
both Nations, against all Enemies whatsoever, and to the unspeakable Advantage
of our Merchants in that Country, and all other parts of the Spanish Dominions.

XV. The incredible Expenses of the Crown having drained His Majesty's
Exchequer, to that degree, that he wanted Money for defraying the Vast Charges,
of Maintaining and Defending Tangier, his R. H. rather then so Imporrant a
Place, for the Trade of the Streights, should fall into the hands of the Moors,
and, perhaps, by them be delivered up to worse Enemies, generously disburs'd a
very considerable Sum of Money, for its Preservation; and by that Action showed
how sollicitous he is about the Welfare of England, even at the very time,
when it contrives his Destruction, which is an infallible Evidence of his being
in his Nature and Principles very averse from Animosity and Revenge. To which
his Enemies have reported him so addicted, that in the opinion of many, he is
accounted irreconcilable; whereas he is so much of a contrary temper, that as
he equals Caesar in his Greatness of Mind, and firmness of Resolution; so he
out-does him in the particular Character of Remembering all things but Injuries.
Christianity has made him so unalterable in this Point; that as Thousands of
Examples do manifest his Sincerity in it, so his common and constant saying,
viz. that as he never forgets good turns, so he can easily forgive bad ones, is
an invincible proof of his Inclination. He needs no Cicero to plead the Cause
of the Guilty, or heap upon him extravagant Praises for his Mercy to his
Enemies in Distress; His own Genius leads him to the practice of that
Gallantry, without the Intercession or Flattery of others. Marcus Marcellus was
not with more readiness and affection received into Caesar's Favors, than all
Adversaries may be into his, upon quitting those Crimes, for which he is now
Vogu'd inexorable; And, were it his Fortune to have the full knowledge of this
particular Virtue spread as far as the Effects have reached, I am confident it
would be impossible for the Malice of a few, to impose upon others, so, as to
make them continue their violent Actions against him, and think that their
Security, (which is really their Hazard) instead of Repenting, to go on to
greater Ills upon so groundless and malicious a supposition.

Lastly, as he believes that none deserves to have Obedience paid to him, when
a King, that is Unruly and Refractory to his Princes Command when a Subject, so
he is submissive to His Majesty's Pleasure, even beyond the Prescript of Law,
having now the third time, with the manifest hazard of his Person, besides the
difficulties and inconveniences of traveling, quitted his Native Country,
upon the first notice of his Commands.

Thus you see what a Prince England is weary of, and that as a weak and
diseased Stomach, nauseates even the best Restorative, so our Nation in the
Confusions and Distractions the fear of losing its Liberty has put it into,
dreads none so much as him, who of all men living, if a King, would be the most
able and willing to Defend them. But I hope Scotland understands his Merit, and
its own Interest better, and will secure him that Ancient Throne, whose
Splendour is much abated, since that Kingdom is, by the Absence of their Kings,
in a manner become a Province; if he fills it once with an exclusion from ours,
it will soon regain its first Luster, and your name will be as glorious, as
ours will be detestable to Posterity: But however, as I would not have the
happy Union of the two Kingdoms dissolved, so I hope that either our Repentance
will recall him, or that, Alexander like, his own victorious Sword, will in time
cut this Gordian Knot of the Succession, and Establish him in his Right: To
which, as I doubt not but you will be assisting, so you need not question the
help of all Loyal men here, and particularly of

Jan. 3. 1679. Your Humble Servant B. T.


