blazon or coat of arms of the City of London

Davies Mayor. Martis quarto die Septembris, 1677. Annoque Regni Regis CAROLI
Secundi, Angliae, etc. Vicesimo Nono.

THis Court does earnestly desire Mr. Thorp to Print his Sermon Preached at the
Guild Hall Chapel, on Sunday Morning last, before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
of this City.

Wagstaffe.

Imprimatur.

T. Turner, R.P.D. Do Episc. Land. a Sacris Domest.

September. 6. 1677.

A SERMON Preached before the RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lord Mayor, AND ALDERMEN of
LONDON, AT GUILD HALL CHAPEL. By George Thorp, B.D. Fellow of Gonvil and Caius
College in Cambridg, and Rector of St. Antholins, and St. John Baptists, London.

LONDON: Printed by Andrew Clark, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1677.

To the Right Honorable Sir THOMAS DAVIES, Lord Mayor Of the City of LONDON;
And the Court of ALDERMEN.
Right Honorable,
WHat you were pleased to hear with so favorable approbation, as to enjoin
this farther Publication (for so I have learned to interpret the condescending
desires of my Superiors) I here humbly present to your like favorable
Patronage. I dare promise nothing for my performance; but may (I think) presume
so much upon the subject, as to judge him fallen out with himself, as all the
World beside, who is not willing to make his frequent appeals thereto. If the
Countenance of your Authority, to its own inward Evidence, recommend it more to
the Serious Meditations and diligent Observance of all, especially of this
Great and Honorable City; I know nothing may contribute farther, under the
Divine Blessing, to its most lasting Renown, and the increase of its Felicity
to all Generations. Which is the Hearty Prayer of

Your Lordships most Humble and Obedient Servant, Geo. Thorp.

MATTHEW. vii. 12. Therefore all things, whatsoever ye would that men should do
to you, do ye even so to them; for this is the Law and the Prophets.


AS among all the Civilized part of Mankind, no Honors, and Commendations have
been judged great enough to bestow upon Virtue in general; so no task has been
found more difficult and perplexed, than to deduce it readily, and safely into
all the single Offices of Humane Life.

Not to insist at present on the immediate bounden expressions of Piety toward
God, about which men always have been, and needs must be at the greatest loss,
where his own express declarations conduct them not, from the infinite distance
of the object: In the more common, and obvious instances of Justice, and
Benignity one toward another, which most acknowledge in the gross reasonable,
and advantageous; yet few are thought so happy, or so faithful, as to follow
them by straight, and uninterrupted lines in their several deductions, and to
accommodate them aright to all the emergent cases incident to our converse one
with another.

After the relief, and directions lent us from Laws Divine, or Humane, the
clearest Revelations of God, the most studied, and improved Reasonings of the
wisest of men spent therein, whether through ignorance, or prejudice,
stubbornness, or malice, scarce any precept has been found so plain, any
conviction so unexceptionable, which some men will not evade, or elude, first
make intricate, and then frustrate, dispute themselves into a loss about it,
and then conclude with almost a full exemption from it, and that in pursuit of
every fancied (however lawless) interest, or groundless humor.

Farther, The circumstances of our actions are open to such almost infinite
variety, and accordingly the reasons, and measures of Commands, and our
Obligations altering; It will be found a matter of some intricacy to the most
upright and wary, without danger or mistake, duly and hastily to apply all
general injunctions to each single act. Wherefore after the largest provisions
of particular Precepts of all sorts, some general Rules we have given to direct
us, where others may come short, or we seem at a loss about them. Among which,
none more full and comprehensive than this of my Text, which has gaind it the
most universal admiration and applause, even from those that observe, or those
that observe it not; from the Enemies, as Friends to our sacred profession. So
that Alexander Severus the Roman Emperor, Aelius Lampridius. p. 376. in vita
ejus.
is reported to have Engraved it on the Walls of his Palace, and other Public
Buildings, as it were a standing Law of his Empire, and the best square of his
own, and others proceedings in the Administration thereof. As our Lord in my
Text declares it to have been of God himself under the Old Testament. He no
less Establishing it for future Generations under the New.

In Treating of which I shall, First, inquire into the proper extent of this
Rule, to vindicate it from some false applications, and assign it, as near as I
can, its true boundaries.

2. The apparent Reasonableness, Justice, and Equity thereof.

3. The plain easiness, and suitableness of it to present use.

4. The Divine Authority, and Sanction of it from the last words.

In order to the former I observe, First, This does not make other men's
dealings with us, the Rule of our dealing with them.

It is not whatsoever men do to you, but, Whatsoever ye would they should do to
you, etc. Which otherwise might open a gap to all injustice, fraud or violence.
It must not pass for a Maxim here, whatever it do in men's Practice, Fallere
fallentem non est fraus. Men are very apt to think it a warrantable excuse, in
the worst of their Actions, if they can but with any pretense say, I do but to
him as he did to me, and give him, as they call it (I know not by what Figure)
as good as he brought. So injuries, as well as animosities, are multiplied, and
bandied from one to another, and contrary to all other violent motions, lose
nothing, but gain still more and more in their rebound. Another man's injustice
or cruelty does not warrant, or alter the nature of mine, and though he began
first, yet no Reason or Precept will justify my following him therein, which
the more I complain of, the greater distance I ought to keep from it: and if in
some instances it be no more than what may be just for him to suffer, yet in
all, it is more than I have power to inflict; not to mention how partial Judges,
and Executioners men would be in their own Causes, while the justest
punishment, where it goes no farther, is not committed to every ones
management; and private Revenge, in all Societies especially, stands convicted
by the Laws of God, Nature, and Compact; and can have no shelter from this. If
in any case of extreme violence, I may, Vim vi repellere, rather Kill than be
Killed, when openly Assaulted, against the common rights of Human Society, by
Thieves and Murderers; It is not so much their desert as my necessity, that
must bear me out, wherein all Reason, and all Laws of God and Man judge it more
equal, that the guilty should suffer, rather than the innocent, where one must
presently, and in such an unavoidable exigence, may have affixt somewhat of a
Public Character on the last for his most necessary defense. But where this
may be otherwise secured, I must make my recourse, and yield up my cause to the
common guard, and most impartial determination of the Community, and of Him
above all that judges therein, who has said Vengeance is mine: So I should be
willing to have done unto me, and if this seem to leave me under disadvantage
with those who will not yet deal so with me; as it justifies them not in the
least, so will it more severely condemn them for it hereafter; and in the mean
time this restraint however uneasy, may be looked on as part of that Self
denial, and taking up the Cross, necessary not only to follow our Lord, but to
ensure the peace and welfare of Humane Society.

2. Our own will and desire for other men's dealings with us, taken in the gross
may be often an unwarrantable, and at other times an incompetent Guide to ours
with them. As if through any Distemper of body, or mind, prejudice, or
misapprehension, I wish for any thing that is really hurtful to my self, I may
not hence justly force it upon another. In opposition to which the Ancient
Latin Copys, T. 4. De Sermon Domini in monte. l. 2. p. 1168.
as St. Augustine observes, read it quaecunque bona, etc. But because it will be
yet controverted, what these good things are, and how to distinguish them; and
besides the case of those who are incapable of judging of any Law; and for whom
another restraint is provided; beside the case of Inferiors, and Superiors, as
such, which admits different considerations, that I shall meet with in my next;
The misapplications of this Rule in which our own inclinations may be aptest,
to impose on us, I reduce chiefly under this particular to two instances. I do
not as I would be done unto, if I urge that upon another which he thinks
hurtful, though I do not; because I do not put my self in his circumstances,
entirely, and so not to him, what I would expect from another, were I in his
place, as this supposes.

Again, When the ground of my desire, or expectation is some other
by-consideration, and not the equity of the Case it self. As when I am willing
any should do somewhat to me, that I may have the advantage of doing the like to
him; which in effect proves not the same. If I think my self stronger than
another, and so should desire he might take from me, what he could, that I
might have the same liberty toward him, or others; here I do not really, what
I would be willing to suffer, and yet where this may be materially the same, it
varies much in the different condition of persons and other circumstances, too
many to reckon up. In all which, as in the case before, I do not truly, and
fully put my self in his place, and stead. In opposition to them, the order of
the words is exactly to be observed; the first part to be considered by it self
absolutely, and not to follow any sinister respect to the last, that is,
abstracted from other aims and designs: Whatever I should choose, and think
desirable in it self, and due to me in the same case, that I hereby bind my
self to, toward another, at least when in my power. But not to invert the
order of the words; Do what you will to any one, so you be willing they should
do it to you: Wherein we shall be easily mistaken and blinded with prejudice
and partiality, when we begin with that, and so proceed to this; as appears by
too woeful experience.

3. I may reasonably suppose this Rule given not so much for a complete System
of all Justice, and Equity: But rather as a convenient relief, and Additionary
Supply to all others, wherein seems to be the best, and safest, and constant
use of it; where we are to seek for any other, or wholly at a loss about its
interpretation, there this may extricate us out of a great many doubts. For
though I suppose most of the Precepts, which concern our converse with each
other, may be fairly deduced from this (of which more in the Close,) yet if any
do not presently appear so, they do not thence lose their Obligation, neither
are we free to every Action, which our judgment may make reconcilable
herewith. For the Authority of God, which binds antecedently to this, or any
other Law, may lay many engagements of Duty upon me toward other men, which I
may be apt to think I should not require from any, nay be unwilling to receive.
Again I may have somewhat imposed upon me by my Lawful Superiors, which I may be
inclined to judge, I should not injoin on them. In which the Case is not left to
even debate, or my judgment to be determined by the reason of the thing alone,
as it seems in the Text. In which also mankind are known naturally partial, and
I may be supposed also more easily mistaken than they, who stand upon much
higher ground, and have a fuller and larger Prospect of all about them, however
the necessary Rights of just Authority to guard, and advance the true Honor and
Service of God, and his Religion, with the Public Peace, weigh much more (that
I say not oblige much farther) than any private judgment, or interest: and
wherein nothing absolutely unlawful is enjoined, he that has the Commanding
Power clears himself fully of this Rule, if, after all others, he do as he
would be done unto, others cannot without that Reverence, and Obedience, which
in like circumstances they would expect from all, though they now obstinately
deny it. However the wills and inclinations of men in their own concerns, as
well as others, are often fickle, and various, received upon very uncertain
grounds, and governed by very unaccountable prejudices, and it seems no way
convenient, that the strength of all Laws Divine, as Humane should stand, or
fall with such weak and tottering supports, and be so long precarious, till
they have stood their trial, and received their doom from so frequent a
partial, but always an inferior Judge. This Rule may superadd a farther
Obligation, but was never designed to exclude, or excuse us from any former;
where others fail this may supply the place of a particular injunction, and
engage us to somewhat beyond what we thought ourselves bound to before, not
discharge us of any other Duty, seeing we can hardly imagine any good beyond
what we wish to ourselves, and are hereby so far engaged to others.

4. Some have thought this rather a Rule of Justice, than Charity. Indeed one
of the Oriental Translations renders it quicquid aequum ducitis. The ground of
their limitation is, that I may lawfully desire, or be willing another should
give me all he can without prejudice to himself; But am not hereby bound to do
so to every other man, nay cannot. Yet I am not willing so to restrain it,
seeing the use, and design of it seems to reach Acts of Charity, as common
Justice, it may be to join them in one. So the way of our Saviors introducing,
and connecting it to the former Verse, may more clear under the last
particular. In the mean time, for the mentioned instance, I may be willing to
receive, what I do not think another bound to give. So Whatsoever ye would in
my Text, is, whatever ye think or judge reasonable, and equitable to expect from
others, or that they are any way obliged to bestow; that reciprocally binds,
and that in Justice too. But in Acts of Liberality, I ought even in my desires
to leave another, as free, as I would be my self, to lay them out where the
best Prudence may direct him. Charity is a large, and diffusive Principle, not
to be tied up to one Method, or confined always to the same measures; seeks
not her own, much more with common Justice restrains our coveting what is other
men's. He that desires always to be forgiven, and to be ever receiving, had need
be as free in giving to, or forgiving others; or else he will not only fall
short of the Mercy, he asks, but fall under the stroke of that Justice, he
violates. So I think I may determine, I ought to bestow that upon another,
which interchangeably in the like case, I should think it reasonable for me to
hope, and expect from him; or else my desires, or actions will be obnoxious to
more guilt, than ordinary partiality. So far of the Explication in General,
which it would be endless to pursue into extreme niceties, more apt to perplex,
and confound, then explain the Precept to our readier observance.

Yet more particularly by way of Paraphrase. No man is willing to be defrauded,
or injured; to be imposed on by falsehood, or treachery. None is desirous to be
reviled, or despised: every man is supposed to wish well unto himself; to have
his person, and all that appertains to him safe from outward violence, or
secret fraud; an evil eye, or as bad a Tongue, to have his Actions interpreted
in the most favorable sense, they are capable: all his good things advanced;
his evil as much as may be diminish't: In all instances go and do likewise.
(Nemo cum ignorantia tenetur, non cupit doceri; quum libatur, amanter ac
secreto moneri, potius quam traduci; nemo quum eget, non velit sibi subveniri:
Nemo velit obtrectari famae suae; Nemo fraudari, etc. Erasmus par.)

I am in the second place to consider the apparent reasonableness, justice, and
equity of the Rule, which has all the evidence possible to recommend it to the
Universal approbation of mankind. Indeed it lies so near the first Principles,
and Originals of all right Reason, and Equity, that it seems hard to derive it
from any more clear, and self-evident, and so far difficult to prove, as to
find any other proposition, that less needs proving: and yet some such
immediate ones, we must have recourse to, or else all discourse must be
fruitless, we can have no foundation whereon to begin, or end to stop at. It
has often fared the worse with very important Truths, for lying near the
Fountain head of all; while through Pride, Obstinacy, or vain Curiosity, some
men will hardly receive the prime verities of Nature, as well as Religion,
without requiring a previous proof, which all men are not alike happy in
managing, nor bind themselves to the same Methods therein: Neither are under
the same apprehensions of Principles, and their consequences; of which others,
(though most unreasonably) have taken such advantage, as more to distrust, or
contemn that proved, which barely propounded, they could not but Reverence. The
proposition in my Text, seems as liable to run this hazard (if it have not
already suffered thereby) as most others; which therefore I rather premise,
that it may undergo no prejudice by my short offers, which I reduce to a small
compass: and in which every ones own Meditations may add what possibly to him
may seem more convincing.

Now with respect to those who (if any) are most like to object against it, I
may begin by considering how reconcilable it is with their own dearest (if not
only) Principle of Self-Love supposed therein, and truly confirmed thereby:
than which nothing with such may, sooner conclude it reasonable. For because
it is taken for granted, that as we do, so we ought to wish well unto ourselves,
and can hardly knowingly do otherwise, therefore it is made the fairest Rule,
but not the only or best ground of our dealing so with others. Wherefore they
who most contradict the purport of it toward them; are as rigid, and hasty as
any, in exacting it toward themselves. When we are bid to love our Neighbor
as ourselves, it is implied as we do, so we must and cannot but love ourselves:
Whereto infinite Appeals are made in all parts of Religion; and were it not
presupposed inviolably strong, and universal, the Bands of Humane Society, and
Commerce, as Converse would be much loosened, which are now more straightned by
this Precept: We are hereby more than warranted to will what is good to
ourselves, while our doing it to others is ruled thereby; which (as all
commands rightly considered) is so far from clashing with true Self-Love, that
it proves its safest guard. We do not what we ought by this Rule to others, if
we wish not what is really best to ourselves. But if this reach not the
evidence of an entire proof, it may remove a considerable prejudice out of its
way, which not done, scarce any other would be admitted.

2. To proceed gradually in matters wherein there is no necessary competition
between my own and my Neighbors concerns, that is, where men's interests do not
really interfere, or what I do to another takes nothing properly from my self,
which yet often happens, there nothing can carry more unexceptionable Evidence,
than the Precept before us. As for instance to give good words, rather than
bad; candid, and benign, rather than peevish, and fretful; to be more forward
to comfort, than to vex; to heal, than to wound, to lift up, rather than to
beat down; to conceal, rather than to expose another imperfections; to defend,
sooner than to accuse; yea in many Offices of Beneficence, wherein I may
relieve another necessity, or much promote his convenience, by that which I
cannot keep, or if I do, it must be useless, or so insignificant, that I shall
be ashamed to own it.

In these and such like instances, what can carry greater conviction, than that
the one part is more excellent, and eligible than the opposite, and yet almost
as soon, and easily done? For I appeal to the most stupid, and prejudiced, is
it not better to save Life, than to destroy it? to be an instrument of another
happiness, than misery? to love, than to hate? etc. that is, to do good, than
to do evil? If there be no difference in things at all, but only in our
Opinions: if, abstracted from other considerations, one includes as much
perfection as the other (for what dare not some men assert?) Why in our own
behalf are we so constantly determined in our choice to the one? so fearful of,
and ready to fly from the other? needing neither force of Argument, or length
of Meditation to secure our preference. An immediate Conviction, that they are
as opposite in their own Natural tendency as our thoughts; and that we can as
soon cease to desire what is good, as such, as not think it to be placed in
those things, which this Rule directs us in to all. Now if what I wish to my
self, or would have others do to me be better than the opposite (or else why do
I choose it?) then by the same reason it is better to all, and at least when my
own prejudice, or interest comes not between, I have no pretense of objection
that involves not a contradiction; and accuse my self of the breach of all the
Laws of Conscience, Reason, and Equity, if I do not what I cannot but judge, and
do so every day, really best, and most eligible.

3. In other Cases where my thus dealing may seem to restrain those benefits,
which otherwise I could wish to my self, yet is it most reasonable, and equal,
that the conveniences of Humane Life should be distributed by such measures,
while no axiom upon which Mathematical demonstration is built can plead clearer
evidence than the Foundation of this. If there it must be received as
undeniably and immutably true. Si aequalia aequalibus addas, tota sunt
aequalia. Si ab aequalibus aequalia demas, quae remanent erunt aequalia. The
same is this, at least on the one side, changing but things into persons, paria
paribus convenient: like things agree to like persons. So that whatever is fit
for, or due to me, must be by the same reason for, and to another in the same
circumstances. All men naturally, as such, are equal, stand upon even terms,
and level ground; and if Society, Compact, and the consequences thereof have
made any difference in the conditions of men, that alters not the Case here;
because the present Precept puts, or supposes us entirely in the same state, or
capacity, ere it determine, or equalize our mutual dues, and obligations.

So that as sure as there is any such thing as right or wrong, reasonable, or
unreasonable, equal, or unequal, and those must be as certain, and evident as
any other Relation whatever; of agreeable, or disagreeable; beneficial, or
hurtful; true, or false; straight, or crooked, etc. which all Self-Love must
derive from the supposed difference of, and subsist by: So unavoidably must the
better part be involved in this direction.

But that I may begin, and end with same persons here (who too often before make
violent attempts upon those fixed boundaries, and so are like to be little moved
by such Topics) I add in the Fourth and Last place, in their own way of
reasoning, There is no other possible Foundation of Society, and so of Peace,
and Self-preservation involved therein, than the supposed observance of this
Law. For if you love your self, so does every one beside, and may do as much,
and therefore can never be supposed to agree in any thing, which provides not
equally for his concerns as yours, and puts him not in a like capacity of
enjoying what he desires. I appeal to the most partial, whether all persons are
like to meet in what only takes care for one, or whether any other Rule, or
misapplication of this, give so large as well as so equal, a provision for
more, yea for all; so that it has not only as much of abstracted reason, but of
private interest, and safety, as it is possible for any general one to have;
wherein alone the concerns of the community are most nearly united: and does
not only follow that order in which God, and Nature have placed us: But the
other fancied Originals of Society fall in pieces without it. Diog. Laert. ^.
5. p. 313. Compare Aristotle de moribus. l. 9. c. 4. p. 148. (...). Dion
Cassius ^. 52. p. 492. 493. (...), etc.
Whence Aristotle in his Life by Laertius, is made to give it as a Rule of
Friendship, which would most difficultly be reduced to any other; and Mecaenas
in that famous Oration of his to Augustus in Dion Cassius (one of the Monuments
of Antiquity of greatest name left us from the common Deluge) concerning the
undertaking, and management of the Roman Empire; gives it him as the great and
compleatest Rule of Government, which challenges an eminency of all most
transcendent, So govern others as you would be governed your self. But our
Blessed Lord more wisely, and charitably prescribes it, as an universal Law to
all, while he supposes, or makes them mutually cordial Friends, and entirely
concerned for each others good, and welfare, as their peculiar care and trust.

3. What may yet farther commend this Rule is its plain easiness, and
suitableness to present use; while Laws, if otherwise never so rational, and
useful, if withal obscure, perplexed, and over-numerous, may prove a snare,
rather than a support; make more Controversies than they decide; lose much of
their strength, and force by being spun out into nice and subtle disputes: and
fall short of their aim by not reaching the greater part of them, whom they
designed to direct: who either have not leisure sufficient to attend, or
capacities to understand them, or ready sagacity to apply them in opportunities
of Action. In contradistinction to which, and such like inconveniences, here
is a Law always at hand, which every man carries about in his own breast,
legible to him that knows no Letters, open and obvious to the most rude and
ignorant, which the worst memory cannot forget, the suddenest surprise prevent,
nor the most wilful blindness conceal: to come at which, we are not forced to
search Ancient Records, or dark Repositories; to revolve and ruminate upon old
dark sentences, or new finer glosses; not to rove about the world to examine
the various Customs and Constitutions of Countries; not to soar as high, as
Heaven, or dive as low, as Hell, in quest of our Duty; after all other pains
return into your self, and look into your own heart, where you may often find it
sooner, and read it clearer than any where beside. The Gentiles, says St. Paul,
Romans ii. 14, 15. Having not the Law, do by nature the things contained in the
Law, these having not the Law, are a Law unto themselves, and show the work of
the Law written in their hearts, their Conscience in the mean time accusing, or
excusing one another. Where can we discern more lively Characters, and a fairer
Transcript of this non scriptae sed natae legis, Tom. 2. p. 545 orat. pro T.
Annio Milone. Tom. 2. edit. Savil. p. 165.
as the Orator styles it, than in this Maxim? whence St. Chrysostom on my Text,
(...), etc.

Of which what farther evidence can be expected than the experience of the even
Infant Age, where the knowledge of other Laws never yet came, amidst the little
transactions of which, how often do we hear such like complaints and
expostulations with each other when aggrieved? This I would, or this I would
not have done to you; implying their native sense of a like obligation on the
other.

Again, this will readily descend to each single Case, and may be easily
accommodated to every emergence thereof, which other Precepts must infinitely,
and endlesly multiply in their attempts toward: However involved with
difficulties, or full of various windings and turnings, this question is soon
asked, and almost as soon answered, What we should desire, and expect to be
done unto us (rebus sic stantibus)* that if not always absolutely, yet is most
likely to be our present Duty to others; if not what we are strictly bound to,
yet is usually what is most safe and innocent; if no other command bind it upon
us, yet our own choice generally does, and convicts us of guilt in the Breach.

This proves the most faithful, and impartial Monitor, a voice still sounding
in our Ears, flee we never so fast from it, This is the way, walk in it. Every
man may soon, and is very ready to put himself in his Neighbors circumstances,
and is as quick in determining what he would have done unto him, you need not
doubt his choice, or that he should take up short of his due; less we cannot
ascribe, more we may add to him.

And because we are so sagacious in finding, and improving every hint, that
makes for our own interest, therefore we are here most advantagiously directed
to put our selves into his Case; which, if any thing, is like to give us the
fairest, and fullest prospect of his due, and the most pathetick motive not in
the least to detract from it.

Neither lies there any exception against so suitable a Precept, according to
which we are made our own Judges, and our own Lawgivers; our own Accusers, or
our own Compurgators; can you desire more kind, and indulgent, ones? Can you
complain of that Burden, which you impose on your self; and think that a
grievance, with which your own happiness is so twisted? Must your will be a Law
to others, and ought it not to be so first to your self? What you have already
judged best, when to be done to you, is it quite contrary, when to be done by
you, and the case in nothing else altered? So that whatever suspicion, or
prejudice may lie against any other, none sure can against our own voice, and
determination, which this only ties us up to. Wherefore no Precept can be
conceived pressed with fewer encumbrances, darkened with less intricacy, open to
larger use, readier to present application, more obvious to all apprehensions,
fitter to supply all other defects and losses, and more safely to interpret
most other injunctions, than this of my Text. Summa omnium quae docet lex, and
Prophetae, quos si aut non vacat, aut per inscitiam non potest evolvere, habet
domi regulam, etc. as Erasmus in his Paraphrase.

Which brings me to the Fourth and Last particular, and part of my Text, the
Divine Authority, and Sanction of this Rule expressed in the last words, This is
the Law and the Prophets.

I have hitherto considered it as the dictate of incorrupt Nature, and unbyast
Reason by its own innate light, and so have purposely omitted other
confirmation thereof. But if any thing seem still wanting to complete the
farther establishment of it for a Law, and to raise a more Religious Veneration
to its Observance, that is abundantly supplied by this last clause: this is not
only to act agreeably to the most improved Reason, but also Divine Revelation;
nor merely to follow the Laws of Nature, but of God over and above: being
strengthened by this his double Sanction, which twofold Cord sure is not easily
broken; to its own intrinsic loveliness, it has all the positive
enforcements, and authority of an immediate Heavenly injunction, This is the
Law; etc.

In which words our Savior seems to go farther yet. It is not only a single
Command, however solemnly Enacted in the Law, confirmed, and renewed by the
succeeding Prophets; but as it were the sum, and recapitulation of the whole:
As if all together reduced into one short Epitome, and Breviate, running
through every Precept, and almost as often repeated, as there are any
Instructions given; So that go through the entire Scripture, at least that part
of it which concerns our deportment toward each other, wheresoever you pitch,
on whatsoever you sit, you cannot but meet the true purport, and design of
this; though not in the same terms, yet in sense. So that if all the Offices,
and single Duties of Humane Life scattered in the Sacred Volumes, may be
included in one common direction, it can hardly be done in fewer words, and
more comprehensive of all, than this.

Also it is not only the Law, and the Prophets, but the Gospel too, where our
Lord most expressly enjoins it, here, and in St. Luke vi. 31. and some Copys
added it to the Apostolic Cannons, Acts xv. 29. His Precepts also are more
nearly suited, and accommodated thereto, where there seems any difference,
being more covertly, and by consequence delivered of old. Wherefore some Copys
Read it in my Text (...) or (...), so, or to this effect are the Law, and
Prophets; others, as we, (...), This is the Law, etc.

Here I shall, (1.) mark out some general Commands of each Testament, which
seem of the same import with this.

2. The Universal extent ascribed to such Commands.

3. How far involved in other more particular and remote.

4. The relation it may stand in to, and the influence it has upon even the
Duties of the First Table, which we owe most immediately to God himself, to
give it so great a Character, as in the close of my Text.

In order to the first may be observed indeed, that it is no where in express
terms in the Old Testament, or the Canonical Books; that which comes nearest,
is in the Apocryphal, Tobit v. 15. Do that to no man which thou hate, where
the negative part of it, is somewhat the same. But the positive sense is in many
places, as Levit. xix. 18. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, often
referred to in the New Testament. Now no consequence can be more direct and
natural, than that if we love him as our selves, we shall do to him what we
would have done to our selves, that only in the strictness of the Letter,
determining the inward Principle, and Disposition of the mind; this the outward
suitable Expression thereof, and Action. To the same purpose may be Interpreted
those many places concerning not only their Just, but Charitable, Humane, and
Friendly deportment toward all, especially the Poor, the Widow, the
Fatherless, Deuteronomy. xv. 12, etc. Yea, the stranger, and their very servants,
Deuteronomy. xvi. 11, 12, etc. While it comes in so often in the close, and as the
strongest enforcement of all, Thou shall remember thou was a bondman, or a
stranger in the Land of Egypt; implying their obligation to recollect, what
though they had not, yet they could not but have wished for, and might
reasonably have expected to have been done to them, and therefore so should now
do to others; nay this very consideration is expressly annexed to the forecited
Precept of loving our Neighbor as our selves, Levit. xix. 34. Alike may be
applied that concerning helping an Enemy in his distress, Exodus xxiii. 4. Yea
most in the beginning of that Chapter, so also concerning not rejoicing at his
calamity. Prove. xxiv. 17. Yea rather multiplying benefits upon him. Prove. xxv.
21. So the Psalmists appeal and profession, Psalm. vii. 4. If I have rewarded
evil to him that was at peace with me, etc. See also Heb. xiii. 3. Remember
them in bonds as bound with them, and them which suffer adversity as your
selves in the body: To omit others in the New Testament, where many things seem
added; to return Good for Evil; Blessing, for Curses; to love them that hate
us, to be merciful and kind to all, even the unthankful; less cannot, more may,
be included, than what is here expressed.

2. The large extent ascribed to such Commands, especially in the New
Testament, suitable to the declaration in my Text, Matthew. xxii. 36, etc. in
answer to that question, Which is the great Commandment of the Law? Our Lord
replies, first, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, etc. and the second is like
unto it, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, on these two Commandments
hang all the Law and the Prophets. So Mark xii. 30, etc. suitably St. Paul, and
more close to my Text, Gal. v. 14. For all the Law is fulfilled in one word,
even in this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self; which St. James, c.
ii. 8.9. calls the Royal Law, which fulfilling we shall do well. Again others
particularly are summed up in it, Romans xiii. 9. After reckoning up the five
negative Precepts of the second Table, he subjoins, If there be any other
Commandment, it is briefly comprehended, or recapitulated in this saying,
namely, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self; In the Verse before, He that
loves another has fulfilled the Law; in the Verse after, Love is the
fulfilling of the Law. So our Lord seems to sum up many in it, Matthew. xix. 18,
19.

3. Other Precepts more remote severally involve the same sense with this,
whatever expressions of Justice, and Charity are provided for in them singly,
are here universally, and together; that is for instance, just Weights and
Measures, an equal Balance, that we have not an Ephah, and an Ephah, as the
Hebrew phraseth the false and deceitful, one to buy, and another to sell with,
so in all other cases most straightly forbid, as a plain intrenchment upon this
Rule, not doing as we would be done by. So to be true to our trust, to speak as
we think, and act as we speak, to do violence to no man, to defraud, defame, or
reproach none, to preserve every ones dues, and secure his right, what is it
but to keep close to this Rule? Also to find pity, and relief in our distress,
and extremity; to have our wounds closed, and not widened; our distractions
composed, and not heightened; our misery as much as may be diminished, and our
happiness advanced, are every ones choice for himself, and so more become his
Duty to others. It were easy to go through most Commands, take almost any of
them severally, and consider what it is they injoin upon all, and bethink your
selves whether you would not choose it rather than the contrary; in all cases
to receive your due, often over and above, good will, and friendly assistance
from all; and can any thing be as more equal, so more desirable?

If there be any case like an exemption, it seems that of severe, especially
capital punishments, which as they are not excluded by all the Precepts of
Christian mercy, and compassion, which would be cruelty to the far greater, as
better part (and this must not as I said, be interpreted to certainly vacate,
and frustrate any other;) so though he that suffers may possibly always desire
pardon, and think himself as ready universally to give it: Yet he that inflicts
it, being under less prejudice, may conclude that were he in the same case, he
ought not to expect it, and that where so many others are concerned, by this
Rule barely, it can hardly be in his power always to give it.

4. In order to the enlargement of this Rule, and it is truly Religious, and
Spiritual, as mere Moral worth, may be considered the respect it bears to, and
the influence it has upon even the Duties of the First Table immediately
toward God, which though not directly, yet by some consequence may be
included, or supposed therein. This contains an universal Principle of Justice,
and Equity; of giving to every one what belongs to him, is due and proper to
his state; and so may be applied to all acts of Piety indispensably due to God,
as such, without the almost Blasphemous presumption of but supposing our selves
in his place. Also the true love of our Neighbor, which this supposes, and
expresses, must be founded in, and can only be preserved, and quickened by the
true love of God, which is the sum of the first Table: But these I need not
pursue, nor yet St. Augustines Argument in the matter in hand, Qui proximum
diligit, T. 3. De Tri^ate l. 8. c. 7. p. 355.
ipsam diligit dilectionem, Deus autem dilectio est, according to that, John i.
4, 8, 16. which especially as improved by the Schoolmen, would lead to somewhat
too nice, or too mystical for me.

In the mean while may be observed, the Scripture seems much more frequent, and
partial in stating the mutual Offices we ow each other in acts consequent on
this Rule, than the immediate outward expressions of Devotion toward God;
seldom expostulates the want of these, but the defect of those fill the Law,
and the Prophets, and the Gospels too with complaints. See the first of Isaiah
throughout, and many more exhorting them to show the truth of their Religion,
that Faith, that Fear, and Love of God in acts of Justice, and Mercy, rather
than Pompous Oblations, or Adorations, of which among others may be consulted,
Prove. xxi. 3. Jer. vii. 4, 5, etc. xxii. 16. Hos. vi. 6. Mich. vi. 7, 8. Mark
xii. 33. So in the account which our Savior gives of the proceedings of the
last day, ( Matthew. xxv. latter end) all the sentences to the good or bad, are
proportioned to the observance, or breach of these.

And as our future doom, so the success of our present Prayers, and Devotions
is made much to depend on this performance. In which may be observed the
connection of this Verse to the foregoing, in that it is, If ye being evil know
how to give good gifts unto your Children, how much more shall your Father
which is in Heaven, give good things to them that ask him? Therefore all
things, etc. As if he should say, there is nothing wanting to secure your
petitions from disappointment, but your not answering other men's equal requests
from you. God is infinitely more good, and so more ready to supply you, than
the most indulgent Parent his own Son. But if you expect God should fulfill your
desires, you must (if I may speak it with reverence) his. He is far removed in
person, and can receive nothing properly from you; in part therefore transfers
his right to his Creatures, for their necessary support, and makes your dealing
with them, the ordinary Rule, and Measure of his Dispensations to you. That
this is no forced interpretation (insisted particularly on by St. Chrysostom,
on my Text) appears by other express places; our Lords reflection upon his own
prayer, Matthew. vi. 14. 15. If ye forgive men their Trespasses, your Heavenly
Father will also forgive you, etc. and to the same purpose he denounces upon
the omission, Chapter xviii. 35. In which also may be farther consulted, Matthew.
vii. 1, 2. Luke vi. 37, 38. Romans ii. 1, 2, 3. By which and diverse like, he
shows how much he makes our actions dependant on this Rule, the square of his
distributions, whether of Justice, or Mercy; and that he measures chiefly our
performances even of Piety to himself, and mainly proportions our
after-rewards, and hopes from him by these like Offices, more than by other
even directer and immediate outward expressions of Devotion to himself; which
he seems sparing in requiring or commending; cautious in extending to their
utmost bounds; or cherishing every plausible pretense thereto, farther than may
strongly guard, and minister Spiritual Life to the other; knowing how often we
are mistaken, how easily seduced out of the way, how soon transported beyond
our line in pretenses to such raised, and still aspiring Passions; and how
unfit ordinarily we are to manage, and govern them, especially in the highest
transports toward such objects, so much above the level of Human
circumstances: that when sincere, but not the best grounded, or guarded, yet
rarely are they unmixt with some Allay of Superstition, or Enthusiasm. But when
heedlesly indulged, and let loose, soon pass into the most Phrensical
extravagances. Wherefore the Scripture seems to take more care to fence in,
than minister fuel to those however sacred flames; and expresses mostly our
Duty to God in general terms, and inward acts of loving him with all your
heart, fearing him, walking humbly with him, etc. But Offices of Righteousness,
and Charity fill every page, are more positive, punctual, and express; the
chief subject matter of Laws respecting us in society, wherein we stand upon
even terms one with another; and the effects of which are presently, and
sensibly beneficial, the stay and support of mankind; the common conveyance of
all the comforts of this Life, and the most advantageous opportunity of
provision for the next. So though this Precept seem literally, and most
strictly to respect the Second Table only: yet has it many signatures, and
evidences of the completion of the First: The Bond of all Society, and nearest
Original of all Justice, and Equity: The grand Pattern, and exemplar of all
Laws, and Constitutions: The Epitome of our whole Duty revealed, or innate: The
Law, Prophets, and Gospel in one: The end of the Commandments: The fairest
transcript of the first, and everlasting Righteousness: The most perfect
summary of Gods will, and the exactest measure of his present, and after
Dispensations; which may justly give it so high a Character in the close of my
Text. This is the Law and the Prophets.

From whence we may, first, admire the most apparent Equity, and impartiality
of the Divine Laws, that so unexceptionably, and universally as much as
possible provide for the good of all: God As one common Parent producing all
alike, so equally takes care of, and guards the Concerns of all; and made their
happiness run in the same Channel, that one part might not rejoice alone, nor
be put to seek, nor hope to find it apart from others: Thus forcing us into all
amicable Society supposed, and much strengthened by these prime dictates of God
and Nature: adding all the force of his authority and injunction to fasten our
mutual dependences, and enlarge the most diffusive felicity. He has thus given
every other man as sure hold of, and as good an interest in you, as you in him;
and made your willingness to receive, an equal obligation in you to give, and
so may appeal to your own judgment, Are not my ways equal? shows that he is no
respecter of persons in what he commands, no more than in what he distributes.

2. Here also we ought to adore the infinite condescension of our great
Lawgiver, that not only makes his own will, but our will our law; and shows
how tender he is of our good, that he makes our own desires the frequent
measure of his Precepts; and how far he delights in the welfare of his
creatures, in that he abridges them not the loving and doing good to
themselves, (...). Orat. 13. ^ Pop. antioe p. 549.
but makes it the matter and pattern of their actions to others; and never
finds fault with the excess of the one, when not perverted to obstruct or
vacate the other. He is pleased you should love your self as much as you can,
the more the better, so you love your Neighbor as your self. St. Chrysostom
proving in us a natural knowledge of good and evil, and that from my Text, as
before, subjoyns this excellent gloss thereon, There is no need of many words,
long laws, or various instructions, let your own will be your Law. You would
receive good, do good to another: you would find mercy, show it to your
Neighbor: you would be praised, praise others: you would be loved, love: you
would enjoy pre-eminence, or advantages, be as forward to yield them first to
others: Be you thus your Judge, and Lawgiver of your own life.

Nothing may more ingratiate unto us his most Divine and excellent Precepts,
than the consideration how, as near as possible, they stoop to our own wishes,
and desire nothing may more shame, and confound, convict, and condemn all
obstinate disobedience thereto, or transgression thereof, than to consider it
as a violence offered to our selves, as God: and one way, or other the not
doing as we would be done unto.

FINIS.

