TACHMAS PRINCE of PERSIA: AN Historical NOVEL, Which happened under the SOPHY
SELIMAN, Who Reigns at this day.

Rendered into English by P. Porter, Esquire

LONDON, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the King's Arms in the Poultrey. 1676.

TO THE Right Honorable, THOMAS Earl of Ossory, AND Lord Baron of MOOR-PARK,
One of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council; AND Knight of
the most Noble Order of the Garter, etc.
My Lord,
PRINCE Tachmas, (as will easily appear by viewing his Story) was a Person so
full of all sort of Virtues, and especially of that of Fortitude and Courage,
That finding his Life to be so near a Draught of Your Lordships Perfections (as
it is possible for any man to have approached to, but Your self) excepting in
his Misfortunes; I thought I should have injured him as much as his Enemies had
done, should I have dedicated his History to any other but Your self. And yet,
My Lord, I must freely confess, It Is not altogether for this Prince's sake I
make You this Present, but likewise for my own. For being one of that numerous
Body of men, that by their own Experience have been taught to know Your
Lordships worth, and consequently to venerate it; I was willing to seize upon
this occasion, to inform the World that I am wary enough to make choice of an
Excellent Patron; and to assure Your Lordship, That You have not conferred Your
Favors upon any man that can have more grateful Sentiments' of them, than I
have; or would with a more ready Zeal, be glad to embrace all opportunities
cordially to approve himself,

My Lord,
Your Lordships most devoted, obliged, and humble Servant, P. Porter.

THE PREFACE.
THis History was related one day by a young Persian in company; and it was
thought by several worthy the publishing in the French Tongue, so that it was
resolved to make an Essay how it would take: and as Truth is never more lovely
then when she appears all naked; We have industriously avoided all those
foreign Ornaments with which she is used to be clouded in these kind of
matters; not but that we might add several likely circumstances which could not
be contradicted: the obscurity with which all things are transacted in the
Palaces of the Sophies of Persia, might afford a Field large enough to Lie with
impunity. But we chose rather to offer nothing more than the true and faithful
Relation as we received it. We have likewise wilfully affected a grave Style,
and altogether different from that they call the Romantic. And we thought it
enough to make a decent Connection of all the transactions together, and from
time to time to make some Reflections upon them.

TACHMAS Prince of PERSIA: AN Historical Novel.
THere is nothing so dangerous for a Subject, as to set too high a value upon
his own Merit from his Sovereign; and to acquire to himself so much reputation
of Virtue and Bravery, as may give his Prince any umbrage of danger: This is a
Crime that Policy never pardons; especially when Love, that believes it may do
any thing, joins its jealousy to that of a Throne, in the apprehension of a
Monarch that wants no power to crush his unfortunate Rival.

The Sophy Chabas, who was poisoned by some whose Treason was never yet found
out, left two Sons, whereof the eldest called Seliman, immediately succeeded
his Father, and fills at this day the Throne of Persia. It is not to be doubted
but that Heaven, which destined him for the greatest Monarch of Asia, did adorn
him with virtuous qualities suitable to the Grandeur of so great a King; but it
should have made his brother Tachmas less aimable, and brought him into the
World with fewer perfections; since in a Subject, all qualities that may seem
worthy of the Diadem, are as so many Allarms in the heart of a Sovereign, and
create as many secret Enemies against him that possesses them. It is hard to
guess whether Tachmas was more obliged to Nature for the Perfections of his
Body, or the Excellencies of his Mind, since both these parts of him, so far
different the one from the other, equally gained him the admiration of all
mankind.

The Stature of his Body wa Noble and disingaged, his Port Majestical, his
Gesture grave without affectation, the Lineaments of his Face bold, his Eyes
quick, with a mixture of Fierceness and Sweetness: he had a freedom and
assurance in his Speech; and all his actions were very natural; his
Understanding was deep and piercing: He was quick-sighted even in the most
intricate matters: He was read in the Sciences; a great Statesman; his
conception of all things was quick and discreet; his discerning-faculty was
Judicious; his prudence perspicatious: he had a Soul worthy of his blood: his
humor was Warlike, abhorring idleness: his Courage lofty; he subjugated all
his thoughts to the interest of his Glory; but would not be dazzled with the
splendor of Greatness: he was as temperate in the use of Pleasures, as he was
constant in suffering Adversity; he was merciful to the oppressed, and kind to
all people; and, what proved his ruin, he was susceptible of Love. The King
his Brother had always a jealous Eye over him; but he wanted a pretext to
color his hatred.

Persia was then in a profound peace; and this sweet tranquillity gave the Court
opportunities to taste the pleasures of Innocent Love.

Amongst all the Beauties that adorned that Court, Negara was the chief: This
Princess, as well as Tachmas, revived in Ispaham the Accomplishments and
Gallantry of the Ancient Persians.

She was of the Illustrious blood of the Sophies; but that was the meanest of
her qualities: Nature had adorned her with a thousand other Perfections far
more commendable than her Birth. Besides the Beauty which she possessed in a
sublime degree, there was something in her Countenance, in her Speech, and in
all her Actions, so Charming, that it was impossible not to be surprised with
it. Her Wit gave a particular grace to all she said: She was in the good esteem
of every body; and what commended her Conversation more, and made it to be
earnestly desired, was the Gaity of her Humor, always pleasant, and free from
all that was morose or reserved. She had a great Soul, an absolute Empire over
all her Desires, excepting those that caused her misfortune. She believed a
long time, That Ambition was the most predominant of her Passions; but she was
undeceived by a cruel Experience, and found there was something else that
always had possessed the first place in her heart.

We are so unequal in our Affections, and so unlike our selves, that one only
object is able to make several different impressions upon us, according to the
diversity of the times, and dispositions of our Soul.

Negara appeared for a long time at Court, before Tachmas had any other
inclination, than an indifferent esteem for her: though she was every day in
his sight, and entettained by him, all her Charms could draw no tribute from
Tachma's heart, but a Civil complaisance, and that respect which he owed to her
Sex and Merit. But the fatal moment was come, wherein Love resolved to
subjugate this Prince to his Empire, to abandon him afterward to the
persecutions of Fortune, which made him her Victim. It was upon a day, as he
entertained the Princess alone in the Appartments of Begona the Sophie's
Mother, where she was bred, and where she passed the most part of her time,
Tachmas fancied a more than ordinary briskness and fire in the Eyes of Negara;
her Words more graceful, and her Wit more acute; he felt secret motions, which
until then had been unknown to him; and his heart showed its disquiet, by the
often changing of his Countenance; his Looks grew passionate; his Discourses
wild, and interrupted with sighs; and it is not to be wondered, if his
Conversation was not so divertising at that time, since he was now no more his
own. He leaves Negara's company much in disorder; this sudden change surprised
him so much the more, because he always had enjoyed a great tranquillity of
mind; but when he considered the object of his Passion, with the eyes of a
Lover; when he represented to himself that confused and flattering Idea of
Beauties, Virtues, and Perfections; he found this his bondage more pleasing to
him, than his former indifference. He resolves to declare himself to the
Princess upon the first opportunity he should meet with: which happened the
next day. Finding her in a Room accompanied with one of Begona's slaves, (who
out of respect withdrew) he endeavored several times to discover his passion
to her; but was hindered still by a kind of secret timorous diffidence which
stopped the passage of his speech; all he could do, was to let his Eyes speak
some part of the Sentiments of his heart. When he was returned to his own
Appartment, he condemned his fears; and foreseeing no reason that might hinder
the Princess from giving him a favorable hearing, he took a strong resolution
not to let slip the next occasion of discovering his passion to her; he went
therefore the next day to visit her, and finding her alone, he spoke to her
after this manner: I come, Madam, to confess a fault to you, for which I hope
you will easily grant me your pardon; which is, That I have lived so long
without being in love with you; but what I have suffered since we last
entertained one another, is so strong, and so far beyond what all other Lovers
endure, that the excess of my Love ought to repair the time of my indifference.
I offer you neither Crowns nor Scepters; I have no other Empire to give you but
that of my Heart: If a Passion that shall ever inviolably burn for you, and
which shall never fix upon any other object, whatever Liberty, my Blood, or our
Laws may give me: If a Complaisance which I shall ever observe to you: If an
unblemished Faith may win you, I am ready solemnly to swear it to you at the
foot of our Altars.

Though Tachmas had not used much action in the delivery of these words, yet
the Eloquent language of his Eyes and his sighs, were persuasive enough to
evince them. It is so sweet a triumph for a Woman to see the grandeur of a
Prince humbl'd at her feet; and to disarm with the Charms of her Beauty, a
Courage that no dangers or perils of War could shake; that there is no Virtue
so austere, that would not relent when the Question is to preserve such a
Captive.

Though Negara were descended from the Blood of the Sophies, yet she was much
inferior in Quality to Tachmas. She was pleasingly surprised with the Prince's
Discourse, not to betray her Joy: she thought it not enough to receive the
Prince's offers in the most obliging manner imaginable; but she assures him,
That she ever had a secret tenderness for him, which she should have
endeavored long since to make him sensible of, if the rules of Modesty and
Decency had not hindered her: and that she would most willingly shut her Eyes
to all the Crowns upon Earth, to open them to his Virtues alone.

Negara in that very instant believed that her Heart disowned her words: and
that it was the desire she had to see her self suddenly, if not the Queen, at
least the first Subject of Persia, that drew from her this declaration: but she
was ignorant of her own thoughts, since her Tongue was then the faithful
interpreter of them: this Discourse was followed with killing-looks, wherein
Love appeared with all its Charms.

We all have a natural bent to believe what we passionately desire: and this
blind propensity is no where more impetuous than in the heart of a Lover: one
little favorable word would suffice to convince Tachmas of the sincerity of
Negara's Love: insomuch that he abandoned himself to all the excesses of Joy
which the imagination and assurance of an approaching felicity can raise in the
soul of a passionate Lover. To hasten the accomplishment whereof, he told the
Princess, as he took his leave of her, That he would go immediately to
Allagolikan to charge him to acquaint the King his Brother with this Affair. It
was with this precipitancy this unfortunate Prince run to his utter ruin, when
he hoped to raise himself to his greatest happiness.

Allagolikan was a man that wholly swayed the Heart of Seliman: though the
Power of the Persian Ministers be extremely limited; and that, to weaken their
Authority, those Kings distribute the management of their Affairs into many
hands: Yet this Favorite had suprised the affections of the young Sophy with
so much address, he had insinuated himself into his very soul with a Zeal so
passionate, such flattering submissions, that he was the only Ruler and
Director of all his Councels: He was likewise endued with all the
accomplishments of a perfect Courtier: He was full of dissimulation: and his
intentions and his words were seldom or never of one accord. He had a servile
Complacency with all the desires of his Prince: He patiently bore with all his
contempts and indignities; but was above measure insolent to all other people.
He was a man of no Faith, seldom kept his word with any man. He willingly
sacrificed Innocence to Treachery, and believed Virtue the greatest of Crimes,
when it stood betwixt him and his Designs. His aim was to remove from Court all
those whose Virtue or Understanding might render necessary or acceptable there;
for he held it for an infallible Maxim, That two Favorites, no more than two
Kings, can never subsist in one Sphere.

Although Tacbmas's birth seemed to place him above the reach of his Jealousy;
Allagolikan was infinitely pleased to find that the Sophy had very sinister
intentions toward his Brother. He made use of all his Craft to maintain him in
his wicked inclinations. But there was yet a particular reason that made
Allagolikan a sworn Enemy to the Prince.

This imperious Minister had one day spoken insolently to Tachmas, whereof he
complained to his Father Sophy Chabas, who confined Allagolikan to a straight
Prison, where he continued until Seliman came to the Empire. Tachmas, who being
naturally Good and Generous, went often to see him in Prison, to testify how
much he was sorry that he had acquainted his Father with the difference that
happened betwixt them, who could never be brought to hear any thing in favor
of Allagolikan during his life. After the death of Sophy Chabas, Tachmas
thought it not enough to express his Joy for Allagolikans liberty, but honored
him also with many other testimonies of his Love and Friendship.

Allagolikan answered the Prince's Caresses with the fairest appearances of
gratitude that might be: but following the inclination of the generality of the
Persians, He was implacable in his Enmity; he always kept in his heart an
immortal hatred against him; in which Tachmas is to be blamed for his want of
prudent conduct upon this occasion, and for having forgotten this Maxim, That
Reconciled Enemies ought always to be suspected.

This wicked Minister, having had Order to acquaint his Majesty with Tachmas's
Request to be permitted to Marry Negara, undertook it for no other end but to
destroy this unfortunate Prince; and to carry on his purpose, he made use of a
most subtle Machination: He took his time when the Sophy was in a pleasant
Humor, in order to his Design: He Approaches him with his accustomed
Submissions, and usual Cringings, and dexterously brings on the Discourse of
Love; and tells the King, That he admired that among so many Beauties for whom
his Majesty had showed an inclination, he had never taken notice that he had
any for Negara. He represents to him, That besides the spendour of her Birth,
she was enriched with so many rare Qualities, that she deserved something more
than a cold indifference: That there never did shine so many Virtues, nor so
much Wit, in so beautiful a Body; that it should seem that Fortune, which
refused to place a Crown upon her Head, had reserved the Empire of all Hearts
as a due Sacrifice to her Eyes alone: That there was none so hard and stony,
that could resist her natural Sweetness and Goodness: and, That there was none
more worthy his Love and Tenderness, than her.

Allagolikan commended Negara with so much Zeal and Earnestness, that Seliman
felt a strong Curiosity to take a more attentive view of her, and to have some
particular Discourse with her: He promised his Favorite to follow his Advice,
and to try how sensible her heart should prove when he spoke to her next.

Sometime, afterward Begona the Kings Mother, who of late had been again
received into favor; after some disgusts that had passed betwixt them, came
into his Chamber to see him, followed by Negara, as the first person of the
Court, and who always went with her every where: when Begona was ready to take
her leave of the King; he made a sign to Negara, to let her know, that he
desired to speak with her in secret; He had her unto his Closet, where the
better to disguise his Design: He entertains her upon a Subject that was very
different from what had obliged him to stay her; He asked her, as she was privy
to all Begona's thoughts, Whether she did believe, that all Begona's
Resentments against him, were quite vanished out of her mind? and whether he
might confide in the outward appearances, of her Love and Caresses?

Whether it was that Seliman was prepossessed by his Favorites Discourses; or
that it was a pure effect of Negara's Charms, which he had but superficially
considered before that time; besides the agreeable surprises the Princess's
Beauty caused in him; all her answers seemed to him so just, and so expressive,
and so full of Wit, that she left him Charmed, and even angry with himself that
he had not loved her sooner; He left her however without saying any thing to
her; and because he would not derogate from the pride of his Diadem, he chose
to send her the tender of his Heart by another hand.

An Eunuch had order to wait upon her, and to acquaint her with the Love the
King had conceived for her: He told her, the Kings passion was attended with so
much respect, and esteem for her, that he would not only place her the highest
in his favors, but that he would bestow upon her the title of Queen; in
assurance of which he would plight her his Faith before the Altars of his gods.

The differences of Rank and Blood is wonderful: and there is little less
distance betwixt a King and his first Subject, than betwixt something and
nothing. Negara before this overture, would have thought her self highly
Honored to be in the Arms of Tachmas; and as she durst not carry her Ambition
higher, she looked upon that Prince as upon an Object whose enjoyment was great
enough to fill all the Desires of her Soul. But as soon as she had been informed
of the Sophies favorable intentions toward her, the glorious Hopes of seeing
her self placed upon the Persian Throne, so filled this young Heart with
vanity, that she forgot, or at least believed she had, all thoughts of Tachmas:
that pompous and dazzling Image of all-ruling Power, made her presently swallow
up the Scepter; and all that granduer which she admired in her first Lover,
appeared to her then but like a shadow, or some faint glimmerings, which
borrowed their light from the Diadem. She had so little power over her self,
that she could not conceal her Transports from the Eunuch; she tells him with
an affected Modesty, more becoming a Slave than a Princess, That if what he had
told her was true, that she had gained favor with the Sophy, she would receive
all his Orders with all the Submissions, and Joy she could express.

In the mean time, Tachmas desires to know of Allagolikan, whether he had
acquitted himself of the Commission he gave him? He replies, That he had not
yet found a fit opportunity of doing it; but that he would watch the first
occasion to perform it. This Traitor that sought to involve this poor Prince
into an inextricable destruction, being afraid that he might stifle his passion
as soon as he should hear of his Brothers pretentions, begun to him a long
Discourse of Negara's Excellencies: Applauds Tachmas's Choice, and tells him,
That if he were a Prince born, he should consecrate all the moments of his life
to so fair an Object: Nothing so feelingly touches a Lover as to hear what he
loves praised by the mouth of a Stranger; nor nothing more convincingly
persuades him that his Love is grounded upon Reason. All Allagolikans words
were as many Arrows that made fresh wounds in the heart of poor Tachmas, and
wounded so much the deeper, because this Discourse proceeded from a man in
appearance altogether disinteressed.

The Prince having recommended to this pernicious Confident to speak to the
King as soon as he might, goes to visit Negara. He tells her, That he came from
Allagolikan, who had yet no opporunity to speak to the Sophy; but if that
within two days he had no Answer, he would pass by all Formalities, and go
himself to speak to his Brother; and that his impatience was so much the
greater, because he was sure the Vows of this Princess agreed with his own.

We strive in vain to resist our selves, and endeavor to oppose the bent of
Nature, which is so powerfully attractive in us: when the Heavens have given
our affection a proclivity to any one Passion, all the rest are not powerful
enough to draw us from it: All the faculties of Negara's Soul were in
distraction at Tachmas's sight and Discourse: Her Ambition to no purpose shows
her the Charms of a Throne; and tells her, This tenderness which began to make
a revolt in her heart, was but a shameful weakness, which she ought to stifle
and sacrifice to her Glory: The Empire has no more that luster, when she
considers she cannot attain to it but at the price of her Faith; the despair
into which she saw her inconstancy must throw this poor Lover, touched her with
pity, and repentance, to have so rashly precipitated her Resolution in
declaring so inconsiderately in favor of the Sophy. Love at that instant
dispelling with his flambeau the beams of Supreme Majesty, left her nothing now
to see but the Thorns that encompass the Crown; and for a solid Good, she sees
nothing but a Phantasm, and a vain illusion. All those tumultuary insults of
Pride, Ambition, and Vanity, vanish out of the heart, with the same promptness
they had been raised. The Imagination of all the Excellencies that were in
Tachmas, offers it self with more endearing luster than ever; and as the
Virtues appear unto us quite different in those we love, than in those who are
indifferent to us; Those which were common to them both, seemed in Tachmas a
glorious Body, of which the Sophy possessed but the shadow. She was a long time
without being able to make any other answer than by her sighs: but as he
pressed her with much impatience to inform him of the causes of her sadness;
She related to him what the Eunuch came to tell her from the King. Tachmas at
this news, as if he had been Planet-struck, stood like a Statue; As soon as he
recovered himself, he resolved to run transported as he was, back to this
perfidious Minister, to punish him for his Treachery: But Negara foreseeing the
danger he was going unseasonably to expose himself to, threw her self in his
way, and with the Eloquence of her sighs and tears, allayed the heat of his
fury.

The Princess being ignorant of Allagobikan's bad inclinations toward Tachmas,
endeavored to justify him; alleging, That perhaps this Favorite might know
nothing of the Kings passion, or that he had not concealed it from Tachmas, but
out of a just apprehension to hurry him into some rash undertaking, that might
be of very funest inconsequence; That taking the proceedings in the stricctest
sense, he could be accused of nothing but too much Zeal toward her, by
desiring to see her upon the Throne. She added, That it was prudence, carefully
to conceal their Love from the Sophy: That it was necessary he should go
immediately to Allagolikan, to desire him to keep their secret, and to engage
him by all manner of Endearments to make him employ all his Credit, and Address
to draw the Sophy from his Design: That Seliman's Love might happily be but a
slight Flame, which might be as quickly smothered as it was kindled: That she
would avoid his sight as much as it was possible for her; and that nothing but
force should ever trample over her constancy, and fidelity to him.

There is no Passion predominant in man's Soul, that so often makes Storms and
Calms succed one another in us, and agitates our minds with so many contrary
motions, as Love. Tachmas, who before this Discourse was all Fury and Rage
against Allagolikan, is now of a sudden all Love and Kindness toward him: and
his Bad Genius utterly blinding his Reason, had now as favorable thoughts of
his intentions, as the Princess had. He goes to him, and by an imprudence,
which nothing but Love could excuse in a Prince so Judicious; He furnishes him
with Reasons to excuse his Treachery. He told him, He very well knew that he
had not concealed the Sophies Love from him, but through his excess of Zeal
toward him; and that he entreated him for the future, to give him a faihtful
account of what should happen, by which only means he should be convinced of
his fidelity to him.

Allagolikan, after a thousand frivolous protestations, swears by the Heavens,
and all that was Sacred and Holy, that he would not fail to give him a true
Account, of whatever came to his knowledge without delay. As he was endowed with
a piercing Wit, he quickly found that this unhappy Lover had let his flame
increase to that degree, that there was no possibility for him ever to be able
to quench it. He thought it to purpose to embroil him with Negara, to inspire
him with so much the more hatred against his Brother, because he endeavored to
rob him of his Princess's Heart, as well as of the enjoyment of her Person.
Feigning of a sudden to repent him of his Oaths and Promises, lets Tachmas
know, That he had a secret of Importance, which he should be glad not to be
obliged to declare; but after shifting for a long time the Prince's
importunity, to raise in him a greater desire of knowing it; at last told him,
That Negara's inconstancy ought as much to be apprehended as Seliman's Love;
That he had been certainly informed, that she received the news of the King's
passion with so much Joy, and showed so much readiness to comply with his
Desires, that he did not doubt but the luster of the Diadem had dazzled her Eyes.

Tachmas returns presently to the Princess all distracted; tells her the cause
of his sighs, and the occasion of his Jealousy. Negara, that naturally loved
sincerity, ingenuously confesses to him, That when the Sophy had sent her a
Declaration of his Love, she had received it favorably in respect of what he
was; and she regarded more his Quality, than his Person; so that when an Eunuch
came to flatter her with the Hopes of being the Sophie's Queen, she still
followed the impulse of her Ambition; and she could not defend her self from
the attractive Charms of a Throne; but that the presence of Tachmas had in a
moments time dissipated all that Ambitious pride; and that those Tears she had
shed, and those sighs which stole from her when she saw him enter, ought not to
be attributed to any thing else, but the regret she had for showing the Eunuch
her Joy, and her submission to the King's Order. That since he left her, her
Ambition striving to rebel against her Love, she had suffered all the Conflicts
that those two Imperious and Tyrannical passions can raise in a Soul. That her
Heart, after being rent by their Cruel insults, and divided betwixt these two
Objects, had at last stifled all the Flames of Ambition, with intent for ever
after to feed those of Love only. That now she began to acknowledge the truth of
the first words she had spoken to him; which were, That she would shut her Eyes
to all the Crowns of the Earth, to open them to his Virtues. That he needed no
other trial of her Love, than that sincere Confession she had made him, which
was the greatest proof she could give him of it. And that she did call the Holy
Prophet to witness, That neither the offers of the Throne, nor the persecutions
of the Sophy, should ever be able to overthrow that Empire which Tachmas had
acquired over her Heart.

Though these Discourses and others might re-assure the Prince; Yet he could
not wholly suppress his Jealousy; for he judged, That as Negara had eloped
from Ambition to Love, she might with the same easiness return from Love to
Ambition.

At that very instant Seliman, whom Allagolikan had acquainted with what passed
betwixt Tachmas and him, came rushing into the Chamber, and commanded Tachmas
to go out; after forbidding him upon pain of Death never to see, nor speak more
to the Princess, whom he designed for his own Bed. He reproached her with the
want of affection for him; telling her, It was an odd way of deserving the
Honor he was going to do her, by suffering any other to entertain her besides
himself: That all the Beauties of Persia would most earnestly wish, not only
for the Rank he intended for her, but even for the least particular favor of
their King: That she deserved to be used like the meanest of his Slaves, were
it not for the respect he had for her Blood. He was not satisfied to have
forbidden her for ever the sight of her Lover, but commands an Eunuch to wait
close in her Chamber, to spy all her actions, and to give him a faithful
account of them. He told her, as he was going away from her, That she should
prepare her self to receive his Faith the next morning.

Whatever has been said of the strength of our mind, it must be allowed, that
all its faculties are very weak, since they are not able to support the
violence of our passions: extremity of Grief, and excess of Joy, make us
insensible as Statues: they must abate of their force, to make us sensible of
them. The Sophies Discourse left Negara without sense or motion; and she was a
long while before she could recover her self, or consider the state she was
reduced to. When she came to her self, and was able to open her Eyes, she could
see nothing but an Abyss of Miseries. As our Desires commonly increase by
Obstacles, and are irritated so much the more, by how much the possession of
their Object is difficult: so the Princess felt her Love to Tachmas grow so
much the greater, by the reflection she made, that she was going eternally to
lose him. The Minutes seemed to fly faster, and the Sun to precipitate his
course, to advance that fatal hour, which was to deliver her a Victim to the
Sophies will. In vain she looked about her for Relief; she could find nothing
that could ease her grief. The very liberty of complaining was forbidden her:
she durst not so much as let fall a tear, nor breathe out a sigh, lest if the
Sophy should know it, he should pour down all his vengeance upon her Lovers
Head.

In the mean time, Tachmas being instructed by Allagolikan, of Seliman's
Resolution, was no less perplexed. Whatever project this great Soul could set
on foot, he saw himself shut up in a Palace full of Eunuchs and barbarous
Slaves, all devoted to the Sophies Will; all his hopes rested in Allagolikan;
it was from him alone he expected some solace in his Despair.

Knowing then that he was all powerful in the Palace; He entreats him to
facilitate his Access once more to the Princess, before that fatal hour,
wherein he was for ever to be banished from her sight. Allagolikan opposed him
for a great while, representing to him the impossibility, and the hazard of
what he desired; That the Discovery would expose both theirs, as well as
Negara's life, to inextricable destruction.

At last, seeing himself more and more pressed by Tachmas, he seemed to yield
to his Prayers: and told him, If any mischief followed, he should in no ways
attribute it to him. He pretended to the Prince, That he was going to give
Order to a trusty Slave, to come to give them sudden notice if the Sophy were
coming out; but it was indeed to let the Sophy know, that the Eunuch whom he
left in Negara's Chamber, was corrupted. Allagolikan returns, and leads him to
speak to another Eunuch that was brother to him that watched in the Princess's
Chamber: The Prince followed him, and the door was opened as soon as the Eunuch
made his voice be heard. Negara was not a little surprised to see the Prince
once more; Love, Fear, Joy and Grief confusedly agitate her Soul. These
ill-Starr'd Lovers scarce had time to mingle tears, and to inform one another
of their mutual tenderness, by their passionate looks, when of a sudden they
heard a great noise of many people coming hastily that way: the Eunuch all in
confusion run to a backdoor that opened into Begona's Appartments, to let the
Prince slip out that way: but was furiously pushed back by the Sophy himself
that entered that way, and caused him immediatel to be run through by another
Eunuch that rushed in at the other door, without giving the poor wretch the
time to justify himself. He Commands them likewise to strangle Tachmas; who
heard this Cruel sentence without the least concern; and who would have made
them sensible of a more undaunted Courage, if a man that is passionately in
Love, could resolve to dye without regret.

The Princess hearing this barbarous Command, threw her self prostrate at
Seliman's feet, and with her tears and repeated Cries stopped, or at least
suspended the execution of this severe Order, which those barbarous Eunuchs
were upon the point of executing.

Begona at the same instant came running in, and would have joined her
supplications with Negara's: but the Sophy, who had always observed, that she
had a more tender affection for Tachmas, than for himself, which had been
indeed the cause of their falling out; believed that she was of intelligence
with them, and therefore would not hear her. He did not then push matters to
the extremity: but gave all sufficiently to understand, by the severity of his
Countenance, by the flaming of his Eyes, all full of fury, and by the often
shaking of his Head, that the punishment he intended to inflict upon these
Lovers, was but deferred. He caused Tachmas to be clapped into a dark Dungeon:
and placed at Negara's door, those of his Eunuchs in whom he most confided,
with strict Order to let no Soul enter, upon pain of falling into the same
disgrace with their dead Companion; and so goes away: and shutting himself with
Allagolikan into a Closet, tells him what happened, and asked his opinion of
what should be done to Tachmas.

Allagolikan showed a feigned tenderness, that he might strike his blow home:
told Seliman, That the Laws of Nature would never permit him to use the rigor
of his Justice in this rencounter. But the Sophy pressed him to deliver his
opinion without respect or regard to persons: and told him, That the Throne was
above the ties of Blood: and that Nature must be silent, where the interest of
the Sovereign was in question.

This perjured Traitor here, calling Heaven, and their holy Prophets to
witness, That he was going to declare his sense without preoccupation, or
prejudice to one side or other; represents to Seliman, That it was of the last
importance to him, not to let Tachmas his offense go unpunished. That the least
Revolt in a Subject against the will of his Prince, deserved Death: That as the
passion which Tachmas had for Negara, could never be extinguished, so he would
never leave trying all ways possible to satisfy it: That Tachmas was of a
daring Spirit, and capable of undertaking any thing: That he might seek his
Brothers Death, as the best expedient to set the Crown upon his own Head, and
securely bring his Mistress into his Embraces: That the execution was not
difficult: That having already seduced one Eunuch, he might do the like to many
more: That perhaps Tachmas came to Negara for no other end, but to concert the
Design how he might rid himself of his Brother: That the example of the Sophy
Chabas, yet fresh in memory, ought to strike a terror into him, and make him
sacrifice to his own security all that was suspected to him. That he ought to
look toward his Neighbors the Ottomans, whose custom it was to Ciment their
Thrones with the blood of their Brothers.

This venomous Discourse of Allagolikan, had too strong an impression upon a
Heart that was already too prone to such barbarous inclinations. Seliman tells
his Favorite, All he said was very just: and that he was resolved to follow
his Advice. He added, That although the Wills of the Sophy's had always been a
Sovereign Law to their Subjects; he was resolved, the better to avoid the
peoples murmuring, not to rid himself of his Brother, without keeping some
formality in putting him to death: and to strengthen this Resolution, with the
opinion and assent of some Judges.

Allagolikan did not oppose the King's Will, because he knew there were but too
many corrupted persons to be found in the Court: He makes choice of Six, who
with a sordid and blind Zeal, had sold their Souls, and condemned poor Tachmas
as Siliman desired. The noise of this fatal Sentence was soon spread about the
Palace: and some months after, all the Town of Ispaham heard, that the
unfortunate Tachmas was to be put to death by the hands of the Executioner, for
some secret and important Reasons.

A Scaffold for this Execution was erected in one of the great Halls of the
Palace, where the Sophy himself resolved to be, to feed his cruel Eyes with
this so Tragical a Spectacle. Allagolikan opposed a great while this
Resolution, fearing what afterward happened; but all his Remonstrances to the
contrary, did but irritate his Desires the more. The Queen Begona run to
Seliman's Door, to conjure him by that life she gave him, not to sully his
Glory with so base a Parricide; but he was so far from letting her in, that he
commanded his Eunuchs to shut her up, fearing her lamentations and cries might
soften his heart, or bring it to relent. The time of this black Sacrifice being
come, they led forth Tachmas out of his Dungeon, to expiate the Crime of his
Love and ill-policy. How strong is the voice of Nature in man's heart? How
difficult a matter is it to lay aside all sense? How powerfully does the
presence of a sad Object move us?

When the Sophy beheld his Brother laden with Chains, his Eyes languishing,
his Face pale and disfigured; not for fear of Death, but through the violence
of his passionate Love: It was too late to call back all his hatred and
Jealousy; there was no resisting of that melting tenderness with which he felt
himself suddenly seized; and if he had any malice left in him against Tachmas,
it was because he found him too innocent. He suspends the Execution, and orders
the Prince to be confined to a larger Prison, where he might have more Light
and Air. The major part of the Judges there present were not sorry for this
sudden Change, because they had no hand in the Judgment given against the
Prince. But Allagolikan was so nearly touched, that his displeasure was seen in
his Countenance; Tachmas perceived it, for his Eyes, that hitherto had been
darkened with the Clouds of Love and Friendship, let fall that mist, to show
him a Traitor that had sworn his Ruin, in the man he believed his most
faithful Friend. And one of the Eunuchs that waited upon him back to prison,
seeing the sentence of Death recalled, helped fully to disabuse him, thereby
hoping to gain his affection; and told him, That it was Allagolikan's advice
that hurried the Sophy to this Extremity.

In the mean time Negara's heart was rent with many mortal Disquiets: she was
tossed betwixt a thousand apprehensions; and gave her self over as a prey to
all the vexations that could perplex a Soul. Death represents many violent
expedient to her troubled Imagination, whereby to free her self from this Abyss
of Misery, into which she saw her self plunged; but she durst not dispose of
her self without knowing Tachmas fate. So true it is, that amongst sincere
Lovers, the interest of what they love, is dearer to them than their own. She
draws one of the Eunuchs aside: and pressing him to let her know what he heard
was become of the Prince, shows him a Diamond of great value, which she wore
upon her Finger; which she promised should be the reward of his Service. This
man, won partly by the hope of the Reward, and partly softened with the fight
of the Princesses miseries, resolved to betray his trust for this one time; as
he did believe he should give some ease to Negara's afflicted Soul, if he drew
her out of the uncertainty she then was in: He confessed to her, That Tachmas
was condemned to lose his Head upon a Scaffold, and that, perhaps, that was the
very moment of his Execution.

We have naturally a great Aversion, and Horror for any thing that torments us:
and we bear all our grievances with so much impatience, that we always fancy
them in the last extremity, and that no new Event is capable of adding to them:
but we are not long in this Error; for Experience often convinces us of the
contrary.

Negara believed she should suffer less by knowing Tachmas's doom; but she soon
was convinced, that her doubts were preferable to so dismal a knowledge: When
she represented to her self those terrifying Idea's of his murder; She fancied
she saw the Prince all covered with blood; and that Face, and those Eyes,
wherein she had been so often pleased to read the marks of a sincere and
passionate Love, now buried in an eternal Night; she could no longer support
the weight of her sorrow. But as she had yet so much sense left, to think, that
perhaps there was yet time enough to rescue her distressed Lover; She conjures
the Eunuch to run and tell the King, That she had something of great moment to
impart to him before he should carry Tachmas to be executed. The Eunuch could
not be won by any promise to satisfy her Request, knowing his Head would be
the price of his Complaisance. So that Negara was forced to address her self to
another, from whom she concealed her knowledge of Tachmas's Doom; only prays him
to acquaint the King, that she desired to speak with him. Seliman at any other
time would have caused all the Eunuchs that were in Negara's Chamber to be put
to death, because he strictly charged them to conceal from her those violent
Resolutions he had taken against his Brother. But the emotions which his
Brothers presence had raised in his Soul, would not suffer him to reflect upon
the breach of his Commands.

As soon as the Princess saw him enter into the Chamber, she threw her self at
his feet: and told him, That his own interest must persuade him to let Tachmas
live; That she would not now speak of the Seditions and Revolts that might be
stirred up amongst a people, that would not quietly bear the loss of a Prince
that was so dear to them, condemned upon the suggestion of an imaginary Crime.
That History was full of Examples of these kind of Disorders, raised upon such
occasions: But, laying aside all these considerations: If it were true, that he
had any kindness for her, he ought to grant her this favor; and in return, she
promised for ever to bury all thoughts of that kindness she formerly had for
Tachmas; and to answer all his designs with so perfect an obedience and entire
resignation, that he should even doubt whether ever she had settled her
inclinations upon any other but himself: but, that if he would push his rigor
against his Brother to the utmost extremity, she durst not promise him that she
should have so much command over her self, as not to hate mortally that man,
who all covered over with the blood of him she had once loved, should force her
to marry him, to make her against her will a Complice to his Crime.

The Princess found little difficulty in obtaining her Request of Seliman; and
Love happily concluded what Nature had begun. But as the Sophy was infinitely
Jealous, he told Negara, That though he had granted her Tachmas his life, it
should be upon those Terms she her self proposed: that is, Upon condition She
should for ever smother all thoughts of Love or Tenderness toward him; and
that the least Sigh that should escape from her, should be the infallible and
irrevocable decree of his Death. That she had his Doom in her hands: That she
must look well to her hits, and take her measures, so as she desired he should
live or die. He added, That he gave her Fifteen days to conquer this her
Passion: and to facilitate her victory over her Love, she should see Tachmas no
more; because he well knew how forcible the presence of the once beloved
Object, was to re-inflame a Love that had been quite extinct.

After this Discourse he left her; and causing his Brother to be brought before
him, he commanded his Chains to be taken off, and outwardly made a show as if
he had been perfectly reconciled to him: though in his Heart he nourished still
a secret Jealousy of him.

Tachmas now was restored to his pristine Liberty, and was forbidden nothing
but the sight of Negara. In the interim, Allagolikan knowing that Tachmas well
understood the hatred he bore him, doubted not but he would study a Revenge:
Wherefore he resolves to declare open War against him, and to suggest new
Crimes against him to the Sophy, to ruin him: And to make his Accusation less
suspected, He contrived to make Negara the Instrument of it, and to make this
unfortunate Princess the chief promoter of her Lovers Death. Therefore he found
out an Invention that had but too Tragical a success.

There was a She-slave in the Princess Begona's Retinue, called Sunamire, one
of the best accomplished Women in all the Court, excepting Negara: she was
transcendently beautiful, and she had a vivacity of Wit, surpassing her Beauty.
As Tachmas loved the conversation of those sparkling Beauties, he had formerly
made his Addresses to Sunamire, as well as to Negara, with much assiduity.

This Ambitious Slave had made such use of it, that she imagined, with a little
Address, the Prince in some short time might infallibly become her Conquest.
But though she made use of all the little necessary Arts for her purpose, by
soliciting the Prince's tenderness by her repeated sighs; whether Tachmas not
yet well acquainted with the intrigues of Love, did not understand them; or
that he did purposely despise them; he returned nothing but indifference: And
the gay humor of Sunamire was the only thing that drew him to her
conversation. But when she saw that after being so long blind to her Caresses,
he had settled his Affections upon Negara, she abandoned her self to all sorts
of Resentments; and by a change which is very common in the hearts of that Sex,
she let the desire of Revenge succeed her Love, in the most violent manner
imaginable. She conceived a most malignant Joy, when she understood that those
Lovers were crossed in their Designs, when they believed themselves upon the
point of perfecting their happiness. However, as it is very hard to wish the
utter ruin of what we once loved, when we see them upon the brink of the
precipice; our first flames which we thought extinguished, easily take fire
again in their favor, and rebel against those motives of hatred which did
animate our vengeance. As soon as Sunamire heard that Tachmas was in danger of
his life, she used all her endeavors for his delivery; without taking notice
that in so doing, she discovered her passion to her Rival. She conjured Negara
with tears in her Eyes (who was but too well inclined of her self), to make use
of all her power and interest with the Sophy to avert the storm that threatened
Tachmas's life.

This Prince, since his being reconciled to his Brother, as was said, was no
more at liberty to see Negara: not but that he had the freedom to come into the
inner part of the Palace; but the Princess was locked up in a little particular
Appartment, whither none but Seliman, Begona, Sunamire, some Slaves, and a few
Eunuchs, could have ingress. Tachmas came often to visit Sunamire; but it was
only to entertain her with talking of Negara, to express to her by the most
tender and sensible Requests he could, the greatness of his Passion for that
Princess; and the despair he was like to fall into, as soon as he should know
that Seliman were possessed of her. Sunamire was upon the Rack to hear every
day a Discourse that pierced her very Soul; but she had still so much power
over her inclinations, to conceal her Jealousy from the Prince. She
dexterously eluded all the Questions that Tachmas asked about the disposition
of Negara's mind; or when she found her self hard pressed, she would tell him,
That Negara had resolved to satisfy the Sophy in all his Desires, since she
had nothing else left in her Choice. She advised him for his part to take other
measures, since there were in Ispaham, and within the Court it self, persons no
way inferior to Negara, either in Beauty or Wit, that would count it their
chiefest Glory to possess Tachmas's Heart. The Prince, that too well understood
the drift of these Discourses so often reiterated, had much ado to endure them.
At last one day, being no longer able to contain himself, told Sunamire, That
he saw well enough what she would be at: That he always believed his silence
had been enough to quell her aspiring thoughts to let her know his mind: but
that since she forced him to explain himself, he gave her to understand, That
his Visits to her were but to receive the consolation from her, of hearing some
news of his Princess, and not to wrong her by so base an inconstancy: and he
should always hold them for his greatest Enemies, that should advise him to
such an infidelity. After these words he withdrew, and left her full of shame
and confusion.

It was then that this fierce Slave smothered for ever all the flames of Love,
to kindle those of Fury and Revenge; and armed her self with all that hatred
and spite could suggest to ruin Tachmas.

Allagolikan knew all that passed within the inner part of the Palace, by the
intelligence he kept with some of the Eunuchs, whom he won with Rewards for
that purpose; amongst others, one called Metardaout, in whom he put an entire
confidence, and to whom he used to impart all his secrets. This Metardaout was
a witty man, a Dissembler; and his Genius much like to that of Allagolikan, and
had the Command of several other Eunuchs; being very officious and complaisant,
he had gained the good opinion of the Ladies. Sunamire above all other, gave
him marks of her kindness, and suffered him freely to discourse with her.

This Eunuch had heard from a place where he had hid himself, all the passages
that happened betwixt Sunamire and Tachmas: he had confidence enough to tell
her of it, and to offer his service to her in her Revenge. Sunamire could not
deny what he said to be true, and accepts of his offers. Metardaout told her,
He would acquaint Allagolikan with all, whom he knew to be an irreconcilable
Enemy to the Prince. Allagolikan was extreme glad to hear that Sunamire would
join in the Plot to ruin Tachmas. He sends the Eunuch to acquaint her with a
Project to that purpose: but as Negara was not to be destroyed as well as
Tachmas (for she hated her to the death), she would give no Ear to this
Proposition. Allagolikan willing to make use of this occasion; and being
fearful that Sunamire would not continue her hatred long, was very angry with
Metardaout; and said, He had not given her a right information: and had much
ado to forbear running into the inner part of the Palace to speak to her
himself; but knowing that all his favor would not protect him against the
Sophies Rage, if he should transgress against his Orders; and that the going
into that place was death to all others but to the Princes of the Blood,
contented himself to send Metardaout once more to tell her, That the course he
intended to stear, was the ready way for destroying Negara as well as Tachmas:
and the only means to draw her into the snare, was by making her believe that
Tachmas was false to her. Sunamire having heard the Reasons the Eunuch gave,
consented to join with Allagolikan in this Plot.

Metardaout, the better to bring the Princess to his bent, hearing her one day
steal a sigh: told her in the Ear, That she ought not to lavish away so many
Tears to lament the loss of an inconstant Lover; and that Prince Tachmas,
seeing her designed for the Sophy, had turned all his Thoughts and Vows toward
Sunamire. Jealousy is a strange passion; and it must be allowed, That when it
infuses its poison into a Soul, it makes it produce most dismal Effects. Reason
to no purpose tells Negara, That since the Prince could be no more hers, it was
just he should look out for some other; since if he should remain indifferent,
it would give new Allarms to the Sophy. She could not endure that another
should enjoy a Heart she could not possess. This information struck her to the
Heart: and she thought it the more likely, because she knew that Tachmas, who
heretofore delighted to be in Sunamire's Company, begun of late to renew his
Visits to her with more Assiduity than ever.

This wicked Maid came the next day into Negara's Chamber, who feeling her
passion, moved by the presence of an Object that was so odious to her, could
not forbear telling her, That she was very happy to be Mistress of Prince
Tachmas's Affections. Sunamire replies, That she ought not to be concerned at
that, since she no longer could pretend an interest in him, being she must now
live for Seliman alone. She uttered these words with a forced malicious smile,
and goes presently out of Negara's Chamber.

The unfortunate Princess, could no longer doubt of her Lovers infidelity, and
begun to repent to have saved that life, which she never believed he would have
made use of to her prejudice. Some time after, an Eunuch one of Allagolikan's
and Metardaout's Creatures came into her Chamber with a paper in his hand.
Negara desiring to know what he meant by that paper: He told her, He was
looking for Sunamire, to give it her from Prince Tachmas. The Princess prays
him to show it her, which he refusing to do, that she might suspect nothing;
she snatched it out of his hand, and suddenly shuts her self into her Closet to
see what was in it. It is easy to guess how unpleasant the Contents of that
Note was to her, which was as follows:

I Chose rather to write to you, than to come to see you, because I fear that
my too frequent Visits may be taken notice of. Sunamire, Resist no longer the
Proposition I made you, To place the Crown of Persia upon your Head, if you
will but make use of a Project I shall tell you, to rid us of Seliman. And do
not apprehend that I retain any longer the least thought of Negara; since I
must utterly forget a Person that took pains to preserve my life for no other
end, but that I might have the displeasure to see her in the Arms of another.

Prince Tachmas.


There was a thousand things that might make Negara doubt of the truth of this
Writing; and she might easily judge, that the Prince had too much prudence to
commit such an important and dangerous Design to a frail paper, and the faith
of an Eunuch, though his Virtue had not retained him from it. But she was too
much blinded with her Jealousy, to open her Eyes to such Considerations. She
followed all the Transports of this Venomous passion. Therefore to break the
Prince's Design, and hinder her Rival from the enjoyment of a good she thought
due to her self: She sent to advertise Seliman, That she had something of high
Importance to communicate to him.

As soon as he came, she showed him this Note: Seliman at the sight of it was
transported with Rage; He commands Sunamire, whom the Princess would charge
with part of this Accusation, to be called before him. He reads this Note to
her. But this cunning Slave confessed it was true, That Tachmas had acquainted
her with his bad intentions against the Sophy; but loudly protested, That she
always had resisted them, as might appear by the Note it self, which if the
Eunuch had brought to her, she would immediately have given the King notice of
it. So that Seliman, that still hated his Brother, and would be sorry to be
undeceived, turned all his Fury against him. He leaves the Note with Negara,
that it might help totally to subdue her passion, if there yet remained any
parts of it unsmothered: and goes away with Terror and Fury in his Countenance.

He sent for Allagolikan, and tells him what he had learnt: the Favorite
seeming to be much surprised, said, He must blame his own lenity in pardoning
his Brother. Upon which Seliman swears the second Crime should not go
unpunished, as the other had done.

In the mean space, Tachmas being ignorant of the Conspiracy that was formed
against him; but very well knowing Allagolikan's nature, and not doubting but
that Sunamire provoked by his last words, would plot some ill Design against
Negara and himself; thought fit to give her a precaution against Sunamire's
plots. He sent to her the same Eunuch that discovered to him the Favorites
hatred: The Eunuch comes into Negara's Chamber, a moment after Seliman left it.
He drew her aside, and cunningly slipped a paper into her hand, which he told
her, Tachmas had commanded him to bring her. Negara presently steps into her
Closet, all her thoughts were discomposed: and going to read the Note, she felt
her Curiosity powerfully opposed by a secret Remorse, and Cruel apprehensions
of finding in it the Sentence of his Death. She had scarce opened it, when she
prensently found it writ by the Prince's own hand, and in his own usual
Character: She draws out of her pocket that Note she had showed to Seliman; and
having compared them together, she found so much difference betwixt the writing
of the one and the other, that she could no longer doubt of the Cheat; but she
was further convinced when she read these words:

I Have found out, that Allagolikan, whom I believed a fast Friend to all my
Interests, to be my mortal Enemy. Wherefore, if you retain yet any Remembrance
of unhappy Tachmas, beware of letting any sign of it appear before his
Creatures: and always suspect whatever comes from him, as well as from
Sunamire, who wishes us ill for Reasons that are not fit to be told: but which
you may easily guess.

Prince Tachmas.


The Princess had scarce ended reading this Note, but she swooned away, all her
senses having left her: a mortal Horror had frozen up her Heart: Her Face was
Veiled with the pale shades of Death; and her Eyes wanted even Tears, to show
they yet had any life left. She lay a long while in this insensible condition;
and it was the happiest state that she ever after saw, during the rest of her
life. When she had recovered sense enough to feel her sorrow, she made several
vain efforts to call out: but her voice remained still intercluded and stifled
by the violence of her grief. Her imagination was clouded with sad and
terrifying Objects: She fancied Tachmas's Ghost all bathed in blood, comes to
Reproach her with his Death, and the dismal effects of her blind and
ill-grounded Jealousy. She returns into her Chamber, and with a Voice
interrupted with Sighs, she prays the Eunuch that brought her the Note to, run
to the Sophy, and to tell him that she had something to acquaint him with of no
less Consequence than what she had already told him.

Seliman returns to Negara; but as soon as he perceived she intended to
justify the Prince, he attributes this precipitated change to her Love, and
would not hear her; but said abruptly as he was going out, That though Tachmas
had not been guilty, these apparent Signs of a passionate affection toward
him, were cause enough to ruin him. He commands the Eunuchs not to let her
come out of her Chamber, nor the Princess Begona, who was then just entered. He
caused Tachmas to be clapped in a dark Dungeon, and left Allagolikan to see it
done.

The Prince not knowing what his Accusation was, perceived all was the
Favorites contrivance, and therefore gave him some reproachful hints of it:
But this Traitor insolently answers him, That he only executed the Sophie's
Orders: to whom he returns.

Seliman calls for some of his Council, to advise with them what was to be done
with Tachmas. Allagolikan, who spoke first, opined his Death; Some were of the
same opinion: but others, with so much force and Eloquence represented to the
Sophy the danger of putting the Prince to Death; That it was sufficient to keep
him in safe Custody. It was carried in spite of all the Favourite's Animosity,
that Tachmas should live. But Seliman would have a Corporal punishment
inflicted upon him: And as he was considering of the kind, Allagolikan proposes
to have his Eyes plucked out: Alleging, That as by the sight of Negara, he
became the King's Rival, so this was the best Expedient to Revenge both his
Love and his Throne; and to take away from Tachmas all means of attempting for
ever any thing against the one or the other. Cruel Seliman approves of this
Advice. And this barbarous Sentence was pronounced against the unhappy Prince:
And the Favorite had Order to see it put in Execution, the King himself
refusing to be present, fearing lest in seeing him, he should be moved to pity,
as before.

Allagolikan being impatient, until he made Tachmas feel the effects of his
Rage; commanded a Stage to be erected in the Hall, wherein this Illustrious
Blood was to be spilt before.

Then it was that this Prince, who under Sophy Chabas his Father, had carried
the Terrors of his Arms through all Asia, and made the Ottomans tremble for
fear of his Valor, even at the Gates of their Seraglio. This Prince that had a
million of Souls at his Devotion, and whose Virtue as well as Power was
cherished by all the Army: This Prince, in fine, for whom all his Soldiers
would have taken pride to shed the last drop of their bloods, saw himself
abandoned to the Fury of a Traitor, without finding one man that durst attempt
any thing in his Defense. So true it is, that Fortune rules the friendship of
the major part of Mankind. Yet no degenerate Voice, no weak or base Complaint
falls from him: only when he desired to know his Accusation, and that it was
answered, It was for conspiring against the King; He beseeched Heaven quickly to
make his Innocence appear, and not to leave so foul, and so black a Treason
unpunished.

In the mean time, the Princess Negara delivered up her Soul to all the Cruel
strokes of an unconsolable grief; and the most pleasing of Objects that can
offer themselves now to her Imagination, were those of Despair. She heard from
all hands, that Tachmas was in the hands of the Executioner; and there were
some of the Eunuchs who by misinformation, assured her that he lost his life.
Then she thought it time to have recourse to the last Remedy, and put an end to
her miseries by Poison, by the Example of Princess Begona, who was there with
her.

The Sophy being distracted with several Remorses, thought to retire into the
inner part of the Palace, that by the conversation of the Ladies he might
dissipate that black Humor with which his Soul was agitated. He was scarce got
within Negara's Chamber, when he saw his Mother pale and ghostly; her Face all
covered with the cold sweats of Death: As he went to help her, turning his Face
toward some noise he had heard, he saw the unhappy Princess grovelling in the
same state with Begona; and making her last Efforts, to dispose of the
remaining moment of her life: she expired, uttering with her dying breath the
Name of Tachmas.

At the same instant, Sunamire presented her self to Seliman, and assured him
that Tachmas was Innocent; and that the Note which was given him, was contrived
by Allagolikan, with whom she had been of Intelligence: and that she well knew
what she deserved for such a Treason; and with that, drew out a Poiniard she
had under her Garments, and therewith stobbing her self in the breast, fell
down bathed in her own blood by Negara's side. The Sophy sent presently to stop
the Execution, but it was too late: for this Traitor was too eager to quench
the thirst of his insatiate Revenge.

The unfortunate Tachmas, having understood what befell in the inner part of the
Palace, wept with Tears of blood the loss of his Mother and his Mistress: and
never did Love and Nature draw so many moving Complaints from any man before,
as Tachmas uttered upon this fatal Occasion.

Seliman, whose Jealousy was now extinguished by so many Tragical Events, fell
into a furious Rage against Allagolikan; He caused him to be strangled before
his Face, thereby making this Traitor at his turn to suffer the just punishment
of all his Crimes.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 25. l. 17. r. into. p. 33. l. 4. r. his. p. 37. l. 15. dele in. p. 40. l.
7. r. faithful. p. 52. l. 5. r. starr'd. p. 66. l. 3. r. expedients.


