THREE LETTERS OF Public Concernment as to the Present Affairs: The I. To a
Friend in London. II. To the Lord General Monck in behalf of Monarchy and
Episcopacy. III. Concerning the just placing of the Legislative Power, and its
influence upon Ecclesiastical Laws and Persons.


AS ALSO Concerning the late Publication OF THE COVENANT in all Churches.

By a Person of Quality and of a Public Spirit.

London, Printed, 1660.

THE FIRST LETTER from a Person of Quality, TO HIS Friend in the City OF LONDON.

London, Printed, 1660.

The First Letter from a Person of Quality to his friend in the City of London.
Worthy Friend,
. I. SInce my last (in a concurrence with the General, if not unanimous Vote
of this Nation) this County has sent up a DECLARATION (being awaked out of
that dull Lethargick stupifaction, that had long seized their Spirits to a
quick resentment of their own condition:) To solemnize the approaching Funerals
of the glory and happiness of this Nation, with their sad Complaints, if
timely remedies be not applied, which I shall not despair of (since as
Physicians tell me, the sense and knowledge of the disease is a great advance
toward, health;) And that those hidden charms, that lay wrapped up in the
prostitute name of Parliament, to bewitch us, has lost its force; even with me
and others* that once adored that great Diana, the Craftsmen or Mechanics of
our times, set up even to the pulling down of Scepters, Laws, Religion, nay
Parliaments themselves, considered in their original Rights and Constitutions;
though my design was no more at the taking up of Arms, then their pretenses,
even a pruning off of luxurious excrescencies in Church and State, not a
digging up of the Vine; and in so much I am still the same, though not in my
Actings any longer, in countenance of those that departed from themselves,
Duties and Oaths; yet am I resolved ever to oppose all exorbitances in State,
Innovation in the Church, and invasion of our Liberties I first engaged
against; and in it agree, I think, with all truly wise and honest Engiishmen.

. II. And I conceive, these Considerations, and the like, have animated these
parts into generous Resolutions, if they cannot Vindicate their Rights, no
longer to betray them by their silence and Compliances, daring to die their
Counrries Martyrs, rather then not attempt their Duties, Resolving with the
Cantabrian to AVOVSTVS, though their goods of fortune may by Tyranny and
Usurpation be taken from them, they will be their own and Gods; and (having
discovered the great Impostures of the Mountebanks at Westminster) will no
longer be Cheated out of their dearest Interests; seeing their pretenses, how
specious so ever, are but a painted Flower upon a withered Stalk, a Devil in
Samuels mantle: When under pretense of RELIGION, they let in Athiesm; and by
abuse of our LIBERTY, lay snares to enslave us, turning our LAWS and Charters
into Arbitrary Voies (The Negative voices and ballancing Interests of KING and
LORDS being forced from us) yet by it they give us a holy advantage, in showing
us that in our present Condition, we enjoy rather an Acry than real being;
when by a vapor, a breath, those Senators may take away ours, (our Lives,
Liberties and Religion at once.) And yet by it, they undermine those pillars
that should support their own Houses to Posterity; and make Shackles for their
Children to wear.

. III. Nay so highly insolent is their Cruelty, as they force us to be
instrumental to our own ruins (by payments to support their Usurpation, and to
twist a Cord to hang our selves) and are not only acting, but enacting
mischief as Law, which ought to make Crimes not Virtue the object of its
punishment; and to stand (as the Pin in the Balance;) a middle thing between
Supreme power and Common Right, which they yet deny us, in obstructing our
enjoyment of a FREE PARLIAMENT, the only prudentiall Remedy (under God) to
compose our distractions, unite our Affections, and concenter all Interests in
a Conscientious submission and obedience to lawful Authority, the very Nerves,
and Sinews, and Ligaments that can keep the body Politic in a happy
combination at home, and make it both reverenced and feared abroad, open Trade
and secure (under God) all other blessings.

. IV. And therefore as your CITIES Declaration gave the first Invitation to
other Counties to Declare; I hope you will still continue fixed (as the Center
in the Circumference; however things move in their vicissitudes about you) in
your Resolves to stand for a FREE and FULL PARLIAMENT.

. V. Which implies Freedom in Sitting from all force: Freedom in Elections to
sit (where the known ancient Laws restrain not;) and Freedom from all previous
Oaths and Engagements, as the Essentials and Elements, out of which it is
Constituted; the Legislative Power (however it may regulate it self, in its
Actings) being never to be bound with humane Cords; Nay, not by it self, in
that it may (nay ought) to unloose the knots it ties; when public Interest and
utility requires it: And therefore should not be confined by any more high and
sacred bands; nor admit of discriminations of Persons in law eligible, which
are but the breasts, that feed and nouris;h Divisions, Distractions and
Animosities amongst us.

. VI. However since all humane law obliges Conscience only in things, which in
their nature are indifferent and Arbitrary, and that by our Fundamental
Constitution, every man's Consent is therefore presumed to concur actually (or
virtually in his Proxies) in those laws he is to be submitted to (as may appear
by the Petition of Right.) We all unanimously Resolve no more Taxes, Excises,
Customs ought by the present Dictators to be laid upon us; and therefore not to
pay them, unless charged by a FRFE PARLIAMENT, which we desire may be
insinuated to your Common Council; who have yet, carried themselves with great
show of Gallantry, Prudence, and public affection to the KINGDOMS Settlenent
and peace. That as we aim at one Port, we may steer by one Compass. And the
better to take in all Interests.

1. We shall desire INDEMNITY to all that oppose not a FULL and FREE PARLIAMENT.

2. INDULGENCE to all TENDER CONSCIENCES, that seek Peace not Faction, with the
Vindication of our ESTABLISHED RELIGION from all its Opposers.

3. The Soldiers SATISFACTION in relation to their Arreares, and for the
present, the Counties will resolve (if your City concur) voluntarily to raise
60000 l, a month, and to pay it into the hands of their several Treasurers; by
them immediately to be paid to such Regiments as the GENERAL and ARMY shall
assign to each County; (and this to continue till a FREE PARLIAMENT take
further care for them,) which will pay them fully for the future, and advance
something toward the Arreares, of those that shall in this way witness their
good affection to the Nation, and redeem the prey out of the hands of those
Land-Pirates at Westminster. Who all this while have made a gain of them and us;

. VII. In which we cannot doubt of my Lord General MONCKS concurrence, he is in
all opinions, a person of so entire a worth (though yet abused by the specious
pretenses of a ruling faction) when he finds the greatest part by much (if not
all) of the Kingdom desire it as the only means to compose us at home, and
secure us from many, now united and powerful enemies abroad; especially, if he
will but consider, how often this pretended RUMP of a Parliament, that poisons
all with their Hellish Fumes has been dissolved, as

1. By the Kings death (as all great Lawyers will agree) who was the most
essential part of it; his Assent only giving a being and animation to all
Laws.

2. As the BILL it self (by which they pretend to disinherit the Primo-Geniture
of the Trienniall Act,) Refers to the Parliament, as then composed of three
Estates, when one dissenting, no Act could pass.

3. By their several Dissolutions and Submissions to other called Parliaments,
and by most of their sittings as members in them.

4. By the Counties new Elections, which was an actual revocation of their
Trust and Power.

5. By the forfeiture of their rights to sit as a HOUSE OF COMMONS in the
forcible expulsion of the best part of their members.

6. By their breach of Trust, their Commissions (as delegated by their
Elections) being only to advise with the KING in (rebus arduis) weighty
affairs (not to destroy him) as appears by the Writs of Summons; And all this,
with the violation of their faith both to God and man; wilful breaches of
their Declarations, Oaths and Covenants; So as a person of General MONCKS worth
and honor can never, upon digested thoughts, espouse their Cause and Crimes by
his protecting them; however, he is a person of too much piety and prudence; to
engage us in a Civil and foreign War at once (where so fair and just an
expedient, as a FREE and FULL PARLIAMENT to be called by the Triennial Act is
proposed) for the skirts and rag of an expired Parliament, which would botch up
a garment, only for their own wearing, leaving us stripped and naked by
depriving us of all our Rights, and all this for the maintaining their guilt
and Interest, who care not to prevent, the rack of our Ship of State, wherein
all are embarked, if they may but stand upon land themselves; And therefore be
not discouraged by what has yet appeared, but let us do our duties, and leave
the event to God; which is the resolution of,

Your lately converted Servant

The Second LETTER to the Lord General MONCK In behalf of MONARCHY AND
EPISCOPACY: Upon the Readmission of the (formerly) Secluded MEMBERS OF
PARLIAMENT.

London, Printed, 1660.

The second Letter to the Lord General Monck, upon the readmission of the
(formerly) Secluded Members.
My HONORED LORD;
THough virtuous inclinations in their Infancy, and Cradle are best Nursed up
with the Milk of Flattery and seeming Courtships; your full grown virtues
(which like Saul amongst the people, make you more eminent than others; and the
eyes of our Israel to look upon you, as their Deliverer) will bear a more
ingenious freedom; which makes me presume (though none more truly honors your
Prudence, Piety and PERSON than my self) as I am here entrusted to receive the
corresponding intelligence from most Counties that have concentred their Hopes
and Addresses in your LORDSHIP, you will Pardon me, if (as the burning-glasse
that collects the scattered and loose beams of the Sun, to give them a more
powerful and vigorous operation) I reflect the united sense of ALL to you; in
relation to your Words and Actings.

The last of which, have been so prudent in Conduct, so daring (yet modest) in
the approaches to your proposed ends; and so successful in the great late
changes, we look upon, as in lets to a settlement of the peace and happiness
of this KINGDOM; as you stand yet unequalled by any in the opinions and
affections of the people, even above men; and only below GOD himself (and OUR
rightful KING) who has wrought so great wonders by you: And we hope will set
fast the bars of our gates, and establish peace in our borders by so glorious
an Instrument, and in it record your memory to all posterity, as the deliverer
of this Nation from the high Usurpation and severe Tyranny we have long
labored under.

But my LORD in relation to your words, and Declared desires to the late
restored Members of PARLIAMENT, there are few satisfied, but such as hope that
with Frederick Duke of Austria, you went abroad in a disguise to hear what
others judments were; by them and their reasons (if convincing yours) to shape
your future proceedings; or (if it were your judgment) that you did declare
and enforce it with all the advantage Oratory or Arguments could contribute to
its support; that in the confutation of them all persons of those mistaken
principles might be reduced by your example; who espouses no interest but in
order to Gods glory and the public good; nor impose your opinion upon, but
submit it to the dispassionate Debates and Resolutions of a FREE PARLIAMENT;
which humility and self denial is the crown and glory of all your other noble
Actions, and that which sets you up a Scepter in the hearts of ALL (but
Factions and Fanatic people, and gives you a Command of our Persons and Purses.

Yet give me leave, as the Echo of the KINGDOMS voice, to tell your Lordship,
it neither is, or ever was, for the alteration of our MONARCHICAL GOVERNMENT
into Commonwealth foundations, which are inconsistent with our ancient
FUNDAMENTAL LAWS, and the humor of the people of this Nation; who comparing
the long happy and flourishing condition it has for many hundred years enjoyed
under their KINGS, and Reverent Episcopacy, with the tragical effects of our
late changes; cannot be in love with their Irons and shackles; nor be willing
to submit to Papall-Presbyterial Tyranny (for such is rigid Presbytery) that
have been acquainted with the gentler Yoke the Fathers of our Church laid upon
us.

And though I might make it appear to your Lordship by clear proofs, and
undisputed authorities from Reason, Nature, Scripture, and Authority.

First, That as all power is GODS, so there is no exercise of it from divine
Commission, but (paternal) what is seated in the person of one man originally;
and derivatively only from him (as the spring and source) into the lesser
streams of subordinate administrations ( which Adam was vested in the state of
innocence;) and that all men are borne to this natural subordination; for the
orderly support of humane societies, (families being the epitomes of Kingdoms)
wherein the person to whom the SUPREME POWER belongs, is only accountable to
God for his Actions (KINGS being subject only to the direction not coaction of
humane Laws.

Secondly, That our KINGS had this right justly conveyed to them by the grace
of God ( not gift of man) and by it have a just title to our allegiance and
obedience, both by divine and civil right, as all our Laws and PARLIAMENTS
have declared.

Thirdly, That King CHARLES the son ( of his late glorious Father and our
Sovereign) has de jure, the same, and cannot without Rebellion ( a sin as high
as that of witch craft) be denied him.

Fourthly, That EPISCOPACY is of divine institution, an order deduced through
all ages of Christ's Church; and continued to us by lawful and undoubted
ordination.

Fifthly, That Bishops have in all ages had Reverence paid them as the Pillars
and supporters of Christianity; by their pious learned and painful labors,
when living; and propagating it when dead, by their blood shed in Martyrdom;
when one dying man made many living Saints.

Sixthly, That it was not the Calling, but exorbitancies in it; not the Tree,
but the Luxurious branches these times at first complained of; and desired to
prune, not dig up.

Seventhly, That it was a Government admired and approved by all the Reformed
Churches abroad, as essential to the been esse of a Church; and by many learned
Divines (ancient and modern) to the esse, the very being of a Church.

Eighthly, That Presbytery as propounded by our Synod of Divines is of a
bastard extraction, and a late birth; being a stranger to antiquity, and an
alien lately legitimated amongst us; a thing so far from being countenanced, as
it was never known in the Christian Church.

Yet waving all these and infinite more considerations, I could offer (humbly
casting my self upon your mercy for a pardon of this deviation) I shall not so
much reflect upon your LORD-SHIPS reasons against introducing MONARCHY and
EPISCOPACY; as to show you they were never taken away by any just power; admit
it were in the late PARLIAMENT, when Full and Free, for until several forces
and violences were acted upon them, and the Secluded Members denied their
Votes; There was no Regicide, (no murdering of the Heirs, that the Vineyard
might be ours) no Votes for altering our ancient (and BEST FABRICATED
Government in the world) but on the contrary, ALL the PARLIAMENTS
Protestations, Declarations, Actions and Covenants were for KING and
PARLIAMENT, Conjunctim not divisim; and were so intended to be adhered to by
our Confessors (though not Martyrs) the lately restored Members; and only
surviving honorable mention of that expired Parliament.

Nor did the people of this Nation ever voluntarily contribute, either of their
persons or purses to other ends then the Parliament had declared, even a
confining of arbitrary power, and keeping all things in their own bounds and
channels, a reforming, a mending the the Watch, not the taking it in pieces

So as the peoples Interests in this are safe, but cannot be entitled to the
endeavors of the changes you mention, without a just forfeiture of all they
enjoy; a maintaining of perpetual divisions at home, and inviting War from the
injured persons, and their now powerful united confederates abroad; having no
Free nor Full Parliament to countenance them in such actings.

And that this was the sense, the Covenant was taken in, and of the Kingdom
now in General; I desire may be submitted to their Votes in the FREE
REPRESENTATIVE to be called, or that they may have a Ballut for it, and then
they will appear a hundred for one to make it good.

Nor is the glory of the City, and opening of Trade at home and abroad, to be
boyed up by any other Engine than what the name of KING actuates: It being the
splendour of Courts, increase of Nobility, Amities abroad, and Peace at home,
that loads the Vine with Clusters, and makes the Wine Press to overflow; as
Londons experience evincingly may prove, if we compare their now withering and
formerly sprouting and flourishing condition together; so as a COMMONWEALTH in
those and many other respects, would rather prove a heightning to the disease,
than a remedy.

And for the Government of the Church, so far as it is prudential, it ought to
be submitted to the Parliament and a Convocation of Divines (justly called) but
what is of Divine Right in it, ought to be preserved and preferred before our
Lives and Liberties.

And therefore I most humbly contend for EPISCOPACY, as an order at least (if
not to maintain it in its primitive glory;) and in that none can be sure there
is a good Ordination without it (unless in case extraordinary) and that all
do agree the Ordination by BISHOPS lawful; we ought to choose a safe before a
doubtful way, as all Casuists agree.

However, having fully, as I conceive, undermined the grounds and satisfied the
reasons, your LORDSHIP laid and urged for a Commonwealth; I shall proceed no
further upon this head, since you have made my Conclusion; That EPISCOPACY
holds best proportion and symmetry to MONARCHICAL GOVERNMENT; and that I have
made it appear, there neither is, nor can be any other form justly introduced
into this Nation.

Yet to take in all Interests, and concenter them in a conscientious obedience
(the sinew of Government) I wish both may be so moderated in their exercise of
power, as there may be no more leading into captivity, nor complaining in our
streets; But that the KING with his PARLIAMENT, and the BISHOPS with their
Presbyters may join to make the close of our Harmony most melodious.

For thus our KING will have an inexhaustible treasure in the affections of his
People; and they best secure their Liberties in becoming their SOVEREIGNS
Favorites; which happy Espousalls, I will yet hope to see YOU solemnize in a
Concurrence with the whole nation, whose desire it is; as well as the prayers of

Your EXCELLENCIES most humble Servant

The third Letter, Concerning the just placing of the Legislative Power, and
its Influence upon Ecclesiastical Laws and Persons.
Sir,
MVch is due to you for your many repeated favors, but more for your Freedom
in communicating your judgment upon the late actings of the men of these times,
which seem to be troubled with the vertigo in the brain, by their giddy and
sudden turnings of the man (his reason) out of himself; and us out of all our
dearest Liberties and rights: Yet the Obligation swells highest by your humble
descent in desiring from me any thing that might either convince or confirm
you in your opinion concerning the Just placing of the Legislative Power, and
its influence upon Ecclesiastical laws and Persons, when I can but bring a
Spark to your Flame.

However since your commands are to be submiited to by me, not disputed, I
shall reflect my apprehension of it to you in a very contracted way in this
surprise of time, and be ready to support both by reason, divine and humane
Authority (if it be required) what I shall positively assert.

And to the first I affirm.

First, That as God is the Spring and Fountain of all power. ( it being
essential in him and derivative only to us) none can have any just propriety
in the Legislative, but such who are Commissioned for it, according to Gods
revealed Will by a Divine as well as Civil right.

Secondly, That who otherwise takes or uses the sword invades both God and man
in their rights; And in an unlawful posture of subordination no just power can
be derived, no more then a sulphurous spring can send forth a sweet stream; in
that Quod deest in causa, deest in effectu.

Thirdly, That the Delegation of the supreme power from God is either immediate
as to Moses, who was placed by him as King in Jeshurun, Deuteronomy. 33.3, 5. or
mediate, by the people ( as in Elective Kingdoms) who choose the person, but
never collate the power; or by both concurring, as in Saul, David, etc. And
that no other Government then what is Paternal and founded in a single Person,
is either of divine institution, approbation, or imitation, ( but That as the
most perfect draws nearest to unity, and a conformity to God himself) as I can
make clearly appear from the light of Scripture, (the Christians compass to
steer by) that of nature (the candle of the Lord set up and burning in sockets
amongst the heathen) and by the instinct and impression the very bruit and
irrational creatures form themselves by, into a kind of Monarchical
government, yet I know Interpreters (now) divide upon this subject, and run
in two Channells.

1. Some in a concurrence with all anssqility and the most eminent more moclora
divines, resolving that no Government is of divine origination and settled by
commission from God, but what is Faternal, where the habit of power is seated
in one person, though the exercise of it may be regulated (through the
indulgence of good Princes) by National and positive laws as well as divine;
to the directive power of which the King ought to be as subject as his
subjects, though not to the coactive, as being in that way only answerable to
God for his actions.

Which made our Government by King, Lords and Commons the best temperd
constitution in the world, in that (as in the Natural body an equal mixture
of Elements) a just proportion and distribution of power in regard of exercise
in the Civil and politic best Fabricates it for a prosperous continuance,
which the experience of this Nation did happlly evidence, till our having no
King in Israel let in (as to the Jews) all Barbarity and impiety amongst us.

2. Others of a more late stamp (that carries the impression of Jesuitisme upon
it) as Buchanan and Knox for the reformed; Ballarmine and Stapleton for the
Romish Church, resolve all power from God into the people and Community of men,
and to be derived from them either by their Individual or representative
suffrages into any posture of government they shall choose, whether
Monarchical, Ariftocraticall, Demacraticall, or the like; in it (and the conse
quences of it) laying the Foundation of most of the Civil Wars and Commotions
that have happened in Christendom since their time.

But however these stremns divide, and these sines are drawn Counter to one
another, they both meet and concenter in that truth you desire a consirmation
in, which is.

That there is a conscientious obedience, at least submission due to the
Legislative Power wherever we own it to be, and that by Gods command whether
to the King as supreme, Pet. 2.13. or higher Powers in the other notion, in
that they are of God, and they that resist the power, resist God, and purchase
damnation to themselves, Romans 13.12. Other ways there would be a progression
ad infinitum, no Center to unite in, no binding up of broken and divided
interests, no common principles to meet in, nothing to resolve our selves into,
but Anarchy and consusion: Wherein all law would be reduced from the boad to
the hand, from prudence to power, the Arbitration of the Sword, the Will and
lusts of men.

Upon which ground all the sober part of the kingdom, as if one Soul had
animated so many bodies, have agreed in desiring that one and only expedient
of a FREE PARLIAMENT, and both Armies have declared for it, so as I hope we
shall all acquiesce in what ONE, so Freely called, shall declare and settle.

Yet there want not Emissaries and boutefeus that to gratify their passions
and private interests, Foment our distractions, and in stead of closing, strive
to widen our Soars, and make our disease mortal, by opposing the remedy of a
FULL and FREE PARLIAMENT killing us with their cordialls of specious pertences,
glorious nothings, and feeding us with Air and Shadows instead of solid food
(to bring us to a consumptive death) the name and picture of Parliament, only
to Idolize when they would destroy the very being of it, with our Religion,
Liberties, and Freedom at once.

But the pit is discovered though strewed over with Flowers, and I hope we are
escaped the snare, by the prudence and public spirit, our never to be enough
honored GENERAL has showed in the management and conduct of our greatest and
dearest interests.

Yet the better to secure the blessings of a happy settlement, (a pregnant and
comprehensive mercy, the Womb of all other Felicities) Let us still with the
wary Pilot have Oculos ad coelum, manus ad clavum: our eyes upon heaven, our
hands at the stern, that we prevent the storm, or sail safe in a rough sea.

1. By our prayers to God, the ascension of our spirits, the wing and weight of
our souls by which we mount in our desires and six in our dependencies upon
him for a blessing.

2. By endeavoring to advance the settling of that Government we most approve,
by all Just, Open, henourable, and Fair ways, being as zealous and active for
GOD and the KING as others are for their too much adored IDOL of PRESBYTERY
and a FREE STATE, till we see what a FREE PARLIAMENT will produce, but then to
acquiesce in its resolutions, as the only suprem power now asserted, that can
oblige us to a conscientious submission (though perhaps not obedince) to their
Laws; the Legistator being above the Tribunal of men and only accountable to
God for his actions

And therefore if any shall be guilty of so daring a presumption as to impose
upon their Judgments, or so high a rebellion as by force to oppose their
commands, though Connter to their own Interests and opinions, or so
Irreligiously bold with God, as not to submit to them for his sake, we are here
resolved (we hope with LONDON and ALL other Counties) to maintain with our
lives and fortunes the unlimited power in regard of humane restraints and
Confinements which we assert as due to a FULL FREE and legally called
PARLIAMENT; having as good hearts, as good Swords, and a better cause to Fight
for, then any can have to oppose us, in the vindication of the Parliaments
undoubted Rights to an usufructuary interest in the gubernative power.

The Invasion of whose Freedom in any kind either in Electing, sitting, or
voting is the destroying of its essence and being, a turning our antidotes into
poison, And a taking from us all humane means of calming the raging of our
Waters and madness of our people, who will otherwise make this nation a great
Bedlam, a Wilderness Inhabited by beasts not men, a Chaos, that nothing but an
Almighty Power can work upon, to produce beauty out of such disorder and
confusion, from which GOOD LORD DELIVER US.

Of the Influence of the Legislative Power upon Ecclesiastical Laws and Persons.
AS to your second Question, how far the legislative power has influence upon
the Ecclesiastical, I think there can be no doubt, but that in the intention of
our ancient laws, the Judgment of the Primitive Catholic Church, the suffrages
and practices of all the reformed ones and the rule of Scripture, they are as
two great orbs in one Firmament, both moving from the Primum Mobile, in a
motion orderly and Independing upon one another, acting according to their
several powers and functions; although subordinate, as members of one Community
and Civil body, so as the Civil Magistrate is supreme over their persons, and
in all Causes Ecclesiastical, in regard of their Animation to the Exercise of
their powers; but not over them; For as the Miter is to obey the Scepter in all
things prudential in Government, and to submit to the regulation of their
outward actings to their Commands: So the Scepter is not to interpose in Cases
merely Ecclesiastical, as in matters of Faith, making of Canons etc. Only in
the enforcing of them, for the Regulation of the Church in Decency any Order
(which S. Paul places in Churchmen alone) nor did ever any age countenance the
invasion of the Clergies rights in it, which were to make an assault upon God
himself, and sacrilegiously to force from his Spouse, not only her Jewels and
Ornaments, but the richest dowry she is invested with on earth.

Nor can the disorderly and excentrick motions and actings of the Clergy
themselves, in their unlawful assemblies, lay a foundation for the Civil
powers, imposing any thing upon us, in order to the change either of Doctrine
or Discipline from what our ancient Laws or Canons prescribe, Especially when
theirs in themselves are so raw and undigested, as they do rather nauseate then
nourish.

And therefore I hope it will be the prudence of the PARLIAMENT to work after
God's pattern, doing all things in number, weight and measure, Order and
proportion, being that alone that gives beauty and permanency to any being; and
after so many wheelings, and revolutions return to our ancient, glorious and
happy Government, by the KING, LORDS and COMMONS in Parliaments, Bishops and
Presbyters in their lawfully called national Synods; which ballancing of the
Interests, cannot but unite the sober, wise and moderate men of all parties, as
I have expressed in my Letter to my Lord General Monck.

For thus the Church can only speak in her representatives, as we do in our
Conventions, by our proxies, and the spirit of the prophets be subject to the
prophets, as the Scripture commands; so as Vzzah's hands must not uphold the
Ark, nor Corah's conspiracy usurp upon Moses and Aaron, without engaging God as
a party to revenge his own cause and servants Interests.

But when all things are done in a Just and orderly subordination, Laws carry
reverence, honor and authority in them; and Religion is as the Bases and
Pillars of Civil power, That as the Roof and Covering of the Church, to defend
her against all the storms of persecution; so as it is the happy union and
combination of both that makes the building durable and glorious, the well
tuning of them to one another that makes the Harmony, when the one obeys all
Civil Injunctions, the other actuates and enforces all Ecclesiastical
constitutions, for they only bring the Bullion prepared for the Legislators
Mint, he gives the Stamp that makes it current, so as all Church-laws to oblige
the inward and outward man, ought to derive to us from the Clergy in a lawful
posture, as their spring (by the Magistrate, as the stream;) the promise of the
holy Ghost in regard of ministerial function and government, being only to
them, as has been fully proved by many, scarce ever denied by any solid and
sober Christian. Which is all I have now to say in relation to what you propose.

The Third Leeter Of the late Publication of the Covenant in all Churches.
BUt there is an exile lately returned, with what design; I know not (the
publication of the COVENANT in all Churches) though it makes way for many
conjectures, which I am not willing to publish, least with the Schoolmen, in
their unclean Speculations, I should teach men many vices they are yet
Innocently ignorant of; Therefore I shall look upon it only as a well meant
error (being willing to extract virtue out of a Venomous and unwholesome plant)
and put this interpretation upon it.

1. That it is only meant to insinuare into men's minds, that natural duty
they owe their. Sovereign both by divine and humane Laws; and bring them to
that Allegiance due to their KING by a sacred tie, so universally taken to
support not enervate their former OATHS of FEALTY and obedience; Which my
charity inclines me to, for it were too daring a sin for any Christian to own
the espousing of any other sense, and a suing out of a divorce from God, as
done in opposition to his ordinances.

2. That in swearing to alter the Government of the Church (as it was, and is
yet legally established) by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Chapters, Officials,
etc. It cannot be interpreted to intend the extirpation of reverent, ancient
and APOSTOLICAL EPISCOPACY, because the Oath Limits the intended reformation to
the rule of Scripture, in which Episcopacy is most clearly established and
undoubtedly to be of the well being (if not being and Essence) of the Church,
but only to design (I hope in an Orderly Way of subordination with the KINGS
Concurrence) a breaking of the Chain, a dissolving of that Hierarchy, and
taking out such links only as were of humane Authority, and perhaps superfluous
at this time, as they drew in a train of unnecessary charges with them, and
increase of Fees in Ecclesiastical Courts (though prudentially retained in the
reformation) but if any shall be so Ignorantly bold, as to attempt more, it is
to undermine, under a pretense of building, and to benight us by obscuring the
great Lights of the Church and damming up the Fountain of it; when Episcopacy
(as the Sun) is the receptacle of all Light, and placed by God in the Church to
transmit it to the Presbyters and Deacons ( Stars of a lesser Magnitude) by a
due Ordination which in the consequences, will let in an Egyptian blackness;
and even Eclips God himself, in the glory of his outward Courts here on Earth,
which he wishes may be restored to its former luster, that is

Your Humble Servant

FINIS.

