I HENRY, Earl of Peterborow, Deputy, with His Majesty's Approbation, to the
Right Honorable Henry, Earl of Norwich, Earl Marshal of England, having
perused a Book Entitled, The Antiquities of Nottinghamshire; Written by Robert
Thoroton, Doctor of Physic: And finding that it contains only what the Title
does import; and nothing contrary to the meaning of the Act of An. 14. Car. 2.
Cap. 33. for preventing abuses in Printing, etc. do therefore License the
Printing thereof.

Dated under my Hand this Third day of May, 1677. PETERBOROW. D. E. M.

THE ANTIQUITIES OF Nottinghamshire, EXTRACTED Out of Records, Original
Evidences, Leiger Books, other Manuscripts, and Authentic Authorities.

Beautified with MAPS, PROSPECTS, and PORTRAICTURES.

BY ROBERT THOROTON Doctor of PHYSIC.

Quid genus and proavos strepitis?
Si primordia vestra
Authoremque Deum spectes,
Nullus degener extat,
Ni vitiis pejora f^vens
Proprium deseret ortum.
Boet. de Consol. Phil. lib. 3. LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Henry
Mortlock, at the Sign of the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard, and at the
White-Hart in Westminster Hall, 1677.

REVERENDISSIMO In CHRISTO Patri ac Domino Dno GILBERTO Providentia Divina
ARCHIEPISCOPO CANTUARIENSI, Totius ANGLIAE Primati and Metropolitano, ET
AUGUSTISSIMO PRINCIPI CAROLO II.

Magnae Britanniae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regi, E Secretioribus Consiliis;
Nottinghamiensi olim Advenae, Et Exinde Plusquam indigenae Fautori, Robertus
Thoroton, M.D.

Hanc Otiis vix indulgendis Commutationem long Imparem Merito D. D. D.

TO MY WORTHY FRIEND William Dugdale, Esquire Norroy King of Arms.
Sir,
BY your hand, as it were, I present these Collections to the Nobility and
Gentry of our County, and to all other lovers of this kind of knowledge, that
your name may procure the Book that esteem, which its own worth cannot give it:
This privilege I claim and use with the greater confidence, not only because I
am sufficiently assured of your kindness and good nature, but also because
indeed you put me upon the work, and therefore though I may not have done so
much, or so well as you intended I should, I think you are a little obliged to
countenance your own choice of the Instrument. You may remember that some very
few years after your Visitation of our County, you and I being with our Friend
Mr. Gervas Pigot, since deceased, at his House at Thrumpton, he brought us a
kind of a Transcript of something, which your old Acquaintance Gilbert Boun,
Sergeant at Law (my Wives Father) was designing, or beginning, toward a
Description of Nottinghamshire, whereof he had been Feodary, which proved to be
only Doomsday Book, and a short Note or two on every Town, but that served to
give occasion to both your importunities that I should attempt something
further in it, which I proved more willing than able effectually to obey,
notwithstanding your promised assistance and directions, which indeed my
profession and other concerns, would not suffer me in all things exactly to
follow; for I could never get opportunity to go my self and stay at York, to
abstract what might be useful for me from that Registry, as you ever advised
me; and others it seems could not well do it for me, for I had several
undertakers who all failed in the point. Yet I have made hard shift to be as
little justly to blame in other things as possibly I could, so that I hope you
will not disown me; and if you do not, I shall be less sollicitous what others
think, for I allow no man for a Judge who has not done something of this
nature himself. And they that have, even for your sake, I am sure will be apt
to be merciful to

Carcolston, Monday in Easter-week, Apr. 16. Anno Dom. 1677. Your Faithful
Friend and Servant, ROB. THOROTON.

THE PREFACE.
THE Art of Physic, which I have professed (with competent success) in this
County, not being able for any long time to continue the people living in it, I
have charitably attempted, notwithstanding the difficulty and almost
contrariety of the study, to practice upon the dead; intending thereby to keep,
all which is, or can be left of them, to wit, the shadow of their Names,
(better than precious Ointment for the body,) to preserve their memory, as long
as may be in the World: Though for this latter undertaking, I expect no more
Glory than I have gotten Riches by the former, well knowing this place not to
be the best chosen for either; and the times such, that too few are much
concerned, either for what is past, or to come. But seeing that by the especial
favor and Providence of God, I have lived happily in it, beyond my own
reasonable hopes, or the opinions of my wisest Friends, who would have set me
on a better Stage; I have thought my self bound to my Country to make it this
further return of gratitude, (however it may relish or please) which no body
else of better abilities and qualifications, has hitherto performed; and I
have put it in the form of an Olla Podrida, which any of them, who shall be
half so fond as I, may the more easily augment or new model, when they shall
think fit; and every Reader, or rather looker on it (for it cannot expect many
more thorough Readers than a Dictionary) may by the help of the Indexes pick
out only those names of Places, or Persons which he desires, without being
obliged to read very much of the rest, which may be thought impertinent enough,
especially by those who will not consider, that I present not here what I would
have chosen, but what I could find, and that for the most part will be judged
too little by any concerned, and too much by others. Yet the time this Work can
pretend to is very little above six hundred years; in the first third part
whereof, there is not too much to be found, the oldest general Authentic
Record we have, being that most famous Survey made by King William the first,
in the latter part of his Reign, which still remains in the Treasury of the
Exchequer, and is called Doomsday Book, and was finished near about two hundred
years after the first perfect Division of England into Shires or Counties, or
of them into Hundreds and Tythings, by King Alured or Alfred (as is said) but
has respect also to the several Lands and their owners in the time of King
Edward the Confessor. This most noble light of those times, as far as concerns
this County of Nottingham, I have therefore exhibited at large, as plainly as I
well could; yet because the Phrase or Language of it is not suitable to this
present Age, I conceive it not amiss briefly in this place to observe and
explicate some few things, which may render it, and some other things in this
Book, more easy to be understood. To begin then with Shire, as the Saxons
called it, or County, as now more frequently is used, we may know it to be one
of those Shares, Portions, or Provinces, whereinto this Kingdom, for the better
Government and Administration of Justice thereof, was nigh, or a little before
the time forementioned, divided, by some of the Saxon Monarchs, who to that
purpose did usually invest some great Man with the power and management of it,
together with the third part of the profits, thereby accrewing to the Crown,
for his Fee or Reward; who was then Styled Eolderman, but shortly after by the
Danes (to whose Laws this place amongst many others was subject) Earl, being a
Norvegian word, as Resenius shows, which still remains a Title of Honor,
though not of Office, amongst us to this day; for several of those Kings, and
all since the Norman Conquest, have prudently thought fit instead of the Earl
to depute or substitute a Shire Reeve for the most part (especially since the
Reign of King Edward the third) annually, who is well enough known, but very
much lessened in profit and dignity at this time. The Hundreds or Wapentaks
whereof these Shires consist, are as unequal as they, and so are the Tythings,
Towns, or Villages which make up them, however they were in the time of the
Saxons, by whom it is evident enough they were all made; for besides the Faith
of History, we have this further Argument for our County, that there remains
not in it the name of any Field, Hamlet, Village, Town, or Place, that I could
note, which is not originally of their Language (or perhaps of the Danes, not
so very much differing) except the Rivers, which seem still to retain the
British; but they made the Hundreds not of an hundred Towns, for such have we
none (though we have one very large one), but more likely of that number at
least of free Sureties or Frank-pledges for the Peace, or else of able
Soldiers for the War, which number in some places exceeded more, in others
less, as we may well suppose, and in process of time (if nothing else did) made
the inequality. Amongst these good men two were appointed by the Statute of
Winchester, 13 E. 1. to be Constables for conservation of the Peace, and View
of Armor, which latter perhaps has more proper relation to the old name of
Wapentak, which certainly contained ten Tythings at the least, and no doubt
very often more. As one of them might contain no less (but often more) than ten
Householders, sufficient Pledges, and as it were incorporated, for keeping the
Kings Peace, the chief whereof was called Tythingman, and Friborgh, now
corrupted into Thirdborough. These ten men did not always dwell in one Town or
Hamlet, but sometimes in two or more, which for that reason at this day have
but one Constable, which Officer, it seems, about the beginning of King Edward
the thirds Reign, grew out of this of Headborough, and by multiplication of
Statutes, since then providing him further employment, has very much obscured
it. Now some Towns have two (or perhaps more) Constables, which may therefore
be concluded to be so great or large in old time, as to contain two or more
such Tythings, at present almost only known by Constableries, and so confounded
with the Towns, Hamlets, Manors, Lordships, or Parishes, whereof they consist,
or wherein they are (as all they are also one with another) that it cannot but
be necessary a little more plainly to distinguish them. By a Town then or
Village we may understand, an uncertain number of dwelling Houses, situate not
far asunder, together with a certain competent circuit of Ground, or Territory,
long since by our Saxon Ancestors comprehended in one name, wherein is
contained one or more Manors, or part thereof, whose owners being formerly and
now called Lords, the whole Content is most constantly termed the Lordship, but
only properly so, when it is all one Manor or one man's; for this word
Lordship, in this case, arising only from such an ownership of a Manor, can be
strictly and truly no further applied than the particular extent of that, which
sometimes is not the whole of any one, but only part of one, or of two, or
three, or more, Villages or Hamlets. This word Hamlet must intimate to us a
little Town or Village, or a smaller number of dwelling Houses, with a certain
Territory and proper name, wherein there was seldom either Manor or Church, as
in Towns most ordinarily were, and it commonly belonged to, or was a kind of a
member of some other Village, and some have happened to be divided amongst
several Constableries, Manors, and Parishes: yet some there are which we are
forced to call Hamlets, in respect of the great Manors to which they belong,
and whereof they are Berews or Berewics* which are as big as the middle sort of
Towns, and some perhaps bigger, and have in them both Manor and Church, or
else a large Chapel, not much inferior in appearance. The word Manor is not
older amongst us than the time of King Edward the Confessor who brought it
from Normandy, in which he was so well seconded by his Kinsman King William,
that all the Manors we have, which may be legally called so, are said to be
specified in his forenamed Survey, wherein we may observe some to be so great
as to contain several considerable Townships, and some so little, that several
Manors are often seen to be comprehended within the bounds of some one little
Town. The greatest doubtless in older times were the Kings, and examples to the
rest, whereof the next size most likely the great Earls and Bishops had, and
the others according to their several degrees were possessed by the Taines, who
were of three Ranks, viz. the Kings Thaine, who was equal to, or the same with
our Parliamentary Baron, or Peer of the Realm. The Middle Theine, who bore
proportion to our greater Gentry, and the less Thegne to our smaller Gentry, or
best sort of Yeomen, who were certainly enough of the middle sort or condition
of men, whereof the Saxons had but three, to wit, Noble, Free, and Servile. We
may conceive then a Manor to have been a certain place with a competent share
or portion of ground and people thereupon for the King, or one of his Nobles,
or Freemen, to remain or dwell at, for some time more or less, wherein the King
for his own, we must think, had always some fit person to take care of and
govern these Lands and people for himself, according to the Laws then in use,
both to do Right, and keep the Peace, whom we now commonly call Steward, in
imitation whereof others obtained the like Privilege from the King to be
exercised for themselves in theirs, which from his own using or grant has now
obtained the name of Royalty. The most common and necessary free Customs which
I think the owner of the least Manor could not well want, are those which the
Saxons called Soc, and Sac; the first whereof imports a Power, Authority, or
Liberty to administer Justice, and execute Laws, as well as the Circuit or
Territory wherein such power is or might be exercised; the latter, a Privilege
to hear and judge Causes, and levy Forfeitures and Amercements, arising amongst
the people resident within such Circuit or Territory, part whereof was ever as
well by the King in his, as other Lords in theirs, kept in his or their own
respective hands or Tenencies, for the sustenance or support of his or their
particular Family there, which is now called the Demesne; the rest is well
known by the name of Tenements, being held by others. Of which one part by the
Saxons were called Book Lands, because the King, or other Lord, gave them to
some Thaines or Freemen by Charter, to inherit either for their Services in the
Wars or Contribution thereto, or else for finding a competent proportion of
Corn or other provisions for the Kings, or other Lords use, which latter Tenure
we understand now by Free Socage, as we do the other by Knights or Military
Service.

These men, however for such their Lands in any Manor or Soke of the Kings, or
of another man's, were named Socmen (especially in Doomsday Book where they are
most often mentioned,) as they have been Thaines, Men, Barons, Knights, and
Freeholders, and are indeed the very Barons, whereof (as the Lawyers say)
there must be two at the least, to make that we now call a Court Baron, in the
reason of which name it seems diverse most Learned men have been mistaken,
calling it from some insufficient Authority, A Barons Court, or Court of a
Baron, as is manifest in that the King himself (not to be called a Baron sure
in any sense, except only the Masculine,) had a Court of the Barons of his
Manor, as suitable and necessary for the Affairs of that, as the great ones
were for the business of his Kingdom, after the Model whereof this was partly
governed: which Court, in old time, had the name of Hallmote; the Kings, as all
others were, being most usually kept in the Capital Message, or Manor House,
then and still called the Hall, whereunto these Sokemen, or Barons, Men,
Knights, Thaines or Freeholders, were once in three Weeks to attend. Some of
the Kings Socmen were great, as were also some of those of the larger sort of
other great men's, and had Manors within the Soc, which sort we now call Mesne
Lords, being in the middle as it were, between their own Socmen, who held of
them, and the supreme or Paramount Lord, of whom they held themselves; but the
most general sort of them were such as the Saxons called Less Thaines, the
Danes Young Men, and we still Yeomen, and were, as I guess, made most
ordinarily of the younger sons or brothers of the Lords of the less sort of
Manors, being certainly Free of Blood, and fit for honorable Service; some
marks whereof yet remain in the Kings Household, and diverse other places. These
Sokemen of the Kings Manors, now known by the name of Freeholders by Charter
in Ancient Demesne, are free from all manner of Toll, for any thing concerning
their own Provisions or Husbandry, and from many other payments which others
are liable to; neither can they be drawn into Plea for any thing concerning
their Lands out of their own Court, wherein from the very first beginning,
without doubt, was exercised all manner of Law requisite for the Kings Tenants,
as well concerning right as peace: as likewise it is probable there was in all
or most other very great Manors or Sokes, which contained several Tythings or
Townships; whence arose also the Court Leet, as we now call it, wherein chiefly
all those Saxon Customs distinguished by several names, or Laws concerning the
Peace, were executed, which by many Lords in their several Sokes was claimed by
prescription, and since the Conquest has been granted to others by the name of
View of Frank-pledge. The other part of the Tenements of a Manor by the Saxons
called Folk-Lands, were occupied or held, for the most part, by the people bred
and born in the Villages, and of Servile condition, called in Doomsday Book,
Villains, and since Natives, or Bondmen, being such as our Husbandmen or
Farmers are now; for those who were like our Cottagers, held very little or no
Land, and in that Record are called Bordars, most likely because they had their
meat where they did their work, which Custom remains amongst us in some places
still: However all these men and all they had went with the Lands of their
respective Manors wherein they lived, and were (saving their lives) as much
and entirely at the will and disposition of their several Lords, who finding no
great profit in keeping alive many such Lazy Families as they were bound to do,
grew more willing to Manumit and make them Free, or else to suffer them to hold
their Lands under such Rents and Services, as they thought fit to impose; which
being entered in their Court Rolls, they made little other use of their
Authority over them; so that Copyholders also now have almost utterly worn out
the memory of any such condition, as well as any of that formerly most numerous
Servile sort of people, whereof for the greater part of these last two hundred
years, there have scarcely been any who would not have despised those who
should not have esteemed them as Freeborn English men as the best, as the late
times have more especially shown.

The last thing which should be distinguished a little more clearly from a
Manor or Soke, Constablery or Tything, Town, Village, or Hamlet, is a Parish,
which amongst us signifies a certain portion of Land or Territory within the
particular charge of a Priest, who is to Administer the Holy Sacraments, and
other Divine Offices, to the Inhabitants thereof, the Precinct or bounds of
which are commonly best known by those of the Manor, or Manors, the Tithes
whereof belong to that Church, though some portion of them may have been given
to some other; for it frequently happens that a Township, Hamlet, or
Constablery, is in several Parishes; the Church Founded in it, always having
the Tithes of it, (except a Portion was by chance given to some Religious
House) and we see a Parish (as before was said of a Manor) may contain one or
more Townships or Hamlets, or only part of one or more. Nay in some places we
have two Parishes in one Town, and but one Church, which must needs arise from
several Manors, the Lords whereof joined in Founding or Building, but not in
endowing the Church, each keeping apart his Tithes, and what else he would give
for the sustenance of his own Clark, whom he intended to present to the Bishop
for the Ministerial care and Government of his own Tenants, who with the Lands
they occupied made up one Parish, as the others did another, yet both had use
of the same Church. These are ordinarily called Medieties, perhaps because the
use of the Church may be equal, though the Parishes or profits be not. The
Kings Manors, before the coming of the Normans, were furnished with Churches,
and Chapels in the Hamlets also, not far short of Parochial Churches, and so
were most other great Manors, and some little ones too; but some have no
mention in Doomsday Book of any Church in them at that time, which yet
manifestly had not very long after; so that, it seems, the Norman Lords built
Churches presently, and fixed their Tithes within their own Manors, which
before were paid to uncertain places; the Dedications or Consecrations of most
of which Churches or Chapels by the Bishop, are still remembered in these parts
by the respective Parishioners, in celebrating a certain yearly Feast commonly
called the Wakes.

But we must further consider that the great Root and Measure of all was
Agriculture, Husbandry, or Tillage, which necessarily imployes, supports, and
multiplies People, as they must Houses and Manors, whereof consist Towns,
Hundreds, and Counties, and of them a Kingdom, so that the King in his
Political capacity, as well as his natural, is fed by the Husbandman;
concerning whom our Laws are so old, natural, and fundamental, that the certain
original of them appears not to the deepest searcher, supposing nothing before
them but a King to give, and People to receive them; for the Learned Seldom,
who went as far as he, or any one else could in that particular, in his Ian.
Anglorum is fain to cite out of Authors whom he judged of little or no credit
in the point, that Donuallo Molmutius, and his son Belinus after him, who
Reigned four or five hundred years before our Savior Christ's time (when
certainly the Inhabitants of this place were not much civilized) Ordained That
Plows, Temples, and Ways leading to Cities, should have the privilege of
Sanctuary. And furthermore, lest the Land should wax empty, or lest the People
should be frequently pressed with want of Corn, or be diminished, if only
Cattle should occupy the Fields, which ought to be Tilled by men, He (the said
Belinus) constituted how many Plowes each County (as we now call them) should
have, and appointed a Punishment for them, by whom the number should be
diminished. And forbad the Beasts which should serve the Plow to be taken away
by the Magistrates, or assigned for debt of money to Creditors, if other Goods
of the Debtor were sufficient besides. However these Laws and Customs have been
ancient and certain enough, whoever made or begun them, and all Measures of the
Country have been taken from the Plow as long as any memorials of such things
are extant: for a Family, or Manse, or Hide with the Saxons; or Carucat with
the Normans, are of the same signification, which is that we call a Plow-land,
and was as much Arable, as with one Plow and Beasts sufficient belonging to it
could be Tilled and ordered the whole year about, having also Meadow and Pasture
for the Cattle, and Houses also for them, and for the Men and their Households,
who managed it. This is the great Measure so often repeated in Doomsday Book in
most Counties by the name of Hide, but in ours, Darbyshire, and Lincolnshire,
only Carucats are found, which are the very same with the other, and esteemed
to contain an hundred Acres, ( viz. sixscore to the hundred) but assuredly were
more or less according to the lightness or stiffness of the Soil, whereof one
Plow might dispatch more or less accordingly. Thus unequal also were the
Virgats whereof four made a Carucat, and so were the Bovats, or as we call them
Oxgangs, of which most commonly eight went to a Carucat or Plow-land, one of
them being defined to be as much Land as one Ox might Till through the year;
which for the reason before, could not be equal in all places, but in some
places was twelve, in some sixteen, in some eighteen or more Acres: Nay the
Acres were not equal, for some had sixteen, some eighteen, some twenty, and
some more Feet to the Perch, of which forty make a Rode, and four of them an
Acre; but the Foot it self was also customary in some places twelve Inches, in
some eighteen more or less, so that we must not too peremptorily determine the
quantity of a Leuc or Quarenten in Doomsday, wherewith the Pasture or other
Woods were measured, and perhaps sometimes Meadow, though it is sure enough the
first meant our Mile, and the other a Furlong, viz. forty Perches, which yet
cannot be precisely judged to an Inch. By these kind of Measures though, were
the ancient Surveys made of every Manor, and part thereof; and by these were
regulated all manner of Taxes, as well before the Conquest as after: for though
the Knights Fees then first brought in with their incidents, Ward and Marriage,
etc. became a Measure for diverse Aids or Taxes afterward; yet even they
consisted or were made up of five, or eight Carucats or Plow-lands apiece, and
the respective Tenants paid for so many whole Fees, or parts of one, or more,
as they agreed with them who first enfeoffed them, according to such
proportions of Carucats or Bovats as were the subject or ground of such
agreements: so that still the Plow upheld all, as the Laws did it indifferently
well, till that stupendous Act, which swept away the Monasteries, whose Lands
and Tithes being presently after made the Possessions and Inheritances of
private men, gave more frequent encouragement and opportunities to such men as
had got competent shares of them, further to improve and augment their own
Revenues by greater loss to the Commonwealth, viz. by enclosing and converting
Arable to Pasture, which as certainly diminishes the yearly fruits, as it does
the people, for we may observe that a Lordship in Tillage, every year affords
more than double the profits which it can in Pasture, and yet the latter way
the Landlord may perhaps have double the Rent he had before; the reason
whereof is, that in Pasture he has the whole profit, there being required
neither men nor charge worth speaking of; whereas in Tillage the people and
their Families necessarily employed upon it, (which surely in respect of God or
Man, Church or King, make a more considerable part of the Commonwealth, than a
little unlawful increase of a private persons Rent) must be maintained, and
their public duties discharged, before the Landlords Rent can be raised or
ascertained. But this Improvement of Rent certainly caused the decay of
Tillage, and that Depopulation, which has much impaired our County, and some
of our Neighbors; and which diverse Laws and Statutes have in vain attempted to
hinder. I shall only take notice of the thirty ninth year of Queen Elizabeth,
when one Statute was made against the decaying of Towns and Houses of
Husbandry; and another for maintenance of Husbandry and Tillage: in the
Preamble of the first is mentioned thus, -- And where of late years more than
in times past, there have sundry Towns, Parishes, and Houses of Husbandry been
destroyed and become desolate, etc. -- the second is after this manner, Whereas
the strength and flourishing estate of this Kingdom has been always, and is
greatly upheld and advanced by the maintenance of the Plough and Tillage, being
the occasion of the increase and multiplying of people both for service in the
Wars, and in times of Peace, being also a principal mean that people are set
on work, and thereby withdrawn from Idleness, Drunkenness, unlawful Games, and
all other lewd practices, and conditions of life. And whereas by the same
means of Tillage and Husbandry, the greater part of the Subjects are preserved
from extreme poverty in a competent estate of maintenance and means to live,
and the wealth of the Realm is kept, dispersed and distributed in many hands,
where it is more ready to answer all necessary charges for the service of the
Realm; and whereas also the said Husbandry and Tillage is a cause that the
Realm does more stand upon it self, without depending upon foreign
Countries, either for bringing in of Corn in time of scarcity, or for vent
and utterance of our own Commodityes being in over great abundance: and whereas
from the 27 th. year of King Henry the eighth, of famous memory, until the 35.
year of her Majesty's most happy Reign, there was always in force some Law
which did ordeine a conversion and continuance of a certain quantity and
proportion of Land in Tillage not to be altered: And that in the last
Parliament held in the said 35. year of her Majesty's Reign, partly by reason
of the great plenty and cheapnes of grain at that time within this Realm, and
partly by reason of the imperfection and obscurity of the Law made in that
case, the same was discontinued: Since which time there have grown many more
Depopulations, by turneing Tillage into Pasture, than at any time for the like
number of years heretofore. Be it enacted, etc. -- These Acts are both expired,
but if they had not, they would have been repealed as diverse of like sort have
been, so that we cannot expect a stop for this great evil till it stay it self,
that is, till depopulating a Lordship will not improve or increase the owners
Rent; some examples whereof I have seen already, and more may do, because
Pasture already begins to exceed the vent for the Commodities which it yields;
but other restraint, till the Lords, and such Gentlemen as are usually members
of the House of Commons, who have been the chief, and almost only Authors of,
and gainers by this false-named improvement of their Lands amongst us, think
fit to make a Self-denying Act in this particular, would be as vain to think
of, as that any Law which hinders the profit of a powerful man should be
effectually executed. This prevailing mischief in some parts of this Shire,
has taken away and destroyed more private Families of good account, than time
it self within the compass of my observations; yet some very few have escaped,
where this devouring Pestilence has raged, and amongst them (through Gods
great mercy) my own, which surely should not be envyed being for the most part
-- procul negotiis
Ut prisca gens mortalium
Paterna rura bobus exercens suis.


I should here have ended, but that it may be pertinent for the encouragement
of any who may be disposed further to enlarge this work, or make any Appendix
to it, to let him know that here is little out of the Archbishop of Yorkes
Registry, from whence one of my Agents only brought me the Titles of certain
Records, and another a Catalogue of the Livings-Spiritual in the Arch-deaconry
of Nottingham, with their Values, Incumbents and Patrons, as they then were;
out of which I only transcribed the values in the Kings Books, and last
Patrons. And also, that here is omitted by mischance and oversight, many Notes
which I had by me and intended to insert, as some concerning Trewthales Manor
in Colston Basset, and a certain Chapel near the Bridge there Founded by the
last Lord Basset; and several particular Inscriptions of Monuments, and other
things in diverse other places, which I beg their pardon for, who may be
concerned. And that though I was a Commissioner for the Royal Aid and Subsidy,
and since that a Justice of Peace, I could never get an exact account of all
the present owners in a great part of the County, but am forced to end in many
places with one I have, which was made about the year 1612. The great helps I
had for elder times were chiefly these, viz. my best Copy of Doomsday Book,
taken by my Father-in-law Sergeant Bounes own hand from that in the Exchequer.
What other use I have made of any of his Collections is marked in the Margent
with B. but where the Printer over-looked it. The Copy of the Red Book in the
Exchequer, and Chartae Antiq. and some other things I had from Mr. Dugdale; the
most excellent Collections from the Pipe Rolls; and some other Records by Mr.
Roger Dodsworth of Yorkshire, I had from my Lord Fairfax, by the procurement of
my honored friend Doctor Vere Harcourt our Archdeacon; several Collections of
the industrious Mr. St. Lo Kniveton, were given me by my Lord Chaworth; the
Leiger Books of Lenton and Dale; and diverse abstracts from the Plea Rolls, and
other Records, were lent me by Mr. Samuel Roper; the Book of Rufford by my Lord
Hallifax; that of Newstede, and some other things, by my Lord Byron; that of
Blyth by Sir Gervas Clifton; and the Register of Thurgarton by Mr. Cecill
Cooper, etc. The rest may be observed as these may also from the Margent.

A Mapp of NOTTINGHAM Shire With its Devisions and WAP ON TAKES described


M Ma^orum in Choro Boreali hujus Ecclesiae, Nec non in Capella omnium.
Sanctorum infra Ecclesiam B. Petri and in Capella B. Mariae infra Ecclesiam St
Nicholai Sepultorum P HENRICUS PLUMPTRE Armiger.


Nottinghamshire. COLLECTIONS Toward an Historical Description Of that COUNTY.
THis County of Nottingham, the Map shows to be of an Oval figure, extending it
self in length, from Stanford upon Sore bordering on Leicestershire on the
South, unto Alkeley or Finningeley bordering upon Yorkshire on the North, near
the space of thirty six English miles; and about half as much in breadth, from
the Lordship of Colinghams bounding on Lincolnshire on the East, to that of
Teversalt (not far from Maunsfeild) adjoining to Darbyshire on the West; which
last named County was not so divided from this, but that they continued to have
one Sheriff, till the tenth year of Queen Elizabeth.

Three Hundreds or Wapentacs, viz. Rushcliff, Bingham, and Newark, containing
betwixt a third and fourth part of this County, lie on the South side the River
Trent, which enters this Shire at Thrumton; where it takes in the River Sore,
and continues his course toward Lincolnshire, which (after it leaves Newark
Hundred) it separates from Nottinghamshire till it come beyond Stockwith to
Hokdik water, the utmost North-East part of it, near the Isle of Axholme. The
rest of this County lies on the North side of Trent; it is also three
Wapentacs, but was in the Conquerours time five, all contiguous to that River,
which therefore may not improperly be said to water the whole Shire. Oswardebek
Wapentac is now the Northclay division of Basset-law, which has two other,
viz. the Southclay and Hatfeild, which make it equal to three Hundreds. Lyda
Wapentac is now joined with Thurgarton and called Thurgarton a Lee, heretofore
Thurgarton and Lythe^ Broxtow remains as it was. In the usual divisions of this
Shire Basset-law and Newark are equal to or set against the other four
Wapentacs, the Town of Nottingham being left out. The Soil is generally of the
most fertile in England, (except a great part of the Forest of Shirewood,
which was the most pleasant, but by the abominable destruction of Woods, is now
much otherwise) and likewise some of that which borders upon Darbyshire, part
whereof affords most excellent Coals. That part of the ancient Fosse way which
lies between Leicestershire and Lincoln enters this County nigh Willoughby on
the Wolds, and at Newark crosses the Road from London to York.

That most eminent Record called Doomsday Book, made in the latter end of the
Reign of King William the Conqueror, which is our principal light, in and
before his time, says, That in Snotingham the water of Trent, and the Fosse,
and the way toward York, were kept so, that if any should hinder the passage
of Navium
Boats, and if any should Plough, or make a Ditch, in the Kings way, within two
Perches, he should make an amends by eight pounds. And in Snotinghamscyre and
Derbiscyre the Kings peace given with his hand, or with his seal, if it be
broken, shall be amended by eighteen hundreths, every hundred eight pounds; of
this amends the King has two parts, the Earl the third, that is, twelve
hundreds the King, and six the Earl.

If any man according to Law shall be banished for any guilt, none but the King
can restore peace to him.

A Tain (or Thane) having more than six Manors, does not give relief of his
Land, except to the King only eight pounds. If he have only six or less, to the
Sheriff he gives relief three Mark of Silver wheresoever he remains in a
Borough or out.

If a Thain having Soc and Sac forfeit his Land between the King and the Earl,
they have the moiety of his Land and Money, and his lawful Wife with his
legitimate Heirs, if there be any, have the other moiety.

Here are noted they who have Soc and Sac, and Thol and Thaim, and the Kings
Custom two pence.

The Archbish. of York upon his Manors, Godeva the Countess upon Nuverc
Wapentac, Vlfenisc upon his Land, the Abbat of (Peter) Burgh upon Colingham,
the Abbat of Berton, Earl Hugh upon Marcheton (Derbish.) the Bishop of Chester,
Tochi, Suen. s. Swain, Baron Siward, Azor. s. Saline, Vlfric, Elsi, Illing,
Levin. s. Aluvin, Alvena the Countess, Goda the Countess, Elsi. s. Caschin upon
Werchesoppe, Henry de Ferrariis upon Edvostone and Dubridge, and
Braylefordsham, Walter de Ayncurt upon Graneby, and Moretune, and Penniesleg.
Of all these none could have the third penny of the Earl, but by his grant, and
that as long as he should live, except the Archbishop, Vlfenisc, and Godeva the
Countess.

Upon the Soc which lies to Clifton, the Earl ought to have the third part of
all the Customs and Works.

Here are noted the Tenants of Land in Snotinghamscire.

1. King William. 2. Earl Alan (of Richmond). 3. Earl Hugh (of Chester). 4.
(Robert) Earl Moriton. 5. The Archbishop of York. 6. The Bishop of Lincoln. 7.
The Bishop of Bayon. 8. The Abbat of (Peter) Burgh. 9. Roger de Busli. 10.
William Peurel. 11. Walter de Aincurt. 12. Goisfrid Alselin. 13. Raph (son of)
Fitz Hubert. 14. Raph de Limesi. 15. Raph de Burun. 16. Roger Pictavensis. 17.
Gislebert de Gand. 18. Gislebert de Tisun. 19. Goisfrid de Wirce. 20. Ilbert de
Lacy. 21. Berenger de Todeni. 22. Hugh (son of or) Fitz Baldric. 23. Hugh Grent
Maisint. 24. Henry de Ferrariis. 25. Robert Malet. 26. Durand Malet. 27. Osbern
Fitz Richard. 28. Robert Fitz William. 29. William Hostiarius (the Usher). 30.
The Kings Thanes.

I might here proceed to recite out of this most excellent Record what Manors
each of these had, and who had them in King Edward's time before the Conquest,
but to avoid repetition, I shall only do it as I mention the several Townships
in each Wapentac, and begin with the most Southerly, Rushcliff, there written
Risclive, so called probably because the usual meeting place of the Hundred,
was at or near some Rushy Hill or Bank; it now contains another Hundred, which
the Book of Doomsday in some place calls Plumptree Hundred. In the Record
called Nomina Villarum made in the ninth year of the Reign of King Edward the
second, Riseclive is returned but half a Wapentac, and the King Lord of it, in
which there is no mention of the Town of Plumptree, nor of many other Villages,
which yet lie promiscuously amongst those that are there named, so that we
cannot certainly from thence conclude, that those omitted made up Plumptree
Hundred.

Joan the Wife of Thomas de Holland Chr. was found to be Sister and Heir of
John late Earl of Kent, Esc. 26 E. 3. n. 54.
26 E. 3. (and aged 25 years) who died seized of the Town of Allerton under
Shirewood (as in that place will also be noted) and a certain Wapentac of
Riscl. and Plumptree of the Towns there adjoining with the Pleas of Court, then
valued at l. 3s. 4d. per annum, which I suppose was the Hundred Court. The
several Townships which now constitute, or are contained in this Wapentac shall
follow, beginning with Stanford before named, which is near the Town of
Lughborough in the County of Leicester, toward which it is like there was some
Stony ford in the River Sour, upon which this Town of Stanford is situate,
which occasioned its name.

Before the invasion of the Normans Elsi had a Manor here which was charged to
the Danegeld or Tax of those times, as ten Bovats or Oxgangs. The Land was then
sufficient for two Ploughs, or was esteemed two Carucats, but afterward it
became the Fee of Roger de Busli whom King William the Conqueror made the
greatest man of Lands in this County by many degrees, for the great survey
taken in that Kings Reign, shows that in this small Shire, he had one hundred
seventy four Manors, being the best part of ninety Townships, besides very
many other Towns which were partly or wholly Soc to some of them. His Seat in
this County was at Blyth, and in Yorkshire at Tikhill. Here he had one
(Plough-land, or) Carucat, five Sochmen (or Freeholders) three Villanes (or
Husbandmen), two Bordars (or Cotagers), having two (plows, plow-lands, or)
Carucats, here was half a Mill, six shillings eight pence; and eleven Acres of
Meadow: All which in the time of King Edward the Confessor, were valued at
thirty shillings, but when this Doomsday Book was made, viz. in the latter part
of the Conquerors, but at ten shillings, having Soc in Normentune. Plac. coram
Rege Mich. 4 H. 3. to. 1.
Ernaldus- Plac. coram Rege Mich. 4 H. 3. to. 1.
Rogerus de Busli. ob. 1099-Muriel Plac. coram Rege Mich. 4 H. 3. to. 1.
Jordan. de Bully.- Plac. coram Rege Mich. 4 H. 3. to. 1.
Rogerus sine prole temp. H. 1. Plac. coram Rege Mich. 4 H. 3. to. 1.
Richardus Plac. coram Rege Mich. 4 H. 3. to. 1.
Johannes de Builli. Plac. coram Rege Mich. 4 H. 3. to. 1.
Idonea fill. and haer.- Plac. coram Rege Mich. 4 H. 3. to. 1.
Rob. de Veteri ponte, ob. 12 H. 3. Johannes ob. 25 H. 3. Rogerus de veteri
ponte ob. 49 H. 3.-Isabel. sor. and cohae. Ric. Fitz-Joh. Ex Collect. Sir Io.
Kniveton. D. 93. and E. 152.
Isabella cohae. 1.- Ex Collect. Sir Io. Kniveton. D. 93. and E. 152.
Rogerus de Clifford ob. 11 E. 1. Ex Collect. Sir Io. Kniveton. D. 93. and E.
152.
Rogerus de Leyburne. Ex Collect. Sir Io. Kniveton. D. 93. and E. 152.
Rob. de Clifford ob. 8 E. 2.- Ex Collect. Sir Io. Kniveton. D. 93. and E. 152.
Matildis amica and una haered. Tho. de Clare. Ex Collect. Sir Io. Kniveton. D.
93. and E. 152.
Robertus de Cliffor. ob. 15 E. 2. sine prol. Ex Collect. Sir Io. Kniveton. D.
93. and E. 152.
Robertus de Cliffo. ob. ante fratrem.- Ex Collect. Sir Io. Kniveton. D. 93.
and E. 152.
Isabella postea nupta Tho. de Mucegros milit. Ex Collect. Sir Io. Kniveton. D.
93. and E. 152.
Robertus de Clifford sine prole.- Ex Collect. Sir Io. Kniveton. D. 93. and E.
152.
Eufemia fill. Rad. domin. Nevil. post nupta Walterede Heselarton. Ex Collect.
Sir Io. Kniveton. D. 93. and E. 152.
Rogerus de Cliffor. mil. ob. 13 R. 2.- Ex Collect. Sir Io. Kniveton. D. 93.
and E. 152.
Matilda fill. Tho. de Bellocampo Com. Warw. ob. 4 H. 4. Ex Collect. Sir Io.
Kniveton. D. 93. and E. 152.
Thom. de Cliffor. Chr. ob. 4. October. 15 R. 2. in part. transmar.- Ex Collect.
Sir Io. Kniveton. D. 93. and E. 152.
Elizabetha fill.....St. Johan. de Com. Ebor. ob. Mar. 26.2 H. 6. Ex Collect.
Sir Io. Kniveton. D. 93. and E. 152.
Johannes Domin. Clifford Chr. ob. Mar. 13.9 H. 5.- Ex Collect. Sir Io.
Kniveton. D. 93. and E. 152.
Elizab. fill. Henrici Percy Chr. occisi apud. Shrowsbury ob. 15 H. 6. Ex
Collect. Sir Io. Kniveton. D. 93. and E. 152.
Thom. dominus Clifford natus die lunae post festum Assumpt. Mariae Virg. 2 H.
5.- Ex Collect. Sir Io. Kniveton. D. 93. and E. 152.
Joanna fill. Tho. domini Dacres de Gillesland.

Ex Collect. Sir Io. Kniveton. D. 93. and E. 152.
Willielmus de Clifford Chr. ob. 6 H. 5. s. p. in f^sto Annunc. die veneris.-
Ex Collect. Sir Io. Kniveton. D. 93. and E. 152.
Anna fill. and una haeredum Tho. dom. Bardolf post nupta Regin. Cobham mil. s.
p.
Ex Collect. Sir Io. Kniveton. D. 93. and E. 152.
Johan. Ex Collect. Sir Io. Kniveton. D. 93. and E. 152.
Tho.
Ex Collect. Sir Io. Kniveton. D. 93. and E. 152.
And. Ex Collect. Sir Io. Kniveton. D. 93. and E. 152.
Johan.

Ex Collect. Sir Io. Kniveton. D. 93. and E. 152.
Idonea cohae. 2.







Pl. de banco, Mich. 14 H. 3. to. 28.
Beatrix Pl. de banco, Mich. 14 H. 3. to. 28.
Henricus Pl. de banco, Mich. 14 H. 3. to. 28.
Johannes Pl. de banco, Mich. 14 H. 3. to. 28.
Henricus Pl. de banco, Mich. 14 H. 3. to. 28.
Alicia Comitissa de Augi. Henricus com. de Augi. Mon. Angl. vol. 1. p. 916.
Pl. de banco, Mich. 14 H. 3. to. 28.






(...)
Robertus de veteri ponte and Idonea his Wife, by fine 6 H. 3. released all
their right from themselves, and the heirs of Idonea, in the Castle and Town of
Tikhill, excepting six Knights fees and an half, which they formerly held, to
Alice Countess of Augi (or Ewe) who confirmed the said Knights fees to them and
the heirs of Idonea, for the service of one Knights fee: they lay in Mauteby,
Samdeber, Kimberwurth, Saute^y, Faldam, Stanford upon Sore, Peverelthor^e,
Bradelwurth, and Torlakeston. H. de Bargo, chief Justice, put to the Kings
claim both for demesnes and services. It seems what lay in this place, came
according to this descent to the Family of Clifford: for it appears, that Es^.
13 R. 2. ^. 14.
Roger de Clifford Chr. died 13 R. 2. seized of one Knights fee, in Stanford
upon Sore; which Robert de Swillington Chivaler then held, and that it was
worth twenty l. per annum, when it happened; and of one fee in Torteston, which
Robert Barry Chr. then held, worth xiv. l. in all its issues yearly, and of
half a Knights fee in Shelton, in the Vale: which Thomas de Staunton Chr. and
his Parceners then held, worth when it should fall C. s. per annum, and of half
a Knights see in Peverelthorp, which the Lord le Spencer held worth when it
happened lxvis. viiid. per annum. And that Es^* 15 R. 2. par. 1. n. 17.
Thomas de Clifford Chivaler died seized of the same fees, 15 R. 2. leaving
Thomas his Son and Heir, who either died young, or else is mistaken for John,
as by the Genealogy may be observed.

Those who held this Manor had their name from the place, for Testa de Nevil.
Peter de Stanford is certified to have held one Knights fee here of the
Countess of Ewe. And Pl. de Banc. Trin. 4 E. 1. to. 80.
Hugh de Stanford, 4 E. 1. recovered his presentation to this Church, against
the Prior of Wulvescroft, because the Jury found that Richard de Trowell had
presented to it alone.

Here was another Manor which before the Conquest was Alfags, Lib. Dooms.
for which he paid to the Geld (or Tax) as ten Bovats. The Land of it was four
Carucats, or Plowlands, Robert Fitz-William, whose fee it was afterward, had
there one Carucat, or Plow, 4. Sochm, 7. Villans, 2. Bordars, having 7. (Plows,
or) Carucats. There was the seat of a Mill, and fifteen Acres of Meadow. This in
the time of King Edward the Confessor, was valued at 40s.

Test. de Nev.
William de Trowell paid one Mark for the third part of a Knights fee, which he
held in Stanford and Leek, of the fee of Raph de Mortimar.

Esc. 32 E. 1. n. 63.
The Jury found 32 E. 1. that Philip de Kyme held Trowell and Stanford upon
Sore for three Knights fees.

Orig. 23 E. 1. to. 1.
There was a partition of Lands here betwixt the coheirs of Ric. Pigot, 23 E.
1.

Fin. apud Natt. di^ lu^ae prori^^ post jeju^ S. Martini, 3 E. 3.
The Manor and advowson of the Church of Stanford, with the appurtenances and
xixs. ivd. rent in Great Leyk and Brokilstow, were by a fine, 3 E. 3. between
William, the son of Hugh Bigg, of Stanford, and Joan his Wife Compl. and Tho.
de Hoppescotes, Parson of the Church of Appelby, and Roger de Astacton, Parson
of Hokesworth Def. settled on the said William Bigg, and Joan his Wife, and the
heirs of William, viz. two parts in present, and the third, which Alice who had
been Wife of Hugh Bigg, then held in Dower, after her decease. Fin. apud Westminster.
Mic. 29. E. 3. and postea Mic. 30 E. 3.
This Manor, with the appurtenances, except one Acre and the Advowson of the
Church, which Joan, who had been Wife of William Big, of Stanford, held for
her life, was by a fine, 29 E. 3. between Rich. de Willughby the elder Chr.
Compl. and Benedict de Vlvescroft, Hugh Sammeson, and John son of Robert de
Donington Deforc. conveyed to the said Richard, and his heirs, and the Advowson
also, after the death of the said Joan.

The Jury, 16 R. 2. found it not to the Kings loss, Es^. 16 R. 2. part. 1. n.
115.
if Tho. de Sutton, and Rich. Baxter, of Wulvescroft gave two Mess. and six
Acres in this Stanford, then held of Roger Swillington, to the Priory of
Wulvescroft, one of which Messuages was charged with the yearly payment of xxd.
to the Priory of Bermondesey.

Sir Richard Illingworth, Knight, had this Manor, as in Boney may be noted in
the time of E. 4. King Philip and Queen Mary, Pat. 5, and 6 Ph. and Mar. part.
3. and O. 5, and 6 P. and M. pa^. 1. to. 62.
by their Letters Patent, dated the ninth day of November, in the fifth and
sixth year of their Reign, granted to Robert Raynes, the Queens Goldsmith, the
whole Demesne and Manor of Stanford. And 11. Mess. 14. Cottages, one Horse
Mill, 50. Acres of Land, 100. of Meadow, 300. of Pasture, 3. of Wood, 1000. of
Furz and Heath, with all their Appurtenances in Stanford, and the whole
Fishing, and liberty of Fishing in the water of Soore, and the yearly rent of
vis. id. ob. q. in Stanford aforesaid, and the yearly rent of xvs. issuing out
of the Lands of -- Barlow, Esquire in Boney, which were lately parcel of the
possessions of Thomas Kniston, Gent. attaint of High Treason. And the Advowson
and right of Patronage of the Rectory and Church of Stanford, and the third
part of a Wood called, Boney Wood, in Boney; containing, by estimation, ten
Acres, and parcel of the possession of the said Thomas, all which were then
extended at xxixl. iiis. vd. ob. q. To have to the said Robert Raynes, and the
heirs males of his body, lawfully begotten. Nicholas Raynes succeeded, and
Robert Raynes, Grandchild of the first Robert had it, Anno Dom. 1641. He was a
thrifty man, and built his house on the top of the barren hill, whither he
intended to remove the Town also, but his Son Robert was not like him: so that
it is now become the possession of Thomas Lewys, Alderman of London, lately high
Sheriff of this County.

The Church is in the Kings books, 9l. 7s. 6d. and Mr. Thomas Lewis, Patron at
this time. But in an old Ms. of Mr. John Marters, Rector of Normanton upon
Sore, made a little before the dissolution of Monasteries, of the values and
Patrons of the Rectories and Vicarages in this Diocese of York, this Rectory is
twenty Mark, and Mr. Yngleworth Patron.

Upon a Tomb in the Chancel.

Hic jacent Radulphus Illingworth Ar. and Agnes uxor ejus, Ex Coll. Sir Lo.
Kni^eton.
qui quidem Radulphus ob. 1. die Mensis Augusti, Anno 1498. quorum animabus
propitietur Deus.

In the window there Arg. a Chevron Azur, with a Labell of three points Ermine,
Swillington; and Azur, three Hedgehogs Or, Heriz.

In the body of the Church.

Hic jacet Tho. Pair de Stoneford valect. and Agnes uxor sua, quae Agnes ob.
6. Jan. --

Upon a Tomb in the Church.

Hic jacent Magister Johannes Harrison, and Alicia, and Agnes uxores ejus, qui
quidem Johannes obiit 4. die Nov. 1532.

In the window over that Tomb, Arg. a fesse on both sides, Flory between three
Anchors sable, quartering Arg. a fesse gules, two Bars engrayled sable; then
the first again, and then sable a fesse between three Stars Arg. all which
together impale with Ermine a Cross engrayled sable, and also Arg. a Chevron
Azure betwixt three Staples sable. The first alone impales in the same window
with Arg. a fesse gules and two Bars sable. And Erm. a Cross engrayled sable,
impales alone with Arg. A Chevr. Azure betwixt three Staples sable.

Normanton upon Sore.
SO called from some owner in the time of the Saxons probably, for Norman was
then a a name frequently used, and ton, or tun is the same with Town now. This
place before the coming of K. William had very many Shares, and several owners,
which made him parcel it out amongst his great men, so that it is very
difficult to give any exact, or particular account of the Tenencies, which in
all likelihood were joined to other more considerable possessions, and so came
to have little mention distinctly made of them, in any Records that I have
seen. The Book of Doomesday shows that of Roger de Buslies fee, here was Soc to
Stanford, as much as answered to the Tax, or Geld, for three Bovats. The Land
was one Carucat, the Soc then waste; Lib. Doomes.
there was four Acres of Meadow, the value was 4s. as in the time of King Edward
the Confessor.

Here was also of Hugh Earl of Chesters fee, Soc to Sudton, two Bovats, and two
thirds, ad geldam. The Land was a Carucat, but waste, there was three Acres of
Meadow. In the Confessors time, this was valued at 5s. then at 3s.

Here was a Manor also of Earl Moritons fee, which Story Lord also of Gotham
and Sutton had before the Conquest, for four Manors rated to the Geld, as ten
Bovats. The Land whereof was sufficient for two Plows (or two Car.) This Alden
held of the Earl, and there had one Car. (or Plow) two Sochm, two Vill. three
Bordars having two Caruc. (or Plows) there was fifteen Acres of Meadow. In the
Confessors time this was 40s. value, in the Conquerours time but 30s.

Of the Land of the Taynes, here was a Manor which Osgod had before the
Conquest, who paid for it to the Geld, as three Bovats and an half. The Land of
it was one Car. there were two Villans, and two Acres of Meadow. This, in the
Confessors time was valued at 20s. then but at 6s. Another Manor in
Normentune, of the Tayn Land, which Raven had, and paid to the Danegeld for it,
as two Bovats.

In the second year of King John's reign, Matthew de Eston released all his
claim and right in the Advowson of the Church of Normanton, Fin. 2 Ioh.
to Bertram, Prior of St. Cuthberts of Durham; for which he was to have
reception in all the benefits which were in that Church. Quo War. 3 E. 3.
The Prior of Durham, 3 E. 3. claimed a Court Leet for his Tenants in
Normanton, Bonington, Kineston, Barton, Cortingstok, Remston, and Gotham.

Oddo, the son of John, for the soul of his son John; Ex Regist. de Lenton. p.
109.
and Matthew, son and heir of Oddo, for the soul of his brother John, gave to
God, and the Church of Lenton, and the Monks there serving God, the whole Land
which Herbert, the father of John, held; the same sixteen Acres which lay at
the West end of the Town, on both sides the way, with Ogga and Iunger, which
paid 4s. per annum. Tho. de Arches, by fine, released to the Prior of Lenton,
Ib. 139.
all his claim in sixteen Acres of Land in Normanton, 32 H. 3. for which the
Prior gave him 100s.

In the time of E. 1. Robert de Strelley gave eleven Bovats of Land in
Normanton, Ex Autogr. pen. Car. Lacock de Woodburgh. genesis

Es^. 25 E. 1. n. 51.


to Sampson de Strelley his son: to his Deed hangs a fair seal of his Arms,
Paly of six.

Roger de St. Andrew, and his partners are certified, 25 E. 1. to have held a
Knights fee in Gaham, Normanton, and Sutton, of the Honor of Leicester.

Robert de Vaus, and Amfelicia his Wife, by fine, Fin. Mich. 18 E. 3.
18 E. 3. pass the Manor of Normanton upon Sore, to Sir Gervas de Clifton,
Knight, and his heirs for ever, paying sixteen pounds per annum, during the
life of Amfelicia only, who particularly; in that fine, released the third part
of the Manor, her Dower distinct from the other 2. parts.

Here was a Manor which was de La Pooles anciently, and came to the Crown by
the Attainder of Edmund de La Poole, 2 H. 8. Pat. 36 H. 8. part. 25.
King H. 8. by his Letters Patents, dated, May 1. in the 36. year of his reign,
granted license to Edward Elrington, and Humfrey Metcalf, Esquire, to give a
Mess. in Normanton on Sore, to Richard Willughby, Gent. and his heirs.

Richard Willoughby, late of Nottingham, Lib. 2. post Mortem, fol. 68.
who held one Mess. in Normanton on Sore, and certain Lands there, late
belonging to the Monastery of Durham, died Apr. 16.37 H. 8. leaving Thomas
Willoughby his son and heir seventeen years of age, Mar. 15. then last past.

William Willoughby claimed against Henry Strelley, Gent. one Cottage, one
Toft, one Garden, Pasc. 2, and 3 Ph. and Mar. rot. 703.
sixty Acres of Land, ten of Meadow, ten of Pasture, four of Wood, with the
Appurtenances in Normanton on Sore, 2, and 3 Ph. and Mariae.

John Rotheram, and William Marwood, Mich. 18, and 19 Eliz. rot. 146.
Gent. claimed against William Willoughby, Gent. diverse Lands and Tenements in
Normanton upon Sore, who called to warranty George Air, Gent. 19 Eliz.

And in another Recovery, which William Willoughby suffered, Trin. 20 Eliz.
rot: 406.
20 Eliz. of the Manor of Normanton on Sore, he called the said George Air,
Gent. who further called Thomas Air, Gent.

This whole Township is now Mr. Daniel Earls, saving five yard Land, which Mr.
Richard Fillingham inherits from his Ancestors: he is now chief Constable; and
there are five more Freeholders, but too small to mention.

Richardus Willoughby de Not. ob. 37 H. 8.-An. fill. -- Parmater. 1 Thom.
Willoughby at. 17. ad mort. Patris, s. prole. 2 Will. Willoughby de Normanton
ob. 1587.-An. fill. Joh. Rotheram de Nun-Eaton. 1 Gilbertus Willoughby Margaret
uxor -- Manly, s. p.
Franc. filia Sam. Marrow, ux. 1.-Frances fill. Willielmi Walkeden Rectoris
Eccles. de Clifton Camvile, ux. 2.-Petrus Columbell Ar. Marit. secundus.
Willielmus Willoughby de Normanton ob. May 4. 1629.-Susanna filia Will. Moulton
de Toddenham in Com. Glocest. ob. 1635.-Edw. Darling de London Ar. Marit.
secund.
2 Will. Willoughby miles de Aston Com. Oxon. ob. 1615. -- - fill Young.
Rotheram Willoughby miles.-Anna filia Ric. Wortly milits Will. Willoughby Ar.
ob. 1630.-Eliz. fill. and una cohaered Timoth. Pusey de Selston, and Mariae
uxoris ejus fill. and cohaer. Joh. Clay de Crich. ob. Oct. 3. 1659.-Jo. Coke
miles Mar. 2. Will. Willoughby Baronettus ob. Feb. 10. 1670.-Marg. fill. and
hae. -- Abbat. Willielmus obiit infans.
Maria-Beaumont Dixie. Wulstan Dixie aet. 14. an. 1671. Beaumont aet. 11. 1671.
Johan. aet. 10. Will. aet. 2. Ric. aet. 1. aet* Eliz. 16. Fran. 7. Mari. 13.
Marg. 5.


Eliza. ux. Ant. Pel. mil. Marga. ux. paramor. An. ux. Norwch. Willielmus*
Johannes. s. p.

Richardus Willoughby Johannes Willoughby mercator de Bristow, 1640.


Ex relatione Io. Marler Rectoris Eccles. de Normanton.
The first William Willoughby was buried in this Chancel, Nov. 28. 1587. and
has a fair blew Stone over him, but nothing written on it. He gave out of some
Lands, which he bought in Nottingham and Lenton, 8l. 6s. 8d. to be yearly paid
to five Towns in course, Normanton Great Marlow, Nun-Eaton, Nottingham, and
Wolvey.

There are two Monuments with these inscriptions in Marble.

Memoriae Sacrum.

Here lies the Body of Frances, the Daughter of William Walkeden, first
married to Gilbert Willoughby, Esquire, by whom she had issue two Sons, and one
Daughter; after married to Peter Columbell, Esquire; and by him had issue six
Sons, and three Daughters: she died A^g. 12. Anno Dom. 1606. Posuit Willielmus
Willoughby, Armiger.

Memoriae Sacrum.

Near to this place lies the Body of William Willoughby, Son of Gilbert
Willoughby, Esquire and Lord of this Town by inheritance; and close by this Wall
lies Susanna his Wife, daughter to William Moulton, of Toddenham, in the
County of Gloucester, Esquire. They were married at seventeen years of age, and
lived together twenty years, and had no issue; which William died the fourth of
May, 1629. Secondly, she married Edward Darling of London, Esquire, and now
Lord of this Manor by purchase, who lived together until the first of June,
1635. And she dyed at Battersey in Surrey, and left no issue, which Edward
Darling caused this Monument to be erected at his own charge, in Remembrance of
them both, May the first, 1636.

The Rectory was 12l. when the Prior of Durham was Patron; Ex eodem Ms.
now it is in the Kings Books 7l. 11s. 0. ob. and Mr. Daniel Earl, Patron.

Sutton Bonington.
NOw one Town, heretofore two. Sudton, is the same with South-Town, and
Boniton, probably, was called so from Reeds growing thereabouts, for such like
signification Bon, or Bun has in the Saxon. The Book of Doomsday shows them to
be diversely shared, both at that time, and before; and that Harold had in
Sudton three Manors, which paid the Geld as a Caruc. and half, (though) the
Land was (but) one Carucat; (which) after the Conquest Hugh, Earl of Chester
had, Robert Fitz-William held it of him, and there had one Car. and an half,
three Sochm. six Vill. having three Car. and an half, one Mill, 20s. fifteen
acr. of Meadow, In the Confessors time, and then valued at 40s. having Soc in
Normanton. In Boniton likewise, Doomes^.
Harold had a Manor rated to the Danetax, or Geld, as six Bovats. The Land was
two Car. there Robert the man (or Tenent) of the said Earl Hugh, had three
Sochm. five Vill. having two Car. and an half, there was ten acres of Meadow, In
King Edward the Confessors time, and then also valued at 20s.

In Sudton likewise, Stori named before in Normanton, had a Manor in the Saxon
times, rated to the public payment for half a Car. The Land was twelve Bovats.
When the Conquerors survey was made, there was one Plow, or Carucat. There R.
Earl of Moriton had three Carucats, three Sochm. in his Demenesne, and five
acres of Meadow. This in the time of King Edward the Confessor, was valued at
3s. then at 20s.

In Sutone also of the Taynland was a Manor, which Leuvord had before the
Conquest, rated to the tax at three Bov. afterward Siuvard held it of the
King. Another Coleman had rated to the Geld at one Bov. and an half. Of the
Taynland also in Boniton, there was Soc to Normentune, as much as was rated at
one Bov. and an half to the Geld. The Land, half a Carucat. There were five
Vill. with one Car. and three acr. of Meadow, In the time of King Edward the
Confessor, and then valued at 6s.

Soc to Lech of the fee of Henry de Ferrariis, Siuvard had also in Boniton,
which paid to the tax, as one Bov. and an half. The Land was four Bovats. There
three Vill. had one Car. and an half, and three acr. of Meadow: this continued
the old value 6s.

Robert Patric paid two Marks for one Knights fee in Bonington, Testa de Nev.
in the time of King H. 3. and after I find William Patrick offered himself
against Nich. de Segrave, Plac. de jur. and Assis. ^pud Derby. 53 H. 3. to. 19.
concerning his presentation to the Church of Bonington, then void and in his
gift. The Advowson of this Church went with the Family of Segrave, as Thorp, in
this Wapentak, did to the Family of Mowbray, and so to that of Barkley, with
which it continues. Elizabeth, Duchess of Norfolk, Hill. 13 H. 7. to. 315.
recovered the Advowson of the Church of Sutton Bou^ng^on, upon a Quare
impedit, 13 H. 7. against Sir Henry Collet, Knight, William Stokes, Clark,
together with Thomas, Archbishop of York.

The Manor of Bonyngton was, by fine, 5 E. 2. settled on Raph de Crophill,
Fin. apud Westminster. in Octab. S. Martin, 5 E. 2.
and Maud his Wife, and the heirs which he should beget on the Body of Maud;
the remainder to Thomas, Son of the said Raph, and the heirs of his Body,
remaining to the right heirs of Raph. The Jury, 12 E. 2. found it not to the
Kings loss, if he granted to Raph de Crophull, Esc. 12 E. 2. n. 52.
and his heirs for ever, to enclose the way, which led from the Church of
Sutton upon Sore, to the Church of Boniton, on the West part of both Towns, to
enlarge his dwelling. Raph de Crophull had view of Frank-pledge in Bonington
and Sutton, granted, Chapter 1 E. 3. n. 56. and n. 66.
1 E. 3. and free warren in Bonington and Tireswell, in this County in
Hemington and Braundeston, in Leicestershire, and in Downesby in Lincolnshire.

Raph de Crophill Chr. complained, 3 E. 3. against Henry de Grendon, Plac. de
^ur. and Assis. apud Not. 3 E. 3. to. 73.
and William de Grindon, Parson of Babworth, that when as Robert de Grendon had
enfeoffed the said Raph, and given him seisin of the Manor of Bonington; and
the said Henry afterward, by his writing released all his right and claim
therein to the said Raph, who commanded the said writing to be ^ead and
pronounced by John le Palmer, they the said Henry and William, upon Monday next
after the Feast of the Nativity of the blessed Mary, in the twenty eighth year
of the Reign of King E. 1. at Bonington, did by force take it out of his hand,
and bruised the Seal, and broke the writing, for which the Jury gave the said
Raph two hundred Marks for his damage. The Grendons brought a Writ of Error,
Pl. de Banc. Trin. 5 E. 3. to. 84. Fin. Mich. 16 E. 3. and postea Pasc. 17 E. 3.
but no Error was found.

Maud Countess of Ulster, by fine, 16 E. 3. settled six Mess. three Bov. of
Land, 13l. 6s. 4d. rent in Sutton upon Sore, Southclifton, and Spaldforth, upon
Tho. Cok, and Isabel his Wife, and the heirs of Thomas after the decease of
Maud, who had been Wife of Robert de Ekleshale, and who held them for her life.

The Manor of Bonington was, by fine, 28 E. 3. settled on John de Verdon, Fin.
T^in. 28 E. 3.
and Matilda his Wife, and the heirs males of the body of Matilda, begotten by
the said John; and for default of such issue, to John de Crophull, Knight, and
the heirs of his Body, the remainder to Nicholas de Crophull, Knight, and his
heirs.

There was a fine levied at Nottingham, in the fourteenth year of King John's
Reign, Fin. apud Not. a die St. Io. Bapt. in 15. dies 14 Ioh.
between Emma, who had been the Wife of William de Sutton, and Galfr. the son
of William, of the third part of ten Bovats of Land, with the appurtenances, in
Sutton upon Sore.

Jordan de Sutton (in Ashfeild) who held several Lands in Darbyshire, Esc. 16
E. 1. n. 8.
and at Sutton in Ashfeld, and other places in this County, is certified to
have held of Richard de Morley xxivs. of yearly rent in Sutton upon Sore, and
Bonington by Scutage, when it happened; and that John his son and heir was
seventeen years old and more, 16 E. 1. as in Sutton in Ashfeild will also be
noted.

The Freeholders of Richard de Sutton, held half a Knights fee in Sutton
Bonington, Lib. de feod. in Com. Not. Inq. capta coram Ioh. Vans, Ioh. Musli.
and Ioh. del Ker. 22 E. 3. Ex Autogr. Collect. per St. Lo Kniveton penes G.
Armstrong.
Kynston, and Normanton, and paid xxs. for it, 22 E. 3. toward the Aid, to
make the Kings eldest Son a Knight.

Anno Dom. 1282. 11 E. 1. Henry son of Raph Gerold, and Alexandra his Wife
(daughter of Thomas Basset) released John Basset of Bonington, etc. Anno 1299.
William son of John de Bonyton, released Alice, who had sometime been Wife of
John Basset. Thomas Basset, of Boniton, and Sibyll his Wife, by fine, 12 E. 2.
settle one Mess. three Bovats, and two Acres of Land in Boniton, Fin. apud
Westminster. Trin. 12 E. 2.
upon Raph, son of the said Thomas and Joan his Wife, and the heirs of their
bodies after the decease of the said Thomas and Sibyll.

Joan, who had been Wife of Raph Basset, of Bonyton, Ex iisdem Autogr. pen. G.
Armstrong.
released, 15 E. 3. to John Basset her son, and Felice, the daughter of Robert
Hemery, of Bonyton, and the heirs of the body of the said John, her whole right
in all the Tenements; which Sibyl, who had been Wife of Thomas Basset, sometime
held in the Town and Fields of Bonyton.

Felice Basset, of Bonington, 42 E. 3. demised to John Basset her son, Ib.
all the Lands in Bonyton, which she had of the gift of John Basset her husband.

John Soket, son of Robert Soket, of Boniton, Ib.
gave to William, son of John Hemery* of Boniton, 30 E. 1. Land near that which
had been the Land of Sir Robert de Swillington.

Suttons Manor came to the Swillingtons, and from them to the Feildings; who,
not long since, sold the same to... Gray, Esquire of Langley in Leicestershire.

George Swillington, Esquire dyed 22. of Nov. 2 Eliz. and left Margaret, Elibr. 3.
Sced. fol. 50
the Wife of Francis Fylding, Gent. and Margery Swillington, his daughters and
coheirs: Anne his Wife was dead before him. He was seized of one Manor in
Sutton Bonington* which was parcel of the possessions of Sir William Turvile,
and held of the King as of his Manor of Stanford, parcel of the Duchy of
Lancaster. Another Manor was Thomas Earl of Rutland's, and parcel of the
Priory of Garroudon; he was likewise seized of a Capital Mess. 120. Acres of
Land, 30. of Meadow, etc. and the Advowson of the Church of St. Anne, in Sutton
Bonington, late belonging to the Monastery of Repingdon, Elibr. 3. post mortem;
fol. 126.
or Repton (in Darbyshire) and some other small parcels in Sutton Bonington,
Kinston, and Normanton upon Sore.

John the son of Robert de Bonington gave one Mess. three Tofts, Pat. 17 E. 2.
part. 2. in 15.
and four Bovats of Land here and in Rudstan, to make a Chauntry in the Church
of St. Andrew (St. Anne, I suppose) at Bonington, 17 E 2. John de Bonington, 1
H. 5. claimed against Thomas de Staunton, Pasc. 1 H. 5. rot. 109. and Hill. 2.
H. 5. rot. 138.
and Elizabeth his Wife, one Mess. two Tofts, sixty Acres of Land, ten of Meadow
in Sutton upon Sore.

Hugh Willoughby of Rysley claimed against Robert de Staunton, 23 H. 6.40s.
rent, Pasc. 23 H. 6. rot. 381.
and two Virgats and an half of Land, with the appurtenances in Sutton upon
Sore, which went against the claim.

Raph Shirley, Knight, John Aston, Knight, John Port, Esquire, Robert Hasylrig,
Esquire, Hill. 5 H. 8^ rot. 503.
Thomas Antwysell, Esquire, claimed against John Wylne, and Margaret his Wife,
one of the daughters and heirs of Thomas Staunton, Esquire, the third part of
the Manor of Sutton, with the appurtenances, and the third part of fifteen
Mess. three Tofts, one Mill, two hundred Acres of Land, sixty of Meadow, sixty
of Pasture, two of Wood, one hundred of Moor, with the appurtenances in Sutton
Bonington, Kinston, and Normanton, this was 5 H. 8. and the 7 H. 8. Raph
Shirley, and the rest, before named, claimed against Thomas Hasylrig, son and
heir of Elizabeth Entwysell, defunct, Pasc. 7 H. 8. rot. 338.
and late Wife of William Hasylrig, Father of the said Thomas, and one of the
daughters and heirs of Thomas Staunton, Esquire, departed, and against Lucy,
Wife of Thomas Hasylrig, the third part of the Manor of Sutton, etc. as before.

Richard, Bishop of Winchester, Gyles Daubney, Knight, Charles Somerset, of
Herbert, Mich. 23 H. 7. to. 614
Knight, Thomas Lovell, Knight, Edmund Dudley, Esquire, and Henry Wyatt,
Esquire, 23 H. 7. claimed against Anne Green, and Maud Green, daughters and
heirs of Thomas Green, Knight, the Manor of Claxton, and twenty Mess. seven
hundred Acres of Land, one hundred of Meadow, two hundred of Pasture, one
hundred of Wood, and 20s. rent, with the appurtenances in Kegworth, Claxton,
Sutton Bonington, Kyngeston, and Ratcliff.

There was another recovery of these same Lands and rent, Trin. 36 H. 8. rot.
112.
36 H. 8. wherein James Rokeby, Esquire, and Henry Averson claimed them against
William, Earl of Essex.

Hill. 5 H. 8. rot. 339.
Rowland Lemynton, Raph Rowlate, Henry Grenescot, and George Bollys, 5 H. 8.
claimed against Thomas Banaster, Gent. two Mess. one hundred Acres of Land,
twenty of Meadow, thirty of Pasture, with the appurtenances in Sutton Bonington,
and Kingston.

There is an ancient Family of the Bonytons, holds a Manor there to this day.
And Stauntons came part to Tate, and part to Shirley, of Staunton Harold in
Leicestershire, where Sir Robert Shirley, Baronet, Father of the present Sir
Robert, built a very beautiful Church. He has here three Farms, having twelve
yard Land belonging to them. Ex relatione Ger. Pigot, Ar.
Mr. Anthony Tate has seven yard Land and an half, which, with his house, came
by his mother, the daughter of Richard Stanley, who dwelt in it.

Lands belonging to the Monastery of the holy Trinity, at Repingdon, in Sutton
Bonington, and West Leke, and also the Advowson of the Church of St. Helen, Ex
Chart. praenobilis Theophili Comitis Huntington.
of West Leke, descended to the Earl of Huntington, from Sir John Port,
Knight, who was one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, 24 H. 8. and married
Joan, daughter and heir of John Fitz-Herbert, of Etwall, in Darbyshire, by whom
he had Sir John Port, Knight, his son, who left three daughters and heirs;
Elizabeth, Wife of Sir Thomas Gerard, Knight; Dorothy, Wife of Sir George
Hastings, Earl of Huntingdon, and Margaret of Sir Thomas Stanhope, named in
Shelford.

The Rectory of Bonington, in the forementioned Ms. is xiil. value, Pen. Io.
Marler. Rector. de Normanton super Sore.
and Mr. Barkeley, Patron. The Rectory of Sutton viii. Mark, and Prior of
Repingdon, Patron. In the Kings Books, now the Rectory of St. Michaels, in
Sutton Bonington, is 15l. 2s. 1d, and the Rectory of St. Annes there, 4l. 17s.
6d. and the Lord Barkeley Patron of both.

In Sutton Bonington Church, upon an old Tomb there.

Hic jacent Thom. Staunton Ar. and Milisenta uxor ejus filia Willielmi
Meringmilitis; Collect. Sir Io. Kniveton Ar.
quae Milisenta obiit* 12. Aug. 1456.

He bears Varrey Arg. and sable, an Annulet Or, and impales with Mering. Arg.
upon a Chevron sable, three Escallops Or. Another Staunton about that Tomb
impales with Arg. a Pile in Point Gules, Chandoys.

Upon another Tomb in the Chancel.

Orate pro animabus Johannis Berwyke, and Margaretae uxoris suae, and Jacobi
filii eorum, qui de hoc saeculo migravit, anno 1528.

He bears Arg. 3. Bears Heads erased sable.

In a Window there Or, a Lion Ramp. Azure, the Lord Segrave, and Gules a Lion
Ramp. Or, (rather Arg. if it be) Mowbray.

Upon a Tomb there.

Here lies Myghell Stanley, deceased the last day of May, 1564. and Mary his
Wife, that was with Child the same day, and delivered of a son named Myghell,
the second of October, the same year. This same Myghell Stanley deceased, was
son of John Stanley, and left his Brethren, William and Henry to see this Work
made.

He bears Or, three Birds Legs erased gules.

Upon a Chief indented Azure, three Stags Heads Or, impales with a Chevron
betwixt three Towers.

In the other Church, an ancient Tomb defaced; it seems it was a Staunton
Varrey Arg. and sable, a Cressent for a difference impales with Mering. as
before, upon that Tomb is Bassets Arms, etc.

Anthony Feilding sold Mr. Gray, of Langley, the house, and ten yard Land
heretofore belonging to Repton Priory, who since bought of old Mr. Tate, of
Sutton, about three yard Land and an half. Mr. Gray disinherited his eldest son
for matching against his consent, so his two youngest sons share with the
eldest. Thomas Gadde has 3. yard Land and an half in Sutton, descended from
his Ancestors. Charles Cock has four, Tho* Strong four, bought heretofore of
Sir George Hastings. Gilbert Millington attaint, had four also.

Kinston.
IN Doomesday Book written Cheniston: so called, probably, from some owner, as
most Towns of that termination, in this County, generally are. Two Manors in
it at that time were made the fee of Hugh, Earl of Chester, Lib. Doomes.
which before the Conquest Leuvin and Richard had, and paid for them to the
public Geld, as three Bov. and an half. The Land of them being then ten Bov.
there under Earl Hugh, one Sochm. had half a Carucat, and nine Acres of Meadow.
This, in the time of Edward the Confessor, was 30s. value, then but 10s.

Here were also several Manors of the Land of the Taynes, one Algar had before
the Norman Invasion, which paid for three Bov. The Land was two Car. This
afterward was held by Sauvinus of King William, and he had there two Vill.
with one Plow (or Carucat) and the seat of a Mill, and ten Acres of Meadow.
This, in the Confesours time, was 20s. value, in the Conquerours 10s. Another
Manor of the ^aynland Vlchet had, and paid the Assesment to the Geld for it,
as one Bov. and an half. The Land was one Carucat. This, when the Conquerours
survey was made, Godric held: Lib. Doomes.
but the men of the Country knew not by whom, nor how. There was one Vill. and
six Acres of Meadow. In King Edwards time, this was valued at 20s. then at 3s.
Of the Taynland also in Chineston, was there Soc to Radeclive, as much as paid
for one Carucat to the Tax. The Land was two Carucats. There eight Sochm. three
Villans, had three Carucats, or Plows.

This Town was commonly esteemed a member of Radcliff upon Sore; and the Tithes
went to the Priory of Norton, accordingly.

Ex libr. Ms. de Nova loco penes R. Perpoint, postea Com. Kingston.
Peter Picot, son of Peter Picot, Lord of Ratcliff on Sore, gave to God and the
Church of the blessed Mary, and St. Hardulf of Bredon, in Frank Alms, two
Virgats of Land in Kingston.

Half a Carucat of Land here held of Thomas Picott, Esc. 41 H. 3. n. 10.
41 H. 3. was taken into the Kings Hand for a year and day, being held before
by one outlawed for Felony.

Pl. cor. Reg. Mich. 10 E. 1. rot. 16. and Pas^. 11 E. 1. rot. 16.
There was a Trial, 10 E. 1. between Peter Picot, Plaintiff, and William Hasard,
and Hawisia his Wife, Adam le Tailour, and Robert le Irot (Iort) and their
Wives for service of Land in Ratcliff and Kinston: but the Judgment was for
the Defendants that they ought none.

Esc. 27 E. 1. n. 10.
Thomas Hasard, aged twenty eight years was, 27 E. 1. found heir of William
Hasard, who had a House and some little Land here, held of the King for 3s. 8l.
Philip Hasard, Esc. 2 E. 3. n. 21.
aged (...) seven years, 2 E. 3. was certified heir of Thomas.

William Seman, 3 E. 2. is certified to be son and heir of Richard Seman, Esc.
3 E. 2. n. 3.
who held a Mess. and two Virgats here of the King for 14s. per annum, and
doing homage and fealty to Sir Peter Picot, and the service of 7s. per annum,
and a pair of Gilt Spurs.

Esc. 17 E. 2. n. 64.
John de Leyk is certified, 17 E. 2. to have held besides a certain Manor in
Leyk, etc. here in Kynston eight Virgats of Land, four of the Prior of St.
Cuthberts of Durham, by the service of 12d., and four of John de Langeton for
4s. per annum. John de Leyk his son and heir being then above fifteen years of
age.

Nicholas, the son of Adam le Taylour, was also certified, Esc. 17 E. 2. n. 22.
17 E. 2. to have held here; and in Ratcliff the third, part of two Mess. and
two Virgats of Land of the King in Capite, paying 3s. 8d. yearly by the hands
of the Sheriff. Alice the daughter and heir of the said Nicholas being then
above twenty years of age.

The Jury, 16 E. 2. said that Agnes who had been Wife of Reginald Iort, Esc. 16
E. 2. n. 9.
held likewise the third part of two Mess. and of two Virgats of Land, etc. as
before, Reginald le Iort being her son and heir. The Jury, the same year found
it not to the Kings loss, if Reginald le Iort had license to keep to himself
and his heirs, Esc. 16 E. 2. n. 19.
the third part of two Mess. and of two Virgats of Land, which he had of Alice,
the daughter of Nicholas le Taylour, held of the King as the Manor of Ratcliff
then was, by keeping the Kings Ostery (or place for Hawks) and paying yearly
3s. 8d.

Henry le Hauker, 10 E. 3. was found to have held one Mess. sixty Acres of Land
in Kinston of the King in capite, Esc. 10 E. 3. n. 7.
by the service of carrying a Hoster, or Goshawk.
Falcon before him in winter, John le Ward, of Kinston, was then his Cousin and
Heir. This Hauker, when he died, held one Mess. ^our Bov. in Kinston of Sir
Peter Pygot, then Lord of Radclyve on Sore; Esc. 12 E. 3. n. 1.
but the Jury found that his Cousin and Heir, the said Ward, held them then,
viz. 12 E. 3. of Raph Basset, of Drayton.

The Jury, 20 E. 3. found it not to the Kings loss, if he granted Robert, Esc.
20 E. 3. n. 39.
the son of Reginald le Iort, to hold one Mess. and one Virgat (or Yard-land)
and two parts of another Mess. and Virgat of Land, in Kinston and Radclive on
Sore, for finding one to appear at the Kings great Turn of Riscliff twice in
the year.

Katherine, Esc. 10 H. 6. n. 3.
who had been Wife of William Sutton was found, 10 H. 6. to have been seized of
three Mess. fourscore Acres of Land, four of Meadow in Kinston, Cortlingstok,
Bonington, Sutton, and Leek; half a Mess. ten Acres of Land, and one of Meadow,
were held of the King in capite, by petty serjeancy: Thomas Fawkener being her
next heir.

This Lordship was the seat of the Babingtons, and a very fair House they had
here; but the first note of their interest here, that I have seen (except that
on the Tombstone in Radcliff Church) is a Recovery, 1 H. 8. where Henry
Sacheverell, Knight, Thomas Babington, John Port, Mich. 1 H. 8. rot. 348. and
Hill. 1 H. 8. rot. 149.
and Raph Sacheverell claim against Anthony Babington, two Mess. one hundred
and sixty Acres of Land, twenty of Meadow, ten of Pasture, and 16s. 8d. rent,
with the appurtenances in Kinston, and Ratcliff upon Sore, who called to
warrant John Bonington.

I have seen a Copy of a Deed, bearing date the 20th. of Febr. 8 Eliz. between
John Lord Darcy, of Aston, in the County of York, and Henry Babington, of
Dethick, in the County of Darby, Esquire in which the said Henry covenants to levy
a fine before the Feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist, then next ensuing,
to the said Lord Darcy, and Sir Thomas Metham, of the Manors of Dethick and
Leichurch, and his Lands in Coleaston, Tannesly, Draynefeild, Wassington,
Workesworth, Radburne, Heige, Asheover, Plaistowe, Wheatcroft, Pingston,
Bredon, and Tongue, and the moiety of the Manor of Norton, in the County of
Darby., and of the Manor of Kinston, in the County of Nottingham, and his
Lands in Kinston, Goteham, Alsworth, Marneham, Normanton, Osberton, Bilby,
Ranby, and Mattersey, and the Rectory of Marneham, and the presentment for the
third turn to the Rectory of Gotham, in this County: all which, or most of
them, were thereby intayled on the heirs Males of him the said Henry Babington
begotten, and to be begotten on the body of Mary, his then Wife, Sister of the
said Lord Darcy.

This Manor in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, by the Attainder of Anthony
Babington, for Treason, and the unthriftiness of Francis Babington his Brother,
afterward came to the hands of Gilbert, late Earl of Shrowsbury, and by his
daughter the Countess of Kent, was sold to the Lady Hide. The whole Lordship
has been long enclosed, and much depopulated, and was lately Sir Thomas Hides.

There is a Tomb in the Chapel of some curiosity of Stone-work, on which are
very many Cotes of Arms, but no Inscription, chiefly Babington impaling most
other Families, named in the following Pedigree, which therefore is not amiss
to be inserted.

Dominus Johannes de Babington miles factus in servitio Regis Ed. 3. capitan.
de Morlais in Brittania Armorsc. Domin. Johannes de Babington-Benedicta fill.
and haer. Simon. Ward de Commit. Cantabr. Tho. Babington de Dethick in Com.
Darb. jure ^xoris.-Isabel. fill. and haer. Roberti de Dethick. Johannes
Babington occis. apud Bosworth.-Isabella fill. Henrici Bradburne de Hough. Tho.
Babington de Dethick ob. Mar. 13. 1518. 10 H. 8.-Edith fill. Rad. Fitz-Herbert
de Norbury. 1 Dom. Anthonius Babington de Dethick.-Eliz. fill. Joh. Ormond de
Alfreton and Janae ux. fill. Will. Chaworth.-Kather. fill. Joh. Ferrers mil. Tho.
Babington ob. 3 Eliz.-Katherina fill. Hen. Sacheverell mil. Hen. Babington de
Dethick.-Fran. fill. Joh. Markham mil.-Maria fill. Georg. Dom. Darcie de Aston, 8
Eliz. Anthonius Attinct.-Margeria fill. Johan. Draycot de Paynsley.
Franciscus-fil... Roe de London. Georgius-...fill. Vine. Ferdinando-....-Anna
fill. Roberti Alvey de Carcolston. Johannes Babington (...). 32. 1672. (...)
Beaumont D^^ie de Se^s^on. Ferdinando Cornelius



Johannes Babington.-Saunch fill. and haer. Ric. Stanhope de Rampton. Original
Babington de Rampton.

2 John 4 Roll. 6 Tho. 8 Rob. 3 Rad. 5 Hum. 7 Will. 9 Geor. Eliz. An. Kat. Dor.
Jan. Eliz.


Do. Will. Babington Capital. Baro, 7 H. 5. and Cap. Justic. de Banc. 1 H. 6.
Equ. Balnei. Margeria fill. and haer.... Martel de Chillwell, ob. Feb. 2 1442.
Will. Babington de Chillwell. Johannes Bab. miles, s. p. Etheldena ux....
Eltonhead, postea ux.... Delves.
Eliz. ux. Th. Nevile de Rolleston. Rob.



Ratcliffe on Sore. Doomesd. Radeclive.
THis Town, whose name imports as much as Red Hill, or Bank, situate upon
the River of Sore, and nearer the River Trent than Kinston, was also Taynland,
and before the Norman Invasion, Osgod was owner of a Manor here, which usually
then paid to the public Tax, as ten Bovats * Doomesd.
The Land was six Carucats. Afterward Sauvinus (named in Kinston) held it of
the King (William) and had two Carucats (or Plows, or Plowlands) nine Villans,
three Bordars, having two Carucats. Here was then a Priest and a Church, and
one Mill, 10s. and six Acres of Meadow, the value then was 60s. but in King
Edward the Confessors time 100s. It had Soc in Chineston, which has been ever
accounted as a membe^ of it, and was of the Parish, as was also Thrumpton,
which yet was not of the same fee at all, though the Tithes belonged to this
Church of Radclive, which was shortly after this time, given by one of the
ancient Constables of Chester, as appears by the confirmation of Roger the
Constable to the Priory of Norton; which Roger died in the year 1211. He
mentions John his Father, Monastic. Angl. vol. 2 p. 187.
and William the younger, who was son of William, son of Nigellus, all
Constables of Chester, and their gifts; and amongst the rest, the Church of
Radeclive upon Sore, in Notinchamsire, with all the appurtenances, and the
fourth part of the Mills of the same Town, and the Tithes of the other three
parts, the Church of Kneshal, and Tithes of the Mills there, and the Tithe of
Allerton Mill, in this County. Howbeit, the Family of Picot held this Town, and
Kinston of the King in capite, by the Serjeancy of keeping Hawks for him of the
old Feoffment, Test. de Nev.
viz. in the time of King Henry the first.

Peter Picot gave account of 100l. for having the Land which was Peter Picots,
his Father, Rot. Pip. 13 Ioh.
in the time of King John.

Thomas Picot had free warrant granted in Radclive and Kineston, Chapter 37 H. 3.
n* 4.

In record. de Custodiis Sergeant and ecclesus and aliis quae sunt de donatione
domini Regis in Com. Not.

Test. de Nev.


37 H. 3. he is sometimes called Thomas de Hedon, by reason of his residence at
that Manor of his in Essex.

The Serjeancies here were let out for rent in King Henry the thirds time, by
Robert de Passelewe; several persons had shares, and some paid rent to Thomas
Pigot, besides the Kings; Elias Pikot held four Virgats for 20s. per annum, to
the King at Mich. and Easter.

Letice Pikot, one Virgat for 5s. Ernold the son of Elias, one Virgat, or
Yard-land for 6s. per annum. Julian, the daughter of Roger de Hamstede, one
Virgat for half a Mark. John le Hostricer (or the Hauker) held two Virgats for
10s. rent, and service to Thomas Pikot for making the Mutes. The heirs of
Thomas le Taylour, William Pimme, and Thomas le Paumer each a Virgat for 4s.
and service to Thomas Pikot, as before. John de Leke three Virgats in like
manner for a Mark. Richard Seaman one Virg... for 4s. Felice, the daughter of
William Pinguant, Anketill, the son of Thomas, and the Prior of Bredon, each
two Virg. Stephen the Cook one Virgat for half a Mark, whose son William
brought his suit against Peter Picot, the son of this Thomas, Plac. de jur. and
Assis. apud Derb. 53 H. 3. rot. 19.
53 H. 3. for distraining him for 2s. rent, which he pleaded to be part of the
half Mark; and said, that neither he nor his Father Stephen ever paid it, but
that after the Battle of Evesham, Peter Picot came to Radclive, and exacted it
of him, and threatened him of his life, so that he was forced to pay it for fear.

Pl. de Banco. Trin. 2 E. 1. to. 13 Ex Bundello de Esson. and aliis placit. 9
E. 1 rot. 47. in dorso.
The Prior of Norton recovered the Advowson of this Church, 2 E. 1. by Assize
and Jury; yet Peter Pigot, Grandclild of Peter, and son of Thomas, 9 E. 1.
claimed it against the said Prior, who called to warranty Henry de Lacy, Earl
of Lincoln, who came and defended the right, by the body of a certain Freeman
of his called John the son of Richard de Baynbrigg, but there was no Judgment
upon the Duel. This Peter was a Knight, Esc. 14 E. 1. n. 13.
and dead 14 E. 1. He held, besides this Lordship, Lands in the Counties of
Kent, Essex and Her^ford, of all which, his son John was then found to be his
heir, and twenty four years old; Esc. 22 E. 1. n. 10.
but John Picot, 22 E. 1. was also dead and his Brother Peter, then of the age
of thirty years and upwards, was found his heir.

Roger de Bathesworth, Robert de Monteney, Peter Picot, Ex lib. de feed. mil.
Hunt. 29 E. 1. p. 321.
and William de Montecaniso were 29 E. 1. parceners of the inheritance of
Stephen de Somery.

A Fine was levied, 6 E. 2. between Raph Basset, of Drayton, Compl. and Peter
Picot, Deforc. of the Manor of Radclive upon Sore with the app^rtenances,
except one Mess. one Virgat, and sixteen Acres of Land. The third part of this
Manor was then Thomas Barkebyes, in right of his Wife Helewisia, who held it
in Dower, the Reversion of which, the said Peter did pass to the said Raph
Basset, and his heirs likewise; this was in Easter Term. Another Fine was
passed in Trinity Term, ^in. 6 E. 2. Pasc. Trin. Mich.
and another in Michaelmas Term, the same year, wherein Raph Basset settled the
premises, both Possession and Reversion upon Peter Picot, and Joan his Wife,
for both their lives; which after the Death of Peter Picot, 8 E. 2. was again
confirmed in Court to Joan his Widow, by the said Raph, Thomas Barkby, and
Helewisia consenting, and there doing her fealty.

Peter Picot dyed seized of the Mess. Virgat, and sixteen Acres of Land, Esc. 7
E. 2. n. 19.
parcel of the Manor of Radclive, 7 E. 2. Simon Seuville, the son of Margery,
one of the Sisters, and Isabella Touke, the other Sister of the said Peter,
being then found his heirs; Simon forty, and Isabel sixty years old, of whom
the said Raph had that Land also the next year after, Esc. 8 E. 2. n. 145.
viz. 8 E. 2.

In the 35 E. 1. Peter Picot and his heirs, were to have view of Frankpledge,
Assize of Bread and Ale, Pillory, Tumbrell, Infangetheof, and Gallows in their
Manor of Radclive, Esc. 35 E. 1. n. ^6. E. Chart. ap. Thrumpton pen. Ger.
Pigot, Ar. Pip. War^. and ^eicest. 30 H. 2.
for a certain rent yearly paid to the King, by the hands of the Sheriff. This
Family of Pigot had interest at Barowe in Leicestershire, where I find
Alexander Pigot, and Robert, and others resident in the time of H. 3. E. 1. and
E. 2. etc. Peter Picot gave account of Barow, 27 H. 2. and 30 H. 2.

Petrus Picot 27 H. 2. defunct. 13 Joh. Petrus Picot 13 Joh. Thom Pigot, dictus
etiam de Heydon. Petrus Pigot miles Margeria Simon Seuvill. aet. 40. 7 E. 2.
haeres Petri.
1 Johannes sine prole. 2 Petrus Pigot s. p.-Joana relict. 7 E. 2. Isabella
ux.... Touk, aet. 60. 7 E. 2. haeres Petri.




The Jury, Esc. 33 E. 1* n. 112.
33 E. 1. found it not to the Kings loss, if he granted John de Byern leave to
infeoff Mr. Richard de Hertford, and Peter, the son of Robert de Herteford, and
the heirs of Peter in two Mess. and thirty two Acres of Land in Radclive. Nor,
9 E. 2. to the Kings loss, Esc. 9 E. 2. n. 58.
to grant to Roger de Raumpaine, and Cicely his Wife, to give one Mess. and one
Virgat, and to Peter de Herteford to give two Mess. and thirty Acres of Land to
Thomas de Barkeby.

Thomas de Radclive upon Sore, Esc. 8 E. 3 n. 37.
8 E. 3. settled one Mess. two Virg. of Land here upon himself, and Alice his
Wife, and the heirs Ma^es of their bodies; and for want of such, to Adam de
Cradeley, and Joan his Wife and the heirs of their bodies, remainder to the
right heirs of Thomas; besides which this Thomas had a Mess. and Carucat of
Land here and in Kinston. Pl. 13 ^ ^3. rot. 8.
Thomas de Ratcliff on Sore, late Undersheriff of Not. 13 E. 3. gave account
of 17l. 6s. 8d. of the fines for diverse transgressions charged upon him, his
pledges were John de Mounteney, and Thomas de Neumarch, Knights.

Raph Lord Basset, of Drayton, by his Testament, Ian. 16. 13 R. 2. gave certain
Manors, Lands and Tenements, and amongst others, this Radclive to Sir Hugh
Sherly his Nephew, and the heirs Males of his body, on condition, that he and
they should bear his Name and Arms, and for want of such, to William de
Stafford, Brother of Edmund Earl Stafford on the like Conditions; and for want
of such heirs or conditions, to John de Gray, Brother of the Lord Gray, on the
like; and after him to Sir William Lisle, as before. Sir Hugh Shirley performed
not the Conditions, Antiq. Warw. per Will. ^ugdale, p. 476.
nor did he quietly enjoy the Lands of the Lord Basset; so devised by the said
Will; Edmund Earl Stafford (being through an old intail made of them by Raph
Lord Basset, his Grandfather, in 13 E. 3. found heir to the rest) opposing him
therein. Howbeit there was an agreement at length, and though the said Earl,
and Sir Hugh were both slain in the Battle of Shrowsbury, 4 H. 4. before it was
sealed, yet the Feoffees of the Lord Basset, 2 H. 6. released all their
interest here and in Colston Basset, in this County, and in the Manors of
Rakdale, Willowes, Radclive super Wreke, Barrow super Sore, Dunton and Watton,
in the County of Leicestershire, of West-Halle and East-Halle in Sheldon, in
the County of Warwick, unto Sr Raph Shirley, son and heir of Sir Hugh, and the
heirs Males of his body; which Sir Raph had his residence at this Manner of
Radclive, 10 H. 6.

This Manor was granted with some others, 1 R. 3. to Sir Gervas Clifton, Pat.
1 R. 3. part. 4. m. 11.
as part of the forfeited Lands of Henry, Duke of Buckingham. Yet Edward, Duke
of Buckingham, 5 H. 8. suffered a recovery of the Manor of Ratcliff on Sore,
Pasc. 5 H. 8. rot. 446.
and Knesale.

After the Attainder of Humfry, Duke of Buckingham, this Manor came to Sir
Richard Sacheverell, Knight, who left it to Raph Sacheverell, his Brother, or
near Kinsman; in which Name and Family it continued, till Henry Sacheverell,
Esquire, the last owner thereof (who purchased also from the Crown, the Rectory
impropriate there that lies in Ratcliff) estated the same on Sir Thomas
Hutchinson his Sisters son, but he out of tenderness to his Cousin Elianor, the
Wife of Roger Columbell, Esquire, the sole daughter and heir of the said Henry
Sacheverell his Uncle, agreed to divide it between them, and so one moiety of
this fertile enclosed Lordship remains to the heirs of John Columbell, son of
the said Elianor, who married.... Hickman, sister of the present Lord Windsore,
who now takes care of her Children, and the other moiety was by Colonel John
Hutchinson, eldest son of the said Sir Thomas, sold to Alderman Ireton,
Radulphus Sacheverell de Hopwell in Com. Derb. Dom. Ric. Sacheverell miles, ob.
25 H. 8. Sepult in le Newark in Leicester, s. p.-Maria domina Hungerford
Relict. Ed. dom. Hastings, matris Com. Huntington. Joh. Sachev. de Morley, and
Hopwell. 2 Radulphus Sacheverell de Radclive, 25 H. 8. ob. 31 H.
8.-Cecilia-Anna. Henricus Sacheverell de Radcliff, ob. Jul. 29.5, and 6 P. and
M.-Lucia fill. and haer. Joh. Pole de Hertington in Com. Derb. Ar. 1 Henricus
Sacheverell de Radclive aerat. 16. an. ad mortem patr.-Jana filia Germani
Ireton 5, and 6 Ph. and Mar. Hen. Sacheverell de Radclive.-.... Boughton-Tho.
Grantham miles, Marit. 2. Elianor post. ux. Will. Hasard.-Roger. Columbell de
Derley. Johannes Columbell-...fill. Hickman.
Ed. Marow de Berkswell, Com. Warwick.-Anna. Dom. Sam. Marow miles.-...fill.
Arth. Carey mil.

Jana ux. Thom. Hutchinson.
2 Johannes.

1 Hen. Sacheverell de Morley miles.


Brother of Henry Ireton, the great instrument in the unhappy Wars. This
Elianor, after her Husband Columbells decease, Married her servant William
Hasard, who proved a good Husband to her, and a kind and careful Father to her
Children; they dwelt in an house built at the Red hill, by the side of the
River Sour, between Radclive and the Trent.

The Abbat and Covent of the House of the blessed Mary of Norton, Claus. 11 H.
4. M 1.
in the County of Chester, 11 H. 4. released to the Prior and Covent of
Burscogh and their Successors, all their right in the Advowson of the Church
of Radclive upon Sore, sometime John de Winwicks.

The Vicarage is in the Kings Books 6l. 13s. 4d. and so it was valued, Ms.
praedict.
when the Prior of Burscogh was Patron.

Upon a Tomb in a little Chapel on the North side of the Church.

Hic jacent Radulphus Sacheverell Ar. nuper Dominus de Ratcliff super Sore, and
Cecilia, and Anna uxores ejus; qui quidem Radulphus ob. 14 Aug. 1539. and
praedicta Cecilia ob. 27 Jun. 1538. and praedicta Anna migravit ab hoc saeculo
--

Upon a fair Tomb in the Chancell.

Here lies the Bodies of Henry Sacheverell, Esquire, and Lucy his Wife,
daughter and heir of John Pole, Esquire; which Henry dyed 29 Jun. 1558. and
Lucy dyed 10 Febr. 1554. upon whose, etc.

Upon a plain Stone.

Hic jacet Elizabetha uxor Anthonii Babington Ar. filia and una haeredum
Johannae Ormond, filiae and haeredis Willielmi Chaworth Militis, ac unius
Consanguinearum and haeredum Roberti La^home,... Caltoft, Johannis Bret, Thomae
Aylesbury, Thomae Keynes Militum, ac Rad. Basset and Johannis Engaines,
Baronum; quae Elizabetha ob. 28 Nov. anno 1505.

Upon another plain Stone close by that.

Hic jacet Isabella quondam uxor Johannis Babington, de Dethik, Ar. ac Domini
de Kinston, quae obiit 18 Mar. Anno Dom. 1486.

In the Chancell upon a plain Stone.

Hic jacet Jacobus Damport filius Domini Tho. Damport Militis, qui obiit 15 die
Aprilis, Anno Dom. 1458.

Upon a Stone near that for a Child.

Hic jacet Jacobus Eadmunson, filius Edwardi Eadmunson, qui Jacobus ob. 27 Dec.
1519.

Upon another plain Stone somewhat higher.

Cy gyst Johan. file and heir Tho. Basset Fitz S. John Basset de Br....la feme
Sir Raph Shirley Fitz and heir Hugh de Shirley.

Upon a plain Stone in the body of the Church.

Hic jacet Thom. Fyndern Ar. and Eliz. uxor ejus, filia Rad. Sacheverell Ar.
qui Tho. ob. 24 Sept. anno dom... and Eliz. ob.... 1574.

Thrumpton. Doomsd. Turmodeston.
SO called from Turmod, some old owner it is like. In it before the Conquest
Leuvin and Elvod were rated at seven Bov. to the Tax for their Manor. The Land
whereof was two Carucats.

There Roger de Busli, whose Fee it was, had one Carucat, three Sochm, two
Villans, two Bordars, having one Carucat and an half; this in the Confessors
time was valued at 40s. in the Conquerours at 20s.

Here was another Manor of William Peverells fee, which before the Conquest
Stapleuvin (owner also in Stapleford) had rated to the Geld at three Bov.. The
Land one Car. There afterward four Sochm. had one Car. and five Acres of
Meadow. This kept the old value 5s. 4d.

Here was another parcel Soc to Edwalton of the fee of Hugh de Greatmaisnill
rated to the public Tax at one Bov. and an half. The Land was one Car. There
were two Sochm. two Bordars, with two Carucats (or Plows) and three Acres of
Meadow. It lay in Sandiriuca (or Sandiacre,) on the other side the Trent in
Darbishire.

That of Buslies fee was held by the Family of Putrell, Ex Autogr. penes
Gervas. Pigot, Ar.
who had their seat here and continued owners till the 5 Iac. that Tho.
Poutrell and John his Brother, sons of Walter Poutrell, conveyed it to Gervase
Pigot, Gent. Grandfather of Gerv. Pigot, Esquire, the present owner 1672. It
was with Upton in the Clay, and some others the fee of Raph Tilly, who it is
likely enfeoffed Putrell. Richard Putrell gave to God and the Church of St.
Peter at Thurgarton, Test. de Nev. Regist. de Thurgarton penes Cecil. Cooper
Ar. p. 55.
the gift which Gilbert his Predecessor of Thurmeston gave, viz. half a Carucat
of Land of his Demesne, with a dwelling House, and Common of Pasture. His
Successors here usually paid the said Prior 5s. per annum for four Bovats of
Land, and one Toft. Ib. 179.


Reginald Basset and Richard Puterel released all their right and claim to the
Advowson of the Church of Thurmodeston by fine, Fin. 12 Ioh.
12 Ioh. to Ranulph, Prior of Norton and his Successors.

Peverells part was held by the Family of Stapleford of Heriz, Lord also of
that place, with the heir female whereof it descended to Teverey, Elibr. fin.
218.
being three Mess. twenty one Bovats, and twenty Acres of Meadow.

Gilbertus Ricardus Puterell Ricardu^ Puterell Henricus Puterell
miles.-Sibilda. Henricus Putrell-Willimina, 1256. Robertus. Galfr.
Poutrell.-Joana 12 E. 2.-Agnes 38 E. 3. Ricardus Poutrell receptor pro E. 3.
ob. 1 H. 4. s. p.-Alesia Tho. haeres fratris. Isabella Poutrell.-....Smith. Ex
Autogr. pen. eundem G.P.
Tho. Smith de Breydeston dictus etiam Poutrell. Tho. Poutrell 3 E.
4.-Katherina fill. Johannis Cotton de Ridware.-Tho. Molyneux de Nauton marit. 2.
Johannes Poutrell-Margaret fill. and una cohaer. Joh. Strelley. Ex Coll. I. B.
and St. Lo Kniveton.
Tho. Poutrell ob. 10 Aug. 4, and 5 Ph. and Mar.-Dorothea fill. and coh. Will.
Basset.-Eliz. fill. dom. Walt. Rodney superst. 5 Eliz. Walterus Powtrell de West
Hallam.-Cassandra fill. Fran. Shirley. Thom. Poutrell, 5 Jac. Johannes.

Nichol Serve. ad leg. s. p.-Anna filia Walteri Rodney mil.






Henricus. Galfr. Ricardus s. p. Edm. haeres Frat.-Joana 20 E. 3.-Elizab.
relict. 38 E. 3. Johan. Laverok de Chaddosden, 2 H. 5.-Agnes fill. and haer.

Ricardus. Walter.





Johannes s. p.-.... fill. Humlock. Robertus Poutrell.-.... fill.... Brailesford.
The third part, or share, it seems, went with Sandiacre; for Richard de
Riston, Ex Autogr. pen. G. P.
son of William, son of Andrew de Rixton conveyed three Bovats of Land in
Turmodeston to John, the son of William de Leke (which continued long with that
Family) To this Deed were Witnesses Peter de Sandiacre, Samson de Stretleg,
Robert de Stapleford, Richard his son, Richard Putrell, Richard his son, Peter
son of Richard de Stanford, Richard de Trowell, Stephen son of Richard de
Kineston, Thomas and Anketill his Brothers, John de Touke, Robert son of
Gocelin, Raph Rosell, William de Boves, Roger de Bromley, Richard de Potloc,
and others; it is sealed with his Image on Horseback. And Albreda the daughter
of Peter de Sandiacre, by another Deed in the custody also of Gervase Pigot,
Esquire, passed likewise three Bovats. I suppose the same to the same person,
and had the same Witnesses.

Reginald Marc was certified to hold twelve Bovats in Thurmodeston worth 60s.
which he bought of Reginald Basset; Ex Inq. Dom. Regem tangent. 4 E. 1. Wap. de
Ryseclive. Test. de Nev.
and John de Leke three Bovats worth 15s. by Richard de Rixton. Reginald Marc
gave his to the Knights Hospitallers; and there he is said to be infeoffed by
Richard de Risseton.

It was by the Jury at Thrumpton, 20 Dec. 25 E. 3. returned not to be to the
Kings loss, Esc. 25 E. 3. n. 46.
if he granted the Prior and Brethren of the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem,
in England, license to give their Manor of Thurmeston to Sir John Waleis,
Knight, in exchange for the Manor of Dalby, in the County of Leicester, and
that here was then one Mess. with a Close adjoining worth 16s. one hundred and
fifteen Acres of Arable Land worth so many shillings; twelve Acres of Meadow,
2s. the Acre, and 24s. yearly rent; and that Hugh de Meyvill had the Mesnalty
of the Manor of Thurmeton, between John Waleis and the King.

About the year 1261. Sir Henry Putrell, of Thormoudeston, Knight, granted
three Virgats of Land to Henry his son, for threescore Marks of Silver, to
acquit him from Judaisme. (Usury.)

Ex Autogr. pen. G. P.
Aymo de Trumberch, Knight, (who married one of the heirs ^f.... Tilly)
confirmed, 45 H. 3. to Henry, the son of Henry Putrell, and to Guillimina his
Wife six Virgats in Thurmeton. On his Seal is a Chief, charged with three
Roundels.

Henry Putrell, with the consent of Willimina his Wife, settled the Capital
Mess. and eight Virgats of Arable Land in Thurmeton, upon Robert his son; and
in defect of heirs of him, to Henry, Geoffry, Richard and Walter his other sons
respectively, and their heirs, paying the said Henry, their Father 20l. per
annum, during his life.

Robert Putrell, of Thurmeton, 12 E. 2. settled upon Geoffrey his son, and Joan
his said sons Wife.

John Munchensy, 38 E. 3. settled on Geoffrey, Ib.
son of Robert Putrell, and on Agnes his Wife; and after the death of Geoffrey,
to Richard Putrell, who was a very considerable man, and some kind of Receiver
under King Edward the third, he dyed, 1 H. 4. without issue. His Seal is a
Fesse between three Cinquefoyles.

John Laverok, of Chadesden, and Agnes his Wife, daughter and heir of Edmund
Poutrell, Brother and Heir of Richard Poutrell, son and heir of Geoffrey,
brother and heir of Robert Poutrell, son and heir of Henry Poutrell, and
Willimina his Wife, passed, 2 H. 5. all their right in Thrumpton, to Sir Raph
Shirley. But there was another claim which carried it, viz. Henry Putrell had
issue Robert, he Geoffrey his son and heir, whose son and heir was Richard,
whose brother and heir Thomas Poutrell had a daughter and heir, called Isabel,
from whom Thomas Smith, of Breydeston, Ib.
claimed as her son and heir; and after him, 3 E. 4. Thomas Poutrell his son
and heir.

Maud, who had been Wife of Sir Gervase Clifton, Cousin and one of the heirs of
Raph Cromwell, late of Cromwell, Knight, Derb. ^in. Trin. and Mich. ^ E. 4. ap.
Westminster.
and Robert Ratcliff, and Joan his Wife, Cousin, and the other of the heirs of
the said Raph, conveyed by fine, 7 E. 4. the Manor of Westhallam, with the
Appurtenances, one Mess. two Bovats, four Acres of Meadow, and fifty of Pasture,
with the Appurtenances in Westhallam and Mapurley, and the Advowson of the
Church of Westhallam, to Thomas Poutrell, Raph Fitz-Herberd, and William
Poutrell, and the heirs of Thomas Poutrell. Westhallam is still the seat of the
Family in Derbishire.

King James, by his Letters Patents dated 9. July, in the second year of his
Reign, Pat. 2 Iac. part. 13.
granted to Gervase Pigot, Gent. the Rectory of Ratcliff on Sore, in Thrumpton,
and the Chapel of Thrumpton, with all its rights and Appurtenances, etc.

He came from Weston upon Trent in Darbyshire, not far from this place, and
acquired most of this Lordship, some belonged to the Family of Willoughby; and
here was a Family had their Name from the place, which had.... Bovats. His last
Wife is yet living; she was sister to Sir Thomas Milward, the Judge; by her he
left an only Son Gervase Pigot, Esquire who has enclosed the Fields, and very much
improved and adorned the Seat, so that it is now as pleasant and convenient both
within and without, as can reasonably be wished; and there is no other
Free-ho^d now left, except.... Chamberlain, and Richard Widdowson.

This second Gervase, was a person of great parts, both natural and acquired.
He was in mourning for Mary, the Wife of Robert Burdet, Esquire, eldest son of
Sir Francis Burdet, of Formark, his only daughter by his first Wife, one of the
coheirs of St. Andrew, of Goteham, when he was made High Sheriff of this
County, upon which occasion, he had for his men black Liveries, with small
Silver trimming, which fitted them for their last attendance upon him to his
Vault, on the North side of the Chancell, at Thrumpton; which happened shortly
after the Summer Assizes, 1669. His Sobriety, Ingenuity, Generosity, Piety, and
other Virtues, few of his Rank will ever exceed, if any equal. Mr. Dugdale
Norroy, in the latter end of his visitation of this County, begun in 1662. upon
sight of a Note left in the House by old Mr. Samuel Roper, and some other
probable testimonial circumstances, judged he was descended from a branch of
the Pigots, of Ratcliff, in this Parish, and therefore granted him and his
Descendants, to bear the Arms of Sir Peter Pigot, viz. Azure a bend Lozengy
PIGOTS HOUSE, at THRUMPTON, ye South side,

On the North side of the Chancell at Thrumpton.

Or, deeply ingrayled between six Martlets Or, whereas before this Family used
the three Pickaxes, as most of the Name do. He made a Monument in the Chancell,
by the door of his new Vault, whereon he caused to be Written, Gervasius Pigot
Armiger Cujus unica proles Gervasius secundus Qui majorum insignia Mensis
Martii die tertio 1656. 1642.

On the other side of the Chancell on the Wall by the South door.

Winifreda

Anno Salutis nostrae 1648. 83.

Cujus reliquiae cum suorum reliquiis

Goteham. Doomsd. Gatham.
A Dwelling or home of Goats. The Chief Manor in Gatham, before the Norman
Invasion, Story had, who is named already in Normanton and Sutton, who had
likewise a Manor in Stantune, and one in Cavord (Keworth) in this Wapentack,
in all which he was succeeded afterward by R. Earl Moriton. This was Assessed,
or rated, usually in those times to the public Tax, or Geld, as two Carucats,
three Bovats and an half, and five Acres* The Land was six Carucats. There Earl
R. had in Demesne three Carucats, three Sochm. twenty Villans, two Bordars,
having nine Carucats, and fourscore Acres of Meadow. The value in the time of
King Edward the Confessor of this was 60s. In the time of King William, when
his survey was made 40s. It had Soc in Leche. Here was another Manor of the
Land of the Taynes, which Godric, (who had also one in Leke) had before the
Conquest, and paid for it to the Geld, as three Bovats and an half, and one
Acre. The Land was one Carucat, afterward it was waste, and Sauvinus (named in
Kinston) had it, and twelve Acres of Meadow; in King Edward the Confessors time
it was valued at 10s. in King Williams at 2s.

This Town came afterward to be of the Earl of Leicesters Fee; and it seems
either had, or was thought fit to have a Castle, because amongst those
Covenants, Ex Autogr. in Biblioth. Cotton.
upon a Truce between Ranulph, Earl of Chester, and Robert, Earl of Leicester,
made in the presence of Robert, the second of that Name, Bishop of Lincoln,
and certain persons of note, on each part, viz. on the Earl of Chester's part,
Richard de Lovetot, William Fitz- Nigell, and Ranulph the Sheriff. On the Earl
of Legrecesters part, Ernald de Bosco, Gaufrid the Abbat, and Reginald de
Bordineio. Amongst many other things it was agreed, that neither the Earl of
Chester, nor Legrecester should or ought to fortify any Castle [ Firmare
Castrum aliquod] between Hinchelai and Coventre, nor between Hinchelai and
Hardreshil, nor between Coventre and Donington, nor between Donington and
Leicester, nor at Gataham, nor at Cheneldestoe [now Kinolton], nor nearer, nor
between Cheneldesto and Belveer, nor between Belveer and Hocham, nor between
Hocham and Rochingham, nor nearer, but by common consent of both parties.

In the time of King Henry the second, Hugh de Diva (of whose Barony it was)
and Helawissa his Wife gave two parts of the Tithe of the Demesne of Gatham,
Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p. 314, and p. 630.
to the Priory of St. Mary de Pratis, by Leicester, of that Earls Foundation.

It appears Hugh de Diva had a son called William, Ib. 630.
who gave the Church of Haddun, to the Abbey of Sulby in Northamptonshire; which
William de Diva, I take to be Father of Maud de Dive, who in the first year of
King John, gave ten Marks, Pip. 1 Ioh. Cant. and Hunt.
that she might not be compelled to Marry: but if she had a mind, would do it,
by the Kings advice (or counsel). And I think it more probable, that this
William was Father than Brother to the three coheirs of the Barony of Hugh de
Dive, notwithstanding the Inquisition taken at Northampton, before the Justices
Itinerant, 3 E. 3. wherein they are put for the Daughters (though I see no
reason but that they might be the Grand-daughters) of the said Hugh: For in an
old Parchment, which Mr. Pigot, the present Lord of this place, still keeps
amongst his Evidences, wherein is the case of the Advowson of the Church, and
was written about the time of King Edward the first, it is thus related.
William de Dyve, who last had the whole Lordship of Gotcham entire, begot three
daughters, who were his heirs, Matilda, Alicia, Astelin, who all in the first
vacancy, jointly presented one Robert de Nottingham to the Church of Gatham,
and then made an agreement, that in the first avoidance, the eldest should
present; in the second, the middle* in the third, the youngest. Matilda was the
first begotten, and Married to Sir Seer de St. Andrea, who in the first vacuity
presented one Saer his Son. Alice the middle daughter was Married to Sir
Richard de Mistegros, and they sold their right to Sir Simon de Montefort, Earl
of Leicester, who presented one Richard de Role. And the said Simon gave his
right with the Advowson of the Church, to the Ancestor of Sir Thomas de St.
Mauro. Astelin was last, Autogr. pen. Ger. Pigot, Ar.
and Married to Sir Simon de Mistegros, who had two daughters and heirs,
Agatha, and Alice; Agatha Married to Walter de Radindon, and Alice to Raph de
Dyve, and they two after the death of the said Richard, presented one Mr. Peter
de Leyk. On the top of it is, Stipes Willielmi de Dive.

Willielmus de Dive Matilda de St. Andrea. Robertus de St. Andrea. Rogerus qui
nunc est.

Alicia de Muscegros. Ascelin de Mistegros. Agatha de Ratinden. Alicia de Dive.


John, son of Agatha de Radinden, Cousin and heir of Alice de Mucegros, Fin.
Pasch. 35 E. 1. fol. 15. Northt.
35 E. 1. paid relief for the sixth part of the Barony, heretofore Hugh Dives,
etc.

By the forementioned Inquisition, in which the names also of the coheirs are
a little mistaken, viz. the second is Ascelin for Alice, and the third Agnes
for Ascelin, it appears how the Lands in Northamptonshire were parted. St.
Andrew had his purport in Haldenby and Ravenesthorp, and the third part of the
Tenements of Pisseford and Boketon. Richard Mucegros had his in West-Haddon and
Holewell, and the like third part of Pisseford and Boketon, who with his son
Robert, passed them to Simon Mountfort, Earl of Leicester; upon whose
Attainder, King Henry the third gave this part to Sir Thomas Bray, the Kings
Seneschall. Simon Mucegros had Brampton, and the like third part in Pisseford
and Boketon, all which were held of the Earl of Leicester. The like division
was made of his Lands in other Counties, as also here at Gotham, where the
Family of St. Andrew did chiefly reside; it was a branch of that of Quincy, and
bore Gules, seven Mascles voided 3.3.1. Or, with a Labell of five Points Azure.

Sir Saier de St. Andr. gave to the Priory of St. Nicolas, of Sandeford in
Barkshire, Mon. Angl. vol. 1. p. 482.
5s. yearly rent in his Town of Littlemore for the health of his soul, and his
Fathers, and Mothers, and for the soul of the Earl of Winchester, his Uncle,
and of Robert de Quinci, son of him the said Saier, and the said Roberts
Brethren.

Margaret de Quinci, Countess of Winchester, in her Widowhood, Ex Autogr. penes
Ger. Pigot, Ar.
after she had done homage to King Henry, son of King John, gave 100s. of Land
to Seher de St. Andrea, in Crokeston Nunc Am^nissimae ville Nottinghamiae
Icomsum Posteris DD Rich Slat^r. Arm et Comitat ejusdem vicecomes Ano. 1577

Picotus Vicecomes-Hugo^ina. Mon. Augl^ Vol. 2. p. 29, and 30.
Wil^ie^mi Cambd. Britt. in Cantabr.
....fill. Picoti-Paganus Peverell Signifer Rob. Curthose in terra Sancta.
Ascelina- Mon. Angl. Vo^* 2.881.
Gausr. de Watervilla. Mon. Angl. Vo^* 2.881.
Matildis-Will. de Diva. Ascelina. Hugo de Diva.-Helewisia. Willielmus de Diva
Matilda-Dom. Seerus de St. Andrea. Dom. Robertus de St. Andr.-Albreda postea
ux....le Walesch. Dom. Rogerus de St. Andr.-Agnes fill. Ric. de Gray and Luciae
ux. 8 E. 1.-Agnes fill. domini Gerv. de Clifton, 4 E. 2.-Matilda, 14 E. 2.
relict. Joh. Pontrell. Ric. de Sr. Andr. defunct. 3 E. 3.-Alicia fill. Roberti
de Stoke juxta Coventry. Dom. Johannes de St. Andr. defunct. 34 E. 3.-Juliana
Soror and haer. Willielmi fill. Rogeri Zouch de Lobbesthorp, Militis. 2 Robertus
de St. Andrea 8 R. 2. 3 H. 4.-Katherina fill..... de Sutton postea ux. Nic.
Belers. Tho. de St. Andr. 9 H. 5.-Elizabetha fill. Petri Pole de Radbourn.
Petrus de St. Andr. ob. 6 Maii. 38 H. 6.-Elizab [Malory] postea ux. Joh.
Rosell. Johannes de St. Andrea. aet. 8. 38 H. 6. ob. 2 H. 8.-Alicia. Willielmus
de St. Andr. Ar. defunct. 29 H. 8.-Margareta fill. Dominae Eliz. Aston, 16 H. 7.
Johannes de St. Andr. Ar.-Katherina fill..... Wells de Horecross. C. Staff.
Georgius St. Andrew-Barbara fill. Georgii Neville de Grove. Will. St. Andrew de
Goteham, Maria fill. Edm. Pilkinton ux. 2. Eliz. relict. Fox. fill.... Wedgewood
de Haracles C. Staff. ux. 3.-Maria fill. Thomae and Soror and haer. dom. Will.
and Joh. Skevington de Skevington in Com. Leicest. Johannes St. Andrew-Elizab.
fill. Johannis Bainbrigg de Lokington, Ar. postea ux.... Bale milit. Maria St.
Andrew-Gerv. Figot, Ar. Maria Pigot-Robertus fill. prim. Elizabetha fill. and
haer.

Elizabetha St. Andrew.-Franciscus Thornhagh and postea Will. Skevington.
Franc. Burdet Bar.
Barbara St. Andr.-Oliverus St. Joh. Bar.
Jana.
Georgius St. Andrew.

Eliz. Hargrave, 1540. Alicia Fox. Anna Organ. Marg. Whode. Kath. Ellen. Maria.
Doroth.
Georgius, 1540.
Thom. 22 H. 7. Edm. 22 H. 7. Hugo Rector de Gotham, 22 H. 7.

Thomas, 34 H. 6.
Johannes, 3 H. 4. Elizabetha, 3 H. 4.
Johannes de St. Andr. fill. prim. 37 E. 3. Edm. 51 E. 3. Rad. 29 E. 3. Alicia,
8 R. 2. Eliz. 29 E. 3. Matild, 29 E. 3.


Matilda, 8 E. 1.
Will. Roger. Laurent. Saer Rector de Rad. Gotha. Joh. Rad. Dive.-Alicia.
Alicia-Ric. de Muscegros. Astelin.-Simon de Mistegros. Caetera ex Autog. pen.
Ger. Pigot, Ar.
Agatha ux Walteri de Ratinden and Hug. de Hengston.


Rad. de Diva. Matild. ux. Willielmi fill. Otonis.
Rad. de Watervill. Gausr. Trussebutr.

Roysia Albreda de Harcourt.
Alicia-Hamo Peche. Gilb. Hamo-Eva. Gilbertus Peche.

Gaufr.
Matild. de Dovre, s. p. Will. Peverell de Dover, s. p.
Robertus fill. Picoti exhaeredarus.

and Kerdington. Robert de Quency, Earl of Winchester, and Constable of
Scotland, gave to Robert de St. Andrea, son of Seher de St. Andrea 100s.
sterling, yearly to be received out of his praepositure and firm of Brakley,
until he gave him 100s. in Land or Rent in Scotland; the Witnesses, Sir William
Manduit, and William his son; Ernald de Bosco, and Ernald his son; Raph Basset,
of Drayton, and Raph his son; Seher de St. Andrew, Philip Lovell, William de
Bosco, etc.

Simon de Musegros, and Ascelin his Wife, made Hugh de Rempeston their
Attorney, Claus. 11 H. 3. part. 2. vel. 3. m. 25. in dors.
against Nic. de A^bin, and Maud his Wife, Leodegar de Diva, Raph de Estun, and
Albrea his Wife, Agnes de Neuthorp, Thomas, son of Peter, Hugh son of Oto, and
Robert Despenser, concerning Customs and Services of his hold in Gatham,
Sutton, Keworth, etc. in the County of Not. 11 H. 3.

Autogr. pen. eundem Ger. Pigot.
Hugh de Hengston, and Agatha de Ratinden his Wife about 9 E. 1. passed all
their Manor of Gotham to Roger de St. Andrea, and Agnes his Wife, and their
heirs, in exchange for the Manor of Sipfeud; with whose posterity two parts of
this Town have ever since continued.

Ib.
At the instance of William Fitz-William, King Edward the first, granted Roger
de St. Andrew, a Charter of Free Warren in Gotham, in Nottinghamshire; in
Haddon, in Northamptonshire; and Hengeston, in Cambridgeshire, dated the fourth
of August, in the fifth year of his Reign.

In the 25 E. 1. Laurence de St. Mauro, who held the other third part of
Goteham, Esc. 25 E. 1. n. 13.
was dead, and his Son and heir Nicolas twenty eight years of age; between
whom, and Roger de St. Andrew there was a Fine levied, 31 E. 1. concerning the
Advowson of this Church, Fin. apud Ehor. Mich. 31 E. 1.
viz. that the said Nicolas and his heirs should have one Turn, and the said
Roger and his, two.

Thomas de St. Maur (or Seymour) who had upon his Seal two Chevrons, Ex Autog.
penes Dom. G. Clifton. Es^. 32 E. 3. n. 31.
and a file of five Labells, and held a Capital Message in Goteham, commonly
called West-Hall, and 50s. Rent of Assize, etc. was dead 32 E. 3. and John
Worthy found his next heir, viz. son of Beatrix Worthy, sister of the said
Thomas. John de Worth, Fin. lev. Pasch. 50 E. 3. Pasch. 2 R. 2
Knight, by fine, 50 E. 3. and afterward, 2 R. 2. by another fine granted to
John Samon of Nottingham, the third part of the Manor of Goteham, and the
Advowson of the third part of the Church of the said Manor, excepting 102s.
6d. Rent in that third part of the said Manor, which yet he granted, together
with the Homages and whole Services of Samson de Strelley, Knight, John
Fraunceys, and Agnes his Wife, and many others, to have to the said John Samon
and his heirs. John Samon, at the Assizes at Not. 8 H. 4. recovered his Seizin
of 32s. Rent Service in Goteham, Assis. apud Not. 8 H. 4. to. 80.
from Henry Nevill, Knight, Robert Nevill, and William Draper.

Robert Nevill, 9 H. 6. was found to have dyed seized of four ruined Messuages,
Esc. 9 H. 6.
forty Acres of Land, eleven Acres of Meadow in Goteham, four in Kinston, and as
many in Thrumpton, and that John Nevill was his heir.

By an Inquisition taken at Not. Oct. 29.5, and 6 Ph. and Mar. it appears that
Henry Sacheverell, of Ratcliff upon Sore, then dead, had this Manor (or share)
of Goteham, which since B. it seems was purchased in by... St. Andrew, and in
the division was allotted to Barbara, the youngest daughter and heir of John
St. Andrew, Married to Sir Oliver St. John, Baronet, who sold it to Gervase
Pigot, of Thrumpton, Esquire, possessed of the principal part of this Township
by his Marriage of Mary, the eldest daughter and coheir of the said John St.
Andrew, which he settled upon Mary, his only daughter by that Wife, whom he
disposed to Robert Burdet, Esquire and she bore him an only daughter, named
Elizabeth, the heir of that part; but Mr. Pigot left this to his son and heir
Gervase Pigot, of Thrumpton, Esquire, the present owner.

Elizabeth, the middle daughter and coheir of the said John St. Andrew was
Married to Francis Thornhaugh, Esquire, eldest son of Sir Francis Thornhaugh,
of Frenton, and by him has issue but her purpart of St. Andrews inheritance is
not here: she is since become the Wife of William Skeffington, Esquire.

The Freeholders in this Town are not very considerable, yet there is one
Spenser, Ex Autogr. pen. Ger. Pigot.
whose Ancestors have held something [two Yard-land, I think] and been resident
here since the time of Sir Saher de St. Andrew, about the beginning of the
Reign of King Henry the third.

The Church in the Kings Books is now 19l. 8s. 6d. ob. Before the dissolution
of Monasteries, Ms. I. M.
when Mr. St. Andrew, and Mr. Salmon were Patrons, the value was 24l.

In the Church on a plain Stone.

Hic jacent corpora Johannis Santandra, Ex Coll. St. Lo Kniveton.
Ar. and Aliciae uxoris ejus; qui Johannes ob. in festo St. Lucae, 1510. and
dicta Alicia ob. 14 Apr. 1509.

Upon it a Chevron between three Waterbougets.

Upon another plain Stone.

Hic jacet Dominus Heugo Santandra, qui quondam fuit Rector de Goteham, ob. 20
Apr. 1528.

On another.

Hic jacent corpora Willielmi St. Andra, Ar. and Margaretae uxoris ejus; qui
Willielmus ob. 3 Dec. 1565. and dicta Margareta -- rather 1535.

St. Andr. there impales with Arg. a Fesse sable, and three Lozenges in chief
sable, Aston.

Upon a Tomb.

Here lies the Body of George St. Andrew, Esquire, which departed this life 27
Aug. 1584. This George had to Wife Barbara Nevill, by whom God sent him
Children, Gervis, William, George, John, Francis, Winifrid, Jane, Barbara.

A Monument of W. S Andrews* at Gotham South Wall, in the Chancell,


John S Andrew, on the North Wall at Gotham,


Leke. Doomesd. Leche.
SO called from the passing of the Water (or Leaking) from the Saxon Leccian,
to water, or moisten, which is done by a small Brook in this place to both the
Hamlets, or Townships, of Great, or East Leak, and Little, or West Leak. On the
North side of this Lordship, on a knoll, called Court-hill, near the bounds of
Goteham, about a flight-shot from Cuckoo bush, the Hundred Court has been kept.

Here was in Leche Soc to Gatham as much as paid the Geld for two Bovats of
Land, and some belonging to Stanford, of Robert Fitz-Williams Fee, which was
one Bovat, ad Geld. The Land four Bovats. There two Suchm* had one Carucat. In
Leche, before the Conquest, Godric (who also had one in Plumptre) had a Manor
which was Taxed to the Dane Geld, as two Bovats. The Land was four Bovats.
There afterward Ernulph the Man, or Tenent of Roger de Busli (whose Fee it
was) had two Carucats, two Vill. with half a Car. and eight Acres of Meadow.
Doomesd.
In the time of King Edward the Confessor, the value of this was 40s. in King
Williams but 10s. The principal Manor in Leche, before the Norman Invasion
Siuvard had, and for it paid the Tax, as two Carucats. The Land of it was then
for six Plows, or six Carucats. There Henry de Ferrariis had afterward in
Demesne four Car. sixteen Sochm. sixteen Vill. having seventeen Car. (or Plows)
There was a Priest and a Church, one Mill, 2s. and fifty Acres of Meadow, small
Wood, two qu. long, one broad. This in the Confessors time was 6l. in the
Conquerours 7l. value. To this Manor lies the Berew Leech, where were two Car.
ad Geldam. This lies in Plumptre Hundred.

Robert (de Ferrariis, Grandchild of Henry, before named) Earl of Nottingham,
gave to Alan de Leca, Ex Autogr. penes Ric. Maunsfeld de Leke, Ar.
the Nephew of Elfast, the Town of Leche, where the Mother Church is, with all
the Appurtenances, and twelve Bovats of Land in his the said Earls Leche, which
were the said Alans Parents, and in Stantun, as much as belonged to the said
Earls Fee, and diverse other Lands in the County of Leicester; for which the
said Alan gave the Earl sixty Marks, and a certain Bay [ Baucham] Horse. The
Witnesses to this Deed, were Hugh, son of Sewal; Richard the Chaplain; Hugh the
Chaplain of Aukenvill; and Ausketill the Clerk; and Roger the Clerk; and
William, son of Nigellus; Henry, son of Sewaldus; Rodbert the Steward [
Dapifero] of Livet; William, son of Herbert; Nicholas, son of Elfin; Galfr. de
Bachepuz; and Walter de Montegumeri.

Mon. Angl. Vol. 2. p. 874.
In the year of our Lord, 1141. Alan de Leica was a chief Witness, when this
Earl Robert offered his knife on the Altar for confirming the gift of the
Tithes, of the Rents of the new Borough, which his Father and he had increased
at Tuttesbury.

Harald de Leke gave to the Church of Kate, and to the Canons there serving God
(afterward removed to Repandon) one Carucat of Land in Leke, Ib. 282.
and likewise three Acres in the same Town, and also released to the said
Canons, the work of IX. of their men of Huntebothe, one day in a year, which
they were wont to do to the said Herald for his pasture of Staunton. Herald de
Leec gave to the Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem one Acre in Stanton. Ib. 527.
Richard, son of Harald de Lecha, Ib. 40.
by the consent of his men of Stan^ane, gave to the Church of St. Hardulf, of
Bredon [a Cell of St. Oswald, of Nostell, in Yorkshire] certain Lands, that the
Prior and Covent should always find, at their own charge, a Chaplain
ministering at Stantune; and William Earl Ferrers, as Earl Robert had done
before, gave to the Church of Bredon, amongst many other things, 20s. yearly
Rent out of West-Leke, or Jordan de Toc's Leke. Burton, Leicestershire descript.


This Family of Leke, it seems, changed their residence to Staunton, in
Leicestershire, and from thence had their Name; the Heir general whereof
carried that Manor to the Family of Shirley, who still enjoy it; and Sir
Robert Shirley, Father of the present Sir Robert, built a Church there, wherein
he lies buried.

Robert de Notingham, Canon of Sarum, Mon. Aug. Vol. 2. p. 232.
gave to the Church of the Holy Trinity, of Repyndon, all his Land in Sutton
and Bonyton upon Sore, together with the Land, which he had of the Canons of
Repindon, in Sutton, while they staid at Kalt, in exchange for two Virgats, and
one Bovat in Westerleke, all which Land the said Robert computed to two
Carucats.

The family of Touk were infeoffed by Robert de Ferrariis before 12 H. 2. of
which in the red Book, in the Exchequer, Lib. Rubr.
there is mention of Humfrey de Toka, having one Knights Fee; and William de
Tolka, the fourth part of one. Here Jordan, Robert, and Walter Touk were in
their several times to pay for a Knights Fee. Lib. feod. in ducat. and Test. de
Nev.
There was a Fine levied before the Justices Itinerant, at Not. 24 H. 3.
between Galfr. de St. Mauro, and Robert de Tuke, Autogr. pen. Magist....
Widmerpole.
of the fourth part of half a Knights Fee in Westerleke, which Philip de Took
held.

William, son of Philip de Touc, of Leke, granted and confirmed to Raph Bugg,
Autogr. pen. Ric. Maunsfild, Ar.
of Notingham, his Wind Mill in Westerleke, with the site of the said Mill and
Chiminage, and the suit of all his men, etc. excepting that he should grind
his own Corn at the same Mill, as freely as he did at the Water-Mill of the
said Raph. The Witnesses were John de Leyk, Robert de Kempston, Gervas de
Wilford, etc. the Seal within a circumscription of his Name, is, a Chevronel
between three Horse-Shooes. John de Touke, son of Sir William de Touke, of
Leyk, remiesd, 14 E. 1. to Geoffrey Bug, of the same, Autogr. pen. ^und. R.M.
all his right in the Fishing of the Water of Leak, etc.

There was a Fine levied at Not. 9 E. 1. between Galfr. son of Raph Bugge
quer. and Richard de Bingham, imped. of the Manor of Westerleke, with the
Appurtenances, thereby recognized, Pin. apud Not. a die St. Martin. in 3.
Septem. 9 E. 1.
to be the right of the said Galfr. as that which he had by the gift of Raph
Bugge, Father of the said Richard: To have to the said Galfr. and the heirs of
his Body, remainder to the said Richard and his heirs, for which the said
Galfr. gave him a Sparrowhawk, and was to pay him one penny yearly at Easter. By
another Fine, 31 E. 1. it appears that Galfr. Bugg had one Mess. one Mill, five
Bovats of Land and an half, Fin. Pasch. 31 E. 1.
and seven Acres of Meadow in Esterleke.

Galfr. Bugge, Lord of Leke, demised to William de Thurminton, and Avicia his
Wife, Autogr. pen. eund. R. M.
34 E. 1. a Toft and Croft, etc. for their lives, so that they should ever
grind all their Corn and Malt at his Mill, and Bake at his Oven, and suit his
Court, etc. The Witnesses were Sir Henry Sutton, Rector of the Church of St.
Leonard, of Lek; John le Touk, of Lek; Nicholas, son of Sir John de Lek; Henry,
son of the said Sir John; Gilbert, Clerk of the same, and others. In 19 E. 2.
by a Fine between Galfr. de Bingham, and Reginald de Sibthorp, Parson of
Strelley, the Manor of Westerleyk, with the Appurtenances; Mich. 19 E. 2.
and five Mess. one Mill, seven Virgats of Land, and 30s. Rent, with the
Appurtenances in Esterleyk and Thurmeton were settled on the said Galfr. for
life; then to Richard his son, and the heirs of his Body; remainder to Galfr.
Brother of Richard, and the heirs of his; remaider to William brother of Galfr.
and his; remainder to the right heirs of the said Galfr. de Bingham: Inq. capt.
apud Not. coram Ioh. R^bens, etc. in libr. de feod. com. Not.
so called, I guess, because Sir Richard de Bingham his elder Brother was dead
without heirs very legitimate, as in Bingham, and other places may be observed;
and it seems his son was sometimes so named too, for Galfr. de Bingham is
certified to have paid 20s. for half a Knights Fee in Westerleke, 22 E. 3.
toward the Aid to make the Kings son a Knight, as Richard Botiller did then
10s. for the fourth part of a Knights Fee, E. Chart. R. M. praedict.
which he held in Esterleke. Yet I find Galfr. Bugge, Lord of Leyk, all or most
of the time of Edward the third, and the 49 E. 3. he made a feoffment of all
his Lands here to the Parson. He Married Margaret, the daughter and heir of
Robert de Champaine, of Thurleston, in the County of Leicester, and Margaret
his Wife, Claus. 24 H. 6. m. 38. Leicest.
on whom Roger de Stoke settled that Manor and Lands in Wikingeston, by which
Margaret, the said Galfr. Bugg had a son Edmund Bugg (Lord also of this place
in the time of Richard the second) who left a son called Rad. Bugg de Not.
Rad. Bugg de Not. 2 Galfr. Bugg de West-Leke. 2 Galfr. Boug. de Leke-Marg.
fill. Rob. de Campania. Edmundus Bugg-Felicia, 9 R. 2. Vide Descript.
Leicestershire. By William Burton.
Baldwin Bug. sine prol. ob. 14 H. 6. 1435. Ric. Turvile 2 H.
5.-Margareta-Reginald Moton ob. 23 H. 6. Will. Turvile ob. 33 H. 6.-Eliz. fill.
Tho. Foulshurst, ob. 1476. Tho. Everingha^, marit. 37 H. 6. Joh. Turvile ob. 1
H. 8.-... Soror and haer. Tho. Staunton de Staunton C. Leicest. Will. Turvile
^il. ob. 1552.-Jana fill. Joh. Warburton mil. ux. 2. Georgius Turvile de Aston
Flamvil ob. 1552.-Argarel Soror Johannis Hind de Maddingley C. Cintabr.
Henricus Turvile ob. 1615.



Will. Grinsby-Anna ob. 1477. Bicardus Vincent.-Anna fill. and haer. Georgius
Vincent de Pekleton 7. El. a^t. 80.-Anna. fill. Will. Story.

Rad. Pole de Radburn.-Eliz. Joh. Pole. Germ. Pole de Radburn C. Derb.




1 Richardus, 19 E. 2. 3 Willielmus, 19 E. 2.
1 Ric. de Bingham miles, a quo familiae de Bingh. Carcolston, etc.
Ricardus Bugg de Willoughby a quo familiae de Wollaton and Risley

Baldwin Bugg, who dyed without issue, and so this Manor descended to the
Posterity of Margaret his sister, first Married to Richard Turvile, and after
to Reginald Moton.

Henry Turvile, 28 Eliz. sold this Manor of West-Leke to John Manners,
Esquire, Ex C^art. R. M.
who 30 Eliz. sold it to Francis Harwar, who together with Elizabeth his Wife,
by their Deed dated 21 Nov. 36 Eliz. exchanged it with Richard Mansfeild, Gent.
for Deane-hall, in the Parish of Caunton, in this County; whose youngest son
Thomas Mansfeild, Married Millecent, the daughter of William Sacheverell, of
Barton, by whom he had Richard Mansfeild, the present owner of this Manor, and
also of two Farms and three Cottages held of it, descended from the Family of
Ferrers, to Sir Walter Devereux, of Castle Bromwich, who sold them, ^
21 Iac. He has likewise another Manor held of this for 10s. per annum, which
belonged to the Family of Leke, who also performed the service of the fourth
part of a Knights Fee. This Richard Maunsfeild, 1662. Married Elizabeth,
daughter of Sir Thomas Richardson, and sister of Thomas Lord Richardson, and by
her has Millecent, Thomas, Elizabeth, and Joyce.

Alan de Lec, by the consent of his son and heir Henry, (...) Com. Huntingdon.
gave certain Lands in Westler to the Canons of Cal^; to his Deed the Seal is
still very perfect having the figure of an armed Knight on Horseback upon it.
He, and Heraldus de Leca, and Richard his son, and several of the Family,
severally confirmed the Church of Leke to those Canons, which their Lord
Ferrars confirmed likewise.

The first, besides Alan, Harald, and Richard of this Family, from whom I can
perfectly draw a Genealogy, is William de Lecha, Rot. pip. 3 Job. etc
who performed the office of Sheriff of Not. and Derb. for Hugh Bardolf, the
third and fourth years of King John's Reign, as Reginald de Carduil did the
fifth; and himself the said William de Lech the sixth, for William Briewerre.
In the tenth of King John, Reginald de Cardoil, and Isabel his Wife, by Fine,
Fin. 10 Job.
passed to Jordan de Toka three Virgats, (or Yard-land) in Leka, and twenty two
Acres in Abbotrewong, and 5s. Rent issuing out of one Virgat, or Yard-land,
which William de Leka held; whose son John de Leke (named in Thrumpton) was a
Knight, Ex Autogr. p^^es G. Clifton.
and so was John his son (named in Widmerpole) After whose death, 32 E. 1.
Galfr. Bugge, of Westerleke, took security of Nicolas de Leyke, his son and
heir, Esc. 32 E. 1.
concerning the reliefs of Sir John de Leyk, Father, and Sir John, Grandfather
of the said Nicolas de Leek, for fourteen Yard-land, or Virgats, held of him
the said Galfr. who then released the said Nicolas and his heirs, their suit to
his Court and Mill for 10s. per annum, at Martinmass, and Pentecost. Fin. Hill.
10 E. 2.
There was a Fine levied, 10 E. 2. between John, son of Nicolas de Leyk,
Querent, and Simon de Si^ethorp, Deforcient, of eight Mess. and fourteen
Virgats (or Yard-land) in Westerleyk, thereby settled for Life on the said
John, son of Nicolas de Leyk; afterward on John his son, and the heirs males
of his body; remainder to Thomas, Brother of the last named John, and his, etc.
This John, the elder, dyed about 17 E. 2. as in Kinston is noted, Esc. 17 E. 2.
^. 64.
Alanus de Leca 1141. Autogr. pen. Theoph. Com. Huntingt.
Henricus fill. and haer. Willielmus de Leca 3 John pip. Johannes de Leke Chr.
Johannes de Leke miles mortuus, 32 E. 1. Nicolas de Leyk Johannes de Leyk
defunct. 17 E. 2. Johannes de Leek defunct. 32 E 3. Alanus de Leyk Chr. 34 E.
3. Johannes. Johannes de Leke Chr. de Cotham 10 H. 4.-Isabella fill. and haer.
Joh. de Towers. Johannes de Leke fill. 2.-Alicia fill. and haer. Johannis Gray.
Willielmus Leke defunct. 37 H. 6.-Katherina fill. Thom. Chaworth, mil. Thom.
Leek dict. de Hasland, fill. 2.-Margar. fill. and haer. Willielmi Fox de
Chesterfeild. Johannes Leek ob. 21 Jan. 37 H. 8.-Elizab. fill.... Hope.
Radulphus Leak aetat. 21. Maii 3. 37 H. 8.-Elizabetha fill. Thom. Leek de
Williamthorp, C. Derb. Thom. Leek de Hasland. occisus per... Samon.-Alicia fill.
Francis. Roos, relict. Briani and Antonii Stapilton. Thom. Leak de Lowdham
obiit in carcere, 2 Car. 2..... filia-... Bull.

Antonius Serleby marit. 1.-Gertrud-Georgius Chaworth.

Elizab.-Joh. Hardwick ex quo familia de Cavendish per Eliz. Comitissam Salop.
Muriel-Georgius Linacre.
Johannes Leek de Sutton a quo Comes de Searsdale.-Elizabetha Savage.
Thoma, 36 H. 6.
Simon Leke de Cotham fill. 1.-Joanna fill. and haer. Johannis Talbot de
Swannington, mil.-Thom. Mallory marit. 1. miles.
Willielmus Leke a quo famil. de Screton.-Avicia fill. and haer. Johannis de
Stockton, 8 R. 2.
Simon Chr. 35 E. 3. 48 E. 3. Ex Collect. Fr. Markham,

St. Lo Kniveton, I. B* and B.



Thomas, 10 E. 2. miles, 38 E. 3.

Henricus, 34 E. 1.

Robertus.

Haraldus de Leca Ricardus de Leca dom. de Stanton Herald. Alanus de Leca.
Samson de Leke 44 H. 3. Ricardus de Leke fill. Samson. Willielmus fill. Ric.
Sampson, 27 E. 1.






where he held eight Yard-land, as he did a certain Manor, and fourteen here,
and some in Basingfe^^d, and Saxendale, etc. John the younger his son was then
above fifteen years old, who about 34 E. 3. left Alan de Leek his son and heir,
Esc. 34 E. 3. n* 62. Autog. pen. ^. M.
who the year following, viz. 35 E. 3. was a K^. but I want further light to
discover his Posterity. Thomas de Leyk, Knight, held a Knights Fee in Cotes
(viz. Cotham) 38 E. 3. and Simon de Leek was a Knight in that time, Esc. 38 E.
3. n. 11.
yet I cannot perfect the descent as I would in this place, where the next
thing I note must be a Fine, 10 H. 4. between Richard de Leek, and Elizabeth
his Wife, Quer. and John Bereford, Parson of the Church of Leek, Deforc. of
thirteen Mess. sixteen Virgats, and two Acres of Land, forty four Acres of
Meadow, with Pasture for six Oxen in the Hall Lesue, and 25s. Rent with the
Appurtenances in Esterleke, and Westerleke, with the Homages and Services of
Peter de Godeham, William Attemilne, and John Legett, and their heirs, thereby
settled on the said Richard and Elizabeth for life, remainder to John Leek Chr.
and Isabell his Wife, and the heirs Males of the Body of John; and for want
thereof to Isabel, the Wife of John Bonyngton, and the heirs of her Body,
remainder to the right heirs of the said John Leek. There was the same Term
another Fine levied between John de Leek Chr. and Simon his son, Pas^^. 10 H. 4.
Quer. and Richard de Leek, and Elizabeth his Wife, Deforc. of five Mess. four
Tofts, eleven Bovats of Land, sixteen Acres of Meadow, and 11d. Rent, with the
Appurtenances in Saxendale, Byngham, Wireton, Carcoston, and Aslacton settled
on the said John and Simon, and the heirs of John. Simon was his eldest son,
and Married Joan, the daughter and heir of Sir John Talbot, of Swawnington, in
Leicestershire, the Relict of Sir Thomas Malory, Knight, as in Kilvington is
noted, by whom he had only four daughters. John Leek his second son Married
Alice, the daughter and heir of John Gray, named in Hicling, who brought a
great increase of Lands to this Family, and was Mother of William Leek, Esc. 37
H. 6.
who about 37 H. 6. died seized of Leeks Manor here and Lands in Saxendale,
etc. leaving ^ohn his son and heir, whose Posterity is mentioned in Landforth:
B.
but Thomas Leek, of Haslond, second son of the said William and his Posterity
were usually styled Leek of Leek; and inherited here, though the other Line of
Sutton, in the Dale of Darbishire, had to do here also, as in Landforth, and
other places may be observed. His son was John Leek, of Hasland, who died the
21 Jun. 37 H. 8. leaving Raph Leek his son and heir twenty one years of age the
third of May then past. Lib. 2. post most. folio 70.
Raph was Father of Thomas, and Gertrud first Married to Anthony Serleby, then
to George Chaworth, who claimed to be heir to her brother slain about 41 Eliz.
by... Samon, without issue; but he had a natural son, called Thomas Leek, who
bangled away his Estate, and died an old man in Prison, 2 Car. 2. having been
brought over from Ireland in the beginning of the long Parliament, to Witness
against Thomas Earl of Strafford; he is said to have left a daughter Married to
one.... Bull.

Elias de Staunton, 9 E. 1. offered himself the fourth day against Thomas de
Meverell, Ex Plac. f^rinsecis, 9 E. 1. rot. 3. dorso. Not.
and Agnes his Wife, Roger de Mercinton, and Elianor his Wife, Raph de Munjoy,
and Isabell his Wife, Henry de Kniveton, and Isabell his Wife, John de ^rendon,
and Johan his Wife, Richard de Draycote, and Agnes his Wife, and Thomas de
Lokesle; in a Plea, that they together with Roger le Botiller, and Marjory his
Wife should acquit him of the service which Edmund the Kings Brother exacted of
him for his Freehold in Esterleke, which he held of them the said Thomas,
Agnes, Roger, etc.

By a Fine, 12 E. 2. between Richard le Botiller, Mich. 12 E. 2.
and Mary his Wife, Quer. and William de Stocton Cler. Def. eight Mess. and
four Virgats, and one Virgat of Land, with the Appurtenances in [ Esterleke,
or) Great Leke were settled on the said Richard and Mary, and the heirs of
their bodies, remainder to the right heirs of Richard.

By a Deed dated at Esterleke the Thursday next after the Feast of the
Conversion of St. Paul, Rot. de Chart. etc. cognit. coram Will. Herle and soc.
suis itinerant. apud Not. 3 and 4 E. 3. to. 2. and in dorso.
4 E. 3. and after enrolled Robert de Iorce, Knight, settled on Sir John de
Leek, Parson of the Church of Humbriston, and Richard his son, and the heirs of
the body of Richard, 39s. 1d. ob. with the Appurtenances in Esterleke, together
with the homages and services of Sir William de Staunton; John, son of John,
son of Simon; William, son of John, son of Simon, and diverse others
particularly expressed; with remainders over to William, and then to John,
brothers of the said Richard, and likewise to Beatrice, and then Maud, sisters
of the said Richard, which form of Entail is several times repeated, by several
persons of several parcels in Esterleke.

A Manor in Esterleke, E Chart. apud Thorp. Collect p^r St. Lo Kniveton.
2 H. 5. was settled on Roger, son of Raph Pare, and on Joan his Wife, and
their heirs; and Thomas Staunton, the elder, of Sutton Bonington upon Sore,
Esquire, 18 E. 4. (whose son and heir was Thomas Staunton) passed his Manor in
Esterleke to the said Raph Pare, and Roger, amongst many others, viz. Sir
Richard Noele the Justice, John Babington, Esquire, Chr. Neele, etc.

Raph Pare, of Great Leake, in the County of Not. Yeoman, Pl. de Banco Mich.
31 H. 6. rot. 138.
was Outlawed in the County of Stafford, concerning a Plea of Debt, 30 H. 6.
which Out-la^y was afterward annulled by the grace of the Court in Michaelmass
Term, 31 H. 6. because the said Raph alleged, and the Jury found, that he was
a Gentleman born.

His Seal of Arms was a Chevron engrailed between three Cross Crosselets, Ex
Autogr. pen. Gabr. Armstrong, Ar. apud Thorp.
which was affixed to his Deed, bearing date July 7. 21 E. 4. wherein he
conveyed the Manor of Hermeston, in the County of Lincoln, to Robert
Crosseby, and Isabell his Wife, daughter of him the said Raph, and heir to his
Wife Isabell, her Mother, daughter and heir of John Blake, of Hermeston. Inq.
34 H. 8.
This Isabell Married to her second Husband Thomas Griffith, and the said
Robert Cosbe being dead the 7 H. 8. her self died seized, 34 H. 8. of a Manor
in Great Leak, or Esterleke, and five Mess. three Cotag. one hundred Acres of
Arable Land, forty Acres of Meadow, and thirty of Heath, and 4s. 4d. Rent of
Assize in Great Leak, held of the Honor of Tutbury, by the service of the
twentieth part of a Knights Fee, and 6s. 8d. Rent, Richard Cosbe, son of her
son John Cosbe, being then her heir, and above twenty six years of Age.

This Manor came afterward to be the possession of the Family of Armstrong,
of Rempston.

The Family of Rempston had some Lands in West-Leke, which descended to
Bingham, Ex Chart. R. M.
as in Bingham and Rempston may be observed, and were by John Stapleton, about
the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, sold to Bar. Rag, and George Bird the
Tenants, whose Posterity still have them; this paid 17d. yearly, or 13d. and a
pair of Spurs of a Groat to the Manor of Westleke, which, as also Cosbyes, in
Great Leak, is of the Fee of Tutbury, in the Baylywick of prima pars Agard;
which Family of Agard of Fosron, ancient Bailiffs to the same, and now Farmers
have by Patent a Court Leet here, and at Bingham, with Weyfs and Streys, and
Felons Goods, etc.

The Advowson of the Church of Great Leak, 8 E. 1. was determined to belong to
the Prior of Repingdon. Il. de jurat. and Assis. apud Not. Crast. animar. 8 E.
1. to. 4. and to. 1.
And the Archbishop of York had a Mandate, notwithstanding the claim of John de
Beningworth, Elias de Staunton, and Geoffrey, son of Raph Bugg, to admit a fit
person to that Church upon the presentation of the said Prior.

Pl. coram Reg. Pasch. 11 E. 2. to. 3.
Reymund, Cardinal of Sancta Maria nova, 11 E. 2. was Parson of Leyk; and so
was John D'avenant, who died Bishop of Salisbury, and had been Chaplain to the
Earl of Huntington.

The Rectory was valued at 30l. when the Prior o^ Repyndon was Patron: ^
Now the Earl of Huntington is; and the value in the Kings Books is 25l. 4s. 7d.

In the Church Windows in Little-Leak, Coll. St. L^ (...)*
were Leaks Arms, sable six Annulets Or, 3.2.1. (now five or nine upon a
Saltier engrailed) there also Or upon a Fesse Gules, three water Budgets Or,
all over a bend Azure. Geoffr. Bug. Arg. upon five Fusells in Fesse, so many
Scallops, the Colors are worn out.

Gules three Bends Argent. Or on a Fesse Gules, three water Budgets, Ar.
Bingham, or Bugg.

In the Church of West Lake,


There is now upon Mr. Maunsfeilds Monument,

Arg. on a Chevron between three Manches sable, three Annulets. Or, which
impales also one with Ermine and Gules of six Bars. R. Maunsfeild, and Ester
Hussy, two with Arg. on a Fesse Gules, Cotised Wavy sable, three Crescents Or.
Fran^ Mansfeild, and Norice Dod. three with Arg. on a Saltire Azure, five Water
Budgets Or. T.M. and Millecent Sacheverel. 4. with on a Chief.... three Lions
Heads erased, R. M. and Elizabeth Richardson.

The Inscription is thus,

Anno Aerae Christianae 1624. Annoque aetatis 75.3. idus Augusti, Animam Deo
creatori reddidit Richardus Mansfeild, Genesis hujus Manerii Dominus. Vxorem
habuit Jocosam Thomae Paget de Barwel comitat. Leicestriae, Genesis filiam. Ex qua
liberos Richardum, Franciscum, Thomam, Mariam, Doroth. and Kath. suscepit.
Quorum Thomas natu minimus ^ societate Templi Interioris, J. C. Ex Millecent
uxore sua Gulielmi Sacheverel de Barton, Arm. filia, filium unum and haeredem
Richardum, qui Elizabetham, Thomae Richardson Equitis Aurati haeredisque
apparentis Baroniae Cramond Regno Scotiae filiam in uxorem duxit, tresque
filias, Mariam, Franciscam and Millecent, reliquit, and obiit 4. Maii, Anno
1638. aet. 50.

In the Chancell on two Grave-stones lying together.

Hic jacet Ed. Bigland Sacrae Theologiae Baccalaureus hujus Ecclesiae Rector,
qui obiit Aug. 2. aetatis suae 75. Anno 1650.

Here lies Mary Bendish his Wife, who died March 9. in the 68. of her Age, An.
1652.

Costock. In Doomesd. Cotingstoche and Cortingstoche, and since Curtlingstoc.
SO named from some Saxon owner Corting, or Curtling, and Stoche which as Stow,
signifies a seat or place. In it were several Manors, whereof two Godric and
Algar had before the Conquest, and for them paid to the Geld, as thirteen
Bovats. The Land of them was but thirteen Bovats, and said to be in Cotingstoc
and Rempeston. There afterward Roger de Busli had two Sochm. on two Bovats of
this Land, Doomesd.
and three Vill. with one Plow or Car. One Car. of this Land was then waste;
there was thirty Acres of Meadow; this in King Edward the Confessors time was
40s. but then in King Williams but 12s.

Fulco de Lisoriis and his Wife Albreda, gave to St. Mary of Blyth, Ex Registro
de Blida pen. dom. G. Clifton, p. 106.
and the Monks of that place (founded by the said Roger de Busli) one Carucat
in Curtingestok for the soul of Goisfrid his ( Dapiferi) Steward, and of his
Wife Richildis, who held it of the said Fulco. This Land he gave to buy Fish
before Christmas; the said Fulc likewise gave to Blithe those two Bovats of
Land in Cortingestok, which he had retained, all which was confirmed by Robert
de Lisoriis his son, and Albreda, the said Roberts daughter, his Grandchild,
and by her son John, the Constable of Chester, by the name of all the Land they
had in Curtingstok, which Ascelimus, Ib. p. 98.
Prior of Blithe, and the Covent gave to the Church of Geroldon in Fee,
reserving 8s. a year Rent for all Services, to which Abbey William de Bouis, son
of William de Bouis, whose Family held a Knights Fee of the honor of Tikhill,
Mon. Angl. Vol. 1. p. 771. Test. de Nev.
and also had their Seat here, gave four Bovats, and two Bovats in this Town,
and Robert de Cheverecourt, of Wyvordby, confirmed all of his Fee in Rempeston,
and Cortelyngestok.

Robert de Chevrecurt, Rot. Pip. 2 H. 3.
2 H. 3. ought one Mark for the summoning Alexander de Cortlingstok, to restore
him the custody of the Land and heir of William de Bows.

John de Bowys, and the Abbat of Geroudon, Ex v^t. Exempl. pe^. meipsum.
for half a Knights Fee in Cortlingstock, 22 E. 3. to the Aid for making the
Kings Son a Knight, paid 20s. whereof John paid 15s. 6d. and the Abbat had a
Writ to discharge him from the 4s. 6d. remaining. This was, before that time, B.
Williams, son of Philip de Cortlingstock, but they paid for another half of a
Knights Fee, which was sometime Thomas de Bowys, and for that John paid 13s.
and the Abbat stopped 7s. with his Writ; and one Stephen de Weston, and the said
Abbat had a fourth part of a Knights Fee here, which was sometime John's, son of
John de Cortlingstok, for this Stephen paid 7s. and the Abbat 3s. which he
discharged with his Writ.

That which the Family of Cortlingstok held, I take to be of Rad. de Burun in
this place, where Seric and two Brothers had a Manor before the Norman change,
which was charged to the Geld, Doomesd. Lib.
as fourteen Bovats, the Land then fourteen Bovats. There afterward William,
the Man, or Tenent of Raph de Burun, had three Car. and one Sochm. on two
Bovats of Land, and nine Vill. and four Board. having five Car. or Plowes. There
was thirty Acres of Meadow. This in the Confessors time was 40s. but in the
Conquerours 30s. Andrew (probably son of this William) gave two Bovats of this
Land to the Priory of Lenton, Reg. Lent. in Bibliothec. Cottoniana, p. 4.
which Robert, son of this Andrew, confirmed and gave his Churches of
Cortingstoc and Rempeston to the said Priory, with a great Curse upon
Willielmus de Cortingstoche temp. Willielmi Conq. Andr. de Cortingstoc Robertus
de Cortingstoc Rogerus de Cordinstoke 12 H. 2. Willielmus de Cortingstoc
Philippus de Cortingstok Willielmus de Cortingstock.

Ranulphus Hugo de Cortingstoc Johannes Johannes, 24 E. 1. Willielmus, 3 E. 3.







his heirs, if any of them should annull his gift, which was confirmed by Roger
de Burun his Lord, and likewise by Roger, the said Roberts own son, who held
two Knights Fees of the said Roger de Burun, Lib. Rubr.
12 H. 2.

William Brieware (who in the time of King John had the Fees of Roger de Burun)
confirmed to the Abbey of Geroudon, Mon. Angl. Vol. 1. p. 771.
the gifts of Philip, son of William de Cortingstock, and of Ranulph de
Cortingstock, and Hugh his son.

Philip de Cortingstoc, in the beginning of the Reign of Henry the third, Test.
de Nev. Lib. feod. in Scaccar.
is certified to hold two Knights Fees of Patricius de Chaurcis, in Cordingstok
and Rempeston, of the old Feoffment. William de Cortlingstok, the son of Philip
de Cortlingstok, Reg. Lent. p. 5.
gave a Toft in this Town to the Prior and Covent of Lenton for two shillings
of yearly Rent, which he and his Ancestors were wont to pay them for two Bovats
of Land here, together with the Advowsons of the Churches of Cortlingstok and
Rempeston, which they held of them.

John, the son of John, the son of Hugh de Cortlingstok, Pl. de Banc. Trin. 24
E. 1. to. 27. fol. 85.
24 E. 1. recovered seizin of one Mess. and one Car. of Land here, and two
Mess. and one Virgat at Rempeston. William, son of John, son of Hugh de
Cortingstoke released to William de Weston, Rot. de Chartis and protect.
Cognit. coram Will. Herle and soci^s

3 E. 3. pen. Arth. Agard in the treasury over the Gate at Westminster.


and Agnes his Wife; Robert, Parson of Staneford, and to sundry others, and to
John de Segrave, and his heirs, all his right in two Mess. two Carucats, and
one Virgat of Land, and two Acres of Meadow, with the Appurtenances in
Cortlyngstoke and Rempeston, which the said John de Segrave had of the gift and
Feoffment of Sir John de Segrave his Father, and by the grant and confirmation
of Stephen de Segrave his (the said younger John's) brother, besides all his
right in the Rents and Services, which the said John had in the Town of
Cotegrave; this bore date at Not. the Wednesday next after the Feast of St.
Martin, 3 E. 3.

There was a Fine levied, 22 E. 3. between Richard de Willoughby the elder,
Pasc. 22 E. 3.
Knight, Quer. and John, son of John de Segrave, Def. of four Mess. two Tofts,
thirteen Bovats, and ten Acres of Land, ten Acres of Meadow, 20s. and 8d. Rent,
and the fourth part of one Knights Fee, with the Appurtenances in
Cortelyngstoke, Rempeston, and Cotegrave, by that made the right of the said
Richard, together with the Homages and Services of John de Rempeston, and
others.

Here was another parcel of this Town Soc to Clifton, Lib. Doomesd.
the great Manor of William Peverells Fee, which paid to the Tax of that time
for one Bovat. The Land was one Bov. There one Sochm. had one Plow or Car. and
two Acres of Meadow. Here was also a Manor, which Fredghis had before his time,
which was charged to the Geld as two Bovats; the Land being two Bovats. There
Goduvin, under William Peverell, Mon. Angl. Vol. 1.771.
had one Car. (or Plow, or Plowland) two Vill. and three Acres of Meadow. This
in the Confessors time was 10s. when the survey was taken in the Conquerours
5s. 4d. value. William Peverell (son of this William, I suppose) gave thirteen
Bovats of Land here to Geroudon Abbey; or else c^nfirmed thirteen Bovats, which
Sampson de Strelley gave, in whose Family some parcels of Land here continued
long.

The Prior of Durham, Quo. Wa^. 3 E. 3.
3 E. 3. claimed view of Frankpledge of all resident on his Fee here, amongst
other neighboring Towns, as Normanton, Bonington, Kinston, Barton, Remston,
and Goteham.

The Jury, Esc. 1^ R. 2. part. 2. n. 99.
16 R. 2. found it not to the Kings loss, if he granted Raph de Crumbewell,
Knight, and Richard de Outhorpe, Chaplain, license to give two Mess. one Virg.
and twelve Acres of Land, two Acres and one Rode of Meadow, and 37s. Rent, with
the Appurtenances in Nottingham, Rempston, Corthlingstoke, and Boney, to the
Prior of Kirkeby upon Wretheke.

There was an inquisition taken 29 Oct. 36 H. 8. after the death of William
Waring, Lib. 2. post mert. fol. 14.
Gent. who dyed 19 Febr. 33 H. 8. seized in Fee of one hundred Acres of Land,
eighty of Pasture, and forty of Meadow in Cortlyngstok, late belonging to the
Monastery of Garrowden. Thomas Waring his son and heir was thereby found to be
seventeen years old, at the time of his Fathers death. B.
Sir George Parkins purchased Lands here of Arnald Waring, Esquire, afterward
Knight; who had them together with Thorp Arnald, in Leicestershire, by descent
from his Ancestors.

Robert Hall purchased also of John Horton, and Mary his Wife, Pat. 9 Eliz.
part. 9.
who had license to Alienate four Mess. two Cotag. six Tofts, six Gardens, four
Orchards, three hundred Acres of Land, etc. 22 Sept. 9 Eliz. and had a recovery
in Michaelmass Term, Mich. 9, and 10 Eliz. rot. 355. rot. 356. Pasc. 10 Eliz.
rot. 141.
at which time there were others for less parcels, as John Leek, and William
Bolton, against William Leck; and the same against Robert Leek, who called,
etc. ^ohn Bows. William Leek, owner in Costok, was Father of William, Father
of William, Father of William Leek, of Wimswould, in the County of Leicester,
Esquire, now living 1674. a Lawyer of great repute and worth.

The Church of Cortlyngestock, viz. the Rectory, when the Prior of Lenton was
Patron, Ms. pen. I. M^
was 12l. Now Mr. Gabr. Armstrong is in his place, it is in the Kings Books but
7l. 18s. 4d.

Rempeston or Rampeston.
THat which was of Roger de Buslies Fee here, I perceive was held by the Family
of Boues, of Costock, for there was a Fine levied at Not. 9 E. 1. between
Roger, Abbat of Geroudon, Quer. by Friar William de Hemington his Monk put in
his place, and William de Boues, Fin. apud Not. coram Just. Itin. in Oct. St.
Martini, 9 E. 1.
of Cortinstok, upon this, that the said William should hold to the said Abbat
the Fine made in the Court of King Henry the third, before the Justices at
Westminster, between Simon, sometime Abbat of Geroudon, predecessor of the said
Abbat, Quer. and the said William, that he should acquit the said Abbat of the
service which the ( Custos) Warden of the Honor of Tykehull, exacted of him
concerning his Freehold, which he held in Rempeston, of the said William, viz.
seven Virgats of Land, with the Appurtenances, for which he, the said Warden,
distrained him to suit the Court of that Honor from three Weeks to three
Weeks, toward the Castle twice in the year, to pay 2s. 6d. half penny farthing,
for a certain Palfrey, 14d. for common Fine, 2d. for the meat of a certain
Watchman, and 1 cl.. Aid to the Sheriff, all which the said William as mean
between him, and that honor discharged him of, for which the Abbat released
all the damages he had sustained till that time.

Lib. Doomesd.
In Rampeston William Pevrel had a Manor, which before Fredghis had, and paid
for it as six Bovats to the Geld: the Land was six Bovats. There five Vill. had
one Car. and fifteen Acres of Meadow. In the time of King Edward the Confessor,
this was 10s. in King Williams 5s. 4d. value.

Rad. de Burun had also a Manor here, which before was Vlchetels, who for it
to the Dane-Geld paid as for 6. Bov. The Land of it was 6. Bov. it was then in
K. Will. time waste, and was valued at 2s. in the Confess. it was 10s. There
was ten Acres of Med. It Is likely this was held by the Family of Rosell, which
had Lands here, and at Cotgrave, and Denbigh, in Darbishire, of the Fee of Raph
de Burun. Richard, son and heir of Robert Rosel, Mon. Angl. Vol. 1.771.
of Rempeston confirmed his own and his Ancestors gifts of Lands to Geroudon.
Hugh, the son of Galfr. de Rempeston, gave to the same Abbey five Bovats in this
Town, and confirmed all it had of his Fee. John Crisp, 17 E. 2. claimed Lands
here, as son and heir of John his Father, Plac. de Banco apud Westminster. Pasch. 17
E. 2. to. 25.
and Petronilla his Mother, to whom the said Lands were given by Ranulph de
Cortlingstok, and to the heirs of their bodies; but the Jury finding they had
alienated some of the Lands before the Statute de Donis Conditionalibus, and
some after, he only recovered the latter, and the Tenants whom he impleaded
kept the former.

Here was a Family which had their name from this place, and became of very
great note in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the fourth.

Galfr de Rempeston Hugo de Rempeston Robertus de Rempeston-....-Alicia fill.
Walteri de Snaynton ux. prima. Tho. de Rempeston 18 E. 1.-Cecilia. Johannes de
Rempeston, 2 E. 2. and 22 E. 3. Tho. de Remston, miles Garterii temp. H.
4.-Margareta-Godefr. Foliambe marit. 2. Thom. de Rempston, miles. ob. 15 Oct.
37 H. 6.-Alicia fill. and haer. Thom. Bekering. Elizabetha-Joh. Cheyney, miles.
Isabel-Brian Stapleton, miles. Brian Stapleton, miles-Jana fill. Joh. dom.
Lovell. Ex Coll. I. B. and lib. Genealog. pen. Tho. Sherbrook, Genesis

Marga^.-Ricardus Bingham, junior.
Robertus.


Amicia ux. Walteri de Finchfeild. 2 Rad. de Sutton-Alicia 19 E. 1.-1 Ph. le
Clerk.

Thomas.

1 Brian Stapleton mil. ob. 2 Apr. 4 E. 6.-Eliz. fill. Hen. dom. Scroop.-Jana
fill. Tho. Basset. Ric. Stapleton miles.-...-... Brian Stapleton, Ar. Willielmus.
Brian vir Aliciae fill. Franc. Roo^.
2 Georgius Stapleton de Rempston ob. 6 Eliz.-Marg. fill. Will. Gasgill. Hen. de
Rempston ob. 29 Eliz. Dec. 28. Fides ux. Math. Babington, s. p.
Anthon. vir Aliciae Roos post Brian. Georgius Gertrud. ux. Baldw. Aclond.
Willielmus Johannes Stapl. vendidit.

Joana ux. Will. Perpont.
Pl. (...) Eston. apud Not. ^. vel 10 E. 1. r^t. 21.
Robert de Rempeston who lived in the time of King Henry the third Married, for
his first Wife, Alice the daughter of Walter de Snaynton, who gave him two
Mess. and five Bov. in Rempston in Frank-marriage, but he had only a daughter
by her called Alice: His son Thomas de Rempston, who succeeded him here, was by
another Wife. The Prior and Covent of Lenton, Reg. Lent. 5.
by their instrument dated 1267. granted that Robert de Rempston might have a
Chantry in his Chapel of his Manor of Rempston, so as he did not admit the
Parishioners to hear Divine Service in prejudice of the Mother Chuch, and that
his Chaplain should swear fealty to the Rector. John de Lymar, of Stanton, and
Cecily his Wife, Trin. 2 E. 2.
2 E. 2. levied a Fine of five Mess. twenty three Bovats of Land 40s. Rent, and
the third part of a Mess. with the Appurtenances in Rempeston, to John, son of
Thomas de Rempeston. John, son of Thomas, Ex Veteri Exempt. pen. meipsum.
held the fourth part of a Knights Fee in Rempston, 22 E. 3. and then paid 10s.
for it to the Aid to make the Kings son a Knight. The next whom I could observe
to succeed here was Sir Thomas de Remston (possibly son of John) He was, Part.
6. pat. 1 H. 4. 3. part. pat. 2 H. 4.
1 H. 4. Constable of the Tower of London, and Admiral toward the West parts,
2 H. 4. His Constableship he had in the fourth year of that King, Nov. 14. and
in the seventh year also, Claus. 4 H. 4. and 7 H. 4. Fin. 4 H. 6. m. 1.
June 20. He was also Knight of the Garter. His son Sir Thomas Rempston, the
younger, had respite of Homage, Nov. 19. 4 H. 6. and had to Wife Alice, the
daughter and heir of Thomas Bekering, and of Isabel his Wife, daughter and
coheir of Sir John de Loudham, Ex Coll. I. B.
and of Isabel his Wife, daughter and heir of Sir Robert Breton, of Walton, in
the County of Darby. This younger Sir Thomus died 15 Oct. 37 H. 6. and left
Elizabeth, then wife of John Cheney, Esquire, (after Knight) Isabel, of Sir
Brian Stapleton, Esc. 37 H. 6.
Knight, and Margaret, wife of Richard Bingham, the younger, his daughters and
heirs. He lies buried in the midst of the Chancell at Bingham, whereof he was
also Lord, as in that place will be noted, which Manor, as this of Rempston
did, it seems fell to the Family of Stapleton, which made this the inheritance
of a younger son, viz. of George Stapilton, of Remston, second son of Sir
Brian, son of Isabel Rempston, before named, which George died Mar. 25. 6 Eliz.
seized of this Manor, and diverse Lands, and 5l. Rent in Rempston, Wodeborough,
Inquis. July 29. 6 Eliz.
Stanford, Bradmere, Costock, Great and Little Leek, and Newton in (...) to him
and the heirs Males of his body; he had diverse sons, Henry, Anthony, George,
William, whereof William only had issue Male, viz. John Stapleton, who sold
these Lands to... Feld; and he to Gabriel Armstrong, and so this place became
the seat of that Family, with which some interest here still continues. Henry
Stapleton, of Rempston, Inq. 22 Ian. 39 Eliz.
made his Will 8 Mar. 25 Eliz. and died there 28 Dec. 29 Eliz. leaving Faith
his only daughter and heir, to whom he gave all these Lands by his said Will.
She was wife of Matthew Babington, and died 1 Iun. 31 Eliz. without issue at
Cussington, Ex Coll. I. K.
in the County of Leicester. Anthony Stapleton married Alice, the daughter of
Francis Roos, of Laxton (named in Burton Iorce) the Relict of his Cousin Brian
Stapleton, but I think he had no Child. Gertrud, the wife of Baldwin Acland,
the daughter of George, the Brother of Henry Stapleton, would have been his
heir; Ex Inq.
the said Henry had this Manor of Rempston, one Mess. four Virg. and an half
in Little-Leek; one Virg. in Great-Leek; one Mess. two Virg. in Costock; one
Virg. in Bradmere; two in Stanford; one Mess. four Virg. and one Cotag. in
Burton, on the Wolds, in Leicestershire; one Mess. two Virg. in Waltham, on the
Wolds; and one Mess. and Close in Wimeswold in that County, all then esteemed
parcel of the Manor of Rempston, and the Manor of Woodborough, and fourteen
Virg. 36s. Rent and five Mess. etc. belonging to it.

Richard Hebbe claimed against William Pegge, and William Bows, Mi^h. 38 H. 6.
rot. 326.
38 H. 6. one Mess. three Tofts, four Virg. of Land, and eight Acres of Meadow
in Rempston. There yet remain some of that name, who have Freehold there.

Ms. I. M.
The Rectory was valued at twenty Marks, when the Prior of Lenton was Patron,
it is now 13l. 2s. 6d. in the Kings Books, and Gabriel Armstrong Patron.

In the Church.

Here lies Henry Stapleton, Esquire, Ex Coll. St. Lo Kniveton.
Patron of this Parish Church of Rempston, who gave ten pounds for ever to the
use and help of the Husbandmen of the same Town; he was the first son of George
Stapletune, Esquire. He left behind him Elizabeth his Wife, Patroness, when
they had lived virtuously together 26 years, and Faith their only daughter. He
departed this world in the true Faith of Christ 28 Dec. 1586.

Upon the Tomb Arg. A Lion Ramp. Sable impales with Arg. 3 Broad Arrow-heads
Or, Phaeons Sable, upon a Chief Sable, a Hound Argent. Upon the Lion is a
Crescent for a difference, and in the other Coat, A Mullett.

Wishou or Wisoe.
PRobably an Hill of Plants, or Custom Hill* In this place before the Normans
came, Estan, Elsi, and Gladwin had three Manors, Doomesd.
which were Assessed to the public Geld for three Carucats. The Land was three
Car. There afterward the Great Roger de Busli had a Man or Tenent, called
Roger, who had three Car. in Demesne, and fifteen Villanes, five Sochm. on si^
Bovats of this Land, and one Board. having ten Plows or Car. There was a Church.
The value in the Confessors time of this was 45s. in the Conquerors 48s.

In the time of King Henry the first, William de Luvetot, who held a Barony in
Huntingtonshire, and was also Lord of Sheffeild, Mon. Angl. Vol. 2. p. 50. and
p. 25.
in Yorkshire, Founded a Priory at Radford, near Wirksop, his principal
residence in this County, to which he gave, amongst other things, all his
Churches, which he held of the Honor of Blyth, the Seat of Roger de Busli,
whereof on this South side the River Trent were only the the Churches of
Coleston, Wilgeby, and Wyshou. His son Richard de Luvetot had Sheffeild and
Wirksop, and the Lands on the North-side Trent, in this County. Nigellus de
Lovetot another of his sons had the Barony in Huntingtonshire, viz. ten Knights
Fees, Lib. Rubr. in Scaccar.
and five Knights Fees of the Honor of Roger de Busli, which lay on the
South Side Trent in this County. This Nigellus accounted, 7 H. 2. for twenty
Marks of his Knights in Cambridge or Huntingtonshires, by his Certificate, 12
H. 2. which he, Pip. 7 H. 2. Cantebr. and Hunt.
as other Barons did, at that time sent in to the King. It appears that of
his whole Barony none were Enfeoffed since the death of King Henry the first.
Lib. Rubr.
Those five Knights Fees of the Fee of Blithe, one was held by Robert de Iorz;
another by Robert, son of Ernulf; half one by Robert, son of William; another
half by Galfr. de Estanton; of another, William Picot held two parts, Ex
Registr. de Wirksop in Biblioth. Seldom. fol. 13. a transcript. p^r St. Lo
Kniveton, A. T. 19.
and Richard de Clifton the third, and the said Nigellus de Luvetot himself had
one in his own hand. He gave to the Church of St. Cuthbert, at Radeford, two
Bovats out of his Demesne in Wishou, one on that part which is at (or near)
Boney; the other at (or toward) Withmerepol. The Witnesses Willielmus de
Luretot fundator de Wirksop, temp. H. 1.-Emma. Nigellus de Lovetot, 7 H. 2. 12
H. 2.-Margareta. Ricardus de Lovetot 25 H. 2. Nigellus de Lovetot sine prole 1 John 10 Joh. Willielmus, sin. prol. Nigellus Elias de Amundevill. Elias, 3 H. 3.
Amicia ux. Rad. Mundevill. Roysia 3 H. 3.-Hubert de Bromford. Ricardus dictus
de Lovetot defunct. 19 H. 3.-Christiana. Rogerus de Lovetot, Vicecom. Not. 39,
41, 42 H. 3. Thom. de Luvetot, 2 E. 1.
Johannes de Luvetot, miles. ob. Nov. 5. 22 E. 1. Johannes de Lovetot miles,
ob. 23 E. 3. Edwardus de Lovetot ob. 43 E. 3.-Joana Soror and haer. Johannis
fill. Roberti de Barkworth, 37 E. 3. Johannes de Lovetot fill. and hear. aetat.
8. an. 43 E. 3. s. p. Johannes Cheyne, miles, 7 H. 4.-Margareta fill. and haer.
1 Robertus, s. p. Johannes. Willielmus



Margeria ux. Ricardi Patric. Will. Patric. 3 H. 3. Margeria ux. Warin de
Vernun and 2 John de Litlebiry.

Rogerus, 2 R. 1. Nigellus. Robertus de Lovetot de Colston. Willielmus.
Ricardus de Lovetot de Wirksop.-Cecilia.

were Robert de Luvetot, and Hugh de Lovetot, and Henry de Luvetot, etc. and
Roger de Ay, son of Roger de Luvetot.

Richard de Lovetot, 25 H. 2. accounted for 100l. and two War Horses for the
Fine of his Fathers Land. Pip. 25 H. 2
And the Sheriff of Cambr. and Hunt. 33 H. 2. gave account of 10l. of the
Honor of Richard de Lovetot, Pip. 33 H. 2 Canteb. and Hunt.
of the Scutage of the Knights that went not with the King in the Army for
Galwei. The King, 2 R. 1. pardoned 20s. of 100s. of the same Scutage to Richard
de Lovetot, Pip. 2 R. 1. Hunt.
who was then gone to Jerusalem. Richard de Luvetot, son of Nigellus de
Luvetot, by the consent of his Brethren Roger, Ex eod. Reg^ Wirksop. fol. 13.
posteriori, fuerunt enim duae p^ginae 13.
Nigellus, Robert, and William de Luvetot, confirmed all the gifts of his
Ancestors, to wit, of William de Luvetot his Grandfather, and of Nigellus de
Luvetot his Father, and Richard de Luvetot his Uncle, and of William de
Luvetot, his said Uncles son, his Cousin, to God and the said Canons of
Radeford, and further gave them ten Acres of his Demesne of Wishowe, and a
Mess. and Croft, as they held them of his Father till his time. Roger de
Lovetot his brother did the like in the same words almost, Ib.
and added to them one Bovat of his own gift in Wishowe, viz. that which was
Lefthens. Nigellus granted to the same Canons the Church of Wilgheby, Ib.
and Robert de Lovetot gave them the Church of Coleston, and the whole Town of
Stoswik. Ib. 14. a.
Roger de Lovetot, 3 R. 1. ought 100l. for relief. Pip. 3 R. 1.
Nigellus de Luvetot, 9 R. 1. ought 200. m. for a Fine of the Land which was
his Fathers. Pip. 9 R. 1. Canteb. and Hunt. Rot. Pip. 3 Ioh.
He gave account, 3. Ioh. of L. m. for ten Knights Fees which he held of the
King in Capite, and for five of the honor of Tykehill. Nigellus de Luvetot, 10
Ioh. gave account of 27l. and three m. of Gold for himself and his brother for
relief of their Lands. Pip. 10 Ioh.
Mon. Angl. Vol. 2.25.
They were Sons of Richard de Lovetot, last named; and William the brother of
Nigellus dying without issue, left him the inheritance, who being a Clerk, left
it to the Posterity of his three Sisters; but we must note that their
Grandfather Nigellus de Lovetot is omitted in that place of the Monasticon, the
Author of that Register of Peterburgh, being mistaken by reason of the two
Richards, whereof one, viz. the Uncle, was son of William, as in the 51 page of
the same Book may easily be observed. Ib. p. 51. Ib. p. 25.
The first Sister Amicia was married to Raph de Mundevil, who begot on her
Nigellus Mundevil, and Elias; upon Nigellus de Mundevil's Seal is.... three
Chevrons... The second, Autog. pen. Ios. Widmerpole.
Rosia was married to Hubert de Bromford, who begot on her a son, by name
Richard, who held the surname of his Mother, viz. of the Ancestors of Lovetot.
The third was Margery, married to Richard Patrick, who begot on her a son,
named William, and a daughter, called Margery. She was wedded to William (it
should be Warin) de Vernon, on whose Seal is... a Fesse between three Flowers
de Lis. William, the brother of Margery, Pen. eundem Ios. Widmerpole.
gave her his whole purpart; and she after the death of Warinus de Vernun,
married John de Littlebiri, who with her, 43 H. 3. levied a Fine to Richard
Earl of Gloucester of one Mess. and one Carucat of Land in Sutho, and of the
homage and service of Peter Cordon, Thomas de Hotetot, Robert Fleming, and of
Robert de Lovetot, for the Lands they held in Wynewik, Pokethorpe, and
Thirning, and of the homage of the Prior of Huntington, etc. Nigellus de
Mundevil did the like, etc. Elias de Amundevil, Hubert de Bromford, and Rohesia
his wife, and William Patric, Pip. 3 H. 3.
heirs of Nigellus de Luvetot, 3 H. 3. ought Cl. for relief of the Land which
was his, the said Nigellus, each of them fifty Marks.

Test. de Nev.
Nigellus Mundevill, William de Sheffeild, and Roger de Lovetot were certified
to hold a Knights Fee here in Wisoe, of Alice, Countess of Ewe, Lady of
Tykhill, of which each part went by the name of the Manor of Wisoe, so making
three again as there were before the Conquest. That Richard de Lovetot (son of
Roysia and Hubert de Bromford) had to wife Christian... and was dead, Claus. 19
H. 3. m. 1. Pip. 39 H. 3* etc. Claus. 5 E. 1. part. 1. m. 7. Fin. 2 E. 1. m.
15. Reg. Lent.
19 H. 3. left his son Roger de Lovetot then within age, who was High Sheriff
of these Counties, 39, 41, and 42 H. 3. and passed the Manor of Wishou to
Robert de Derley, reserving 10l. per annum to him and his heirs. Thomas de
Lovetot, 2 E. 1. was his son and heir, and succeeded his Father, the said
Roger, in this place* Sir John de Lovetot, Knight, brother of Roger, last
named, was sometimes called Clark, because of his learning in the Law, I
suppose, for he was one of the Judges of the Kings Bench, and conveyed to
William de Henovere the Custody of the heir and Lands of Robert de Derley, Pl.
apud W^stm. Pasc. 9 E. 1. to. 67.
then dead, viz. 9 E. 1. in Wisoe and elsewhere, which the said John had of the
Grant of the forementioned Thomas de Lovetot, who recovered the same against
the King, in the Kings Court, before himself and his Council. Fin. apud Ebor.
in Oct. Trin. 11 E. 3. and postea apud Westminster. Mich. 13 E. 3.
John de Lovetot (son of Sir John) by Fine, 11 E. 3. and 13 E. 3. passed to
Richard de Willughby, and Joan his wife, four Knights Fees, and 10l. Rent, with
the Appurtenances in Wisowe, Kercolston, E^leston, Flintham, and North-Clifton,
together with the homages and services of Matilda de St. Andrea, Thomas de
Widmerpole, and Elizabeth his wife, William Deyncourt, Roger de Whatton, John
de Gloucester, Galfr. de Staunton, Thomas de Golhall, John, son of John Pigo^t,
of Dodington, Henry Torald, William de Asteley, and Isabel his wife, and John,
the son of John de Hose, and their heirs for the Tenements they held of the
said John de Lovetot: To hold to the said Richard and Joan, and the heirs of
Richard. Robert, the son of John de Lovetoft, Ex Autogr. apud Thorp. pen. Gab.
Armstrong.
by his Deed dated on Thursday in Whitsun-week, 31 E. 3. released to Richard de
Willughby the Elder, Knight, all his right and claim in ten pounds Rent,
issuing out of the Manor of Wisow, and five Knights Fees, which the said
Richard had of the Feoffment of John de Lovetoft his Father.

Fin. Com. Cambr. and Hunt. Pasc. 30 E. 3. Hunt. ^ol. 56. Fi^. 7 H. 4. Mich.
fol. 61. Hunt.
It appears that Edward de Lovetot, 30 E. 3. was son and heir of this John
(Robert having no issue,) and had a daughter and heir called Margaret, married
to Sir John Cheyney* Knight. This continued long to the Family of Willughby,
which they had from these Lovetofts.

Patricks part, I suppose, came to William de Sheffeild, Nephew to Nigellus de
Lovetot, possibly by a second Husband of his Sister Margery (if he was not his
own natural son, and so called as the Pope does) however he gave him, by that
addition of Nephew, Ex Autogr. pen. Ios. Widmerpole Ar.
five Virgats of Land in the Town of Wishou, viz. that which Raph de Buney
held, etc. The Witnesses to his Deed were William Picot, William de Villariis,
Richard de Lec^, william de Bowis, Hugh de Rempeston, Thomas de Rempston,
Reginald Picot, Hugh his brother, Robert de Luvetot, William de Valle, Rad.
Guard. William de Wandreshelf, Richard de Wishou, Autogr. pen. eund. I. W.
the Clerk, and others. The said Nigellus de L. gave by another Deed to the
said William de Schefeld, fourscore and one Acres of his Demesne in Wishoe. To
this were Yvo de Heriz, Helias de Marten, Rad. de Iorge, Gervas de Somervill,
Galfr. de Somervill, Hugh de Rempston, William de la Valle, William de
Bradewar, Walter de Wisho, Richard de Greinvill, William de Waldeschef, and
Henry his brother, etc. Richard de Lovetot, of Wishowe, Autogr. Ib.
gave to William de Shefelt the whole Meadow of his Demesne upon the Wald of
Wishowe, viz. that which lay between the Meadow of Warin de Vernun and the men
of Wishow^ William gave him four Marks of Silver for it. The Witnesses were
John de Heriz, Helias de Martini, Hugh de Rempston, Philip de Cortingstok,
William de Waldeself, William Brodey, Walter de Wishou. Warinus de Vernun, and
Margery his Wife also passed Lands to this William de Sheffeld: Autogr.
Witnesses Nigellus de Mundevill, Richard de Lovetoft, William Waldeseiff, etc.
Margery who had late been Wife of Warin de Vernun, confirmed to William
Sheffeud that which William, Father of the said William, had of the gift of the
said Warin de Vernun in Wishou, witness John de Ly^lebyri, etc. William de
Schefend, 22 E. 1. styles himself Lord of Wishou, Autogr. 16. pen. I. W.
and upon his Seal of Arms within the circumscription of his name had a Lion
Rampant, and above the Shield a Crescent in imitation of Lovetots Lion perhaps.

There was a Fine levied, Trin. 35 E. 1/^
35 E. 1. between William de Shefeld, Quer. by Durand de Wydemerpol put in his
place to get or lose, and Mr. Raph Barry, Deforc. of ten Mess. two hundred and
forty Acres of Land, six of Meadow, 20s. and 6d. Ren^ with the Appurtenances in
Wysowe and Willughby, whereof nine Mess. two hundred and sixteen Acres of Land,
six of Meadow, with the Appurtenances, were settled after the decease of William
on Thomas, son of Nicolas de Wydemerpol, and on Elizabeth his Wife, daughter of
the said William, and the heirs which the said Thomas should beg^t on the body
of the said Elizabeth, remainder to the right heirs of Elizabeth. Thomas, son
of Adam Walkelin, of Thorlaston, Ex Autogr. pen. eund. I. W.
and Margery his wife, daughter and one of the heirs of William de Schefeld, of
Wishou, released to Thomas de Wydemerpole, and Elizabeth his wife, and the
heirs of their two bodies, their whole purpart of the service, etc. in Wishou.
Thomas, the son of Nicolas de Wydemerpole, Autogr.
and Elizabeth his wife, 16 E. 3. settled on Robert their son, and Alice his
wife, etc. This continues still with the Family of Widmerpole.

Mundevils part, I guess, was, 28 E. 1. by Richard Ayleston for the sum of 370
Marks paid beforehand, conveyed to William de Berge, Autogr. apud Thorp. pen.
Gab. Armstrong, Ar.
Archdeacon of Berks for his life, and after to John, the son of Sir Robert
Poutrell, Knight, and his heirs.

Robertus Poutrell, mil. de Prestwold. Joh. Poutrell-Matilda Fin. 8 E. 2.
Ricardus Poutrell Matilda-Waltrus de Goteham. Robertus fill. Joh. Perte.-Joana.
Robert. de Pulteney.-Cecilia.
Robertus, 31 E. 3.
Rog. de St. Andr. Will. Poutrell de marit. secund. Prestwo. Fin. 8 E. 2.

This John Poutrell had to wife Matilda, afterward third wife of Sir Roger de
St. Andrew, of Goteham, and two sons, Richard Poutrell, who paid together with
the Abbat of Gero^don, 22 E. 3. for a Knights Fee here 40s. whereof he paid
35s. and the Abbat discharged the other five with his Writ, Lib. feod.
and Robert Poutrell. Richard had three daughters and heirs: E Chart. apud
Thorp.
Maud married to Walter de Goteham, Joan the wife of Robert Pert, and Cecily of
Robert Pulteney, of whom about 32 E. 3. Sir Richard Willughby purchased it, and
his son Hugh, the Clerk, progenitor of the Family of Risley, about 11 R. 2.
passed it to Robert Armstrong, of Thorpe, in the Clotts, whose son John
Armestrong married Felice, the daughter of the said Hugh, afterward wife of
Raph Bingham; In quod Rot. de feod. in ducat. temp. H. 6.
she was said to hold a Knights Fee in Wissawe, which sometimes was Elias
Maundevills. The Family of Armstrong still inherit at Wishou.

Alice, the wife of William Thrumwin, senior, who held a Virgat of Land in
Canock, Esc. 24 E. 1. n. 22.
Staff. held jointly with her Husband twelve Bovats in Wishow, and a Windmill,
etc. 24 E. 1. of Thomas de Rempston by a penny a year, and suit of Court at
Tikhill Castle; and at Wishow Court from three weeks to three weeks.

Mon. Angl. Vol. 1. p. 771.
Nigellus de Lovetot gave one hundred and also twenty Acres of Land in Wishow,
Margaret his wife joining at the latter parcel, and 3s. Rent; Nigellus his son
gave 20s. Rent there, and Elias de Amundevill, the Nephew of Nigellus de
Lovetot gave four Acres and an half of Meadow to the Abbey of Geroudon, in
Leicestershire.

The Church or Rectory of Wissall alias Wisshawe, Part. 5 Pat. 6 E. 6.
late belonging to the Priory of Wirksop; and all Lands and Tenements belonging
to it, King Edward the sixth, Ian. 2. in the sixth year of his Reign, among
other things, granted to Thomas Reve, and George Cotton.

Ms. I. M.
The Vicarage was eight Marks value when the Prior was Patron, now in the Kings
Books it is 4l. 11s. 0d. ob. and.... Stopford, Esquire Patron.

In the Church of Wishow.

Hic jacent Johannes Armstrong, Genesis and Johanna, ux. 3. ejusdem Johannis; qui
quidem Johannes obiit 4 die mensis Julii, Anno Dom. 1485. and praedicta Johanna
ob. in festo decollationis St. Johannis Baptistae, Anno Dom. 1483.

Upon the Tomb is Arg. two bars Azure, the uppermost charged with two
Cinquefoyles, the other with one Or, Teverey.

Hic jacet Thom. Armstrong, Ar. fill. Johannis Armstrong, de Wysowe; qui quidem
Thom. ob. 1 die Januarii, Anno Dom. 1513.

Hic jacet Philippa Armstrong, ux. Tho. Armstrong. fill. Ric. Villers.

Upon a fair Tomb.

Here lies the Bodies of Hugh Armstrong, Esquire and Mary his wife, daughter of
Henry Sacheverell, of Ratcliffe upon Sore, which Hugh died 22 Dec. 1572. and
the said Mary dyed 20 Maii, 1562. About the Tomb are his daughters Matches.
Turvile Or, three Chev. varry impales with Armstrong, three dext. Arms Armed,
and the hands open. Fitz-Herbert gules three Lions Ramp. Or, with a Labell of
three points and a Crescent impales with Armstrong. Raynes Cheque gules and Or
upon a Bend vert, a Moors Head between two Annulets Or, and a Canton Ermine
with a Mullet Or in the middle, impales with Armstrong.

In the window, Arg. on a bend Azure, three Flowers de Lis Arg. Poutrell.

Willoughby. Doomsd. VVilgeby.
SO called from Willowes. Was of diverse Fees. That of Roger de Buslies, Odincar
had before the Change, and paid to the Dane-Geld for his Manor as six Bov. The
Land was six Bovats. There were two Sochm. or one Bov. of this Land, and three
Vill. fifteen Board. having four Car. or Plowes, and thirteen Acres of Meadow. In
the Confessors time this was 20s. when the survey was made in the Conquerours,
10s. This William de Lovetot had in the time of Henry the first, and then gave
the Church to his Priory of Wirkesop, as in Wisoe is noted.

Here of the Fee of Rogerius Pictavensis were two Manors, which Godric and
Erwin had before, and paid for them as six Bovats.. to the public Tax. The
Land was twelve Bovats. There was at the time of the Survey in Demesne one
Carucat. and two Sochm. six Vill. two Board. having two Carucats. There was nine
Acres of Meadow; this was then 22s. value, in the Confessors time it was 50s.
Here was of the Land of the Tayns two Manors, which Sbern and Vlmer had, and
were assessed for them to the Dane-Geld as three Bovats. The Land was three
Bov. Elwin and Erwin held it of the King William, it was then waste. Lib. Dooms.
There were five Acres of Meadow and five Board. This in the Confessors days
was 10s. 4d. but in King Williams, 2s. value. Another small parcel of the Fee
of Henry de Ferrariis, belonging to Lech, rated to the Geld as one Bov.. The
Land was three Bovats. Soc in Badeleye waste also, there was six Acres of
Meadow. And here was also of William Pevrels Fee two Bov.. of Clifton Soc.

About 32 H. 2. Robert de Heritz (Lord of Widmerpole) confirmed the Grant of
Richard, Ex Chart. Fran. Willughby, Ar.
son of Gervas, of Lands in Willughby, to the Knights Hospitallers of St. John's
of Jerusalem, which the Prior granted to Peter, son of Raph and Athelicia,
paying 4s. per annum, and the third part of all Goods for a Mortuary.

Reginald de Colewyke lived an hundred years, but was dead 36 H. 3. he died
seized of nineteen Bovats of Land in Willughby on the Would, Esc. 36 H. 3. n. 38.
for which he gave the King an Horse of 5s. 4d. price, and was to find Sac^ and
Broch when the Army went into Wales; Philip his son and heir was then above
forty years old. Lib. de Fin. Not. and Derb. 16 E. 1. fol. 187. in S^accar.
Fin. apud Not. in O^^. St. Mart. 8 E. 1.
William de Colwick, 16 E. 1. held the third part of a Carucat here.

William de Nodariis (Lord also at Colwick) 8 E. 1. levied a Fine of the
Advowson of this Church to Alan, Prior of Wirkesop. This Sir William de Nowers,
20 E. 1. granted to his son William de Nodariis his Mess. in Wileby, and all
his Lands and Tenements, Rents and Services, Villains and their Sequels, etc.
reserving a Rose yearly, To have to the said William, and the heirs of his body
lawfully begotten; remainder to the right heirs of Sir William.

It appears that Odo, son of Pigot de Wylughby, and John, Ex Lib. de Warrantis
temp. H. 5. in offi^. ducat. fol. 69.
son of Geoffrey de Willughby, Cousin and heir of the said Odo, gave Lands to
the Prior and Covent of Sempringham, the Tenants whereof should be quit of
doing service at the Court of Wysowe. John, son of Geoffrey de Willoughby, Ex
Chart. F^. Willughby, Ar.
25 H. 3. gave an acquittance to Raph Bugge, for all was due to him for Lands
which the said Raph Bugge bought of him in Willoughby, excepting six Marks. He
promised also to get the Deed of Sale confirmed to the said Raph, by the chief
Lords of the Fee, John de Eriz, and Robert le Vavasor. Hugh de Rutinton, 43 H.
3. sold to Richard Bugge a Sack of Wool, Ex Chart. F^. Willughby, Ar.
for security of the delivery whereof he gave him seizin of an Oxgang of Land
in Rutinton. Ralph Torkart, 44 H. 3. confirmed to Richard, son of Ralph Bugge
one Selion of Land, Ib.
with the Appurtenances in Willughby, which he had of the gift of Robert, son
of John Torkart. Roger de Somervill, 42 H. 3. released half the Fishing in
Trent, with a Tenement in Engelby, in Darbyshire.

Here diverse persons conveyed Lands to him, whereby he became a great man; Ib.
he was called Richard Bugge of Wiluby, and his son Richard de Wyllebi, son of
Richard Bugge, who also increased his Patrimony exceedingly, and was a Lawyer,
and very rich, as by his Will made, 31 E. 1. appears, Ib.
wherein he appointed his Body to be buried in the Church of All Saints, in
Willughby, before the Altar of St. Nicolas. Howbeit he died not then, for if he
did, his son was called Sir Richard de Willughby, Senior, all the time of
Edward the second till 18 E. 2. that he died, E^^. 18 E. 2. n. 81.
leaving Richard de Willughby his son above thirty years of age. But he must be
noted particularly in Wollaton, which he acquired of Sir Roger de Morteyn,
where I shall place the Descent, that being the principal residence of this
great Family.

In the Record of Nom. Villarum, 9 E. 2. this Willughby answers for a whole
Villa, Nom. Vill,
and Richard de Willughby, and the Master of the Hospital of Sr. John of
Jerusalem are certified to be Lords of it.

Richard de Willoughby, 1 E. 3. had a Charter of Free Warren for Willoughby,
Wollaton, Chapter 1. E. 3.55.
Cossale, Radington in this County, Riseley, Aylewaston, Engleby, and Maperley
in Darbishire.

Upon the return of an Ad quod Damnum, Esc. 12. E. 3. n. 12.
12 E. 3. it appears the Jury found it not to the Kings loss, if he granted
Richard de Willughby license to give a Mess. and 10l. Rent in Wisoe and
Willughby on the Would, to three Chaplains, every day celebrating Divine Service
in the Parish Church of this Willughby; Orig. 13 E. 3. to. 64.
he gave ten Marks for his License 20 Feb. 13 E. 3.

This Lordship became almost entire to this Family, and continued with it till
Sir Percivall Willoughby sold it. Sir Thomas Hutchinson had the Demesnes which
his son Charles inherits, the Tenements are amongst Freeholders.

The Church, Pat. 7. R. ^. part. 2. m. 3.
7 R. 2. was appropriated to the Priory of Wirksop.

King Edward the sixth, July 13. in the first of his Reign, Pat. 1 E. 6. par. 1.
granted to the Master and College of the Virgin Mary, and All Saints in
Fotheringay, in the County of Nothampton, all the Rectory and Church of
Willowbie, late parcel of the Priory of Wirksop, in this County. And the
Rectory and Church of Rushenden in that County, late parcel of the Monastery
of Lenton. This Rectory, with the Advowson of the Vicarage, Pat. 6 E. 6. par. 5.
6 E. 6. Ian. 11. after the dissolution of Fotheringay, was, amongst other
things, granted to John and William Dodington. B.
It was Robert Earl of Kingstons.

The Vicarage was 8l. when the Prior of Wirksop was Patron. Now in the Kings
Books it is 6l. 18s. 6d. ob. and the Lady Katherine Hutchinson Patroness.

In the Church are old Monuments of the Willughbyes, which are represented in
the two following Pages.

In the midst of the Burying place, in the South I Will at Willoughby.
Under a South Wall, at Willoughby,
Under An Arch Wall in the Quire at Willoughby on the woulds


In the North Alley in the Church at WILLOUGHBY*


Thorp, (a Village.) Buzzard, Bochart.

IT was a Berne of Broughton, which Earl Algar had before the Conquest, and
answered the Tax as ten Bovars. The Land was sufficient for ten Oxen; Lib. ^*
in the Confessors time it was valued at 40s. the Conqueror had it in his own
hand, and then it was a waste Berne; there was twelve Acres of Meadow valued at
2s.

Here was another share of Roger de Busli's Fee belonging to Wisoe, which
Odincar, Lord of Willeby, had before rated to the Geld as seven Bovats. There
was six Acres of Meadow then valued at 2s.

Of the Tain-Land in Willebi, viz. two Bovats. ad geldam, was Soc to Earl
Algars part of this Thorp, in which were two Sochm. with three Carucats, or
Plowes, and three Acres of Meadow belonging to Gatham.

This part, it seems, Se^lo Blundus held, and gave two parts of the Tithe of
his Demesne here to the Priory of Lenton, Reg. Lent.
at the foundation thereof in the time of Henry the first, as many other of
William Peverels dependents did of theirs in other places. Here was likewise a
Mill shortly after given by Robert Bluet, Reg. Lent. p. 39.
and confirmed by Warnerius de Insula to the said Priory, for his own Souls
health and his Brothers, to wit, Hugh the Prior, and Radulph. Thomas Dispenser,
13 Ioh. with the daughter and heir of Hugh de Insula, I^ Lib^. Rub. ^^. 151.
I^q. 13 (...) Pipirelli de Not.
had three Knights Fees in Northauntescir of the honor of Pipirell, of Not.
in Hibernby in Northaunt. two in Lubestorp; in Leicestershire, three parts; and
in Torp, in Not. a fourth part. B.
This part afterward came to the Normanvills. Raph de Normanvill paid 12s. for
a fourth and seventeenth part of a Knights Fee of the honor of Peverell, Test.
de N^v.
in Thorpe, in the time of H. 3.

That of Roger de Buslies Fee was held by the Lovetots of Wirksop and Wisow;
Alice, the daughter of Matilda de Lovetot, held the fourth part of a Knights
Fee of her Mother, and she of Alice, Countess of Ew.

The Kings part Albani Earl of Arundell had, under whom John Bochart held the
third part of a Knights Fee, about the beginning of Henry the third, Te^t. de
N^v.
from whom it was called Thorpe Bossarte.

Hugh de Albini, brother and heir of William de Albini, late Earl of Arundell
made Fine with the King, 18 H. 3. for two thousand five hundred Marks to have
Seizin, Fin. 18 H. 3 pa^. 1. ^. 11.
and the Kings Term till he should come of Age, of all the Lands and Castles,
etc. which were the said Earls his brothers, and of the Lands which came to him
by inheritance from R. Earl of Chester and Lincoln his Uncle, etc. Whereupon
the several Sheriffs then had the Kings Precept to give him Seizin accordingly,
and amongst the rest, the Sheriff of Not. and Derb. besides many other Fees in
the County of Darby, of this third part of a Knights Fee in Thorpe Bochard.

Robert de Derley, 4. E. 1. is found to have held a Message, (...). 4 E. 1. ^.
1.
and Garden in Derley, in the County of Darby, of Henry de Derley, and others,
and the Manor of Netherhaddon, in the same County of the King in Capite, and
the Manor of Wisowe, in this County, of Thomas de Lovetoft paying homage and
10l. per annum, and the Manor of Thorpe, of Rand. Moryn, paying Homage and 1d.
a year for all his Services, and that his son and heir Robert was then fifteen
years old. In the same year, Oct. 26. the King assigned Cecily the wife of the
said Robert de Derly one Mess. and 7l. 5s. of Land and Rent in Thorpe for her
Dowry, Cla^s. 4 E. 1. m. 3.
and the next year after, Claus. 5 E. 1. par. 1. ^. 1. E C^a^t. pen. G. Arms^r.
viz. 5 E. 1. commanded Thomas de Normanvill his Steward, concerning it again.
Rob. de Derley, and Margaret his wife, 33 E. 1. released all their right in the
Advowson of the Church of Thorpe Bozard to John de Segrave and his heirs, and
the year after, viz. 34 E. 1. levied a Fine of one Mess. one Bovat of Land,
Hell. 34 E. 1
and the said Advowson of Thorpe to the said John de Segrave. The said Robert
de Derley, and Margaret his wife, 6 E. 2. levied a Fine, Pasc. 6 E. 2.
by which they settled six Mess. and eleven Bovats of Land, with the
Appurtenances in Thorp Bussard, upon John their son, and Joan daughter of Simon
Pouger, of Wylestrop, and the heirs of the body of the said John; to which Fine
Nicholas de Widmerpole, and Thomas his son, set to their claim.

John de Segrave, Senior, Esc. 19 E. 2. n. 88. and n. 91.
19 E. 2. was found to have held one Mess. and one Bovat of Land in Thorp
Bossard of the Lords of Barowe, as parcel of the Manor of Thorp Bossard,
which Robert de Derley then held of those Lords, and that John de Segrave, son
and heir of Stephen de Segrave, son of that John was his Cousin and heir, and
then above nine years old; he held the Advowsons of the Churches of Thorpe and
Bonington, and diverse Manors in Darbishire, Bretby, and Roscelaston, and Lands
in Repindon and Tikenhal, which the said John, and Christian his wife, then
living, had of the gift of Edmund Earl of Arundell, etc. Elizabeth daughter and
heir of the last John de Segrave carried it to the Family of Mowbray, Dukes of
Norfolk, B.
from whom it descended to the Lord Barkeley, who in Queen Elizabeth's time sold
it to Mr. Armstrong.

Henry Temple, of Thorp, in the Clotts, by his Deed dated on the Feast of St.
George, Ex Autogr. apud Thorpe pen. G. Armstrong collat. per S. K.
38 E. 3. granted to Raph Basset, Knight, and Hugh Annesly 20l. per annum,
during his own life out of his Lands and Tenements in Thorpe, with a clause of
difference. Maud Temple, Widow, 51 E. 3. granted to Robert Armstrong, and
Margaret his wife, the moiety of the Manor of Thorpe, to find her Meat, E^
iisdem Chart. apud Thorp. per S. K.
Drink, and Clothes during her life.

Thomas Columbell, and Margaret his wife, gave one Mess. and six Virgats of
Land here to John Columbell, and Thomas Warin (Parson of this place) 14 H. 4.
and John Armstrong, son and heir of the said Margaret, confirmed it for Thomas
Columbells life.

Nicolas de Thorp, 9 R. 2. was found by the Jury to have held the Moiety of the
Manor of Thorpe, together with Robert Armstrong, Esc. 9 R. 2. n. 51.
and Margaret his wife, who held the other half in right of the said Margaret
of the King in Capite, by the Service of making suit to the Wapentak of
Rishcliff from three weeks to three weeks; and finding two Franke-pledges at
the great Turn of Rishcliff, and Thomas, son and heir of the said Nicolas, was
then twelve years old.

The Family of Armstrong flourished here, and by degrees became possessed of
the whole Township, and some neighboring Manors, as is already noted.

The Kings Commissioners, I^q. de Inclausuris and decas. dom. temp. H. 8.
9 H. 8. sitting at Not. on Monday, the Eve of the Nativity of the blessed
Mary, found that Gabriel Armstrong, Gent. had been, and then was Seized of
eighty, and of ten Acres of Arable Land, apt for the Robertus Armstrong de
Thorp in le Clots 11 R. 2.-Margareta fill. Henrici del Temple vidua 15 R.
2.-Thom. Columbell de Derley, marit. 2. Johannes Armstrong obiit 1421.-Felicia
fill. Hug. Willughby Clerici.-Rad Bingham, marit. 2. Hugo Armstrong ob. 17 E.
4.-Joana. Johannes Armstrong ob. 1485.-Joana fill. Hug. fill. Roberti Teverey de
Stapleford ob. 1483. Thom. Armstrong ob. 5 H. 8.-Philippa fill. Ricardi
Villers.-Joan fill.... Hampton. Gabriel Armstrong ob. 2 E. 6.-Doroth. fill...
Thurland.-Margeria fill. Alex. Buxam. Hugo Armstrong ob. 15 Eliz.-Maria fill.
Hen. Sacheverell de Radcliff. Gab. Armstrong-Margar. fill. Th. Knyveton de
Mircaston. Gilbertus Armstrong-..fill... Rice. Fortune Pacy 2. Gabriel
Armstrong-....fill.... Min. Gabriel Armstrong aet. 20. 1672.-....fill.... T.
Wells. Eliz. Marg. Rebecca.
Hugo.
Gervas. de Scarrington Eliz. fill. and haer. R. Shipman. Hugo Cler. Dan.
Helen. ux. Turvile. Jana ux.. Fitz-Herbert. Luc. ux. Nic. Raynes.
Edm....ux. More....ux. Elton. Francisca.
Alex. Ricardus. Johannes.





sowing of Grain in Thorpe in le Clotts, and so seized, did the fourteenth of
March, 6 H. 7. the said Acres enclose with Hedges and Ditches, and so enclosed
convert to pasture. Enclosing the Lordship (as it does in all places where the
soil is any thing good in this County for certain) has so ruined and
depopulated the Town, that in my time, there was not a House left inhabited of
this notable Lordship (except some part of the Hall, Mr. Armstrong's house) but
a Shepherd only kept Ale to sell in the Church, which is still presentative,
and to it all the Tithes belong, paying 20s. per annum, the Pension to Lenton.

The Rectory of Thorpe was 10l. value, and Mr. Barkeley Patron, Ms. I. M.
now in the Kings Books it is 12l. 9s. 4d. ob. and Gabriel Armstrong is Patron.

Widmerpole. Doomesd. Wimarspol. Wimears Poll or Spear: or, Wide mere poole.
IN Wymarspol, of the Fee of Raph Fitz-Hubert, lay to Boney as much as was
assessed to the Dane-geld, as one Bovat; this continued with Boney. But here
was, of the Tain-Land, a Manor which one William had before the Conquest, Lib.
Dooms.
and paid for it in the public Tax, as eleven Bovats. The Land was two Car.
Aldene had there fourteen Sochm. two Vill. two Servants, with six Plows or Car.
and twenty Acres of Meadow. In the time of King Edward the Confessor, this was
valued at 40s. of the Conqueror at 30s. There four Tains had Lands, which paid
the Geld as six Bovats. The Land was one Car. Alden had there one Sochm. with
three Oxen in Plow, and six Acres of Meadow. In the Confessors time this was
20s. then when the Survey was taken 6s.

It seems there was almost continually suits between the Family of Crumbewell
and that of Heriz, and their posterity for this place: for Raph de Crumwelle, 1
R. 1. is certified by the Sheriff Raph Murdach to owe five Marks, Pip. 1. R. 1.
for hastening his right here against Robert de Heriz; but the Record says he
yet had not right. Raph de Crumbewell, 5 H. 3. claimed against Ivo de Heriz
three parts of a Knights Fee in Wydmerpol, Pl. apud Westminster. Trin. 5 H. 3. to. 22
in the County of Not. whereof Haldoen his Ancestor was seized in the time of
King Henry the elder ( viz. the first) from whom the right descended thus, viz.
from Haldoen to Hugh his son, from him to Raph his son, whose son and heir
Raph, was Father of the said Raph de Crumbewell then claiming. The great suit
in the time of Henry the sixth was between Raph Lord Crumbwell, and Sir Henry
Pierpont, as in Gunnaston will be noted, where the descent of this Family of
Heriz shall also be inserted, being Lords of that as well as of this place.

William de Heriz, by the consent of his wife Aelina (daughter and heir of
Robert de Whatton) and of Robert de Heriz his brother, Reg. Lent. 109.
gave Arnald his man, of Widmerpole, with his whole Land, viz. four Bovats, and
all customs and services thereto belonging, and his Mill at Widmerpole, and
Wood out of his Woods at Huccanal, to make and mend it for ever; and half his
Mill at Gonolveston, and the like power in his Woods there, and diverse other
things, to God and the Church of Lenton upon the great Altar, whereon this gift
was offered by himself and his wife, in the presence of very many Witnesses,
Robert de Heriz, and William his Uncle, Simon son of Richard, and Herbert his
brother, William Pietas (Pity), and Roger his brother, Robert the Sheriff, and
William his brother, Robert, Raph, and William his son, Henry the Clerk of the
Sheriff, and Henry of Huccanal, and Henry Medicus (Leech), Roger de Burthon,
and Peter Palmer, Reginald de Aslacton, Walter de Whatton, and Richard his son,
Ambrose, and John, Plungun, and Fulc servants of Sir Vlf de Wydmarpole, and
Gilbert the Parson, and many others there named; Robert (de Heriz) his brother
confirmed the gifts, and gave his whole Portion of Corn, growing on his Land at
Widmerpole, with his Body to be there ( viz. at Lenton) Christianly buried.

Ivo de Heriz, 13 Joh. is certified to hold four Knights Fees of the honor of
Peverell, ^ib. Rubr. I^q. de Hon. etc. Hon. Piperelli, fol. 151.
in Not. and Derb. viz. in Oxcroft half a Fee, in Gunnelveston half a Fee, in
Widmarepol one Fee, in Tibbesell Oggedestone, etc. one Fee. --

The last John de Heriz by Fine, 18 E. 2. settled this Manor of Gunaldeston,
Trin. 18 ^. 2
and the Darbishire Lands, Winfeild and Tibghelf on himself for life; then on
Roger Beler for his life; then to Roger, the son of the said Roger Beler, and
Margaret the elder daughter of Richard de la Rivere, Knight, and the heirs of
their Bodies; then to Thomas Beler, son of Roger, and to Margaret, the younger
daughter of the said Richard de la Revere, and the heirs of their Bodies;
remainder to the right heirs of the said John de Heriz.

This Manor, and that of Gunaldeston, after they had passed through the
Families of Beler and Swillington, by the help of another Fine levied 9 H. 5.
or 1 H. 6. by Sir John Gray, of Ingleby, in the County of Lincoln, and Margaret
his wife, daughter and (after the death of her brother John) heir of Sir Roger
Swillington, wherein the last remainder was to the right heirs of Sir John
Heriz, and by a great suit in the time of Henry the sixth were, amongst others,
upon atonement obtained by the Family of Perpoint, descended of Sarah, sister
of Sir John Heriz; and the Right Honorable Henry, Marquess of Dorchester is
now Lord of this Manor by inheritance from his Ancestors of Heriz.

There is an Ancient Family which had their Surname from their residence here,
which are still owners of considerable Lands in this Lordship. Ex Autog. pen.
Ios. Widmerpole Ar.
The first that I have noted of them, out of their own Evidences, is in the
time of Henry the third, where John, the son of John de Leke, conveyed three
Bovats, and one Message in Widmerpole to Nicolas, the son of Henry de
Tydesworth; and in another Deed Walter, son of Walter Salmon, of Widmerpole,
and Alice his wife released all their claim in three Bovats, and one Mess. viz.
those two which John de Valeye, Father of Alice, held of John Plunchun, and one
Bovat of John de Heriz, to Nicolas, son of Henry de Diddisworth. William de la
Valeye, 12 E. 1. of Widmerpole passed four Henricus de Diddisworth Nicolas de
Widmerpole. Nicolas de Widmerpol.-Matilda 12 E. 1.-Alicia, 10 E. 2. Thom. de
Widmerpol, 15 E. 2.-Elizabetha fill. and haer. Will. 10 E. 2. 31 E. 1. Robertus
de Widmarpole-Alicia, 16 E. 3. Nicolas de Widmerpole Johannes de Widmerpole,
Ar.-Fina, 16 R. 2. Nicolas de Widmerpole-Elizabetha, 22 H. 6. Johannes de
Widmerpole, senior, 5 H. 7. Johannes de Wydmerpole, Ar. 6 H. 8. Edwardus
Widmerpole de Everton, 6 Eliz.- Ex Copia Lib. Visitat. pen. Reason Mellish, Genesis
Dorothea fill.... Danby Com. Ebor. Will. Widmerpole 6 Eliz.- Ex Copia Lib.
Visitat. pen. Reason Mellish, Genesis
Anna fill..... Grimston de Need, in Com. Ebor. Georgius Widmerpole de Wid.
1614.- Ex Copia Lib. Visitat. pen. Reason Mellish, Genesis
Jana fill. Termine Russell de Torchaster. Josephus Widmerpole sine prol.-Anna
fill. Mat. Palmer mil. relict... Daniel Nicol. Josephus Widmerpole. Nicolas.
Georgius.
Thom. Hug.








Robertus, 10 E. 2. Ex Autog. in Chartular. de Widmerpol^.




Willielmus de Sheffeildnepos Nigelli de Lovetot. Rob. Will. de Shefeud Dom. de
Wisou, 15 E. 1.-Avicia, 27 E. 1. Thom. de Widmerpol, 15 E. 2.-Elizabetha fill.
and haer. Will. 10 E. 2. 31 E. 1. Tho. fill. Adae Walkelin.-Margeria.


Acres of Land there to Nicolas, Ex Autogr. Ib.
son of Nicolas de Widmerpole, and Maud his wife. John, son of Sir John de
Heriz, Knight, 31 E. 1. granted and released to Nicolas, son of Nicolas de
Widmerpole, marriage, relief, etc. for Lands which the said Nicolas held of
William, son of Robert de la Valeye, then within age. Thomas, son of Nicolas de
Widmerpole, married Elizabeth, daughter and heir of William de Sheffeld, of
Wisou, as there is shown, by whom he had issue Robert, which made a great
increase in the Patrimony of this Family there and elsewhere, Ms. I. M.
which yet continues at this place.

The Rectory was 15l. and Mr. Perpoint Patron. Now in the Kings Books it is
14l. 16s. 0. ob. and the Marquess of Dorchester Patron.

Staunton on the VVolds. Stony Town.
THere was a Manor in Stauntune of the Fee of R. Earl Moriton, which before
the Conquest Stori (a great man in these parts) had, and discharged it to the
public Tax for 3.. Bova^. The Land was one Car. There Alured the man (or
Tenant) of the Earl had one Car. six Vill. three Board. with two Car. (or
P^owes) there was twenty Acres of Meadow. Lib. Dooms.
This in the Confessors time was 40s. value, in the Conquerours 20s. Another
Manor here of the (...) Earls Fee, Frane had before the Conquest, and paid to
the Geld for it as one Bov.. the Land was half a Car. when the survey was made;
three Vill. had there one Car. or Plow. In Stantune belonged to Plumptree as
much as paid the Dane-Geld for half a Bovat. There one Vill. had five Oxen in
Flow, this was of the Fee of Roger de Busli. Here was also some of William
Peverells Fee of the Soc of Clifton, which paid the Geld for two Bov.. which
with what was of that sort in Willebe, Cauord, and Normantune, was two Car. of
Land, and there were upon it four Sochm. one Vill. one lord. having three Car.
There William Peverell had in Stantune one Car. (or Plow) and two Acres of
Meadow.

Peter Fitz (or son of) Osbert held the fifth part of a Knights Fee here, Test.
de Nev.
in the time of Henry the third, of the Honor of Peverell, and about 21 E. 1.
Cecilia, daughter of Seman de Stokes held the eighth part of a Fee of the same
Honor. Pl. de Banco. Mich. 18 E. 1. to. 71.
Nicolas, son of Seman de Stoke, could not say in a suit he brought but that
three others, not named, held Lands in Staunton upon Seggeswold, besides Thomas
de Rempston, and Cecilia his wife, who were therefore dismissed.

Robert de la Sauce held here the eighth part of a Knights Fee of the Honor of
Peverell all the time of Henry the third, Test. de Nev.
and is mentioned still, 11 E. 1.

There was a Fine levied at York, 30 E. 1. between Raph de Vylers, Mich. 30 ^.
1.
Quer. and John de Lymare, and Cecilia his wife, Deforc. of the Manor of
Staunton by Keworth, whereby it was settled on the said John and Cecily, and
the heirs which he should beget on her Body; remainder to the right heirs of
Cecily; from this man it is like it had the name of Stanton Lymar.

There was another Fine, 10 E. 2. between Nicolas de Wydmerpole, T^in. 10 E. 2
and Alice his wife, and Robert, son of the said Nicolas, Quer, and Durand de
Wydmerpol, Deforc. of six Mess. and eight Virg. of Land, with the Appurtenances
in Widmerpole, and Staunton by Wydmerpol, thereby settled on the said Nicolas,
Alice, and Robert for life; remainder to Thomas, son of Nicolas, and the heirs
of his body; remainder to the right heirs of Nicolas. John, son of John de
Staunton Lymar, Es^. 3 E. 3. W. 17.
held at the day of his death the Manor of Stanton Lymar, of Thomas de
Widmerpole by the service of the service of the eighth part of a Knights Fee,
Cecily and Margaret, 3 E. 3. were found to be his dau^^ters and heirs.

The Family of Sibthorp, as in that place may be seen, had interest here. So
that of Swillington, as in Boney; and so had that of Clifton, as in that place
may be observed, which now remains entire owners of this whole Enclosed and
depopulated Lordship.

The Rectory was 46s. 8d. and Mr. Stainton Patron. Now in the Kings Books it is
2l. 13s. 4d. and Sir Ger. Clifton Patron, as his Ancestor was in the time of
Edward the third.

Keyworth. Doomsd. Cauord.
PRobably Cai's Hall or Village.

Here Stori (named in Stanton) before the Normans came had a Manor rated to
the Tax as three Bov.. The Land of it was sufficient for one Plow, or one Car.
Lib. Dooms.
There Alured the man or Tenant of R. Earl Moriton, whose Fee it was, had two
Sochm. one Vill. one Board. with one Car.. This in King Edwards time was 20s. in
King Williams time 10s. Here was some of Roger de Busli's Fee, Soc to
Normanton, rated to the Geld as two Bov. There two Vill. had half a Car. this
belonged to Plumptre, but of his Fee here were also three Manors, which before
he came, Harold, Richard, and Frane had, rated to the public Tax as six Bov.
^/3. The Land was two Car. There Roger had four Sochm. three Vill. two Board.
having three Car. There was sixteen Acres of Meadow. In King Edwards time this
was 30s. in King Williams 17s.

Of Raph Fitz-Huberts Fee, In Caworde, Frane had a Manor before the Conquest,
rated to the Tax at five Bov. The Land one Car.. There afterward Raph had one
Car.. and three Acres of Meadow. In King Edwards time valued at 20s. in King
Williams at 10s. This usually went with Boney, or most of it.

That of Roger de Buslies Fee, which went not with Plumptre, seems to have been
held by the Family of Malnoers, or Malnuers, Lords of Holme. A Fine was levied,
24 H. 2. before the King at Northampton, Regist. de Thurg. 150. pen. Cecil.
Cooper, Ar.
the Tuesday next after the Feast of St. Matthew, between the Prior and Canons
of Thurgarton, and Leonius de Malnuers, of the Land of Kaword, for which the
said Leonius gave them 7s. Rent in Meadow, viz. four Acres wanting a Rood in
Estemore, in the Manor of Holme, and all Wolrichemedwe. Walter de Hulmo at the
request, Ib. 68.
and with the consent of Agnes his wife, and John his heir gave the Church of
Kaeworth, to God and the Church of St. Peter at Thurgarton, for the health of
his own Soul, and his Ancestors, and for the soul of Swain de Hoiland, his
wives Father, and the soul of Robert, son of Levenad, who gave the same Church
to the said Priory. John, son and heir of the said Walter, confirmed the gift.
Ib.
James de Keworth, son of this John, enfeoffed John Barry of Lands in
Basingfeld, as in that place may be observed, and I suppose here also.

Henry Perpount, and Annora his wife, Fl. Pas^. 12 E. 1. rot. 46. fol. 111*
12 E. 1. claimed against Maud Barry (wife of John) two Mess. and five Virgats
of Land in Kewrth, and against Richard Barry (her son) five Mess. and six
Virgats of Land, and ten shillings Rent in the same Town, and Basingfeild, of
which James de Kewrth, Cousin of the said Annora, whose heir she then was, was
seized. Richard Barry pleaded the said James dyed not seized, and the Jury
found for him accordingly.

The Jury found, 13 E. 1. that John Barry, quondam Husband of Maud had his Bull
and Boar at Keiworth, Pl. de Banc. Mich. 13 E. 1. to. 22. fol. 152.
free to go and eat in the Corn, Medows, or any other place in the said Town,
where he would. And that it was as the said Maud alleged in her answer by
reason of the Tenements and Advowson of the Church in the said Town, in which
she was at that time endowed: Therefore Thomas de Rempston, who had taken and
impounded (...) Bull because he eat of his Corn, was in mercy (cast). These
Barryes were Lords of Torlaston, where more concerning them is noted, B.
the heir of the last of them being married to... Pendock. William Pendocke,
and John his son sold their interest here to diverse Freeholders, and the
Advowson of the Church to Sir George Parkins in our time. This Manor and
Advowson, whereof Thomas Barry dyed seized, Esc. 19 H. 8.
18 H. 8. March 4. leaving John his son and heir, about twelve years old, was
held of Sir William Perpount of Holme, except one Mess. and four Bovats of
Land, held of the heirs of Henry Ellershawe in socage by fealty, and 6d. rent
yearly. There yet remains of this last name in the Town.

Hugh, son of Hugh de Somervile, of Keword, gave to God and the Church of
Lenton one Bovat of Land in Keword, Regist. de Lenton in Bibl. Cotton 105.
which Azor held, to which Deed were Witnesses Mr. Richard his brother, and
Gervas his brother, Robert Andegavensis, etc. Gervas, son of Gervas de Clifton,
Stephen the Priest of Wilford, and Elias his son, Geoffrey Lutterell. Gervase
de Somervile acknowledged to owe to the Lord of Boney yearly, Ib. 108.
the service of the fourth part of a Knights Fee for twelve Bovats (or Oxgangs)
which he held of him in Kaworth, and 8s. for ten Bovats more of another part.
Walter de Holme passed the Church of Kaword to Geoffrey de Somerville. Reg.
Lent. 108.


Philip Marc, and Anne his wife purchased Lands of several people here, which
was of the Fee of Hugh de Bellomonte (which I take to be of that which was Earl
Moritons) nine Bovats, whereof the said Philip (who was Sheriff of Not. and
Derb. the latter part of King John's Reign, Rot. Pip.
and seven or eight years of the beginning of Henry the thirds) gave with his
Body to Lenton, where it lay honorably entombed, as his said wifes
confirmation imports. And Sabina, who had been the wife of Hugh Bellomont, for
4s. and a quarter of Rye in her very great need, released her Dower in three
Bovats and an half of the nine to the said Priory, and swore upon the holy
Gospels (a custom very common in those times and occasions) that she would
never go against her release, nor any way else disturb the quiet possession of
them. Here then were other owners, as Robert de Orleans, and one Robert de
Glamorgan, Knight, who settled his Lands here, and his Rent out of Bradmere,
upon his brother William Glamorgan for his Life, in the year 1290. Mr. William
de March, the King of Englands Treasurer was a witness to his Deed.

Richard de Lec, 7 R. 1. paid one Mark to have seizing of four Bovats in
Chaword, Pip. 7 R. 1.
which he forfeited for being in Rebellion with Earl John (a fault whereof many
of this County were at that time guilty). Sampson, son of Alan de Leke, 44 H.
3. for four Marks of Silver, Reg. Le^t. Ib.
released to the Prior and Covent of Lenton four Bovats, which he had recovered
in the Kings Court; so did Henry, son and heir of Gervase de Wilford, which his
said Father recovered in the said K. Court before the Justices Itinerant at
Not. 43 H. 3. William, son of Richard Sampson de Leyk, 27 E. 1. remised to
William de Schefeud, Ex Autogr. pen. T^o. Rosell de Ratcliff, Ar.
and Avicia his wife, Sir James de Sutton, and Agnes his wife, and to Alice
Barry, and their heirs the Homages, fealty, wards and relief of the Lands and
Tenements which Raph Bugge had of the gift of Samson de Leyk, his Grandfather
in Keworth, and granted that he the said William Samson would defend them
against all men from the view of Frank-pledge.

There was a Fine levied, Pasc. 4 E. 2.
4 E. 2. between Robert, son of Robert, son of Henry de Keworth, and Alice
daughter of Gervas le Frankeleyn, of Keworth, Quer. and Gervas le Frankleyne,
Deforc. of one Mess. five Bovats and an half of Land, with the Appurtenances,
thereby settled on the said Robert, and Alice, and the heirs of their bodies;
remainder to the right heirs of the said Robert. There was another Fine, Pasc.
19 E. 2.
19 E. 2. between Gerv. Frankeleyn, of Keworth, Quer. and John Rosell, of
Cotegrave, Deforc. of four Mess. and five Virgats of Land, with the
Appurtenances in Keworth and Wishowe, by it settled on the said Gervase for
life; remainder to Richard, son of Robert le Iorz, of Lughburgh, and Agnes his
wife, and the heirs of their bodies; remainder to Agnes, daughter of the said
Gervas and the heirs of hers; remainder to the right heirs of the said Gervas.

Two Tofts and three Bovats here in the Tenure of William Sewell, Part. 12.
Pat. 38 H. 3
were Nov. 24. 38 H. 8. granted by the King to John Bellowe, and John
Broxholme, Esquire, and their heirs, which late belonged to the Monastery of
Derley, in Darbishire.

Queen Eliz. Feb. 27. in the eighteenth of her Reign, granted to Anthony
Rotsey, Pat. 18 E part. 7.
and William Fisher one Mess. and seven Bovats, with another Mess. and Croft,
and a Toft, and half a Bovat, in the occupation of John Sewell, etc. lately
belonging to the Monastery of Lenton in Keyworth.

The Rectory was 8l. and Mr. Barry Patron. Ms. I. M.
Now it is 7l. 5s. 0. in the Kings Books, and Isham Parkins, Esquire, Patron.

Boney.
PRobably from Reeds. This place in the time of King Edward the Confessor was
the Freehold of one Levenot, who had other considerable places in this County,
as Kirkeby in Ashfeild, Annesley, Lib. Dooms.
and some others, in all which Raph (son of, or) Fitz-Hubert is certified in
the Book of Doomsday to be his Successor; his Manner in Bonei was rated to the
public Taxation as two Carucats. The Land was (sufficient for six Plows, or)
six Carucats. There Raph had in Demesne two Carucats, and eighteen Villains,
and seven Sochm. and two Board. having seven Car. There was a Church and a
Priest, and one Mill 12d. and one hundred and sixty Acres of Meadow, and small
Wood ten qu. long and one broad. In the Confessors time it was 4l. value, when
the survey was made in the Conquerours 60s.

Odo de Boneia held much Land hereabouts of the Fee of Raph Fitz-Hubert in the
time of Henry the first, Reg. Lent. 104.
for he then gave the Church of Barton, and his part which was half the Church
of Adinborow, and two parts of the Tithe of his Demesne here and in Bradmere,
to the Church of Lenton at or near the foundation. And not very long after one
Edward, and Aeliz his wife, granted, Ib. 4.
to the Church of the holy Trinity at Lenton, whatsoever his Ancestor Odo gave:
to his Deed, amongst others, were Witnesses Raph Bar, Ranulf de Insula, Hugh
de Boney and Raph his son, Ernald and his sons.

There was a Precept to Ivo de Heriz, 3 H. 3. to let Philip Marc have the
custody and marriage of Raph, Claus. 3 H. 3 m. 14.
son and heir of Anchor de Fressunville; and another to the Sheriff of Not. 6
H. 3. to take into the Kings hand the Lands which Julian, Fi^. 6 H. 3. part. 1.
m. 2.
the daughter of Hubert Fitz-Raph died, seized of, the marriage of her son and
heir being granted by the King to Philip Marc. The sea^ of this Barony was at
Cruch, now Criche in Darbishire. Raph de Fressenville held of the Barony of
Hubert Fitz-Raph five Knights Fees, Test. de Nev.
and a tenth part in Boney, Barton, Bradmere, Scarde^live, and Cruch, with the
Appurtenances. The King being at Not. December. 1. 36 H. 3. granted to Raph de
Frescheville free Warren in all the Demesne Lands of his Manors of Boney in
Notts. C^. 36 H. 3. m. 26.
Cruch, Scardeclive, Alwoldeston, Chelardeston in Derbishire, and Cusswortham
in Yorkshire.

Raph de Frechevill confirmed to the Abbey of Derley the gifts of his Ancestors,
(...) Regist. de Derley. p. 115.
viz. of William Fitz-Raph* and Robert his Son, of the Advowson of St. Michael
in Darby, and the Chapel of Alwoldeston; of Hubert Fitz-Raph, the Advowson of
the Churches of Cruch and Scardecliff, and Chapel of Palterton, and some
other things which he gave for the souls of Edelina and Sara his wives. The
said Hubert Fitz-Raph in the year 1175. confirmed to these Canons the Land of
Pentri^, and of Rippele, Ib. 134.
and of Ulkerthorp, and that Land of Chilwell, which belonged to the said
Manor of Pentriz, which Land his Father gave, and Raph Fitz-Stephen afterward
granted, and diverse other things this Hubert gave them, and so did Hubertus de
Ria Mon. Angl. Vol. 2. p. 900.
Radulphus fill. Huberti temp. Will. Conq. Willielmus fill. Rad Robertus.
Sara-Hubert fill. Rad 1175.-Edelina ux. 1, Ankerus de Fre^^unvile.-Juliana
defunct. 6 H. 3. Radulphus de Freskenvill, 3 H. 3.-Willimina. Ankerus de
Frescheynville defunct. 53 H. 3.-Amicia. Radulphus de Freschenvill aet. 22. and
amplius 15 E. 1.-Margareta sor. and haer. Nic. Musard Domini de Staveley ob. 7
E. 3. Ankerus de Frechevilie defunct. 14 R. 2. Rad. de Frecheville Chr. mort. 4
H. 5. Gervasius Idiora haer. frat. 4 H. 5. Petrus de Frecheville Armig. H. 6.
ob. 1503.-Matilda ob. 1482. Johannes de Frecheville ob. Feb. 5. 24 H. 7.-....
fill. and haer.... de Nutthill. Johan. Frechevil aet. 15. and marit. ante ob.
Patris.-Elizabetha fill. Joh. Leake de Sutton. Dom. Petrus Frecheville aetat.
16. an. 20 H. 8. ob. 5 P. and M.-Elizab. fill. Ric. Tempest, mil. Petrus
Frechevil-Eliz. fill. Gerv. Clifton, mil.-..... Dom. Petrus Frecheville-....
fill. Fleetwood. Johannes Frecheville creatus dom.-.... Frecheville de Staveley
per Car. ^. Feb. 17. 1664. 16 Car. 2.-Sarah fill.-...Harington.-.. fill. Hen* de
Vic. Bar. Marin s. p.-Carol Dom. St. John. Eliz.-Philip. fill. Ph. Warwick, mil.
Francesca-....... Culpeper.




... Hug. Annasley.-Joana-Johannes Cranmer.



Radul. Rad. de Fr. de Palterton ob. 23 E. 3. Joh. de Frecheville de Paltert.
ob. 48 E. 3. Johannes de Frecheville.







Hubert de Norw. Adam de Cantia. Eudo Dapifer W. 1.

this Raph de Frecheville, who made an agreement with Raph the Abbat, the
Saturday next before the Feast of St. Gregory, the Pope, at Wynefeld in the
year 1243. that the Canons should have their Estovers out of the Wood and Hay
of Criche, Ib.
and confirmed the gift of his Mother Julian of a Bovat of Land in Scardi^lyff.

By an Inquisition taken at Boney, Esc. 45 H. 3. n. 24.
45 H. 3. concerning the Lands which were heretofore Raph de Freschervills (son
and heir of Anchor and Julian before mentioned) in this County, it appears that
he held this Manor in Capite, of the King by the service of a Knights Fee, and
that then there were at Boney in Demesne and Villenage sixty and two Bovats of
Land, each Bovat worth 6s. 8d. which makes the sum of 20l. 13s. 4d. Item, in
Rent of Assize of the Freeholders 55s. 9d. Item, in Cottages there 24s. 9d.
Item, the Capital Mess. of Boney worth 6s. 8d. per annum. Item, a Windmill one
Mark. Item, the said Raph held of John de Musters half a Knights Fee of the Fee
of Richmond in Rotingdon, for which he paid the said John 5s. per annum. And
that Anchor his son and heir was then of full Age. Anchor being dead 53 H. 3. his
wife Amicia was found to be in the Kings disposal. Esc. 53 H. 3. n. 20.
There was an Inquisition taken 15 E. 1. at Not. before Thomas de Normanvile,
Es^. 15 E. 1. n. 5.
to discover what Lands Ancher de Frechevile held of King Henry the third in
his the said Thomas his B^ilywick upon the others of Sir John de Leek, Knight,
Thomas de Rempston, Nicolas de Widmerpole, Henry Puttrel, Mich. de Leek, etc.
who said that at his death the said Anchor held of King Henry the third the
Manor of Chruch, in the County of Darby, worth 20l. per annum, by the Service
of half a Knights Fee, and the Manor of Palterton in the same County worth
10l. for half a Knights Fee, and the Manor of Boney in this County of Not. by
the service of two Knights Fees, which was of the value of 20l. per annum; and
they said that he likewise held of Sir Raph Musart, in Woodthorp in Darbishire
100s. of Land for a penny per annum; and of Sir William Bardolf, in Alwaston,
in that County 100s. Land by the service of two Knights Fees; and that Raph de
Frecheville, being then above the Age of twenty two years, was his son and heir.

Esc. 19 E. 2. n. 98.
Roger Belers, 19 E. 2. held the Manor of Cruch, of the King in Capite, for a
Knights Fee, Raph de Frechevill aliened it (as he did all or most of his part
of the Barony) Raph, son of Raph de Frechevill put his claim to the Fine which
the said Raph de Frechenvill levied of the Manor of Boney, Mich. 18 E. 2.
18 E. 1. to the said Roger Beler and his heirs for ever, who held two parts of
this Manor of Boney; Margaret, the wife of Raph de Frecheville holding the
third in Dower. Roger Beler his son and heir was then above seven years old.
Alice, the wife of the said Roger Beler besought the said Margaret, who was the
wife of Raph de Frecheville, for her reasonable Dower out of the Manor of
Crich.

From this time this Noble Family of Frecheville have been resident at their
Manor of Stavely, in Darbishire, the present seat of John Lord Frecheville,
two parts whereof, with the Advowson of the Church, Esc. 7 E. 3. n. 27.
this Margaret about 7 E. 3. was about to settle on Anchor the son of Raph de
Frecheville, deceased and the heirs of his Body. There were two Raphs, sons of
Raph de Frecheville, Esc.
the elder whereof settled on the younger about 10 E. 3. the Manor of
Palterton. Raph Frecheville Chivaler, Fin. 14 R. 2. m. 2.
son and heir of Anchor Frecheville, deceased 14 R. 2. Ian. 30. had respite of
Homage. Raph Frecheville, Knight, died seized of two parts of the Manor of
Staveley the Monday before the Feast of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, Esc.
4 H. 5 n. 18.
4. H. 5. Gervase his brother and heir was an Idiot, and above thirty years old
at that time. Peter Frecheville, Fin. 27 H. 6. m. 2.
son and heir of Gervase, deceased 27 H. 6. had respite of Homage May 17. that
year. John, son of Peter Frechewell, one Inq. says, died seized of two parts
of the Manor of Staveley, 27 Ian. 24 H. 7. another, Feb. 5. but his Tomb, Ian.
20. 1509. His son John was then about fifteen years old, and had been long
married to Elizabeth, daughter of John Leek, of Sutton, Esquire, before his
Fathers death. Peter Frecheville, 20 H. 8. was found to be Cousin and heir of
the former Peter, Virtute offic. b^ndell. 2. Ex Coll. St. Lo Kniveton.
viz. son of John, son of John, son of the said Peter. This last Peter was
Knighted at Leith by the Earl of Hertford, 1544. and had to wife Elizabeth,
daughter of Sir Richard Tempest, etc.

Robert de Swillington, Knight, was by the Jury, Esc. 15 R. 2. par. 1. n. 61.
15 R. 2. found to have held this Manor of Boney in right of his wife
Margaret, as also Gonaldeston, and Widmerpole, and other Lands, and that Robert
[rather Roger] de Swillington was his heir.

This Magaret was one of the daughters and heirs of Roger Belers. Richard de
Crumewell, Lib. de Fin. Hill. 9 R. 2. Ib. Mich. 9 R. 2.
Chr. son of Amicia, sister of Roger de Belers, Knight, held a place of Meadow
called Eremitesmedow, and two Acres in Milnewong, in Boney.

Margaret Ailesford, Esc. 6 H. 5. p. 216, 217.
late wife of Roger Swillington Chr. 6 H. 5. had the Manor of Boney to her and
her heirs, and Robert Swillington died seized of it. Robert Swillington was
then found Cousin and heir of the said Margaret.

Margaret, the wife of John Gray, 8 H. 5. was found sister and heir of Robert
Swillington Chr. of this Manor. Esc. 8. H. 5. p. 259.


Raph Lord Crumwell, Pat. 9 H. 6. part. 2. m. 6. Esc. 8 H. 6^ n. 40.
9 H. 6. had this Manor and Cruch; though the Jury, 8 H. 6. found that
Margaret, who was the wife of Sir John Gray, Knight, the daughter of Sir Roger
Swillington, Knight, died seized amongst others of the Manors of Wydmerpole,
and Gonaldeston, and the Advowsons of the Churches, and of this Manor of
Boney, of one Mess. three Tofts, four Virgats, and one Bovat of Land, and
twelve Acres of Meadow in Stanton on the Would, and the Advowson of the Church,
two Virg. in Hickling, one Cottage, three Tofts, four Virg. in Sutton and
Bonington held of Mary, late wife of Sir Thomas Green, of Kegworth, of two
Virg. in Great Leek, etc. and that Elizabeth, the wife of Robert Sampson, of
the County of Suffolk, was her Cousin and next heir, viz. the daughter of
Thomas, son of Robert, son of Adam, Father of Robert, Father of Roger, Father
of the said Margaret, and that the said Elizabeth was then above thirty years
of Age. There was a Fine levied, 4 E. 4. by Humfrey Bourchier, Knight, Lord
Crumwell, Claus. 4 E. 4. m. 15. and 5 E. 4. m. 23.
and Joan his wife one of the heirs of Raph Crumwell, Knight, late Lord
Crumwell, and Sir Gervase Clifton, Knight, and Maud his wife, another of the
heirs of the said Lord Crumwell, to Thomas Tirrell, Knight, Thomas Billing, and
Richard Illingworth, of the Manors of Boney and Stanford on Sore, and seven
Mess. four Tofts, one Dove-coat, twelve Bovats of Land, fifty Acres of Meadow,
and 30^. Rent in Staunton on the Would, Hickling, Great and Little Leek, Sutton,
Boninton, and Bradmere, and the Advowson of Stanton Church in this County, and
of the Manor of Bredes^ale, called the Netherhall, and sixteen Mess. four
hundred Acres of Meadow, two hundred and twenty of Pasture, two of Wood, and
26s. Rent in Breydeshall, in the County of Darby.

Robert Dixson, of Quadring, Claus. 8 E. 4 m. 23, 24.
in the County of Lincoln, Husbandman, Cousin and heir of Nicholas Dixson,
Clark, released, 8 E. 4. to Sir Richard Illingworth all his right in the
Manors of Boney and Stanford, and the rest of the aforesaid Lands.

Richardus Illingworth, miles 8 E. 4. Cap. Ba^o 2 E. 4. Radulphus
Illingworth-Agnes. Ricardus Illingworth-Elizab. fill. Ric. Boughton, Ar.
Georgius Barloe-Joana. Thom. Barley-Dorothea Meverell. Humfredus
Barlo-Elizabetha fill. Aden Berisford de Fenny-Bently Com. Derb.-Ricardus
Parkins, Ar. marit. secundus ob. 1603. Ursula. Georgius Parkins, miles-Maria
fill. Ed. Isham de Walmercasil. in Cantia. Isham Parkins ob. 1671. 2 Thom.
Parkins vicecom. 1672. Cressy Parkins.
1 Theophilus ob. ante patrem fine prole.-...
Ricardus



Joh. Kniveton-Alicia. Tho. Kniveton A^tinct.
...Dethick Maria. Johannes Dethick-
Anna ux. Joh. Eaton.



Thom. Parkins de Mattisfelde in Com. Berks Willielmus Parkins Ricardus Parkins
Humfredus Barlo-Elizabetha fill. Aden Berisford de Fenny-Bently Com.
Derb.-Ricardus Parkins, Ar. marit. secundus ob. 1603.



There was an Indenture dated Febr. 25. 19 E. 4. between Raph Illingworth,
Claus. de an. 20 E. 4. m. 6. in dorso.
Esquire, on one part, and Richard Boughton, Esquire, on the other. That where
William Chauntre, Dean of the new work of Leicester, and diverse others, have
recovered the Manor of Boney, in Not. and other Lands in Boney by a Writ of
Right; and where the same William, and the rest were enfeoffed in diverse Lands
in Kirkeby in Ashfeild, Kirkby Woodhouse, and in Hardwick, in the County of
Not. to them and their heirs, by a Deed dated Ian. 20 in the year aforesaid;
and where they be also enfeoffed in the Manor of Stanford, in the County of
Not. and the Manor of Bradsale, in the County of Darby, and of Lands in
Stanford, and Bradsale, and in certain Lands in Apurknoll, and Oneston, in the
County of Derby, and Lands in Penington, in the Parish of Leghe, and in
Leghkirk, in the County of Lancaster. The Intent of the said Recovery and
Feoffment is thus. That the Manor of Bredsale, and the Lands there, and in
Apurknoll, and Oneston, and Penington aforesaid, be to the use of Rauff, and
Agnes his wife, for their lives, and after to the use of Richard, son of the
said Raph, and the heirs of his body; the other Manors, Land and Tenements in
Hardwick, to the use of Richard the son, and Elizabeth, daughter of the said
Richard Boughton, during their lives, and to the heirs of the Body of the said
Richard the son. The Manor place of Boney, and certain Lands there to the
value of 20l. to the use of the said Richard Illingworth, and Elizabeth, and
the heirs of the body of the said Richard. It seems her Father gave her 80l.

Raph, son and heir of Richard Illingworth, Mag. lib. de finibus. fol. 219.
Mich. 17 E. 4.
Knight, 17 E. 4. acknowledged himself to hold the Manor of Boney by one
Knights Fee, and the Manor of Shelford, called Everingham Fee, of the King in
Capite for half a Fee. It seems it went to the heirs Female of Illingworth, for
after the death of John Eaton, Lib. 2. s^ed. post mort. fol. 93.
Gent. it is said the Lands which he held by the Law of England, by reason of
issue between them, were after their deaths to descend to John Dethick,
Esquire, son and heir of John Dethick, son and heir of Mary, one of the sisters
of the said Anne, and to Thomas Barlo, as son and heir of Joan, another of her
sisters, and to Thomas Kniveton, as son of Alice, another of the sisters of the
said Anne; which said Thomas was attaint for counterfeiting the money of
England, called Mary Groats; the said John Eaton died Dec. 10* 3 Eliz. he held
eight Mess. six Cottages, six hundred Acres of Land, two hundred of Meadow,
three hundred of Pasture, half a Windmill, sixty Acres of Wood, and Free
Warren in Boney, parcel of the Manor of Boney.

Trin. 16 Eliz. rot. 355.
Richard Parkins, Gent. and Elizabeth his wife suffered a Recovery of the said
eight Mess. etc. 16 Eliz. and called John Dethick, Esquire. The said Richard
suffered another of one Mess., one Toft, Hill. 18 Eli. rot. 360.
one Dovecote, one Garden, one hundred Acres of Land, etc. in Boney and
Bradmere, and called to warranty John Smith, 18 Eliz.

Richard Parkins, Esquire an Apprentice of the Law, B.
of the Inner Temple, and a Reverend man in his time for his learning and
judgment, purchased the entire Manor of Boney; and with his Posterity it
still continues.

William Harvey Clarencieulx 18 Aug. 1559* granted to Richard Parkins, Autogr.
pen. Tho. Parkins, Ar.
of Mattisfe^d, Gent. and his posterity a Pineapple branch vert. the Apple
proper for a Crest; which Richard was son and heir of Richard, son and heir of
William, son and heir of Thomas Parkins, Gent. of the said place, in the County
of Berks.

Hugh Shirley Chr. 4 H. 4. died seized of 13s. 4d. Rent in Boney, Esc. 4 H. 4.
p. 51.
held of the King in capite, Raph his son and heir was then twelve years of age.

Ancher, son of William, son of Froue, of Boney or Bradmere, Reg. Lent. 185.
gave three Roods of Meadow in Boney to God and the Hospital of St. Anthony, at
Lenton, in pure Alms.

In the year 1288. the official of York gave definitive sentence, Ib.
That the two parts of the Great Tithes of Elias de Bradmere, Raph de
Frecheville, Lord of Boney, the Lady Maud Torkard, Agnes de Staynton, Richard,
son of Felice, Maud Dolfin, William Smith, of Boney, Amice* Poyne, of Bradmere,
and William, son of Raph, of the same, within that Parish did belong to William
Heceredibire, Rector of Boney, and not to the Prior and Covent of Lenton.

The Chapter of Southwell, Pat. 17 E. 2 par. 2. m. 11.
17 E. 2. granted and appropriated the Church of Boney, to make a Chauntry for
the soul of William Archbishop of York in the Chapel of our Lady. Pl. de
Banc. Trin. 5 E. 1. rot. 24. fol. 36.
Richard de Gray, keeper of the Land, and heir of Anchor de Frecheville, 5 E. 1.
recovered by Assize the Advowson of the Church of Boney, against the Chapter of
Southwell.

The Vicarage of Boney was 8l. and the Prior of Ulvescroft Patron. Ms. I. M.
Now it is in the Kings Books 6l. 15s. 0d. and Isham Parkins, Esquire, Patron.

In the Church Windows, Azure 2. Chevrons and a Bordure Or, Musard. Azure a
Bend between 6 Escallops Arg. Frecheville. Gul. A Lion Ramp. within a Board.
engrailed Arg. Or, a Bear passant sable muzled Or, Beresford.

Here lies Humfrey Barley, son and heir of Thomas Barley, of Stoke, Esquire,
and Dorothy Meverell, wife of the said Thomas; which Thomas was son and heir of
George Barley, of Stoke, At the upper end of the South I Will in the Church at
Bunney

aforesaid, Esquire and Alice (it must be Joan) his wife, one of the daughters and
heirs of Richard Illingworth, Esquire This Humfrey thereby was one of the Lords of
the Manor of Boney, and diverse other Lands in the Counties of Not. and Derby,
and took to wife Elizabeth, eldest daughter of Aden Beresford, of Fenny Bently,
in the County of Derby, by whom he had issue Vrsula his daughter and heir. The
said Humfrey died the 10 of July 12 Eliz. and was buried at his Chapel, in his
own I Will, in Stony Middleton, in Derbyshire. And this Monument erected by the
said Elizabeth, now wife of Richard Parkins, Esquire for a remembrance in
perpetuity of the said Humfrey and his Progeny.

Over this Tomb in one Escutcheon, 1 Barley. Wavey Arg. and Sab. A Chief, the
first half Ermine, the other Gules. 2. Erm. upon a Chief Azur. 5 besants. 3.
Berisford, Arg. a Bear rampant Sable muzzled Or. 4. Or, 3 Flowers de Lis azure.
5. Party per p^le Or, and Gules 3 roundels Counter-changed. 6. Ar. 2 Broad
Arrows Chevron-wise between 3 Horns and strings sable. 7. Party per Chevron
Arg. and Or, 3 P^ae^ns sable. 8. Rolleston. Arg. a Cinquefoyle Azure upon a
Chief Gules a Lion passant Or.

Upon another Monument in the Chancel North-wall.

Here lies Richard Parkins, Esquire, Justice of Peace and Quorum in the County
of Not. and Recorder of the Towns of Leicester and Not. In the Chancell North
Wall* at Bunney,
and an ancient utter Barrester in the Inner Temple, who Married and took to
wife Elizabeth Barlowe then a Widow, late wife of one Humfrey Barlowe, of
Stoke, in the said County of Dar. Esquire deceased, being the eldest daughter of
Aden Beresford, of Fenne Bentlye, in the County of Darby, Esquire deceased, by whom
the said Richard had 8 Children, viz. 4 sons, and 4 daughters, that is to say,
Sir George Parkins, Knight, his son and heir, Adrian Parkins, John Parkins,
Aden Parkins, Fraunces, Anne, Elizab. Margaret, and dyed the the third day of
July 1603. Upon whose soul, etc. BVNNEY HOUSE y North Side,


Bradmere. Broad Mere, or Lake.
THE principal Manor of Bradmere in Doomsday Book is that which Azor held
before the Conquest for which he was rated to the Dane-geld as twelve Bovats.
The Land was three Car. But at the time of that Survey Robert Malet had in
Demesne three Car. and sixteen Vill. and eight Board. having five Car. The value
then and before was 3l. it had Soc in Ruddington, and so had the Manor of
Ruddington here. It is manifest also that part of this Township was of Raph
Fitz-Huberts Fee involved in Boney, else he or some of his acquired Robert
Malets very shortly after the Conquest, or both, which is most probable.

Hubert Fitz-Raph gave to Richard de Bradmere his man (or Tenent) and Uncle,
Reg. Lent. ^6.
all his Land which he held in Bradmere that year and day in which King Henry
was alive and dead; Besides the Land his Brother and heir held for the tenth
part of a Knights Fee. The Witnesses were Mr. Richard, Robert Sautcheverel, and
Robert his son, and others. Raph son of (the said) Richard, Ib. 104.
the Knight of Bradmere, gave and granted to Robert de Glamorgan; who was the
^opes Subdeacon and Rector of Boney; the Homages, Rents and Services of John,
the son of Thomas, the Chaplain of Plumtre and his heirs, and of William his
own son and heir, and of very many others who held of him in Bradmere, all
which, with diverse other Lands, Rents and Services, were given by the said
Robert to God and the blessed Virgin, and Sir Roger the Prior of Lenton, and
the Monks there serving God, for the Souls of his Ancestors and Successors,
chiefly of Philip de Glamorgan his Father, and Amabile his Mother; and that the
said Prior and Covent should pay him and his Successors at Boney yearly, on
Easter day, a Penny for all Services, yet so that they should of their charity
celebrate his Obit, and the Obits of the said Sir Philip his Father* and the
Lady Amabil his Mother, of Brian de Insula, Raph de Fressenville, and Willimina
his wife every year.

Mr. Gervase de Somerville gave to the Hospital of St. Anthony, Ib. 95. b.
within the Court or Churchyard of Lenton, seven Bovats of Land here, for the
free and charitable sustentation of such as should be troubled with St.
Anthonyes fire. Raph de Freschevile confirmed the said seven Bovats and added
the Service of the eighth, Ib.
which they had of the gift of the said Mr. G^rvas de Sumerville, with Common
of Pasture, as well as Turbary of Boney, belonging to Bradmere. Sir Geoffrey de
Boney, and Sarah his wife confirmed the same seven Bovats. Ib 98.


In the year 1262. an exchange was made between Roger, Ib. 101.
Prior, and the Covent of Lenton, and John Bar of Torlaton; the Prior gave
all his Land in Keworth, of the Fee of Sir Thomas Fitz-Williams of Plumtre, for
all the said John Barre's Land in Bradmere: Sir Philip de Colwick, and Sir John
de Vilers were Witnesses.

The Fee of Rad. Fitz-Hubert in the time of H. 2. was parted between Henry de
Stuteville and Hubert Fitz-Raph. Pip. 32 H. 2.
And Henry de Stuteville (his Grandson it is like) had 100s. Land here in the
time of H. 3. and John de Stotevile paid for fifteen Knights Fees of Raph
Fitz-Huberts Barony after Henry, in the same Kings Reign. Test. de (...).
Estout de Estotevile (son of John) bound himself, 5 E. 2. to enfeoffe Sir
Richard Gray, Lord of Codenor, Autogr. ex Chart. Fr. Willughby, A^* defunct.
July 3. 1672.
in his Manors of Barton upon Trent and Bradmere, and thereof to acknowledge
to him a Fine, and to give him all legal security in the Courts of France and
England, Richard paying therefore at London 800l. sterling on a certain day,
and for default* thereof Estout to reenter. Claus. 6 E. 3. m. ^5.
Stout de Stoteville son and heir of Sir Nicolas de Stoteville, Knight, 6 E. 3.
passed the Manors of Barton and Bradmere to Richard Lord Gray, of Codnor, and
his heirs, with the Knights Fees, of which there was a Fine levied in
Michaelmas Term the same year.

There was a Charter* 12 E. 3. granted to Richard de Willughby and his heirs of
Free Warren in his Demesne Lands here and at Barneby in this County, Chapter 12 E.
3. m. 25. n. 43.
and at Wimundeswold in Leicestershire, where he also had a Market every
Wednesday, and a Fair for two days, viz. on the Eve and day of St. Peter and
St. Paul yearly. The Jury found, 7 H. 4. that Hugh Willoughby, Esc. 7 H. 4. p.
79.
when he died, held the Manor of Wollaton, and the Manner of Bradmere, and
that William Mallory of Leicestershire, and Bertram Mounboucher were Cousins
and heirs of the said Hugh. Howbeit this continued with the Willughbyes of
Wollaton, till Queen Elizabeth's time, B.
that it was sold to the before named Richard Parkins of Boney, and with his
posterity of that place it still remains. Queen Eliz. Apr. 27. in the
eighteenth year of her Reign granted to Roger Manors, Esquire with the Rectories
of Grandby, Per^. 3. pat. 18 Eliz.
Boney, and Annesley, and other things, a Mess. in Bradmere, late belonging to
Lenton. John Earl of Rutland had lately a Farm there.

Barton. A Grange, or Village.
THE chief part was of the Fee of Raph Fitz-Hubert, wherein, before the
Conquest, Leuric had a Manor which discharged it self to the public Geld; or
payment for thirteen Bov. of Land. The Land was three Carucats. Lib. Dooms.
There Raph Fitz-Hubert had two Car. and eighteen Vill. and five Board. having
five Car. and an half. There was forty eight Acres of Meadow, small Wood two qu.
long, and half a qu. broad. In the time of the Conf. it was valued at 6l. in
the Conquerours at 100s. with the two Ciluvells, in which were seven Sochm. and
half a Church.

Another Manor Vluric had, rated to the Geld as two Bov. The Land whereof was
one Car. There Raph had one Car. and two Vill. and one Board. with one Car. (or
Plow.) This kept the old value 20s. There was a small Berew in Clifton
belonging to Barton, which paid for two Bov. to the Tax.

But here was Soc to Clifton of William Peverells Fee, as much as paid to the
Geld for two Bov. and one third. The Land one Car. There three Sochm. had two
Car. and three Acres of Meadow.

Of the Tayn Land here was also a Manor, which before the Norman change, Algar
had, and paid for one Bov... The Land was one Car. There Sauvinus afterward
had one Vill. and two Board. with three Oxen plowing, and three Acres Edmundus
Dominus de Morle. Ex Autogr. in Chartulario Will. Sachever^ll, Ar.
Walterus-Elizab. Robertus fill. Walteri.-Dina. Isouda Simon de S. Ma^ro marit.
secundus.-Philippus de Derbi defunct. 4 Joh. Hugo de Morle fill. Phil. de Derbi.
Hugo fill. Hugonis de Morle Ricardus de Morley.-Joana fill. Willielmi and una
cohaer. Johannis de la Laund, milit. Lucia-Hugo de Russelep-Willielmus de
Moston marit. secundus. Lucia-Rogerus de Masci de Sale Com. Cestr. Goditha ob.
5 H. 5.-Radulfus de Stathum ob. 3 R. 2. Thomas de Stathum-Eliz. fill. Rob.
Lumley. Johannes Stathum ob. 1454. Nov. 6.-Cecilia fill....Cornwall. ob. 1444.
Thom. Stathum mil. ob. 1470. his marit. Henr. Stathum ob. 1481. ter
marit.-Eliz. St. Low. Joana fill. and unica haeres postea ux. Willielmi Zouch
senioris de Bulwick in Com. Northampt.-Johan. Sacheverell ob. 1485. Ric. miles.
in bello Ric. 3. juxta Bosworth. Henricus Sacheverell de Morley, miles-Isabella
fill. Nic. Montgomery. 1 Johan. Sachev. de Morley.-Eliz. fill. Will. Perpont,
mil. Johannes Sachev.-Katheri^a fill Ant. Fitz-Herbert, mil. Henricus
Sacheverell.-Jana fill. Humfrid. Bradburn, mil. Jacinthus Sacheverell dedit
Morley Henrico.-....fill. Ric. Harpar, mil.


2 Will. de Staunton juxta Swarston, ob. 1558.-Maria fill. and haer. Clem. Low.
and Isabellae ux. haer. Joh. Strelly. Radulphus.-Emma fill. Will. Dethick. Will.
Sacheverell de Barton.-Tabitha fill. and haer. Jacobi Spenser de Alvaston C.
Derb. Henricus de Barton and Morley.-Jocosa fill. and haer. Francisc.
Maunsfield. Willielmus Sacheverell de Barton and Morley, 1672.-Maria fill.
Willielmi Staunton de Staunton. Robertus Sacheverell, aet. 3. 1672.
Katherin. ux. Franc. Sitwell. Jacosa ux. ^. Milward.

Henricus. Tho. Harrington, marit 2. Robertus Harington.


3 Ricardus-Eliz. fill. and haer. Hen. Gray. Henricus Sacheverell dedit Barton
Radulpho.

Radulphus de Radcliff super Sore



Ricardus 14 R. 2.






Alicia-Williel. de Verdun. Amphelisia ux. Ph. de Wastenes

Edwardus filius Primogenitus-Johannes de Sautcheverel-....fill. and cohaer.
Rad. fill. Ertaldi. Robertus de Saucheverel-Hawisia soror Eustachii de Moretan
fill. Adae. Robertus de Saltucapreoli. Oliverus de Saltucapris. Patricius de
Saucheverell-Joana fill. Roberti le Vavasor. Robertus de Sautcheverel miles, 15
E. 1. Willielmus de Saltcheverel. Willielmus de Saucheverel-Isabella
fill....Okeover. Johannes de Saucheverell. Robertus Sacheverell Johannes
Saucheverell. Rad Sacheverell-..... fill. Jon. Curson.












of Meadow. In King Edward the Confessors time, this was 10s. when the survey
was made in King Williams 3s. value.

Odo de Boney, at the first endowment of Lenton, in King H. 1. time, gave this
Church and half the Church of Chillwell or Attenborow, which a Successor of his
called Edward, and Aeliz his wife confirmed, as in Boney may be seen.

Leonia de Rennes, wife of Robert Stotevill, and Mother of Henry de Stoteville*
Ex Chart. Will. Sacheverell, Ar.
had this Manor, 6 Ioh. They had Kirkeby in Ashfeild also, where I shall place
their Descent. Barthon is said to be an Eschaet of the Kings of the Land of the
Normans, which Henry de Stoteville forfeited, Test. de Nev.
and that the value of it was 20l* per annum, and that Earl Warren then held
it. Yet John de Stotevill paid nine Marks shortly after, in the time of H. 3.
for four Knights Fees and an half in Barton, and other places. And Estut de
Stuteville (son of John) 4 E. 1. is certified to hold three parts of the Town
of Barton of Robert de Stotevile, Pip. 1^ E. 2.
by the service of one Knights Fee. His Grandchild Stute or Stout, son of Sir
Nicolas de Stutevill passed it away with Bradmere, 6 E. 3. to Richard Lord Gray
of Codnor, as in that place is noted, which Richard by Fine the year following,
viz. 7 E. 3. settled it on himself and Joan his wife, Pas^. and Mich. 7 E. 3.
and to the heirs of himself. John Lord Gray of Codnore had Free Warren granted
Aug. 13. 21 E. 3. in all his Demesne Lands in Barton upon Trent. This Manor
continued with that Noble Family (whereof I shall place the Descent in Boueton)
till after the death of Henry last Lord Gray of Codnor, Chapter 21 E. 3. m. 9. n.
19.
who by his Will made 18 H. 7. appointed his Feoffees Thomas Leeke of Kirketon,
by Screveton, Esquire and Roger Johnson to convey it to Henry Gray his natural Son,
Ex Chart. W. Sacheverell, Ar.
who about 13 H. 8. married Elizabeth his daughter and heir to Richard, the
third son of Sir Henry Sacheverell of Morley, in the County of Darby, by whom
she had a son and heir called Henry Sacheverell, who gave it to his Cousin Raph
Sacheverell, son of William, second son of the said Sir Henry Sacheverell, with
whose posterity it still continues.

That Elizabeth married to her second Husband George Bougham, and gave away
some Lands which are now the inheritance of Francis Marshall. Else the whole
Lordship, saving that of Peverells Fee, which descended with Holme Perpoint to
the Right Honorable the Marquess of Dorchester, two or three Farms being
bought in by his Father and Great Uncle, remains the inheritance of William
Sacheverell, Esquire, Lord also of Morley, in the County of Darby, whereof he
is now one of the Knights of the Shire, who has exceedingly enlarged and new
builded this Seat.

That of William Peverells Fee in this place is called Gerbodthorp, from Gerbod
de Eschand, to whom H. 2. gave Clifton and Langar, and other of William
Peverells Lands: It was accounted twenty Bovats, Esc. 8 E. 3. n. 46.
8 E. 3. after the death of Robert de Perpoint, who held it of Sir Gervase de
Clifton by the service of a Clove; and it was then to descend to Henry, son of
Henry, son of Robert de Perpoint.

The Court Leet at Normanton upon Sore, heretofore the Prior of Durhams, has
some suitors here.

Nicolas, son of Hugh de Wermundesworth, Reg. Lent. 73.
and Raph, and Robert, the son of Robert Constentin had interest here about the
time of E. 1. Geoffrey de Constentin, Lib. Rubr.
12 H. 2. is certified by Hubert Fitz-Raph to hold two Knights Fees and an half
of him, and Robert de Barton half of one.

The Priory of Newsted had Lands here demised to John Rotheram at 24s. per
annum, and were in the tenure of Simon Callis, Part. 6. Pat. 41 Eliz.
when Queen Elizabeth, July 2. 41 Eliz. granted the whole Tenement to Thomas
Estechurch, and Henry Best, and their heirs.

Queen Elizabeth, 8 Apr. in the second year of her Reign, granted ^o John
Doddington, Part 15. Pat. 2 Eliz.
and John Iackson Lands in ^^^ford and Barton, late belonging to the Co^ledge
of Clif^on.

Sir John Stanhope, Gervas Handley of Wilford, and Francis Wallis were
Freeholders here, 1612. and I suppose owners of some or all of that Land
purchased in by Mr. Sacheverell, before-named.

About the year 1266. a great Suit was ended between Roger, Prior of Lenton,
Reg. Lent. 73.
and Mr. Bartholomew called Tortus, son of the Noble Knight Adam Wlf, Canon of
Anaguin, Rector of the Church of St. George at Barton, upon the Priories paying
three hundred Marks, wanting twelve, and taking his Parsonage to Farm five
years, for thirty two Marks per annum, of good, new, and lawful Sterling Money
13s. 4d. to the Mark to be paid in Bermondsey house. The quarrel was, They had
presented one Thomas Raley, whom Mr. Barthol. had been nine years in getting
out with his Apostolical Letters, and other charges.

After the dissolution of Monasteries, the Town of Not. petitioned to have had
this Advowson, Part. 8 Pat. 34 H. 8.
but King H. 8. Feb. 19. 34 H. 8. granted it to the Archbishop of York, and his
Successors, who still enjoy it. When the Prior of Lenton was Patron this
Rectory was 20l. Ms. I. M.
In the Kings Books now it is 19l. 3s. 9d. value.

In the Chancell, on the South side, upon the Wall, is a Monument for Henry
Sacheverell.

On the South-East end for Raph Secheverell, on the wall also: and at the
North-East end, on the ground, one for William Sacheverell, of Alabaster. There
are several Arms in the Windows besides, as in the North-East Window, Gules a
Fesse embattailed Arg. between 3 Besants Barry of six Arg. and Azure a very
small bendlett Gobone Or and Gules. Hen. Gray. In the South-East Window Arg. A
Bend Azure cross croslette Or, Lowdham. In the next South Window the same Gray*
and one broken on the top, the bottom is Barry Arg. and Azure, two Flowers de
Lis on the upper, and one on the lower Or. In the next Pane Azure a Cross
Counter Compony Arg. and Gules, Cokfeild. And Varry Arg. and Sab. an in escotch.

Here lies buried Henry Sacheverell of Barton, Esquire son and heir of Richard,
the third Son of Henry Sacheverell, Knight, and Elizabeth his wife, daughter
and sole heir of Henry Gray, base son of Henry last Lord Gray of Codnor, which
died the 27 of December, in the year of our Lord, 1598.

Here lies buried Raph Sacheverell, Esquire son and heir of William, second son of
Henry Sacheverell, Knight, and Emme, daughter of William Dethick, Esquire his wife,
had issue William, Anthony, John, John, Thomas, Edmund, and Raph, and Henry,
Mary, Lucy, Jane, Millescent, Isabel, Dorothy, and Ellen; Raph died the first
of September, 1605. and Emme died last of April, 1606. About this are many Arms.

Arg. on a Saltire Az. 5. Waterbougets Or, Sacheverell impaling. Arg. a Fesse
Varry Or, and Gules between 3 Waterbougets Sable, Dethick. Arg. 3 Hares and
Bagpipes Gules, Hopwelle. Arg. a Lion Ramp. Sable Corone Or, Lord Morley.
Gules, a pale Lozengy Arg. Statham. Gule^, a Shoveler Arg. collared Or,
Snitterton. Az. a Lion Ramp. Arg. Morley. Az. a Buck tripping Arg. Low, with
Strelley, Vavasor. And Arg. a Fesse between 3 Crescents Gules. Arg. 3 Roses
Gules. Sab. 3 Millstones pierced Arg.
Hic jacet corpus Mariae Sacheverel filiae natu maximae Gulielmi Staunton nuper
de Staunton, in Comitatu Nottinghamiensi, Armigeri, uxoris Gulielmi Sacheverel
de Morley, in Comitatu Derbiensi, Armigeri, hujus Manerii Domini; qui ex ea
su^ceperat Henricum, Gulielmum, Radulphum, Mariam, Gulielmum, Elizabetham,
Jocosam, Rober^um, and Catharinam, Ex quibus quatuor filii cum una filiola
matre adhuc superstite nec non acerbam supradicti Henrici primogeniti hic
itidem sepulti mortem supra quam far valuit deflente, supremum diem obierunt.
Maria vero, Elizabetha, Jocosa, and Roberto in vivis relictis; Ipsa d^cimo nono
die Augusti, Anno Domini Millesimo, Sexcentesimo, Septuagesimo quarto vitam cum
morte commutavit.

Clifton. Bank Town. Wilford and Glapton, A small Hamlet parcel of Clifton.
THis was a very eminent Manor in the time of Edward the Confessor, and did
belong to the famous Good the Countess, who paid to the Dane-geld for it as two
Car. and an half. The Land was five Car. There, when the Conquerours great
survey was made, William Peverell his natural son ^ad two Car. in Demesne, ^ib.
Dooms.
four Sochm. nineteen Vill. eight Board. having nine Car. There was a Priest and
a Church, and one Mill 12d, and twelve Acres of Meadow. In the Confessors time
the value was 19l. in the Conq. but 9l. with the ^oc, it had in Willesford, as
much as was taxed or rated at three Car. The Land six Car. There twenty three
Sochm. had seven Car. There was a Priest and eighteen Acres of Meadow, and half
a Piscary or Fishing. The Soc extended also into Bartone, Bridgeford,
Normantune, Cauord, Willebye, Stantune, Cortinstoche, Basingfelt, Adbolton,
Gamelestune, etc.

Here was also a small Berew of Barton, of Raph Fitz-Huberts Fee, which paid
for two Bov. to the Geld, and of the Taine-Land, some belonging to Gatham,
which Vlchet held of the King, and paid to the Tax as one Bov. He had here one
Vill, with two Oxen plowing, and one Acre of Meadow.

Langar (as in that place will be noted,) and Clifton were principal Manors,
and of the Demesne of William Peverell, and with many other forfeited to the
Crown by William his son, in the beginning of the Reign of King H. 2. who
before the nineteenth year of it, had given them to Gerbode de Eschaud. Pip. 19
H. 2. etc. 25 H. 3. per inspeximus apud Clifton. Pip. 1 Ioh. Pip. 6 H. 3,
Autogr. in Chart. de Clifton.
How they passed from him I find not, but certain it is, that Gerard de Rodes
had them, 1 Ioh. And Raph de Rodes, a very great man, was possessed of them, 6
H. 3. whose son Gerard de Rodes, Lord of Melles, about the latter end of H. 3.
or beginning of E. 1. granted the Manors of Clifton and Wilford, and the
services of the Freeholders and Villans there, and at Barton, to Sir Gervase de
Clifton, reserving 30l. per annum Rent; which afterward he also released. And
John de Beaulu likewise released the Manors of Wilford and Clifton to the said
Sir Gervase, which were sold to him the said Sir Gervase, by Sir Gerard de
Rodes. King Edward the first, in the ninth year of his Reign, Chapter 9 E. 1. n.
102. m. 17. Autogr.
reciting the Deed of the said Sir Gerard confirmed it. Gervase, son of Gervase
de Clifton, was Senescall in this Gerards time.

This worthy Family therefore which held Lands here, and had their name from
their residence at this place, and sometimes at Wilford, must not till this
time pretend to be Lords of it, notwithstanding the received Tradition, and old
Parchment writing, importing that Sir Alvered de Clifton, Knight, was Lord of
the Manor of Wilford, and Guardian of the Castle at Not. in the time of
William Peverell, and his son Sir Robert de Clifton, after him in like manner.

There is no Manor of Wilford in Doomsday Book, and King William, or William
Peverell built the Castle of Not. himself, and dwelt in it, and his son after
him; yet it is not unlike but that they might have some considerable trust or
employment under the Peverells.

Gervas de Clifton I find mentioned in the time of H. 2. who it seems had a
daughter named Cecily, the wife of Roger de Cressi, who 3 Ioh. claimed Dower
against William de Cressi, Pip. 3 Ioh.
who gave an account of twenty Marks, and a Palfrey, to be justly, and
according to the custom of England, brought off from it; but she in the same
Pipe Roll is said to owe forty Marks, and one Palfrey for having her reasonable
Dower out of the Freehold of her said Husband in Nottinghamshire, Ex vtteri
membrana inter Collec.

St. ^o Kniveton, dubiae antem fidei.


Alveredus de Clifton, miles, Dom. Manerii de Wilford and Guardianus Castelli
Not. temp. Will. Peverell. Ex vtteri membrana inter Collec.

St. ^o Kniveton, dubiae antem fidei.


Robertus de Clifton, miles, Dom. de Wilford and Gardianus Castelli Not. etc.
Gervasius de Clifton, 33 H. 2. 1186. 5 Joli.-Ismania, 5 Joh. Catera ex Chart.
Autogr. apud Clifton and al. Record.
Gervasius de Clifton, 20 H. 3.-....fill. Robe^^i de Alvideleg, 5 Joh. Dom.
Gervasius de Clifton 52 H. 3. ob. 17 E. 2.-Amflisia fill. Will. Sampson de
Eperston, mil. 25 E. 1. Gervasius de Wilford and de Clifton ob. in vita patris.
vir Margar. 9 E. 2.-Alicia postnata fill. and haer. Roberti de Rabacin, 27 E. 1.
Dom. Robertus de Clifton aetat. 25. anno 17 E. 2. defunct. 1 E. 3.-Emma filia
Dom. Willielmi Moton, milit. Dom. Gervasius de Clifton aet. 14.1 E. 3. superst.
51 E. 3.-Margareta fill. Rob. Perpoint, 3 E. 3.-Isabella, 22 E. 3.33 E. 3.
Robertus de Clifton-Isabella, 19 E. 3.-Agnes fill....de Gray, 35 E. 3. Dom.
Johannes de Clifton ob. 4 H. 4. occi^^s apud Salopiam.-Katherina fill. Dom. Joh.
Cressisor. and cohaer. Hug.-Rad. Makarell, Dom. marit. secund. dec^llat. to E.
4. Dom. Gervasius de Clifton ob. 8 Dec. 32 H. 6-Isabella fill. Roberti Franceis,
mil. Dom. Robertus de Clifton aet. 30.32 H. 6. ob. 18 E. 4. Apr. 9.-Alicia fill.
Johannis Both de Barton Com. Lanc. Sor. Willielmi and Laurentii Archiepisc.
Ebor. Dom. Gervasius de Clifton, Ar. Corp. E. 4. mil. Baln. R. 3. ob. 6 H.
7.-Alicia fill. Tho. Nevil de Rolleston relict. Ric. Thurland.-Agnes fill.
Constable relict. Walteri Griffith. Dom. Gervasius de Clifton ob. 23 H. 7. Jun.
5.-Agnes fill. Walt. Griffith and Agnetis.-Joana fill. Johannis Bussy relict.
Nic. Byron, mil. Robertus de Clifton, Ar. ob. 9 H. 8.-Alicia fill. Sim. Digby L.
Turris Land.-Anna fill.... Domini Clifford. Dom. Gervasius de Clifton, aet. t. 8
H. 8. Mar. 26. ob. Jan. 20. 30 Eliz.-Maria fill. Dom. Johan. Nevil de Chete
Ebor.-Winifreda fill. and haer. Will. Thwaits de Oulton Com. Suff. rel. Geo.
Perpont, milit. Georgius Clifton, Ar. ob. 29 Eliz. Aug. 5.-Winifreda fill. Dom.
Antonii Thorold and Annae uxoris filiae and cohaetedis Dom. Joh. Constable de
Kinalton.-Henricus Kervile, marit. secundus. Dom. Gervasius Clifton, mil. and
Baronet 9 Jac. duxit 7. ux. ob. 1666.-Penelope fill. Com. Warwick ob.
1613.-Frances fill. Fr. Com. Cumberl. ob. 1627.-Jana fill. Ant. Eyr. Dom.
Gervasius Clifton. Bar. s. p. ob. Januar. 14. 1675/6. Dom. Clifford Clifton,
mil. ob. 1670.-Frances fill. Henag. Finch, mil. Dom. Willielmus Clifton, Bar.
aet. 13. 1676. Kath. Arbella.
Robertus-..fill...Farkhurst.



Hugo.
Robertus fill. and haer. Clericus aet. 30. and ampl. 7 H. 7.
Robert. Archi-Diaconus de East Riding Com. Ebot.


Gervasius-Isabella Finch, and Matilda cohaer. Dom. Crumwell.





Cecilia relict. 3 John Roger. Cressi.



Gervasius de Rabircy de Glapton Gervasius. Robertus Rabacy de Glapton.
Gervasius de Wilford and de Clifton ob. in vita patris. vir Margar. 9 E.
2.-Alicia postnata fill. and haer. Roberti de Rabacin, 27 E. 1. Richardus
Martell-Marg. 27 E. 1.



and that she should not be compelled to Marry.

There was a Fine levied at Leicester, in the fifth of King John, Fi^. 5 Ioh.
wherein Gervas de Clifton, and Ysmania his Sister restore and quitclaim all
writings made between the said Gervase and Robert de Alvideleg, concerning
covenant of Marriage of the Son of Gervas, and the daughter of Robert, and all
other Covenants between them the said Gerv. and Robert, and the writings and
Charters concerning the inheritance of the said Robert, for which the said
Robert, gave to the said Ysmania the Land which was his Uncles Richard Barionas
in Gedling and Stoke, during her life. Gervase, son of Gervase de Clifton, 5 H.
3. was detained in Prison for Robbery; Pat. 5 H. 3. m. 8.
Sir Gervase de Clifton, Knight, this man's son and Successor in his Lands here,
must be accounted a principal advancer of this Family, for he purchased the
Manors of Clifton and Wilford, as before is shown, and the Manor of
Broughton, Sul^ey of John, son of Alvered de Soleni, who in the sixth year of
E. 1. levied a Fine to him of eight Virgats of Land there, which Adam de St.
Lo, and Sibyl his wife held in Dower of his inheritance. This Sir Gervase was
Sheriff of Not. and Derb. 9 E. 1. and 13 E. 1. and the 20 E. 1. the Sheriff of
Not. and Derb. was commanded to attach him, Brev. Pasc. 20 E. 1. n. 35.
to make his account for Yorkshire, for the time he was Sheriff there. Robert
de Tibtot the Constable, 12 E. 1. demised Nottingham Castle, with the
Appurtenances, to him for 68l. per annum, which, if there were no other reason,
might occasion the story of the Guardianship. He Married Amfelisia, the
daughter of Sir William Samson of Eperston, in this County, Knight, and over
lived his Son Gervas, who was sometime called of Glapton, where he lived,
having married Alice, one of the daughters and coheirs of Robert, son of
Gervas de Rabacy, who held some Lands there, by finding an under B^yliff to
make summons and distresses in the Court of Peverell. Fin. Much. 27 E. 1.
Richard Martell, 27 E. 1. had to wife Margaret, Sister of the said Alice. This
Sir Gervase himself was also sometimes called of Wilford, as in the 13 E. 1.
where he is a Witness by the name of Gervas de Wilford to the Deed, whereby
John, son of Gerard de Rodes passed to the said Robert de Tibtot the Manors of
Langar and Barneston, etc. together with the Homage of Gervase de Wilford, for
the Manors of Clifton and Wilford, of Henry Perpont for Barton; and of Robert
Lutterell for Brigford and Gamelston, etc. yet there was a branch of this
Family kept the Surname of Wilford, whereof one Gervase de Wilford was
Remembrancer of the Exchequer, Chron. Series Orig. Iuridic. Will. Dagdale, p.
47.
14 E. 3. and Chief Baron of the Exchequer, 24 E. 3. But the posterity of this
Sir Gervase keep the Surname and Manor of Clifton to this day.

Sir Robert de Clifton, 17 E. 2. his Grandchild, was found his heir, and above
twenty six years of age, Es^. 17 E. 2. n. 36.
who married Emme, the daughter of Sir William Moton, by whom having a Son
named Gervase, he married him young to Margaret, the daughter of Robert
Perpont, which said Gervas, 1 E. 3. was by the Jury found to be but fourteen
years of age, Es^. 1 L. 3. n. 33.
that year after the death of his said Father Sir Robert.

The Jury, 22 E. 3. found it not to the Kings nor any others loss, Es^. 22 E.
3. Part. 2. n. 59.
if he granted unto Gervase de Clifton Chivaler, license to give eleven Mess.
five Virg. and one Bovat of Land in Stanton on the Would and Clifton, and the
Advowson of Staunton to three Chaplains, daily celebrating Divine Service in
the Church of St. Mary of Clifton by Not. for the good estate of him the said
Gervase, Plac. Hill. 22 E. 3. Cor. Reg. rot. 45.
and Isabel his wife. This Sir Gervase the same year got a Jury to enquire what
damages he sustained by reason of certain Trenches made in Robert Tibtots time
to bring the water of Trent, out of the ancient course to Nottingham Castle,
for the benefit of the Kings Mills there, through Wilford Medows, and the Jury
found 100l. whereof he prayed 52l. 7s. 0d. ob. q. might be to satisfy his
arrearages when he was last Sheriff, and the rest paid him. His Father, the
last named Robert, Cousin and heir of the former Sir Gervase, Claus. 1 E. 3
part. 1. m. 1. and pat. 11 E. 2. par. 1. in Scedul^ Pend.
had petitioned King E. 2. and had an Inq. taken before Roger de Verdon,
Lieutenant of John de Segrave, Warden of Nottingham Castle, but he had order
only for 30. and 5l. out of the Exchequer. This Sir Gervase lived long: I find
him 10 R. 2.

His son Robert to his first wife had Isabel.... 19 E. 3. but to his second, 35
E. 3. Agnes Gray, by whom he had Sir John de Clifton, who brought a great
increase of Estate to the Family by his wife Katherin the daughter of Sir John
de Cressi, and Sister and heir of Hugh Cressi, by whom he had Hodsak in this
County, Down Hall, and Cre Hall, in Claypole in Lincolnshire, and Melton in
Yorkshire; she was, after Sir John her husbands death, who is said to have been
slain at the Battle of Shrowsbury, 4 H. 4. married to Raph Makarell; her Sister
Elizabeth, the other coheir was married to Sir John Markham, the elder Judge.

Here was a notable Sir Gervase Clifton, of this Family, who sometimes has
been thought to be son of this Sir John Clifton; but whether he was Brother or
Cousin, I cannot yet discover; he married Isabel, daughter of... Harbard alias
Finch of Brabourn in Kent, the widow of William Scot, and was several times in
the Reign of H. 6. Sheriff of Kent. He was, Rec. Trin. 23 H. 6. r^t. 9. in
Dorso. Orig. 29 H. 6. to. 22.
23 H. 6. Lieutenant of Dover Castle, under Humfry, Duke of Gloucester. The
King, 29 H. 6. upon the resignation of Sir Richard Vernon, made him, for his
good Service, Treasurer of Cales, and the Marches of the same; and the next
year following, Orig. 3^ H. 6. rot. 28. Kant.
viz. 30 H. 6. committed the Temporalties of the Archbishopric of Canterbury
into his hands, upon the death of John the Archbishop. He was a Commander at
several places in France; Pontois he was Captain of. After Robert Lord
Willughby of Eresby, and Thomas Nevil, he was third husband to Maud, Niece and
coheir of Raph Lord Crumvel by Maud his Sister, second wife of Sir Richard
Stanhope. In a pardon he had the 9 E. 4. he was styled Gervas Clifton, Knight,
late of Bra^ourn in the County of Kent, alias late of Clifton in the County of
Not. alias of London, alias of Gresby in the County of Lincoln, but continuing
his zeal to his old Masters interest, he was 10 E. 4. dispatched at Tewkesbury,
and 11 E. 4. amongst the rest proclaimed Rebel and Traitor. Claus. 11 E. 4. in
Dorso.
He left issue by his first wife two daughters, Joan married to John Digges,
and Isabell to John Gerningham. He bore the same Arms with this Family, as
appears by his Seal.

The son and Successor of Sir John Clifton was Sir Gervase Clifton of Hoddesak,
who married Isabell, the daughter of Sir Robert Franceis, Knight, and left her
a widow 8 Dec. 32 H. 6. Sir Robert his son being then above thirty years of
age, who married Alice, the Sister of William Both, Archbishop of York, and
begun to found the College dedicated to the holy Trinity at Clifton, but died
Apr. 9.18 E. 4. before he had accomplished his design; yet his son Sir Gervase
religiously performed it, who had to his first wife Alice, the daughter of
Thomas Nevill of Rollaston, Esquire, the Relict of Richard Thurland. There is a
fair Alabaster Tomb for her in the North-East end of the North I Will in Clifton
Church.

This Sir Gervase was Esquire of the body to Edward the fourth, and Knight of
the Bath at the Coronation of R. 3. who, for his singular and faithful service,
gave him in the first year of his Reign, by his Letters Patents, bearing date
Apr. 24. the Manors of Ratcliff on Sore in this County, 4 Part. Pat. 1 R. 3.
m. 11.
and all the Lands which were Henry Duke of Buckinghams in Ratcliff and
Kinston, and in Kegworth in Leicestershire; the Manor of Overton Longvile in
the County of Hunt. together with the Advowson of the Church, which Sir Roger
Tocotes of Bromeham, Knight, lately forfeited; and the Manor of Dalbury, and
Dalbury Lies, with the Advowson of the Church, and all the Lands there, and in
Etwell and Wirkesworth in the County of Darby, which were late Henry Duke of
Exeters. About 22 E. 4. this Sir Gervas married to his second wife Agnes, the
daughter of.... Constable of Flamborough, the widow of Sir Walter Griffith, and
his second son Sir Gervase to Agnes the daughter of the said Sir Walter
Griffith, and the said Agnes. His first Son and heir Robert was a Clergyman,
as was Robert his Uncle, who was Archdeacon of the East Riding of Yorkshire.
Upon the aforesaid Marriage he settled Ian 10.22 E. 4. on Mr. Robert Both,
Cler. Dean of York, William Constable, Cler. William Rokeshaw, Cler. Stephen
Capendale, Cler. Robert Yole, Cler. and Thomas Orston the Manors of Clifton,
Wilford, and Broughton Sulney, with the Advowsons of all the Churches, the Soke
of Hoddesak, viz. Hodsac, Holme, Dulecotes, Harmeston, Fl^rthorp, Stirap,
Letwell, and Gildenweles in this County, so that he was not seized of any when
he died, which was 12 May, 6 H. 7. his son the said Sir Gervase, being then
above thirty years of age, by the Inquisition taken at Blithe, 30 of October.
before Thomas Hunt, Eschaet. 7 H. 7. Another Inq. taken at Newark, 21 H. 7.
says he died 5 H. 7. on Ascension day.

Sir Gervase, the son, took to his second wife Joan, daughter of John Bussy,
widow of Sir Nicholas Byron, about 21 H. 7. but he left her a widow again ^un.
5.23 H. 7. and his son Robert Clifton, Esquire to succeed him, who married to
his first wife A^ice, the daughter of Simon Digby, Lieutenant of the Tower of
London, and to his second Agnes, daughter of Henry Lord Clifford, by whom he
left an heir about a year and an half old, at the time of his the said Roberts
death, which was 3 Sept. 9 H. 8. called Gervase who proved an excellent Person,
and of great Authority both in peace and war, and was so courteous, that he was
generally styled Gentle Sir Gervase. His first wife was Mary, daughter of Sir
John Nevile of Chete in Yorkshire, by whom he had Elizabeth married to Sir
Peter Frechevile of S^aveley in Darbishire; his second was Winifrede, daughter
and heir of William Thwaits of Dulton in the County of Suffolk, the relict of
Sir George Perpont of Holme, by whom he had George Clifton, Esquire, who died
Aug. 5.29 Eliz. about five or six months before him, for he died about the 20
of Ian. 30 Eliz. leaving his Grandson Gervase a year old his heir, and the only
hope of this Noble and Ancient Family, whom his said son George, a Consumptive
person under age, begot on Winifrid his wife, daughter of Sir Anthony Thorold
and of Anne his wife, daughter and coheir of Sir John Constable of Kinalton;
the said Winifrid afterward was married to Henry Kervile, and had issue by him.

This Gervase was certainly more Gentle than his Grandfather, being generally
the most noted person of his time for courtesy, he was very prosperous and
beloved of all. He Generously, Hospitably, and Charitably entertained all, from
the King to the poorest Beggar. He served eight times in Parliament; he was
Knight of the Shire in King James's time, and in his present Majesty's King
Charles 2. He was Commissioner at Oxford and Newark for King Charles the first.
He was an extraordinary kind Landlord, and good Master. Husband to seven Wives,
the first was the beautiful Penelope, daughter of Robert Earl of Warwick and
Penelope his wife (howbeit Chapter Blount Lord Mount^oy, Earl of Devonshire paid
her portion), she was Mother of the wretched unfortunate Sir Gervase his
^athers greatest foyl; she died Oct. 26. 1613. aged 23 years. The second was
Frances, daughter of Francis Earl of Cumberland, and Grisil^a his Countess: she
brought him, 1. Margaret, who was first married to Sir John South. 2. To....
Whitchcote. And 3. to Sir Robert Carey. 2. Frances, first wife of Richard
Tempest. 2. Of Anthony Eyr. 3. Anne married to Sir Francis Rodes. 4. Sir
Clifford. And 5. Letice, wife of Clifton Rodes: This Lady died Nov. 22. 1627.
aged 33. years. The third was Mary, daughter of John Egioke of Egioke in
Worcestershire, and Anne his wife; she was widow of Sir Francis Leek of Sutton
in Darbishire, and died Ian. 19. 1630. The fourth was Isabel, daughter of....
Meek, the relict of John Hodges, Alderman of London, buried here at Clifton (as
were also the two first Ladies) July 10. 1637. The fifth was Anne, daughter of
Sir Francis South of Lincolneshire, Knight, buried here likewise June 1. 1639.
The sixth was Jane, daughter of Anthony Eyr of Rampton, Esquire; she was Mother
of Robert Clifton, who married... daughter of Mr. Parkhurst of Woodford in
Essex, and of Jane Clifton, now wife of Chr. Pack of Cotes in Leicestershire,
and of Charles, lately dead a Bachelor. She was buried at Clifton, March 17.
1655. she died at London. The seventh was Alice, daughter of Henry Earl of
Huntington, she died after her husband in the same year 1666. at London, and is
buried in St. Giles Church, as the third Lady also was.

He received the honor of Knighthood early, and was created Baronet with the
first 9 Iac. His Port and hospitality exceeded very many of the Nobility, and
his continuance in it most men, being almost fourscore years Lord of this
place, CLIFTON HOUSE. y^ North Side.
of a sound body, and a cheerful and facetious Spirit; yet in his latter time
timorous, so that his last part was miracle enough to convert an Atheist, to
see his Christianity so far prevail over his nature, that without the least
shadow of fear, unwearied with pain, grief, or sickness, he left the choicest
things of this world with as great pleasure as others enjoy them.

He received from me the certain notice of his near approaching death, as he
was wont to do an invitation of good friends to his own Bowling green, (one of
the most pleasant imaginable), and thereupon immediately called for his old
Chaplain Mr. Robert Thirleby to do the office of his Confessor, as if it had
been to attend him to that recreation he often used and loved, and when he had
done with him, for his Children, whom Patriarch like he particularly blessed
and admonished, with the smartness and ingenuity of an excellent and well
studied Orator. The day following he received visits from diverse friends
sitting in the old Dining Room near his Bedchamber, who were not so sensible
of his danger, because he entertained them after his usual manner; yet that
night (as I easily foretold him) his sleepiness begun, which could never be
taken away by reason that both his Ureters were so petrified (as things are by
the dropping Well near Knavesburgh in Yorkshire) that no Urine could descend
into his Bladder, as at the opening of his Body did manifestly appear, as also
that one of his Kidneys had of long time before been totally stopped with a
wonderful great stone (as is reported of the pious and learned D. Hammond)
whose hair was also Red, like that of this worthy Sir Gervase, who died June
28, 166^. and was buried the second of August following with great solemnity,
Mr. Dugdale Norroy, Mr. Ashmole Windsor, and Mr. Ryley Lancaster, Heralds; the
Quire of Southwell, and many Mourners attending his Funeral. Sir Clifford
Clifton his son and heir (in default of Sir Gervase) was buried June 22. 1669.
leaving by the present Lady Clifton his wife (daughter of Sir Henage Finch, and
half sister of the Attorney General, since Lord Keeper) one son Sir William
Clifton, Baronet, now about thirteen years old, the heir of this Illustrious
Family.

The Rectory of Clifton was 22l. and that of Wilford 16l. value. Mss. I. M.
Now Clifton is 21l. 7s. 6d. and Wilford 18l. 7s. 6d. in the Kings Books* and
the Patron as of old Sir Gervas^ Clifton.

In the Church were these Inscriptions in the North I Will.

Hic jacet Isabella filia Roberti Fraunceis uxor Gervasii Clifton, militis,
filii Domini Johannis Clyfton, militis, quae obiit 13 I^nii 1457.

Hic jacet Domina Alicia Clifton, filia Johannis Both, Ar. Soror bonae
memoriae Domini Willielmi Both, Ehor. Archiepiscopi, and uxor Domini Roberti
Clifton, militis, quae obiit 9 Sept. 1470.

Orate pro anima Roberti Clyfton, militis, fundatoris trium Capellanorum
Collegii in hac Ecclesia, qui obiit nono die mensis Aprilis, Anno Domini
M.CCCC.LXXVIII. Cujus animae propitietur Deus, Amen.

Orate pro anima Gervasii Clifton, militis, filii and haeredis Roberti Clifton,
militis, fundatoris Collegii de Clifton, finiti and stabiliti per Dominum
Gervasium qui obiit in domo fratrum praedicatorum apud London 12 Maii 1491.
Cujus Corpus abinde per Agnetem filiam Roberti Constable de Flamburgh, militis,
secundam uxorem ejusdem Gervasii, and alias ejus executores juxta voluntatem
suam istuc honorifice and decenter conductum fuit, and s^b hoc lapide marmoreo
hic humatum. Cujus animae propitietur Deus. Pro cujus quidem Agnetis
prosperitate dum vixerit and pro cujus anima cum ab hac luce migraverit,
speciales ordinantur memoriae, and orationes per Gardianum and Capellanos
Collegii praedicti juxta Compositionem and Statuta inde ordinatae perpetuis
futuris temporibus devote fienda.

There is a very good Tomb of Alabaster for this man's first wife, with her
Figure upon it, and the Arms of Clifton, and Nevil of Rolleston on the side,
and at the head of it another, either for this man, or his son, without
Inscription, or Arms, saving that upon his breast is a Lion Ramp.

A Tomb at Clifton in the South Quire or Cross I Will, the South side,
The West side of the Tomb,
The North side of it,


A Tomb in the South Wall, of Clifton Chancell


In the South I Will upon a great Tomb.

Here lies the Bodies of Sir Gervis Clifton of Clifton, in the County of Not.
Knight, and Dame Mary his first wife, daughter of Sir John Nevell of Cheete, in
the County of York, Knight, and of Dame Winifride his second wife, the daughter
and heir of William Thwayres of Oulton, in the County of Suff. Esquire which Dame
Mary deceased the 10. of Apr. 1564. and the said Sir Gervais deceased the 20.
of January 1587. and the said Dame Winifride dec --

In the North I Will again.

Here lies George Clyfton, Esquire who was son and heir apparent of Sir Gervis
Clifton of Clifton, Knight, and Dame Winifride his wife, who married Winifride
the daughter of Sir Anthony Thorold, and Dame Anne his wife, one of the
daughters and heirs of Sir John Constable of Kynalton, Knight; which George had
issue, by his said wife, Gervais Clifton, and died at Clifton the first (or
fifth) of Aug. 1587. and was of the age of 20. years and 7. months.

This Stone covers the Body of Dame Anne Thorold, daughter of Sir John
Constable of Kinolton, Knight, and heir to her mother, who was daughter and
coheir to... Sothell, Esquire, and widow of Sir Anthony Thorold of Marston, in
the County of Lincoln, Knight, the most loving and careful Grandmother of Sir
Gervas Clifton, Knight and Baronet, who laid the same for her Piety and
exemplar virtues, worthy to be had in perpetual remembrance, died here Aug.
1611.

On the North side in the Cross I Will, at Clifton.


In the Chancell by the side of the Vault.

Memoriae conservande causa
Dilectissimarum sibi conjugum,
Penelopes filiae Roberti Comitis Warwicensis and Penelopes uxoris ejus,
Foeminae tum corporis tum animi egregia pulchritudine conspicua. Quae cum
convixisset marito annos 5. peperissetque ei unicum filium Gervasium, mortua
est and hic conditur. Obiit 26. die Octobris anno salutis MDCXIII. aetatis suae
23. Franciscae Francisco and Grisilda Comite and Comitissa Cumbriae genitae,
Nobilissimae, Prudentissimae, Pientissimae foeminae, quae relicta prole
Margareta, Francisca, Anna, Cliffordo and Laetitia, migravit ex hac vita 22.
die Novembris An. Dom. 1627. aetatis suae 33. and eodem conditur.

Mariae filiae Johannis Egioke de Egioke, in Comitatu Wigorniae Armigeri, and
Annae uxoris ejus, Francisci Leeke de Sutton in Agro Derbiensi, Equitis Aurati
viduae, Lectissimae foeminae, aetatis in senectuteminclinatae, animi in mariti
liberos materni, mortua est 19. die Januarii An. Dom. 1630. Et sepulta in
templo Divi Egidii Land.
Illis quidem monumentum,
Sibi vero est meditamentum
Inter sepulchra majorum suorum qui per annos plus quam sexcentos Equestri
dignitate villam hanc incoluerunt, Posuit Gervasius de Clifton, Eques A^ratus
and Baronettus. Expecta tot terra meis majoribus orta
Tandem me ejusdem hinc ordinis atque loci,
Et similem; quod si quisquam concedere nolit,
Mime^it ecce tic^ est ut (...) facias.


Effigies GERVASI^ CLIFTON M^l. and ^ar.


Over the door into the Vault.

Hic intus cum patribus and uxoribus suis dormit Generosissimus Dominus
Gervasius Clifton, miles, and (primae creationis sc. 9 Jac.) Baronettus, qui de
patria and tribus Regibus in octo Parliamentis been meruit, nec non de Carolo
primo durante bello Commissionarius in praesidiis Oxonio and Newarka, quem
antea cum Maria Regina in manerio de Clifton festive refecerat. Septem uxores
duxit, quarum tres juxta memorantur, viz. Penelope filia Roberti, Comitis
Warwic. 2. Domi^a Francisca, filia Francisci, Comitis Cumbr. 3. Maria, filia
Joh. Egioke, Armig. relicta Fran. Leeke, Militis. 4. Isabella, vidua Johannis
Hodges, Alderm. London hic sepulta, Jul. 10. 1637. 5. Anna, filia Francisci
South, Militis, hic etiam condita Jun. 1. 1639. 6. Jana, filia Anthonii Air de
Rampton, Ar. matter Roberti Clifton, Janae and Caroli Clifton, obiit Londini huc
translata Mar. 17. 1655. 7. Domina Alicia, filia Henrici Comitis Huntington,
marito superfuit, sed eodem anno 1666. in Ecclesia S. Egidii, London, inhumata.
Ipse laetu^ felicem obivit mortem, Jun. 28. and Pompa decora hic repositus
fuit, Aug. 2. 1666. Anno aetatis suae 80. Hunc secutus est filius ejus Dominus
Cliffordus Clifton, Miles, Jun. 22. 1669. vir Franciscae, filiae Domini
Henneagii Finch, Militis, and pater Wilielmi Clifton, Katherinae, and Arabellae.

M. S. Gervasius Holland servus and cognatus Posuit. Upon a Coffin within the
Vault.

Sarah uxor Gervasii Clifton, Armigeri, filii natu maximi Gervasii Clifton de
Clifton, in Comitatu Not. Equitis and Baronetti. Filia Timothei Pusey nuper de
Celston, Armig. ab antiquae Puseanorum familia in Comitatu Bercheriensi
oriundi, Diem obiit, Jan. 22. Anno Dom. 1652.

Dignissima hoc Epitaphio.
Virtutis jacet hic monumentum vivida quondam
Vivendi, mortis nunc jacet Archetypa.
Ho^pes pauperibus; rabido sic casta marito,
Penelope ut merito victa pudere queat. 1652.
There are many Arms in the Windows, viz. in the Chancell North Window,

Or 2. Bars Gules, and 3. Torteauxes in chief.

Arg. 5. Fusills in fesse Gules, Newmarch.

In the Church South I Will,

Arg. a Lion Ramp. queve furche sab. Cressy.

Az. a Bend between 6. Escallops Arg. Frecheville. Gules, 6. Or, 3.2.1.

Sab. a Lion Ramp. in an Orle of Cinquefoyles, Clifton: this is very often, and
in the upper Windows the Crest with it, A Peacocks head between the wings
erected per pale Arg. and Sab.

.... A Chevron and File of 3. Labels, Swillington.

Per pale Gules and sab. A Lion Ramp. Arg. Corou. Or, Bellers.

Barry of 6. Arg. and Az. Gray.

Arg. a Bend Az. Crusule Or, Lowdham.

Arg. a Lion Ramp. sab. amongst Cinquefoyles Gules, Pierpont.

Az. a Lion Ramp. Or, on his shoulders a Flower de Lis, Braytoft.

In the North I Will,

Clifton, impaleing Arg. a Chevron between 3. Eaglets displayed Gules, Fraunces.

Clifton, quartering, Braytoft.

Clifton, quartering Arg. a Fesse between 3. Escallops Gules.

On a fair Alaba^ter Tomb without Inscription.

Clifton, impaling Gules a Saltier Ermine, Nevil of Rolston.

On three or four Tombs more and in the Hall very many impalements, and
quarterings, and all the Coats single which are in the Gallery at Hodsac, of
the matches.

Bridgeford. Gameleston. Adbolton.
MAster Cambden mentions Bridgeford to have been built by King Edward the
Elder, which it might likely enough be, Cambd. Brittan.
if that was not mistaken for some buildings, which may have been within
Nottingham, on the South side of Trent, where there is ground enough within the
limits of it near the Bridge end, for such a purpose; and I rather suspect it
because before the Saxon Government was changed, Lib. Dooms.
I find Bridgeford a member of Clifton Sok, and not of Not. and it paid the
Dane-geld as twelve Bovats. The Land was three Carucats. There William Peverell
had half a Car. in Demesne, three Sochm. four Vill. two Board. having four Car..
and twelve Acres of Meadow. In Gamston of Clifton Sok also was as much as was
rated to the public Geld as six Bovats. The Land one Car. There two Sochm. had
one Car. and seven Acres of Meadow. And there William Peverell had in demesne
two Car. and eleven Vill. and four Board. having four Car. In Adbolton of the
same Soc was there also six Bov. ad geldam. There was also a Manor in
Adbolton, which Godwin the Priest had before the Conquest, Lib. Dooms.
rated to the Tax at six Bovats. The Land one Car. There William Peverell had
in Demesne one Car. and six Vill. and one Board. having two Car. or Plows. There
was a Church and six Acres of Meadow. The value of this in the Confessors time
was 10s. in the Conquerours 20s.

The Family of Lutterell were the most eminent and ancient owners of Gamston,
that I next meet with. The Sheriff William Briewerre, 6 R. 1. gave account of
xxxiiiis. of the Lands of Galfr. Luterell, who had been misled, Pip. 6 (...).
as most of our Gentry were, by Earl John into a Rebellion against his brother
King Richard the first. In the first year of King John, the said Galfr. gave
account of fifteen Marks to have seisin of xlivs. and viiiid. Land in Clifton
(Soke) whereof he was disseised by occasion of Earl John. Pip. 1 Ioh.
In the second year of King John, he with William Fitz-Walkelin, Pip. 2 Ioh.
Chapter 30 H. 3. m. 6. Orig. 36 H. 3.
was an over-seer of Hugh Bardolfs expense of xxxl. for enclosing of Bolsovre
Park for King John. Andrew Lutterell, 30 H. 3. had Free Warren in his Demesne
Lands in Gameleston and Bruggeford, 36 H. 3. he gave the King three Marks of
Gold to have the liberty not to be Justice, Sheriff, or any other Bailey for the
King, during his whole life; and that he should not be in Assizes, Juries, or
recognizances.

In the 49 H. 3. Galfr. son and heir of Andrew Luterell deceased, ^i^. 49 H. 3.
m. 7. Pl. Forins. 9 E. 1. rot. 3. in dorso.
did his homage.

Robert Luterell, 9 E. 1. claimed against Richard, son of Raph Bugge, seven
Virgats, and twelve Bovats and an half of Land, with the Appurtenances in the
County of Not. as his right. And Richard called to warrant Agnes de Vescy, who
came upon summons, and further called to warrant John de Ferrars under age, son
of Robert Galfr. Luterel 6 R. 1. and 2 John.-Frethesenta-Henr. de Novo mercato
Pip. 3 H. 3. Ebor. Andreas Luterel, 14 H. 3. Pip. Ebor. Galfr. Lutterell, 49 H.
3. Robertus Luterel Chr. 9 E. 1. ob. 25 E. 1.-Joana. Galfr. Lutterell-Agnes.
Andreas Luterel Chr.-Beatricia fill. Galf. Scrope 13 E. 2.-Hawisia. Andreas
Lutterell, mil. ob. 21 R. 2. Galf. Luterell Chr. defunct. 7 H. 5.-Maria
superst. 7 H. 5. Godfr. de Hilton 6 H. 5.-Hawisia-Thom. de Belesby marit. 1.
Godfr. Hilton fill. and haer. 1 E. 4. Galfr. Hilton aet. 15. 12 E. 4. Ric.
Thymelby Ar.-Eliz. una fill. and haered. Johannes Thymelby, mil. ob. 3 E.
6.-Marg. filia Joh. Boys. Rich. Thymilby, mil.-Katherina filia Rob. Tyrwhit,
mil. Johannes Thymilby, Ar.-Maria filia Georgii S. Paul.

Elianora-Thom. Goodhall.

Tho. Belesby infr. aetat. 1 H. 6. Johannes Pygot.-Elizabetha haeres frat. Fin.
8 H. 6. m. 16.


Galfr.-Constantia fill. Galfr. Scrope.
Guido. Robertus Rector de Irnham.




de Ferrars by the Charter of William de Ferrariis, Grandfather of the said
John his heir, which Testified, That the said Will. de Ferrariis, gave the said
Land to William de Vescy in Frank Marriage, with Agnes his daughter. Robert
Luterell, 25 E. 1. was dead: he held certain Lands and Tenements in Gameleston
and Bridgeford, Es^* 25 E. 1. ^. 35.
with the Advowson of the Church of Bridgeford, of Robert de Tiptoft, by the
Service of half a Knights Fee, and a Capital Mess. in Gameleston, and xii.
Bovats in Demesne in Bridgeford; he held in Gameleston five Virg. of Annora de
Pierpont, and five Bovats in Huckenhall, belonging to the Manor of Gamelston:
Galfr. Luterel his son and heir was then above 21 years of age.

Mr. Robert Luterell, Parson of Irnham, who about the year 1303. gave Lands to
the Priory of Sempingham in Ketton, Cotesmore, M^^. Angl. vol. 2. p. 792.
Casteeton in the County of Rutland, and in Stanford in the County of Lincoln,
to maintain three Chaplains, one in the Church of St. Andrew at Irnham, another
in the Chapel of St. Mary, beneath the Manor he gave in Stanford; and the
third in the Conventual Church of Sempingham, celebrating for his Soul, and to
sustain Scholars, studying Divinity and Philosophy at Stanford in convenient
times, was of this Family it seems.

Galfr. Lutterell by his Deed dated at Irnham in Lincolnshire the first Sunday
after Trinity, Ex Lib. (...). transcript. de te^^is Scr^p^r. in Bibli^t. (...).
fol. 3.
13 E. 2. settled the Manor of Gameleston and Bruggford, with the Advowson of
the Church of Brugeford with all his Lands and Tenements in Basingfeild, and
other places, which the Lady Ioane, wife of Sir Robert Lutterell, held for her
life on Guy Lutterell, during the life of the said Galfr. afterward to Andrew,
son of the said Galfr. and to Beatrice his wife, daughter of Galfr. Scroop, and
the heirs of their bodies; for want of which to Galfr. brother of Andrew, and
to Constance his wife, sister of the said Beatrix, and the heirs of theirs;
remainder to the right heirs of Galfr. the Father. There was a like settlement
then made of Irnham and Salteby, and Lands in Correby, Kesseby, and Haverthorp,
etc. in Lincolneshire. It appears that Sir Andrew Lutterell settled the Manor
of Gameleston and Briggeford, Es^. 14 R. 2. p. 32.
and the Advowson of Brigsford, and all his Lands in Briggesford, Gameleston,
Basingfeld, Normanton, Torlaston, Keworth, and Nottingham on himself and
Hawisia his wife, and the heirs of their two bodies; remainder to his right
heirs; and that 14 R. 2. Sir Andrew Lutterell Chr. was the heir of the said Sir
Andrew the elder. Galfr. Lutterell settled this Manor with the Advowson of the
Church of Brigford on William Belers, Es^. 6 H. 5. p. 221.
and others. Galfr. Loterell Chivaler Lord of Irnham about 6 H. 5. died seized
of the Manor of Gamelstone and Brigeford, and Hoton Paynell in Yorkshire, etc.
leaving the Lady Hawisia de Belesby, the wife of Galfr. de Hilton, his sister
and heir. Galfr. or Godfr. de Hilton was his son and heir, 1 E. 4. who had
daughters and heirs; one, I guess, was Hawisia, wife of Laurence Brewerne; but
it is certain that Elizabeth, wife of Richard Thymelby* Esquire, was one, whose
son and heir Sir John Thymelby did his homage, 14 H. 8. rot. 3^.
14 H. 8. after the death of his Father the said Richard, which happened 24
Apr. then last past, being seized of the moiety of the Manors of Gamelston and
Brigford, Inq. 14 H. 8. Apud Not. Iun. 28.
and Advowson, etc. the said Sir John being then above forty years of age, who
died 3 E. 6. and left Richard Thimelby his son and heir; Lib. 1. Sped. fol. 150.
whose son John Thimelby, Esquire, as I take it, sold his interest to Sir Henry
Pierpont, B.
Father of Robert Earl of Kingston, Father of the Right Honorable Henry
Marquess of Dorchester, the present entire owner of all the three Townships.
There was a Fine levied, 14 and also 15 H. 7. between Sir Henry Willughby,
Trin. 14 H. 7. Mich. 15 H. 7.
Knight, Thomas Hunston, and Thomas Hartwell, Compl. and Lawrence Brewerne, and
Hawisia his wife, Deforcients, of the moiety of the Manor of Gameleston, with
the Appurtenances in Briggeford, Basingfeild, Normanton, Tollerton and Kaworth;
and a recovery suffered, 19 H. 7. of the said moiety, with the moiety of the
Advowson of Briggeford, Hill. 19 H. 7. rot. 312.

Inq. Tangen. Dom. Re^gem, 4 E. 1.


etc. wherein the said Lawrence and Hawisia were called to warrant. Walter Bec,
4 E. 1. was certified to have had Assize of Bread and Ale in Bruggeford, and
afterward William de Bec in Brigford, and the Lady of Gameleston to have had
Free Warren.

The Manor of Adbolton was held by the Family of Strelley. E lib. rubr. Inq.
de Honor. Escart. and 13 Ioh. Honor. Pipere^i, fol. 1 1. Ex mag. Libr. de Fin.
in Scaccar. fol. 187. Pasc. 16 E. 1. Fin. apud Ebor. Mich. 31 E. 1.
Walter de Stradleye held of the honor of Peverell in Stradley, Adbolton,
Curtling Stoke, etc. 13 Ioh. And Robert, son and heir of Robert de Strelley, 16
E. 1. held a Knights Fee in Strelley, Adbolton, Cortingstoke, etc. of the
honor of Peverell. By a Fine, 31 E. 1. between Sampson de Strelley, and
Philippa his wife, Quer. and Henry de Whattone of Stoke, Deforc. ten Mess.
three Tofts, one Mill, sixteen Bovats, and twenty five Acres of Land, with the
Appurtenances in Oxton, Salterford, and Adbolton, and the Advowson of the
Church of Adbolton were settled on the said Sampson, and Philippa; and the
heirs of their two Bodies; remainder to the right heirs of the said Sampson; Ex
Coll. I. B.
by her he had Stephen and John, who had no issue, and Robert who had two
daughters and heirs, Cecily, wife of William Eland of Algarthorp, where their
Descent will be noted; and Alice, wife of Thomas Basily of Radcliff, whose heir
was married to Rosell of that place, as there also may be seen. In the time of
H. 7. Elands part descended from Henry Eland to Mary the daughter of his son
Thomas Eland. And afterward was Sir Nich. Byrons, and after that.... Halls.
George Halls Father sold it to Robert Earl of Kingston. B.
Sampson de Strelley had a son named Richard by a former wife, Progenitor of
the Strelleys of Woodborough, who, it seems had some share here; for the heirs
of Richard Strelley accounted for 2s. 6d. for the eighth part of a Knights Fee
here, Exempl. pen. mei^s.
3 H. 4. to the Aid for Marrying Blanch that Kings eldest daughter. And Queen
Elizabeth 18 June, Part. 17. Pat. 41 Eliz.
in the 41 year of her Reign, granted, among other things, a Capital Mess. here
with Lands here and in Bridgeford, at the Bridge end, parcel of the
possessions of Robert Strelley, of the yearly value of ivl. viis. ivd.
reserving that Rent to Sir Henry Pierponte, and his heirs, who was Grandfather
of the before named Henry Marquess of Dorchester.

The Church of Bryggford, the Parish whereof extends into Gamelston, Mss. I.
M.
Basingfeild, and Adbolton was 14l. value when Mr. Thymbylby was Patron. But is
now 16l. 13s. 2d. in the Kings Books, and the Marquess of Dorchester Patron. Ib.
The Rectory of Adbolton was 10l. and Mr. Rosell Patron. And is now (the Town
being wholly enclosed) 2l. 13s. 9d. in the Kings Books, and the said Marquess
Patron, and is shrunk to a Vicarage, but I have not seen how.

Edwalton. Eadwalds Town.
OF Rogerius Pictavensis Fee here was a Manor, which Stepi had, before he and
the Normans came, and paid for it to the general Taxation as six Bovats. The
Land was twelve Bovats. Lib. Dooms.
There was in Demesne, when Doomsday Book was made, one Car. one Vill. sixteen
Acres of Meadow. In the Confessors time it was 30s. value, then 10s. In
Edwolton in the Confessors time Good had a Manor rated to the Geld for six
Bov. the Land whereof was two Car.. There in the Conquerours time Hugo
Grentemaisnil had in Demesne two Car. six Sochm. eleven Vill. having one Car..
and twenty Acres of Meadow then valued at 20^. in the King Edwards time, before
but at 10s. It lay to Stoctun.

Robert (son of, or) Fitz-Ranulph, who was High Sheriff of these Counties, 12
H. 2. and so much a zealous Servant of the King, that he is reported (how
truly, Ex Coll. I. B.
I know not) to be one of those who committed that foul Murder on Thomas
Beckett, the Archbishop of Canterbury, for which (besides two others) he built
the Abbey of Beauchief in Darbyshire, to which he gave this Church, Mon. Angl.
vol. 2. p. 608.
together with the Churches of Norton, and Alfreton, and Wymundeswold; those
Lordships continued long with his Posterity, and this does still.

Thomas de Chaworth, Chapter 41 H. 3. m. 3.
one of the heirs of the Barony of Alferton, 41 H. 3. had Free Warren granted
in Marneham, Chaworth, Edwalton, and Osberton in this County, in Alferton, and
Norton in Darbyshire, and the like in other places of his estate in Leicester,
and Yorkshires.

The Family of Latham of Lancashire was the other heir, Test. de Nev.
of which Robert de Latham is said to hold half a Knights Fee here of the Earl
of Leicester (who married Petronilla, heir of Grentemaisnil) of the old
Feoffment, which I suppose was but in the minority of Thomas Chaworth, whose
heir Male Patricius Viscount Chaworth of Armagh, in the Kingdom of Ireland, now
enjoyes it by descent from Engelram, Father of Ranulph, Father of Robert, first
mentioned, which Engelram was enfeoffed thereof by the said Hugo Grentemaisnil,
as I guess, in the time of H. 1. Thomas de Chaworth, 16 E. 1. was to pay 30s.
per annum to the Prior of Merton, Pl. de Banc. Hill. 16 E. 1. to. 34.
according to a Fine levied, 53 H. 3. by Robert de Auferton his Uncle, whose
heir he was for Tenements in Edwolton, which Robert, I think, should be Thomas
(rot. pip. 26 H. 3.)

Esc. 25 E. 1. n. 51.
Raph Basset of Drayton is found, 25 E. 1. to hold the third part of a Knights
Fee here of the Honor of Leicester. But it seems that Thomas Chaworth, Esc. 17
E. 3. n. 59.
17 E. 3. held it of the Lord Basset. The present Lord Chaworth is also an heir
of the Lord Basset, as in Wiverton, or Marneham is more particularly shown,
where the Descent of that Noble Family is inserted.

This is now thought to be in the Parish of Ruddington, and my Lord Chaworth
bought some Lands here of the R. H. William Earl of Devonshire, heir also of
that Impropriation.

This small Lordship is all or most of it enclosed.

Rodintone. Flawforth.
THE principal Manor in (...) Town in the Conquerours Survey is mentioned to
be the Land of Earl Alan of Richmond, which before the Norman invasion Leviet
had, rated to the Tax as twelve Bovats. The Land was four Carucats. Lib. Dooms.
There Earl Alan had in Demesne one Car. six Sochm. seven Vill. having three
Car. (or Plowes.) There was fifty five Acres of Meadow valued then at 30s. but
in the Confessors time at 60s. Another Manor was of the Fee of Gislebert de
Gand, which before the Conquest Vlf had, taxed at half a Car. The Land one Car.
There was at the time of the Survey in Demesne one Car. four Sochm. five Vill.
two Board. having three Car. There was also thirty three Acres of Meadow, then
valued at 8s. but in the Confessors time at 20s. Here was of Roger de Buslies
Fee Soc to Plumptre, rated to the Geld as ten Bov. ^/3. The Land two Car. There
was eighteen Sochm. having three Car. and thirty three Acres of Meadow. Here was
also some of Robert Malets Fee Soc to Bradmere, taxed usually as one Bov.. The
Land being two Bov. Some of this Town had Soc in Bradmere. Robert de Paveilli
gave two parts of the Tyth of his Demesne to the Monks of Lenton, Reg. Lent. 90.
his Brothers Hugh and Stephen consenting. Robert de Veteriponte, 1 Ioh.
accounted to the King for the Farm of Hocton, Pip. 1 Ioh. Northant.
Suleby, and Pery, which had been the Lands of Robert de Paveley, and the same
year, viz. 1 Iohannis, Galf. de Paveilli gave account of fourscore pounds, and
a hundred Shillings for the Fine of his Land. Galfr. de Paveilli, Pip. 4 Ioh.
4 Ioh. fined for four Knights Fees in Northamptonshire. The same Galfr. 5 Ioh.
gave account of 1. m. for an Assize of Mort de Ancester, Pip. 5 Ioh.
which was summoned between him and Agnes, the wife of Will. de Rutington,
concerning 3. Bov. of Land in Rutington. Rob. Pavilli dyed seized of the Mann^^
of Pery and Suleby, and part of the Manor of Hocton in Northamptonshire about
35 H. 3. and certain Lands in Rudington and Wetlegh in this County, Es^. 35 H.
3. n. 50.
which are said to be held of Edm. Lascy, so that it is probable this was of the
Fee of Gaunt. Robert de Pavilli his Son was then twenty three years of age.
Autog. apud Clifton.
I find Richard de Pavelli, Knight, 26 E. 1. resident at Ruddington. William
Peverell enfeoffed Robert de Pavelli and his heirs in Piry and Hoghton in
Northamptonshire, Pat. 1 E. 3. par. 2. m. 26.
and in Risle and Wingfeild in Darbyshire, which King Edward the third
confirmed in the first year of his Reign to Laurence Pavely, Esc. 20 E. 3. n.
50.
who was heir of Robert (some Copies have it Raph) Pavely of this Manor of
Rudington. This Laurence was Father of Sir Robert Pavely, Knight, 23 E. 3.
Roger and John; which Sir Robert was Father of Laurence Paveley, the last I
have noted here.

Robertus de Paviliaco temp. H. 1. Robertus de Pavelli Galfr. de Pavelli, 1 John 13 H. 3. Robertus de Pavelli, 12 H. 3. Robertus de Pavelli at. 23. 35 H.
3.-Sara. Richardus de Pavelli, miles, 26 E. 1. Laurentius-.11 E. 2. Robertus
Paveli, mort. 20 E. 3. Laurentius Pavelli haer. Rob. 20 E. 3. Robertus Paveli,
miles, 23 E. 3. Laurentius Pavely.
Rogerus. Johannes.
Rob. Nic. Tho. Rog. Will. Joh.
Laurentius. [ F. 50.] Est. 20 E. 3. n. 50.






Hugo. Stephen. Galfr.

About the latter end of E. 3. and in the Reign of R. 2. I find Hugh de
Annesley a considerable man here; which Family, it seems, succeeded the
Paveleys in this place, and continued the name of Hugh very much. Hugh
Annesley, Senior, 16 H. 8. dyed seized of Pavelys Manor, and Bugges Manor
(which was but a Mess. so called) in Rudington, Ex Inq,
and two Mess. in Bradmere, and of a Manor in Hucknall Torcard, his son and
heir Hugh Annesley, Esquire, being then above fifty years of age, who died 30
H. 8. and left his son Gervase 28. Another Gervase Annesley sold it to the Earl
of Kingston, B.
who purchased also that belonging to Plumtre, and all or most of the rest
considerable, and the R. H. the Marquess of Dorchester is now owner.

Hornius (who might possibly be predecessor of a Family named of this place)
gave all the Tyth of his Demesne here to the Monastery of Lenton, Reg. Lent. 92.
offering his gift with his Knife upon the Altar, Margery his wife, and William
his son, and Duran, the Deacon of Flaufore praising the act, and being
Witnesses.

Richard de Roll. confirmed the gift of Michael, Reg. Lent. 90.
son of Richard de Rutington of four Bovats of Land, which were Fulco's, the
Brother of the said Richard, which William his son held Richardus de Rutington
Michael de Rutingtona. Ricardus de Rotington.-Margareta. Willielmus de
Rutington.-Agnes. Ricardus de Rutington 1234.



Fulco. Willielmus.

after him, to the Monastery of Lenton; and that they might be more secure,
William de Roll. his son and heir, and Raph his Brother did quit their claim in
his presence to the said Monastery.

William, son of Richard de Rotington, confirmed the gift of Galfr. de
Malquinci his Uncle of four Acres, Ib. 92.
to the said Priory. And Richard, son of this William, confirmed the gifts of
Richard his Grandfather, son of Michael de Rutinton, and likewise gave his
Meadow called Godwinesholm, which lay near Clifton Water-milne, in the year
1234. being at Lenton Fair, to that Monastery.

This last Richard de Rutinton, 12 H. 3. claimed against Robert Pa^illi ten
Bovats of Land in Burton, Pl. de Banc. Mich. 12 H. 3. to. 40. in dorso.
and four Bov. and an half here, as heir to Galfr. de Malquinci, who died
without issue in the time of R. 1. for which there was a Duel waged and fought,
and the man of Robert Pavilli was vanquished in the Field.

The Sheriff of Not. 14 H. 3. was commanded that the imparlance [ loquela]
which was in his County, Fin. and Claus. 14 H. 3. part. 2. m. 8. in dorso.
between Richard de Rudington, and Robert Pavilis concerning that, that the
said Robert should do suit to the Court of the said Richard at Rudington,
should be respited while the said Robert was in the Kings service beyond the
Seas; the King at that time made his Voyage into Britany.

John, son of Sigerus de Clifton, remised to Richard called Martell of Rodinton
Lands, Autog. apud Clifton.
sometime the Bishop of Dunblanes; the Witnesses were Sir John de Leke, Sir
Galfr. de Stapleford, Knights, Richard de Pavelli of Rodinton, Henry Poutrell
of Thurmeton, etc. in the time of E. 1. It Is like the Bishop was of this
Family, and that Rodintons were afterward called Martells.

Anchor de Freschevill, 45 H. 3. was found heir of Raph his Father, Es^. 45 H.
3. n. 24.
Lord of Boney, who held half a Knights Fee in Rotinton of John de Musters of
the honor of Richmond. William, son of Thomas de Plumire, 15 E. 1. could not
deny but that he was to acquit Richard de Bingham (whose name was Bugge, Pl. de
Banc. Trin. 15 E. 1. to. 63.
as in Leek, and other places may be noted) against all persons wha^soever of
the service which Henry de Lascy, Earl of Lincoln, exacted of him for one
Mess. one Bovat, and four Sesions of Land in Rutington, and the Advowson of the
Church, which Sir Richard de Bingham, Knight, 46 E. 3. by Fine passed to Sir
John de Nevill, Tin. 46 E. 3.
Knight, with two Bovats, and William Bond his native with his sequel.

In the same 15 E. 1. Paulinus, Ibid. in dorso.
son of William, son of Thomas de Plumptre, claimed against Thomas, son of
William de Plumptre, a yearly Rent of ten Marks Sterling in Plumptre, one
Virgat of Land, with the Appurtenances in the same Town, two Bovats of Land and
an half, and seven Carucats of Land, with the Appurtenances in Rutington, which
William de Plumptre gave to Thomas, son of the said William, and to the heirs
of his body; and which after the death of the said, and of William his son,
ought to descend to the said Paulinus, son of the said William, as Cousin and
heir of the said Thomas, to whom the said William de Plumptre gave the said
yearly Rent of ten Marks, out of his Lands, Medows, and Pastures in the
territory of Plumtre; and the said Virgat of Land, with the augmentation of
three Acres of his Demesne in the same Town, (...) these two Bovats and half,
and seven Carucats in Rotington; by which gift the said Thomas was seized in
his Demesne, as of Fee and Right in the time of Peace, in the time of King
John, Grandfather of the King then dead. But Thomas, the son of William,
pleaded that the said William only gave the said Thomas, and Avicia his wife,
the premiss for their lives, and afterward to remain to the right heirs Ma^^s
of the said William, whereupon the said Paulinus was cast.

Ruddingtons Manor came to Richard called Martell, Autogr. ap. Clifton, and
alibi.

Quo War. 3 E. 3.


for he lived there in the time of E. 1. and Hugh Martell of Chilwell, 3 E. 3.
claimed view of Frankpledge, and all things belonging to it, of all his Tenants
in Rudinton. He afterward, viz. 16 E. 3. did or was about to found a Chantry
in the Chapel of St. Andrew, Esc. 16 E. 3. n. 52.
in the Church of St. Peter of Flawfore, to which he gave, or intended to give
two Mess. and three Virgats in Rotindon, and one Bovat and an half, and half a
Mess. in Clifton. But it seems to have been perfected, 37 H. 6. by William
Babington, Esquire, son of Sir William Babington, Knight, Ex libello Ric. St.
George Norroy. Collect. per St. Io Kniveton.
and of Margery his wife (whom I judge to have been the daughter and heir of
Robert Martell) for three Chaplains officiating, two in this Chapel of St.
Andrew in Flaforth Church, and one in the Chapel, within the Manor of
Chilwell, who were to pray for the good state of King H. 6. Margaret his Queen,
Edward Prince of Wales, etc. of William Babington the founder, and Elizabeth
his wife, and for the Souls of Sir William Babington, Knight, and Margery his
wife, etc. and also for the souls of Mr. Robert Prebend, sometime Bishop of
Dunblane, of Richard Martell, Hugh Martell, and Robert Martell, and for the
Souls of them to whom the said Mr. Robert and Sir William are held bound in the
sight of God. This was (...) called Babingtons Chantry, it had 21. (...) yearly
Rent out of twenty eight Bovats of Land and eighteen Acres, and one Rood of
Meadow in Chilwell, twelve Bovats of Land and Meadow in Clifton and Glapton,
sixteen Bovats of Land, and four Acres of Meadow in Bramcote, and forty Acres of
Land, and sixteen of Meadow in Lenton, for the Warden, and the said three
Chaplains, and their Successors for ever, which Lands were of the yearly value
of 25l.

Assis. 10 H. 4. to. 82.
At the Assizes at Nottingham, 10 H. 4. the Prior of Newstede, recovered a Mess.
and one Bovat of Land in Rodinton, which had been held of the Priory since the
time of H. 3. by the service of 5s. and fealty, because John Hutt, the late
Tenent, died without heirs.

The Rectory was appropriated to the College of Durham in Oxford, lately
dissolved, and was rated at the yearly value of 26l. 13s. 4d. B.


There was also in the Town a house and certain Tithes of Corn and Hay,
appropriated to the Priory of Lenton, rated at the yearly value of 3l. 15s. all
which is now the inheritance of the Right Honorable the Earl of Devonshire.

The Vicarage was 8l. value when the Prior of Durham was Patron. Mss. I. M.
It is now 6l. 13s. 4d. in the Kings Books, and the Countess of Devonshire
Patroness.

There is a Church-like Chapel in the Town, but the Parish Church stands in
the Field, and is called Flawforth Church, betwixt the Towns of Edwalton, B.
Plumptre, Keyworth, Boney, and Bradmere, whereof some parts of the three last
are belonging to the Parish. It was parcel of the possessions of St. John's of
Jerusalem, and the Tithes being thereunto appropriate, are sold as diverse
Portions in the several Townships.

In that Church is a South Quire, called Dumlaws Quire, corrupted, I suppose,
from Dunblane (the Bishop whereof, I guess, built it) in the middle of which,
upon one Stone, are cut the Figures of a Man and a Woman, which seem very
ancient, with this Inscription about the sides,

DIC IACET IN TVMVLO MATILDIS CVM GALEFRIDO......... PON.... ARE BARTVN QI.
TENVERE.

Galfr. de Malquinci, and Matildis his wife held West-Burton in Bassettlaw
Wapentack. He died in the time of R. 1. as before is noted.

Upon another very hard Stone is a picture of a woman, it seems, with a strange
old Cap, and about the sides in great Brass Letters,

... WOSRE: PASSEG: PAR: ICI: PRIEB: PV... L...... ME MAR GERI: NE: DEV: LE:
PACE: MARCI: AMEN:

If this be for Margery, the wife of Hernius, it is very old. I do not think it
to be Margery, the wife of Sir William Babington. There is a Gravestone for
William Babington, with his Arms at each corner, by his head, Ten roundels, and
a File of three Labels.

On another Gravestone,

Hic jacet Sidonia Al soror Mari Babington quae obiit vi. die Maii, Anno Domini
M.CCCC.XL.VIII.

Close by the Wall, one cross-leg'd, his Gown or Surcoat reaching below his
knees.

In the Chancell, a Priest and a Chalice by his head: and about it,

Hic jacet Dominus Willielmus Jokin vicarius de Rodington, qui obiit xxv. die
mensis Novembris Anno Domini Millesimo, D.XV. cujus animae propitietur Deus,
Amen.

And upon one in the Church.

Orate pro anima Margaretae nuper uxor. Henrici Vinir, qui obiit apud Rodyngton
xv. October. Anno Domini M.CCCC.XXX.IX. Cujus animae propitietur Deus, Amen.

And diverse others without Inscriptions.

In an old Hall Window at Rodington, Pa'y of 6. Arg. and Azure a bend Gules,
Annesley; impaling Azure a Chevron between 3. Mullets, Or.

Plumptre and Normanton.
HEre were two Manors in Plumptre in the time of King Edward, before the
Norman Invasion, which Vlfac and Godric had rated to the public Geld for
twelve Bov. Lib. Dooms.
The Land (was then esteemed sufficient for three Plows, or) three Carucats. It
afterward was the Fee of Roger de Busli, who had there in Demesne three Car.
thirty three Vill. having five Car. There was a Church, and twenty three Acres
of Meadow. This then kept the old value 3l. having Soc in Rodintone. In
Normentune, Vnfac had a Manor Taxed at six Bov. before the Conquest, the Land
whereof was three Car. There Roger de Busli had also in Demesne two Car. six
Vill. three Board. four Sochm. with three Car. The value of this had been in the
time of King Edward the Confessor 40s. but then was but 30s. Here was also a
Berew Taxed at four Bov. and an half. The Land half a Carucat. There were two
Vill. one Board, having half a Car. It lay in Plumptre, to which more of the Soc
also lay in Stantune and Cauord.

Plumptre has been esteemed a kind of Wapentac, or Hundred, and belonging to
Donington Eastie, as the Earl of Chetters, concerning which, something is
already noted in the beginning of this Rushcliff Hundred; but the Manor, or
Sok of Plumptre, seems to have been continued to the Posterity of this Godric,
with Sprotburgh in Yorkshire, still united in the possession of Sir Godfrey
Copley of that place, who inherited them from Chetilbert, who, I suppose, was
son of this Godric, because his sons name was Godric; which Godric, son of
Chetilbert, was Lord of Sprotburgh, 5 Steph. and Father of William, who married
Albreda de Lisoures, Pip. Eber. 5 Steph. Pip. 15 H. 2. Eber.
whose son and heir William was called Fitz-William, which became the Surname
of this Noble Godric tenuit plurima Maneria temp. Ed. Conf. and Willielmi Conq.
Chetilbertus Godric filius Chetilberti, 5 Steph. Willielmus-Albreda fill. and
haer. Roberti de Lusoriis-Ric. Constab. Cestriae. Willielmus fill.
Willielmi-Matildis. Thom. fill. Willielmi temp. H. 3. Willielmus fill. Willielmi
Willielmus Fitz-William-Isabella. Johannes Fitz-William Johannes Fitz-William,
miles-Elizab. fill..... Clinton Comitis Huntingt. Willielmus Fitz-William,
miles-Matildis fill. Rad. Crumwel. J^^annes Fitz-William, miles ob. 6 H.
5.-Elionora fill. Hen. Green milit. Johannes Fitz sepult. 9 H. 5.-William, Ar.
probat. aet. 6 H. 5.-Margareta fill. Thom. Clarell de Aldwerk.-Willielmus
Gascoigne, miles, mar. 2. Willielmus Fitz-William, Ar. ob. 10 E. 4.-Elizab.
fill. Tho. Chaworth, milit. Willielmus Fitz-William, miles, ob. 3 Jul. 9 H.
7.-Elizab. fill. Joh. Conyers, mil. Johannes Fitz-William, Ar. ob. 5 H. 7.
Willielmus Fitz-William, Ar. mort. 7 Eliz. aet. 13. 19 H. 7. and ampl.
Willielmus Copley, miles, ob. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar.-Dorothea co-haer. Will.
Nepotis. Philip. Copley aet. 34. 2 and 3 Ph. and M.-Mar. fill* Br. Ric. Gascoign
Hastings, mil. mar. ^. s. p. Willielmus Copley-Elizab. fill. Godfr. Bosvile, Ar.
Godfridus Copley, s. p. Radulphus, s. p.
Alvered. Copley-.... fill... Gunby, Ar. Willielmus Copley-Dorothea fill.
Willielmi Routh, Ar. Godfridus Copley de Sprotburgh, Baronettus superst.
1673.-Elenora fill. Thom. Walmesley milit.-Elizab. fill. Willielmi Stanhope ux.
2. Godfridus Copley fill. and har.


Marg. Franc. Joh. Tho.

Tho. Sothill.-Margareta. Elizab-Henric Savile, mil.


Hugo Fitz-William, Ar. superst. 7 Eliz.


Edmund Fitz-William-Matildis fill. Joh. Hothum, m^^.

Thomas, 18 E. 3. Joana, 18 E. 2. Agnes. Isabel.



Johannes Constab. Rogerus Constab. Cestr. ut in Kneesal.





Family; and his son Thomas Fitz-William held this Manor of Plumptre, Test. de
Nev.
of the honor of Tikhill in the time of H. 3.

Raph de Nevill, 24 H. 2. gave account of Cs* for hastening the Duel against
William son of Godric. Pip. 24 H. 2. Ebor.


Now whether this William was called de Clarofagio; or it was another William
so named, who was also Husband to Albreda de Lisures; but before that had
another wife called Avicia, the daughter and heir of Will. de Tanai, by whom he
had a daughter named Sibyll, married to Raph Tilli, who had two sons by her,
Raph, and Roger, both Benefactors to the Monastery of Hampole in Yorkshire,
Mon. Angl. vol. 1. p. 831.
I have not yet found evidence certainly to determine: but certain it is, that
in the year of our Lord 1331. William Fitz-William, Lord of Sprotburgh in
Yorkshire, confirmed the gift of his Father William, son of Thomas Lord of
Sprotburgh, of 30s. Rent out of Athewyk in that County, to the Nuns of
Hanepole, and the gift or donation of the said Thomas his Grandfather, which
confirmed the Grant of William, son of William (or Fitz-William) Father of the
said Thomas, and son and heir of Albreda de Lizours, which confirmed the gift
of the said Albreda his Mother, and Grandmother of the said Thomas, of the
Church of Athewick, and twenty shillings Rent out of her revenue at Plumtre
near S^roby; which Rent, the said William her son, granted to find a Lamp
continually burning at the Tomb of Matildis his wife. He also gave a Mark of
Rent to Blyth out of the same Plumtre, Reg. de Blia. p. 98*
as in that place is noted, and there he is called William, son of William, son
of Godric.

Albreda de Lisures (as in Kneesale, Hodsak, Styrap, etc. may be seen) had
another husband called Richard, Mon. Angl. Ib.
by whom she had John, Constable of Chester, who also confirmed his Mothers
gifts to this Monastery of Hampole, to which they gave Athewyk, Melton, and the
very si^e of Hampole.

There was a Fine levied, 18 E.. between William, Trin. 18 E. 1. potius 18 E. 2.
son of (or Fitz-) William, Quer. and Edmund Deyncourt, and Edmund, Parson of
the Church of Plumtre, Deforc. of the Manor of Plumtre, with the
Appurtenances, and the Advowson of the Church of the same Manor, whereby it
was settled on the said William Fitz-William, and the heirs of his body;
remainder to John son of the said Will. and the heirs males of his; remainder
to Thomas, brother of John, in like sort; remainder to Joan, sister of Thomas*
and the heirs Males of her body; remainder to Agnes, and so Isabel, her sisters
respectively in the same manner; remainder to the right heirs of the said
William. (I doubt this should be 18 E. 2.)

There was a Writ dated 12 Feb. 7 Eliz. directed to the Sheriff of Yorkshire,
that he should command Richard Gascoigne, Esquire, and Elizabeth his wife, that
justly, and without delay, they restored to Hugh Fitz-William, Esquire, the
Manors of Emely and Darthington, with the Appurtenances, which Edmund
Deyncourt gave to John, son of William, and the heirs Males of his body; and
which after the death of the said John, and of John Fitz-William, Knight, son
of the said John, and William Fitz-William, Knight, son of the said John
Fitz-William, Knight, and of John Fitz-William, Knight, son of the said William
Fitz-William, Knight, and of John Fitz-William, Esquire, son of the said John
Fitz-William, son of the said William Fitz-William, Knigh^, and of William
Fitz-William, Esquire, son of the said john Fitz-William* Esquire, and of
William F^^z-William, Knight, son of the said William ^itz-William, Esquire,
and of John Fitz-William, Esquire, son of the said William Fitz-William,
Knight, son of the said William Fitz-William, Esquire, and of William
Fitz-William, Esquire, son of the said John Fitz-William, Esquire, son of the
said William Fitz-William, Knight, ought by the form of the donation (or
Formedone) aforesaid to descend to the said Hugh, son and heir of John
Fitz-William, Esquire son of John Fitz-William, Knight, son of William
Fitz-William, Knight, son of John Fitz-William, Knight, son of the said John,
son of William, as Cousin and heir of the said John, son of William. But this
Writ, it seems, went to the Ground, because the seisin was laid in the Donee,
where it should have been in the last Seisor. Sir William Ingleby was then
Sheriff of Yorkshire.

Sir John Fitz-William, Knight, Esc. 6 H. 5. p. 203.
son of Sir William, and Maud his wife, daughter of Raph Crumwell, dyed seized
of this Manor of Plumtre, and Rents in Chaddesden, Wodhall, and Braydeston in
Darbishire, Esc. 6 H. 5. n. 41. Derb.
esteemed parcel of it; and likewise of the Manors of Emlay and Sprotbrough in
Yorkshire, 6 H. 5. leaving his son John Fitz-William his heir, Ex Collect. St.
Lo Kniveton, Ar. A. C. 134.
who died at Roan, and was buried at Sprotburgh, 9 H. 5. He married Margaret,
daughter of Thomas Clarell of Aldewerk; and his son William Fitz-William, Lord
of Elmeley, died at Hathilsey, and was buried at Sprotbrugh, 10 E. 4. Sir
William Fitz-William, Knight, of Sprotbrugh, Lord of Emley, his son died, 9 H.
7. buried there also, as was his son John, who died before him, 5 H. 7.

William Fitz-William, son of this John, died without issue, and so this Manor
of Plumptre, with the Appurtenances in Normanton, Ex Inq.
Clipston, Ruddington, and Chaworth, fell to his Aunt Dorothy, daughter of Sir
William Fitz-William, and wife of Sir William Copley, whose son Philip Copley,
Esquire, was found his heir by an Inquisition taken at Newark 29 Oct. 3 and 4
Ph. and Mar. of this Manor, and half the Manor of Bafforth, being then above
thirty four years old.

Philip Copley, Esquire, by Mary, daughter of Sir Brian Hastings, Knight, his
wife, Ex Relatione Godf. Chpley, Bar. de Sprotburgh in Com. Ebor.
had William, Margaret, Francis, Alverey, John, Thomas; William Copley married
Elizabeth, daughter of Godfrey Bosvile, sister and one of the heirs of Fr.
Bosvile of Gumblethwait, Esquire and had issue Godfrey and Raph Copley both without
issue. Alverey Copley, second son of Philip, had by his wife.... the daughter
of... Gunby, Esquire, William Copley, whose wife was Dorothy, daughter of
William Routh of Roumley, Esquire, by whom he had Sir Godfrey Copley, created
Baronet, 17 Iun. 13 Car. 2. the present Lord of this Manor, and Sprotburgh in
Yorkshire, whose first wife was Ele^or, the daughter of Sir Thomas Walmesly,
Knight, and Mother of Godfrey his son and heir; his second wife is Elizabeth,
daughter of William Stanhope, Esquire.

There was a good Freehold in Normanton, the inheritance of the Eldershawes. B.
This Hamlet is enclosed to the great loss of the Church of Plumtre, to which
it is Parish, as is also Clipston.

The Rectory was 30l. value, and William Fitz-William Patron. Mss. I. M.
Now it is 19l. 19s. 7d. in the Kings Books, and Sir Godfrey Copley Patron. The
present incumbent is Vere Harcourt, D. D. Archdeacon of Not.

In the East Window of the Chancell there is, Lozengy Ar. and Gules,
Fitz-William, impaling with Crumwell, quartering Tateshale; and with Chaworth,
viz. Ar. 2. Chevrons Or, quartering Caltoft, and with Gules a Bend between 6.
Martletts Arg. and with another broken away. Fitz-Williams is in the Church
Windows likewise, and Arg. a plain Cross Gules.

In the middle of the Chancell, on an Alabaster,

Hic jacet Dominus Thomas Wigfall, quondam, etc... obiit 16 Iunii 1534. Cujus
animae, etc.

Plac. de Banco. Trin. 15 E. 1. to. 63. in dorso.
Iu. 15 E. 1. Paulinus, the son of William de Plumptre, then lately deceased,
claimed diverse Lands and Tenements in Plumptre and Normanton, which William
Fitz-William gave to the said William de Plumptre his Cousin, and to the heirs
of his body (who is therefore thought to be a branch of the Family) but the
several persons, against whom he claimed, pleaded that when he obtained the
Writ, they had nothing in the premises, but at the Will of Thomas, son of (or
Fitz-William de Plumptre:) whereupon Paulinus came not, and so his pledges
Richard Curs^n and Roger le Spicer were amerced.

Pl. de Iur. and Assis. coram Will. Herle and Soc. ap^d Not. die Lunae prox
post fest. St Martini 3 E. 3. to. 13
William de Plumptre, 3 E. 3. claimed Lands in Plumptre, as son of Henry, son
of Paulinus de Plumptre, who held them in the time of E. 1. and was sometimes
called le Clear*

Bingham Hundred.
Binghamshou Wapentac.
SO called from the usual place of meeting, viz. a certain Pit on the top of
the Hill, on the contrary side of the Fosse way, near the most westerly corner
of Bingham Lordship, called Moot-house Pit, where the Hundred Court, now known
by the name of Moot-house Court, is, or ought to be still kept, or called;
though, I think, they usually remove to Crophill Butler, as the nearest Town
for shelter.

Clipston.
WHen Plumtre Wapentak was in use, this Town of Clipston was esteemed as part
of it, but now it is and has been long, even from the Conquest, Doomsd.
of Binghamshou, though it yet remains of the Parish of Plumtre. It was also of
Roger de Buslies Fee; where before the Norman Invasion Vlviet had a Manor
rated to the public Taxation (or Dane-geld) at three Carucats. The Land three
Carucats. There Roger had in Demesne two Car. three Sochm. twelve Vill. one
Bordar, having six Car. (or Flows.) There was twenty Acres of Meadow. In K.
Edward the Confessors days the value of this was 60s. In King Williams but
40s.

There is in Doomsday Book mention of two Manors in Wa^eberge (now utterly
lost, except it was some part of Kinolton) whereof Godric named in Plumtre,
before the Conquest, had one, and paid for it to the Geld as twelve Bov. The
Land was twelve Bov. It was waste, and the Fee of Roger de Busli. There was ten
Acres of Meadow. In the Confessors time it was 20s. In the Conquerours but 5s.
Another Fredgis had rated to the Dane-geld at thirteen Bov. ^/2. The Land
whereof was sufficient for two Plows, or two Car. There Rogerius Pictavens^s,
whose Fee it became, had one Car. and two Sochm. and one Board. having one Car.
and ten Acres of Meadow. This was 10s. in the Confessors time, and 12s. value
in the Conquerours. It seems not to be far off from Cotegrave, Crophill,
Outhorpe, Kinolton, and this Clipston in which Rog^r de Busli gave the Tithe of
one Plow-Land or Carucat to the Monastery of Blyth, Reg. Bl^. 104.
amongst many other things, in his very foundation Charter thereof bearing date
1088.

John de Gatton is said to have held a Knights Fee here, of the Earl of
Lincoln, Test. de Nev.
of the old Feoffment.

Richard de Bingham, 22 E. 1. had a Charter of Free Warren in Bingham,
Clipston, Chapter 22. E. 1. m. 50. Trin* 1 E. 2.
and Kinalton. There was a Fine, 1 E. 2. between Richard de Byngham, and Alice
his wife, Quer. and Mr. Alan de Neuson, Deforc. of the Manors of Byngham and
Clipston, and of nine Mess. twenty eight Acres, and eight Bov. of Land and an
half, and twelve Acres of Meadow, with the Appurtenances in Outhorp, Kinalton,
Cotegrave, Notingham, and Rotington, and the Advowson of the Church of
Rotington, thereby settled on the said Richard, and Alice, and the heirs Males,
which the said Richard should beget on the Body of the said Alice; remainder to
William, son of Alice Bertram of Bingham, and the heirs Males of his body;
remainder to Richard, younger Brother of William and his; remainder to Thomas,
brother of the said Richard the younger, and the heirs* Males of his* remainder
to the right heirs of the said Richard de Byngham. It appears by another Fine,
2 E. 2. between the said Richard de Byngham, Mic. 2 E. 2.
and Alice his wife, Quer. and William Bertram of Bingham, Deforc* concerning
twenty Bovats of Land, with the Appurtenances in Outhorpe, Cotegrave, and
Kynalton, settled as before on the said Richard and Alice, and so on William,
Richard, and Thomas, that he first had these sons by her, and afterward took
her to wife, for William is there said to be son of the said Alice.

In the Record called Nomina Villarum, 9 E. 2. Basingfeild, Gamelston,
Torlaston, Nom. Vill. 9 E. 2.
and Clipston answered for a whole Villa, and the Lords then were certified to
be Joan Luterell, John Barry, and Alice de Byngham.

Trin. and Mich. 18 E. 3.
William de Bingham Chr. 18 E. 3. by Fine settled this Manor, and some other
Lands, with those in Kinalton, on Richard de Bingham, and Amora his wife, then
in the Custody or Guardianship of Robert de Meaux. Sir Richard de Bingham,
T^in. and (...) Mic. 40 E. 3.
Knight, 40 E. 3. by another Fine settled these Lands on his Son William, and
Margaret his wife, and the heirs of their Bodies, reserving 100s. per annum
Rent, with remainder to the right heirs of himself the said Sir Richard. This
William married another wife called Isabell, and died before his Father the
said Sir Richard, who died about 11 R. 2. Esc. 11 R. 2. n. 10.
Robert his Grandchild, by this William, being then found his heir, and about
four years old.

Mi^h. 1 H 4.
Which Robert, I suppose, lived not long, for there was a Fine, 1 H. 4. levied
between Sir Thomas de Rempston Chr. Complainant, and Richard, late King of
England Chr. Deforc. of the Manors of Bingham and Clipston on the Hill by
Plumtre, etc. by which these Lands were settled on Sir Thomas Rempston and his
heirs; but Isabell, the wife of William de Bingham had then her life in this
Manor, which descended to the heirs of this Sir Thomas de Rempston* with
Bingham, and his other Lands, as in Bingham more particularly may be seen.

Sir Brian Stapleton, and Elizabeth his wife, suffered a recovery, Mic. 2 H. 8.
rot. 415.
2 H. 8. of his Manor of Bingham, and Lands here.

Es^. 2 H. 6. pa. 335.
Lucy, who had been wife of Edmund Holland Earl of Kent, held in Dower after
the death of her said husband, 2 H. 6. of the inheritance of the Duchess of
York, the wife of Henry Bromflete, Knight, one of the Sisters and heirs of the
said Earl her husband, of Margaret Duchess of Clarence, the second Sister of
Edmund late Earl of Ma^^h, son of Elianor, a third Sister, of Alice, the wife
of Richard Nevill Chr. deceased, within age, and in the Kings custody the
fifth, sisters Cousins and heirs of the said Earl, amongst other things, the
fourth part of a Knights Fee in Clipston by Plumbtre, which the Lady of Bingham
lately held, and another fourth part in Hickling which William Gray held.

In 7 H. 8. William Perpoynt, Knight, claimed against Hugh Taylour one Mess.
one hundred Acres of Land, Mic. 7 H. 8. to. 512.
twenty of Meadow, forty of Pasture, with the Appurtenances in Clipston on the
Hill, in the Parish of Plumtre, and the Advowson of the Chantry, or free
Chapel there called St. John's Chapel.

This Lordship was purchased by Sir Henry Pierpont, B.
and descended to his son Robert Earl of Kingston, and remains the Marquess of
Dorchesters.

Upper or Over Broughton. Doomsd. Broton.
IN Broton Algar the Earl (of Leicester) had a Manor which paid the Tax for
two Car. The Land of it was sufficient for seven Plows or seven Car. 1 (...).
There after the Change King William had two Car. and twenty three Vill. and
four Board. having seven Car. and one Mill. 5s. and one hundred Acres of Meadow.
In the Confessors time when a former survey was made this was 3l. value, but
when the Conquerours was returned 4l. Thorpe was a Berew belonging to this
Manor (as in that place is noted) which together with this Town went from the
Crown to the Earl of Chester, and so to Albini Earl of Arundel.

Brocton was the Land of Aluredus de Suleni, a certain Norman, and seized into
the Kings hand, Test. de Nev.
but the King restored it to the Earl of Chester, because that Knight held it
of him, and the Mother of the Earl held in Dower; it was then a Knights Fee;
and in another place said to be held by Aluered de Sulleny, of the Earl of
Arundel, of the old Feoffment.

The King, 36 H. 3. pardoned Aluered de Sullyny, who had to wife Sibyll, (...).
Mic^. 36 H. 3. to. 3.
the daughter and heir of John de Braytoft, 11l. which was the Arrearages of a
30. in Lincolnshire, whereof John de Braytoft had been one of the Collectors.
This Sibyll was wife of Roger de Cressi of Hodsak* and last of all of Adam de
St. Lo, as in Clifton may be observed, who held some Lands here in Dower of
John son of Aluredus de Soleni's inheritance when he passed it to Sir Gervas de
Clifton, about the beginning of the Reign of Edward the first, with whose
posterity it continued till the last Sir Gervase Clifton, Knight and Baronet,
was persuaded to sell it, Ex relatione and (...) ips^as Do^. G^rv. Clifton.
which he often repented himself of, being so long in his Family, and he not
necessitated, as he has several times told me himself, so that the Advowson of
the Church is all that remains of it to his posterity. It is commonly called
Broughton Sulney from the Ancient owners whose Seals were quarterly...... it is
also thereby distinguished from Nether Broughton in Leicestershire which is by
it. Ex (...). pe^. Mic^. Britt de Brought^^. Mss. I.M.


The Rectory was twenty Marks. It is now 11l. 9s. 4d. ob. in the Kings Books,
and Sir G. Clifton Patron.

Hickling. Doomsd. Echeling and Hegeling.
A Small part of this Township was a Berue of Crophill, and did and does still
with it belong to St. Mary of Sudwell, being a piece of the two Prebends of
Oxton. Before the Conquest in Echeling three Carucats and an half for the Geld,
Tarchill and Goduin held for two Manors. The Land whereof was then returned to
be sufficient for eight Plows, or eight Car. Lib. Dooms.
This afterward became the Fee of Ilbert de Lacy. Here was then in Demesne
three Car. and four Sochm. Twenty three Vill. with one Board. had six Car. o^
Plows. There was two hundred Acres of Meadow. This part in elder time was valued
at 6l. but when the Conquerours survey was taken at 4l.

Another part of this Town was Soc to Granby, of the Fee of Walter de Ayncurt,
and was rated to the Geld for two Car. The Land was four Car. There eight
Sochm. one Vill. ten Board. had five Car. There was a Mill 16s. and eighty Acres
of Meadow.

Walter de Eyncurt (Grandchild, I suppose, of this Walter) restored to Elias
(or Eliseus, Reg. de Thurg. (...) p. 131.
as in that Deed) de Fanecurt the whole Land, which his Father Gerard de
Fanecurt held of him, viz. one Knights Fee in Hickeling and Kinalton, and in
Brunneby one Knights Fee, and in Scaupewik four Quadrigats of Land, and in
Graneby one Quadrigat of Land for half a Knights Fee, for the exchange of Land
which he held in Timberland.

Sir Gerard de Fanecurt, son of Elias, was a very great Benefactor to the
Priory of Thurgarton o^ Rad. de Eyncurts Foundation: (...). de Th^^g. 70, and
71.
for he not only confirmed what his Grandfather Sir Gerard had given out of his
Estate in Lincolneshire, but gave away his whole Manor of Hickling, as it was
increased by an exchange he made with Oliver de Lovetot Lord of Corcolston, of
his Lands there for the said Olivers in Hickling, which Eustachia de Fanecourt
his wife, in her widowhood, also released, after she had claimed them against
the Pr^or and Covent by a Writ of Entry, viz. ten Bovats of Land 2s. Rent, and
the Lands out of which it issued, as her own right. Robert Salwayn, son of
Gerard Salwayn, released also to that Priory 10s. per annum Rent, which he was
wont to receive of Oliver de Lovetoft for ten Bovats of Land in Hicklinge.
Edmund de Ayncurt, son of John, confirmed Sir Gerard de Fanecourt's gifts of
the homages, services, wards and reliefs, etc. in the Towns of Hickeling and
Kinalton, and also released 60s. Rent, which he himself had, during his life,
out of this Manor, to the said Prior and Canons. Sir Gerard de Fanecourt bore
for his Arms, Ex (...).
in imitation of Deyncourt it seems, Azure Billette Or, with a Canton Ermine.
Sir Roger de Alneto held of him in Cressewelle, whose homage and service he
also gave, as he did of all his Freemen in Hikling and Kinalton. Here were Raph
de Fanecourt, William de Villiers, Walter de Loveto, whose daughters Avicia,
Matilda, Agnes, Margery, and Alice, released to Prior Gilbert, and the Covent
of Thurgarton, one Mess. and two Bovats of Land, which their Father held of
this Fee, and very many others of like sort.

The Prior of Thurgarton, 8 E. 1. claimed not Assize of Bread, Ib. 136. Plac.
de Rag^^^^ 8 E. 1. de q^o War.
or Gallows, or Tumbrell, but the Emendation of the Assize of Ale broken he
did. But Gilbert de Thorneton, who then sued (or followed) for the King
demanded judgment how the Prior, who had renounced Tumbrell, which is the
judgment of the Assize of Ale broken, could claim the Emendation of that
Assize broken. But his successor, 3 E. 3. claimed a Court Leet here, Quo War. 3
E. 3.
which the Jury found accordingly, and for the Rent of 8l. a year to the King
was regranted. About that time the value of the whole Manor belonging to
Thurgarton was 24l. 5s. 2d. per annum, Reg. T^urg. 176.
there being then four Carucats of Land, each 40s. apiece, two Dovecotes 24s.
one Windmill 20s. the rest made up of small Rents of the Freeholders, Bondmen,
and Cotagers.

M^^. Angl. (...). 1.659.
Ilbert de Lacy gave two parts of the Tithe of his Demesne in Hickling to the
Chapel of St. Clement in Pomfret Cas^^e. Lacyes Fee descended to the Earls of
Lincoln, the most ancient Tenent whereof, that I find, was Robert de Harestan,
Lib. f^od. in Scaccar. pen. remem. Regis.
who is said to hold two parts of the Town of Hickling by free Farm for nine
Marks per annum, of the Fee of the Earl of Lincoln. He held some part of a
Knights Fee in S^^ton in the Dale in Darbyshire, Es^ 33 H. 3. Derb.
and was dead 33 H. 3. Richard de Harestan being then found his son and heir.
Isolda, wife of Robert de Harestanes, 36 H. 3. had a Charter of Free Warren in
Hickeling. Richard, Esc. 36 H. 3. m. 25. Rot. Quo War. 3 E. 3. to. 11. in dorso.
son of William Gray of Sandiacre in Darbishire, had a Charter of Free Warren
here granted Dec. 16. 37. H. 3. which William Gray, his great Grandchild,
claimed, 3 E. 3. This Richard, it seems, married Lucia, the heir of Harestan,
by whose consent he gave with Agnes his daughter, to Roger de St. Andrea, Ex
Autogr. pen. Ger. Pigot, Ar.
Lord of Goteham, all his Land in Bifeild in the County of Northampton in
Franke-marriage. His Seal is Barry of six pieces (the Arms of Gray of Codnor)
upon which is a Saltier engrailed without a Shield, (which may be Harestans). I
have seen diverse so about that time; but now the use is, when one has married
an heir, and has issue by her in being, to have an inescutchion, or Scutchion
of pretense, which is very much less than that which lies under it. There was
an agreement made, 4 E. 1. between this Sir Richard de Gray, and Adam, Prior of
Thurgarton, Reg. Thurg. 72.
that Sir Richard should have his Bull free in the Corn Fields of Hickling two
years, and the Prior the third. Sir Richard Gray died about or before 26 E. 1.
and left Hickeling, Sutton in the dale, Sandiacre, Esc. 26 E. 1. n. 30.
and other Lands to his Grandchild and heir Richard de Gray, son of his son
William, which Richard was then about eleven years old. Richard de Gray died
seized of these Lands about 4 E. 2. his son and heir William being then found
to be four years old. There was a Fine levied, Esc. 4 E. 2. n. 1.
Hill. 17 E. 3
17 E. 3. between William de Gray of Sandiacre Complainant, and Robert Hillary
Parson of Sutton in Colefeild, and Richard de Gray, Parson of Sutton in the
Dale, Deforcients, of the Manors of Hykeling and Hokenale Torcard, with the
Appurtenances, and the Advowson of the Church of Hykeling, which were settled
on the said William Gray for his life; remainder to Edward, son of Henry
Hillary, and to Alice his wife, and the heirs of their bodies; remainder to the
right heirs of William de Gray. The Jury, 8 R. 2. found the Lady Alice Illary,
daughter and heir of William de Gray of Sandiacre, Esc. 8 R. 2. n. 18.
heir to the first mentioned Richard de Gray, to whom the reversion of the
Manor of Landford belonged, of which he enfeoffed one Richard de Gray (I
suppose a younger son) who had issue Sir Richard de Gray, Knight, who had issue
Philip, and he Richard under age, in the Tuition of the Lord Gray of Codnore.

Alice de Gray (it seems she liked her own name better than her husbands) about
the 14 R. 2. died seized of this Manor, and Advowson, Esc. 14 R. 2. n. 24.
and left John de Gray her son and heir. John Gray, 4 H. 4. died seized of the
Manors of Sutton in the Dale, Sandiacre, and Kirkhalam, Esc 4 H. 4. n. 1.
(...)*
of which last, his wife Emelina was joynt-tenant, and left Isabell, wife of
John Walch of the County of Leicester, and Alice wife of John Leek, Henricus de
Gra, Pip. 8 R. 1. de Codenour-Isolda haeres...-Reginaldus de Mendre, marit.
secundus 23 H. 3. Willielmus de Gray.-Isolda Rob. de Harestan 28 H. 3. Dom. de
Sutton.-Isolda. Ric. de Gray de Sandiacre ob. 26 E. 1 Willielmus Gray ob. ante
patr. Ric. Gray aetat. 10. 26 E. 1. ob. 4 E. 2. Willielmus Gray aetat. 4.4 E.
2. Alicia Gray haeres de Landford, 14 R. 2.-Edvardus fill. Henrici Hillary.
Johannes Gray, 14 R. 2. de Sandiacre-Emelina relicta, 4 H. 4. Alicia cohaer. 4
H. 4.-Johannes de Leek. Willielmus Leek de Sutton-Katherina fill. Thom.
Chaworth, mil. 1 Johannes Leek de Sutton ob. 1504.-Elizab. fill. Joh. Savage,
mil. Johannes Leek de Sutton, mil. ob. 14 H. 8. 1522.-Jana fill. Hen. Folejambe
de Walton, Ar. Franciscus Leek mil. ob. 1 Aug. 22 Eliz.-Elizab. fill. Willielmi
Paston, mil. Francisc. Leek de Sutton mil. and Bar. 9 Jac.-Francesc. fill. Rob.
Swift-Maria fill. Joh. Egioke-Ger. Clifton mar. secundus. Franciscus Leek mil.
and Bar. creat. Dom. Deyncourt and postea Com. de Scarsdale, viz. 1645. Nov.
15.-Anna fill. Ed. Carew. Nicolas Comes de Scarsdale.-Franc. fill. Rob. Comitis
Warwick. Robertus Dom. Deincourt aet. 21. 1675.-Maria fill. and cohaer. Johannis
Lewys Bar. Richardus Leek.

.. fill... Orme ux. 2.-Willielmus Leek Ar. de Newark.-Eliz. fill. Guide. Palms,
mil. ux. 1. Francisc. Leek mil. and Bar. adhuc tenet Sandiacre.-Frances fill.
Willielmi Thorold, mil. Franciscus Leek.




2 Tho. Leek de Will. thorpe.
2 Tho. Leek de Hasland, vide Leke.
Thom. 36 H. 6.
Joh. Walsh mar. primus 4 H. 4.-Isabella cohaer. ob. 14 H. 6. s. p.-Humfridus
Halloughton.



Johannes, 10 E. 2.
Rogerus de St. Andr.-Agnes. Ric. Gray de Landford Ric. Gray, mil. de Landford.
Philippas Gray ob. 1 R. 2. Ric. Gray de Landford ob. infra aet. 6 R. 2.
Alianora sor. and haer. obiit infra aet. s. p. 8 R. 2.



Lucia haer. Richardus, s. p.
Ric. de Gray Dom. de Codenhour.-Lucia fill. and haer. Johannis de Homaz, 13 H.
3. Pip. Staff.

Esquire, his daughters and heirs. Emelina, the wife of John Gray, abut 13 H.
6. died seized of the Manor of Landford, Esc. 13 H. 6. n. 21.
and three Mess. with the Appurtenances, and three Virgats, and other Lands and
Rents, and the Advowson of the Church in Hykeling. Then her daughter Isabell
had married one Humfrey Halloughton, but shortly after about 14 H. 6. she left
her sister Leek, Esc. 14 H. 6. n. 17.
her heir.

There was a Fine, 10 E. 2. between Margaret, Mich. 10 E. 2.
the daughter of Hugh de Eyton, Quer. and Hugh de Eyton of Hickeling, and
Felice his wife, Deforc. of twenty two Acres of Land, two of Meadow and an half,
and half a Mess. with the Appurtenances in Hickeling, thereby settled on the
said Margaret, and the heirs of her body; remainder to John, son of William le
Gray of Sandiacre, and the heirs of his; remainder to the said Hugh and Felice,
and the heirs of Felice.

At the Assizes of Nottingham, 29 E. 3. William de Rempston recovered seisin of
one Mess. twenty Acres of Land, Assis. Not. rot. 43. 29 E. 3.
and three of Meadow in Hykeling, and John de Rempston was amerced.

Anthony Fitz-Hubert, Sergeant at Law, and diverse others claimed against John
Leek, Pasc. 5 H. 8. rot. 53. Derb.
Esquire (in recoveries which he suffered) 5 H. 8. the Manors of Sutton in le
dale, Sandiacre, and Kirkehalome, with the Appurtenances, and also one hundred
Mess. etc. in Sutton, Sandiacre, Kyrkehalome, Normanton by Hastond, and
Chesterfeild, and the Advowson of the Church of Sutton in le dale in
Derbishire; Not. rot. 536.
the Manors of Landford, Collyngham, Elston, Hykling, Gedling, Huknall Torcard
and Leek, with the Appurtenances, and also two hundred Mess. etc. in Landford,
Collingham, Elston, Hykling, Gedling, Huknall Torcard, Little Leyk, Great-Leyk,
Saxendale, Stoke by Newark, Stoke Bardolfe, Colwyke, Wyverton, Byngham,
Carleton, Karcolston, and Holme by Newark, with the Advowsons of the Churches
of Elston and Hykling in this County; the Manor of Harston in Leicestershire;
L^^c. Wig. rot. 538.
the Manor of Crowenest, with the Appurt. in Worcestershire. B.
This Manor, after the Leeks, was Stapletons.

This is certainly a mistake, for though Rempstons Land here, as elsewhere
might descend to Stapleton, and Cheyne, of which latter the Lord Vaux became
heir; E^ Chart. and exempl. pe^. Ric. Maunsfeild de Leek, Ar.
yet I find that Francis Leek of Sutton in le Dale, Esquire, 16 Feb. 34 H. 8.
for the sum of 276l. sold the Manor of Hickling, with the Appurtenances and
Advowson of the Church, whereof he levied a Fine in Easter Term, that same
year, to John Cunstable of Kinalton, Esquire, afterward Knight, and his heirs.
Which Sir John Cunstable, 1 October. 6 E. 6. sold the premises to John Ingleby, a
younger son of William Ingleby, late of Ripley in Yorkshire, Esquire, then
deceased. And John Ingleby of Rudby (Ebor.) 7 Septem. 42 Eliz. conveyed them to
John Ingleby his son. Which John, or another of his name, then dwelling at
Hickling in the Vale, by Indenture dated 2 July, 1 Iac. for 534l. sold to
William Farborne of that Town, Gent. the Manor of Hickling, with all the
Appurtenances whatsoever in Hickling, Kinalton, Over Broughton, Staunton,
Colson B^sset, and Withmerpool in this County; except the Advowson of the
Church; and also excepting that Mess. and seven Oxgangs of Land, etc. which he
had then sold to Thomas Bean the elder of A^^octon, and William Bean his
second son. Which said John Ingleby, and William Farborne, 2 Oct. 2 Iac.
conveyed the said Manor to Gervase Farborne, son of the said William.

James Wilson, Gent. and George Ward, claimed in Michaelmas Term, Mich. 9 and
10 Eliz. rot. 149.
9 and 10 Eliz. against John Smyth alias Walton, and Raph Smith* the Manor of
Hyckling, with the Appurtenances, and diverse Lands there, who called, etc.
William Vaux, Lord Harowdon.

Hickling is now in the hands of very many Freeholders. King Edward the sixth,
by his Letters Patent dated 30 June, Pat. 6 E. 6. Part. 11.
in the sixth year of his Reign, granted to Lyonell Duckett, and Edward
Whitchurch the Lands and Rents in Hickelinge belonging to the Monastery of
Thurgarton (excepting the Tithes belonging to that Monastery) which August 16.
5 Eliz. were granted by the Queen to Sir Thomas Gresham, Pat. 5 Eliz. Part. 2.
Knight, and his heirs. The Manor which was Leeks is now the inherit^nce of
Richard Maunsfeild of Leek, Esquire, who had it after the death of Francis
Maunsfeild his Uncle.

Mss. I. M.
The Rectory of Hiclinge was 22l. when Mr. Leek was Pa^ron. In the Kings Books
it is now 18l. 8s. 4d. and Sara Bardsey, widow, Patroness.

Kinalton. Doomsd. Chinelton. Kineldestowe and Newbold.
PArt of this Town, in the Book of Doomsday, is said to be of Walter de
Ayncurts Fee, and of the Soc of Graneby, where his Seat was in this County* it
was rated to the Tax or Geld as seven Bovats. The Land was two Carucats. Doomsd.
There was nine Sochm. four Board. having three Car. or Plows, and seven Oxen
plowing, (or draught Oxen) and twenty Acres of Meadow. Another part of Chinelton
is there certified to be of the Land of the Taynes, where one Azor before the
Conquest was rated to the Dane-geld at one Bov. for his Manor. The Land
whereof was three Bovats. The son of Azor held it afterward of the King, and
there had three Vill. with three Oxen plowing, and three Acres of Meadow. In
King Edward the Confessors time, the value of this was 10s. in the Conquerours
2s. 8d.

By what appears in Hickling it may well be concluded that the Family of
Fancurt held Deyncourts Fee in this place, but it is certain enough that Gerard
de Fancourt held a Knights Fe^ of Oliver de Aynecurt in Hickling and Kinalton.
Test. de (...).
Adam de Sutton, Prior of Thurgarton, for 18s. Reg. Thurg. 69.
of Silver yearly, by the consent of the whole Covent, granted and confirmed to
Raph de Fanecurt all the Land which the said Raph held in the Town and
Territory of Kinalton of Sir Gerard, son of Sir Elias de Fanecurt. Elias de
Franencurth gave twelve Bovats in the Territory of Newbold to the Abbey of
Swinshead in Lincolnshire, Mon. Angl. vol. 1.773.
which King Henry the second confirmed, as he did also, in this same place, of
the gift of William de Vilers, and Paganus his son, two Carucats of Land, Mon.
Angl. v. 1. p. 773.
and two Bovats and an half, and Keteleswang, and Holeboldeswang, and seventeen
Acres of Land at Cranemere, and four Tofts with Crofts, and the whole [
Brus^am] Brouse which belonged to Neubold.

In Doomsday Book there is mention of Newbold, in those days a very
considerable place, but now it is well-nigh lost between this Lordship and
Colston Bassett, which is not in that Record described at all by any other
name, that I know of, besides Newbold; yet the name of the Manor of Newbold
has been longest preserved in memory in Kinalton, where there yet remains some
obscure knowledge of it: therefore it is not amiss to insert what that famous
Record has of it in this place: which shows that E^rl Morcar had a Manor in
it Taxed at three Carucats. Doo^.
The Land whereof was eight Car. before the Conquest, afterward King William
himself had there 3 Car. thirteen Sochm. thirteen Vill. three Board. having
seven Car. and two Acres of small Wood. There was a Priest and a Church. In the
Confessors time this was 4l. but in the Conquerours improved to 10l. value.

In Newbold also was another Manor, which Morcar likewise had, for which he
paid as ten Bovats to the public Geld. The Land two Car. There William Pevrell
(the Conquerours natural son) had afterward in Demesne one Car.. and nine
Vill. having three Car. and forty Acres of Meadow. This kept the old value 3l.
How the two Townships parted this New^old I cannot discover, for I find the
Family of Vilers, sometimes Paganus de Vilers primo ^coffat. H. 1. Willielmus
de Vilers Paganus de Vilers, H. 2. Willielmus de Vilers-Petronilla relict. 13
H. 3. Johannes de Vilers de Newbold Willielmus de Vilers, 9 E. 1. Matheus de
Vilers....Clementia. Paganus de Vilers, miles de Kinolton, 11 E. 3. and de
Newbold-Isabella. Avena dicta fill....Ireland de Hartshorne Com.
Derb.-Godefridus Foliambe, miles, mor^^^s 6 R. 2. (...). Folejambe-Margareta,
40 E. 3. Godfr. Folejambe infra aetat. 6 R. 2. Alicia fill. and haer. Godfr.
Foljamb, milit.-Robertus de Plumpton. Willielmus Plumpton, mil. ob. 15 Oct. 20
E. 4.-Eliz. fill. Briani Stapleton-Katherina fill. Tho. Wintringham. Willielmus
de Plumpton-....fill. Dom. Clifford. Elizabetha aet. 19, 20 E. 4.-Henricus
Sot^hill vel Johannes. Henricus Sothill-Jana fill. ^ic. Empson. Jana-Joh.
Constable de Kinalton, mil. Anna-Anth. Thorold, miles Winifred-Georgius
Clifton, Ar. marit. 1. Gervasius Clifton, mil. and Bar. ob. 1666.-Frances fill.
Fr. Clifford Comitis Gumbr. Clifford Clifton, miles, ob. 1670.-Fran. fill.
Heneagii Finch, mil. Dom. Willielmus Clifton, Bar. aet. 13. 1676. Katherina.
Arabella.



Will. Bevercotes marit. 1.-Cicely-... Oglethorp.
Willielmus Drury de Com. Suff. mil.-Elizab.

Joh. vel Rob. Rocliff-Margareta aet. 21. 20 E. 4. Brian Ro^cliff-Margeria fill.
Thom. Metham, mil. Johannes Ro^cliff Ingeram Clifford, miles-(...).



Robertus de Plumpton, miles-Agnes fill. Will. Gascoign, mil.
Godfr.








Math. Beatrix.
Almus. Robertus 16 H. 3.-Maria sor. Rad. fill. Rad. fill. Sim. fill. Ric. relict.
20 H. 3. Robertus de Vilers, 40 H. 3.

Thom. Ricardus.

Almus.

called of Neubolt, sometimes of Kinolton, and the Vicar of Colston Basset
esteems himself Parson of that Neubold, which is now known in Kinolton Lordship.

Paganus de Vilers, Ex lib. de (...) St. Petr. Eb^. i^ Bibl. (...)
in the time of King Henry the second, gave and granted to Roger Archbishop of
York, and his successors, for the use and housekeeping (or hospitality) of the
Archbishops, that no other Parson should be instituted into the Church of
^itrel^e stowe, with the whole Garden, as well belonging to the Church, as not
belonging, and four Bovats of Land, which the Church had before, and one Toft
belonging to those Bovats with all other their Appurtenances, and furthermore
twelve Acres of his own gift with Common of Pasture through the whole Territory
of the Town, as much as belonged to a^l the said Lands; to this grant there
were above threescore W^^^^sses, and their names expressed in it.

The Family of Vilers held this Lordship of the B^^^ers of Werington in
Lancashire; so that it is like the Castle mentioned in Gotham, to be sci^^^re in
this place, was of the Earl of Chesters Party, of whom that Family had
dependence. Wili^^s B^^ler had seisin in King John's time of one Knights Fee in
Newbot and Outhorp. ^
And Wiliam B^tler is certified to have held two Knights Fees in Crophill and
Kinalton, and (...).

Paganus de Vilers was a great man and had many sons. He gave his son William
Newbolt. Perri^ila, who had been wife of William de Vilers, ^
13 H. 3. claimed against Alexander de Vilers f^^t Bovats of Land, and the
third part of one Bov. and three Tofts, with the Appurtenances in Newbolt as
her Dower. John, son of William de Vilers, ^
held a Knights Fee in Neubold of Lancaster Fee.

Rap^ Bag held Lands here which descended to his Posterity of Bingham with
Clipfton. William de Villers p^ssed one Mess. and ^en Bov. of Land by Fine, ^
9 E. 1. to Richard son of Raph Bag, in this Town, of which, when Thomas Earl
of Lancaster, after the death of William Ba^ler the Tenant, exacted relief, the
Sheriff had a precept to compel Matthew, son and heir of William Vilers, to
show cause why he should not acqu^t the said Richard, who came, and, 33 E. 1.
pleaded that he had no Lands or Tenements descended to him by inheritance from
his Father.

^
The last of this Family, that I have seen any thing of, was Paganus de Vilers
of Kinalton, Knight, 11 E. 3. on whose Seal was six Lyoncels, 3.2.1.

There was a Fine, 40 E. 3. levied between Sir Godfrey Foljambe, Knight, Quer.
and Henry Dale, (...). 4^ E. 3.
and Ma^d his wife, Deforc. of twelve Mess. twelve Virg. of Land, and twenty
Acres of Meadow in Kinalton; and another the same Term, Tri^. 40 E. 3. between
Godfr. son of Godfr. F^l^ambe, and Margaret his wife, Quer. and Robert
Dal^port, Clark, Deforc. of the Manor of Kynalton, whereby it was settled on
the said Godfr. and Margaret, and the heirs of their bodies; remainder to the
right heirs of Godfr.

Fi^. 6 (...) 14. and (...).
The King 5 March, 6 R. 2. committed to Sir John Leeks Chr. the custody of the
Lands which were then in his hands, by reason of the minority of Godfr. son of
Godfr. son of Godfr. (...), Knight, deceased, whose wifes name was Ave^a, and
might have been supposed an heir of Vilers, ^
but that in a Pedigree of Foljambe, I find she is said to be the Daughter
of... Ireland of Hartshorne. However Alice, Ex Lib. Vis. tat. Ric. St. George.
the daughter and heir of Sir Godfrey Foljamb, was married to Sir Robert
Plumpton, Knight, and had issue Sir William Plumpton, Knight, whose first wife
was Elizabeth, daughter of Brian Stapleton, by whom he had William Plumpton,
Esc. 2^ E. 4*
who left two daughters and heirs, Margaret, wife of John Rocliffe, aged 21.
and Elizabeth, wife of John Sothill, aged 19 years, and something more at the
death of their Grandfather Sir William Plumpton, which was 15 Oct. 20 E. 4.
This Manor descended to these two coheirs of their Father, but their said
Grandfather dyed seized of a great number of other Manors and Lands which were
intayled on Sir Robert Plumpton his son, by Catherin, daughter of Thomas
Wintringham, viz. in Darbishire the Manors of Okebrok, Chaddesdon, Derley,
Staunton, Edinsor, Pillesley, Hassep, Wormill, Chelmerdon, Lands in Spondon,
viz. two Mess. in Eneston, Martinside, Combs, Batfeild in Hurdlow, Broughton,
Tiddeswall, etc. In Yorkshire, the Manors of Plumpton, Steton, Garsington,
Idol, amongst which only Kinolton and Maunsfeild-woodhouse are numbered in this
County. Elizabeth Sothill, widow, Ex Inq. ap. Maun^feild Woodhouse, 16 Ian. 22
H. 7.
died 21 Sept. 22 H. 7. leaving three sons, Henry, John, and Gerard. Henry
Sothill had two daughters and heirs by his wife Jane, or Ioane, the daughter of
Richard Empson. King H. 8. Aug. 22. in the first year of his Reign granted to
Sir William Perpoint, 1 Par. Pat. 1 H. 8.
Knight. the Custody of Ioane and Elizabeth Southill, and their Marriage. 2 Par.
Pat. 2 H. 8.
He also had July 24. 2 H. 8. the Lands and Tenements which were Henry
Sothills, and Elizabeth Sothills, widow, as long as they remained in the Kings
hand. Elizabeth, the daughter and coheir of Henry Sothill, was wife of Sir
William Drury of the County of Suffolk, Knight, and Joan, or Jane his other
daughter, of Sir John Constable of Kinalton, Knight, who bought Harteswell
Grange in this Lordship, formerly belonging to Swinsheved Abbey, 3 Par. Pat. 31
H. 8.
which Harold R^sell of Cotgrave, May 4. 31 H. 8. had license to alienate to
the said Sir John, and Ioane his wife, who had issue Cicely, first the wife of
William Bevercotes, and afterward of.... Oglethorpe; and Anne the wife of Sir
Anthony T^orold, by whom she had Winifrid her daughter and heir, B.
the Mother of Sir Gervas Clifton, who purchasing of the Lord Savile what he
had got from... Oglethorp, which was three parts of the Manor, and half the
Grange (for... Oglethorpe prevailed with his Mother to disinherit her son by
Bevercotes, and bought Druryes part,) became Lord of the whole, and his
posterity now have the whole Township, except a Farm, which was Sir Thomas
Hutchinsons, which his Ancestors bought, together with the Manor of Outhorpe,
and another which is William Days, Par. 8. Pat. 29 Eliz.
formerly belonging to Thurgarton Priory, which Queen Elizabeth, June 16.29
Eliz. granted to Edward Heron, Esquire, and John Nicholas, Gent. being four
Bovats. There is also a little Freehold which Francis Hacker gave to his son
Rowland Hacker of East-Bridgeford.

The Rectory is appropriate to the Archbishopric of York, and in Lease to the
Family of Clifton. The Vicarage is 7l, 18s. 11d. ob. in the Kings Books, and
has Episcopal Jurisdiction in the Parish. Newbolt Chapel (which I suppose is
that now used in the middle of the Town) was annexed to the Parish by Walter
Gray, Archbishop of York, Ex Rot. maj. Walteri Gray, Ebor.
in the beginning of the Reign of H. 3. The Church is quite out of the Town, on
the top of the Hill, not far from the Fosse way, whither the Parishioners do
seldom resort.

Owthorpe.
IN Ouethorpe Helge, before the Conquest, had a Manor which paid the Tax for
half a Car. The Land was three Car. There William the man or tenent of Roger de
Busli (whose Fee it afterward was) had one Car. four Sochm. eight Vill. having
three Car. There was twelve Acres of Meadow. Lib. Dooms.
This in the Conquerours time, and before, was 30s. value.

Another Manor Rolf had in the Confessors time rated also to the Geld at half
a Car. The Land three Car. Likewise there Durand Malet, whose Fee it was in the
Conquerours time, had one Car. four Sochm. three Vill. having two Car. (or
Plows.) There were twelve Acres of Meadow too, but the value was shrunk from
30s. to 20s.

Tochi, a great man and Lord of Shelford, and many other Towns in this County,
before the Norman Conquest, had a Manor here also which paid the public Geld
for a whole Plowland. But when Goiffrid de Alselin succeeded him, as he did in
all or most places in the time of the Conquerours Survey, here was nothing to
be had.

That of Roger de Buslies Fee, I suppose, the Posterity of that William, before
mentioned, who had their name from this place, continued long possessors of.
Reg. Thurg. 86.
John, son of William de Outhorpe, gave to the Priory of Thurgarton the right
of Patronage, which he had in the moiety of this Church.

John de Vvitorp was disseised, and paid Cs. Fine, Pip. 7 R. 1. Pip. 2 Ioh.
Eber. Wi^sor.
7 R. 1. for being with Earl John. And 2 Ioh. John de Vvitorp ought Cs. for
having his Land in Yorkshire in the Honor of Tikhill. Gervas, son of John de
Outhorpe confirmed to the Canons of Thurgarton five Bovats of Land in the
territory of Outhorpe, Reg. Thurg. 83.
viz. two Bov. with one Toft, and two Crofts, which Robert Bude held, and two
which Robert, son of William held, and one which Robert de Camera held, with
their homages and services, as the Chartels of Ywein le Bretun, and William
Brito his Father testified, reserving 16s. per annum Rent, and likewise two
Bovats, which the said John de Outhorp his Father gave to Raph, son of Simon,
son of Richard, reserving 4s. per annum, and by the consent of Felice his wife,
added more to his other gifts. Ibidem.
Henry, son of Gervase de Outhorpe released xx^. yearly Rent, which the said
Priory paid him for vii. Bovats held of him, and xiis. per annum Rent, issuing
out of a Toft, and one Bovat held likewise of him in Outhorpe. John, son of
Henry de Outhorp, (...).
granted and confirmed seven Bovats to the said Priory. Raph de Outhorp
confirmed all the Lands and Tenements to Willielmus de Outhorpe Johannes de
Outhorpe Gervasius de Outhorpe-Felicia. Henricus de Outhorpe Johannes de
Outhorp Radulphus de Outhorpe Johannes de Outhorpe 10 E. 3.-Margeria.






the said Monastery, which they held of his Fee in Outhorpe so free, that
neither the Canons nor any of their men nor Tenants should do any suit to his
Court, nor to any of his heirs or successors, neither should they be distreined
by him or his Bailiffs, to answer any in his said Court. There was a Fine
levied, 10 E. 3. and afterward, Fin. apud Ebor. Mich. 10 E. 3. and Pasch. 11
E. 3.
11 E. 3. of the Manor of Outhorpe between John, son of Raph de Outhorpe, and
Margery his wife, Quer. and Reginald, son of Simon de Si^thorpe, Deforc.
whereby it was settled on the said John and Margery, and the heirs of their
bodies; remainder to the right heirs of John; at that time John de Oxford, and
Maud his wife, held the third part of it in Dower.

Simon de Hedon, Test. de Nev.
and Gervase de Vvetorpe paid for two Knights Fees in this place, in the former
part of the Reign of H. 3. At another time Simon is certified to hold but three
parts of one Knights Fee here. In quodam Rot. defeod.
Robert Wasteneys held in Hedon and Outhorpe two Knights Fees about the time of
E. 4.

That of Durand Malets Fee became, it seems, part of Lancaster Fee, and was
held of Butler of Werington in the County of Lancaster, by the Family of
Vilers. Claus. 6 Ioh. m. 21. and Chapter 6 Ioh. m. 16.
The Sheriff of Not. was commanded 6 Ioh. without delay to make John Botiler
have such seisin of the Land of Wulmer de Wudehus in Hilla [Hole] and Wudhous,
and Huverthorpe, as the same Wulmer had when he forfeited it to King Henry the
second; and such as the same John had when he was disseised for King John's
service when he was Earl, which William, son of Gobion was to deforce. William
Butler, Claus. 17 Ioh. m. 5. Reg. Thurg. 79. b.
17 Ioh. had seisin of one Knights Fee in Neubot and Huthorpe. William, son of
Paganus de Vilers, gave to God and the Church of Thurgarton four Bovats of Land
in the territory of Outhorpe, for which the Canons gave him thirty Marks of
Silver. Test. de Nev.
John de Vilers is certified to have held a Knights Fee in Newbolt and
Ovethorpe of the honor of Lancaster. John de Vilers of Newbold, son of William
de Vilers, Reg. Thurg. 81. b.
confirmed to God and the Church of Thurgarton, all held of his Fee in Outhorp,
free from all services, except Scutage and Ward, of the honor of Lancaster. Sir
Robert de Vilers, Knight, son of Alan, was a very great Benefactor to that
Monastery, he gave five Bovats of his Demesne, and several other parcells, then
all his Demesne in Outhorpe, with his Capital Message, and the Church of
Outhorp, and gave four Bovats and an half, which he had in Marriage, with his
wife Mary, the daughter of Raph, son of Simon, son of Richard, for the Priory
to find one of their own Canons, or a secular Chaplain to celebrate Mass in the
Church of Outhorp for his soul and his wife, the said Mary's, and the souls of
his Ancestors and heirs. Raph, his wifes brother, acknowledged a Fine, 16 H. 3.
and Mary his wife, 20 H. 3. Robert de Vylers his son levied a Fine, 40 H. 3.
whereby he passed to the said Priory, not only a Carucat of Land, which Robert
de Vilers, his said Father, had given to Robert de Brunnesley for ten years
only, as he there intimated, which Robert de Brunnesley had likewise given to
Thurgarton; but also all his Lands and Tenements, etc. in Outhorp, except the
homage and service of Richard de Vilers and his heirs, which should remain to
the said Robert and his heirs for ever.

The Prior wanted not such privileges as were convenient, when he had gotten
so considerable a part of this place, as Court Leet, and the like.

Ib. 177.
In the year of our Lord 1328. 2 E. 3. the Church was valued at twenty Marks,
and three Carucats of Land each at 40s. A Windmill at 10s. There were many
Freeholders then held of the Priory. Henry de Torlaxton held several parcells;
John de Kniveton, (whose predecessors Gerard and John his Father, son of
Nicholas de Kniveton were benefactors,) paid for half his Capital Message, and
ten Bovats of Land 2s. There were then Rents of Assize 7l. 4s. 1d. the value of
the whole was 23l. 4s. 0d.

Raph Bugge had Lands here also which went to his descendents of Bingham, with
Kinalton and Clip^ton, etc.

There was a recovery, 18 H. 8. wherein Humfrey Garret, Clark, Richard Musson,
Clark, Mich. 18 H. 8. rot. 102.
Richard Godeselowe, John Loide, and Thomas Couper, claimed against Richard
Scote, and Katherine his wife, Thomas Doble, and Elizabeth his wife, and
Nicholas Ryder, and Agnes his wife, the Manor of Owthorpe, with the
Appurtenances, and five Mess. two hundred Acres of Land, forty of Meadow, one
hundred of Pasture, one hundred of Furz and Heath, and 9s. Rent, and the Rent
of 1l. of Pepper, and 1l. of Cumminseed, with the Appurtenances in Owthorpe;
they called to warranty Thomas Fish.

The Ancestor of Sir Thomas Hutchinson bought that which was Hedons, of the
heir of Wastenes. B.
Sir Thomas was entire proprietor of the whole Township and Rectory
impropriate; the greatest part whereof, with the house built by his son John,
and sold by his widow, remains the possession and place of residence of Charles
Hutchinson, son of the said Sir Thomas by his second wife Katherine, the
daughter of Sir John Stanhope, half Sister to the first Earl of Chesterfeild.

Tho. Hutchinson de Owthorp 1 Willielmus Hutchinson de
Owthorpe-....fill....Watson de Hareby. Tho. Hutchinson de Owthorp-...fill. Geo.
Perpont, mil.-Elianor fill. Geo. Zouch de Codnor. Tho. Hutchinson de
Owthorp-Jana fill. Hen. Sacheverell de Radcliff super Sore. Tho. Hutchinson de
Owthorp mil.-Marg. fill. Joh. Byron mil.-Kath. fill. Joh. Stanhope, mil. Joh.
Hutchinson-Lucia fill. Alani Apsley, mil. Thom.-Jana fill. Alex. Radcliff, mil.
s. p. Edw. Lucius.
Georg. Hutchinson-Barbara sor. Luciae. Alanus.
Carol. Hutchinson de Owthorp.-Isabella fill. Fr. Butler de Hatfeild Woodhall in
Com. Hearts. Carolus Hutchinson aet. 10. 1675. Thom. aet. 8. Elizab. aet. 3.
1675. Botilerus aet. 7. Stanhopus aet. 6.
Car. fill. Car. Cotton de Beresford, At.-Isab. Beresfordus Cotton.

Jana-Fr. Grantham and... Poulton.
Joh. Waring de Estwell, Ar. Com. Leicest.-Dorothea.

2 Johannes Hutchinson Georgius Johannes



There was 5s. per annum issuing out of the Lands of George Crosland in
Outhorpe, Part. 10. Pat. 38 H. 8.
belonging to the Prior of Haverholm, granted Nov. 4. 38 H. 8. to Giles Iseham,
and Gregory Isehm.

And there was about four Bovats in Owthorp, belonging to the Hospital of St.
John of Jerusalem granted 17 July, 5 Eliz. to Stephen Holford, and John Ienkin,
Part. 7. pat. 5 Eliz.
Gent.

The old Church, which was pretty large, and the Chancell, both covered with
Lead, were pulled down by Colonel John Hutchinson, and this little one built to
the North Wall of the Chancel, in which he made a Vault, wherein his body now
lies, being brought from Dele Castle in Kent, where he died a Prisoner.

Colesion Basset. And Newbold.
THis Township being wholly omitted in Doomsday Book, saving what is there
recorded of Newbold, the Reader must look back to Kinalton for what he would be
satisfied in concerning it: where he will find two parts of Newbold, one King
Williams, and another his son William Peverells; the greater part whereof it is
like concerned this place, but how it was disposed is uncertain.

Raph Basset, Justice of England, 21 H. 1. gave one Carucat of Land in
Chinalton, Baronage of Engl. p. 378.
and ten Oxen for the maintenance of a Monk in the Abbey of Eynsham in
Oxfordshire, which Land was parcel of his Lordship of Colestune.

King Henry the first confirmed the gift of Richard Basset, and Matildis Ridel
his wife, Mo^. Angl. vol. 2. p. 90.
of several Lands, and very many Churches, amongst the rest, this of Eoleston,
to the Church of St. John Baptist of Laund in Leicestershire, which they had
Founded for the Soul of King William his Father. Lib. (...). in Scac. Northant.
Their Son Galfr. Ridel certified King Henry the second, about the twelfth year
of his Reign, that Richard Basset his Father held at the death of King H. 1.
ninescore Carucats of Land and four, and one Virg. for the Fees of fifteen
Knights, and that Raph, the son of Radulphus Basset Justic. Angl. temp. H. 1.
Richardus Basset Justic. Angliae temp. H. 1. and Steph.-Matildis Ridel.
Radulphus Basset haer. Gevae.-Alicia...-Galfr. Ridel haer. Gevae.-Sibylla sor.
Will. Manduit ux. 2. Radulphus Basset de Drayton-Isabella. Radulphus Basset de
Draiton occis. apud Evesham, 50 H. 3.-Margareta fill. Rogeri de Someri.
Radulphus Basset ob. 27 E. 1.-Joanna fill. Johannis Gray Justic. Cestr.-Helewisa
ux. 1. Radulphus Basset de Drayton ob. 17 E. 3.-Joana B. ob. 27 E. 3. fill. Tho.
de Bellocamp. C. Warw. Rad. Basset de Drayton ob. ante patrem.-Alicia fill. Nic.
Dom. de Audeley. Radulphus D. Basset de Drayton aet. 16. 27 E. 3. ob. s. p. 13
R. 2.-Joana de Bretagne superst. 20 R. 2.
Thom. de Shirley mil.-Isabel.
Will. Heriz-Matild. Jordanus le Bret mil.-Joana. Rogerus Bret miles. Johannes
Bret miles. Johannes Bret miles, s. p.-Joana. Joh. de Caltoft mil.-Catherina.
Willielmus de Chaworth-Alicia fill. and haer. aet. 30 14 R. 2.-Thom. Hethe, mil.
marit. prim.




Ed. Scafford-Margar. Rad. Com. Staff. Hugo Comes Stafford. Thom. Com. Staff.
haer. 14 R. 2. Edmund. Com. Staf. 4 H. 4. Humfr. Dux Buckingham. Humfr. Com.
Staff. Henricus Dux Bucks Edwardus Dux Bucks Attinct. 13 H. 8.









Rich. Basset de Weldon haer. Galfr. 33 H. 2.
Willielmus Basset.....-Rob. de Cauz -Matildis-Rad. Fitz-Stephen Camerar. H. 2.



Geva fill. Hugonis Com. Cestriae-Galf. Ridel Justic. Angliae temp. H. 1.
Richardus Basset Justic. Angliae temp. H. 1. and Steph.-Matildis Ridel.

Raph Basset held Coleston of him, which was of the honor of Warengford, for
the service of a Knights Fee, which Raph Basset, the said Galfr. his
Grandfather held; which last mentioned Raph Basset, Mon. Angl. v. 1. p. 440.
Father of Raph, was one of the heirs of Geva, daughter of Hugh Earl of
Chester, and Galfr. Ridel was another, and both of their Grandfathers Chief
Justices of England for King H. 1. as was also Richard Basset, the first Raphs
son, before spoken of, which Richard was likewise Grandfather to Raph, son of
Raph Basset, before mentioned, who held this Coleston, which from this Family
received the addition Basset, to distinguish it from another Coleston in this
Wapentac, called Ear-Colston.

Test. de Nev. Pl^^^ Ba^^. Trin. 27 H. 3. ^^. 5.
Raph Basset of Draiton held a Knights Fee here, and was summoned, 27 H. 3. to
answer the Prior of Laund, that he should hold his Covenant formerly made by
his Indenture, or Cyrograph, concerning Common of Pasture in Colston, which he
did accordingly. Raph Basset, 12 E. 1. had Market and Fair in this Town. Raph,
Chapter 12 E. 1. n. 44. Ex. 14 R. 2. ^. 9. Artiq. War^. by William D^gdalt, Esquire p.
725.
the last Lord Basset of Draiton dyed May 12. 13 R. 2. and by the Inquisition
taken the year following, viz. 14 R. 2. Thomas Earl Stanford, aged 24 years,
was found one of his heirs, as son of Hugh, son of Raph, son of Margaret,
sister of the said Raph Lord Bassets Grandfather, and Alice the wife of Sir
William Chaworth another of his heirs, as daughter of Catherine, daughter of
^ohn, son of Roger, son of Joan, daughter of Matildis, another sister of the
said last Lord Bassets Grandfather, which Alice was then, viz. 14 R. 2. a great
deal more than thirty years of age; it seems the women married young, and
Matil^is was much the eldest daughter of Raph Basset, because this time over
goes that of Stafford two Descents in four. Ioane who had been wife of Raph,
son of Raph Basset of Drayton, Esc. 4 H. 4. p. 46.
held the third part of the Manor of Colston Basset, and the Manor of
Radcliff on Sore for life; the Reversion belonging to Walter Skirlaw Bishop of
Durham: but the Jury, 4. H. 4. found Edmund Earl Stafford, son of Hugh Earl
Stafford, son of Raph Earl Stafford, son of Margaret, sister of Raph, Father it
should be Grandfather of the said Raph Basset, was Cousin and heir of that last
Lord.

This Manor was sold by Edward Stafford, the last Duke of Buckingham, B.
of that Family, who suffered a recovery o^ it, Mich. 4 H. 8 rat. 560.
4 H. 8. before his Attainder, to... Kitson, whose heir Sir Thomas Kitson sold
the same to Mr. Golding his Steward, whose Grandchild and heir Edward Golding
was, by King Charles the first, at the beginning of the War, created a Baronet,
and was proprietor of the whole Town, and impropriate Rectory, saying that part
which his Father (who enclosed most of the fields) sold to Mr. Francis Hacker,
whereon he built an house, which was by Francis Hacker his eldest son forfeited
by his Attainder, with the rest of his Lands, which the Duke of York favorably
sold to Colonel Rowland Hacker his next brother, who has since sold his
interest here to John Grubham How of Langar, Esquire, the present owner of
that part.

Richard, son of Gervas de Barneston, gave to the Priory of Lenton two Bovats
of Land in Coleston, Reg. Lent. 87.
with the Man who held them, which his Father gave by the consent of his
faithful wife Margaret, and of this Richard his son and heir, when he confirmed
the gift of Richard his Father of two Bovats in Wiverton with him that held
them. This grant, of Richard the Grandchild, was made at Notingham before the
Kings Justices John Cumin, Alan de Furneus* Mr. Hugh de Raberst, William de
Be^ding (which was 25 H. 2.) and before many other Witnesses, Robert de
Davidvill, Serlo de Grendon William Fitz-Ranalf, Samson de Strelley, Gervas de
Wiverton (son of that Richard I suppose) and very many others.

G. Ridel restored to Gervas, son of Richard (de Wiverton) his inheritance,
Reg. de W^ll^^^* 113.
viz. Dukmantan (in Darbishire) to him and his heirs to hold of the said G. and
his, free and quiet for the service of a Knights Fee for Duchemanton, and for
the Land of Coleston, which he held of the brother of the said G. because it
was recognized in the Court of the said G. that W. brother of Gervas, son of
Richard, in his free power rendered up Duchemanton to the said G. that he might
pass the inheritance to the said Gervas, which he did; and likewise to Richard,
son of Gervas, Ib.
afterward called Sir Richard de Wyverton, Knight, who for forty nine Marks of
Silver, which Galfr. Fitz-Peter gave him, conveyed his whole Land of Dukmanton
to the Abbey of Wellebek, which Gervas his son confirmed, and Thomas de Mellys
son and heir of Adelina, sister of the said Sir Richard de Wiverton, by
releasing.

There is an error in the Register or Leiger book of Wellebek, Ib. 58.
page 58. which has misled many excellent Genealogists, viz. that Galfr.
Ridel, and Richard Basset, Father of Raph Basset of Welledon, were brothers,
and that Galfr. dyed without heir, and his inheritance descended to the said
Richard his brother, and so to Raph Basset; whereas it is manifest that this
Galfr. Ridel (or Basset, for he was son of Richard Basset, and Matildis Ridel
his wife) had two wives, and by his first left Richard Basset, Mon. Angl. vol.
2. p. 90. Ex Rot. de Dominabus Pueris and Puell. de Don. Dom. Regis in
Sca^carlo. Rot. 3. Nort^ant. H^ndr. de Stokes.
who about the 33 H. 2. was heir of his second wifes Dower, whose name was
Sibylla, the sister of William Manduit, and she was then fifty years old, and
had two sons and one daughter (to confute the story further), which were not
heirs of her Dower, by reason of the said Richard Basset, her husband the said
Galfr. Ridels son by his first wife.

The line of the Bassets of Drayton, which were all Raphs, that I have met
with, except their wives, and times of their deaths could be certainly found,
cannot be exactly described. Mr. Robert Glover Somerset Her^ld, Lib. Genealog.
de familia de Chaworth pen. P. Vicecom. Chaworth.
a most industrious person, and one of the best learned in this kind, in his
time, sets down Raph Basset of Drayton, husband of Margaret de Someri, slain at
the Battle of Evesham, 50 H. 3. Raph his son, the husband of Helewisa died 27
E. 1. Raph his son, husband of Joan the daughter of... Beaucamp Earl of
Warwick, and brother of Matildis, wife of William de Heriz, and of Margaret her
eldest sister, wife of Ed. Stafford, died 17 E. 3. Raph his son, husband of
Alice, daughter of Nicholas Lord Audeley died before his Father, and his son
Raph, the last Lord Basset of Drayton, husband of Joan, sister and heir of John
Duke of Britain died 13 R. 2. being sixteen years old at the death of Joan
his Grandmother, 27 E. 3. which will not agree with a Confirmation made by
Raph, son of Raph, son of Raph Lord Basset of Draiton, to the Priory of
Canwell, Printed in the Monasticon, Vol. 1. p. 441. dated at Draiton, Mon.
Angl* vol. 1.441.
May 7. 26 E. 3. because at that time there was no Raph living of age,
sufficient to make it, according to Mr. Glover's draught. And there may some
scruples arise, notwithstanding the inquisitions after the last Lord Bassets
death, concerning fix Generations, not exceeding three above twenty three
years, as in Alice the wife of Sir William Chaworth, one of his heirs, whose
Ancestor Matildis with her husband William de Heriz, certainly lived in the
former part of the Reign of H. 3. as in Wiverton will be manifest, and yet seem
to be contemporary with Joan, daughter of Thomas Earl of Warwick their
Sister-in-law, which could not well be, if we consult Mr. Dugdales
Warwickshire; but we must not aver against a Record, but endeavor to reconcile
apparent improbabilities by the utmost possibilities.

Queen Elizabeth, Mar. 27. in the forty third year of her Reign, Part. 6. pat.
43 Eliz.
granted to Anthony Nevill, and his heirs, the Rectory of Colston Basset, and
diverse Lands in the Lordship, belonging to the Priory of Land.

The Vicarage was eight Marks value when the Prior of Laund was Pa^ron. Mss. I.
M.
It is now 8l. 7s. 6d. in the Kings Books, and the King Patron.

The Church stands in the fields, now all enclosed, and the Town thereby
depopulated.

In it were Varry Arg. and Sab.

Basset, with a quarter Ermine of Drayton.

Collect. p^ St. Lo Kniveton.
Azure a Cross Argent impales, with Paly of six Or, and ^uses, a Bordure
Azure, Besante, Aylesbury and Basset of Weldon.

Arg, a Cross Sable between four little Crosses of the second.

Cotgrave. Godegrave.
OF the Fee of Rad. de Burun in Godegrave, before the Conquest Oghe had a
Manor rated to the Geld at two Car. The Land whereof was three Car. There in
Demesne were three Car. seven Sochm. four Vill. four Board. having four Car. and
an half. There was half a Church. Small Wood one qu. long, one qu. broad. In
the Confessors time this was 40s. value, Lib. Dooms.
in the Conquerours 60s. Another Manor Turchill had rated to the Geld as one
Car. The Land one Car. There Gozel, the Man of Raph de Burun, had half a Car.
five Vill. one Board. having two Car. There was thirty Acres of Meadow. Small
Wood, half a qu. long and. qu. broad. This kept the former value 10s. In
Godegrave Warnerus had six Bovats of the Land of that Manor.

Of the Fee of Rogerius Pictavensis in Godegrave, Vinric before the Conquest
paid the Tax for three Car. for his Manor. The Land whereof was four Car.
There afterward Roger had one Car. in Demesne, and six Sochm. ten Vill. one
Board. having five Car. There was thirty Acres of Meadow. Small Wood two qu.
long, one qu. broad. In the Confessors time the value of this was 4l. in the
Conquerours but 40s.

In the year of our Lord 1144. 9 Steph. Hugo de Burun, Lig. Lent. 3.
and Hugo Meschins his son and heir, gave to God and the Monastery of Lenton
the Church of Ossington, and that of Orsely, and half the Church of Cotesgrave,
which one Nicholas then held. This was done solemnly in their Chapter House
before very many Witnesses, his younger son Roger praising the act. Three years
after, viz. 1147. 12 Steph. he gave whatsoever he had in the Town of
Cotesgrave, except the Knights which he kept in his own hand for the service of
the King, and for the service of his son and heir. To this were Witnesses of
his own men, Robert, son of Andrew (of Cortingstok) Robert de Rosello (whose
Family continued here) Robert, son of Serlo, Albert the Knight, he was his
Steward, and called of Kilburne; Hugo de Busli, he was his Chamberlain, and
several others. This Hugo de Burun (whose Seat was at Horstan Castle, Reg.
Lent. 75.
some ruins whereof yet remain in Horseley Park in Darbyshire) by the consent
of Hugh and Roger his sons gave to the Church of the holy Trinity at Lenton,
Turchetill his Man of Cotegrave, with his Children and Lands, and all things he
held of him, and all the Land Walter, son of Iocelin, held of him in the said
Town, and the Land of Swincliff and Greindale, which were of his Demesne, to
which the forementioned persons were also Witnesses. He also gave three Bovats
of his Demesne here, for three which the Canons had in Ossington, and gave them
Meadow as much as belonged to three Bovats, and six Acres of Meadow in the Wald,
for which they gave him a War-horse prized to ten Marks of Silver. Lib. R^b.
Roger de Burun flourished in the time of H. 2. his wife Nicola, the daughter
of Roeland de Verdun, was after his death married by the Earl of Chester to
Anketin de Brikesard, without the Kings consent, and therefore was disseized of
diverse, if not all her Lands, Pip. 2 Job.
for some of which she Fined about 2 Ioh. Roger de Burun recited all those
parcells given to Lenton by his Father, Reg. Lent. Ib.
and many others, two Bovats of the Land of Hugh Rosel, thirteen Acres given
for the S^ul of Albrea his own Mother, and twenty Acres above Cotegrave Wood,
etc. to his Deed Gerv. de Clifton was a Witness.

There was a Fine levied, 2 Ioh. wherein the Prior of Lenton released to Robert
de Burun two Carucats of Land in Cotegrave, Ib. 85.
for which he gave to that Priory three Bovats and half Geldehomor.

Henry, son of Robert de Burun, 4 H. 3. demitted and quit-claimed to Walter
Malet and his heirs, his whole right and claim in half the Land which was of
the Fee of Burun in Cotegrave.

Alan Malet succeeded Walter, 14 H. 3. Claus. 14 H. 3. m. 6. Reg. Lent.
Thomas Malet, son and heir of Alan, 5 E. 1. released all actions against the
Prior and Covent of Lenton, and their Bailiffs, for the waste made in his
Estate, while it was in their custody: the Witnesses were Henry de Tibetot
Constable of Not. Castle, Walter de Stircley, then Sheriff of Not. and Derb.
Richard de Iorz of Burton, Gervas de Willeford, etc. After him was Henry Malet,
whose son James had two sisters and heirs, Elena, Fin. Psa^. 30 E. 3.
the wife of Nicholas de Tydeswell, and Isabell, 30 E. 3.

Warinus de Boyvile held the Land in Cotegrave for the Barony of Byron, 4 E. 1.
Test. de Nev. Ex Rot. de Inq. 4 E. 1


That other part of this Town, which was of the Fee of Roger Pictavensis, it
seems, was given to Swinsheved in Lincolneshire. King H. 2. in the twelfth year
of his Reign confirmed to the Monks of Swinsheved the whole Land of Robert de
Gresley in Cotegrave, (...) 12 H. 2.
and the mo^ery of the Church, and one Car. of Land in Cotegrave, of the gift
of Robert de Arc^is, and whatever Robert de Gresley, and Albert his son, the
Founders, gave to the said Church of Swinsheved, fourteen Acres which Robert
Rose^^ gave, and the exchanges which Roger de Buru^ and his men ( i. e. those
who held of him) made with the said Monks, and likewise of the gift of William
de Vilers, and Paganus his son, of two Car. and two Bov. and an half, etc. in
Neubold, and of Elias de Fanencourth of twelve Bovats in the same territory.
Robert Gre^e gave one Bovat of his Fee in Cotegrave to the Church of Lenton, to
which Raph his Priest of Cotegrave was a Witness. Reg. Lent. 82.
Maurice de Cre^n, 28 H. 2. gave account of two hundred Marks for having the
wife, Pip. 28 H. 2^ Li^^.
who was Albert Gresle's, with her reasonable Dower. Wido de Cre^^, 1 R. 1.
ought 7l. 6s. 8d. for the very same. Pip. 1 R. 1. Lint. Pip. 2 R. 1. Lin^.
Gilbert Basset, and Alan and Thomas his brothers, 2 R. 1. gave account of five
hundred and fifty Marks for the custody of the son of Albert Gresle, with his
heir and Land; Albert Gres^y had one son and three daughters, Re^. de
Dom^^^bus, (...) and (...) in (...) Regis i^ (...) Rot. 1. Lin^. and Rot. 5.
Norf. 3 Par. pat. 31 H. 8.
and their Uncle Gilbert Basset, with his Father Thomas Basset, had the keeping
of them about 33 H. 2 but out of diverse of their Lands money was received by
Nige^ Fitz-Alexander, and Robert de Burrun.

King Henry the eighth for the sum of 684l. 16s. 8^. in the 31 year of his
Reign, granted to Harold Rosel of Cottegrave, the Manor of Cotgrave, (...)
belonging to the Monastery of Swyneshed, and Cotgrave Grange, Herteswell
Grange, and Broughton Grange, etc. all which (except Herteswell Grange in
Kinalton) he had license to pass to George Pierpont, Esquire, and Elizabeth his
wife, which still continue with their posterity the Right Honorable the
Marquess of Dorches^er.

Bingha^^s Land here went with Clipston, Kinalton, etc. to the Family of
Rempston. Harold Scrimshire purchased a Farm called Remp^^on Hall in Codgrave,
Ex relatione Iohann^s Scrimshire.
of Brian Stapleton of Carleton by Snayth in Yorkshire; and another of....
Rosel^, wherein his brother Thomas lived, which was purchased together with
Walter Whalleys, and Richard Champions.

.....Scrimshire. Harold Scrimshire de Codgrave-Margareta fill..... He^son alias
Hall. Willielmus Scrimshire-Elizab. fill. Nic. (...) de Estwell in Com. Leicest.
Johannes Scrimshire-Margar. fill. Mic. Wright de Bricksworth. Will. Scrimshire
de Cotgrave (...) 32. 1672.-(...) Rob. Frank de P^^tefract. Johannes Scrimshire
aet. 4. 1672.
Eliz.-Clifton Rodes. Joh. Mich. Sam.
Willielm^^-K^^h. fill. Geo. Underwood de Wittlesea 1 Williel^^s. 2 Hugo. 3 Sam.


Tho^as.
(...) Rect^r de Codgrave.
Thomas Whalley of Cotgrave, held a Farm there under Richard Whalley of Kirkton
by Screveton, Ex Rentali pe^^s Per. Whalley Ar.
and was his Kinsman probably.

Thom. Whalley-Margareta fill.... (...) Walterus Whalley-Cecilia fill....
Efcog^^on de Bro^ghton in Com. Staff. Johannes Whalley-Maria fill. Williel^^
Midleton de Wa^^esley. Walterus Whalley-Maria fill. Mich. Wright de Bricksworth.
Walterus Whalley aet. 23. 1672. Michael.

Georgius ^rosell.-Margaret. Ursula-Franc. (...)


..... Champion is now chief Constable of the Hundred. Par. 10. pa. 3 and 4 Ph.
and Mar.


The King and Queen May 31. 3, and 4 Ph. and Mar. granted to Thomas W^^^e, and
Agnes his wife, and the heirs of the body of Thomas, the Manor of Cotgrave,
with the Appurtenances, late belonging to the Monastery of Lenton, etc.

Thom. White de Com. Suff. vel Johannes Thom. White de Woodhead in Com.
Rutland-Agnes. Dom. Johannes White de Tuxford, miles-Dorothea fill. Dom.
Johannis Harpur de Swarkeston, mil. 3 Thom. White tandem haeres-....fill. Dom.
Ed. Hartup de Buckminster in Com. Leicest. Johannes White de Cotgrave-Jana fill.
Dom. Thom. Williamson de Markham, Bar.
2 Gervas s. p. 1 Rich. White s. p.



Ricardus Cecil Thom. White de Woodhead in Com. Rutland-Agnes. Willielmus Cecil
Dom. Burleigh

Mr. White now makes this the place of his residence, and the Marquess of
Dorchester keeps a Court here, which was Shelfords, and belonging to the
Knights Hospitallers of St. John of Jerusalem. The Advowsons of both the
Rectories, Par. 16. pat. 36 H. 8.
28 July, 36 H. 8. were granted to George Pierpoynt and his heirs. The
Medieties of this Church were each 16l. when the Abbat of Swinshed, Mss. I. M.
and Prior of Lenton were Patrons. Now the first part is 10l. 7s. 1d. and the
second 9l. 14s. 9d. ob. in the Kings Books, and the Marquess Patron of both.

In the Church, in the low South-East Window, there is Or on a Fesse Gules,
three Water Budgets Arg. Or Ermine, Bug. or Bingh.

Azure a Lion Ramp. Or, on his shoulder Martlett.

On a Stone in a Seat in the Chancell,

Arg. a Pillar Gules between three Coughs sab. or Gules quartering... on a
Fesse Gules between three Bells sable as many Cross Croslets, Or.

Sub atrato hoc marmore tuto recumbunt sepositae Johannis Scrimshire nuper de
Cotgrave Com. Not. Genesis exuviae, quem juris simul and aequi dudum Cultorem
princeps and patria habuerunt fidelem, uxor and liberi nec non alii ejus
indigentes auxilio patronum ac patrem ubique solicitum.

Obiit 2. Decembris, Anno Aetat. 61. Sepultus 4. Decembris, Anno Dom. 1669.
Hic jac et and alter Johannes Charissimus superioris filius, Artium magister
and utriusque hujus medietat is curialis-Rector: Qui divinae voluntatis studios
us heu brevis! instituto pius ac severus, cum tam exemplis quam pr^ceptis per
turbidos hujus mundi fluctus rectam ad aeternae salutis portum viam
exhibuisset, e vivis discessit Festo die S. Johannis Baptistae Anno Aetat. 28.
Dom. 1669.



Tollerton. Torlaston. Torlaveston. Roclaveston.
THis Town in Doomsday Book is called Roclaveston, in which it was certified to
have been the Manor of one Elsi before the Conquest, who paid for it as two
Car. to the Geld. The Land was four Car. There afterward Roger de Busli had in
Demesne one Car.. eleven Vill. one Board. having three Car. eight Sochm. with
three Car. and two Mills 3s. Lib. Dooms.
There was a Church and thirty Acres of Meadow. In the Confessors time it was
40s. then 60s. value.

Not far from hence, a place called Warberge, or Warbey, must needs lie now
utterly lost, but the great survey of the Conqueror shows that in it Godric
Lord of Plumtre had a Manor before the Normans came, rated to the Geld at
twelve Bovats. The Land twelve Bovats, but it then was waste. There was ten
Acres of Meadow. In the Confessors time it was 20s. value, then but 5s. this
was then of Roger de Buslies Fee; but another Manor in Warebeg was of Rogerius
Pictavensis Fee, which Fredgis had before rated at thirteen Bov.. to the Dane
Tax. The Land whereof was two Car. There Roger Pictavensis had one Car. two
Sochm. one Board. having one Car. and ten Acres of Meadow; this he had advanced
to 12s. which was but 10s. in the time of Edward the Confessor.

Serlo de Torlavistune gave his moiety of the Church of Torlouton to the Church
of Lenton, Reg. Lent. 5.
at the request, and by the consent of William de Olive, then Parson of it, in
the time of King H. 2. To this gift his wife Adelina was a Witness, and so was
Beatrix, the wife of Richard Barri, who by the consent of the said Beatrix his
wife, Ib. 6.
and Raph his heir, and the rest of his children, confirmed his Church of
Torlaviston to the said Priory of Lenton, which Ranulf de Insula his
Grandfather, and Matildis Malebisse his Grandmother had given before. Pl. de
Banc. Pas. 17 E. 2. to. 30. and pl. and Iur. and Ass. ap Not. 3 E. 3. to. 2.


John Barry of Torlaston, 17 E. 2. and 3 E. 3. claimed against Reginald de
Aslacton twenty eight Bovats 1/^. of Land, twenty eight Acres of Meadow, and ten
Mess. except the sixth part of a Mess. in Torlaston, as son and heir of
Richard, son of John, brother and heir of William, son of Radulphus Bar, 5
Steph. Richardus Barri-Beatrix. Radulphus Barry temp. R. 1. Radulphus Barry
Richardus Barry Johannes Barry frat. and haer.-Matilda relict. 12 E. 1.
Willielmus s. p. Richardus Barry, 15 E. 1. Johannnes Barry de Torlaston, 3 E.
3.-Amicia. Rogerus Barry de Torlaston Chr. gross. fin. 50 E. 3. m. 9. Robertus
Barry, miles 50 E. 3.12 H. 4.-... Elizabetha superstes 8 H. 6. Edmundus Barry
fill. and haer. 8 H. 6.26 H. 6. Hug. Barry de Torlaston, Ar. 22 E. 4. ob. 21 H.
7. Nov. 17. Thom. Barry de Torlaston aet. 12. and ampl. 22 H. 7. ob. 18 H. 8.
mar. 4. Johannes Barry de Torlaston aet. 12.18 H. 8. Will. Barry de Torlaston
Matilda filia and haeres-Richardus Pendock. Willielmus Pendock de
Torlaston-Elianora fill..... Lovet. Johannes Pendock obiit 1648.-Jana fill.
Richardi Parkins de Boney. Rich. Pendock aet. 19. 1614. obiit 1645.-Eliz. fill.
Will. Gelsthorp de Whatton. Philippus Pendock de Torlaston aet. 57. 1675.-Jana
fill. Nic. Charlton de Chilwell, ob. 1675. Thom. Pendock aet. 14. 1675. Elizab.
Anna. Maria.
Rich.-Joseph. Barry Pendock aet. 13. 1675. Joseph.
Sam.
Gerv. Johan. Barry. Georg. Eliz.


Joh. Barry's. prole.









Radulphus, 53 H. 3.





Will. Pendock de Gotherton in Com. Glouc.-Margaret fill. Ric. Heydon de Heydon.
Matilda filia and haeres-Richardus Pendock.

Richard, son of Raph son of Raph Barry, who lived and had them in the time of
King Richard the first.

William de Aslocton in the 50 E. 3. recovered his seizin by Assise and Jury of
the Manor of Torlaston, called Asloctons Manor, Pl. cor. Reg* apud Winton.
T^in. 51 E. 3. rot. 33.
against Robert Barry Chr. and Roger de Clifton Parson of Keworth, and 40l. for
damage, upon which Sir Robert said, the Jury had made a false Oath, and a Jury
of twenty four came to convince, etc. but no judgment at that time was given.

It seems Torlastons Manor came to the Family of Aslocton. Robert de Torlaston
was a considerable man in the time of H. 3. but how it passed, by sale, or
inheritance, Autog. pe^. meipsam.
I have not yet found.

There was a Fine levied, Trin. 4 E. 2.
4 E. 2. between Mr. Raph Barry of Torlaston, Compl. and Thomas Barry of
Torlaston, Deforc. of se^^nteen Mess. one Mill, forty six Bovats of Land, and
fifty Acres of Meadow in Torlaston and Basingfeild, and the Advowson of the
Church of Torlaston, whereby they were settled on the said Raph for his life;
remainder to John, son of Richard Barry, and the heirs of his body; remainder
to Thomas, son of John Barry, and the heirs of his body; remainder to John
Rosell of Cotgrave, and his heirs. By another Fine, 3 E. 3. between John de
Barry of Torlaston, Fin. die lunae prox. post fest. S. Ma^tini 3 E. 3. apud
Not.

Ex Autog. pen. Will. Arnall de Carcolston. Auteg. pen. T. Shipman de
S^arrington.


and Amicia his wife, Quer. and Raph Rosel Parson of Keworth, Deforc. the same
parcells were settled on the said John, and Amicia, and the heirs of John. The
nex^ of this Fam^ly was Roger Barry Chiveler in the time of E. 3. and Robert
Barry, Knight, was here 12 H. 4. whose son and heir Edmund Barry, 8 H. 6. and
26 H. 6. had on his Seal of Arms three Bars Crenelle. Hugh Barry was of this
place, 22 E. 4.

After the death of Hugh Barry, which was N^v. 17.21 H. 7. there was an
Inquisition taken at Newark, viz. 16 Oct. 22 H. 7. whereby it appears that he
was seized of the Manors of Torlaston and Keyworth, Ex I^q. 22 H. 7.
with the Advowsons of the Churches of Torlaston, Bassingfeild, (which as I
take it has none) and Keyworth, with the Appurtenances, and diverse Lands and
Tenements in Torlaston, Keyworth, Lambecote, and Kneton, and that he gave the
Manor of Keyworth, with the Advowson of that Church* to Thomas Barry, and
Brigit Agard, and the heirs of the body of Thomas. Thomas Barry, son and heir
of Hugh was then found to be above twelve years old, as in Keworth is already
noted. There was another taken at Turford in the Clay, 27 Aug. 19 H. 8. after
the death of Thomas Barry, Esc. 19 H. 8.
Gent. who died the 4 Mar. 18 H. 8. seized of the Manor of Keworth, and the
Advowson of the Church, and of two Mess. nineteen Bovats of Land, eight Bovats
of Meadow, and two Bovats of pasture, and 9s. and 4d. Rent, with the
Appurtenances in Keworth, and also of the Manor of Basingfeild, and four Mess.
seven Bovats of Land, and three Bovats of Meadow, with the Appurtenances in
Basingfeild, and of 3s. 4d. Rent in Lamcote, Ratcliff, and Kneton, and likewise
of the Manor of Torlaston and Advowson of the Church. John Barry his son and
heir was then found to be above twelve years old.

Richard, son of William Pendock of Gotherton in Gloucestershire, Ex Lib.
(...). 1614.
married Ma^d* the daughter and heir of William Barry of Torlaston, with whose
posterity this Manor continues, which is now enclosed, since the late War, by
Philip Pendock the present owner.

Part of the Land which Mr. Pendock now has, was lately bought of....
Ha^feild, B.
and there are some other Farms in the Town of Tollerton, which were the
inheritance of Robert Earl of Kingston, and are now his sons the Right
Honorable the Marquess of Dorchester; one was Mr. Shipmans of Scarrington, and
by Mr. Thomas Shipman sold to Mr. Io. Parker of Not. the Mercer.

Here lived of the Family of Boyvile, Walter, in the time of H. 3. E. 1. and E.
2. and John in the time of E. 3. and likewise Walkelins, Ex Autog. pen. Thom.
Shipman, Genesis
Adam, and Thomas, about those times.

The Rectory was 16l. value when Mr. Barry was Patron. Mss. I. M.
Now in the Kings Books it is 15l. ^s. 4d. ob. and Philip Pendoke, Esquire,
Patron*

Basingfeild. Basinfelt. Gamelston.
THis Basingfeild was part of it of the Fee of Roger de Busli, and Soc to
Hulme, as much as answered the Tax for ten Bovats, and two thirds of a Bovat.
The Land was two Carucats. There eight Sochm. had three Car. and five Acres of
Meadow. Lib. Doo^s.
Another part of it was Soc to Clifton of William Peverels Fee, as much as was
Taxed for five Bovats, and one third of a Bovat. The Land was one Car. There
two Sochm. and two Board. had one Car. and seven Acres of Meadow. This was
chiefly enjoyed by the Family of Lutterell, with Bridgeford at the Bridge-end,
and Gamelston, already mentioned in Rushcliff Wapentak. The other, the Lords of
Holme had, of whom the Barryes, Lords of Torlaston, held a considerable part.

Michael de Maunvers levied a Fine, 3 Ioh* to Walter de Hulme (his brother of
thirteen Bovats in Basingfeild, Fin. 3 Ioh.
for the which the said Walter gave him three Marks of Silv^^* and quitclaimed
to him all his right in two Bovats in the said Town, which William de Leek held
of the said Michael, and the service of one Bovat, which the said William held
of the said Walter in this place.

There were very great Suits in Edward the firsts time, between Richard Barry,
Pl. apud West. cor. Rege Trin. 18 E. 1. rot. 48. and Pl. de Banc. Mich. 15 E. 1.
and Henry Perpunt, and Annora his wife, 15 E. 1. 18 E. 1. in which Record the
Clark, who engrossed it, has inserted a Leonius, and a Michael in the
pleading, more than the time can possibly admit, which I have therefore omitted
in the Descent. The quarrel was for 10l. Rent, out of certain Lands in
Basingfeild, which James de Hulme (sometimes also called of Keyworth) reserved
when he passed the Estate to John Barry, the said Richards Father, from which
James dying without issue, the right devolved to one Michael, brother of
Walter, the said James his Grandfather, from which Michael it descended to
Leonius his son and heir; from Leonius, to Michael his son and heir; from that
Michael, to Leonius, that Michael's son and heir; from this Leonius, to Michael
his son and heir: which last Michael had two Wives: by the first he had Leonius
and Iohane; by the second John and this Annora, who was cast because none of
her Ancestors were seized of the Rent; James the Feoffor dying before it became
due; but being notably versed in Law Suits (as in Sueynton may be noted) she
obtained a Writ of Error, and got the better of him at length, and likewise,
20 E. 1. when her Husband was dead.

This Town of Basingfeild is part of the Parish of Bridgeford, B.
and part of the Parish of Holme, whereof the greatest part, except the
Demesnes, was either Barryes or Bonitons* Barryes Lands there in King Henry the
seconds time, were granted to William the Clark of Hulme by Leonius de
Maunvers, by the name of two Carucats of Land in Basingfeild; which grant was
confirmed by King Henry the second. They were sold by.... Pendock to Sir Henry
Pierrepont, Kn^ght, deceased. Bonitons were lately sold by one of that name to
Robert Earl of Kingston, whose inheritance the whole Township was* together
with Boughton Grange, a single Farm, unto which did belong anciently twelve
Oxgangs of Land dispersed in the Fields and Territory of Basingfeild.

Leonius de Maunvers superstes, 24 H. 2. Michael Leonius de Malnoers Michael
Leonius Michael-.... ux. 1.-.... ux. 2. Leon. de Maunvers-Marger. Johanna.
Johannes. Henricus Pierpont defunct. 20 E. 1. mil.-Annora consang. and haer.
Jacobi, 12 E. 1. Robertus Pierpont, miles-Sara soror Johannis de Heriz,
militis. Henricus de Pierpont-Margareta fill. Willielmi Fitz-William, mil. 2
Edm. Pierpont mil. 29 E. 3.-Joana fill. and haer. Geo. Monboucher, mil. Edmundus
Pierpont, miles, 1 H. 6.-Frances fill. and haer. Willielmi Frank de Grimsby.
Henricus Pierpont, miles, 19 H. 6.-Elena fill. Nich. de Langford, mil. Henricus
Pierpont-Thomas^na fill. Johannis Melton, militis. 2 Franciscus Pierpont-Marg.
fill. Joh. Burdon. Willielmus Pierpont, miles-Joana fill. Briani Stapleton, mil.
ux. 1.-Jana fill. Ric. Emson, mil. Cancellar. duca^us Lanc. Elizab.-Joh.
Sacheverell. Georg. Pierrepont, mil.-Eliz. fill. Anth. Babington, mil. ux.
1.-Winifreda fill. Will. Thwaits-Gerv. Clifton mar. secundus^ Annora-Joh. Rosel.
Henricus Pierpont miles.-Francesca fill. Will. Cavendish, mil. Robertus Pierpont
Comes Kingston occisus. Creat. 4 C. 1. Iul. 25. 1628.
-Gertruda fill. and cohaer. Henric. Talbot and... uxor. ejus, fill. and haer.
Will. Raynor, milit. Hen. Marchio Dorcestriae aet. 65. 1672. Creat. Mar. 25.
1645. 20 C. 1.
-... fill. and cohaer.... vic. Ba^ning.-....fill... Com. Derby. Will. aet.
64.-.... fill. and haer.... Harris Serve. ad Legem. Franciscus ob. Jan. 30.
1657.-Eliz. fill. Bray. Anna-Joh. Dom. Roos. Gracia. Rob. Pierpont ob.-.. fill...
Evelyn. Comitissa Ogle. Comitissa Clare Gertruda 2. ux. Geo. Vicecom. Hallifax.
Robertus de Not.-Anna fill. Henrici Murrey. Franciscus Pierponte aet. 12. Mar.
10. 1674. Georgius aet. 9. Willielmus aet. 4. Anna not. 1674.

Georg ob.-.. fill.... Jones. Gerv. Franc. ux.... Rolston.
Georgius Mauners mil.-Gratia. Ric. Stapleton-Eliz. Th. Comes Kelly in
Scot.-Fran. Fulco Cartwright.-Mari^.
Tho. Thorold marit. 1.-Anna-Franciscus Beaumont. Joh. Harpur-Isabella. Gerv.
Willielmus.


1 Henricus Pierpont, mil. 13 E. 4. ob. s. p.-... fill... Roos de Ingmanthorp.



1 Henricus fin. 3 E. 3.
Robertus, fin. 3 E. 3.-Cecilia. 1 Rob. 2 5 Rog. 6 Georg. 3 John Fin. Rad. 4 3
E. 3. Edm. Eliz. jun. Agath. Marg. Agnes, Cecilia. Annor. Alicia. Eliz. sen.







Walterus de Hulme 1 Johannes Jacobus de Keyworth nepos Rad. fill. Nich. pat. 11
H. 3. m. 2.
Willielmus. Agnes Petrus Johannes superst. 20 E. 1.


Agnes fill. Suani de Hoiland. Willielmus, Reg. Lent. p. 6.

Holme Pierrepont.
IN Holme, Toret before the Invasion of King William was rated to the Dane-geld
at twelve Bov. for his Manor. The Land whereof was sufficient for three Plows,
Lib. Dooms.
or three Carucats. There afterward Roger de Busli had two Car. fourteen Vill.
two Board. having five Car. and one Mill 5s. and eighty Acres of Meadow. This was
valued both before and after the Conquest at 6l. having Soc in Basinfelt.

The heir of Leonius de Malnuers is certified to hold a Knights Fee here of the
old Feoffment, Test. de Nev.
that is, whose Ancestor was infeoff'd in the time of King Henry the first.

Raph Plucket levied a Fine, 3 Ioh. of the Town of Aneston (in Yorkshire) and
this Holme to Michael de Maunuers and his heirs, Fin. 3 Ioh.
to be held of the said Raph and his heirs, by the service of two Knights Fees,
excepting only to himself and his heirs, one presentation of a Clark to the
Church of Holme, after the death of Walcran the Parson. Pip. 6 Ioh. Michael de
Maluniers ought C. m. for having that presentation which the King had, by
reason that Raph Plucket, who reserved it, was departed from his Faith with
that King.

Chapter 52 H. 3. m. 8.
John de Rye, 52 H. 3. had a Charter of free Warren granted in Holme,
Basingfeld, Lambcote, Adbolton, and Anstan. This man called himself Lord of
Holme, Autog. pen. Tho. Rosel, Ar.
and was so styled, 1 E. 1. On his Seal were Bars Gemelles, and on a Chief
three Escallops.

Raph Fitz-Nicholas, 11 H. 3. the Kings Steward had the custody of the Lands
and heirs of Robert son of (or Fitz-) William, Chapter 11 H. 3. part. 1. m. 7.
and of the heirs of Leonius de Malnoers, Liberat. 10 H. 3. m. 1. Pat. 11 H. 3
m. 2.
July 16. This Raph, the year before, viz. 10 H. 3. was Warden or Keeper of
Nottingham Castle, and James de Keworth was his Nephew, from whom Annora at
length the sole heir of this Family of Maunvers, and Married to Henry Pierpont,
claimed Rents in Basingfeild, as his Cousin and heir, 12 E. 1. as likewise in
Keyworth, as in those places may be observed. This Henry de Pierpont is said to
be son of Henry. Ex Coll. I. B. Ex lib. de Felley.
John le Pierpont of Kirkby in Ashfeild, whose Lands there still remain with
this honorable Family, had a brother named Henry, and another Roger etc. I
suppose them sons or Grandsons of Robert de Pierpont, Lib. Rubr. in S^acca^.
who held a Knights Fee of the Bishop of Lincoln, 12 H. 2.

Shortly after this, it appears Rot. vasc. 22 E. 1. in dorso. m. 8.
, that Simon de Pierpont had summons to that Parliament, which was called in
June 22 E. 1. in order to that King's Expedition into Gascoine: and that in
September following, he had command to attend him in person thither, well
fitted with Horse and Arms for that Service.

Certain it is, that the posterity of Sir Henry Pierpont, and Annora being for
the most part principally resident at this place gave occasion for the calling
it Holme Pierpont, where at this time is the principal mansion of the Right
Honorable Henry Marquess of Dorchester, son and heir of Robert Earl of
Kingston, the great advancer of this Family, who added the high Buildings to
the House, which else, for the most part, is as Sir Henry Pierpont the said
Earls Father left it; but the Stables, Garden, Bowling-Green, and diverse other
Ornaments and Offices were done by the Marquess.

The Jury found, 4 E. 1. that Margery who had been wife of Leoninus de
Maunoers, Ex Rot. Inq. dom. Reg. Lang. 4 E. 1.
permitted her self to be married to John, son of Henry de Nottingham, without
the Kings license, as was believed, being in the gift (or disposal) of the King.

The Jury, Pl. de Iur. and Assis. in Com. Not. 8 E. 1. to. 43.
8 E. 1. found that the Towns of Basingfeild and Holme were bound to repair
Polleford Bridge, and the Township of Boughton, a Bridge and Causey there; and
Holme, the Bridge and Causey of Holme.

Roger de Wilford, and Ioane his wife, who held the Manor of Bughton for her
life, Fin. Trin. 29 E. 3.
passed it by Fine, 29 E. 3. to Sir Edmund Perpount Chr. and his heirs, paying
100s. of Silver yearly while she lived. It is now utterly decayed, but went
commonly with Holme.

Galfr. de Neyvill, and Henry de Perepunt were Justices of Assize, Esc. 8 E. 1.
n. 47.
8 E. 1. and sat at Blithworth in this County concerning Forest matters.

King Edward the second, Pat. 6 H. 8. Part. 1. m. 5. per inspex.
by his Charter dated at Not. October. 27. in the ninth year of his Reign,
granted to Robert Perepount Free Warren in his Demesne Lands of Holme, juxta
Not. Holebek woodhouses, Landford, and Weston in this County; and North
Anestan, and Treton in Yorkshire, which Sir William Pierpount had confirmed,
amongst many other, 6 H. 8. The same King Edward the second, Scot. 10 E. 2. m.
1.
by his Letter dated at Woodstock, 27 Iun. in the tenth year of his Reign,
wrote to Robert de Perpount, John Deincourt, and Hugh de Hercy, for two
thousand Footmeen, whereof two hundred [ Funditores] Pioneers, Spademen,
Miners, or the like, to be chosen in the Counties of Not. and Derby, and the
said Robert and Hugh to lead (or conduct) them. The same year Aug. 20. the King
wrote to Robert de Perpont from York, Claus. 10 E. 2. m. 26. in dorso.
to come to him with Horse and Arms, for the War of Scotland.

In the Octaves of St. John Baptist, 3 E. 3. a Fine was levied between Robert,
son of Robert de Perpunt, Quer. and Robert de Perepont, Knight, Trin. 3 E. 3.
Deforc. of the Manor of Holme juxta Notingham, and the Advowson of the
Church, whereby the said Sir Robert settled them on the said Robert, son of
Robert, and the heirs males of his body, paying him 200l. Sterling per annum,
during his life, and for want of such issue, to George, brother of the said
Robert, son of Robert, and his heirs males; then to Raph, brother of George,
and his; then to Edmund, brother of Raph; then to Roger, brother of Edmund;
then to John, brother of Roger, and his heirs Males; for want whereof to
Elizabeth the younger, sister of John, and the heirs males of her body;
remainder to Margaret, sister of Elizabeth, and her heirs males; remainder to
Cicely, her sister in like manner; remainder to Alice, her sister, etc.
remainder to Agatha, etc. to Agnes, etc. to Annora, etc. remainder to
Elizabeth, the elder sister of Annora, and the heirs males of her body; for
want of which, to return to the said The South prospect of the House and Church
(...) HOLME PIEREPONT
In the South I Will at Holme Pierepont.
Robert Perpount and his heirs, quit of all other heirs of the said Robert, son
of Robert, George, Raph, Edmund, Roger, John, Elizabeth, Margaret, Cicely,
Alice, Agatha, Agnes, Annora, and Elizabeth the elder. To this Fine Henry, son
of Henry de Perpount, put to his claim.

The same Term Robert de Perepount, and Cecily his wife, Fin. Trin. 3 E. 3.
and George his son, by another Fine settled twenty Mess. one Mill; etc. in
Landford on Robert and Cicely for life* then to George and his heirs males;
remainder to Raph his brother and his remainder to Edmund; so to Roger; then to
John and his heirs males; the last remainder to Robert, brother of John, and
his heirs for ever.

Robert Perepont married Sara, the sister of Sir John Heriz, Ex C^ll. I. E.
by which match this Family, a long time after, increased their Patrimony, by
the addition of the Lordships of Gonaldeston and Widmerpole in this County,
which Sir Henry Pierpont, 19 H. 6. claimed as son of Edmund, son of Edmund, son
of Henry, son of the said Sara, sister of the said Sir John Heriz.

King Edward the third, in the thirty third year of his Reign, (...) Chart. i^
Placit. 33 E. 3. to. 1.
took Sir Edmund de Pirpond into his protection, and all his Men, Lands, Goods,
Rents, and Possessions, because he was then about to go beyond the Seas with
Henry Duke of Lancaster, at the Kings request. Sir Edmund Perpoynt, 43 E. 3.
had a Seal of Arms circumscribed with his name, Ex Autog. in Chart. Et Clifton.
whereon was three Roundels, on each of which was a Lioncell Rampant* within a
Border engrayl'd.

King Edward the fourth, for the good and laudable service, Orig. 5 E. ^. r^.
24. Derb.
which Henry Pierpoynt, Esquire, at his great costs and charges, and with
manifold bodily dangers against the Kings Rebels, levying War against him,
before that time done and still continued, viz. 5 E. 4. gave the said Henry and
his heirs males the third part of the Manor of Staley, with the same
proportion of the Advowson of the Church, and the like of the Chantry there in
the County of Derby, which came to the Kings hands, by the Attainder of John
Lord Clifford.

The Rectory of Holme was 12l. value. It is now 15l. 17s. 6d. in the Kings
Books, and the Marquess of Dorchester Patron, as his Ancestors the Pierponts
have long been.

In the Church on a Brass fixed in Stone.

Amoris and Gratitudinis ergo

Erga

Optimum virum Gervasium Pierrepont, Armigerum,

Filium secundogenitum Georgii Pierrepont, militis,

Fratrem Henrici Pierrepont, militis,

Patruum Roberti Comitis de Kingston, Vicecom, Newarke,

Baronis Pierrepont de Holme Pierrepont.

There are very many Arms on the Tombs, and in the Windows, viz.

Pierrepont with quarterings of Maunvers, Heriz, Monboucher, Thwaits, etc.
Stanley Earl of Darby, with quarterings. Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, with
quarterings of Montegomery Earl of Shr. Talbot, Strange, Nevill, Furnival,
Verdun, Lovetot, and many impalements, as with Cavendish, Banning, Bray, and
others.

In the East window of the Chancell,

Arg. 6. Annulets Sable, 2.2.2. Maunvers, and Barry nebule Arg. and Sab. Blount.

On the South side of the Church at Holme Pierepont.


On the North side of the Quire over the Vault this Monument:


Upon which is Inscribed,

Here lies the Illustrious Princess Gartrud^ Countess of Kingston, daughter to
Henry Talbot, Esquire son to George late Earl of Shrowsbury. She was Married to the
most Noble and Excellent Lord Robert Earl of Kingston, one of the Generals to
King Charles the first, in the late unhappy differences, and in that service
lost his life. She had by him many Children, most dead; there are living Henry
Marquess of Dorchester, William, and Gervas Pierrepont, Esquires; and one
daughter, the Lady Elizabeth Pierrepont. She was a Lady replete with all
qualities that adorn her Sex; and more eminent in them than in the greatness of
her birth; she was most devout in her duties to God, most observant of those to
her neighbor; an incomparable wife; a most indulgent Mother; and most
charitable to those in want. In a word, her life was one continued act of
virtue; she has left a memory which will never die, and an example that may be
imitated but not easily equaled; she died in the 61 year of her age, A. D.
1649. And this Monument was erected to her by her son Gervas Pierrepont.

On the South side of the Church


Here lies the body of Sir Henry Pierrepont, Knight, who in his life time
abounded with Charity, and many other virtues, for whom the Lady Frances
Pierrepont, eldest daughter of Sir William Cavendish of Chatsworth, Knight, and
the most noble and renowned Lady Elizabeth his wife, late Countess of
Shrewsbury, caused this Monument to be made, being the least of many
testimonies she has given of her great and dear affections toward him. He
died the nineteenth day of March, in the year of our Lord God 161^. aged 69.
and an half.

Ratcliffe.
IN Radeclive before the Norman Invasion Fredeghis was Taxed to the Danegeld at
one Car. and an half for his Manor. The Land of it was three Carucats. Lib.
Dooms.
Afterward Fredgis and Vlviet held it under William Peverell, whose Fee it
was, and had there two Car. and fifteen Vill. six Board. having four Car. and
eighteen Acres of Meadow, and the Seat of a Fishing and an half, and a third of
a Fishing. This in the Confessors time was 60s. in the Conquerours 32s. value.
Here was another Manor which Swayn had before the Conquest, rated also to the
public Tax at one Carucat and an half. The Land of it was likewise three
Carucats. There Walter de Ayncourt, whose Fee it was, had afterward in Demesne
two Car. fourteen Villains, three Bordars, having three Car. and nineteen Acres
of Meadow. This kept the old value 40s.

Raph, the son of William de Godenoure, is accounted by the Sheriff, Pip. 24 H.
2.
24 H. 2. to owe three Marks, for having right of half a Knights Fee in
Radclive. This part which was Peverel's, continued to the Family of the Lord
Gray of Codnour, from the first Henry, whose Seal is Barry of six, till the
last; yet Henry Lord Gray of Codnour, Autog. pen. Tho. Rosell, Ar.

Esc. 22 H. 6.


22 H. 6. was found to have held the Manor of Radcliff, of Grauby Fee ( viz.
Deyncourts) Henry Gray his son being also then found his heir.

James Wode, Gentleman, and Elizabeth his wife, Autog. pen. Tho. Rosell, Ar.
daughter and heir of William Burton of Burton Ioys, Esquire, 1 H. 8. bargained
and sold to Richard Gray, Esquire, all their Meases, Lands and Tenements, Rents
and Services in Radclive on Trent and Lamcote, which they Covenanted to be of
the yearly value of 43s. above all Charges. This Richard Gray, I suppose, was
Father of Thomas Gray, and son of one of the Henrys natural sons of Henry the
last Lord Gray of Codnor, Ex. Chartis Will. Sacheverell, Ar.
who settled this Manor, with others, on Thomas Leek, and Roger Johnson in
trust for them, as in Touton more particularly will be noted. Thomas Gray,
Esquire, by Fine, 38 H. 8. conveyed the Manor of Woodhall in Ratcliff upon
Trent, O Io^. Mic. 38 H. 8.
and ten Mess. four hundred Acres of Land, thirty of Meadow, two hundred of
Pasture, etc. to the King, by the advice of Thomas Cranmer, B.
as it is said, to whom it was re-conveyed from the Crown by Indenture, bearing
date March 20. 1 E. 6.

Harold Rosel of Radcliff, Esquire, married Dorothy, the said Archbishops
sister; and John Rosel his Grandson and heir, son of John Rosel, the said
Harold's son, married Mary, one of the daughters and coheirs of Thomas
Cranemer of Aslacton, Esquire, grand Nephew of the said Archbishop, viz. son
of Thoma^, son of John Cranmer, his elder brother; by which means this Manor
is now the inheritance of Thomas Rosell, Esquire, son of Gervas, son of George,
son of the said John and Mary.

Henry de Notingham, when he died, was found by the Jury, Esc. 1 E. 3. r. 32.
1 E. 3. to have held a certain Tenement of the heirs of Richard de Bingham,
and here was a certain capital Mess. and sevenscore Acres of Arable Land, and
three Acres of Meadow, etc. and eight Acres of Meadow held of Richard de Gray.
And that Henry, son of John, son of the said Henry de Not. was his Cousin and
heir. Henry de Not. was a Knight about the beginning of Edward the first.
This, I suppose, Autog. pen. Tho. (...).
was of Peverel's Fee too, but Deincurts was the chief part, and had the
Advowson of the Church* of whom held Hugh de Hoveringham, and Raph de Go^sell,
who bought one Bovat here of Reginald, son of Roger de Radclive, and had a Fine
levied, 10 Ioh. which Walter de Gousel his son, Fin. apud Leicest. 10 Io^.
Autog. pen. T. R.
by the consent of Matilda his wife, and his heirs gave to Gerard the Parson of
Radclive and his heirs, which Parson had a son named William. The Seal of this
Walter de Gousle is, three Annulets, whereof one is covered with a large Canton
or Quarter.

Robert Daincurt, and Hawisia his wife, for their Souls health, Autogr. Ib.
gave to God and St. Mary of Radeclive, one Toft toward the sustentation of a
Priest for ever, to celebrate the Mass of St. Mary: the Witnesses were Galfr.
and Robert, then Chaplains in Rad^live, William the Clark, William Marescall,
Gerard the Clarke, Hugh Baisely, Hosbert, son of Hubert.

Mr. Thomas de Hotot claimed this Manor, and the Advowson of the Church of
Radcliff, Pl. de (...). and Assis. Not. 3. E. 3. rot. 18.
3 E. 3. as Cousin and heir of Hawisia de Eyncourt, viz. son of Ioane, daughter
and heir of William, son of Hawisia. But the posterity of that Hugh Basily, or
some of his Family, became by degrees possessed of most of this Fee, Autog.
pen. T. R.
and had their most constant residence here, till about King Richard the
seconds time, that the Family of Rosel, by the marriage of the heir female,
came from Cotgrave into their place, where it still continues.

The Lady Hawisia Deincourt gave diverse of her Villains to Thomas Basily.
Walter de Gousil, Autog. pen. T^o. Ros^ll, Ar.
17 E. 1. gave to him the homages, rents and services of certain Tenants which
he had here. Richard, son of William de Birtun, gave to Thomas, son of William
Baysely, certain Villains, Ib.
Lands and Houses; and Margaret, widow of that Richard, released to him also 10
E. 1. He acquired Lands of diverse other persons, and had a son named John
Basily, whom he over-lived, Ib.
who married Margery, the daughter of Sir John Folvile of Kerisby in
Leicestershire, about 23 E. 1. with whom he had Lands in Stanton; and left
issue Thomas Basely, Ib.
whose son Thomas married Alice, one of the daughters and coheirs of Robert
Strelley. William Eland married Cicely her sister. Robert Basily, son of the
last Thomas, in imitation of Deincourt, I suppose, Ib.
bore Arg. Billette, and a Fesse Dance Gules, as by his Seal, and the Church
Window may be manifested. He had no issue by his wife Audina, who over-lived
him, to whom, 19 R. 2. Robert, Ib.
son of Thomas Rosel his Cousin and heir, ratified her Estate for life in
Radcliff, Lambcote, Adbolton, Oxton, Calverton, Salterforth, Ib.
Hoveringham, and Epurston.

Hugh de Hoveringham gave to Osebert, son of Hubert de Radeclive the whole Land
which Hubert his Father had in that Town, Ibid.
of the gift of Robert, Father of the said Hugh, with the Pasture Robertus de
Rosello Rich.... Hugo de Rosel Simon de Cotgrave Will. Rosel Reg. Lent. 76.
Johannes Rosel Johannes Johannes Johannes Rosel Tho. Rosel de Cotgrave-....
fill. and haer. Roberti Basily de Radcliff. Robertus Rosel de Radcliff, 19 R. 2.
Johannes Rosel de Radcliffe Johannes Rosel-Margareta-Agnes, 2 H. 7* Tho. Rosel,
2 H. 7.-Agnes fill. Johannis Bingham de Kercolston. Johannes Rosel-Isabella fill.
Jo. Babington de Dethick, Ar. Haroldus Rosel-Dorothea fill. Tho. Cranmer, Ar.
Johannes Rosel-Barbara fill. Hen. Sacheverell de Radcliff super Sore-Annora fill.
Georgii Pierpont, militis. Johannes Rosell-Maria fill. and una haered. Tho.
Cranmer de Aslacton, Ar. Georgius Rosel-Marg. fill. Walteri Whalley de Cotgrave.
Gervasius Rosel-Elizab. fill. Franc. Hacker-Jana fill. Rog. Ascough, mil. Tho.
Rosell de Radcliff Ar. ae^. 46. 1672.-Eliz. fill. Joh. Wright de Ripley in Com.
Derb. Gervasius, aet. 8. 1672. Elizabetha, aet. 5.
Anna. Elizab. Kath. Maria*
Nic. Strelley-Eliz.-Ricardus Dom. Byron*

Gervasius. Amhon. Henr.

Georgius. Edmundus-Joan.
Robertus Rad. Presbyter. Thom. Willielmus


.....fill. Edm. Pierpont, mil





Simon.

Rad. 4 Joh. Nich.


Hugo Basily Willielmus Basily Tho. Basily, 1 E. 1. Joh. Basily ob. ante
patrem.-Margeria fill. Joh. de Folvile, militis, 23 E. 1. Thom. Basily-Joana
Tho. Basily-Alicia fill. and haer. relict. 41 E. 3. Willielmus Eland-Cecilia
fill. and hae. Ex Coll* I. B. (...)*
Robertus Basily-Audina s. p. Willielmus Callow, marit. 2. Tho. Rosel de
Cotgrave-.... fill. and haer. Roberti Basily de Radcliff.



Will. Thom. 11 E. 2.




Walterus de Strelley-Isilia-Willielmus de M^iz, (...). 1* Sampson de Strelley
Dom. Walterus de Strelley-Cecilia fill. and cohae^. Rob. de Somervile Dom.
Robertus de Strelley Dom. Rob. de Strelley fill. and haer. Sampson-Ph. Steph. s.
p. Robertus Strelley Tho. Basily-Alicia fill. and haer. relict. 41 E. 3.
Willielmus Eland-Cecilia fill. and hae. Ex Coll* I. B. (...)*








of Has^egange, paying him and his heirs 3s. yearly, for which concession the
said Osebert gave the said Hugh 30s. of Silver. The Witnesses were William de
Leke, John and Robert his sons, Mr. Stephen de Radeclive, Robert de Ra^peston,
Raph de Creissi, John de Bingham. The Seal is very large, with his Image on
Horseback, and a fair circumscription of his name. There are several other of
his grants with the same Seal amongst Mr. Rosels Evidences; Ib.
one to Eustachius de Ludham, Clark, of one Toft, with the Appurtenances in
Radeclive; and further for Common of Pasture in the same Town, and also in
Hestegaud and Nesse, for sixty Sheep, and their sequel of one year. The
Witnesses to this were Walter de Stanton, William de St. Paul, John de Lec,
Raph de Creissi at that time Sergeant (or else Servant of) Leon. de Malnoers,
Roger de Saucusemar, William Marescall, Raph de Saxindale, Robert de Sibthorp,
William de Manjoy, William the Clark, Walter de Hulme, John his son, William
Rosell, Henry de Burun, Osbert, son of Hubert, Ibid.
Hugh Basily, etc. By another the said Hugh de H^veringham, gave to God and St.
Mary, and the House of the Hospital of St. John Baptist at Jerusalem, and the
Brethren there serving God, one Bovat of Land in Radclive for his Soul, and the
Souls of his Wives, and of his Ancestors and Successors, and for the journey of
his Pilgrimage, which he promised to make to St. Andrew.

Friar Peter de Hacch'm, Lieutenant of the Master and Prior of St. John's of
Jerusalem, in the year 1292. granted to Thomas Basily of Radecliffe, and his
heirs, one Bovat of Land there paying 15s. per annum, and two appearances every
year at their Court of Schelford (which is still kept at Cotgrave.)

Mr. Stephen de Radclive had a son named Stephen, and he one named Ancelline,
who was living 29 H. 3. One of the Stephens, as the tradition is, Ib.
gave the Pasture to the Town; he lies in the South wall of the Church, under
his image cut in Oak, under an Arch.

Robert de Ferrars Earl of Darby, gave to his beloved Servant [valetto] Thomas,
son of William de Radeclive, all the Lands and Tenements, which William de
Akeover held in the Town of Stretton in Staffordshire. The Earls Seal, Horse
and Man, and the Shield on the other side all Varry.

Robert, son of Thomas de Radclive, 29 E. 3. remised to Berengar Hascuil all
his Lands in Radclive; on his Seal, within the circumscription of his name is a
Chevron Varry, probably, in relation to the Earls before noted. Berengarius
Hascul of Anestan, 37 E. 3. passed to Sir Edmund Perepount, Knight, and his
heirs, four Mess. with four Tofts in this Town, which Agnes, mother of the said
Berengar, Ibidem. omnia ex Chartulario T. R. A di^ Pas^. in 3. Septiman. 10 H.
4.
held for her life, of the Feoffment of Thomas de Radclive.

There were four Mess. and six Bov. of Land in Radcliff and Lamcote, settled by
Fine, 10 H. 4. on Alexander Meringe, and Agnes his wife, for their li^es;
remainder to Thomas, their son, and the heirs of his body; remainder to
William, another son, and the heirs of his; remainder to John Burdet, and the
heirs of his body; remainder to Elizabeth, their daughter; remainder to the
right heirs of the said Agnes.

There was a recovery suffered in the beginning of the Reign of Henry the
eighth, Pasc. 1, and 2 H. 8. rot. 421.
wherein William Digby, John Wates, William Colt, and Edward Ballard claimed
against Richard Page three Mess. one hundred Acres of Land, twenty of Meadow,
eighty of Pasture in Radclive on Trent, who called to warrant Robert Balard.

Queen Elizabeth, Pat. 44 Eli. Part. 17.
April 1. 44 Eliz. granted to Laurence Wright, Gent. a Manor in Radcliffe,
and three Mess. belonging to it, late in the tenure of Edward Beamont, and
parcel of the possessions of John Beamont, Esquire of the yearly value of 9l. 4s.
8d.

The Rectory of Ratcliff upon Trent, late belonging to the Monastery of
Thurgarton, Pat. 33 Eli. part. 11.
and demised to Sir John Zouch for 20l. per annum, was by the said Queen Eliz.
3 Apr. 33 Eliz. granted to Michael Stanhope, Esquire, and his heirs, at the
extent of 17l. 3s.

This last Manor, and the Rectory, the Earl of Chesterfeild had, B.
and the Earl of Kingston had Lands here of good value, now the Marquess of
Dorchesters.

Here were some Lands in Ratcliff and Lamcote, belonging to the preceptory of
Newland, parcel of St. John's of Jerusalem, some to Newstede, and some to the
Monastery of Dale in Darbishire; the rest, save some few Freeholders, viz.....
Pilkinton.... Butler........ is Mr. Rosells.

The Vicarage of Radcliffe on Trent was 8l. when the Prior of Thurgarton was
Patron. Mss. I. M.
It is now in the Kings Books 4l. 12s. 6d. value, and the Earl of Chesterfeild
Patron.

In the Church South I Will,

Or, 5 Palets Sab.

Azure Semi de Lis Or.

Arg. a Lion Ramp. Sab. quartering Or. A Castle sable, Paly of six Arg. and Az.
Strelley.

Arg. on a Bend sable, three Roses Or, quartering Arg. a Fesse Dance and
Billette Gules, Rosell with Basily.

In the East Window of the Chancell.

Azure Billette with a Fesse Dance Or, Deincourt.

In the North I Will of the Church,

Barry of six Arg. and Azur. with a Bendlet Sinister Gules, Gray. The same
impales with Quarterly Arg. and Azure, a plain Cross counterchanged.

Upon a Brass in the Wall,

... A Gryphin.... impales with.... on a Chevron between three Demi Lions
Passant, with a chief Party per Fesse indented through, or else upon it three
Piles, three Roundlets.

Anne, the wife of William Ballard of Wimeswould Com. Leic. Esquire, 1626. and
George Adrian, miles, Daniel Bowyt, and Gabriel their Children. --

Lambecote.
THere is not much left visible of this Town, at present, saving two Farms, and
ten Cottages, and some Leyes and Closes at the end of Radclive, with which it
was intermixed, which yet bear the name of Lambecote Leyes, and Lambecote
Closes. Here were two Manors before the Conquest, which Franc and Odincar had,
afterward of Roger de Busties Fee. They defended themselves in the public
payments for seven Bov.. Lib. Dooms.
The Land was one Car. There Roger de Busli had one Car.. one Vill. and two
Acres of Meadow. This kept the ancient value 13s.

Another Manor here was Vlchets, and paid the Dane-geld for five Bov. There
Osmund the Man of Raph de Burun (whose Fee it was) had one Car. one Vill. and
six Acres of Meadow. This retained the old value also 10s

Here was another Manor of the Taynland, which Vlchet had before the Conquest,
and paid to the G^ld for it as five Bov.. This afterward Aldene held of the
King, and had here one Car. in Demesne, and six Acres of Meadow. This in the
Confessors time was 10s. then but 5s* value.

Roger de (...)* or most of it was, I suppose held by the Lords (...) (in which
Pari^^ all, or a great part of the Ham^et is:) for Michael de Malnoers, about
King John's time, passed several small parcells here to E^stachius the Clark of
Ludham, Autog. pen. T. R.
who was Sher^ff, or ^t least accounted for Philip Marc 16 Ioh. for these
Counties of Not. and Derb. Pip. 16 Ioh.


Thomas, the Son of Geoffrey the Knight of Lambcote, Autog. pen. T. R.
passed all his Land in Lambcote, which he held of Geoffrey Torcard, who also
himself confirmed it to the said Eustachius de Ludham. This was the Fee of Raph
de Burun. Galfr. de Wellebof gave four Bov. here to the said Eustachius,
reserving 11s. Rent yearly. John, the son of Robert Torcart of Hokenale,
released to Sir Walter, Ib.
son of Sir Walter de Loudham, the homage, and all the service, due and
accustomed for a Knights Fee, which he held of him in Lambcote and Hokenal.
Robert* son and heir of Geoffrey de Stretley, released to John, son of Sir
Walter de Loudham 11s. Rent in Lambcote. Sir John de Loudham, Knight, 7 E. 2.
let to Farm his Manor of Lambcote to Robert Rasen, Ib.
and Annora his wife, for their respective lives, reserving sixteen Marks
Sterling per annum, to be paid to the said Sir John, and Alice his wife. Sir
John de Ludham, 11 E. 2. passed this Manor to Thomas Basily and his heirs, in
exchange for his Lands in Newton and Shelford. Ib.


Henry Fenepar had anciently a Manor here.

B.
The Jury, 3 E. 4. found that Agnes Marmion was seized of the Manor of Lamcote,
and passed it to Thomas Stathom, Es^. 3 E. 4. pa. 757.
Knight, and William Babington, Esquire, and that Agnes, the wife of Thomas
Pilkington was her Cousin and heir, and then 26 years of age; and that she had
also Lands in Riseley in Darbyshire.

George Pilkington of Croxton Curyall in the County of Leicester, Esquire,
Autog. pen. T. R.
7 Eliz. sold his Manor, or Capital Mess. of Lambcote to John Rosell of
Radcliff, Esquire, with whose posterity it still continues. The next year he
the said John Rosel suffered a recovery of this Manor of Lamcote, Hill. 8
Eliz. rot. 151.
etc. and free Fishing in the Water of Trent in Lambcote, which Thomas
Cranemere, Esquire, and George Cartwright, Gent. claimed against him, and he
called to warrant the said George Pilkington.

Here was a Mess. Barn and Croft, and two Bovats of Land in Lamecote in the
Parish of Holme, Part. 14. Pat. 16 Eliz.
late belonging to the Monastery of Newstede, granted Feb. 19. 16 Eliz. to
Christopher Fenton, and Barnard Gilpin, Gent. and their heirs.

Crophill Bishop. And Crophill Butler.
THese two Towns, I suppose, had their name Crophill from a Round Hill, which
is between them now called Hou Hill; they lie near together, and have Lands
intermixed in one Field, and have been esteemed as one. For in an old Book of
Fees in the Exchequer it is Recorded, that the Chapter of Suwell, and Prior of
Lenton [of Thurgarton rather] held the whole Town of Crophill in pure Alms of
the Fee of John de Vilers, Lib. seod. in Scac. pen. Rem. Regis.
except fourteen Bov. of Land which William Gernet held of the said John by 6s
per annum, but they are very distinct Lordships, and Crophill Bishop, now
commonly called Great Crophill, in Doomsday Book is reckoned amongst the Lands
of Thomas the Archbishop of York, but did then belong to St. Mary of Sudwell,
there certified to have a Manor in Crophill, and a Berew in Hegeling, wherein
was two Car. * for the Geld. The Land seven Car. Lib. Dooms.
There the Canons had in Demesne two Car. there were seven Sochm. twelve Vill.
four Board. having six Car. two Bov. and twenty Acres of Meadow* In King Edward
the Confessors time valued at 3l. then at 50s.

Robert, son of Raph (de Hickling) for the love of God, and of his Lord William
Peverell, Reg. Lent. p. 37.
gave 2 Bov. of Land in Crophill Bishop to the Priory of Lenton, where he the
said Robert himself, and Dame Adelina his wife, and William his son, offered
the gift with their own hands on the Altar.

There was a Fine levied, 5 E. 2. between John de Sandwich, and Margaret, the
daughter of Walter de Lumby, Quer. and Nicholas de Haliwell, Deforcient, A die
St. Trin. in 15 dies, 5 E. 2.
of three Mess. four Bov. of Land, and 8s. Rent in Crophill Bishop, one Mess.
one Bov. and thirty Acres and an half, and three Acres of Meadow and an half,
with the Appurtenances in Goverton, Bleseby, and Gippesmere, whereby they were
settled on the said John and Margaret for life; afterward on Idonea, the
daughter of John, and the heirs of her body; remainder to William her brother
and his; remainder to John his brother and his; remainder to John de Sandwich
and his heirs.

The whole Lordship of Crophill Bishop (except three or four not very
considerable Freeholders), together with the Tithe of Corn and Hay, and two
good Farms in Hickling, makes part of the two Prebends of Oxton, belonging to
the Collegiate Church of Southwell, in very near equal proportion; but the
provision for the Vicar is so small, as it too often happens, both in this
Church of Southwell, and many others of like sort, that it is not to be
mentioned without a good wish, that the Law did not, or might not suffer any
alienation of profits from Churches great or small, without a more effectual
reservation of a competent share to that to which they did and do originally
belong. For the Layety to have good Leases, may be good policy in some sort to
preserve the Church; but for so many places to be so extraordinarily ill
supplied, cannot consist with Religion or good Government, whatever some modern
Statesmen fancy.

The Lessees of the two Prebends of Oxton, are at present Patricius Viscount
Chaworth of Armagh, and Sir William Child, for Mr. John Andrews his Son-in-laws
Children. The Freeholders are George White, Joseph Henson, Thomas Haukinson,
Thomas Mabbott, etc.

The Vicarage was ten Marks. Mss. I. M.
It Is now 5l. 3s. 4d. in the Kings Books, and the said Prebendaries Patrons, as
they ever were.

Crophill Butler.
SO called because it was long held by the Family of Butlers of Warington in
the County of Lancaster.

In the Conquerours great survey it appears that Vluric had a Manor here in
the Saxon Government, which defended it self against Foreign or Public
payments for two Car. and six Bov. The Land of it was six Car. And that it
became, Lib. Doo^^.
after the change, the Fee of Roger Pictavensis, who had here three Car. eight
S^chm. and seventeen Vill. having six Car. There was twenty Acres of Meadow,
Pasture, Wood ^. leuc. long, four qu. broad. In the Confessors time the value
of it was 8l. in the Conquerours 5l.

In Crophill were two Manors, which before the Conquest Vlviet and Godri^ had
rated to the Robertus Pincerna-Ivetta. Richardus Pincerna Willielmus Pincerna
Almericus Pincerna Pip. 18 H. 3. fill. and haer. Willielmi Willielmus Pincerna
de Werington, 22 H. 3.-Dionysia. "Henricus le Botillet "Willielmus le Botiller,
13 E. 1. voc. ad Parl. 25 E. 1. "Willielmus Botiller, mil. 6 E. 3.-Elizab. 17
E. 3. "Ex Collect. Hen. Ferrers.
"Johannes Botiller, mil. 17 E. 3. "Willielmus Botiller Chr. "Johannes Botiller,
4 H. 5. "Johannes Botiller "Thom. Botiller-"Marg. fill. Johannis Delves, mil. de
Dodington in Com. Cestr. "Thom. Botiller, temp. H. 8.-"Cecilia fill. Petri
Leicester de Lyme in Com. Cestr. "Tho. Botiller de Beausey juxta
Warington-"Alianora fill. Johannis Huddleston. "Edw. Botiller "Margareta.
"Elizab.





Johannes.
"Richardus s. p. Normanus, 42 E. 3.





Walterus de Staunton-Albreda de Vilers Walterus de Staunton, 20 H. 3.-Agatha.
Walterus de Staunton-Alicia. Robertus de Staunton de Crophill.



Robertus Pincerna. Johannes.

Dane-geld at four Bov. The Land two Car. Of this Land Ilbert de Laci was
seized, but when Roger of Poytiers, or Pictavensis received his Land, he seized
that Manor over Ilbert. The Wapentach bore testimony that Ilbert was seized,
(when Doomsday Book was made), it was in the Kings hand, except the third part,
and the Tene [or Tayn] [Teneum qui est Cap. Manner.] who was chief of the
Manor, whom [ quem] Ilbert held. There was then in Demesne one Car. and four
Sochm. having nine Oxen in Plow (or nine Bov. in Car.) and six Acres of Meadow.
In the Confessors time this was 16s. value, in the Conquerours 10s.

Here and in Wivreton was some of Walter de Ayncurts Fee Soc to Granby, Lib.
Dooms.
which was rated at four Bovats to the Geld. The Land being one Car. There were
four Sochm. seven Bordars, having two Carucats, and thirteen Acres of Meadow.

This Roger Pictavensis was third son of Roger de Montgomery, Mon. Angl. vol.
1. p. 566.
first Earl of Shrowsbury, after the Conquest. And gave, amongst many others,
the Churches of Cotegrave and Crophill to the Monastery of St. Martins at Sais
in France, which it is like his Ancestors founded, howbeit they were afterward
disposed otherwise.

The Sheriff, 23 H. 2. gave account of 51s. 8d. of the firm of Crophull for the
half year, Pip. 23 H. 2
which had been the Lands of Richard the Butler.

Robert the Butler of Ranulf Gernons Earl of Chester was Father of Robert, Mon.
Angl. vol. 1. p. 891.
and I suppose of William le Botyller, and Richard his brother, who lived in
the time of Henry the second; and possibly of John also who had interest at
Outhorp, 6 John.

William the Botiller [Pincerna] 9 H. 3. gave account for four Marks, Rot. Pip.
9 H. 3.
concerning two Knights Fees in Crophill, and Uvetorp, and Keniton, and
Caverton.

Pip. 18 H. 3
Aumericus the Botiller, son and heir of William the Butler, 18 H. 3. gave
account of 30l. of the Fine, for his relief, of six Knights Fees, which the
said William held of the King in Capite. William Earl Ferrars, 19 H. 3. gave
100l. for having the Custody of the Land and heirs of Aumerick le Buteler, Pip.
19 H. 3
until they should be of age, together with their marriage. William le Butiler
seems to be of age 22 H. 3. for then he accounted to the Sheriff for six Marks.
Pip. 22 H. 3
William, son of Almeric le Botiller, confirmed to the Priory of Thurgarton for
the health of his own soul, Reg. T^urg. ^1, etc.
and of Dionysia his wifes, several gifts, viz. two Bovats of Walter de
Stauntons, who married Albreia de Vilers, who was daughter of Richard Butler,
and had a son, and Grandson of his own name, who succeeded him here; which last
Walter de Staunton had a son named Robert, resident here also. This William
Butler likewise confirmed the gift of Sir Matthew de Vylers his Grandfather,
who, by the consent of his heirs, viz. Robert, son of Helgod, and Beatrix his
own daughter, and of his brothers Thomas and William de Vylers, gave to the
Canons and Brethren serving God, and St. Peter at Fiscarton upon Trent, one
Carucat of Land in Crophill of his Demesne, for which the Canons gave him their
habit, and made him a Brother, who had been a Benefactor. This Matthew and his
Brothers William, Ib*
and Alan, and Thomas de Vylers, gave to God and the Church of St. Peter at
Thurgarton, with Richard his brother, all his Land of Lound, and the service of
Raph de Sanchr. and his Church of Warington, and the Church of Tytheby, and
Chapel of Crophill; Ib.
and Thomas his brother gave the Church of Outhorpe, and the said Matthew
granted the Lambskins of his house; Walter de Staunton for the soul of Albrei^
de Vylers his wife, confirmed the said gifts of Sir Matthew and his Successors,
etc. Walter de Staunton his son, for the soul of Agatha his wife, who, I
suppose, was daughter of Godfr. le Angevin, confirmed also all the
forementioned gifts.

There were other Benefactors here to the Priory of Thurgarton of less
condition, as William, Ib.
son of Robert de Leik, and Idonia his wife, who gave a Toft, and one Bovat in
Crophill, and Petronilla, and Alice, daughters of William Gernet, and several
others.

William le Botiller of Werington, 13 E. 1. had a Charter of Free Warren in
Crophill. Chart. 13 E. 1. in (...)* A die St. Mich. in 15 (...), 8 E. 2.


There was a Fine levied, 8 E. 2. between Robert, son of William de Kercolston,
and Agatha his wife, Quer. and William, son of William de Kercolston, Deforc.
of two Tofts, and four Bov.. of Land, five Acres of Meadow 5s. 6d. Rent, and 1l.
of Cummin-seed, and half a Mess. with the Appurtenances in Crophill Botiller,
whereby they were settled on the said Robert, and Agatha, and the heirs of
their bodies; remainder to Raph, brother of Robert, for his life; remainder to
Hugh, brother of Raph; remainder to the right heirs of Agatha.

Two parts of the Manor of Crophill Botiller, with the homage and services of
Paganus de Vilers, William de Stanley, John de Annesty, Cra^^. St. I^^. Bapt. 6
E. 3.
John le Knight, Agnes Cole, and John Oliver, and their heirs, by a Fine, 6 E.
3. were settled on William le Botiller, and Elizabeth his wife, and the heirs
of their bodies; remainder to the right heirs of William.

A Fine was levied, 17 E. 3. of one Mess. two Tofts, nine Bov. of Land, A (...)
Pas^. i^ 15. dies, 17 E. 3. and p^stia in Oct. St. Hill. (...) eadem. ^
fifteen Acres of Meadow, etc. whereby one Mess. four Bov.. etc. were settled on
William de Staneley the elder, and Johan his wife, together with the homage and
services of John de Staunton, and John, son of Raph de Staneley and their
heirs, during the lives of the said William and Joan; remainder to William le
Botiller of Werington, and Elizabeth his wife, for their lives; then to John
their son, and the heirs of his body; remainder to the right heirs of William
le Botiller: and so the rest of the particulars were limited.

Sir Edmund de Willughby, Knight, 43 E. 3. passed by Fine to William de
Wakebrug, A die Pas^. in 15 dies, 42 E. 3. and (...) Octa^. St. Ioh. Bapt. 43
E. 3. Esc. ^ H. 5. p. 133.
two Mess. and four Bovats of Land in Crophill Botiller, which Norman, the son
of William le Botiller of Werington, then held for the term of twelve years.

William Boteler of Werington Chr. sometime seized of the Manor of Crophill,
gave it to John his brother for life, with remainder to him the said William
and his heirs; the Jury, 4 H. 5. found that John Boteler was son and heir of
the said William. There was a recovery suffered, 15 H. 8. wherein Richard,
William, John, and Thomas Gresham, William Botery, and John Gostwyke claimed
against Thomas Boteler, Trit. 15 H. 8. r^t. 455.
Esquire, the Manor of Crophill Boteler, twenty Mess. one thousand Acres of
Land, two hundred of Meadow, etc. and 100s. Rent, with the Appurtenances in
Crophill Boteler and Tytheby.

In another recovery, 17 H. 8. Robert Draper, Hill. 17 H. 8. (...). 145.
and Thomas Kendale claimed against John Marshall, Gent. son and heir of Agnes
Marshall, late wife of Thomas Marshall, daughter and heir of William Muston,
late Merchant of the Staple of Cales, the moye^y of two Mess. two hundred Acres
of Land, one hundred of Pasture, and twenty of Meadow in Crophill Boteler,
Crophill Bishop, and Tytheby. In another, Hill. 19 H. 8. (...) 446.
19 H. 8. Thomas Saunders, Gent. and William Saunders claimed against Henry
Wyat, Knight, the like moiety of two Mess. etc. and called to warrant Richard
Whethille, Knight, and Elizabeth his wife. In another, 3, and 4 Ph. and Mar.
Thomas Hochenson alias Hutchinson, Gent. claimed against Edmund Saunders, ^
Knight, Chief Justice, the Manor of Cropwell Butler, and ten Mess. ten
Gardens, one Dovecote, one thousand Acres of Land, etc. and 40s. Rent, with the
Appurtenances in Cropwell Butler, Cropwell Bishop, Tytheby, Saxendale,
Codgrave, and Ratclyffe.

It was late the inheritance of Sir Thomas Hutchinson, B.
who sold the Farms to diverse Freeholders, and the Demesne to the Earl of
Kingston, whose son the Marquess of Dorchester is still owner of it.

The Grange, with fifteen Oxgangs of Land (formerly, I suppose, belonging to
Thurgarton Priory) are the Lord Chaworths, who has also four Farms and certain
Cottages, and a Windmill. The Freeholders are Mr. Andrew Poole, who has ten
Oxgangs... Crosland eight, William Cock four, Andrew Bell four, Thomas
Fillingham four, Thomas Smith three, etc.

The Tithes formerly Thurgartons (which Priory it seems served Outhorp and
Titheby with Priests from their own Covent, for I find no mention of the
Vicarages of either) are my Lord Chaworths, who finds a Chaplain at Titheby,
whither the Inhabitants of this Crophill resort as to their Parish Church.

Titheby.. And Wivreton.
IN Tideby before the Conquest Vlric had a Manor, for which he was rated to
the D^negeld as four Bovats. The Land one Car. When the Conqueror made his
great survey Fredgis held it of William Peverell. Lib. Dooms.
There was one Sochm. five Vill. four Board. had two Car.. and twenty Acres of
Meadow. In King Edward the Confessors time this was valued at 20s. in the
twentieth year of the Conquest at 10s.

Part of Tiedby was S^c to Turgastune of Walter de Ayncurts Fee, and rated to
the Geld at two Bov. here were twelve Vill. and two Board. having six Car. There
[ viz. at Thurgarston] was a Priest, and forty Acres of Meadow. Pasture Wood
five leug. long,. leu. broad. In the Confessors time, the Manor of
Turgarstune, having S^c in Horsep^l and Tideby, was valued at 3^. in the
Conquerours at 4l.

Hugh de Tytheby is certified in the time of Henry the third, ^
to hold half that Town of the Fee of Isolda de Gray, for which he paid half a
Mark Rent yearly. Robert, son of Hugh, son of Gervas de Tytheby, ^
gave and sold many small parcells of Land here to his Lords, the Prior and
Covent of Thurgarton; he gave likewise certain parcells to Roger, son of Awin
de Barneston, to find Alice his wife, and Margaret his daughter, sufficient
Estovers, during their lives; so he did other parcells to Sir William de Heriz,
to find sufficient Estovers for himself and his son John; and so ^e did to
Richard, son of Gerv^^e de Wiverton, to find his sons Peter and Hugh sufficient
Estovers for their lives, viz. meat, drink, and clothes; and at length, he
passed all his Land here to the said Sir William de Heriz, and Richard de
Wiverton, to find himself, his wife and children their sufficient Estovers. Sir
William de Heriz, and Sir Richard de Wiverton, by his consent passed it to the
Priory of Thurgarton.

In the great complaint made concerning the Sheriffs oppressing the Country, ^
by selling their Bayliwicks in the time of Edward the first, or beginning of
Edward the second, William de Tytheby is instanced for being forced to sell his
Land to buy his Bayliwick of S^r Gervas de Clifton.

Hugh de H^veringham confirmed seven Bovats of Land in Titheby, Reg. (...) 37.
which Emma his Grandmother, and Robert his Father* gave to God and the Church
of Thurgarton. Robert de Handesacr, Knight, for himself, Ib. 29.
and the soul of Alin his wife, gave to the Priory eighteen Sesions in the
fields of Crophill and Titheby.

Wiverton, commonly called Werton, now utterly depopulated, and so came to the
present owner Patricius Viscount Chaworth of Armagh in the Kingdom of Ireland,
from his Ancestors, was anciently of several Fees. Here was a Manor of William
Peverells Fee, ^
which Vlric had before the Conquest rated to the public Tax or Geld as one
Bov.. The Land half a Carucat. There three Vill. one Board. had one Car. and six
Acres of Meadow. This was both before and after the Conquest valued at 10s.
Another parcel of William Peverells Fee here was Soc to Langar, and paid the
Tax as three Bovats and an half. The Land one Carucat. There seven Sochm. one
Bordar had one Car. and two Bovats, and eight Acres of Meadow. Another part of
Wivreton was of Walter de Aync^rts Fee, and Soc to Granby, and paid to the
Dane-geld for six Bovats. The Land one Carucat. There five Sochm. had two Car.
or Plows, two Bov. or draught Oxen, and twenty Acres of Meadow. Another part was
also Soc to Granby, but of the Fee of Osburn Fitz-Richard, and was rated to the
tax at three Bov. The Land one Car. There seven Sochm. had two Car. or Plows;
this part had S^c in Coleston.

Cut in Stone over a door on the North side at Wyverton rulg^ Waerton. p. 98.
A prospect of The Inside of the Gatehouse next the Court at Waerton being the
North side.


At the East end of the Chancell at Titheby.

At the East end of the Chancell at Tithby.


Before the midst of this high Altar lies Thomas Chaworth of Cropwell
Botlers, Squire, and Ankaret his wife, son and heir of George Chaworth of
Ansley, Squire, and Alice his wife, daughter and heir of John Ansley, Squire;
Which (...) Thomas deceased on Trinity Sunday, in the ye^^ of Grace,
M.CCCC.XXXV. On whose Souls Jesu have mercy. Amen.

One of the most considerable and ancient owners, that I light on, was Gervase
de Wiverton, son of Richard, son of Gervas, son of Richard de Berneston,
mentioned in Coleston Basset, which said Gervase had a son named Richard de
Wiverton, who was a Knight and Benefactor to Wellebek and Thurgarton
Monasteries, Reg. Thurg. 30.
to which last he gave with his body six Acres of Land in this Field, which
Walter, son of Richard de Botelesford, and Alice his wife, his youngest sister
and heir, Idonia another sister and coheir; and Thomas, son of Raph de Mellys
(which Thomas is supposed to be son and heir of his other sister Alina) did
after his death confirm. This Sir Richard de Wiverton left his wife Matilda a
widow before 37 H. 3. Esc. 37 H. 3. ^. 51.
Then he was certified to Richardus de Barneston Gervasius-Margareta. Richardus
de Wiverton, 25 H. 2. Gervasius de Wiverton Richardus de Wiverton,
mil.-Matilda. Gervasius s. p.
Radulphus de Mellys-Alma. Tho. de Mellys..... de Mendham-.... Johannes de
Mendham nepos and haer. Tho. Mellys Johannes de Mendham, aetat. 28. anno 6 E. 2.


Idonia Beatrix. Henricus de Co^grave-Alicia.
Roger le Brett-Sara.
Alicia ux. Walter. fill. Ric. de Botesford.




have held here of the King twenty four Bovats of Land in Wiverton and
Barneston, by the service of the fifth part of a Knights Fee of the Honor of
Peverell, and sixteen Bovats of Land in Wiverton and Colston of Raph Lord
Basset, and seven Bovats in Wiverton of Henry de Bek, for the sixth part of a
Knights Fee. His Ancestors had disposed some Lands to pious uses: what he left
was subdivided into small parcels among the several heirs of his three sisters.

His youngest sister Alice had two daughters and heirs, Esc. 8 E. 1. n. 32.
one called Sarra, married to Roger le Brett, and aged twenty eight years 8 E.
1. and another named Beatrix, who left her daughter and heir Alice, then aged
fifteen years, who, 28 E. 1. was wife of Henry de Cotgrave. The heir of Thomas
de Mellys was his Nephew John de Mendham, Esc. 5 E. 1. n. 19.
who left a son called John his heir, twenty eight years old 6 E. 2. The
portion of Idonia, the other sister and heir of Sir Richard de Wiverton, Rot.
Pip. 27 E. 1.
was Aliened to Hugh de Stapleford of Not. and his heirs, whose sister and
heir Alice, was wife of John le Paumer, who had a daughter named Agnes, the
wife of Richard de Whatton. Esc. 8 E. 3. n. 44.


Here were many other owners and Benefactors to the Priory of Thurgarton; Reg.
Thurg.
as 1251. William, son of William de Wiverton, and of Albreda his wife,
daughter of William Gernet, as I guess; Gundreda wife, and Roger, son of that
William confirmed his gift; that Roger had a son named William de Wiverton,
father of (...). Henry de Bek, Knight, gave all the Land he bought in the
Fields of Titheby and Wiverton. Henry, son of Dionysius de Bingham, in the year
1270. confirmed all his own gifts and sales to the said Priory, and (...) all
the services of his Fee, reserved in any gift or sale by himself or Robert de
Handsacre. His wife Christian, and William de Bingham his son, confirmed what
he did. Others here were too many to insist on, but the principal owner in the
time of King H. 3. was Sir William de Heriz, Knight, before named.

Sir Raph Basset, son of Raph Basset, granted to William de Heryez of Wyverton
in Frank-marriage with Maltilda his sister, Ex Collect. R. Glover. pen. Will.
Dugdale, No^^oy.
six Marks of Land in Wyndesclive, as Sir Raph Basset their father, granted to
the said Matilda* to this Richard Basset, Parson of Drayton, was a Witness.
This Matildis was sister of Raph Lord Basset of Drayton, Grandfather to the
last Lord Basset of that house, Esc. 14 R. 2.
who died the 12 May, 13 R. 2. at which time Thomas Earl Stafford, aged twenty
four years, claimed and was found to be one of his heirs, as son of Hugh
Stafford, son of Raph, son of Margaret, sister of the said Raph Lord Basset his
Grandfather. The said Matildis, the other sister before named, wife of Sir
William Heriz, left issue Joan (often called in Thurgarton Book, Lady of
Wiverton) who married Sir Jordan Bret, who had issue by her Sir Roger Bret, Ex
Coll. I. B.
who married Ramberga or Roberta, the daughter of John Lord Deincurt, by whom
he had a son Sir John Bret, who married Alice, the widow of Sir John de
Loudham, for which he paid twenty Marks of his Fine to the King, Pip. 13 E. 2
13 E. 2. and had a son Sir John Bret, who married Joan.... on whom the Manor
of Wiverton, Fin. Hill. 50 E. 3.
50 E. 3. was settled for life, but died without issue, so that his sister
Catherin married to Sir John Calt^ft Lord of East Bridgeford, carried the
inheritance to A^ice their daughter and heir, first married to Thomas Heth Chr.
to whom Sir John Bret Chr. granted 100l. Rent, 40 E. 3. out of all his Lands in
Wiverton, Langar, Barneston, Tytheby, Crophill Bishop, Cla^s. 40 E. 3. n. 1,
and 2*
Colston Basset, Shelford, and Aslocton, and fifty Marks out of William^thorp,
Hynkershull, Wolveley, and Calale, etc. and afterward to Sir William Chaworth,
which Sir William in right of her the said Alice his wife, aged above thirty
years 14 R. 2. was the other coheir of the last Lord Basset of Drayton, before
mentioned. Esc. 14. E. 2.


This S^r William Chaworth, and Alice his wife, had issue Sir Thomas Chaworth,
Ex C^ll. I. B.
who had to his first wife Nicola, the daughter of Sir Reginald Braybrook,
Knight, by whom he had a daughter Elizabeth married to John Lord Scr^op of
Massam; to his second he had Isabell, daughter of Sir Thomas Aylesbury, and
Aunt and coheir of his Grandchild Hugh, son of his son John, which Hugh
Aylesbury dyed without issue 2 H. 6. his other Aunt and coheir being Elianor,
the wife of Humfrey Stafford of Grafton.

This Sir Thomas Chaworth, by this ma^ch, was entitled to the inheritance of
the honorable Families of Aylesbury, Pabenham, Exgaine, Basset of Weldon, and
Kaynes, and better enabled to make the Park here, which he had the Kings
license to do 24 H. 6. who likewise granted him Free Warren in this place, Chapter
24 H. 6. ^. 9. ^. 1^
whereby it is very probable that he was the chief builder of that strong House,
which from thence forward was the principal mansion of his worthy Successors,
and in our times made a Garrison for the King, which occasioned its ruin, since
when, most of it is pulled down and removed, except the old uncovered
Gate House, which yet remains a Monument of the magnificence of this Family.

This Isabell, his ^a^ter wife, brought him a numerous issue, his first son Sir
William married Elizabeth, and his second son John Chaworth, Margaret, the
daughters and coheirs of Sir Nichola^ Bowit of Kepingale, Knight, by whom each
of them had a son named Thomas, who died childless; but Sir William (whose son
Thomas had to wife Margaret, the daughter of John Earl of Shrowsbury, who
proved Lunatic) had also a daughter called Ioane, married to John Ormond, who
was buried at Alfreton, 1507. and left by her three daughters and heirs,
Elizabeth married to Sir Anthony Babington of Dethick, Anne to William Mering,
without issue, and Ioane, first wife of Thomas Denham of Eythorp in
Buckinghamshire, and afterward of.... Fitz-Williams.

His third son George Chaworth married Alice, the daughter and sole heir of
John Annesley of Annesley in this County; afterward the wife of Reginald
Leighe: by her this George had Thomas Chaworth of Crophill Butler, who married
Ancareta, daughter of.... Serleby; after wife of... Bailey of Hickling: she
brought him a son called George Chaworth, Ex Lib. (...).
who was husband of ^atherin, the daughter of Thomas Babington; she died 12
Oct. 15^7. and was buried at Langar, as her husband also was, where they of
this Family have a burying place, in the North cross I Will Robertus de Chaurciis
12 H. 2.-... Soror ^ad. fill. Will. de Walichvill dom. de Marneham. Willielmus
de Chaurces-Agnes. 1 Robertus de Chaurcis s. p. 2 Willielmus de
Chawurcis.-Alicia Einecia fill. and cohaer. Thom. de Chaurcis cohaer. Avunculi
Tho. fill. Rob. de Auferton infra (...). 26 H. 3.-Joana. Willielmus de Chaworth.
Thom. de Chaworth miles.-Jana fill. Galfr. Lu^erell, milit. Tho. de Chaworth ob.
ante patrem.-Joana-Margar. fill. Ric. Pole, milit.-Will. de Spaigne marit. 2.
Willielmus de Cadurcis five de Chaworth.-Alicia fill* and haer.-Tho. He^^e Chr.
marit. 1. Thom. Chaworth miles.-Nicola fill. Reginaldi Braybrook, mil.-Isabella
ux. 2. Elizabetha-Johannes Dom. Scroope de (...). Will. Chaworth miles.-Elizab.
fill. and cohaer. Nic. Bowyt de Repingall, mil. 2 Johan.-Margareta cohaer. Nic.
Bowyt de Repinghall. Thom. Chaworth s^^e prole.-Margareta fill. Johan. Com.
Salop. Lun^tica. Johannes Ormond-Joana sor. and haer. Tho. Chaworth, ob. 25
Dec. 2 H. 7. s. p.
3 Georg.-Alicia fill. and sola haer.-Reginaldus Leigh ma. ^. Tho. Chaworth de
Crophill Butler.-Ankareta fill.... Serleby Dom. de Harthill and Woodhall, postea
ux..* Bailey de Hickling. Georgius Chaworth ob. 22 Sept. 1521.-Katherina fill.
Tho. Babington ob. 12 Oct. 151^.-Elizabetha fill. North. relict... Roche.-...
Matterden marit. 3.-Dom. Griffin Dun marit. 4. Johannes Chaworth, miles, ob. 3
Sept. 1538. apud Wiverton.-Elizab. soror Will. Compton.-Maria fill. Will.
Paston, mil. Georgius Chaworth, mil. ob. 4 Mar. 1589.-Anna fill. Will. Paston,
mil. nepotis Will. praedict.-Nic. le Strange mil. mar. 2.-Anthonius Cope* mil.
mar. 3. Elizabetha fill. and unica haer.-Willielmus Cope, miles, fill. and haer.
Anthonii.

Georgius-Maria fill. Henrici Sacheverell de Morley, militis. Joh. Chaworth de
Crophill Butler.-Jana fill. David. Vincent de Stoke Dabern. in Com. Sur.
Georgius Chaworth mil. creat. Vicecom. Armagh.-Maria fill. Tho. Kniveton de
Myreaston Com. Derb. Johannes Vicecom. Chaworth de Armagh.-.... fill. Edm.
Vicecom. Campden-.... Hickman sor. Dom. Windsor. Patri^ius Dom. Chaworth-Gratia
fill. Johannis Comitis Rutland. Juliana aet. 1^. 1672.
Willielmus Byron fill. and haer Ric. Dom. Byron-Elizabetha. Michael Armine
Bar.-Maria, s. p.

Ric. Ll. Doctor mil.... fill. Com. Linds. Joh.
Georg.- Henr.













Engelramus Ingeram. Reg. Lent. 8. Ranulfus Vicecom. Not. and Derb. 2 H. 2.
Jordanus de Chevercurt.-Avicia. Robertus Vicecom. Not. and Derb. 12 H 2.
Willielm. de Aufirton. Robert. de Auferton.-Agnes. 2 Willielmus de
Chawurcis.-Alicia Einecia fill. and cohaer. Thomas de Auferton s. p. Robertus de
Lathorn.-Joana vel Amicia.


Will. Vicecom. Not. and Derb. 16 H. 2.-Idonea de Blacwell. Isabella-Johannes
de Orreby. Gilbertus de Orreby.-Rad. dom. Basset de Drayton.
Matildis-Willielmus. de Heriz. Jordanus le Bret, mil.-Joana fill. and haer.
1273. Rogerus le Bret Bret, miles.-Ramberga vel Robert^ fill. Johannis
Deyncourt. Johannes Bret miles.-Alicia relicta Joh. de Loudham, militis.
Johannes Bret mil. s. p.-Joana, 18 E. 3. Johannes de Caltoft, mil.-Katherina
sor. and haer. Willielmus de Cadurcis five de Chaworth.-Alicia fill* and
haer.-Tho. He^^e Chr. marit. 1.










Tho. de Alesbury-... fill. and haer. Laur. Pabenham, milit. Thom. Chaworth
miles.-Nicola fill. Reginaldi Braybrook, mil.-Isabella ux. 2. Humfr.
Stafford-Elianora.

Richardus tenuit Annesley, 14 W. 1. Radulphus de Anesleia Brito Reginald. de
Annesley 1156. 2 H 2. Radulphus de Annesley 1 H. 3. Radulphus Robertus Johannes
Johannes Johannes Ashwell.-Isabella.



Reginaldus de Annesley, mil. Johan. de Annesley Johannes de Annesley
miles.-Annora Isabel ux. 2.-Joh. de Annesley Chr.-Tho. Johannes de Annesley.
Thom. de Annesley. Tho. de Annesly Johannes de Annesley. 3 Georg.-Alicia fill.
and sola haer.-Reginaldus Leigh ma. ^.




Gregor.







of the Church, but he married another wife before, called Elizabeth, the
daughter of..... Nor^h, and the relict of L... Roche; afterward married to...
Matterden, and at length to Sir Gryphin Dun; by her this George had a son
Thomas, and died 22 September. 1521. By his first the said Katherin he left many
children. His eldest son Sir John Chaworth by Mary, the daughter of Sir William
Paston, had Sir George Chaworth, who by his Lady Anne, the daughter of Sir
William Paston, Nephew of the former, left Elizabeth his daughter and heir,
married to Sir William Cope, son and heir of Sir Anthony Cope, her mothers
third husband; her second was Sir Nicholas le Strange. By this Ma^ch Sir
Anthony Cope now inheriteth Marneham, the most ancient inheritance of the
Chaworths in this County, where I shall have occasion to mention the elder part
of this Descent, and to rectify some errors in the Collections of Mr. St. Low
Kniveton, Printed in the second Volume of the Monasticon Anglic. page 607. and
of others not Printed, concerning the same, and now proceed in this modern
part, to George Chaworth (brother of Sir John, and second son of the said
George and Katherin Babington), who married Mary, the daughter of Sir Henry
Sacheverell of Morley in Darbishire, Knight, and had by her many Children, as
John Chaworth of Crophill Butler, George, Henry, etc. John's wife was Jane, the
daughter of David Vincent of Stoke Dabernon in Surry, who also left him a
plentiful Offspring.

His eldest son Sir George Chaworth, who married Mary, the daughter of Thomas
Knyveton of Myrcaston in Darbishire, was created Viscount Chaworth of Armagh in
Ireland 1627. 4 Mar. 3 Car. 1. and was father of John Lord Chaworth, who
married.... the daughter of Edward Viscount Cambden, by whom he had Patricius
Lord Chaworth, the present owner.

Ioceus de Spalding, 13 E. 3. ought 33s. 4d. of the custody of two parts of
eight Mess. sixty five Acres of Land, Pip. 13 E. 3.
twelve of Meadow, and 14s. 7d. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Wyverton and
Barneston, which were Hugh de Garthorpes, then in the Kings hand, by reason of
the minority of William his son and heir, from the 12 E. 2. This was some of
Sir Richard de Wiverton's, I suppose.

About the year of our Lord 1257. many mentions are made in the Leiger Book of
Thurgarton, Reg. Thurg. 72. and alibi.
of the Church of Wiverton, though it may, possibly, be interpreted of Langar
Church or Tithebyes, for ^ never could see any thing else which could satisfy,
that there ever was a Church at Wiverton; there was a very good Chapel in the
House, now ruinous with it; and besides it, there is no more Houses, so that
the Church and Town have a like fate the place of either not very discoverable,
the necessary consequence of enclosure of good Land in these parts.

Langar and Barneston. AND St. Aubreys, or St. Aethelburga's.
THese Towns went together before the Normans came, as they have done ever
since, and do still. In King William's time they were the Fee, and a great part
of the Demesne, of William Peverell. But before that time Godric had a Manor
in each Town, Lib. Doo^^.
and for that in Langare was rated to the public payment of the Geld, at two
Car. four Cov.. The Land being sufficient for six Plows, or so many Carucats.
There William Peverell had in Demesne three Bar. fi^teen Sochm. upon six Bov.
of this Land, nineteen Vill. six Board. having eleven Car. two Mills 5s. and
five Acres of Meadow. There [1. Francus homo] one French man, or Freeman, had
one Car. In King Edward the Confessors time the value of his was 100s* but in
King Williams was improved to 10l* having Soc in Wivreton. In Barnestune Godric
and Azor had each man his Hall, and each paid the Geld, then in use, for four
Bov. s. The Land was four Car. Lib. Dooms*
There William Pevrell bad in Demesne three Car. seven Sochm* on four Bov. of
this Land, seven Vill. six Bordars, having four Car.. There was thirty six
Acres of Meadow. In King Edward the Confessors time this was but 10s. in the
time when the Conquerours Survey was taken, it was 4l. valu^.

In each Town there was a considerable share Soc to Granby of the Fee of Walter
de Ayncurt, viz. in Langare as much as was rated to the Geld at four Bov. and
an half. The Land was two Car. There eight Sochm. one Bordar, had two Car. and
six plowing Oxen. There was half a Church, and thirteen Acres of Meadow. In
Bernestune, that which was Soc to Granby, paid the Dane-geld for half a Car.
The Land was two Car. There five Sochm. one Board. had two Car. two draught
Oxen, and eleven Acres of Meadow.

William Pevrell, at his first endowment of Lenton Priory, Reg. Le^^. p. 1.
which he founded in the time of King Henry the first, gave two parts of all
his Tithes, which that house enjoyed here accordingly and the Church of Langar,
with all its Lands and Tithes, and one Villan, holding a Virgat of (or Yard)
Land. William Peverel his son, who succeeded in this inheritance, was, it
seems, rather for King Stephen than King Henry the second, who when he wrote
himself but Duke of Normandy and Angeou, gave to Ranulph Earl of Chester,
Autog. i^ Bibl. C^^ton.
amongst many other vast possessions, the whole Fee of William Peverel, unless
he could acquit and clear himself in the said Duke his Court of his wickedness
and Treason. But I do not find that the Earl of Chester enjoyed any thing here
of that gift, for the Sheriffs accounted in the Pipe Rolls for the Farm of
Peverells Land, P^r. Pip. H. 2.
being in the Kings hands several years, in the beginning of the Reign of King
Henry the second, until about the nineteenth, that Robert Fitz-Randalf Lord of
Auferton made his account, wherein he mentions Langar and Clifton to be before
that time ('it is said, 9 H. 2.) given to one Gerbod de Escalt, as Hornecastle in
Lincolneshire also was. B.


Gerard de Rodes was the next owner of these Lands, that I have seen, who had
them of the gift of King John^: Te^ de Nev.
but, I think, he only confirmed them; for in the Pipe Roll, of the first year
of his Reign, Rot. Pip. 1 I. b.
they are mentioned as if King Richard the first had so disposed them before.

Raph de Rodes succeeded this Gerard, to whom the Prior and Covent of Lenton,
having remitted the custom of Tything his Corn here at Langar, after it was
brought into the Barn, and out of their liberality, ^ig. Lent. p. 8^.
agreed to take it in the field; This said Raph did, in the third year of the
Reign of King Henry the third, make his acknowledgement thereof, and engage
himself, That if they should have any loss by so doing, they should enjoy their
old Custom again of Tything at the Barn; and this he did in a full Chapter
before W. de Roderham, Archdeacon of Not. to whose Jurisdiction and
constraint, if he should fail, he submitted himself, without Appeal, by a
sealed instrument, as the custom then ordinarily was in such like cases. The
Prior and Covent likewise granted him and his Lady Berta, to have a Chapel
within their Court at Langar, provided the Chaplain should be presented to the
P^^son of Langar, and swear not to hinder the Mother Church, and to be liable
to be suspended by the Parson, if he did; and that the Lord and Lady should
come and hear Divine Service at the Church on all the Festivals, except there
was manifest cause of hinderance, but to have no Bell in the said Chapel.

There was an ancient Church or Chapel in the ^ields of Langar, called St.
Athelburga's, or St. Aubrey's, which was upon Deyncurts Fee, and was given to
Thurgarton Priory, Regist. de (...). p. 72, and 75.
as Graneby Church was, to which Parish it properly belonged; for this Raph de
Rodes gave the Priory of Thurgarton 2s. a year to be taken of Richard, son of
Thurkel of Barneston, or of whomsoever should hold these two Bovats or Oxgangs)
he then had, to be free from paying small Tithes to the Church of Granby, for a
certain Grange, which stood near Giselkirk (the old English name of St.
Aubreys) part whereof stood in the Parish of Grandby.

There was matter of question between Sir William de Rodes, Rector of Langar,
and the Prior and Covent of Thurgarton, concerning certain obventions of the
Church of St. Athelburga, without the Town of Langar, but the parties appearing
in the Church of Wiverton, the Tuesday after Palm Sunday, in the year 1257.
they agreed partly to divide the subject of the question between them.

There was an agreement made also in the Court of Sir Raph de Rodes at Langar,
Ib. 75.
before the whole Soc, the Knights and Freemen of the said Raph being present
and Witnesses, between the Prior of Thurgarton, and the Parishioners of that
Fee in Langar and Barneston, that they should all bring home the said Priors
Tithes, and keep them safe till they could be carried to their proper place,
for which the said Prior gave them 3s. of Silver yearly at Lammas.

Sir Gerard de Rodes was son and Successor of Raph, and had one son called by
his own name Gerard de Rodes Lord of Melles, and another named John, who, 13 E.
1. passed away to Sir Robert de Thibetot, and Eve his wife, and Paganus their
son, the Manor of Langar and Berneston, and also the homages of Gervas de
Wileford, for the Manors of Clifton and Wilford, and of Henry de Perpunt and
his heirs of the Manor of Barton, and of Robert Luterell of the Manors of
Brigford and Gameleston, and of Edmund de Deyncurt and his heirs, which Gerard,
son of Gerard de Rodes his brother, granted to him the said John de Rodes, on
whose Seal, Autog. (...)* I. How de Langar, Ar.
circumscribed with his name, is a Lion Rampant debruised with a Bendlet.

There are diverse Seals of the largest size, of some of this Family, in the
Chartulary at Clifton, with their Images on Horseback on one side, and on the
other SECRETUM, with a Lion Rampant upon a Shield, and one within a Bordure.

Eva, the wife of Robert de Tibetot, was daughter of (...) de Cadurcis. Coll.
R. Glov^^.


Robert de Tibbetot had Free Warren granted, 18 E. 1. in Langar, and Barneston,
and Bentley in Yorkshire.

This Robert de Tibetot had a son named Robert, who, Pat. 23 E. 1
23 E. 1. was to marry the daughter of Raph de Tony, but his son and heir was
Paganus, before mentioned, Pat. 26 E. ^
who about 26 E. 1. married Agnes, the daughter of William de Ros. He confirmed
to the Priory of Thurgarton all their Lands and Tenements, Reg. T^u^g. p. 72.
Rents and Possessions within his Demesne in Langar, Barneston, and Wiverton,
and particularly, all their concerns in the Chapel or Church of St. Ethelburga
the Virgin, situate and founded within his Demesne of Langar, called in
English Giselki^ke. In the year of our Lord 1314, Cr^^. (...) in Bibl. Cotton
fol. 6. a.
he was slain at Strivelin, amongst many other English Nobles, in the Battle
against Robert de Brus, where the Scots were Conquerours. The next year after,
or sooner, the King, 8 E. 2. pardoned Thomas de Veer for marrying Agnes, 2 P.
pat. 8 E. 2. m. 3.
the wife of this Pagan Tibetot, without license, on condition, that he found
twenty men at Arms at Karliol, from Lammas then next following, to the Feast of
All Saints, to defend those parts against the Scots.

King Edward the second, Nov. 21. that same year, Claus. 11 E. 2. m. 24.
viz. 8 E. 2. for a thousand Marks granted to Barth. de Badlesmere the custody
of certain of the Lands of this Paganus de Tibtot, by reason his son and heir
John was under age. This Barthol. married this John to his daughter Margaret
(or Elizabeth, Fin. ^^ E. 3 in rot. Claus. Ebo^.
as some Copyes) which afterward proved to be one of the four sisters and
coheirs of his son Sir Giles Badlesmere, whereof another was married to
William Lord Ros; another to John Vere Earl of Oxford; and another to William
Boun Earl of Northampton. By her this John de Tiptot had a son called John, who
died without issue under age, Claus. 41 E. 3.
33 E. 3. but he had another called Robert, on whom this Manor Robertus de
Tibetot-Eva fill. P de Cadurcis. Paganus Tipetoth, occis. 1314. apud
Strivelin-Agnes fill. Will. de Roos-Th. de Vere mar. 2. Johannes Tibetot-Eliz.
vel Margareta soror and una 4. cohaer. Egidii de Badlesmere. 2 Robertus Tibtot
ob. 1372. Apr. 13.-Margareta fill. Willielmi Deyncurt ob. 1 R. 2.-Johannes
Cheyne mar. 2. 47 E. 3. Margareta-Rogerus le Scrop fill. Ric. Rich. Dom. Scrope
de Bolton.-Margar. fill. Rad. Commit. de Westmorl. Henricus Dom. Scrope.-Alicia
cohaer. Tho. Dom. Scrope de Upsal. Johannes Dom. le Scrope mil. Garterii,
1462.-Joana fill Will. Dom. Fitzhugh and Margeriae fill.... Dom. Willughby.-....
fill. Dom. St. John ux. 2. Henricus Dom. Scrop-Elizabetha fill. Henrici Percy
Comitis Northumb. Henricus Dom. Scrope de Bolton and Upsall-Mabel fill. Tho.
Dom. Dacres de Gillesland. Johannes Dom. Scrope-Catherina fill. Henrici Comitis
de Cumberland. Henricus Dom. Scrope, mil. Garter. 1584.-Maria fill. Edw. primi
Dom. North-Margar. Howard sor. Ducis Norfole. Thomas Dom. Scrope, mil. Garter.
1598.-Philadelpha fill. Henr. Carry Dom. Hunsdon. Emanuel Dom. Scrope fill. unicus
Tho. creat. Com. de Sunderland, 3 Car. 1. Jun. 19. 1627.-Eliz. fill. Johan. Com.
Rutland, sine prole.-Martha Janes amasia. Domina Annabella aet. 43.
1672.-Johannes Grubham How. Scroope How, miles aet. 24. in Nov. 1672.-Anna
fill. Johannis Comitis Rutland. Johannes Scroop How not. Oct. 5. 1675.
Johannes Grubham aet. 15. 1672. Carolus aet. 11. Emanuel Scroop. Maria. Diana
aet. 13. Elizab. aet. 18. 1672. Brigitta aet. 22.
Elizabetha-Thom. Com. Rivers. Maria-Carol. Dom. St. John de Basing. Johannes,
s. p.

Henricus, 33 Eliz.







Stephen le Scrop fill. Ric.-Millecent. Steph. le Scrope. Johannes le Scrope.

Phil. le Dispenser-Eliz. Margeria-Roger. Wentworth. Philippus Wentworth.


1 Johannes ob. infra aetat. 33 E. 3. 3 Paganus Tibtot. Joh. Tibtot Chr. Tho.
Dom. Ros.-Philippa aetat. 62. 1 H. 7. Johannes Comes Wigorn. Edward. Tiptot
Comes Wigorn. ob. 3 R. 3. Aug. 12. fine prole.




Rob.-.. fill. Rad. de Tony.

was settled, 22 E. 3. who married Margaret, the daughter of William de
Ayncourt, Fin. 22 E. 3
and did his homage 41 E. 3. His wife was, after his death, married to John
Cheyne. Autog. pen. Io. How, Ar.


King Edward the third, Aug. 7. in the forty sixth year of his Reign, committed
to Richard le Scrop the custody of all the Lands, Fin. 46 E. 3. m. 18.
which were this Robert Tibetots, then dead, until the full age of Margaret,
Millecent, and Elizabeth, his daughters and heirs, together with their
Marriages.

Margaret was married to Roger le Scrop of Bolton, son of Richard, whose
posterity thereby enjoyed this fair Lordship, Autog. pen. ^and. I. H.
Millecent to Stephen Scrop, son of Richard also, and afterward to Hugh (or
John) Claus. 13 H. 4.
Fastolf; Elizabeth to Philip le Dispenser, who by her had a daughter named
Margery, married to Roger Wentworth.

The Lands were many and great Lordships, Barowe in Sussex, Oxendale in
Gloucestershire, Secryngdon in Bedfordshire, Siberton in Kent, Overton in
Rutland, Bentley in Yorkshire, Hameldon in..... etc.

Roger le Scrope Chr. when he died held this Manor jointly with Margaret his
wife, Esc. 8 H. 4. p. 88.
and 8 H. 4. left Richard le Scrope his son and heir, or sooner. On the Seals
of Roger and Stephen le Scrope, and Philip le Dispenser circumscribed with
their names, 9 R. 2. are yet visible, on Rogers a Bend, and likewise on the
said Stephens, Autog. pen. I. H. apud La^gar.
with a large Mullett added to the top of the Bend; on Philips is; Barry of six
a Canton Ermine, with a file of three Labels, two in the said Canton, or rather
quarter (for it is a large one) and the other toward the Sinister part of the
Escutcheon.

This Manor descended, as the Genealogy shows transcribed out of the Sicling
of the great Gallery at Langar, from Richard Lord Scrope to Emanuel, the last
Lord Scrope, created Earl of Sunderland, who married Elizabeth, daughter of
John Earl of Rutland, but having no issue by her, he settled it, and the rest
of his Estate, upon his natural issue, which he had by Martha Ianes, yet
living, of which his only son John died unmarried the last of July, 1646. aged
about twenty years; but his three daughters, which by that means divide the
whole inheritance amongst them, are yet living, Oct. 2. 1672.

Mary, the eldest, was first married to Henry Carry Lord Lepington, eldest son
and heir of the Earl of Monmouth, but he leaving her a widow, without children,
she is since become the wife of Charles Lord St. John of Basing, eldest son and
heir of John Marquess of Winchester, and by him has issue.

Elizabeth the second daughter, is wife of Thomas Earl Rivers; and Annabella
the third, of John How, second son of Sir John How of Compton in
Gloucestershire, Baronet, by whom she has many children. Her eldest son Sir
Scrope How, Knight* has lately married the Lady Anne, daughter of John Earl
of Rutland, and is heir apparent of this Manor, which in the division, fell to
the share of his Mother; to whom our present Sovereign King Charles the second,
by his Letters registered in the Office of Arms, bearing date the first day of
June, 1663. in the fifteenth year of his Reign, in consideration of the good
and acceptable service done and performed by John How of Langar, Ex A^^^g.
Esquire, her husband; and for a mark of his especial Grace and Royal favor,
granted and ordained that she, the said Annabella, should be had, taken and
esteemed as the daughter of an Earl of this Kingdom of England, and that for
and during her natural life, she have, hold, use, take, and enjoy the Style,
place, degree, precedence, and privileges thereof in as full and ample manner,
as if she had been the Legitimate daughter of Emannuel late Earl of Sunderland,
with a precept of obedience to all and every of His Majesty's Subjects, since
when she is usually styled, the Right Honorable the Lady Annabella How.

Oliver de Eyncourt released to Raph de Rodes, thirty one Bovats of Land, ^eg.
Thurg. p. 141.
and fifteen Tofts in Langar and Barneston, which he had brought a Writ of
right for, in King Henry the thirds time, for which the said Raph gave him 50s.
of Land in Barneston, which, together with his other Lands there, and some
other in Braunceton in Lincolneshire, the said Oliver gave to the Priory of
Thurgarton, to find two Chaplains to celebrate for him, his Ancestors and
Successors for ever.

Richard de Wiverton, Knight, gave also three Bovats in Barneston and Wiverton,
(...). 73.
and two Acres of Meadow in Berneston with his body, to the said Priory of
Thurgarton, to find a Secular daily to celebrate Divine Service at the Altar of
our Lady there for his Soul and his Wifes.

Thomas Artebrig, 10 E. 3. had license to give 63s. 6d. Rent out of Langar and
Wiverton, 2 P^^. pat. 10 E. 3. m. 26.
to make a Chantry in the Church of St. Andrew in Langar.

Queen Elizabeth, 7 of June, in the thirteenth year of her Reign, P^r. 9. Pat.
13 Eliz.
granted to Henry Lord Scrope of Bolton, the Lands late belonging to Thurgarton
in the Fields of Langar and Barneston. And to John Dudley, and John Aiscough,
29 January, Part. 5. Pat. 1 Eliz.
17 Eliz. the Tithes in the Parish of Langar, in the tenure of Sir John
Chaworth, Knight, at 12l. per annum, late belonging to the Priory of Lenton.

These Tithes, I suppose, Mr. How purchased of the Lord Dunbar, as he has
since done a Mess. and some Lands of Moses Foxcroft, son of John, Rector of
Goteham, which were Henry Flowers of Langar, and by Henry Walker, a Captain for
the King in the unhappy wars, and Anne his wife, sister and heir of Thomas
Flower, heir of the said Henry, sold to the said Mr. John Foxcroft, so that now
the whole Lordships of Langar and Barneston (except the said Mrs. Walkers
house, and some little Meadow, which was her Ancestors, the Flowers) is become
the possession of Mr. How, who has made a convenient Park of the Closes which
he found nigh the house, which is well stored with Deer, much better than the
Towns are with people, where so considerable parts of the Fields are enclosed,
the too common fate of good Land in this County.

A Quare impedit, 6 H. 6. was recovered by Guy Fayrfax, and William Akworth
Plaintiffs, Pas^^. 6 H. 6. rot. 433.
against John Elingham Prior of Lenton, and Thomas Smith, Clark of the Advowson
of the Church of Langar.

The Rectory of Langar (which has but the third part of the Tithes) was 10l.
and the Lord Scrope Patron. Mss. I. M.
It Is now 10l. 7s. 11d. value in the Kings Books, and Mr. How Patron.

In the South Cross-Ile is a fair Tomb for Thomas Lord Scrope and his Lady,
whereon lie their Effigies at full length; at the feet whereof is the figure of
their son Emanuel kneeling in much less proportion; the Top or Canopy of the
Tomb (whereon are their Arms with quarterings) is supported by tall Pillars of
black Marble well polished.

In the windows on that side is Arg. a Saltier engrailed Gules, Tiptoft. And in
some places Azure a Bend Or, Scrope, quartering the former.

In the North Ovire at Langar the feet against the East wall.


On the Lord Scroop's Tomb.

On the North side in two Tables.

The Right Honorable and Noble Lord, Thomas Lord Scroope, Baron of Bolton,
Masham, and Upshall, of the most Noble Order of the Garter Knight, Lord Warden
of the West Marshes, Steward of Richmond, and Richmondshire, and Bow-bearer of
all His Majesty's Parks, Forests, and Chases within the same, Lies here
buried, and died the 2 day of September, Anno Dom. 1609.

On the South side in two Tables.

The Right Honorable Thomas Lord Scroope, etc. married the Right Honorable
Lady Philadelphia, daughter to the Right Honorable Lord Henry Cari^, Baron of
Hunsdon, Lord Chamberlain to our late Queen Elizabeth her Majesty's Household,
who died the 3 of February, 1627. and had issue only one Son Emanuel Scroope.

At the feet of the Tomb this.

Emanuel Scroope, son and heir of the Right Honorable Thomas Lord Scroope, and
of the Right Honorable Philadelphia his wife, was, after his Fathers decease,
Lord Scroope, and then Earl of Sunderland.

A South Prospect of a Tomb at Langar.


In the body of the Church upon the North Wall, Ermines (viz. sable poudered
with white) a cinquefoyle Ermine, (or counterchanged.) Under it is written, In
memoriam bona vitae and m^rtis Henrici Flower nuper de Langar avi, and Thomae
filii and haeredis ejus, quorum animae apud Deum, and corpora in ista ecclesia
sepulta remanent. Henricus filius and haeres praedicti Thomae per Katherinam
filiam Georgii Chaworth, Ar. fraetris Johannis Chaworth, militis, fieri fecit,
Anno 1600. and obiit postea dit mensis Anno Dom....

In the body of the Church, the South I Will, Mr. How has made an arched Vault
of Brick, for a burying place, where yet there only is laid Annabella his
second daughter, who was a Virgin of a most excellent disposition.

In the North Cross I Will there is a low Vault, the burying place of the
Chaworths, on the East Wall whereof over an old Tomb is written, In the North
I Will at Langar the feet to the East Wall


By this Tomb side lies George Chaworth late Lord of Wereton and Anseley, son
and heir of Thomas Chaworth of Cropull Butler, and Father, by Katherin his
first wife, of John Chaworth, Knight, and George Chaworth, Squyre, and of Anne,
Dorithy, Elizabeth, and Katherine, and Father by Elizabeth his second wife of
Thomas Chaworth only; which George, the Father died 22 Sept. anno 1521. and the
said Katherine his first wife buried under this Tomb, she dyed 12 Oct. 1517.
for whose Souls of your Charity say a Pater Noster and an Ave Marie.

The Arms there quartered are Barry of ten Arg. and Gules, three Martletts
sable, Chaworth, Azure two Chevrons Or, Alfreton, (but almost ever used for
Chaworth.) Arg. a Scutcheon encompassed with an Orle of Cinquefoyles sable,
Caltoft. Gules a Fesse double Dance between ten Billetts* Or, Brett. Paly of
six Arg. and Azur* a Bend Gules, Annesley: with which last is quartered the two
Chevrons only, and they impale Babington. Arg. ten Torteauxes, with a File of
three, and sometimes five Labels Azure.

At Langar Against the North wall in the Cross I Will* belonging to the Hon*
Family of the Chaworth^ of Wae^ton.


Hic jacet Johannes Chaworth, miles, filius Georgii Chaworth, Ar. qui ob. apud
Wiverton 3 die Sept. Anno Dom. 1558. and habuit duas uxores, viz. Elizabetham
prius nuptam Waltero Rodnei, militi, fuit soror Willielmi Compton, and obiit
sine exitu, and Mariam quae fuit filia Willielmi Paston, militis, and habuerunt
14. liberos, and ob. anno and mense supradictis and una cum eo hic sepelitur.

Over this Tomb upon the Wall, is

Here lies buried Sir George Chaworth, Knight, son and heir of Sir John
Chaworth, Knight, the said Sir George having issue Elizabeth, his sole daughter
and heir, not five years old when he died, which was 4 Martii, an. 1589. by
Anne his wife, the daughter of Sir William Paston, Knight, surviving him; she
was next married to Sir Nicholas Strange, Knight; and afterward to Sir
Anthony Cope, Knight.

Upon the side of this Tomb is writ,

Henr. Chaworth, Ar. fill. and haer. Georgii Chaworth, Ar. fratris suprascripti
Johannis, ac proximus haeres masculus supra nominati Georgii Chaworth, militis,
posuit.

In the Windows, Az. two Cherons Or, quarter with Arg. two Lions Passant Gules,
over the first is written Lathum; and over the Lions.... ndolf... Randolf.
Chaworth quarters the Chevrons, over which is written Lathum and Chaworth
transposed, etc. several mistakes of the Glasier, or Painier.

Scroope with a File of three Labels Arg. impaling the two Chevrons quartering
Caltoft, and they impale with Fitz-Williams Lozengy Arg. and Gules. And
Fitz-Williams empales the two Chevrons quartering Caltolft, and Azure a cross
Argent, Alesbury, etc.

A South Prospect of LANGAR HOUSE and Church.


Granby and Sudton.
IN Graneby before the Conquest Hamine had a Manor rated to the public Geld
for one Car. and an half. The Land was twelve Car. There afterward Walter de
Ayncurt, whose Fee it was, had in Demesne four Car. forty four Vill. nine Board.
having ten Car. There was a Priest and a Church, one Mill 2s. two hundred Acres
of Meadow. In the Confessors time this was 12l. when the Conquerours Survey was
taken 20l. value, having Soc in Bernestune, Langar, Wivreton, Hecheling,
Chinelton, and Crophill, and Wivreton. Here was another Manor, which Algar the
Earl had, and discharged it to the public Tax for three Car. The Land of it
was sufficient for ten Plows, Lib. Dooms.
or ten Car. This, when Doomsday Book was in making, was the Fee of Osberne
Fitz- (or son of) Richard, and Robert de Olgi then held it of him, and there
had four Car, twenty two Sochm. fourteen Vill. eight Board. having ten Car. A
Priest and a Church, two Mills 10s. and ten Acres of Meadow. In the Confessors
time the value of it was 8l. then 15l. having Soc in Wivreton and Salterford,
which last place was rated to the Dane-geld as six Bovats, and was then waste:
yet had a Berew in Coleton, and Pasture Wood one leuc. long, and four qu.
broad. I should have imagined this Coleton to have been Coleston Basset, but
that the only name which is left of Salterford, is in the Forest nigh
Calverton, which by reason also of the Wood, makes it more likely to be that;
and, I suppose also, one of these Churches was St. Ethelburga's, or St.
Aubrey's nigh Langar, which was in Deincourts Fee, as in that place may be
observed, in which Family both these Fees were soon united and so long
continued, this being the principal Seat of the Lords D'ayncourt in this
County, or any other, that I have known.

Walter de Daincourt gave his Tithes of Cotes [now Cotham] of Turgaston, Mon.
Angl. vol. 1. p. 389.
of Greneby, of Hikaling, of Cnapthorp, and some other places, to the Abbey of
St. Mary's at York, to which his wife Matildis was also a Benefactor.

Raph de Aincurt, whom, I suppose, to be son of this Walter, mentioned in
Doomsday Book, founded a Religious House at Thurgarton, Reg. Thurg. p. 1.
on which at the foundation, by the advice and entreaty of Thurstin Archbishop
of York, he bestowed all Thurgarton and Fiskerton, and the Park by Thurgarton,
and all his Churches, viz. of Graneby, Cotes, Nottss. Swaffeild, Haneworth,
Scaupewit; Kirkeby, Braunceton, Timberland; Blaunkeney* Linc. Elmton, and
Langwath, Derb. for his Souls health, and his sons and daughters, and of
Basilia his woman, and all his Ancestors, excepting that the Canons should pay
yearly 10s. of his gift to the infirm of Stokes (Hospital of St. Leonard), etc.
the Witnesses were the Chapter of St. Mary of Suwell, Robert Fitz- (or son of)
Hubert, William de Heriz, Richard de Kiriell, Robert de St. Audoeno, Hervey the
Clark, and others.

Ib. 75. b.
Raph Dayncurt gave to the Church of All Saints at Graneby the Toft, and Crossed
Acke in pure alms, his son Robert being a Witness; but I think this might be
son or Grandchild to the former: for his son who succeeded him in the
inheritance of the Barony, was Walter, Ib. 140.
who by the consent of Oliver and John his sons and heirs, Mon. A^g^. vol. 1.
p. 808.
in the year 1140. was a Benefactor to the Monastery of Kirkstead in
Lincolneshire, and John his son, by the consent of Aelice his wife, likewise in
the year of our Lord 1169. Ib.


This John Lord Dayencourt gave to God and the Church of St. Mary at Belvoyr
one Carucar of Land here at Granby, Ib. 329.
for the Souls of Oliver his brother (who was slain in the Battle at Lincoln
in the time of King Stephen) and of Walter his Father, who had granted it
before. This John lived long, and had a son called Nicolas, besides his son
Oliver, who was his heir, Reg. Thurg. p. 110.
who died 3 Ioh. and who had one wife named Amabilis, and another Matildis
Pecc^e, Ib. 21.
mother of Roger de Ridewar; but whether of them was mother of his son Oliver
Deincourt, Baronage of Engl. p. 387. Pip. 30 H. 3.
who was in minority 13 Ioh. and afterward Father of John Lord Deyncourt, who
paid his relief, 30 H. 3. and was father of Edmund Lord Dayencourt I find not,
but in the mean time suppose Amabilis.

Edmund considering that his Surname and Arms, after his death, 2 Par. pat. 10
E. 2. m. 13.
in the person of Isabell his daughter and heir, were likely to be laid aside
and forgotten, and zealously affecting the contrary, obtained Letters Patents,
10 E. 2. for the good and laudable services he had done to King Edward the
first, and to that King himself, to settle all his Manors, Lands and Tenements
which he held of the King in Capite on whomsoever he pleased, which he did
accordingly on William, the son of John de Ayencourt, who entered on this
Lordship the 20 E. 2. after the death of the said Edmund, Esc. 20 E. 2. n. 39.
by reason of a Fine between him the said Edmund, and Mr. Oliver Dayncourt, and
John Dayencourt of Parkhall (Derb.) as his Cousin and heir, being then above
twenty six years of age, and was summoned to the Parliament as Baron of
Blankeney, 6 E. 3. and was amongst others, Summon. ad Pa^l. 6 E. 3. part. 2. m.
^9. in dorso. 2 Par. pat. 3^ E. 3. Esc. 38 E. 3. n. 11. Gross. fi^. 5 R. 2. n.
6. and m. 8.
33 E. 3. assigned to stay with King John of France in the Castle of Hartford.
William Dayncourt, son of his son William, was found his Cousin and heir, 38 E.
3. This William by Alice his wife had Raph his eldest son and heir, and it
seems was dead in or before 5 R. 2. for the Lands of William Deyncourt Chr.
deceased, in the Counties of Bucks, Not. Derb. Linc. Northampton were to be
seized 3 Nov. 5 R. 2. into the Kings hands, in whose custody Raph his heir was,
Esc. 3 H. 4. n. 26.
18 Iun. which Raph died without issue under age, and John his brother, second
son of the said Will. succeeded. Which John married Ioane, daughter and heir of
Robert Gray of Rotherfeild; and by her had William, the last Lord Deyncourt,
who married Elizabeth, sister of John Viscount Beaumont, (who was afterward
married to Sir Thomas Nevill), I^q. 20 Nov. in Com. Derb. Esc. ^ H. 6.
but dyed under age without issue, 5 Dec. 1 H. 6. leaving his two sisters his
heirs, Alice, who married William Lord Lovell, eighteen years old, and Margaret
seventeen, who was wedded to Raph Lord Crumwell, but left the whole inheritance
to her sister, 33 H. 6. who after the death of her husband Lovell, married Sir
Raph Boteler: but Sir John Lovell Walterus de Ayncurt-Matildis. Radulphus de
Ayncuria sundator de Thurgarton, temp. H. 1.-Basilia. Walterus de Ayencourt
mort. 14 H. 2. Johannes de Ayancourt, 1169.-Alicia fill. ^ad. Murdak. Oliverus
de Ayencuria 3 John mort.-Amabisis-Matild. Peeche Oliverus 16 H. 3. ob. 30 H.
3.-Nicola. Johannes de Aynecourt mort. 47 H. 3. Edmundus de Eyncourt, ob. 20 E.
2. Isabella.


Roger. de Ridewar.
Nicholaus..... ux. Willielmi de Bella aqua.
Oliverus occisus in Bello Lincoln. Rogerus Robertus. Rogerus. Rogerus-Joana
fill. Willielmi Thorp. Johannes de Ayencourt de Knapthorp and Parkhall in Com.
Derb. Willielmus de Ayencourt cui Dom. Edm. dedit Terras and Arma, Summon. ad
Parl. 6 E. 3. Willielmus Deincourt, miles, ob. in vita partis-Margareta.
Willielmus Deincourt haeres Avi, 38 E. 3.-Alesia. Johannes Dayncourt-Joana fill.
and haer. Rob. Gray de Rotherfeld. Willielmus Dayncourt, miles ob. infra a^t.
s. p.-Elizab. for. Joh. vic. Beaumont Willielmus Lovell-Alesia. Johannes Dom.
Lovell and Holland Franciscus Dom. Lovell attinct. 1 H. 7.

Rad. Crumwell s. p.-Margareta aet. 17. 1 H. 6.
Radulphus haer. ob. infr. aet.


Rogerus





Hugo.


succeeded here, whose son and heir Fr^ncis being attaint, this Manor, with
diverse others of the Lord Deincurts ancient Lands, were by King Henry the
seventh granted to Sir John Savage, Orig. 1 H. 7. to. 80.
Knight, and the heirs males of his body, in the first year of his Reign.

Morton, and Parkhall, or Parkhouse near Northwingfeild in Darbishire, the
ancient residence of the Deyncourts, owners of Knapthorp before they came to be
Lords, became the possession and inheritance of the Family of Leek of Sutton in
Scarsdale, whereof they are now Earls, which gave the greater occasion of Sir
Francis Leeks being created Lord Deincort, in memory of this Illustrious Stock
of worthy persons, otherwise almost forgotten.

The last Sir John Savage, and Sir Thomas Savage, B.
the late Viscount Savage his son, sold the Demesnes of this Manor, and the
Royalties to Sir John Mauners, Knight, Grandfather to the Right Honorable John
Earl of Rutland, the present owner: and parcelled the Farms and Tenements
amongst diverse and sundry Freeholders, whereof some have part of the Hall Land:
so that it seems the Earl has not all the Demesnes.

I have not found any thing concerning Sutton distinct from Granby, of which it
is a member.

The first John Lord Deyncourt gave to William de Bella aqua in Frank-marriage
with his daughter 4l. Land, viz. two in Cressewelle, Reg. de Wellebek* p. 301.
and two in Sotton, which is of the Sok of Granebi, and the service of half a
Knights Fee in Hokertun, with all the Common of Elmeton.

Roger de Alneto gave to God and the Church of St. Peter at Thurgarton the
Tithe of his Mill here at Granby, Reg. Thurg. 75.
for his own Soul and his wife Alice's, etc.

The Abbey of St. Mary's at York, Ib. 139.
in the year 1352. agreed to take of the Priory of Thurgarton, ten Marks yearly
for their Portions of Tithes in Granby, Hickling, and Cotum, being two parts of
the Tithe Corn of the Demesne, which was heretofore Walter Deincourts in this
place, and in Hikling, and in Cotum two parts of the Tithes of the Demesne
Lands of the Lord of the Town.

John de Ayencourt, 36 H. 3. had Free Warren, Market and Fair here, Chapter 36 H.
3. m. 12.
which last remains still on All Souls day, 2 Nov.

Reg. Tourg. p. 140. b.
Edmund Lord Deincourt, son of this John, granted to the Priory of Thurgarton,
that at the Election of a new Prior, they should only send their Letter by two
of their Canons to him for his approbation, before he be confirmed by the
Archbishop, if he be resident in any of his Manors of Blankeney, and
Braunceton in Linc. of Graneby in Not. or Elmeton, and Holmesfeild in Derb.
but if he or his heirs be absen^ from all these places; then to the Lady at
Graneby; or in her absence to the chief Servant or Bailey; or in want of such,
to the Vicar or Chaplain of Graneby, and so if it should happen that the Barony
should descend to daughters, etc.

There were five Mess. and five Bovats of Land in Granby and Sutton, Fin. a dit
St. Mich. in 15 dies, 18 ^. 3.
settled by Fine, 18 E. 3. on William, son of Richard de la Launde for life;
remainder to William his son, and Isabell his wife, and the heirs of their
bodies; remainder to Thomas, brother of William, son of William, and the heirs
of his body; remainder to the right heirs of the said William, son of Richard
de la Launde.

The Rectory was appropriated to the Priory of Thurgarton, B.
and granted 18 Eliz. to Roger Manners, Esquire, and his heirs, and is now the
inheritance of the said Earl of Rutland.

Walter Gray, Archbishop of York, made the Vicarage here, Reg. Thurg. p. 144.
only to consist of the Altarage, unless it should seem necessary to augment
it, (which now it certainly does.) It was t^n Marks when the Prior of
Thurgarton was Patron. Mss.
And is now 6l. 3s. 6d. ob. in the Kings Books, and not more in the common
reputed real value, too little to sustain a married Priest.

Elton. Doomsd. Ayleton.
IN Ayleton, before the Normans began th^e change, Morcar was Taxed for his
Manor to the Dane-geld at seven Bovats. The Land was four Carucats. There
afterward Raph, the Man (or Tenant) of Roger de Busli, whose Fee it was, had
four Car. three Sochm. eleven Vill. having six Oar. There was a Church and
twelve Acres of Meadow. In King Williams time it kept the same value it had in
King Edward the Confessors, viz. 4l.

In the year of our Lord 1088. 2 Willielmi Ruf. Roger de Busli, and Muriel his
wife, amongst other things, gave all Elleton, and whatsoever belonged to it, to
God and the Church of St. Mary at Blyth, and the Monks there serving God: to
which Monastery it belonged till the dissolution; after which it was granted
to..... York, B.
who sold it to Sir John Lion, Citizen and Alderman of London, who dyed the
seventh of September. 6 Eliz. Richard Lion, 2 Lib seed. for. 2^3.
son of Henry Lion, brother of the said Alderman, being then his heir, and aged
thirty two years. In King James his time George Lion, B.
Esquire, sold it to... More, and Alexander his eldest son deceased, whose
widow was married to Peregrine Mackwor^^, left it to Gabriel More, Esquire, his
son, the present inheritor, who is Nephew to Henry More, D. D. fellow of
Christ's College in Cambridge, who was Nephew to Gabriel More, D. D. heretofore
Fellow of the same House, and after Prebendary of Westminster.

I do not find exactly how the Sochmen (which we now call Freeholders) or the
Villains (now Husbandmen) those that held Lands in bondage, and were with their
whole offspring totally at their Lords dispose, were increased in the time of
two hundred years, viz. from the time that the Survey of this Manor was made
by King William, with the rest, till one I find made in the year 1283. which
shows that the Rents in money were not much increased, Reg. de (...) p. 33.
amounting at that time in all but to 4l. 13s. 11d. ob. and were paid by
several small parcells, customarily at ten or eleven Feasts, or Seasons in the
year unequally, viz. St. Mich. St. Martin, Ember in Advent, Purification, Ember
after Ashwednesday, [quatuor temporum Cinerum], Annunciation, Easter,
Pentecost, Trinity, St. Botulf, and Nativity of Mary. But the Monastery had
other ways to make the utmost profits this Lordship was any way able to yield
then, as well as the present owners do by the extremest rack Rents now paid,
which I shall set down, that some comparison may be made of times, this being
near upon four hundred years from the former account, as that was two hundred
from Doomsday; and this Lordship is as little altered in the use or husbandry
of it, as any that I know in the whole County, for there is but 22l. 13s. 4d.
of enclosure now belonging to it in all the Territory.

To proceed then with the middle Survey, the Priory had besides the money, Ib.
two Hens and a Cock at Michaelmas, and forty Hens and an half at Christmas,
and two Capons at Whitsunday, and fourteenscore and three Eggs at Easter,
besides an uncertain proportion of paunage of Hogs (or Swine feeding), and
likewise their Summage (or Rent Corn) which was forty quarters and two bushels
(which two bushels according to the continued phrase of this County, make half
a quarter, or four London bushels) which here are called four Strikes, (whereof
two make a bushel.) This Corn was yearly paid by eighteen several Tenants,
whereof eight paid three quarters apiece, and eight more half so much, viz.
each one quarter and two bushels, and the other two Tenants, each of them, two
quarters and one bushel. And each Bovat of Land ought yearly at Blyth the
carriage of six bushels of Corn.

Another part of the profits was made out of the Services of the Tenants, in
ordering the Demesne; and otherwise: as by an Inquisition taken in the Chapel
of Elleton, Reg. d^ Blid. ^^.
the Thursday after the Feast of All Saints, in the year of our Lord 1283. by
Robert de B^kyngham, then Steward to the Priory, concerning the Diets (or days
labor) of the Bondmen of Elleton appears, which day William de Pavely, and
Gilbert (praepositus) the Reeve being sworn, said upon their Oaths, That every
Bovat (or Oxgang, as we now call them) of Land of the Bondmen of Elleton ought
two days work in every Week, viz. in one Week Monday and Thursday, and in
another Monday and Saturday, and so of the rest; and he who h^ld two Bovats,
ought four days work or diets, viz. Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday:
and if any of those days between Michaelmas, and Lammas, happened to be a
Festival; it was quit, but from Lammas to Michaelmas another day was to be
given for it in that Week. And they further said, that every Bovat ought to
Plow halt an Acre through the year, and for that plowing it was freed that week
from one Diet, or days work. And (he, or those who held the Bovat) ought that
same half Acre of Land [ trahare, sarclare, metere, and cariare] to Harrow (or
Clott) Weed, Reap, and Carry, and for every of those to be freed from half a
days work. They said likewise, that every Bovat ought ( trahare) to Harrow one
day in the time of Wheat; and another in the time of Pease, or Barley; and
every Bovat was to make carriage thrice in the year to Blithe, every time half a
quarter of Corn. The carriage made in Winter was for three days; in Summer but
for two days work. And they said that he that held one Bovat (or Oxgang) of
Land was to find half a Cart in Winter, to carry Wood out of the Forest of
Shirewode, and he who held two Bovats a whole Ca^t, and then they should be
freed from one Diet, or days work. Likewise every Bovat ought to carry half a
Cart of Hay from Thorp, and as much from the Gore of Garnemer. Likewise they
ought to Mow the common Medows and St^ple (of the Priory;) likewise every Bovat
ought two Hens and a Cock at Christmas, and ten Eggs at Easter; likewise every
Freeholder ought to find at the Bedripe three times in August, if there should
be need, two workmen; and the Freemen themselves (these are evidently the
Sochmen in Doomsday Book), ought to keep all to their work in the Bedripe, well
and faithfully to the best of their skill and power. These we now call Boon
days in Harvest.

This servile tenure is now quite abolished, and has been long wearing off,
for the Lords as they had all the Services and Wealth of their Villains, if
they had any, so they were liable to main^ain them and their sequel, and
therefore the willinger to Manumit and make them free upon easy terms. John
Gaynesburgh Prior of Blyth, Reg. Bli. 52^
and the Covent of the same, 6 H. 6. were bound to William Porter of Elton
(whose Ancestors were here 1283.) in the sum of 400l. that they nor their
Successors should not seize, trouble, or disquiet the said William Porter, nor
his issue begotten, or to be begotten, by reason of any Service or Villenage.

Roger Archbishop of York (who lived in the time of Henry the second) granted
the Priory of Blide to impropriate, Ib. 103.
that is, to take to their own uses, the profits of their Churches of Weston
and Elton, when they should happen to be next vacant; but it seems it did not
succeed, for Walter, who was his Successor in the said Archbishopric, about
the beginning of the Reign of Henry the third, granted them a Pension of two
Marks per annum out of the Church at Elton; and likewise to have the Tithe of
all the Corn growing on their Demesne Lands in the said Town.

The Rectory was 8l. value, and the Prior of Blyth Patron. Mss. I. M.
It Is now 8l. 5s. 0. in the Kings Books, and Alexander More, Junior, Patron.

The Tithe is ordinarily valued at 70l. per annum; and there is belonging to
the Parsonage two Oxgangs 10l. per annum. The utmost Rent of the whole Town
besides is 288l. 15s. the Oxgangs or Bovats are now esteemed to be 55.. whereof
the Marquess of Dorchester has six: most of the rest are Mr. Mores, and Let
for 3l. 6s. 8d. an Oxgang, besides 8s. apiece rent Corn; and every three
Oxgangs pay a Load of Coals at Grantham yearly, worth 16s. and a Capon 12d. The
Manor or Hall Farm is nine Oxgangs, and the Rent about 36l. Five other Farms
of six Oxgangs apiece, are each of them 24l. yearly. There are three small
Farms besides, and nine Cottages, all Mr. Mores, and three Cottages William
Bartrams, which is all the present state of this Town: so that it seems there
is not much above half so many Farmers as in old time. Engrossing Farms was the
depopulation first complained on, as by the Statutes may be observed: but that
is nothing comparable to enclosing, and converting Arable to Pasture.

Orston.
IN Oschinton King Edward the Confessor had a Manor rated to the Geld for
three Plow Land. The Land was ten Carucats. Lib. Dooms.
There the King ( William) had three Car. and three Sochm, on one Car. of this
Land, and nineteen Vill. eleven Board. having fourteen Car. There was a Church
and two Priests having one Car. and one Bov. and one hundred and eighty Acres
of Meadow. This Manor in the time of King Edward was 30l. in number [ ad
numerum]; in King Williams but 20l. value, having Soc or Berews in Scarrington,
Stantune, Turvercu^i, Screvington, Coleston, and Aslacton.

It continued in the Crown till King Richard the first granted it to William de
Albeni Lord of Belvoyr, Test. de Nev.
to whom King John granted and confirmed it also, in the fourth year of his
Reign, Chart. Antiq. AA. 11.
together with Cs. in his Sokage of Wilverdston, and Stoke in the County of
Northampton.

William de Albini the third for the Soul of Agatha his wife, Mon. Angl. vol.
1. p. 330.
but chiefly for the Soul of Margery his former wife, gave to the Monks of
Belvoyr out of every Acre of his whole Demesne in all his territoryes, of
Belver, of Wulsthorp, of Botelesford, of Oskinton, and Stokes, one Sheaff of
whatever kind of Grain, as well Wheat as Rye, Barley and Oats, or Beans and
Pease, or any other Corn, to which gift were Witnesses, William de Albiney the
fourth, Odinell^n, Robert, and Nicholas his own sons.

William de Albini of Bevir, 2 H. 3. gave account of the Scutages of the Fees
of thirty three Knights, and of the Fees of three Knights, Memorand* Trin. 2 H.
3. to. 1. Leic. and Linc.
of the inheritance of his wife, and of two Knights Fees in Oskinton, of the
gift of King Richard.

King Henry the third, in the sixth year of his Reign, Com. Pasc. 6 H. 3. to.
1. in dorso.
commanded the Sheriff not to exact [ Album] the white Rent of William Daubigny
out of the Manor of Oskinton, because the King gave it him to hold by Knights
Service.

By an Inquisition taken, 26 H. 3. it appears that William de Albini held in
the Town of Oskinton in Demesne thirty two Bovats of Land, Es^. 26 H. 3. n. 23.
every one containing sixteen Acres of Arable Land, and two Acres of Meadow, and
every Oxgang or Bovat worth 12s. per annum. There he had a Windmill of 20s.
per annum: but the easements of the houses could not sustain the houses. There
were sixty eight Bovats held of him in Orskinton in free Socage, and twenty
Bovats in Thurverton in like manner. Here he had also view of Frank-pledge, and
Pleas, and other cases happening in Reliefs, and the like. Roger Bozon held of
him in Scherinton, Screventon, Coliston, Dalinton, Staunton, and in Orskinton
10^. Land for the Service of half a Knights Fee. William de Audeley held
likewise of him in Scherinton 100s. Land, for the fourth part of a Knights Fee.
Richard H^^et held of him 20s. Rent, for the fortieth part of a Knights Fee;
and William de Huntindon 20s. Rent in Orskinton, for the same proportion of the
fortieth part of the Service of a Knights Fee.

Isabell, the wife of Robert Lord Ros, was found his daughter and heir in 36 H.
3. having been sometimes in the Kings custody, Es^ 36 H. 3. ^. 57.
I suppose while s^e was under age, but she lived pretty long, for she was
alive Nov. 17. 27 E. 1. when that King confirmed to her, Pat. 27 ^. 1. m. 1.
by the name of Isabell de Ros Lady of Belver, the gift she had made to her son
Nicolas de Ros of this Manor of Orston, held of the King in Capite, which
Nicolas de Ros, in the Record of Nomina Villarum, Nom. Vill.
9 E. 2. was certified to be Lord of it: but it shortly after reverted to the
Lords of Belvoyr, and with them continued till our memory. Therefore seeing
that place overlooks, and gives nam^ and honor to a chief part of our Country,
viz. the Vale of Belvoyr, it cannot be very impertinent in this place to insert
the Descent, and give some short account of the Illustrious owners of that
place, notwithstanding what will be done by my excellent friend Mr. Dugdale, in
his great work of the Baronage of England; or in a particular one which was
almost ready for the Press at the death of the last and most Noble Frances
Countess of Rutland, May 19. 1671. but for want of such a Mother and Nurse, is
like enough to be abortive, and make no further appearance.

I shall begin therefore with the great Norman Robert de To^ne^o esteemed the
builder, Mon. Angl. vol. 1. p. 328.
who Founded a Priory near his Castle of Belvidere, and made it a Cell of St.
Albans. To the endowment of Tithes and Lands which he made to it, his son
Berengerius was a Witness; which Berengerius de Todeni, the Book of Doomsday
shows to have been Lord of diverse Manors in this County of Not. But it seems
his Father outlived him, because after having buried his wife Alice, he the
said Robert for her soul, by the con^ent of his sons William and Geoffrey, gave
a Carucat of Land in Sapertun to the Church of St. Mary at Belvoyr; and that
William was his son, and heir of his honor, who I think was called William de
Albini Brito, from his being born in England, notwithstanding in the Charter of
Confirmation made by Thomas Lord Ros, Ib. 329.
there seems to be two persons, however he was a great Baron in the time of
King Henry the first, Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p. 90. and p. 3^7.
and witness to many of his Charters, particularly in the year of our Lord
1133. 33 H. 1. as in several places of the Monastic^^ Angl. may be observed. He
seems to be the son of Matild de St. Liz, Ib. p. 877.
sister of Walter, son of Robert, son of Richard Earl of Clare, son of Gilbert,
p. 75.
but the time will scarcely bear it, therefore we may rather suppose she was
his wife, and Mother of William de Albini his son, whom I have sometimes seen
called also Bri^^, as his Father was; Lib. R^br.
yet it appears William de Albini Brito (if that be not this second William
too) had another wife called Cecilia, Mon. Angl. vol. 1. p. 247.
who together with himself, and his son and heir William, were benefactors to
Thorney Abbey; and to his gift were Witnesses, Roger and Robert his sons, and
his three Nephews, (...). son of his brother Galfr. ^wan, and Ga^fr. de
Ca^i^in; one of his Deeds is to Alexander Bishop of Linc. in the time of H. 1.

When the first William died, I find not, but I suppose both him and his son
William dead, 14 H. 2. for in the Pipe Ro^^s of that year. I find, Pip. 14 H. ^
though he be there named for paying the Scu^age for the Aid, for marrying Ma^d
the Kings daughter, for thirty three Knights Fees, and for four, more of new:
yet William Basset, the then Sheriff of Warewi^h and Legrecester-shires
accounted for 26l. 16s. 11d. of the issues of the honor of Belvier, and for
providing for the Children of William de Albineio thirty nine weeks, and one
month 15. and 21d. by the Kings Writ, it may indeed be otherwise, but I find no
more of him afterward.

William de Albeni the second was called sometimes Meschines, and had two
Wives, Mon. Angl. vol. 1. p. 3^8.
Adeliza his first, and Cecilia his second, by whom he had his son and heir
William de Albeni the third, who was abroad with King Richard the first, in his
Army in Norm^^dy, and therefore had a Quittance for his Scurage, Pip. 6 R. 1.
Bucks and Bedf.
6 R. 1. in the Counties of Bucks and Bedford.

It appears, 10 R. 1. and 1 Ioh. that he gave DC. Marks to have Agatha
Trusseb^t with her inheritance: she was his second wife: Pip. 10 R. 1. and 1
Ioh. Buck. and Bedf. Mo^. A^gl. vol. 2. p. 444.
but I do not find he had issue by her. By the consent of William de Albini the
fourth, his son and heir, he Founded an Hospital at the Bridge of Wass between
Off^ngton and Stanford, for the health of his own soul and hers the said
Agatha, and for Margarets his former wife; his sons William de Albini, and
Odinellus, Nicolas, and Robert de Albini were Witnesses.

William de Albini the fourth, for the health of the soul of the Noble Lord
William de Albini his Father, Ib.
and the soul of Margery de Vmfravile his Mother, and the souls of his own
wives Albreda [Biset] and Isabel, confirmed to this Church of St. Mary of
Newstead by Uffington Bridge, what his Father had given. Isabella, this last
Williams only daughter and heir, Mon. Angl. vol. 1. 328.
who was the wife of Robert de Ros, is said to be buried in this Newstead in
the year 1301.

The first Ancestor of this Robert, that I know of, was Peter de Ros, who
married Adelina the youngest, as William de Bussey did Hawisia the eldest, and
Nicholas de Trais^y, Albreda the second of the three sisters and heirs, of that
great and Potent B^ron Walter de Espec, who having an only son by his wife
Adelina, called also Walter Robertus de Belvedeir sive de Totencio. Adela^^.
2 Will. de Albini Brito, 33 H. 1.-Matild. de St. Liz. Willielmus de Albeni
Brito.-Adeliza-Cecil. Willielmus de Albeni.-Margeria de Umfravile.-Agatha
Trusbut, Pip. 10 R. 1. Willielmus de Albeni.-Albrea Biset-Isabella. Isabella de
Albini sola haeres-Robertus de Ros. Willielmus de Roos-Matilda fill. Joh. de
Vallibus and ex semisse haeres. Willielmus de Ros-Margeria una 4. cohaer.
Egidii de Badlesmere. 2 Tho. de Ros.-Beatrix fill. Rad. Com. Stafford.-Ric.
Burley Chr. mar. 2. Fin. 9 R. 2. m. 2 and 3. 2 Willielmus de Ros ob
1414.-Margareta fill. Dom. Johan. de Arundell. 2 Thom. de Ros.-Alionora fill.
Ric. de Bellocamp. Com. Warwic. ex Eliz. nepte and haered. Warini Dom. L'is^e.
Tho. de Ros-Philippa fill. Joh. Dom. Tiptoft sor. and cohaer. Com. Worcest.
Edmundus Dom. Ros ob. 1508. sine p^ol. legitim. Robertus Manners de Etal in
Com. Northumb. miles.-Elianora sor. and haer. Georgius Manners-Anna fill. Annae
Ducis^ae de Exeter and Tho. St. Ledger, militis. Thom. creatus Com.
Rutland-Dorothea fill. Willielmi Paston, mil. vel Elionora. Henricus Comes-Marg.
fill. Rad. Com. Westmorl: Edwardus Comes Eliza-Will. Cecil. Will. Cecil Dom. Ros.

Johannes Comes Rogetus Comes. Franciscus Comes Georg. Villers Dux.
Buckingham.-Katherina.
Georgius Comes.

Johan. Manners, mil.-Dorothea fill. and cohaer. Geo. Vernon de Haddon, mil.
Georgius Manners, mil.-Grace fill. Dom. Hen. Pierpont. Johannes Comes.-Frances
fill. Ed. Dom. Mountague, ob. May 19. 1671. Johannes Dom. Ros.-Anna fill. Hen.
March. Dorcest. repudiata.-Diana fill. Com. Alesbury, s. p. ob. 1672. Franc. ux.
Com. Exeter. Gracia Dom. Chaworth. Dorothea Dom. Ashley. Margareta Comitisia
Sarisb. Elizab. Domina Annesty. Anna ux. Scrope How, miles.



Ricardus, mil. Oliverus. Johan.
Edwardus.

Rich. Ma^ga^.
1 Johannes s. p.-Marioria fill. and haer. Phil. le Despenser.
Johannes s. p.-Maria. de Orreby ^or. Com. Northumbr. Thom.
1 Willielmus s. p.-Marg. fill. Rad. Dom. Nevil.
Johannes, Esc. 12 E. 3. n. 41.
Nicolas. Robertus pat. 25 E. 1. p. 1. m. 19.

Odinellus. Robertus. Nicolas.
Rogerus. Robertus. Cecil.
Radulphus de Albeni. Rog. Rob.
1 Berenger de Tode^i s. p. Rob. de To^neyo. Agnes-Hubert de Rya. Henricus de
Rya.
Galfr. Oliver. Ewan. Gaufr. de Cabivin.


Walterus de Espec- 3 Petrus de Ros.-Adelina. Robertus de Ros.-Sibylla de
Valoniis. Everardus de Ros.-Rosa fill. Will. de Trusbut. and tand. haer.
Robertus de Ros dictus Fursan.-Isabella fill. Regis Scotiae. Willielmus de
Ros-Lucia. Isabella de Albini sola haeres-Robertus de Ros.
Rob. de Ros de Wark.


Everardus de Ros.
2 Albreda ux. Nic. Trayly. 1 Hawisia ux. Will. Bussy.
de Espec slain in the flower of his youth by a fall from a swift running Horse
(which kind of creature the young man loved too well). Mon. Angl. vol. 1. p.
727.
He by the consent of King Henry the first, in the twenty second year of his
Reign, and of Adelina his own wife, and by the consent of his Nephews, the sons
of his sisters, of which William de Bussey, Jordan, and Roger de Bussy, sons of
his eldest sister Hawisia; Galfr. de Trayly, William, Nicholas, and Gilbert de
Trayly, sons of Albreda his second sister; and Everard de Roos, and Robert de
Roos, sons of Adelina his youngest sister, were Witnesses to his Charter of
Foundation, Founded the Priory of Kirkham in Yorkshire, to which he gave the
right and Patronage of seven Churches in that County, and Northumberland to be
appropriated, and eleven hundred Marks of Land and Rents in the same Counties;
and in the year of our Lord 1131. by the like consent, and to which Charter of
Foundation his said Nephews were likewise witnesses, he Founded the Abbey of
Rival in Yorkshire also, to which amongst other things of its very ample
indowments he gave all their Easements in his Manor and Forest of Helmestat,
to wit, materials and wood for their proper uses, etc. which I mention to
interpret the word Easements mentioned before in this Chapter, and to note that
in the time of Henry the first, a Subject might have a Forest, or something
then called so. In the year 1136. he Founded the Monastery of Warden, and took
a Monks habit at Ri^vau^r two years before his death, which was 1153.

It is not unlike but that he might be most kind, and settle the greatest share
upon his Sister Adelina, because such vast possessions descended from him to
the Lords Roos, and he gave her the Advowsons of his Monasteries. Her son
Robert de Ros married Sibylla de Val^niis, and by her had Everard de Ros, who
married Roesia, the daughter of William de Trusbut, son of Gaufr, Fitz-Pagan;
and after the death of her brothers Richard, Gaufr. and Robert de Trusbut,
coheir, together with her sisters Hillaria and Agatha before mentioned, not
only to her Fathers estate, but also to her Mothers, who was widow, and called
Albreda de Harcurt, daughter of Roysia, one of the daughters and coheirs of
Pagan Peverell, Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p. 30.
who was Standard Bearer to Robert C^rthose, the Conquerours eldest Son in the
holy Land. Her Sisters the said Hillaria and Agatha failing of issue, her
posterity the Lords Roos became also Barons of Trusbut; her son and heir was
Robert de Ros, called Fursan, who married Isabell, daughter of the King of
Scotland, and by her had two sons William and Robert.

This Rob. Fursan built the Castles of Helmesly and Wark, and gave to the
Templars the Preceptory of Ribstan in Yorkshire. To his son William he gave the
Castle of Hemmisly, with the Appurtenances and the Advowsons of the Monasteries
of Kirkham, Rivalle, and Wardon, and to his son Robert the Castle of Warke,
with the Appurtenances; and a Barony in Scotland, to be held of William his
brother and his heirs by Knights Service. Which William de Ros, son of Robert
Fursan, had by his wife Lucia, Robert de Ros, the forementioned husband of our
Isabella de Albini, who besides their son Nicholas, spoken of before, and
Robert and other children, had William de Ros their heir, who married Maud, the
daughter and coheir of John de Vaulx; and his son William de Ros married
Margery, one of the coheirs of Gyles Baddlesmeye, mentioned in Langar, and
begot on her William, Thomas, Margaret, and Maud. William de Ros married
Margaret, the daughter of Raph Lord Nevill Earl of Westmerland, but died in the
holy Land without heirs, and Thomas his brother succeeded him, who married
Beatrice, daughter of Raph Earl Stafford, and by her had John, William, Thomas,
Robert, Elizabeth, and Margaret. John de Roos had to wife Mary de Orrebe,
sister of the Earl of Northumberland, but dyed at Cyprus, going toward the
holy Land, without issue male, and William de Roos his brother succeeded, who
by his wife Margaret, the daughter of Sir John de Arundel, had John, William,
Thomas, Robert, Richard, Beatrice, Alice, Margaret, and Elizabeth. John de Roos
his son and heir married Margery, the daughter and heir of Philip Despenser,
but died in France on Easter Eve 1421. with his brother William, without issue,
and Thomas de Roos their brother inherited, and married Elianor, daughter of
Richard de Beaucamp Earl of Warwick, by whom he had Thomas Lord Ros, born Sept.
7. 1427. 6 H. 6. who married Philippa, the eldest daughter of the Lord Tiptoft,
and sister and coheir of the Earl of Worcester, of whom he begat Edmund,
Alianor, Isabell, Margaret, and Ione.

In this Thomas Lord Ros his time, Orig. 11 E. 4. rot. 31.
he being attaint, this Manor of Orston, amongst others, was granted by King
Edward the fourth, to John Earl of S^rowsbury, but Edmund his son being
restored, 1 H. 7. it came again to the Family. And Elianor, eldest sister of
this Edmund who died without issue 23 Oct. 1508. brought it together with her
great inheritance to the Family of Maunors of Northumberland, her husband being
Sir Robert Maunors by whom she had George, Edward, Elizabeth, and Cicely.

George married Anne, the daughter of Anne Duc^ess of Exeter (sister of K. Edw.
the fourth) by her husband Sir Thomas St. Leiger, by whom he had Thomas created
by King Henry the eighth, Earl of Rutland, and a numerous issue besides. Earl
Thomas had likewise many children.

His eldest son Henry Earl of Rutland by his wife Margaret, daughter of Raph
Earl of Westmerland, had Earl Edward, whose daughter and heir Elizabeth was
married to Sir William Cecill, and had issue William, who claimed to be Lord
Rosse, and King James determined, that he should be Lord Roos of Holdernes, Ex
Copia pen. Com. Rutland.
and have the ancient Seat of the Lord Ros in Parliament, but that the Title of
Lord Ros of Hamla^, Trusbut, and Belvoyr, should still remain to Francis then
Earl of Rutland, who was brother and heir of Earl Roger, son of Earl John,
brother of Earl Edward.

This Earl Francis was a very great man, and Father of Katherin Duchess of
Buckingham, to whom he gave Hemesly Castle, and the ancient Yorkshire Lands,
and likewise this Manor of Orston, which shortly after was sold, and thereby
became the possession of Robert Earl of Kingston, and now remains the
inheritance of the Right Honorable Henry Marquess of Dorchester his son and
heir.

Francis was followed in the Earldom of Rutland by his brother George, who
dying without issue, left it to the Right Honorable John, the present Earl,
who was son of Sir George Maunors, son of Sir John Maunors, second son of
Thomas the first Earl of this Family, which Sir John married Dorothy, the
daughter and coheir of Sir George Vernun of Haddon in the County of Darby,
from whom that Manor and diverse others are descended to this Earl, who,
together with his Countess Frances, the daughter of Edward Lord Mountague of
Boughton, has rebuilt this Castle, pulled down by Ordinance of Parliament in
the Rebellion, and made it a Monument of their Magnificence.

The posterity of Roger Bozon, before named, continued their possessions here,
till after that Family was broken into coheirs (as in Scre^eton may be noted),
and then it was sold, and likewise became the inheritance of the said Earl of
Kingston, and with his Family continues.

William Rufus gave this Church, with what belonged to it in the time of Edward
the Confessor, (...). A^g. 3. ^. 261.
to the Church of St. Mary of Lincoln, and Robert the Bishop, and all his
successors in perpetual possession And the Dean and Chapter of the Cathedral
Church of Lincoln still have, and of ancient time had, the whole Rectory of
Orston, which was confirmed to them (also) by William de Albini the first owner
of this Lordship of that name. E^ (...) exemplar.


(...), the Dean and the Chapter of the Church of Lincoln granted five Bovats
of Land in the Territory of Horskinton (temp. Ioh. vel H. 3^) to Robert, E^
A^t^g. (...). G. F^ower.
son of William de Derebi and his heirs, paying 10s. a year, as in those times
was usual. The Dean and Chapter, Q^o War. 3 E. 3.
3 E. 3. claimed emendation of the Assize of Bread and Ale broken, of their
Tenants in Orston, and Richard (or rather Nicholas) de Ros at the same time a
Court-Leer in his Manor of Orston.

Mr. John Kerchevall holds the Tithes, and five Bovats of Land in Lease of the
Church of Lincoln* as his Ancestors have done; he has two Bovats and ten
Oxgangs; and some enclosure Freehold. Six Oxgangs, and two Cottages were sold
by his Father ( John) or his Grandfather Hugh to Mr. Welby of Hather.

There are very many small Freeholders, William Malthy has six Oxgangs, John
Marshall five, John Cliff four John Challon four, William Clark three, formerly
Mr. Kerchevalls, Mr. Halford of Weston in Rutland, owner of part of Aslacton,
two. Henry Norman two. William Wright two, Robert Braunston three, formerly
Beans, etc.

The Vicarage was 12l. And is now 12l. 4s. 7d. in the Kings Books; and the Dean
and Chapter. of Lincoln Patrons, who have Augmented it since the Kings return;
it serves the Cures of Thor^ton and Scarington.

In Orston Church were Collected by Mr. St. La Kni^eton,

Gules, two Cher^^s Or.

Azure, six Flowers de Lis Or.

Gules, three Water bougets Arg. Lord Ros.

Upon a plain Stone.

Here lies the Body of John Kerchevall, for unto Heugh Kerchevall, ob. 9 Apr.
1597.

STaunton lies in Newark Hundred, but a good share of it is a Berew or Hamlet
of Orston, and pays all sorts of Duties with it in Bingham Hundred. It
belonged to the Priory of Haverholme in Lincolneshire, but since the
dissolution is become the inheritance of Staunton of Staunton, and therefore I
shall refer it to that place.

Thoroton. Thurverton and Torverton.
THis Town was ever an Hamlet or Berew of the Soc of Orston; the Book of
Doomsday shows that it was assessed or rated to the public payments of those
times as twelve Bovats. The Land being (before the Conquest esteemed) four
Carucats. When the Survey in the time of King William was taken, there was one
Sochm, six^een Villains, one Board having seven Plows, Carucats, or Plowlands;
there was also then a Friest.

It is most reasonable to conjecture that the posterity of that Sokman (or
Freeholder as we now call him) took their Surname from this place, howbeit the
first that I have any good authority to fix any time to certainly was, Ex
Autog. pen. meipsu^. R. T.
Roger de Thurverton, a considerable owner and resident here in the time of
King Henry the third, who had a son called William de Thurverton living till
toward the latter end of the Reign of King Edward the first, and another
called Roger.

William, together with his wife Matilda, 32 E. 1. did make a demise of certain
Lands in Newton to one Raph del Clay of Bingham for twelve years, Autog. pen.
meips.
which the said Matilda and Margaret her sister held by right of inheritance,
which I conclude with very good probability was from Walter de Boyvill their
Father, who was resident at, and owner of some Lands in Torlaston, Autog. pen.
Tho. Shipman, de Scarington, Genesis
and of the Family of Wari^us de Boyvill of Cotgrave, for I have only one other
Deed which is without date, but the Witnesses show it to be about the latter
end of Henry the third, concerning those demised Lands, by which Alesia, the
daughter of William Bellard of Herdeby, gave to Walter de Boyvill her Nephew
and his heirs; those and some other Lands in Newton, and some in Carcolston,
and a Croft there called Tu^ Croft, reserving to herself 40s. a year for her
life. Autog. pen. Gr. Brom de Carcolston, Genesis
The Croft in Carcolston was afterward called Boyvile-croft; and I have a
Close there which yet bears the name of Bellard or Bullard Leyes.

This William de Thurverton outlived Galfr. his son (as I suppose) whose son
Robert and Marjory his wife, Autog. pen. G. Flower.
passed away some few Acres in Orston by a Deed without date, though in the
time of Edw. 2.

This Robert had a brother called Hugh, who in his latter time became a
Clergyman, Autog. pen. Tho. Barret de Thoroton, Genesis
and was Parson of Kilvington, whose son John has on his Seal to his Deed
bearing date at Thurverton, 1360. which yet remains amongst my own Evi^ences, A
Fesse between three Hunters Horns, in imitation, I guess, of the Family of
Otringham in Yorkshire, with which there was some intercourse about those
times, Autog. pen. ^eips. R. T.
but whether any marriage or no, I cannot certainly say.

This Roberts son was Roger de Thurverton, who in the beginning of King Edward
the thirds time, had to wife one Lecia, Autog. pen. meips. R. T.
and was Father of several sons, Roger a Clergyman, and John, but William de
Thurverton was his son and heir, who married Agnes, one of the daughters and
coheirs of John Morin of Carcolston, who was son and heir of Robert Morin of
Kilvington, and of Joan his wife, eldest daughter, and at length coheir of
Oliver de Lovetot Lord of Carcolston; by whom inheriring some Lands in
Carcolston and Screveton, they, the said William and Agnes, made the latter a
dwelling for Richard de Thurverton their son, Ib.
and the 15 R. 2. passed to him their Lands at Kercolston, reserving to
themselves out of them, five Marks per annum, during their respective lives.

Agnes I find was living, 1 H. 6. (very old which gave further occasion for her
posterity to continue their residence at Screveton, and so to neglect and
diminish their patrimony here, which was done so effectually in a few
generations, that 13 H. 8. Robert Thoroton, then removed to Carcolston (where I
shall place the whole Descent) passed all his Lands and Tenements in the Town
and Fields of Thoroton to George Barret, A^tog. pe^. Tho. Ba^r^ de Thoroto^,
Ge^.
his Ancestors having parcelled away a considerable part before. His
Grandfather Robert Thoroton of Skreveton suffered a recovery of eight Acres
here, 4 H. 7. to one Thomas Orston. Mi^. 4 H. ^. ro^. 462.


John Barret of Horbling in the County of Lincoln, Autog. pe^* Harv. Staunton
i^ Stau^t^^, Ar.
about 36 H. 6. married to his second wife Margaret* one of the daughters of
Thomas Staunton of Staunton in this County of Not. Esquire; this John, we
suppose to be Grandfather of the before named George Barret, as we guess Thomas
might be his Father; but certain it is, that Richard Barret of Thoroton his
son, Ex A^t^g. om^ia.
married..... one of the three sisters and heirs of Richard Claxton, son of
Edmund Claxton of Balderton, by whom he increased his Patrimony here, and at
Oxton in this County, and had also his son and heir Richard Barret, who to his
first wife had Katherin, the daughter of Thomas Shipman of Scar^ington, to his
second..... the daughte^ of.... Brookesby of Kilbington; and to his third
Dorothy, daughter of... Bingham. By his first he had George Barret of Thoroton,
who first married Anne Bea^mont; and after her decease Anne, daughter of John
Savile of Oxton, by whom he had Richard, who by Frances, daughter of John
Owtram of Carc^lston his wife (Cousin German to my Grandfather Robert Thoroton)
had my kinsman Thomas Barret, the present owner, and other Children, Richard,
George, John, Frances, and Anne.

Johannes Barret de Horbling. Com. Linc.-Margareta fill. Tho. de Stutton ux.
secunda. Thom. Barret Georgius Barret de Thoroton, 13 H. 8.-.... fill.....
Pierpo^t. Rich. Barret de Thoroton, 38 H. 8. 4 Eliz.-.... fill. and una 3.
cohaer. Edm. Claxton. Rich. Barret de Thoroton, 23 Eliz.-Katherina fill. Tho.
Shipman-... fill... Brokesby-Dorothea fill....^ingham. Georgius Barret, 38.
Eliz.-Anna fill.... Beaumont-Anna fill. Joh. Savile. Richardus Barret de
Thoroton-Frances fill. Joh. Owtram, ob. 1672. Thom. Barret de Thoroton.
Richardus Georgius. Johannes.







My Cousin Barret has about twenty one Oxgangs, and I hold the Tithes and
Glebe, with the third part of the Tithes of Screveton, etc. by Lease under the
Dean and Chapter of Lincoln, as a portion or part of the Rectory of Orston,
which I had of Sir Edward Lake, Baronet, and he of the Marquess of Dorchester,
who held during the life of Nicholas Timperley of Norfolk, Esquire.

Here were some Lands given to the Priory of Haverholme, the Tenants whereof
pay some Rents, and Suit the Court Leet at Staunton, sometime belonging to that
Priory, to which, part of a Farm of four Oxgangs also belonged, and was bought
of William Staunton, Esquire, by one.... Sprigge; Ex A^tog. pen. ipsa^
Gracian^^ ^x... F^court.
it was lately the inheritance of Grace, the daughter and heir of William
Sudbury of Sutton upon Trent, first married to Gilbert Radford my
Schoolmaster; then to William Th^rold, who died 1658. and left her four sons
and a daughter: Richard Thorold the eldest married Anne, the youngest sister of
Thomas Barret; but the third husband of that Grace was John Meringe, son of
William, son of John Mering and Dorothy his wife, daughter and coheir of John
Smith of Sutton upon Trent, afterward married to Nath. Lodge. This Mr. Mering
had a son William by this Grace, on whom this Farm was settled; but she has
since his death married another husband, one.... Fancourt; in it now dwells
Henry Hall, the son of Mr. Henry Hall, who has lately sold his Farm of four or
five Oxgangs to.... Marriot; the rest of the ^reeholders are but very few, and
very small: yet some Land here was belonging to Belvoyr Priory, and some very
little to Sibthorp College.

This Church is Dedicated to St. Elena the Queen.

Scarington.
THis was also a Berew of Orston, and rated to the Dane-geld at two Car. The
Land three Car. Lib. Doo^s.
There the King ( William) had two Plows or Car. and twenty three Villains, and
four Bordars, having five Car. and an half.

The Chief Court of Orston has been anciently and is still divided, saving
that all appear at Orston on St. Thomas day, else there have ever been, and yet
are two distinct Courts kept, one now at Screveton for those in Scarington,
Carcolston, and Screveton, etc. the other at Orston, for Orston, Thoroton, and
that neighbou^hood; that of Screveton in the 19 E. 1. and I believe before that
time, Ex E^t. (...) pe^. (...), A^.
was kept at Scarington and since too* for I have an old Writ by me of 10 E. 3.
directed to the Bailiff of Robert de Whatton of Skerington.

It seems it was purchased of Roger Boson, named in Orston, E^. 33 E. 1. ^. 21.
by Robert Bardolf, and Lora his wife, which Robert, 33 E. 1. left Amicia his
daughter and heir then thirty years old, and the wife of Ingeram Belet* it was
then called the S^k of Scarrington, as I have seen it since called the Sok of
Screveton; at leng^h it returned again to the Lords of Orston, with whom it
continues: It was, together with that fourth part of a Knights Fee, mentioned
in Orston; which William de Audeley had here, Roger de Whattons in the 27 E. 1.
who was younger brother of Sir Richard de Whatton, Knight, which Roger was then
called de Skerington, (...). 27 E. 1. n. 1.
and had married Joan the relict of Robert Moryn, one of the three sisters and
coheirs of John, son of Oliver de Lovetot of Carcolston, named before in
Thoroton, by whom he had Lands, and a son called Richard de W^atton, who
married Agnes, daughter and one of the coheirs of Alice, (...). 3 E. 3. n. 44.
who had been the wife of John le Palmer of Nottingham, before spoken of in
Wiverton; by which Agnes the said Richard de Whatton had parcells of Land in
Bingham, Wiverton, and Titheby, formerly the possessions of Sir Richard de
Wiverton, Oct. St. Mart. 10 H. 5. Oct. St. Hill. 2 H. 6.
Knight. All which, together with a considerable part of his other inheritance,
were by Fines, 10 H. 5. and after, 2 H. 6. by Margaret, who had been the wife
of Sir William Bagot, Knight, and sister and heir of Robert Whatton, passed to
Margaret, who had been the wife of Sir Thomas de Rempston, Knight, and her
heirs, viz. the Manor of Skeryngton, with the Appurtenances, eighteen Mess.
one Toft, forty six Bova^s of Land, one hundred and forty Acres of Meadow, 13l.
4s. and 8d. ob. Rent: the Rent of a pair of Gloves, and three grains of Pepper
in Skerington, Bingham, Kercolston, Wiverton, Tytheby, Kneveton, Aslacton, and
Whatton. John de Knyveton, and Agnes his wife, held one part, and ^oyce de
Plumton another, for life; there is mention also of Maud and Margery, after
whose decease, all should come to the said John and Agnes, if they chanced to
over-live the said Joyce, Maud, and Margery, for their lives; the Reversion to
the Lady Bagot, who conveyed it to the Lady Rempston, before named, who it
seems had a son (besides Sir Thomas Rempston) called Robert Rempston, Esquire,
who died seized of these Lands about 16 E. 4. Thomas Cheyne, Esquire, Esc. 16
E. 4. n. 64.
then aged above twenty six, and Isabella Stapleton aged fifty years, being at
that time his Cousins and heirs.

I cannot learn what relation this John Knyveton, and Agnes his wife, had to
these Whattons; but I perceive, Mic. 2 H. 4. rot. 402.
2 H. 4. there was a recovery of these Lands wherein they were parties. The 10
H. 4. there was one, Hill. 10^. H. 4. rot. 291.
which was the Execu^ion of a Fine levied, Hill. 4 R. 2. between Robert
Skipwith, son of John de Whatton, and Alice his wife, Complainants; and Robert
Smyth of Bautre, Deforcient, of the Manor of Skerington, and the very same
Lands. And again, Mic. 11. H. 4. ro^. 446.
11 H. 4.

In the division of Rempstons Lands, between Stapleton and Cheyne, this Manor
it seems was of Stapletons part: for, 4 H. 8. Thomas Stapleton, and Elizabeth
his wife, Pasch. 4 H. 8. rot. 152.
suffered a recovery of it, and it was not long after in the Family of Eltoft
of Knottingley in Yorkshire, but continued not there: for Thomas Shypman, Mich.
8 and 9 Eliz. rot. 146.
9 Eliz. suffered a recovery of it, and called to warrant Edmund Eltofts,
Esquire.

Thomas Shipman was son of Richard, Ex Autog. pen. T^om-Shipman de Scarri^gton,
Genesis
and had by Isabell Hutchinson his wife three sons, Richard, Thomas, and
William. Richard ^by Elizabeth Bruntz his wife, had Elizabeth Shipman, who
carried this Manor to Gervase Armstrong her husband, a younger brother of the
house of Rempston, and the most excellent in Hawking, Hun^ing, Fishing, and
Fowling, that ever I knew. He married a second wife Fortune Pacy, and by her
had very many children, whereof George his eldest reproved a vile Parliament
Soldier for Swearing and Cursing, and was by him stabbed to death, and left two
daughters and heirs by his wife.... the daughter of... Aufeild; afterward
married to Captain William Warburton: one of them is now the wife of Richard
^anes; and the other of.... Parker, who inherit the Tithes and six Oxgangs of
Land, and two little Closes, and one called Haverh^lme or Hareham Close in
Aslacton by Scarrington. But by his first wife the said Elizabeth Shipman, the
sad Gervase had Thomas Armstrong, who married Mary Enderby, by whom he had
Gervase bred abroad beyond the Seas, and diverse other children, Willielmus
Shipman de Scarrington, 4 H. 8. defunct. 16 H. 8. Willielmus Shipman defunct.
31 H. 8.-Magareta. Richardus Shipman, 38 H. 8. Thom. Shipman de
Scarrington-Isabella fill....Hutchinson. Rich. Shipman-Elizab. fill. Bruntz.
Elizab. Shipman sola haer.-Gerv. Armstrong-Fortuna Pacy ux. 2. Tho.
Armstrong-Maria fill... Enderby. Gervasius.
Georgius Armstrong.-....fill. Awfeild.-Will. Warburton marit. 2....ux. Parker.
ux. Rich. Janes.


Will. Tho.-Maria Ellis.
Willielmus-Joana fill....Hall. Thom. Shipman-Philippa fill. and cohaer. Jo.
North de Lowdham. Elizab. fill...Kendall.-Will.-Sara fill....Parker Alderm. de
Not. ux. 2. Thom. Shipman.-Marg. fill... Trafford. Trafford Shipman.
Willielmus. Thom.
Will. Gerv. Johan. Anna, etc.



Edw. Margareta.


to whom this Manor does still belong.

Richard Shipman, Father of the first named Thomas, was son of William Shipman
of Scarrington; and had also a son named William, Father of Thomas Shipman, who
was a very prudent man, and raised a fair Estate: he married Philippa, one of
the daughters and coheirs of John North of Lowdham, by whom he had several
children. To.... his daughter married to Richard Marshall of Brandon in the
County of Lincoln, he gave a great deal: yet left his son and heir William
Shipman a considerable Estate here, and in Aslacton, with the Rectory of
Whatton, and Lands in other places, as Flintham, Torlaston, Carcolston, etc.
Some of the Lands lying in the Territories of Scarrington, and Aslacton (which
are much intermixed,) were heretofore the inheritance of a Family, who had
their name from this place, of which I have seen three or four Descents: Roger,
father of John, Autog. pen. T. S.
father of John, father of Roger de Skerington, who lived in the time of Edward
the third, and of a third John also, and some others. It seems to me that
Nicholas de Leek of Scarrington had this Land in the time of Henry the fourth;
and that afterward it was Binghams of Carcolston. There were some Lands
likewise purchased of the Cranmers of Aflacton.

This William Shipman to his first wife had Elizabeth, the daughter of...
Kendall of Smithesby, by whom he had two daughters; his second wife was Sara,
daughter of... Parker, Alderman of Not* by whom he had many children.

Thomas Shipman his eldest son, a good Poet, and one of the Captains of the
Trained Bands of this County, the present owner, married Margaret, the daughter
of.... Trafford, Esquire, who brought him a good inheritance at Bulcote, about
three miles distant; settled upon her by her Grandfather Simon Wood, whose
daughter and heir Margaret was her mother: she has born him several sons.

The Tithes of Scarrington, part of the Rectory of Orston, are held by Mr.
Thomas Porter of Blyth, to whose father old Mr. Hugh Kerchevall sold his
interest in them by Lease, as he did in two Oxgangs of Glebe belonging to them,
to William Oliver, who had also Freehold here, now sold to Thomas Castledine.
The present occupant of the Tithes is Thomas Ialland, who married my sister
Mary, and has a pretty Freehold here, and in Aslacton and Carcolston; his
Cousin Will. Ialland or Chalon has a Farm likewise: the rest of the
Freeholders are not considerable.

In Scarrington Church was Collected by Mr. St. Lo Kniveton,

Gules, a Bend Ermine betwixt six Bezaunts.

Arg. the first Quarter Ermine, A Cross Gules.

Carcolston.
IN Coleston of the Soc of Orston, Ancient Demesne the Land of King Edward the
Confessor, there was a portion rated to the Danegeld at four Bovats, and four
Acres. Lib. Dooms.
The Land was then esteemed to be one Carucat. There in King Williams time were
five Sochmen (or Freeholders) who had one Carucat and an half: four of these
five Sochmen, whereof I am for one my self, remain visible at this day; the
Land of the fifth has been long dispersed into several hands. That Carucat and
half in Doomsday by a Rental of Orston, renewed 16 H. 8. appears to be above
nine score Acres; Pen. Meips. R. T.
of which the heirs of Thomas Cheyney (named in Scarington) whose Land was
formerly Whattons, and descended from the Family of Cheyney (which had it by
inheritance from that of Rempston) to William Lord Vaux of Harrowdon, who 8
Eliz. sold it to William Alvey, held thirty nine Acres; Richard Whalley,
formerly the Leeks, and before them Kirktons, forty four Acres; Richard
Bingham, now Mr. Bromes, thirty six Acres, and Robert Thoroton, thirty two. the
chief Rents of them respectively, amounts to 2d. an Acre; the fifth share is
now amongst Dr. Brunsell, William Arnall, and Thomas Wilford, and some others.

But the principal Manor in Coles^on, was the Fee of Roger de Busli, which
Vlviet had before the Conquest, rated to the public payment of the Dane-geld,
at six Bovats and one Acre. The Land being then returned to be five Carucats.
There afterward Roger the Man or Tenent of Roger de Busli, had two Carucats in
Demelne, thirteen Sochm. three Vill. seven Bordars, having eight Plows or
Carucats; there was seventeen Acres of Meadow. This in the Confessors time was
valued at 30s. in the Conquerours at 40s.

Another Manor here was, which Tori Lord of Aslacton, and many other Towns in
this and other Counties, had, in which he was succeeded, after the Normans
came, by Walterus de Ayencurt, whose Fee it was, and whose Man or Tenent
Walchelin, Doomsd.
who held Aslacton also of him, held it: being rated to the Tax at two Bovats
and an half, and one Acre. The Land one Carucat. Here one Bordar plowed one
Bovat: and here was three Acres of Meadow; this was 10s. value in the
Confessors time: when the Conqueror took his Survey but 5s.

That Roger before named, who held that of Roger de Buslies Fee here, held
several very considerable Manors of him in this County besides this, viz. at
Flintham, Wisoe, Gresthorp, Normanton, Clifton below Newark, Tireswell,
Gringley, Walkringham, and Wirksop, as the Book of Doomsday manifests, in all
which he was succeeded in the time of King Henry the first, M^n. Angl. v^l. 2.
p. 50.
by William de Luvetot, a very great man; who by the consideration and consent
of Emme his wife, and their children (which Emme, I therefore conjecture, was
heir of that Roger) did, amongst the rest of the Churches of his Demesne, of
the honor of Blyth (the Seat of the said Roger de Busli) give this Church of
Coleston to the Priory of Radford by Wirksop, which he then Founded; and
besides his other endowments, gave to it the tenth penny of all his set Rents,
both in Normandy and England.

Ib. 51.
Richard de Luvetot, son of the said William the Founder, by the consent of his
own son and heir William, confirmed and enlarged his Fathers gifts, as here in
Colestun the Church and two Bovats of his Demesne, with one dwelling house. In
Wyshou also two Bovats of his Demesne, and the like, which Matilda de Lovetot,
daughter and heir of the latter William, and wife of Gerard de Furnivalle also
confirmed.

Yet the first William de Lovetot had another son besides Richard, called
Nigellus, whose Barony lay in Huntingtonshire, having only five Knights Fees of
the Honor of Blyth added to it, as by the Red Book in the Exchequer is
manifest; Lib. (...).
which five Knights Fees in this County lay all on this South side the River
Trent. And the said Richard and his posterity, who had also Sheffeild and
Halomshire in the County of York, inherited only those Lordships of the first
William Lord Lovetots, which lay on the North side that River in this County,
of which Wirksop was the chief; which accordingly descended through the Lords
Furnivalls, Nevill, and Talbots Earls of Shrowsbury, to the present Duke of
Norfolk, as in Wirksop more particularly will be declared.

Nigellus de Lovetot had his Seat at Wishou, as in the Notes concerning that
place may be observed; as also the confirmations both of himself and of his
sons, as particularly that of his son Richard, who by the consent of his
brethren, Roger, Nigellus, Robert, and William de Lovetot, his other sons,
confirmed the gifts of his, and their ancestors, to the said Priory of St.
Cuthbert at Radford by Wirksop; to which Robert de Lovetot, who it seems had
his residence here, Ex Regist. de (...), fol. 8. b. and 14. a.
so as to be called of Coleston, by the consent of Hugh his heir, gave the
Church of Coleston, and the whole Village or Town of Sloswi^.

His next successor here, (whom I suppose son of Hugh), was Robert de Lovetot,
Test. de N^^.
who held a Knights Fee in Carcolinston, of the honor of Tikhill, Autog. p^n.
meips. R. T.
whose son and heir was Oliver de Lovetot, who had a son called John, who died
about 26 E. 1. seized of this Manor or Capital Message, and Lands in
Flintham, Esc. 26 E. ^. n. 18.

Autog. pen. meips. R. T.


etc. leaving his three sisters his heirs. Joan first married to Robert Morin
of Kilvington; and then to Roger de Whatton, called in several Records, Roger
de Skerington from his interest, or residence there, at that time having that
Manor of Scarington; Isabell, the second sister, wife of Ranulf Morin; and
Alice the youngest, Extr. fin. cancella^iae 27 E. 1. n. 1.
then wife of William Morin.

The said Roger de Skerington, and Joan his wife, and the rest of the said
sisters and heirs of the said John de Lovetot, with their said husbands did
homage, and had Livery of their Lands, 27 E. 1. and divided them; Com. Pas^h,
28 E. 1. rot. 4. in dorso.
and 28 E. 1. paid Relief for a Knights Fee here, held of the honor of Thekill.

To Roger de Whatton King Edward the second committed the Manor of
Kesclingbury, Brev. Pasc. 19 E. 1. rot. 8.
which was Warinus de Insula's, and the Rent, which John de Insula had there,
being forfeited for Rebellion; but upon the said John's making Fine to the King,
he had order to deliver it back the same year, viz. 16 E. 2. so that I suppose
neither he nor his posterity was much the richer for it. His interest here,
which he had by the division of this Manor, went with Scarrington: in which
share happened to be some of the Lands of Deincourts Fee also, which descending
to Cheyney, (as in Scarrington may be observed) came, amongst others, to
William Vaux Lord Harowdon, before named, who, Ex Autog. pen. Rob. Alvey.
20 Ian. 8 Eliz. sold it, being three Closes, and twelve Oxgangs of Land, to
William Alvey for 161l. 13s. 4d. who settled it on Robert Alvey his younger
brother; whose son Robert Alvey sold two Meadow Closes (of which his said Father
had good share at the enclosure of this Lordship, whereof he is said to have
been a principal promoter) to Robert Earl of Kingston, which are now the
Marquess of Dorchesters. And his son, the third Robert Alvey, sold about half
the remaining part to Henry Sherwin of Not.: and not many years after, viz.
about 1669. the rest to Isaac Hodgekin of London Vintner.

Ranulf Morin, who married Isabella de Lovetot, the second of the coheirs, Ex
Autog. pen. meips.
had a son named John, and he one called Thomas Morin of Carcolston. Willielmus
de Luvetot fundator de Wirksop, temp. H. 1.-Emma. Nigellus de Luvetot, 7 H. 2.
and lib. r^br. 12 H. 2.-Margareta. Robertus de Coleston Hugo de Lovetot haer.
Roberti Robertus de Lovetot Dom. de Coleston. Oliverus de Lovetot de
Carcolston-Alicia. Joh. de Lovetot ob. 26 E. 1. s. p. Rob. Morin marit.
1.-Joana-Rog. de Whatton and de Skerington dict. Johannes Morin de Carcolston
Joana Morin. Agnes fill. and haer.
Rich. de Whatton.
Isabel. ux Ranulfi Morin. Alesia ux. Will. Morin.
Radulphus.


Willielmus. Nigellus. Rogerus. Rich. de Lovetot Nigellus ult. Baro. ut in
Wishou.-Rogerus de Thurverton. Will. de Thurverton-Matilda fill. and cohaer.
Walteri de Boyvill ut suppon. Galfridus de Thurverton Hugo Johannes 1360.
Robertus Rogerus de Thurverton.-Lecia. John. Morin-Will. de Thurverton.
Richardus de Thurverton-Christiana. Johannes de Thurverton-Joana-Simon de
Bredsale, marit. 2. Robertus de Thoroton de Screveton Johannnes Thoroton ob.
1513.-Alicia-Johannes Brocock, marit. 2. Robertus Thoroton de Carcolston, ob. 4
E. 6.-Margareta fill....Bingham ut suppon.-Joana.-Emota. Robertus Thoroton de
Carcolston, ob. 3 Mariae-Agnes relicta Roberti Kellum-Henr. Ward, marit. 3.
Robertus Thoroton obiit 1604.-Maria fill. Ric. Owtram. Robertus Thoroton ob.
1646.-Dorothea fill.... Olney. Robertus Thoroton aetat. 71. 1672. ob. Feb. 15.
1673.-Anna fill. Petri Chambers. Robertus Thoroton de Carcolston in Med. Doctor,
hujus libri Author, aetat. 49. 1672.-Anna fill. Gilberti Boun serve. ad legem.
Anna, aet. 23. 1673.-Philippus fill. Philippi fill. Will. Sherard, Baronis le
Trim. Philip Thorotonus Sherard natus in festo Sim. and Jud. 1674.
Johannes Turner de Swanwick in Com. Derb.-Elizabetha, aet. 18. 1672.
Richardus. Gervasius.
Rich. Joh. Thom. Tho. aet. 9. 1672.

Thom. aet. 57. 1672.
Walterus. Thom. Johannes.





Rogerus Apprenticius, 7 H. 5.
Nicolaus Capellanus.
Rogerus Capellanus. Johannes






Richardus de Luvetot-Cecilia. Will. de Lovetot-Matild. Matild. de Lovetot ^ola
haer. ut in Wirksop.-Gerard. de Furnivalle.



And William, who had to wife Ales, the youngest of those coheirs, had by her,
Robert Morin Lord of Kilvington; but further I find not of them: for John de
Gloucester, son of Roger, and Nephew of Henry the Clergyman (who had also a
share in the Manor of Sutton upon Trent) was possessed of the greatest part of
this Manor of Carcolston (by purchase I suppose) in the former part of the
Reign of King Edward the third, as by the Fine in Wishou, 11 E. 3. and 13 E. 3.
between Lovetot and Willughby; and by Evidences in my own and several of my
Neighbors hands appears: and with that Family of Gloucestre continued till
the time of King Henry the seventh. Henry de Gloucester being the last that I
have met with, who suffered a recovery of this Manor and Sutton upon Trent,
Pasch. 20 H. 7. rot. 114.
20 H. 7.

There is a broken window in the East end of the North I Will of this Church,
wherein was left, Agnetis, and Will. Mering, Militis; and the Arms which I
guessed to be Gloucesters: Sable, a Chevron between two Martlets, and a Cross
croslet Botony Fitchy, Arg. which makes me conclude that Sir William Meringe,
Knight, married Agnes, the heir female of this house: and the rather because
upon his Grandchild Sir William Merings marriage with Margaret, Autog. pen.
Pen. Whall^y, Ar.
the daughter of Thomas Cave of Stanford, 38 H. 8. this Manor, and Sutton,
amongst the rest, were to be settled; and the 4, and 5 Ph. and Mar. Sir William
Meringe by fine passed it to Edwar^ ^yfeild; and he by another Fine, 7 Eliz. to
Robert Bulby; which Robert, or Nicolas Bulby or both, conveyed it to Richard
Whalley of Screveton, Esquire, toward the latter part of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, who having near about that time, viz. 38 Eliz. bought of Sir Francis
Willoughby of Wollaton, and Dorothy his wife, for the sum of 220l. another
Manor then in Lease to Richard Owtram, and Dorothy his wife, and John their
son, for their respective lives, at the Rent of 4l. 13s. 7d. per annum, and
inheriting some other Lands here from his Ancestors; he prevailed with the rest
of the owners, though they were neither very few, nor very inconsiderable, to
enclose the Fields; after which, I do not find that either lie, or they, or any
of them, ever found any great improvement in their fortunes or conditions,
though the Rents were much increased, nor have their posterity much reason to
brag, most of them having resigned their shares to new purchasers: Mr.
Whalleyes being, together with Hawkesworth and Flintham Grange, made Collateral
security for the quiet enjoyment of Sibthorp, which he sold not well freed from
encumbrances it seems, became by that means at length the inheritance of the
Earl of Newcastle, who being driven out of the Kingdom in the time of the late
Rebellion, his son the Lord Maunsfeild, with others his Trustees, sold all the
said Lands and many others, toward payment of debts and raising portions,
whereby Peniston Whalley, Esquire, Grandson and heir of the said Richard,
became purchaser of the Manor, and those Lands on the East part of the
Lordship, which lie before and behind his house, as Francis Hacker did of those
lying in the West part toward Bingham, which latter parcel (belonging to
Willoughbys Manor) was, by the Kings favor upon his return (Col. Fr. Hacker
then proving Attaint) restored, and still remains the inheritance of his Grace
the now Duke of Newcastle, who during his life, enjoies Mr. Whalleys part also.

Richard Whalley, his Grandfather, before named, sold the Sites of both these
Manors. That of Willoughbyes which is called the Hall-Close, to Mr. Brom, it
lying near his house. The other which was Bulbyes, and lies over the way North
from the Church, is through many hands come to Thomas Wilford the present
owner. The said Mr. Whalley sold likewise several Messuages and some Lands
to.... Thurbarne or Fairbarne, he to... Lathom, he to Mr. Shipman of
Scarrington, whose Grandchild has sold them to Richard Porter of Bingham the
present owner.

William, ^
son of William of Coleston (called Lord or Loverd), held half a Knights Fee of
the honor of Tikhill, but immediately of the Lovetots of Wisoe. Roger de
Lovetoth (who was High Sheriff of these Counties, ^
39 H. 3. etc.) did release, by his Deed without date, to William de Colliston,
for the sum of 20s. the Suit of Court to Wisho from three weeks to three
weeks, which he ought for that be held of him in Colleston, reserving his
attendance there only twice a year, upon summons timely given to him and his
heirs, at the Court next after Michaelmas, and that after Easter, to which were
Witnesses Robert de Torlaston, John Barry of the same, Simon de Aslacton, Henry
de Houthe^p, Nicholas de Schiventon, Robert de Rempston, Robert de Lovetoth of
Colleston, Oliver his son, Roger de Fanecourt, William de Sceflet, etc.

William, son of William de Colleston married Alice, the daughter of Sir Robert
de Burstall, Reg. (...) p. 1^.
Knight, and had many children, Raph, Mr. John, Robert, and others.

In 16. R. 2. Aut^g*
I find that which was Robert Loreds, to be Edmund Willughbyes, which Family, I
suppose, obtained it about the time, (or shortly after) that Sir John de
Lovetot had sold his interest in Wishou, which was confirmed by Robert de
Lovetot his son, 31 E. 3. to Sir Richard de Willughby the elder, the great
advanter of that Family, with which this Manor continued till Mr. Whalley
bought it, as before is mentioned.

Sir John de Lovetot the elder, Father of John, before named, and brother of
the said Roger the Sheriff, by his Deed not dated, (on the Seal whereof within
the circumscription of his name, ^
is his Image on horseback, in a long Coat with his Sword drawn in his right
hand; and upon his Shield on his left arm a Lion Rampant, and likewise upon the
clothing of his horse), passed to William de Weston Rector of Kercolston, a
Message lying between the Parsonage and the common Moor, or Green, which the
said Parson, who was son of Sir Richard de Weston, Knight, settled upon Mr.
John, Aut^g. (...). Will. Arnall.
the son of William Lord, before named, and 30 E. 1. ten Acres more on the said
Mr. John, and Alice his wife. John, son of Mr. John, had a son called Robert,
who married Agnes, the daughter of John de Scarrington, and after her one named
Margaret; after whose decease and his own, these Lands were estated on John
Lord of Eyleston, and Alice his wife, who had a daughter and heir called
Margaret, married to Hugh Wymbish, who 25 H. 6. gave this Mess. and all his
Lands in this Town of the Sok of Orston, to John Arnall, and Elizabeth his
wife, and the heirs of John, whose heir male William Arnall still enjoyes it.

Willielmus Arnall, 2 H. 5. Johannes Arnall, 14 H. 6.-Elizabetha. Willielmus
Arnall Johannes Arnall Willielmus Arnall Richardus Arnall Willielmus Arnall
Willielmus Arnall Willielmus Arnall-Alicia fill. Tho. Kirk. Will. Arnall ^t.
1672.-Maria fill... Thompson. Anna ^^. 16^2. Maria
Ric.- Joh.- Thom. Greg.









Who succeeded Walkelin, before spoken of in that Manor, which was of the Fee
of Walter de Ayencur^, immediately, I cannot say. Jordan de Coleston held it by
the Service of half a Knights Fee, ^
and his son Gilbert after him, who had a daughter named A^ice, ^
and certain sons, one named Roger, but no mention is further made of his
posterity that I can find; but of the heirs of Gilbert de Carcolston in
general. Oliver de Lovetots wife was Alice, A^tog. pen. (...).
and most of the Lands of that Fee, were amongst his, as by that share which
Roger de Whatton had* and at length came to the Lord Vaux, may in some other
place be noted; however it is evident, that several persons of note had
interest here very anciently. Robert de Somerville Lord of Oxton, Reg. T^u^g.
p. 77.
whose two daughters and heirs were married to Walter de Strelley, and Hugo de
Capella (as in that Town will be shown) confirmed to Robert, son of Randolf de
Colston, the Land which his said Father Randolf had, viz. Ketellescroft (the
greatest piece of old enclosure in the whole Lordship, heretofore banked on the
sides with broad Walks, and lying near the Capital Mess^age or Manor house, to
which it does still belong,) and an Oxgang of Land, which was Tokes, for which
the said Robert de Somerville was to have the yearly Rent of six shillings, and
four Capons of the said Robert, son of Randolf, whose Stepmother Hawisia was
to hold Ketelcroft for her life, and to pay her Son-in-law 2s. and two Capons
yearly. Philip de Paunton, Knight, (...). p. 76.
gave to Thurgarton, to sustain the Pitance of the Canons there 15s. and six
Capons yearly Rent of William son of Reginald de Kercolston, and 3s. and two
Capons of William, son of L^cia of the same, with their Homages, Services,
Wards, and Reliefs, etc. Some of the Deme^ne, and some of the Tenements
likewise which belonged to this Manor, were of the Soc of Orston, and lay in
Screveton Au^og. pen. meips. R. T.
, as partly appears by a Fine levied in the Court of Roger de Boun (or Bozon)
at Screveton (being that which belongs to Orston) wherein diverse Fines have
been levied by the Kings Writ, as this was, 41 H. 3. And the High Sheriff
before spoken of, Roger de Lovetot, and four other Knights, viz. Adam de
Novomercato, Henry de Bec, Roger de Alneto, and Raph de Charnels, came
accordingly to see right fully held by the said Writ, between Roger de
Fanecourt of Coleston, and Robert, son of Thomas, and Thomas, son of the said
Robert of Screveton, concerning a Toft, and two Bovats of Land, excepting one
Acre, in Screveto^ which after their disavowing they acknowledged to yold of
the said Roger, and then agreed to increase the old Rent of 3s. 4d. per annum,
to 4s. which is the only Chief Rent now left to this Manor, and is paid by
Richard Howytt, who is also to appear at Orston Court on St. Thomas day only,
by the said Fine. Reg. Thu^g. p. 76.
Sir Gerard de Fanecourt, Knight, who held in many other places Lands of
Deyncourts Fee, and was a great Benefactor to Thurgarton Priory, to which he
gave the Rents, Homages, Services, Wards and Reliefs of diverse of the Tenants
of this Manor both in Screveton and this Town, exchanged it with Oliver de
Lovetot for his Lands in Hickling, which he also gave to the same place, as in
that Town is manifested.

Cecilia, married to Walter Cuily, Pl. de Ba^^. Pasc. 6 E. 1. to. 11.
Laderina the wife of William Tesserand, Elizabeth, and Amicia the four
daughters and heirs of Hugo de Capella in 6 E. 1. recovered their seism of five
Tofts, six Bovats 6s. 4d. Rent, and two Capons in Screveton, Kercolston,
Herdeby, Hertewell, and Everton, and William de Stokes, and Brian de Herdeby
were amerced; and against Oliver de Lovetot 3s. and two Capons Rent in the same
Towns.

Oliver de Lovetot settled the Capital Message, A^tog. pen. meips. R. T.
with Garden and Dove-coat, and all the Lands he had of the said Sir Gerard de
Fanecourt in this Town, and out of it also, viz. one Mess. one Cottage, and
four Bovats of Land, etc. in Screveton, with all their Appurtenances, on Joan
his daughter, and the heirs of her body lawfully begotten, in which Deed he
mentions a Custom of making a Feast every third Christmas, which it seems the
three Manors did by turns, and had several Lands which contributed thereto by
their tenure.

This Joan, the eldest daughter of Oliver de Lovetot, was married to Robert
Morin of Kilvington, as before is said, and by him had a son called John Moryn,
and other children, Robert and Emme; and the 22 E. 1. was a widow: she
continued not long so, for to her second husband she had Roger de Whatton,
before spoken of, Autog. pen. meips.
who 19 E. 2. passed all the Lands he held in Kercolston, and Screveton, by the
Law (or Courtesy) of England, after the decease of Joan Morin, his quondam
wife, to her son John, son of Robert Morin of Kilvington, which she the said
Joan had of the gift and Feoffment of Oliver de Lovetot. Those Lands she had by
inheritance from her brother, he made a shift to secure to his own posterity.

Esc. 10 E. 2. n. 61.
The Jury, in 10 E. 2. found it not to the Kings loss if he granted license to
Raph, son of Henry de Kilvington, and to Alice his wife, to give or enfeoff
Richard, son of Roger de Whatton in two Mess. fifty eight Acres of Land,
sixteen of Meadow, and 28s. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Kercolston, held of
the honor of Tikhill.

John Morin lived here most of his time, which gave this place the name of
Moryn-hall; Autog. pen. meips^m.
^he 14 E. 3. infeoff'd Raph de Bredon a Clergyman, and Richard, son of Thomas
of Carcolston, in all his Lands here, and at Screveton, and Alverton; to which
Deed, as to diverse others of his, the Seal is Quarterly the first and fourth
party per pale, deeply indented, on the second and third, each a Flower de Lis.
His said feoffees, 23 E. 3. settled those Lands on him the said John Morin for
his life; afterward to his daughters and heirs Ioane and Agnes, and the heirs
of their bodies. Agnes was married to William, son of Roger de Thurverton, with
whom continuing at Thoroton, they both, 15 R. 2. passed their estate here to
Richard their son, then dwelling at Screveton, reserving five Marks per annum
Rent during their respective lives, as in Thoroton is already said.

This place became ruinous by the absence of the owners, who continued their
residence at Screveton for the most part. Richards son was John, who lived at
Thoroton, 9 H. 6. and 16 H. 6. and had interest in the Tithes there belonging
to the Church of Lincoln, but his son Robert Thoroton was most at Screton; for
he, together with Ioane, the then relict of Simon de Bredsale, whom I suppose
his mother, 3 E. 4. demised this Moryn-hall in Carcolston, to William Arnall
for eight years. So that neither this Robert, nor his son John, (though I find
them both sometimes said to be of Carcolston were constant here; but Robert,
the son of John Thoroton, 10 H. 8. conveyed this Morin-hall to Henry Bingham
and others, for a joyn^ure for Margaret his wife, and made it habitable by
laying Thatch upon the Slates, where any were left; in which Condition it
descended to me Robert Thoroton, who, in the year 1666. part of it being not to
be mended, pulled it down and built it new, not in the very same place but a
little North-west-ward, to join it to a Message in old time called Took place,
which in the time of Henry the third, was Sir Roger de Alneto's, and remained
to his son Roger de Launey, 23 E. 1. and lasted in that name till 12 H. 4. that
Roger Launey, and Maud his wife, passed it with another less one to William
Arnall, whose son and heir William passed it away to Robert Gourton; A^tog.
pen. ^eips.
and his ^on John, 13 H. 7. to Robert Wilkinson; his son Richard, 2 H. 8. to
Thomas Bowdon; Otwell Bawdin, 1 E. 6. to John Brandreth, whose son Christopher
gave it, 40 Eliz. to his son Thomas, and he to his brother Roger, who sold it
in King James his time to my Grandfather Robert Thoroton, and I have sold part
of the Lands, with some other of our old inheritance, to Samuel Brunsell, D. D.
Rector of Bingham, who has also bought a Mess. and certain Lands of William
Kirk, which in the time of Richard the second, were Robert Chaworths, and
lasted in that Family three or four Descents, where the said Doctor has built
a Brick-house, being very near Screton Church, of which he was also Rector.

At the South-west-end of the Town lying next Bingham is situate a Mess. which
in the time of Edward the first, was the dwelling place and inheritance of John
in le Willughes, Autog. pen. Gre. Bro^^.
and continued in that name two or three Descents more.

There were Covenants, 4 E. 3. made between the last John in the Willughes, who
had then to wife Anneys... and William his son and heir on the one part, and
Richard de Strouxton on the other, to whom this was conveyed, but not long
after was the Binghams. In the year 1392. 16 R. 2. Maud the relict of Thomas de
Bingham of Kercolston passed her interest in all the Lands which were of the
gift of Robert, son of John in the Willows (which Robert was Parson of Freton
in Norfolk) to Raph, son of Thomas de Bingham.

Tho. de Bingham 39 E. 3. 11 R. 2.-Matilda. Rad. Bingham de Carcolston 6 R. 2.
1 H. 6.-Elizabetha. Johannes Bingham 3 E. 4. ob. 1488. Thom* Bingham defunct.
19 E. 4.-Mageria-Joh. Bell mar. 2. Richardus Bingham 8 H. 7. 10 H. 8. Thom.
Bingham de Carcolston, 26 H. 8.-Agnes. Johannes Bingham de Glaston in Com.
Rutland, 2 Eliz.
Henricus.
Willielmus, 2 H. 7. Henricus, 10 H. 8.
Willielmus.

Johan. senior. Johan. junior.

This Raph had two brothers both named John, Autog. pen. G. B.
whereof one might possibly be the Father of Sir Richard B^ngham the Judge, who
was very much concerned in all the affairs of this Family in his time, 3 E. 4.
He passed these Lands to John, son and heir of Raph, in whose posterity they
lasted till they were purchased by William Henson alias Hall, in the beginning
of Queen Elizabeth's time; to which William, John Bingham of Glaston in the
County of Rutland, 2 Eliz. was bound in 300l. to perform certain Covenants.
Gregory Henson his son and heir lived to see the Lordship enclosed, and his own
only son William Henson buried at the age of twenty six years, May 4. 1604.
unmarried, but his daughter called Alice he married to Gervase Annesley of
Ruddington, who left only daughters by her, so that the said Gregory Henson
married her again to Thomas Brom of Caunton and intailed all these Lands on
Henson Brom, and Gregory Brom her sons (except a Close called Boresmore,
which he gave to the poor, and another called Sharp-close, which he gave to the
Church of Carcolston). Henson Brom died before his Parents a bachelor.
Gregory his brother married Mary the daughter of William Palmer of So^thwell,
Esquire, by whom he has left a son Gregory too, now almost of full age 1672.
to inherit the Estate, being with the forementioned Hall-close, and
Pilkinton's Farm, which also lay near the house, and was purchased by the said
Gregory Henson, a very pretty Seat.

Besides these there was at the enclosure of this Lordship William Tenman,
whose Lands since passed through several owners.... Wilford, and..... Hamerton,
till at length they were purchased by John Machin, and Mr. Edward Winter Vicar
of this Church, and divided between them, chiefly by the Lane called Tenman
Lane, which leads to the Fosse way from the Town. Mr. Winter's (whose father
Robert Winter was Vicar here also, and a forward man at the enclosure, having
married the widow of... Ward a Freeholder) remain to his son Edward; but John
Machin's is parcelled away: one Close by the Fosse way being sold by his son
Lancelot, to whom he gave it, to the said Mr. Porter of Bingham; and the next
to it by Edward his Grandchild, son of his son Robert, to Thomas Wilford, who
had to his first wife Ellen, the relict of James Johnson Vicar here, and by
that ma^ch was better enabled to purchase that Wards Land, which he did of...
Flint, who went into New England.

Mr. Johnson was between the two Mr. Winters, and the most famous Country
Schoolmaster of his time: he wrote a Book of Epigrams in Latin, Printed at
London by John Beale, 1615.

Thomas Wilford has also purchased the Site of the principal Manor of one
Henry Willm^t, where was a House which Mr. Whalley made of the materials of the
Parsonage house, and intended (as the people of that time reported) for an
house of Correction, which the said Thomas Wilford has pulled down, and sold
the frame of Wood to George or John Gunthorpe of Hickling, to set up there
after the burning his old one.

Henry Billidge had also a Farm which Thomas his Grandchild, son of William
his eldest son, sold to... Wileman, whose son is yet owner of it. This Thomas
Billidge was a servant in the Earl of Newcastles Family; as his brother William
was in Sir John Harpurs: which William was reputed stout man, and was a Captain
in the late Wars, in which he died; a little before which his said brother
Thomas went to Goa in the East Indies, on the account of Sir William Cortin,
where he stayed about seven years, and then came hither, and got a matter of a
thousand pounds or more for his Land, and returned into those parts, where he
became rich, and died in a few years leaving his friends and relations
Legacies, and the poor of this Town 100l. as it is said: but Mr. Blake, who
married his sister, and got most of his Estate, has not yet performed his Will
in that particular.

Richard Kirk a Romanist, had likewise at the enclosure which he resisted to
the utmost, a considerable share, which he was forced to convey to his brother
Thomas, and died in Prison. Thomas Kirk of Flintham, eldest son of that
Thomas, retains some; his youngest son William sold some to William Iacson of
East-Bridgeford, and the rest, with the house, to the said Doctor Brunsell.

The Rectory was appropriated to the Priory of Wirkesop in the year 1349. And
the Prior compounded with the Dean and Chapter of Lincoln, ^
for what concerned the Tithes here of Orston Sok, for 4l. per annum; which in
case of non-payment they were to distrain for at Gringley and Walkringham.

John Bellowe, and Robert Big^tt had license, Pa^^. 7 (...). 37 H. 8.
December. 17.37 H. 8. to alienate the Rectory and Advowson of the Vicarage of
Carcolston, late belonging to the Priory of Wirkesop, to Richard Wha^ley and
his heirs. The same persons had another grant, 22 Nov. 38 H. 8. together with
the Tithes of Corn and Hay within the Town and Fields o^ Screveton, (...) 38 H.
8.
then in the tenure of the said Richard W^^^ley, late belonging to the said
Priory of Wirk^op, which parcel of this Rectory in Screveton, amounts to one
third of two third parts of the whole Ty^hes there, and remains to Peniston
Whalley, Esquire.

The Tithes at Coleston are his Grace the Du^e of Newcastles: but being charged
with 20l. per annum to the King, and that 4l. due to the Church of Lincoln,
are for the most part of no great value besides.

The Vicarage was ten Marks when the Prior of Wirksop was Patron. Mss. I. M.
And is now 6l. 1s. 10d. value in the Kings Books, and the Duke of Newcastle
Patron.

In the Church were lately, in an upper Window,

Barry of six Arg. and Gules, a File of three Labels Azure.

Or on a Fesse Gules, three Waterbongets Arg. Bingham.

And Arg. five ^usells in Fesse Gules, New-march.

And Party per pale Arg. Gules, and Sab. a Lion Ramp. Arg.

And Arg. upon a Bend sable, between six Cross Cros^ets, Gules, three Besants,
Whatton.

And Sab. a Chevron between two Martlets, and Cross Cros^et botony f^^che Arg.
Gloucester, I suppose.

Written on the Wall,

In piam memoriam Sanctissimi viri Gregorii Henson, And upon another Wall,

Here lies the body of Gregory Henson, Qui nunc emeritae permensus tempora
vitae
Adscriptus Divum coelicolumque ^hero est. ob.....


Upon the top of a Buttress in Freestone is cut on the outside,

A Fesse between three Hunters Horns, quartering a Lion Rampant. And quarterly
party per pale indented, and a Flower de Lis: Thoroton, Lovet^t, and Morin.

And under that,

Dec. 12. 1646. Regi and Ecclesiae fidus Robertus Thoroton totius paterni
cognominis pervetusti jae^ superstitis parens and decus, ab antiquis hujus
villae dominis Lovetotis, scilicet, per Morinos, haereditarie genus and terram
ducens, juxta Robertum Thoroton patrem Anno 1604. Peste mortuu^, Mariam Owtram
matrem, and Dorotheam Oldney uxorem ejus, hic infra sepultu^ fuit, Anno aetatis
suae 77. Cujus octo liberi, viz. 1. Robertus qui ex Anna Chambers conjuge
providissima hic etiam Anno 1660. inhumata genuit Robertum Thoroton, M. D.
virum Annae Boun, Mariam triennem filiolam, Anno 1655. submersam and hic
conditam, huc usque lugentis, Elizabetham, Richardum, Gervasium, Mariam, and
Thomam. 2. Alicia. 3. Richardus. 4. Johannes, pater Johannis, Roberti, Rogeri,
Franciscae, Henrici, Mariae, Thomae, Willielmi, Dorotheae, and Annae. 5. Maria.
6. Thomas. 7. Dorothea. Et 8. Francesca adhuc supersunt, 1664.

Screveton. And Kirketon.
BEsides that which was of the Soc of Orston, which in the Confessors time was
rated to the Dane-geld at one Carucat; The Land then esteemed three Carucats,
where in the Conquerours time were three Sochm. two Vill. and one Board. having
one Carucat and an half, and eight Acres of Meadow.

There was a Manor in Screvinton, of the Fee of Odo Bishop of Bayon, which
Toti had, before the Normans came, and paid to the Geld for it as twelve
Bovats. The Land was three Car. then, ^
but afterward Hugh, the Nephew of Herbert, the Man or Tenent of the Bishop,
had there five Sochm. and four Villains, and one Bordar, having three Carucats
or Plows, and six Oxen, and twelve Acres of Meadow. This was 25s. value in the
time of King Edward the Confessor; and when the Book of Doomsday was made, 32s.

There was in Escrevintun, of the Fee of Roger de Busle also a Manor, which
before the Conquest was Odincars, then also Lord of Flintham and Bridgeford,
which was rated to the payment of the public Tax at five Bovats. The Land of
it was one Car. There, when the great Survey was made by the Conqueror, one
Sochm. with one Bordar, had one Car. This in the Confessors time was 5s. in
the Conquerours 8s. value.

The Tithes of these three Fees have ever been and are yet distinct. Those of
Orston Soc are the third part, and belong to the Church of Lincoln, as part of
the Rectory of Orston, and are now held by me of the Dean and Chapter. The
third part, of the two remaining parts, belonged to the Priory of Wirksop, with
Coleston, which was Roger de Buslies Fee, and are now the inheritance of
Peniston Whalley, Esquire; the rest remain to the Church. And the custom of
dividing the Tithes is at eighteen; the Rector of Screveton has eight; I, for
the Church of Lincoln have six; and Mr. Whalley four.

There was a final agreement made at Not. in the Kings Court, Regist. de
Wellebek 205.
the third day after the feast of St. Gregory, next after Henry, King of
England, son of Maud the Empress, sent his daughter into Sicily, before William
Fitz Raph, and William Basset, and Michael Belet the Kings Justices, between
Hugh, son of Alan, and between Ingelram, son of Geoffrey de Screveton,
concerning the Advows. of the Church of Screveton, whereof Plea was moved
between them, viz. that the said Hugh remised to the said Engelram, the moiety
of the Advowson of the said Church, to be held to him and his heirs, in Fee of
the said Hugh and his heirs, with the rest of the Fee which he held of him the
said Hugh.

In King John's time William de St. Paulo, claimed against Yngeram de Screveton
the Advowson of the Church of Kirketon; Mi^^. Job. incerti temp. 20.9. in dorso.
and upon that the Abbat of Croxton came and pleaded, that Yngeram had by his
Charter given him the moiety, and brought the Chirograph made in the Kings
Court, between Hugh, son of Alan (which Hugh was) Father of the wife of William
St. Paul, in whose name the said William made his demand or claim, which was
that before recited.

There was a Fine, 12 Ioh. levied at Dorchester between William de Hawkesworth,
(...) 12 Job. ap^d Do^ce^te^. Reg. ^elleb. 205.
Compl. and Richard Abbat of Wellebek, and Ingelram de Screveton, Deforcients,
of the Advowson of the Church of Screveton, whereby one moiety was settled on
William, and his heirs begotten on Cecilia his wife, and the other moiety on
the Abbat and his Successors, which the said Ingeram gave him, having
recovered it in the Court of King Henry the second, against Hugh, son of Alan
(which Hugh was) Grandfather of the said Cecilia, which Writing he produced,
and it was also the same before rehearsed.

William de St. Paul confirmed to his Clark Mr. Stephen de Radeclive 20s. per
annum, Ib.
to be received of Gilbert the Clark. who possessed the Church of Kirketon, as
well by his gift, as also of the gift of the Abbat of Wellebek, as a Pension
out of that Church, during his life, for the good of Peace, which was confirmed
to the said S. (there written Simon), in the vacancy of the Sea of York, by W.
Archdeacon of Not. and the Dean of York.

There was a Fine levied, 26 H. 3. between John de Pabham, In Oct. Trin. 26 H.
3. A die St. Job. Bap. i^ 15 d^^s, 10 E. 1.
Quer. and the Abbat of Wellebek, Deforcient, concerning the Advowson of this
Church of Kirketon, whereby it was agreed they should present by turns; and so
it was by another, 10 E. 1. between Thomas Abbat of Wellebek, and Robert
Bardolf, named in Scarrington; Esc. 33 E. 1. n. 21.
which Robert, it seems, bought a Bovat of Land, and 20s. Rent in Kirketon, and
the Advowson of William Hottot.

Gaufr. de Stokes held sixteen Bovats of Land here of Robert Hotot, Esc. 51 H.
3. n. 31. Esc. 21 E. 1. r. 43.
and 51 H. 3. was dead; and his heir John, son of his Cousin Paul, did the like
of Joan Hottot, and was also dead 21 E. 1.

Jordan de Sutton held here of the heirs of Hugh de Cap^lla, Esc. 16 E. 1. ^. 8.
viz. in Kirketon and Screveton 60s. and 6d. yearly Rent. John his son and heir
was found, 16 E. 1. to be seventeen years of age.

But the main of the Lordship was held by Roger Bozun, in the time of Henry the
third, sometimes written Boum, mentioned in Orston; he was in the time of
Edward the first, succeeded by John Bozon, A^tog. pe^. (...) Whalley, Ar.
who was son of Raph, to whom William le Hotoft, 33 E. 1. passed some of his
interest here; he was a Knight; and the Lady Gunnora Bozon his widow, Rot. C^^.
kept a Court here, 9 E. 3.

A^tog. Ib.
Sir Hugh Hose, Knight, 35 E. 3. settled the Manor of Screton, and Lands which
were Henry Bozoms, on Margaret, who had been wife of Sir John Bozom, Knight;
remainder to Sir John, son of John Bozom; remainder to Hugh Bozom, who proved a
Clergyman, and Parson of Fullbeck in Lincolneshire.

The next successor of this last Sir John Bozom that I meet with, was Thomas
Bosom of Syreston, who was concerned in this Manor, and Orston, and I think
dyed about 3 H. 6. and him, I suppose, father of Henry Boson, Esc. 3 H. 6. n.
11.
named in Lanum, and he of Thomas Bosom, who married Anne, one of the four
sisters and coheirs of Sir Gerard Vlveflett, great Grandchild and heir of
Lora (or Loretta) daughter and heir of Gerard de Furnivalle, son of Gerard de
Furnival, who married Christian Leydet, and was son of Matilda de Lovetot: by
her Thomas Bosom had Henry Bozom of Syreston, father of Sir Richard Bozom of
Barrowby; which Henry and Richard, 5 H. 8. had the Wardship of Robert, son and
heir of John Thoroton then dead, A^tog. pen. meips. R.T.
who in his life time held some Lands in Screveton, which came to him by
descent from Oliver de Lovetot, as in Coleston may be seen; but his son before
named, who came to age that same year, after the death of Alice his mother, who
married Rogerus Bozon Johannes Boum, miles-Gunnora, relict. 9 E. 3. Willielmus
Bozon, mil. 10 E. 2.-Agnes. Johannes Bozom, miles-Margareta, relict. 35 E. 3.
Johannes Bozom, 35 E. 3. Tho. Bozom, Ar. 9 H. 4. and 9 H. 5. Henricus Bosom vel
Boson, 25 H. 6.-Alicia. Tho. Bozon, Ar. 1 H. 7.-Anna soror and una cohaer.
Gerardi Uluflett, mil. Henricus Bozom, Ar.-Katherina fill. Rob. Markham, mil.
Ric. Bozom de Barrowby, miles, ob. 16 H. 8.-Dorothea fill. and haer. Jac. Devyn
de Sireston-Will. Vernon, marit. 2. Amy vel Agnes ux. Hen. Babinton. 2. Fran.
More. Alicia ux. Geo. Poole. Eliz. ux. Rich. Paynell. Maria-Thom. Worsley. Ric.
Clopston, miles-Margareta. Henricus Savile de Lupsett.-Jana fill. and haer.





Hugo Rector Eccl. de Fulbeck, 9 H. 4. 8 R. 2.



one I. Brocock, before that Kings Reign was past, sold a Mess. and Cottage,
and four Bov. of Land to Richard Arnall of Stoke, which since that time were
parcelled, and some part is purchased by Mr. Whalley, and part by John Parker
the Wheelwright, whose new house is the Cottage.

Sir Richard Bozom died before or about the 16 H. 8. and left five daughters
and heirs, Ex lib. (...). pe^. Car. La^o^k.
by his wife Dorothy, the daughter and heir of James Dev^n of Sireston, who to
her second husband married William Vernon, and left him a daughter and heir,
who was married to Henry Savile of Lupsett in Yorkshire, the Kings Receiver
general for that County, Progenitor of the present Lord Halifax.

One of the coheirs of Sir Richard Bozom was Elizabeth, the wife of Richard
Paynell of Boothby in Lincolneshire; another was Margaret, wife of Sir Richard
Clapton, who had a daughter married to Sir William Cordell, Knight, Master of
the Rolls. Another was Alice, wife of George Poole; another Mary, wife of John
Worsley; and another daughter and coheir was Amy or Agnes, first married to
Henry Babington, afterward to Francis More; which Francis More, or his son of
that name, A^tog. pen. Pen. Whalley, Ar.
sold this Manor of Richard Whalley, Esquire, Grandfather o^ Peniston Whalley,
the present owner, which thereby made him the entire possessor (except two or
three small Freeholders) of the whole Township, a good part whereof he
enclosed: as his Grandchild and heir, the said Peniston, did another part by
the Fosse way side; since when, viz. 1669. he sold most of it to my Brother
Thomas Thoroton, and my Brother-in-law John Story of Kneveton.

The other Manor called Kirkton Hall, is and has been the Seat of the
Whalleys, and their Progenitors the Leeks, and the Kirktons, who had their name
from the place situate close by the Church; and the house it self is in the
very division of the Lordships of Coleston and Screveton; in each of which,
part of the Demesnes lay. In some Evidences it is called Kirketon juxta
Kercolston, but in more juxta Screveton.

Roger de Kirketon, to whom Raph, Autog. Ib.
son of Yngeram de Screveton, passed some parcells here, is the first that I
have met with. Roger had a son called Hugh; but the next successor that I can
discover was John, son of Robert de Kirketon, who lived in the latter end of
the Reign of Henry the third; and in the time of Edward the first. In Edward
the seconds time Robert, son of John Rogerus de Kirketon Robertus de Kirketon
Johannes de Kirketon, 56 H. 3. 14 E. 1. Robertus de Kirketon, 4 E. 2. 19 E.
2.-Beatrix. Thom. de Kirketon, Ar. 17 E. 3.-Margareta....... fill. and
haer.-Johannes de Stockton, 45 E. 3. Avicia-Willielmu^ de Leek de Kirketon, 8
R. 2. Willielmus de Leek de Kirketon-Joana. Rad. de Leek, 6 H. 5. 8 H. 6. 17 H.
6.-Agnes fill... Babington ut suppon. Thom. Leek, Ar.-Jana. Elizabetha fill. and
haer.-Rich. Whalley de Darlaston Com. Staff. Laurentius Hatfeild-Isab. fill.
Will. Marshall and Alicia. Tho. Whalley, Ar. de Kirketon.-Eliz. fill. Joh.
Strelly de Woodborough. Ric. Whalley de Kirketon Ar. ob. 1582.-Lora fill. Tho.
Brookman.-Ursula-Barbara. Tho. Whalley de Kirketon Ar. ob. 1582.-Elizab. fill.
and cohaer. Henr. Hatfeild, Ar. Richardus Whalley de Kirketon, Ar.-Anna fill.
Georg. Horsey de Digswell.-Frances fill. Hen. Crumwell, mil.-Jana fill....
Stirap. Tho. Whalley ob. ante pattem-Maria fill. Tho. Peniston, mil.-Ric. Draper
marit. 2. Peniston Whalley, Ar. aet. 48. 1672.-Margar. fill. and haer. Geo.
Ireland, Ar. de Com. Lanc. ob. Sep. 10. 1675. Elizab. aet. 18. 1672. Tho. Hall
Rector de Screton, 1674.-Margareta, aet. 16. 1672.
Eliz.-Will. Ayloff. Whalley Draper-Rob. Butler. Rob. Butler.

Edw. Joh..... fill. Herbert Springate, mil. Herb. Whalley.

Henr.
Thom. Johan. Walter.-
Willielmus Whalley.-Barbara fill. and cohaer.

Stephanus Hatfeild.-Eliz. fill. Tho. Molyneux, mil. relict....Becard. Henricus
Hatfeild ob. 26 H. 8.-Alicia cohaer. Joh. Hercy* milit. Tho. Whalley de
Kirketon Ar. ob. 1582.-Elizab. fill. and cohaer. Henr. Hatfeild, Ar. Willielmus
Whalley.-Barbara fill. and cohaer.





Nicholaus Thom. 6 H. 5.
Radulphus Johannes, 6 H. 5.






Hugo.

de Kirketon, A^tog. pen. Will. Arnall de Ca^colston. A^tog. pen. (...).
was owner of this place; and in Edward the thirds, was succeeded by Thomas de
Kirketon, Esquire, to whom, together with Margaret his wife, 17 E. 3. Thomas de
Newmarch the younger did convey Lands, which sometime were Henry Bozoms. This
Thomas de Kirketon is said to have had a daughter and heir married to John de
Stockton, whom I find resident here, 45 E. 3. and that he had interest in Lands
in Cla^ton (now Clauffon) and Kirkeby Belers, in the County of Leicester, in
which latter place I find Roger Beler did make some exchange, with Adam de
Stocton, about the time of Edward the first, or sooner. Stoctons daughter and
heir is supposed to be Avicia, wife of William de Leek, who, 8 R. 2. enfeoffed
Sir John de Leek, ^
Knight, Richard de Outhorpe, Richard de St^cton, and Hugh Bozom Chaplain, in
their Lands in Screveton, Kercolston, Kirkeby Belers, etc.

William de Leek of Kirketon, 6 H. 5. (or Skreveton) passed Lands in
Kercolston, ^
Bingham, Asla^ton, and Flawbergh, to Simon de Leek, Raph his own son, and
Johan his own wife, to Raph his brother, and John his said brothers son, and to
Nicolas his brother, and Thomas son of that Nicolas: his Seal to it has nine
Annuletts upon a Saltier engrailed within a Bordure.

Sir William Babington, Knight, Simon Leek Norman Babington, Ib.
Thomas Nevill, Esquire, William and Robert, sons of Sir William Babington, 9
H. 6. made Henry Peyto, and John Chaworth, their Atturneys to receive seisin,
of Raph Leek, Esquire, of his Lands in Kirketon, Screveton, Kercolston,
As^ac^on, Kneveton, Bingham, Newark, Sibthorp, Eyleston, and Flawbergh in this
County; in the City of Lincoln; in Claxton and Kirkeby in Leice^tershire; and
in the City of Coventre in Warwickshire.

The Manor of Kirketon, and Lands in Kirketon, Ib.
Screton, Carcolston, and Aslacton, 17 H. 6. were settled on Raph Leek, and
Agnes his wife (therefore supposed to be a Babington) and the heirs of their
bodies; remainder to William, son of Sir William Babington.

Ib.
Thomas Leek of Kirketon, Esquire, and Jane his wife, 18 E. 4. covenanted to
marry Elizabeth their daughter and heir, to Richard Whalley o^ Darl^ston in the
County of Stafford, Esquire.

This Richard Whalley made his Will, 1 R. 3. and by it gave order to his
Feoffees, Ib.
Sir Gervas Clifton, Sir John Babington, Knights, Thomas Leek, Squire, Richard
Whalley, Priest, and George Whalley, Gentleman, to dispose the Manor of
Darlaston to Elizabeth his wife, for her natural life; and after to Ioane his
daughter; and his Lands in Lancashire, to the sons of his Uncle Gilbert
Whalley, if he should die without issue Male himself: which he did not, for 9
H. 7. Sir Henry Willoughby passed the Wardship of Thomas Whalley his son, Ib.
to Thomas Leek, before named. This Thomas Whalley married Elizabeth, the
daughter of John Strelley of Woodborough, Ex Collect. I. B. A^. pen. (...).
and had a son called Richard Whalley, who had to his first wife Lora, daughter
of Thomas Brookman; to his second, Vrsula; and to his third, Barbara, who
survived him, and married..... Burnell, for whom she made a fair Tomb at
Sibthorp; as she did here at Screton for her husband Whalley: which shows he
had twenty five Children by his three Wives; which great number, many of them
being very well Matched; as one to Sir John Zouch of Codnor, another to....
Bellingeham, another to John Nevill of Grove, and the like, together with his
imprisonment in the Tower, upon the account of the Duke of Somersett, Lord
Protector of Edward the sixth, whose servant he was, and some other mishaps,
might very well be thought to lessen that great advancement he had otherwise
necessarily made of his Family; being by his relation to, and interest with,
that Duke, easily let in to purchase Abbey Lands; of which, notwithstanding, he
had a convenient share, in this and other Counties. To his eldest son Thomas
Whalley, A^tog. pen. P. W.
and his son William, the eldest by his second wife, did Sir John Hercy of
Grove, Uncle of John Nevill, before named, marry also his two Nieces Elizabeth
and Barbara, the daughters and heirs of Henry Hatfeild of Willughby, Esquire,
by Alice, one of the eight sisters and heirs of the said Sir John; but she was
afterward married to.... Markham, by whom having a son, none of Hercyes
inheritance came to this Family. This Richard Whalley died the 23d. of
November, in the year 1583. aged 84. years, having buried his said son Thomas
the year before, who less several sons and daughters. Richard his eldest,
succeeded his Grandfather here, and was a person of great parts and action: he
was Knight of the Shire, and one of the most splendid Sheriffs of this County;
but being much encumbered and engaged in Suits, the latter part of his time was
not prosperous. He had also three Wives: his first was Anne, daughter of George
Horsey of Digswell; his second, by whom he only left issue, was Frances,
daughter of Sir Henry Crumwell of Finchingbrook by Huntington; and his third
was Jane, daughter of.... Stirap; afterward married to Edward Coleby. He had
two brothers Doctors in Divinity, Walter of Pembroke Hall, and Thomas of
Trinity College in Cambridge* and John Whalley another brother died a
Bachelor at Screton; his sister Elianor was married to Thomas Draper of
Flintham, whose son Richard Draper married Mary, the widow of Thomas Whalley
his eldest son, and by that means succeeded him here at Screveton, during the
minority of Peniston Whalley his Grandchild, the present owner, who married
Margaret, the daughter and heir of George Ireland, Esquire, eldest son of Sir
Thomas Ireland of Beausey near Warington, the ancient Seat of the Butlers in
Lancashire, and by her has two daughters and heirs, Elizabeth and Margaret.

Edward Whally the Major General, and Henry the Advocate, were sons of this
last Richard, and advanced in the War by Oliver Crumwell their Kinsman.
Elizabeth, the sister of Peniston Whalley, is wife of William Ayloff, Esquire*
of Ba^ingbourne, but has no Children.

The Church of Screveton was 8l. and the Abbat of Welbeck, and Mr. Bozome
Patrons. ^
It Is now 6l. 19s. 2d. in the Kings Books, and Peniston Whally, Esquire, Patron.

A Prospect of A Tomb on the South wall of the Chancell at Screaton


In Screveton Chancell. The Inscriptions of the Tomb. Behold his Wives were
number three:
Two of them died in right good Fame;
The third this Tomb Erected she,
For him who well deserved the same,
Both for his life and Godly end,
Which all that knoes must needs commend:
And they that knows not, yet may see,
A worthy Whallaye lo was he.
Made Anno Domini 1584.
Since time brings all things to an end,
Let us our selves apply,
And learn by this our faithful friend,
That here in Tomb does lie,
To fear the Lord, and eke behold
The fairest is but dust and Mold:
For as we are, so once was he;
And as he is, so must we be.


In the Chancell is a fair Alabaster Tomb for Richard Whalley, whereon lies his
Statue in Armor; and above, against the Wall, kneel his three Wives, L. W. V.
W. B. W. under which, and at the end, over his head, are diverse foolish English
Rhymes in Golden Letters embossed; and along the side is, Here lies Richard
Whallay, Esquire, who lived all the age of 84 years, and ended this life the 23
of November 1583. At the end, in the outside of the Tomb, kneels in Armor, T.
W. and over his head is, Arg. three Whales heads sable, with some quarterings,
(but not proper) and underneath on the side Whalley impales with Arg. a Bend
between two Lions heads erased Gules.

On the top of the East Window in the Chancell, Arg. A Chevron and a Mullet
pierced in the duxter point Sable, Rempston.

Gules, three Waterbougetts Arg. (this is often.) Lord Ros.

Azure Billette, and a Fesse Dance, Or, Deyncourt.

Azure two Chevrons Or, Chaworth.

Below was Arg. on a Saltier Sable, nine Annulets Or, within a Bordure of the
second likewise engrailed, and charged with Croslets pate of the first, Leek.
And before one in Armor on his knees, an Helm with a Crest, a Sheaf of
Feathers upon the Wreath or Torce, Leek.

In the South I Will a plain flat Tomb without Inscription; in the East Window by
it was, on the lower part, Party per Fesse Gules, and Sable, a Lion Rampant
Arg. (Mr. Kniveton says) crowned Or: it may be supposed, Bellers; then Leeks
as before. And in the next Pane, Argent a large Ta^ (or Cross) Ragule Gules,
supposed Stocton; And under, Orate pro animabus Willielmi de Leek, and Amice de
Leek uxoris ejus.

On the top of this Window is, Arg. a Chief Gules, with a Bendlet Azure,
Crumwell.

Ros. again, and Gules, a Saltier Arg. Nevill, and Deincourt again.

And Arg. five fusills in Fesse Gules, within a Bordure Sable, charged with
Cross Crosselets of the first. This is upon a Stone over the Church door in
the Porch; and upon a little stump of a Stone cross, on a little hill in the
Highway before Mr. Whalleyes Gate.

In the North I Will Windows is, Arg. and likewise Erm. three Birdbolts Gules,
Bozom.

And Quarterly Gules, and Or, A Mullet Arg. in the first, Oxford.

England, and that again with file of three Labels Azure.

In the South I Will Windows, Arg. five Fusils in Fesse Gules, Newmarch.

And Gules, five Fusills in Fesse Or, Newmarch.

And Gules, three Water bougetts Arg. Ros, as before. And Azure two Birdbolts,
in Saltier Gules between four Cinquefoils Or.

In the South I Will of Screveton Church, this,

Sub hoc lapide conduntur Thomae and Johannis Maii Anno Do. 1637. Ju. anno do.
1638. In Screveton Church.

Here lies Thomas Ireland, Genesis descended from the Ancient Family of the
Irlands of Hut in Lancashire who died October 1669. aged 76.

Or he, or none strict life did superarrogate, For loyalty, old age, with
Celibate.

Hoc pi^tatis ergo sculpi feci Margaretta Whalley Eodem Stirpe Irlandorum
progenita Jan. 16. 1670. det Deus nobis Lucem aeternam. Amen.

The Inscriptions under the Altar.

Hic deposuerunt Thomas and Maria Whalley filiolam Martham Charum pignus,
Scientes cui crediderunt natam and denatum anno Dom. 1624.

Hac sunt Incunabula in quibus Thomas and Maria conjux filium Tho. Whalley
sopitum posuerunt, Natum renatum and denatam anno Dom. 1628. Et denuo
nasciturum.

Flintham.
ELvuin had a Manor in Flintham, which paid the Geld in the time of King
Edward the Confessor, as fourteen Bovats, and one third part. The Land whereof
was five Carucats. There King William had two Car* in Demesne, five Sochm. four
Vill. five Board. having three Car. Lib. Dooms.
There a Church and a Priest had half a Car. and (there was) sixty Acres of
Meadow. Small Wood three qu. and an half long, one qu. broad. In the Confessors
time the value was 60s. in the Conquerours 40s. It seems to have had Soc in
Cheneviton.

Besides this of the Kings, Roger de Bus^i had a Manor in Flintham, which
Odin^ar had before the Conquest, and was rated for it to the Tax, or Geld, as
six Bovats. The Land whereof was then two Car. There afterward Roger, the Man
or Tenent of Roger de Busli, had two Sochm. three Vill. four Board. having two
Car. This had also Soc in Cheneviton, and kept the old value 20s. as did
another Manor here of Walter de Ayncurts Fee, which Tori had before, and paid
to the Geld for it as six Bov. The Land whereof was also two Car. There one
Sochm. seven Vill. and one Board. had two Car. and twenty four Acres of Meadow.
Raynold, the Man of Walter, had (...) Car. or Plow; small Wood one qu. long,
one qu. broad. The value of this was also 20s.

The Abbat of Wellebec, 14 Ioh. ought the King four Palfreys, (...) 14 I^^.
for his confirmation of the reasonable gift which Agatha, the daughter and
heir of Hugh Bretel, ma^e of Lands and Tenements with the Church of Flintham.

Agatha, the daughter and heir of Hugh Bretel, (...) 225.
who was first married to Galfr. M^nachus; and afterward to Mr. Humfrey, King
John's Cook, gave the Church of Flintham, and Pasture for three hundred Sheep
in this Territory to the Abbey of Wellebek. She had a son named Richard Bretel,
Ib. 26.
whom I suppose to be the husband of Rhagenildis (by whom he had a son of his
own name), one of the three daughters and heirs of Nicolas, Bastard son of
Paganus de Sancta Maria, whose legitimate son Adam de Sancta Maria, did
confirm to that Abbey seven Bovats of Land, which Hugh Bretel held here, viz.
six in Demesne, and the seventh in Service in the tenure of William Colstan.
This Monastery had Lands of the gift of diverse persons in this Town; and Free
Warren granted, 19 E. 1. as in Whatton and Asla^^on may be noted.

Roger de Mareseye offered himself, 13 H. 3. against Robert de Abrincis, (...).
13 H. 3.^^.1.
concerning four Bovats of Land in Flintham, which he claimed as his right to
h^ld of the King in Capite. The posterity of Auerenches or Auerenge, were
Benefactors to Wellebeck, and some of them continued here till Henry the
fourths time: then sometimes written Arage. ^


This Manor was held in the latter end of the Reign of Henry the third, and
the beginning of Edward the first, by Sir John de Hose, Knight, of Thomas de
Marsey or Ma^hersey, of the Honor of Lancaster. Nicholas de Wynchford is also
said to have held it of that Honor; Test. de Nev.
but the Hose's continued here Lords of this Manor, till Queen Elizabeth's
time; that John Hosee had a son called Robert, who dying without issue, Anne
his sister, the wife of John Draper, whose Ancestors had been here resident
since the beginning of Edward the third, (...). per. T. S.
became one of his heirs: and had to her share the Tenements. The Demesnes are
the inheritance of Mr. John Hacker, Esquire, by Descent from his Father
Richard, who purchased them of....

John Draper by his said wife, the daughter of John Hussee, Esquire, had a son
called Thomas, who married Elianor, daughter of Thomas Whalley of Kirketon by
Screveton, Esquire, and by her left John Draper of Grayes Inn, who Johannes le
Hose, miles, 23 E. ^. Hugo le Husee de Flintham, 31 E. 1.-Lucia relict. 3 E. ^.
Johannes de Hose, 3 E. 3.-Isabella. Johannes fill. Johannis le Huse, 13 E. 3*
Hugo Hose, miles. 44 E. 3. 6 H. 5. Rad. Hose-Elizab. 17 R. 2. Ex Coll. I. B.
and lib. visit. (...). Reason (...).
2 Henri^^^ Hussy.-... fill. Joh. Methley. Willielmus Huse-... fill. Willielmi
Staunton. Will. vel Johannes Hussy-... fill. Roberti Revel. Johannes
Hussy-Elizab. fill. Ric. Baker de Aldesworth. Rob. Hussy ^ine prole. Anna ^or.
and har.-Johannes Draper de Flintham. Thom. Draper-Elianor fill. Thom. Whalley,
Ar. Rich. Draper (...). 73.1672.-Maria fill. Thom. Peniston.-Thom. Whalley,
marit. 1. Whalley Draper sola haer.-Robertus fill. Roberti Eutler de Southwell,
Ar 1 Robertus Eutler aet. 15. 16^2. 2 Richardus aet. 13*







1 Hugo Huse, Ar. 10 H. 6. Margar.-Hen. Sutton.





dyed without issue, as did also Francis and Thomas his other sons, so that
Richard Draper was at length his only son and heir, who married Mary, the
daughter of Sir Thomas Peniston, the relict of Thomas Whalley his Cousin
German, and by her has Whalley, now his only daughter and heir, wife to Robert
Butler of Southwell, Barrester of Grayes Inn, who has two sons by her, Robert
and Richard.

The Seal of Sir Hugh Hose, Knight, to an Instrument bearing date 6 H. 5. is a
Lion passant upon a Fesse. Autog. pen Tho. Shipman, Genesis


Philip de Aubeny, 13 H. 3. had a Knights Fee in Flintham: but whether this or
no, Rot. Pip. 13 H. 3.
I cannot discover.

That Manor of Roger de Buslies Fee, Test. de Nev.
was held by the L^verots of Coleston: and after them by the Gloucesters.

Galfr. le Fremund is mentioned to have held here half a Knights Fee of this
Honor, viz. Tikhill. Christian, sometimes wife of Richard, Autog. pen. Tho.
Shipman de Scarrington, Genesis Autog. pen. Pen. Whalley, Ar.
son of William de Flintham, released to Galfr. her son, one Bovat of her
Dower, which she retained when he married Avicia, the sister of Henry de le
Fremund, on whose Seal is two Barrulets or Gemmells in Chief: that name
corrupted into Ferryman and Freman.

Test. de Nev.
Fulco de Hotot is certified also to have held half a Knights Fee here. Alice,
the relict of Fulco de Hotot, gave to Fulco de Hotot her son two Bovats in
Flintham, of the Fee of Lovet^t, which she had of the gift of Nic. de Kniveton
her brother.

This Family held under Albani of Belvoyr, whereof was Od^ardus de Hotot, and
Willielmus de Hotot, 5 Steph. Leicest.

Ex A^t^g. p^r. T. S.
Fulco de Hotot de Bocclesford-Alicia so^^r Nicol. de (...) relict. 1271. Fulco
de Hotot de (...)-Joana fill. and haer. Willielmi fill. Hawisiae (...).
Willielmus de Ho^of^ de (...), 10 E. 3. Walterus de Hoto^, 10 E. 3.-(...).
Henricus Hoto^-Agnes, 45 E. 3. Johannes Hotot, 16 E. 2. Henricus Hotot, 17 H.
6. H^go H^tot-Margareta relict. 6 E. 4. Johannes Hotot,-E. 4. (...) 2^.-Agnes.
Wi^^ielmus Ho^ot, 19 H. 8. (...) Ho^oft, 16 Eliz. Alexander Ho^^^t ob.
16^3.-Eliz. f^r.... Whitmore de C^^nton. Walterus Ho^oft, ob. 164^.-Anna fill.
and cohaer. Joh. North de Lo^dham. Robertus Ho^^ft (...) ^3. 1672.-Judith fill.
Mich. Gr^^dy de E^easby. Henricus Ho^ot (...). 3^. 16^2. Johannes 33. Alexand.
26. Sam. 21. Judith-Willielmus King.
Maria ux. Fr. Heaps. Eliz. ux. Geo. Gunthorp.
Rich. cleric. Nic. Mich. Martin. Rob.
Ric Hotoft fill. and haer. 16 Eliz.


Thom. Ho^^ft, 6 E. 4.



Thom. Ho^o^-Jo^na relict. 44 E. 3.

Mr. Thom. Hotot, ^ E. 2. 3 E. 3.


The Jury found (...), the son and heir of Hugh H^t^t, Est. 7 E. 4.
7 E. 4. who had held one Mess. and three Bov. 1/^. in Flintham, of the
Wapentak of Bingham, for the Rent of 6^. yearly, and sixteen Acres of the
Honor of Tikhill for 9^. to be then twenty eight years of age.

This Family has (...) little Freehold left: part of their Land was sold to
Thomas Ship^^n of Scarrington; whose Grandson Thomas Shipm^n lately sold into
John Molyneux, Esquire, eldest son of Sir Francis M^lyneux of Kneeton, Baronet.

That of Dey^curts Fee was held by Hugo de Hoveringham, and the Family of
Counsel as Hoveringham was.

Raph de Gousell held half a Knights Fee in Flintham. ^
Hugo de Hoveringham passed two Bovats to Elias de (...), and John de Ay^ecourt
was pledge for the Covenants. Reg. (...). p. ^2.


Walter, son of Mr. Stephen de Radelive, and brother of Thomas, Parson of
Flintham, gave to Thurgarton Priory, two Bovats and one quarter, which he had
of the gift of Raph de Barkew^rd, together with Gilbert, son of Roger, son of
Colstan of Flintham, with all his, who held that Land. The gift was confirmed
by Robert de Aync^rt, and Hawisia his wife.

Robert Auerenge of Flintham released to the Prior of Thurgarton, all the
actions he might have against him in his Meadow of Flintham, by reason of the
Fishing of Hesilford.

Roger, son of Jordan de Flintham, Regist. de Rufford, p. 47.
gave to the Abbey of Ruchford, a certain part of his Land in Flintham, lying
between the Land which Robert, son of William de Flintham, gave; and the Land
of Richard, son of William de Flintham. The Witnesses were, Raph, son of Robert
de Go^usle, Robert Morin, and John his son, Robert, son of William de Go^usle,
Gaufr. de Gorram, and others. Raph de Gousel's son Walter was witness to Robert
son of William de Flinthams Deed, Ib.
and so were Richard and Henry de A^^renches, and William Morin, and others.
And the said Raph de Gousell confirmed the gift of Roger, son of Jordan de
Flintham of the Seat of his Mill.

Es^. 8 E. 3.1.64.
The Jury, 8 E. 3. found it not to the Kings loss, if he granted leave to Alice,
the widow of William Alexander of Flintham, and John Fader, Chaplain, to give
five Mess. sixty Acres of Land, eighteen of Meadow in Flintham and Kneveton,
held of John le Hose, by the Service of 20s. per annum, and Suit to his Court
from three weeks to three weeks, to a certain Chaplain celebrating in the
Church of St. Augustine of Flintham for ever.

At the Assizes at Nottingham, 1 H. 4. Richard Archbishop of York, (...).
Not. (...). 73.
recovered his seisin of Hesilford Ferry, and Hugh Husye of Flintham was
amerced.

The Church of Flintham was appropriated to the Abbey of Wellebek by Thomas
Archbishop of York, ^
about the year 1389. It now belongs to Trinity College in Cambridge, to which
it was granted, together with the Demesne and Manor of Hoveringham and
Flintham, which belonged to Thurgarton Priory, by King Henry the eight, (...)
38 H. 8.
by his Letters Patents, dated 24 December. 38 H. 8.

That College, as I take it, purchased of Arthur Hall the moiety of the
Manors of Hoveringham and Flintham, with the Appurtenances; whereof there was
a recovery, 5 H. 8. wherein Humfrey Wingfeild, (...) H. 8. (...). 325.
Esquire, Francis Hall, and others, claimed them against Anthony Wingfeild,
Esquire.

The Family of Cooper of Thurgarton have usually been grand Tenants to the
College. But Mr. John Hacker, before named, is Tenant of the Rectory. Flintham
Grange, and the Doveco^e on the west part of it, and all other the
Appurtenances, late belonging to the Monastery of Welbeck, Part. 12. pa^. 33 H.
8.
Nov. 22. 38 H. 8. was granted to John (...), and Robert Biget, named in
Coleston, with that Rectory, etc. And with Mr. Whalleys part of Car^^lsten,
became the Possession of William Earl of Newcastle, whose Trustee Sir John
Harper of Swarkeston conveyed the Reversion of it after his decease, to John
Story of Kneveton and his heirs.

The Vicarage of Flintham was 8l. when the Abbat of Welbeck was Pa^^on. (...)
I. M.
It Is now 6l. 3s. 4d. in the Kings Books, and Trinity College Patrons.

In the Church South I Will, upon an old low Stone Tomb, an Effigies of a Knight,
and on his Shield a Lion passant Gardant upon a Fesse, with a small Cressent
before him.

In a South Window, Arg. a Fesse between six Martletts Sable, and in several
other places.

On the Wall was painted Arg. on a Fesse Sable, a Lion passant guard. of the
first, ^
Hussy.

In the Windows were, Arg. upon a Fesse Gules, three Waterbougers Arg. perhaps
Bingham.

Arg. a Chief Gules, a Bend over Azure, Crumwell.

Arg. three Bends Gules, Byron.

Hic jacet Radulphus Prudhom fill. Richardi Prudhom, quick. 5 Sept. Anno 1470.

Hic jacet Agnera Prudhom filiae ejusdem Richardi, quae ob. 28 Maii 1471. upon
the same Tomb.

In the South Cross I Will at Flintham*


Hawkesworth. Hochesword.
PArt of this small Town was Soc to Aslactune of Walter de Ayncur^s Fee, which
answered the public Tax for one Bov. The Land two Bovats Soc. There two Sochm.
and one Board. had two Bov. three Car. and two Acres of Meadow. Doomsd.


Another part was Soc to Watone of the Fee of Gislebert de Gand, and answered
the Geld for thirteen Bovats. The Land three Car. There two Sochm. one Board.
had four Car.. and twenty Acres of Meadow.

Walter, son of William de Aslacton, (which Family held the Fee of Deyncourt)
confirmed to God and the Church of St. Peter at Thurgarton, Reg. Thurg. p. 52.
five Bovats and an half, with Tofts and all Appurtenances, which the Canons
had of his Fee in Hokesworth and Aslacton. In his Deed of Confirmation is
mentioned, seven days of Entertainment they were to give him every year, in
their house at Thurgarton, which his son Walter in his Confirmation released.
These Bovats were given in several parcells by William de Rupe, I^. 49.
William Sturmin, Hereward son of Peter de Hokesword, and John his son, and
confirmed and added to, by William le Champion, son of William le Champion of
Hokesworth.

The Family of Newmarch held the Fee of Gislebert de Gand at Whatton and here.
There was a Fine levied at Darby, Ib. 151.
and an Agreement made there the tenth of King John, which was, that Adam de
Novomercato should present three times successively to the Church of Hokesword;
after which the Advowson should entirely remain to Henry Prior of Thurgarton,
and Richard Prior of St. Katherines by Lincoln, and their Successors and
Churches: William de Hokesword was present, and released for himself and his
heirs, both at Darby and at Lincoln.

These Churches had difference, but at length agreed to divide such Pensions as
they should get settled out of it, Ib. 51.
and so present by turns. But it is also to be considered, that a good part of
this Township (if not the chief) has ever belonged to Sibthorpe, as will
partly appear by Gocelinus de Sancto Paulo (which Family were the principal
Lords of Sibthorp), his giving this his Church of Hokesword in pure Alms to the
Priory of Thurgarton; betwixt which and Henry de Sibthorp in the year 1277.
(for I hear nothing then of the Prior of St. Katherins), there was an agreement
made, and a Fine levyd the same year, 6 E. 1. that the Priory, and the said
Henry and his heirs should present by turns. And it appears that Simon de
Sibthorp had the Manor of Hawkesworth and kept his Courts, Es^. 9 E. 3.1* 2^.
when Thomas de Sibthorpe Parson of Bekingham, was Founding his College at
Sibthorpe, to which he gave four Mess. and ten Acres of Land here, which ought
Service from three weeks to three weeks to this Court. It continued to the
posterity of this Simon, which may be more particularly noted in Sibthorp,
though I do not exactly find how long.

There was a Recovery suffered, Pasc. 4 E. 4. rot. 3^1.
4 E. 4. of the Manor of Stanton on the Wolds (which also did belong to this
Family of Sibthorp) and this Manor of Hoxworth, which William Leybourn the
younger, claimed against Sir William Chaworth, Thomas Nevill, Esquire, and John
his son and heir, John Metheley, and John Staynton.

There was another, Hill 14 H. 8. rot. 106.
14 H. 8. wherein Amon Sutton, Robert Sutton, Vincent Grantham, and Nicholas
Sutton claimed against Thomas Blesby, and Katherin his wife, one of the
daughters and heirs of Richard Dysney then dead, the moiety of five Mess. two
Tofts, one Windmill, one hundred Acres of Land, sixty Acres of Meadow, and one
hundred Acres of Pasture, with the Appurtenances in Hawkesworth and Denthorp,
and the moiety of the Advowson of the Church of Hawkesworth.

Here was William Wymbish, and John his son after him, and William his
Grandchild, Autog. pen. T. S.
lived in the time of Edward the third, and here were likewise some Descents of
Grants. Robert le Grant paid the Priory of Thurgarton for a Toft, Croft,
Regist. de Thurg. p. 179.
and three Bovats of Land 30s. a year, when all their Revenue here amounted but
to 55s. 0d. ob. in the year 1328.

Raph de Handelby before, Pl. co^an Reg. 1^ E. 1. Pas^. ^o. 32.
17 E. 1. made a Chartel to Mr. Robert, called de Belver, Rector of the Church
of Moston, and his heirs, of one Mess. four Bov.. of Land in Houkesworth.

Raph, son of Peter, and his three Partners are said to hold of Gilbert de
Gaunt, Test. de (...).
a Knights Fee in Hokesworth, and Adam de Novo Merca^o paid for three Fees of
that Honor in the time of Henry the third in Whatton, Aslacton, and Hokesworth.

Queen Elizabeth, 14 July, in the third year of her Reign, granted to Richard
Whalley, Part. 2. pat. 3 E. ^^.
Esquire and his heirs, the Demesnes and Manors of Whatton, Hawkesworth, and
Tawton, and the Advowson of the Rectory and Church of Hawkesworth, late parcel
of the Possessions of Sir Maurice Dennys, Knight, with all the Mess. Lands and
Tenements to them belonging.

Mr. Whalleys interest here went to the Duke of Newcastle, and is now become
the Possession of Mr. Robert Butler. What belonged to the College of Rotheram
here, Mr. Whalley had also, as in Sibthorp will be noted. There was a good
share was Mr. Grices a London Tailor, which is now sold to Mr. John Hacker of
Flintham.

One Thomas Barret has a Freehold, the rest are not considerable.

In the ninth of King John, William de S. Paulo claimed against the Prior of
Thurgarton the Advowson of the Church of Hawkesworth. Pl. Mi^^. 9 Io^. (...) in
dorso.
The Prior showed the Charter of Confirmation of Roger, late Archbishop of
York, that they should have it to their own uses; but the Canons of the
Hospital of St. Katherin, Lincoln, pleaded that they had the Charter of
Alexander, Father of William of the same Church.

The Rectory of Hawkesworth was 10l. when the Prior of Thurgarton, Mss. I.M.
and Mr. Mydleson were Patrons. It Is now 8l. 13s. 9d. in the Kings Books, and
Mr. Robert Butler Patron.

Over the entrance into the Porch in a Stone is Engraven,

Gauterus and uxor ejus Cecelina fecerunt facere Ecclesiam istam in honorem
Domini nostri Jesus, and Beatae Mariae virginis and omnium Sanctorum Dei simul.

In the Windows is,

Gules on a Bend Arg. 3. Cross Crosletts Azure.

Gules, a Lion Rampant Arg. over all a Bend Azure charged with three Escallops
Or, Mydleton of Fulbek Com. Linc. and Sibthorp.

Arg. on a Saltier engrailed Sable, five Annulets Or, Leek.

Arg. three Birdbolts Gules, Bozom.

In the Chancell about the year 1659. was buried Robert Rockhold, the most
ingenious Rector of this place, aged about 60 years. A Bachelor, and a great
example of Piety, Charity, and Eloquence.

Aslacton.
TOri before the Conquest (whose Lands were afterward Walter de Ayncurts) had
a Manor in Aslactune, which was rated to the Tax for one Car. The Land was
three Car. There Walchelin the Man or Tenant of Walter de Aincurt, had two Car.
and one Sochm. on one Bovat of this Land, six (or seven) Vill. two Board. with
one Car.. and twenty four Acres of Meadow. This kept the old value 30s. having
Soc in Hochesword.

Another Manor with Soc and Sac had Leving, which discharged it self to the
Dane-geld for one Bovat. The Land was half a Car. After the Conquest Vluric
held it of Ilbert de Lacy, whose Fee it became; and there had two Oxen plowing,
two Sochm. one Board. having half a Car. and eight Acres of Meadow. This kept the
value also, Lib. Dooms.
which it had in the Confessors time, viz. 5s. 4d.

Another Manor here was of the Tainland, which Levric had before the Normans
came, and discharged it likewise to the public Geld for one Bov. The Land was
four Bov. Vluric held it afterward of King William, and there had two Oxen in
Plow, and two Sochm. one Board. with half a Car. there was likewise eight Acres
of Meadow, and it kept the old value 5s. 4d.

In Aslacton was some ancient Demesne of the Soc of Orston, the Kings Manor,
as much as was rated to the Geld at one Bov. There was one Villain.

In Haslacheton was there likewise of the Soc of Whatton, of the Fee of
Gislebert de Gand, which used to be rated to the Geld for half a Car. The Land
was one Car. and an half. There nine Sochm. had four Plows, or Carucats.

This part, it seems, had the pre-eminence to carry the Tithes; or else the
nearness of that Church, made the rest of the Lords less careful to get one of
their own* and so the whole Township has been ever esteemed in Whatton Parish,
and the Church interest (except that little of Orston) went with that Rectory
in the time of Henry the second, to the Abbey of Wellebek, to which Henry Crok,
Reg. de Wellebeck p. 140.
son and heir of Walter Crok of Aslacton, gave the Homage and Service of Mr.
Raph, son of Mr. Richard, for two Oxgangs of Land in Aslacton, and of diverse
others: and also diverse other Lands.

Another part was held by the Family, which took their name from Button near
Nottingham; in the Wapen^ac or Hundred of Thurgarton, called Burton Iorz, and
is still distinct from the rest, and now in the tenure of Mr. M. Hawford of
Eedy Weston in Rutland, as I take it.

But the most considerable part of this Township, viz. both Deyncourts, and
that of the Fee of Gaunt (which, Esc. 32 E. 1. n. 61.
32 E. 1. John de Newmarch is said to hold here and in Hawkeworth), were very
anciently the Aslactons, who held of the Newmarches of Whatton, and they of the
other Newmarches, and they of Gaunt, and after of Bell^monte.

Reginaldus de Aslacton (probably descended from Vluric or Walchelin) was a
Witness, Reg. Lent. p. 88.
as was also Roger de Burton, to the Lady Adelina de Whattons Deed, who by the
consent of William de Heriz her Husband, gave to the Priory of Lenton her two
Men or Tenants Hugh and Henry, with the three Bovats of Land they held in
Aslacton, which gift she and her said Husband offered on the high Altar of the
holy Trinity at Lenton.

Simon, son of Reginald de Aslacton, gave to the Priory of Thurgarton a Toft
and Croft here, Reg. de Thurg. p. 52.
which was Ordric's, and one Acre of Meadow of the Fee of Oliver Dayencourt, and
a great Land or Selion, whereon was a Windmill; all which H. Prior of that
place gave to Maud, the wife of Simon de Aslacton, and the heirs on her
begotten.

Raph Bozun (or Bugun) gave to Reginald, son of Simon de Aslacton 22s. yearly
Rent, Autog. pen. Tho. Rosell, Ar.
out of Thurverton and Skerington, with Maud his sister in Frank marriage.

Simon de Aslacton, who was Sheriff of this County 44, and 45 H. 3. I take to
be son of this last Reginald, and father of another, who was also father of
Reginald de Aslacton, Knight, who by Fine between himself and Roger de
Aslacton, Fin. apud Ebor. a die S. Mich. in 15 dies, 2 E. 1.
Parson of Hawkesworth, 2 E. 3. settled this Manor of Aslacton, on himself for
life; then to his son John the elder, and the heirs of his body* for want of
which, to John the younger; then to Simon; then to Roger, his other sons, and
the respective heirs of their bodies successively; for want of which, to the
right heirs of himself.

John the elder had two Wives: by his first called Alice, he had William de
Aslacton, mentioned in Torlaston; his second was Johan, Ex Regist. de Sibthorp
p^n. meips. R. T.
the relict of Peter Hodle, and sister and coheir of John, son of Simon de
Kirketon in Holland Lord of Sibthorp, but by her he had no issue.

John de Aslacton Clark, Pl. cor. Reg. Mich. 30 E. 3. to. 88*
30 E. 3. was impleaded by Nicholas de Langford, Junior, and Alice his wife,
and John Ryvell Chr. and Joan his wife, daughters and heirs of Roger Deyncourt,
Reginaldus de Aslacton temp. H. 2. Simon de Aslacton-Matilda. Reginaldus de
Aslacton-Matilda soror Rad. Bozun. Simon de Aslacton vicecom. Not. and Derb.
44 H. 3. Reginaldus de Aslacton Reginaldus de Aslacton, miles-Alicia. Joh. de
Aslacton, Sen.-Alicia-Joana for. and cohaer. Joh. fill. Sim. de Kirketon, s. p.
Willielmus de Aslacton Isabella fill. and haer.-Edmundus Cranmer. Johannes
Cranmer de Aslacton-Alicia fill..... Marshall. Thomas Cranmer-Agnes fill.
Laurentii Hatfeild. Johannes-Joana fill. Joh. Frecheville. Thomas
Cranmer-Cecilia fill..... Quadring. Thom. Cranmer de Aslacton-Alicia fill. Joh.
Lucy, ux. 1.-Elizab. fill. Thom. Hutchinson relict. Will. Erookesby. Maria
haeres-Johannes Rosell de Radcliff. G^org^^^ Rosell
Thom. Molyneux marit. 1.-Alicia haer-Joh. Thorold, mil. Johannes Molyneux,
Baronettus.


Richardus. Carolus. Margareta.
Thom. Archiepisc. Cantuariens. Dorothea ux. Haroldi Rofell. Anna ux. Edm.
Cartwright.




Johannes Jun. cler. Sim. Roger.






Hugo de Cranmer-Matilda fill. Willielmi de Sutterton. Gilbertus Cranmer-Ida
fill. Adae de Loughton. Hugo Thom. Cranmer Isabella fill. and haer.-Edmundus
Cranmer.

Johannes.


for violent ejecting them from the custody of the Land and heir of John de
Aslacton, being then under age, which John dyed seized of one hundred Acres of
Land, forty of Meadow, and the third part of the Manor of Aslacton, which he
held of the said Roger Deyncourt by Knights Service, viz. by Homage and Scutage
for a Knights Fee, whereupon the Jury gave them 20l. damage, and they desired
Execution and had it. This heir then in minority was William it seems, whose
daughter and heir Isabell was married to Edmund Cranmer, and to that Family
carried this Manor of Aslacton.

Edmund Cranmer of Aslacton, and Isabell his wife* ^
4 H. 6. claimed against William de Sibthorp, Esquire, two Mess. one Toft,
twenty six Acres of Land, and two of Meadow in Aslacton. She left (...) John
Cranmer, ^
who by Alice, the daughter of.... Marshall of Muscam, had a son named Thomas
Cranmer, who married Agnes the daughter of Lawrence (or Stephen) Hatfeild of
Willoughby in Thurgarton-a- Lee Hundred; Ib.
and by her had his eldest son John Cranmer, whose first wife was Joan,
daughter of John Frecheville, Esquire; and his second Margaret, daughter of
John Fitz-Williams of Sprotburgh; another of his sons was Thomas Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury and Martyr, fit to weigh down the Scale against
Thomas Becker his Predecessor; another son was Edmund Cranmer Archdeacon of
Canterbury: he had also diverse daughters, Jane, wife of John Monings Lieutenant
of Dover Castle* Isabell, of Sir... Shepey, Knight; Anne, of Edmund Cartwright;
and Dorothy, of Harold Rosell of Radcliffe on Trent.

King Edward the sixth, by his Indenture bearing date the 20th. of March, in
the first year of his Reign, for the sum of 429l. 13s. 2d. granted to Thomas
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, Tat hanc. pia in tanti Praesulis simul et
Martyris memoriam. Munificentia propr^s impensis c^elari fecit Guilielmus
Cartwright (...) de Ossington in Com. Nottingh.
the Site of the Priory of Arthington, and diverse Lands thereunto belonging,
and the Site of the Monastery of Kirstall, and the Demesne Lands thereof, and
other Lands belonging to it, both in Yorkshire, and the Rectoryes of Whatton
and Aslacton, with the Advowson of the Churches, both which then lately
belonged to the Monastery of Welbeck. And the Manor of Wood-hall (in Radcliff)
in this County, late part of the Possessions of Thomas Gray, Esquire. And the
Advowson of the Church of Kingesworth in Kent, to him and his heirs for ever.

His Nephew Thomas Cranmer, son of his brother John by his said first wife,
dyed seized of the Rectory of Whatton and Aslacton, 8 December. 5 E. 6. to which
belonged one hundred Acres of Land, Lib. 2. s^ed. fol. 95.
twenty of Meadow, thirty of Pasture in Whatton and Aslacton, and also of the
Manor of Aslacton six Mess. etc. and two Mess. in Whatton, etc. and left his
son Thomas Cranmer his heir, then above twenty two years of age. Which latter
Thomas had two Wives: by his first he had Mary, wife of John Rosell of Radcliff
on Trent, Esquire, Grandson of Harold before named; and by his second
Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Hutchinson, and widow of William Brookesby of
Grimsby, Lib. 3. s^ed. fol. 616.
he had Alice wife of Thomas Molyneux, and after of Sir John Thorold, his
daughters and heirs, and died 8 December. 1 Eliz.

Sir John Molyneux, Baronet, son of the said Alice and Thomas, and Father of
Sir Francis, sold the Cranmers interest, which descended to him. And the Manor
is now the Marquess of Dorchesters; the Tithes and some Glebe, with the
Parsonage House, etc. were Mr. Gervas Armstrongs of Scarrington, as in that
place is noted. Thomas Bean had a good Freehold here, part whereof is my
Brother-in-law Thomas Iallands. And there are some other small Freeholders
Thomas Castledine, Thomas Draper both of Scarrington, with some others; diverse
of the Tenants in Aslacton do suit to the Court Leet at Cotgrave, formerly
belonging to St. John's of Jerusalem. There was a Chapel in the Town, which is
now a dwelling House.

Whatton. VVatone.
THis Town so called from the watery situation, the River Smite being close by
it, which sometimes continues longer full of water than other swifter Rivers
do, unless the Channel be very well cleansed, was before the Norman Invasion
the Land of one Vlf, who was charged to the Tax for his Manor here, as two
Car. and an half. The Land being then accounted sufficient for nine Plows, or
nine Car. There Robert, the Man or Tenant of Gislebert de Gand, Lib. Dooms.
whose Fee it afterward became, had three Car. twenty eight Vill. twelve Board.
having nine Car. and one Mill 4s. and eighty Acres of Meadow. There was one (
Molaria ubi molefodiunt) of three Marks of Silver, which I know not how to
render, except it be Marle.

In these parts Mold signifies fat Earth almost in powder, fit to receive Seed.
There have been Marle Pits at Whatton, but that Husbandry has been long
disused here-abouts. There is only a thin blew shelly sort of Stone; and
perhaps there may have been Plaster like that of Paris in this Lordship, which
there is in diverse near it, as Elton, Sutton, Orston, Crophill, Langar, etc.

The value of this Manor was in the time of King Edward the Confessor 20l.
but when King William made his famous Survey for the more easy regulating the
Taxes which should be raised, 16l. having Soc in Hochesword and Haflacheton:
it is the highest value that I have observed for so little a Lordship, but the
Soil is very good.

It Is very probable that the posterity of that Robert, before named, had their
Surname from this place, Regist. de B^ia. fol. ^6.
for I find Sir William de Watun Lord of this place, a Benefactor to the
Monastery of Blyth very near this time, William de Novoforo likewise; and Adam
de Novomercato confirmed the gifts of his Ancestors, which Family became
superior Lords to the other, and held immediately of Gaunt.

Adelina, the daughter and heir of Robert de Whatton, gave the Church of
Whatton to the Abbey of Wellebec, to maintain the Hospitality thereof, for the
Souls of her said Father, her Mother Beatrix, and William de Heriz her Husband,
Rot. pip. 20 H. 2. and 22 H. 2.
who was living about 20 H. 2. but in 22 H. 2. his brother Robert de Heriz, who
was his heir, was amerced for trespassing on the Forest.

Adam de Novomercato confirmed the gift which Adelina had made, Reg. de
We^^ebek, p. 225.
and so did Adam de Novomercato his son, to whom, in the year 1241. William the
Abbat and the Covent of Wellebek gave that place of Meadow which lay be^ween the
Holme of the said Sir Adam, Ib. 139.
and the Causey of Aslacton, which belongs to the Chapel of Aslacton, for that
place which lay by the Water-Mill of Whatton, between the Damm and the Sik, by
the Land of the said Abbat, saving to the said Sir Adam his Turbary, etc.

Henry de Novomercato, son of this Sir Adam, confirmed to that Abbey all their
Lands and Possessions they had in his Fee in this Parish of Whatton and our,
and so did Thomas de Novomercato, son and heir of this Sir Henry.

This Thomas produced a Charter of Free Warren granted to him and his heirs, in
all his Demesne Lands here, by King Edward the second, dated at York the 12
Nov. in the ^enth year of his Reign, which was allowed in Air, Qu^ Wa^. 3 E.
3. (...).
3 E. 3. before William de Herle and his fellows Justices at Not. the Monday
after the Feast of St. Martin. So was not the Abbats of Wellebek, granted by
King Edward the first, dated also at York 5 Apr. 19 E. 1. because it had not
been well used here in Whatton, Aslacton, Flintham, Ib. rot. 3. in dorso.
Kniveton, nor Oulecotes, and Styrap, though in all their other places it was,
and therefore the Abbat made Fine to the King of forty shillings, and had it
restored in these also.

Adam de Novomercato, 6 Joh. Adam de Novomercato Henricus de Novomercato Thomas
de Novomercato Thom. de Novomercato Hugo de Novomercato Chivaler-Alina, 1 R. 2.
Margareta, 11 H. 4.-Ric. Reins. Elizabetha-Radulphus de Novomercato. Robertus
de Novomercato Elizabetha de Novomercato-Johannes Nevill de Althorp Com. Linc*
Joanna fill. and haer.-Willielmus Gascoigne, miles. Willielmus Gascoigne, miles,
ob. 4 Martii, 2 H. 7.-Marg. fill. Henrici 3. Comitis Northumb. Ex lib. visit.
pen. Rob. Shirbrook de Oxton, Genesis
Willielmus Gascoigne, miles, aetat. 19. 4 H. 7.-Alicia fill. Ric. Frognell, mil.
Willielmus Gascoigne, miles-Margareta fill. Thom. Fitz-Williams de Aldwark.
Willielmus Gascoigne, miles-Beatrix fill. Ric. Tempest, mil. Margareta fill. and
haer.-Thom. Wentworth.














Johannes de Novomercato Adam de Novomercato de Bentley Ebor. Adam de
Novomercato Robertus de Novomercato* Elizabetha-Radulphus de Novomercato.




This Thomas Newmarch, then called the elder, because his son was also Thomas,
Chapter 12 E. 3.1.4.
had Market and Fair granted, 12 E. 3. as well as Free Warren in this Lordship.

Which said Thomas Newmarch his son left it to Hugh Newmarch his son and heir,
A die S. Hill. in 15. dies, 1 R. 2.
who by Fine, 1 R. 2. settled this Manor on himself and his wife Alina, and
the heirs of their bodies, with remainder to the right heirs of the said Hugh.

The Lands which were Margarets, who had been wife of Richard Reins, Fin. 11
R. 4. m. 27.
one of the daughters and heirs of Hugh Newmarch Chr. 8 July, 11 H. 4. were to
be seized. But Elizabeth, daughter and heir of the said Hugh, was married to
Raph Newmarch, son of Robert, son of Adam, son of Adam, son of John, owners of
Bentley in Yorkshire, Inq. Ebor. 4 H. 7.
which afterward descended with this Manor.

This Raph and Elizabeth Newmarch, had a son called Robert, Ex bundello
petitionum de An. 23 E 4.
who had an only daughter named Elizabeth, married to John Nevile of Althorp in
the County of Lincoln; whom the said Elizabeth her Grandmother, over-living
her said son Robert, had a mind to disinherit, and thereupon enfeoffed John.
Duke of Norfolk, and Raph Leventhorp, Clark, of this Manor, and by that means
thought to convey it to Thomas Newmarch, Esquire, and the heirs of his body:
but the Duke after the death of Leventhorp, not liking the design, conveyed it
to the Grandmother for life; the remainder to the said Elizabeth; the wife of
John Nevile, and the heirs of her body, who accordingly succeeded, and left a
daughter and heir named Ioane, the wife of Sir William Gascoigne, Knight, Inq.
virtut^ officii ^4 Iun. 4 H. 7. Ever.
by whom she had a son called Sir William Gascoigne, Knight, who died seized of
this Manor, and the said Manor of Bentley in Yorkshire, amongst many others,
4th March, 2 H. 7. His son Sir William Gascoigne, 4 H. 7. was above nineteen
years old when the Inquisition was taken.

There was a Recovery suffered of this Manor, Mich. 2^ H. 8. rot. 347.
27 H. 8. and William Gascoigne the elder, Knight, called to warrant.

It was sold by one of the Gascoignes to Sir Thomas Stanhope, Knight, B.
Grandfather of Philip first Earl of Chesterfeild, whose Grandson Philip the
second Earl now enjoyes it.

In Adelina's time, the daughter and heir of Robert de Whatton, Regist. (...)
Lenton. p. 88.
there were left Males of the Family, viz. Walter de Whatton, and his sons
Richard, and Robert, and William the son of Richard, but who was father of Sir
Richard de Whatton, Knight, and Roger his brother, who lived in the times of
Edward the first, and Edward the second, I could never yet discover.

Richard de Whatton, and Agnes his wife, intayled Lands and Rents here by Fine,
Fin. in Oct. S. Trin. 3 E. 2.
3 E. 2. on themselves for life; then to Robert their son, and the heirs of his
body; and in default of issue of Robert, to their other sons Roger, John, and
Richard successively in like manner. Robert had a son called John, Autog. pen.
meips.
living in the latter end of the Reign of Edward the third and after, but much
further I cannot trace this Descent, except Robert Skipwith, mentioned in
Starrington, who lived in the time of Richard the second, and Henry the fourth,
was this man's son and changed his name.

Sir Richard de Whatton lies buried in this Church under a well cut Stone Tomb,
whereon is his Pourtraiture with his Shield, having his Arms imbossed upon it,
which the Windows also show to be Argent on a Bend Sable between six Cross
Crosletts Gules, three Besants; his name was on the side, where yet some
Gilding is visible.

Robertus de Watune temp. Willielmi 1. Dom. Willielmus de Watuna Robertus de
Watton-Beatrix. Reg. Lent. 51. Aelina fill. and haer.-Willielmus de Heriz s. p.
Walterus de Wathon Richardus Willielmus de Whatton Richardus de Whatton
miles.-Agnes. Robertus de Whatton-Roger. 3 E. 2. Johan. Johannes de Whatton 41
E. 3. 9 H. 4.-Margeria.
Rich.
Roger. de Whatton dict. de Skerington.-Joana fill. Oliveri de Loverot.-Robertus
marit. 1. Rich. de Whatton-Agnes fill. Joh. le Palmer 8 E. 3. Johannes de
Whatton Alicia* 4 R. 2.-Robertus de Whatton vel Skipwith, 10 H. 4. Will. Bagot,
miles-Margar. sor. and haer. Roberti.


Morin-Henr. Richardus. Henricus de Whatton, 3 E. 3.-Marg. fill. Hug.
Saunssaile. Ada. Benedict.



Robertus.



What appears concerning his brother Rogers posterity, is not^d also in
Scarrington.

There was a Fine levied, 9 H. 4. between John, A die S. Hill. in 15. dies, 9
H. 4.
son and heir of Robert de Whatton, and Margery his wife, Quer. and John de
Knyveton, and Agnes his wife, D^forc. of five Mess. 160 Acres of Land, 30 of
Meadow, and 20s. Rent in Whatton, whereby they were settled on John and Margery,
and the heirs of their bodies; remainder to the right heirs of John de Whatton.

Richard, son of Henry de Whatton, 3 E. 3. settled by Fine a Mess. and four
Bovats of Land and 16 Acres of Meadow in Whatton, Fin. apud Ebor. in Octab.
Puri^. Ma^iae, 3 E. 3.
on Henry his son, and Margaret the daughter of Hugh Saunsfail, and the heirs
of their bodies; remainder to Adam and his; remainder to Benedict, and two
other of his sons.

How these Lands passed I have found no further light certainly to determine.

Thomas Savile, Gent. and John Hanston in a Recovery, 10 Eliz. claimed against
Edmund Stevenson, Hill. 10 Eliz. rot. 454.
Gent. and John Blodworth, 4 Mess. 4 Cottages, 4 Tofts, 1 Dovecote, 6 Gardens,
400 Acres of Land, 100 of Meadow, and 200 of Pasture, with the Appurt. in
Whatton and Bingham, and called John Blythe, Esquire. The next year Brian Stapleton
suffered a Recovery of 4 Mess. 3 Cotag. etc. 200 Acres of Land, Hill. 11 Eliz.
rot. 144.
etc. in Bingham and called to warrant the said John Blythe, Esquire.

Mr. Whalleys Manor of Whatton, which was Sir Maurice Dennys his, mentioned in
Hawkesworth, I suppose was sold to some of the Gelsthorps, whereof William
Gelsthorp has now eight Oxgangs, and three Cottages, and Francis Cook five,
which were heretofore purchased of Mr. William Gelsthorp of London. Ex Relat.
Tho. Cook.
Eight Oxgangs more were bought of... Gelsthorp of Fishlake in Yorkshire,
whereof four are John Iallands, and four the heirs of Francis Haines, and were
lately Peter Gelsthorps, son of James.

Queen Elizabeth, 7 Iun. in the twelfth year of her Reign, granted License to
Thomas Cranmer, Esquire, Part. 9. p^^. 12 Eliz.
to alienate the Rectories and Churches, with the right of Patronage of the
Vicarages of the said Churches of Whatton and Aflacton, to Nicholas Rosell, and
Robert Brookesby, and the heirs of Nicholas.

Sir John Molyneux sold twelve Oxgangs, accounted Parsonage Land, whereof
Robert Clark has 9, and 2 others; and the said Francis Cook, 3. He likewise
sold 12 Oxg. of other Land; 6 to Henry Cook father of Thomas, father of the
said Francis, and of Tho. Cook his elder brother, Chief Constable of this
Hundred the present owners, my Kinsmen by their mother, the daughter of Edward
Oldney of Hawton. Six Oxgangs more were sold to Thomas Sawell, whereof three
remain to his Grandchild Richard, son of Henry.

The Tithes were purchased by Thomas Shipman of Scarrington, whose Grandson
Thomas Shipman is the present owner, and has half an Oxgang of Land also.

The Vicarage of Whatton was ten Marks, when the Abbat of Wellebek was Patron.
Mss. I. M.
It Is now 5l. 6s. 8d. in the Kings Books, and Thomas Shipman, Esquire, Patron.

In the Church in the North I Will, near Sir Richard Whattons Tomb, whereon was
his name on the side, is another plain one whereon is,

Hic jacet Thomas Cranmer, Armiger, qui obiit 27 Maii, 1501. cujus animae
propitietur Deus. Amen.

Upon it... A Chevron between three Cranes... Cranmer.

And Arg. on five Fusells in fesse Gules, each an Escallop Or, Aslacton. Which
is also in the Windows, and so is,

Arg. five fusells in Fesse Gules, Newmarch.

And Arg. on a Bend sable between six Cross. Crosletts Gules, three Bezants,
Whatton.

And Gules, A Lion Ramp. with a Bordure engrailed Arg.

And Sable, A Chevron between ten Cross Crosletts Arg.

In the middle of the East end of the South I Will, lies one well cut in
Alabaster, in Maile, and rich Armor: upon his Helmet, the Head, and part of
the body of a Gryphin, compassed with a Coronet; on the Border by his left
Cheek is, Adoramus te Christ; and on the right, Ih'e.... A... Newmarch at the
Head; below is five fusells in Fesse; and on his Breast, and at the feet, that
impa^ing a Chief, and three Cross Crosletts Botony Fitche; on the sides are
eighteen several Shields of Arms embossed,... A Chevron, and file of three
Labells... a Lion Ramp.... Quarterly 2 and 3 fretty a Bend... two Chevrons... A
Lion Ramp. with double Queve... A Lion Ramp. amongst Cinquefoils... a Fesse,
with a file of three Labells... three Pickaxes... six Roundels 3.2.1. these are
on the South side. On the North side is Barry of six, three Roundels in Chief.
Quarterly per fesse indented. Party per fesse in the upper part two Mullets of
six points pierced. A Chief, and three Cross Crosletts Botony Fitche... a
Fesse between three Cinquefoiles. Ermine, A Chief indented.... three Bends: two
others are broken away.

There was in a Window, Gules, A Lion Ramp. Arg. crowned Or; Ex Coll. St. Lo
Kniveton.
the Crest an Eagles Head, betwixt the wings sable coming out of a Crown Arg.

Galfr. Archbishop of York appropriated this Church of Whatton to the Abbey of
St. James at Welbeck, Reg. de (...), p. 226.
saving always a competency for the Vicar that should Minister, viz. the third
part.

Bingham.
AFter the Conquest this became wholly the Fee of Roger de Busli; before which
Tosti had a Manor here, rated to the Geld for three Car. two Bov.. Lib. Dooms.
The Land was then five Car. There Roger had in Demesne four Car. twenty six
Vill. five Board. fourteen Sochm. having twelve Car.. Pasture wood one leu.
long, and eight qu. broad. In King Edward the Confessors, and in King Williams
time, this was 10l. value, having in Nivueton as much as paid the Tax for three
Bov. Here were also before the Conquest two Manors, which Hoge and Helga had,
and were rated for them as five Bov.. There one Sochm. eight Vill. one Board.
had one Car. and twenty four Acres of Meadow. In the Confessors time this was
20s. in the Conquerours but 13s. It had Soc in Scelford, which part had Soc in
Bingham; there three Sochm. had one Carucat, or Plow Land.

Roger de Busli, at his Foundation of Blyth Priory, Reg. de Blia, p. 104.
which was in the year 1088. gave to it two parts of the Tithes of the Hall of
Bingham, which in the Copy of the Foundation Charter, Printed in the Monast.
Angl. vol. 1. p. 553. is omitted by the fault of some Scribe.

William Paganel, husband of Avicia de Romeilli, and father of Adeliza, Mon.
Angl. vol. 2. p. 96.
wife of Robert de Gaunt, was the next owner of this place, who by the advice
of Thurstan Archbishop of York, who lived in the time of Henry the first,
founded the Priory of Drax in Yorkshire, to which William le Vavassur, who 32
H. 2. gave account of the new Farm of the Land of the said William Painell,
paid 13s. 4d. which he had allowance for, as he had for 40s. laid out in the
repair of the Houses of Gartorp and Bingeham by the Kings Writ, Rot. Pip. 32 H.
2.

Avicia de Romilli gave to God and the Church of St. Peter of Thurgarton in
pure Alms, Reg. de Th^rg. p. 75. b.
for her own and Childrens health, and for the Soul of William Painell, and for
the Souls of her father and mother, and of her brothers and sisters, Bur milne,
with the Multure of Bingham and Waterholm.

Hugh, the son of Clement de Bingham, gave 6d. ob. Rent, out of a Toft, Ib.
which Roys. daughter of Cecily his sister, held of him in Bingham, and 12d.
Rent, out of other Lands there, to Alan the Chaplain, son of Geoffrey, son of
Philip de Wyneston, who gave them to God and the Canons of Thurgarton.

Richard, son of Robert, 6 Ioh. gave ten Marks, and one Palfrey, ^in. 6 Ioh. m.
3.
for having seisin of fourteen Bovats of Land, with the Appurtenances in
Bingham, and of the Service of... Bovats of Land, with the Appurtenances in the
same Town, which were in the Kings hand, whereof Robert de Bingham, father of
the said Richard, died seized, etc.

Fouke Painell held the Barony of Bingham by the Service of a Knights-Fee;
Test. de Nev.
he enfeoffed Hugh de Bingham, and John de Cruce for that service. Afterward
Fouke was disseized of that Barony, by occasion of the Kings Precept de terris
Normannorum, and that Town was given to Henry de Baillol for 40l. Land, and the
Service of Hugh and John still kept in the Kings possession.

The Town of Bingham was found to be an Escheat of the Land of the Normans, Ib.
Ve^edict. de sing^lis Wapent.
and that Colwinus de Lettris and his brother, had it of the gift of King Henry
the third, and of King John his father. Nicholas de Lettres had a Patent for
this Manor, 14 H. 3.

Pat. 10 H. 3. m. 8.
William de London had the Kings presentation to the Church of Bingham, which
before was Rogers, the son of the Earl of Saunty, then made Bishop, viz. 10 H.
3.

Chapter 19 H. 3. m. 2.
The Manor of Bingham, 19 H. 3. was granted to William de Ferrariis.

Pat. 50 H. 3. m. 88.
But in the 50 H. 3. the King granted it in Fee, to Raph Bugge, whose son
Richard de Bingham was a Knight, and is mentioned in Leek and Clipston.

There was a Suit in the Spiritual Court between the Monastery of Blyth, and
Robert the Parson of Bingham, Reg. de Blia. 109.
for that he had carried away in the year 1280. the Tithes of the Sheaves
growing on the ancient Demesne of Sir Raph de Bingham and his Ancestors in the
Fields of Bingham, whereof the said Monastery was anciently possessed, etc.
which controversy was agreed, that the said Rector and his Successors should
pay four Marks yearly in the name of a Farm to the said Monastery, by the
consent of Sir Richard de Bingham the Patron 1284.

This Sir Richard was resident here (all or) most of his time, and had by one
Alice Bertram three sons, William, Richard, and Thomas; on William he settled
this Manor, and Clipston, and Lands in Outhorpe, Kinalton, Cotegrave,
Notingham, and Rotinton, and the Advowson of the Church of Rutington: and in
the latter end of his time married her, as may be gathered out of the Fines he
levied concerning these Lands, 34 E. 1. 1 E. 2. 2 E. 2.

Radulphus Bugge de Nottingham Radulphus Bugg, 50 H. 3. Rich. de Bingham
mil.-Alicia Bertram. Will. de Bingham, mil 34 E. 1. Richardus de Bingham mil.
ob. 11 R. 2.-Annora, 18 E. 3. Willielmus de Bingham oblitante patrem.-Margareta
4* E. 3.-Isabella. Robertus de Bingham aetar. 4. 11 R. 2.

Johannes, 14 E. 3.
Rich. Tho. de Colston. Matild.
Galfr. Bugg. de Leek.
Rich. de Willughby*

In the 29 E. 1. the Jury found it not to the Kings nor any others loss, Es^.
29 E. 1. n. 104.
if Sir Richard de Bingham gave five Marks yearly Rent out of Nottingham; Esc.
1* E. 2. n. 29.
nor if he gave, 1 E. 2. a Mess. and one Acre of Land here to a Chaplain
celebrating Divine Service in the Chapel of St. Elen at Bingham.

Alice who had been the wife, (...). 3 E. 3.
and William the son, of this Sir Richard, 3 E. 3. claimed a Market every
Thursday, and a Fair at Bingham for six days every year, viz. the Eve and
Feast of St. Simon and St. Jude, and four days following, Chapter 8 E. 2. ^. 54.
which was granted to them, 8 E. 2. and the heirs of the body of William,
together with Free Warren in Clipston and Kinalton.

A Fine was levied, A (...) Pasc. (...). 21 E. 3.
21 E. 3. between William de Byngham Chr. Quer. and Roger de Eynecourt, and
Matilda his wife, Deforc. of one Virgat, and two Acres of Land, and 7l. and
21d. ob. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Bingham, Neuton, and Sibethorpe, and
the Advowsons of the Church of All Saints, and the Chapel of St. Elen of
Bingham, thereby settled on the said William, and the heirs Males of his body;
remainder to Richard, brother of the said William and his, etc. and for want of
such to Matilda, daughter of Richard, son of Raph Bugge, and her heirs.

Sir Richard de Bingham Chr. succeeded as son and heir of this William, as in
Clipston may be seen, and had a son called William, whom he over-lived, who
left Robert his son about three or four years old at the death of his
Grandfather the said Sir Richard, Es^. 11 E. 2. ^. 1^.
which was about 11 R. 2. the Thursday before St. Matthews day at Westchestre.

This young Robert, it seems, lived not very long, for there was a Fine levied
1 H. 4. between Thomas de Rempston Chr. Complainant, (...) 15 dies, 1 H. 4.
and Richard late King of England Chivaler, Deforcient, of the Manors of
Bingham and Clipston of the Hill by Plumtre, thirty two Mess. thirty three
Virgats of Land, fifty Acres of Meadow, and 100s. Rent, with the Appurtenances
in Clipston aforesaid, Codgrave, Kynalton, Outhorp, and Neuton, and the
Advow^on of the Church of Bingham, whereby the premises were settled on the
said Sir Thomas Rempston and his heirs. Isabell, who had been the wife of
William Bingham, held Clipston for her life; and Ioane, who had been the wife
of Sir John Pavely, then held Bingham for hers; after whose decease it was to
come to William Arundell, and Agnes his wife for their lives if they over-lived
her, but after all those lives, to the said late King and his heirs.

This Sir Thomas, by Margaret his wife had Sir Thomas Rempston, who married
Alice, the daughter and heir of Sir Thomas Beckering by Isabell his wife, one
of the two sisters and coheirs of the younger Sir John Loudham, Knight, and
lies bured in the middle of the Chancell at Bingham, under a fair Alabaster
Tomb, whereon lay the Effigies of himself and his wife, but is now almost
defaced; he died about 37 H. 6. and left three daughters and heirs, Elizabeth,
Esc. 3^ H. 6.
the wife of John Cheyney, Esquire, Isabel the wife of Sir Brian Stapleton,
Knight, and Margaret, the wife of Richard Bingham the younger, Esquire; which
last pair, I think, left no issue.

This Manor fell to the Family of Stapleton with Rempston, as in that place
may also be noted, with several other Lands: and was by Brian Stapleton,
Esquire, sold to Sir Thomas Stanhope, B.
Grandfather of Philip the first Earl of Chesterfeild, whose Grandson and heir
Philip the second Earl now enjoyes it.

^
The Book of the Forest of Shirwood sho^s, that Hayw^^d (a p^^ce of the Forest
between O^eten and Blidworth) was Raph B^gges of Nottingham, and descended to
Sir Richard de (...), and belongs to the Town of Bingham, and still it remains
to the said Earl accordingly, who has disposed it to old Mr. William Stanhope
his great Uncle.

^
There were very many Recoveries and Executions of the Fine forementioned in the
1 E. 2. concerning this Manor, and the rest of Bingham: Lands in the time of
Edward the fourth; whereof Sir Brian Staplet^n, and Elizabeth his wife, 2 H. 8.
suffered one also; and 17 H. 8. was an Execution of the said Fine of 1 E. 2.
between the first Sir Richard de Bingham, and Alice his wife, etc.

^
Adam Bugge, 8 E. ^. for eighteen Marks of Silver acknowledged one Toft, and
one Bovat of Land in Bingham, to be the right of Hugh, son of Silvester de
Bingham.

There was a Fine levied, 11 E. 2. whereby William, the son of E^stac^i^^ de
Bingham, settled two Mess. and thirty Acres of Land on himself and Agnes his
wife, and the heirs of their bodies; for want of which, one half to his son
Robert, and the other to his son William, and the respective heirs of their
bodies; remainder to the said William, son of E^stac^i^^.

The Guild Hall of St. Mary in Bingham, and the Lands belonging to it there,
(...) 13. (...) E. 6.
were granted 18 May, 7 E. 6. to (...), and George (...), Gent. of which there
were several grants to others in the time of Queen Elizabeth: as there was 22
I^n. 17 Eliz. to John S^nkey, and Percy^all (...) (amongst other things) of the
Close in Bingham, ^
wherein stood the Chapel of St. James, and of St. Hellens Close, etc.

There was a portion allotted for a Vicarage at Bingham about the 26 E. 1.
which within two or three years after was consolidated with the Rectory, ^
with which it continues.

The Rectory of Bingham was 44l. and Mr. Stapleton Patron. It Is now 44l. 7s.
11d. in the Kings Books, and the Earl of Chesterfeild Patron. Several of the
Rectors have been removed to Bishoprics, (...), Ha^^^r, Wren, successively.

In the middle of the Chancell on Sir T^^mas Rempst^ns Tomb was, Arg. A
Che^^on, with a M^ller or Cinquef^^l, in the dexter poy^^ s^cle, Rempston,
impaling Che^. Arg. and Gales, a Bend sable, Bekering; which was also in the
Windows, but in some made Lazengy.

In the Church a Stone Tomb, and one of Alabaster, now under a Se^^, (Mr.
Richard Porters I think, the only considerable Freeholder in the Lordship)
whereon lie the Statues cross-leg'd of some of the Binghams, with their
Shields, whereon is imbossed three (...) a Fesse.

Newton. Newentone.
BEsides that part which was of the Soc of Bingham, which was discharged in
public payments for three Bov. (if the two Manors of Hoge and Helga were not
here also,) of Roger de Buslies Fee; Lib. Doo^^*
The most considerable part of this Township was of the Fee of Goisfrid de
Halselin, and of the Soc of Shelford, and was rated to the Geld at nine Bov.
The Land being esteemed three Car. before the Conquest. There afterward were
nine Sochm. four Board. having four Car. and four Acres of Meadow.

The posterities of these nine Sochmen continued their shares in several hands.

The Chapter of Southwell held eleven Bovats of Land in Newton, Test. de Nev.
Lib. diverse. Inq. pe^. Re^. Regis.
of the Fee of Robert de Everingham (to whom some of Alselins Fees descended,
as in Laxton may be noted) in pure Alms, and one in Saxendale, all which Robert
de Lexington, the great Judge in the former part of the Reign of Henry the
third, and sometimes one of the Canons there, bought and gave when he founded
his Chantrys, as in Southwell may be seen.

Ales, the daughter of William Bellard of Herdeby, gave certain Lands here,
A^tog. pen. meip^. R.T.
and in Bingham, and Car^ol^^on, to her Nephew Walter de B^yvil and his heirs,
reserving 40s. per annum Rent for her life, which were inherited in the time of
Edward the first, by Maud the wife of William, son of Roger de Thurverton, and
Margaret her sister, as in Thoroton is already noted.

The Family of Basily of Radclive had diverse Lands here, and in Shelford,
A^tog. pe^. Tho. Ro^ell* A^.
which Thomas Basely in the year of our Lord 1317. gave to Sir John de Loudham,
Knight, and Alice his wife, and the heirs of the said Sir John, in exchange for
all the Lands which the said Sir John de Loudham had in Lambecote and
Cotegrave, which Lands in Newton descended to the posterity of the said Sir
John, as in Loudham may be observed.

A Fine was levied, In Oct. S. T^in. 14 E. 3. and in Oct. S. Mi^.
14 E. 3. between John de Sibethorp, and Alice his daughter, Quer. and William
de Brinkelee, Deforc. of one Mess. and six Bovats of Land, with the
Appurtenances in Newton by East-Bridgeford, whereby they were settled on John
and Alice, and the heirs of the body of Alice; with remainder to Robert de
Sibethorp, and the heirs of his body; remainder to William de Sibethorp, and
the heirs of his; remainder to Cecily, daughter of Robert de Sibethorpe, and
hers; remainder to John, son of William de Bingham, and his; remainder to
Richard, brother of John, son of William de Bingham, and his; remainder to the
right heirs of John de Sibethorp.

Henry Young, Fin. apud Ebo^. in Oct. S. Io. Bapt. 8 E. 3. and in Oct. S.
Martini.
8 E. 3. by Fine likewise settled two Mess. three Bov. of Land, five Acres of
Meadow, etc. in this Town on his sons Henry, William, Robert, Roger, and Alice
his daughter successively after the same manner.

T^i^. H. 5. (...). 16.
John Burton, 9 H. 5. offered himself against John Sa^yard, concerning a Ple^
of one Mess. thirty Acres of Land, and three of Meadow, with the Appurtenances
in Neuton.

What was belonging to Bingham, or Shelford, or Stoke Bard^^f, came to the
Family of Sta^^^pe, as in those places may be noted, and the Earl of
Chesterfeild accordingly enjoyes.

Another share of Newton is now his Grace the Duke of Newcast^es, during life,
whose Trustees in his absence, during the Rebellion, sold it to... Clarke, in
which is Southwell share held for 52s. per annum Re^^.

About a fifth part of the Tithes (whereof the Land is still known to be of
Bingham* Fee, and in that Parish) belong to the Rectory of Bingham. The Earl of
Chesterfeild has the rest.

December. 7. 38 H. 8. the Lands in Newton by the Tren^* ^
belonging to the Priory of St. Katherin^, by the Walls of Lincoln, were
granted to Robert Brekelsby, and Nic^^l^s Girlington, and their heirs.

Saxendale. Saxeden.
ULviet and V^spac had two Manors here before the Conquest, r^ted to the Geld
at twelve Bovats. The Land then four Car. There Roger de Busli, Lib. (...).
whose it became afterward, had in Demesne two Car. five Sochm. five Vill.
three Board. having two Car. There was a Church, and one Acre of Meadow. The
value (...) 25s. as it was before in the time of King Edward the Confessor.

Malgerus de Saxendal, in the first year of King John, P^. Mi^^. 1 (...).
had a Trial for the Advowson of this Church, against Mr. William Tes^ard, who
pleaded he was instituted by the Archbishop of York, but Malger pleaded be
held it of the Honor of Tykehill, and the Jury found that he presented the
last Parson, and so ^e had his presentation accordingly. This Family of
Saxendale held of the Lovetots, (...). 2. p. 51.
who had it in the time of Henry the first, and then Malger^^ de Saxendale was
a Witness to William de Lovetots Foundation Charter of the Priory of Radford by
Wirksop. Some of them, it seems, give this Lordship to the Priory of Shelford, ^
who held it of Matilda de Lovetot in the time of Henry the third; and
afterward of her posterity the Lords Furn^^all, for the Service of a Knights
Fee.

Hugh de Chais^ets gave to God and St. Peter of Thurgarton, Reg. de (...). p.
54.
and the Canons there serving God, one Bovat of Land in Saxendale, which
William de Adelington held there of him: this gift was for his own Soul, and
Lecia his Wifes, and William Carpenters his Lords, and Sasa^na his wifes, and
the Lady A^rea Bysets, and his fathers and mothers, etc. Henry Biset confirmed
this gift made by Hugh de Caysne^^; which confirmation be made also for the
Souls of William Carpenter his Father, Ib.
and of Susanna his Mother, and Albrea Bisets his Wife.

Adam, Prior of Thurgarton, and the Covent passed it away to John, son of John
de Leyk and his heirs, paying 12d. a year, which with some other Lands which
that Family held here of the Priory of Shelford continued long with it. John de
Leyk, Es^. 17 E. 2. ^. 64.
17 E. 2. died seized of one Mess. 72 Acres of Land, and four of Meadow, in this
place, held of the Priories of Shelford and Thurgarton: his son and heir John
being then above fifteen years old. After the death of William Leek, 37 H. 6.
it was called a Manor, Es^. 37 H. 6.
and said to be held of the Prior of Shelford, his son John Leek being then
found his heir.

The Jury in 32 E. 1. found it not to the Kings loss, Es^. 32 E. 1. ^. 118.
if he granted John de B^^chevaler to give a Mess. in Saxendale to the Priory
of Shelford.

Here was very anciently, and is yet a great Turn kept for the Honor of
Tikhill, whither most of the Tenants of that Honor, in this side of the
Wapent^^, have used and still do resort.

John de la Cre^^over Bailiff of Tikehill, 29 E. 1. at the great Turn o^ Court
of Saxendale next after Michaelmas that year, Reg. de (...), p. 5.
claimed that the Frank-pledges of Elleton, ought to have presented the Prior
of Blithe, for not appearing there, but the Inquest found that they ought not to
present him, nor he to appear: there were then present, besides the Inquest in
the said Court, Richard de Whatton, Roger his brother, Simon de Sibethorp,
Fulco de Hot^t, William his son, John de O^thorp, Mr. John de Colston, Raph his
brother, Robert, son of William de Colston, William Waryn, etc.

After the Priory of Shelford had the Church of Saxendale, the Provision for
the cure was little, and since that Priory came to the Family of Stanh^pe, with
which it yet continues, they had..... to swear it was but a Chapel of Ease,
Ex (...). I. (...).
and that Saxendale was ever Parish to Shelford, and so to save a small
allowance they pulled down the Church, and some of the few Inhabitants now
left, have taken up Stone Coffins, and still use them for Troughs for their
Swine. The Lordship is lately enclosed.

Shelford. Doomsd. Scelford.
THere was in this place of Roger de Bus^ies Fee S^c to Bingham, as much as
paid the Geld for three Bov. The Land one Car. There three Sochm. had one Car.
Lib. Dooms.
But the most of it was the Fee of G^isfrid de Alselin, who succeeded Techi, a
great Saxon owner in this County, who was rated before the Conquest for his
Manor in Scelford to the Dane-geld at four Car. The Land of it was eight Car.
when the Conqueror took his Survey. There were thirty six Vill. twelve Board.
having nine Car. and one Mill 4s. and one Piscary. There was a Priest and a
Church. In the Confessors time the value of this was 8l. then but 4l. It had
Soc in Newton, Ouetorpe, Chenaptorpe, and Carientune.

This Barony was very anciently divided, and a Priory of Canons Regular of St.
Austins founded here; B.
to which King Stephen granted immunity from Toll.

Raph Halselin in the 5 Steph. gave account of two hundred Marks of Silver, ^
and on^ Mark of Gold, for the relief of his Fathers Land; and the same year
Robert de Calz, and Walter his son, gave ^ccount of one hundred Mar^s of
Silver, and one Mark of Gold, for the grant of the Land of L^^^win Chidde. In
the 7 H. 2. Raph Hanselin, ^
and Robert de Caux had pardon for each 20^. In 8 H. 2. Raph Hanselin had
twenty five Knights Fees, and Robert de Cauz fifteen; and so they were
constantly rated through the Reign of Henry the second.

In the Suit between William Bardolf, and Adam de Everingham, ^
for the Patronage of this Monastery, 42 H. 3. William Bardolf pleaded, that
Raph Hanselin his Ancestor, whose heir he was, in the time of King Henry,
Grandfather of the th^^ King Henry the third, founded that Priory, and
enfeoffed it of all his Lands in Shelford, and diverse other Lands. Adam would
have his Ancestor Robert de Cauz Founder, because the Canons presented a
certain Person to John de Birking, Grandfather of the said Adam, whose heir he
was: but the Jury found for William Bardolf, that he was the true Patron, and
that it was Founded by Raph Haunselin; and indeed Bardolf^ moiety of all or
most of their Churches, B.
was appropriated to this Priory of Shelford; as Gedling in this County, and
Westborough, and Dodington in Lincolneshire, and the like: for it appear^ that
the said William and Adam had each a moiety of the Barony of Shelford, E^^. 4
E. 1. (...). and ^ E. 1. ^. 5.
and their Courts there; but because by degrees the B.
Priory became possessed of all, it will not be amiss to make further mention of
the Family of Bardolf in S^oke, and of Everingham in L^^ton, which continued
longer to their posterities.

The Court now kept at Co^gra^e, ^
formerly belonging to the Prior of St. John's of Jerusalem, in the year 129^.
by Peter de Hacch^m, then Master and Lieutenant of the Prior, was called their
Court of Shelford.

William the Prior, and the Covent of Shelford, (...). Thurg. p. 55.
granted to the Prior and Covent of Thurgarton, that they and all Passengers
should have a way through the middle of their Meadow of Ogh^ng, and the D^^ch of
the said Meadow without difficulty, for which purpose they would find a Bridge,
from M^rtinmas till the beginning of May, if need were, and would not challenge
any T^^le in the moiety of Gunthorpe Ferry, by reason of that way; for which
way their Brethren of Thurgarton were to pay 3s. per annum.

There was an Agreement made between the said two H^uses, (...). de Thurg. p.
54.
concerning differences about Tithes* and other things, in Croph^ll and
Tytheby, by Walter Archdeacon of Carliel, by Authority from Pope Innocent 4.
in the third year of his Papacy.

Raph Ilingworth, 19 E. 4. suffered a Recovery of the Manors of Boney and
Shelford. ^


But King Henry the eighth, 24 November. in the twenty nin^^ (...) Reign* ^
(...) of the Priory and (...) etc. (...) it, and one hundred sixty (...) of
Land (...) of Meadow, are (...) of (...), with the App^^^enances, (...),
Esquire, and Anne his wife and the heirs Males of Michael; as he did also, 5
Febr. 31 H. S. (amongst other things) the Manor of Shelford and the Rectoryes
of the Parish Churches o^ Shelford, Saxenda^e, (...) 31 H. 8.
Gedling, Button Ioys, and North-Buckham, Edwardus Stanhope de Rampton
mil.-Ade^^^a fill. Ger^. (...) mil.-(...) Doc^. Fitz. Waren. 1 Richardus
Stanhope de Rampton.-Anna fill. and (...). Joh. Strelley. 2 Michael Stanhope
mil.-Anna f^^. Nichol. (...). Tho. Stanhope mil.-Margar. fill. and cohar. Johan.
Po^^e de E^wall in C. Der^. mil. E^ianor-Thomas Cooper. Edw. mil.
(...)-Johannes (...). (...) Baron. Stanhope* 3 ^an. Jam-Rogerus Townesend.
Johan. Stanhope mil. ob. 1609.-Cordelia fill. and cohaer. Ric.
A^ington.-Dorothea fill. Tho. Trencham. Philippus Stanhope, mil. creat. Com.
Chesterfeild, 4 Car. 1. Aug. 4. 1628.-Kath. fill. Franc. Dom. Hastings, for.
Hen. Com. Huntington.-.... relict. Ferrers.-Will (...) 1672. Hen. Dom. Stanhope
ob. ante patrem.-... fill. and cohaer. Ed. Dom. Wo^ton.-Heer^^n marit. 2.
(...)-D^^. O. Ne^le, marit. 3. Ferdi^^^.-Ar^h Philippus Com. Chesterfeild-...
fill. Algernon Com. Northumb. uxor 1.-Eliz. fill. Jacobi (...) O^mond (...).
2.-Eliz. f^l.... Com. (...) ux. 3. Filia Elizab. Philippus Dom. Stanhope.
Carolus.
Carolus Stanhope.-Francesca fill. Katherin Fran. Top, ob. 1673. (...).
Sa^a. Eliz. Alexander-
Tho. Johan. ^il. Anna Coc^^^^. Katherin Hutchinson. Doroch. Ja^^. Fr^nc.
Ann^-Joh. (...) Comes C^are, 22 J^n. 1624. Nov. 2. Thom. Edw.
Edw. ^.D. Mich.


(...) Doc^. Fitz. Waren. Anna-Ed. Seymour Box Somerset, Protector E. ^.

and all Manors, Mess. Lands, and Tenements, etc. in Shelford, Saxendale,
Newton, Brigford, Gunthorp, Lowdham, Cathorpe, Horingham, Bulcote, Gedling,
Carleton, Stoke, Lamcote, Flintham, Long Collingham, Cawnton, the Town of Not.
Newarke, Burton Ioys, and North-Muskam in this County, late belonging to this
Monastery of Shelford, paying 119l. per annum.

This Michael was second son of Sir Edward Stanhope of Rampton, Ex Coll. I. B.
by his first wife Adelina, the daughter of Sir Gervas Clifton; his second was
Elizabeth, daughter of Fulc. Bourchier Lord Fitz-Warin, by whom he had a
daughter named Anne, married to Edward Duke of Somerset, Lord Protector of
Edward the sixth, in whose cause this Sir Michael Stanhope lost his Head, but
left the beginning of a fair Estate, which his son Sir Thomas, and the rest of
his posterity have well increased.

In Shelford Church,

Here lies the body of the Lady Anne Stanhope, wydowe, daughter to Nicholas
Rawson of Aveley in the County of Essex, Esquire, late wife to Sir Michaell
Stanhope, Knight; which Lady Anne deceased the 20. of Febr. anno 1587. Vivit
post funera virtus.

Over above the Tomb on the Wall, is,

The Epitaphe of Sir Michaell Stanhope, Knight, whilst he lived, Governor of
Hull under the late King of famous memory H. 8. and Chief Gentleman of the
Privy Chamber to the late Noble and good King E. 6. By Sir Michaell she had
these children, Sir Thomas Stanhope of Shelford in the County of Not. Knight;
Elenor married to Thomas Cooper of Thurgarton in Com. Not. Esquire; Edward
Stanhope, Esquire, one of her Majesty's Council in the North parts of England;
Julian married to John Hotham of Scoreborough in Com. Eborum, Esquire; John
Stanhope, Esquire, one of the Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber to our most dear
Sovereign Lady Q. Elizabeth; I^ne married to Sir Roger Towneshend of Eyam in
Com. Norf. Edward Stanhope, Doctor of the Civil Law, one of her Majesty's High
Court of Chancery; Michaell Stanhope, Esquire, one of the Privy Chamber to
Queen Elizabeth; besides Margaret, William, and Edward, who died in their
infancy. The said Lady Anne Stanhope, lived wydowe thirty five years, in which
time she brought up all her younger Children in virtue and learning, whereby
they were preferred to the marriages and callings before recited in her
lifetime. She kept continually a worshipful House, relieved the poor daily,
gave good countenance and comfort to the Preachers of Gods Word; spent the most
of the time of her latter days, in Prayer, and using the Church where Gods
Word was Preached; she being.... old, she died 20th. day of February, ^o. 1587.
the thirtieth year of the Reign aforesaid, in the Faith of Christ, with hope of
a joyful Resurrection.

Upon a smaller Tomb close by,

Here lies Beatrix Rauston, widow, daughter of Sir Philip Cook, Knight, of
Essex, who departed 14 January, 1554. She was Mother of the Lady Stanhope.

Sir Thomas Stanhope married Margaret daughter and coheir of Sir John Port, by
Elizabeth, only daughter of Sir Thomas Gifford of Chillington, and Dorothy, one
of the three daughters and coheirs of Sir John Montegomery of Cubley in
Darbishire, by whom he had Sir John Stanhope, father of Philip, created Earl of
Chesterfeild by King James, and other Children, as Anne, wife of John Hollis
Lord Houghton, and Earl of Clare, Edward and Thomas Stanhope. Sir John had very
many children, Philip his eldest son the first Earl, outlived Henry Lord
Stanhope his son, who married.... the eldest daughter and coheir of Edward
Lord Wotton of Bocton Malherbe in Kent, by whom he had Philip the present Earl,
whose first wife was.... the daughter of Algernon Earl of Northumberland; his
second Elizabeth, daughter of James Duke of Ormond, by whom he has a daughter
Elizabeth; and his third wife is Elizabeth, daughter of.... the Earl of
Caernarvan, by whom he has sons, Philip Lord Stanhope, Charles, etc.

The House was a Garrison for the King, and Commanded by Colonel Philip
Stanhope, son of the first Earl and Uncle of this, which being taken by Storm,
he and many of his Soldiers, were therein slain, and the House afterward
burned. Ferdinando Stanhope his brother was slain at Bridgeford, doing a
charitable office, in commanding assistance for the quenching an House there on
fire by accident, by a Parliament Soldier, some while before. Mr. William
Stanhope, servant of the present Earl, and son of William Stanhope of Linby,
his great Uncle, is now making some Buildings to the Walls, which stood after
the fire.

In Shelford Church upon the Tomb is for Sir Michael Stanhope, Quarterly
Ermine, and Gules, quartering Mallovel, Longvillers, etc. impaling Sable a
Castl^ Argent.

This Family of Stanhope before used the Coat of Lungvillers, viz. Sable a bend
between six Cross crosletts Arg. for their paternal Coat, as in Tuxford,
Newstede, and other places may be observed.

On a new Tomb in the Chancell is thus Inscribed, Expecting a Glorious
Resurrection,

Near to this place rests the body of Katherine, one of the daughters of
Francis Lord Hastings, eldest son to George Earl of Huntingdon, first wife to
Philip Lord Stanhope of Shelford, and Earl of Chesterfeild, which Katherine
departed this life the 28 day of August, An. 1636. leaving issue eleven sons,
viz. John (who died without issue, and lies here interred) Henry, Thomas,
Edward, Charles, Francis and Ferdinando, both also interred in this place;
Michael and Philip here likewise buried; George and Arthur, and two daughters,
viz. Sarah and Elizabeth; which Henry taking to wife Katherine, daughter and
coheir of Thomas [Edw.] Lord Wotton of Bocton in Kent, had issue by her two
sons, viz. Wotton (who died young) and Philip now Earl of Chesterfeild, and two
daughters Mary and Elizabeth, [Katherine.

This small Monument is dedicated to the memory of his dear Mother by Arthur
Stanhope her youngest son, who has done the like in the Church of St. Giles in
the Suburbs of London for his dear father; which Arthur having wedded Anne,
one of the daughters of Sir Henry Salisbury of Lawenny in the County of
Denbigh, Knight and Baronet, by Elizabeth his wife, daughter to Sir John
Vaughan of Golden Grove in the County of Caermarthen, Knight, has had issue
three sons, and one daughter, viz. Philip and Henry, who both died young,
Charles and Katherine now living.

East-Bridgeford on the Hill.
IN Brugeford, before the Normans came, here Odincar had the principal Manor,
which was then rated to the public Taxation at four Carucats. The Land was
then accounted six Car. There afterward Roger de Busli, who had the whole
Township, had in Demesne three Car. twenty Sochm. on ten Bovats of this Land,
Lib. Dooms.
fifteen Vill^ins, three Bordars, having eleven Plows or Car. There was a
Priest and a Church, and twelve Acres of Meadow. In the Confessors time the
value was 3l. in the Conquerours 5l. Here were three Manors which Turstan,
Roschett, and Luston had, before the Conquest rated to the Dane-geld at six
Car. The Land one Car. There was three Acres of Meadow: but after the Conquest
the Land was not Tilled. The value then was 3s. before in the Confessors time
it was 8s.

Roger de Busli, in the year of our Lord 1088. gave to the Priory, which he
Founded at Blithe, two parts of the Tithe of the Hall in Brugeford, both of the
Lands and small Tithes.

Willielmus Biset-Hawisia. Willielmus Carpentar-Susanna. Henricus Biset-Albrea
de Lisures soror Johannis Constab. Cestr. Reg. Lent. 46. b. Johannes Biset
Margeria fill. and haer. aet. plen. 27 H. 3. Ela, 27 H. 3. Isabe^la cohaer. 27
H. 3.
Albrea-Warinus de Basingburne. Constancia. Johannes de Caltoft-Agnes aet. 40.
11 E. 2. Philippus de Caltoft. Johannes de Caltoft-Katherina fill. Johannis
Bre^. Alicia fill. and haer.-Thom. at Hethe Chr. marit. 1.35 E. 3.-Willielmus
de Chaworth. Thom. Chaworth, miles-Nicola fill. Reginaldi de Braybrook,
mil.-Isabella fill. Tho. de Aylesbury, mil. Elizabetha-Johannes Dom. Scroope de
Massam. Thomas le Scroop de Massam, 6 E. 4* Thom. le Scroop. Alicia Scrope fill.
and haer.-Henricus Scroop, Ar. 12 H. 7.







Johan. de Multon-Isabella. Thom. de Multon aet. 15.11 E. 2.

Albrea Esc. 21 E. 1. Nort. and Linc.-Willielmus Ie Grant. Rogerus le Brabazon
mort. 11 E. 2.-Beatrix*



Manasser Biset. Henricus. Ausoldus.

Sub titulo Com. Not. cap. 1.
In a great Book in the Duchy Office, mention is made of Ranulph Earl of
Chesters giving Ludeham and Brigeford to Henry de Lacy in Fee; but the next
owners I find were the Family of Biset.

Reg. de T^^^g. p. 53.
William Carpentar by the consent of Henry Biset his son, and of Manasser Biset
his own brother, and of Ernulphus Biset his Nephew, gave his Mill on Doverock
called Clive milne, to the Priory of Thurgarton, for the Souls of William Biset
his father, and Hawisia his Mother, and Susanna his wife, and Henry Biset, and
Ausoldus his brothers, and Henry his Nephew, and all his Ancestors, so that the
said Mill should be toward the building of the new Church; and when that
should be finished, to be expended amongst the Friars, reserving to himself and
his heirs, the Molture of the Corn of his Demesne, when he would grind there.
With this he gave himself living if he pleased; or if he died in England, there
to be buried. Henry Biset, son of William Carpentar, Ib. p. 56.
confirmed his Fathers gift of that Mill, with a Bovat of Land in Ludham, and a
Toft lying by the said Clive Milne, and likewise gave to the said Priory, the
passage of Briggeford, with a Toft belonging to it, (which is now known by the
name of Botemans Leyes, and still belongs to the Ferry), with William the
Miller, for the Souls of his said father, and of his mother, and of A^brea his
wife, reserving to himself and his heirs, and servants, the free Fishing.

The Abbat of Roucestre, 27 H. 3. claimed against Albreda de Basingburne eight
Carucats, Pl. de Ban^. c^r. ^ob. de Laxingto^ and soc. Pas^. 2^ H. 3. rot. 1,
and 2.
and two Bovats of Land, with the Appurtenances in Briggeford, whereof every
Carucat contained eight Bovats of Land measured, whereof Thurstan his
Predecessor Abbat of Roucestre, in the time of King Henry the second; was
seized in right of his said Church. Abreda came and answered, that neither she,
nor her Ancestors, ever defended this Manor but by four Carucats, as in
Tallages, Aids, Customs, and Services, and called to warrant Margery, Ela, and
Isabella, the daughters and heirs of John Biset. Margery was then of fullage,
Ela, and Isabella under age, and in the ^^^tody of John de Plesseto: they were
the^ ^^^moned in the County of (...).

(...) Basingburne paid two Marks for one (...) Fee here, ^
in the time of Henry the third. ^^oreda de Bassingburne held a Knights Fee
here, ^
by reason of the custody of the Land and heir of John Biset, granted by the
King. Albreda had issue Constancia, and she Isabel, and Agnes: Pl. de Iur. and
A^sis. ap^^ N^tt. 9 E. 3. to. 75. and to. 85. Quo War. 3 L. 3. (...). 1 E. 3.
m. 65.
Isabell was mother of Thomas de Multon of Kirketon, and Agnes of Philip de
Caltoft, between whom, 9 E. 3. the Land was divided. The said Thomas and
Philip, 3 E. 3. claimed Court Leet, Tumbrell and Pillory here, and Philip a
Market on Tuesday, and two Fairs granted, 1 E. 3. to the said Philip de Caltoft.

Roger le Brabazon held the Manor of Est-Briggeford, one moiety of the
inheritance of Beatrix his wife, Es^. 11 ^. 2. ^. 42.
to them and the heirs of their bodies; the other moiety for term of his life,
of the grant of John de Caltoft, and Agnes his wife; and John de Multon, and
Isabell his wife, as the inheritance of them the said Agnes and Isabell; Roger
and Beatrix died without heirs of their bodies, and so the Reversion of their
moiety, 11 E. 2. came to the said Agnes, wife of John de Calisft, then aged
forty years, as Cousin and heir of Beatrix; and to Thomas de Multon, son of the
said Isabell the other heir: which Thomas was then above fifteen years old.

It appears that John Caltoft (son of Philip) 25 E. 3. infeoffed Sir John de
Loudham, Knight, Es^. 27 E. 3. ^. 14.
Richard Pensax, and others in his moiety of this Manor, which descended to
Alice his daughter and heir, who, it seems, was first married to Sir Thomas
Hetke, and after to Sir William Chaworth.

Multons moiety was become Deyncourts in the time of Edward the third. The
Jury, Es^. 27 E. 3. n. 3^.
27 E. 3. found it not to the Kings loss, if he granted leave for William
Deyncurt to give a Mess* and three hundred Acres of Land, with the
Appurtenances in this place, to three Chaplains to celebrate in this Church of
East-Bruggeford.

The King, Chapter 34. and 35 E. 3. m. 3.
35 E. 3. granted to Thomas at Herb, and Alice his wife, who held one moiety
of this Manor, and to Robert Deyncourt, who held the other, that they should
have a Market here on Tuesdayes, and two Pairs yearly to them and their heirs.

In 49 E. 3. Alice, who had been formerly the wife of Sir Thomas de Heth,
Knight, A^tog. pen. Patric. Dom. Chaworth.
made William Carbone^^ Rector of the Church of Alyngton her Attorney, to
deliver seisin to Sir John de Loudham Chivaler the younger, John de We^by, and
to John de Stamford, Rector of the Church of East-Bridgeford, of her Manors of
Est-Brigeforth, Thoresby, Alyngton, and Toynton: The circumscription of her
Seal is, Sigillum D. Aliciae de Hethe; and on the Shield is a Bend between two
Cotises Dance, imp^ling an Escutcheon, within an Or^ of C^nquefoy^s, viz. Hethe
imp^ling Caltoft.

Thomas Deyncourt of Upminstre in Essex, 36 H. 6. demised to Thomas Southwick,
and Henry Normanvile, Esquire, Claus. 36 H. 6. m. 2^.
his Manors of Alington alias West Alington (which was also Bisets Land) in
the County of Lint. Est-Briggeford, and the Advo^son of that Church in Not.
Walley Hall in Darbishire; Ketlethorp in Keton in Rutl. and one Mess. called
the Hall in Kyrton, and all his Lands and Tenements in Alger Kirk, Soterton,
Bykirke, Wygtoft, and Boston, and a certain Rent annually of ten Marks out of
the Demesne of Turford. Howbeit it appears, Es^. 20 H. 6.
20 H. 6. that Robert Deyncourt died seized of the moiety of this Manor, and
ten Marks yearly Rent in Turford; Ales the wife of William Lord Lovell, and
Margaret of Raph Lord Cr^^well, being then by the Jury found his Cousins and
heirs.

Raph Boteler Lord of Sudeley, Knight, Claus. ^ E. 4. m. 21.
and Ales his wife, daughter and heir of William Deyncourt, Knight, 8 E. 4.
remitted all their right and claim to William Bishop of Winchester, in the
moiety of the Manor of East-Briggeford, and Advowson of the Church, and in ten
Marks Rent in Turford etc. And there was a Fine levied, In Crast. Purificat. 20
E. 4.
20 E. 4. between the said William Bishop of Winchester, and Sir Thomas
Billing, Knight, Quer. and John Deyncourt, and Ioane his wife, and Robert
Deyncourt their son and heir, Deforc. whereby this moiety of the Manor and
Advowson, were settled on the said Bishop and his heirs, who gave it to
Magdalen College in Oxford, which he Founded, whereto it still belongs.

The other half, which was Sir John Caltofts, before mentioned, and with his
said daughter and heir Alice, went to the Family of Chaworth, (as in Wiverton
is also shown,) was it seems settled on Thomas Chaworth her son and heir, and
Nicola, daughter of Sir Reginald Braybrooke his first wife, and the heirs of
their bodies.

By an Inquisition taken at Not. 24 Ian. 12 H. 7. after the death of William
Claxton, Esquire, I^q. 12. H 7.
who died the Wednesday next before Whitsunday, 11 H. 7. leaving Raph his son
and heir twenty six years of age and upwards. It appears the Jury found that
Elizabeth Scroop, widow, late wife of John Scroop (of Massam^ Knight, and
daughter and heir of Nicola, sometimes wife of Thomas Chaworth, Knight, seized
of the Manor and Advowson of the Church of East-Briggeford, 29 Apr. 38 H. 6.
gave them to the said William Claxton, Esquire, then her servant, and to
Elianor his wife, daughter of the said Elizabeth, for term of their lives;
after whose decease, at the time of the Inquisition, they were the inheritance
of Henry Scroope, Esquire, and Elizabeth his wife, daughter of Thomas, son of
Thomas, son of the said Elizabeth Scroop, who, 6 E. 4. left her son the said
Thomas Scroop of Massam, Esc. 6 E. 4.
thirty years old.

This remains the inheritance of Simon Scroop, Esquire, who has been and is
still a good Landlord to his Tenants here.

I find John Babington resident at Briggeford in the time of Richard the
second, A^tog. pen. T. S.
and Henry the fourth. Sir John Babington, Knight, died seized of a Manor here
20 of March, Ex Inq. capt. apud Not. ult. Maii, 20 H. 7.
16 H. 7. and Etheldena his sister, then widow of John Delves, entered as heir,
and died 20 Apr. 19 H. 7. leaving her daughter Elena, the wife of Sir Robert
Sheffeild, her heir, who had a son called also Sir Robert Sheffeild, who died
Nov. 15. 24 H. 8. leaving his son Edmund, then nine years of age, eleven
Months, and twenty five days: he was Lord Sheffeild, and died 1 Aug. 4. E. 6.
his son and heir John Lord Sheffeild, being then above twelve years old.

The Lord Sheffeild sold this to John Hacker, who left four sons, Francis his
eldest succeeded him here; John was of Trowell; Richard of Flintham; and
Rowland had a Lease from Magdalen College, of their principal Farm in this
Town, which he left to his only Child..... the wife of Roger Waldron, whose son
Roger died lately in it, and has left Roger his son, scarcely of age yet; who
has also Lands in Scalford and Goteby in Leicestershire.

Francis Hacker, eldest son of Francis and his heir of this Land, was a Colonel
for the Parliament, and Attaint; so that his younger brother Rowland, by the
favor of his Royal Highness the Duke of York, who sold him his brother the
said Francis his Estate, is the present owner. He was a Colonel for the King,
in whose Service he had a younger brother called Thomas Hacker, slain in his
Company about Colston Basset, where their Father old Francis had an Estate
also, which he purchased of Mr. Golding, and had built an House, as in that
place is noted already.

To this House at Bridgeford did Dr. Gilbert Sheldon, then Warden of All Souls
College in Oxford, now Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, retire with old Mrs.
Okeover, shortly after the Parliaments Commissioners had put him out of his
place in that University, and continued here three or four years, well pleased
with the River and Fields, and honored by the neighborhood, to all which he
was ever very extraordinarily kind, and from my self, amongst the rest,
deserves a better acknowledgement.

The Church of Briggeford was one of those, Reg. de New^ted. 206, and 243.
accounted as part of the Chappelry of Blithe, in the Charter of King John, made
in the second year of his Reign, to Walter Archbishop of Roan and his
successors, and the Canons of that Church, where King Henry the second his
Father, and his brother King Henry the younger were buried. This he did at the
request of Queen Elianor his Mother, which King Richard the first, his brother,
had done before, and himself also when he was Earl Morton.

The Inquisition taken at Blithe, 16 E. 3. before Nicholas de Langeford, the
Kings Eschaetor, finds that the Archbishop and Canons of Roan, had the Church
of Briggeford in their hands, as annexed to the Chappelry of Blithe, till King
Edward the first granted it by the name of the free Chapel of Tikhill, to one
Mr. John Clarell, who was thereupon inducted into the Church of Briggeford, as
appropriate and annexed to the said Chappelry, and so held it all his life.
After whose death, the same King Edward the first, gave the said Chappelry to
Mr. Boniface de Saluciis his Kinsman, who was accordingly inducted into this
Church, as belonging to the said Chappelry, and possessed it quietly twenty
four years: but after the death of King Edward the first, in the time of King
Edward the second, William de Grenefeild, then Archbishop of York, began to
seek all occasions he could, to trouble the said Boniface, and procured one
Thomas de N. to be presented to the Church of Briggeford, by Roger Brabazon,
then the Kings Justice, telling him it was of his Patronage in right of Beatrix
his wife, which Thomas was admitted and continued Parson, and Sir John de
Caltoft, and Sir Thomas de Multon, Knights, afterward claimed the Advowson,
which has ever since been used by their successors alternately; Multons
passing through the Deyncourts to William Bishop of Winchester, and so to
Magdalen College in Oxford; and Caltofts descending to the Family of Chaworth,
as before is shown, remains with the heir Male of that House, though the Land
be the inheritance of the said Simon Scroop from an heir general. Patricius
Viscount Chaworth of Armagh, who had this Turn from Sir Richard Chaworth Vicar
general of the Archbishop of Cant, his great Uncle now lately, viz. Nov. 12.
1672. deceased, presented Mr. Henry Smith, the present incumbent.

Next beyond the Parsonage from the Church is a small place heretofore called
Sir John Markhams Manor, Ex A^tog. pen. Will. Iacson, Coronator^^.
given by one Mr. Iacson Parson of this Church, to his Kinsman Michael Iacson,
who married Frances, the daughter of... Poole of Syres^on, and by her left four
sons, William his eldest, Roger Parson of Langeford in Darbishire, George a
Citizen of London, and John of Burton Iorz.

William had one only Child called also William, a modest man, but of great
worth, who died Parson of Screveton, Feb. 27. 1661. leaving but few equals for
Prudence, Piety, and Learning, in this Country. He married Dorothy my Fathers
sister, by whom he left a son of his own name, William (now one of the Coroners
of this County) to succeed him in this small Freehold, together with a Lease
from the said College, and some Lands in Carcolston, and three other sons,
Michael, Roger, and John, and a daughter named Elizabeth, now married to her
Cousin Richard White in London.

The Rectory of East-Bridgeford was 24l. It Is now 19l. 8s. 6d. ob. in the Kings
Books, and the Lord Viscount Chaworth, and the College of St. Mary Magdalen in
Oxford, Patrons by turns.

In the South I Will at East Bridgford the Feet to the East end of the I Will*
On the North side of the Church at East Bridgford the feet to the East Wall.


In the East Window of the Chancell are some painted in their Coat Armours, one
Azure, a Fesse Or, between three Bezants, Mr. Kniveton calls them Libards
heads, quartering with Arg. on a Bend Gules, three pair of wings of the first,
which he also calls three Chevrons; to this the Crest is, A man's head Gules,
with a wreath about the Temples Arg.

Another is Azure, two Chevrons Or, Chaworth.

Another is Deyncourt, with a file of three Labells Arg. charged with six
Billets, Gules.

In the South window encompassed with Johannes Allestre Prior de Thurgarton,
twice, Sable three Keys Arg. the Arms of Thurg. Priory.

In the Church North I Will a Stone Tomb, with one in Maile cross-leg'd, upon
which was, Arg. an Orle of Cinquesoyles, about a small Escutcheon Sable,
Caltoft.

In the Window the same, wherewith impales Ar. two Chevrons Or, Chaworth and
Caltoft; and the same for Chaworth (as it is ever here) quarters with Gules a
Fesse Dance between ten Billets Or, Brett: and both impale Caltoft, in an upper
Window, Chaworth quartering Caltoft.

In the South I Will an Alabaster Tomb North and South, one in Maile, his Belt
between two Cotises Dance; on the sides, Barry of six Or, and Gules, a Canton,
or quarter, Ermine, Gousell.

Azure a Fesse Dance and Billette, Or, Deyncourt.

Three Roses, amongst Cross Crosletts, Darcy. At the feet, Gules, a Bend Or,
between two Cotises Dance Arg. impales with Arg. an Escutcheon Sable, and both
of them encompassed with an Orle of Cinque, or six foiles, like a bordure.

In the window over it is one with a shaven, or bald Crown, his upper Garment
is, Arg. powdered with six Foiles Sable; and by him, Gules, A Bend Or between
two Cotises Dance Arg. this I suppose to be for Sir Thomas Hethe.

There is an old Alabaster Tomb flat, in the North Wall of the Church, and on
it,

Hic jacet Johannes Babington...... ob...... 1409.

And over it on a Stone engraven, Ten Roundels, and a File of three Labels. In
the Window was, Arg. ten Torteauxes, and a File of five Labels Az. impaling
with Arg. a Lion Ramp. Gules, bordered about with Roundells, Or.

Kneveton. Cheneviton.
HEre was Soc to the Kings Manor of Flintham, as much as answered the Tax for
three Bov. The Land was four Bovats. There one Sochm. had half a Car. and an
Acre of Meadow. Before the Conquest Elsi had a Manor here, which paid the
public Geld as one Car. The Land was twelve Bovats. There Earl Alan (of
Richmond), ^^b. Dooms.
whose Fee it became afterward, had one Car. three Sochm. five Vill. having
two Car. There was a Priest and half a Church, and one Mill 10s. and five Acres
of Meadow. This in the Confessors time was 20s. value, in the Conquerours, when
he made his Survey, 40s. Earl Alan had another Manor here, which before was
Vluricks, rated also to the Geld at one Car. The Land twelve Bov. likewise,
there was one Vill. and one Board. Another Manor in this place Vlviet had
before the Norman Invasion, which was then discharged in public payments for
five Bov.. The Land was then one Car. There afterward Roger de Busli had one
Car. and two Vill. with one Car. (or Plow.) and four Acres of Meadow. This kept
the ancient value 10s.

It seems the Family of Musters of Tireswell, was first infeoffed of Earl Alans
part here, which was called Richmund Fee, because William de Musters acquitted
the Abbats of Welbek and Neubo, Regist. de Welleb^k, p. 19, and 20.
and diverse others for the Scurage which he received of them, viz. 6s. 8d. for
their Tenements in Kniveton of Richmond Fee, granted to King Edward the second,
in the fourth year of his Reign, and other times, and particularly for seven
Bovats and an half geldable, and two Bovats of the Glebe of the Church of
Kniveton. The Land which the Abbey of Welbek held here in Villainage, I^. 55.
was given by Eustachius de Mortayn, and held of Richmond. But Adam de St.
Maria, who was Lord of Rowmarrais in Yorkshire, and Bulcote, and Knyveton in
this County, whose second daughter and heir Lucia, was married to.... de
Annesley, gave to this Abbey the Land which John Gouyell held in Kniveton,
together with eight Bovats of Land in Flintham, whereof the Grange had two, and
Robert de Sibbethorp six, concerning which Land, the said Abbat paid Ward and
Scurage to Sir John de Hannesley, and he to the Lord of Bentley by Doncaster,
Paganus de Tiptoft, and he to the chief Lords of Tikhill.

Adam de Sancta Maria gave to the Church of Wellebek, with his body, Ib. 150.
and for the Souls of Alice and Albreda his Wives, and Barthol. his son's, the
whole Service of Robert de Kniveton.

Eustachius de Moretein gave to Mr. Robert de Byngham, and Alice, the daughter
of John de Vvethorp, all his Demesne in the Town and territory of Kniveton, of
the Fee of Hugo Selvein, with the right of Patronage of the Church, as much as
belonged to that Demesne, with the Seat of a Mill upon the Trent, and suit to
it when it should be repaired, of all them of his Men, whose Ancestors used to
grind there, reserving only 4s. per annum Sterling. And beside he granted them
for the same Rent, and their heirs and assigns, all that part of the Mess. of
Robert son of Hugh, which the said Robert held of him of the same Fee, and the
custom of all his Tenants in this Town, to grind at the Windmill of the said
Robert, till the Water-Mill upon the Trent should be repaired: All this did Mr.
Robert de Kniveton (called before de Bingham) and Alice, the daughter of John
de Vvethorp, give to the Abbey of Wellebek, as they had it of Eustachius de
M^retein. Philip Marc, then Sheriff of Not. was Witness, which shows it to be
in King John's time, or the beginning of Henry the third. Ib.


Hugh Silvein gave to Gaufr. de St. M^dardo his brother, all his part which he
had of the Land at Kniveton, and to his heirs for ever, but if he had none by
his wife, then his brother Jordan should have it.

^
William de Malebisse, and the Abbat of Welbeck, held in Kniveton three parts
of a Knights Fee, of Alice Countess of Augi, or Ewe Lady of Tikhill. The Canons
of Neubo in Lincolneshire, (...) H. 3. ^. 17.
19 H. 3. had a confirmation of the third part of the Church of Knyveton by
that King, said to be of the gift of Richard Malebisse; and that King, (...).
H. 3. ^. 2^.
36 H. 3. confirmed the gift of William, son of John Malebisse, being his
Capital Mess. and his whole Demesne in Kniveton, and a Toft and Croft of the
gift of Hugh, son of R^bert, son of Hugh de Knyveton, to the said Abbat of
Neubo, (...). 1 E. 2. (...). 82.
who was impleaded, 1 E. 2. by Ioane, the widow of John, son of John, son of
Nicolas de Knyveton, for the Advowson of the Church, but the Abbat recovered it
because her husband, the said John, did not present when he ought.

John, son of Raph de Kniveton, and others, 9 E. 1. claimed against John,
(...). 9. E. 1. (...) 10. (...).
son of John de Knyveton, that he should acquit them of the Service, which the
Abbat of Wellebek exacted of them for their Freehold, which they held of the
said John, in this Town.

John, son of Raph, had a daughter named Emme, (...). 3 E. 3. ^o. 41.
married to Richard de Kniveton, son of John de Birton, by whom, 3 E. 3. she
had a son called Henry, son of Richard de Kniveton.

The Abbat of Neubo is said to have Court Leet, and Court Baron, Wards,
Marriages, Reliefs, Villains, Felons goods, and Free Warren here, but I have
not seen authority sufficient to conclude it was so.

There is mention likewise of John, son of Nicolas de Knyveton, (...) 4^ E. 3.
(...) 40.
John del Holme, and Alane de Otringham as owners here. And Hugo de Thurverton
about 43 E. 3. or before, had been concerned here.

A Mess. Toft, and six Bovats of Land, about 26 E. 3. were taken into the Kings
hand, (...). 26 E. 3. n. ^^.
by reason of Felony which Agnes, wife of Robert le Ward, had committed, which
were held of William de Wakebrugge, who held them of Thomas At Halle of
Knyveton.

The Jury, 15 R. 2. found it not to the Kings loss, (...). 15* E. 2. part. 2.
^. ^5.
to grant Henry le Scroop Chr. Roger Vicar of the Church of Benington, and
William de Canewyke Chaplain, license to give three Mess. fifty seven Acres of
Land, three of Meadow, and 10s. Rent in Knyveton to the Abbey of Neubo, which
were held immediately of that Monastery, for 13s. 4d. per annum, and Suit of
their Court, from three weeks to three weeks, which the said Abbey held of the
Honor of Richmond, then in Queen Anns hand, which she held in Capite as of the
Crown.

It seems Thomas Babington also about 6 E. 4. had some interest here. Es. 6 E.
4. n. 39.


All Lands and Tenements in the Parish of Kneeton, in the Tenure of Robert
Mower, late belonging to the Monastery of Welbek, May 1. 35 H. 8. were granted
to Edward Fynes Lord Clinton and Say, and Robert Tirwhitt, Esquire, Part. 1^.
part. 35 H. 8.
to be held by them and their heirs in Capite.

Sir Edward Molyneux, Knight, Lib. 2 (...) mortem, fol. 242.
6 E. 6. held the Manor of Kneton of the King in Capite, by the Service of the
fortieth part of a Knights Fee.

There was a Recovery suffered, Mich. 16* and 17 E^i^. rot. 141.
16 Eliz. wherein Robert Fletcher, and John Lascells, Gent. claimed against
John Molyneux, Esquire, two Mess. two Tofts, one Dovecote, two Gardens, one
hundred Acres of Land, ten of Meadow, twenty of Pasture, and 26s. 8d. Rent in
Kneton, Screton, and Carcolston, who called to Warrant Richard Whalley,
Esquire, and Thomas Whalley his son.

This Lordship was enclosed in my time by George Lassells, Esquire, and shortly
after sold to the Lady Dormer, from whom it passed to Sir Henry More, and so to
the Marquess of Dorchester, who about the year 1665. sold it to Sir Francis
Molyneux, Baronet, who has repaired and new built the Seat, and makes it his
Habitation.

There was a good share bought of Edward Mower, and some of Thomas Bean, which
Mr. Pochin of Leicestershire, sold to old Mr. Francis Hacker; and his son the
Colonel has sold it to Elizabeth, the relict of Francis Thornehagh the
Colonel, now wife of William Skeffington, Esquire, whose it is at this present.

My Brother-in-law Mr. John Story has a considerable share, and resides in
this Town, where his Grandfather William purchased some of Mr. Molyneux, which
his Father John increased, and added to it some which he bought of Richard
Alvey of Colston, and Henry his son. There is Robert Holmes has a small
Freehold also, and I think no more.

The Vicarage was 6l. when the Abbat of Newboe was Patron. Mss. I. M.
It Is now 4l. 9s. 4d. ob. in the Kings Books, and Sir Francis Molyneux Patron.

Staunton. Part with Orston.
OF the Land of Edward the Confessor, the ancient Demesne of the Crown, it was
discharged to the public payments for seven Bovats, and three Acres. The Land
was then three Car. Lib. Doo^^.
There after the Conquest King William had ten Sochm. three Board. to three Car.
and sixty Acres of Meadow.

Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, in the year of our Lord 1139. Mon. Angl. vol. 2.
p. 792.
Founded a Priory in the I Will of Hafreholm, and gave satisfaction to Raph
Halselin, and Robert de Calz (Lords of Shelford), for their part of that place;
to which Priory of Haverholme in the County of Lincoln, did this part of
Staunton (which lies in Newark Hundred, but is ever charged with Orston in
Bingham Hundred) belong.

There was an Agreement, 23 H. 3. made in the Church of St. Mary Magdalen of
Newarke on St. Laurence day, Autog. pen. Ha^^^y Staunton, (...).
before Sir Hugh Picot, Sir Ranulf Morin, Sir Galfr. de Stoke, Sir Robert
Vavasor, Sir Henry Thuke, Knights, Warner de Eugaine, Alan de Cranewelle, Fulc
de Houtoft, and others, between the Prior and Covent of Haverholm on the one
part, and Galfr. son of William de Staunton, on the other part, concerning each
parties having their Bull free every where in the Fields and Medows of
Staunton, so as he was not put in the Plow, or any other work during his going
there, and that each part might dispose of the Heads of their Lands (called
then Chevez, now Hades) as they pleased.

The Priory got the Fishing in Smite and Devene, and view of Frank-pledge, Ex
Rot. (...) and lib. Mss. Rob. Staunton, pe^. H. S. Autog. pen. Harvey Staunton,
Ar.
and a Court Baron too, and had many Suitors in Thoroton, and other adjacent
Towns.

Sir Thomas Tresham, Knight, and George Tresham, Gent. 5 E. 6. passed this
Manor to Thomas Gravesend, and Bartholomew Garewey of London, Gent. who, Feb.
20. 6 E. 6. conveyed it to Jerome Brand, who married Brigit, the daughter of
Anthony Staunton, Esquire, and by her had Robert Brand, who sold it about the
28 Eliz. to his Cousin William Staunton, Esquire, and Elizabeth his wife, for
1200l. whom it made entire Lord of the whole Town, which enabled his posterity
the better to enclose and sell, as they have done some part to William
Car^wright, but some of it yet remains to Harvey Staunton, Esquire, the present
owner, great Grandchild and heir of the said William Staunton.

The Tithes of this part belong with the rest of the Rectory of Orston, to the
Church of Lincoln, and the Dean and Chapter find a Curat to officiate in a
Chapel, which stands in the Churchyard of Staunton, whither the inhabitants
which hold this Land resort, as being of Orston Parish. Harvey Staunton,
Esquire, is Lessee to the Dean and Chapter also.

Newark Hundred.
Newarke Wapentak
LAy to Newark before the Conquest, and was then the famous Countess Godeva's,
Lib. Dooms.
and since the Bishop's of Lincoln, till it was taken into the Crown, where it
remains, as in the Town of Newarke may be observed.

Staunton.
THat part of Stantune which is in Newarke Wapentac, before the Norman Invasion
was the Freehold of Tori, who paid the public Tax of the Dane-geld for it, as
ten Bov. The Land being then three Car. There, at the time when the Conqueror
made his Survey, it being then become the Fee of Walter de Ayncurt (as all or
most of Tories Lands in this County were), in Demesne were three Car. and four
Sochm. on one Bovat and an half of this Land, and eleven Villains, Lib. Dooms.
two Board. having two Car. There was a Priest and a Church, one Mill 5s. 4d.
sixty Acres of Meadow; in the time of Edward the Confessor the value was 4l.
then 100s. It had Soc in Alureton, Flodberge, and Dallintune, and was then held
by Malger, whose posterity having their chief residence here had their name
from this place, and do continue in the Male Line possessed of it to this day,
Nov. 30. 1672.

Oliver Dayncourt gave to William de Albeni the younger, Ex veteri exampl. pen.
Harvey Staunton, Ar.
the Fee of two Knights, which Galfr. de Staunton held, and which Raph
Dayencurt his Grandfather gave to the said Williams father, himself adding half
a Knights Fee in Gunwortheby, for which the said William de Albeni was but to
do the Service of one Knight, as the rest of the said Olivers own men did.

The Stauntons were ever esteemed to hold of the Lords of Belvoyr, by Castle
Guard, where Staunton Tower is yet to be found, sufficiently guarded by the
strength of its own liquor, with which the bottom of it is usually replenished.

Galfr. de Stanton gave Lands in Kelum to the Monastery of Rufford, Regist. de
Rufford pen. ^. Viceco^. Hallifax* p. 1.39, and 41.
which King Stephen confirmed, viz. five Bovats, by the consent of Beatrix his
wife, and Malger his son; and confirmed likewise forty Acres there, which those
Monks had of the gift of Malger de Rolleston. Beatrissa de Muscamp, after the
death of her Husband the said Galfr. de Stantun, for three Marks, and a Cow,
which she received of the said Monks, in the presence and by the consent of her
then Lord and Husband Eudo de Aubeni, confirmed to them the said five Bovats,
though they were part of her Dower. And William, son of Malger de Stanton, also
confirmed his Grandfather the said Galfr. de Stanton's gift.

This William made free Hugh Travers, son of Simon de Auvrington, and all his
Progeny, Autog. pen. H. Staunton, Ar.
because he took a Cross for him, and went for him to Jerusalem; so he did
also John, the son of Simon de Auvrington, and gave them to God and the Church
of St. Mary of Staunton, to be in the protection of the Rector of Staunton. The
Witnesses were, Raph de Orlingberga, Robert de Stokes, William de Houkesworth,
Ranulf Morin, Walter de Hou, Richard de Staunton the Parson, William, Parson of
Kilvington, Roger, Parson of Elveston, Raph de St. Paul, and diverse others.
Athelina, this Sir William de Stauntons wife, Ex Mss. Roberti de Staunton, pen.
H. S. p. 39.
is said to be the second of the three daughters and coheirs, of John de
Musters Lord of Basingham in Lincolneshire, by which means part of that
Lordship came to this Family of Staunton.

There was an Agreement in the year 1257. between Sir Galfr. de Staunton,
Knight, this Sir Williams son, and the Priory of Haverholme, concerning many
things to be observed on each part; Autog. pen. H. S.
to which instrument there yet remains a fair Seal of the said Sir Galfr.'s,
having his name circumscribed, and upon the Shield within, is, Two Bars, and a
large Canton, charged with a Mullet of six points.

Sir Galfr.'s wife was Alice, who together with himself settled the whole
Manor of Seredington in Lincolneshire, Autog.
on William de Staunton their eldest son, and the heirs of his body, which they
had of the gift of Thomas Amys, and Malgerus temp. Willielmi Conq. Galfridus de
Staunton-Beatrix de Muscham-Eudo de Aubeni marit. 2. Malgerus de Staunton,
miles Willielmus de Staunton, miles-Athelina un. cohaer. Joh. de Musters.
Galfr. de Staunton, miles-Alicia. Will. de Staunton miles, ob. 1326.-Isabella
soror Rad. de Kirketon, mil. Willielmus de Staunton ob. ante patrem-Joana.
Galfridus de Staunton miles, ob. 1369.-Joana fill. Johannis de Lowdham, mil.
Will. de Staunton miles, ob. 1371.-Elizab. fill. Br. Thornehill. Elizab. fill.
and haer.-Will. de Hamstrelley.
Thom. mil. s. p.-Alicia. Rad.-Constantia fill. Agnetis Sutton. Thom. de
Staunton ob. 1446.-Marg. fill. Tho. Maperley.-Eliz.-Joana. Thom. de Staunton ob.
1482-Elizabetha. Will. de Staunton ob. 14 H. 7. s. p.-Katherina Deisney.
Georgius ob. 1498..... de Staunton fill. and haer.-..... Brooks by.
Will. Rector and Dom. de Staunton. Johan. Thom. ob. 1517.-Anna. Antonius de
Staunton ob. 1560.-Sitha fill. Rob. Nevill de Ragnall ob. 1569. Robertus
Staunton ob. 1582.-Brigitta fill. and cohaer. Gabr. Barwick de Bulcote, Ar.
Willielmus Staunton, Ar. ob. 1602.-Elizabetha fill. Dan. Deisney Anthonius
Staunton-Francisca soror Math. Palmer, militis-Robertus Waring maritus 2.
Willielmus Staunton Ar. ob. 1656.-Anna fill. Edm. Waring. Malgerus s. p. Harvey
Staunton-Anna fill. and haer. Geo. Came. Rad. Maria ux. Will. Sacheverell. Anna
Petri Broughton. Kath. Eliz.
Robertus Waring-Anna Pate. Math. Morgan C. Montegomery-Francisc^.
Johannes Cler.

Anthon. Rich. Joh. Will. Eliz. Anna. Ellen. Since. Kath. Brigit*

Alicia ux. Joh. Thorold de Marston.
Johannes Barret de Horbling-Margareta.


Simon Rector, ob. 1346. Thom. Isabel. Marg. Johannes Johannes, miles, de
Devonsh. 5 E. 3. Johannes, 37 E. 3.


Margareta.
Robertus Rect. de St. Johannes Rect. de Staunton. Marg.-Theobald. de
Trekingham.

Galfr. Willielmus Rogerus de Thourleby-Marg.

Robertus. Hugo.
Robertus.

Christian his wife, for which the said William de Staunton, was to do the
Service for a Knights Fee and an half, to his said Father and mother, and if he
should have no issue, it was to go to the heirs of their bodies. The Witnesses
were Sir Henry de Longo campo, Knight, Sir Rich. de Huwelle, Will. Morin,
Nicholas Morin, Everard de Hall, etc.

William de Staunton, Knight, son of Sir Geoffrey de Staunton, Knight, gave to
Sir Theobald de Trickingham, Autog. pen. H. S.
Knight, in Frank-marriage with Margaret his sister, and to the heirs of their
bodies begotten in lawful Matrimony, his Rent in Starthorpe, and Silkeby, and
certain Homages, Reliefs, and Services, which his Grandchild Sir Geoffrey de
Staunton by his Attorney John de Staunton, 8 E. 3. at York, claimed against
John Asseballoks of Newark, Plac. apud Ebor. cor. Will. Herle and Just. de
Banc. 8 E. 3. rot. 43. Autog. pen. H. S.
because Sir Theobald and his Lady had no issue. The Seal now hanging at Sir
William de Stauntons Deed is, two Chevrons, and S. WILLI. DE. STAVNTON,
MILITIS, in the circumference. To this William de Staunton did Raph de
Kirketon, Knight, give with Isabell his sister in Frank-marriage, all his Land,
Rents, I^*
and Services in Kilvington and Wilberdeston, together with the right of
Patronage of the Church of Kilvington: to this Deed were Witnesses, Sir Raph de
Charnelles, Sir James Byron, John Hosey, Hugh de Charnelles, William de
Sybetorp, Thomas de Hotoft.

There was a Fine levied, 8 E. 1. before Walter de Helyun, John de Lovetot,
Roger de Leycester, and William de Burneton, between Thomas de Welond, and
Margery his wife, and Richard, son of the said Thomas, Querents; and Alice, who
had been wife of Geoffrey Staunton, Deforc. by Richard de Thistleton put in her
place to get or lose, of 10l. with the Appurtenances in Ass, Tunstall,
Blakeshale, Watesdon, and Marleford Rendham, whereby she settled those Lands on
the said Thomas, Margery, and Richard, for twelve years then next ensuing,
without any Rent at all, but afterward they were to pay her and heirs 10l. per
annum, and so were John Woland and Thomas, brothers of the said Richard, upon
whom they were entailed for want of issue of Richard.

Sir William de Staunton was a man of great Action. He was, 6 E. 1. agreeing
with Almeric de Bellafago, concerning some Estate in Sadik, Ib.
whereof a Plea was between them in the Kings Court before Richard de Exon, and
his fellow Justices Itinerant at Lymeric. The King, 8 E. 1. took him into his
special protection, being to go beyond the Seas. He over-lived his son William
de Staunton, and made his Will 9 Nov. 1312. wherein he gave his body to be
buried in the Churchyard of St. Mary of Staunton, with which he bequeathed his
Palfrey, with his furniture. To William his son he gave a Ring with a Sapphire,
and another with a Seal of Cornelyan, likewise a Murrey Cup with a foot; to
Isabell his own wife he gave a Silver Cup, in which was a certain Shield; and a
Murrey Cup with a foot to Ioane his said sons wife; to Margaret his own
daughter he gave like Legacies; and to Geoffrey his sons so^ a Cup of a Nut, to
be an heir Loome, to John, Simon, and Thomas, sons of his said son William; to
Isabell his daughter, and to many Covents of Friars, and to the Churches and
Poor of his own Towns he gave something; and to the Friar Elias de Levissingham
vis. and viiid. for the first day of his Sepulture, and the seventh ten Marks,
and as much to the Holy Land, that two footmen should go the first passage in
his name, and each have five Marks: to perfect all, he ordered his Ward of
Basingham, which he had by Sir Tho. de Multon of Francton, as long as he should
be in his hand with his other Goods. His Executors were Isabell his wife,
William his son, and Sir Robert his brother Parson of Staunton, by the advice
of Fr. Elias de Levissingham.

Sir Geoffrey de Staunton, Knight, was this man's Grandchild, and was Sheriff of
Not. and Derb. in the time of Edward the third; A^^og. Ib.
he married Ioane, the daughter of Sir John de Loudham, and had two sons by her
Knights. Sir William his eldest son, was twice married, but left only a
daughter named Elizabeth after her mother, which daughter was married to
William Hamstrelley, as in Elston is mentioned. Sir Thomas his second son, had
a wife called Alice, who survived him, but had no issue, so that this Manor
came to Raph his third son, whose first wife Hellen left no children, but
Constancia, the daughter of Agnes de Sutton, his second wife left many. Thomas
de Staunton, Esquire, his eldest, about 4 H. 4. had to wife Margaret, the
daughter of Thomas Mapurley, and afterward two others, 2 H. 6. Elizabeth, and
10 H. 6. Ioane. Thomas de Staunton his son, by Elizabeth his wife, daughter
of.... Sleford (as it is said,) left many sons, on whom the Estate was entailed;
he had a sister called Margaret, who, 36 H. 6. was second wife of John Barret
of Horbling in Lincolnshire. His first son William Staunton, Esquire, married
Katherin Deisney, but had no issue, for he left this Manor, 4 Mar. 14 H. 7. to
George his brother, who had a daughter married to.... Brookesby; but after him
this Manor went to William his brother, who was both Lord and Parson of this
place, and left it to his brother Thomas Staunton (John being dead before).
These had a sister named Alice, married to John Thorold of Marston in
Lincolneshire. This last Thomas by his wife Anne, daughter of Th^mas Pourment,
or Paramour, who had cut on the Brass of her Tomb, a Chevron between three
Roses, had a son called Anthony, who married Since, daughter of Robert Nevill of
Ragnell, Esquire, and by her had very many children, Elizabeth, first wife of
Roger North, then of Hugh Thornhil, and after of Arthur Walpole; Ellen, wife of
William Wild of Nettleworth; Brigitt, of Jerome Brand before named; Katherin,
of Richard Marshall; Anne, of William Snow; Since unmarried: his sons were
Anthony, Richard, John, William, but his eldest was Robert Staunton, Esquire, a
very pious good man; he married Brigitt, one of the two daughters and coheirs
of Gabriel Barwick, Esquire, Lord of Bulcote in this County, by whom he left
William Staunton, Esquire, a very good man too; but he sold his share in
Bulcote to his Cousin Gabriel Odingsells for 1500l. to purchase his Cousin
Brands here for 1200l. which were those belonging to the Priory of Haverholm
already mentioned, after which he sold other Lands, as in their places may be
observed. His wife was Elizabeth, the daughter of Dan. Deisney of Norton
Deisney in Lincolneshire, Esquire, with whom he had 300l. portion. She after
his death married.... Aston, and... Bussy. He left his son Anthony Staunton
under age, who was Ward to the Earl of Rutland, and the Tradition is that Sir
Matthew Palmer of Southwell, won him at Bowls of Robert Dallington, servant to
Earl Roger, who gave him to that Gentleman 1604. and when he the said Sir
Matthew had him, he married him to his sister Frances, who had to her second
Husband Robert Waring of Wilford, to whom she bare a son called also Robert
Waring, and two daughters; the elder, Frances, was the first wife of Matthew
Morgan of Aberhavesp in the County of Montegomery; the second, Elizabeth, died
unmarried; but first to her husband the said Anthony Staunton, she brought a
son called William, who married Anne, Niece to her said second husband, being
daughter of Edmund Waring of Leycroft in the County of Stafford, Esquire, his
elder brother.

This William Staunton went with the King to Edgehill Fight, and afterward
was a Colonel for him in the Garrison of Newark, which impaired his Estate, as
the Parliament Soldiers did his house here, in which they sometimes quartered.
He sold some of this Lordship to William Cartwright the Lawyer, before named,
as after his death his Trustees did another part to Dr. James Margetson, now
Lord Primate of Ireland. He left many children, his eldest son Malger died a
Bachelor, and left his brother Harvy Staunton, Esquire, the present inheriter
of this Manor, who married Anne, the daughter and heir of George Came of
Tuxford, (by whom he has daughters, and may have sons to continue this most
ancient Family in the Male Line;) his sister Mary is wife of William
Sacheverell of Barton, Esquire; his sister Anne of Peter Broughton of Lowdham,
younger brother of Sir Brian Broughton; his sister Katherine of Mr. Holbrooke
Parson of Edgemond in Shropshire, brother of William the present Parson of
Staunton; his sister Elizabeth is yet unmarried; and his brother Raph Staunton,
a Scholar in Trinity College in Cambridge; the rest of the Colonels Children
are dead.

The Rectory of Staynton was 18l. It Is now 16l. 13s. 11d. ob. in the Kings
Books, Mss. I. M.
and Harvy Staunton, Esquire, Patron as his Ancestors have been.

There is a certain kind of Rhyming Bard-like Pedigree of this Family, made by
one Robert Cade; who did the like for the Family of Skeffington, and it is like
for some others; in this he has Transcribed the Epitaphs out of this Church,
and therefore it cannot be much a-miss to insert it for an Example of such like
work, which has been much esteemed by some Families.

To the Reader.
GOod Reader thou which hereon looks
A^^^g. pe^. H. S.
Abandon mind so haultye,
It may be proved that is averde,
Though thou think it be faultye.
Forget the Baseness of thy birth,
Do not the best condem,
The Stauntons may compare with thee,
And thou can not with them.
Therefore better I do conclude
To rest, and not to rise,
Leest that thou rise and fall again,
By means of Enterprise.
Then Petigrewe go show thy self,
Truth lurkes not in the dark,
And you that Supervysores are
Attentyve be and mark.
Under this is, Stauntons, two Chevrons, with a Fox for the Crest. And Dysneys,
three Flowers de Lis upon a Fesse, and a Lion passant gardant for the Crest.

The Stauntons Petygrewe.

O Champion chief and warlike wight,
Of Stauntons stock the pryme,
The and thy sequel I must blase,
And Petigrewe define.
Though Haroldes they in noble sort
Thy Arms not pende in vain,
Yet something war^s that here is writ,
As Books and Toumbes show plain.
The first Sir Manger Staunton, Knight,
Before Wylliam came in,
Who this Realm into one Monarche
Did conquer it and win.
At which same time this Mauger Knight,
Thrughe feats of Arms and Sheeld,
In Marcyall prowes so valiant was,
That then he wanne the Feelde.
In Belveor Castle was his houlde,
That Stauntones Tour is highte,
The strongest Forte in all that front,
And hiest to all men's fight:
Unto which Forte with force and Flagge,
The Stauntons stock must stick,
For to defend against the Foe,
Which at the same could kick.
His lodgeinge large in that Turritte
At all times for his ease,
He may command both night and day,
And no man to displease.
And therefore Stauntons Manor now
Which in Staunton does stand,
Of Belveor Castle is now held
By tenure of the Land.
This Staunton Knight got sure to wife
One Emme of worthy fame,
Also a son that Knighted was,
Which Mauger had to name;
Which last Sir Mauger took to wife
Beautrix both sage and wise,
As valiant as his father was
In every Enterprise.
Which Lady Beautrix, daughter was
To him that then was Lord
Of Belveor Castle (in the Vale)
As Tombs and Arms accord;
Which two Sir Knights cross-legged lies
In Male and Armoure fine:
Their superscriptions worn away,
Their deaths are without time.
Yet warlike wightes with helmes on heads
In Stauntons Church do lie,
Their Souls, no doubt, for noble acts
Ascend the Skies on hie.
Before his death this last Knight got
Two sons, William and John,
And also with Manhood and strength
The Mar Pasture he won.
The Belveor Lord said, it belonged
To Northmanton truly,
But this Knight seasde did die thereof
As his demaine in Fee.
Sir William Staunton, Knight, was next,
Dame Athlin was his wife,
Sir Geoffrey Staunton, Knight, their heir,
Both void of vice and strife.
And Sir Henry his brother was,
Who gave himself to learn,
That when he came unto man's state,
He could the Laws discern.
And in the same went forward still,
And profited much, I know,
At Ynnes of Court a Counsailer
And Sergeant in the Law.
And in process of time indeed,
A Judge he came to be
In the Common Benche at Westminster,
Such was his high degree.
A Baron wise, and of great wealth,
Who built for Scholars gain,
Saint Michaels house in Cambridge Town,
Good learning to attain;
Which deed was done in the eighteenth year
Of second Edward King,
One thousand three hundred twenty four,
For whom they pray and singe.
In which said house the Stauntons may
Send Students to be placed,
The Founder has confirmed the same,
It cannot be defaced.
This Lord Baron no issue had,
We cannot remember his wife,
Nor where his body Tombed was
When death had cut off life.
Sir William, the father is Tombed sure
In Stauntons Church of old,
And has engraved upon his Stone
Verbatim to behoulde.
Hic jacet Wilelmus de Staunton, miles, and filius Maugeri de eadem, militis,
qui obiit 6.
ultimo Maii: Cujus animae propitietur Deus. Amen.

Sir Geffrey took Dame Alce to wife,
Four Sons he did beget,
Willyam, Richard, Robert, and John,
and also Margaret.
Robert and John were Persons both
Of Staunton aforesaid,
Margret was married to Trickingham,
Which cannot be denaide.
This Robert in the Chauncell li'the
Of Staunton to be seen,
The superscription Extant there
In these words as I ween.
Hic jacet Robertus quondam rector ecclesiae de Staunto et frater Wilelmi
Staunton de eadem, militis, qui obiit nonis Kalend. Maii, Anno domini 1329.
Cujus animae propitietur Deus.

John his brother in like sort too
Lies tumbled under a Stone,
The superscription may be seen,
It is not all out gone.
Hic jacet Johannes quondam rector ecclesiae de Staunton, and filius Galfridi
Staunton de eadem, militis.

Anno domini this Sir Gefrey
One thousand, and also
Two hundred fifty, as we read,
And addinge seven thereto,
Rated the Prior of Haverholme,
And Neighbors dead and gone,
How many Cattle they should put
Into the Mar each one:
For which unto the Lord alwais
A certain chief in lue,
Of old time called their Mar pennyes,
Which at this day are due.
The Stauntons also likewise have
Common therein yet still,
Willowes to cut, and Fish to take,
With other things at will.
Sir Willyam was Sir Gefreys heir,
And Isbell was his Spouse,
Sister to Sir Raph of Kerketon.
Werton,
A Knight of ancient house;
Which Rafe unto Dame Isbell gave
Lands great with Rents they say,
In Kilvington and Wilberdston
In Franke-marriage for aye;
Which Sir Wilyam, and Dame Isbell
A son between them had,
His name Sir Wilyam Staunton was,
A Knight both grave and sadd.
Which Sir Wilyam the father has
On his own Tomb well writ,
As it is here set word for word,
With his Arms graved on it.
Hic jacet Wilelmus de Staunton, miles, filius Galfridi de eadem, militis, qui
obiit nonis Maii, anno domini 1326. Cujus animae propitietur Deus.

To last Sir Wilyam Ioane was wife,
They sons had four indeed,
Gefrey, John, with Simon also,
And Thomas, as we reed.
And John, his second son, we find,
Had issue John a-right,
A Devonshire man of courage stout,
Which was a worthy Knight.
But Simon was a learned Clerk
Of Staunton Parson he,
His life and calling coequal,
With Men he did agree.
On Pers'nage ground he builded much,
And those were very large,
Houses of office, and Gate House
Were semely for the charge.
Which Simon, when he had ended
And done his works of cost,
He left them all and past away,
As if labor were lost:
And for his pasport, to be plain,
There Is writ upon his Tomb,
A great reward for such a man
For all that he has done.
Hic jacet Magister Simon Rector ecclesiae de Staunton, et frater Galfridi de
eadem, militis. Qui aedificavit Rectoriam de Staunton. Obiit Idus Septembris,
anno domini 1346. Cujus animae propitietur Deus. Amen.

The last Sir Wilyam wedded was
To Ioane of beauty fair,
In unity they lived long,
Sir Gefrey was their heir.
Which Wilyam died in the year of Christ
One thousand, as I guess,
Three hundred forty addinge one,
Not one year more or less.
Good Sir Gefrey, Sir Wilyams son,
Was wedde to Lady Ioane,
Daughter to Sir John of Loudham,
A Knight now Tomb'd in Stone.
Gefrey with Ioane five Children had,
Wilyam, Thomas, and Rafe,
Well learned John, and Alce also,
Christ keep their Souls in safe.
The same John was a good Devyne,
God poured on him his grace,
For he was Parson of Staunton,
But death does all deface.
Alce his own sister husband took
The Lord of Rampton Town,
Stephen Maulovell, a Squire rich,
Of worship and renown.
Alce then was buried in Stauntons Church
The Pulpit very near,
The superscription of her Toumbe
In these words follow'th hear.
Hic jacet Alicia, uxor Stephani Maulovell domini de Ramton, and filia Galfridi
de Staunton, militis. Que obiit in Kalendis Augusti; Anno Domini 1349. Cujus
animae propitietur Deus. Amen.

Sir Gefrey, Knight, on Mondaie died
The sixteenth day, I hear,
Of October, the tenth Month,
Which happens in the year
Of Christ one thousand, as I find,
Three hundred sixty neene,
As writeings old can well declare,
Which have been read and seen.
This Gefrey was a learned Manne,
And well seen in the Law,
Both grave, modest, and wise also,
And once Shreve was, I know;
And in Election once again
That Office to have used.
Justice of Peace he long time was,
Till life had him refused.
Before whose death Stauntons Lordship,
And Basingham, with Lands more,
As Quarington, and Scregenton,
With Elston, truth was foe,
He did intaile to Stauntons heirs,
That males lawfully were,
And of the same seized did die,
By Deeds it may appear.
And of good Lands in Newarke Town,
In Lughborowe without fail,
In Leicester Town in Derbishire,
His right it could not quail.
The said Dame Ioane, Sir Gefreis wife,
Li'the in Saint Laurence queare
In Stauntons Church, the Deed declares,
The writeinge follows here.
Icy git Jone, que fute la femme Mounsier Gefrey de Staunton, and la fillie
Mounsier John de Loudham. Que morust le derayne joure de July, la anne le
nostre seignor Christ 1366. Xcic mercy de sa alme.

Dame Cicely, Sir John Lowdhams wife,
And mother to Lady Ioane,
Li'the buried in Saint Laurence quere,
emongst her friends now gone.
Hic jacet Domina Alicia.
Cicilia de Loudham, uxor Johannis de Loudham, militis, and filia Roberti de
Kirketon, militis. Quae obiit septimo Idus Octobris, Anno Domini 1344. Cujus
animae propitietur Deus. Amen.

Sir Wilyam was Sir Gefreis heir,
Wives worshipful two had,
The Lady Katherin was the first,
Dame Elizabeth full sad:
Elizabeth was daughter dear
To Sir Brian of Thornehill,
A worthy Knight in his Country,
His wit did rule his will.
Sir Wilyam had with El^zabeth,
A wise and virtuous child,
Elizabeth she had to name,
Both modest chaste and mild;
Which El'zabeth his only child,
For Wilyam had no mo,
For aye to her his Manor gave
Of Elston, it was so:
And given to wife no doubt she was
To Hamsterly, a Squire.
The writing writ on Wilyams Tomb
Now read at your desire.
Hic jacet Wilelmus Staunton, filius Galfridi de eadem, militis. Qui obiit Idus
Augusti, Anno domini 1371.

The second son of Sir Gefrey,
Sir Thomas was the same,
And brother to Sir Wilyam he,
And heir of Stauntons name,
Wed Alce, but issue had they none,
Which was small comfort then,
And in the Churchyard lies cold
Emonge the simple men.
So much he did deb^se himself,
To show his humble mind,
That wheresoever his body lay
God could his Soul out find.
This Sir Thomas by his last Will
Gave twenty pounds in deed,
To build an Isle in Stauntons Church,
Which could not be decreede.
For that same money was bestowed
In building the Roof again
Of Stauntons Church which was decaid,
But not as Thomas did mean.
For he willed the Isle should be made
In honor of our Lord,
And to Saint Thomas dedicate,
But they could not accord.
Therefore Saint Thomas of Canterbury
Lost some part of his right,
To remember the Stauntons dead
And buri'de out of sight.
Dame Alce, Sir Thomas wife, does lie
In the Parish Church of Stoke,
Near New'rk, the Superscription is
Which no man can revoke,
Here lies Dame Alce Staunton; over this Toumbe, I pray you, as I have loved
you entirely, to our Lord God you pray for me: the which died the neeneteenth
day of November. In the year of our Lord God 1418. Jesus for thy Passion, take me
to thy mercy; Lady, for thy pity have mercy upon me.

Raph, the third son of Sir Gefrey,
Sir Thomas was his brother,
Was next heir by succession,
The Law could judge no other,
Which Rafe was an Esquier rich,
He lived and had two wives,
Hellen and Constance were their names,
Which both led Godly lives.
Rafe begot Thomas and Wilyam,
But Thomas he was heir,
Who had three wives which discreet were,
Margaret that was so fair,
Elizabeth, and Ioane also,
Three women rare to see:
In them all virtues did abound
Faith, Hope, and Charity.
Rafe was Tomb'd in Quarrington,
Superscription none there is,
Do ye not doubt of his good death,
His Soul enjoys bliss.
And Thomas lies in Stauntons quere,
And writ over him indeed,
As next ensueing this same Verse
You plainly may well reed.
Hic jacet Thomas Staunton, Armiger, filius Radulphi Staunton, Armigeri, qui
obiit ult. Kalend. Aprilis Anno Domini 1446. Cujus animae propitietur Deus.
Amen.

Vermibus hic donor, Et sic ostendere conor:
Nam sicut hic ponor, Ponitur omnis honor.
Next Thomas with El'zabeth had
Five sons, I can them name,
Wilyam, George, Wilyam, Thomas, John,
Then Alce their sister came.
The elder Wilyam, Katherin wedde,
Whose daughter? can you tell?
The Lords of Norton Disney sure,
By proof I know it well;
Who though with wealth they did abound,
Off-springe they both had not,
And George his brother wedded was,
His wifes name is forgot.
Yet this George a fair daughter had,
Whose name we cannot reed,
But Master Bruxbie married her,
In Melton dwelt indeed:
And buride George was the fourth (...) March
One thousand, and some more,
Four hundred years ninety and eight,
By proof we find it so.
Alce, Georges sister, a husband took
John Thorold, a Squire good,
In Marston there his livinge lay,
Who came of gentle blood.
Wilyam Staunton the younger called,
Succeeded as heir Male,
Who in his former brethrens lives,
Mark what I you tell shall,
Well learned he was in all the arts,
He had a passinge brain,
Parson of Staunton he was made,
He cared not for gain.
For being both Lord and Parson then
He was at extreyme charge,
The poor he fed, good house he kept,
His livinge was so large.
And after huge and great sums spent,
He did a single man,
And buried is in Staunton Church,
His own Toumbe show I can.
Thomas, the fourth son of Thomas,
And brother to the Priest,
Was Lord of Staunton by descent,
For he was heir male neest.
His wife was Anne, they children had
Both Anthony and John,
The yongst was Priest a seculare manne,
But mark what else was don,
This Thomas was learned in the Laws,
And mervailed of many,
For he en^ailde the Stauntons Lands,
Not better done of any.
That the heirs Males might it possess,
Both Staunton Manor and all,
With Kilvington, and Alverton,
And Pur^nance general.
Flaubrugh also, and Dal^ington,
According to intent,
As by a Deed which does declare
What Thomas Staunton mente;
Which Deed bears date the fiveteenth year
Of Edward then the King,
The fourth Prince of that name, we read,
Truly an ancient thing,
Don in the year of Christ our Lord
One thousand hundreds four,
And seventie thereto added right,
With twice two and no more.
He builded also the great Barn,
Which by the Manor does stand,
A thousand four hundred sixty three,
Then was it taken in hand.
When Thomas and Anne had run their race,
In Saint Laurence Quere were laid,
The Superscription on their Toumbe
Does follow you may read.
Hic jacet Thomas Staunton, Armiger, filius Thomae Staunton, Armigeri, and Anna
uxor ejus. Qui obiit nono die Ja^^^rii, Anno Domini, 1517. Cujus animae
propitietur Deus. Amen.

Which Thomas and Anne before their deaths
Had two sons them between,
Anthony, John, well learned were;
John was a Priest I ween,
But Anthony, a noble Squire,
A Lover of the poor;
A stout man and Couragiouse,
Well willinge evermore.
He marri'de one of good worship,
Whom he lov'de as his life,
A godly woman in all respects,
Her name was Mistress Sith;
The elder Robert of Ragnell,
A Nevell not forgott,
Her father was, who loved her much,
There was no cause why not,
A good Squier this Nevell was,
His liveing great is it,
An ancient name of worthy house,
Whose stock does florishe yet.
This Anthony, and Sith also,
Had children two and neene,
All virtuous, six wedded well,
As many children been:
Richard, Robert, John, and Wilyam,
Elizabeth, Anne, with more,
Ellen, Brigit and Katherin both
With Sith, it must be so.
Richard and John no issue had,
But El'zabeth, trust me,
Wed Roger North of Walkringham,
And after Whalpole she.
Anne matched her self with Wilyam Snow,
Whose life was short we reed,
Yet issue had he to be seen
John and Richard indeed.
Ellen the next wedde Wilyam Wild,
Of Nettelworth Lord he was;
After him a young man she took,
Cotes brought it so to pass.
Ellen to Wild did bear a son,
Edward we do him call,
The only heir of all his Lands,
If right may to him fall.
And Brigit, like a woman wise,
Was matched with Jerome Brande
Lord of West-hall, or Stauntons Grange,
For so I understande.
Though his life short, yet children four,
Robert, Wilyam also,
Isbell and Anne he did beget,
God send them well to do.
Katherin Staunton, Brigits sister,
A lovinge housebande took
Richard Marshall, a proper man
Most comely on to look.
And Sith her sister was not wedde,
God lov'de her not amiss,
The earth her body has entoumb'd,
Her Soul remains in bliss.
This Anthony the Father he means.
brother of
These godly children all,
Buil'te Stauntons Chimney as it stands,
And Window in the Hall:
And soon after was laid down flat
And chested under stone,
Over whose Toumbe you may discern
That there lies such a one.
Hic jacet Anthonius Staunton, Armiger, filius Thomae Staunton, Armigeri, and
Sitha uxor ejus filia Roberti Nevell, Senioris de Ragnell, Armigeri. Quae ipsa
obiit 27 Feb. 156^.
Qui obiit Septimo die Februarii, Anno Christi 1569. Quorum animabus
propitietur Deus. Amen. Anima Domino Deo meo vivet, Et semen meum serviet ipsi.
En Dieu maffie.

Robert Staunton was eldest next,
And Anthonies heir by bludde,
For he was worthiest of them all,
A famous Squire and good.
His doings in his Fathers life
To small gain did amounte,
Eight hundred pounds then did he owe,
And more by just accounte:
Yet in few years discharged it all,
Without raiseing of Rent;
Few Leases likewise did he make
To furnishe his intent.
And or he did, such order took,
That thirty pounds by year
Soon purchased of Lands in Fee,
And left them to his heir.
Well learned he was, and studiouse
His Books and writeings show,
His deeds and notes are wonderful
To prove the same most true.
He built the Porch at Stauntons house,
And other buildings fair,
Toward the Southe next the Orcharde,
Which remains to his heir.
Hic jacet Robertus Staunton, Armiger, filius and haeres Anthonii Staunton,
Armigeri. Qui quidem Robertus obiit 19 Junii 1582.

Wilyam Staunton, being under age,
Is Lord of all his Land:
His mother likewise gave him hers
Confirmed with her hand.
To Edward Ros Earl of Rutland,
This Wilyam ward was found
In Newarke by a Jury just
Thrughe tenor of his ground;
Which Wilyam in minority
He so his God does fear,
Hundreds of pounds his fathers debte
He does already clear.
At School he learned to serve the Lord,
His learning stands in stead,
Good fathers steps let him out-trace,
And his Books often read.
This Wilyam married E^^zabeth,
God grant them still accord,
Daughter to Daniell Disney, 'Squire,
Of Norton Disney Lord:
An house of great antiquity,
As many that I can name.
And when that she a maiden was
All did commend her fame:
Most vert'uslie she was brought up,
According to her age,
On Instruments she can well play,
Modest she is and sage.
Both Book and Needle she can use,
And Roman write full well,
With qualities more she is indu'de,
Which were too long to tell.
In Roman letters Capital
Thy Stauntons Posy trust,
En Dieu maffoye writ first above,
Which Christians follow must.
The Disneys Posy not forget,
Which is, Suffrance does ease;
Then without doubt for to be toulde,
Few folks you may displease.
Now farewell Wilyam, with thy Spouse,
God grant worship increace,
And Nestors years to live on earth,
And your love not to seace.
God grant you off-springe to your ^oye,
God grant you have his grace,
God grant that I may see in heaven
You all look face to face:
And all that know you say Amen,
No other cause ye have:
If any thing be done amiss,
Free pardon I do crave.
Finis then Quoth. a freende of yours,
And servaunt in his trade,
Which writeing wrought, and Verse also,
His name is Robert C. ^ade.
The mistakes committed by this Bard may easily be corrected, and pardoned.

On the South side the Church at Staunton.
Between the Church and North I Will at Staunton this.
On the North side at Staunton
On the North side at Staunton*


In the Church is, Arg. two Chevrons sable, with a Bordure Engrailed, sable
also. And without a Bordure for Staunton. And Gules, a Fesse Ermine between
three Waterbougets Arg. or Ermine.

And Gules, a B^nd Or.

And Azure, a Fesse Dance, and Billette Or, Deyncurt.

And there was also,

Hic jacet Tho. de Staunton, Armiger, filius Thom. de Staunton, ^ E. Mss. Rob.
Staunton.
Armigeri. Qui obiit nono die Augusti, Anno Domini 1482.

Kilvington. Chelvington.
IN this Town there was Sok to Newark of the Bishop of Lincolnes Fee, as much
as paid the Geld for one Bov. Here was some also Soc to Sibetorpe of Ilbert de
Lacies Fee, but the Manor in Chelvington and Alvreton, which one Colegrim had
before the Conquest, was the chief part, which he then discharged to the
public Tax or Geld for three Bov. The Land being two Carucats. After the
Conquest Hugh (the Sheriff) son of or Fitz-Baldric had it, of whom one Ausger
held it, and had here two Car. and one Sochm. of half the Land, and three Vill.
two Board. having two Car. and twenty Acres of Meadow. Lib. Dooms.
The value of this, in King Edward the Confessors time, was 30s. in King
Williams but 20s.

The next to Ausger, that I have seen, was in the time of Henry the second,
William Morin, who married Beatrix, daughter of Randulf, and sister of Robert
to whom he confirmed two Bovats of Land one in Kilvington, and the other in
Alurington, Autog. pen. Harvey Staunton, Ar.
which the said Robert's father had given him to be held of the said William
Morin for 2s. per annum. These two Bovats were confirmed to this Robert, Ib.
son of Randulf; also by Ranulf Morin, son of the said William Morin, to whose
Deed were also Witnesses Ranulf the Clark, and Eustacinus Bailiffs of Newerch,
Malger de Staunton, Galfr. de Musters, William de St^kes, Raph, son of Robert
de Sibetorp, etc. This Ranulf Morin was living, and Lord of this Manor in the
former part of the Reign of Henry the third. Test. de Nev.
William Morin succeeded him, and in the time of Edward the first, three of
these Morins married the three daughters of Oliver de Lovetot of Carcolston, as
in that place is shown; Robert Morin had Joan, the eldest; Ranulf his brother
had Isabell, the second; and William Morin had Alice, the youngest of the three
which were sisters, and at length heirs of John de Lovetot, son of the said
Oliver. William Morin had a son called Robert, who held this Manor of Hugh de
Rabaz of Ardingworth, Autog. pen. H. S.
by the service of 3s. 4d. which said service, he the said Hugh, 21 E. 3.
conveyed to Sir Geoffrey de Staunton, Knight; but before that, this Robert
Morin, and Ioane his wife, had passed away most of their interest here, as by
Fine they did, 15 E. 3. seven Mess. one Mill, A die Pasc. in 15. dies, 15 E. 3.
sixteen Bovats of Land, forty Acres of Meadow, and 6s. 8^. Rent in Kilvington
and Alverton, to Sir William de Bingham, Knight, and his heirs, reserving both
their own lives in them only. And the said Robert had, in the time of Edward
the second, passed several of his Villains to Robert le Vou of Steinwath, who,
18 E. 2. manumitted Isabell, Autog. pen. H. S.
the daughter of Raph, son of Richard of Kilvington and her two daughters Maud
and Margery, and several others, as the said Robert Morin had granted him power
to do.

Sir William de Bingham, A die S. Ioh. Bapt. in 15. dies; and postea, a die S.
Mich. in 15. dies. 18 E. 3.
18 E. 3. by Fine settled these Lands, together with some in Clipston, on
Richard de Bingham his son, and Annora his wife, then in the custody of Robert
de Meaux their Guardian, and the heirs of their bodies, with remainder to the
right heirs of the said Richard: Ioane, the widow of Robert Morin, then held
these for her life.

John Loudham the elder, Knight, and Edmund de Bingham Parson of Plumtre,
Autog. pen. H. S. Ar.
48 E. 3. confirmed to Simon de Leek, Knight, and John Pain Citizen of London,
all the Lands in Kilvington, Alverton, and Flawburgh, which they had the year
before, viz. 47 E. 3. of the gift of Richard de Bingham, Knight, who had power
to redeem them in six years for 226l. 13s. 8d. to be paid to the said Citizen.

John de Leek Chr. and Isabell his wife, 6 H. 4. by Fine settled the Manor of
Kilvington, A die S. Hill. in 15. dies 6 H. 4.
four Mess. sixty four Acres of Land, sixteen of Meadow, and 20s. Rent, with the
Appurtenances in Kilvington, Staunton, Flawburgh, Dalington, and Newarke, on
Simon de Leeke, and Ioane, who had been the wife of Sir Thomas Mal^ry, Knight,
and the heirs of their bodies; but if the said Simon and Ioane should fail of
issue, to remain to them the said John and Isabell, and the heirs of John.

This Ioane was the daughter and heir of Sir John Talbot of Swannington in
Leicestershire, Ex Coll. I. B.
and bore to the said Simon Leeke Lord of Cotham (as in that place may be seen)
four daughters and heirs, whereof Mary was second wife of Sir Giles D'anbeney,
and bore him a daughter called Jane, who carried her inheritance to Sir Robert
Markham of Cotham her husband, with whose posterity these Lands continued till
the year of our Lord 1574. that a threefold exchange was made, between Robert
Markham of Cotham, Esquire, who passed his Lands in Kilvington, Er Lib. Mss.
Rob. Staunton.
Alverton, Flawburgh, Dalington, and Staunton, to Robert Staunton of Staunton,
Esquire, who passed his in Basingham, Quarington, and Sleford, to Anthony
Thorold of Marston, Esquire, who passed his in Cleypoole to the said Robert
Markham: But Robert Staunton had the hardest bargain, for he gave not only 6l.
per annum, more Rent of Land to his Cousin Thorold, but also 40l. in money to
his Cousin Markham, to whom he was also to give 100l. more, if his son William
Staunton, when he came to the age of nineteen, should refuse to take to his
wife, Frances, the daughter of the said Robert Markham, though he was not
obliged to give her any portion. This was, Ib.
after two or three years talking of, at length agreed and effected, by the
mediation of Thomas Markham of Ollarton, Esquire, Robert Wood of Lamley,
Esquire, chosen for the said Robert Markham, the said Anthony Thorold, and
William Sutton of Averham, chosen for Robert Staunton, at Cotham, 18 Sept.
1574. as before is said.

This made entire the Lordships of Staunton, Kilvington, Alverton, and
Flawburgh, saving part of this Town which Francis Brookesby inherited, from
George Staunton, mentioned in Staunton, and the Priory Lands in Staunton, then
Jerome Brands, but afterward purchased by William Staunton, of Robert Brand,
as before is also shown.

This Manor, and Advowson of the Church, since the death of the last William
Staunton the Colonel, is sold to William Cartwright, before named in Staunton,
and remains the inheritance of William Cartwright his son and heir.

Raph de St. Paul Lord of Sibthorpe (noted also in that place), whose daughter
and heir Dionisia, was married to Alexander Bozon of Kirketon in Holland, whose
son was called Raph de Kirketon, and gave this Advowson with his sister, as in
Staunton is shown (if this latter Raph be not also sometimes called Raph de St.
Paul) or some other of that name, Fin. 10 Ioh. apud Leicest.
passed by Fine 10 Ioh. one Bovat here, to Hugh, son of Roger.

The Rectory of Kilvington was 10l. and Mr. Staynton Patron. Mss. I. M.
Now it is 6l. 12s. 1d. in the Kings Books, and the Church of Southwell Patron.

Mr. Colston is a Freeholder in Kilvington, I think that which was Brookesbies
heretofore, and not long since, Mr. Iosuah Wrights.

Alverton. Alvrington.
IN Alvreton, Flodberg, and Dallington, there was of the Sok of Stauntune, of
the Fee of Walter de Ayncurt, as much as paid the Geld for six Bovats. Lib.
Dooms.
The Land two Car. There twelve Sochm. had three Car. and one hundred Acres of
Meadow; this Malger held, as in Staunton may be observed. Another part here was
Soc to Sibthorp, of Ilbert de Lacies Fee; and another to Kilvington of Hugh
Fitz-Baldric's Fee, which Auger held, and afterward the Family of Morin, as in
Kilvington is noted.

John, the son of Robert Morin of Cartolston, 17 E. 3. passed a Mess. here to
John, Autog. pen. meips. R. T.
son of William Morin of Kilvington, and to Alice his wife.

Simon de Leek, named before in Kilvington, 1 H. 6. made a Letter of Attorney
to take seisin of Agnes, Autog. pen. H. S.
who had been the wife of William, son of Roger de Thurverton, in one moiety of
a Toft, and three Bovats of Land, seven Acres of Meadow, etc. in Alverton, which
descended to the said Agnes, by right of inheritance, after the death of John
Morin of Kercolston her Father; and in the Reversion of the other moiety after
the death of Raph de Bingham of Kercolston, who then held it by the Law of
England, after the death of Elizabeth, late his wife, all which the said Simon
had of the gift and grant of the said Agnes, according to the force and effect
of a certain Instrument or Chartel thereof by her made to him.

This went with Kilvington to the Family of Staunton, as there is shown; and
William Staunton, son of Robert, who made the exchange, falling into the hands
of Henry Hewyt, Citizen and Cloathworker of London, for whom he proved too
weak, gave him possession of Alverton, and an enclosed part of Kilvington, 10
Dec. 1590. 33 Eliz. with whose Family, viz. Sir Thomas Hewyt, son of William,
it still continues.

William Wright, elder brother of Iosuah the Grazier, had a Freehold, and built
an house there, now the inheritance of John Dickinson of Claypole in
Lincolnshire.

Flawborough. And Dalington. Flodberge.
BEsides that which in Doomsday Book is mentioned to be of Walter de Ayencurts
Fee, and of the Soc of Stantune; here was also of his Fee, another parcel Soc
to Cotes (now Cotham), which paid the Dane-geld as one Bov.. The Land being one
Car. There was twenty four Acres of Meadow. Lib. Dooms.
There five Sochm. had one Car.. and twenty four Acres of Meadow. Here was also
a Manor in Flodburge, which Vlvric had before the Conquest, and discharged it
to the public Tax for two Bovats. The Land then was certified to be one Car.
There Walter de Ayncurt had afterward one Car. four Vill. with one Car. This
kept the old value it had before, in the time of Edward the Confessor, viz.
20s. Here was another small part went with Shelton of Roger de Buslies Fee, the
Tithes whereof are paid thither still.

Here was a Family called de le Hou, Ex Chart. de Staunton.
from their residence on the Hill, the lower part is usually called Dalington.
Of them, Gerard, and after him Walter de le Hou; and in the latter end of Henry
the third, and beginning of Edward the first, Robert del How, Et pen. meips.
(who passed some parcels in Flawbergh and Dalington to Robert Morin) were of
most note, though afterward, 13 E. 3. I find William, but I think most of
their Lands were gone first; yet in some writings it is still called
Flawborough del How.

Galfr. Bugge of Wester Leke in 26 E. 1. sold to Sir William de Staunton six
Bov. and an half of Land, with the Villains, Autog. pen. H. S.
in Flawburgh for fifty Marks, to be paid in the Manor House of Sir Richard de
Bingham, brother of the said Galfr. Bugge.

The greatest part of this Township became the possession and inheritance of
the Family of Staunton shortly after, as I guess, for in the Record of Nomina
Villarum, Nom. Vill.
9 E. 2. it is certified to be half a Villa, and Sir William de Staunton Lord
of it, where Kilvington, Staunton, and Alverton answered for a whole one, and
Sir William de Staunton, and Robert Morin were Lords: However when the exchange
in Kilvington was made, that Markhams part (wherein it is like was also some or
all of that share belonging to Cotham), came to the Stauntons, it made it
entirely enough theirs; but it was not very long so, for in the time of the
late troubles it was sold by the then Earl, now Duke of Newcastle, or his
Trustees to Sir John Cropley, whose son has been at great charge and loss, to
spoil a good Lordship for Corn, by enclosing and depopulating it, as we think.
Some of this Town was of Orston Soc, as in that place is mentioned, viz. some
of the lower Town called Dalington, and 26 H. 3. held by Roger Bozon; this is
still in Orston Parish, but the main of the Township is Parish to Staunton. Mr.
Cropley, I see, is now rebuilding some good Farm-Houses, viz. 1675. but the
Lordship I doubt will not hastily recover its former state.

Shelton.
IN Sceltune and Colingham, was a Manor of the Fee of Raph de Limesi, who had
Thorpe and Holton, and one in Dordenthorpe in this Wapentak. This was rated to
the Geld at five Bov. and an half. The Land four Car. There were eight Sochm.
five Vill. having three Car. and sixty Acres of Meadow, Lib. Dooms.
two Acres and one Virg. of Wood or Pasture. In King Edward the Confessors
time this was valued at 4l. but in the Conquerours at 40s. In Scelton and
Flodberge, of the Fee of Roger de Busli, was a Manor, which before the
Conquest Alsi had, and paid for it to the public Tax as seven Bov.. The Land
two Car.. There Robert the Man (or Tenant) of Roger had one Car. six Vill. two
Board. having two Car. There was a Church, and a Mill, and thirty Acres of
Meadow. This in the Confessors time was 40s. in the Conquerours but 30s. value.
Here was also of the Fee of Ilbert de Lacy, Soc to Sibetorp, in Scelton,
Alvreton, Chelvinton, and Torverton, as much as paid the Tax or Geld for three
Bov. The Land one Car. There six Vill. and one Board. had two Car. and thirty
Acres of Meadow.

It Is like the posterity of that Robert, had their name from this place:
however it is certain that a Family of that name here was very anciently.

Lucia, the daughter of Edward Foliot, and Ioane her sister, 33 E. 1. passed a
Mess. and a Car. of Land in Shelton, In Crast. S. Ioh. Bapt. 33 E. 1.
by Fine to Walter Bedewynde.

The Manor and Advowson of the Church of Shelton, In Crast. S. Ioh. Bapt. 7 E.
2.
7 E. 2. by Fine were settled on John de Shelton, and Alice his wife, and the
heirs of John.

In the 9 E. 2. Sibthorp and Shelton, answered for one Vill. and Sir John de
Charnels, Nom. Vill.
John de Bedewynde, John de Schelton, John de Thorpe, and Simon de Sibthorpe
were certified to be Lords.

A Fine was levied of this Manor and Advowson, 10 E. 2. between John de
Shelton, In Oct. S. Trin. 10 E. 2.
and Alice his wife, Quer. and Robert de Helpeston Parson of Houton, Deforc.
whereby they were settled on the said John and Alice for their lives, and to
remain after their decease, to Nicolas de Widmerpole, and Alice his wife, and
the heirs he should beget on her body; and for default of such issue, to the
right heirs of the said Nicolas.

Thomas de Staunton, and Alice his wife, In Crast. Ascens. 2 R. 2. and a die
Pasc. in 15. dies 8 R. 2.
2 R. 2. and afterward, 8 R. 2. levied a Fine of one Mess. in Newarke, and the
Manor of Shelton, and Advowson of the Church to Thomas de Hatfeild Bishop of
Durrham, and John de Popham.

Sir Thomas de Staunton, Knight, and his parceners, Esc. 13 R. 2. n. 14.
13 R. 2. were found to have held half a Knights Fee here of Roger de Clifford,
and 15 R. 2. of Thomas de Clifford, Esc. 15 R. 2. par. 1. ^. 17.
whose son Thomas de Clifford was then found heir of the said Thomas de
Clifford, Knight.

Walter Parker of Segbrok, Cousin of the Lady Alice, Claus. 7 H. 5. m. 7
sometime wife of Sir Thomas de Staunton, Knight, 7 H. 5. released to Simon de
Leke, He was not a Knight.
Knight, and his heirs, all his right in the Manor of Stoke nigh Newarke
called Overhall, and in the Manor of Shelton, and Advowson of the Church, with
the Appurtenances in Shelton and Flawburgh, and in one Mess. in Newarke.

The Manors of Kilvington, Shelton, and Overhall in Stoke by Newark, with the
Appurtenances, and eighteen Mess. twelve Tofts, fifty Bovats of Land, two
hundred Acres of Meadow, with the Appurtenances in Thorpe, Elston, Staunton,
Kilvington, Alverton, Flawburgh, Shelton, and Stoke by Newark, were, A die S.
Ioh. Bapt. in 15. dies 18 H. 6.
18 H. 6. by Fine settled on Richard Willughby, and Anne his wife (one of the
four daughters and heirs of Simon Leke of Cotham, Esquire,) and the heirs of
their bodies; remainder to the right heirs of Anne.

Richard Bingham of Watnow, Esquire, and Anne his wife, suffered a Recovery,
Pasc. 3 H. 8. rot. 146.
3 H. 8. wherein Sir Henry Willughby, Knight, Anthony Fitz-Herbert, Sergeant at
Law, Nicholas Fitz-Herbert, Nicholas Purefey, Esquire, John Savage, Esquire,
Nicholas Strelley, Esquire, and John Newton, claimed against them, the Manor
and Advowson of Flaburgh, two Mess. two Tofts, one hundred and sixty Acres of
Land, forty of Meadow, and forty of Pasture, with the Appurtenances in Bramcote,
Shelton, Flaburgh, and Dalington. They suffered another, 7 H. 8. wherein Sir
William Mering, Mic. 7 H. 8. rot. 540.
Knight, Rowland Digby, Esquire, Everard Digby, Esquire, Nicholas Strelley of
Linby, Esquire, Nicholas Strelley of Strelley, Esquire, and John Digby, Gent.
claimed against them, the Manors of Watnowe Chaworth, and Shelton, and the
Advowson of Shelton Church.

Robert Markham, Esquire, Hill. 10 Eliz. rot. 146.
suffered a Recovery, to Francis Leek, Esquire, and Thomas Markham, Esquire, of
the Manor of Shelton, with the Appurtenances, and two Mess. one Cottag. two
Tofts, one Dovecote, three Gardens, two hundred Acres of Land, forty of Meadow,
sixty of Pasture, with the Appurtenances in Shelton, Dallington, and
Flawborowe, and called to warrant George Purefey, Esquire, 10 Eliz.

B.
Sir Robert Markham, the destroyer of that Family, sold it to Sir Thomas Bennet
an Alderman of London, whose issue enjoyes it at this day entire and enclosed.

Ms. I. M.
The Rectory of Shelton was 8l. and Mr. Markham, and Mr. Bingham, Patrons. It Is
now 6l. 15s. 2d. ob. in the Kings Books, and Simon Bennet, Esquire, Patron.

Sibthorpe. Sibetorpe.
THis is no great Lordship for content of ground, only the soil may be thought
tolerably good, because the Book of Doomsday gives us notice, that in those
days here were four or five several Manors, whereof Earl Alan of Richmond had
some, viz. two which were Vnspaec's before the Conquest, who paid the Geld for
them as two Bov... The Land being then one Car. Fredgis held this of Earl Alan,
and there had one Car, four Sochm. on one Bovat, and two Bordars, Lib. Dooms.
having one Car. There was a Priest and a Church, to which belonged the fourth
part of the Land. There was ten Acres of Meadow. The value of this in the
Confessors time was 20s. then 12s. Another Manor in Sybetorpe this Earl had,
which before was Osberts, who was rated for it to the Dane-geld at one Bov. and
three Acres. The Land half a Car. There was a Priest, two Board. four Acres of
Meadow. This had been 10s. but then was 4s. value.

Of William Peverells Fee here were two Manors, which before the Normans came,
Leuvine and Turvert had, and were rated for them to the Geld at four Bov. The
Land of them, was thirteen Bovats. There Robert the Man (or Tenant) of William
Pevrel had one (Plow, or) Car. and five Villains, with one (Plow, or) Car. and
one Mill 20d. and seven Acres of Meadow. This was in the Confessors time 40s.
value, then but 24s.

Here was another Manor, which before the Conquest Pileuvin had, for which he
paid the Tax as two Bov.. The Land of it was one Car. Afterward, when this
great Survey was made by the Conqueror, Ilbert de Lacy had it. Arnegrime held
it of him. There was one Car. in Demesne, and three Sochm. on half a Bovat of
Land, and sixteen Bordars, having three (Plows, or) Carucats, and the third
part of a Mill 10d. and ten Acres of Meadow. The fourth part of this Land
belonged to the Church of the same Manor. There was a Priest. This kept the
old value 30s.

Earl Alans part here, as most of the Richmond Fee in these parts, was held
immediately of the Family of Musters of Treswell in this County, where Robert
de Musters their Ancestor had his residence, and was called the Man of Earl
Alan in Doomsday Book. John de Musters of Tireswell Chr. 22 E. 3. claimed 3s.
Rent here, Pl. de Banc. Mich. 22 E. 3. rot. ^50.
whereof his Ancestor John de Musters, was seized in the time of King Richard
the first, the right of which descended to Robert his son and heir, and from
the said Robert, to John his son and heir; who dying without issue, it was
inherited by William his said sons brother, who in like manner left it to
Robert his brother; from whom it came to his son and heir the said John de
Musters, who then claimed it. Ex Regist. de Sibethorp pen. meips. R. ^.
John de Musters of Tireswell Chivaler, by Fine, 22 E. 3. passed to Thomas de
Sibethorp Parson of Bekyngham 3s. Rent in Sibethorpe, together with the Homages
and Services of Robert, son of William del Grene of Sibthorp, Robert Adam,
William Elys, Henry Elys, Robert de Stridelington Parson of Skeldingthorpe,
Isabell, who was the wife of Robert de Stridelington, Robert, son of Robert de
Stridelington, and Isabell his wife, John Alisaundre of Sibethorp, Simon de
Sibethorp, and John his younger son, William, son of Simon de Sibethorp, and
Cecily his wife, Constance, daughter of Roger de Botelesford of Sibthorp,
Alice, daughter of Constance de Botelesford, Sarra who had been wife of Walter
de Essewellethorp of Sibethorpe, Henry, son of Walter de Essewellethorpe of
Sibethorp, Hughde St. Paul, Geoffrey Bythelane of Sibethorpe, John, son of
Geoffrey by the Lane, William, son of John, John de Cougham, William de
Middelton, and Elias de Middelton and their heirs, for all the Tenements they
held of the said Sir John de Musters in Sibthorpe.

Robert, Pl. Mich. 20 E. 3. to. 164.
son of William del Grene of Sibthorpe, 20 E. 3. claimed an Acre of Meadow, and
16d. farthing Rent in Sibthorpe, as heir to Goscelinus (de St. Paul) son of
Roger de Sibthorpe, Rogerus de Sibthorp. Goscelinus de St. Paul, R. 1. Thomas
Rogerus Alicia fill. and haer. Willielmus Robertus del Grene de Sibethorp, 20 E.
3.






Tericius de Sibethorp temp. R. 1. Petrus Robertus Henricus Nicole fill. and
haer.-Will. de Middelton. Elias de Middleton, 23 E. 3. Willielmus de Middleton,
23 E. 3.






which Gocelinus had it in the time of Richard the first, and left it to his
son and heir Thomas, who had a son called Roger, who left it to his daughter
and heir Alice, the mother of William, father of the said Robert del Grene, who
passed it and other things to the said Thomas de Sibthorp; so did Elias de
Middleton, and William his son, Pl. Mich. 23 E. 3. to. 93, and to. 94.
23 E. 3. which Elias claimed two Mess. three Tofts, three Bov.. of Land, ten
Acres of Meadow, and 20s. Rent in Sibthorpe and Syreston, from Tiricius de
Sibethorp his Ancestor in the time of Richard the first, who left his right to
Peter his son and heir, who did the like to his son Robert, who had Henry,
father of Nicola, wife of William, and mother of the said Elias de Middleton.
The rest who held any of this Fee, or most of them before named, conveyed their
several interests to this Thomas de Sibthorp Parson of Bekingham.

Lacies Fee, it seems, Reg. de Sibthorp.
came to Sir Stephen Waleys, of whom it was held in the time of Edward the
third.

The most ancient Lord of this Manor, Pl. de Banc. Mich. 21 E. 3. rot. 624.
that I have met with, was Raph de Sancto Paulo, who had a daughter and heir
called Dionysia, married Radulphus de Sancto Paulo Dionysia fill. and
haer.-Alexander Bozon de Kirketon in Hoyland, miles, temp. R. 1. 1 Radulphus,
s. p.-Alicia relict. 2 Hugo Simon de Kirketon in Holand, miles. Johannes de
Kirketon, s. p. Margareta ux. Johannis fill. Rad. Chaumpeneys de Quaplade.
Alicia ux. Fulc. Everard. de Sutton the black, and Willielmi fill. Hugonis de
Flete. Joana ux. Petri Hodle and Johannis fill. Regin. de Aslacton, milit.




to Sir Alexander Bozon of Kirketon in Hoyland, Knight, in the time of King
Richard the first, who left it to a son called Raph de Kirketon, who dying
without issue, his brother Hugh Bozon de Kirketon was his heir, and left it to
Simon de Kirketon his son, who also had a son and heir called John de Kirketon,
but he died without issue, and so this Manor became the inheritance of his
three sisters, Margaret, wife of John, son of Raph Chaumpneys of Quaplade;
Alice, wife of Fulc Everard of Sutton the Black, and after of William, son of
Hugh del Flete; and Ioane, first wife of Peter Hodle, and after of the elder
John, son of Sir Reginald de Aslacton, Knight, who passed this Manor by Fine,
20 E. 3. to the said Thomas de Sibthorp, having obtained the shares of all the
coheirs; and Reginald, son of William del Woodhouses, upon whom his Uncle the
said John, Ex Regist. de Sibthorp.
elder son of Sir Reginald de Aslacton, had settled the Reversion of it; after
the death of himself and the said Ioane his wife without issue, and one,
William Stanfords, confirmed his said Uncles Estate, made of it to the said
Thomas de Sibthorp, with all the Appurtenances in Sibethorp, Shelton, and
Kniveton.

Will. Pevrels Fee, I guess, was held by the posterity of that Rob. before
named in Doomsd. Book, which had their Surname from their residence here.

Robert, son of Raph de Sibethorp, gave this Church to the Knights Templars,
about the time of Henry the second, which several of his heirs and successors
confirmed. William de Sibthorp, and Simon, son of William.

Simon de Sibethorpe, 15 E. 3. claimed the Advowson against Thomas de
Sibethorp, whereof his the said Simons Ancestor Robert was seized in the time
of King Richard the first, Pl. de Banc. Pa^ch. 15 E. 3. rot. ^30.
and presented one Richard de Sibthorp his Clark, who was admitted, and
instituted in the said King Richard the first's Reign; from which Robert, the
right descended to Raph his brother and heir, who had William de Sibthorpe his
son and heir, (who held half a Knights Fee here in the time of Henry the third,
and afterward a fourth part), Test. de Nev.
which William had issue William, the father of Simon de Sibthorp the
Plaintiff. But Thomas pleaded that the forenamed Robert, gave the said Advowson
to the Knights Templars, who presented John del Temple, Anthony Fraunceys, and
Mr. William de la Bruere* their Clarks, successively in the time of Henry the
third, and Gilbert de la Bruere, and upon his resignation Mr. Stephen de
Kynardesey, in the Reign of King Edward the first, and after annulling of the
Order of the Knights Templers, this Advowson and 2s. 6d. Rent came to the hands
Robertus tempore Will. Conq. tenuit M. de Sibthorp Robertus de Sibetorpe
Radulphus de Sibthorp Robertus de Sibthorpe temp. R. 1. s. p. Radulphus
Willielmus de Sibthorp Willielmus de Sibthorpe Simon de Sibthorpe-Margareta.
Willielmus de Sibthorpe.-Cecilia. Willielmus Willielmus de Sibthorp, Ar. 4. H.
6.

Reginaldus, Cler. Johannes, Cler.

Hugo.





of the Knights Hospitallers of St. John's of Jerusalem; whereupon Thomas le
Archer then Prior, upon the resignation of the said Mr. Stephen, presented one
William de Aslacby his Clark, who was thereupon admitted, and instituted in the
time of King Edward the second; and that the said Simon did release all his
right and claim to the said Prior, being seized of the said Advowson, as both
he the said Simon, and William, son of William de Sibthorpe, had done before to
the Knights Templers. And that afterward Philip de Them Prior of the said
Hospital of St. John's of Jerusalem in England, and the Brethren by the consent
of the whole Chapter, the Kings license also being obtained, did give the said
Advowson and 2s. 6d. Rent to the said Thomas de Sibthorpe and his heirs for
ever, in exchange for three Mess. twenty Acres, one Carucat and an half of
Land, fifteen Acres of Meadow, thirty of Wood 40s 5d. ob. Rent, and the Rent of
half a pound of Pepper, and Pasture for ten and eight Oxen, with the
Appurtenances in Miggeham and Wolevington in the County of Berks.

This Thomas de Sibthorpe Parson of Bekingham in Lincolneshire, lived long and
was a great man in his time; in Edward the seconds he began to found a Chantry
here, Reg. de Sibthorp pen. ^eips. R. T.
which in time, when he became possessed of most of this Lordship, and the
Advowson of the Church, which he got appropriated, he improved into a College,
wherein was a Warden being a secular Priest, and eight or nine other Chaplains,
and three Clarks or more, some to sing Trebles, or small like Boys, to help
them to officiate daily in the Church of St. Peter at Sibethorp, and in the
Chapels of St. Anne, St. Katherin, St. Margaret, and St. Mary Magdalene in the
same Church, for the Souls of King Edward the second, and of King Edward the
third, Pl. d^ Banc. Mich. 15 ^. 3 to. 456.
and of his heirs: and for the Souls of the said Thomas de Sibethorp the
Founder, Thomas de Baumburgh, John de Sibethorpe, Robert de Bardelby, Robert de
Baldok, Clarks, Hugh le Dispenser the younger, William the father, and Maud the
mother of the said Thomas de Sibethorpe, Raph his Cousin, and all the Parents
of them the said Thomas de Sibethorp, and John, and all Benefactors to the said
Chapels and Chantry, and for the Souls of William Durant, and Isabell his
wife, and of all the Faithful departed. Also to distribute every Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday, to the Poor of the Parish of Sibthorp seven Loaves of
Wheatbread, every Loaf weighing fifty shillings, (that is two pounds and an
half Troy weight), so as that one of the said Chaplains should daily celebrate
at the Altar in the Chapel there built to the honor of the blessed Anne, the
Mother of the Virgin Mary, for the Souls of Simon de Sibethorp, Robert de
Stridelington, William the father, and Hugh the Uncle of the said Simon,
William, and Reginald, the sons of the said Simon, and of Margaret their
mother, and of all the Heirs, Children, and Ancestors of the said Simon, and
William his son, and likewise for the Souls of the said Thomas de Sibethorp,
William his father, and Maud his Mother, and all the Faithful departed. And
also that the said Warden, and all the said Chaplains and Clarks coming
together in the said Chapel of St. Anne every year, in the Eve of the
Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary, and the night before, do make an
Anniversary with solemn Ringing, as for the body present, for the Souls of the
said Simon, William, Hugh, William, and Reginald, and of their heirs,
Ancestors, and Parents, and likewise on the said Eve and day following, in the
Chapel of St. Mary, for the Souls of the said Thomas de Sibethorp the Fo^nder,
and William his ^ather, and of Maud his mother, and of the said John and Raph,
and of all their Fathers, Mothers, Ancestors, Parents, and the Benefactors to
the said Chapels and Chantrys, and of the Wardens, and all the Parishioners of
the said Church. And that after Mass on the said day of the Annunciation, the
said Warden and his Successors, distribute threescore Farthings, or Bread to
the true value thereof, amongst the poor of the Parish, which shall be then
found in the Churchyard, and to every Chaplain two pence, and each Clark there
ministering a penny for ever. And there was likewise a provision for one and
thirty Wax lights, P^. de (...) Trin. 21 E. 3. (...) 413.
and one Lamp to be ready to burn at certain times in the said Church, Chapels
and Chancell. And that one poor old or weak man, who was to keep the gate, and
one poor woman born in the Parish, every day at nine of the Clock, eat in the
Hall before the said College, one repast of the Alms of the said House, and
each of them have a garment every year delivered to them, at the Feast of the
Conception of the Virgin Mary, and many other Ordinances, for which the
College had the Manor of Sibethorp, five and twenty Mess. five Tofts, one
Carucat, three Bovats, two hundred and four Acres of Land, seventy two Acres of
Meadow, twenty Acres of Pasture 8l. 6s. 7d. Rent, with the Appurtenances in
Sibethorp, Hokesworth, Sireston, Eyleston, Asiacton, and Thurverton. And the
Church impropriate, and indeed, before the dissolution, most of the Township.
This Thomas de Sibethorp Founded a Chapel and Chantry at Bekingham in
Lincolneshire, where he was Parson, Ex (...) de Sibthorp.
which he endowed with sixteen Mess. five Tofts, etc. and seven and forty
shillings of yearly Rent, with the Appurtenances in Bekingham, Sutton, Fenton,
Thagelthorpe, Broughton, Stapelford, Skirches, and Barneby, out of which the
Warden was to pay the Warden of Sibthorp 6s. 8d. yearly.

Thomas de Sibethorp was to present a fit Chaplain to the Archbishop of York,
Regi^^. de T^^^g. p. 43.
to be instituted during his life, and afterward the Chapter of Southwell
within fifteen days of the Avoidance, else the Prior and Covent of Thurgarton
within other fifteen, else the Archbishop of York to Collate the said Chantry
of Sibthorp to any fit Chaplain.

How this Thomas de Sibethorp was related to Simon, or any of this Family, I
cannot certainly determine.

William Sibthorpe of Sibthorpe, being to go beyond the Seas, on the Kings
business, did, Aut^g. pen. (...).
18 R. 2. settle his Manor of Sibthorp, and eight Bovats (or Oxgangs) of Land
there, and the Manor of Staunton on the Wolds, upon Sir John Leek, and Simon
Leek his son, intending they should have them, if his own issue failed, though
as in his declaration of the trust he expresses it, they ought to descend to
one Petronilla Gauy. The rest of his Lands in Sibthorpe, and all his Lands,
Tenements, Services, Rents, etc. in the Towns and Fields of Hokesworth, Orston,
Staunton, Thurverton, Aslacton, Flintham, and Farnedon, with the Appurtenances,
and all his Goods and Chattels, he then likewise conveyed in trust, to the said
Sir John Leek, and Simon Leek his son, and William Leek to pay his debts, and
fulfill his last Will, and keep his Children, appointing the surplusage of his
Rents and Profits of his Lands, till his son and heir William Sibthorp should
come of age, to increase the fortunes of his son Gerard, and daughter Margery,
only Sir John Leek to have 100s. for his pains, and Simon, and William Leek
five Marks a-piece; but if all the Children dyed under age, the said Simon Leek
to have all. The last I have noted of this Family is, William Sibthorp,
Esquire, named in Aflacton, 4 H. 6.

Hugh, son of Roger de Bingham, gave two Bovats of Land in Sibetorpe to
William, A^^^g. pen. (...) H. S.
son of William de Selton, in the first year after the Election of Simon de
Langton, to the Archbishopric of York; but because that Land was then in the
hands of Galfr. fill. Pagan, and Galfr. de Tolnei, both of Newerch, for four
years, he found pledges to give seisin after the expiration, viz. Walter del
Hou, Ranulf Morin, and William, son of Roger de Bingham, Roger, heir of the
said Hugh, then also passing his word: The Witnesses were William de Dive,
William de Staunton, Galfr. de Claipole, Richard de Selton, William de
Hokesword, Raph de St. Paul, John ae....., William de Bingham, Reginald de
Aslacton, Walter Croc, Mr. Richard de Aslacton, Roger the Chaplain, who wrote
the Cyrograph, and many others.

William Dayvill, 8 H. 5. was summoned to answer Thomas de Grene of Sibthorp,
(...) H. (...). 310.
concerning a Plea, that he should acquit him of the Service which the King
exacted of him for the Freehold, which he held in Sybthorp of the said William.

William Laybourne the younger (named in Hawkesworth), (...) 7 E. 4. (...). ^^1.
7 E. 4. was against Thomas Nevyll, Esquire, and John his son, John Metheley,
and John Saynton concerning a Plea of one Mess. and eight Bovats of Land, with
the Appurtenances in Sybthorpe.

There was also a Recovery, 20 E. 4. wherein John Byngham, (...) 20 E. 4. ^ot.
3^9.
Esquire, claimed against Thomas Seyman, and Elizabeth his wife, the Manor of
Hoxworth, with the Appurtenances, one Mess. eight Bovats of Land, with the
Appurtenances in Sybthorp, and likewise the third part of fourteen Mess. two
hundred Acres of Land, I^. to. 310.
sixty of Meadow, sixty of Pasture, and 40s. Rent, with the Appurtenances in
Elston, Sybthorp, Hoxworth, Flawbergh, Shelton, and Staunton.

The College of Sibthorp, 37 H. 8. July 25. with all its Hereditaments, G^ig.
3. (...). 37 H.S. ^o. 32.
was granted to Richard Whalley, Esquire, and Thomas Magnus (the Warden who had
it for his life), and to the heirs of the said Richard. His Grandchild Richard
Whalley of Kirketon by Screveton, Esquire, (though here were some Lands also which
belonged to the College of Rotheram, Founded by Thomas Rotheram Bishop of
Lincoln, B.
and after Archbishop of York in the time of Henry the eighth) intired and
enclosed, and entangled, and sold this Lordship, which went from him, with
other Lands in Carcolston, Hawkesworth, and Flintham, which were collateral
security only for this; but thereby became also at length the possessions of
the Right Hon. William, then Earl, now Duke of Newcastle, whose Trustees sold
it during his absence and the Kings, to Edward Whalley the Major General, son
of the said Richard, who had it from the Parliament then ruling likewise; but
he being Attaint, the King at his return, gave the then Marquess of Newcastle
this Manor, and all the rest of his own Lands forfeited to the Crown by any of
the Purchasers; howbeit.... the son of John Whalley, whom the Major General his
Father married to..... the daughter of Sir Herbert Springate, is now in
possession, by reason of a Mortgage the Duke made to Sir Arnald Waring long
since, but still kept on foot.

In the Chancell there is a fair Tomb of Alabaster, made for Edward Burnell
1590. He married the widow (being the third wife) of Richard Whalley the
Patentee: it stands before one in the North-wall, by which is cut in a small
Shield in Stone, A Spread Eagle. In the North Windows of the Church are the
Arms of England and Spensers.

Syreston.
HEre was some of the Soc of Newark, the Fee of Remigius Bishop of Lincoln,
which discharged it self to the Tax for one Bov.. but besides that in Sireston,
were three Manors, one of the Fee of Earl Alan of Richmond, which Aylric had
before, and paid for it to the public Tax for three Bovats. The Land of it was
a Carucat and an half, Lib. Doo^s.
which three Sochmen had. There were twelve Acres of Meadow. Robert (de Musters)
held it of Earl Alan. It had been 40s. value, but was then fallen to 20s.

Another was of the Fee of Berengarius de Todeni, which Sbernecroc had before
the Conquest, and paid for it to the Dane-geld as two Bov.. The Land was one
Car. Goduvin held it of Berenger, and there had one Car. one Sochm. two Vill.
with half a Car. There was ten Acres of Meadow. This in the Confessors time was
30s. value, then but 20s.

Another was the Kings Tayn Land, which Turvert had, and discharged for two
Bovats to the Geld. The Land was five Bov. There two Vill. one Board. had one
Car. and five Acres of Meadow. This in the time of King Edward the Confessor
was 10s. value, then but 5s.

The Family of Mustiers had the Richmond Fee, whereof I find Galfr. de
Mustiers, who, 6 Ioh. gave account of fifty Marks, for having to wife Amicia de
Sablello, Pip. 6 Io^.
with her Land.

Walter de Wyldeker paid 5s. 4d. for the fifth part of a Knights Fee, which he
held in Sireston, Te^t de Ne^.
in the former part of the Reign of Henry the third.

Galfr. de Stokes was found, 51 H. 3. to have held four Bovats in Sireston,
Est. 51 H. 3. n. 31.
of Galfr. de Musters.

William Hagh recovered seisin, 14 E. 1. of one Mess. two Bovats of Land, Pl.
de Ba^c. T^i^. 14 E. 1. to. 3.
and 14s. Rent in Sireston, against John, son of Paulinus de Stokes (who was
Cousin and heir of the said Galf. de Stokes) by default.

E^^. 10 E. 1. n. 2^.
Sir Robert de Musters held two Knights Fees in Knyveton, Sireston, Sybthorp,
Tyreswell, Ketelthorpe, and Wynelingham for 20s. a year, and Ward of the Castle
of Richmond, 10 E. 1.

N^^. Vill.
In the Nom. Vill. 9 E. 2. Sireston and Eyleston answered for one Vill. and
Henry de Musteres, and William de Heygh, are certified to be Lords.

There was a Fine levied at York, 10 E. 3. between Henry de Musters, (...)
Past. i^ 3 Sept. 10 E. 3. ap^d E. ^.
Quer. and William Bernak Parson of Gonaldeston, Deforc. of the Manor of
Sireston, whereby it was settled on the said Henry for life; afterward on
John, son of Richard Sutton of Averham, and Ioane his wife, and the heirs of
their two bodies; and for want of such issue, to the right heirs of the said
Henry de Musters. I do not find that the said John de Sutton had any issue by
her (though some Pedigrees seem to affirm it), but have seen a note of Mr.
George L^ssells his hand to the contrary.

There was a Fine also at Not. 3 E. 3. between Robert de Syreston, (...) S.
(...), 3 E. 3. apud Not.
and Emme his wife, Quer. and Robert, son of John de Eyleston, Deforc. of four
Mess. six Bovats, and the third part of a Bovat of Land, eighteen Acres of
Meadow 7s. 2d. and two Geese Rent, with the Appurtenances in Syreston and
Gypesmere, which were thereby settled on the said Robert and Emme for their
lives, and after on Thomas, son of Robert de Syreston, and Avicia his wife, and
the heirs of their bodies; remainder to Simon, brother of the said Thomas, and
the heirs of his body; remainder to Nicholas another brother, and the heirs of
his; remainder to Richard in like manner; remainder to the right heirs of the
said Robert de Syreston.

William, son of John, son of William de Hagh, 23 E. 3. confirmed to John Cosyn
Warden of the Chapel of Sibethorpe, Pl. de Banc. (...). 23 L. 3 to. 75.
one Mess. two Bov. of Land 13s. and 5d. Rent, with the Appurtenances in
Sireston; which John the younger son of Simon de Sibthorp, had of him when he
was under age, and passed to Thomas de Sibethorp the Founder. In this Record
the Prior of Hagh. is said to be chief Lord of the Fee.

Sir John Markham the younger, the Chief Justice, Ex Coll. I. ^.
had a sister called Margaret, married to Walter Pedwardyn, who had a daughter
named Katherin, married to Nicholas Deuyn, or Deane, of Sireston, who by her
had James Deuon, whose daughter and heir Dorothy, was first married to Sir
Richard Bozome, mentioned in Screveton (whose Ancestor was of Sireston in the
time of Henry the fourth) and afterward wife of William Vernon, son of Raph,
younger brother of Sir Henry Vernon of Haddon, by whom she had Anne (some call
her Jane) the wife of Henry Seyvile, Ex C^ll. St. (...), Ar.
as there is also noted, where the many daughters and coheirs of Sir Richard
Bozon, are likewise set down.

George Pole, son of Raph Pole of Wakebridge in Darbishire, by his second wife
Anne, the daughter of Philip Leche, succeeded here, and by Alice his wife, the
daughter and coheir of the said Sir Richard Bozom, had a Son called William
Pole of Sireston. (...) R. T.


In the year 1612. Robert Poole, Gent. was owner here.

Ioane, the daughter of John Bussy, B.
wife of Sir Nicholas Byron, and after of Sir Gervase Clifton, had some
inheritance here.

It is all now become the possession and inheritance of Robert Sutton of
Averham, Lord Lexington, whose son and heir Robert Lord Lexington is in
minority at this time.

There was a Recovery, Mich. 12. and 13 (...) rot. 56^.
13 Eliz. wherein Adam Arnold, and John Nutkin claimed against Matthew Gybon
one Toft, thirty Acres of Land, six Acres and three Rods of Meadow, seven Acres
of Pasture, with the Appurtenances in Syerston, who called to warrant Richard
Whalley, Esquire, and Thomas his son and heir. William Hamond had a good
Freehold here, which is now William his sons.

I suppose this Town is in Stoke Parish, for the Vicar comes and serves the
Cure here.

Elston. Elveston.
THE Book of Doomesday shows this Town to have been in those days much
divided. One Bov. was of the Soc of Newark, that is to say, Land so rated in
the Public Taxation, which was of the Fee of the Bishop of Lincoln, who,
besides that, had two Manors here, which, before the Norman Invasion, Leuvin
and Pileuvin had, which they discharged in public Levies or Gelds for two
Bovats. The Land was then accounted four Bovats. There one Vill. and three
Board. had one Car. There was twelve Acres of Meadow. This part, Lib. Doom^.
when the Book was made in the time of King William 1. kept the former value
10s. Ranesford and Armgri then held it of the Bishop.

Another part of this Town was of the Fee of Roger de Busli, wherein was a
Manor, which Oudencare had before the Conquest, and paid for it to the
Dane-geld as two Bov. The Land was half a Car. There Norman the Priest had of
Roger five Villains, having five Bovats in Car. (or in a Plowland, or in
Tillage), this also kept the old value 10s.

The greatest share in Elvestune was of the Fee of Ilbert de Lacy, one part
whereof was that wherein Goduvin in the Saxon times had his Manor, which was
rated to the Geld at six Bovats. The Land being then certified to be
(sufficient for three Plows, or) three Carucats. This afterward Armegri held
of Ilbert, and there had one Car. (or Plow) three Sochm. on two Bovats of Land,
and one Vill. five Board. having two Car. (or Plows). There was thirty Acres of
Meadow. In the Confessors time this was 40s. value, in the Conquerours 35s.
Another part was three dwelling houses [ mansur.] which Ilbert had, in which
were two Sochm. one Board. belonging to Stoches. They had not the Land. Ilbert
claimed upon Bishop Remigius the Land of the Priest, and in Stoches he claimed
(or challenged) the fourth part of the Town.

The Family of Bussy of Hogham in Lincolneshire, named more particularly in
Balderton, had the Bishop of Lincolnes Fee, as will appear by several instances.

Roger de Buslies, the Lord Loveto^ named in Wisou had, ^
and thereof infeoffed the Ancestor of Galfr. de Estanton, in the time of King
Henry the first, for half a Knights Fee.

Geoffrey de Staunton, son of William de Staunton, (...) Reg. (...). 15 l. 3.
(...). 41.
recovered against Sir John de Staunton of Eyleston, Knight, and Amicia his
wife, 15 E. 3. fifteen Bovats of Land in Eyleston, which Walter de Evermue gave
to Galfr. de Staunton, and Alice his wife, and the heirs of their bodies, who
had issue William de Staunton, and he William the Father of the said Geoffrey
then claiming. It was a very great Suit tried in several places, and at length
brought into the Parliament, and excellently argued on both sides, and the
Errors discussed very elegantly.

A^^^g. pen. H. S.
This Sir John de Staunton was son of John, son, I suppose, of Sir Geoffrey* and
dwelt in Devonshire, and had a son called John also, 37 E. 3. but Sir Geoffrey
de Staunton the Plaintiff, who, it seems, carried it, had a son and heir called
Sir William de Staunton, Knight, as in Staunton is said, who was twice married:
his first wife was Katherin; his second Elizabeth, daughter of Brian
Thornehill, relict of Henry M^^ers, by whom he had a daughter and heir, called
Elizabeth, who was the wife of William Hamsterley, and died seized of a certain
Manor in Eyleston about 15 R. 2. called Stouhall Fee, Es^. 15 E. 2. p^^. 1. ^.
34
with sixteen Oxgangs of Land held of the honor of Tikhill, and Gollhall Fee,
and sixteen Oxgangs of Land held of Sir John Bussy Lord of Hogham, William
Hamsterley, son of the said William, being then found her heir, and sixteen
years of age.

Ex Col^. I. ^.
William Hamstrelley, the husband of Cecilia (the daughter of Sir John Bussy)
slew Thomas Duke of Gloucester, and had a son called also William Hamstrelley,
who had two daughters, A^ne, wife of Richard Banister, and Ioane, of William
Orme, or Orome, who had Hamond Orome, who inherited this Manor, and was, May
6. 16 E. 4. at Balderton Court, and there acknowledged to hold Gollhall Fee of
Sir Thomus Bussy.

William Hamsterley went into France, and there died; Ap. 117.
and he had two daughters, which the Lady Roos, after the death of his wife at
Staunton, took Ward, and William Eyton sold them to Raph Banister, whose two
sons Richard and Roger married them; but it seems Roger died, and left his wife
for William Orme, before named, whose posterity continued to our time, viz. the
latter end of King James his Reign; that Captain.... Orme sold his Lands here, ^
some to George Lascells, Esquire, who paid to the honor of Tikhill, of which
he was Feodary, for eighty Acres of this Land for respite of Homage, etc. as
Mr. Wightman did, who paid for thirty, and Mr. Robert Poole, Gent. for his
House and seventy Acres; William Bristowe for forty; Alexander Watson for
eighty; the heirs of Robert Greaves for his House and ninety; John Hollingworth
for his House and forty Acres;.... Gamble for nine* Richard Elston for seven,
etc. and others who bought the said Mr. Ormes Lands.

Lacies Fee which Arnegrim held, who also held of him in Sibthorpe, came to Sir
Stephen Waleys, who, Pl. de (...). Hill. 17 E. 1. ^^. 16. f^l. 44.
17 E. 1. did implead Robert de Eyleston, that he should do him certain Customs
and Services for two Car. of Land in Eyleston, which he held of him by Homage
and the Service of 29s. and Suit of Court of the said Stephen in Eyleston from
three weeks to three weeks, whereof his Ancestor was seized in the time of King
John, etc.

Sir John de Depeden, Knight, A^^og. pen. (...), A^.
and Elizabeth his wife, daughter and heir of Sir Stephen Waleys, 19 R. 2.
passed 50s. Rent in Sibthorpe and Eyleston, and some places thereabout, to Sir
John Leek, Knight, Richard de Sceckton Rector of the Church of Burgh Waleys,
and William de Leeke of Kirketon, and the heirs of William, whose heir is
Peniston Whalley, Esquire, to whom some of the Rent yet remains, viz. 30s. out
of Elston, paid by Mr. Lassells yearly. The Seals show Depedens Arms to be,
Ermine on a Chief, three Lioncells Rampant, and Waleys his to be quarterly and
a Bend.

Robert de Eyleston, (...). S. (...). 5 E 2.
5 E. 3. passed by Fine to Richard de Gauy, and Maud his wife, one Bovat, and
two Acres and an half in Elston.

There was a Fine, 13 E. 3. between Robert, (...). S. (...) and (...). 1^ E. 3.
son of John de Eyleston, and Elizabeth his wife, by John de Misterton put in
her place to get or lose, and Hugh, son of Richard de Thorpe, of the Manor of
E^leston, and the Advowson of the Church, whereby they were settled on the said
Robert and Elizabeth, and the heirs of their bodies; remainder to the right
heirs of Robert.

There was a Fine levied at Not. 3 E. 3. between Henry, son of Laurence de
Stoke, Di^ (...). S. Martini, 3 E. 3.
and Maud his wife on the one part, and Robert de Hickling Vicar of Granby on
the other part, concerning two Mess. three Bovats of Land, twenty six Acres of
Meadow, and 2s. Rent in Eyleston and Stoke by Newark, which were thereby settled
on the said Henry and Maud for life; remainder to Henry Gauy of Stoke, and
I^ane his wife, and the heirs of their bodies; remainder to the right heirs of
Henry Gauy. To this, Robert de Nuncormesby, and John, son of Robert de
Eyleston, put to their claim.

There was a Fine, 33 H. 6. and afterward, A (...) 15 dies, 33 H. 6. and (...)
35 H. 6.
35 H. 6. between Thomas Rempston, Knight, and Henry Wheteley, Quer. and
Nicholas Wymbysh, Clark, and Hugh Wymbyshe, and Margaret his wife (who was
daughter and heir of John Lord of Eyleston, mentioned in Carcolston) Deforc. of
the Manor of Elston, with the Appurtenances, and four Mess. two hundred Acres
of Land, thirty of Meadow, ten of Pasture, and 6s. Ren^, and the Rent of three
pair of Gloves, and of 1l. of Cummin, with the Appurtenances in Elston, whereby
they were settled on the said Hugh Wymbish, and Margaret his wife for life;
then to Alice, the wife of John Leeke of Landford, Esquire, for her life; then
to Thomas Leeke, son of the said John, and the heirs of his body; for want of
which, to the heirs of the body of the said John; and in default of such, to
the right heirs of the said Alice.

There was another Fine, A die S. Hi^^ i^ 15. dies 36 H. 6.
36 H. 6. between Thomas Leeke of Landford, Quer. and Hugh Golhall of
Wodeburgh, and Alice his wife, Deforc. of the Manor of Elston called Elstons
Manor, with the Appurtenances, and the rest of the particulars as before,
which were then settled on the said Hugh and Alice during their lives, and
after on Ioane Golhall, daughter of the said Hugh, during her life; then to
revert to the said Thomas Leeke and his heirs for ever.

There was a Recovery, 32 H. 8. wherein Thomas Rooper, Mich. 32 H. 8. rot. 122.
and William Wright, Clark, claimed against Francis Leeke, Esquire, the Manor
of Elston, with the Appurtenances, and three Mess. two Cottag. one Dovecote,
one hundred Acres of Land, forty of Meadow, forty of Pasture, 8s. Rent, and the
Rent of 1l. of Cummin-seed, two pair of Gloves, and a Steel Needle, in Elston,
Thorpe, and Stoke by Newarke.

There was a Recovery, 38 H. 6. wherein John Metheley the younger, Mich. 38 H.
6. rot. 153.
claimed against John Compton five Mess. two Cottages, one hundred and twenty
Acres of Land, forty of Meadow, and 24s. 8d. Rent in Elston, Flintham, and
Sireston.

Johannes Metheley Johannes Metheley de Elston. Ex lib. genesis pen. Reason
Mellish, Ar.
Joana soror Edm. Percy Decan. Sacelli, relict. Hansard. Christoph.
Metheley-Anna fill. Tho. Lister de Wakefeild. Barthol. Metheley de
Elston.-Joanna fill..... Bingham de Carcolston. Elizabetha fill. and
haer.-Johannes Lascells fill. tertius Georgii Lascells de Stourton and Gateford.
Georgius Lascells de Elston.-Anna fill. Gervasii Wirrall de Leversall in Com.
Ebor. Johannes-Lascells-... fill.... Coppinger. Georgius Lascells-........fill.
Franc. Leek de Balderton and haer.-Anna fill. Hercy Pate relict. Rob. Waring.
Barthol.-... fill... Deisney.






Ropers Manor, which before was Leekes, and Metheleys Lands, the Capital Mess.
whereof heretofore was called Carues place Manor, are now the Inheritance of
George Lascells, Esquire.

The Rectory of Elston was ten Marks, and some Prebendary Patron. Mss. I. M.
It Is now 9l. 8s. 9d. in the Kings Books, and William Wightman, Esquire, of Stoke,
Patron.

Cotham. Doomsd. Cotes.
HEre before the Norman Invsiaon were diverse Manors, one was the Freehold of
Leuric, who paid for it to the Dane-geld as three Bovats. The Land then twelve
Bovats. This afterward was the Fee of Odo Bishop of Baion's, whose Man (or
Tenant) Wacelinus had here one Car. five Vill. and one Board. having half a Car.
and twenty Acres of Meadow. ^ib. Doo^^.
This in the Confessors time was 40s. value, in the Conquerours 30s. Here was
likewise of Walter de Ayncurts Fee, the principal part of the Township, in
which, before the Conquest, were two Manors which Suen and Tori had, who paid
the public Tax for them as nine Bovats. The Land being then certified to be
six Car. There afterward Walter had in Demesne one Car. ten Vill. eight Board.
having three Car. There was a Priest and a Church, and six Acres of Meadow. This
was in the Confessors time 100s. in the Conquerours 6l. value, when Doomsday
Book was made.

Walter de Ayencurt gave his Tithes here, Mo^. Angl ^ol. 1. p. 339, and 392.
and at very many other places, to the Monastery of St. Mary's at York, which
had a Pension of 24s. per annum, in the year 1344. as in the Visitation of
William (Zouch) Archbishop of York appears. But Raph D^yncourt, Reg. T^urg.
p. 1, and 1^9, and 184.
when he Founded Thurgarton, gave this Church called there Cotes, as in Granby
is said. And in the year 1352. the Abbat and Covent of St. Mary's at York
agreed to let the Prior and Covent of Thurgarton have their portions of Tithes
in the Arch-deaconry of Not. viz. two parts of the Tithes of the Demesne Lands
in Graneby and Hikling, and the like in Cotum, for ten Marks of Silver yearly
for ever.

In the eleventh year of King John's Reign, Assis. 11 Job. 1^.3.
there was an Assise, to try if Robert Rusell and others, had unjustly
disseised Henry de Mar. and Petronilla his wife, of their Common of Pasture,
and Turbary, and Marish in Cotes and Beninton, which belonged to their Freehold
in Cotes. The Jury found that Robert Russell, and Richard the Parson, had
carried away Turf, which the men of the said Richard had wrought, in the Common
of the said Henry, and so had disseised him; the rest had leave from the Earl
of Chesters Baylys: and that it was always lawful for the said Earl, and the
said Henry, to give leave to others to cut Turf.

In the twelfth year of King John, Petronilla, the daughter of Guido de Croun,
Rot. Pip. 12 Job.
gave to Paganus, son of William de Mara and his heirs, her whole Land of
Cotun, reserving two pound of Pepper yearly Rent. She married to her first
husband William de Longechamp, Mo^. A^gl. vol. 1.444.
and by him had Henry de Longechampe, who had a daughter called Alice, who was
married to Roger Pedwardyn. But the said Petronilla, the daughter and heir of
Guido de Croun, had another husband called Oliver de Vaux, by whom she had a
son called John de Vaux.

Pl. (...). 53 H. 3. ^o. 16.
There was an Assise at Derby, 53 H. 3. before John le Breton, to try if
Stephen, Father of William de Cotone, was seized of one Toft, and two Acres of
Land in Cotone, which Adam de H^tot held, who called to warrant before John le
Bretone, Alane le Breton, who came and summoned to warranty Stephen, the son of
Stephen de Haya. Walter de Hayea paid 40d. for the eighth part of a Fee in
Coton. (...). de Nev.


The Jury, 8 E. 1. found that Roger de Vallibus held in Cotum sixteen Bovats of
the Fee of Dovor (which I take to be that of Odo Bishop of Bayon) of Stephen de
la Hay, ^
which the said Stephen was wont to hold of the King in Capite, by the service
of finding a man of Arms [ Armigerum] forty days, at his own charge, in the
time of War.

There was an agreement made between Roger de Vallibus, (...) 7.
and Robert de Cumpton, 8 E. 1. also concerning right of Common, in which the
said Robert granted, that the proper Goods of the said Roger might Common in
the Territory of Houton, except the several, after the Corn was carried away,
excepting Swine and [ Bidentibus] Sheep, so that neither his Freeholders,
Servants, Villains, nor Cottagers did Common. And another bargain was then also
made, touching the entering of their Cattle into both their Territories, as well
Houton as Cotum, and for the manner of replevying.

It was adjudged, 10 E. 1. that Roger de Vallibus, (...). Reg. Mich. 10 E. 1.
r^. 16.
and Clementia his wife, should recover their seisin of certain Customs and
Services, which diverse Men and Tenants of Cotum, ought to do for their Land
there. Roger de Vallibus, 15 E. 1. was found to have greater right to hold
sixteen Bovats, Mi^^. 15 E. 1. to. 3.
(except seven Acres and one Rod) in Cotum, than the King; and that this Manor
was held of the Castle of Dovor (as before); but then the Rent was raised to
40s. per annum, which Stephen de la Hay, 11 E. 1. said he was wont to receive
out of Cotum, P^^^. 11 E. 1. to. 5.
in the name of Service.

The Manor of Cotum, by a Fine between John de Ludham, (...). S. Trin. 31 E.
1. apud (...).
and John de Vallibus at York, 31 E. 1. was settled on the said John de
Vallibus, and Constancia his wife, and the heirs which he should beget on her
body; remainder to the right heirs of the said John de Vaux. By another Fine at
York, 2 E. 3. between John de Vaus, and Sibyll his wife, A (...) S. (...) 3.
(...). 2 ^. 3.
and Thomas de Sibethorpe Cler. it was settled on the said John and Sibyll, and
the heirs of their bodies; for want of which, on Arnold, son of John de
Mounteney, and the heirs of his; remainder to Robert, brother of Arnald, and
the heirs of his body; remainder to John, brother of Robert, and his; remainder
to the right heirs of John de Vaus.

In the Record of Nomina Villarum, 9 E. 2. John de Monteney was certified to be
Lord of this place: N^^. Vill.
it is possible it might be by the marriage of John de Vaus his mother.

Thomas de Leyk, Knight, 38 E. 3. was certified to hold a Knights Fee in Cotham
of William Deyncourt. Es^. 38 E. 3. ^. 11.


This afterward became the inheritance of that Family, Ex Coll. I. ^. Ar.
whereof there was said to be two or three Sir John Leeks, the last whereof had
two sons, the younger of which was John Leek, who married Alice, the daughter
and heir of John Gray, and was Progenitor of the Earl of Scarsdale, and of Sir
Francis Leek of Newark, Knight and Baronet; the elder was Simon Leek, who
married Ioane, the daughter and heir of Sir John Talbot of Swannington in the
County of Leicester, the widow of Sir Thomas Malory, Knight, and by her had
four daughters and heirs, the second whereof Margaret, was married to Sir John
Markham the Chief Justice, Progenitor of Sir Robert Markham of Sedgebrook in
the County of Lincoln, Baronet. Elizabeth, the third, was wife to Sir Hugh
Hercy of Grove. Anne, wife of Richard Willoughby, was the fourth; but Mary,
Es^. 24 H.S
second wife of Sir Gyles D'aubeney was the first, in whose right the said Sir
Giles held, by the Courtesy of England, the Manors of Cotum and Houghton by
Newarke, and left a daughter and heir by her called Ioane, who carried this
Lordship to Sir Robert Markham her husband, son of Sir Robert, brother by their
Father Sir John Markham the elder, one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, to
the said Sir John Markham the Chief Justice, Ex Col. Fr* Markham.
who made the match.

In Peverton in the County of Somerset, was this Epitaph,

Hic jacet Domina Maria D'aubeney ^xor Egidii D'aubeney, militis, quondam filia
Simonis Leeke, Armigeri, Com. Notinghamiae, quae obiit 17. mensis Februarii,
Anno Domini 1442. Sis testis Christ.

Many make this Simon Leek a Knight, but the mistake, I suppose, came by reason
there was a Knight of that name, living in the latter end of the Reign of
Edward the third, as in Kilvington may be observed.

The Family of Markham made this their principal Seat, and were of great note.
Polyd. Vi^g. l. 26. p. 569.
Sir John Markham was a Captain at Stoke Field, Anno 1488. but as the Tradition
goes, Ex Coll. Fr. Markham p^^. Phil. Markham, Ar.
was an unruly spirited man, and striving with the people of Benington in
Lincolneshire, about the Boundaries of their Lordships, which are contiguous,
he killed some or other of them, (some have it that he hanged the Priest), for
which, retiring, he lay hid at a place in Lincolneshire, which the elder Sir
John Markham, his great Grandfather, had by his wife Elizabeth, the sister and
coheir of Hugh, and daughter of Sir John Cressy of Hodsak, from them called
Cressy Hall, where, as says my Author Francis Markham, it was his good Fortune
to entertain the Lady Margaret, mother to King Henry the seventh, who not only
begged his Pardon, but married her Kinswoman Anne, the daughter of Sir George
Nevill, to his son, who was likewise called Sir John Markham, and had a son by
her called John, who died before him, but left a son born at Sireston 1536.
called Robert; but after her death he married Margery, the daughter of Raph
Langford, by whom he had a son named Robert, and a daughter, married to Robert
Moreton of Bawtree, and eleven more Children; after her he married a third
wife, Anne, the daughter, and likewise sister and coheir Johannes de Markham
legis peritus-.... fill. Nic. Bothomsell. Robertus de Markham legis
peritus-..... fill.... de Caunton. Johannes de Markham, mil. Justic. de
Banco.-Elizabetha sor. and cohaer. Hug. Cressy.-Millecent fill..... Bekering
relicta Nic. Burdon, mil. Robertus de Markham. mil.-Elizab. fill. and haer. Nic.
Burdon, mil. Robertus Markham, mil. de Cotham.-Joana fill. Egidii Daubeney and
haer. matris Mariae fill. ejusdem Simonis Leek de Cotham, Ar. Johannes Markham,
miles-Alicia fill. Willielmi Skypwith, mil. Johannes Markham, mil. ob. 1558. 1
Eliz.-Anna fill. Georg. Nevile milit.-Margeria fill. Rad. Langford.-Anna fill. and
cohaer. Johannis Strelley relict. Richardi Stanhope. Johannes Markham, Ar. ob.
ante patrem-Katherina fill. Antonii Babington. Robertus Markham-Maria fill.
Franc. Leeke, mil.-Jana fill. Willielmi Burnell de Winkeburne. Robertus Markham,
miles de Cotham.-Anna fill. Johannis Warburton Com. Cestr. mil.-Anna fill. Rob.
Thorold de Haugh. vel Winifrid. 1 Johan. Markham. 2 Robert. 3 Daniel. 4
Alexand. 5 Philip. Philip. Markham ob. ap. Haugh. in Com. Linc. 1669
Franciscus.

Thomas, a quo familia de Allerton.



Johannes Markham, mil. Capital. Justic.-Margareta fill. and cohaer. Simonis
Leeke, Ar.



of John Strelley, Esquire, the relict of Sir Richard Stanhope, Knight, and by
her had Thomas Markham, who married Mary, the daughter of Rese Griffin, and was
Progenitor of the Markhams of Allerton, and two or three daughters, and died 1
Eliz. 1558. He was in very great prosperity, but at length utterly ruined: yet
the Earl of Shrowsbury, whom he unadvisedly made his enemy, helped to raise his
Children. His Grandchild Robert succeeded here, whose first wife was Mary,
daughter of Sir Francis Leeke; his second, Jane, daughter of William Burnell of
Winkeburne, by whom he had Roger Markham. By his first wife he had many
Children. His eldest son Robert had also two Wives; his first Agnes, daughter
of Sir John Warburton of Cheshire; his second Winifred, daughter of Robert
Thorold, by whom he had Philip Markham, Esquire, who died 1669. the rest were
dead before.

This last Sir Robert was a fatal unthrift, and destroyer of this Eminent
Family; he had a brother called Francis Markham, who was a Soldier and a
Scholar: he was admitted into the University of Heidelberg 12 Febr. 1595. He
collected the History of his own Family, and wrote certain Decades of Epistles
to Eminent Persons concerning the Art of War, which he Printed.

This Township is now decayed, the Houses pulled down, and most of it enclosed,
being the inheritance of his Grace the Duke of Newcastle.

The Rectory of Cotteham, and Advowson of the Vicarage, Pa^. 12. pat. 38 H. 8.
late belonging to the Priory of Thurgarton, 24 Nov. 38 H. 8. were granted to
John Bellowe, and John Broxholme, Esquire, together with the Tithe Barn of
Cotteham, with the Appurtenances, then in the tenure of John Markham.

The Vicarage of Cottome was 8l. when the Prior of Thurgarton was Patron. It Is
now 7l. 18s. 1d. ob. in the Kings Books, and, I suppose, the Duke of Newcastle
Patron, who allows toward 20l. a year to one to officiate sometimes, but
none have been presented of late.

In the Chancel by the North Wall is a good Tomb of.... Markham.

In the Windows is,

Cheque Arg. and Gules, a Bend sable, Bekering.

And Arg. a Lion Ramp. queve furche sable, Cressy.

Stoke by Newark. Stoches and Efloches.
THis Stoches was very much parcelled in old time, and so continues; some of it
which was rated to the Dane-geld at one Bovat and an half, was of the Soc of
Newark, and of the Bishop of Lincolnes Fee, which some Sochmen held.

Another part of this Town of Stoches, was the Fee of Walter de Ayncurt, where
before the Conquest Tori had a Manor which was discharged to the public Tax
for six Bovats. The Land then was certified to be two Car. There was afterward
in Demesne one Car. three Vill. five Board. having half a Car. and sixty Acres
of Meadow. In the Confessors time this was 6l. sclo. (or 60s.) in the
Conquerours 40. Osbert held it. And it had Soc in Holton.

Another part was of Ilbert de Lacies Fee, which Turchill had before, and
discharged his Manor to the Geld for five Bovats, though the Land was then
known to be two Car. Manfrid held it of Ilbert, and there had half a Car. and
three Sochm. five Bordars, having one Car. and two Oxen plowing, and sixty four
Acres of Meadow. In the Confessors time this was 20s. in the Conquerours 15s.
value.

Another Manor in Stoches, before the Normans came, had Sbernecroc, which he
paid for as two Bovats and an half to the Geld. The Land was one Car. This
afterward became the Fee of Berengarius de Todeni, which Raph his Man held,
and there had one Car. two Vill. three Board. plowing with two Oxen. There was
forty Acres of Meadow. This in the time of King Edward, before the Conquest, was
12s. when King William made his Survey 10s. value.

Here was a Family which took their name from this place, of which I find
several, but cannot give an exact account of them. The County of Not. 11 May,
Pat. 6 Ioh. m. 1.
in the sixth year of King John, was committed to Peter de Stokes, as long as
the King should please. Robert, son of Stephen, the Knight of Stokes, by the
consent of Margaret his wife, and Stephen his son and heir, gave to God and the
Church of St. Peter at Thurgarton two Selions, Reg. Thurg. 44.
or Leyes, by Templecroft, without the Town of Stoke toward Newark, to make a
Toft, and one Bovat of Land, and all his Meadow in Withenes, and a Path for
Footmen and Horsemen to Fiskerton Ferry, over the (Cheveciis) Heads of his
great Furlong by the Trent, and the like, which Stephen, son of this Sir Robert
de Stokes, Knight, confirmed.

Here were many Benefactors to the Priory, of whom that Covent got small
parcells of Land. Hugh Blanchard the Chaplain of Stoke, gave part of a Toft,
four Selions of Arable Land, a Rood of Meadow, and the like, which he had of
John de Roldeston of Stoke, chief Lord of the Fee, whose wife Maud, the
daughter of Robert de Harston, in her widowhood confirmed it; so did William,
the son of the said John de Roldeston. Robert Pain of Neuwerks, gave a Toft and
Croft in Stoke, and some small Rents, and half an Oxgange of Arable, etc. which
Hugh Cundi held of him in Villanage, together with the said Hugh, his whole
offspring, and all his Chattels. Thomas de Bekering, Knight, son of Thoma^,
released all his right and title in half a Bovat of Land, which should descend
to him by inheritance, after the death of Thomas de Bekering his great
Grandfather, to the said Prior and Covent. And Roger de Stokes confirmed to
them, all the Lands and Tenements they had of his Fee in Stoke by Newark, which
confirmation seems to bear da^e 15 E. 2. John the Prior and the Covent of
Thurgarton, passed to Sir John de Munteney, and the Lady Constantia his wife, a
Toft and Croft containing three Roods, lying next the Message of the said Sir
John on the East in Stoke, to them and the heirs of their bodies, paying 2s. a
year: for the security of which the said Sir John made a Bovat, which Robert
Moxly held of him in Stoke in Villanage, to be liable to their distress.

Robert de Stokes paid two Marks for one Knights Fee here, Test. de Nev.
which I take to be of Deyncourts part.

The Bishop of Lincoln infeoffed the Ancestor of Dive Lord of Kingerby in
Lincolneshire, who had his Court kept at Balderton, and was succeeded by Bussy
of Hogham, as in Balderton more particularly.

Galfr. de Stokes was found, Esc. 51 H. 3. n. 31.
51 H. 3. to have held something in Darbishire of Richard de Sandiacre, and
likewise of the Fee of Kinnerby in Stoke twenty Bovats, in Newark four Bovats,
and in Balderton eight Bovats of the same Fee; of the Fee of Bekering in Stoke
ten Bovats, four in Sireston, and sixteen in Screveton (there noted;) John, son
of Paulinus de Stoke, was found Cousin and heir of this Geoffrey. And Matilda,
sister of John de Stokes, Esc. 21 E. 1. n. 43.
21 E. 1. was found his heir.

An Assize, Pl. de Banc. Mich. 16 E. 1. rot. 149.
16 E. 1. came to be recognized before the Justices at Not. if Robert de
Stokes the Uncle of Robert de Omesby, and of Robert de Ayleston, was feised of
one Mess. one Windmill, one hundred and fifty one Acres of Land, thirty five of
Meadow, nine of Pasture, 6l. 9d. Rent, in Stokes by Farndon, which Henry de
Gauy, and Isabell his wife then held, and called to warrant Stephen de Stokes,
who was summoned in Northamptonshire, and came and voided the warranty, because
the Jury found that Isabell had not done him Homage, which she pleaded she did
at Siberton.

In the Record of Nom. Vill. 9 E. 2. Stoke answered for a whole Villa. and
Henry de S. Licio, Nom. Vill.
and Isabell de Gauy are certified to be Lords of it. The year before, 8 E. 2.
Henry de S. Licio, Esc. 8 E. 2. n. 141.
had an Ad quod Damnum, that he might give ten Acres and an half to the Master
of the Hospital of S. Leonard at Stoke and his Successors, which shows he held
of John de Bussy, and he of the Bishop of Lincoln.

This Hospital is very ancient, for Raph de Aincurt, in the time of Henry the
first, Regist. de Thurg. p. 1.
when he Founded the Priory of Thurgarton, excepted 10s. per annum, of his gift
to the infirm of Stokes; but who Founded it I have not yet discovered. It had
Lands in Newark, and very many other Towns within that Soc, given by several
Benefactors. The Jury, 12 E. 3. found it not to the Kings loss, Esc. 12 E. 3.
n. 4.
if he granted Henry, son of Laurence de Stoke, license, to give a Mess. in
Stoke, to the said Hospital; nor, 21 E. 3. for John le Veynour of Stoke, nor
Robert Moge, to give a few Acres in Stoke, nor for William, son of William,
Esc. 21 E. 3. n. 89.
son of Stephen de Stoke, and Simon de Sibthorp, to give 10s. Rent in Stoke,
nor for Gilbert, son of Lene of Holme by Newark, to give a Mess. three Acres of
Land, and five Acres of Meadow in Holme aforesaid, to the said Hospital. I have
met with very many such small Contributers. Thomas Ogle, Clark, 16 R. 2. and
Alice Porter, Esc. 16 R. 2. par. 2. n. 112.
a Mess. and half an Acre in Stoke, held of John del Car, in right of Alice his
wife, who held of the Lord Deyncourt; John Cony another Mess. held of the same
persons, and the like.

In Crast. S. Martini, 27 E. 1. apud Ebor.
By a Fine at York, 27 E. 1. between William de Westwode, and Maud his wife, and
Henry, son of the said Maud on the one part, and Elias de Bekingham on the
other; six Mess. one hundred Acres and five Bovats of Land, thirty Acres of
Meadow, five of Pasture 45s. 9d. Rent, and Rent of a pound of Pepper, and a pair
of Gilt Spurs, in Stokes, Sireston, Eyleston, Newark, and Balder^on, were
settled on the said William, Maud, and Henry. It Is like Maud was the sister of
John de Stoke, before named.

There was another Fine levied at York, 16 E. 2. between Roger de Stokes, and
Petronilla his wife, A die S. Hill. in 15. dies, 16 E. 2. apud Ebor.
Quer. and Robert de Helpeston Parson of Houton, Deforc. whereby the Manor of
Stoke was settled on the said Roger and Petronilla for life; afterward on
Peter, son of Nicholas de Wydemerpole, and Alice his wife, and the heirs of
Peter on the body of the said Alice; remainder on Reginald, brother of Peter,
and the heirs of his body; remainder on Maud, sister of Reginald, and hers;
remainder to Nicolas de Wydemerpole, and Alice his wife, and the heirs of the
said Nicholas: these last are mentioned in Shelton. Peter de Wydmerpole, and
Alice his wife, A die Pas^. in 3 Sept. 17 E. 3.
by Fine, 17 E. 3. passed to Henry Gauy, and Ioane his wife, two Bovats in this
Stoke.

I find Galfr. de Butiler about 8 E. 1. granted for himself and his heirs, Pl.
de Iur. and Assis. in Com. Not. 8 E. 1. to. 13. In Oct. S. Mic. 7 E. 3. apud
Ebor.
that Richard Ingeram and his heirs should have Commons for two Cows in the one
hundred Acre Moore of Stoke.

By a Fine at York, 7 E. 3. Sir John de Mounteney, Knight, settled thirteen
Mess. one Mill, nineteen Bovats and an half, and twenty three Acres and a Rood
and half of Land, fifty two Acres and an half of Meadow, thirteen Acres of
Pasture, and 40s. and 3s. Rent in Stoke, Thorpe, and Eyleston, and the Advowson
of the Church of Eyleston, on himself for life; then to John his son, and the
heirs Males of his body; remainder to Robert, brother of John, and his;
remainder to Arnald, brother of Robert, and his; remainder to the right heirs
of Sir John himself.

Ex Cap. Visitat. pec. ^^ason Mellish, Ar.
Johannes de Mounteney, miles-Constantia. Johannes de Mounteney Constantia fill.
and haer.-Johannes Bosvile de Chete Ebor. miles. 3 Johannes Bosvile-.... fill.
Percivalli Amyas C. Ebor. Johannes Bosvill-.... fill..... Radcliff de Ordsall
Com. Lanc. Willielmus Boswell de Chete 1 Elizabetha fill. and cohaer.-Joh.
Nevill, mil. ex familia de Leversege. Henricus Nevill Georgius Nevill de Chete
1581.

2 Rob. Nevill de Ragnell-Alicia fill. and cohaer. Georgius Nevill-Barbara sor.
and cohaer. Joh. Hercy, mil. Johannes Nevill-Gertruda fill. Richardus Whalley.
Hercy Nevill de Grove-Brigitta fill. Hen. Savill.





2 Thom. s. p. 1 Achilles s. p.

Robertus, s. p.

A Fine was levied of the Manor of Stoke, called the Overhall, A die S. Trin.
in 15. dies, 13 R. 2.
13 R. 2. between Elias de Mydylton, Raph de Staunton, John Bozon Vicar of the
Church of Stoke, Hugh Bozon Parson of the Church of Haukesworth, William de
Leeke, and Walter de Topclif, Quer. and Thomas de Staunton Chr. and Al^^e his
wife, Deforc. whereby it was conveyed to the said Hugh and his heirs. Thomas
Bozome, brother of Sir Richard, had his residence here.

William Leek of Leek, Esc. 37 H. 6.
died seized of six Acres of Land, and two of Meadow in Stoke, about 37 H. 6.
held of Richard Willughby, and Anne his wife, as in the right of Anne. She was
one of the coheirs of Simon Leek of Cotham; John Leek was then found to be son
and heir of the said Will.

I. Bosvyle of Stoke, descended by an heir female from Sir John de Mountenay,
AP. 116.
held a Manor in Stoke, called Nether-hall of Bussy, and some Lands of Richard
Willughby. William Bosvyle's daughter of Chete in Yorkshire, called Elizabeth,
B.
one of the coheirs, married Sir John Nevill; and the other called Alice,
brought this Manor to Robert Nevill of Ragnell her husband; and by John
Nevill, son of George, it was sold to...... Wightman, whose posterity still
enjoyes it.

The Manor of Stoke, called Overhall, is the inheritance of the Honorable
Arthur Stanhope, younger son of Philip, first Earl of Chesterfeild.

Queen Elizabeth, 30 March, in the eighteenth year of her Reign, 2 Par. pat. 18
Eliz.
granted to John Mershe, Esquire, and Francis Greneham, Gent. amongst other
things, the whole House and Site of the Hospital of St. Leonard of Stoke by
Newark, and all Houses, Buildings, etc. except two Houses or Cottages in Stoke
called Bedehouses, where two poor people dwelt. Mr. Robert Butler has some
interest in this, as I take it, and Mr. Philip Lacock of Woodborough had
considerable Lands here and in Elston, which remain to his son Charles.

Francis Viscount Lovell, the heir of the Lord Deyncourt, Act. Parl. 11 H. 7.
was Attaint, because it appeared he was with John Earl of Lincoln, at this
Stoke, 20 day of June, 2 H. 7. where a great Battle was then fought.

The Tithes of Stoke, with some in Elston, and Sireston, and Codington, belong
to the Chancellor of the Church of Lincoln, who is Patron of the Vicarage of
Stoke, which was 7l. and is now 8l. in the Kings Books: The Vicar serves at all
the forenamed places, which find him work.

In the Church Windows of Stoke were,

Arg. a Chevron Gules betwixt three Whales Heads (or such like) set foreright,
not erected, Sable.

Quarterly per Fesse indented Arg. and Gules.

Gules, a Lion Rampant, Or.

Paly of six Arg. and Azure, upon a Bend, Or; three Jews Harpes, or such like,
Sable: this is often.

Arg. three Fusells, in fesse Gules.

Quarterly Arg. and Gules fretty Or, a Bend of the second.

Markham quartering Leek.

Arg. two Barrulets, and a Palet Gules, impale with Gules a Cross of four
Hearts Arg.

Arg. a Cross Croslett Botony Sable.

Arg. three Bird Bolts Sable.

Arg. three Pincers Sable.

Arg. upon a Bend Azure, three Cross Croslets Arg.

Arg. upon a Fesse Sable, a Lion passant Arg. Hose.

Quarterly Gules and Ermine, upon the first and fourth, a Goats Head Erased
Arg. the Horns Or, Moreton.

Arg. five Fusells in Fesse Gules, three Martlets in Chief Sable. The same
again, with A File of three Labells Azure.

Gules, three Waterbougets Arg. Lord Ros.

Ermine a Cross engrailed, Gules.

The Lady Alice Stauntons Tomb is mentioned in Staunton.

Thorpe by Newark.
IN Torpe, the Fee of Rad. de Limesi, before the Conquest Vlvric had a Manor
then rated to the Dane-geld at six Bov. and an half. Lib. Dooms.
The Land four Car. There afterward Manfrid the Man or Tenant of Raph de
Limesi, had one Car. and nine Villains and five Bordars, having three Car. and
seventy two Acres of Meadow: the value is omitted.

In King John's time Malger de Torpe, Pl. de Banc. ^^. Ioh. rot. 5.
was summoned to warrant to the Prior of Haverholme, the Advowson of the Church
of Thorp, who came and confirmed the grant of it, made by Walter de Torp his
Father, to the said Prior and his successors, who then produced the Chartel or
Deed of the said Walter. And it appears, Par. 2. pat. 22 E. 3. m. 30.
22 E. 3. that Priory enjoyed this Church accordingly.

In the Record of Nomina Villarum, Nom. Vill.
9 E. 2. Thorpe and Cotum answered for a whole Villa, and Richard de Thorpe,
and John de Mounteney, were certified to be Lords.

There was a Fine levied at Not. 3 E. 3. between William de Thorpe, Knight,
Apud Not. die lunae prox. post festum S. Martini, 3 E. 3.
and Margaret his wife, Quer. and Hugh de Goushull Parson of Radcliffe, Deforc.
of the Manor of Thorpe, with the Appurtenances, five Bovats of Land, five
Acres of Meadow, seven Marks 2s. 1 ob. 1 q. Rent, and Rent of 4 Hens, and 6
Geese, in Stoke, Eyleston, Newark, and Northgate by Newark, whereby the
premises were settled on the said Sir William and Margaret, and the heirs of
the body of Sir William; remainder to Herbert his brother, and the heirs Males
of his body; remainder to the right heirs of Sir William de Thorpe.

Sir Edmund Molineux, who was Sergeant at Law, and made Justice of the Bench,
Bill. signat. 22 Oct. 4 E. 6.
during the Kings pleasure, 22 October. 4 E. 6. was son of Sir Thomas Molineux of
Hawton by his second wife, the daughte of... Cotton of Cheshire, and had this
Manor, and bought the Lands which were the Knights Hospitallers of St. John's
of Jerusalem in this place, B.
belonging to the Preceptory of Eagle in the County of Lincoln, formerly the
Knights Templars, of one...... Thorpe, who, together with.... Lister, had them
from the Crown, 35 H. 8. and was succeeded here by his son John Molineux of
Thorpe, and he by his son Edmund, who left a son called Sir John Molineux, who
sold this place to John Halsey and others.

The Township is enclosed, and the Capital Message, and Grounds near the
Town, are now the inheritance of Robert Butler, Esquire, whose Father Robert
Butler re-edified the ruined Church.

There was a Recovery suffered, 6 Eliz. wherein Robert Flecher, and John
Fawconer, Trin. 6 Eliz. rot. 121.
claimed against John Molineux, Esquire, three Acres and one Rood of Meadow, and
one hundred Acres of Moore in Thorpe and Stoke by Newark, and Common of Pasture
for all Manor of Cattle in four hundred Acres of Land in Thorpe and Stoke; and
Robert Markham, Esquire, George Nevill, Esquire, and John Arnald, Gentleman,
were called to warranty.

Diverse of the Closes are the inheritance of Sir Francis Leek, Knight and
Baronet, whose Father William Leek, was son of Sir Francis Leek by his second
wife, the daughter of...... Edgioke, after married to Sir Gervas Clifton; which
said Williams second wife.... the daughter of.... Orme of Elston, still keeps
them in Jointure. She was since married to.... Druell, who is also dead.

Mss. I. M.
The Rectory of Thorpe was 10l. value when the Prior of Brodholme (perhaps
mistaken for Haverholme) was Patron. It Is now 8l. in the Kings Books, and the
King himself Patron.

In the Church was an ancient Tomb, whereon lay one in Armor and Mail,
cross-leg'd, and on his Shield Azure, a Fesse Arg. betwixt three Lions Rampant
Or, which is often also in the Window, Thorpe: and the Inscription is,

Hic jacet Dom. Willielmus de Thorpe, miles, and Domina Margareta uxor sua...

Here was Staffords and Bouns Earl of Northampton.

And Or a Lion Ramp. Az. a Bend Gobony Arg. and Gules.

Barry of six Arg. and Az. Gray of Codnar.

Gules a Fesse Barry betwixt three Libards Heads Or.

Quarterly Arg. and Sab. a Bend Gules.

Arg. three Martlets sab.

Quarterly per Fesse indented.

Ermine and Arg.

Barry of six Or and Az. a Canton Ermine.

Or thr^e Chevrons Gules.

Gules, a Saltier Arg. Nevile.

Azure on a Bend Arg. Cotised betwixt six Lioncels Ramp.

Or three Mullets Sab. Boun.

Hawton. Doomsd. Holton.
HEre was Soc to Newark as much as was rated to the Tax for two Bov.. of the
Bishop of Lincolnes Fee; and here was of Walter de Ayncurts Fee Soc to Stoches
in Holton, which paid the public Geld for two Bovats. The Land was one Car.
There six Sochm. had two Car. and twenty Acres of Meadow. Lib. Dooms.
But the most considerable part of this Township was the Fee of Raph de Limesi,
wherein Tored had a Manor which in the Confessors time paid the Dane-geld for
four Bov. and an half. The Land being then certified to be sufficient for two
Plows, or two Carucats. There Raph de Limesi had two Car. and four Sochm. on
two Bovats and an half of this Land, and five Vill. five Board. having three
Car. There was a Priest and two Churches, one Mill 5s. 4d. Here were likewise
four Manors in the Confessors time, which Bugo, Raynald, Torvet, and Bugo
had, and then discharged them to the public payment or Geld for six Bov.. The
Land was then returned to be two Car.. Soc also there which paid the Geld as
five Bovats. The Land two Car. Soc. In these Lands were eighteen Sochm. two
Vill. ten Board. having six Car. These five Manors Alured held of Raph. In the
Confessors time the value was 100s. when Doomsday Book was made 4l. 10s.

Richard de Houton was the first Successor of Alured that I have found, Autog.
pe^. Harvey Staunton, Ar.

Autog. pe^. Dom. Fr. Molyneux, Bar.


and he I suppose lived in the time of King Henry the second. William, son of
Roger de Honton, gave to Walter des Mores, son of Rob. des Mores, that Toft and
two Bovats, etc. in Houton: the Witnesses were Robert de Basingham, Richard his
brother, William, son of Richard de Houton, William, son of Roger de Stokes,
Walter del How, Henry, son of Thomas de Roldeston, Walter, son of Alured de
Collingham, Raph, son of Robert de Collingham, Robert de Stokes, William, son
of Harvey, Adam, son of Albert, Henry de Carleton, Malger de Thorp, Walter, son
of Henry, and others. Regist. de Th^^g. 41. b.
Sir Roger de Howton, son of William de Houton, Knight, gave with his body
seven Bovats in Houton, to the Priory of Thurgarton, for the sustentation of a
Ca^on, to celebrate Mass daily in that Church, where he intended to be buried,
for the health of his Soul, and of Agnes his wife, and all his Ancestors and
Successors. Walter Archbishop of York confirmed the Church of Houton to that
Priory, Reg. Th^rg. 143.
which it had of the gift of the said Roger, son of William; and afterward
granted the Prior and Covent two Besants yearly out of it, to be paid by the
Parson in the name of a Pension. Ib. 149.
There was a Fine levied at Not. 42 H. 3. between Richard Prior of Thurgarton,
and Robert de Houton, by which the said Prior passed the Advowson of the Church
of Houton, to the said Robert and his heirs, who then gave to that Monastery
three Bovats of Land in Houton, and confirmed the seven Bovats, and four Tofts,
together with Stephen de Houton, William de Bingham, Walter le Dispenser, Maud
le Dekne,. Villains, who held the said Lands, and all their sequel, and three
Tofts, and one Bov.. in Woodburgh, and the Villains who held them, and the
Homage and Service of William de Nevill and his heirs, for two Bov. of Land in
Fulbek held of Roger de Houton his brother, whose heir the said Robert then was.

Roger de Brettevile, and Amabilia his wife, who afterward married, Ib. 41.
or else was daughter of... Verly, gave 7s. Rent to Thurgarton, out of Lands in
this Town, then in the occupation of Ernabald Brun. Benedict de Rolleston, Pl.
cor. Reg. Hill. 10 E. 1. to. 14.
10 E. 1. released to Roger de Bretevill, and Amabille his wife, one Mess. and
two Car. of Land, and ten Acres of Meadow, and one Mill in Hoghton the Thursday
after the Feast of St. Marc the Evangelist.

Robert de Cumpton Lord of Houton, Ex Autog. per. Dom. Fr. Molyneux, Bar.
gave to Theophania, daughter of Adam le Vavasur, one Mess. two Bovats of Land,
etc. in this Town, paying yearly half a pound of Wax at Christmas. The
Witnesses were Sir William de Staunton, Sir John de Thorp, Knights, William de
Sibthorp, Paulinus de Stokes, etc. -- The Seal within the Circumscription of
his name is, on a long straight lined Triangular Shield, three Helmets; which
Arms were on all the Seals of this Family, in the Reigns of several Kings,
though differing sometimes in shape of the Helmets. Sir Robert de Cumpton was a
Knight 1302. Ib.
There was a Fine levied of the moiety of the Manor of Houton by Newark, Fin
apud Ebor. ^ die S. Martini i^ 15. dies 29 E. 1. Apud Ebor. dai^ Pasc. i^ 15.
dies 27 E. 1.
29 E. 1. by Robert de Compton, to Hugh Barry.

Nicholas Curzun of Thorleby, and Maud his wife, passed by Fine, 27 E. 1. to
Hugh de Stanford, one Mess. one Toft, six Bovats of Land, nine Acres of Meadow,
with the Appurtenances in Houton by Newark.

This was returned a whole Villa, 9 E. 2. and Robert de Compton Lord of it.
Nom. Vill.


Robertus de Cumpton, viz. Fenny Cumpton in Com. Warw. Robertus de Cumpton,
miles, 29 E. 1. Robertus de Cumpton 3 E. 3. Johannes de Compton, 43 E. 3.
Willielmus de Compton Willielmus de Compton, Ar. 6 H. 6. Johannes de Compton,
37 H. 6. Willielmus Compton, Ar. 5 H. 8.




Johannes, 3 E. 3. Radulphus, 3 E. 3. Jacobus, 3 E. 3.


There was a Fine levied at Not. 3 E. 3. between Robert de Cumpton, Die Lunae
prox. post fi^. S. Mart. 3 E. 3.
Quer. and Robert de Helpeston Parson of Houton, Deforc. of two parts of the
Manor of Houton by Newark, with the Appurtenances, and the Advowson of the
Church of the said Manor, thereby settled on the said Robert de Cumpton for
life, afterward to his sons Robert, John, Raph, James, successively, and their
respective heirs Males; remainder to the right heirs of the said Robert de
Cumpton. Robert de Compton, 43 E. 3. acknowledged to have received of John his
son five Marks 7s. and 6d. of his Rent, Autog. pen. Fr. Molyneux, Bar.
of the Lands and Tenements which the said John held of him in Houton.

William Cumpton of Houton, Esquire, 6 H. 6. conveyed the Manors of Houton,
Autog. pen. Fr. Molyneux, Bar.
and Fenny Compton in Warwickshire, to Thomas Cursun, Esquire, and John
Flaubergh, Clark.

Nicholas Wymbish, Clark, Hugh Wymbish, and Raph Bellers, Ib.
Esquires, 23 H. 6. released to John Cumpton, son and heir of William Cumpton
the younger, late of Houton by Newark, all their claim in the Manor of Houton,
and in all the Lands and Tenements which were William Cumptons, Grandfather of
the said John, in the Counties of Not. and Warwick. Ib.
John Cumpton, son and heir of William Compton, for a sum of Money, conveyed
the Manors of Houton, and Fenny Compton by Chepingdorset, etc. to Hugh
Pakenham, and John Pakenham.

This Family, it seems, residing in this County, was not discovered by Mr.
Dugdale in Warwickshire; The Antiq. of Warwick^h. illustr. by Will. Dugdale,
Esquire, Norroy.
in Fenny Compton Church Window he observes Sable, a Fesse engrailed between
three Helmets Argent, which might probably belong to some of this Stock.

John Compton, Cla^s. 37 H. 6. m. 25.
son and heir of William Compton, and Cousin and heir of William Compton,
Father of the said William, sometime of Houton by Newark, 37 H. 6. released to
Hugh Pakenham, and John Pakenham, Clark, in possession being, and their heirs,
all his right in the Manor of Houton, and the Advowson of the Church.

I have not seen further of these Comptons, Mic. 5 H. 8. rot. 106.
saving that, 5 H. 8. William Compton, Esquire, claimed against Robert
Molineux, and Katherine Molineux, widow, two parts of the Manor of Houton,
which was then the inheritance of that Family, whereof the first was Thomas
Molineux, Ex genesis Collect. pen. Sam. R^per, Ar. pen. Ric. Dom. By^^n.
Grandchild, son, and brother to Sir Richard Molineux of Sefton in the County
of Lancaster, which said Thomas was made Banneret, by Richard Duke of
Gloucester, at Barwick, in the year 1482. and built the Church, and a fair
House at this Hawton: his first wife was Elizabeth daughter of Robert Markham
of Cotham, by whom he had Robert Molyneux, who succeeded him here; his second
wife was Katherine, the daughter of John Cotton (and I suppose the widow of
Thomas Poutrell) by whom he had Sir Edmund Molyneux the Judge, mentioned in
Thorpe. He died, 6 H. 7. and his son Robert, before named, is said to have
Dorothy, the daughter of Thomas Poutrell of West Hallam in Derbishire, to wife,
and by her a son called Thomas, who having no issue, left this Manor to
Richard his brother. Robert Molyneux, Autog. pe^. F. M.
and Edmund Molyneux, in consideration of a marriage had between Richard
Molyneux, son and heir of Robert, and Margaret, daughter of Edmund Bussy,
Esquire, demised to him, Aug. 3. 22 H. 8. all the Lands and Tenements which
were Thomas Molyneux's, Father of Robert, in Carleton and Gedling, and Lands in
Hawton, etc. By this Margaret, daughter of Edmund Bussy of Hather in
Lincoleshire, this Richard had Francis Molyneux, who married Elizabeth,
Granddaughter and coheir of Roger Grenehagh of Teversall (where I shall place
the Descent) whose son Thomas Molyneux had to wife Alice, daughter and coheir
of Thomas Cranmer of Aslacton, noted in that place, who bore him John Molineux,
who was Knight and Baronet; and to his first wife had.... daughter of John
Markham of Sedgebroke; and to his second Anne, daughter of Sir James Harington
of Ridlington in Rutland, widow of Thomas Fol^ambe. By his first he had Sir
Francis Molyneux, to whom he left but very little clear Estate, having sold a
great part of his Lands, and Mortgaged this Town to Sir Francis Leek, the first
Baronet of that name, and Father of the first Earl of Scarsdale, so that it
became the inheritance of Sir Francis Leek, who has Mortgaged it also to
Richard Newdigate, Sergeant at Law. By his second wife Sir John had Colonel
Roger Molyneux.

The Lands in Hawton belonging to the Priory of Thurgarton, B.
were granted, 4 Eliz. to James Hardwick and his heirs, and so came to the Earl
of Devonshire.

The Lordship is depopulated very much since the War, and a great part of it
enclosed since then too, which never fails to produce that effect.

Mss. I. M.
The Rectory of Hawton was 20l. value, and Mr. Molyneux Patron. It Is now 17l.
13s. 4d. in the Kings Books.

In the Church there was upon a Marble Stone cut in Brass, Ex Coll. St. Lo
(...).


Of your Charity pray for the Souls of Degory Adys, Knight of the Sepulcre
and Merchant of the Stapull of Calys, and Dame Anne his wife, daughter of
Thomas Powtrell, Esquire; the which Degory deceased 27 Febr. 1521. Upon it is
Arg. a Bull sable, Horned Or, amongst long Reeds Or, the tops sable; and by it,
Or a plain Cross between four Croslets Gules, the first impales with Arg. a
Fesse between three Cinquefoils, Gules, Poutrell.

In the Brass of another Stone,

Of your Charity pray for the Souls of William Molyneux, and Marget his wife,
their Childrens Souls, and all Christian Souls; which William departed this
present life the last day of October. 1541. There is Molyneux Arms with a
Crescent.

In the Chancel on a piece of Brass, upon a little plain Stone was,

Of your Charity pray for the Souls of Robert Molineux, Esquire, and Dorothy
his wife; which Robert deceased 13 Apr. 1539.

Upon a little Stone for a Child,

Johannes filius quintus Thomae Halgh de Wigtoft, generos.

In the Windows Molyneux impales with Markham.

Arg. a Lion Ramp. sab.

Gules, a Bend Cotised betwixt six Martlets Or.

Cheque Arg. and Gules a file of three Labels Az.

On the North side of the Chancell* at Hawton, Iuxta Newarke



Molineux impales with Az. a Spread Eagle Arg. Cotton.

Arg. 3 Bars sab. Bussy.

Or upon a Fesse Gules, three Waterbougets Arg. Bingham.

Lozengy Arg. and Gules, Fitz-Williams.

Arg. an five Fusell^* in Fesse Gules, five Scallops Or, Aslacton.

Az. a Bend between six Martlets Arg. Lutterell. Leeke. Gules upon a Bend Arg.
three Cross Croslets Azure.

Sab. six Annulets Or, 3.2.1. Arg. three Chevronells, and a bordure engrailed
Sable.

Arg. upon Bend Az. three Waterbougets Or, Booth.

Arg. a Chief Varry Or, and Gules a Bend Sable, Fitz-Herbert impaling with
Molineux* of Northbury.

By the Wall side in the Chancel an old cross-leg'd Monument, with a Shield not
ordinary.

Farneton. Doomsd. Farendune.
THe Book of Doomsday certifies that Baldertune and Farendune were Berewes of
the great Sok of Newarke, and are there involved in that which was the Fee of
the Bishop of Lincoln.

I have met with nothing memorable in old time worth inserting, saving that the
Wapentak and Town of Newark presented Mr. William le Tanner of Newark, Pl. de
Iar. and Assis. and Coroy in Com. Not. 8 E. 1. rot. 42.
8 E. 1. that he held certain Meadow in Farnedon, at the will of the Bishop of
Lincoln, for which he was bound to repair Morkerbrigg; and that he came and
acknowledged it to be his duty. But this, I think, only now amounts to the
leading of certain Loads of Gravel.

There is a Manor here parcel of Richmund Fee, B.
which in the time of Henry the seventh, was the possession of William Nevill;
in the time of Henry the eight of Thomas Sutton; and afterward of Sir John
Molyneux of Thorpe, great Grandchild to Sir Edmund Molineux the Judge.

The Vicarage of Faringdon was 8l. Now it is 6l. 13s. 4d. in the Kings Books,
and the Patron the Prebendary of Balderton in the Church of Lincoln, who has
both the Churches served by the same Vicar.

Balderton.
BEsides the Berew, here was in this Town of Balderton, which was not reckoned
together with Newark in the Conquerours great Survey, Lib. Dooms.
Soc of the Manor as much as was rated to the Dane-geld at six Bovats and an
half. The Land three Carucats. There twenty six Sochm. three Board. had nine Car.

Robert (de Kayneto) Bishop of Lincoln, Founded the Priory of St. Katherins,
Mon. Angl. vol. 2.814.
in the Suburbs of that City, to which he gave, amongst other things, three
Bovats of Land in Baldertune, with the dwelling Houses, which King Henry the
second confirmed; in whose Reign, viz. 21 H. 2. it appears William de Dive had
interest here, Rot. Pip. 21 H. 2.
for his Land of Balderton then ought two Marks for defect.

Here was a Manor in Balderton, to which several Lands in Barneby, Codington,
Farnedon, Stoke, Elston, and Sireston, and other places did belong, whereof
John de Dyve of Kingerby in Lincolneshire, Mon. Angl. vol. 2.422.
son of Sir William de Dive, and Ermetrida de Amundevill, the heir of that
Family, by whom that place, and many other descended to him, died seized about
21 E. 1. held of the Bishop of Lincoln, leaving Joan, Esc. 21 E. 1. n. 42.
then the wife of Raph de Trehampton (formerly of William Deisney) and
Elizabeth, wife of Sir John D'aubeney his sisters and heirs; which Elizabeth
the year following, viz. 22 E. 1. left Sir Hugh de Bussey, Knight, Esc. 22 E.
1. n. 44.
her son by Sir Lambert de Bussey her former husband, her heir, then aged about
thirty years. Sir Hugh de Bussey left the Manor of Balderton, Esc. 34 E. 1. n.
45.
and many other Lands about 34 E. 1. to his son and heir John de Bussey, then
being twenty four years of age.

To this worthy Family, whose principal Seat was at Hougham in Lincolneshire,
did this Manor remain, B.
till the heir Female of it carried it to Meeres; and that in Queen Elizabeth's
time, Francis Meeres the heir and issue of that match, sold it to Gyles Foster,
whose heir sold it to James Leeke, Gent. whose son and heir Francis Leek
succeeded, and left only a daughter, who was married to George Lascells of
Elston.

The Rectories of Balderton and Farneton were anciently appropriated to the
Church of Lincoln, and do make one good Prebend, there called Balderton
Prebend.

Jordanus Bussy temp. Conq Lambertus Bussy temp. W. 1. ob. 1082. Ex Regist. de
Novo Loco.
Jordanus Bussy Et Collect. G. E.
Lambertus Bussy Hugo Bussy ob. 20 Joh. de Hougham-Mabilia fill. Hen. de
Braybrook. Lambertus Bussie-Lucia fill. Gilb. de Beningworth. Hugo Bussie ob. 7
E. 1. Nov. 1. Lambertus Bussie-Elizabetha cohaer. ob. 22 E. 1.-Johannes de
Albiniaco, marit. 2. Hugo Bussie, mil. aet. 25.22 E. 1.-Elizabetha. Johannes
Bussie, miles, de Hougham, ob. 4 September. 1349.-Elizabetha vel Joanna. Johannes
Bussie, miles, ob. in vita patris-Agnes fill.... Com. Suffolk. Willielmus
Bussie, miles-Isabella fill. Johannis Paynell de Botheby. Johannes Bus^ye,
miles, decapitat. apud Bristow, 1 H. 4.-Matilda fill. and haer. Philippi Nevile,
mil. Dom. de Scotton. Johannes Bussie, miles-Catharina fill. and haer. Johannis
Cumberworth de Hundon C. Linc. Johannes Bussie, miles, ob. 20 Febr. 13 H.
7.-Elizabetha fill. Laurent. Barkeley, mil. Hugo Bussie de Hougham ob. in vita
patris.-Joana fill. Johannis Wichecote. Milo Bussie de Hougham, mil.-Margareta
fill. Hen. Foljambe Johan. Bussie-Agnes fill. Tho. Dom. Burgh. Agnes Bussie-Edm.
Brudenell mil. sine prole.
Joana-Thom. Meeres. Francisc. Meeres.-Elizab. fill. Tho. Cony de Kirton.
Anthonius Meeres-Catharina fill. Jac. Crewes.



Edmundus de Hather.-Alicia Culpeper. Edw. Bussie de Hather.-Jana sor. and coh.
Joh. Hercie de Grove, mil. Johannes Bussie de Hather.-... fill.... Pole de
Radburne, mil. Rhod. Ed. Bussie miles.-Christoph. Carolus. Francisc. feodar.
Com. Not.


Edward. Willielm. Johannes.















Rogerus de Amundevilla.... fill. Gerardi Sylvan. Jolanus de Amundevil-Beatrix
fill.... Paganel. Walter. s. p. r. Willielm. s. p. ^. Elias de Amundevil,
3.-Emma B^lemer. Jo^lan* de Amundevil-Ermetruda neptis C* A^merle* Petrus de
Amundevil-Joana de Acclum. Ermetruda de Amundevilla fill. and haer.-Willielmus
de Dive, mil. Lambertus Bussie-Elizabetha cohaer. ob. 22 E. 1.-Johannes de
Albiniaco, marit. 2. Johannes de Dive, s. p. Willielmus de Isney.-Joana-Rad. de
Trehampton.



Radulph. Alan. Jordan.
Johannes. Robertus.

Barneby in the Willows.
HEre was belonging to Newark of the Bishop of Lincolnes Fee, as much as
answered the Tax or Dane-geld for two Bovats. But the chief part of this Town,
was the Fee of Odo Bishop of Bayeux; which Manor was Vlurics before the
Conquest, Lib. Dooms.
and was charged to the Dane-geld, the Tax then usually paid, at or according
to seven Bovats. The Land of it being then for three Plows, or three Carucats.
There afterward Losuardus, the Man or Tenant of the said Bishop of Baion, had
one Car. and 4 Sochm. upon two Bov. of this Land, and nine Vill. and six Board.
having four Car. and an half. There was a Priest and a Church, in which lay
half a Bovat of this Land, and one Mill 5s. 4d. and thirty Acres of Meadow, and
a small Wood. All this kept the value it had in the time of Edward the
Confessor, viz. 40s.

Much of this Bishops Land in this County became afterward parcel of Richmond
Fee. In 10 E. 1. Esc. 10 E. 1. n. 28. (...). 26.
Sir Hugh de Babington, and Sir Henry de Perepont, held a Knights Fee of that
Honor in Rolleston, Cotington, Barneby, and Colingham, and paid 10s. per
annum, to the Ward of the Castle of Richmond.

John de Dyve, 15 E. 1. or before, granted to Andrew de Nevill for that one
time, (...). de Banc. (...). 15 E. 1. rot. 119.
the presentation to the Church of this Barneby on Wythem, saving his right
otherwise; Andrew de Nevill granted this presentation for one turn, to Roger de
Brinkill, who granted that Andrew and his heirs should present ever after.

(...) Banc. (...). 18 E. 1. (...) 82.
In a great Assise, 18 E. 1. the Jury found that Andrew de Nevill (named in
Rolleston) had more right to hold the Advowson of the Church of Barneby near
Newarke, than William de Wyvill.

Nom. Vill.
In the Record of Nom. Vill. 9 E. 2. Winthorpe and Barneby answered for one
Villa, and the Bishop of Lincoln, John de Nevill, and Alexander de Percy, were
then certified to be Lords.

The fourth part of the Manor of Barneby on Wythem was by Fine, (...) Oct. S.
(...) 10 E. 2.
10 E. 2. settled on Alexand. de Percy and Julian his wife, and the heirs of
their bodies; remainder to John, son of the said Alexander and the heirs of
his; remainder to the heirs of the said Alexander.

It is called Barneby in the Willowes, for distinction from Barneby in the
More. B.
Here was a Manor anciently Houghes, from whom it came to A^deley, whose
daughters and heirs were married to Edmund and Robert Thorold, sons of William
Thorold of Marston in Lincolneshire, and brothers of Sir Anthony Thorold,
Knight. This was Roberts part, and his son Anthony sold it to.... Brownlow. It
is parcelled out, and part thereof is the inheritance of... Kellet, and a great
part of Mr. Robert Butler.

The Manor of Barn^by, about 12 H. 7. was exchanged betwixt.... Strangewayes,
and.... Suthi^l.

The Earl of Westmerland (who had Richmond Fees this way) had Lands here, 6 E.
4. The Rectory is appropriate to Southwell.

Here are some Grounds on the North part of this Lordship, called the Manor of
Flaufore, which heretofore was the Knights Templars, and after the Hospitallers
of St. John's of Jerusalem, which Thomas le Archer the Prior, (...) de quo
^^ar. cor. ^ill Herle, 3 E. 3. apud N^tt. rot. 2.
and the Brethren of that house, granted to Thomas de Sibthorp Parson of
Bekingham, who gave it to a Chantry which he Founded there, and had it
confirmed to him with Free Warren in it, and all the Appurtenances both in
Lincolneshire and Nottinghamshire, by King Edward the second, 20 Nov. in the
nineteenth year of his Reign. It is now the Inheritance of William Cartwright,
Esquire.

The Vicarage of Barneby was ten Marks. It is now 5l. 9s. 9l. ob. in the Kings
Books, Mss. I. M.
and the Chapter or Church of Southwell, Patrons.

Coddington. Cotinton.
THat part of this Township which was reckoned with Newark, and more especially
Soc to it, paid the Geld as two Car. but the Bishop of Lincoln had two Manors
here besides, one whereof Vluric had, before the Normans came, and paid the Tax
or Geld as one Bov. The Land was two Bovats. There afterward the Bishop had
half a Car. and one Acre of Meadow. This in the time of King Edward the
Confessor was 40s. value, when King Williams Survey was made 20s. Another Bugo
had, and was charged for it to the public Tax at two Bovats and an half. The
Land whereof in the Confessors time was certified to be half a Car. but was
waste: Botild held it, and it was 2s. value, Lib. Dooms.
there was two Acres of Meadow. Here were two other Manors likewise of the Fee
of Odo Bishop of Bayon, one of which Vluric had, before the Conquest, and was
Taxed at three Bov. and an half for it. The Land being then found to be twelve
Bovats. There Losuardus the Man (or Tenant) of the Bishop had two Vill. and
four Board. with one Car. and three Acres of Meadow. In the Confessors time this
was 20s. in the Conquerours 10s. value. Another Manor Leuric had, before the
Norman Invasion, rated at five Bov. to the Dane-geld. The Land two Car. There
Oulchell under the Bishop had half a Car. and four Sochm. on four Bovats of
this Land, and three Board. with half a Car. and five Acres of Meadow.

Robert Peysun, Regist. de Thurg. p. 42.
by the consent of William his brother, gave one Bovat in the Fields of
Codington of his Demesne, between his own Lands next the Sun, to God and St.
Peter of Thurgarton, and the Canons there serving God, and four Selions to make
a Toft nigh the Cross, without the Town of Codington on the West. This was
confirmed by William, son of Walter, son of Paganus de Newarke, and Sara, wife
of the said William, to whom it was re-conveyed by Elias the Prior, to be held
of that House by him and his heirs for 4s. per annum.

In the year 1328. Sir Robert Perpoint held it accordingly of that Monastery.
Ib. p. 1^9. b.


By a Fine at Not. 8 E. 1. Robert A^tebek, In Oct. S. Ma^tini, 8 E. 1. Assis.
in Com. Not. 8 E. 1. to. 9.
and Odierna his wife, and Mariot and Alice her sisters, daughters of William
Henning, passed one Toft, seven Acres and an half of Land, and three Acres of
Meadow, with the Appurtenances in Codyngton, to Henry de Percpunt and his heirs.

By an Inquisition taken at Not. 20 May, Esc. 8 E. 3. to. 46.
8 E. 3. it was certified that Robert Perpount by a Fine levied, 10 E. 2. had
made himself only Tenant for life of 60s. Rent in Newarke, held of the Bishop
of Lincoln, and of one Mess. one Carucat of Land, and 11s. Rent in Codington,
held of Iollanus de Nevill for 24s. per annum; and of the Prior of St.
Katherins without Lincoln, by the Service of 8s. per annum; and in Balderton
of one Mess. one Carucat of Land, five Acres, and one Rood of Meadow, and 13s.
Rent, held of John de Bussy, by the Service of a pair of Gilt Spurs, and of
22s. Rent in Stoke by Newarke, held of William de Thorpe by the Service of 6d.
per annum; and of 26l. and 3s. Rent in Sneynton, held of John de Tibtot, by the
Service of a pair of Gloves or 1d. and of twenty Bovats of Land in Barton, held
of Gervas de Clifton, by the Service of a Clove at Christmas; and of two Acres
of Wood in Carleton by Colwyk, held of Adam de Everingham for a Rose at
Midsummer; and of one Mess. one Carucat of Land, ten Acres of Meadow, 20s. and
9d. Rent in Kirkeby, held of Ioane, who had been wife of John de Stotevile, by
the Service of the sixteenth part of a Knights Fee, and 15s. per annum, and of
one Mess. forty Acres of Land, four of Meadow, one Park containing twenty Acres
of Wood, and 60s. Rent at Holbek Woodhouses, held of Thomas de Furnivall for
20s. per annum; and of the Manor of Weston, held of William le Fitz-William,
by the Service of the fourth part of a Knights Fee, and Lands in Darbyshire,
which were to descend and remain to Henry, son of Henry de Perpont, son of the
said Robert, being then about twelve years of age, when the Writ directed to
William Erneys Escaetor in the Counties of Warewick, Leicester, Not. Darby,
and Lancaster was executed.

Codington in the Record of Nomina Villarum, Nom. Vill.
9 E. 2. answered for an entire Villa, and the Prior of St. Katherins by
Lincoln, John de Nevill (of Rolleston) and the Bishop of Lincoln, were
certified to be Lords of it.

Walter de Maresco, it seems, had some share in Cotinton, Test. d Nev.
for which he ought the King a pair of Scarlet Breeches, but it was Aliened
when Robert de Passelewe, in the time of King Henry the third, let this
Serjeancy to the Prior of St. Katherins for 40s. per annum, being twenty two
Bovats then valued at 4l. 8s. per annum. Robert le Porter held two Bovats, Pl.
d^ I^^. and Assi^. Not. 8 E. 1. to. 42.
which were of the Serjeancy of twenty Bovats, which the Prior of St. Katherins
held of the King in Cotinton about 8 E. 1.

John, son of John de Weseby, 23 E. 1. recovered seisin of four Mess. seven
Bov. of Land, Pl. de Ba^^. Trin. 23 E. 1. to. 12.
and three parts of a Mess. in Cotinton, and Andrew de Nevill, and Thomas de
Kirkeby were amerced.

Henry de Codyngton Parson of Botesford, having had license from King Richard
the second so to do, Reg. Thurg. 167, 181, 190.
Founded a Chantry at the Altar of St. Peter in the Parish Church of Codington
for one Priest, to pray for him while he lived, and for his Soul after his
decease, and for the Soul of John de Codyngton, late Parson of Adesham, and of
their Fathers, Mothers, Brothers, Sisters, and Benefactors, to which he gave
five Mess. three Tofts, one hundred forty four Acres of Land, twenty seven and
an half of Meadow, with the Appurtenances in Codyngton and Holme by Muskam. John
Ashwell was the first, whose Successors, after the death of the said Henry de
Codyngton, were to be named by the Prior of Thurgarton, to whom he left the
chief charge and care of the Chantry; but if he should fail, the Prior of
Shelford was to put in one after a mon^h. The Instrument bears date 1 Ian. 4 H.
4.

The Prior of St. Katherins had Free Warren at Coddington and Wigges^e, Rot.
Cart. 5 E. 3. n. 28.
5 E. 3. in this County.

By Indenture bearing date 15 June, 6 E. 6. the King in Consideration of the
Manors of Northhall in Hertfordshire, and Northrawceby in Lincolneshire, and
the Site of the Priory, and the Rectory of Cardigan in South Wales, and other
Lands in Cornwall, and other places, granted to William Cavendish and his
heirs, the Manors of Medowplek and Rectory of Yolgrave belonging to the Priory
of Leicester, of Pentrich and Ulkerthorpe belonging to the Abbey of Darley, of
Blackwall to Lenton, and the Tithes in Kingstorodale, Cowdale, and Sledon, and
the Demesne Lands of that Monastery of Lenton in Ashfeild, all these and many
others in Darbyshire, with several others in the Counties of Stafford, Dorset,
Cornwall, Kent, Essex, etc. amongst the rest the Prior of St. Katherins part
in this Cotington.

The Chantry Lands, 1 Sept. 6 E. 6. were granted to Edward Bray, Knight, Part.
9. pat. 6 E. 6.
John Thorneton, John Danby, and to the heirs of the two latter, Part. 22. pat.
44 Eliz.
and 6 Iun. 44 Eliz. to Thomas Leonard alias Pocklington and his heirs, then
being of the yearly value of 67s. 4d.

This Town gives name to a Moore, whereon used to be a famous Horse-race, for
which the Major and Aldermen of Newark were wont to provide the Plate.

The Cure is served by the Vicar of Stoke, so that it is like the Tithes belong
to the Corpse of the Prebend of the Chancellor of the Church of Lincoln.

Winthorp. Doomsd. VVymunthorp.
OF the Soc of Newark here was as much as was charged to the Dane-geld at six
Bovats and an half, which, together with what is mentioned in Chelingtone;
Scireston, Elvestone, Stoches, Holton, Cotintone, and Barnebye, Lib. Dooms.
of that Soc, is reckoned to make for that Tax three Car. and an half (but the
particulars amount to somewhat more than the gross sum). The Land was 10 Car.
and an half in all these places. And there were seventy seven Sochm. with four
Board. having fifteen Car. and an half, and in them one hundred sixty three
Acres of Meadow.

Walter de Amundevill, Mon. Ang^. vol. 2. p. 421.
eldest son of Iolanus and Beatrix his wife, daughter of.... Paganell of West
Rasin in Lincolneshire, gave the Church of Winthorp, with that of Kinerby, and
some others to the Hospital of Ellesham in that County, which his said Mother
Beatrix began to Found, and also three Mills Situate upon Trent, without the
Town of Winethorp, and one in it, which Thurstan the Carpenter and his heirs
ought to hold of the said Hospital for 12d. per annum, and one Toft, with a
Bovat and half of Land, which Ranulf Small (parvus) held in the same Town;
which gift William de Amundevill his next brother confirmed, and after him
Elias de Amundevil the third brother, to whose Deed were Witnesses Raph de
Amundevill his brother, and Adam his brother also, Iorslenus, and William de
Evermo his Nephews, Raph de Amundevill, son of his brother Raph, etc.

William de Amundevill gave the Monks of Rufford license to make a Fishing in
his Land, Regist. de Ruff. p. 8.
and in Trent between Winbeltorpe and Muscam, with all the liberty he should
use himself, if he would have made one, and would that all his heirs should
know that he gave it for a sin which he did against them, and that they should
remit it, and grant him and his heirs to be pa^takers of all the good which
they should do.

William Clement Prior of Hellesham was a Witness to his Deed. Pi^. 2 Ioh. Linc.


Alice, the daughter of Elias de Amundevill in the Sheriff of Lincolnshire's
account, 2 Ioh. ought twenty Marks for having recognizance whether Elias her
Father gave her the Town of Wintertorp to marry her, so that she was seized of
it in her Fathers life time, and after his death, till Ioslenus her brother
disseised her, while she was in his custody. This Iolanus, son of Elias de
Amundevill, Mo^. Angl. vol. 2. Ib.
confirmed the Hospital of Ellesham; he married Ermetrida, Niece to the Earl of
Aumerle, and his son Peter de Amundevil left a daughter and heir called
Ermetrida, married to William de Dive, whose son John Dive, mentioned in.
Balderton, left his Estate to his two sisters and heirs there named, which were
married to the two excellent Families Bussy and Deisney, some of which are yet
in being, though much lessened in Estate.

This last mentioned Wintertorp may perhaps be in Lincolneshire, for this
Wynethorp is said to be an Eschaet, and that it was of 12l. yearly value, Test.
de Nev.
and that the Bishop of Lincoln (Lord of Newark) held it of the gift of King
John, with which place it has usually gone. Howbeit certain it is that the
Prior of Ellesham was Patron here of this Rectory, in whose time it was valued
at 10l. (...). I. M.
It Is now 7l. 11s. 0d. ob. in the Kings Books, and his Majesty Patron. It Is now
reported to be annexed to Newark in the new Charter, Feb. 8. 1672.

Landford.
AT this place, before the coming of the Normans, Leuric had a Manor which
usually answered to the Public Tax at two Car. three Bov. 1/^. The Land of it
being for eight Plows, or eight Car. Afterward it became the Fee of Goisfride
de Wirce, whose Man or Tenant Ranulf, Lib. Dooms.
is certified to have had two Car.. and sixteen Sochm. seventeen Villains, four
Board. having seven Car. There was a Priest and a Church, two Mills 12s. one
Piscary, one hundred Acres of Meadow. In King Edward the Confessors time this
was 4l. value, in the Conquerours 4l. 10s.

Mr. Dugdale, in his Book of Warwickshire, shows that Wirce his Lands were by
King Henry the first, P. 50.
granted to Nigel de Albany, Progenitor of the Family of Mowbray, who, it is
likely, did enfeoff Robert de Ayvill mentioned in Egmanton of this Manor. For
John de Auvill gave 40s. in the seventh year of King John, Fin. 7 Ioh* m. 5.
for having a certain Precipe that William de Mumbray should restore unto him
Landford, with the Appurtenances, to wit, a Knights Fee, which Robert de
Auvill, Father of the said John, gave in marriage to Roger de Caily, with Jane
his sister then dead, who had a son who died without any heir at all, so that
for want of heir the Fee ought to return to the said John, son and heir of the
said Robert.

The next I find here was Richard de Gray (of Codnor) paying his Mark for half
a Knights Fee, Test. de Nev.
in the former part of the Reign of Henry the third. William de Gray of
Sandiacre in Darbishire, 53 H. 3. had Free Warren here, who, I suppose, Chapter 53
H. ^. m. 5.
was enfeoffed of this Manor by the said Richard, whom I guess to be his
brother William died about this year, and his son Richard was his heir, who
married Lucia, Pip. Rot. 54 H. 3.
the daughter and heir of Robert de Haresta^ Lord of Sutton in the Dale in
Darbishire, and Harestan in Leicestershire, and Hickling in this County, as in
that place may be seen, where it also appears that this Lordship with the rest,
became the inheritance of John Leek (said to be younger brother of Simon Leek
of Cotham) in right of his wife Alice, Grandchild of Edward Hillary and Alice
Gray, by John Gray their son and heir.

This John Leek, and Alice his wife (who after the death of her sister Isabel
without issue, Ex Coll. I. B.
about 14 H. 6. became sole heir) had a son called William Leek; who by
Catharin his wife, the daughter of Sir Thomas Chaworth, Knight, had a younger
son called Thomas Leek of Hasland, whose daughter Elizabeth, the wife of John
Hardwyk, Esquire, was mother of Elizabeth, the wife of Sir William Cavendish,
afterward Countess of Shrowsbury, the great instrument of placing the two
Illustrious Houses of Newcastle and Devonshire in these parts: but his eldest
son was John Leeke of Sutton, who by his wife Elizabeth, the daughter of Sir
John Savage, had two sons John and Thomas, and three daughters, Catharin, wife
to Sir Godfr. Foljambe; Miriel to Sir Thomas Waterton; and Elizabeth to John
Frechevile. He was buried in Sutton Chancel 24 March 1504. and by his Will,
committed the said Thomas his son (who was called Leek of Williamthorpe) to
Thomas Savage Lord Archbishop of York, Holgrave. 33.
to be ordered concerning his marriage, and gave to Thomas Leek of Hasland his
brother before named, and noted more particularly in Leke, Lands in Carleton
juxta Gedling; this same John Leek had Lands in the Counties of Not. Derb.
Linc. Leicest. and Worcester, he gave four hundred Marks toward the building
of Sutton Church, making of his Tomb, and paying his debts, and was succeeded
by Sir John Leeke his son and heir, who, 10 December. 14 H. 8. 1522. being about
to go in the Army into Scotland, under the most Noble Captain, the Kings
Lieutenant General, and Steward of England, the Earl of Showsbury, made his
Will, and either died or was slain, for it was proved, 10 Oct. 1523. whereby it
appears that he had three natural daughters, Susan, Bodfeild 12.
Elizabeth, and Dorothy, begotten on the body of Anne Mainwaring, who was with
Child when he made his Will. His wife was Jane, the daughter of Henry Foljambe,
Esquire, by whom he had Anne, and Katherin, the wife of Francis Mering; and two
sons, Francis, who married Elizabeth; and John, who married Margaret, the
daughters of Sir William Paston of Norfolk; the Lands mentioned in his Will,
are at Sutton in le Dale, Sandiacre, Hickling, Normanton, Chesterfeild, Huknall
Torcard, Little Leek, Great Leek, Notingham, Stoke by Newark, Lanforth,
Colewick, Carcolston, and Wiverton.

B.
His son Sir Francis Leeke, in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Eliz.
obtained the other part of this Lordship, whereof Robert de Perpount was Lord
in 9 E. 2. to whose Family it continued with Holme Perpont, Nom. Vill.
where it is also mentioned till that time; but he shortly after sold the whole
to George then Earl of Shrowsbury.

It has since been purchased by John More, Dr. of Physic, and by him left to
Sir Edw. More his Nephew, Baronet, of Nova Scotia, who leaving four daughters
and no son, John More of Kirtlington, another of the Doctors Nephews succeeded,
and left John More his son and heir, the present owner, who married my Lord of
Dunbar's sister.

Sir Francis Leek died 1 Aug. 22 Eliz. and left a son and heir of his own name,
who was Knighted at Greenwich 1 Iun. 1601. 43 Eliz. and made Baronet at the
first Creation of that honor 9 Iac. His first wife was Frances, the daugh^er
of Robert Swift, by whom he had Sir Francis Leeke crea^ed Lord Deyncourt, and
afterward Earl of Scarsdale, Father of Nicolas the present Earl. His second
wife was Mary, the daughter of John Egioke of Worcestershire, (after his death
married to Sir Gervas Clifton) on whom he begot William Leek, commonly called
^quire Leak, the Father of Sir Francis Leek of Newark, Knight and Baronet, the
present Lord of Sandiacre.

There was a Moore and Common in Landford, belonging to St. John's of
Jerusalem, Part. 7. pat. 6 E. 6.
which, 18 December. 6 E. 6. were granted to Edward Fynes, Knight, Lord Clynton,
and Say, and Henry Hereson, and their heirs; there were Lands and Commons in
Barnebie and Landford, late bel^nging to the said Priory of St. John's of
Jerusalem, Part. 1. pat. 28 (...).
4 Oct. 28 Eliz. granted to Sir Christopher Hatton, Knight, and his heirs. And
21 Oct. 30 Eliz. to Edward Wymark, Part. 7. pat. 30 Eliz.
Gent. and his. Possibly that Priory had the Church also. Mr. More has the
Tithes.

Mering.
Lib. Dooms.
KIng Williams Land here was rated to the Geld at six Bovats and an half. It
should seem it, or part of it became afterward of the Earl of Richmonds Fee,
Test. (...) Nev.
because Richard de Sutton is said to hold of that Honor a Knights Fee in
Sutton, Carleton, and Meringes. And before that I find that Alan de Mering, Ex
lib* de (...), f^l. 1^1. b. ^ap. 4.
son of Harvei, by the grant of Hervei de Sutton his Lord, gave one place of
Land in the territory of Mering, to the Canons of Radeford (by Wirksop.)

The first of this Family, which had their name from their residence here, that
I can reconcile to any certainty of time, was Gillebertide Meringes, who
granted to Raph Murdac (High Sheriff of these Counties, Regist. de Lent. 131.
30 H. 2.) six Acres of Meadow in Meringes, in that called Esteng, which Roger
de Caisneto held of him for 2s. per annum, as the said Raph Murdac was to do,
who gave it away to the Priory of Lenton, for the health of his own soul, and
of Alexander de Cheinai's; and together with it, for the more abundant firmness
and security of his said gift, the writing which he had from the said Gilbert
de Meringges, for which after his death, the Monks were to make him a perpetual
Anniversary, as for one of their Advocates, or principal Benefactors.

The next whom I have found of this place was Gerard de Mering, Pip. 6 H. 3.
in the beginning of the Reign of Henry the third.

In the 40 H. 3. Roger de Luvetot the Sheriff, gave account of 2 Marks, of
Gilb. de Mering, Pip. 40 H. 3.
and Ivetta his wife, for having a Writ of Attaint.

Robert de Mering, Pl. de Ba^^. Pasc. 32 E. 1. to. 33. fol. 14.
32 E. 1. claimed the hearing of a Writ, which Guychard de Charun (Lord of
Sutton by Mary his wife, one of the coheirs) procured against him, for
services at Mering, due to the said Guichard: but it appeared by the date of
the Writ, that it was obtained eight days before the fault was said to be
made, therefore he had nothing by it. But this Guichard, I take upon further
consideration, to be son of him who married the coheir, but not by her, as in
Sutton may be observed; for I find Sir Robert de Mering* Knight, held of John
de Muscam (son of Gilbert and Agnes de Sutton another coheir) all his
Tenements in Mering, Regist. in Novo loc p. 227.
by Foreign service; and that the said Robert redeemed the said Service, and
Ward of his h^irs, of the said John. After the said Robert, succeeded John de
Mering his son, whose son and heir Thomas married the daughter of Peter Foun of
Marcham, who had the custody of the said Thomas under age. Peter Foun had a son
and heir called John, who died without issue, and Thomas Mering became his heir
in right of his wife.

Alice, Pl. de Iur. and Assis. cor. Will. Herle, apud Not. 3 E. 3. to. 10. and
in dorso. Fin. apud Ebor. a die, Pasc. in 3 Sept. 11 E. 3.
who had been the wife of Nicolas de Widmerpole, and Robert, son of Nicolas de
Widmerpole, had a Suit against Sir Thomas, son and heir of John, son of Robert
de Mering, 3 E. 3.

A Fine was levied at York, 11 E. 3. of the Manor of Mering, between Thomas
the elder son of John de Mering, and Elizabeth his wife, Quer. and Richard de
Kelum of Sutton Chaplain, Deforc. whereby it was settled on the said Thomas and
Elizabeth, and the heirs Males of their bodies; remainder to Bertram, Thomas
and John, sons of the said Thomas, and the heirs Males of theirs successively;
remainder to the right heirs of the said Thomas, son of John.

Thomas de Mering, who was Tenant by the Courtesy of England, Esc. 42 E. 3. n.
42. and Esc. 36 E. 3. Par. 2. c. 18. Reg. de. Nov. loc. p. 228.
after the death of Elizabeth his wife, of the third part of the third part of
the Manor of Turford, etc. which her Father Peter Foun had by Margery her
mother, one of the three daughters of Agnes, one Herveius Alanus de Meringa.
Gillebert de Meringges. Godardus sive Gerardus de Mering, 3 H. 3. Gilbertus de
Mering, 40 H. 3.-Ivetta. Robertus de Mering mil. 32 E. 1. Johannes de Mering
Thom. de Mering, mil. 3 E. 3.-......-Elizabetha. Bertram de Mering, 11 E. 3.
Tho. Joh. 2 Alexander de Mering Willielmus Mering-Elizabetha fill. Tho. Nevill
de Rolleston. Willielmus Mering, miles Willielmus Mering, Ar. Will. Mering,
mil.-Agnes fill. and haer. Hen. Gloucester de Carcolston and Sutton-...-...-
Johannes Mering-Katharina sor. and haer. Johannis Hercy, militis. Willielmus
Mering, miles-Margareta fill. Thom. Cave de Stanford. 1 Thom. Mering, aetat. 26.
1576. 2 Willielmus. 3 Ambros.
Franc. Thom. Johan.

Tho. Mering-... fill. Thwaits^ Franc. Alicia ux. Ric. Sutton.

Elizab.-Robertus Markham
Alex. Mering de Collingham- Eliz. ux. Joh. Strelley and Jac. Savage. Marg. ux.
Tho. Bassete.

1 Franciscus de Mering, 36 E. 3.







Richardus de Lexington Robertus de Lexington.-Matildis. Rich. de Marcham
potius Willielmus.-Cecilia Robertus de Marcham Willielmus de Sancta
Cruce.-Agnes. 2 Petrus Foun-Margeria. Johannes Foun sine prole.
1 Joana ux. Joh. Bayeux and Rob. Hakthorn. 3 Elizab. ux. Joh. Barkworth.
Willielmus de Lungvillers.-Bertha. Johannes de Bray marit. 2.-Cecilia.
Richardus de Marcham, s. p.
Johan. Dom. Lexington custos sigil. H. 3. Rob. Dom. Lexingt.-Hen. Episc. Linc.
Alicia ux. ^. de Sutton


of the three daughters of Robert de Marcham, son of Cecilia, one of the
sisters and heirs of the Lord Lexington, left a son about 42 E. 3. called
Francis de Mering, who was his heir; but it seems he died without issue,
because Alexander Mering, Ex Coll. I. B.
another of his sons, had a son called William, Lord of this Manor, who
married Elizabeth, one of the eight daughters of Thomas N^vill of Rolleston,
and by her had Elizabeth, wife of John Strelley, and after of ^ames Savage, and
Margery, wife of Thomas Basset of Fledbourgh, mother of Katherin, wife of
Thomas Sutton of Averham, Ancestor of the present Lord Lexington, and a son
called Alexander Mering of Collingham, besides his son and heir Will. Mering,
father of William Mering, Father of Thomas Mering of Newark (as I guess) to
whom King Richard the third, by his Letters Patents dated the fourth of March,
3 Par. pat. 2 R. 3. m. 1.
in the second year of his Reign, granted the Manors of Raunardwyke, Ikylford,
and Piryton in the County of Hartford, and Lands in Arkesey in the County of
Bedford, which were Sir Roger Towcotes, Knight, then a Rebel, to have to him
and the heirs Males of his body, and likewise Father of Sir William Mering; who
was thrice married: one of his Wives I suppose to be Agnes, heir of Henry
Gloucester of Carcolston, by whom he had John Mering, who married Katherin one
of the eight sisters and coheirs of Sir John Hercy of Grove, and by her had
Francis, Thomas, and John, besides Sir William Mering, who had to wife
Margaret, the daughter of Thomas Cave of Stanford, and by her three sons,
Thomas, William, and Ambrose; and many daughters, but of them I can say no
more, saving that this Lordship was sold to George Earl of Shrowsbury, B.
and is now the possession of his Grace the Duke of Newcastle.

Now some begin to esteem it out of this Wapentac; but in Nomina Villarum there
was no doubt of it, for there it is joined with Gretton, as in that place is
noted.

Colingham North and South.
BEfore the Normans invaded this Country St Peter of Burgh had a Manor in
Colingeham, rated to the public payment of that time at four Car. and half a
Bovat. The Land whereof was then certified to be fourteen Car. There, when King
William made his great Survey, Lib. Dooms.
in Demesne were two Car. and thirty seven Sochm. on two Car. and three Bovats
of this Land, and eight Villains, and twenty Bordars, having fourteen Car.
There was a Priest and two Churches, and two Mills 20s. and two hundred Acres
of Meadow, small Wood two qu. long, and 1 qu.broad. This continued the former
value 9l.

Here was some part also which went with Shelton of Raph de Limesies Fee, and
some part was accounted of Richmond Fee, but the main of both the Towns
continued to the Abbat of Peterborow, who had Free Warren granted here, 35 H.
3. Yet the Bishop of Lincoln, 14 E. 1. complained of him, Chapter 35 H. 3. m. 2.
Pl. de Banc. Mich. 14 E. 1. to. 49.
that he had set up Gallows at Collingham, and there hanged a Thief, to the
derogation of the liberty of his Wapentach of Newark, which the Bishop held of
the grant of the Kings Predecessors: to which the Abbat answered, That the
Kings Father, in the thirty seventh year of his Reign, granted to him and his
Successors, Infangthef, and Utfangthef, in all his Hundreds and Demesnes, and
so he avowed his Gallows, and complained against the Bishop, That he took two
Horses and six Cows at Newark, and drove them to his Parc (or Pound) and there
detained them. The Bishop pleaded that he held the Wapentac of the gift of the
King, within which are the two Towns of Collingham, which the said Abbat held,
and for which he ought to make suit at the said Wapentac, by three men of each
Town, from three weeks to three weeks, and because the suit was withdrawn, he
took the Horses and Kine: at last they agreed, the Abbat being constrained to
pull down his Gallows and submit. The Bishop of Lincoln, 10 E. 3. impleaded
diverse men of North and South Colingham, Pl. de Banc. Hill. 10 E. 3. to. 76.
for that when his Bailey had taken diverse Cattle, of several condemned and
out-lawed persons, of the said Towns, (same whereof were hanged) as the Goods
of Felon^ and Fugitives belonging to him, in right of his Wapentac of Newark,
and impounded them; the said men broke the Pound and took the Cattle, and had
them away, for which they answer. They are not culpable; but the Agreement
before mentioned, 14 E. 1. between Oliver Bishop of Lincoln, and the Abbat
will end the strife.

The Grand Assise, 53 H. 3. at Darby between Rob. de Collingham, and John de
Hyrst, Compl. and Walter, son of Galfr. and Walter de Markham, Pl. de Iur. and
Assis. apud Derb. 53 H. 3. to. 19.
concerning Common of Pasture, which the two Walters exacted in the Lands of
the said Robert and John in Collingham, was respited till the Octaves of St.
Michael at Leicester, because Nicholas de Eyvill, Robert de Markham, Robert de
Burstall, Richard de Weston, Benedict de Rolleston, Richard de Gray, Raph
Barry, Philip de Colewick, Bryan de Herdeby, Simon de Gringeley, Walter de
Touk, Thomas de Bella aqua, Galfr. de Staunton, Robert de Stokes, John de
Vilers, Roger de Alneto, Knights, chosen, came not, and were therefore amerced.

Here was a Manor in North Colingham, which the Leeks of Landforth held of the
Abbat of Peterburgh. B.


These Towns still belong to that Church, and the Honorable Anchetill Gray,
son of Henry Earl of Stanford, is the Grand Lessee; he married Anne, the eldest
of the three daughters and coheirs of Sir Henry Willoughby of Risley in
Darbishire, the relict of Sir Thomas Aston, and mother of Sir Willoughby Aston.

The Rectory of South Collingham was 20l. when the Abbat of Peterburgh was
Patron. Mss. I. M.
It Is now 14l. 1s. 10d. in the Kings Books, and the Bishop of Peterburgh
Patron. The Vicarage of North Collingham was 8l. when the said Abbat was
Patron. It Is now in the Kings Books 8l. 19s. 2d. and the Dean and Chapter of
Peterborow Patrons.

The holy Abbess St. Ebba.. and her Nuns, who defaced themselves lest they
should be deflowred by the Heathen Danes, are reported to have had their
residence at Collingham, but I having seen nothing certain of it, Mon. Angl.
vol. 2. p. 1051.
must leave her to Coldingham in Scotland, a Cell of Durrham, where there is
more certain notice of her.

Dernethorpe. Dordenthorpe.
MOst of this Hamlet seems to be involved in Collingham, yet the Book of
Doomsday shows part of it to be of the Soc of Houton, of the Fee of Raph de
Limesi, which was rated to the Geld or Tax at one Bov. The Land was two Bov.
There five Sochm. and six Board. had two Car. (or Plows). There was a Church and
a Priest, with one Car. and fourscore Acres of Meadow.

William, son of Roger de Houton, released to Adam, son of Richard de Harthill,
Regist. de Thurg. p. 40.
and his heirs, all manner of demand concerning Customs and Services for the
Land which the said Adam held of him in the Town of Dornethorp.

Adam de Hertehill gave to Roger, son of Roger Deyncurt, Ib.
with Alice his daughter in Frank-marriage, all his Land in Derlesthorpe, or
Dornethorpe, with all Homages, Reliefs, and Services. Sir Richard de Hortehill
confirmed to his sister his Fathers gift of all his Land in Dornethorpe and
Collingham, Ib.
reserving to himself and his heirs the Service of the twelfth part of a
Knights Fee. Alice, after the death of her husband Roger Deyncurt, Ib.
gave all her interest to the Priory of Thurgarton, to which Roger de
Brettevile, and Amabilia his wife, named in Houton, also released their claim
in eleven Tofts, and four Bovats in Dornethorpe and Colingham, in the year of
our Lord 1263. and levied a Fine at Lincoln, 47 H. 3. five weeks after Easter
the same year, for which the said Roger and Amabil were to be taken into the
benefits and Prayers, which should from that time be done, or made in that
Church for ever.

Adam de Harthill had two Bovats here by Fine, Ib. p. 149.
16 H. 3. from Nicolaus de Breydeston, and Alice his wife, before Stephen de
Segrave, Adam de Novomercato, William de Eboraco, William Basset, Mr. Robert de
Shardeslogh, Mr. Roger de Cantelupe, and William de Insula the Kings Justices
Itinerant, at Notingham the day after Trinity Sunday.

The Prior of Thurgarton, and the Abbat of Peterborow, Reg. Thurg. 41.
agreed that all the Tenants of that Prior and Covent in Dornethorp, ought, and
were accustomed each to Plow three days in the year, viz. in Winter Seed time,
in Lent Seed time, and in the time of Fallowing (Warecti.) Each Plow was to
have every day four Loaves, and four Herrings. They were likewise to Reap two
days and an half in Autumn, and to have their wonted meat of the Abbat once in
the day, and the second day likewise, if he would have them all the day,
otherwise after nine of the Clock they were to go away without meat; the third
day they were not to Reap but till nine of the Clock without meat. Besides they
were to put into the Abbats Fold all the Sheep which they had in their
possession or custody in the Winter, except their own or their childrens, which
lived with them in the house [ manu pasti] and if any were sold, or removed
from them, they were to procure as many others in their places, for the Abbats
Fold. Besides they were to attend the Courts at Colingham, and the like.

Gray of Landford had a Mess. and twelve Acres of Land here, Esc. 8 R. 2. n. 18.
and as much in Landford, said to be held by petty Serjeancy of the King in
Capite, by paying 11s. 8d. per annum.

The Manor of Darnethorpe, late belonging to the Monastery of Thurgarton, Par.
4. pat. 36 H. 8.
together with the Lands and Tenements, and appurtenances thereto belonging
there and in South Colingham, 4 July, 36 H. 8. were granted to John Bellowe,
and John Broxholme, and their heirs.

The Church, I believe, has been long gone.

Scarle. Doomsd. Scorveley. And Besthorpe.
THis was of the Sok of Newark, and was rated to the public Geld, in the time
of King William, Lib. Dooms.
at two Carucats and an half.

In the Record of Nom. Vill. 9 E. 2. Scarle and Besthorp answered for one
Villa, Nom. Vill.
and the Bishop of Lincoln was certified to be Lord.

There was a Recovery, 1 H. 8. wherein William Pocklington, Trin. 1 H. 8. rot.
130.
and Elizabeth his wife claimed against Robert de Lawethorpe of Yorkshire,
Gent. one Cro^^, fourteen Acres of Meadow, eighty Acres of Land, and twenty of
Pasture in South-Scarle.

The Vicarage of Scarle was 10l. and a Prebendary there (I suppose of Lincoln)
Patron. Mss. I. M*
It Is now 5l. 2s. 6d. in the Kings Books, and the King Patron.

Gretton, Girton. Doomsd. Greton.
THis was also the Bishop of Lincolnes, of the Soc of Newark, and paid the Tax
for one Car. and an half.

The Knights Templars got some interest here, Pl. de Iu^* and Assis. apud Not.
8 E. 1. rot. 42.
and the Jury, 8 E. 1. found that the Master had straitened the passage of the
water of Trent, with his Weres at Gretton How, so that Boats and other Vessels
could not pass as they were wont, which was a great Nuisance, for which he was
amerced, and the Sheriff had a Precept to enlarge is as it formerly had been at
the costs of the said Master of the Templars, by view of the Jury.

In Nomina Villar. 9 E. 2. Nom. Vill,
Gretton and Mering answered for one Villa, and the Bishop of Lincoln, and the
heirs of John de Mering, were then the Lords.

Wiggesley.
THis place also is reckoned with several others of the Soc of Newark, Lib.
Dooms.
and was rated to the Dane-geld or public Tax of those times at seven Bovats.

King Henry the second confirmed the gift which Robert the second (of that
name) Bishop of Lincoln made to the Priory of St. Katherins, Mon. Angl. ^ol.
2. p. 814.
of five Bovats in Wiggesle.

Hugh, son of Lambert de Bussy, 41 H. 3. had Free Warren granted in Wigisille.
Chapter 41 H. 3. m. 4.
And John Dyve had likewise, 5 Iun. 5 E. 1. Free Warren in Balderton and
Wiggesley, which John de Bussy claimed at Not. in the Quo Warranto, 3 E. 3.
Quo War. 3 E. 3. to. 2.


The Prior of St. Katherins without Lincoln, at the same time claimed to have
the liberty to hold all his Tenements in Newarke, Codington, rot. 25.
and Wygesle, well and peaceably; and in the 5 E. 3. he had Free Warren granted
in the two latter. Chapter 5 E. 3. m. 23.


Thornehawe and Wygesleye, 9 E. 2. answered for one Villa: Nom. Vill.
the Lords then were said to be Richard Peers, James Peers, and John de Ely.

But it appears that, 11 H. 7. Edmund Bussy, Hill. 11 H. 7. rot. 101.
Esquire, suffered a Recovery of the Manor of Wygesley, one Mess. three
hundred Acres of Land, fifty of Meadow, one hundred of Pasture, and sixty of
Wood, with the Appurtenances in Wygesley, Spaldford, North Clifton, and South
Clifton, and called, etc. John Smalley, and the same Edmund and Alice his wife,
Mich. 16 H. 7. rot. 197.
16 H. 7. suffered another of the same parcell^.

Bussies Manor held of Newarke Castis, and is now become the inheritance of
Sir Rich. Earl. B.


St. Katherins share was granted, 36 H. 8. to John Bellowe and Edward Bales,
and their heirs.

Cliftons North and South.
IN these Towns were four Manors of the Bishop of Lincolne's Fee, and one of
Roger de Buslies. One Manor Vlviet had before the Conquest, and was rated to
the Dane-tax for it at six Bov. and an half. The Land being then certified to
be three Carucats. There afterward had Bishop Remigius three Sochm. on three
Bovats of this Land, and one Bordar, with one Car. there was thirty one Acres
of Meadow, Pasture Wood half a leuc. long, and three qu. broad. In the
Confessors time this was 20s. value, in the Conquerours 10s. Raph held it.
Another Manor before the Normans came Frane had, which was rated to the Geld
at three Bov. and an half. The Land of it was twelve Bov. There Bishop Remigius
had one Car. six Vill. and two Board. having one Car. and an half; there was
fourteen Acres of Meadow. This was 40s. in the Confessors time; when the
Conqueror made the Survey but 20s. value: Siuvale held it. Another Manor in
Clifton, Vlviet had before the change, which he paid the Dane-geld for, as one
Bov. and an half. It was waste: Raph held it. There was the fourth part of a
Church, and eight Acres of Meadow. Lib. Dooms.
In the Saxon times the value was 10s. then in the Norman beginnings but 5s.
Another Manor Agemund had, and in the Confessors time paid the Geld for it as
two Bov. and an half. The Land was then found to be one Car. The same Agemund
held it under the Bishop, and had two Bov. of Land, three Car. and two
Villains, likewise two Bov. three Car. (if it be not mistaken for three Acres.
I cannot certainly understand this repetition of three Car.) and eight Acres of
Meadow. In King Edward the Confessors time the value was 10s. in the time of
Doomsday Book 6s. Another Manor there was in Clifton, but of Roger de Buslies
Fee, which before was Ougrim's, and paid the Tax for six Bovats. The Land
whereof was three Car. There Roger the Man of Roger de Busli had one Car. one
Sochm. on one Bov. of this Land, and seven Villains, with three Plows or Car.
and the fourth part of a Church, and thirty Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood two
qu. long, and half so much broad. In the Confessors time this was 40s. value,
in the Conquerours when the Survey was taken 30s.

This of the Fee of Roger de Buslie, in the time of King Henry the first, was
William de Lovetots, as was all that which this Roger, the Man or Tenant of
Roger, is said to hold in this County; by which, William was the Ancestor of
William Picot then enfeoffed of two parts of a Knights Fee, and Richard de
Cliftons Ancestor of one part, as the Red Book in the Exchequer, in the
Certificat of Nigellus de Luvetot, Lib. Rubr.
to King Henry the second of his Knights Fees in Huntendo^ser, and of the
honor of Roger de Buisli in this County does manifest, which is noted in
Wisowe, as is also in the Fine in the 11 E. 3. whereby John de Lovetot conveyed
to Richard de Willughby, and Ioane his wife, four Knights Fees and 10l. Rent,
with the Appurtenances in Wisowe, Kercolston, Eyleston, Flyntham, and this
North Clifton, together with the Services of diverse persons who held them, and
amongst the rest of John, son of John de Pigot of Dodington (in Lincolneshire,
but not far distant.

I suppose the Suttons of Averham had their first interest here, by the
marriage of a daughter, Claus. 4 H. 5. in dorso, m. 12. and 15.
or heir geeral of Pigot John de Willughby, son of Robert de Willughby, late
Lord of Eresby, and Katherin his wife, 4 H. 5. granted and to Farm let, to
Henry de Sutton, Esquire, Hugh Huse Chr. William Compton, Esquire, and others,
Lands and Tenements in Averham, together with the Manors of Kertlington,
Cliftun, Hardeby, and Kelum.

There were two Fines levied in the Octaves of Sr. John Baptist, 22 H. 6. in
the same words, Fin. lev.
except the names of the persons. One was between Sir Thomas Chaworth, Knight,
Quer. and Richard Sutton, Esquire, and Katherin his wife, Deforc. of the Rent
of a pound of Pepper, with the Appurtenances in Hardeby, and of the Manor of
Kertlington called Pigots Manor (or Pigot Hall) with the Appurtenances, except
seven Mess. one Toft, two hundred Acres of Land, forty of Meadow, ten of
Pasture, and twenty of Wood, with the Appurtenances in the same Town of Hardeby
and North Clifton in the same Manor. The said Richard and Katherin
acknowledged the premises to be the right of the said Thomas Chaworth, to whom
they further granted, together with the said Rent, the Homages and Services of
John Pigot, Knight, and his heirs, for the Tenements which he held of them in
the said Town of Hardeby, etc. The other Fine was between the same Sir Thomas
Chaworth, and Thomas Curson, Esquire, and Margaret his wife.

There was also a Fine levied, Fin. lev^^^ crast. Purif. 21 H. 6.
21 H. 6. between John Archbishop of York, Raph Crumwell, Knight, William
Babington, Knight, William Babington, Esquire, John Cokfeild, Esquire, etc. and
Thomas Howson, Quer. and William Skypwith of Haburgh, Esquire, and Ioane his
wife, Deforc. of the Manor of South Clifton, with the Appurtenances thereby
recognized to be the right of Thomas, etc.

There was a Recovery suffered by George Chaworth, Esquire, Trin. 15 Eliz. rot.
603.
15 Eliz. wherein Edward Earl of Rutland Lord Ross, William Paston, Thomas
Stanhope, Bartholomew Armin, and Henry Chaworth, Esquire, claimed against him
the Manors of South Marneham, North Marneham, Cropwell Butler, South Clifton,
and Annesley, etc. In another, Pasc. 17 Eliz. rot. 603.
17 Eliz. the same Earl and others claimed against Nicholas Buller, and John
Gelsthorpe, the same Manors, with Burton Iorce, and Bridgeford on the Hill,
who called to warranty George Chaworth, Esquire.

Hugh Willughby of Risley, Mich. 22. H. 7. rot. 598.
22 H. 7. suffered also a Recovery of three Mess. six Bovats of Land, and 40s.
Rent in South Clifton, and 6s. Rent in Trowell.

Augustine Earl, Mich. 14, and 15 E. rot. 1154*
15 Eliz. claimed against George Willughby, Gent. and John Willughby his son
and heir, the Manor of South Clifton, with the Appurtenances, and eight Mess.
four Cottages, eight Tofts, one Dovecoat, eight Gardens, three hundred Acres of
Land, sixty of Meadow, seventy of Pasture, twenty of Wood, one hundred of Moore,
and 4l. Rent, with the Appurtenances in South Clifton, North Clifton, and
Spaldforth.

William Brun of Clifton held one Bov. in Clifton of Constancia de Lysures:
Es^. 50 H. 3. n. 20.
about 50 H. 3. he committed Theft, for which he was hanged.

William Cause held Lands in South Clifton of Richard de Howell, Esc. 20 E. 2.
n. 21.
by the Service of the eighth part of a Knights Fee; Thomas Cause, 20 E. 2. was
found his son and heir, and to be then twenty five years of age and upwards,
and that he had Lands at Laceby in Lincolneshire.

By an Inquisition taken at Not. 18 Sept. 32 H. 8. it appears that William
Dymock of Eyton in Leicestershire, Ex Bundell. 3 I^qu. virtut. offic.
Gent. died seized of Lands in South Clifton and Spaldforth, 10 Iun. 1 H. 8.
whose sister Margaret married to... Alyn, had John Alyn, whose sister Elena was
his heir and wife of William Gregory, who had a son called Thomas Gregory, the
Cousin and heir of William Dymock, and was forty years old at the time of the
taking the Inquisition.

Laurence Sturtivant, 21 H. 8. claimed against William Abys two Mess. thirty
Acres of Land, Pasch. 21 H. 8. rot. 1^1.
six of Meadow, ten of Pasture in Hareby and North Clifton.

Here were some Lands belonging to Torkesey Priory in the County of Lincoln,
as in Saundby will be noted, 35 H. 8. granted to Philip Habbye; but 14 May, 3,
and 4 Ph. and Mar. Raph Parker, Par. 10. p^t. 3, and 4 Ph. and M.
Gent. and Henry Parker his son and heir, had license to Alienate the Demesnes
and Site of that Priory, and all and singular the Mess. houses, etc. in the
Counties of Lincoln, Not. and York, belonging to it, and all Mess. Lands and
Tenements in the Parishes of Saunby, Clyfton, Rampton, Cotham, Retford, and
Sturton in this County, to John Fenys, Esquire, and his heirs.

The Vicarage of Clyfton was 10l. and the Prebendary there (I suppose of
Lincoln) Patron. Mss. I. M.
The Vicarage of North Clifton is now 7l. 6s. 0^. ob. in the Kings Books, and
the Prebendary Patron.

Spaldford.
THe greatest part of this Town was of the Soc of Newark, which before and in
the time of King William, was rated to the public Tax at three Car. and an
half, which, together with the parcels in Scorveley, Lib. Dooms.
Greton, Torneshay, Wiggesley, Herdrebye, and Cotum, together paid the Geld for
six Car. and an half, and half a Bovat (though the parcels summed together
amount to more. The Land of all was twenty one Car. three Bov. There were
seventy one Sochm. seven Board. having twenty one Car. and an half. There was
two hundred and eighty Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood five qu. long, four broad.
This was the Bishops of Lincoln's. But here was some Soc to Clifton of Roger de
Buslies Fee, which paid the Geld for four Bov. The Land one Car. There two
Sochm. had half a Car. and twelve Acres of Meadow in Clifton; which Town and
Spaldford, 9 E. 2. answered for one Villa, and the Bishop of Lincoln, Nom.
Vill.
and John de Bussy were then Lords of them.

It appears that about 36 E. 3. Sir Richard Willughby had interest here. Esc.
36 E. 3. n. 8. par. 2.


And the Certificat of the Lands of the Templars taken in the time of King
Edward the second, Esc. 18 E. 3. n. 97.
shows, they had something here, as also in Codington, Thorpe by Newark, Stoke,
Sireston, Elston, Gretton, Newark, Colingham, Sibthorpe, Flaufore, Barneby,
Landeford, and many Towns in Lincolneshire thereabouts.

At the Assizes at Not. 10 H. 4. Thomas Chaworth, and two others, Assis. apud
Not. 10 H. 4. to. 81.
recovered their seisin of one Mess. one Toft, twenty seven Acres of Land, and
nine Acres of Meadow in Spaldeford and Wyggesley, and Raph Whytle, and two
others were amerced.

A Farm, Mess. and one Bov. of Land, Par. 12. pat. 37 H. 8.
with the Appurtenances in the Tenure of Nicholas Borell in Spalford, late
belonging to the Preceptory of Willoughton in the County of Lint. and parcel of
the possessions of the Hospital of St. John's of Jerusalem, 25 August 37 H. 8.
were granted to Charles Sutton, Esquire, Richard Welby, Esquire, and Thomas
York, Gent. and their heirs.

Spaldford is within the Parish of Clifton. B.


Thorney. Thorneshagh.
IN Torneshay of the Soc of Newark, there was a parcel charged to the Dane-tax
at one Car. and was reckoned together with those Towns before named in
Spaldford, of the Bishop of Lincolne's Fee. Yet Walter de Clifford, Fin. lev. 3
Ioh.
and Agnes his wife, by Fine in the third year of King John, conveyed the
Advowson of the Church of Turnehage to Thora Prioress of Brodholme, and her
Nuns there, for which they received the said Walter, and Agnes, into all the
benefits of that House. Henry de Lacy Earl of Lincoln, 10 E. 1. had Free
Warren here in Thornehagh. Chapter 10 E. 1. m. 20.


Fulc le Strange, and Alianora his wife, held the third part of this Manor,
and he, after her death, by the Courtesy of England. John le Strange, 17 E.
2. was found by the Jury, their son and heir, and to be then above eighteen
years of age; he had Lands in Huntingtonshire, and Shropshire.

In 27 E 3. I find Sir Thomas Bret, Knight, called of Thornehagh, and after; Ex
Autog. pen. Rob. Atkinson de Newark, Genesis

Esc. 10 R. 3. n. 12.


and sometimes written Byrt, and sometimes Bert.

It is said, 10 R. 2. that Giles D'aubeney Chr. then dead, long before his
death enfeoffed Henry Molyns, William D'aubeney, and John Haywood Chaplain, of
Lands here, as parcel of the Manor of South Ingleby in the County of Lincoln;
and it appears, 12 R. 2. that Gyles Daubeney Chr. died seized of one hundred
Acres of Wood, one hundred Acres of Pasture, Esc. 12 R. 2. n. 180.
with the Appurtenances in Thornehagh by Brodholme, as parcel of the Manor of
South Ingleby in Lincolneshire, of the grant of Mary, the wife of Raph
D'aubeney his Father, paying her for the whole Manor fifty Marks per annum,
during her life, which Manor was held of the Lord Ros, as of his Castle of
Bever, by the Service of 32s. yearly Rent.

George Nevill, Esquire, 9 Eliz. suffered a Recovery of the Manor of Thorney,
Trin. 9 Eliz. rot. 460.
with the Appurtenances, and sixteen Mess. twelve Cottages, eight Tofts, one
Dovecoat, twenty Gardens, four hundred Acres of Land, one hundred of Meadow,
three hundred of Pasture, three hundred of Wood, forty of Marsh, one thousand
of Moore, sixty of Turbary, one thousand of Furz and Heath, and 7s. Rent, and
1l. of Pepper, with the Appurtenances in Thorney, Wiggesley, South Clifton,
North Clifton, and Spaldford, and called, etc. Sir William Mering, Knight.

This Manor was purchased by George Nevill of Grove, Esquire, B.
(being the inheritance of the Merings) and by him settled upon two of his
younger sons, Gervas Nevile, and Dionyse Nevile, whose heirs the Neviles hold
it at this day.

Georgius Nevill-Barbara so^o^ and una cohaeredu^ Johannis Hercy, mil. Georg.
Nevill-Gervas. s. p. Georg. Nevill de Thorney-...fill.... Terwhyt. 2 Georg.
Nevill. de Thorney.-Alicia fill. Georgii Stow, relict. Will. Rothwell. Georg.
Nevill de Thorney aet. 39. 1676.-Maria fill. Tho. Boswell de Edlington in Com.
Ebor. ux. 1.-Elizab. fill. Jeremi. Hal^head ux. 2. Georgius Nevill aet. 13.
1676. Elizabetha gemella cum Georgio aet. 13. Maria aet. 12. Anna 10. Jana 8.
Brigit 6. Edwardus Nevill aet. 1. 1676.

1 Gervas. N. de Hadington in Com. Linc. mil.-Kath. fill. R. Hutton Justic.

Anthon. s. p. Dionysius-...fill....Gernon. Gervasius Nevill de Thorney-Elizab.
fill. Nic. Rayner. Joh. Nevill aet. 55. 1676. vendidit ter^. in Thorney Georgio
Nevill de Thorney.-Rebecca fill. Rad. Clark. Dionys. Nevill de Eastwood in
Rotheram, Ebor. aet. 25. 1676.


Joh. Nevill de Grove-Gertrud. fill. Ric. Whalley

The Rectory of Thorney, and right of Patronage of the Vicarage, Par. 10 pat.
35 H. 8.
late belonging to the Priory of Brodholme, 1 May, 35 H. 8. was granted to
Edward Fynes Lord Clynton and Say, and Rob. Tirwhit, Esquire, and their heirs,
who, Par. 12 pat. 35 H. 8.
3 May, had license to alienate it to William Mounson, Esquire, and his heirs,
who, 20 November. 37 H. 8. had likewise license to alienate the said Rectory and
Advowson, Par. 17. pat. 37 H. 8.
and forty Acres of Land, twenty of Meadow, and forty of Pasture, with the
Appurtenances in Thorney, Wiggesley, and Brodholme, to Roger Frape and his
heirs.

Here was a Mess. and some Lands lying in Thorney, Par. 16. pat 36 H. 8.
in the occupation of Edward Lee, also belonging to the Monastery of Brodholme,
20 Aug. 36 H. 8. granted to Robert Brookesby, and John Lion, and their heirs.

The Vicarage of Thorney was eight Marks when the Prioress of Brodholme had the
Patronage. Mss. I. M.
It Is now 4l. 7s. 6d. in the Kings Books, and John Disney, Esquire, Patron.

Hareby. Herdeby. Herdrebye.
IN Herdrebye there was some Soc to Newark, which paid the Dane-geld for one
Bov, but besides that the Bishop of Lincoln had a Manor, which, before the
Conquest, was Godwins, and paid the Tax for six Bov. The Land whereof was two
Car. There was, when Doomsday Book was made, Lib. Dooms.
five Vill. had two Car. and twelve Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood half a leuc.
long, and half a leuc. broad. This before in the Confessors time had been 40s.
but then was fallen to 20s. value.

The Baylisss of the Bishop of Lincoln for Newark, Pl. de Iur. and Assis. apud
Derb. 53 H. 3. to. 20. in dorso.

Esson. in Novopalat. Westminster. 9 E. 1. to. 60.


about 53 H. 3. distreined Bryan de Herdeby by nine Oxen worth 4l. to pay 5l.
to the Abbess of Grace dieu.

The Jury, 9 E. 1. were to determine whether forty Perches in length, and eight
in breadth, with the Appurtenances in Herdeby, were Frank Almaigne belonging to
the Church of Clifton, of which William de Langwath was then Parson, or the Lay
Fee of Brian de Herdeby. They found half against Brian, and half against the
Parson, viz. four in breadth only belonged to the Church. But the Jury, Pl. de
Ban^. 10 E. 1. to. 116. fol. 96.
10 E. 1. found one Mess. six Acres and an half of Land in Herdeby to belong to
the Church of Clifton, and not to be the Lay Fee of this Brian de Herdeby.

Richard de Weston, 19 E. 1. had Free Warren in Hertheby, Chapter 19 E. 1. m. 65.
both in Not. and Lincolneshires.

Clifton and Herdeby, 9 E. 2. answered for one Villa, Nom. Vill.
and the Lords were then the Bishop of Lincoln, and John de Weston.

At the Assizes at Not. 4 H. 4. Robert Sutton recovered his seism of the
Manor of Herdeby, Assis. apud Not. 4 H. 4. to. 74.
and Elizabeth, who had been the wife of John Pigot, was amerced.

This Manor remains still to the Family of Sutton, the present heir whereof,
is now the young Lord Lexington.

Hill. 3 Eliz. rot. 440.
William Holstock cla^^^d against Ambrose Sutton, 3 Eliz. the Manor of Harby,
and twenty Mess. six Barns, twenty Cottages, etc. with the Appurtenances in
Clyfton, and view of Frankpledge in Clifton: this, I suppose, was Sutton of
Linc.

Brodholme.
OF the Fee of Roger de Busli was a Manor in Brodholme, which before the
Norman change was Alwins, who answered the Tax for it as four Bov. The Land was
certified to be twelve Bovats. There were four Sochm. on two Bov. of this Land,
and three Villains, having four Car. (or Plows) and twelve Acres of Meadow:
Roger de Busli held it. In the time of King Edward the Confessor the value was
40s. then 30s. Here was another Manor which before the Conquest Turget and
Halden had, and discharged it to the Dane-geld for five Bovats. The Land was
two Car. After the Conquest, in the time of King William 1. it was waste, and
then Berengarius de Todeni, and William Percy had it. The Land lay to Newark,
but the work of the Villains belonged to Saxeby in Lincolnescire. There was
thirty Acres of Meadow, and Pasture Wood, one qu. long, and another broad.

This Berengarius was son of Robert de Totneia, the first Norman owner of
Belvoyr, mentioned in Orston, who was succeeded by the Albenies, Lords of that
Castle, Lib. rubr. in Scaccar.
of which Family William de Albenni Brito the second, (of whom his brother Raph
de Albenni held fifteen Knights Fees of the old Feoffment) did enfeoff Elias de
Albenni in one Knights Fee of his own Demesne, which was of the new feoffment,
being done after the death of King Henry the first.

Helias de Albeniaco, and Hawis his wife, and Oliver and Raph their sons, Mon.
Angl. vol. 2. p. 590.
gave to Newhouse, the first of the Premonstratenses in England, all their
right in the Church of St. Botulph of Saxelby, which belonged to their Fee,
viz. the third part, and twenty Acres of Meadow in Driholm, which is on the
South side of Fosse dic, for the Soul of William de Albeniaco, who gave them
that Fee, and for the Souls of their Fathers, Mothers, and Ancestors, etc.

Here was a Priory of the same Order very near as ancient as Neuhus, Ib. p. 646.
to which King Edward the second, in the twelfth year of his Reign, confirmed
the gift and grant, which Raph de Albeniaco, by his Deed, made to God and St.
Ma^y, and the Brethren and Sisters of Brodholme, of all that which was of his
Fee in the Orchard by the Churchyard of the Church of St. Botulphs of Saxelby,
and of a certain Plain of Ground, lying between the Court of the said Sisters
and his Wood; the said King likewise confirmed the gifts of Sarra, daughter of
Peter de Gousla (possibly the Founder of Newhouse) to the said Sisters, Mon.
Angl. vol. 2. p. 647.
of several Lands and Tenements, and of those likewise which the said Sisters
had of the gift of Peter de Gousla her Father, Agnes de Camvilla her mother,
and Henry, brother of the said Sarra. Peter de Chaumpaigne, Knight, confirmed
the gifts of the said Peter, and Agnes his wife, and Sarra their daughter, and
Henry her brother, to the said Nuns. Peter, son of Peter de Campania, gave a
Toft in Saxelby to this said Prioress and Covent of Brodholme. A. Abbat of
Newhus confirmed all the Sisters had or should have of their Donors. Joan,
daughter of William de Ver, gave one Bovat, and some Meadow in Saxelby. Walter
de Clifford, and Agnes his wife (daughter and heir of Roger, son of Osbert de
Cundi) and Walter de Clifford their son, besides the Church of St. Helen of
Turnehag (mentioned in Thorney) gave the Site of a Mill in the Moore, which
lies between Thorna and Drengesha, to these Brethren and Sisters, and thirty
Acres of Land which the said King Edward the second also confirmed, as he did
the gifts of Hugh, son of Lambert de B^sseto, of fifteen shillings Rent in
Newark, which his Grandfather Sir Hugh gave them, to be had of John, son of
Henry Cutiler, and of two quarters of Corn, one of Wheat and another of Ry, to
be received of him and his heirs at his Manor* of Wygesley; and the gift which
Galfr. son of Murield de Thornehaugh, made of a Toft and Croft, with the
Appurtenances in Herdeby near Eykel; and the gift of Raph de Muscamp, of half a
Mark Rent in Colingham, which Raph de Hag, and Nicholas his brother, gave to
the said Brethren, and Nuns proportionably; and the gift of Isabel, daughter of
Alured de Colingham, to the said Nuns, of 4s. 2d. Rent to be received of Henry,
son of Adam de Muscamp, and his heirs, and many others of like sort.

The Advowson of this Priory usually went with the Manor of Saxelby, Ex A^t^g.
pen. Rob. Atkinson de Newark, Genesis
part of which was by Hugh de Normanton, son of John, son of Hugh, passed to
Sir John de Lyseux Lord of Fledburgh, by the name of the Manor, as another
part called also the Manor of Saxelby, was afterward, viz. 27 E. 3. by
Christian, late the wife of William, son of Sir Gilbert de Br^dsale, Knight,
(who enfeoffed the said Christian, together with her husband) to the said Sir
John de Lyseus, and Isabell his wife, and James their son, reserving to her
self ten Marks per annum, for the next ten years of her life, and fourteen
Marks per annum, during the rest of it, for which, in case of non-payment, she
might distrein in either Manor.

William Cressy of Markham (on whose Seal within the Circumscription of his
name, Ib.
are three Crescents upon a Bend) and Thomas Cagy of Fledbourgh, 38 E. 3.
settled the Manor of Saxelby, and Advowson of Brodholme, on James, son of Sir
John de Lyseus, and on Maud his wife, and the heirs of their bodies; for want
of which, on Isabell, mother of the said James, for her life; after which, on
William, son of Richard Basset of Normanton, and the heirs males of his body;
and for want of such, on Richard Basset, Nephew of the said William, and the
heirs males of his; for want whereof, on the right heirs of Sir John de Lyseux
for ever.

Thomas Trussebut, Ib.
whose Seal of Arms circumscribed with his name, is, A Waterbouget, and on a
Chief two Mullets, 10 R. 2. released all his right and claim in Saxelby, and
the Advowson of Brodholme, which were his Uncles the said Sir Gilbert
Bridesalls, to Sir John Marmion Lord of Tanfeild, and others.

This Manor and Advowson remained to the B^ssets of Fledborough.

John Basset, Esquire, Henry Basset, Clinton Basset, and Edward Basset (his
brothers) and Elizabeth Basset, Fi^. lev. 37 Eliz. Hill. Term.
widow, 37 Eliz. levied a Fine of the Manor of Saxelby to Henry Ballard (of
Southwell) Gent. to whom it was then sold. Thomas Ballard of Saxelby, 6 Car. 1.
Mortgaged it to Thomas Atkinson of Newark, Gent. son of Gilbert, and is now the
possession of Robert Atkinson of Newark, Gent. his son.

King Richard the second, 19 Febr. 12 R. 2. committed to Alionor, Fin. 12 R. 2.
m. 10.
who had been wife of Giles D'aubney Chr. deceased, the custody of the Manor
of South Ingleby, in Saxelby, and Brodholme in the Counties of Lin^. and Not.
till his heir should be of full age. The Jury, 1 H. 4. found that Elianor; Esc.
1 H. 4. n. 54.
wife of Sir Giles D'aubeney, held of the inheritance of Sir Gyles her husbands
son, while she lived, the third part of the moiety of a certain Pasture called
the South-dike by Brodholme, and the third part of the Wood. It appears
likewise, 19 H. 6. that Elizabeth, Esc. 19 H. 6.
who had been wife of Warin Walgrave, and formerly of John Daubeney (whose
brother Sir Giles was his heir) held a third part of two parts of 13s. 4d. Rent
of Assize of the Prioress and Covent of Brodholme, and the third part of two
parts of fourscore Acres of Meadow, called Burton Ings, and the third part of
two parts of fourscore Acres of Pasture, lying at South-dike, etc. and that
Thomas Goldington was her next heir. Gyles Daubeney, mentioned in C^tum, about
24 H. 6. left William Daubeney his son, Es^. 24 H. 6.
and heir of this great Meadow, Pasture, and Wood, as parcel of his Manor of
South Ingleby, held of the Lord Roos of Bever. Alice, Esc. 33 H. 6. n. 20.
the widow of Sir Giles, about 33 H. 6. left her interest here, and three
daughters her heirs, Amice, Isabell, and Alianor.

There was a Recovery, 30 H. 8. wherein Thomas Dymock, Mich. 30 H. 8. rot. 435.
Esquire, and James Smyth, Gent. claimed against William Mounson, Esquire*
forty Acres of Meadow, sixty of Pasture, thirty of Wood, and several Fishing in
the Water called Newpyttys, in Brodeham, Saxelby, and Thorney, who called Henry
Earl of Briggewater.

Pat. 6 Eliz. part. 7.
The Site and House of the Priory of Brodholme, and all the Demesne Lands, etc.
30 June, 6 Eliz. were granted to John Conyers, and William Haber, Gent. and
their heirs, lately in the Tenure of William Mounson, Esquire, and of the
yearly value of 10l. 10s. 4d.

Newarke.
THis Noble Manor of Newerh was by the famous Leofric Earl of Mercia, and his
most pious Lady Godiva, given with Flatburch in this County, (now Fledborough)
to the Monastery of Stow near Lincoln, in the time of King Edward the
Confessor, who with his Queen and Nobles was present at, Mon. Angl. vol. 1. p.
263.
and consenting to the Agreement made between the said Earl and Countess, and
the Bishop Wulwi, that they should have Priests there* and altogether the same
Service which was St. Paul's at London, and that the Lands they should give,
should be for the Food and Raiment of the Brethren (or Friars) there. And that
the Bishop might have for his Table all those things which Aetheric the Bishop,
and Aednoth the Bishop had before him, of those things by right belonging to
his Bishopric, to wit, two parts of all things coming to that Monastery, and
the Priests the third.

King William the first confirmed their gifts, and at the request of Remigius
the Bishop, gave to Stow the Church of Eynesham in Oxfordshire, and all the
Land belonging to it, though Stow was accounted but a Cell of Eynesham, to
which, Bishop Robert, the Successor of Remigius, gave in exchange for Newerch
and Stow, before or about the tenth year of King Henry the first (who by the
consent and counsel of his Bishops and Barons, had restored and repaired
Eynesham) Cherlebery, Stoches, Wdcote, and in Cantebrigges^yr in Histon,
fifteen Hides, and three Virgats, and the Tithe of Them, to wi^, in Corn,
Cattle, Wool, and Cheese, and one Bordar, with two Acres. Likewise the Tithe
of Bannebery, and of Croppery, with the Bordars: Likewise Middelton Tithe, and
the Tithe of Wax of the Altar of Stow.

The Conquerours famous Survey shows, that Godeva the Countess paid the
Dane-geld (the public Tax of that time) for her Manor of Newarke, with the
two Berues, Baldertune, Lib. Dooms.
and Farendune, as seven Carucats, and two Bovats of Land. Ye^ the Land of it
in her own time, in King Edward the Confessors Survey, was returned twenty six
Carucats. There, after the Conquest, Bishop Remigius (of Lincoln) had in
Demesne seven Car. and fifty six Burgesses, forty two Villains, four Bordars,
having twenty Car. (or Plow-lands) and an half. There were ten Churches, and
eight Priests, having five Car. There were seven French (or Freemen) Franci
homines) having five Carucats and an half. There was one Mill 5s. 4d. and one
Piscary (or Fishing.) To Newerche lay all the Customs of the King, and Earl of
that Wapentac. In King Edward the Confessors time, the Rent of it was 50l. in
the latter end of the Conquerours, but 34l. It had Soc. in Balderton,
Chelintone, Scireston, Elvestone, Sto^hes, Holton, Cotintone, Barnebye,
Wymunthorpe, Storveley, Greton, Spaldford, Torneshay, Wiggesley, Herdrebye, and
Cotum.

St. Remigius in the twenty fourth year of his Pontificate, 4 W. 2. viz. 1091.
confirmed this Lordship to Stow. Rob. Bloet succeeded him, and made the
exchange with the Abbey of Eynesham.

Alexander, the next Bishop of Lincoln, is said to have built the Castle in
King Stephen's time, though it seems (by what follows) to be of older date, and
therefore might possibly be but a re-edifying or repairing it, as may by some
of the gifts of Robert the second Bishop of Lincoln (who immediately succeeded
Alexander) which King Henry the second confirmed to the Priory of St.
Katherins, Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p. 814.
which by the consent of the Chapter of Lincoln he Founded near that City, of
the Order of Sempingham, be partly manifested. Amongst which were the Churches
of Newerc, Norton, Martune, and Newetune, and two Mess. or dwelling Houses in
the Borough of Newerc, and the Houses, with the Land on the North East part of
the Mother Church, and four Bovats of Land in the Fields of Newerc, with the
dwelling Houses, and twenty Acres in the Heath, and a dwelling house which the
Church of Newerc had before, with two Bovats of Land in the Fields. And the
Chapel of the Apostles, Philip and James, Founded in the Castle of the same
Town, and Anciently given to the Mother Church, with the tenth penny of the
whole Toll of the Borough of Newerc, except the Fairs. And 4s. Land which
Malger held in Newerc.

Simon, son of Robert, son of Malger de Newark, passed to Warin, son of Hugh,
upon Fosse of Newark, Regist. de T^urg. p. 42.
his Tenement in Milnegate, he paying 6d. to the Bishop of Lincoln, and 10d.
to the Prior of Thurgarton, to whom the said Simon afterward wholly released
it. There were some other small parcells belonging to that Monastery, as there
were to diverse others, viz. St. Katherins, Kirkestede and Neubo in
Lincolnshire, Croxton, and Burton Lazars in Leicestershire, B.
Mountgrace in Yorkshire, Shelford, Brodholme, and St. Leonards Hospital in
this County, and some others. Besides here were a great company of Chantryes in
the Church of Newark, which is now one of the fairest Parish Churches I ever
saw; but I cannot think the present Fabric older than Henry the sixth, if so
old. Yet I suppose it better than all the ten mentioned in Doomsday Book, which
I guess were not all in the Town, though in the Soc. Who built it, or Founded
all the Chantryes, I cannot yet discover. Here was one at the Altar of All
Saints, two at the Altar of the Holy Trinity, one of St. Nicholas, one of
Corpus Christi, one of Mary Magdalen, another called William Saucemers* another
William Newarks. Besides here were diverse parcels of Land, and several Houses
given to the maintenance of Priests, that were in the nature of Chantries. Here
was also a certain great House of Friars, of the Order of St. Augustine, which
was granted from the Crown, 35 H. 8. to Richard Andrews, and Nicholas Temple,
and their heirs. Sir John Markham had it, Lib. 3. post mort. fol. 114.
and since it was Sir Francis Leekes dwelling House, and also the Lord
Deyncourts his sons; but his son, the present Earl of S^arsdale, sold it lately
to Mr. Matthew Ienison the present owner.

Next it Southwards stands another great House called the Chantry, in which
dwelt William Leck, half brother of the said Lord Deyncourt, and Father of the
present Sir Francis Leek, Knight and Baronet, who made it also his principal
residence.

Next that is the Free School, which together with a Song-Schoole, situate on
the North-west point of the Churchyard, for an Organist and six Queristers,
was Founded by Thomas Magnus Archdeacon of the East Rideing of Yorkshire, and
Warden of the College of Sibthorpe in this County, which after the dissolution
he had for life, it being granted to him and Richard Whalley, Esquire, and the
heirs of Richard, 37 H. 8. as in that place is shown.

By an old Tradition in the Town, Printed by Dr. Thomas Fuller in his Englands
Worthyes, he is said to have been found in the Church Porch of Newarke, and
having neither Father nor Mother, was by the people called Thomas Amang us:
Exemplar* pen. Mat. Ienison.
but it appear to be otherwise in his Deed of Settlement, wherein he mentions
John Magnus his Father, and Alice his wife his Mother, and Ioane, Elizabeth,
and Katherine his sisters. His Arms (possibly but of his own time) are still in
several places of the School, and other-where, Bendy of six pieces, Vert and
Gules, on a Fesse Or, a Lion Passant between two Cinquefoiles of the second,
with his Motto under, AS GOD WILL.

The Lordship of Everton in this County, was the pricipal part of the indowment
for the said Schools, with which he chiefly trusted the V^car of Newarke, and
Brethren of Trinity Guild, then the most considerable Governors of the Town of
Newarke; but shortly after, viz. 1 Ianuar. 3 E. 6. it was made a Corporation of
one Alderman and twelve Assistants, Orig 3 E. 6. Par. 5. to. 15.
and 2 C. 1. upon renewing the Charter, the Alderman Commenced Major, B.
and the twelve Assistants Aldermen, and so it continues, with what additions
our present Sovereign King Charles the second, has made in the new Charter, as
choosing two Burgesses to serve in Parliament, enlarging the compass of their
Jurisdiction by annexing several Towns, and the like.

The whole Manor, Sok, and Wapentak continued to the Bishops of Lincoln, B.
till the time of Edward the sixth, that Rands alias Holbech, then Bishop of
Lincoln, surrendered it to the Crown, in which it still remains.

It was usually divided into the Borough of Newark, and Northgate; at the
further end whereof, from the Town, stood a fair House belonging to the
Hospital of St. Leonard of Stoke (commonly called the Spittie) which Sir Robert
Constable had by Lease, the interest whereof his son Henry Constable had; and
from him it came to William Cecill, Esquire, late Earl of Exeter, who built a
goodly House there; which after his decease, was, by Act of Parliament, 17 C.
1. exchanged from the Hospital for Lands of better value, and estated upon his
widow ( Elizabeth) the Countess Dowager of Exeter, and her heirs. Shortly after
the Wars happened, and Newarke became one of the most considerable Garrisons
the King had, in which the Loyalty and courage of the Townsmen were ever
remarkable, and sufficiently manifested in all the three Sieges: at the first
whereof, Sir John Henderson the prudent Governor caused all Northgate, and
that forementioned House the Spittle to be burned; yet the Case of it made a
receptacle for the Enemy at the second Siege, where Prince Rupert took a goodly
train of Artillery, which I saw, together with their Foot Arms, when he so
fortunately relieved the Town, then under the Government of Sir Richard, now
Lord Byron; but before the third, there was not one Stone left unthrown down,
and in or near the place, a strong Fortification raised in Sir Richard Willis
his time (as I remember) and called the Kings Sconce, which by his Majesty's
Special Command, then in the Scots Quarters on the North side the River Trent,
was about the sixth of May 1646. with the Town, and Castle, and the rest of the
Fortresses, E^empl. pen. Ro^. Atkinson, Genesis
concluded by the Commissioners of the Right Honorable John Lord Bellasis the
last Governor, to be Surrendered the Saturday following, though it is said that
Mr. Smith the valiant Major, upon his Lordships communicating to him the Kings
Order, urged the said Governor with Tears, to Trust God and Sally, rather than
think of yielding the Town, which indeed at that time suffered more by the
Plague within, than the Enemy without.

The Vicarage of Newark was 18l. when the Prior of St. Katherins was Patron.
Mss. I. M.
It Is now 21l. 5s. 2d. in the Kings Books, and his Majesty Patron.

Upon the upper part of the North Porch, on a Shield, there is a Cross Croslet
Botone.

The great Window, of the Cross South I Will, s^ems to have been given by William
Philpot, wherein the Arms of Deyncourt are often placed.

In the contrary I Will is, Arg. a Chief Gules, and Bendlet Azure (Crumwell)
quartering with Cheque Or, and Gules, a Chief Ermine (Tateshal).

Gules, three Sheaves, within a Bordure engrailed Or, Archbishop of Cant.

Arg. a Chevron with a Cinquefoil sable in the first quarter, Rempston.

Azure, two Chevrons Or (Chaworth) quartering Arg. an Orle of Cinquefoiles
about a Scutcheon sable (Caltoft).

Azure, five Fusills in Fesse Or, each charged with an Escallop Gules
(Plumpton) quartering Sable. A Bend between six Scallops Or (Folejambe).

Arg. three Birdbolts Gules, (Bozome).

Arg. on a Saltier engrailed Sable, nine Annulets Or, within a Bordure of the
second Crusule of the first (Leek of Kirton).

Gules, three Pickaxes Arg.

Arg. two Bars imbattailed Gules (Barry of Torlaston.)

Arg. two Bars Vert (Harthill), impales with Leek.

Markham quarters with Leek.

In another Window, which Thomas Mering, and Mary his wife, caused to be made.
Arg. upon a Chevron Sable, three Escallops Or, (Mering) impa^^s with Gules, a
Saltire Ermine (Nevill). Mering impales Leek also. There is Babingtons Arms
likewise.

Sir Thomas Brough, Knight of the Order, built another Window, Azure, three
Flower de Luces Ermine (Burgh) quarters with Paly Or and Sable, which also
impales Or a Lion Ramp. Az. all which so together quarter with Gules, three
Waterbugets Arg. (Lord Ros) which quarters Arg. a Fesse double Cotised Gules
(Badlesmere.) Azure, a Chief, and three Chevronells intermixed in base Or,
(Lord Fitzhugh) impales with Burgh, quartering as before; with which
quarterings Brough also impales with Gules upon a Chevron Or, three Stars sable.

Pierpont (in another Window) viz. Arg. a Lion Ramp. sable, with Cinquefoiles
about him, impales with Arg. six Annulets sable, 2.2.2. (Maunvers.) Peirpont
also impales with Azure, three Hedgehogs Or, (Heriz) and also with Sable, a
Saltier engrailed Or.

Heriz impales with Arg. three Cocks heads Gules, if they be not Escallops, and
so does Pierpont.

And with Lozengy, Arg. and Gules, (Fitz-Williams.)

In the South I Will there is a very large Marble, overlaid very much with Brass,
excellently Cut, whereon is the Portraiture of a Man with several Sentences out
of Scripture in Latin, And

Hic jacet Alanus Fleming, qui obiit Anno 1373. in die S. Helene cujus anima
per Dei miseri^ordiam requiescat in pace. Amen.

On a high Marble Tomb in Brass, upon the upper Edge.

Hic jacet Robertus Brown, Armiger, and Agnes uxor ejus. The Arms are Party
per Pale on a Chevron engrailed betwee^ 3 Libards heads, 3 Escallops.
Nuper Aldermannus Gildae S. Trinitatis hujus Ecclesiae, and Constabularius
Castelli, and principalis Senescallus libertatis hujus villae, ac etiam
Receptor tam Thomae Wulsy, Cardinalis Ebor. quam Domini Johannis Longlandi
Episcopi Lincoln. praeterea Vicecomes Com. Nottingham and Derby, and insuper
Custos Rotulorum tam in Com. Nottingham, quam in partibus de Kesteven in Com.
Lincolnie. Qui quidem Robertus obiit 10 die mensis Decembris, Anno Domini 1532.
Cujus anima propitietur Deus.

On a Gravestone in the middle of the Quire.

Hic jacet Willielmus Boshom, Armig. qui obiit Anno Dom. 1469. Sept. 21. die.
Cujus animae propitietur Deus. Amen.

The Arms, three Bird-bolts.

At the South East corner of the Quire there is a Chantry Chapel, and in it a
Monument of... Markham, over which there is an Arch of Freestone, and on the
side of that,

Orate pro animabus Roberti Markham, Armigeri, and Elizabethe uxoris ejus.

THE SOUTH PROSPECT OF THE CHURCH OF NEWARKE UPON TRENT


On the outside of it several Arms coursely cut, Markham impaling Mering,
Bozome, Markham, etc.

At the bottom of the great East Window,

.... Thom. Mering, and Elizabet. ux. ejus hanc fenestram fieri
causaverunt.....M. CCCCo..... gesimo.

At the bottom of the great South Window of the Cross I Will, called Trinity
Chapel, wherein are the Arms of England and France quarterly, and Deincourts,
before mentioned,

Orate pro bono statu Willielmi Phelypot, and Iohanne uxoris ejus and
omnium..... sororum.... and benefactorum........ nunciatoris beat. Marie
virginis qui istam fenestram fieri fecerunt, Anno Domini M.CCCCC. tricesimo
nono.

On a Brass Plate in the out I Will is the Portraiture of William Phyllypot, in an
Aldermans Furred Gown, and below it,

Here under this Stone lies buried the body of William Phyllypot, Merchant,
and Elizabeth his wyffe; which William decessyd the viii. day of May, in An.
Dom. M.CCCCC.L.VII. whose death desyryng you all to have in rememberans,
calling to God for mercy.

On the same Stone above,

The eight day of July 1514. was buried the body of John Phyllypot, Grandfather
to this William Phyllypot.

At the Vestry Door on a Freestone.

Hic jacet Johannes Phelypot, Junior, Draper, and Margareta uxor ejus; qui
quidem Johannes obiit 23 Augusti, Anno Dom. 1519. Quorum animabus propitietur
Deus. Amen.

In the Quire upon a Gravestone,

Hic jacet Robertus Whitecoumbe, quondam Mercator villae Calesie, qui obiit III
Novembr. Anno Dom. M.CCCC.XL.VII. Cujus animae, etc.

On a Marble, formerly almost covered in Brass,

Hic jacet Magister Johannes Bu^ton, Doctor Sacrae Theologiae, quondam
Vicaerius istius Ecclesiae, qui obiit tertio die Februarii, Anno Dom. 1475.
Cujus, etc.

Hic jacet M. Johannes Smythe in legibus Baccalaureus, quondam Vicarius de
Newark, Et Vicariatus sui XL.IIII. Prebendarius de Lynchaster, ac Rector
Kellam, qui obiit 14 die mensis Augusti, Anno Dom. 1521. Cujus, etc.

On a Brass Plate,

Orate pro animabus Simonis Bentley, Capeliani beati Nicolai, and Domini
Stephani Bentley, Capellani S. Trinitatis fratrum quiescentium; qui quidem
Simon obiit 21 die Jun. Anno Dom. 1530. Quorum animabus, etc.

In the North I Will two Portraits, with the Drapers Arms over them,

Orate pro animabus Johannis Bostone, Merceri, and Willielmi Boli, filii dicti
Johannis* Qui Willielmus obiit 4 die Aprilis, Anno Dom. 1551. Quorum animabus,
etc.

Pray for the Soul of Thomas Griffeth, Gentleman, which decessed the V. day of
March, Anno Dom. M. Vc. XIX. On whose Soul JHU have mercy. Amen.

Depositum Johannis Pole, Med. D. Denati ad 6t. Nonas 8br. Anno Christi 1674.

In Newark Church, at the North West corner of the Quire, an Effigies, and over
it,

Or, an Eagle displaied Sable.

Under which is,

Here lies the body of Robart Ramsey, Esquire, Servant to his Majesty, who
dyed the 9 day of April 1639.

Then follow Verses, and under them, Gules, a Regal Crown Or, and on a Chief
Arg. a Cross of the first.

Here lies buried the body of Robarte Kirkebye, the first Master of the
Song-School of this Town of Newark, in which rowme he was plast by Master
Thomas Magnus the Founder thereof, and continued a worthy Teacher therein the
space of xlii. years, who departed this life the 19th. of Mar. in the year of
our Lord God 1573. And here lies also Elizabeth his wife, who died before him
the 17th. of November. Anno 1566. To whom God send a joyful Resurrection.

Anno Dom. 1579. Maii 17, aetatis suae 68. Here lies buried the body of Mr.
William Leveret, Physician, thrice Alderman of this Town, who incresed by the
good help of the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Rutland, his Lord and Patron,
the Corporation of the same Town. He was of Godly life, zealous in Gods
Religion, and a Benefactor to the poor, whose soul rests with Christ Jesus
in Heaven.

In the Quire an Effigies on the Wall upon a Marble Tablet.



Memoriae aeternae
Arce potiti lucida inter ordines
Coelestium quietos, Thomae Atkinsoni,
Sanguine qui cretus prisco Imagines
Patrum sepultas, secundis eruit
Laboribus, and recenti cingit Adorea.
Amoribus nexus castis, and foedere
Certo, tuctur pignora genealis tori
Pariter avorum ipse, ac nepotum decus.
Rerum estimator prudens, and recti tenax,
Vtramque passus fortunam, stabilis and juris sui.
Norunt Catervae obstantes perduellium
(Piissimorum hominum impiissimum genus)
Quid Mart posset, volantes si explicuerit
Ignes, and Iras victricis dexterae.
Laeti repetimus revocatum ordinem,
Vindicias sceleris, and culpas exules,
Nomen Novarce, and invidendas civium
Vires, illo Custode, rerum and arbitro.
Demptum dolemus, orbi hunc urbis patrem
Subscribimus Statuae, hunc urbis Genium.
Obiit 10 Calend. Sextilis, Anno a partu virgineo M.DCLXI. Materno LX.

The Arms on the Monument are Ermine on a ^esse Sable, three Pheons Arg.

Edovardus Greavesus
O memorande mihi post nullos ( Smythe) ministros!
Quam cito te (verbi gladio) peccata prementem,
Quam cito te (Domini recte sacra verba secantem)
Sava falce sua mors importuna secavit?
Angelicam nisi certus eram te vivere vitam,
Perpetuos tristi resonarem carmine luctus.
Gulielmus Smythus obiit Pastor de Newark.

O mihi (Greavese) satis duris spectate periclis,
Mitte precor gemitus, lacrymas effundere mitte.
Nam mihi Mors lucrum, mihi Christus vita perennis,
Corpus in hoc tumulo est, animam super aethera vexit
Rex, Deus omnipotens, Arx, Cornu, Petra, Piorum:
Det Deus Astriferum mecum te scandere coelum.
Obiit 2. November. An. Dom. 1585. aetatis suae 36.

Edovardus Greausus quondam verbi Domini praeco in Ecclesia Novarcensi.

Me quoque terra tegit tandem (suavissime Smithe)
Ossa sub hoc tumulo recubant, super aethera fertur
Spiritus, ut tecum coelesti pace fruatur.
Vtque tibi fuerim sincero junctus amore
Tam tibi vicinum placuit mihi (Smithe) sepulcrum.
At mi Seele vale ne sim tibi causa doloris.
Johannes Seelus.
Quis mihi fraena dabit luctus compescere tantos
Quantos quam Chari Mors dira ministrat amici?
Si quicquam posset pietas aut gratia vulgi,
Mors nondum Greausum prostrasse^ funere tristi.
At quia stelliferi voluit te Rector Olympi
In coelos tolli, non restat causa doloris.
Obiit December. 21. An. Dom. 1586. aetatis suae 28.

On the backside of the East part of the Quire under an Effigies.

This Monument represents the person of John Joy of Belvoyer, Esquire deceased in
Lent 1608. who served a long time the House of Rutland, first Secretary to the
right Honorable and worthy Lords Edward and John, Earls of Rutland in their
several times, and lastly Steward of the Household to the Right Honorable and
noble Lord Roger, now Earl of Rutland, etc. He was about the age of 60. and in
his declining time made choice to end his days in this Town, and to leave his
body here Enterred, whose love and charitable affection, he has by his last
Will expressed to this Church, and Poor of the Town. Et sic in vita and morte
gaudet in Domino. On the North side of the Quire, an Effigies, and under it,

To the memory of Mr. John Johnson, Alderman, and twice Major of the Loyal and
unanimous Corporation of Newarke, who deceased the 24th. day of January, Anno
Dom. 1659. and lies interred near this place, with hopes of a joyful
Resurrection. After many English Verses, Hoc grati animi ergo triste Monumentum
posuit Johannes Johnsonus Cognatus ejus.

On the South Wall of the Church against the Quire steps,

Quod reliquum est Gulielmi Hobman praefecti hujus oppidi Novarchiensis spe
Resurrectionis, 8 die mensis Martii, Anno saelutis 1659.

There was a Shield of Arms also upon this Monument, but by Mr. Dugdale Norroy,
in his visitation, ordered to be defaced.

There are very many Epitaphs and Verses besides these, which to avoid
prolixity I must abbreviate, or omit, and therefore shall only name the
persons, and time of their deaths.

Willielmus Grene, Baker, obiit Mar. 20. 1529. Cujus, etc.

Lambart Watson, Draper, dyed Sept. 1. 1530. On whose, etc.

Beatrix Law obiit Nov. 14. 1450.

Gervase Bowman ob. April. 22. 1619.

Nicholas Penythorne.......

William Symson, Upholster.... 1546.

Henricus Fawconer, and Margareta ux. Hen. ob. Apr. 11. 1480.

William Robinson, Glover, thrice Alderman, dyed Dec. 7. 1575.

William Hodgekynson, Barber, and Wax-chandler, Aug. 27. 1529.

Edward Saynton, Gentleman, twice Alderman, and Justice of Peace, Mar. 2. 1573.

A Prospect of NEWARK from Lincoln Road,


Prospect of NEWARKE from Hawton way


Thomas Hobman, Ironmonger, son of Thomas, Alderman, Feb. 13. 1640.

John Beke, Waxchandler, dyed Ian. 12. 1512.

Agnes his wife died Ian. 24. 1533.

Alice, the wife of Nicholas Tomson, Feb. 23. 1540.

Hugh Kelsterne, Draper, Alderman, died Iul. 9. 1563.

Alles his wyffe died before him, Anno Dom. 1539.

Hugh lived 80. and his son Edward Kelsterne, Draper, the Alderman, 68 years,
who had two Wives, and ten Children by the first, he died Febr. 1. 1588.

Elizabetha filia Edw. Kelsterni, and uxor Christoph. Ienison, obiit 15 October.
1589. Her son Edward Ienison made Verses for her in Latin, and also for his
Father. Qui quidem Christopherus Jenisonus, vere generosissimus, tertio
Alderin. hujus oppidi obiit 13 Januar. 1606. aetat. sue 67.

Robertus Webb infaeliciter obiit 20 Iul. 1610. as his sons Verses show.

Anne, wife of John Shawe, Gent. died 16 Oct. 1619. aet. 28.

By the North East corner of the Church upon a Marble within an Alabaster on
the Wall,

M. S. Henrico Trewmanno viro faeliciter docto and hujus Hen. Trewman.

Charissimi Soceri memoriae pie consulens, triste hoc sui obsequii ministerium
posuit L. Jenison. Aetatis Quinquagesimo quinto obiit 2 December. Anno Restituto
Mundo 1655.

In the South I Will on a Brass Plate,

Here lies the body of Jane Bethell, only daughter of William Bethell, and
Elizabeth his wife, of the Reddinge Grange in the County of York, Gent. she
died the 30 of October. 1610. being of the age of sixteen years when she died.

On another,

Hic jacet Robertus Eurion, Tanner, Katherina, Agnes, and Johanna uxores ejus;
qui quidem Robertus obiit ultimo die November. Anno Dom. 1539. Quorum, etc.

Johannis Martinii

Here lies the body of George Sanduich, Barber, Servant to the Right
Honorable Earl of Rutland, who deceased the 18th. of April 1613.

Here lies Mrs. Alice Came, wife of Mr. Henry Came of this Town, daughter of Mr.
Robert Baxter of South-Clifton, buried August 28. 1671.

Henry Came buried March 6. 1671.

There are many more Arms obscurely painted, and cut in the Church, as on the
Roof, Arg. a Fesse Dance between three Waterbudgets sable.

Arg. a Cross Ragule couped sable.

Gules, a Cup Arg. and sometimes Or, etc.

Broxtow Hundred. Broxtow. Doomsd. Broculstou Wapentac.
THere was in the time of King Edward the first, Test. de Nev. de Firm^s Hundr.
etc.
great complaining concerning the Farms of Hundreds, so that Juries returned
their Verdicts, which were of ancient Farm, and which not, and how much every
Farmer gave for his Bayliwike: at which time the Jury found and said, That in
the time of Philip Mark, and Eustace de Loudham, Sheriffs of Not., and of
other Sheriffs in ancient time ( viz. King John) the Bailiffs of Brokelstowe
gave for having the Bayliwike half a Mark, viz. Moris de Notehall, and other
Bailiffs of that time* and in the time of Sir Robert le Vavasour (which was 20,
or 30 H. 3.) the Bailiffs, viz. John Warlett, and other Bailiffs of that time;
gave xxs. And afterward, in the time of Simon de Hedon, Sheriff, the Bailiffs
gave for having the Bayliwike four Marks ( viz. 43 H. 3.) and in the time of
Hugh Babyngton, and Walter de Stircheley (viz. 4, vel 5 E. 1.) being Sheriffs,
the Bailiffs, viz. Stephen de Darleton, and Tho. de Lee, and Galfr. de Herdeby,
for having their Bayliwicks gave six Marks, to the great damage of the Country,
and yet lost much. And in the time of Gervas de Clifton, then the Sheriff, (
viz. between 7, and 18 E. 1.) Aunsell de Gameleston, and William de Tytheby
gave, for having the said Bayliwick, nine Marks, with Courtesies, to the great
damage of the Country: and this they did to get a living, and only to make the
Bargain, sold their Lands. The Jury likewise said that Brockelstowe was an
entire Wapentac, yet the greatest part was of the Honor of Peverell, and Hugh
de Stapleford held that Honor of Peverell, by the Charter of King Henry, son
of King John, for term of his life, and the Farm of the Honor of Peverell was
raised in the same manner, as the Farm of the Wapentac to the great damage of
the Country.

Attenborough.
THis place lies in the corner, where the River of Yrewis or Erwas, which parts
the Counties of Nottingham and Derby, falls into Trent, and is rather to be
called a Church than a Village, having but few Houses, and no Fields. The
Church serves for Chillewelle, and Toueton, and part of Bramcote. Half of it
was in the Conquerours time with Cillewelle, of the Fee of Raph Fitz-Hubart,
and shortly after at or near the Foundation of the Priory of Lenton, given to
that Monastery by Odo de Boney, and afterward confirmed by his Successor
Edward, and Aeliz his wife, as in Boney and Barton is shown. The other half
with Touton, was of Pevrells Fee, and came to the Lords of Codenour in
Darbishire.

Betwixt Henry Lord Gray, and the Prior and Covent of Lenton, Regist de^
Lenton, p. 47.
there was a case depending in the Kings Court, which could not be there
determined according to their minds in forty years, concerning the right of
Patronage of the moiety of the Church of Adinboro. At length Richard Lord Gray,
son and heir of the said Henry, and the Prior, totally submitted the
Controversy to W. Archbishop of York, who to make peace, and avoid effusion
of blood, ordained, that the Prior and his Successors should have Tithes to
the value of forty shillings yearly, in the name of a simple Benefice, in that
moiety of the Chapel of Bremcote, whereof Mr. Robert de Stanford was then
Re^^or, and who also gave his consent, and that the right of Patronage of the
other Mediety should remain to the said Richard Lord Gray, and his heirs. This
Ordinance bears date in January 1246. The Rector was to have the other Mark,
which remained of the then full value of those Tithes, and the Prior was to pay
a pound of Frankincense at Adinboro Feast every year. This was afterward
confirmed by William Archbishop of York, as it seems.

Fin. lev. a die Pasc. in 15. dies and postea in Oct. S. Mic. 13 E. 3.
John de Gray of Codnoure Chr. by Fine. 13 E. 3. passed one Acre of Land in
Toueton, and the Advowson of the Church of Adyngburgh, which Thomas de Vaus
then held for his life, by virtue of a Fine levied at York the day after All
Souls, 11 E. 3. to the Prior and Covent of Felley, and their Successors; to
which Monastery it was appropriated by William Archbishop of York, Mo^. Angl.
vol. 2. p. 57.
about the year 1343.

The Church and Rectory, with the Advowson of the Vicarage, late belonging to
the Priory of Felley, King Edward the sixth granted, May 4, in the seventh year
of his Reign, to Sir James Folejambe, Knight, for the Rent of 18l. per annum.
It was by.... Folejambe given to a charitable use for Chesterfeild School (as I
take it) to which it remains.

The Vicarage of Adynbrughe was ten Marks, when the Prior of Felley was Patron.
Mss. I. B.
It Is now 4l. 6s. 8d. in the Kings Books, and Sir Francis Folejambe Patron.

In the Church were the Arms of Babington impaling with quarterly Ermine, and
Chequey Or, and Gules. And Nevile, viz. Gules, a Saltier Ermine, Ex Coll. S. Lo
Kniveton.
impaling with Babington. And Leake impaling Babington, and Arg. two Bars Azure.

Upon a plain Stone there was also,

Here lies Thomas Trowell, and Dianise, and Margaret his wives, Henry, John,
William, John, Elizabeth, Annes, John, Margaret, Alice, his Children by Dianise
his wife; which Thomas died Anno 1536. the 2d. of May.

Chillewell.
IT seems by the Book of Doomsday, that here were two Chillewelles, one whereof
was called Estre Cillewelle, both Soc to Barton, of Raph Fitz-Huberts Fee, and
answered the Tax or Geld as three Car. and three Bov. of Land. The Land was
four Car. and an half. There Raph had one Car. and two Sochm. and five Vill.
and thirteen Bordars, having six Car. or Plows, and two ( Draught, or) Plowing
Oxen. There was seventy Acres of Meadow, and half a Church, and four Acres of
small Wood, Lib Do^ms.
and four Acres of Oziers (or Holt.) In Childewelle of that Soc five Bovats for
the Geld, were in Tolvestone. Here was also of William Peverells Fee Soc to
Tovetune as much as was rated to the public Geld at three Bovats. And in
Estre-Cillewelle of the Taynland here was a Manor, which before the Conquest
Dumine had, and paid to the Tax for five Bovats for it. The Land being then
certified to be five Bov. Erwin after the Conquest had there one Villain, with
half a Car. and twelve Acres of Meadow. In the Confessors time the value was
5s. 4d. in the Conquerours but 3s. 4d.

Odo de Bon^y, and his successor Edward, already mentioned in Barton, and
several other places, Mo^. Angl. vol. 2. p. 230.
were undoubtedly the first Tenants of Fitz-Huberts Fee, howbeit Raph
Fitz-Stephen, and Hubert Fitz-Raph passed afterward to the Abbey of Derley the
Land of Pentric, and of Rippele, and of Ulkerthorp, and the Land of Chillewell,
belonging to the Manor of Pentriz.

Norman de Montfautrell, as other of Peverells Men did in several places, Reg.
Lent. p. 12.
gave two parts of the Tithes of his Demesne in Chillewelle, which Will.
Archbishop of York afterward confirmed to Lenton Priory, as in that place may
be noted.

John Constable of Chester gave to God and the Church of the holy Trinity at
Lenton, and his Brethren the Monks there serving God, Ib. 46. b.
any first draught of Sperlencs (so in Lancashire and Cheshire they now
ordinarily call Smelts, therefore I here suppose Gudgeons) next after the
draught of his Steward in his Fishing of Chillewell, and whatsoever in the said
draught God should bestow on the said Brethren, as Salmon or Lamprey, or any
other kind of Fish, he gave them freely: The Witnesses were Henry Biset, and
Albreda de Lisures his wife (sister of the Constable), and Geoffrey, the said
Constables son, Sanson de Strelley, Gaufr. Hugh, and Philip his sons, Roger de
Weston, and many others. At another time he gave the said Monks a draught in
the River of Merse, called Sandwarpe, so that the Fish should be for the Monks
own use, Ib. 131.
and not let to Farm; and there he mentioned the third draught in the Fishing
of Chillewell, where he also gave them an Acre of his Demesne to enclose, to
make a dwelling for their Servants to look after their Fishing, for which they
were to make an Anniversary for his Father and Mother during his life, and
afterward for himself: to this were Witnesses (after some Clergy) Robert
Constable of Chester his son (miswritten I suppose for Roger) Raph de Furneis,
Samson de Siretley, Richard, and Gaufr. sons also of the said Constable, John,
and others.

The Family of Strelley held Lands here from the time of Henry the first, till
about 27 H. 8. that Thomas Poutrell by partition had them, A^tog. pen. Will.
Sacheverell, Ar.
as one of the four coheirs of John Strelley, Esquire, with which Family of
Poutrell some of them yet continue. Robert de Moyz, 14 H. 3. claimed against
Robert de Estradlegh two parts of three Bovats of Land, Pl. de Ba^^. Hill. 14
H. 3. to. 6.
with the Appurtenances in Chelewell, whereof Robert de Moyz his Father was
seized in the time of Henry the second, and eleven Bovats of Land, with the
Appurtenances in Chelewell, as his own right, whereof one Isilia his great
Grandmother was seized in the time of H. 1. There were Lands parted to the five
sons of Isilia, whereof three, Robert, Henry, and Richard, she had by her first
husband William de Moyz, but Samson and Rog. she had by her second husband
Walter de Stradlegh, Samson was Father of Walter de Strelley, the Father of
Robert the Defendant, who pleaded that Robert, son of Will. de Moiz and Isilia,
had no son by his married wife, as he did likewise the same Term, Ib. rot. 5.
Dereby in dorso.
concerning twenty four Bovats in Haselbech in Darbishire, which he had passed
to Philip de Stradlegh, about which Nicholas de Karl, Adam de Herthell, John
Bret, and Roger de Ayencurt were the four Knights summoned to choose twelve, to
make a recognition of the Grand Assize between the said Robert de Moyz,
Complainant, and Robert, son of Walter de Stradlegh, Defendant. They came and
chose Richard de Cursun, Hugh Pycot, Richard Putrell, etc.

Robert de Strelley died seized about 12 E. 1. of twelve Bovats here, Esc. 12
E. 1. n. 10.
and likewise of sixteen more which he held of Henry de Gray. His son and heir
Robert was then found to be above thirty years of age; and his son and heir
Robert de Strelley, 30 E. 1. was found to be twenty years old on St. Matthews
day. Esc. 30 E. 1. n. 39.
There was then mention of a Windmill, and customary Tenants at Chilewell.
Robert de Strelley is certified to have held here the fourth part of a Knights
Fee of Henry de Gray, Test. de Nev.
and the Abbat of Derley the third part of one, of the heir of Anchor de
Frechevill, and Robert Dethec a fourth part of a Knights Fee of the Abbat of
Derley.

Ib.
Richard Martell, and William Torkard held shares here also in the time of E. 1.

The Prior of Sempringham, 8 E. 1. had a Trial, Pl. de Iur. and Assis. in Com.
Not. 8 E. 1. to. 15.
wherein Geoffrey de Southcolme, and Ioane his wife were cast, concerning two
Mess. and two Bovats of Land in Westrechilewell.

In 9 E. 2. Chillwelle answered for a whole Villa, Nom. Vill.
and the Abbat of Derley, Robert de Strelley, and Richard Martell were
certified to be Lords of it.

These Martells had interest in Ruddington, as in that place is shown, whose
heir was married to Sir William Babington. Sir John Babington (his Grandson)
had a sister called Ethela^na married to..... Delves, as in Bridgeford is
shown, who had a daughter and heir called Elena, who carried a great Estate in
this County to the Family of Sheffeild, viz. the Manors of Chillewell,
Ruddington, and Beeston, that in Bridgeford, and Lands in Newton, Bramcote,
Allesworth, Stapleford, Attinborough, Notingham, Hucknall Torcard, Clifton,
Bradmere, Rolleston, and Kellum.

B.
This Manor was sold by the Earl of Mulgrave to.... Pymme, and since that it is
purchased by.... Poutrell, who has also Strelley's part, as before is said.

Certain Lands in Chillwell, and the Fishing in Trent, Par. 3. pat. 38 H. 8.
belonging to the Monastery of Derley, 16 Aug. 38 H. 8. amongst many other
things were granted to Robert and Hugh Thornehill, Gent. and their heirs. And
all the Lands and Rents, Par. 11. pat. 42 Eliz.
formerly belonging to that Monastery in Chilwell, Bramcote, and Adenborough,
28 November. 42 Eliz. were granted to Hercules Witham, and Francis Thekeston,
Gent. and their heirs.

Nicholas Charleton, Father of Thomas Charleton, Esquire, late High Sheriff of
this County, left him an House, and considerable Lands here, which were
purchased of... Pymme.

William Sacheverell of Barton, Esquire, has purchased of Mrs. Poutrell, the
widow of John Poutrell, Lands lying on the South side the River of Trent,
called Chillwell Borresse, adjoining to the Lordship of Barton.

In the old House in a Chamber-window at Chilwell, Ex Coll. S. Lo Kniveton.

Ex relat. ipsius Hen. Epist. Feb. 2. 1674.


Babington impales with Arg. three Hammers, or Pickaxes, Gules, Martell.

This Manor, Tithe and Demesne were given by the said Mrs. Poutrell to her
Nephew Sir Henry Hunlake of Wingerworth in Derbyshire, Baronet, whose Ancestor
Nicholas Humlake was an owner hereabouts in the time of H. 8.

Toueton,
MIstaken by Dr. Thomas Fuller, in his Ecclesiastical History, for that in
Yorkshire, Book 4. page 187, etc. 190.
where the great Battle was fought 1461. between the Houses of York and
Lancaster, and so many slain, viz. 35091. and K. Henry the sixth defeated.

This was of the Fee of William Peverell, and one Aldric had it before the
Conquest, who was rated for this Manor to the public Tax at three Carucats.
Lib. Dooms.
The Land whereof was then three Car. and an half. Here Warner the Man (or
Tenant) of William had three Car. (or Plows) and four Sochm. on three Bov. of
this Land, and 16 Vill. three Board. having six Car. (or Plows). Here was half a
Church, and a Priest, and two Mills 8s. one hundred Acres of Meadow, and a small
Ozier Bed (or Holt). It continued the old value 60s. having Soc in Chilewelle.

Robert, son of Warner, at the Foundation of Lenton Priory, by his Lord William
Peverel, Reg. Lent. p. 1.
in the time of Henry the first, gave, as others did, two parts of the Tithes
of his Demesne here in Toueton.

By an Inquisition taken 13 Ioh. it appears that Henry de Gray had then six
Knights Fees of the Honor of Peverell, Lib. Rubr. 151.
which came to the King by Escheat in the Counties of Not. and Derb. viz. in
Henour one, in Normantone one, in Sirland one, in Codenour and Toueton one, in
Radeclive one, and in Be^ley one. The Sheriff William Briwerre, Rot. Pip. 8 R.
1.
8 R. 1. gave account of the Scutage of the Honor of Pevrel of Nottingham,
assessed the year before, being the second for the Army in Normandy, and
likewise of Henry de Gray Cs. of his Scutage for five Knights Fees, because he
was in the Kings Service beyond the Sea. His Seal, within the Circumscription
of his name, has upon it Barry of six (which were Arg. and Azure) as in
Radcliff upon Trent may be observed. His wife was Isolda* whom Mr. Burton, in
his description of Leicestershire, Autog. pen. Tho. Rosell, Ar.
affirms to have been the daughter and heir of Hugh Bardolf. He was undoubtedly
a great man, and I think had diverse sons, John, Father of Reginald de Gray, who
had Shirland, and William Lord of Sandiacre, mentioned in Hickling, but the
eldest son and heir, Pip. 31 H. 3
both of him and Isolda his wife (who after his decease was married to Reginald
de Mendre) was Richard de Gra Lord of Codenhour in Darbyshire, Chapter 23 H. 3. m.
5, and 6.
who married Lucia, the daughter and heir of John de Homaz. Pip. 13 H. 3.
Staff. Esc. 56 H. 3. n. 34.


The Jury 56 H. 3. found that John de Gray held the Manor of Radeclive, as
belonging to this of Toueton, which he held by Barony, viz. in Capite, together
with Codenowre, said to be an old Escheat, and many other Lands in several
Counties; and that his son Henry de Gray was his heir, and fourteen or fifteen
years of age.

Henry de Gray, Pl. de Banc. Hill. 29 E. 1. to. 37.
29 E. 1. entered into a recognizance of ten thousand pounds to Robert Fitz-Payn
before Roger de Brabauzon, and his fellow Justices, which yet was to be void,
if the said Henricus de Grae-Isolda-Reginald de Mendre marit. poster. Richardus
Dom. Gra de Codnour-Lucia fill. and haer. Joh. de Humez, Claus. 7 H. 3. Norf. m.
8. Johannes Dom. Gray ob. 56 H. 3.-Lucia. Henricus Dom. Gray ob. 2 E. 2.
Richard^s Dom. Gray mort. 9 E. 3.-Joana. Johannes Dom. Gray, miles Gart. in
prima fundatione-Alianora, 18 E. 2.-Alicia de Insula. Henricus Dom. Gray
Richardus Dom. Gray, miles Gart. mort. 6 H. 5.-Elizab. fill. and cohaer. Rad.
Basset de Sapcote, ob. 29 H. 6. Esc. Derb. 1 Johannes Dom. Gray mort. 9 H.
6.-Joana. Henricus s. p.
2 Henricus Dom. Gray ob. 22 H. 6.-Margareta fill. and cohaer. Hen. de Percy d'
Atholl, mil. Ric. Vere marit. alter. Henricus Dom. Gray aet. 28.4 E. 4. ob. 18
H. 7.-Katherina. Henricus Gray Elizab. Grey-Ric. fill. 3. Hen. Sacheverell, mil.
Henricus Sacheverell s. p.

Henr. Gray.

Elizab.-Joh. Zouch, mil. Joh. Zouch-Eliz. fill. Joh. St. John de Bletsoe. Joh.
Zouch, mil. de Codnour-Margareta fill. Hen. Willughby, mil. Anna fill.....
Geinsford-Georgius Zouch-Elianor fill.... Lane, ux. 2. Johan. Zouch de Codnor,
mil.-Eliz. fill. Ric. Whalley, Ar. Johannes Zouch factus mil. 1 Jac. aetat. 10.
1559.-Maria fill. Henr. Barkley, mil.
Elenor.-Tho. Hutchinson de Owthorp.










Willielmus Johan.

Henry did not sell nor Alienate the Manors of Toueton and Estwayt in this
County, but leave them to Richard de Gray his son and heir, and to the heirs of
his body. ^sc. 2 E. 2. ^. 47.
In 2 E. 2. Henry de Gray was dead, and his son Richard de Gray his heir was
then found to be twenty six years of age.

Richard de Gray of Codnour, 3 E. 3. claimed the Emendation of the Assise of
Bread and Ale broken in Toueton, Rot. Quo Wa^. 3 E. 3.
as a member of Codnour. He left Ioane his widow, Es^. 9 E. 3. n. 4.
9 E. 3. and his son John his heir then aged twenty eight years.

The Jury, 18 E. 2. found it not to the Kings loss, Esc. 18 E. 2. n. 134.
if he granted John, the son of Richard de Gray, and Alianor his wife, to
retain the Manor of Hoo in Kent to themselves. The Castle of Codnour, with the
members, in Darbishire, and the Manor of Towton in Nottss. remaining over,
etc. This John Lord Gray was Knight of the Garter at the first Foundation, his
Grandchild Richard Lord Gray was also Knight of that Order, The Instit. Eliae
A^hmole, Ar. p. 698. Ib.
who was son and heir of Henry, eldest son of the said John, by Alice de Insula
his wife.

This Richard married Elizabeth, daughter and coheir of Raph Basset of
Sapcote, Knight, she was born at Castle Bytham in the County of Lincoln, Esc.
10 R. 2.
and Baptized in the Church of St. James there, the Sunday before the Feast of
St. James the Apostle, 46 E. 3. and was fourteen years old 22 July, 10 R. 2. He
was, 26 Apr. 2 H. 4. constituted Admiral from the mouth of Thames toward the
Northern parts of England, as Sir Thomas Rempston was, 21 Apr. toward the
West. She bore him two sons John and Henry, both Lords Gray, whom she outlived.

The King, 9 H. 6. December. 18. committed to John Duke of Bedford, Fin. 9 H. 6.
m. 10.
the Custody of the Castles, Manors, etc. which were Ioanes, late wife of John
Lord Gray of Codnor, deceased, which, after the death of the said Ioane, came
into the Kings hands, by reason of the minority of Henry de Gray, son and heir
of the said Ioane, with the marriage of the said heir: Esc. 9 H. 6. n. 157.
but he died about that time, and the forementioned Henry, brother of the said
John, was Lord Gray, and had to wife Margaret, the daughter and coheir of
Henry Percy d' Atholl, Knight, Fin. 11 H. 6. m. 13.
whose son and heir Henry de Gray, after her death, 4 E. 4. was found to be
about twenty eight years old; Esc. 4 E. 4.
being above nine years of age at the death of his Father, the said Henry Lord
Gray, which was, 17 July, 22 H. 6. Esc. 22 H. 6.


Henry Lord Gray, and Katherin his wife (said to be the daughter of the Earl of
Devonshire) suffered a Recovery, 5 H. 7. of the Manors of Estwayt, Ex Coll. S.
Lo Kniveton.

Mic. 5 H. 7. (...) 410.


Toueton, Barton, Radcliff, and Dunham in this County, to Thomas Leek, and
Roger Johnson, who were appointed by the last Will of the said Henry Lord Gray,
bearing date 18 H. 7. to convey them to his two sons (natural). Ex Autog. pe^.
Will. Sa^heverel at Barton, (...).
One of them (I suppose the elder) called Henry Gray of Towton, 13 H. 8. gave
three Mess. etc. here in marriage with Elizabeth, his daughter and heir, to
Richard, third son of Sir Henry Sacheverell of Morley, mentioned in Barton, and
himself died about 23 H. 8.

This Manor, in the year 1568. 10 Eliz. was by Richard Whalley of Welbeck, Ex
Autog. (...). P^^ist. Whalley, (...).
Esquire, settled one half on his son Thomas, who had married Elizabeth, and
the other half on his son William, who had married Barbara, the two daughters
and coheirs of Henry Hatfeild.

(...) 13 Eliz. ^et. 155.
In the 13 Eliz. Thomas Stanhope, and Edward Stanhope, Esquire, suffered a
Recovery of this Manor, and called to warrant the said Richard Whalley, and
William his son, and Thomas his son and heir.

Exemplif. pe^. W. Sa^^^verel, (...).
In 27 Eliz. and 42 Eliz. John Zouch of Codnor, Esquire, claimed as son and heir
of Sir John Zouch, Knight, son and heir of George Zouch, Esquire, son and heir
of John Zouch, Knight, son and heir of John Zouch, Esquire, son and heir of
Elizabeth Gray, Cousin and heir of Henry Lord Gray, viz. daughter of Richard
Lord Gray, Father of Henry Lord Gray, Father of Henry last Lord Gray.

Richard Whalley of Screveton, then claimed as son of Thomas, son of Richard,
son of Thomas Whalley, son and heir of Ioane (mistaken for Elizabeth) Leek,
daughter and heir of Thomas Leek (as in Screveton may be seen).

How they ended their Suits I have not found, but shortly after the
forementioned Settlement and Recovery, it was Sir Thomas Stanhopes; and Sir
John Stanhope of Elvaston in the County of Darby, left it to John Stanhope,
Esquire, his son and heir, who first Mortgaged, and after sold it to Arthur
Waren, son of Sir Arnald Waren of Thorp Arnald, descended of those mentioned in
Costock, who has enclosed the Fields, and sold some of the ancienter
Enclosure, lying toward the Trent side, to William Sacheverell of Barton,
Esquire, with the Ferry.

Bramcote. Broncote.
PArt of Broncote the Book of Doomsday shows to belong to Ernehale, the Kings
Manor, and was rated to the Tax at six Bovats, the Land of it being six
Bovats: And part to Olaveston (now Wollaton) of William Peverels Fee, charged
to the Dane-geld as six Bovats also, yet at that time Waste.

But the principal part seems to be four Manors, which Vlchel, Godric, Alvric,
and Levric had before the Conquest, Lib. Dooms.
and paid to the Dane Tax as twelve Bovats for them. The Land whereof was then
certified to be no more. Afterward William Ostiarius (the Usher, or Porter)
whose Fee it was, had two Car. four Vill. four Board. having three Car.. This
part in the Confessors time was 60s. value, but when the great Survey was made
by the Conqueror 20s. was the rate of it.

Herbert de Brampcote confirmed to the holy Trinity, and the Monks of Lenton,
Regist. de Lent. 47. b.
the gift which Azor, son of Vlfac, made of two Carucats of the Fee of Arnale,
which the said Herbert held in Brampcote, leaving his heirs the Curse of
Almighty God, and his own, if they should ever attempt to go against his Grant.
H. de Nevill confirmed eight Bovats of Land in Brampcote, and four in Sutton,
of his Soc of Arnale, concerning which there had formerly been some
controversy in the Kings Court, to the said Priory, reserving 12s. yearly Rent
to himself, and his heirs: to this Deed were Witnesses H. de Burgo the Kings
Justice, William Briwer, Stephen de Sedgrave, Raph de Nevile, Philip Marc,
William Rufus, Robert de Harleston, Walter de Estwayt, John de Leke, Helyas
Briton, Gervas de Arnale.

Herbert de Riseley, and William de Riseley, and the Nuns of Sempringham, Test.
de Nev.
held half a Knights Fee here, which is said to be of the Fee of Mortimer; and
Henry de Birchinwood the sixth part of a Knights Fee. Nicholas Birchwood did
Suit for eight Bovats of Land in Bramcote, to the Honor of Pevrel, 21 E. 1.

In the Nom. Villar. 9 E. 2. Robert de Byley, and the Prior of Sempringham,
Nom. Vill.
are certified to be Lords. Quo War. 3 E. 3.
And in 3 E. 3. Robert de Billy of Bramcote, claimed Assize of Bread and Ale of
his Tenants in Bramcote. As the said Prior did Free Warren in his Demesne Lands
here at Trowell, and Chillwell. Afterward John de Beley held that which was
Riseleys; Ex Inq. Coll. Auxilii ad fill. primog. mil. fac.
and 22 E. 3. that which was Birchwoods, was become Richard de Willughbyes of
Wallaton, with which Family it continued, and with his posterity, Lords of that
place, still remains.

Richard, son of Richard de Willughby, 13 E. 2. released to John del Ker of
Rotington 9s. 8d. Rent out of 10s. 4d. which the said John was to pay to
Richard, Ex Autog. in Cartul. Fr. Willughby, Ar. nuper defuncti.
as part of 1l. 9s. 4d. which Richard had by the grant of John de Thorneton,
out of a Mess. and four Oxgangs in Bramcote, which the said John was to hold of
the said Richard by service, etc. Esc. 33 H. 6. n. 23.
Here was a place called Karr Manor, and some Lands which were Sir William
Babingtons Lord of Chillewell, whereof his son William Babington, Esquire, was
found heir 33 H. 6. Some part of this Town belonged to Attenborow Parish, as in
that place may be discerned.

The Manor of Bramcote, formerly belonging to the Priory of Sempringham, Part.
10. pat. 6 Eliz.
was by Queen Elizabeth, by her Letters Patents dated 14 July, in the sixth
year of her Reign, amongst other things, granted to Charles Iackson, and
William Mason, and the heirs of Charles.

Richard Handley, Yeoman, purchased the Sempringham Lands, and left his son
Henry, Ex Autog.
Father of Henry, at Bramcote, and Gervas his second son, who married An. the
daughter of Jerome Brand of Staunton at Wilford, where his posterity in the
Male-line still continues.

Richardus Handley de Wilford-....fill.... Fitz-Williams de Com. Ebor. Henricus
Handley de Bramcote-Alicia fill....Bray. Henr. Handley de Bramcote-....
Percivall Handley, s. p.

Gerv. Handley de Wilford-Anna fill. Jer. Brand. Richardus H. de Wilford- Gerv.
Gervas Handley de Wilford-Kather. fill.....Wharton Rectoris de Wilford. Gervas
Handley de Wilford aet. 31. 1673.

Rob. Hen. Hunt.


Sir William Segar Garter, 21 June, 1614. granted Arg. a fesse Gules between
three Goats passant sab. garnished Or, etc.

Henry Handley had a Manor here, whereof he (having buried his only son
Percivall Handly) made some settlement for pious or charitable uses: but his
kinsman Robert Harding Barrester at Law, keeps it in his possession, though
Gervas Handly of Wilford, did make some attempt to obtain it before he died by
suit at Law.

Beeston. Bestone.
IN Bestune before the Conquest, were three Manors which Alfeg, Alwin, and
Vlchel held; who were rated for them to the Tax then paid, at three Carucats.
The land was then certified to be four Carucats. There afterward William
Pevrel had in demesne two Car. 17 Vill. 1 Sochm. having nine Car. Lib. Dooms.
There also was meadow 24 acres. The value in the Confessors time, and then
likewise was 30s. when the Conquerours survey was taken.

This Manor after it was escheated was granted from the Crown to a branch of
the family of Bellocampo: Test. de Nev.
Miles and Richard paid two Marks for one Knights fee, in the beginning of the
Reign of H. 3. and John de Beauchamp 40s. another time.

Regist. Lent. p. 43
In the year 1241. Richard de Beauchamp gave two Bovats in Beston, which Jordan
son of Yvo held; together with the said Jordan and all his sequel, to the
Priory of Lenton.

Sarra Wawton the wife of Adam de Hockewold, joined with the said Adam in
confirming the gift of her Uncle, the said Richard; who it seems was son of
Richard de Bellocamp, In Bundello de E^son. Hill. 9 E. 1. to 55.
who had another son of that name, and one called Hugh, who all died without
issue, and left their sisters heirs, viz. Isabell, mother of Robert de Souleby;
Matilda, mother of John de Croxton, and Philippa mother of Sarra the wife of
Adam de Hockewold, who in the right of Sarra his said Wife together with the
Prior of Wimundley, Robert Daft, and William de Ley held this town. 21 E. 1.
Robert de Whatton is reckoned with the rest instead of the said Adam and his
wife, T^^t de Nev.
by Richard Martel Bailiff of the Honor of Peverell, who gave into the
Exchequer an account of the Knights Fees, 7 November. that year; and there Rafe
Bellocamp is mentioned to have held it in former time.

In the Nom. vill. 9 E. 2. Roger de Bellocampo is returned Lord of it: And
after him his son Roger, Nom. vill.
22 E. 3. as appears by the Inquisition taken the Saturday after the feast of
St. Laur. at Not. before John de Vaus, John de Mustiers, and John del Kerr,
Collectors for the aid of 40s. for every Knights Fee, to make the Kings son a
Knight.

William de Beston, Parson of Cotegrave, Esc. 28 E. 3. n. 39.
held diverse lands here of Roger de Bellocamp; whom I take to be son of Roger,
son of Ralph, son of Roger de Bellocamp, of whom the forementioned persons held.

William de Beston otherwise called William de Beckeford Parson of Cotegrave,
Regist. de Lenton, p. 178.
founded a Chauntry in the Church of Beston, for his own Soul, and the souls of
John, his father, and Felice, his mother, and of Alice de Langeton, and of his
brothers and sisters, to which he first presented John, son of John de Beston;
to whom and to his Successors, he gave one Mess. and two Bovats in Beston which
Matilda Rotour then lately held. And one Mess. in the same Town, which was Hugh
Maistersons, together with the reversion of two Bovats of land with the
appurnances lying to the said Mess. which Margaret Hereward held for term of
her life. Likewise one Mess. and one Bovat which were John de Stretleyes of
Nottingham, and the reversion of a place of Meadow called Doddesholm, under
Lenton; and 12d. yearly rent. He likewise gave to the said John two Mess. and
thirty four Acres of Arable land in Lenton; which he had of John de Tumby of
Nottingham, etc. which was confirmed by John Archbishop of York, by his
Instrument bearing date at his Manor nigh Westminster, May 19. 1356. and in
the fourth year of his translation.

Ga^fr. Poutrell son of Robert P. 3 E. 3. claimed lands here, Pl. de Jurat. and
Ass. apud Not. Mich. 3 E. 3. to. 13.
which Henry Putrel of Thurmeton, his great Grandfather, settled on his
Grandfather Henry Putrell and Wilimina his wife in the time of E. 1.

Richard de Willughby had some interest here also, Esc. 27 E. E. 3. n. 8.
27 E. 3.

The Manor of Beeston, late belonging to the Priory of Wymondley, in the
County of Hartford, Part. 5. Pat. 29 H. 8.
12 Apr. 29 H. 8. was granted amongst other things to James Needham Gent.
paying 69s. 4d. yearly rent. He sold it to William Bolles, from whom coming
again to the Crown, B.
Queen Elizabeth passed it in the forty second year of her Reign, amongst
others, to Ben. Harris and Robert Morgan gent. at the extent of 9l. Beauchamps
Manor, seems to go by inheritance from Delves to Sheffeild, as in Chillwell;
the Lord Sheffeild has sold it to diverse freeholders, of whom I take Mr.
Charleton of Chillwell to be chief.

Ex Regist. de Lent. p. 46. and 47.
The Priory of Lenton got the Rectory appropriated, and the Church to be made as
a Chapel only, and Lenton to be the mother Church, by the help of the Popes
Alexander the third, and Lucius 3. whose Letters they produced against the
Parishioners, and poor Vicar, before John de la Laund and William de Hundon,
Rectors of Arnale and Barneburgh, Commissaries especially deputed to determine
the cause concerning the repair of the Chancel by the Parish, and the payment
of 22s. yearly by the Vicar to that Covent, in the year 1330.

Mss. I. M.
The Vicarage of Beiston was eight Marks when the Prior of Lenton was Patron.
It Is now 4l. 15s. 0. in the Kings books, and the Earl of Devonshire Patron.

Stapleford.
IN Stapleford before the Norman invasion, were four Manors, which Vlcicilt,
Staplewin, Godwin, and Gladwin had; and were rated for them to the Danegeld,
(the tax of that time) at two Car. and six Bov. The land of them being then
returned to be sufficient for three Plows, or three Car. r There afterward
William Pevrel of whom Robe^t (I suppose de Heriz) held it, Lib. Dooms.
had in demesne three Car. six Vill. and two Servants, with six Car. or Plows.
There was then a Priest, and a Church, and 58 Acres of Meadow: In the
Confessors time the value was 60s. in the Conquerours 40s.

Gaufr. de Heriz held it at the foundation of Lenton Priory, Reg. de Lenton p.
1.
in the time of King Henry the first, by William Pevrel, who gave two parts of
the tithe of his demesne here to that Monastery, as in the rest of his Lands.
Ib. p. 15.
King Stephen confirmed that which Gaufr. de Heriz by the consent of his
mother, gave to that Church. The Sheriff, Pip. 25 H. 2.
25 H. 2. gave account of lxxixs. and viiid. of Stapleford the Land of Robert
de Heriz.

Galfr. de Heriz Lord of Stapleford, had descending of him Robert, who died
without issue, Regist. de Novo lo. p. 262.
and Agnes who died without issue, Avicia Mabilia who died without issue, and
Alice, of whom Galfrid. Robert, Hugh, Richard, and Hugh Heriz.

Richard de Cazmera married Avicia Lady of Stapleford, Ib. 257.
who gave that Church to Newstede Priory.

Phillip de Stradley, Oblat. 2 Ioh. m. 19.
2 Ioh. gave the King ten marks and a Palfrey, for having the daughter of
Avicia de Stapilford to wife with her inheritance.

Galfr. de Ecclestone, 26 May, Fin. 8. H 3. m. 6.
8 H. 3. made fine of 10l. for seizing of the Land which Avicia, who had been
wife of Richard de Camera, held of the King in Capite, which concerned him as
his inheritance in Stapleford. This man I take to be the son of her sister
Alice, and sometimes called Heriz, and sometimes Stapleford.

Galfr. de Heriz, and Hugh de Stapleford, were brothers; Regist. de Novo loco.
p. 257.
but Galfr. held the Capital Mess. with the demesne of Stapleford, and Hugh
held that part which John de Stapleford, called le Ward, and his heirs held,
but they both joined and gave two Bovats, in alms to the Priory of Newstede:
And Richard the son and heir of the said Galfrid gave four. Nicolas son and
heir of Hugh gave two. Which Nicolas was father of John le Ward, whose son and
Her John married Elena, sister of Sir William Gray of Sandiacre: and both of
them died in the pestilence, in the year 1349. and left Robertus temp. Will. 1.
Gaufridus de Heriz Robertus de Heriz, s. p. Agnes, s. p.... de
Eccleston-Alicia. Galfr. de Eccleston dictus Heriz, and de Stapleford Richardus
de Heriz Hugo de Heriz-Joana. Richardus de Heriz aet. 15.25 E. 1.-Margeria, 11
E. 3.-Thom. de Ayvill de Egmanton. Rich. de Heriz-Eliz. fill. Joh. de Bughton.
Johannes Fermery-Idonea. Robertus del Furmery.




Hugo de Stapleford Nicolas Johannes le Ward Johan. ob. 1349.-Elena sor. dom.
Will. Gray. Nicholas de Stapleford.



Rich. Rob. Hugo. Heriz.
Mabilia, s. p. Rich. de Camera-Avicia de Stapleford....ux. Ph. Strelley, 2 John s. p.



Nicholas their son under age, whom the same Sir William had in custody.

The other Hugh, brother of Galfr. de Heriz, called also de Stapleford, I take
to have been the Clergyman, or at least Lawyer (for so Clericus did then also
import) who was under or deputy Sheriff, Rot. Pip.
for Reginald Gray, 51 H. 3. and afterward himself Sheriff in 54 H. 3. and in
55 H. 3. for Walter Gray Archbishop of York, as may be seen in the Pipe Rolls
of that time.

Richard de Stapleford, son of that Galfr. de Heriz, Esc. 32, and 33 H. 3. n.
19. and Esc. 51 H. 3. n. 49. Pl. de Banc. Mic. 2 E. 1. to. 92.
had a son and heir called Hugh de Heriz, omitted in the Book of Newstede, who
yet, 2 E. 1. claimed the Advowson of the Church of Stapleford, whereof his
Ancestor was seized in the time of King John, against the Prior of that place.
And afterward passed it by Fine levied at Not. the day after St. Martin, Fin.
lev. apud. Not. 8 E. 1.
8 E. 1. to John the Prior, and the Church of St. Mary at Newstead; as that
which Eustachius the Prior his Predecessor had of the gift of Avicia de Heriz,
Cousin of the said Hugh; and by the confirmation of Galfr. de Eccleston,
Grandfather of the said Hugh, whose heir he also was.

This Hugh de Heriz (of whom Galfr. de Stapleford, Esc. 25 E. 1. n. 32.
Knight, held thirty six Bovats in Stapleford and Thurmeton, and John, son of
John de Stapleford, twenty six Bov. etc. in this Town) left Richard de Heriz
his son and heir fifteen years old, 25 E. 1. Richard de Heriz left a son also
of his own name, his heir under age, whom the said Book of Newstede mentions to
be granted to Sir John de Mounteney, Knight, by the King, and that Sir John
sold his Wardship and marriage to one John de Bughton of Wellum, who married
him under age to his daughter Elizabeth, in the time of the Air, 3 E. 3.

Fin. apud ^bo^. Trin. 11 E. 3.
Richard de Heriz, and Elizabeth his wife, by a Fine levied at York the day
after St. John Baptist, 11 E. 3. passed two parts of this Manor, and the third
part which Margery, the wife of Thomas Dayvill of Egmanton had then in Dower,
after her decease, to Richard de Bughton, and his heirs, paying them 40l. per
annum, during their lives.

The Book of Newstede says, this Richard de Bughton was an Ecclesiastical
person, Reg. de Nev st. p. ^59.
and that the said Richard de Heriz gave this Manor to Richard, the brother of
his wife, who first died, and then his said wife, in the aforesaid Pestilence,
and that after their deaths he the said Richard de Heriz enfeoffed William de
Wakebrigge, and others, to give to the Priory of Newstede, to make and found
Chantries; but having a sister called Idonea, the wife of John del Furmery, who
had both sons and daughters, he was by her, and other friends, within three
days after persuaded to revoke that, and settle it on Robert del Furmery her
son, who was to have married Cecily, the sister of Elizabeth, before named, but
he did not; so dying without issue, it remained to the said Idonea, and her
heirs, who gave only two Bovats to Newstede.

Inq.
By an Inquisition taken at Not. the Saturday next after the Feast of St.
Michael, before Thomas Mapurley, and his fellow Commissioners, 7 H. 6. it
appears that the Knights Fee, which Richard de Heriz formerly held in
Stapleford, was then in five parts, whereof the Prior of Newstede had one,
Thomas Columbell one, Nicholas Stapleford one, Robert Matley another, and
William Johnson another.

Robert Matley had a daughter and heir called Margaret, the wife of John
Davenport, Esquire, whom the Jury, 32 H. 6. found to be but seventeen years of
age; and that Elena Vernon, mother of Richard Vernon, and sometimes wife of
Robert Matley, and after of William Heresse, had in Dower here the third part
of half the Water Mill, and two Mess. six Bovats, and the third part of 5s.
Rent, etc. This part I guess now to be my Cousin Hollingworths, who has the
Water Mill, and considerable Lands in this Town.

Columbells part is sold to Edward Manley.

The Lands which belonged to the Priory of Newstede, I suppose, most of them
were John Brodbents, to whom William Cambden Clarenceaux, Ex Lib. Reason
Mellish, Ar.
45 Eliz. 1601. granted for his Arms Party per pale, Ermine and Azure, a Fesse
Wavy, Gules, the Crest a Pheon; his daughter and heir Mary Broadbent was
married to Gervas Iackson, by whom she had George Iackson the Chief Constable,
the present owner.

In the year 1612. I find the owners to be John Brodbent, who had ten Oxgangs,
In Mss. pen. meips.
William Greyseley four Oxgangs, George Clarke four, Thomas Mere two, Peter
Columbell, Gent. four Oxgangs, Francis Hollingworth fourteen Oxgangs, and
Gervas Teverey, Gent. forty Oxgangs. He purchased the Lord Sheffeilds Lands in
this Town, whereof mention is made in Chillwell, and inherited a good share in
this Lordship, besides some at Thrumpton and Sandiacre, which was most
anciently the Staplefords, and descended to the Teveryes, formerly resident at
Long Eaton in the County of Derby, in which they had Lands in several other
places; but since the match with Staplefords heir, which the Genealogy inserted
(drawn out of Mr. Pigots Evidences, for the most part) manifests, they have
made this place their chief habitation, which the said Gervas Teverey, Esquire,
together with his Lands at Estwayt, Eyton, Sandiacre, Little Thrumpton (the
other Thrumpton he sold to Mr. Pigot) and diverse others in these parts, settled
on Teverey Palms his Grandson, second son of his eldest daughter Mary, the
wife of Sir Brian, son of Sir Guy Palms, Knight, but he died a Bachelor, and
his elder brother Francis succeeded, who married the Lady Mary Fane, daughter
of Mildmay Earl of Westmorland (since married to John Earl of Exeter) whom he
left without issue, so that this Estate descended to William Palms the next
brother, who having married Mary, a coheir of the Lord Evers his Estate, and
liking Yorkshire better, has disposed of this old House to Arthur Waren, son
of Arthur, named in Touton, with the Demesne, as he did before the Farms to
Mr.... Burrowes, the Soapboyler of Darby, who purchased them about a year
since, or more, as I have heard.

In the year of our Lord 1259. the Prior and Covent of Lenton, Regist. de Lent.
p. 47. b.
passed both their great and small Tithes which they had in the Parish of
Stapleford, by reason of the Demesne Lands which were William Pevrells in that
place, to the Prior and Covent of Newstede in Shirewood, Regist. de Dale, p.
86, 90.
Willielmus de Stapleford Regist. de Dale, p. 86, 90.
Robertus de Stapleford Regist. de Dale, p. 86, 90.
Richardus de Stapleford-Elizab. Regist. de Dale, p. 86, 90.
Galfridus de Stapleford, miles Richardus de Stapulford Rich. de Stapulford
haer. frat. 17 E. 2.-Agnes. Sampson de Stapleford s. p. 42 E. 3. Nichol. s. p.
Margareta-Johannes Teverey. Hugo Teverey de Stapilford-Agnes. Robertus Teverey
aetat. 26. 6 E. 4. Hugo Teverey ob. 8 H. 8.-Elizab. fill. Hugonis Willughby de
Risley, Ar. Robertus Teverey aetat. 21. 8 H. 8. ob. 1553.-Katherina fill.
Georgii Chaworth, Ar. ob. 1571. Johannes Teverey ob. 1603-Anna fill. and haer.
Johannis Crevequeur de Twiford. Gervasius Teverey ob. 1639.-Anna fill.....Ashby
de Quenby Com. Leicest. 1 Maria-Bryan Palms, miles. 2 Teverey Palms s. p. 1
Franc. Palms s. p.-Maria Fane fili Mildmaii Com. Westminster.-Joh. Com. Exeter
marit. 2. 3 Willielmus-Maria fill. and cohaer....Evers.
3 Raph Huband de Ipsley Com. Warw. Ar.-Anna. 2 Elizab. s. p. Johannes s. p.







Will. Paveley-Alicia. Galfr. haer. 10 E. 2. Thomas.


Regist. de Dale, p. 86, 90.
Adam. Regist. de Dale, p. 86, 90.
Elias.


Richardus Tevery Robertus Teverey Willielmus Teverey Hugo Teverey, 25 E. 1.
Willielmus Teverey 20 E. 2. Margareta-Johannes Teverey.





for five Marks per annum Rent: but if they of Newstede should lose or be
excluded from the possession of the Church of Stapleford, the bargain was to be
void. To which were Witnesses Sir Richard de Sutton, Canon of Southwell, John
his brother, Rector of Lexington, Mr. William Bishop, Rector of St. Nicolas
Church in Nottingham, and others.

Upon a Gravestone in the Chancell.

Hic jacet Dominus Johannes Abbot, capellanus istius Ecclesiae xlviii. annos;
qui obiit vii. die Novembr. Anno Dom. M.CCCCXXXVIII.

In a high Window in the Church, and twice on Surcotes,

Arg. on two Bars, Azure, three Cinquefoyls Or. And the same impaling Arg. a
Bendlet, Gules.

In a Window of the Chancel,

Gules, on a Bend Azure between two Wolves heads erased Arg. three Libards
heads Or.

A Bordure, Gobony of the second and third, underneath, Thomas Gunthorp Prior
of Newstede.

Three Lions passant gardant Arg. upon large Bars sable, divided with
Barrulets, Gules. The Chief is broken away, and intended for the Priory of
Newstede.

Arg. on a Bend sable, three Birds, or Choughs, Or.

In the North I Will Window of the Church, quartered,

1. Or on two Bars Gules, three Waterbouget's Arg. Willoughby.

2. Sable, a Lion Rampant amongst Cinquefoiles Arg. Clifton.

3. On the upper half Arg. on two Bars Azure, three Cinquefoils Or, and on the
lower half Arg. on a Bend Gules, three Hedge-hogs Or.

4. Willughby again impaling Gules, on a bend Arg. three Scallops sable.

In the South Wall of the Church at Stapleford,


Hic jacet Johannes Tevery, filius et hares Roberti Tevery, et Katherinae
Chaworth, Amicorum amator, pauperum amicus, Comis, affabilis, benevolus,
munificus, librorum studiosus, rem familiarem adaugens: Vxorem habuit Annam
Crevequer, filiam and haeredem Johannis Crevequer de Twyford: ex quatres liberi
die quo mortem obibat (aliis anteacto tempore defunctis) spiritum ducebant;
Gervasius, Anna, et Katherina; hac prole edita milessimo quingentessimo
octogessimoque anno advento, decimo septimo die Martii, e terris demigravit
uxor sospite salvoque viro; tum ille cum sexaginta sex annos aetatis
explevisset, milessimum, sexcentessimum tertiumque annum salutis attigisset,
marbo et morte non senio conficitur decimo quarto die Martii, vitae vinculis
dissolvitur.

In the South I Will a^ Stableford.


Upon John Tevereys Monument are his Arms, with Mantle, and Helm, and Crest,
viz.

Arg. on two Bars, Azure, three Cinquefoiles Or, quarterly, Arg. on a Bend
Gules, three Hedge-hogs Or, all which impale Or, Fretty sable, and on a chief
Gules a Lion passant, gardant of the first. The Crest is a Wolfes head erased
Arg. Muzled Azure.

Upon a very fair Tomb for Gerv. Tevery.

Siste Lege
Morae pretium erit scire, quis hic situs est,
Qui sibi virtutis incrementum,
Posteris ad familiae ornamentum,
Patriae ad boni publici emolumentum faeliciter natus est: qui tribunalis in
provincia sua moderator adeo prudens, ut apud summos juris oraculum: tantus
aequi and justiciae patronus fuit, ut apud infimos pauperum tutelare numen
audierit.

Qui in amicitiis fidem,
In sodalitiis humanitatem,
In moribus integritatem sanctissime coluit:
Liberalis semper hospes, idemque prudens pater familias:

G^rvasius Tevery, Armig. nobilissima Staplefordorum, Paschallorum, and
Creveceurorum proles and haeres: majoribus, ut in vita (qua postridie idus
Augusti, Anno Domini 1639. aetatis vero 65. pie defunctus est) ita and in morte
succedens, inter avorum umbras hic placide conquiescit. Cujus sacris manibus
and debitae memoriae, hoc tantis virtutibus impar monumentum, multas inter
Lachrymas posuit and dicavit Anna, vidua ejus moestissima:

Quae ex veteri prosapia Ashbyorum de Quenby in agro Leicestrensi oriunda, ei
peperit unicum filiolum and tres filias, Johannem in primo aetatis germine,
Elizabetham in ipso flore satis immature praereptam; Mariam Briano Palms,
Armig. enuptam, and Annam, utramque haeredem ejus and superstitem.

This Inscription, as I remember, was made by his ingenious Friend Huntington
Plumptre of Not. Doctor of Physic.

The Crest on this Tomb is as the former, but the Arms are Azure, a Lion
Rampant Arg. within a Bordure engrailed Or, for Teverey. Quartering Arg. on two
Bars Az. three Cinquefoiles Or, for Stapleford. Arg. on a Bend Gules, three
Hedge-hogs Or, for Paschall. And Arg. fretty sable, with a chief Gules charged
with a Lion of England, for Creveceur: all which impale Azure, a Chevron Ermine
between three Libards heads Or, Ashby of Quenby.

On a Gravestone,

Hic jacet Robertus Tevery, conjugio junctus Katherinae Chaworth, quae cum tres
liberos ei edidisset, Johannem, Georgium, and Dorotheam, circa festum
Pentecosti, Anno salutis 1553. a marito morte correpto deseritur, superstatque
eum usque ad annum salutis 1571. Quo tempore fa^is concessit terrasque
relinquit.

Trowell. Doomsd. Torwall.
THE principal Manor in this Town, before the Norman Invasion, was Verebrands,
who paid the Dane-geld for it as one Carucat and an half. The Land was then
found to be twelve Bovats. Afterward it became the Fee of William Ostiarius,
mentioned in Bramcote, who had here one Car. six Villains, with four Car. Here
was a Priest, and half a Church, and six Acres of Meadow. Lib. Dooms.
This was valued in the Confessors time at 100s. but in the Conquerours, when
Doomsday Book was made, at 20s. Here were, of the Land of the Taynes, three
Manors more, each of them answering the Tax for half a Carucat: one of them
was Vlchels, the Land whereof was four Bovats, and waste; after the Conquest
Alden had it, there was Meadow two Acres. This Manor had been 10s. but in the
time of the Survey, 14 W. 1. was but 5s. 4d. value. Another Manor Aluric had,
the Land whereof was also four Bovats, who still continued and held it of King
William the Conqueror, and had there three Vill. with two Car. and two Acres
of Meadow. This kept still the old value of 9s. The other Manor Vluric had. The
Land of which was half a Car. when the Conqueror made his Survey; Eruvin had
one Board. one Vill, with one Car. and two Acres of Meadow; in the Confessors
time this was valued at 10s. then at 5s. 4d. There lay one Bov. of Land Soc,
which was waste.

It seems that William Ostiarius his interest came to Mortimer, of whom held
Philip de Kyme, Test. de Nev.
and under him the family of Trowell, named in Stanford on Sore. Richard de
Trowell paid for a Knights fee here, in the former part of the reign of H. 3.
William son of Richard de Trowell gave to God, Regist. de Dale, 15, and 16.
and the Church of St. Mary in Stanley Park (called Dale Abbey) and the Canons
of the Order of the Praemonstratenses there serving God, all the lands, and the
rents of them which Richard his father held in Trouwelle; with the homages and
services of the Tenants, and with the woods of Estlound, and Broxhale; and with
the right of the Patronage of the moiety of the Church, which was known to
belong unto him. Richard de Trowell gave them 3s. rent, which he was wont to
receive of William de Stanley, for two Bovats which he held of him in Trowall;
And he likewise gave them toward their Pytance, the homage and service of
Hugh, son of Thomas de Corsale, Ib.
with the yearly rent of 7s. which he was wont to receive of him, for land
which he held of him in Corsale, which he bought of Stephen Grenehod. William
son of Raph de Trowelle gave them the homage, and whole service of Hugh Balok
of Trowell and his heirs, and the rent of 11s. yearly; which the said Hugh paid
for four Bovats of Land in Trowelle, for which Sir Robert de Esseburne gave him
seven Marks in a gross-summ, and by the consent of the Abbot and Covent the
11s. rent was atturned to the Sacrist, of Stanly Parc, to buy wine for
celebrating the Eucharist in that Church for ever.

Test. de Nev.
The other Manors of the Tayns William Pevrel got, and so they were escheated
to that Crown, and were held by the Nuns of Sempringham, the family of
Brunnesley, and the family of Strelley.

Reg. de Dale. p. 16.
Robert, son of Walter de Stretleg, for the health of his Soul, and of all his
Ancestors, and Successors, but especially for the Soul of William de Dyve, gave
to the said Monastery of Dale or Stanly Parc, three Bovats of Land, with the
appurtenances in Trowelle; one which Thomas Son of Galfr. le Ryver held in
villenage with him the said Thomas, and all his Cattle and his whole sequel,
and two more which Letice the widow of Robert son of Henry held in like manner,
with all her cattle and her whole sequel, from the time of making that writing
to be begotten: And likewise all the Meadow which Robert le Vavasor had of the
gift of Walter de Halum, in Kirk Halum Parc, for the sustentation of one Canon
daily celebrating Mass, in the said house of the Parc, for the Soul of the said
William de Dyva, in Sutton upon Sore; and for the souls of all the faithful
departed. Strelleys Manor descended to the family of Poutrell, by Margaret,
one of the daughters and coheirs of John Screlley, and in the year 1612. was
John Poutrells, Esquire.

There was a fine, 20 H. 3. between Robert de Brunnesley Quer. and William de
Stanley Imped. concerning two Bovats of Land in Trowell, with the
appurtenances, the right of the said Robert de Brunesley, paying yearly a pair
of white gloves, and doing a foreign service.

Robert Broun of Brunnesley, and Ioane his wife (who was daughter and heir of
John, Fin. in C^ast. purif. 8 H. 6.
son of Robert, son of Galfr. son of Roger, son of Gilbert de Brunnesley, who
held it in the time of H. 3.) levied a fine, 8 H. 6. of the Manor of Trowell,
one Mill, thirty acres of Land in Brunnesley, and Trowell, and the moiety of
the Advowson of the Church of Trowell, to John Cockfeild, Esquire; John Curson,
Esquire; Thomas Makworth, Esquire; John son of Henry Both, Esquire; and Robert
Oelage of Brunnesley. This Brounes posterity probably were called Brunnesleys,
after their mother, as has been very usual, for this Manor descended to
Francis Brunsley, as appears by^an office taken at Nottingham, 15 March, 39
Eliz. after his death, whose son Gervase Brunsley, B.
Esquire, sold it to John Hacker, Gentleman, with whose posterity it continues.

The rents of Assize of the Freeholders, viz. 14s. 11s. per annum. three Mess.
one Bovat, and Trowell Mill, with the waters and fishing belonging to it, etc.
formerly belonging to the Monastery of Dale, Part. 9. Pat. 10 Eliz.
amongst other things, 21 July, 10 Eliz. were granted to Percivall Bows and
John Moysier Gent. and the moiety or purpart of the Manor of Trowell, demised
before to William Cox, Part. 4. Part. 16. E^iz.
for 6l. per annum: together with the right of Patronage of the Rectory of
Trowell, sometimes belonging to the Priory of Sempringham, 9 July, 16 Eliz.
were grant-to Drugo Drurie, Esquire, and Richard Downing. These Monastery Lands
Sir Percivall Willoughby of Wollaton had. B.


Mss. I. M.
The Rectories of each moiety of Trowell were x. Marks a piece, when the Prior
of Sempringham, and Mr. Cockfeild (for Brunnesleys) were Patrons. They are now
4l. 14s. 6d. a piece in the Kings Books; and Sir Francis Willoughby, and
William Hacker, Gent. Patrons.

The Arms of Brunnesley, viz. Quarterly per quartered Chevron between three
Escallops Or, and Sable Counterchanged, are in the windows of the Church, and
East window in the Chancel, under which is Robertus Brinsley patronus istius
Ecclesiae.

In the South windows of the Church is paly of six Arg. and Az. Strelley.

There is a Monument lately made whereon is

Hic infra jacet sepultus Gulielmus Hacker, Generosus, unius in hac parochia
medietatis Patronus, vir omni literarum genere instructus, filius Ecclesiae
Anglicanae obedientissimus, necnon fervidus Christianae fidei professor, quam
fidem pari vitae sanctimonia, eleemosynis assiduis, in familiae precibus and
sedulo ad verbum dei attendendo egregie ostendit and ornavit, Trowelli dum
vixit Lumen and Columen, obdormivit in domino December. die 21. Anno salutis
1668. Aetatis suae 64. In cujus piam memoriam Johannes Hacker filius, quam
unicam prolem unica and delectissima ejus Conjux Anna Thomae Gilberti de Lockoe
in Agro Derbiensi Armig. filia natu maxima ibi peperit, monumentum hoc
effingendum curavit.

Lenton. Morton. And Kighton.
PArt of Lentune was Soc to Arnall of the Kings own land, which paid to the
Danegeld for four Bovats, and was wast in the Conquerours time, the rest was
William Pevrels, his natural son, part whereof was Soc to Newbold mentioned in
Kinalton, (if there be not a Neubolt lost here also) and paid the Dane-tax for
two Caruc. The land was certified before the Conquest to be two Car. Lib. Dooms.
There afterward were four Sochm. four Board. having two Car. and one Mill.
Here was also a Manor which Vulof had before the Conquest, and paid for it to
the Geld as four Bovats: The land was then returned to be half a Car. In the
Conquerours time is was likewise in the Custody of William Pevrell, and there
the same Vlvod had one Car. one Vill. one Board. having one Car. one Mill 10s.
ten acres of Meadow, ten acres of small wood: This in the Confessors time was
ten Shillings, in the Conquerours 15s. value. In Mortune before the Normans
changed the Landlords, Boni had a Manor which answered to the tax or geld for
one C^r. and an half: The land of it being then twelve Bovats. There afterward
William Pevrel had one Car.. five Sochm. on three Bovats of this land, twelve
Vill. one Board. having 9 Car.. This kept the old value 20s. This Town is now
lost in Lenton, and so is Kighton, saving one place which is still called Kigh*
Closes.

At this Lenton, so named probably from the River Len or Line, upon which it
stands, did William Peverel found a Monastery in Honor of the holy Trinity
for love of the worship of God, Reg de lent. p. 1. etc.
and the common remedy of the Souls of King William, and Queen Maud, and of
their children, and of their and his own Parents; and for the health of King
Henry, and Queen Maud his wife, of William their son, and Maud their daughter,
for the State of his Kingdom, and for the health of his own soul, and of
Adelina his wife, and his son William, and all his own Children, and gave it to
God and the Church of Clugny, and to Pontius the Abbot, and his Successors,
yet so that it should be free, paying a Mark of Silver yearly as an
acknowledgment. To this Monastery did he give the town of Lenton, with the
appurtenances, except four Mills, whereof he held two in his own demesne, and
his wife Adelina the third, and Herbert his Knight the fourth, the rest of the
Mills were the Monks, and properly 7: likewise Radeford, Morthon, Kichton, with
their appurt* and whatsoever he had in Newtorpe, and Papelwich, in wood, and
plain, and in other things: Likewise Blacowell in the Peak, with the
appurtenances: Likewise Corthahal, in (North) Hantesyre, with the wood, and all
appurtenances, except the fee of one Knight, and the land of Thurstin Mantell,
likewise two parts of the Tithes of his demesnes, of all things which could be
Tythed, viz. in Blideesword [Northantescir] with a Country fellow holding a
Virgat (or Yard-land) to gather up the tithes. In Doston likewise ( Northant.
in Neubot likewise in Tideswell, (Derb.) likewise in Bradewell, Badecowell,
Hoccalaw, Es^eford, Wrmmil, Moniax, and Hulme. Two parts of the tithes of his
demesne pastures in the Peake, namely, Sachalcros, Ferneley, Darnehal,
Quatford, Buchessanes, Sirebroch, Stafdon, Cudal, Cr^hil, Chaldelaw,
Dunningestede, Cheimarden, Staur^dal. The whole Tithe of Colts and Fillyes,
wherever he should have Harace in the Peake, or any other on his demesne
pastures. The whole Tithe of his Lead and of his Venison (or hunting) as well
in skins, as flesh, and the whole Tithe of the Fish, of his Fishing at
Nottingham. He likewise gave by the Concession of his Lord King Henry the
first, the Church of St. Mary, of the English Borough of Nottingham, with the
Land, and Tithes, and appurtenances; the Church of St. Peter, and the Church of
St. Nicolas likewise in* Nottingham; the Churches of Radeford, Lindebey, and
Langar in this County, with Land and Tithes, and other Appurtenances, and a
Villain holding a Virgat of Land. The Church of Foteston (in Leice^^ershire)
with a Virgat of Land. The Churches of Herleston, Corthohal, Irencester, and
Rissenden (in Northantescire) with a Virgat of Land, and a Villain holding it.
He likewise granted to this Monastery whatsoever his Men should bestow on it,
for the remedy of their Souls, viz. two parts of all the Tithes of their
Demesnes of whatsoever could be Tythed. The first of these was Avenellus
(Ancestor of the present Earl of Rutland) who granted it out of his Demesnes in
Haddon, and is Methedweploth, and Maniax; Safred in Empingham, and in Baseford,
and Robert, son of Pagan, in the same Town likewise. Robert de Heriz, in
Hesburne, and in Ossecropht; Godefrid and William in Ernesby; Norman de
Montfaltrel, in Asebech, and in Chillwelle, and in Horpol; Rogerius Brito, in
Walenthon, and in Kalahal; Gocelinus in Wathenoch; and Raph Malaherbe in
Aspeley; and Serlo Blund in Torp; and Erbert in Gonolveston; likewise Helgot in
Baresword; and in Cotis Robert de Paviliaco in Hocton; Walter Flammength in
Hauresham; Hugh, son of Richard, in Claindon; Norman de S. Patric in
Deresburch, and in Blacolwesley, and in Raalund; Gaufr. de Heriz in Stapelford;
Adelelmus in Langueley; and Robert, son of Warner, in Touethon; likewise Robert
de Moretuein, and his heirs, ten shillings (or ten shillings yearly Rent) for
ever. Of his gift and writing were Witnesses Gerard Archbishop of York, Robert
Bishop of Lincoln, Robert Earl of Medlent, Simon Earl of Nordhamton, Hugh
Sheriff of Leicestershire [Grentmesnill] Robert de Chauz, Hugo de Burun, Oddo
de Boneia, Avenellus de Haddona, and all the rest of his forenamed Men.

King Henry the first confirmed all, and granted to the Monastery a Fair of
eight days at the Feast of St. Martin: Reg. de Lenton, p. 2.
and commanded that no man should buy or sell in Notingham, during that time;
and that all coming to the Fair, and returning, should be free from (Law
process) or Plaints. He likewise granted them daily two Cart-loads of dead Wood
and Heath in Bescowod, and also Royal Liberties and Customs, viz. Sach, Soch,
Tol, Them, and Infangenthef, and quittance from Scyre and Hundredth, from
Wapentach and Treding (or Frankpledge) from Army and every Custom, and secular
exaction, except Murder and Dane-geld.

King Stephen being at Notingham, Ib. p. 14. b*
at the very earnest entreaty of William Peverell, the younger, together with
Oddona his wife, and Henry his son, confirmed what William Peverell his Father,
or William himself, or any other Benefactors had done to this Priory, of which,
besides those already named, Robert Earl of Medlent who gave the Churches of
Wiggeston and Withingston in Leicestershire; Hugo de Burun, who by the consent
of his sons, Hugh and Roger, gave the Church of Horseley in Darbishire, and
Cotegrave in this County, with a Virgat, or more Land there, with some in
Almton, given in exchange for the Church of Ossington, formerly given to this
Priory by the said Hugh de Burun, and after to the Knights Templars; and Odo de
Boney, who gave two parts of the Tithe of his Demesne, and the Churches of
Barton and Adinborow, were the chief.

The succeeding Kings were not wanting in their respective confirmations, but
added more, and augmented the privileges of this place, so that at the
dissolution it was valued at 329l. 15s. 10d. ob.

King Henry the eighth, Par. 21. pat. 36 H. 8.
Mar. 23. 36 H. 8. in consideration of the good, true, faithful, and acceptable
service of his beloved and faithful servant Francis Leek, Knight, to him before
those times many ways performed, granted him many Lands and Tithes in
Darbyshire, belonging to several Monasteries, and, amongst the rest, some Lands
and Tithes in Home, Duston, Whitwell, and Ledwor^ in the Peak, late belonging
to the Monastery of Lenton, and then in the Kings hands, by reason of the
Attainder of Nicholas Heathe, last Prior of that Monastery, lately Attaint, and
Convict of High Treason.

Ex Autog. (...). Ger. Gregory, Ar.
The Manor of Lenton, amongst other things, was by Letters Patents, bearing
date 9 Sept. 4 C. 1. granted in Fee Farm to Edward Dichfeild, Salter, John
Highlord, Skinner, Humfrey Clarke, Dyer, and Francis Moss, Scrivener, Citizens
of London; who by the appointment of diverse Aldermen and Commoners of the City
of London, constituted Commissioners, and Authorized by diverse Acts of the
Common Council, of Major, Aldermen, and Commoners of the said City, to sell and
dispose of the Manors, Lordships, Lands, and Tenements, to them by the said
King granted, did, by their Inden^ure* bearing date the sixth day of November,
in the sixth year of the said King Charles the first, for the sum of 2500l.
paid to Robert Bateman, then Chamberlain of London, sell to William Gregory of
Not. Gent, Ib.
and his heirs, the said Manor of Lenton, with the Fair, and all Royalties,
and Privileges, Rents and Services thereto belonging, reserving the Fee Farm
Rent of 94l. 5s. to the said King, his heirs and successors, who by his
Letters Patents, dated December. 16. in the thirteenth year of his Reign, amongst
other things, did grant the said Fee Farm Rent of 94s. 5s. per annum, to the
Right Noble James Stuart Duke of Richmond and Lenox, who by his Indenture,
bearing date Febr. 20. Anno Dom. 1650. for the sum of 1460l. sold the same to
John Gregory, son and heir of the said William, and to George Gregory his son
and heir, the present owner, who obtained the present King Charles the second
his Letters Patents, bearing date 9 November. in the fifteenth year of his Reign,
for another Fair to be kept at Lenton, every year, on the Wednesday next after
Pentecost, and six several days following: but the Demesne of the Abbey of
Lenton was granted to William Hicks, Esquire, (now Sir William Hicks) 20 Iun. 2
Iac. And Mr. William Nix, Alderman of Not. had Lands there, which are now Mr.
Thomas Charletons, who married his daughter Tabitha. There was only one square
Steeple left of the Monastery, which, not long since, fell down, and the Stones
of it were employed to make a Causey through the Town.

The Vicarage of Lenton was 12l. when the Prior was Patron. Lib. Mss. I. M.
It Is now 9l. 2s. 6d. in the Kings Books, and the King Patron.

Radford. Redeford.
IN Redeford, in the time of King Edward the Confessor, Alvric had a Manor
which paid the Dane-geld for three Car. The Land of it being then returned to
be three Carucats. There William Peverel (whose Fee it afterward became) in
Demesne had two Car. eleven Vill. four Board* having four Car. Lib. Dooms.
There were four Mills 3l. and thirty Acres of Meadow, and three Acres of small
Wood, and half a Piscary (or Fishing). This retained the old value 3l. Of this
same Land Vlvod held one Bovat in Tayn-Land.

This Town William Peverel gave to the Monastery which he Founded at Lenton (as
before is shown) with which it was ever mixed, and so continues.

Robert, son of Philip of Radeford, granted and confirmed to God, Reg. de Lent.
p. 13.
and the Church of the holy Trinity at Lenton, four Bovats of the Villanage of
Radeford, quit of all Service belonging to him, and twenty four Acres of his
Demesne, with the Appurtenances, which his Father gave and granted to that
Church, to which he also gave all the Land in Aldiswrd, which was of his Fee,
with a Meadow called Bradmedow.

Walter Archbishop of York, 12 Kalend. of March, in the eighth year of his
Pontificate, Ib.
being then at Lenton, admitted Mr. Raph the Clark, presented by the Prior and
Covent of Lenton, to be perpetual Vicar of the Church of Radeford, which
Vicarage he made to consist of the whole Altarage of that Church, and four
Bovats belonging to that said Altarage, with the Tithes coming of those four
Bovats, and likewise the Tithe of two Mills, and all that Toft which lies
between the Toft of that Church, and the Water which is called Lene; but the
Vicar was to sustain the burdens of the Bishop and Archdeacon, viz. Synodals
and Procurations, etc.

Thomas E^inham Prior of Lenton and that Covent, 9 H. 5. demised to Hugh
Willoughby, Reg. de Lent. p. 184.
Richard, Nicholas, and Thomas his sons, their Land which lay within the
Precinct of Radford, between the enclosure called Stokkinge on the South part,
and the Field of Broxtow on the North, and abutted on the enclosure of John de
Brokstow on the West, and on the East head, on the Highway which leads from
Brokestow to Radford, during all and any of their lives, paying 2s. per annum,
by equal portions at the Feasts of the Invention of the Cross, and St. Martin
in Winter: but every day the Rent should happen to be unpaid after the set
time, it was to be doubled, and the Priory was to have free passage over it
with Carriages all the time as the said Hugh and his sons had.

The Reversion of the Herbage and Paunage of Aspley Wood in Radford, Par. 6
pat. 6 Eliz.
parcel of the Manor of Lenton, demised to Edward Southworth, Gent. for twenty
one years was granted, 6 Eliz. to Richard Pype of London, Leather-seller, and
Francis Bowyer of London, Grocer, together with the Site of Wallingwells
Priory, and many other things, August the fifth.

Aspley-Wood Hall was the dwelling place of Thomas Blyth, named in Mapurley, in
the time of Queen Elizabeth.

Mss. I. M.
The Vicarage of Radford was 5l. when the Prior of Lenton was Patron. It Is now
3l. 9s. 4d. in the Kings Books, and his Majesty Patron.

Sutton Passeys.
OF the Taynland were two Manors in Suton, which before the Conquest Aluric
and Brun held, rated for them to the Dane-geld at twelve Bovats, and Vlsi then
Lord of Olaveston (now Wollaton) in which the Soc lay, Lib. Dooms.
had one Car. and an half for the Geld. The Land was three Car. There was also
in Sudtune Soc to Olaveston of the Fee of William Peverel, which paid the Tax
for twelve Bov. The Land three Car. but was waste in the time of King William
the Conqueror, as some other Lands of that Soc at that time were.

Regist. de Lent. p. 34.
Robert, son of Raph, and all his heirs, gave to God and the Church of the holy
Trinity at Lenton, two Bovats of Land [here] One of them was that which Erchin
held with a Toft, divided into three parts, the other was half a Bovat, which
Matthew held, but he filled it up and made a whole one of it out of his
Demesne. This Alms he offered before God and his Saints upon the Altar of the
holy Trinity at Lenton, for the health of the Soul of his most dear wife
Adelina, that her memory might be made every year: The Witnesses were Richard
Abbat of Lecester, Robert Avenell, Roger, son of Adelina, Peter de Sandiacre,
Iofrid Bochart, Gubert de Nottingham, Herbert, son of Gladwin, Raph, son of
Lewin, Hugh de Sutton, Helric de Sutton, Grunquetel, Anselinus de Radclive,
Everard de Lenton, and Gervase his son, and many others.

Robert de Passeys gave to God and the work of the Church of the holy Trinity
at Lenton, for the health of his Soul, and of Alice his wife, and William his
Father, and Edelina his former wife, fifteen Acres of his Demesne in Sutton:
William de Passeys, Ib.
son of Robert de Passeys, confirmed the fifteen Acres of the gift of his
Father, and gave four Acres himself.

In the year 1278. Robert, son of William Gyon of Bramcote, gave to the Prior
and Covent of Lenton 4s. yearly Rent, Ib.
which Hugh de Stapleford, Clerk, was bound to pay him for four Bovats in
Sutton, with Homage, Ward, Relief, and all the Appurtenances: to this were
Witnesses Sir Robert de Stratley, Sir Galfr. de Dethec, Sir Raph de Arnale,
Knights, John de Cortlingstok, Henry de Waten^ou, John Passeys, William
Torcard, and others.

William Mailard paid two Marks for a Knights Fee in Sutton, Test. de Nev.
in the former part of the Reign of Henry the third. But it appears in several
other places, Ib.
that the Family of Passeys held it by Serjeancy of finding a Horse and Sack in
the Army in Wales. In one place it is Recorded, that Robert Passeys held two
Carucats and an half; and that there were two Bovats here of the Soc of Arnale,
which used to pay 5s. and that Hugh de Nevill held them in his own hand.

Alice, daughter of Robert Passeys, had four Bovats of this Serjeancy in
Sutton, and paid the King a Mark per annum. Alan Passeys, son of Robert, had
one Bovat for 4s. the Prior of Lenton sixteen Acres for 3s. William Passeys
afterward came and warranted that Land to the Prior, and held the rest of the
Serjeancy, then valued at 100s. John Passeys of Sutton, 7 E. 2. left his son
John his heir twenty two years old; Esc. 7 E. 2. n. 3.
he held a Mess. and six Bovats of William Mortein at Wollaton, besides some
Land in Sutton.

In the Record of Nom. Vill. 9 E. 2. Sutton Passeys answered for a whole Villa,
Nom. Vill*
and John Passeys was then returned Lord of it.

The Jury, Esc. 19 E. 2. n. 47.
19 E. 2. found it not to the Kings loss if he granted license to John Watnowe,
to enfeoffe John le Colyer of Nottingham, in fourteen Acres in Sutton Passeys,
having 40s. Land and Rent in Notingham besides. In 16 E. 3. the Jury likewise
returned no loss to the King, Esc. 16 E. 3. n. 47.
if John de Colier of Not. gave a Mess. a Toft, and five Bovats of Land in
Sutton Passeys, to a certain Chaplain to celebrate in the Church of St. Mary at
Sutton Passeys; which Manor was then become the possession of Richard de
Willoughby, Lord also of Wollaton, with which Family it continued, and is now,
and long has been totally decayed, and only known by the name of Wollaton
Park, and other the Demesnes of that Manor; howbeit the Parishioners of
Radford say it is in that Parish, and within their Perambulation.

Wollaton. Olaveston.
IN Olaveston (through corruption of speech now called Wollaton) there was of
William Peverells Fee a Manor which before the Conquest Vlsi had, who paid for
it to the Dane-geld after the rate of a Carucat and an half. The Land was then
for twelve Oxen, or twelve Bovats. There afterward Warner the Man of William
Peverell had one Car. seven Sochm. four Vill. having four Car. small Wood, one
leuc. long, Lib. Dooms.
one qu. broad. In King Edward the Confessors time this was valued at 100s.
but when the great Survey was made, toward the latter end of the Conquerours
Reign, but at 60s. The Soc extended into Cotteshale, Bruncote and Sudtune.

The Family of Mortein were the next successors to Warner in this place, of
which Robert de Mortein lived in King Henry the firsts time, at the Foundation
of Lenton Priory; Pip. 22 H. 2. Regist. de Lent. p. 43.
and Adam de Moretonio, 22 H. 2. gave account of xxx. Marks of the Amercements
of the Forest. Eustachius de Moretoin gave Henry, son of William Hamelyn of
Wollaton, his Villain, with all his sequel and Cattle, to the Priory of Lenton.
Eustace, Reg. Lent. 39.
Robertus de Moretein Reg. Lent. 39.
Adam de Moretein Reg. Lent. 39.
Eustachius de Moretein, pip. 9 R. 1.7 Joh. Eustachius de Moretein Vide Grove.
Willielmus de Mortayn- Rogerus Rogerus de Mortein-Isabella una haered. and
neptis M. Will. de Luda Episcop. Eliens. Willielmus de Mortein. Isabella ux.
1.-Richardus de Willughby, mil. Justic. de Banco-Jo^na, 11 E. 3.-Elizab*
Ricard. de Willubi, mil. s. p.-.. soror Joh. dom. Gray. Hugo Cleric. ob. 1
Sept. 7 H. 4.-Joana de Riseley. Hugo de Willubi ob. 10 Sept. 3 H. 5.-Joana fill.
Joh. Dabridge-court. mil. Hug^ Willoughby de Riseley ob. 12 Sept.
1491.-Isabella fill. Gerv. Clifton ob. 3 May 1462. Johan. ob. infra aet. 1 H. 6.
Felicia-Joh. Armstrong.
Thom. s. p. Alicia monialis. Rog. s. p. Sibylla ux. Bertram. Momboucher.
Bertram. Momboucher. Bertram. consangu. and haer. Hug. Willughby, Cler. 7 H. 4.

Marger. ux. Joh. Malory. Robertus Malory. Williel. Malory cons. and haer. Hug.
7 H. 4.






Reg. Lent. 39.
Adam.


Radulphus Bugge de Notingham Richardus Bugge de Wiluby Ric. de Willughby, mil.
ob. 18 E. 2. Isabella ux. 1.-Richardus de Willughby, mil. Justic. de
Banco-Jo^na, 11 E. 3.-Elizab* Edmundus de Willughby, mil.-.. fill. Rich* Pole de
Suff. mil. Edmund. de Willoughby.-Isabella fill. Hug. de Annesley, mil. Isab.
fill-.... Fol. jambe, ux. 1.-Hugo de Willughby, mil.-Margareta fill. and coh.
Baldwin Freville, postea ux. Richard. de Bingham Justic. Richardus Willughby s.
p.-Anna fill. and cohaer. Sim. Leek. Nichol. s. p. Tho. s. p. Robertus
Willughby.-Margar. fill. Johannis Griffith, mil. Henricus Willoughby miles and
Bannerettus ob. 1528.-Margareta fill. Rob. Markham, mil.-Elizab. fill. Tho. Abon
vel Burgh, relicta Dom. Fitzhugh.-Elena fill. and haer. Johannis Egerton de
Wrenhall Com. Cestr. ux. 3.-A... fill.... Wells vel Walters, ux. 4. Johannes
Willughby mil. s. p.-Anna fill. Ed. Gray Vic. Lisle. Edward. mil.-An. fill* and
haer. Will. Filioll. Henricus Willoughby, Ar. occisus 27 Aug. 4 E. 6.-Anna fill.
Tho. Gray Marchionis Dorset. Tho. Willughby aet. 8. an. ad mortem patris, ob.
celebs. Franc. Willoughby, mil. aedificavit Wollaton.-Elizab. fill. Johan.
Littleton, mil.-Doroth. fill. Tho. Coleby relict. Jo. Tamworth, ux. 2.-Philippus
Dom. Wharton mar. 3. Brigitta-Percivale Willoughby, mil. de Com. Cantii. Fra.
Willoughby mil. ob. 1665. Franc. Willoughby Ar. ob. 1672.-...fill.... Bernard.
Franciscus.

Edw.-Elizab. fill. Joh. Atkinson de Nottingham. Georgius Willoughby de
Cossale.-Elizab. fill. Roberti Mellish de Ragnall. Franciscus. Robertus. Elizab.
Franciscus. Edw.
Percivall. Rob. Tho.
Doroth. ux. Henrici Hastings Margar. Rob. le Spenser, mil. post. Bar.
Winifr.-Edwardus Willoughby. Abig.-Will. Pargiter Com. Northant.
Fran.-Mountague Wood de Lamley. Henric. Wood. Maria ux. Wilsey Wright. Abigail
Dom. Darcy. Joh. Fr. ux. Rob. Callis and Petri Fulwood, Cler. Edw. Eliz.



Hugo Willughby mil. Nauta celebr.-Joana fill. Will. vel Nic. Strelley, mil.







Rad. pater Ric. de Bingham, and Galfr.

son and heir of Eustachius de Mortein, Rot. Pip. 7 H. 3. and Fin. 7 H. 3. m. 7.
had seisin, etc. 7 H. 3. I suppose that William de Mortein, who was several
years High Sheriff of the Counties of Warewick and Leicester, and married
Ioane, eldest daughter of Sir Philip Marmion, but had no issue, was son of
Eustachius, son and heir of Eustachius de Mortein, son of Adam, son of Robert,
before named; which William died seized of the Manors of Wollaton and Cossale
on St. Leonards day, 12 E. 1. Roger, Esc. 12 E. 1. n. 26. C^. 12 E. 1. m. 52.
son of Roger de Mortein, being then found his next heir; which Roger had a
Charter of Free Warren the same year for Wollaton and Cossale in this County,
Eyum and Riselle in Darbyshire, and Walesalle in Staffordshire; Rot. P^p. 14 E.
1. Warw. and Leic. Esc. 7 E. 2. n. 130.
it seems he was Nephew and heir of his Uncle the said William Mortayne.

The Jury, 7 E. 2. returned it no damage to the King, etc. if Roger de Morteyn
granted and assigned fourscore Acres of Wood in Wollaton, and the Advowsons of
the Churches of Wollaton and Cossale to Richard Willoughby, and his heirs.

William, son of Sir Roger de Mortein, 11 E. 2. granted to Richard de
Willoughby, Ex Autog. in Coll. G. B.
Knight, the whole Manor of Wollaton, except the Capital Mess. etc.

This Sir Rochard de Willughby was son of Richard de Willoughby, son of Raph
Bugge of Nottingham, the original Ancestor of diverse good Families, as in
Willoughby on the Woldes may be observed, and in some other places of this
Book. That branch of Bingham bore for their Arms three Waterbougets upon a
Fesse, being, it seems, from the eldest son: this of Willoughby divided the
Fesse into two Bars, with two Budgets on the uppermost, and one upon the lower;
as the Seal of Sir Richard Willoughby, Autog. pen. Will. Clifton.
appendant to his Deed, bearing date 17 E. 3. whereby he passed the Advowson of
the Church of Stanton on the Would to Sir Gervas de Clifton, yet remaining at
Clifton manifests.

This first Sir Richard de Willuby did increase his Patrimony very well in
diverse places, Ex Evid. Fr. Willougby, Ar.
and added to it much Land, which he purchased of the Morteins, both in this
place and elsewhere; he died 18 E. 2. seized of the Manors of Wollaton and
Willughby, Rot. Escaet. 18 E. 2. to. 7. in dorso. and Esc. 18 E. 2. n. 81.
and the third part of Riseley, and Lands in Ingleby and Aylwaston in
Derbyshire, which the Kings Eschaetor took into his hands the seventh of April
after, and delivered them the seventeenth of May following to Richard de
Willuby his son and heir, who was then found to be above thirty years old.

This second Sir Richard, was the very great advancer of his Family, Orig. Iur.
45. and Claus. 7 E. 3. p. 1. m. 2.
being a Judge from the 3 E. 3. to the 31 E. 3. and sometimes Chief Justice,
when Galfr. le Scrop the Chief Justice was gone on the Kings business beyond
the Seas. He married ( Glover, Regist. de Novoloco, p. 264.
Isabell) the daughter of Roger de Mortein, and had the Town of Cossale of his
gift, which he gave to Sir Richard his son, who married the sister of Sir John
de Gray, but died without issue, as did also Roger another son, so that the
entail he had made of Riseley, Isc. 7 H. 4. n. 44.
and other Lands, 11 E. 3. brought the Inheritance to Hugh Willoughby, Clark,
his next son, who died the 14 Sept. 7 H. 4. and the Jury found Bertram
Monboucher, son of Bertram, son of Isabella his sister, and William Malory, son
of Robert, son of Marjory his other sister his heirs, as John Malory, son of
Robert, son of this William did afterward claim.

But this Hugh the Clergyman had a wife (or Concubine) called Ioane de
Riseley, Glover, Ex Coll. S. Lo Kniveton.
by whom he had a daughter named Felice, married to John Armstrong of Thorpe,
and a son called Hugh Willoughby, who married Joan, daughter of Sir John
Dabrigecourt, Knight, by whom he had a son Hugh Willoughby of Risley, who
married Isabell, daughter of Sir Gervase Clifton, and bore the Arms of his
mother, viz. Ermine, three Bars Humett, as appears by his Gravestone in Wilne
Church, upon which those Arms of Dabrigecourt impale with Cliftons. From these
are descended the Willoughbies of Risley.

But the more considerable part of that great Estate descended to Sir Edmund
Willoughby, son of Sir Richard the Judge by another wife, who at the death of
his brother Hugh, 7 H. 4. was above sixty years old, and had livery, Fin. 7 H.
4. m. 6.
18 September. that year of this Manor and Bradmere, three Mess. and seven
Bovats in Carleton, etc. his wife was the daughter of Sir Richard Pole of
Suffolk, by whom he had a son of his own name Edmund, who took to wife Isabell,
the daughter of Sir Hugh Annesley, Knight, and by her had Sir Hugh Willughby,
whose first wife was Isabell, daughter of.... Folejambe, who brought him
Richard Willughby, who married Anne, one of the ^our daughters and coheirs of
Simon Leek of Cotham, Esquire, but he died without issue, 12 E. 4. as his
younger brothers Nicolas and Thomas it seems did before. His Father the said
Sir Hugh to his second wife had Margaret, Fin. 7 H. 5. m. 1.
sister and coheir of Sir Baldwin Frevile, son and heir of Sir Baldwin
Frevile, Knight, afterward married to Sir Richard Bingham the Judge, who
brought him many Children. His eldest was Robert Willoughby, Esquire, heir to
his half brother Richard, before named; he married Margaret, daughter of Sir
John Griffith of Wichnor in the County of Stafford, Knight, by whom he had Sir
Henry Willoughby, Knight and Banneret, who had four Wives, the first was
Margaret, daughter of Sir Robert Markham, by whom he had Sir John Willughby;
who married Anne, daughter of Edward Gray Viscount Lisle, but died without
issue, and Sir Edward, and others. His second wife was Elizabeth, daughter of
Thomas Abon (or Burgh) the relict of Richard Lord Fitzhugh. His third was
Ellen, daughter and heir of John Egerton, Esquire, of Wren-Hall in Cheshire, by
whom he had Sir Hugh Willoughby the famous Navigator, who was frozen to death
in the North Seas, whose wife was Jane, the daughter of (Sir Nicholas)
Strelley, by whom he had a son called Henry after his Grandfather, whose fourth
wife was A... daughter of Wells (or Walters.) He died the seventh of May, and
was buried in the Church of St. Leonard at Wollaton, in the 20 H. 8. Sir Edward
his son, named before, married Anne, daughter and heir of Sir William Filioll
of Woodlant, afterward I think married to George Medeley, Esquire; she brought
Henry Willoughby, Esquire, who married Anne, the daughter of Thomas Marquess
Dorsett, and was slain in the Commotion WOLLATON HALL.
at Norwich, 27 August, 4 E. 6. the year after the death of his Uncle Sir John
Willoughby, before named, leaving his son Thomas Willoughby his heir then 8
years old, nine weeks and one day, who died 16 August, 1 Eliz. and left his
Fortune to his brother Francis, second son of this Henry, who by his Will gave
the Inn called the Castle in Holborne to George Willoughby alias Fox,
Populwell, 45.
his Bastard brother, and to the heirs of his body; remainder to this Francis,
who came of age 10 Eliz. and was the Builder of that Stately Pile, the House at
Wollaton, the Stone whereof was all brought from Ancaster in Lincolneshire by
the people of those parts, who then fetched Coals from Wollaton, which they had
for their labor, which still remains a conspicuous Monument of the greatness
of the Family and Estate, the most considerable part whereof this last Sir
Francis Willoughby, having no son, settled on Brigitt his eldest daughter, the
wife of Sir Percivall Willoughby descended from another Judge, of the House of
Eresby in Lincolneshire, but resident in Kent, who had Sir Francis Willoughby,
Father of Francis Willoughby, Esquire, who died owner of it in the year 1672.
having two sons by.... his wife, the daughter of Henry Barnard, Esquire: but
besides his said daughter Bridget, whose posterity still enjoy this Manor, Sir
Francis by Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John Littleton of Frankeley, his wife,
had Dorothy, wife of Henry Hastings, second son of George Earl of Huntington,
and Father of Sir George Hastings. His third daughter was Margaret, wife of
Robert le Spenser. His fourth Winifrid married to Edward Willoughby, son of
Percivall Willoughby of Booreplace in Kent. Another was Abigail, married to
William Pargiter of Northamptonshire. Another was Frances, wife of Mountague
Wood of Lamley. Sir Francis Willughby had another wife, Dorothy, daughter of
Thomas Coleby of Grayes Inn, the relict of John Tamworth, and afterward was
Lady Wharton, who made her advantage of the declining time of her husband
Willoughby, and his great Estate, if we may believe report.

Sir Galfr. Bakepuz, Regist. de Lent. p. 137.
and his wife the Lady Amicia, demised, during their lives, the Mill called
Ingram, Situate on the Leene, between Lenton and Wollaton, by the way-side
which leads from Not. to Derby, to the Prior and Covent of Lenton for 20s. per
annum, and the Multure of their House and Family of Wollaton, and the Town of
Wollaton was to grind there for the twentieth grain; which Suit Hugh de
Weloghby Lord of Wollaton also granted for his life to Sir Galfr. the Prior,
and the Covent of Lenton, Ib. p. 184.
8 H 4. to their said Mill, upon the same terms; and Thomas Elinham the Prior,
and the said Covent, 1 H. 6. demised the said Mill, with the said Suit, to John
Botre for ten years for 3l. per an.

The Jury, Esc. 25 E. 3. n. 48.
25 E. 3. found it not to the Kings loss if he granted to Sir Richard de
Willughby the elder, license to give a Mess. and two Bovats of Land in Wollaton
to two Chaplains in the Parish Church of Wollaton.

The Chantry House of St. Anthony, in Willerton, was granted, 24 July, Par. 7.
pat. 3 E. 6.
3 E. 6. to William Nevell, Esquire, amongst many other things.

The Rectory of Wollaton was 12l. Mss. I. M.
It Is now 14l. 2s. 6d. in the Kings Books, and the Patronage continues to the
Willoughbies.

On the South Wall in the Chancell at Wollaton


In the Chancell on a flat Marble, whereon is cut in Brass, the Effigies of a
Man in Armor and a Woman.

In the North Wall of the Chancell at Wollaton


Hic jacet Ricardus Willoughby, Armiger, qui obiit VII. die Octobris, Anno
Domini nostri JHV CHRISTI M.CCCC.LXXI. and Anna uxor ejus quae obiit XXIII. die
mensis Julij, Anno ejusdem Domini M.CCCC.LXVII. Cujus animae propitietur Deus,
Amen.

On it are the Arms of Willoughby and Leek, single, and the same impaled also.

In the Church on a Tomb the Statue of one lying, with two Wives on each side.

In an Arch between the South I Will and the Chancell at Wollaton.


Hic jacet Henricus Willoughby, miles, pro corpore Regis and Baronettus
(mistaken for Bannerettus) and quondam Dominus de Wollaton, qui obiit XX. die
mensis Maii, Anno Domini M.CCCCC.XXVIII. Cujus animae propitietur Deus.

At the East end of the North I Will on a Monument in the Wall.

At the East end of the North I Will at Wollaton,


Henricus Willoughby, Armiger, and Anna uxor ejus, Henrici Gray Ducis
S^ffolciae soror, hic foeliciter in Domino obdormiunt. Ille obiit in Bello
contra Rebels in Norfolcia 1548. Illa occubuit Anno salutis nostrae 1546.
Tres liberos susceperunt Thomam; qui obiit sine prole superstite, Franciscum
Willoughby Equitem Auratum, and Margaretam nuptam Matheo Arundell, militi.
Optimis parentibus Franciscus filius m^rosus, and amoris ergo hoc Monumentum
posuit.

On it are many Quarterings.

On another Monument on the North Wall.

At the vper end of the North I Will in the North Wall, (...) at Wollaton.


Hic jacet Henricus Willoughbeus, Armiger, filius quartus Percivalli
Willoughbei, militis, and Dominae Brigittae uxoris ejus, Iurisconsultus and
unus Assessorum e Templo interiore Londinensi instructissimus, studiis
devotissimus nec non edocumentis Religionis and integritatis; qui obiit decimo
octavo Septembris, Anno aetatis suae quadragesimo octavo, Annoque Domini
Millesimo quingentesimo quadragesimo primo.

The Arms on it, Azure fretty Or, Willoughby of Eresby, impaling Or on two
Bars, Gules, three Waterbougetts Arg. Willoughby of Wollaton.

On an Alabaster Tomb under an Arch in the middle of the Church,

Hic jacet Nobilis Domina Domina Matildis, quondam uxor Domini Johannis
Dabrishecourte, militis, quae obiit xxi. die mensis Maii, Anno Domini M.CCCC.
quinto. Cujus animae propitietur Deus, Amen.

The Arms on it are,

1. A Saltire engrailed, impaling a Fesse, and five Billetts in Chief, (if it
should not be a File of five Labells.)

2. Erm. a Chevron.

3. Erm. three Bars Humette, Dabrichcourt. And 4. on two Bars, three
Waterbougets, Willoughby.

In the Chancel on a flat Marble in Brass,

Hic jacet Robertus Willoughby, Armiger, Dominus de Wollaton, filius and haeres
Hugonis Willoughby, militis, and Dominae Margaretae uxoris ejus...........filia
Johannis Griffyth, quae obiit die.... mensis..... M.CCCC...... norumanimabus
propitietur Deus.

On this are many quarterings.

Cossale. Doomsd. Cotteshale.
THis Cotteshale was a Beru of Olaveston, which was assessed or rated at six
Bovats to the Geld or Tax. The Land was for six Oxen (or six Bovats.) There was
in Demesne one Car. two Vill. and one Acre of Meadow, a pasture Wood one qu.
long, and two broad, Soc. This was William Peverells Fee; but here was another
part of this Township, in the Conquerours time, of Raph Fitz-Huberts Fee, which
before was the Freehold of Leuenot Lord of Annesley, who answered to the Tax
here for six Bovats, and the Land was then sufficient for so many Oxen, Lib.
Dooms.
i. e. six Bovats. There was at the time of making the great Survey three Car.
or Plows, with three Villains (or Husbandmen) and five Acres of Meadow: formerly
this had been valued at 16s. but then was 10s.

The first part was with Wollaston, the possession of the Family of Mortein;
the latter seems to have been enjoyed chiefly by a Family who had their Surname
from the place, of which was Sir William de Cossale, Cler* Baron of the
Exchequer, who was a great Benefactor to Newstede Priory, Orig. Iuridic. Chr^^*
series 41. Lib. 4 E. 3. m. 3.
and did by Fine at York; Trin. and Mich. 8 E. 3. se^tle upon it twelve Mess.
one Mill, eight Bovats, and sixty Acres of Land, twenty of Meadow, eghty of
waste, and 20s. yearly Rent, with the Appurtenances in Cossale, Notingham, and
B^ll^ell, to find three Chaplains, two in the Church of St. Katherin of
Cossale, and the third in the said Priory of Newstede, to celebrate Divine
Service for the Souls of the said William, his Ancestors, and Successors.

Reginald, son of Idonia de Cotsale, gave to the Priory of Thurgarton all his
Lands in Cotsale, viz. half a Bovat, Regist. de Thurg. p. 67.
and a quarter of a Bovat, with two Tofts, one at the end of the Town toward
the East, and the other next the Toft of Roger the Gerefe [praepositi,] the
said Priory paying to Sir Reginald de Annesley and his heirs 10s. per annum.

Adam de Cossale held in the Town of Cossale, one Mess. five Cottages, one
Water-Mill, two Carucats of Arable Land, twenty three Acres of Meadow, Regist.
de Novo loco, p. 262.
ten Acres of Pasture 20s. Rent, which were settled, 7 E. 2. by Fine on
William, son of the said Adam de Cossale, and Johan his wife, and the heirs of
their two bodies; remainder to the right heirs of the said William: Robert was
their eldest son, who married Katherin, the daughter of John Bozon, of whom
there was no issue; John their younger son married the daughter of William
Michell, and had issue. Of William, son of Adam de Cossale, and Johan his wife,
Sir William de Cossale, before named, obtained the Land and Soil where the two
Granges (or Barns) below the Manor of Cossale, belonging to the Priory of
Newstede, were built, in exchange for one Land or Selion in Cossale between the
Thorpes; he purchased likewise of their Fee Lands in Cossale and Broksale, for
the Services whereof the said Robert and John their sons made a Release,
reserving only 3s. 10d. Rent yearly; which Rent, together with all his Lands
and Tenements in Cossale, Robert (de Cossale) son of the said John sold to Sir
Richard de Willoughby the elder, who settled the Town of Cossale (a great part
whereof he had by the daughter of Sir Roger de Mortein) on Sir Richard de
Willoughby the younger, as in Wollaston is said.

This Sir William de Cossale, the Baron, purchased some Lands of Sir Roger
Mortein, and some of other Freeholders, all which he gave to Newstede, as
already is shown.

The Jury found, 23 E 3. that Warin, son of Thomas le Latimer of Braybrooke,
Esc. 23 E. 3. part. 2. n. 43.
and Katherin his wife, then alive, were jointly enfeoffed, and held the Manor
of Cossale of William Zouch Archbishop of York, by the Service of six pence
a year, and that John, son of the said Warin, was his next heir.

The Jury, 7 H. 6. found that William Skevington, Esquire, held the Manor of
Cosshale of King Henry the fifth, Esc. 7 H. 6. n. 12.
by the Service of the fourth part of a Knights Fee of the Honor of Peverell,
and that Humfrey Skevington his son and heir was one and twenty years of age
the first of June, then past. The Jury, 13 H. 6. found that Humfrey Skevington
held this Manor of Cossale by the Service of the twentieth part of a Knights
Fee, the day that he died; Esc. 13 H. 6. n. 14.
and that Hugh Skevington was his brother and heir; it was 23 May, 11 H. 6. in
the Kings hands, because Hugh was under age, and Humfrey dead. Fin. 11 H. 6. m.
9.


In a Recovery, 15 H. 7. Sir Henry Willoughby, Knight, claimed against John
Marmion, Rob. Laurense, Clark, and Rob. Skevington, Mich. 15 H. 7. to. 513.
the Manor of Cossale.

Pasch. 22 H. 7. rot. 421.
Thomas Thurland, John Marmion, and others, 22 H. 7. claimed against Elizabeth
Willughby four Mess. one hundred Acres of Land, sixty of Meadow eighty of
Pasture, four of Wood, forty of Heath, and 20s. Rent in Cossale: she called to
warrant Hugh Willughby, and so did Thomas Willughby, Ib. rot. 503.
and Isabell his wife, against whom the same persons claimed three Mess. thirty
Acres of Land, twenty of Meadow, thirty of Pasture, one Water-Mill, and 13s.
Rent in Lenton and Cossale.

Part. 9. pat. 10 Eliz.
The Manor of Cossal alias Cossal Marsh, late belonging to the Monastery of
Newstede, and in the occupation of Francis Willughby, 21 July, 10 Eliz. was
granted to Percivall Bows, and John Moysier, Gentlemen. The Monastery of Dale
had a Wood of fifteen Acres in Shortwood in the Parish of Cossale, Part. 12.
pat. 14 Eliz.
9 July, 14 Eliz. granted to Sir Christopher Hatton.

The Priory of Felley had a portion of Tithes in Cossale, Part. 10. pat. 2 Iac.
which King James, 2 March, 2 Iac. granted to Sir John Ramsey, Knight, and
Thomas Emerson.

This place remains to the Willughbyes, and George Willughby, Nephew of the
last Sir Francis, has a Seat there.

Strelley. Stradleg. And Straley.
IN Straley were three Manors, two whereof were of William Peverells Fee, but
the third was of the Land of the Taynes, and had been Vlchels, who paid for it
to the Geld as three Bovats. The Land of it being so much. In the Conquerours
time Vlsi and Godwin held it of the King, and had there four Vill. one Board. In
the Confessors time this was 4s. value, then but 3s. One of the other Manors
before the Normans came was Godrics, Lib. Dooms.
and paid to the Dane-tax as six Bovats. The Land of it being for six Oxen.
Afterward, in King Williams time, Godwin the Priest had one Car. three Vill.
two Board. having two Car. this kept the old value 10s. The other Manor was
Bruns before the Conquest, which was then rated to the Geld at three Bovats.
This Ambrose held of William Peverell, being valued at 12d. though in King
Edward the Confessors time it was 3s.

The next owner that I have met with any certain knowledge of, was Walter de
Stradlegh, who married Isilia the widow of William de Moiz, in or near the time
of King Henry the first (as in Chillewell is said) by whom he had a son called
Samson de Stradleg, Rot. Pip. 22 H. 2.
who, 22 H. 2. gave account for ten Marks of his amercements in the Forest. In
King Richard the firsts time this Samson suffered much, as most of our
Nottinghamshire Gentry did, for being in Rebellion with Earl John. William
Briewer the Sheriff, 6 R. 1. accounting for half a year, Pip. 6 R. 1.
reckons for 46s. 3d. of the Land of Samson de Stradley, then seized by the
King, as other of his Enemies Lands and Goods at that time were. This Samson
gave account, Pip. 7 R. 1. Pip. 10 R. 1.
7 R. 1. of four Marks for having his Land again; but it seems, 10 R. 1. that
it cost him thirty Marks to have seisin of his Fathers Land, because he was
with Earl John, who, (as it appears) esteemed him well when he was King. In
the fifth year of his Reign he sent his Precept, Rot. terr. and denar. liberat.
in Aug. 5 Ioh. m. 6. n. 46.
dated at Tikehull the nineteenth of February, to William Briewerr to deliver
to this Samson de Stratleg the Manor of Horseley in Darbyshire for his
sustentation, while he had the Castle of Horestan (the Seat of the Burons not
very long before.)

His son Walter de Stradleg, Pip. 9 Ioh.
9 Ioh. was reckoned to owe a Falcon for having seisin of the Land which was
his Fathers at the time of his death. Regist. de Wellebeck, p. 165.
This Walter and Hugo de Capella married the heirs of Robert de Sumervill of
Oxton: Philip (brother I suppose of Walter) de Strelley, had the custody of the
heir of this Walter from Galfr. de Mandeville, to whom King John gave it.
Cecilia, wife of Walter, had the third part for Dower: his Land out of which
she had it, was then valued at 100s. per annum. Philip de Stradleg seems to
have had some good interest in Geoffrey Fitz-Peter Earl of Essex, because, 7
Ioh. he was his pledge for the Fine, Fin. 7 Ioh. par. 2. m. 9. Leic^st.
viz. 10 Marks, one Palfrey, and one Falcon, which the said Philip gave the
King for having the post-humous daughter of Richard Fitz-Roger to wife, with
her Land belonging to her; besides I perceive that G. Fitz-Peter made the Fine
of twenty Marks, and one good Palfrey, for having the custody of the Land and
heir of Walter de Stradlye, which, Com. de Term. pasch. 4 H. 3. to. 3. m. 2.
in 4 H. 3. Hugh Fitz-Roger the Seneschal or Steward of Philip de Stradly was
then making up the arrears of.

The 20 July, 13 H. 3. Robert, Claus. 13 H. 3. m. 7. Assis. cor. Rege, 50 H. 3.
to. 18.
son of Walter de Stradley, did homage and had seisin of his Lands. Robert de
Strelley was taken at Kenilworth, as the Kings enemy; and the King, 50 H. 3.
granted his heir to William de Mortein. A Fine was levied, 9 E. 1. between
Alexander de Hotham, Quer. and Robert, son of Walter de Stradley, and Hawisia
his wife, Deforc. of the Manor of Esk, which seems to be then settled on the
heirs of Hawisia. Esc. 12 E. 1. n. 10.
This Robert died about 12 E. 1. leaving then his son and heir Robert above
thirty years old, who married Elizabeth, the daughter and heir of William
Vavasour of Shipley in Darbishire, Ex Coll. I. B.
by whom he had Bilborough, the next Lordship to Strelley. Samson de Strelley,
another of his sons, married Luciae, the daughter and heir of Sewall le Fone,
and Amicia his wife, one of the daughters and coheirs of Hugo de Capella,
before named; from this Samson descended the Strelleys of Woodborow, in that
place to be noted more particularly.

Robert de Stradley, 30 E. 1. left Robert his son and heir aged twenty three
years at the Feast of St. Matthew. Esc. 30 E. 1. n. 39.


There was a Protection, 4 E. 2. for Robert de Vmfravile Earl of Angus,
Nicholas de Segrave, Rot. Chart. Mich. 4 E. 2. to. 1^
Robert de Strelley, and John, son of William Howard, who had taken a Journey
into Scotland, with Peter Gavestone Earl of Cornwall.

Walterus de Stradlegh-Isilia temp. H. 1.-Will. de Moiz mar. prim. Samson de
Strelley 4 Philip 3 Hugh. 2 Gaufr. 1 Walter de Stredlegh, mil.-Cecilia cohaer.
1 Robertus de Stretley, miles-Hawisia. Robertus de Strelley aet. 30. 12 E. 1.
mil.-Elizab. fill. and haer. Willielmi le Vavasor de Shipley. Robertus de
Strelly, miles Sampson de Strelley, milles-Elizab. fill. Joh. Hercy, mil.
Nicolas de Strelley mil. ob. 9 H. 6.-Elizab. fill. Ed. Pierpount, mil. Robertus
de Strelley, mil. ob. 16 H. 6.-Joana fill. Ric. Stanhope, mil. Robertus de
Strelley, mil. ob. 3 H. 7. Mar. 12.-Isabella fill.... Kempe soror Cardinalis. 1
Johannes de Strelley fill. and haer.-Saunchia fill. Rob. Willughby. Joh. s. p.
Isabella ux. Clem. Low, and Richard. Paynell. Marg. ux. Joh. Poutrell. Elizab.
ux. Will. Ayscough, mil. Anna ux. Ric. Stanhope, and Johannis Markham, mil.
2 Nich. de Strelley mil. ob. 6 H. 7.-Margareta fill. Tho. West Dom. de la Ware.
Nich. de Strelley, mil. ob. 3 Eliz.-Eliz. fill. Johan. Spenser, milit. ux. 3.
Anthonius Strelley, mil.-Joana fill. Georgii Baynam, mil. Philippus Strelley
mil. ob. 4 Jac.-Eliz. fill. and haer. Tho. Garneys. Nicolas sine prole.
Georgius-Eliz. fill..... Aldred de Colwick. Nicolas Strelley.-Elizab. fill. G.
Rosell.-Richardus Dom. Byron, mar. 2. Georgius Strelley obiit in Gallia coelebs.

Elianora-Joh. Michel, mil. Magist. Cancellariae Regis Jac.
Johannes-Anna fill. Geo. Baynam, mil. Willielm. Strelley-Marg. fill.....
Jenkinson. 1 Nich. Strelley de Not.-An. fill. Fr. Tilman. 1 Nicolas. 2
Gervasius. Anna.
2 Johan. 3 Franc. 4 Vincent. 5 Williel.





Joh-Joana fill. and haer. Joh. Hunt de Lyndeby. Johannes Strelley de
Lindeby-Elizab. fill. Will. Mering. Nich. Strelley, mil. s. p.



Will. 14 E. 2.

Pha.-Sampson-Lucia fill. and haer. Richardus Strelley de Woodborough-Elena. 1
Willielmus Rob. de Strelley s. p. Ivo Jake de Prestwold.-Elena.
2 Thom. de Strelley Richardus de Strelley de Woodborough.





Rogerus. Robertus Henr. Rich. s. p.

Robertus de Somervil Dom. de Oxton Robertus de Somervill 1 Walter de
Stredlegh, mil.-Cecilia cohaer..... ux. Hug. de Capella Sewallus le
Foune-Amicia un. cohaer. Pha.-Sampson-Lucia fill. and haer.




Sir Samson de Strelley, Knight, was son and heir of this Robert, Ex Coll. I.
B. T^ores by Regist.
and married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir John Hercy. Samson de Strelley, 30 E.
3. 1356. had license, that he and the rest of the Parishioners of that Village,
might hear Sermons for the space of a year in the Chapel situate within his
Manor of the said Village, because the Parish Church was not then fully built.
About 13 R. 2. he left Sir Nicolas de Strelley his heir, Esc. 13 R. 2. n. 50.
who by his wife Elizabeth, the daughter of Sir Edmund Pierpont, had one son
called John de Strelley, who married Ioane, daughter and heir of John Hunte of
Lindeby; but his eldest son was Sir Robert de Strelley, whom he left his heir;
and by his Will ordered his own body to be buried in the Church of All Saints
at Strelley, 1430. 9 H. 6. which Sir Robert married Agnes, the daughter of.....
Harcourt, and Joan, the daughter of Sir Richard Stanhope, and died about 16 H.
6. and was succeeded by Sir Robert de Strelley his son and heir, Ex Coll.
varior.
who married Isabell the daughter of.... Kempe, and died 12 of March, 3 H. 7.
leaving John Strelley, Esquire, his son and heir forty years old 4 H. 7. when
the Inquisition was taken. This John married Saunchia, Ex Inqui^ Ex Coll. I. B.
the daughter of Robert Willughby, Esquire, and by her had a son of his own
name, who dying without issue, his four daughters became his heirs. Isabell,
the eldest, was first married to Clement Low, by whom she had a daughter and
heir, wife of William Sacheverell, second son of Sir Henry Sacheverell of
Morley in the County of Darby, Knight, and afterward to Richard Payney,
Esquire; the second was Margaret, wife of John Poutrell, Esquire; the third was
Elizabeth, wife of Sir William Ascough; and the fourth was Anne, first married
to Richard Stanhope, Esquire; and afterward was third wife of Sir John
Markham, Knight.

By the Instrument of division, bearing date 10 October. 27 H. 8. it appears that
Thomas Ascugh divided the Lands of John Stirley into four parts, Ex Autog. pen.
Will. Sacheverell, Ar.
whereof Sir John Markham, and Thomas Poutrell chose the two first, viz. First,
all the Lands in Wheteley, Saundby, Northleuerton, Southleuerton, Sturton,
Litilburgh, Burton, Radcliff, Codgrave, Shipley, Gedding, Langley, Stapilfurth,
Cortlingstock, Notingham, and Harby, for one part; and for the other (which
Poutrell had) all in Chillewell, Trowell, Adingbrugh, Bramcote, Calverton,
Estwayt, a House in Trowell, a House in Cossal Marsh, and Colston Basset. The
next was chosen by Isabell Paynell, widow, William Sacheverell, and Mary his
wife, which was all in Bilburgh, Hemsell, Cossall, Kymberley, Tomlynholme,
Carleton, and Marshall Hall; and Thomas Ascugh had for the fourth part all in
Oxton and Plunger.

But Sir Robert Strelley, Father of this John, had another son called Sir
Nicolas Strelley, whose posterity inherited this Manor. This Sir Nicolas
married the daughter of Thomas Lord de la Ware, and died at London the last of
April 1491. 6 H. 7. and was buried in the Church of St. Andrew at Baynards
Castle, Milles 45.
leaving Margaret his wife behind him, and Nicolas his son, and Agnes and
Cecily his daughters. He appointed half his Goods to be employed for his
Children in Merchandise, and made his Nephew Sir Walter Hungerford Supervisor
of his Will, which was proved 12 June, that same year, viz. 1491. Sir Nicolas
his son married (to his third wife, as I take it) the daughter of Sir John
Spenser, and died at Strelley, Aug. 25. 3 Eliz. seized of this Manor and
Bilburgh, Ex Inq.
and the Advowsons of both the Churches, and Lands in Bullwell, Cossall,
Wattenhow, Farnesfeild, and Basford, as by an Inquisition taken at Not. the
year following appears, Sir Anthony Strelley his son and heir being then
thirty two years of age; who married Ioane, daughter of Sir George Baynham, by
whom he had Sir Philip Strelley, who married Elizabeth, the daughter and heir
of Thomas Garneys, Esquire, and died 29 Sept. 4 Iac. He had a son called
Nicolas, who married a daughter of Sir Percivall Willoughbies, but had no
issue. This Manor has been the inheritance of Lawyers, most of my time, and
for some space before. It is now possessed by the posterity of Elianor, sister
of Sir Philip Strelley, who was married to Sir John Michell, one of the Masters
of Chancery in King James his time, who notwithstanding all his Law and power
could never get it in his own time from Nicolas Strelley, natural and perhaps
legitimate) son of George, brother of the said Sir Philip, which Nicolas
married Elizabeth, daughter of George Rosell of Radcliff, Esquire, by whom he
had a son called George, whom he left young, yet he kept it till he died in
France not of full age; his mother being married to Richard now Lord Byron.

After the death of this last George Strelley, Nicholas, son of William, son of
John, brother of Sir Anthony Strelley, (which John married also a daughter of
Sir George Baynham, named Anne, sister of Sir Anthonies Lady) was some while in
possession of this Lordship; which said Nicholas Strelley lives now in
Nottingham, upon some ingenious Manufactures in Glass, which he spins and
orders very commendably.

The Coals, the chief profits of Strelley, are not so plentiful now as formerly.

William de Strelley, son of Galfr. de Strelley, Fin. in Oct. S. Hill. 14 E. 2.
by a Fine, 14 E. 2. settled one Mess. ten Bov. and an half, and one Rood of
Land, with the Appurtenances in Strelley, Cossale, and Bilburgh, on Sir Robert
Strelley, Knight, for life; and afterward on William, son of Sir Robert, for
life; remainder to Sir Robert and his heirs.

The Rectory of Stirley was 8l. It Is now 6l. 4s. 9d. ob. in the Kings Books,
and the last Patron that I have seen, was Nicholas Strelley, Esquire, as his
Ancestors the Strelleys had ever been in all my observations.

Bilborough. Bilburch.
THere was one Bovat of this Township Soc to Ernehale, the Kings own Land; but
here were two Manors which Aylric and Vlsi Swen had before the Conquest, Lib.
Dooms.
which were accounted to the Dane-geld for seven Bovats. The Land being for so
many Oxen. There Ambrose the Man or Tenant of William Peverell, whose Fee it
was, had one Car. two Sochm. three Vill. four Servants, with one Plow or
Carucat. There were eight Acres of Meadow and small Wood. In the Confessors
time this was 30s. value, in the Conquerours 20s.

Herbert de Bilburc gave to the Priory of Lenton one Mark yearly, Regist. de
Lent. p. 8.
out of a Mill which is between Blaccliff and Radford. This Herbert gave in
Gunnovelston and Molinton also.

Simon, son of Simon, son of William, Ib. 38.
gave a Mark of Silver yearly of his Mill in Bilboro, called Bobursmilne, to
Lenton, for the Soul of Walter (de Kime) his brother.

Petronilla, who was wife of Stephen de Faukonberg, Esson. and Plac. Mich. 1
Ioh. rot. 15.
came and quit-claimed to Walter de Ryebof, and Isabell his wife, all the Land
which was Simons, son of Simon, in Not. and Derbishires, for her self and
heirs for ever, (these persons are named in Cuckeney.)

There was a Fine at Notingham, Fin. 4 Ioh.
4 Ioh. whereby William de Gatton passed his right and Title in three Bovats of
Land in Bileburgh to Walter de Riboef, and Isabell his wife.

Robert Fitz-Aman in King John's time claimed as his right, against Simon de
Kime, whom Walter de Ribof, and Isabell his wife, Pl. in crast. Claus. Pasc.
anno incerto Regis Ioh. to. 7. and Pl. 13 Ioh. term. Mich. to. 5.
called to warrant, half a Knights Fee in Bilenburch, whereof Ivicia his
Grandmother was seized, in the time of King Henry the first; and from her the
right descended to Robert her son, and from him to Raph his brother, Father of
the said Robert Fitz-Aman. Simon pleaded that the said Ivicia had an elder
sister called Emme, who had a certain son called Robert, who had a son called
Ivo de Heriz, then alive, who had as much right, and without him he would not
answer. Robert acknowledged that Emme was the elder sister, but when the
Inheritance was divided, to Emme were assigned Gunnolveston and Keilmerse, as
her purpart, whereof her heirs were yet seized; and that to Ivicia were
assigned Molinton and Bloubroc, to which the said half Knights Fee belonged,
for her purpart. Simon de Kime produced the Charter of King Henry the second,
wherein was contained, that he granted and confirmed to Simon, son of William,
which Simon was Grandfather of the said Simon de Kime, all the Tenements which
he held of him in Capite (to wit) Bileburch. Robert had the better at that time.

Esc. 11 E. 1. m. 3. part.
Philip de Kyme was found, 11 E. 1. to have had a Knights Fee in Bilburgh.

Robert de Strelley held in Bilborough, in the right of Elizabeth his wife,
half a Knights Fee of Walter Rybof of the Eschaet of Peverell. Test. de Nev.
Richard Rybof is also mentioned to pay for half a Knights Fee here. But Robert
le Vavasor was the constant owner in the time of Henry the third, in whose
Reign he was many years High Sheriff of these Counties of Not. and Derb. viz.
the 20, Rot. Pip.
and 22, and 23, and the 30, till the 39.

This Manor has gone along with Strelley, as it still does, some part of it
being in Strelley Park.

The Rectory of Bilburgh was 10l. It Is now 6l. 2s. 6d. in the Kings Books, and
the last Patron that I have found is George Strelley, as his Ancestors used to
be formerly.

Broxtow. Broculstowe
It Is like this place in ancient time was made use of for the people of the
Hundred to meet in, because it gives name to the Wapentak. Here was of the Soc
of Ernehale Ancient Demesne, as much as was rated to the Dane-geld at one
Bovat, Lib. Dooms.
but in the time of the Conquerours Survey it was waste; and of William
Peverells Fee here were five Acres which lay to Nuthale; but here was also a
Manor in Broculstowe of the Fee of Robert Fitz-William, which before the
Conquest was Godrics, and answered the Tax for three Bovats, the Land of it
being so much; here the said Robert had one Car. and one Vill. Small Wood one
q. long, and one broad. In the Confessors time it was 16s. in the Conquerours
but 8s. value.

Gilbert, son of Eustachius de Broculstowe, gave to the holy Trinity of Lenton,
Regist. de Lent. p. 41.
and the Monks there serving God, one Toft in Broculstowe, on the East part of
the Church.

Test. de Nev.
Galfr. de Broculvestowe held the Bovat of the Soc of Arnale for 12d. yearly.
He held there also two Bovats of H. de Nevill, and other Lands.

In the 9 E. 2. Broxstowe answered for half a Villa, Nom. Vill.
and John de Broxstowe was Lord of it.

By an Inquisition taken at Not. the Saturday after the Feast of St. Michael,
7 H. 6. before Thomas Mapurley and his fellow Commissioners, it appears that
the Jury (of which John Broxstowe was one) found, that in the Parish of
Broxtowe there were not then ten Inhabitants, who were Housekeepers, or
Householders.

Henry Lord Gray of Codnour, Esc. 22 H. 6.
about 22 H. 6. died seized of this Manor, then said to be held of the Soke of
Arnale.

The Manor of Brokestow, A die S. Mich. in unum m^n^. 14 E. 4.
with the Appurtenances, two Mess. one Vill. sixty two Acres of Land, and
thirty two of Meadow in Baseford and Allesworth, were settled by a Fine, 14 E.
4. on Thomas Parker, and Ioane his wife, and the heirs of their Bodies;
remainder to the heirs of Ioane. In 7 H. 8. Henry Willughby, Knight, John
Markham, Knight, Richard Egerton, Clark, and Thomas Thurland, Esquire, claimed
against Anthony Fitz-Herbert, Sergeant at Law, and William Whithalgh, the
Manor of Broxstowe, with the Appurtenances, as also four Mess. ten Tofts, one
Mill, two hundred Acres of Land, forty of Meadow, two hundred of Pasture, and
forty of Wood, with the Appurtenances in Brokstow, Bilborough, Basford, and
Alsworth, who called to warrant George Parker, Gentleman.

Another Recovery was suffered, Pasc. 7 E. 6. rot. 7^9.
7 E. 6. wherein Walter Whaley, Esquire, claimed against Hugh Willoughbie,
Knight, and Ioane his wife, the Manors of Brocstow and Basford, with the
Appurtenances, and fourteen Mess. two Mills, etc. with a great number of Acres,
and 30s. Rent in Billeborough and Basford, and ten Mess. ten Cottages, etc. in
Mapurley in Darbyshire. The Manor of Broxtow and Maperley in Darbyshire, Brev.
de Priv. Sigillo.
late in the possession of Thomas Whalley, Gent. and Richard Whalley, Esquire,
July 21. 12 Iac. were by the King granted to Philip Stanhope, Knight, his heirs
and assigns, as late the Lands of Richard Whalley, Esquire, paying 21l. 4s. per
annum, to the Exchequer.

This Manor has since passed through the Families of Byron and Stanhope, and
Isham Parkins, B.
Esquire, sold it to Thomas Smith, younger son of Sir Francis Smith of Ashby
Folevile in Leicestershire, who builded the House, and adorned the Seat, and in
the Wars received the honor of Knighthood; but not long since it was sold to
Sir Francis Top, then Servant to his Grace the Duke of Newcastle: his Lady was
Elizabeth Chaplan, whon had been Servant to the Duchess since her childhood:
it remains Sir John Tops, Baronet, her son's.

It Is now esteemed, as I take it, in the Parish of Bilborough.

Baseford. And Algarthorpe, or, Eland-Hall.
THere were many Manors in Baseford of William Peverells Fee, and one which
was Tayn-land, which Aluric had before the Conquest, paying to the Geld for
four Bovats. The Land was half a Car. He continued to hold it of King William
when the great Survey was made, and there had one Vill. holding one Car. and
one Acre of Meadow, and two Mills 16s. and small Wood one Acre. Lib. Dooms.
This held 20s. value, as it had been formerly. Alcwin had a Manor here before
the Conquest rated to the Geld at ten Bovats. The Land was then twelve Bovats.
There afterward Safred the Man (or Tenant) of William Peverell had one Car.
two Vil.... Board. one Sochm. having two Car.. There was a Priest, and three
Acres of Meadow, and one Acre of Wood; this likewise kept the old value 20s. Two
other Manors here Alfeg and Algod had, which answered the Tax for two Car. and
two Bov. The Land whereof was so much. There Pagen and Safred, the Men of
William Peverell had one Car. two Vill. five Board. having two Car. and three
Mills 25s. 4d. and six Acres of Meadow, and a small Wood: this also kept the old
rate 40s. There was besides these another parcel, one Bovat for the Geld, which
Escul held.

Philip, son of Safrid, and Maud his wife, by the consent of William Peverell,
Regist. de lent. p. 39.
gave to the Monks of Lenton, in honor of the High and undivided Trinity,
twenty four Acres of their Demesne, viz. a little Essart at Broculstow, and a
Tilled place (or Wong) called Trucchere well, and another called Thorniwang,
another Copperodes, besides two Bovats which William, son of Gilbert, held, and
two which Alfer had in Baseford.

Robert, son of Philip de Baseford confirmed the four Bovats of the Villenage
of Baseford, and the twenty four Acres of Demesne which his Father gave, and
likewise confirmed to that Church of Lenton, all the Land in Aldesworth of his
Fee, with a Meadow called Brademedoe; he likewise released to the same Church a
Meadow, which he once sued the Monks for, viz. the upper Island which the water
of Lene did anciently compass.

One of these Manors John de Orreby held, and Gilbert de Orreby, Test. de Nev.
Chapter 52 H. 3. ^ 12. Esc. 19 E. 2. n. 19.
52 H. 3. had Free Warren here. The Jury, 19 E. 2. said that Simon de Orreby
held Lands here during his life, of the Inheritance of Alveredus de Sulney, who
was then found heir of the said Simon, and above 26 years of age.

Inq.
By an Inquisition taken 7 H. 6. it appears that Margery Langford held some of
Sulneys Lands here, and John de Cockfeild others, whose Family held also
another Manor in this place, which went with Nuthall, as in that place is
shown.

Sir Raph Langford, Knight, Esc. 5 H. 8
was seized of eight Mess. two hundred Acres of Land, ten of Meadow, ten of
Pasture, with the Appurtenances in Baseford, which he passed to Anthony
Fitz-Herbert, Sergeant at Law, and others, 14 Ian. 2 H. 8. to fulfill his last
Will: he died 1 Febr. 5 H. 8. his Grandchild Raph Langford, son of his son
Nicholas, then above four years old being found his heir. This was a Family of
principal note and great possessions in Darbyshire, and other Counties.

William Hollys the younger, Mich. 29 H. 8. rot. 513.
Gent. 29 H. 8. claimed against Raph Langford, and Dorothy his wife, the Manor
of Baseford, and likewise the Manors of Blakwell, Whitwell, and Cressewell in
Darbishire, and the Advowson of the Church of Whitwell.

In 37 H. 3. the Manors of Betewast in the County of Northampton, Pat. 37 H. 3.
of Lubbesthorp in Leicestershire, and Basford in this County, were confirmed
to William de Cantelupe. George de Cantelupe, 1 E. 1. is found to have held
nothing in Demesne in Basseford, but that Stephen de Brokelstow held of him one
Mill, Esc. 1 E. 1. n. 16.
three Acres of Land, and two of Meadow in Fee for xiis. iiiid. and likewise
held of him in Bondage, fifteen Bovats and an half of Land, for lxiis. and
seven Cottages, which yielded xvs. iiiid. His two sisters were his heirs, of
which Millecent de Monte alto, who also married Eudo le Zouch, succeeded him in
this place.

The Jury, Esc. 17 E. 2. n. 81.
17 E. 2. found it not to the Kings damage, if he granted to Thomas le Zouch,
that he should retain to himself five Mess. and eleven Virgats of Land, with
the Appurtenances in Basford, which he had acquired of William de la Zouch.

A Fine, In Octab. Hill. 24 E. 3.
24 E. 3. of Lands in Baseford was levied between Raph, son of Raph de
Crumwell, and Maud his wife, Quer. and Raph de Crumwell Chr. and Amicia his
wife, Deforc. whereby they were settled on Raph, son of Raph, and Maud his
wife, and the heirs of their bodies; remainder to Raph and Amicia, and the
heirs of Raph. Another Fine was levied, 46 E. 3. between Raph, son of Raph de
Crumbewell, Knight, A die S. Trin. in 15. dies and postea, a die S. Mich. in
15. dies, 46 E. 3.
and Elizabeth his wife, Quer. and Raph de Crumwell Chr. and Maud his wife,
Deforc. of the Manors of Baseford and Bleseby, by which they were settled on
Raph, the son of Raph, and Elizabeth his wife, and the heirs of their bodies;
remainder to Raph, and Maud his wife, and the heirs of Raph, quit from any
other heirs of the said Raph, the son of Raph, and Elizabeth.

Gervas Clifton, and Maud his wife, Claus. 5 E. 4. m. 6.
late wife of Robert de Willughby, 5 E. 4. granted to Anthony Wydevile Lord
Scales and Newsells, these Manors and many others, which were late Raph Lord
Crumwells.

William Shirbourn, Hill. 28 H. 8. to. 302.
28 H. 8. claimed against William Hollys of London, the younger, Gent. the
moiety of twenty Mess. etc. in Basford, who called to warrant Edward Knivett,
Esquire. He and Fitz-Williams were the heirs of the Lord Crumwell, as in
Crumwell may be observed. Sir William Copley, in the right of Dorothy his wife,
died seized of the moiety of the Manor of Basforth, 28 Apr. 2, and 3 Ph. and
Mar. as in Plumptre is said. These came to the Family of Hollis, B.
and were by the last Earl of Clare save one, dispersed amongst Freeholders,
but the principal Farm was by him repurchased in his life time, which now, with
Copleyes Manor, remains the Inheritance of the Earl of Clare.

Cokfeilds came to Taylboys, and the next descent to John Ayscough, son and
heir of Sir Will. Ayscongh the Judge, in whose Family it continued till Sir
Rog. Ayscough sold it amongst Freeholders.

Another Manor in Baseford was called Algarthorpe, and afterward Eland-Hall,
from the possessors of it of that name.

Regist. de Lent. p. 39.
Eustach^us de Moreton Lord of Wollaston, confirmed the Alms, which Robert de
Moreton his Grandfather, and Adam his Father gave to God and the Church of the
holy Trinity at Lenton, and the Cluniac Monks there serving God, viz. 16s. per
annum, out of that which Gerard de Algarthorp held of him and his Ancestors,
viz. 10s. at Pentecost, or within the Octaves, and 6s. within the Octaves of
St. Martin. This was also confirmed by Adam, son of Adam de Moretuin, brother
of the said Eustachius.

Robert Daft paid 10s. in the time of Henry the third, Test. de Nev.
for the fourth part of a Knights Fee, which he held in Algarthorp.

In 28 E. 1. by a Fine levied at York, Adam le Paumer, Fin. apud Ebor. a die
Pasch. in un. men's. 28 E. 1. Orig. 10 E. 3. to. 13.
and Isabell his wife, passed the Manor of Algarthorp to John le Paumer, the
younger, and his heirs.

William de Eland the Kings Servant [ valettus] who lately had the custody of
the Castle of Not. and the Bayliwick of the Honor of Peverell in the Counties
of Not. and Derb. for life, had the said Bayliwick, 26 September. 10 E. 3.
granted to him and his heirs, paying fourteen Marks yearly. William, son and
heir of William de Eland, 41 E. 3. acknowledged himself to hold the Bayliwick
of the honor of Peverell in the Counties of Not. and Derby, Lib. de Fin. fol.
202. Pasch. 41 E. 3.
of the King, by the Service of paying 14s. yearly. William Eland married
Cecily, the coheir of Robert, son of Sampson de Strelley, as in Radcliff may
be noted. Stephen de Strelley, 28 E. 3. passed Lands and Rents in Radclive and
Lamcote, Autog. pen. Tho. Rosell, Ar.
to William Eland, and Cecily his wife, and William their son. This Family had
their chief residence at this Algerthorp, which gave it the name of Eland-Hall.
William Eland, Esquire, (possibly the Grandchi^d of the first) about 8 H. 6.
left his son William his heir above nine years old. Esc. 8 H. 6. n. 4.
William Eland died the 27 December. 17 H. 6. and left his son and heir William,
Esc. 17 H. 6. n. 2.
aged twenty weeks and four days, 3 Iun. when the Inquisition was taken, in
the tuition of Margaret his widow, mother of the Infant. By an Inquisition
taken at Not. 31 October. 9 H. 7. it appears that Henry Eland (who it seems was
brother and heir of Thomas Eland, Esc. ^ E. 4. p. 777.
and forty years old, 5 E. 4. when his said brother left the Bayliwick of
Peverell in both these Counties to descend to him) died 8 Sept. 9 H. 7. seized
of this Manor, there said to be held of Sir Henry Willoughby, as of his Manor
of Wollaton, some small parcels in Radcliff and Lamcote, Ex Inq.
and diverse other places, as Adbolton, Calverton, Bagthorp, Brigford at Brig
end, and an Essart called Eland Close; and that Mary Eland, daughter of Thomas
Eland, son of the said Henry, was his Cousin and heir, then aged one year and
one month. She married Roland Revell, and after his death the 8 November. 23 H.
8. conveyed this Manor, Claus. 23 H. 8. script. irrotal.
and all her Lands, Rents, and Services in Algarthorp, Basford, Adbolton,
Oxton, Radcliff, Calverton, Lamcote, Eland, and elsewhere in the County of
Not. together with the Bayliwick of the honor of Peverell in the Counties of
Not. and Derb. to Randall Revell, because he had helped her in the great Suits
she had with Nicholas Styrley, Esquire, concerning her said inheritance; and
for that Hugh Revell his son, was her Cousin and next heir, viz. son of Joan,
sister of Thomas Eland her Father. It was afterward sold to Thomas Hutchinson
of Outhorp, who gave it to Iohn-Hutchinson his second son, whose Grandchild
John Hutchinson was Lord of it. It is now sold to......

In Basford Town 1612. were owners, William Lord Cavendish, Sir John Hollys,
Sir John Byron, Sir Percivall Willoughby, Knights, Godfrey Copley, Esquire,
George Strelley, Esquire, Mary Hutchinson, widow, George Hutchinson, Gent.
Geoffrey Brock, Gent. John Speed, Clerc. Francis Byfeild, Gent. John Kyme of
Not. Gent. etc.

The Rectory of Basford, Par. 6. pat. 4 Eliz.
8 Ian. 4 Eliz. in the occupation of Roger Wo^d, late parcel of the possessions
of the Priory of Catesby in the County of Northhamton, was granted to James
Hardwicke and his heirs.

This Church of St. Leodegarius of Baseford, with the Lands, Tenements, Mon.
Angl. vol. 2. p. 896.
and Appurtenances there, was given by the before named Robert, son of Philip,
to the Prioress and Nuns of Catesby (of which place he seems to have been a
principal Founder:) his son William was likewise a Benefactor.

The Rectory (it should be Vicarage) of Baseford was ten Marks, Mss. I. N.
when the Prioress of Cateswyke (or Catesby) had the Patronage. The Vicarage is
now in the Kings Books 8l. 17s. 6d. and in his Majesty's Patronage.

In the South Window of the Chancel,

Arg. a Chevron between three P^ts with Ears, and three feet a piece, Gules,
within a Bordure sable Besanty, Mounboucher, impaling Sable a Bend between six
Escallops Or, Folejambe.

Azure a plain Cross countercompony, Arg. and Gules, Cokfeild, impaling
Folejambe; and Folejambe impaling Arg. a Bend Azure Crusuly Arg. ( it should be
Or) Lowdham.

On the Church North I Will East Window,

Paly of six Arg. and Azure, a Bend Gules, Annesley. Paly of six Arg. and
Azure, Strelley. Arg. a Chief Gules, and Bendlet Azure, Crumwell. Arg. a Lion
Rampant, Queve Furche sable, Cressy. Arg. a Bend Azure Crusuly Or, Lowdham.
Arg. on a Saltier engrailed sable, nine Annulets Or, Leek. Annesley with a
Mullet on the top of the Bend.

Strelley, with a Cinquefoyle Gules in the middle, Strelley of Woodborough.

Maperley.
THE Wood of Basford, which was John de Cokefeuds, (...). Fo^e^t. de S^^^^wood
15 E. 1.
and Robert de Orrebyes, 15 E. 1. was found wholly wasted, and had been so of
old. John, son of Robert de Orreby, and John Cokfeld had taken 2s. 6d. a year,
for five and twenty years last past, and appropriated the Wood to themselves
without warrant, and therefore were amerced.

Hugh de Nottingham, Clark, 25 E. 1. had Lands in Nottingham called Cornerwong,
C^. 25 E. 1. E. 9.
confirmed to him and his heirs by Bounds, etc.

In 31 E. 3. it was found that John Montgomery, Ex Chart. Sa^. Staples de Not.
Ge^.
then dead, made one Essart of old, besides the Kings Wood of Nottingham, that
was called Cornerwong, and it contained thirty Acres of ground, and was sown
since the last regard.

The heirs of Alice Palmer held one Essart of old called Basfordwong,
containing twenty Acres, William Eland was then Tenant, viz. some while after
31 E. 3. about which time that Essart was thought to be made. Adam Palmer made
one Essart of old of five Acres, and one Rood of the Kings Demesne at
Algerthorp; of this William Eland was also Tenant.

In the time of Richard the second, Thomas Mapurley was a considerable Man at
Nottingham: on his Seal was a Bend between six Cross Croslets. AD. 81.
He or his posterity became possessed of the chiefest part of these Grounds,
which was the occasion of their being called Maperleys Closes; and since there
being a Cottage House or two, and some odd Barns erected, it goes for a small
Hamlett called Mapurley.

John Mapurly, Esquire, 3 H. 8. (then living at Bullwell) suffered a Recovery
of two hundred Acres of Land in Basford called Cornerwong, Mi^. 3 H. 8. ^^t.
348.
with the Appurtenances, to Thomas Archer, and John Byron, Esquire. John Byron,
Ex. Cha^t. Sam. Staples, Genesis
and John Byron his son, 1 March, 1609. for the consideration of 100l.
alienated the premises to Robert Staples of Nottingham, together with a Cottage
or Tenement, and Barns thereto belonging. Robert Staples, and Maud his wife,
1612. settled, in consideration of marriage, Cornerswong, or Mapurly Closes,
containing sixty Acres, with one Cottage, etc. on Alexander Staples, and Ioane
his wife, and the heirs of their two bodies; and in default thereof on
Alexander and his heirs.

Robert Querneby of Nottingham, son and heir of Elizabeth, Autog. pen. S.
Staples, Genesis
wife of Humfrey Quarneby, daughter and heir of Robert Mellors, and Julian his
wife (daughter I suppose, and at length) heir of John Mapurley by his Deed
dated 14 December. 31 Eliz. in consideration of marriage, which had been before
that time solemnized between Thomas Blyth, one of the younger sons of William
Bl^^he, and Mary, one of the daughters and heirs of him the said Robert
Querneby, settled on George Beardmore, and William Monk, and their heirs,
certain Lands and Tenements in Nottingham, and five Closes in the Lordship or
Parish of Basford, in trust for himself and his heirs. His other daughter and
heir Elizabeth, was married to John Kyme, as in Nottingham will be shown.

In the third year of King Charles the first, Autog.
11 Apr. 1627. Thomas Blyth the elder, and Mary his wife, and Thomas Blyth the
younger, and Magdalen, in consideration of 500l. sold to Robert Staples, and
his heirs, five Closes in Cornerwong, or Maperley. On the Seals of Blyth are a
Chevron between three Lioncells Rampant, and upon some for a Crest, a Lion
passant on the top of a Tower. These are called Nether, or Lower Maperley, and
are now with the other also, the Inheritance and Possessions of Samuel Staples,
who I think had them, for names sake, settled on him or his Father by the
Purchaser Robert Staples, in whose House in Nottingham the said Samuel now
lives, and has rebuilt part of it of Brick and Stone, which before was but
like the rest, of Wood. And has also since that built a little Brick house at
this Mapurley.

Arnall. Ernehale.
IN Ernehale King Edward the Confessor had a Manor which answered the Geld or
Tax of those times for three Plow-land, or three Catucats. The Land was three
Car. There King William had one Car. or Plow, twenty Vill. and four Bordars,
having seven Plows, Lib. Dooms.
or seven Car. pasture Wood in several places three leuc. long, and three leuc.
broad. The value in King Edwards time was 4l. and two Sextaries of Honey; but
in K. William's 8l. and six Sextaries of Honey. This Manor had Soc in
Broncote, Waleton (I suppose meant for Wollaton), Lenton, Broculstow, and
Bilburch.

Here was a Family took their name from their Residence at this place, whereof
Richard de Ernehale, Pip. 22 H. 2.
22 H. 2. gave account to the Sheriff of x. Marks, for his amercement for his
Forest trespasses. William de Beleu, son of Robert de Beleu, Autog. p^n. Tho.
R^^^ll, Ar.
who married Alice the daughter of William de Arnal, gave her in Dower at the
Church door before marriage, all his Land in Lamcote; remainder to the heirs of
their bodies: to this were Witnesses Mr. H. de Arnall, Walter de Sneyaton,
Henry de Bully, Chaplains, Adam de Burgunvill, Raph, son of William de Arnall,
William Marescal, etc. Raph de Arnale in 1278. was a Knight. The Jury, 19 E. 1.
found that Raph de Arnehale held of John de Nevill, Es^. 19 E. 1. n. 7.
in the Town of Arnehall, one Mess. with a Garden; and three Bovats of Land,
paying him 22s. 4d. a year, and an Essart in the Fields of Basford of John de
Cokfeild, and Stephen de Pancester for 2s. per annum, and of diverse others, as
of Raph, son of Raph de Crumwell in Lamley, two Bovats, and the like: Raph, son
of William, son of the said Raph de Arnall, was then his heir.

Gervase, son of Richard de Arnall, Fin. 14 H. 3. m. 9.
14 H. 3. held three Bovats, and one Culture with Essarts.

But in a Book of Fees in the Exchequer Herbert de Nevill (rather Hugh, Lib.
(...). in Scac.
as I suppose) is said to hold the whole Town of Arnall, and the fourth part of
Woodbourgh, for which he paid yearly 10l.

Chart. Ant. BB. 19. and MM. 10.
King John in the fifth year of his Reign, the fourth of May at Winchester,
granted to Hugh de Nevill, and his heirs, the Manor of Blanston for the fourth
part of a Knights Fee, and the Manor of Ernehale in Fee Farm for 10l. and the
Service of the fourth part of a Knights Fee, and fourscore and ten Acres of
Essart in the said Manor of Ernehale, free and quiet from the regard and view,
etc. and all manner of privileges.

Hugh de Nevill held the fourth part of a Knights Fee in Arnall, T^st. de Nev.
which Hugh de Nevill his Father held.

Esc. 8 E. 1. n. 47.
The Jury before Galfr. de Neyvill, and Henry de Perepont, Justices of Assize,
at the Inquisition at Blitheworth the Wednesday next after the Feast of St.
John Port Lat. 8 E. 1. found that John de Nevile held Pleas in his Court of
Arnall, concerning trespasses made of the Vert in his Wood of Arnal, which is
within the bounds of the Forest, and made Attachements for the same, and
suffered not his Dogs to be expeditated, and not by his own proper authority,
but as his Ancestors did, from the time of Hugh de Nevill the Justice, who held
Pleas for the King concerning the Forest, and was Grandfather of this said
John, who held the Manor of Arnall at the time of that said Inquisition.

Robert Bishop of Bath, 18 E. 1. impleaded Sampson de Stredeley, Pl. de Ban^.
Pasch. 18 E. 1. to 47.
and others, for cutting the Woods at Arnall, who pleaded that the Bishop had
nothing in that Manor, but in the name of Guardian of Hugh, son and heir of
John de Nevill, whose that Manor was; and seeing he was not so named, they
demanded Judgment, etc. upon which the Bishop desired license to recede, and
had it.

The Jur^, 2 E. 2. said that Jordan the Rector of the Church of Arnall, Esc. 2
E. 2. n. 96.
cut and took 20 Oaks, whilst that Manor was in the Kings hands, William de
Arnall sixteen, and Raph de Arnall six, etc.

The Manor of Arnall, 4 E. 2. was settled by a Fine on Hugh de Nevill, Fin. in
Oct. Purif. beat. Mariae, 4 E. 2. Esc. 9 E. 3. n. 49. Pip. 13 E. 3.
and Ida his wife, and the heirs of their bodies; remainder to the right heirs
of Hugh, who, 9 E. 3. lest John de Nevill his son and heir. Hugh de Nevill, son
and heir of John de Nevill, 13 E. 3. gave account of 10l. of the Farm of
Arnall, by the hands of John de Verdun.

The Jury, 41 E. 3. found it not to the Kings loss if he granted license to
Humfrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford, Esc. 41 E. 3. n. 4.
Essex, and Northampton, to give the Manor of Arnale, which he held of the
King in Capite by Knights Service, and the Service of 10l. yearly Rent paid
into the Exchequer, to Sir Nicholas Tamworth, Knight.

Thomas Duke of Gloucester, who married Alianor, Esc. 21 R. 2. n. 29.
one of the daughters and heirs of the said Humfrey de Bohun, and Ioane his
wife, left this Manor, 21 R. 2. to his son Humfrey.

The Jury, 35 E. 3. found that Richard Pensax of Skegby left his son William
his heir, Esc. 35 E. 3. part. 2. n. 30.
who, amongst other Lands, held one Mess. in Arnale, and two Virga^s of Land of
the Earl of Northhampton.

Fin. lev. in Oct. S. Hill. 11 L. 2.
The Manor of Arnehale (possibly Arnales) 11 ^. 2. by Fine was settled on Raph
de Crophill, and Ma^d his wife, and the heirs of their bodies; remainder to the
right heirs of Raph. The Jury, 14 H. 6. found that the Manors of Arnald, and
of Tiercewell, were by Fine, 5 H. 5. settled on John Merbury, Esquire, and
Agnes his wife, Esc. 14 H. 6. n. 32.
and the heirs of their bodies, etc. and that the Manor of Arnald was held of
Margaret* who had been the wife of Sir Thomas Rempston, Knight, as of her
Manor of Arnald, and that Walter Devereux, Esquire, was Cousin and heir of the
said Agnes, viz. son of Walter, son of the said Agnes. The Jury, 16 H. 6. found
the same, Esc. 16 H. 6. n. 43.
saving that Elizabeth, wife of Walter Devereux, was daughter and next heir of
John Merbury.

A Fine was levied at Westminster. the day after the Ascension, 8 H. 4. between Sir
Roger Leech, Fin. in crast. Ascen. 8 H. 4.
Knight, William Babington, John Folejambe, and Peter de la Pole, Quer. and
William Bourghchier, Knight, and Anne his wife, Deforc. of the Manor of
Arnall, with the Appurtenances, whereby it was settled on the said John
Folejambe, and his heirs. Sibylla Beauchamp, when she died, Esc. 7 H. 5.237.
about 7 H. 5. held two parts of the Manor of Arnall; the remainder was to Sir
Roger Leech, and others.

Sir Nicholas de Strelley, Knight, Esc. 9 H. 6. n. 28.
9 H. 6. died seized of two Bovats of Land, and twelve Acres of Meadow in
Strelley, which in his life time he held of Margaret, the wife of Sir Thomas
Rempston, as of her Manor of Arnale. Par. 3. pat. 19 H. 6. n. 27.
Margaret, the wife of Sir Thomas Rempston, Knight, Nicholas Wymbish, and
others, 19 H. 6. had pardon for having acquired of Sir William Plumpton,
Knight, Cousin and heir of John Folejambe, the Manor of Arnall without the
Kings license. She died 32 H^ 6. solely seized of the Manor of Arnall, Esc. 32
H. 6.
Sir Thomas Rempston being then her son and heir.

The 20 H. 6. the Castle and Manor of Wressyll in Yorkshire, Par. 2. pat. 20
H. 6. m. 12.
the Manors of Burwell, Ledenham, and Washingburgh in Lincolneshire, and the
Manor of Bullwell, and also the Fee Farm Rent of 10l. per annum, in Arnall in
this County, were granted to Raph Crumwell, Knight, and his heirs. By an
Inquisition taken at Nottingham the Thursday after Palm Sunday, 23 H. 7. before
Sir William Perpoint, Sir Edward Stanhope, Knights, Raph Agard, etc. concerning
intrusions, or hauntings in the Kings Forest or Chases, Ex Inq. pen. meips.
etc. it appears that Sir William Hastings, Knight, was seized in the Manors
of Lamley, Arnald, and an Annual Rent of 10l. called Everingham Fee in Gedling,
and died the 24 Iun. 1 E. 5. whose widow Katherin Hastings held them till 20
Apr. 12 H. 7. and from that, till the taking the said Inquisition, William de
Hastings, one of his younger sons, had the Manor of Arnall, and Everingham
Fee, and Richard de Hastings, another, the Manor of Lamley. All Mess. Lands
and Tenements in Arnall, Par. 8. pat. 2, and 3 Ph. and Ma.
parcel of the possessions of William Hastings, Esquire, 24 March, 2, and 3
Ph. and Mar. were granted to John Parratt, Knight, and his heirs.

The Manor of Arnall came to the Family of Hastings, B.
and 4 E. 4. to George Duke of Clarence, and after it was John Beaumonts, who,
in the time of Edward the sixth, conveyed the same to the Crown, with other
Lands, in satisfaction of a great debt due for the arrears of his Office, as
Receiver general of the Court of Wards; it anciently consisted of a small
Demesne, and the main part of it were Copyholders of Inheritance; they in King
James's time purchased the Manor for the preservation of their Customs and
Commons, the Township being within the Forest of Shirewood, and Mr. William
Stanhope, half brother to Philip first Earl of Chesterfeild, has the Demesnes.

Another Manor was Sir Thomas Rempstons, and came after to the Lord Ferrers of
Chartley, and was late the inheritance of Samuel Cludd, Gent.

Part. 6. pat. 41 Eliz.
The Rectory of Arnall, 24 Aug. 41 Eliz. was granted to John Flint, and William
Ienkinson, and their heirs, at the extent of six pounds per annum.

Mss. I. M.
The Vicarage of Arnell was 8l. when the Dean of Leicestre was Patron. It Is now
7l. 18s. 1d. ob. value in the Kings Books, and the Earl of Devonshire Patron.

Eastwood. Eastwayt. And Estewic.
IN Estwic before the Conquest Vlfechetel had a Manor which answered for four
Bovats to the Dane-geld or Tax. This was afterward William Peverells, but was
then waste. In the Confessors time it was 5s. value.

Regist. de Lent. p. 49, and 50.
Henry de Gray Lord of Codnour, and of Estweit, for the Souls of Sir Henry de
Gray, and the Lady Ysolda his wife, and of his own Father and Mother, and other
his and their Ancestors, and all the faithful departed, released to the Priory
of Lenton all claim and right of Common of Pasture in a place called Fulwood,
either beloning to his Castle of Codnour, or his Town of Estwait, or his
Villains there: To his Deed were Witnesses Sir Richard de Gray, Sir Henry de
Perpount, Sir Gervas de Clifton, Sir Galfr. de Stapleford, Knights, and others.

In the year 1286. Ranulf Paskayl of Estwait, Ib.
for himself, his heirs, Freeholders, and Villains, released to the said Priory
all the like claim and right of Common in the said Wood called Fulwood: to his
Deed were Witnesses Robert de Kymmerley, Regist. de Lent. p. 50. and 49.
William de Belew, Robert de Watenhowe, John Passeys, Robert Francis, and
others. William Pascayl of Estwait did the like, and so did William, son of
Godefrey de Estwait, and Thomas, son of William de le Rode of the same, and
diverse others, by which means the Priory had that Fulwood entire to themselves,
and enclosed; Pl. de Banc. cor. Rege, Mi^^. 18 E. 1. to. 71.
it whereupon, 18 E. 1. Adam, Parson of the Church of Esthwayt impleaded the
Prior of Lenton, and others, because they disseised him of Common of Pasture in
about one hundred and fifty Acres of Pasture in Fulwode; the said Prior pleaded
that Fulwode was neither Burgh, Town (Village) nor Hamlet, which the Parson
could not gainsay, and so was cast. Adam de Markham the same time had another
Assise or Trial, Ib. rot. 73.
being the same Parson of the Church of Esthwait, for the same, and then the
Prior pleaded it was in Newthorp, which the Jury found to be so, and that the
said Parson ought not to Common there.

A Fine was levied at York, Fin. apud Ebor. a die S. Ioh. Bap. in 15. d^es, and
postea in Oct. S. Martini, 10 E. 3.
10 E. 3. between Ranulf Pascail of Estweyt, Quer. and John Arnald, Deforc. of
the third part of the Manor of Estweyt, which was thereby settled on the said
Ranulph for life; remainder on Ranulf his son, and Ioane, the daughter of Roger
de Vston, and the heirs of their bodies; remainder on William, brother of the
said Ranulph, the son of Ranulph, and the heirs of his body; remainder to
Ioane, the sister of William, and the heirs of hers; then to Isabell, and then
to Agnes her sisters, in like manner; remainder to the right heirs of the said
Ranulph Pascail. Pascails part became the Tevereys of Stapleford. B.


Hugh Teverey, Esc. 9 H. 8.
son and heir of Robert Teverey, Esquire, and husband of Elizabeth, daughter of
Hugh Willoughby of Riseley, 7 Mar. 8 H. 8. died seized of 10s. yearly Rent
here, which, 24 H. 7. was passed to Thomas Bapthorp Chr. son and heir apparent
of Raph Bapthorp, and others, for the use of the said Hugh, and his said wife
Elizabeth, by the name of the Manor of Estwayt; but the Jury at that
Inquisition taken at Stapulford, 25 Oct. 9 H. 8. after the death of the said
Hugh, who left his son Robert Teverey, his heir, and then above twenty one
years old, found that the said 10s. Rent was held of Sir Henry Willoughby, as
of the Manor of Estwayt. However some Lands here came by inheritance from the
Tevereys to William Palms, Esquire, with Stapleford, and Eyton in Darbyshire,
and other Lands, which he got an Act of Parliament to enable him to sell, and
has sold this accordingly to Hen. Harrison, 1668.

The Lord Greyes part descended it seems to the Family of Zouch, as in Toueton
may be seen. Sir John Zouch, 19 Iun. 28 Eliz. died seized of it, leaving John
Zouch, Esquire, Ex Inq.
his son and heir five Months above twenty one years of age and more, as the
Inquisition taken at Darby that year, 19 Sept. after his death shows. Howbeit I
find that this Manor, B.
after the death of the last Lord Gray, Regist. de Felley.
was bought of the King by Sir Henry Willoughby, who sold it to Sir John Port,
and so it afterward came to the Family of Stanhope, by the marriage of
Margaret, one of his daughters and coheirs to Sir Thomas Stanhope, and, as I
think, was sold by Arthur Stanhope, Esquire, one of the sons of Philip, first
Earl of Chesterfeild, not long since [ viz. 1657.] to Huntington Plumptre,
Esquire, Doctor of Physic, whose son and heir Henry is now Lord of it.

Thomas Aleyn, and Emme his wife, 21 E. 4. levied a Fine of twenty Acres of
Pasture in Estwayt called Gressebreeches to Gervas Clifton, Fin. a die Pas^. in
un. Mensem. 21 E. 4. In crast. Purif. 22 E. 4. Mss. I. M.
Esquire, and 22 E. 4. of thirty Acres of Land there.

The Rectory of Estwait was 6l. when H. Lord Gray of Codnor was Patron. It Is
now in the Kings Books 4l. 13s. 1d. ob. and Arthur Stanhope, Esquire, Patron.
But now, viz. 1674. Henry Plumptre, Esquire, is Patron.

Newthorpe.
PArt of this Village was of R. Earl Moritons Fee, in the time of the
Conqueror, which before was Aelayns or Aluins, who had one Bov. for the Geld.
The Land was two Bov. There was Pasture Wood, eight qu. long, half.... broad.
Lib. Dooms.
This was 2s. value in the Confessors time, in the Conquerours but 12d. But
the better part of this Township was William Peverells Fee, wherein before he
had it was a Manor or two, which Grunchel had, one whereof was rated to the
Geld at 5^ Bovats. The Land being half a Car. In the Conquerours time this was
waste, and but 2s. In the Confessors it had been 5s. Another was taxed at five
Bov. to the Geld. And the Land of it was also half a Car. and had a B^rew in
Chinemerley, where were two Bov. waste. William Peverell gave what he had here
to his Priory of Lenton, as in that place may be seen; and Robert, son of John
de Newthorp, Reg. Felley.
gave to it something in Folewoode.

Earl Moritons Fee it seems came very anciently to the honor of Leices^er,
Regist. de Bellavalle.
and was held of the Lords of Goteham. Sir John de St. Andrew, 28 E. 3. gave
8s. Rent, Esc. 28 E. 3. ^. 27.
issuing out of a Mess. and Virgat of Land in Neuthorp, to find a Light in the
Conventual Church of Lenton, as he should order it. John of Gaunt confirmed to
Robert de Teversalt Vicar of Greseley (who had it for, and conveyed it to, the
Priory of Beauvale) one Mess. seven Tofts, two Bovats, and sixty Acres of Land,
and 12s. 7d. yearly Rent, with the Appurtenances, which he held of Julian the
relict of Sir John de St. Andrew Chr. and John Samon in Newthorpe by the
Service of 2s. per annum, and they of the Honor of Leicester. Robert de St.
Andrew of Goteham, granted license to the said Vicar of Greseley, Ex Reg. de
Beauvale.
to give it to the Priory of Beauvale, and so did John Samon of Nottingham for
a third part, according to the division mentioned in Goteham. This Land was
most of it held by William Ferrour of Neuthorp, who passed it to the Vicar
also, and his son John Ferrour confirmed it, being all the Land, Rents and
Services, which the said William had in Neuthorp, except the Mess. he dwelt in,
which was not passed at that time.

William de Hickeling Rector of Thornore, referred a Controversy between him
and the Prior of Beauvale, concerning a certain Rent of 6s. 6d. issuing out of
a Mess. and two Bovats of Land, and one Cottage of his inheritance in Neuthorp,
which was held by William Ward of Kymerley, husband of his sister Maud, to Sir
Nicholas Strelley, William Babington, Thomas Hunte, and William Wollaton, to
Arbitrate, who determined the Rent to be due to the Priory, seeing the Land was
held of Robert de Kemerley, as of his Manor of Kemerley, whose right the
Priory then had.

Beat^ix, sometime wife of Robert de Watton, gave to the Priory of Lenton two
Bovats in Neuthorp, reserving 2s. a year Rent by the consent of William de
Heriz her Son-in-law, Regist. de Len^. 51, 52.
and her daughter his wife.

Robert, son of Robert de Kynmerley, and Roger Prior of Lenton, agreed that
there should be a division made between the Woods of the said Priory, and the
Wood of the said Robert in Neuthorp. Robert le Vava^ur of Chyppeley, was to
fence the Priors Wood, which lay next a certain Holme in Newthorp, which Roger
the Prior of Lenton gave him and his heirs, from any loss or damage it should
(sustain or) have from his Millers, or people coming to his Mill, or else
suffer the Prior to shut it up close.

The Prior of Lenton enfeoffed Hugh, son of Peter de Halum, in one Bovat in
Newthorp for the sum of four Marks and an half, which William and Raph his
sons returned to the Monastery again.

John, son of Thomas Leech [medicus] of Neuthorp, 22 E. 1. released all Actions
and demands to William Prior of Lenton, who was his Guardian when he was under
age.

William le Ferrour, 25 E. 3. released to the Prior of Lenton all his right and
claim in the Lands and Tenements of Raph de Neuthorp, and all his own Goods
which were in his house where the said Raph dwelt.

Raph de Annesley the elder, and Agnes his wife, Pl. de Banc. Pasc. 17 E. 2.
to. 25.
17 E. 2. recovered their seism of one Mess. twenty one Acres of Land, and two
parts of a Mill in Neuthorp against Peter de Cressey, and others, and twenty
Marks damage, for which they desired execution, and had it granted.

The Manor of Newthorp, Par. 1. pat. 37 H. 8.
and diverse Lands there, late belonging to the Monastery of Lenton, 13 July,
37 H. 8. were granted to John Mylle, and George Mill.

As those belonging to Beauvall were, 8 July, Par. 8. pat. 33 H. 8. Lib. 2.
s^ed. post mort. fol. 193, and fol. 138.
33 H. 8. to William Hussy. The Land of Sir William Hussy, Knight, who died 10
Ian. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. descended to Richard Deisney, and Neile his wife, and
Francis Columbell, and Anne his wife, daughters and heirs of the said Sir
William, who held in Newthorpe and Underwood seven Mess. twenty Cottages, one
Water-Mill, two hundred Acres of Land, thirty of Meadow, one hundred and fifty
of Pasture, thirteen of Wood, and 14s. 6d. Rent, besides Lands and Tenements in
the County of Lincoln, in Leake, Leverton, Skerbe^k, and Halowell, and the
Rectory of Bouby, and Saxby, and the Manor of Stratton in Rutland. That which
was granted to Milles, B.
37 H. 8. was the same year sold to William Bolles.

Greyseley. Griseley.
IN Griseley, before the Norman Invasion, Vlsi had two Manors, one was rated
to the Geld at four Bovats. The Land one Car. There William Peverell, whose Fee
it afterward became, Lib. Dooms.
had one Car. five Vill. two Board. having three Car. There was a Priest and a
Church, Pasture Wood, nine qu. long, and six broad. In the Confessors time
this was 16s. value, in the Conquerours but 10s. The other was also rated to
the public Geld or Tax at four Bov. and the Land was likewise certified to be
one Car. but this was waste when the great Survey was made in the Conquerours
time, and Aylric held it of William Peverell.

William de Griseley, 5 Steph. gave account of ten Marks of Silver for a
Covenant of Land between him and Raph Barret. Rot. Pip. ^ Steph.
I suppose this William of the same Family with Hugh, son of Richard, mentioned
in Lenton, who gave Land in Claindon, because his next successor, which I have
met with here, was Raph de Gras^le, who, 13 Ioh. was certified to ^old three
Knights Fees of the honor of Peverell of Not. one in this Grasele, Inq. 13
Ioh. in lib. rubr.
and two in Clayndon in Buckinghamshire. Fin. par. 1.15 Ioh. m. 11.
Raph de Grasele, 15 Ioh. made Fine with the King five hundred Marks for having
the Land which was Robert de Muscamps, Father of Isabell, wife of the said
Raph, and that he might marry Agnes his daughter to Robert Lupus; and if he
should happen not to have her (as it is most like he had not) then he would
marry her by the Kings advice and will: and there was a Precept, 23 November. to
the Sheriff of Not. and Derb. that when the Sheriffs of Buckinghamshire,
Yorkshire, Lincolneshire, and Staffordshire, should certify that they had
taken their proportions of security for the payment of that Money, that he
should do so for the rest, and forthwith deliver full seisin to the said Raph,
of all those Lands in his Bayliwick.

This Raph, 17 Ioh. had a Son-in-law called Hugh Fitz-Raph, Claus. 17 Ioh. m.
1* in do^so.
who was one of those great Men (or Barons) who took up Arms against the King.

Hugh Fitz-Raph, and Agnes his wife, daughter and heir of Raph de Gresele, Pip.
12 H. 3.
12 H. 3. gave account of 15l. for their Relief, of three Knights Richardus de
Hugo de Willielmus de Grisele Radulp. de Gresele-Isabella. Agnes fill. and
haer.-Hugo fill. Rad. Radulphus Nic. de Cantelup fra^er Will. de Cantelup, mar.
1.-Eustachia fill. and haer.-Will. de Roos de Ingmanthorp, mar. 2. Willielmus de
Cantelup 2 Nichol. de Cantelup fundator de Beauval, ob. 29 E. 3.-Typhania
ux.-Joana ux. 2. Willielmus de Cantelup Nichol. de Cantelup s. p. Willielmus de
Cantelup s. p.

1 Willielmus s. p.
Willielmus de Roos-Isabella. Robertus de Ros.


Hugo.





Robertus de Muskam Senescal. G. de Gaunt Hugo de Muscam Robertus de
Muscamp-....soro^ Fulc. Castilon. Radulp. de Gresele-Isabella. Rob. de Muscam
s. p.-Agnes soror Almerici de Gassi, mil. Hugo s. p.-Idonia. And^. s. p.
Hugo.


Fees, which the said Raph held of the honor of Peverell of Not. viz. two in
Claindon, and one Fee in Gresele, with the Appurtenances. Hugh Fitz-Raph, 36 H.
3. 10 April, had Free Warren granted in all his Demesne Lands in Gresele, Chapter
36. H. 3. m. 16.
and Muscamp in this County, and Elkesdon in Darbyshire, where he had also a
Market and a Fair, on the Eve of the Assumption of the blessed Mary. He had a
son called Hugh, but Eustachia, Reg. Ruford p. 90. Ex bundell. de a^nis incert.
H. 3. to. 192. Com. Hill. 49 H. 3. to. 8. Esc. 2 E. 2. n. 51.
daughter and heir of his son Raph was his heir, and Nicholas de Cantelupe (of
Hartfordshire) who had to wife Eustachia, the Niece and heir of Hugh Fitz-Raph,
had the Knights Fee in Greseley, 49 H. 3. which the said Hugh, then dead, held
of the King in Capite.

The Jury, 2 E. 2. found that William de Cantelupe held this Manor at his
death of Sir William de Roos of Ingmanthorp, who held it by the Courtesy of
England, as the inheritance of Eustachia his quondam wife, mother of the said
William de Cantelupe, whose son William de Cantelup was then his heir, and of
the age of sixteen years.

The King, Apr. 14 E. 3. granted license to Nicholas de Cantelupe and his
heirs, Prim. pars Claus. 14 E. 3. m. 23.
to strengthen or fortify his mansion House of Grysele in the County of Not.
and to embattel it; from this time it was called a Castle. And here was
likewise a Park, Regist. de Beauvale.
wherein this Nicholas de Cantelupe Founded the Monastery of Beauvale, whom I
guess to be the brother of that William, last named under age: yet some might
think of his Father rather, because this Nicholas, by his son and heir William,
had a Grandson of his own name, who was Witness to his Charter of Foundation of
that Priory, bearing date 9 December. 17 E. 3. though the Book of Beauvale, in
the Descent Printed in the Monasticon Angl. makes the said Founder to be son
and heir of that first William de Cantelupe very positively, Mon. Angl. vel. 1.
p. 963.
but how much it is mistaken in some other parts of this Descent, these notes
will in some sort discover to any who will take the pains to consider it.

At the Assizes at Darby, 30 E. 3. Ioane, who had been the wife of Nicholas de
Cantelupe, Assis. Derb. 30 E. 3. to. 37.
impleaded William de Cantelupe Chr. Raph Fawconberg, and others, for fifty
Mess. twenty Tofts, one Mill, and ten Carucats of Land, one hundred Acres of
Meadow, two hundred of Pasture, and two of Wood, and ten Marks of Rent in
Ilkeston: Raph Fauconberg, produced a writing of the said Ioane, by the name of
Ioane de Kym, whereby she released the said Tenements, and the Castle of
Greseley in the County of Not. but she denied it to be her Deed, and recovered
the Manor of Ilkeston; as she did at the Assizes at Nottingham the same year,
Assis. Not. 30 E. 3. to. 46.
30 E. 3. the Castle of Greseley, thirteen Mess. three Carucats of Land, twenty
Acres of Meadow, two hundred of Pasture, one thousand of Wood, and 10l. Rent,
and William de Cantelupe, and the rest were amerced.

Lib. de Fin. in Scac. Trin. 13 R. 2. fol. 205.
In Trinity Term, 13 R. 2. William la Zouch of Bramfeild, son and heir of
William la Zouch of Haringworth, Knight, then dead, held the Manor of
Elkeston, of the Lord of Bellomonte, then within age, and in the Kings custody,
as of the honor of Folkingham; and the same Term William la Zouch of
Harringworth, Knight, held the Castle of Greyselegh, and a certain parcel of
Land in Kymerle, etc.

Fin. 14 R. 2. m. 12. Ebor.
By an Inquisition taken in Yorkshire, 26 Feb. 14 R. 2. it appears that William
de Cantelup, Chivaler, then dead, held the Manor of Ravensthorpe, with the
members, viz. Thrilly and Boltby, and diverse Lands in Azerlawe and Braythwat;
and that John, son and heir of John de Hastings late Earl of Pembroke, son of
John, son of Laurence, son of John, son of John, son of Ioane, daughter and one
of the heirs of Will. de Cantelupe, brother of Nic. de Cantelupe, Father of
Will. Father of Nic. Father of Will. Father of Will. de Cantelupe, who died
within age, without heir of his body; and Will. la Zouche Chr. son of Eudo, son
of William, son of Millecente, daughter, and another of the heirs of William de
Cantelupe, brother of Nicolas, Father of William, Father of Nicolas, Father of
William, Father of the said William de Cantelupe, who died without heirs of his
body, were at that time found the next heirs of the said William de Cantelupe,
Es^. 19 R. 2. n. 34.
etc. William la Zouche, about 19 R. 2. died seized of this Castle and Manor,
and the Advowson of the Priory of Beauvale, and William le Zouch his son was
found his heir. Es^. 3 H. 5. p. 174.
William le Zouch Chr. who long before his death settled the Castle of
Gresseley on William Lord Roos of Hamlak Chr. and others, about 3 H. 5. left
William his son and heir.

B.
From the Lord Zouch this Lordship came to the Crown, and was by King Henry the
seventh, granted to Sir John Savage, Knight, (mentioned in Granby.) Sir John
Manners, Grandfather of the present Earl of Rutland (who is now Lord of it,
June 16. 1673.) purchased it of Sir John Savage, and Sir Thomas Savage Lord
Savage, Father of John Earl of Rivers, and Grandfather of the present Earl
Thomas.

Mss. I. M.
The Vicarage of Gres^ey was 8l. when the Prior of Beauvale was Patron. It Is now
8l. 5s. 0. in the Kings Books, and Arthur Capell, Esquire, Patron.

Bevall. Beauvale.
NIcolas de Cantelupe Lord of Ilkeston in Darbishire (mentioned in Greseley)
having obtained license of King Edward the third, Ex Regist. de Beauvale.
dated 22 September. in the sixteenth year of his Reign, Founded a Monastery in
his Park of Greyseley, for a Prior and twelve Monks, of the Order of the
Carthusians, to which he gave ten pounds, per annum, of Land and Rent, in the
Towns of Gryseley and Selleston, together with the Park of Gryseley, and the
Advowsons of the Churches of both the said Towns, which he got appropriated:
And this he devoutly did for the glory of Almighty God, and the increase of
Religion, and the Divine Worship, and for the good or healthful state of the
said King Edward the third, and of William la Zouch the Lord Archbishop of
York, his most dear Lord and Cousin, Ib.
and of the Lord Henry de Lancastre Earl of Darby, and of himself, and Ioane
his wife, and William his son and heir, while they should live, and for the
Souls of the said King, and of all the rest, when they should die, and for the
Soul of Tiphania his former wife, and of his Father and Mother, and all his
Progenitors and heirs; wherefore he by his special Deed, gave to God and the
blessed Trinity, Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, and the Prior and Monks of
the Carthusian Order in the Monastery called (the fair Vale) Bellavallis, which
he had builded for them in his said Park of Gryseley, and their Successors,
there serving God according to the Custom, Order, and Rule of the Mother Church
of the Carthusians, the said Monastery and Park of Gryseley adjoining, and
three hundred Acres of Land, ten Mess. twelve Bovats, with the Appurtenances in
Gryseley, which Richard le Carter, John Pygot, Robert Neubell, John le Carter,
Thomas Dey, Roger Pygot, Hugh, son of Agnes, John le Maisterman, Henry le
Cartre, Richard Sareson, Roger Dey, Thomas de Fulwode, and Hugh de Pynkeston
his Natives, or Villains, held of him in the said Town in Villanage, together
with the said Villains, their Chattels, Sequels, and Sects, and also 3s. Rent
of John Whitteberwe in the Town of Selleston, and 4s. 4d. of like yearly Rent
of John Arnold in the same Town. As also thirteen Messuages, and seventeen
Bovats and an half, with their Appurtenances in the said Town of Selleston,
which Robert le Coke, John above the Kirk, Nicholas le Schipherd, William le
Tayllour, William, son of Richard le Wright, Thomas le Mough, Nicola, who had
been wife of Richard le Wright, John, son of Richard le Wright, Robert, son of
William Coke, and Thomas Cabald his Natives, held in that Town in Villanage,
together with those Natives, and all that were born of them, Ib.
and their Suits and Services (here also called Sects and Sequells) and
likewise the said Advowsons of the Churches of the said Towns of Gryseley and
Selleston, with all their rights and Appurtenances. He also granted that the
said Prior and Monks, and their successors, should have Common of Pasture for
all manner of Cat^le whatsoever, wheresoever they couched, or from whencesoever
they came, through his whole Dominion or Lordship, and Demesnes of Gresly and
Selleston, in all places and times where his other Freeholders had, and that
they should have Stone for all the work of the Church and their Houses, and
Marle to Marle their Lands in all the said places, except his Park of
Kirkestall: To this Deed were Witnesses his said Cousin the Archbishop of
York, Richard Bishop of Durham, Thomas of Linc. Roger of Coventre and
Lichfeild, Henry de Lancastre Earl of Darby, William Earl of Northampton, and
William Earl of Hundyngton, John de Gray, William Dencourt, William de Gray of
Sandiacre, Knights, William his own son and heir, and Nicholas, son of that
William, Robert Barnak, William Facumbrige, and others: this was dated at
Gryseley, 9 December. 1343. 17 E. 3. as was also another of his, partly to this
purpose, but something shorter, which had other Witnesses, viz. Sir Richard de
Wyleby, Robert de Streuley, William de Gray, John de Annesley, Knights, Hugh
Martell, John A^tecarre, William Dauvers, and others, by which it appears very
probable at least, that in those days they were not more precise in the date
of their Deeds, in reference to either time or place of sealing, than they are
now. In the year 1347. 21 E. 3. by another Deed dated at Gryseley, the
twentieth of October. before the same Witnesses, saving that Thomas was then
instead of Richard Bishop of Durham, and John instead of Thomas of Lincoln, Ib.
and William Gray of Sandiacre was wanting, the said Nicholas de Cantelupe his
son and heir, William, having, by his instant supplication, obtained license of
the King for 20l. per annum, of Land and Rents in the Towns of Gresly,
Seleston, Watnowe, Kynmarly, and Neuthorpe, to be given to the said Prior and
Covent, and their Successors, did for the same reasons, and as before is
expressed, give five Mess. one Mill, and forty Acres of Land, with the
Appurtenances in Gresley and Watnowe, and all his Demesne of the said Town of
Selleston, and a great company of his Villains, with the Messuages and Bovats
of Land which they held in Watnowe, with all their Chattels, Suits, and
Sequels, and 16s. 6d. yearly Rent, out of the Lands which Thomas de Gratton
held of him in Selleston, and as much out of the Lands and Tenements, which
Ioane, who had been the wife of William le Cressy held in the same Town, and
diverse small Rents in Greseley, and the Reversions of twenty one Acres which
Thomas le Purchaceour held of him for life in Watnow, and of a Mess. and six
Acres of Land on the North side of the Castle in Greseley, which William de
Beaurepayr held for life, and of another, and five Acres, and one Rood of Land,
which William de Worthington, and Agnes his wife, held for life, on the North
side also of the Castle, etc.

King Richard the second, granted license to Elizabeth, who had been the wife
of Sir Brian Stapleton, the younger, Knight, and to William de Rither Chr. and
Sibyll his wife, to give to the Prior and Covent of Beauvale, each of them
forty shillings a year out of their respective moyeties of the Manors of
Kirkbye Orblawers, and Kereby, for two Monks more especially to celebrate in
the Church of Beauvale, for the Souls of Will. de Aldburgh the elder Chivaler,
and Eliz. his wife, Ib.
and Will. de Aldburgh his son and heir (brother of the said Eliz. and Sibyll)
and Margery his wife, and of Edward Balid Chr. which they did accordingly, and
William Rither, and Sibyll his wife, Mich. 18 R. 2. levied a Fine; which Rents,
after some time of intermission of payment, William de Rither, Knight, their
son, and Robert de Rither, Knight, his son and heir, restored to Thomas
Metheley the Prior and his successors, he forgiving them all the Arrears,
except 40s. of silver, which they were to satisfy to the Noble and Reverend
Guy Fairfax, which he had paid to the said Prior and Covent, for which the said
William and Sibyll, and William and Robert their Wives and Children in their
lives, and after their deaths, were to have full participation of all the
Masses, Prayers, Psalms, Watchings, Disciplines, Fastings, Alms* and other
spiritual exercises of the said House of Beauvale.

William de Aldburgh Chr. for the Soul of his Lord Edward de Balliol King of
Scotland, and of Elizabeth his own wife, and that himself might be as one of
the Founders, and the King of Scotland as a principal Benefactor, in the
participation of the spiritual benefits of that House, with some others also of
his near Kindred, did by his Deed, bearing date at Willey Hay, 10 Febr. 1362.
37 E. 3. give and confirm the said Hay of Willey, to the said Prior and Covent
of Beauvale, which he had of Sir Thomas Metham* Knight, heir to his great
Grandfather Adam, son of Adam de Hamelton, to whom King Edward the first
granted it in the ninth year of his Reign, reserving 10l. per annum Rent to be
paid yearly into the Exchequer, which said Fee Farm Rent of 10l. King Edward
the third, 1 January, in the thirty second year of his Reign, granted to his
beloved Servant John Attewode for term of his life, and the Reversion of it,
26 May, Ib.
in the thirty seventh year of his Reign, to his beloved Cousin Edward de
Balliol King of Scotland, and William de Aldburgh Chr. with license likewise
for them to give it to this Priory, which they did that same year, having
obtained of John Attewode the possession also, so that the said Edward Balliol
King of Scotland might from thence-forward likewise enjoy all the benefits of
that House, Ib.
as one of the Founders.

They had the Rectory of Ferneham at the first Foundation, which Sir William
Malbis, Sir William de Plumpton, and Sir Robert de Roos of Ingmanthorp, passed
to Robert de Barnak, Hugh de Cressy, and Hugh Martell, and they to the Founder
Nicholas de Cantelupe.

John of Gaunt, granted license to Sir William de Fincheden, Knight, Richard de
Ravenser Archdeacon of Lincoln, Mr. Nicholas de Chaddesden, Richard de
Chesterfeild, and Richard de Tyssington, Clarks, to give the Manor of Etwelle
in Darbyshire, to this Priory, to pray for him while he lived, and for his
Soul, and the Soul of his wife Blanch when dead, which John de Ryboef also
released to the Prior and Covent.

All they got was valued to 196l. 6s. 0. per annum, and after the dissolution
most of it, 8 July, 33 H. 8. was granted to Sir William Hussy, Par. 8. pat. 33
H. 8.
and the heirs males of his body at 21l. 11s. 9d. ob. Rent, viz. the Site of
the Priory of Bevall, and diverse Lands in Gresley, Hucknall, Bagthorpe,
Westwood, Watnow Cauntcliff, Watnow Chaworth, Brokebresting, Bulwell,
Moregreen, 3 part. Or. 37 H. 8. to. 49.
Kymberley, and Etwell, and the Rectory of Ferneham, and Lands in Underwood and
Newthorp, 37 H. 8.

Par. 2. pat. 4 E. 6.
But all these, and the Manor of Selston, were 22 Nov. 4 E. 6. granted to
Richard Morison, and Brigitt his wife, and the heirs of Richard, at the value
of 168l. 10s. 7d. yearly. The Lord Capell married the heir of Morison, and with
his posterity, the Earl of Essex, they still continue.

Watnow. Watenot. Chaworth. And Cantelup.
WAtenot was all of William Peverells Fee, of which here was Soc to Nutchale,
as much as was rated to the Geld at two Bovats. Grunchel had a Manor here
before the Conquest, which then paid to the Dane-geld as one Car. The Land
being found to be so much. Lib. Dooms.
There William Peverel had three Car in Demesne, Pasture Wood five qu. long,
two broad. Another Manor Siuvart had, which paid for two Bov. to the public
Tax, and had Soc in Watenot. Grim had of this Soc one Bov. for the Geld had Soc
in Bulwell; Almar had also of this Soc which paid the Geld for two Bov. The
Land one Car. There was in Demesne one Car. one Sochm. two Vill. two Board.
having one Car. Pasture Wood five qu. long, four broad. This kept the old value
40s. Gozelinus and Grunchel held it when the Conquerours Survey was taken.

Gocelinus is mentioned in Lenton amongst William Peverels Men, who gave two
parts of the Tithes of their Demesnes to that Priory at the Foundation.

Lib. rubr. fol. 151.
In 13 Ioh. Robert, son of William de Alfreton, was certified to hold three
Knights Fees in these two Counties of Not. and Derb. of the Escheat of
Peverell, viz. in Moniasse and Roudesle one Fee, in Calvour half one, in
Watenho half one, in Woodburgh half one, and in Hadsop and Bramcote half a
Knights Fee: this descended by inheritance to the Family of Chaworth; as it
seems another part of this Township did from the Lords of Greyseley to that of
Cantelupe, which made the common distinction, which is yet in use, of Watnow
Chaworth, and Watnow Cauntcliff, the latter of which, all or most of it, became
the possession of Bevall Priory, by the gift of the Founder, as in that place
may be discerned, and some likewise that Monastery got afterward in the former.

Raph, son of Hugh de Redinges (sometimes, Test. de N^v.
as I take it, called Hugh de Watenhou) gave to the Priory of Lenton a Bovat of
Land in Watenhow, which Toly held, Regist. de Lent. p. 42.
and afterward Galfr. Stoyle, which, during his life, he held himself, paying
the Monastery 16d. a year, but after his death the Priory might dispose of it
as their other Lands; and he granted Common to their Tenant, as the rest of the
Men of Watenhow had in all places; he gave it to the Monks to make an
Anniversary for his Father, and left a bitter Curse for his heirs, if any of
them should attempt to go against or hinder his gift. The Monks demised it to
Robert, son of Roger de Watenhow for his life; and after that, when Sir Simon
de Hedon was Sheriff, in the time of Henry the third, to Sir Robert de Lathom,
during his life, for a Noble yearly; and afterward in 5 E. 1. to Robert, son
of Robert de Watenhowe, for the same Rent, during his life.

This half Fee which Thomas Chaworth had, lay half of it in Ridinges in
Derbishire. Vis. Coll. S^ut. 4 E. 2. in S^ac.
Hugh de Watenhow paid for half a Knights Fee here, one Mark in the beginning
of Henry the third, Test. de Nev.
and Robert de Watenhow afterward held it.

Hugo de Redings vel de Watenhow Regi^t. de Lent. p. 41.
Matheus. Radulphus. Rogerus Robertus de Watenhou Robertus de Watnow.



But in Nom. Vill. 9 E. 2. Robert de Kinmarley is certified to be Lord. Nom.
Vill.


William Fox, and Margaret his wife, 8 E. 1. acknowleded one Mess. and sixteen
Acres of Land in Watenowe, Pl. de I^^. and Assis. apud Not. cra^t. animar. 8
E. 1. to. 11.
and Brokebresting to be the right of Robert de Strelley.

A Fine was levied at Not. the Monday next after the Feast of St. Martin, 3 E.
3. between William de Mekisburgh of Nottingham, Quer. and John de Hacunthorpe
of Watnowe Chauworthe, and Agnes his wife, Deforc. who acknowledged the Manor
of Watnowe Chauworthe (the inheritance of the said Agnes) whereof Joan, who had
been the wife of Stephen de Kinmarle, then held two parts in Dower, to be the
right of the said William.

When the Aid, 22 E. 3. of forty shillings for every Knights Fee, Lib. de feod.
in Com. Not. Inq. 22 E. 3.
to make the Kings eldest son a Knight, was gathered, William de Amyas was
found to hold the fourth part of a Knights Fee in Watenhowe, which Robert de
Kynmerley held in former time. John Wollaton of Nottingham, Cousin and heir of
William Amyas, Claus. 20 H. 6. m. 34.
late of Not. remised 20 H. 6. to John Vicount Beaumont, and others, all his
right in the Manor of Watenowe Chaworth, late William Wollatons his brothers.
William Wollaton pardoned the Prior and Covent of Bevall, Regist. de Beauvalt.
for acquiring of Robert Vicar of Greseley, without his license, one Mess. and
one Bovat in Watnow Chaworth, sometime Hugh Cressyes, and eight Acres of Land,
which was Richard Selstons in the same Town held of him, and five Tofts, and
fifteen Acres of Land in Brokebresting, sometimes John de Pynkestons, and
others, which were held of him and John Skiffelyn of Broxtow, which he and John
his son also confirmed to the Priory.

Richard Bingham of Watnow Chaworth, married Anne, Descript. Leicest. by Will.
B^^ton, p. 195.
one of the four sisters and heirs of Sir Nicholas Strelley of Lindeby, and by
her had Anne, the wife of Rafe Purefey of Drayton, and Margaret the wife of
Raph Rolleston, lineal Ancestor of Lancelote Rolleston, the present owner as I
suppose.

Mi^. 7 H. 8. rot. 539. D^^b. and rot. 5^^. Not. pasci^. 3 H. 8. rot. 145.
Derb.
This Richard de Bingham, and Anne his wife, 7 H. 8. suffered a Recovery of the
moiety of the Manor of Ryddinges, and of this Manor, and Shelton, as in that
place is noted. And 3 H. 8. also of Ryddinges, which it seems went along with
this Manor.

Kymberley. Doomsd. Chinemerley.
IN Chinemarlye, before the Conquest, Azor paid the Geld as four Bov. for his
Manor, and Grimchetell likewise four Bov. for his. The Land was one Car. Lib.
Dooms.
There William Peverell whose Fee it became, had two Sochm. one Vill. five
Board. having three Car. and an half, small Wood, four qu. long, two broad. This
kept the old value 10s.

Raph, son of William de Toueton; gave to the Church of the holy Trinity at
Lenton, Reg. Lent. p. 41.
and the Monks there serving God, all his Rent he had in Kymberley, viz. half a
Mark of Silver yearly. To his Deed were Witnesses the Abbat of Derley, Sampson
de Stretley, Warner de Beheleg, Richard de Roissalt, Robert, son of (or Fitz-)
William, Mr. Henry, Richard de Hartill, Hugh, son of Sampson, William his
brother, Raph, son of Hugh de Watenhow, Matthew his brother, Gilbert de
B^oculstow, and others.

This Manor seems to have been held by a Family, who had their name from their
residence here. In 9 E. 2. it went for the fourth part of a Villa, Nom. Vill.
and Robert de Kynmarley was certified to be Lord of it.

John de Kynmerley, Clark, son of Robert late Lord of Kynmerley, Regist. de
Beval.
9 E. 3. passed this Manor, and the Advowson of the Church, and all the Land
he had in Neuthorp of the gift and feoffment of his said Father, to Sir Ioh. de
Monte Rector of Greyseley, together with all his Goods. John de Monte, 12 E. 3.
conveyed it to Nicholas de Cantelupe Lord of Ilkeston (who Founded Bevall) and
Richard del Hull of Little Halum, brother of John de Monte confirmed it. Sir
Nicholas de Cauntlowe, 29 E. 3. passed it to Robert Bernak, and William de
Braydiston, Clark, who the same year settled it on Hugh de Cressy of Selleston,
for his life, and afterwrds on the Prior and Coyent of Beauvale, and their
Successors. Hugh de Cressy, and Cecilia his wife, 33 E. 3. released the
premises in Kinmerley and Newthorp to the said Religious people for 7l. 10s.
per annum, during his life, and 4l. 10s. during hers, if she over-lived him, to
begin after his death; for which, in case of non-payment, they might distrein
in the Priory Lands in Selleston, Watnow, Greysely, and Mourhouses.

Another parcel went with Greyseley, which after the death of Sir Nicholas de
Cantelupe, and Ioane his wife, came to Nicholas, son of William de Cantelupe;
and after his death to his brother William: after whose death, 49 E. 3. for
want of heirs it reverted to William their Father, Esc. 49 E. 3^ par. 1. n. 28^
as son and heir of the said Nicholas the Grandfather; it shortly after came to
the Lord Zouch of Haringworth, as in Greyseley is said, and being forfeited to
the Crown by William Lord Zouch, was, 7 Mar. 1 H. 7. granted to Sir John Savage
the younger, Par. 3. pat. 1 H. 7.
and is now the Earl of Rutland's.

The Priory Lands went with the rest to Sir William Hussy, and after to....
Morison, and so descended to the Lord Capell, and are now the Earl of Essex's.

In the 7 H. 6. there were not ten Householders in the Parish of Kynmerley. Inq.
7 H. 6.


Hempshill. Hemdeshull. Doomsd. Hamsell.
IN Hamsell Soc to Hochenale were six Bov. for the Geld. The Land one Car. Lib.
Dooms.
There were two Sochm. two Vill. two Board. having two Car. and four Acres of
small Wood. This Soc lay in Bulwell, and Watenot, and was William Peverells.

Some little of this belonged to Greyseley, and some to other places, but the
most considerable part was Strelleys, as in that place may be seen: in the
division it was Sacheverells; afterward the Family of Ascough had it by
purchase; and it at length descended to Jane, the daughter of Sir Roger
Ascough, (his son and Grandson failing) who was the second wife of Gervas
Rosell of Radcliff, Esquire, who left it to her daughters and heirs Elizabeth,
Katherin, and Mary.

There is another House, and some Grounds belonging to it, which was the
Willughbyes of Wollaton, and is now the inheritance of..... Shepherd.

Aldesworth. Doomsd. Eldeurd. And Eldesword.
AELdeswurth at the Foundation of Burton Priory, ^on. Angl. vol. 1. p. 269.
by Wulfric Spot, was reckoned with Clown to be in this County, and numbered
amongst those Towns which then belonged to that Monastery.

In Eldeurd, Alwin had a Manor before the Norman Invasion, Lib. Dooms.
which answered the Public Tax for four Bovats: it was afterward waste, and
William kept it; I suppose Peverell whose Fee it was.

Hugh de Lambecote, and William his son and heir, Reg. Lent. p. 40.
put into the hands of Raph de Weldebof a certain Rent of 12d. yearly, in the
Mill of Aldesworth to be paid to the Prior and Covent of Lenton, by the said
Hugh and his heirs at Pentecost, which appeased the strife betwixt the said
Prior and him concerning that Mill.

Peter the Prior of Lenton, and the Covent of that place, Ib.
restored and confirmed to Adam, son of Robert de Aldesworthe, the whole Land
of Aldesworch, which Robert his Father, and his Ancestors held, paying to the
Priory a Mark yearly at the Feast of St. Martin: this was in the time of H. 2.
or his son's.

Test. de Nev.
In 21 E. 1. Robert de Aldisworth did Suit the Peverell Court with only one Man
for the moiety of the Town of Aldisworth.

William de Bella aqua held the tenth part of a Knights Fee here of the Bishop
of Lincoln.

Nom. Vill.
Cossall and Aldesworth, 9 E. 2. answered for a whole Villa, and Sir Richard de
Willughby, Junior, Thomas le Belewe, John de Aldesworthe, and William de
Cossall, were certified to be Lords.

Inq. 22 E. 3.
John de Aldesworth, 22 E. 3. is found to hold half a Knights Fee here of Raph
de Crumwell, which Robert de Kynmerley sometime held, and Agnes de Belew a
fifth part of a Knights Fee, of the Fee of Crumwell, who in Test. de Nev. is
said also to hold of the Bishop of Lincoln.

Inq. 7 H. 6.
The Jury in 7 H. 6. found that John Broxstow, Richard Baker, and Henry
Mackworth held each a third part of the half Fee in Aldesworth, which John
Aldesworth sometime held.

William Sallowe about 12 H. 4. had interest here: Esc. 12 H. 4. n. 25. Esc. 6
H. 5. n. 15. Esc. 3 E. 4. n. 14. Hill. 18 E. 4. rot. 3^3.
and about 6 H. 5. George Sallowe. This seems to be Belews share, because they
were concerned at Kertlington also, as 3 E. 4. Agnes Marmion appears to have
been after them. Edmund Lemyng, Clark, Walter Outhorp, Chaplain, and John
Polffen, 18 E. 4. claimed against Galfr. Pilkington, and Agnes his wife, the
Manor of Allesworth, with the Appurtenances; and there was another Recovery
the same time, wherein Galfr. Pylkyngto^, rot. 359.
and Agnes his wife, claimed the same against John Vavesour, William Catesby,
John Nevill, Thomas Kebeell, and Nicolas Blakwall, Chaplain.

Bakers posterity remained here several Descents.

Rich. Baker de Aldesworth H. 6. Johannes Baker de Aldesworth.-.. fill... Hide
de Coventrey. Richardus. Baker.-Brigitta fill. Tho. Powtrell de Westhalum.
Richard. Baker.-Marg. fill... Huddleston de Wollaton. Tho. Baker-Maria fill. Joh.
Eyton de Eyton, Salop. Elizab. Katherina. Ex lib. Visit.

Anna ux. F^. Gelsthorp de Whatton.
Eliz. ux. Joh. Hussy de Flintham. Marg. ux...Woodhouse de Glapwell. Kath. ux.
G. Wells Ebor.



They had for their Arms, Ermine on a Chief Vert, two Boars heads Or. But the
Township of late was Sir Henry Willoughbies of Kisley, B.
and Sir Roger Ayscoughs of Nuthall.

Nuthall. Doomsd. Nutehale.
HEre were in Nutehale two Manors, whereof one was Tayn-land, and before the
Conquest held by one Alchill, who answered for three Bov.. to the Tax. Lib.
Dooms.
The Land being then returned so much, afterward Aluric held it of the King (
William) and there had six Vill. with two Plows or two Car. In the Confessors
time this was valued at 10s. but when the Conqueror made his Survey at 6s. 8d.
The other Manor was of William Peverells Fee, which before Aldene had, and was
rated at four Bovats and an half to the public Geld or Tax. The Land was for
so many Oxen. There William Peverell had one Car.. and four Vill. four Board.
having one Car. small Wood five qu. long, and one qu. broad. This kept the old
value 10s. and had Soc in Broculstow and Watenot. The Church was dedicated to
St. Patrick. B.


Galfr. de St. Patricio, Knight, gave his Church of Nuthale to the Priory of
Lenton, Reg. Lent. p. 6, and 7.
which Roger Archbishop of York confirmed, and after him Pope Lucius.

The Sheriff accounted, 7 R. 1. that Robert de St. Patric did then owe iii.
Marks for having his Land of Nuthale, Pip. 7 R. 1.
whereof Earl John had disseised him.

John Earl Morton was at Nuthale when he granted to the Priory of Lenton,
Regist. de Lent. p. 12.
the Heath about the Wood of Beskwood, and about his other Woods in Not. and
Darbishires, Witness Roger de Silan, and Raph Murd^c.

Norman de St. Patric was in the Sheriffs account, 9 R. 1. that he ought six
Marks, Rot. pip. 9 R. 1.
tha^ he should not go over Sea in the third Army into Normandy, and for three
Knights Fees of the Honor of Peverell, for which, 10 R. 1. his Fine was 15l.

William de St. Patric, 2 Ioh. gave the King one Mark for having a Jury of
twelve Free and lawful men of the Voisinage of Nutehall, Oblata 2 Ioh. m. 2.
Pip. 3 Ioh.
who b^tter knew the truth of the matter, and that they might be before the
King wherever he was in England, in the day after the close of Easter, ready
to recognize (or try) on their Oaths, whether his Grandfather Gauf. de St.
Patric gave the Church of Nut^hale to the Priory of Lenton, and thereof made
his Chartel in his lawful power, or in his sickness, whereof he died.

Pasc. 1 Ioh. to. 3. in do^. Pasc. 11 Ioh. to. 8.
They had Suits most of King John's time about it, but it seems the Priory did
not prevail, because it continued, and I think yet does, to the Lords of
Nutthall.

St. Patric's part was conveyed to Robert de Cokfeld, B.
to hold for the fourth part of a Knigh^^ Fee, who had the rest of the Town.
St. Patric's Inheritance and Blood is conceived to go to the Family of
Aufreton: Test. de Nev.
for Robert de Cokfeld is certified to have held the fourth part of a Knights
Fee in Nuthall, of the Honor of Alfreton. His Predecessor Adam de Kocfeld
gave to the Priory of Lenton 8^. yearly Rent to be paid by the Miller, out of
his Mill of Nuthale; Regist. de Lent. p. 6.
and if it should fall, or be removed, or any thing else happen that it could
not be had, he promised to make it good out of some other Land in the County.

Adam de Cokefeld-Lucia. Adam de Cokefeld, 7 Joh.-Agatha. Robertus de Cokefeld,
miles, 17 H. 3. Johannes de Cokfeld, 10 E. 1. Johannes de Cokfeild-...-Margeria
ux. 2.13 E. 2. Johannes de Cokefeld, miles, 24 E. 3. Robertus de Cokfeld,
miles, 33 E. 3. Johannes de Cokfeld sine prole-Marg. sor. Tho. Foljambe-Rad.
Munboucher mar. 2. Joh. Taylboys-Agnes. Johannes Taylboys-Kath. fill. Will.
Gipthorp, mil. Margareta Taylboys fill. and haer.-Johannes Ayscough-Elianor.
fill. and haer. Ric. Tunstall, ux. 2. Ex Coll. G. B.
Willielmus Ayscough, miles-Maria fill. Roberti Hilliard ux. 1. Willielmus
Ayscough, miles-Elizab. fill. Tho. Writtesley Com. Staff. Franciscus Ayscough,
miles-Eliz. fill. and haer. Will. Hansert ux. 1.-Elizab. fill. Roberti Dighton
relict... Dalison Justic. Edwardus Ayscough, mil. Rogerus Ayscough de Nuthall,
mil.-Doroth. fill. Will. Fitz-Williams de Malberthorp C. Linc. Edwardus Ayscough
de Hempsell-... fill... Roberts. Jacobus Ayscough s. p.
Willielmus s. p. Johannes s. p. Jana ux. 2.-Gervas. Rosell 1 Elizabetha
Rosell. 2 Katherina Rosell. 3 Maria Rosell.








Johannes.
Thomas.

Thurslan. Adam fill. and haer. Robertus de Cokfeld, 10 E. 1.




Willielmus Ayscough Justic. de Com. Banc. Margareta Taylboys fill. and
haer.-Johannes Ayscough-Elianor. fill. and haer. Ric. Tunstall, ux. 2.

Ib.
Agatha de Cokefeld Lady of Nuthale, gave her Mill of Nuthale, situate on the
Rivulet between the Town and Houdeshill, to the Priory of L^nton, out of which
those Monks were wont to receive 8s. yearly Rent, and together with the said
Mill, the Suit of all Nuthale, except her own House, so that the Men of Nuthale
should always grind according to their due and ancient custom. She likewise
granted, that if any of the men of Nuthale (except those who were Free when she
conferred that Charter) should be intercepted grinding at another Mill, when he
might grind at that, it should be lawful for the Mi^^er or any person else
deputed by the said Monks to Arrest him, and the Sack with the ^orn was to be
the Monks; but the Man so intercepted for his forfeit, was to be in the mercy
of her and her heirs.

Adam de Cokefeld, 7 Ioh. had half a Knights Fee here: Pip. 7 Ioh.
he was, I suppose, son of another Adam, and Lucia his wife, who were
Benefactors to St. Mary's by Northampton, ^on. Angl. ol. 1. p. 1018.
and their Grandson Robert de Cokefeld likewise.

Robert de Cokefeld gave the Manors of Nuthall and Basford to John de
Cokefeld, a younger son, Pl. de Banc. Hill. 10 E. 1. to. 71.
which, 10 E. 1. Robert, son of Adam de Cokefeld, claimed as heir of his
Grandfather Robert; but John produced a Fine levied 46 H. 3. between himself
and the said Robert the Grandfather, whereby the said Robert was made but
Tenant for life, which cast the Plaintiff in that Suit. On the Seal of John,
son of Sir John Cokefeld, Knight, appendant to his Deed, bearing date 13 E. 2.
within the Circumscription of his name is, A plain Cross Counter-Compony.

This Manor by Fine, 12 E. 2. was settled on John de Cokefeld, Fin. in Oct. S.
Mart. 12 E. 2.
and Margery his wife, and the heirs of their bodies; remainder to John his
elder son, and the heirs of his body; remainder to Thomas another son, and the
heirs of his; remainder to the right heirs of the said John de Cokefeld the
Father. Upon the back Reginald, son of John de Cokefeld put to his claim.

Sir John de Cokefeld, Knight, 24 E. 3. had two sons Robert, and John; Robert,
33 E. 3. was a Knight, Ex. Coll. I. B.
who had issue John Cokefeld, Esquire, and Agnes; John married Margaret, and
died without issue; Agnes was married to John Taylboys, Esquire, whose eldest
son John Taylboys had a daughter and heir called Margaret* Clau^. 22 H. 6. m.
17. Lin^.
married to John Ayscogh, Esquire, son of William Ayscogh the Judge.

A Fine was levied, 22 H. 6. between John Cokfeld, Ad^e Pas^. in 15. dies, 22
H. 6.
Esquire, and Margaret his wife, Quer. and Richard Bingham, and William
Foljamb, Deforc. of the Manors of Nuthall and Baceford, with the
Appurtenances, and of ten Mess. one Toft, twenty Bovats, and forty Acres of
Land, and twenty Acres of Meadow, with the Appurtenances, in Nuthall, Baceford,
Radford, and Lenton, and the Advowson of the Church of Nuthall, whereby they
were settled on John and Margaret, and the heirs Males of their bodies;
remainder to the heirs of the body of John; remainder to John Ayscogh, and
Margaret his wife, daughter and heir of John Taylboys the younger, Esquire, and
the heirs of their bodies; remainder to the heirs of the body of Margaret, the
wife of John Ayscogh; remainder to the right heirs of Sir Robert Cokfeild,
Knight. By an Inquisition taken 14 Iun. 4 E. 4. after the death of Margaret,
(...). 4 E. 4.38.
the wife of John Cokefeild, it appears, that after his death she married Raph
Mo^^boucher, and that Thomas Folejamb, Esquire, was Cousin and heir of the said
Margaret, viz. son of Thomas her brother, and then aged above forty years.

Sir* Roger Ayscough, younger son of Sir Francis, B.
viz. by the second venture, sold this Manor to James Ayscough, or Asgill, a
Merchant of London, who by his last Will appointed it to be sold; and by reason
of the Tenure, the third part became the Inheritance of Edward Ayscough,
Esquire, a younger brother (or son) to Sir Edward Ayscough, the chief of the
Family, by purchase from the heirs of James Ayscough. The other two parts of
the Manor are now the Inheritance of Richard Slater, Esquire, the present
owner.

The Rectory of Nuthyll was ten Marks when Mr. Ascoghe was Patron. It Is now 3l.
14s. 9d. ob. in the Kings Books, and Richard Slayter, Esquire, Patron.

On a Tomb, whereon are the Figures at length of the Man and his Wife, and five
Children at the foot in half proportion, is inscribed,

Here lies Edward Boun, Gent. and Isabel his wife, daughter and heir of Edmund
Hunt, Gent. which Edward died the 12 of December. Anno 1558. and the said Isabel
the 13 of July, Anno 1562. On whose Souls God have mercy, Amen.

In the South Window near the Pulpit,

Paly of six Arg. and Az. Strelley.

In the West end of the North I Will,

Gules, a Bend between six Crosses Fitchy Arg.

In the East end of the North I Will,

Chequey Or, and Azure, a Fesse Ermine.

On the top of the same I Will, in a Window over the Pew,

.....A Lion Rampant Sable, Crowned Or.

In the same Window,

Azure, three Cinquefoiles between five Crosse-Croslets Arg. Darcy.

In the middle Window,

....Upon a Bend Vert three Martlets, Or.

Bulwell.
IN Bulwell Godric had-before the Conquest two Car. of Land for a Manor. The
Land was two Car. There was one Car. one Vill. one Board. and two Acres of
Meadow. Lib. Doo^s.
In the Confessors time it was valued at 12s. when William Peverell had it but
at 5s.

This came to the Crown, with the rest of William Peverells Lands. Test. de Nev.


Stephen Cut held Bolewell in the time of King Henry the second, Esc. 39 H. 3.
n. 25.
and delivered it with a certain daughter to one Reymund de Burgarvill in
custody; so that he should find the said Stephen all necessaries; when Reymund
died, the King seized it into his own hand.

Test. de Nev.
Philip Mark the Sheriff said he held Bulewell, and the Advowson of the Church,
by demise from King John. And it is also said Henry Medicus [Leech] held the
Church which was of the Kings gift, but the Jury found not by whom the said
Henry had it; but then Philip Mark had the Township by demise from King John,
Claus. 9 H. 3. m. 20.
valued at 100s. the said Philip Mark had the Manor of Melburne committed to
him and the Farm of Bullwell to sustain him as long as, etc. he had this
Manor, Claus. 14 H. 3. m. 17. Fin. 7 H. 3. m. 7. Test. de Nev. Esc. 40 H. 3.
n. 38. Claus. 12 H. 3. m. 14.
14 H. 3. for life.

The Men of Bulewell had the Manor of Bulewell to Farm, during the Kings
pleasure about 7 H. 3. They had likewise the Advowson of the Church. They had
Common of Pasture in the Wood of Beskwood, 12 H. 3. to the great Street.

In Bulewell is one Carucat and an half, which was wont to defend it self in
the time of William Peverell, Test. de Nev.
by a Horse with an Halter; King John gave it to Roger Rascal, but the Jury
knew not by what Service he held it.

Lib. seod. in Scac.
The King had the whole Town of Bulewell, with ten Bovats in Hemdeshill, and
received yearly for both 7l.

About 10 E. 1. John le Charer, and Richard Morell held Bolewell, Esc. 8 E. 1.
n. 47.
whereof part was within the Bounds of the Forest, and part without, as it was
wont. Lib. Forest. de Shirewood.
The Forest Book mentions Snapefeild, wherein the Cattle of Bullwell and
Hempshill were wont to Pasture, in which some old Essarts were made to belong
to the Town of Bullwell. It is got to be a kind of a Corporation, having the
Perquisites of their own Courts, B.
and the appointment of their own Stewards, and still pay their 7l. per annum,
and keep themselves Copyholders to preserve their Customs and Commons in the
Forest, as is thought.

Bullwell Wood, Or, Bullwell Park.
Ex libr. de Novo lo^o pen. Re^. Regis in Scac.
THE Wood of Bulwell Ground, or Bulwell Rise, in the Forest of Shirewood, was an
ancient Demesne Wood and waste of King Henry the third, and Edward the first*
and parcel of the Forest. And Richard Oysell the Commissioner of King Edward
the first, in the twenty sixth year of his Reign, demised eighty Acres of the
said Wood on the West side, to Philip Willoughby, Clark, his Heirs and Assigns,
to enclose with Ditch and Hedge according to the Assise of the Forest, and so
enclosed to hold for ever, paying yearly to the Exchequer 26s. 8d. Forty Acres
more of this Wood the said Sir Richard de Oysell demised to Thomas de
Rydewalle, and his heirs, paying 13s. 4d. per annum; and the rest of it only in
Herbage to the Township of Bulwell, paying 5s. per annum. This, as the rest of
the seven Demesne Woods, and five Hayes, is said to be without the Bounds of
any Town or Parish, and to pay no Tithes. Philip de Willughby aliened the
eighty Acres to William de Cossale, Regist. de Newstede pen. Ric. Dom. Byron,
p. 95.
who gave them to the Priory of Newstede (as in Cossale is said), who likewise
had the forty Acres also, till John, son of John, son of that Thomas de
Ridewale, brought his Suit before the Barons of the Exchequer in Hillary Term,
27 E. 3. upon which the Prior disclaimed them, and the Town of Bulwell was
found to have Pastured in them.

Sir William Trussebutts Lieutenant of Sir Raph de Nevill, Keeper or Warden of
the Forest, Ib.
and Richard Pensax, and John del Morhaghe, Verderers, and all the regarders of
the Forest, and the whole Town of Bullwell, and many strangers on either part,
29 E. 3. came to Bullwell-Ryse, and measured out the eighty Acres for the
Priory; and at another day the forty Acres for the said John de Ridewale, after
twenty one foot to the Perch, the Forest foot being eighteen inches long, which
foot used in the time of Richard Oysell for Renting the wastes of the Forest,
was marked and graven in the Chancel Wall at Edenestowe, and in the Church of
St. Mary at Nottingham, and at Newstede.

Bullwell-Wood with Newsted Priory, 4 part. pat. 32 H. 8.
28 May, 32 H. 8. was granted to Sir John Byron, Knight; it is now imparked,
and in it is the M^nsion House of the Honorable William Byron, Esquire, only
son of Richard Lord Byron.

The Rectory of Bulwell was 5l. and the King Patron. Mss. I. M.
It Is now in the Kings Books 5l. 6s. 3d. and Elizabeth Rosell, Widow,
Patroness, (it should have been Jane, I suppose.)

Brinsley, or Brunnesley.
BEfore the Conquest Brun had in Brunnesley a Manor which paid to the Geld or
Tax for four Bov. The Land was half a Car. Lib. Doo^s.
There Ailric, after the Normans came, held under William Peverell, whose Fee
it was, one Car. and one Vill. having one Car. and two Acres of Meadow, Pasture
Wood six qu. long, three and an half broad. In the Confessors time it was
valued at 6s. 8d. in the Conquerours at 4s.

This was held by a Family who had their name from the place very anciently:
the first which I can certainly fix any time to was Roger de Brunnesley, Pip.
12 H. 3. Test. de Nev.
who was dead 12 H. 3. and left his son Gilbert de Brunnesley, then in the
custody of Ran. Brito, which Gilbert held this Manor, and part of Trowell, 26
H. 3. as in that place is noted. Some Lands he held of the Serjeancy of
Peverell, Pip. 26 H. 3. Test. de Nev.
by finding an Horse of 5s. price, with Sack and Broch, and Halter of an half
penny, for forty days, at his own cost, in the Army for Wales; he died about 7
E. 1. and left Roger de Brunnesley his son and heir thirty years old, Es^. 7 E.
1. n. 6. Esc. 5 E. 3. n. 77. Pasc. 21 E. 3. lib. de fi^. in S^ac. fol. 199.
Hill. 16 R. 2. Ib. fol. 207. Mic. 4 H. 6. Ib. fol. 212.
who about 5 E. 3. left his son and heir Galf^. de Brunesley above fifty years
of age, who held by the same Tenure, as did also Robert, son and heir of Galfr.
de Brunesley, who made Fine to the King of 50s. 21 E. 3. whose son and heir
John de Brynesley did the like, 16 R. 2.

Robert Broune, and Ioane his wife, daughter and heir of John, son of Robert de
Bronesley, and Elizabeth late his wife, 4 H. 6. made Fine as before for this
Manor of Brunnesley. Howbeit in the Records I find that, 1 H. 4. Robert, Mic.
1 H 4. to. 9.
son of Robert, son of John de Brunesley, was outlawed Rogerus de Brunnesley
defunct. 12 H. 3. Gilbertus de Brunnesley ob. 7 E. 1. Rogerus de Brunnesley
aet. 30. 7 E. 1. ob. 5 E. 3. Galfr. de Brinsley aet. 50. ad mortem patris
Robertus de Brynnesley Johannes de Bronesley-Elizabeth. Willielmus de
Brunesley, 3 H. 5. Johannes Brinsley-.... fill. Galfr. Holmes de Henour Com.
Derb. Johannes Brendesley-.... fill..... Kirby. Robertus Brinsley de
Brinsley-Elizab. fill. Radulphi Poole de Wakebridge Com. Derb. Franciscus
Brinsley 1569.-Kath. fill. Joh. Stephen. Salop. s. p. ux. 1.-Beatrix fill. Georg.
Nevill de Grove. Gervasius Brinsley de Brinsley.-Maria fill. Edw. Onley de
Catesby in Com. Northampt. Jana-Richardus Lewys de Selston. Johannes Jews de
Leadston in Com. Ebor. mil. and Bar.-Sara fill. and haer. Tho. Foot, Alderm.
London, mil. and Bar. 1 Elizab. aet. 19. 1673.-Theophilus Com. Huntington. 2
Maria-Rob. Dom. Deincurt fill. and haer. Nic. Com. de Scarsdal.

Maria-Dom. Steph. Butler.
Johannes de Blyth Spittle.-Constanc. fill..... Farndon.




Joana, 4 H. 6.-Robertus Broun.






in this County, and that John Brynnesley held when he died about 3 H. 5. the
Manors of Brynnesley and Trowell, Esc. 3 H. 5. p. 165.
etc. and that William Brynnesly was then found his son and heir; and John de
Brynesley about 13 E. 4. left John Brynnesley his son, Esc. 13 E. 4.
heir of these Manors, then aged twenty five years.

And this Manor certainly enough continued to the Brinnesleys (Brounes
posterity possibly being so called after their Mother, as Poutrells of
Thrumpton were:) for Gervas Brinnesley, Esquire, who sold it, was son of
Francis, and Beatrix his second wife, daughter of George Nevill of Ragnell or
Grove, which Francis was son of Robert Brendesley, and Elizabeth his wife,
daughter of Rauf Pole of Wakebrige; which Roberts Father was John, son of John
Brendesley of Brendesley, as it appears in the Visitation of Robert Glover,
Somerset Herald, who visited for William Flower, Norroy, in this County, in the
year 1569. at which time the said Gervas Brinsley is said to be but two years
old. That Norroy granted to the Brinsleys to bear for their Arms, Party per
pale Or, and sable, a Chevron between three Escallops Counter-changed, but the
ancient Coat yet remaining in the Church of Trowell, is Or and sable quartered
with a Chevron it self, also quarterly between three Escallops Counter-changed.
B.
This Gervase sold the Tenements to Gilbert Millington, Esquire, since better
known by the Chair of the Committee for plundered Ministers, and the Kings
death. The Demesne and Capital Mess. to Patric Cock, and others. It is parcel
of Greyseley Parish.

Some of the Grand Serjeancy was Grettons, and descended to John Middleton of
Wannesley.

Wandesley.
LEuric, before the coming in of the Normans, had a Manor in Wandeslei, Lib.
Do^^.
which paid to the Geld or Tax of those times as five Bov. of Land. The Land of
it was then found to be sufficient for one Plow or one Carucat. Afterward it
became the Fee of Raph Fitz-Hubert, who had there half a Car. and three Vill.
and two Board. There was a Priest and half a Church, and four Acres of Meadow,
feeding or pasture Wood, four qu. long, and four broad. In King Edward the
Confessors time the value of it was 8s. in the Conquerours, when the Book of
Doomsday was made, 10s.

Lib. Rubr. in Scac.
Ranulf de Wannesle is certified to hold a Knights Fee of Hubert Fitz-Raph in
the time of Henry the second, of the old feoffment, that is, whereof his
Ancestor was enfeoffed before the death of King H. 1.

In the Pipe Rolls of 22 H. 2. William de Wandeslega gave account of two Marks
of the Amercements of the Forest, Rot. Pip. 22 H. 2.
and Ranulf de Wandeslega of three Marks.

Raph de Wandesleia gave to God and the Church of St. Mary of Felley, Ex
Regist. de Felley, p. 71.
and the Canons there serving God, the whole Land which Richard, son of Walter,
held, with all its Easements and Appurtenances, and the said Richard, with his
Sect, with all liberties belonging to the Town of Wandesleia: Witness Philip
Marc the Sheriff of Nottss. Adam de Seyn Martyn, Stephen the Dean of Gresley,
Adam Parson of Selston, Galfr. de Insula, Herbert his brother, Richard his son,
Walter de Estweyt, Raph le Poer, Saphri le Frop, etc. Nicolas de Wandeslei
confirmed to the same Church the Land which Richard Naht held in Thorp, Ib. p.
72.
viz. that which Raph de Wandesley his brother gave: The Witnesses were Sir
Walter de Estwayt, Iwan Briton, Raph de Poer, Reginald de Annesley, Roger de
Watenowe, Henry de Estweyte, Peter de Russale, John de Perepount, Thomas the
Clark of Annesley, Galfr. del Held, and many others.

Henry, son of Paschal de Estweyt, 4 H. 3. had a pardon for the death of
Ranulf, Pat. 4 H. 3. m. 5.
son of Ranulf de Wandesle.

Nicholas de Wandesley his heirs and successors, and their Tenants or Men,
Regist. de Felley, p. 74.
were to make reasonable Hedges and Fences about their Winterseed in their
Assarts, and about the Assarts which were made in his Fee before Easter day, 15
H. 3. which Walter the Prior of Felley obtained by an Assize against him the
said Nicholas and Peter de Russale, and Alexander, son of Hube^^, and Jordan de
Bothweyt, and Judge de Berhis, and William Bausaw, and William, son of Swane,
and Richard, son of Swane, and Raph T^stard, and Adam, son of Walter of
Selston, and Godfr. de Westwood, and Ranulph de Westwood, in which there is
mention of a way which was considered by the view of Walter de Estwayt at that
time High Sheriff, and by the view of twelve Knights which were in the Assize.

Walter the Prior of Felley, and the Covent of the same, Ib. p. 74.
agreed with Alexander de Wandesley concerning a certain Assize of Novell
disseism of Common of Pasture, of a certain Assart of the said Alexander in
Wandesley, in a place which was called Drihirst, in which they released all
their right and claim in forty Acres of it measured by the Perch of twenty four
feet, which was assarted and enclosed at the Purification of St. Mary, 24 H. 3.

Ranulph de Wandesley, son of Alexander de Wandesley, Ib. p. 76.
gave to the Priory of Felley for the sustentation of one Canon of their
number, daily celebrating Divine Service in his Chapel of Wandesley beneath
his Manor, the Rent of sixty shillings yearly to be received of certain of his
Freeholders, and their Lands and Tenants in Selston, Westwode, Thorp, and out
of his Mills.

Thomas the Prior and the Covent of Felley bound themselves and their
successors, Ib. p. 78.
to Sir Ranulph de Wandesley, Knight, and his heirs and Assigns possessing the
Manor of Wandesley by any Title whatever, to find one religious Canon of their
House in the Chapel beneath his Manor of Wandesley, for the said yearly Rent
of sixty shillings, which he gave them. Their Instrument, wherein is contained
all the several Articles of their agreement, what the said Canon is to do and
have, bears date at Wandesley 1279. the Tuesday after the Feast of St. Edmund
the King and Martyr, the Witnesses being Sir Richard Launcecumbe Rector of the
Church of Derle, Sir Roger le Power Rector of the Church of Penkeston, and Sir
Robert de Stretley, and Sir Robert Saucheverell, Knights, and Roger de
Burnisle, and Hugh de Chauomer, and others.

In 33 E. 1. there was a partition made of the Manor of Wannesley between
William de Gratton, and Isabel his wife, and William de Cressy, Regist. de
Beauvale.
and Johan his wife.

A Fine was levied in the Kings Court at York, Ebor. a die S. Mart. in 15.
dies. 33 E. 1. and postea in Octab. Hill. ap. Westminster.
33 E. 2. and afterward Recorded the same year at Westminster. between Roger de
Cressy, Querent, and Thomas de Cressy, and Margery his wife, Deforcients, of
fourteen Mess. fourscore and thirteen Bovats of Land and an half, seven Acres
of Meadow, 27d. Rent, and the third part of two Mills, and of three hundred
Acres of Wood, with the Appurtenances in Wandesley, Selston, and Brunnesley.

In a Plea for a Mess. in Nottingham, Pl. de Iur. and Assis. apud Not. 3 E. 3.
die Lunae post. fest. S. Martini to. 17. in dorso.
^ E. 3. before William Herle and his fellows, the Monday after St. Martin at
that place, Johan, who had been wife of William de Cressy, daughter and one of
the heirs of Ranulph de Wandesleye, and William, son of William Folejambe of
Gratton, Cousin and the other of the heirs of the said Ranulph, were called to
warrant.

At the Inquisition taken at Not. the Saturday after St. Laurence day, Lib.
feod.
22 E. 3. before John Vaux, John de Musters, and John del Ker, Collectors of
the Aid of 40s. for every Knights Fee, to make the Kings son a Knight, the Jury
found that Thomas de Gretton (and in some other Inquisitions the heirs of
William de Gratton) Iohana de Cressy, and Hugh de Cressy held a Knights Fee in
Wandesley, which Ranulph de Wandesley held in times past.

Raph de Cressy of Selston, granted to Thomas Columbell of Sandiacre his
brother, Regist. de Beauvale.
his Manor of Wandesley. Thomas Columbell of Thorp in the Clorts, passed it to
Sir Henry Perpownt, Knight, John Bows of Cortingstok, John Manchester, John
Melton of Normanton, Ib.
Thomas Derley of Thorpe, and Thomas Waryn Clerk of Boney, who after the rest
had released to him, 13 Febr. 8 H. 6. passed it to John Cokfeild of Nuthall,
Esquire, Thomas Wartre, John Oteway, Thomas Woodhall, Clark, and John
Chamberlain of Watnow, who passed it to Sir Robert Strelley, Knight, William
Vout, Clark, John Milner, Clark, and Robert Brige of Selston.

Raph Shelton of Shelton in Norfolk, Esquire, Cousin and heir of John Cokfeild,
released it to John Fitz-Herbert, Galfr. Staunton, John Bland, Clark, Robert
Trewluffe, Clark, and John Hygate, Clerk, who, 8 November. 11 E. 4. passed it to
Gervase Clifton, Esquire, upon Condition that he should pay 120l. he being
Sheriff of this County. John Rosell, Esquire, and John Kelom, the Coroners,
made warrants for his seisin of Lands in Selston, which he recovered before
Judge Litilton at Not. on Saturday the Feast of St. James, 12 E. 4. against
Thomas Brige of Selston, viz. fourteen Mess. one hundred and sixty Acres of
Land, seven of Meadow, ten of Wood, and one hundred of Pasture. He passed it to
Richard Middelton, Esquire, and the Lady Maud Green his wife, Robert
Throgmorton, Esquire, and Nicholas Russell, Clark, to whom also Thomas Brigge
of Not. son and heir of William Brigg theretofore of Selston, released all his
right in the Manor of Wandesley, with the Appurtenances in the Town and Parish
of Selleston.

Richard Middelton, and Maud his wife, 18 E. 4. levied a Fine of the Manor of
Wannesley, called Cressy Fee, to John Stanhope, John Fitz-Herbert, Thomas
Molyneux, Thomas Orston, Robert Yole, John Blande, Clark, and Robert Treulofe,
Clark. John Bland passed or released it to John Prior of Beauvale, and the
Covent of the same, with which it remained; and amongst the rest of the Lands
of that Monastery, came to the Lord Capeli, with whose posterity, viz. the Earl
of Essex it still continues.

There were two Recoveries in 18 H. 7. wherein Thomas Medylton claimed against
Robert Throkmorton, Hill. 18 H. rot. 411.
Knight, and William Rolleston, the moiety of the Manor of Wannesley, with the
Appurtenances, and ten Mess. four hundred Acres of Land, one hundred of Meadow,
three hundred of Pasture, four hundred of Wood, one hundred of Furz and Heath,
and 40s. Rent in Wannesley, and Selston. The same Thomas Medylton at the same
time claimed the Manor of Gratton in Darbishire, Lib. rot. 413.
against the same persons.

There was a Recovery, 4 Eliz. of these two Manors, Trin. 4 Eliz. rot. 676.
wherein John Byron, Knight, and Francis Molyneux, claimed against Robert
Flecher, and Edmund Stephenson, who called to warrant Robert Agarston alias
Middelton. This Robert seems to be son of Gilbert, as was also Francis his
younger brother buried at Selston, Ex Regist. paroch. de Selston.
Aug. 10. 1558. Robert himself was buried there also, May 3. 1567. and was
Father of Wlli. Midleton, buried at Selston, Sept. 18. 1624. which William died
at Cotgrave, where he had a daughter Mary, the wife of John Whalley; her Mother
was Troth, daughter of Roger Columbell of Darley in the County of Darby: she
was also Mother of John Middleton, who died about 1642. and had to wife Anne,
daughter of Raph Bache of Stanton in the Peak, by whom he left issue William
Middleton of Wannesley, and John, who died a Bachelor. William was aged about
forty four years 1673. and by his first wife Martha, daughter of Brian Norton
of Bullingbrook in the County of Lincoln, had a son John Midleton heir
apparent of this Manor and Gretton in Darbishire, and of a parcel in
Brunnesley: but he and his son (who as I have heard married... the widow of...
Shepherd of Hempshill) are now, viz. 1675. both dead.

Selston. Doomsd. Salestone.
SAlistune before the Conquest had three Manors in it of three Bovats, which
Vlmer, Lib. Dooms.
Gladuin, and Vluric had. The Land whereof was one Car. This afterward became
the Fee of William Peverel, and there four Vill. two Board. had two Car. There
was a Church, and three Acres of Meadow. In elder time the value was 8s. when
the Conquerours Survey was taken 10s.

Ranulph de Wandesley is certified to hold Seliston of Robert de Stoteville,
Test. de Nev.
who succeeded Hubert Fitz-Raph, so that it seems the greatest part of this
place was with Wannesley of the Fee of Raph Fitz-Hubert, except the fourth part
which William de Roos (mentioned in Greseley) is said to hold in the right of
Eustachia his wife, which was Peverells Fee, wherein was the Church, which
Nicholas de Cantelupe gave to the Priory of Beauvale at the first Foundation
(as in that place is shown) William de Roos, Pl. de Banc. Trin. 17 E. 1. to.
72. and co^. Reg^ Trin. 18 E. 1. to. 14.
and Eustachia his wife, having in 17 E. 1. and 18 E. 1. recovered it against
Ranulph de Wandesly.

Hugh Fitz-Raph Ancestor of Eustachia (mentioned in Greyseley) for the Love of
God, and for the health of his Soul, Regist. de Dale, p. 153. pen. Ancherill
Gray, Arm.
and for the Souls of Agnes and Idonea his Wives, of Raph and Hugh his sons,
and for the Souls of all his Ancestors and Successors, gave to God and the
Church of the blessed Mary in Stanley Park, and the Canons of the order of the
Premonstratenses there serving God, seven Bovats of Land in the Territories of
Paynesthorp and Seleston, to wit, those which John de Molinton, and Judge his
Mother held, and four Bovats in the same Territories, which Eda the wife of
Henry the Clark held, and ten Acres of Land measured by the Perc^ of four and
twenty foot in the Territory of Wandesleg, which Hugh de Fraunceys held, with
Tofts, Crofts, Homages, Services, Wards, Reliefs, and Eschaets, Ib.
and he likewise confirmed to that Monastery, for the same reasons, fourteen
Bovats of Land in Little Halum in Darbyshire, which the said Canons gave him in
exchange for ten Bovats in Seliston; he likewise gave them for the Soul of his
wife Agnes, a Toft lying near the Toft of Grimhel, with one Bovat of Land in
Seleston and Wandesley; and another Bovat in Seleston called Standelfcroft, and
11s. yearly Rent, which Nicholas de Wandesley paid him, and 3s. 6d. which
Robert de Brunesley ought him yearly, and Rents of diverse others for
Tenements, which they held of him in Seleston and Wandesleg. The fourteen
Bovats in Halum, it seems, Hugo de Muscamp gave to Wido de Ver in
Franke-marriage with Margaret his daughter, as the said Wido did to Adam, son
of Robert, son of Ernisius, with Gundreda his daughter; but she had another
husband called Nicolas de Chauencurt, who for her Soul, and the Soul of Wido de
Ver her Father, and of Robert de Muscamp her Uncle, and of Robert de Chauencurt
his own Father, and of Erneburga his Mother, gave them to that Abbey, to which
Simon, son of Walter de Ver, also confirmed and granted the same.

In Crast. Ma^tini, 34 E. 1.
By a Fine, 34 E. 1. between William de Cressy, and Johan his wife, Petents, and
William de Gratton, and Isabel his wife, Tenants, of two Mess. two Carucats,
thirty and seven Bovats of Land, twenty Acres of Meadow, six Cottages, two
Water-Mills, eight Acres of Wood, 46s. Rent, with the Appurtenances in
Selleston, William and Isabel acknowledged the moiety of the said Tenements to
be the right of the said Iohane, and rendered them up in the Court to the said
William and Ioane, and remised and released from themselves, and the heirs of
Isabell to them, and the heirs of Ioane; for which the said William and Ioane
remised to William and Isabell, and the heirs of Isabell, all their claim in
the Capital Message, and the moiety of all the Premises.

Regist. de Beauvale.
King Richard the second, seeing his Grandfather King Edward the third, had
granted license for the Prior and Covent of Beauvale, to purchase 10l. per
annum, and also 20l. per annum, of Lands, etc. gave leave to Robert Vicar of
Gryseley, to give to that Priory three Mess. twelve Tofts, two Carucats, three
Bovats, and fourscore and three Acres of Land, and 4l. 12s. and 7d. Rent, with
the Appurtenances in Selston, Wandesley, Brynnesley, Neuthorp, Watnow Chaworth,
Brokebresting, and Hukenale Torkard, which were not held of the King, in full
satisfaction of the said 30l. Land and Rents. One Mess. and two Carucats of
these were Hugh Cresseyes of Selston, and held of the Manor of Wandesley, for
which the said Vicar had also the special license of William de Gratton, and
Raph de Cressy, then resident at and Lords of Wandesley. These went with
Beauvale, as in that place may be discovered, and some part of the rest with
Wandesley, as I s^^pose.

3 part. pat. 35 H. 8.
A Mess. and one Bovat called Bothweth in Selston, belonging to the Priory of
Felley, 15 July, 35 H. 8. were granted to Richard Andrews, and Nicolas Temple,
amongst many other things, Par. 6. pat. 35 H. 8.
who had license the same year to alienate them to Rog. Greenehalgh of
Teversall, and his heirs.

At Selston sometimes lived Mr. Iay. And since that House has been purchased
by Mr. Timothy Pusey, who made it his place of residence; he left only three
daughter his heirs, one whereof ( Sarah the eldest) was married to Gervas
Clifton, eldest son of Sir Gervas, but she died without issue; another was wife
of... Brooks of Norton in Cheshire; and the other which succeeded in this
place, was first married to William Willoughby, Esquire (descended from the
Family of Normanton on Sore, where the Genealogy is therefore placed), and
afterward to Sir John Cook of Melbourne, by whom she had no issue; but by her
former husband she left Sir William Willoughby, Baronet, and Mary, the wife of
Beaumonte Dixie, Esquire, who is now become the Inheritrix of this place, by
reason that the said Sir William Willoughby her brother left no heirs of his
body lawfully begotten. He was very rich, and had the Lordship of Wortley in
Yorkshire, by the settlement which his great Grandmother the Countess of
Devonshire made of it; but it returned also to the heirs general of the
Wortleyes. He had two natural sons by the wife and widow of.... Revell a
Blacksmith, one called Richard Revell, the other Hugh Willoughby (who is now
dead 1675.) for both which he made good provision in his Will, which his said
sister and her husband have with great expense and loss, vainly hitherto
endeavored to destroy, it being strongly supported by the diligence and
interest of Mr. Francis Willoughby of Wollaton, to whose son he gave the
Lordship of Muscam: he died at Selston, Feb. 10. 1670. and had a solemn Funeral
in the beginning of May (as I remember) next ensuing.

The Vicarage of Seleston was ten Marks when the Prior of Beauvale was Patron.
Mss. I. M.
In the Kings Books it is now 5l. value, and Sir William Willoughby remains the
last Patron.

In the East Window of the South I Will are these three Coats,

Or, a Fesse Dancette Sable, Vavasor.

Arg. a Lion Rampant Queve Furche, sable, Cressy.

Arg. a Chevron between three Martlets erected Sable.

In the Chancell East Window,

Gules, on a Bend Arg.

Three Roses of the first, and under it Willielmus Iay, Armig. sibi and
haered.....riam, Anno....

By the North Wall of the Chancel is a fair Tomb, whereon are the Arms of
Willoughby with quarterings, And,

Here lies William Willoughby, Esquire, son and heir of Sir Rotheram
Willoughby of Muscombe in the County of Not. Knight, and of Dame Anne his
wife, one of the daughters of Sir Richard Wortley, Knight, and Elizabeth his
wife, now Countess of Devon. He married Elizabeth, one of the daughters of
Timothy Pusey, Esquire, who made this Monument in memory of her husband; and by
her he had four Children* He was aged twenty one years and three quarters, and
died the xii. day of November. 1630.

Annesley.
IN Aneslei, Leuenot, in the time of the Saxon Government, Lib. Dooms.
had a Manor which paid to the public Geld or Tax for one Carucat of Land.
The Land of it being then found to be twelve Bovats. There after the Normans
came Raph Fitz-Hubert, whose Fee it was, had one Car. and nineteen Villains,
and one Board. having seven Car. and three Acres of Meadow, pasture Wood, one
leu. long, and one leu. broad. This kept the value it had in the Confessors
time, viz. 40s. When the Conquerours Survey was taken, one Richard held it, who
probably was Father or Ancestor of Raph, called Brito, who, together with his
son Reginald de Anesleia, gave the Church of Felley to the Priory of St.
Cuthbert of Radeford near Wirkesop, in the year 1156. 2 H. 2. which was shortly
after confirmed by Pope Alexander the third, Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p. 53.
in the second year of his Pontificate, in the year of our Lord 1161.

I find in the Pipe Rolls, 22 H. 2. that Reginald de Anneslega, Rot. pip. 22 H.
2.
gave account of one hundred Marks of the Amercements of the Forest. The next
that I have noted was Raph or Ranulph de Anesley, to whom the Sheriff of
Nottss. was by the Kings Precept, Pat. 1 H. 3. m. 15.
1 H. 3. to deliver seisin of all his Lands which he had in this County, when
he departed from the Faith and Service of King John, Father of that King, to
whose Faith and Service he was then returned. The next year, viz. 2 H. 3. Raph
de Anesley was quit from the Office of Coroner in this County because he had a
great infirmity. Claus. 2 H. 3. m. 2.


Reginald Marc made an House in the Forest of Shirewood at Aneslegh so strong,
Pat. 4 H. 3. m. ^. v^l. 4.
and built after such a manner, that, 4 H. 3. it was thought it might chance to
bring damage to the neighboring parts.

Reginald de Anesley, son of this Raph, confirmed to the Priory of Felley,
Regist. de Felley, p. 25. b.
the gift which his Father made to Walter the Prior, and the Canons of Robert,
son of Richard del Broc his Villain, with his whole sequel; and likewise one
Bovat which Galfr. son of Richard del Broc, held in the Fields of Annesley,
which his said Father Raph gave to God, and the Church of All Saints at
Annesley, to find a Lamp burning all the hours which were Sung in that Church.
Baldwin de Paunton the Sheriff gave account amongst other things, 25 H. 3. of
one Mark of Reginald de Annesleg, and Sibyll de Sancta Maria, for having four
justices ('it is likely to see the acknowledgement of some Fine in those times,
Pip. 25 H. 3.
ordinarily performed in several Courts by four lawful Knights upon the Kings
Writ, for the having or executing whereof, I suppose, the Mark was paid), an
example of which is also noted in Carcolston.

Reginald de Annesley paid 4l. for two Knights Fees in the time of Henry the
third, in Annesleg, with the Appurtenances, Test. de Nev.
then held of Raph de Fressenville, who had part of the Barony of Hubert
Fitz-Raph; the other part was then John de Stutevilles of Kirkeby, viz. fifteen
Knights Fees.

John de Annesle was High Sheriff of these Counties of Not. and Derb. 14 E. 1.
and so continued five or six years together, Rot. Pip.
as appears by the Pipe Rolls of those times.

By a Fine, 18 E. 2. the Manor of Annesleye, with the Appurtenances, In Crast.
S. Ioh. ^ap. 18 E. 2.
and twenty five Mess. one Mill, thirty three Bovats of Land, fifty seven Acres
of Meadow, three of pasture, twelve of Wood, 34s. 8d. Rent, and the third part
of a Mill, and Rent of one pound of Cummin in Gypesmere, Gouerton, Bleseby,
Morton, Birton, Bulco^e, Lowdham, Kneveton, and Crophill Botiller, were settled
on John de Annesleye, and Anora his wife, and the heirs of their bodies;
remainder to the right heirs of John. John de Annesley in the great Air before
William de Herle, Pl. de Quo War^ apud Not. 3 E. 3. r^. 2. in ^^rso.
and his fellow Justices at Not. 3 E. 3. pleaded that King Edward the first by
his Charter bearing date at Newstede in Shirewood, 4 October. in the eighth year
of his Reign, granted and confirmed to John de Annesley his Father, whose heir
he was, that he and his heirs should have Free Warren in all their Demesne
Lands in Annesley, whereupon it was allowed by the Court. The King, Rot. Fin. 2
E. 3. m. 12.
2 E. 3. granted to John de Annesley the custody of the Honor of Peverell in
these Counties of Not. and Derb.

John de Annesley Chivaler, married Isabell the daughter and heir of Margaret,
one of the three sisters and heirs of Sir John Chaundos, and had Livery 23 May,
Gross. Fin. 50 E. 3. m. 21. Oxon.
50 E. 3. of certain Lands in Oxfordshire, which Sir Richard Damory held for
life in Fee Farm, for fourscore and one pound, per annum, viz. the Manor of
Hedyngton, and Hundred of Bolynden and Nethyate; but it seems by Mr. Robert
Glover's Scheme of the Descent of this Family, (which, Pen. Patric. Hom.
Chaworth.
for want of other light, I am forced to make use of in this place, almost
against my judgment, by reason the time will scarce bear it) that he had no
issue by her, but a son called also Sir John Annesley by another wife, who was
Father of Thomas, Father of Thomas, Father of the last John de Annesley.

William de Wakebrugge, and Robert de Annesley Parson of Rodyngton, Regist. de
Felley, p. 37.
Founded a Chantry in the Church of Annesley, for a Secular Priest (whereof
John de Breton was the first) to make special mention of them two, and John de
Annesley, in his Mass whilst they should live, and for their Souls when dead;
as also for the Souls of John de Annesley, Knight, and Annora his wife, and of
their Father and Mother. The presentation of a fit Chaplain was to remain to
the said William and Robert, during their lives; then to devolve to the said
John de Annesley, and the heirs Males of his body; and ^or want of such, to
Thomas his brother, and the heirs Males of his; for want whereof to their
brother Gregory, and the heirs Males of his; and in case of failure of all, to
the Prior and Covent of Felley, and their successors. The Writ of Ad quod
damnum was 35 E. 3. upon which the Jury found it not to the Kings loss if he
granted them license to give eight Mess. and ten Bovats of Land, Part. 2. Esc.
35 E. 3.
whereof five Mess. and six Bovats were in Annesley, Annesley Woodhouse, and
Kirkby Woodhouse, and three Mess. and four Bovats were in Bleseby, Gourton, and
Gippesmere; and that there then remained, (to the Feoffees of Sir John de
Annesley) besides, twenty Marks per annum, and Lands in Cruch held of Roger
Beler; and in Rudington held of John Pavely, at which place a Branch of this
Family of Annesley was shortly after resident, which continued there almost
till my time. The Kings license for this Chantry was dated 10 Febr. 36 E. 3.
and John Archbishop of York his Confirmation, 27 Ian. 1373. Regist. de Felley,
p. 41, and 42.


Thomas de Annesley Lord of the Town, 1 H. 5. required of his Freeholders and
Tenants within his dominion of Annesley, Ib.
that he might enclose a certain place called Nicoll leys to his own profit for
one year, because of (dolationis) the laying out a certain Hedge between the
Fields of Wodhouse Field, for which he gave them beforehand 3s. 4d. for the
Fabric of Annesley Church.



The Ground plat of the South East Corner of Aus^ey Part with the Redeings and^


John de Annesley, 14 H. 6. granted to John Makworth Dean of Lincoln, (...).
14 ^ 6. m. 22.
John Curson, Thomas Makworth, Esquire, and others, his Manors of Annesley,
Bulcote, and Gippesmere, and all his Lands and Tenements in Crophill and
Cossale in this County, and in Rawemersh and Bolton upon Derne in the County of
York, which descended to him after the death of Thomas de Annesley his
Grandfather. The Jury, 18 H. 6. found Alice de Annesley to be daughter and heir
of the said John. (...) 8 H. 6.
She was first married to George Chaworth the third son of Sir Thomas Chaworth,
as in Wiverton, where the Descent is placed, may be seen, from whom the R.
Honorable Patricius Viscount Chaworth of Armagh, as heir Male lineally
descended, inherits this Manor, and now makes it his principal residence,
where he has also a most pleasant Park, which by removing away some Houses, he
has lately made to come up so near the House, as to be contiguous to the
Gardens.

By Fines levied 23 H. 6. and 32 H. 6. it appears one Isabell, Fin. lev. (...)
Oct. ^^^ch. 23 H. 6. and ^rast. As (...). 32 H. 6. and ^ost^a in Oct. S. Trin.
then the wife of Robert Shrigley, Esquire, held the third part of this Manor
in Dower, and released it to John Viscount Beaumont, Reginald Leigh (who was
second husband of the before-named Alice, the heir of Annesley) and James
Leigh, Esquire, and others.

By a Fine, 6 E. 4. eight Mess. three hundred Acres of Land, A die Pas^. in un.
^^ens. 6 E. 4.
one hundred of Meadow, and two hundred of Pasture, with the Appurtenances in
Annesley, Annesley Woodhouse, and Kirkeby Woodhouse, were settled on William
Forde, and Margaret his wife, for life; remainder to Richard Willughby,
Esquire, and his heirs. By another, I^ Crast. S. Ioh. Bapt. 9 E. 4. Pasc. 15 E.
4. rot. 358.
9 E. 4. they were passed to Galfr. Staunton, and his heirs. Galfr. Staunton,
Chaplain, and William Bucley, Clark, in a Recovery, 15 E. 4. claimed against
Thomas Parker, and Joan his wife (who in another Recovery the same Term claimed
against Richard Illingworth, Knight, rot. 354.
) the Manor of Kirkeby Woodhouse, with the Appurtenances, two Mess. eleven
Tofts, ten Bovats, and three hundred Acres of Land, forty eight of Meadow, four
hundred of Pasture, one hundred and eight of Wood, and 3s. Rent, with the
Appurtenances in Kirkeby Woodhouse, Annesley Woodhouse, and Annesley. In
another, Mic. 5 H. 7. rot. 307.
5 H. 7. John Bassingbourne, and others claimed the same, with some small
additions against Richard Illingworth.

Annesley Woodhouse is a kind of a Grange, now belonging to his Grace the Duke
of Newcastle. B.


The Rectory of Annesley, with the Advowson, Par. 3. pat. 35 H. 8.
and right of Patronage of the Church, late belonging to the Priory of Felley,
15 July, 35 H. 8. together with a Mess. in Tevershall, and other things were
granted to Richard Andrews, and Nicholas Temple, and the heirs of Richard. The
next day, Part. 18. pat. 35 H. 8.
viz. 16 July, 35 H. 8. they had license to alienate the premises to William
Bolles, and his heirs. This Rectory and Church parcel of the possessions of
William Bolles, Esquire, exchanged, together with the Rectory of Grandby, late
belonging to the Priory of Thurgarton, and the Rectory of Boney to the Priory
of Olvescroft in the County of Leicester, Par. 3. pat. 18 Eliz.
and a Tenement in Cossall, sometime in the Tenure of Percivall Elton, and then
in the Tenure of Thomas Holcroft, late belonging to Newstead, and a Mess. in
Bradmere to Lenton, and Lands in Sloswick to Wirksop, 27 Apr. 18 Eliz. were
granted to Roger Mauners and his heirs.

In Annesley Church South I Will East Window,

Gules, seven Mascles, Arg. 3.3.1.

Paly of six Arg. and Azure, a Bend Gules, Annesley: this is often.

And upon one in Mail, and by his head,

Arg. a Lion Rampant, Sab.

Gules, a Fesse Varry between three Libards heads jessant, three Flowers de
Lis, Or, the tops of the heads downwards.

Varry Or, and Sab.

Arg. six Lioncels, Gules 3.2.1.

In a North Window,

Gules, a Cross engrailed Arg. impaling Annesley.

In old Carving upon Wood of the Pew,

Azure, two Chevrons Or, Chaworth.

Arg. a pale deeply indented (or Lozengy) Sable, with an Unicorns head erased
for a Crest, Savage.

Annesley, as before.

In the East Window of the Chancel, Chaworth with quarterings, put there not
very long before the unhappy Wars, which destroyed such matters.

Felley.
RAdulph Britto of Annesley, by the consent of his heirs, Regist. de Felley, p.
21. b.
gave and confirmed to God and the blessed Mary, and St. Helen, and Friar
Robert the Hermit, and his Successors, the place of Felley, with the
Appurtenances, in pure Alms. It was afterward by the said Raph, and Reginald
his son, given to the Priory of Wirkesop, as already is noted in Annesley.

In the year from the Incarnation, according to the course and computation of
the English Church 1311. in the sixth year of Pope Clement the fifth, Ib. p. 31.
May 6. the Prior and Canons of the Monastery of Felley of the Order of St.
Austin, having the Parish Church of Annesley for their proper uses, appeared in
Southwell Church before the official of the Archdeacon of Nottingham, and
humbly besought him that their ancient Evidences whilst they were yet perfect,
might be published and Recorded, whereupon he cited Sir Thomas Rector of the
Parish Church of Kirkbi, Sir John Lord of Annesley, Knight, and Sir William de
Manthorp Priest of Lincoln Diocese, whom the matter chiefly concerned, to
appear the Friday next after the Feast of the Ascension the same year, in the
Church of St. Mary at Nottingham before him, to show cause canonical of
impediment, if they had any; but they not appearing, there was produced a
Writing, which had an oblong Seal of very old white Wax hanging at it, the
impression whereof contained the figure of a certain woman standing in the
middle of the Seal, and holding her right hand upon her right side, and
carrying above her left hand stretched out the sign of a Bird. The
circumference was Sigillum Leonie de Raines, The Tenor, That Leonia de Raines,
and Henry de Stutivill her son and heir, gave the Church of Anneslei, with all
its Liberties and Appurt* to God and the blessed Mary of Felley, and the Canons
there serving God, for the health of King Henry, son of the Empress, and Robert
de Stutivill, and her and their Ancestors; for which they were to find one
Canon, and Light to celebrate for the Souls of the forementioned King Henry and
Richard de Stutivill, and their Ancestors, and for her and hers: The Witnesses
were William the Chaplain, Hugh Parson of Kyrkeby, John his brother, William de
Mara, Ib.
Alan de Bosco, Raph de Yvetoft, etc. There was another Writing produced
whereat* was hanging a round Seal of old white Wax, the impression whereof
contained the Figure of a Lion passant, and the circumference was Sigillum
Reynaldi de Annesley: it mported, that Reynald de Annesley at the request of
his Father Radulph le Brett, gave to St. Mary and the House of Felley, and the
Brethren of that place, the dominion and whole right of his Patronage, which he
had in the Church of Annesley, in pure Alms, for the health (or safety) of
himself, and of his wife, and his heirs, and for the refreshment of all his
Parents departed: The Witnesses were Andrew the Canon of Suthuel, Drogo brother
of the said Reinald, Alan the Chaplain of Suell, Robert, son of Azor, Lisia de
Barton, Reginald de Insula, William Brettun, Hugh de Anneslei, Daniel, son of
Swan de Annesley. There was also another Writing with an oblong Seal of old
Green Wax hanging at it, the impression whereof contained the Image of a
certain Bishop standing in his Pontificals, holding his Episcopal Staff in his
left hand, and lifting up his right hand to bless: the circumference of it
being Sigillum Gaufridi Dei gracia Ebor. Archiepi. The Tenor whereof imported,
that Gaufr. by the Grace of God Archbishop of York, and Primate of England,
seeing the controversy between Lyonca de Raines, and Henry her son, and
Reginald de Annesley, and Hugh Parson of the Church of Kyrkeby, concerning the
Church of Annesley, was appeased in his presence by all of them, giving their
right to the Canons of Felley, he therefore confirmed it to them for their
proper uses. There likewise were produced Letters Apostolical, Ib. p. 33.
Signed with the Subscriptions of very many Cardinals and their Marks, with a
true Leaden Bull (or Seal) hanging in a Silk string, in which Bull on one side
appeared the heads of the blessed Peter and Paul the Apostles, with
Superscriptions set to them on the accustomed manner; and on the other side was
Coined Celestinus Papa iii. Ib.
The Tenor of it imported, that Pope Celestine the third, took the Church and
Prior and Covent of Felley into his own and St. Peter's protection, and
confirmed to them the rule of S. Augustine for ever, and what ever Possessions
or Goods they then had, or afterward by the grant of Popes, bounty of Kings or
Princes, offering of faithful people, or other just ways they could get,
particularly the place where the Church was situate, with all the
Appurtenances, of the gift of Raph de Anneslei, the Church of Anneslei, with
all its Appurtenances, Bradelei, with the Seat of a Mill, Lamberstorth, the
Sart of Raph Sauteclif, the Sart of Robert, the Sart of Gocelin, Clauerthwayt,
the Sart of Gilbert, Kyrkeleis, with the Appurtenances, the Rent of Notingham,
of the gift of Serlo de Pleslei the Land of Huluesdis, with the Appurtenances,
of the gift of Hubert Fitz-Raph five shillings, of the gift of Peter de Le
twelve pence, of the gift of Robert de Heriz the Land of four shillings, of the
gift of William Briton one Acre of Land, and fifteen pence of Rent at
Chesterfeild, of the gift of Reginald de Insula two Bovats of Land, of the gift
of Galfr. Bar one Bovat of Land, and twenty Acres at Tiversold, the Land of
Suell, of the gift of the Constable of Chester half a Mark at Newark, of the
gift of Simon de Leleshauc two Virgats of Land at Hoverton, and one Bovat at
Colwyc; and that none should presume to exact Tithes of their Arable Lands,
which were in their own hands, or Tilled at their costs, or of the nourishments
of their Cattle* and that it should be lawful for them to receive to Conversion
Clarks or Lay, Free and absolved, flying from the world, and them without any
contradiction to retain; and forbad that any of their Brethren, after
profession made in their place, should depart without license of the Prior,
except to obtain a more strict Religion, and that none should dare to retain
any so departing without the caution of common Letters. And that when there
should be a general interdict of the Land, it should be lawful for them, the
gates being shut, and excommunicate and interdicted persons excluded, the Bells
not stirred, to celebrate Divine Offices with a low voice. And inhibited lest
any should presume to publish sentence of Excomunication or interdict against
them or their Church without manifest and reasonable cause, or grieve them in
new debts or exactions. And farther decreed, that the Sepulture of this place
should be free, that none should hinder the Devotion and last Will of them who
should have delivered themselves to be buried there, except by chance they were
excommunicate or interdicted, yet saving the right of those Churches from which
the bodies were taken; and the like, as free choice of the Prior, and security
from all manner of trouble or disturbance; and a great Curse and
Excommunication for all infringers of their liberties, etc. It was signed by
all or most of the Cardinals then at Rome, and bore date Anno Domini 1194. and
in the fourth year of Pope Celestine the third, the 14 of the Kalends of August.

John the Prior and the Covent of Wirksop seeing that many times contentions
were moved between them and the Prior and Covent of Felley, Regist. de Felley
in fine.
both because they were wont to receive ten shillings of that House yearly due
to them from the beginning of it by the imposition of the Founder, and also
challenged certain subjections and obediences, and to have interest and voice
in their elections, and for these causes saw themselves burdened and wearied
with expensive and laborious prosecutions, as well as the said House in the
like defenses, by the advice and consent of the Reverend Father and Lord
Godefr. Archbishop of York, released all in his presence; the rest of the
Witnesses being the Abbats of Rufford and Welbeke, the Priors of St. Oswald,
Thurgarton, Newstede, and Shelford, Mr. John Clarell, Sir Richard de Sutton
Canon of Suthwell, Sir Rob. de Stotevill, Walter de Ludham, Regin. de Annesley,
Galfr. Barri, Simon de Aslacton, Knights, Sir Will. Rector of the Church of
Kyrkeby, Alexander de Wandesley, and others, for which release Henry Prior of
Felley, and the Covent of that place, granted to the Church and Canons of
Wirksop the yearly Rent of twenty shillings, which compotsiion was confirmed by
the said Godefr. Archbishop of York by his Instrument dated at Scroby, 5 Non.
March, 1260. and in the third year of his Pontificate.

Yvo de Heriz, for the safety (or health) of the Soul of his brother William,
Regist. de Felley, p. 89.
gave to God and St. Mary of Felley, and to William de Lovetot the Prior, and
the Canons there serving God, twenty Acres, etc. in Oggeston and Brachinpheyt:
The Witnesses were Hubert de Crich, William Barry, William de Heriz of
Wyverton, Raph le Poer, Raph de Annesley, William Pity, Simon the Chaplain of
Wynfeld, and very many more.

Robert de Heriz gave them a Sart in Oggedeston, which Edward the Smith of
Wistanton held: The Witnesses were Sir Walter Abbat of Darby, Gilbert Prior of
Thurgarton, Albred Prior of Newstede, Simon, son of (or Fitz-) Richard, Philip
de Belmes, Philip de Vston, Richard Aaron, Robert le Aungevin, William Pite,
Roger Pite, John Plungun, William de la Vale, Galfr. de Heriz, Robert, son of
Robert de Heriz the Donour.

Yvo de Heriz confirmed this, according to the Deed which the Monks had of his
Father.

Ib. 84.
John de Heriz for the health of his Soul, and of Sarra (I suppose his wife)
gave to that Church of Felley ten and eight Bovats of his Land in Tibbeself, to
sustain two Canons of that Covent, who should daily celebrate in that Church of
Felley for ever: The Witnesses were William the Prior of Thurgarton, Robert de
Wylieby, Galfr. Berri, William de Heriz, Reginald de Annesley, Yvo de Heriz,
Roger de Aencort, Raph de Wynfeld, Roger de Somervill, Ywan Baeton, and others.

William Pite of Tibbeself released to the Canons of Felley and their
Successors, Ib. 86.
the Homage and all the right and claim which he had in the heirs of Sir
William de Heriz; and in all that Land, with the Appurtenances, which Thomas
the Miller sometime held of Warin Pite his Father in Wylleby on the Would.

Ib. 91.
Galfr. de Langley for the health of his own Soul, his Fathers, Mothers, and
his Wives Christina and Matilde, his Children, Ancestors, Successors, Friends,
and Benefactors, and all the faithful departed, gave to God, St. Mary, and Sir
Raph the Prior of Felley, and the Canons there serving God, and their
Successors, his whole Land which he had in Essover, viz. Peynstonhyrst, which
he bought of Simon de Marcham Rector of the Church of Essover, and Willamfeld,
which he bought of William de Vston: so that his name and the names of his
Wives before mentioned, and the Souls of his Ancestors and Successors, should
be daily named and specified in the Mass, which is sung for the Benefactors of
the said house; and that every year one Mass should be solemnly celebrated,
with Placebo and Dirige, on the day of his death (or obit) as for a Prior of
that House; and on that day for his Soul, and all the aforesaid, thirteen poor
people should be fed, whereof every one should have one white Loaf, [ Micham],
and two should have one sufficient Mess [ Ferculum] and one Flagon [ Lagenam]
of the better Beer or Ale; and one other Mass should be celebrated for the Soul
of Maud his wife, on the day of her Anniversary, viz. on the Translation of
Benedict the Abbat, and on that day five poor people were to be fed as before
is mentioned, etc. The Witnesses were Sir Gilbert de Preston, and John de
Octon, then the Kings Justices [ viz. 52 H. 3.] Galfr. (de Langley) his son,
William de Langeford, Knights, Robert de Wylleby, Raph de Rerysby, Galfr.
Dethek, Roger de Somervill, Hugh de Chaunny, and others. These Lands were
confirmed by Robert, Ib. 92, and 3.
son of Raph de Rerysby, and Robert, son of Sir Robert de Wilweby, who were
heirs of Serlo de Plesley a Benefactor also, and formerly Lord of Essover (now
Ashoure in Darbishire.)

They had many other Benefactors* some whereof will be noted in other places of
this Book, as others have been already where the Land lay.

There is the Exemplification of a Charter of King Henry the third, Pat. 18 E.
1. m. 6.
in 18 E. 1. which shows that the Canons of Felley should be quit of Toll, and
all custom throughout all England.

King Edward the first, Regist. de Novo loco, p. 85.
in 34 E. 1. granted to the Priory of Felley the Tithes coming of the Kings
Essarts in the Hayes of Lindeby, Romwood, and Willey, which are out of the
Bounds of any Parish whatsoever. In Attenborow is shown the interest which this
Monastery had in that Church.

The House and Site of the Priory or Monastery of the blessed Mary of Felley,
Par. 6. pat. 30 H. 8.
and all Messuages, Houses, Orchards, Gardens, Lands, and Tenements, within and
without the said Site in Felley and Annesley, and forty Acres of Arable Land
and an half, twenty of Meadow, three hundred fifty six of Pasture, with the
Appurtenances in Felley and Annesley; also one Mess. one Barn, one Water-Mill
called Felley Mill, and two parcels of Meadow, etc. Sept. 1. 30 H. 8. were
granted to William Bolles, and Lucy his wife.

They were granted 4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. to Sir Anthony Strelley, Knight, and
Ioane his wife, Part. 10 pat. 4 and 5 P. and M.
and the heirs of their bodies.

King James, 7 Iun. 1 Iac. granted to Anthony Millington, and his heirs, Part.
18 pat. 1 Iac.
the Reversion of the House and Site of the Priory of Felley, etc. which King
Henry the eighth had of William Bolles, at the yearly Rent of 17l. 3s. 0d. It
was Gilbert Millingtons Attainted, named in Brunnesley, yet I think it remains
to Edward Millington his son, or to Edwards son his Grandchild.

Hucknall Torcard. Hochenale.
ONe part of Hochenale was of William Peverells Fee, in which two brothers
answered to the Geld for four Bovats. The Land of their Manor being half a
Carucat. Lib. Dooms.
There three Villains had then one Car. This in the Confessors time was valued
at 8s. but then, viz. in the latter end of the Conquerours at 2s. Some Soc lay
to it in Hamsell. But the greater part was of the Fee of Raph de Buron, in
which Vlchel, before the coming of the Normans, had twelve Bov. for the Tax or
Geld. The Land of his Manor being for two Plows, or two Car. There Osmond the
Man or Tenant of Raph had one Car. and five Villains had three Car.. pasture
Wood one leu. long, and. leu. broad. In the Confessors time this was 30s. in
the Conquerours 15s. value.

William Peverells part it seems was held by Serjeancy. William, son of Cost
held in Hukenhall the Wainage of one Carucat, Test. de Nev.
and certain Essarts, and a certain Mill, the whole valued at 6l. 10s. by the
Serjeancy of keeping a Falcon, which William then said, that he had the Kings
Falcon at his House. Hugh, son of this William, 2 H. 3. made Fine for having
seisin of the Land of Huckenhale, Fin. 2 H. 3. par. 2. m. 7.
and the Mill of Radeford, etc. and held it after him, in his time it was
valued at eight Marks. This was at length dispersed into many hands. Test. de
Nev.
William le Bretun had two Bov. of the Serjeancy of Hugh Fitz-Coste in
Hokenale, Radford, and Kirkeby, and paid the King 5s. per annum. Richard Freman
one Bovat, and paid 2s. 6d. Elias le Bretun eight Acres, and paid 18d. per
annum, The Prior of Felley three Acres, and paid 1s. 6d. John de Perpunt three
Roods, and paid 3d. and some others had such other small parcels; Hugh
Fitz-Coste held the rest himself then valued at ten Marks, by the Service of
carrying the Kings Gerfalcon at the Kings cost, having 9d. a day when he did
the Service.

I suppose this or most of it came to the Family of Gray of Sandiacre. Simon de
Greenhill, and William his brother, 7 E. 2. had interest for life in half a
Carucat here, Esc. 7 E. 2. n. 27.
the third part whereof was of Peverells Fee, and the other two parts were then
held of Henry Winkeburne. Richard de Gray of Sandiacre, about 3 E. 3. Lord of
Sutton in the Dale in Darbyshire, Esc. 3 E. 3. n. 47.
held diverse Lands in this Hukenhale, where was also a Capital Message, with
a certain Garden, and thirty Acres of Land, and two of Meadow, William Gray his
son and heir being then left twenty six years of age. This I take to be that
which was afterward, viz. 37 H. 6. called Leekes Manor, Esc. 37 H. 6.
which some while before William Leek left to descend with his Manor of Little
Leek, and other Lands in Gedling, Carleton, Stokebardolf, Colwyke, Saxendale,
and Stoke by Newark, to John Leek his son and heir. John Leeke, Knight, held
the Manor of Hucknall Torcard of the Crown by Knights Service, and also by the
Service of carrying one Gerfalcon from Michaelmas till Lent at the Kings cost,
with Horses and 2s. a day, and half a Cistern of Wine, and two Robes when he
was warned to do the Service. John Biron, Knight, and John Palmer of Hucknall,
purchased Lands and Tenements in Hucknall of Francis Leek, Esquire, to the
value of 3l. 2s. 8d. per annum, held of the Queen [ Eliz.] in Capite. B.
Sir John Leekes Manor was in my time the inheritance of Lancelot Curtis.

The dispersed parcels passed through many hands. Roger Porter, Lib. de (...)
fol. 20^. Pas^. 33 E. 3. Ib. fol. 20^. Hill. 41 E. 3.
son and heir of Maud Porter, 33 E. 3. had a Mess. and eighteen Acres, etc. of
this Fee, and Thomas Breton, brother and heir of John Breton, 41 E. 3.
acknowledged to hold the two Bovats, before noted, to be William le Bretuns by
Petit Serjeancy.

The Fee of Rad. de Burun, William Briewer had in the beginning of King John's
time or sooner, from whom it descended to Baldwin de Wake Lord of Brun or Burn
in Lincolnshire, of which Manor, 10 E. 1. John Torcard, Esc. 10 E. ^. n. 26.
and William Pity, were found to have held two Knights Fees in Lambecote and
Hukenhale.

The first of the Torcards which succeeded Osmund, and by their continuance
here left their name to distinguish the place, whom I have light upon was
Gaufr. Torcard, who with the consent of Maud his wife, and Henry his son, for
the health of his Soul, and of his Ancestors, Regist. de Lent. p. 4^.
and Successors, and for the Soul of Alexander de Chiney, gave to God and the
Church of the Holy Trinity at Lenton, and the Monks there serving God, one Cart
to be continually wandering about, to gather up his dead Wood of Huckenale: The
Witnesses were Raph Murdac, Raph de Chelnei, Hugh his brother, Philip de
Beaumes, Hugh de Lichelade, Gilbert the Chaplain of the Castle, Alan, Robert,
Gregory, Clarks, Mr. Silvester, Gaufr. Torcard of Chillewelle, William de
Davidvill, Henry Torcard his own son, and others.

There was a Fine levied, 10 R. 1. between Galfr. Torcaz, and Maud his wife,
Petents, Fin. 10 R. 1
and William Pity, Tenent, of two Knights Fees in Huckenhale and Lambecote,
whereof they all gave the Church of Huckenhale, and five Bovats of Land there,
to the Church of Newstede, and the rest equally divided between Galfr. and
William; Henry the eldest son of Galfr. had then married Alin, the daughter of
William, who was then also his heir, with whom he gave the third part of his
share in marriage: but if William should happen to have an heir Male, Henry,
and Alina his wife, were but to have half of Williams part after his death.

Roesia Torkard paid four Marks for two Fees in Huckenhale and Lambcote, Test.
de (...).
and John Torkard the like sum afterward, for two Fees in Huckenhale, then
held of Johan the relict of Hugh Wake, who paid also 20s. for half a Fee in
Kyleburne (in Darbyshire) which was also part of Buruns Fee.

Nom. Vill.
Henry de Winkeburne was Lord of Hucknall, 9 E. 2. Henry de Winkeburne, and
Albreda his wife, A die S. (...). in 15. dies 5 E. 3. ^n O^^. S. Mich. 18 E. 3.
did by Fine, 5 E. 3. pass the Manor of Hukenale Torkard, to Alexander de
Gonaldeston and his heirs. The said Alexander, and Alice his wife, by another
Fine conveyed it to Raph de Crumbewell, and Avicia his wife, during their
lives; and after their decease to Vlker, son of the said Raph and Avicia,
during his life; remainder to the right heirs of Raph.

Raph de Crumbwell, and Avicia his wife, made a certain Causey otherwise than
had formerly been, Regist. de Novo loco, p. 153. and 156.
to increase the Water to serve their Mills, which was it seems in the Ditch,
and upon the Soil which belonged to the Prior of Newstede, and extended from
the Churchyard to the head of the Damm toward the East, for which they gave
the said Prior, three Roods of Arable Land lying in the East field in diverse
places at the Towns end toward Nottingham, but the said Raph oppressed the
Priory more in causing it to pay more than it ought in the several Scutages:
for in 5 E. 1. in that for the Welsh expedition, it paid but for the third part
of a Knights Fee, and there were Tenants who held ten Bovats of Torkards Fee,
and eight of Lutterells (of Gamelston) besides; but this Raph Crumbwell got an
Inquisition, which found the Priory to have two parts of a Knights Fee in
Demesne and Service of Tenants, so that the Prior was forced to entreat that he
might pay but for half a Fee, which he thought too much before. Vlgar Crumwell
it seems gave his interest to the Priory of Beauvale, which paid also for half
a Knights Fee.

Raph de Crumbewelle Lord of Tatershale in the County of Lincoln, Regist. de
Bellavalle.
passed his Manor of Hukenall Torkard, which his brother Vlker had for life,
to Richard de Chesterfeild, Clark, Richard de Tyssington, Clark, William de
Wakebrugg, and John de la Pole of Asseburne, to whom he levied a Fine of it,
Trin. 43 E. 3. They passed it to Hugh de Annesley of Rodyngton, as did also
Maud de Crumbewell Lady of Tatershall, the better to convey it to the Priory of
Beauvale, with some other small things, to which it was confirmed by the
feoffees of Raph Lord Crumbewell after his death, viz. William Bishop of
Winchester, William Gray Bishop of Ely, John Earl of Shrowsbury, John Lord
Stourton, Knight, John Fortescue, Knight, Chief Justice, Walter Moyle, one of
the Justices of the Common Bench, John Radcliffe, Esquire, Thomas Teryll,
Knight, Mr. William Say, Clark, Thomas Bylling, John Say, Esquire, William
Venour, Thomas Young, John Taylboys, Senior, Esquire, Robert Scheffeild,
Richard Illingworth, Richard Waterton, Esquire, John Langholme, Edward Blake,
Thomas Palmer, William Stanlowe, John Vincent, and Richard Flynt, the rest were
dead, viz. Reginald Bishop of Coventry and Lichfeild, Thomas Clifford Lord
Clifford, Robert Beaumont, Clark, John Saucheverell, Esquire, and John Stathum.

Iaq. 7 H. 6.
Beauvale, 7 H. 6. paid for one half of a Knights Fee, and Newstede for another.

After the dissolution they partly followed the fortune of those places with
which they still continue.

The Rectory with the Patronage of the Vicarage, Part. 10. pat. 24 Eliz. Part.
19 pat. 42 Eliz.
25 Ian. 24 Eliz. was granted to Edward Downinge, and Peter Ashton. The same
Queen, 27 Iun. 42 Eliz. granted to Michael Stanhope, Esquire, one of the Grooms
of the Privy Chamber, and to Edward Stanhope, Doctor in the Laws, the Manor of
Hucknall Torkard which did belong to Newstede (to which at the Foundation King
Henry the second, Mon. Angl. vol. 2.31^. and Chapter 6 Ioh. n. 42.
gave the Church of Hokenhale, which King John confirmed, 6 Ioh.) at the yearly
value of 13l. 9s. 10d. But now the principal part of this Township is the
inheritance of the Lord Byron, as it was in the time of King William the
Conqueror.

There are now reckoned four or five Manors of which the Honorable William
Byron has two, Mss. I. M.
the Earl of Essex Lord of Beavale has one, Lancelot Rolleston, Esquire, one,
and.... Curtis one, etc.

The Vicarage of Hucnall was 8l. when the Prior of Newstede was Patron. It Is
now in the Kings Books 4l. 18s. 1d. ob. and William Byron, Esquire, Patron.

In Hucknall Torcard Chancel upper South Window,

Barry of six Arg. and Azure, a file of five Labels Or, Gray of Sandiacre.

Arg. a file of five points Or, I suppose the same the Azure only worn off.

Paly of six Arg. and Azure a Bend Varry Or, and Gules.

Painted on the Wall Byron, with quarterings impaling Molyneux.

In a South Window of the Church these five,

1. Barry of six Arg. and Azure, Gray of Codnour. 2. Or three Piles meeting in
the base, Gules, a Canton Ermine, Basset of Drayton. 3. Arg. on a Pile, Gules,
a Falcon of the first Crowned Or, impaling Paly of six Arg. and Azure a Bend
Gules, Annesley. 4. Or on two Bars Gules, three Waterbudgets Arg. Willoughby of
Wollaton. 5. Sable, a Lion Rampant amongst Cinquefoiles Arg. Clifton.
And in another South Window,

1. Arg. a chief Gules, and Bendlet Azure, Crumwell. 2. Arg. a Chevron Gules, a
file of three points Ermine. 3. Sab. a Bend between six Scallops Arg. a Canton
Or. 4. Paly of six Arg. and Azure, a Bend Gules charged on the upper part with
a Mullet of the first.
In the North I Will East Window,

Or a Lion Rampant purpure.

In a North Window,

Arg. two Bars Sab. a Martlet Gules in the dexter point.

Paly of six Arg. and Azure a Bend Gules, Annesley, and above also.

Gules, a F^sse Varry between three Libards heads ^esant, three Flowers de Lis
uppermost, Or.

Beskwood Park.
KIng Henry the first granted to the Prior^ of Lenton, Regist. de ^ent. p. 2.
to have two Carts to fetch (...) Wood and Heath out of Bescwood. King Henry
the second granted that Covent to have every day two Carrs or three Carretts to
bring them dead Wood or Heath as much as they should need for their own use.

Lib. Forest. de Shirewood.
In the Inquisition taken at St. John's House in Nottingham, the fourth of the
Nones of July, in 35 H. 3. before Geoffrey Langley Justice of the Forest, it is
called an Hay or Park of our Lord the King wherein no man Commons.

In the Regard, 31 E. 3. the Kings Hay of Beskwood is said to be closed in with
a Pale, and to be then in the keeping of Richard de lawche [de la Vache] Knight.

King Edward the third by his Letters Patents, dated at his Park of Beskwood,
Regist. de (...) loco, 91.
1 Sept. 37 E. 3. pardoned and released certain Rents issuing out of Lindeby
Hay, and Bullwell Rise, to the Priory of Newstede.

The Wood of Beskwood was, 2 E. 3. granted to Richard de Strelley for his life,
Fin. 2 E. 3. m. 8.
paying...... the extent thereof yearly, having had an Ad quod Damnum; Pla^.
Fo^est. 8 E. 3. rot. 28.
the same King, 22 Febr. 8 E. 3. granted him all the dry Zuches, which in
English were then called Stovenes or [ Stubbes] within his Hay of Beskwood.
This Richard Strelley is there styled Dilecto valecto nostro.

Philip de Willughby mentioned in Bullwell, about 33 E. 1. held one Toft there,
Esc. 33 E. 1. n. 14.
and two Bovats of Land, with the Appurtenances, by the Service of being
Forester in Beskewood, and likewise the fourscore Acres, there noted, in
Bullwell Ground. His brother William de Willughby was then found his heir.

B.
It has a very fair Lodge in it, and in respect of the pleasant Situation of
the place, and convenience of Hunting and pleasure, this Park and Lodge has
for these many years been the desire and achievement of great men: three Earls
of Rutland had it, Roger, Francis, and George; before that Thomas Markham, a
great Courtier and Servant to Queen Elizabeth, had it; and before him little
Sir John Byron a great favorite to King Henry the eighth. It is now in Lease
to William Lord Willughby of Parham.

Before the troubles it was well stored with Red Deer. But now it is parcelled
into little Closes on one side, and much of it has been plowed, so that there
is scarce either Wood or Venison: which is also too likely to be the fate of
the whole Forest of Shirewood.

Lindeby.
IN Lindeby three brothers had (before the Normans came) three Manors, which
paid to the Dane-geld as one Carucat and an half. The Land was for two Plows or
two Car. There afterward William Peverell had three Car. and twelve Vill. and
two Board. having five Car. There was a Priest, Lib. Dooms.
and a Mill 10s. pasture Wood one leu. long, and one leu. broad. In King Edward
the Confessors time this was valued at 26s. 8d. but when Doomsday Book was
made at 40s. In Paplewic five Bovats of Land lay to this Manor. Regist. de
Lent. p. 41.


William Peverell (the younger) granted to God and the Church of the Holy
Trinity at Lenton, and his Brethren there serving God, the Town which is called
Lyndeby, and whatsoever he had in it, viz. Lands Tilled and untilled, in Wood
and in Plain, in Medows and Pastures, with the Church of the same Town, and the
Mill of Blaccliff, for the Treasures which his Mother bestowed on that Church,
and he compelled by very great necessity took; and for all other excesses, in
which he, by the instinct of the enemy against that Church, imprudently had
exceeded, contrary to the Command of his Father, and the Bargain which he made
with him, and with his Mother.

William Abbat of Leycester, and Robert Prior of Kenelingwrd, Ib.
by the Authority of Pope Alexander 3. made an agreement that Robert the Priest
of Edingla, who gave the Monks of Lenton five Marks, should hold the Church of
Lyndeby while he lived Secular, paying that Priory half a Mark of Silver yearly
at Martinmas in the name of a Pension, which one Henry the Clark was also to
have if he over-lived Robert, paying the like Pension.

William Cursun, Clark, obliged himself to make it a whole Mark Pension to the
Covent of Lenton, when there should be a solid establishment made of the
Parsonage and Vicarage, which Adam the Chaplain was to acquit him of, so long
as the said Adam continued in secular habit.

The Town of Lyndeby was an Eschaet of the Kings of the Honor of Peverel of
Not. and Will. de St. Michael of London, Test. de Nev.
had one moiety of it of the gift of King John, paying yearly in the Kings
Chamber a Furr of Gris, and that half was worth 7l. 6s. per annum; and Peter de
Lettris, and his brother had the other half by the Kings Counsel, as long as
the King pleased, which was of the same value.

The King, 36 H. 3. held half of it, and it was valued at 7l. 14s. 100s. of
old, Esc. 36 H. 3. n. 13.
and 46s. of old increase, and 8s. of new. Test. de Nev.
Robert de Marys held the other half by occasion of the Wardship of Laurence,
heir of Laurence de St. Michael, and paid a Furr of seven Tyres [ Fessis]
yearly.

The Jury in 5 E. 2. found that John the son of Thomas Metham held, by reason
of Sibyll his wife, as of the inheritance of the said Sibyll, and jointly with
her of the King in Capite, the moiety of the Town of Lindeby by the Rent of a
Skin of Gray Furr, and one Mess. and two Carucats of Land in Willey (mentioned
in Beauvale) by the Service of 10l. to the Exchequer, Thomas, son and heir of
the said John Metham, being then twelve years old.

The King granted the moiety of the Town of Lindeby to one Laurence de
Seyntmychell, Regist. de Novo loco, p. 80.
and by him entered Sir William de Hameldon, and enfeoffed his son, and Sibyll
de Metham, who in her widow-hood enfeoffed William de la Pole, who gave it to
the King in exchange for another Manor ( viz. Mitton in Yorkshire*) King
Edward the third, Claus. 4 E. 3. m. 33. in dorso.
gave it to Sir Tho. de Bourne, Anno 1342. and he sold it again to William de
la Pole, and enfeoffed Edmund his son, in the year 1345.

Esc. 6 H. 6. n. 11.
About 6 H. 6. Thomas Hunt died seized of this moiety, and left it to descend to
his daughter and heir Joan, the wife of John Hikelinge, Esquire, she being then
above thirty years of age.

By an Inquisition taken at Not. the Thursday after Palm Sunday, 23 H. 7.
before Sir William Perpoint, Knight, Edward Stanhope, Knight, and Raph Agard, I
find that John Strelley of Lindeby, died seized of it, 4 March, 2 H. 7. leaving
his son and heir Nicolas Strelley above twelve years old. Elizabeth his Mother,
relict of the said John, the next year after was married to James Savage,
Esquire. From Strelley it went to Staveley, B.
by the marriage of a daughter.

There was a Recovery, 20 Eliz. of the Manor of Lindeby, Pasc. 20 Eliz. rot.
145.
wherein William Savyle, Esquire, and Martin Earl, Gent. claimed against John
Savyle, Gent. who called to warranty Thomas Staveley,Esquire. It Is said Mr.
Savile, and Sir John Byron, made an exchange between this and Oxton.

John, second son of Sir Nicolas de Strelley, married Ioane, Ex Coll. I. B.
the daughter and heir of John Hunt (which I suppose should be Hikling) of
Lyndeby, and by her had John Strelley of Lindeby, who by Elizab. the daughter
of Will. Mering, Esquire, had Sir Nicolas Strelley, Knight, who married
Elizabeth, daughter and one of the heirs of Sir Brian Fitz-Randolph, Knight,
but died without issue; he had four sisters, Anne, the wife of Richard Bingham
of Watnow, Isabell, the wife of.... Stavelly, Elizabeth, of... Cade; and Jane
Strelley died unmarried.

The Kings moiety was commonly in the hands of great men, and usually went with
Maunsfeild, as in that place will appear.

Thomas le Hayer or de le Hay, and John le Colyer, Regist. de Novo loco, 38.
Ib. p. 5, 7.
took sixty eight Acres of the Kings Soil in Lindeby Hay, of Richard de
Oysell, whose sons and heirs Hugh le Colyer, and Robert de le Hay, sold them to
Sir John de Crombewell, who gave them to Newstede Priory, before or about the
beginning of Edward the third, upon which 25s. 4d. was reserved yearly to the
Crown, and by the Exchequer men was exacted twice over till the Prior got a
Supersedeas dated at Aukeland, Ib. p. 70.
12 Oct. 10 E. 3. That Priory had also one hundred and eighty Acres of waste in
Lindeby Hay, granted by King Edward the first, May 20. in 22 E. 1. for 4l. per
annum; and in the 26 E. 1. were also arrented of Richard de Oysell the Kings
Approver, and measured by the Perch of twenty four foot according to the Assise
of the Forest. The same Priory, 4 E. 3. had one hundred and twenty Acres, and
diverse other parcels, the Rents whereof they got by degrees discharged and
Released.

That which belonged to Newstede King Henry the eighth, Par. 7. pat. 2 E. 6.
passed with that Monastery to Sir John Byron, whose posterity still enjoys
it, being all or most of it now the Inheritance of the Honorable William
Byron, Esquire, son and heir of Richard Lord Byron.

The Church, viz. the Advowson of the Rectory was granted, 6 Aug. 2 E. 6. to
Robert Strelley, and Frideswide his wife.

The Rectory of Lindeby was 8l. when the Prior of Lenton was Patron. Mss. I. M.
It Is now in the Kings Books 4l. 9s. 9d. ob. value, and William Byron, Esquire,
Patron.

In the South Quire of Lynby Church is a Tomb of... Strelley,

On the South side is,

1. Strelley impaling Mering.

2. A Bend and File of three Labels impaling quarterly a chief Cheque, and a
Saltier. And three Lozenges in Fesse, and a Spread Eagle, and a Saltier
engrailed.

3. A Bend quartering a Saltier engrailed; on an Inescutcheon a File of three
Labels.

4. Strelley with a Roundell ( as was the first also) impaling a Chief indented
quartering a Bend, and a File of three Labels.

On the North side of it Strelley (with a Roundell) impaling a Dragon erected,
and Strelley, viz. Paly of six.

In a little North Window,

Az. a Fesse Dancy, and Billette Or, Deincourt.

In a West Window in the Steeple Strelley, viz.

Paly of six Ar. and Az. with the Roundell.

And over the Porch in Stone Strelley without the Roundell.

In the North Quire Wall,

In this little Chapel, under the two Gravestones with Crosses, lies George
Chaworth, Esquire, and Mary his wife, the daughter of Sir Henry Sacheverell,
Knight, late Farmers of this Manor place and Demesnes of Lynby, between whom
was issue three sons, and three daughter; which George died 22 Aug. 1557. and
Mary his said wife died 15 Jun. 1562. On whose Souls God has mercy.

Papplewick. And Newstede.
BEsides what lay to Lindeby, the Conqueror^ great Survey mentions in
Pappleuvic, some of the Land of the Taynes, which Alvric, and Alfa, and Elric
had, and paid to the Dane-geld for two Car. three Bov. but they were then
waste. There was Pasture Wood one leu. long, and half one broad. In the
Confessors time it was valued at 20s.

Regist. de Lent. p. 1. Ib. 118.
William Peverell gave what he had here to the Monastery of Lenton at the first
Foundation. King Henry the second gave to Lenton Priory fourscore Acres of
Effarts of Curtenhale in Northantescr, and the Mill of Blaccliff in exchange
for the Land of Papilwich, which he gave to the Canons of Newstede in
Schirwode, which he there Founded.

King Henry the second gave the Town of Papulwick, Regist. de Novo loco.
with the Church of the same, and the Mill which the Canons of Newstede made,
with the Meadow of Beskewod along the water, with all the Appurtenances, to God
and St. Mary, together with the New Stead or Place, which he Founded in
Shirewod, for Canons Regular of the Order of St. Austine, Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p.
317.
to whom he gave also long and large wastes lying about the said Monastery
within the Forest; which wastes in ancient Charters are called Kygell and
Ravenshede, and are described by their bounds, and the particulars within them.
He granted the Monks also view of Frank-pledge, and many other privileges and
freedoms, and a Park of ten Acres according to the measure of the foot of the
Forest, by the Site of the said Monastery, to be enclosed as they should
please, out of the view of the Verderers, Regarders, Foresters, and other
Officers of the Forest, and a Field of Arable Land called Abbey Field, lying
between the Town of Papilwyke and the said Monastery, to hold enclosed with
Hedge and Ditch according to the Assise of the Forest, upon the head of which
the Canons made a Grange nigh the Town of Papilwyke, and ever kept that Field
several, and in their own Tillage, and out of the Covert of the Forest as their
proper Demesne. The said King Henry, son of the Empress, gave them also at the
first Foundation Cs. Land in Shepewyke and Walkringham, Regist. de Novo loco.
to which belonged something in Misterton and Walcreth, and confirmed what
Robert de Cauz, and John Cook gave in Notingham.

King John, and the following Kings, confirmed and enlarged their Territories
and Privileges; Ib.
and they had several other good Benefactors, as in diverse places of this
County will be noted, amongst whom Robert Lord Lexington was one of the most
considerable.

The value of this Monastery in the first fruits Office is 167l. 16s. 11d. ob.

King Henry the eighth, by his Letters Patents dated May 28. 32 H. 8. granted
this House, Par. 4. pat. 32 H. 8.
with the Manor of Papilwick, and Rectory of the same, and all the Closes by
their several names about the Priory, and Commons in Raucushede and Kygell in
the Forest, and all in Newstede, Paplewyk, and Lindby, etc. to Sir John Byron,
Knight and his heirs. Part. 2. Cla^s. 31 H. 8.
This Priory was surrendered 1 July 1539. 31 H. 8. viz. the year before. It has
been almost ever since, and still is the principal Seat of that Noble Family,
of which therefore it cannot be improper to give some brief account in this
place.

The first was Raph de Burun, whom the Book of Doomsday, Sect. xi. made in the
latter part of the Reign of King William the Conqueror, shows to have had in
Derbyscr, the Manors of Westune, Horselei, Denebi, Halum, and Herdebi; in the
Park of Horseley, there was a Castle (some of the ruins whereof are yet
visible) called Horestan Castle, which was the chief mansion of his next
Successors; in this County the same Record Snodenghamscire, Sect. xv. mentions
him to be Lord of the Manor of Oscington, to which part of Almenton belonged,
of one in Calun, now Kelum, one in Hochenale, one in Cortingestoche, one in
Rampeston, one in Lambecote, and two in Codegrave, in which place it appears,
his next Successor and (as I suppose) his son, was Hugh de Burun, Father of
Hugh called Meschines, and Roger; Hugh became a Monk at Lenton, and Roger
enjoyed the Barony, of which he gave an account to King Henry the second,
concerning his Knights Fees, as in the Red Book in the Exchequer is manifest.
This Roger married Nicola, the daughter of Roelend de Verdun, Pip. 2 Ioh.
who was by the Earl of Chester, Oblat. 1 Ioh. m. 8. n. 8. Derb.
about 1 Ioh. after his death married to Anketin de Brikesard, as in Cotgrave
is likewise said, but I find not what Children he left. Robert de Burun,
somewhere, 2 Ioh. styled Lord of Horestan Castle, who was Father of Henry and
Peter, there also named, I suppose was his son: and so does Samuel Roper,
Esquire, in the great Pedigree of this Family, now in the Possession of the
Right Honorable Richard Lord Byron, done with great diligence and cost, upon a
very large Roll of Velum, with Transcripts of Evidences, wherein he sets down
this Robert de Biron to marry Cecilia, the daughter and heir of.... de Clayton
in the County of Lancaster, by whom he had Sir Richard, the Father of Sir James
Byron of Cadeney in Lincolneshire, who married Alice, the Relict of John Common
of Ulseby, daughter of William Lord Ros of Hamlak, and Sir Robert Byron Lord of
Clayton, in right of his Mother, who, by Maud his wife, had William and Sir
John de Biron, who, about 24 E. 1. was Governor [ Custos] of York, and had
been some five or six years before of Dover, he married Ioane, the daughter of
Baldwin Thies, Knight, [ Teutonici] the widow of Sir Robert Holland, Knight, by
whom he had Sir John de Biron, Knight, Lord of Clayton, who married Alice the
Cousin and heir of Rob. Banastre of Hyndeley in the said County of Lancaster,
who was after his death, about 12 E. 3. married again to Sir John de Strykland,
Knight, by her he had Sir Richard de Byron of Cadenay, Knight, Lord of Clayton,
whose first wife was Agnes.... his second Elizabeth, who after his death, 21 E.
3. was married to John, son of Thomas Colepeper, his son and heir was Sir James
Biron, Knight, who by Elizabeth his Radulphus de Burun temp. W. Conq. Hugo de
Burun-Albrea. Rogerius de Burun, 12 H. 2. Bar. de Horestan Castro.-Nicola fill.
Roelant de Verdun, postea nupta Anketino de Brikesard. Robertus de Burun, 2 John Dom. de Horestan Cast.-Cecilia fill and haer.... de Clayton C. Lanc.
Robertus de Biron-Matildis. Johan. de Biron, mil. custos Civ. Ebor. 24 E.
1.-Joana fill. Baldwini Teutonici vel Thies mil. relict. Rob. Holand. Johannes
de Biron mil.-Alicia consang. and haer. Rob. C. Lanc. relict. 12 E. 3. Banastre
de Hindley-Johannes de Strykland, mil. mar. 2. Richardus de Byron de Cadeney,
mil. Dom. de Clayton, ob. 21 E. 3.-Agnes, ux. 1.-Elizab. ux. 2.-Joh. fill. Tho.
Colepeper mar. 2. Jacobus de Byron, mil. 16 E. 3.-Eliz. fill. Will-Bernak, mil.
Richardus Byron, mil. ob. 21 R. 2.-....-Joana fill. Will. de Colwick, and haer.
Tho. frat. Johannes le Byron de Clayton, miles-Margeria, 20 H. 6. Nicolaus
Byron de Clayton, miles-Alicia fill. Johannis Boteler de Beausey C. Lanc.
Nicolaus Byron de Colwick, mil.-Joana fill. Joh. Bussy-Gerv. de Clifton, mar. 2.
Johan. Byron, mil. ob. 1488. s. p. Johannes Byron, mil.-Isabella fill....
Lemington-Eliz. fill. Will. Constantin relict. Rogeri Halgh. Johannes Byron de
Newsted, mil.-Alicia fill.-Nic. Strelley de Strelley. Johannes Byron,
miles-Margareta fill. Willielmi Fitz-Williams. Johannes Byron gemellus,
mil.-Anna fill. Ric. Molineux de Sefton O. Lanc. Bar. 1 John Byron, mil. Balnei
creat. in Bar. de Ratch dale per Car. 1.19 C. 1. s. p. ob. in Gallia
1652.-Cecil. fill. T. West. Bar. de la Ware. 5 Tho. mil.-Kather. fill. H. Brom.
Thom. ob. s. p. Johannes.
6 Rob. mil.-Lucia soror Cecil. 2 Nicol. 4 Will. 7 Gilb. 8 Phil. Ric. Dom.
Byron fill. tertius.-Eliz. fill. Geo. Rosel relict. Nich. Strelley ux. prim Will.
Byron-Elizab. fill. Johannis Vicecom. Chaworth. Willielmus Byron aet. 4. 1673. 2
Kath. 1 Eliz. 3 Maria. 4 Ann.
Kath.
An. ux. Thom. Lucas, mil.
Nic. Bar. gemellus cum Joh.-Sophia fill. unica Dom. Lamberti Charles de Numigen
in Holland Gubern. de Breda. Ernest. Byron, Bar. aet. 38. 1673.-Isabel fill.
Will. Stanley. Edward. aet. 12. 1673.








Johannes, mil. s. p.
Johannes Clericus.


Williem. 3 E. 2.
Richardus, mil. Jacobus de Cadeney in Com. Linc. mil.-Alicia relict. Joh.
Common de Ulseby fill. Willielmi de Ros de Hamlak.
Henricus. Petrus.
Petrus Johannes.

Hugo Meschines fill. and haer. Monachus sine prole.


wife, daughter of Sir William Bernak, Knight, had Sir John Byron, Knight, who
died without issue, and Sir Richard Byron Lord of Clayton; who to his second
wife had Ioane, daughter of William de Colwick, and heir of her brother Thomas,
which brought this Family to have a considerable interest in this County again;
by her he left a son and heir called John le Byron of Clayton, Knight, who, by
Margery his wife, had Sir Nicolas Byron of Clayton, Knight, who married Alice,
the daughter of Sir John Boteler of Beausey in that County of Lancaster,
Knight, by whom he had Sir John Byron, who married Margery, the daughter of Sir
Robert Fowleshurst, Knight, but died without issue 1488. having been made by
King Henry the seventh, Prim. Bund. de Priv. Sigillo, 1 H. 7. and Par. 2. pat.
2 H. 7.
so soon as he began his Reign almost, viz. Sept. 22. 1 H. 7. Knight, and
Constable of Not. Castle, and Porter of the same, Steward and Warden of the
Forest of Shirewood, and of the Parks and Woods of Billay, Birkeland, Rumwood,
Ouseland, and Fulwode, with 40l. etc. for the said Offices; and Sir Nicolas
Byron of Colwyck and Clayton his second son, who married Jane, the daughter of
John Bussy of Hougham in Lincolnshire, afterward married to Sir Gervas
Clifton, by whom he had Sir John Byron Steward of Manchester and Rachdale, and
Lieutenant of the Forest of Shirwood (this was called little Sir John with the
great Beard), who had this Priory granted, as before is said: his first wife
was Isabell, the daughter of.... Lemington, by whom he had no issue; his second
was Elizabeth, the daughter of William Constantine, and the relict of Roger
Halgh, on whom he begot (soon enough) Sir John Byron of Newstede, who married
Alice, the daughter of Sir Nicolas Strelley of Strelley, and by her had Sir
John Byron of Newstede, the husband of Margaret, the daughter of William
Fitz-Williams, by whom he had Sir John Byron of Newstede, who had to wife Anne,
the daughter of Sir Richard Molyneux of Sefton in the County of Lancaster,
Knight and Baronet, who brought him many Children, his eldest was Sir John
Byron, Knight of the Bath, created by King Charles the first Baron of
Ratchdale: he married Cecily, daughter of Thomas West Lord de la Ware; and
after her, as I remember, Elinor Needham the Lord Kilmurreys daughter, but died
without issue in France, in the year 1652. after he had eminently served the
King, as his Uncle Sir Nicolas Byron, Baronet, a Twin with his Father, and his
brothers Sir Richard, William, Sir Thomas, Sir Robert, Gilbert, and I think
Philip did* he was esteemed one of the best accomplished Gentlemen of his time.
His brother Sir Richard, now Lord Byron, succeeds in this place, who married to
his first wife Elizabeth, the daughter of George Rosell of Radcliff, Esquire,
the relict of Nicolas Strelley, Esquire; and to his second Elizabeth, the
daughter of Sir George Booth of Dunham in Cheshire, Baronet, by whom he has no
issue; by his first he has William Byron, and Katherin: William married
Elizabeth, the daughter of John Viscount Chaworth, by whom he has three or
four daughters, and a son named William.

In the Bow Window of the Hall at Newstede there is yet W. S. P. William
Savage, Prior, and the Arms of Newstede Priory, viz. England, with a Chief
Azure, in the middle whereof is the Virgin Mary, with the Babe Or* and
Quarterly France and England. And Azure a Pall Arg. impaling Arg. a pale deeply
indented (or Lozengy) Sable, Savage Bishop of...... In the Pantry, Gray of
Codnors; and Crumwell quartering Tateshall. In Henry the sevenths Lodgings the
Pictures of King Henry the seventh, and Elizabeth his Queen* and Prince Arthur.
In the next Pane of the same Window, Arg. ten Torteauxes, and a file of three
Labels Azure... Babinton, Militis. Barry of six Arg. and Az. Henrici Gray.
Sable, a Bend between six Cross Croslets Arg. Arm Iohannis Stanhope, Armig.

These Canons at several Altars were to pray for the Souls of King Henry the
second, and all the Kings their Founders; of Robert Lexington, who gave the
Towns of Routhorn and Scarcliff (in Derbishire) and Starthorp, to supply four
Canons; of William Cossall, who gave his Manor of Cossall and Bullwell Wood,
and diverse Lands and Tenements in Not. and Egmanton; Ex libro Rob. Cutwolf
Prioris de Novo loco temp. H. 6. pen. R. dom. Byron.
of John Longvylers, who gave Tuxford Church; of Robert and Henry Edenstow,
Brothers, who gave North Muskam Manor, excepting the stipend of the Chaplains
at Edenstow; of Elias Breton, who gave diverse Tenements in Huknall; of
Dionysia Eynell, who gave Tenements in Tershill; of Robert Ripers, Alice
Palmar, Hugh Ropley, and of Thomas Sutton.

Kirkeby. And Woodhouse.
THis place in the great Survey, called Doomsday Book, is certified to be of
the Fee of Raph Fitz-Hubert; but before the Conquest in Chircheby, Levenot had
for his Manor Land, which paid the Dane-geld for ten Bovats, Lib. Dooms.
being then accounted two Carucats. There Raph had in Demesne three Car. and
one Sochm. on one Bov. of this Land, and twenty Vill. and six Board. having
twelve Car. There was a Church and a Priest, and two Mills 3s. and three Acres
of Meadow, Pasture Wood by places two leu. long, and two broad. In the
Confessors time this was valued at 4l. then in the Conquerours but at 3l. Here
was another Manor of the Tayn-land which Alvric had before the coming of King
William, which was rated to the Geld at two Bovats, and the Land of it returned
then to be so, viz. two Bov. He afterward held it of King William, and there
had one Car. This was valued then as before 11s. There was also another Bovat
which was then waste.

Henry de Stuteville, about 33 H. 2. gave account of 15l. of the Scutage of the
Fee which was parted between him and Hubert Fitz-Raph. Pip. 33 H. 2.


The wife of Robert de Stutevill (not long after) was in the Kings custody,
Rot. de Dominabus pueris and puellis in Scac.
and of the [ Parentela] lineage of Edward de Salesbery, on the part of her
Father, and of the part of her Mother of the Progeny of Roger de Rennes; she
had one Town called Diham, which was her Inheritance, which was yearly worth
24l. She had one son and two daughters, their age was not then known to the
Jurors. Ex Chart. Will. (...) de Barton, Ar.

Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p. 6* 2. P^p. 2 R. 1. Esser. Test. de Nev.


She was usually named Leonia de Reins, by whom her husband the said Robert de
Stuteville had one son called Henry de Stoteville, who inherited the Barony;
and another named William, mentioned to be living, 2 R. 1.

Afterward there is mention of the Honor of John de Stuteville, concerning
the moiety of the Barony of Hubert Fitz-Raph, and that there was paid by the
said John for fifteen Knights Fees in Kirkeby, with the Appurtenances.

About 45 H. 3. Robert, son of John de Stotevill, Chapter 45 H. 3. m. 1.
had Market and Fair, and Free Warren granted in Kirkeby in (...). It appears,
12 E. 1. that Robert de Stoteville showed great disobedience and contempt in
not coming upon the Kings summons to Aid him in the last Expedition into Wales,
Com. Trin. 12 E. 1. to. 7.
for which the King pardoned him upon his submission, he paying for every
Knights Fee which he held one hundred Marks, which John de Vescy, John de
Evil, and John de L^vetot, undertook he should perform; the Barons upon the
Kings Precept, searching the Rolls of the Exchequer, found that John de
Stotevill, Father of the said Robert, held fifteen Fees of the Barony, which
was Hubert Fitz-Raph's; and that the said Robert held five Fees of the
Inheritance of Alianor de Genevere his wife, to whom Roger de Bertram granted
and demised the Castle of Mitford, with the Fees and other Appurtenances, which
made in all twenty Fees. Robert de Stotevile, about 34 E. 1. died seized of the
Manor of Ekinton in Darbishire, and of this Henr. de Stuteville Robertus de
Stuteville-Leonia de Rennes, 6 R. 1.6 Joh. Henricus de Stotevill Johannes de
Stoteville Johannes de Stotevill, 36 H. 3. Rob. de Stotevile-Alian. de
Genevere. Johannes de Stotevile Robertus de Stotevill intra aet. 17 E. 2.

Studo de Stotevile Nicolaus de Stotevile Studo sive Stoutus de Stotevile, 6 E.
3.




Willielmus, 2 R. 1.


Manor, Esc. 34 E. 1. n. 33.
leaving his son and their John de Stoteville twenty four years of age, who was
heir to his Mother Alianora de Genevere, wife of the said Robert, to whom
Alianor, Queen of England, the Mother of King Edward the first, gave the Castle
of Mitford, Esc. 4 E. 2. n. 7.
and diverse Lands in Northumberland: she died about 4 E. 2.

Esc. 16 E. 2. n. 61.
The Jury, 16 E. 2. found that this John de Stotevile was to pay out of this
Manor the yearly Rent of 40s. to buy Wine, and 6s. 8d. or a quarter of Wheat
of that price, to make Wafers [ Oblata] to celebrate the Eucharist in the
Church of St. Mary at Newstede, which John de Stutevill [Triavus] Grandfathers
Grandfather of this John, then, viz. 16 E. 2. lately dead, charged upon this
Manor, and King Henry, Grandfather of that King, in the twenty ninth year of
his Reign confirmed; but I suppose it is a mistake for avus, or at most for
proavus, and then there must be two John's, which is all the time will well
bear, from 29 H. ^. to 16 E. 2. that this John, son of Robert, was dead, who
left his son Robert born beyond the Seas his heir, then aged seven years. O^ig.
13 ^. 3. (...). 6^,


William, son of Gilbert le Warner of Kirkby upon Ashfeild, 13 E. 3. Ian. 27.
made Fine with the King for pardoning the transgression, which the said William
and Gilbert made in acquiring certain Tenements of John, son of Robert de
Stutevill, Knight, in Kirkeby upon Ashfeild, in the time of the Kings Father,
and entering them without license, being held of the said Kings Father in
Capite. Pip. 13 E. ^. de Extract. plac. forest. in Com. Not. cor. ^ad. Nevil^,
and ^oci^s, etc. to. 8. Par. 2. ^at. 18 E. 3* m. 2.


Thomas de Langton, and Robert de Barton, 13 E. 3. paid 20s. of the remainder
of their account of the Manor of Kirkeby on Asshefeld, which was Lora de
Stotevills, an Alien.

King Edward the third, by his Letters Patents dated 1 March, 14 E. 3. granted
the Manors of Ekinton in Darbyshire, and Kirkeby in this County, which were
late John Stotevills, and by the forfeiture of Robert Stotevill, son and heir
of John, were come into his hands, together with the Manors of Louthe and
Baliogary, and other Lands in Ireland, to John Darcy, sometimes called le
Cosyn, sometimes le Piere, and in some other Records le Nevew, and his heirs
for ever, who had license, 21 Ian. 18 E. 3. (when also he had his confirmations
of these and many other things) to enclose and make Parks of his Woods at
Temple Newsom, and Temple Hir^^ in Yorkshire; at Torkesay in Lincolnshire;
Ekington in Darbyshire; and Kirkeby in this County. He was a very great man
both in England and Ireland: his principal Seat was at Knayth in Lincolnshire;
he is supposed to be Nephew of Thomas, and son of Norman, and brother of Philip
Lords Darcy of Nocton in that County, the old Seat of that Illustrious and
ancient Family.

King Edward the second, Par. 2. pat. 15 E. 2. m. 17.
15 E. 2. at the request of his well beloved and faithful men Robert Darcy,
John Darcy his brother, and John Darcy le Cosyn, of his especial grace granted
to them Philip Darcy, and Norman Darcy his Enemies and Rebels, taken and
detained in his Prison at York, to be delivered or otherwise disposed
according to their wills, saving to the said King the Eschaet and forfeiture of
their Lands and Tenements, Goods, and Chattels, belonging to him on that
occasion. Par. 2. pat. 2 E. 3. m. 24. Par. 1. pat. 3 E. 3. m. 28. Par. 1. pat.
4 E. 3. m. 17.


John Darcy le Nevew, 21 Aug. 2 E. 3. was constituted Justice and Keeper of
Ireland.

John Darcy le Cousin, 19 Febr. 3 E. 3. is so constituted.

John Darcy Justice of Ireland, being about to go by the Kings command to the
parts of the Duchy of Aquitaine, Roger Vtlagh, Prior of the Hospital of St.
John's of Jerusalem, 31 May, 4 E. 3. was made by his consent Lieutenant till
his return*

Johannes Darcy le Piere ob. 21 E. 3.-Emelina fill. and haer. Walteri fill. Will.
Heyrun-Joana ux. 2. Johannes Darcy le Fitz ob. 30 E. 3.-Elizab. fill. and haer.
Nic. Menill. Philippus Darcy-Elizab. Johannes Dom. Darcy-Margareta ob. 33 H. 6.
Philippus Darcy fill. and haer.-Alianora fill. Henr. Dom. Fitzhugh.... Tunstall
mar. 2. Margeria-Johannes Conyers. Johannes Conyers, mil. Gart. Willielmus
Conyers aet. 21. 5 H. 7.

Elizab.-Jacobus Strangways, Junior.
Johannes-Margareta. Richardus Willielmus Darcy aet. 4. an. 32 H. 6.



Johannes fill. and haer. s. p.


Par. 1. pat. 8 E. 3. m. 1. and 42.
John Darcy was Justice of Ireland, and Thomas de Burgh, Clark, Treasurer of
Ireland, 8 E. 3. by the Kings Letters Patents dated at Notingham, 16 July, was
made Lieutenant of the Justice of Ireland, as often as he should happen to be
absent.

Anno Domini 1333. William Earl of Ulster, was slain by his own men, Fragm.
Hibern. p^n. Dom. Io. Cotton.
viz. by the Maunvilis; and the same year Sir John Darcy Justice of Ireland,
went into Ulster, with a great Army to revenge the death of the said Earl, but
before he came the men of that Country had done it; and the Justice with his
Army went into Scotland to the King of England, who at that time was there in
War, and left Sir Thomas Burke his Lieutenant in Ireland. And in the Eve of St.
Margaret there was a great slaughter in Scotland by the Irish, by the said King
in one part, and the said Justice in another, and so was conquered the King of
Scotland, and they made Sir Edward Bayloll King of Scotland, and the said Sir
John Darcy came again Justice of Ireland, and delivered Walter Bermegham out of
the Castle of Dublin.

John Darcy le Piere, 20 E. 3. had the Custody of the Tower of London for his
life, Par. 1. pat. 20 E. 3. m. 26.
but it seems he continued not long, for he died 30 May, 21 E. 3. seized of
this Manor and Ekinton in Darb. of the Reversion of Temple-Newsom, Esc. 2^ E.
3. n. 54.
after the death of Mary de St. Paul Countess of Pembrook, and many other Lands
and Manors in Yorkshire, amongst which were the Manors of Notton and
Silkeston, and Lands in Wollay, which were of the Inheritance of Emelina his
wife, who was daughter and heir of Walter, son of William Heyrun, Esc. 25 E. 1.
n. 25.
Lord of the Manor of Hadiston in Northumberland, which with Knayth and
Torkesey, and many other Lands in Lincolnshire, and other Counties, descended
to Sir John Darcy, Knight, son and heir of the said John, and Emelina, then,
viz. 21 E. 3. aged thirty years.

Par. 1. pat. 22 E. 2. m. 18. Par. 2. pat. 23 E. 3. m. 16. Par. 1. pat. 26 E.
3. m. 17.
John Darcy of Knayth, 22 E. 3. took the state of Banneret of the King. The
next year, 5 Aug. 23 E. 3. he was made Keeper of the Tower of London, which he
had for his life: but for the great affection he bore to the person of John de
Beauchamp of Warwick, he passed it to him, seeing that for other businesses
himself could not attend the custody thereof, and the King, 26 E. 3. confirmed
the same to the said John de Beaucamp, during his life, if he should over-live
John the said Darcy: he married Elizabeth, Claus. 30 E. 3. m. 1^. Esc. 30 E. 3
n. 33.
daughter and heir of Nicolas Lord of Meinill, and died, 30 E. 3. the Saturday
after the Feast of St. Chad, leaving John Darcy his son and heir not six years
old, who lived not above six years more; but left his brother Philip Darcy to
succeed him, who proved his age of twenty one, 47 E. 3. and died 22 R. 2.
leaving by Elizabeth his wife, Esc. 47 E. 3. n. 11.
John and Philip.

John Lord Darcy left his wife Margaret a widow, and his son Philip his heir
under age, 13 H. 4. who before he came to age, viz. 2 Aug. 6 H. 5. died also,
leaving his two daughters, Esc. 7 H. 5. n. 78.
Elizabeth two years old, and Margaret one, his heirs: his wife was Elianor,
daughter of Henry Lord Fitzhugh, who married to her second husband....
Tunstall, by whom she had a son, and died 36 H. 6. Her first husbands brother
and heir Male, Esc. 32 H. 6. n. 15.
was John Darcy Chr. who died 25 Mar. 32 H. 6. and left his Grandson William
Darcy, son of his son Richard, his heir, then about four years old.

Elizabeth, the elder daughter and coheir of Philip Lord Darcy, was married to
James Strangways the younger, by whom she had issue; her sister Margery the
other daughter was the wife of Sir John Conyers, who in her right had this
Manor and Advowson of the Church: he over-lived her, and John Conyers their
son; so that after his death, Ex Inq.
which was 14 Mar. 5 H. 7. William Conyers was found his Cousin and heir, viz.
son of his said son John Conyers, and came to the age of twenty one years the
St. Thomas day before.

There was a Recovery, Trin. 18 H. 7. rot. 148.
18 H. 7. wherein William Conyers, Knight, and others, claimed against Richard
Illingworth, the Manor of Hardwyk, with the Appurtenances, and one Mess. six
hundred Acres of Land, sixty of Meadow, five hundred of Pasture, and twenty of
Wood, with the Appurtenances in Kirkeby, Ashfeild, and Hardwyk, and called to
warrant John Illingworth.

This Manor is now the Inheritance of his Grace the Duke of Newcastle. Sir
Charles Cavendish his Father had begun to bu^ld a great House in this Lordship,
on a Hill by the Forest side near Annesley Woodhouse, where he was assaulted
and wounded by Sir John Stanhope and his Men, as he was viewing the Work, which
was therefore thought fit to be left off, some blood being spilt in the
quarrel, then very hot betwixt those two Families.

In Kirkeby Woodhouse, Galfr. de Insula confirmed all the Alms which he and his
Father gave to the Canons of Felley, Regist. de (...), p. 51.
and all the Land they had, or with his consent could get in his Fee. Hawisia
de Dyve in her widow-hood released to Walter the Prior, Ib. 55. b.
and the Canons of Felley, Hugh, son of Herbert of Kirkeby-wodhouse, with all
his Chattels, for the health of her Soul, and for the Soul of Galf* de Insula
her husband, etc.

Reginald de Insula, son of Galfr. de Insula of Kirkeby-wodhouse, Ib. 57.
in the year of our Lord 1252. at Easter confirmed to the said Canons of
Felley, all they had acquired in the times of his Ancestors and his own, saving
the Foreign Service as much as belonged to one Bovat of Land which Arnald Pugil
bestowed on that House. Reginald de Insula by the counsel and consent of Hawise
his wife, Ib. 51. b.
gave the said Canons the whole Land which was Ernulphs de Wodhouse: The
Witnesses to his Deed were, Henry, Parson of Ossington, Mr. Silvester of
Nottingham, Robert the Parson of Gresseley, Stephen his brother, Henry Parson
of Hukenall, Henry de Stutevill, Reginald de Annesley, Raph his son, William
Breton, Iuon his son, Ranulph de Wandesley, Galfr. his son, Roger Poer, Ranulph
his son, Raph de Gresley, and many others.

Robert de Stutevill also confirmed the gifts of Arnald Pugil, and the rest.

Nicolas de Insula, 23 E. 1. confirmed a place of a Toft amongst other things
in Kirkeby-wodhouse, I^. 45.
which he had by Eschaet after the death of Hugh, son of Roger, son of Herbert:
The Witnesses were, Thomas de Perors Rector of the Church of Kirkeby, John
Torcart, Robert Russell, John Colet, John de Langton, Henry de Pillesley,
Robert, son of Reginald, and others.

Robert le Gaunt of Kirkeby Wodhouse, gave to William and Philip his brothers,
and Agnes his Niece, Ib. 62.
as long as they lived, and after their decease to Henry, son of Gilbert of
Kirkeby Wodhous, and his heirs, the Toft which he bought and had of his brother
Philip, with all the Land which he had or could have of Robert de Insula in the
Field of Kirkeby Wodhouse, with the Meadow butting upon the Park of Kirkeby, in
the Storthes, to hold the same of Nicolas, son of Reginald de Insula, and his
heirs, paying yearly to the House of Felley 12d. and to Newstede 6d. and to the
Light of the blessed Mary the Virgin in the Church of Kirkeby 6d. and to the
Hospital of Jerusalem 4d. and to the Fabric of the Chapel of Wodhous 8d.
etc. The Witnesses were John de Annesley, Nicolas de Insula, Raph Briton,
William, son of the Chaplain of Wodhouse, Hugh de Plumptree, Robert Mantell of
Wodhouse, Galfr. his brother and others.

In gathering an Aid in the time of Edward the third, Ex I^q. 22 E. 3.
after John Darcy had the Manor of Kirkeby, the Collectors had of Serlo de
Brokelstowe for the fourth part of a Knights Fee in Kirkeby Woodhouse, which
Nicolas de Insula held in former time. They likewise then had of Richard de
Stapleford, Edmund Perpoint, and Robert de Barton for another fourth part of a
Fee in the same place, which Richard de Stapulford, Thomas Pereres, and Sibyl
Torkard formerly held.

John Pirpunts of Kirkeby, Regist. de Thurg. p. 69.
gave to the Priory of Thurgarton four Acres of Arable Land, and two Selions in
the Territory of Kirkeby, which Agnes his wife after his death confirmed, as
did also Robert de Stuteville, reserving 12d. a year for all Services.

Nicolas de Overton, Plac. de Banc. 24 E. 1. to. 27.
24 E. 1. recovered his seisin of two Mess. six Bovats of Land, five Acres of
Meadow, five of Wood, and 10s. Rent in Kirkeby in Ashfeild, and John Thorkard
was amerced.

Sir Henry Pierpoint, Knight, Claus. 27 H. 6. m. 9*
27 H. 6. released to Richard Illingworth and his heirs, all his right in a
Meadow called Akbrigge near Hardwick in the Parish of Kirkeby in Ashefeild, and
in all the Lands and Tenements in the Fields and Gardens of Hardewick
aforesaid. Elena his Lady, 31 H. 6. after his death did the same. Claus. 31 H.
6. m. 9. Claus. 39 H. 6. m. 5.
Henry Pierpoint, Esquire, 39 H. 6. son and heir of Henry Pierpoint, Esquire,
son and heir of Henry Pierpoint, Knight, did likewise.

In 20 E. 4. the Custody of two hundred Acres of waste in the Forest of
Shirewood, Fin. 20 E. 4. m. 2.
the Lands and Tenements of Richard Illingworth, Knight, (mentioned in Bony)
called Hardwick Closes, and Akebrigge, and a Water-Mill called Sutton Mill in
the said Forest, between Maunsfeild and Hardwick aforesaid, were committed to
Raph Illingworth, and others, for ten years.

John Strelley of Lindby died seized of three Mess. twelve Bovats of Land, Ex
Inq.
twenty Acres of Meadow, and as many of Pasture in Kirkeby in Ashefeild, 2 H. 7.

John Langton of Kirkeby, Esc. 9 H. 6. n. 14.
about 9 H. 6. held when he died one Mess. called Langton Place, and six
Closes, with the Appurtenances, of Elizabeth, and Margery, daughters and heirs
of Philip Darcy, by the Service of the hundredth part of a Knights Fee. Richard
Langton was then his son and heir.

There is an ancient House and Demesnes within Kirkeby called Langton Hall
alias Westwood, B.
it was granted out by John Lord Stotevile in Henry the seconds time [I suppose
it should be Henry the thirds, and so it first was written] to Richard, son of
Hugh de Ruddington, and his heirs, by particular Metes and Bounds; and shortly
after this, Ruddington granted the said Lands to Geoffrey de Langton, reciting
the former grant from the Lord Stotevile to him, and that he was in seisin
thereof 34 H. 2. [34 H. 3. rather.] In Langtons Family it continued till Henry
the eighths time, that Cuthbert Langton dying without issue [Male] it fell to
Fitz-Randolph by the marriage of Langtons daught^^ and heir, in whose name it
continued till of late.

Cuthbert Langton, 6 H. 8. of Midleton in the County of Warwick, Abstract. per
Tho. Braylesford de Senour, Com. Derb. Genesis
Gent. enfeoffed John Markham, John Zouch, Knights, John Willowby, John
Fitz-Randolph, Edward Willowby, Nicolas Strelley, Esquire, John Savidge, etc.
in his Manor of Langton Hall in Westwood, Lands in Huknall Torkard, Durty
Huknall, Maunsfeild Woodhouse, Kirkeby in Ashfeild, and Watnow Chaworth in the
County of Not. and Birchwood in the County of Darby. And there were Covenants
of marriage between Christopher Fitz-Randolph on the one part, and the said
Cuthbert Langton on the other, for Christopher, Cousin of the said Christopher,
and Ioane, one of the daughters and heirs apparent of the said Cuthbert.

Christopher Fitz-Randolph de Langton Hall-Joana fill. and haer. Cuthberti
Langton. Thom. Fitz-Randolph-Kath. fill. Godfr. Folejambe, mil. Johannes-
Jacobus Fitz-Randolph-Kath. fill. Walteri Mantlemil de Com. Northampton. 1
Philalethes at. 22. 1614. s. p. 2 Thom. s. p. 3 Ferdinand s. p. Isabell.

Edward. Christoph.

P^rt. 13. pat 36 H. 8.
Some Lands in this Kirkeby belonging to Felley, 25 Mar. 36 H. 8. were granted
to William Berners and his heirs. In the year 1612. Sir Charles Cavendish, Sir
Henry Pierpoint, Knights, James Fitz-Randolph, Gent. and John Newton, Senior,
Thomas Newton, Christopher Newton, etc. were owners. William Newton, son of
Christopher or Laurence, died this year 1673. without issue, and left his
brother John his heir.

Mss. I. M.
The Rectory of Kirkeby was 20l. when the Lord Conyers was Patron. It Is now 18l.
1s. 8d. value in the Kings Books, and the Duke of Newcastle Patron, and Clement
Ellis the worthy Incumbent.

In the Chancel is England and France quartered. And Azure, three Cinquefoiles
and Crusuly. Arg. Darcy impaling Azure, three Bars gemelles, and a Chief Or,
Meinill. And the Monument of William Coke (of Trusley in Darbyshire) and his
two Wives, the first the daughter of... A^sop in le dale; the second the relict
of Mr. Gilbert of Lockhagh.

In an high North Window in the Church,

Sable a Fesse between three Mullets Arg. quartering Paly of six Arg. and Or.

And Arg. a Fesse Or between three Escallops Sable.

And Arg. two Bendletts engrailed Sable, over them a Fesse Gules.

There is in the same Window the last, Quartering the Fesse and Escallops; and
another in the third place broken away; and in the fourth place the first of
the former mentioned Coats, viz. Sable a Fesse between three Mullets Arg.

In a low Window in a Square,

Barry of four Arg. and Azure.

Sutton in Ashfeild. AND Hucknall Huthwayt.
THis Sutune with Hochenale Houthweit, and Skegeby were Berues of the Sok of
Maunsfeild, which was King Edward the Confessors Land, and afterward King
William the Conquerours.

Gerard, son of Walter de Sutton, gave to God and the Church of St. Peter at
Thurgarton, Regist. de Thurg. p. 67.
two Bovats of Land with his Mother when she took the habit of Religion, and
the Church of the same Town, his brother Robert being converted to Religion or
dead.

Ranulph the Sheriff of Nottinghamshire confirmed it for the Soul of his Lord
King Henry [2.]

Jordan de Snitterton (Darbish.) had some yearly Rents by the Assignation of
William de Ferrariis, sometime Earl of Darby, Derb. Fin. in* diversis Com. Cap.
and non ap. Westminster. 42 H. 3.
whereof there was an arrear which Robert de Marcham, and Sarra his wife, 42 H.
3. by Fine released to Robert, son of Harvey, viz. 40s. and so did Gerard de
Sutton, as in right of Alice, sometimes his wife, which Sarrah and Alice were
daughters and heirs of the said Jordan.

Jordan, son of Gerard de Sutton, Regist. Thurg.
added some small parcels also to the Monastery of Thurgarton.

Sulton in Ashfield and Hucknall were a whole Villa, and not Gildable, Test. de
Nev.
being of the ancient Demesne of the Crown, except the fourth part which Jordan
of the same held of the King with the Advowson of the Church.

The Jury, 16 E. 1. found that Jordan de Sutton held in Darbishire, something
in Snitterton of his own, in Matloc Iboll Peuerwich of the Inheritance of
Amicia his wife: Esc. 16 E. 1. n. 8.
in this Sutton he held one Mess. and twelve Bovats of Land, and two Bovats in
Hothweit, for which he paid 14s. per annum to the King, and did Homage and
Service and Suit to Maunsfeild Court from three weeks to three weeks, and Suit
in the Kings Army in Wales for forty days with one Man, Horse, Haubergeon, Cap
of Iron, Lance and Sword; he held likewise ten Acres where the Mill used to be
set in Sutton S^hawe; he had 24s. Rent in Sutton on Sore, and Bonington, and
60s. 6d. of the heirs of Sir Hugh de Capella (...) Kirketon and Sereveton, as
in those places is said. John his son and heir was then above seventeen years
of age.

About 33 E. 1. John de Sutton died seized of this Manor, Es^. 33 E. 1. n. 56.
and the third part of Suitterton, leaving John his son and heir sixteen years
old and more. John de Sutton, 16 E. 2. had license to alienate two parts of the
Manor of Sutton upon Ashefeild to John his son, Par. 1. pat. 16 E. 2. ^. 13.
and Amicia his wife.

The Jury, 6 E. 3. found it no loss if the King granted to John de Sutton of
Ashefeld, ^sc. 6 E. 3. n. 9.
Clerk, that he might give ten Acres and an half of waste in Sutton, held of
the King by 5s. 3d* yearly to the Exchequer, to Robert de H^noure of Sutton,
and his heirs Males; remainder to Alianor, daughter to the said Robert and
hers; remainder to Beatrix her sister, and hers; remainder to John* son of John
de Sutton, and Avicia his wife, and the heirs Males of the body of the said
Avicia, for want whereof to revert to the said John de Sutton, and his heirs.

Thomas de Mareslee purchased one Mess. one Bovat, (...) 15 E. 2. n. 8.
and one Acre of Land, half an Acre of Meadow, with the Appurtenances in Sutton
in Ashfeild of Roger de Somervile, who bought them of John de Sutton. By a
Fine, 20 E. 3. they were settled on Tho. de Merseley, In crast. S. Ioh. Bapt.
20 E. 3.
and Agnes his wife, during their lives; and afterward on John de Montford,
and Maud his wife, and their heirs.

Roger Grenehaugh, Esquire, of Teversholt died 23 Ian. 5 Eliz. seized of this
Manor; Lib. 2. S^^d. fol. 263 and 264.
Elizabeth, the wife of Francis Molyneux, and Anne, the wife of Gervase Nevill,
Esquire, daughters and coheirs of Thomas Grenehalgh, Esquire, son and heir of
the said Roger, being then his heirs.

There was a Recovery, 14 Eliz. wherein Robert Rockley, Thomas Draxe, and Henry
Nevile, Esquire, claimed against Gervase Nevile, Esquire, and Anne his wife,
the Manor of Sutton in Ashfeild, Pasch. 14 Eliz. (...). 153.
and ten Mess. ten Cottages, twenty Gardens, ten Orchards, five hundred Acres
of Land, two hundred of Meadow, four hundred of Pasture, twenty of Wood, and
twenty of ^urz and Heath, with the Appurtenances in Sutton, Ashefeild,
Claworth, Bekingham, Hothewayt, and Sellefton, and likewise the Manor of
Rowthorne in Darbyshire. And another Recovery, 16 Eliz. wherein Nicholas
Hardwick, Hill. 16 Eliz. rot. 158.
and Richard Eckingfeild claimed against James Hardwick, Esquire, these Lands
in larger particulars, who called to warrant Gervase Nevyle, and Anne his wife.
This Manor remains the Inheritance of the Right Honorable William Earl of
Devonshire, who is son of Earl William, son of Earl William, son of Elizabeth
Countess of Shrowsbury, sister of James Hardwick, Esquire.

In 1612. the owners of Sutton in Ashefeild are set down, William Lord
Cavendish, Edward Langford, Thomas Clark, William Lyndley of Skegby, Gent. and
Edward Fitz-Randolph, Gent.

The Forest Book mentions many Essarts and Enclosures made in Fullwood, Lib.
Forest. de Shirewood.
an old decayed Wood, now only a great Common without Wood, to belong to
Hucknall Howthwayte.

At the Assizes at Not. 28 E. 3. John, Assis. Not 28 E. 3. to. 42.
son of Hugh Cole, recovered his seisin of one Mess. one Carucat of Land, and
20s. Rent in Hothewayts Hokenale, and William, son of John Cole, was amerced.

In the year 1328. the Church of Sutton on Ashefeld yielded twenty Marks yearly
Rent to the Priory of Thurgarton, Regist. de Thurg. p. 178.
aed there was then half a Carucat, which then also was a Mark Rent, and the
Tyth of the Watermill was then 5s. and John Fraunceyes paid for a Toft 2s.
which made the whole 14l. 7s. per annum.

Skegby.
SChegeby was also a Berew of the great Sok of Maunsfeild, Ancient Demesne of
the Crown.

King John, 28 Aug. in the eighth year of his Reign, Chapter 8 Ioh. m. 7. and
Chart. Antiq. BB. 27.
granted to Godfrey Spigurnell his Sergeant of his Chapel, five Bovats of
Land, and his Mill, with the Appurtenances in Scheggeby to Fee Farm, 20s.
whereof the Tenants used anc^ently to pay.

Galfr. Spigurnell the Kings Servant ( viz. Sealer of Writs) 11 H. 3. had the
Customs and Services of the Kings men of Skegby, Pat. 11 H. 3. m. 7. and Chapter 11
H. 3. m. 9.
holding twenty Bovats of Land in Fee Farm for 54s. 4d. in number, per annum, 8
Apr. 11 H. 3. he had it granted with the Kings stock; Chart. Antiq. FF. 10.
and the 18 Apr. as before is said the same year.

The Jury, 24 E. 1. found that Edmund Spigurnell, Esc. 24 E. 1. n. 23.
who had also the Manor of Staundon in Essex, held this Manor in Fee Farm for
4l. 4s. 4d. per annum, being a Capital Message, with five Bovats in Demesne,
and a Water-Mill, and twenty Bovats, which the Tenants held by the Custom of
the Manor of Maunsfeild, and two Bovats in Bondage, and that John Espigurnell
his brother and heir was then forty years of age.

John Spigurnell, 2 E. 2. left his son and heir Edmund, aged twenty three
years. Esc. 2 E. 2. n. 22.


Edmund Spigurnell, about 8 E. 2. died seized of this Manor, Esc. 8 E. 2. n.
16.
and left his daughter and heir Ioane half a year old. Howbeit he either (as I
suppose) left his wife with Child, or else that Ioane should have been
Elizabeth, for in the Quo Warranto of 3 E. 3. Thomas Gobion, and Elizabeth his
wife, Rot. Quo War. 3 E. 3. n. 22. in dorso.
daughter and heir of Edmund Spigurnell claimed view of Frank pledge in the
Manor of Skeggeby.

The Jury, 8 E. 3. found it not to the Kings loss but gain, Esc. 8 E. 3. n. 59.
if he granted Thomas Gobion the younger, and Elizabeth his wife, license to
enfeoffe Richard de Pensax in the Manor of Skeggeby, To have to him and his
heirs for ever, because the said Richard held 100s. Land, etc. in Belgrave in
the County of Leicester, of the Earl of Lancaster; and 100s. Land and Rent in
Wysowe in this County, of Maud de St. Andrew Lady of Wysow, whose custody
belonged to the King. This Maud was widow of Sir Roger de St. Andrew, and
before that of John, son of Sir Robert Poutrell, in whose right she then held
Wissowe in Dower.

Esc. 35 E. 3. part. 2. n. 30. Esc. 40 E. 3. n. 32.
Richard Pensax, 35 E. 3. left William his son and heir, and the Jury, 40 E. 3.
returned it not to the Kings loss if he granted license to Percivall Pensax to
have to him and his heirs one Mess. and twenty Acres of Land in Sutton in
Ashefeild, and the Manor of Skegby, with the Appurtenances and Easements,
except one Mill, forty Acres of Meadow, ten of Wood, and the moiety of the
Capital Mess. and five Bovats of Land in the same Manor, which the said
Percivall purchased of William Pensax by the Kings license. One of the Family
of Linley in Yorkshire, married a daughter of Pensax, and with them it
continues.

Ex Copia lib. visit. pen. Reason Mellish, Ar.
Percivallus Linley-Elena fill. Will. Pensax de Hernegate in Com. Ebor. 2
Willielmus Linley-Joana fill. Roberti ^ighley de Newhall in C. Ebor. Thom.
Linley de Althorp-Margareta fill.... Evers de Axholme. 1 Willielmus Linley de
Skegby 1659-Margareta fill. Joh. Farmery Com. Linc. Franciscus Linley 1614.-Jana
fill. Franc. Molineux de Teversalt. 1 Thom. Linley-Rosafil. Godfr. Clark de
Somerfall Com. Darb. 2 Percivallus..... ux. Roberti Morton de Morton.
Richard. s. p. Elizab. Elianora.
2 David-Anna fill.... Rothwood. Johannes Linley.


1 Thom. Linley sine prol. masc.-.... fill. and haer. Joh. Gowland.

Hugh, son of Hugh de Skeggeby, for the health of his Soul, Regist. de Thurg.
p. 67.
and his wife Mauds, gave 4d. a year to the Priory of Thurgarton, to be paid by
himself and his heirs for ever, at the Feast of the Nativity of the blessed
Mary.

In 1612. the owners here were William Lyndley, Liber libere te^.
Gent. Lord of the Manor, Roger Swinstone, Clark, Richard Tomlinson, William
Butler, Francis Swinstow, William Osborne, James Cowper of Tibshelf, Thomas
Iackson of Askam, etc.

Teversalt. Te^sall.
THis in the Conquerours Survey is certified to be of the Fee of Raph
Fitz-Hubert, and before that to have been the Freehold of Leuric, who had in
Tevreshalt a Manor which answered the Dane-geld or Tax for six Bovats of Land.
The Land was then returned to be one Car. and an half. Lib. Dooms.
There Raph had one Car. and one Sochm. on one Bov. of Land, and nine Vill.
having three Car. and an half, there was one Mill 16d. and eight Acres of
Meadow, and small Wood one leu. long, and one broad. In the Confessors time
this was 60s. value, in the Conquerours but 30s. and then Godefrid held it; his
posterity I suppose had the name of Bar.

Raph Barret, 5 Steph. gave account of xiil. ixs. iiiid. of the old Farm of the
Land of Odo Fitz-Raph. Pip. 5 Steph.


Galfr. Bar, 12 H. 2. held two Knights Fees of the Barony of Hubert
Fitz-Raph, Lib. Rubr. in Sca^.
whereof his Ancestor was enfeoffed before the death of King Henry the first.
Galfr. Barret, 22 H. 2. gave account as many others at that time did, Pip. 22
H. 2.
of x. Marks of the Amercements of the Forest.

Mic. 3 Ioh.
Raph Bar, 3 Ioh. by Fine passed four Bovats of Land, with the Appurtenances
in Teveresholt to William Bar.

The Abbat of Beauchief, Pl. de I^^. and As^^s. in diverse. Co^. apud Dar^. 53
H. 3. to. 20.
53 H. 3. offered himself against Raph Barry in a Plea, that he should permit
him to have Common of Pasture in Tevershall, which belonged to his Freehold in
Stanle, of which Galfr. Bar, Father of the said Raph, whose heir he then was,
unjustly disseised Roger, sometime Abbat of Beauchief, his Predecessor, etc.

The Seal of Sir Galfr. Bar, with his name circumscribed in the year 1244.
was Barry of eight or ten, with a File of five Labells; Ex Autog. in Chart.
Ioh. Molineux, Bar.
and so were the Seals of Raph his son, and William Bar, Knight, his
Grandchild.

Galfr. Barry for the health of his own Soul, and of Alice his wife, gave to
the Canons of Felley, the Homages, Rents* and Services of Nicolas le Crouer,
and Adam le Glay, and their heirs, Regist. de Felley.
for the Lands which they held of him in Whyteberugh, and all the Land which
Robert, son of Henry de Bosco, held of him there, for which one Canon of that
House was to celebrate every day at the Altar of St. Edmund Archbishop of
Canterbury in the Church of Felley, for the Souls of the said Galfr. and Alice,
and for the Souls of their Parents, Brothers, Sisters, Sons, Daughters,
Ancestors and Successors for ever; and if the Service was not performed, the
Lands and Premises were to return to his heirs: the Witnesses were the Prior of
Newstede, Reginald de Annesley, Nicolas Sprigonell, Iocelin de Steynesby,
Ranulph le Poer, Mr. William Barry, Roger le Poer, Raph Breton of Annesley
Woodhouse, Walter Faueley, and others. Raph Barry, Ib.
son and heir of Sir Galfr. Barry, confirmed and added to his Fathers gifts,
and so did William Barry, son of Raph Barry of Tiversalt, and gave to the said
Canons of Felley all that place called Dobbe Pyngyll, which lay in breadth
between the Land which Galfr. Barri his Grandfather gave to the said Canons,
with his body, and between the [ divisam] Boundary or Mere which Raph, the said
Williams Father, made for Roger Godefridus temp. W. Conq. Radulphus Bar, 5
Steph. Galfr. Bar, 22 H. 2. Radulphus Bar, 3 John Galfr. Bar, mil.
1244.-Alicia. Radulphus Bar Will. Bar, mil. 1294.-Eliz. matter Thom. Thom.
Barry Dom. de Tiversalt 1328.-Isabella. Thom. Barry, 30 E. 3.-Alicia. Thom.
Barry-Agnes relict. 2 H. 4. Johan. Barry, 12 H. 6.-Eliz. Christina Greenhalgh
vidua, 9 E. 4. Radul. Grenalgh de Tevershalt, 23 H. 7. Roger. Greenhalgh fill.
and haer. ob. 23 Jan. 1562.-Anna fill. Tho. Babington ob. 19 Jun. 1538. Thom.
Greenhaugh 2 Anna fill. and cohaer.-Gervas. fill. Henr. Nevil. Elizabetha fill.
primogenit.-Franciscus Molyneux. Thom. Molineux ob. 1597.-Alicia fill. and
cohaer. Tho. Cranmer. Joh. Molineux, mil. and Bar.-... fill. Joh. Markham de
Sedgebrook-Anna fill. Jac. Harington, mil. relict. Tho. Foljamb. Franc.
Molyneux, Bar. aet. 71. 1673. ob. Oct. 12. 1674.-Theodosia fill. Ed. Heron, mil.
Balnei. Johannes Molineux de Teversalt aet. 50. 1673.-Lucia fill. Alex. Rigby
relict. Rob. Hesketh Com. Lanc. 1 Franciscus aet. 1673. 2 Johannes. 3 Thom.
Franciscus-... fill.... Darcy relict.... Best. and Mos. Janes. 1 Darcy Molyneux
aet. 21. 1673. 2 Franc.

Roger. Molyneux-... fill. and coh. To. Mounson.







Isabel.




Sibylla-Willielmus.





Willielmus de Molans fr. sen. Vivian de Molans temp. Conq. Adam de Molineus
Dom. de Sefton in Com. Lanc.-Annora fill. and haer. Bened. le Garnet Dom. de
Espec. Robertus Molineux-Beatrix fill. Roberti de Villers de Crosby. Richardus
de Molineus de Sefton, 12 Joh.-Editha soror Almerici le Boteler. Genelogi^ ista
de Mulans collecta fuit per Sam. Roper, Ar. and rimanet (...) Ric. Dom. Byron.
Adam de Molineux, 12 H. 3. mil.-Leticia de Brinley. Willielmus Molyneux de
Sefton, mil. 40 H. 3.-Margar. fill. Alani Thornton, mil. Richardus Molineux,
mil.-Emma fill.... Done. Will. Molyneux de Sefton Banneret. 14 E. 1.-Isabella
Skatsbreck. Rich. Molyneux de Sefton, mil.-Agath. fill. and haer. Rog. Ilerton,
mil. Will. Molyneux, mil. ob. Cantuariae 1372.-Joana fill. and haer. Jordani
Ellol forestarii de Wyrdsall temp. E. 2. Willielmus Molineux de Sefton-Jana
cohaer. Rob. Holand Dom. de Tukeston. Elena fill. Tho. Urswick, mil.-Rich.
Molyneux, mil. Vieec. Lanc. pro vita. Ric. Molyneux de Sefton, mil.-Joana haer.
Gil. Haddock-Elen. relict...Harington. 2 Eliz. fill. Rob. Markham mil. ux.
1.-Thom. Molyneux de Hawton Banneret. ob. 6 H. 7.-Kath. fill. Joh. Cotton ux. 2.
Rob. Molyneux.-Doroth fill. Tho. Poutrell. 1 Thom. s. p. 2 Rich. Molyneux de
Hawton.-Marga^. fill. Edm. Bussy de Hather. Elizabetha fill.
primogenit.-Franciscus Molyneux.

Edm. mil. Baln. Justic. Johannes de Thorp Edm. Molineux-Etheldr.-Brigit.
cohaer. Rob. Sapcotes. Johan. Molineux de Thorp* mil.



1 Rich. Molineux de Sefton













de Somervill, and which in length extended it self from the Hedge of Hokenale
unto the Marle pit of Wheteberogh, excepting one [ itinere] way, in which men
may carry of that Marle [ Marlera] without the impediment of the said Canons or
their Successors. William Barry also confirmed all the Lands which Galfr. his
Father, Ib.
and Raph his brother, gave to the said Canons, and by the Concession of his
heirs, gave as an augmentation, pasture for one hundred Sheep in the pasture of
Tiversalt, and of Dunshill, and of Stanley, for the Soul of Sibyll his wife,
etc. William Bar, Knight, the Friday after the Conversion of St. Paul 1294.
at Tiversalt released to these Canons all the Service of the [ Clausturae]
fence of his Park of Tiversalt, Ib.
due to him for the Lands and Tenements which sometime were Roger and Richard
Bryd's of Tiversalt, excepting only that which belonged to the Croft of Roger
Bryd, and for which distress should not be made upon what they held besides it.
Sir William Barry claimed a Free Park in Teversale from ancient time, Test. de
Nev.
and by the confirmation of King Henry the third, William Bar of Tiveresholt,
Autog. pen. Ioh. Molyntux, Ar.
gave to God and St. Mary, and St. Thomas the Martyr, etc. of Beauchief, one
Bov. of Land in Demesne, to be always had and possessed with two Tof^s, and
Crofts, etc. in Stanley, and pasture for three hundred Sheep, whereof two
hundred Ewes with their issue every year, till the Feast of St. Botolph, and
pasture for twenty Cows and a Bull, and eight Mares, with the whole offspring
of both, until they were three years old, and Pasture for sixteen Oxen, etc.
as his men of the Sok of Tiversholt had. The Witnesses were Richard Abbat of
Wellebek, Robert, son of William de Alferton, Ranulph his brother, John de
Eincuria, Robert Briton of Waleton, Roger de Sidenhale, William de Meinil,
Roger de Eincurth, Raph, son of Richard de Bramton, Simon, son of Hugh,
Richard, son of William de Glapwell, Robert de Briminton, Hugh de Linacre, and
others.

William Barry of Tyversholt, confirmed to the house of Beauchief pasture for
four hundred Sheep, Ib.
and other gifts of his Ancestors, etc. the Witnesses were John de Heriz, Roger
le Bret, William, his brothers, John Deynkurt, Roger le Breton, etc.

Sir William Barry, son of Sir Raph Barry of Tiversand, Autog. Ib.
gave to John Touke, and Nicola his wife, all that Land which Raph de Hereford,
sometime held of Sir Galfr. Barry in the Territory of Doovedale in the Fee of
Tyversand: The Witnesses Sir William de Chawyrthe, Robert de Sutton, James de
Sutton, Walter Touke, William de Steynesby, Knights, Roger le Sauvage, Roger de
Somervile, etc.

Robert de Newbold, 21 E. 1. recovered Common of Pasture in forty Acres of
Wood, Pl. de Banc. Hill. 21 E. 1. to. 29.
and waste in Tyvresholte against William Barry of the same Town.

By a Fine at York, 31 E. 1. William Barry conveyed the Manor of Teveresholt
to Mr. William de Pykeringe. Fin. lev. T^^m. Hill. 31 E. 1. apud E^or. Autog.
pen. eund. I.M.


Adam de Pikerings Rector of the Church of Wynesburgs, 14 E. 2. settled the
Manor of Tyversalt on Thomas Barry, and Isabell his wife, and the heirs of
their bodies, excepting the third part, which Elizabeth, Mother of the said
Thomas, held in Dower, etc. The Witnesses were Robert de Pirepount, John de
Annesley, Knights, Robert de Dogmarfeld, Robert de Rodemortweyt, etc. -- Robert
de Pykering Dean of St. Peter's of York, Ib.
brother and heir of Mr. William de Pykering, 1328. released and confirmed to
Thomas Barry Lord of Tyversolt, and Isabell his wife, and the heirs of their
bodies, certain Lands there.

Thomas Barry, 16 E. 2. was found to hold the Manor of Tevresalt of John de
Stoteville, Esc. 16 E. 2. n. 61.
by the Service of a Knights Fee.

In the year 1337. Thomas Bar Lord of Tyversholtee, passed this Manor to
Thomas, Autog. pen. eund. I.M.
son of the said Thomas, and to Alice his wife.

Thomas Barry, 22 E. 3. paid 40s. toward the Aid for making the Kings eldest
son a Knight, Inq.
or Knights Fee, which William de Pickering held sometime before in Teveresale.

The said Thomas Barry, and Alice his wife, 30 E. 3. had this Manor. Autog.
pen. I. M.


John de Gayteford, Senior, and Hugh de Cressy of Oulecotes, Ib.
2 H. 4. settled the Manor of Tiversalt, which they had of the gift of Thomas
Bar, on him the said Thomas for life; then to Agnes, who had been wife of
Thomas Bar, son of the said Thomas for her life; then to John, son of Thomas
Bar the younger, and the heirs of his body; remainder to Isabell, daughter of
Thomas Bar the younger, and the heirs of hers; remainder to the right heirs
of Thomas Bar the elder: The Witnesses were John Wastnays Lord of Hedon,
Robert de Barley Lord of Barley, John de Bevercotes Lord of Bevercotes, John de
Greuley then Coroner, William Selyok, etc.

Peter de la Pole, Esquire, 12 H. 6. passed all the Lands and Tenements which
he had in Tyversalt to John Bar, Esquire, Ib.
and Elizabeth his wife.

Christina Grenehalgh, 9 E. 4. in her pure Widowhood demised to John Flecher
four Acres of Land lying in the Field of the Hill upon Cokeclyffe, etc.

John Williamson, son and heir of William Will^amson, late of Norton Cokeney,
Ib.
13 E. 4. released to John Barry Lord of Teresholt, Gentleman, one Mess. in
Dunsell nigh Teresholt, called Pykering Feld, sometime Thomas Hardwyks of
Hoddeshok Hall.

Raph Grenalgh of Teverhalt, Gentleman, 23 H. 7. passed to Thomas Fitz-Herbert
Doctor of the Decrees or Decretalls, Ib*
John Fitz-Herbert of Norbury, Esquire, Raph Babington, Clark, Roland
Babington, Roger Air of Holme, Esquire, Thomas Leek, Senior, Raph Frechwell, and
Anchor Frechwell, Gent. his Manors of Tevershalt, and Sutton in Ashfeild, and
other things in Claworth, and Beykingham, and Wormyll in Darbyshire, etc. for
the marriage of Roger Grenealgh his son and heir apparent, according to an
Indenture between Thomas Babington of Dethik, Esquire, and Anne Leche widow on
one part, and him the said Raph Grenalgh on the other, dated May 6. 23 H. 7.
The Witnesses to this were William Babington, Raph Grenalgh the younger, Thomas
Grenalgh, Thomas Leek of Greyeves Lane.

Roger Grenhalghe of Tevershall, Esquire* 2 December. 1562. 5 Eliz. made his
Will, wherein he appointed his body to be buried in the South I Will of that
Church near unto the Altar there, Autog.
and gave 60l. to be bestowed in alms-deeds, and other expenses the day of his
Burial about his Funeral, and 40l. in deeds of Charity the Months day after; he
gave to that Church of Tevershall 20l. and for mending the H^gh-waies of
Teversall 40l. and after Legacies to diverse Poor, etc. to all his friends that
were at his burial each a black Gown, and every Yeoman within his House a black
Coat; to his Cousin Francis Molineux, and his Cousin Anne Nevill all his Plate,
etc. Francis Molineux, and Thomas Loods, Clark, he made his Executors; and gave
50l. to purchase Lands for the Free School of Maunsfeld, if there be one, else
for his heirs. He gave Teversalt, with Woodhouse, Whetbarrow, Dunshill,
New^ould, Stanley, and Stanley Grange, to Francis Molineux, and Elizabeth his
wife, and the heirs of the body of Elizabeth; remainder to Gervas Nevell (son
of Henry) and to Anne, his wife, and the heirs of the body of Anne; remainder
to Richard Barry of Farnesfeld, and the heirs of his body; remainder to John
Barry, and the heirs of his; remainder to the right heirs of Roger Grenhalghe;
the other Lands he gave to Gerv. Nevell, and the said Anne his wife, with like
remainders. Sir Gervas Clifton he made over-seer of his Will, with a Legacy of
twenty Angels. This Roger Grenehaugh mentioned in Sutton in Ashfeild, Lib. 3.
post Mort. fol. 211.
died seized of that Manor and this, and Rowthorne in Darbyshire, three Mess.
in Tibeshelf, and one in Hethe, and some other Lands in both Counties, Thomas
his son and heir being dead before him; Elizabeth the elder daughter of the
said Thomas, then aged twenty three years, and wife of Francis Molineux, and
Anne the younger, then aged twenty one, and wife of Gervase Nevill, were the
heirs of their Grandfather, the said Roger Grenehalgh, Esquire.

From this Elizabeth it is descended to Sir Francis Molyneux, Baronet, as in
Hawton is shown, who made it his principal Residence till of late that he left
it to his son John, who married Lucie, the daughter of Alexander Rigby, and
widow of Robert Hesketh of Lancashire, by whom he has three sons, Francis,
John and Thomas, and diverse daughters now dwelling at this place; Sir Francis
having made Kneeton a fit habitation for himself, where he continued my
Neighbor.

It appears in 21 E. 1. that to the Prior of Felleys interest here, Esc. 21 E.
1. ^. 112.
Roger Brid added one Mess. and one Bovat, and Richard Bryde one Bovat, and
Thomas de Clay, etc. of Tiversold, as before may be better observed.

Roger Grenehalghe, 7 Iun. 28 H. 8. had license to alienate one Mess. in
Whitbarrow in this Parish, and several Closes therein, and Bothweth Grange in
Selston, ^ate belonging to the Priory of Felley, to George Grenehall, Gent. hi^
son, and his heirs Males.

William Bolles, Esquire, 2 E. 6. had license to alienate Stanley Grange in the
Parish of Tevershall, Par. 3. pat. 2 E. 6.
sometimes belonging to the Monastery of Beauchieff in Darbyshire, to Roger
Greenehalghe, and his heirs, who, 2 Ian. 4 Eliz. had license to alienate both
Stanley Grange, Par. 9. pat. 4 Eliz.
then in the holding of Richard Sherbrooke; and the other Mess. and Lands and
Clos^s which belonged to Felley, and had been lately held by Thomas Spencer, or
Thomas Greenhalgh, to Francis Molyneux, Esquire, and Elizabeth his wife, and
the heirs of the body of the said E^izabeth lawfully begotten.

Robert de Willughby, and John de Harecourt, Lords of Plesley in Darbyshire,
Esc. 10 E. 2. n. 78.
10 E. 2. who held also one Carucat of Land in the Sok of Maunsfeild, held the
Advowson of the Church of Tevyrsall, of which, with the Manor of Plesley,
there was a Recovery suffered, 9 H. 7. by Humfrey Peshale, Esquire, Mic. 9 H.
7. rot. 335.
and Margaret his wife, who called to warrant William Asteley, Esquire (whose
Ancestor I suppose married the heir of... Harcourt).

The Rectory of Tevershold was 7l. when Mr. Hastley, and Mr. Leeke were
Patrons. Mss. I. M.
It Is now 9l. 19s. 9d. ob. in the Kings Books, and Sir Francis Molyneux Patron.

In Teversalt Church South I Will East Window is,

Paly of six^ Arg. and Azure on a Bend Gules, three Scallops Or.

Underneath are two raised Alabaster plain Tombs both close together, and on
the more Southerly Tomb is,

Orate pro animabus Rogeri Greenehalghe, Armigeri, and Annae, uxoris suae,
unius filiarum Thomae Babington de Dethick; quae quidem Anna obiit xix. die
Junii Anno Domini 1538. Qu^rum animabus propitietur Deus, Amen.

And on the other,

Orate pro anima Rogeri Grenehalghe, Armigeri, Domini quondam istius villae;
qui quidem Rogerus obiit vicesimo tertio die mensis Januarii, Anno Domini 1562.
Cujus animae propitietur Deus, Amen.

Memor esto quoniam mors non tardat, quid superbis terra and cinis.

On the top is also his Pourtraiture scored and filled with Lead: and on the
side three Hunters Horns stringed upon a Bend engrailed, quartering Barry, all
which impales Babington.

Over the entrance into the Mansion House in the Stone-work is Barry, (which it
seems at the building he used for his Paternal Coat) impaling Babington.

Maunsfeild. And Woodhouse. And Nettleworth.
IN Maunesfeld King Edward the Confessor had a Manor which paid to the
Dane-geld for three Carucats, and six Bovats. The Land was then nine Carucats
or Plow-lands. King William the Conqueror had there two Car. or Plows in
Demesne, and five Sochmans on three Bovats of this Land, and thirty five
Villains, twenty Bordars with nineteen Car. and an half, one Mill, one Piscary
21s. twenty four Acres of Meadow, Lib. Dooms.
Pasture Wood two leu. long, and two broad; there were then two Churches and
two Priests. Schegeby and Sutun were Berues or Hamlets of this great Manor,
the Sok whereof extended into Warsop, Clune, Carberton, Clumber, Buteby,
Turesby, Thorp, Scoteby, Rounton, Edenestowe, Grymeston, Echering, Mapelbek,
Besthorp, Carentune, Schitinton, Carenton, Raneby, Bodmescill. It had likewise
Soc in Wardebec Wapentak, afterward called Oswardebec Sok and Manor, being a
great share of the further or Northerly part of Bersetlowe Wapentach, these
other already named, being some in Broxtow, and some in Thurgarton and Lee
Hundreds, as in their proper places may be seen.

William Rufus gave to the Church of S. Mary of Linc. and Rob. the Bishop of
that Church, Mo^. Angl. vol. 3. p. 261.
for the Soul of his Father, and of his Mother, and his own, the Church of
Oschinton (now Orston) and the Church of Chestrefelt, and the Church of Eseburn
(now Ashbourne in Darbyshire) and the Church of Maunesfeld, and the Chapels
which are in the Berewies, which lie to the said four Manors, with Lands and
Tithes, and all things which belonged to the said Churches in the time of King
Edward: this gift was made the day after that, on which his Archbishop Anselme
was made his Liege man.

Henry de Hastings held the whole Town of Maunsfeild with the Sok, Test. de Nev.
viz. Wudehus, Sutton, and Nettlewurd, and received yearly of the Farm 32l. 3s.
10d.

The King, 6 E. 2. granted the Manor of Maunsfeld, Orig. 6 E. 2. r^. 27.
with the Soke and Farm of Lindeby, and Carleton Mill in this County, the
Manor of Geytington in Northantss. and Harewell in Barkshire to John Common
after the death of John Common Earl of Boghan.

John de Hastings, 12 E. 2. prayed the King concerning the Manors of
Maunsfeld, Esc. 12 E. 2. n. 123.
Oswoldbek, and Leirton in this County, which King Henry the third, that Kings
Grandfather, gave to Henry de Hastings his great Grandfather, and Ada his wife,
in the twenty second year of his Reign.

Oswardebek continued to that Noble Family of Hastings, as in that place may be
seen. But Queen Isabell, 3 E. 3. claimed the Manor of Maunesfeld, Rot. Quo
Warrant. 3 E. 3.
with the Soke belonging to it, and therein view of Frank-pledge, and
emendation of the Assize of Bread and Ale broken, Pillory, Tumbrell, Gallows,
Wrek, Weyf, and a Market every Thursday throughout the year. At the same time
Mr. Anthony de Bek, Dean of Lincoln, Ib. ^o. 1. in (...).
pleaded that he was Parson [ Persona personata] in the Church of Maunesfeld,
as in right of his Deanery, and that he had diverse Tenants belonging to his
said Parsonage, and that he and all his Predecessors Deans of Lincoln, used
to have Assise of Bread and Ale.

Richard de la Vache, Knight, 35 E. 3. is called Lord of Maunsfeld, Esc. 35 E.
2. par. 2. ^. 3^. Es^. 4^ E. 3. n. 29.
but it seems he held it but for life; he had Rent of Assise here of the
Freeholders 17l. 13s. 4d. and two Water-Mills worth 8l. per annum in the Town,
and one in Maunsfeld Woodhouse, and another in Sutton members of this Manor,
and 18d. Rent out of Carberton Water-Mill, and the Perquisits of Maunsfeld
Court, then valued at x. Marks, and he had likewise eight Marks six shillings
and 8d. yearly Rent in Lindeby of the Tenants at Will.

The King, 2 R. 2. March 12. committed the Custody of the Manor of Maunsfeld
to John the son of John de Burle, Knight. Fin. 2 R. 2. m. 17.


The Jury, 11 H. 6. found that Alianor, who had been wife of Nicolas Dagworth
Chr. when she died held the Manor of Maunsfeld and Lindeby, and that John
Inglefeild, Esquire, Esc. 11 H 6. n. 25.
was then her son and heir.

King Henry the sixth, in the thirty first year of his Reign, Esc. 35 H. 6.
granted the Manors of Maunsfeld and Lindeby to Edmund Earl of Richmond his
brother, and Jasper Earl of Pembroke, and likewise the Manor, Demesne, and
Town of Clipston in Shirewood. Henry Earl of Richmond, was son and heir of the
said Edmund.

By Act of Parliament, 6 H. 8. the Manors of Clipston, Lindeby, Maunsfeld,
Maunsfeld Woodhouse, and Sutton in Ashfeild, amongst very many others in other
Counties, were settled on Thomas Duke of Norfolk (for his great Victory over
the King of Scotland at Floddenfeild) but were then exchanged by the King for
some others: and this is now the Inheritance and makes part of the Titles of
his Grace the Duke of Newcastle.

The Men of Maunesfeild, 1 Ioh. gave the King fifteen Marks for having Common
of Pasture in the Park of Clipeston, Oblat. 1 Ioh. m. 3.
as they were wont to have it before the Park was enclosed. King Henry the
third, Claus. 11 H. 3. par. 2. vel 3. m. 6.
11 H. 3. granted the Men of Mansfeld, that they and their heirs should have a
Market at his Manor of Maunsfeld, and commanded the Sheriff accordingly. It
seems they gave the King five Marks for his Charter to have a Market there on
Mundayes. It appears, Fin. 11 H. 3. m. 4.
14 H. 3. that the Men of Maunsfeld are to have Housebote and Haybote in the
Forest of Shirewood. Claus. 14 H. 3. m. 18.
And in 1 and 2 E 3. that the Tenants were to have Common of Pasture in a place
called Woodhouse Wood. Esc. 1 E. 3. n. 3. and in dorso Claus. 2 E. 3. m. 38.
Par. 2. pat. 1 R. 2. m. 31. Pen. Rob. Butler, Ar.
King Richard the second, in the first of his Reign, granted a Fair every year
on the Feast of St. Peter.

In a Forest Book of Parchment written 1520. or 1533. wherein are the
Customaries of the Manors of Arnall, Mauncefeld, Edwynstowe, and Southwell in
this County, and of Horeston and Bollesour in Darbishire, and to which is
annexed that of Warsop in Paper, the Customary of Mauncefeld begins thus, Be it
bad in mind that the Town of Maunsfeld Wod^ouse was burned the Saturdaye next
before the Fest of Exaltation of the holy Cross, the year of our Lord
M.CCC.IIII. And the Kirk Stepull, with the Belles of the same, for the Stepull
was before of Timber work: And part of the Kyrk was burned. Afterward there
follows several Heads of the Customs of the Manor, as That the Tenaunts be
fre of blood, and lefully may marye them after there wills as well men as women.
That the Eyres as soon as they been borne been of full age. That Lands are
departabil betwex sons, or daughters if there be no son, and the like.

William de Steynesby held some small parcells of Lands in Mansfeld, Esc.
and Mansfeld Woodhouse for 3s. 1d. per annum, and had two sons found his
heirs, and of full age according to the Custom of the Manor, Iocelin nineteen
years old, and Nicolas fourteen.

The Jury, 12 R. 2. found that Godfrey Foljambe Chr. son of Godfrey, Esc. 12 R.
2. n. 21.
son of Godfrey Foljambe, Knight, held, when he died, one Mess. and half a
Caruc^^ of Land in Mansfeld Woodhouse, ancient Demesne of the Manor of
Maunsfeld, by diverse Services, viz. 13s. 4d. per annum Rent, and Suit to the
Court from three weeks to three weeks, of being the Kings Forester there,
Frank-pledge, Constable of the Peace as often as his course shall happen, or he
be chosen by the neighbors, etc. Alice his daughter being his heir. Sir Robert
Plumpton, Knight, was her husband, Esc. 11 H. 6. n. 5.
and about 11 H. 6. died seized of one Bovat in Mansfeld Woodhouse, called
Wolfhunt Land, and one Essart in the same Town at Wadgate near Woodhouse Mill,
held by the Service of winding an Horn, and driving, or frighting the Wolves in
the Forest of Shirewood; William Plumpton was his son and heir by the said
Alice. This amongst other Lands is now the Inheritance of Sir John Digby, B.
Knight, who has his residence here.

Rowland Dand, Esquire, has also an House and good interest here.

Sir William Willoughby, Baronet, had a House which Sir Thomas Blackwell built,
which is now Mr. William Pinkeneys, who has made a Park toward Shirbrook and
Warsop this year 1673.

Mr. William Clarkson of Kirkton has also an House here, and Richard Neale,
and diverse others.

William Chapel, D. D. the Reverend Bishop of Cork and Ross in Ireland was
born here: his brother John Chapel was also a Learned m^n.

Richard Stern, now my Lord Archbishop of York, was born at Maunsfeild.

There were in the Church of Maunsfeild, before the time of Edward the sixth, B.
ten Chantries, whose Lands Queen Mary gave in Fee to Christopher Granger,
Clark, the Vicar, and William Wild, Par. 8. pat. ^ and 5 Ph. and Ma.
and John Chambers, the Churchwardens of the Parish Church of Maunsfeild, by
the name of the Governors of the Lands and possessions of the Parish Church of
Maunsfeild, 24 Febr. 4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. to sustain one Chaplain or Priest.

Mss. I. M.
The Vicarage of Maunsfeild was 8l. It Is now 7l. 7s. 6d. value in the Kings
Books, and the Dean of Lincoln continues Patron.

In the year 1339. John the Prior of Felley, Lib. de Felle^, circa* sin^^.
and the Covent of the same, obtaining the Church of Annesley for their proper
uses, at the request of Robert Stuffyn of Neuwerk, who had acquired and
bestowed on them the Advowson of the Church of Adyngburgh, besides many other
Munificences, engaged for themselves and their successors, to find a secular
Chaplain, and to pay him and his successors six Marks of silver yearly, to
pray for the said Robert and Alice his wife, whilst they should live, and for
the Souls of Richard Stuffyn, their Fathers, Mothers, and Ancestors, and for
the Soul of John, son of Hugh de Portesmouth of London; and after the death of
the said Robert and Alice, for their Souls, and all the faithful, at the Altar
of the blessed Mary, in the Church or Chapel of Mammesfelld Wodhous; which
said Robert Stuffyn, during his life, in every vacancy was to present a fit
Chaplain to the Archbishop of York, the Sea being full, or else to the Dean
and Chapter of York; and after his decease his sons Richard, Robert, William,
and James, which of them should survive him according to their seniorities, for
their respective lives, within fifteen days of the avoidance, afterward the
Prior of Felley, or if he slipped the fifteen days, the Vicar of Maunsfeild, and
if he did, the Archbishop or Dean and Chapter of York.

In Mansfeild Church South I Will East Window,

Arg. a Lion Ramp. sable amongst Cinquefoiles Gules, Pierrepont, quartering
Arg. six Annulets sable, 2.2.2. Maunvers.

And Azure three Hedgehogs Or, 2.1. Heriz, with a Fox for the Crest, and two
more for supporters.

Sable, a Buck couchant Arg. impaling Arg. a Falcon rising Sable.

This is again in another South Window, and by it,

Arg. three Unicorns Heads erased sable, impaling Gules, two Chevrons Arg.

In another England with a Bendlet Azure.

And in the same, Azure three sixfoyles, and Crusuly Arg. Darcie.

In another South Window,

Bendy of six Arg. and Gules quartering Varry, and Barry of six Or and Arg. and
Gules a Cross flory Arg. impaling a Tower Arg. and Nebule Or and Sable.

Azure three Flowers de Lis Arg. quartering Or three Palets Sable, quartering
Gules a Lion Ramp. Arg.

In the top of another England.

In another South Window,

Varry Or, and Gules, Ferrars.

And Arg. three Crossecroslets Fitche Sable, and on a Chief Azure three Mullets
pierced Or.

On a Tomb of.... Blackwell,

Arg. a Greyhound in course sable, and on a Chief indented of the second, three
Beasants, quartering Erm. on a Bend Gules three Escallops Or, impaling Azure a
Chevron Erm. between three Gryphins heads erased Arg.

The Crest a Dogs head and neck collared cooped.

Nettleworth
IS an Hamlet also of Maunsfeild, and lies between it and Warsop, of which
Parish it is part.

William de London, 7 R. 1. gave account of ten Marks for half a Knights Fee,
Pip. 7 R. 1.
and for certain Lands of the Serjeantry in Nettleswurd, and Warechip, and
Tineslaw.

The Jury, 33 H. 3. found that William de London held half a Mess. and four
Bovats of Land in Nettlewurth, Esc. 33 H. 3. n. 55.
of the King in Capite, of the Sok of Maunsfeild, and forty six Acres of Land
in Demesne, worth 6d. an Acre per annum, and thirteen Bovats in Villanage, each
worth 3s. 4d. yearly, and ten Cottages worth 10s. 11d. per annum, and 18d. of
one Freeholder for one Bovat of Land, and one Mill worth 20^. per annum, of
Geoffrey de Bakepuz, and Emycina his wife, by the Service of half a Knights
Fee, and 5s. 4d. per annum, and they held it of Malvesinus de Hercy, and
Theophania his wife, and they of the honor of Tikhill. This William died in
the time of King Henry the third without issue, Pl. and Esson. 9 E. 1. apud
Not. to. 53.
and left three or four sisters and heirs, whereof Elizabeth and Elianor died
without issue, and Isabel likewise, who entered into Religion at Ambresbury, Pl.
de Banc. Trin. 12 E. 1. to. 31.
and was there professed, so that Walter Bret claimed the Land as son of
Richard, son of Eva, sister and heir of the said William de London, against
Henry de Tyneslawe, who was son of Dionysia, another sister, and had his share
accordingly, but Walter le Bret pleaded that he was a Bastard, which the
Archbishop of York had a Mandate to enquire of.

The Jury, 15 E. 2. found that William de Tynneslaw held in Nettelworth the
Site of a Manor, Esc. 15 E. 2. n. 28.
and thirty Acres of Land in Demesne, of the King in Socage of the ancient
Demesne of Maunsfeild, by the Service of 5s. yearly, and Suit to Maunsfeld
Court from three weeks to three weeks. He held in Netelworth and Warshop Lands
and Tenements of Stacy Mortein, as of the Manor of Grove, by the Service of
the sixth part of a Knights Fee, in Netelworth ten Acres of Land, and in
Warshop seven Bovats, etc. and that Walter de Tynneslawe was then his brother
and heir, and above fifty years old.

Bertram de Bolyngbrok, and Johan his wife, 42 E. 3. granted and demised all
their Lands and Tenements in Netelworth, Ex Autog^ pen. Will. Wild, Genesis
as well those of the Fee of Maunsfeld, as those of the Fee of Tikhill to Will.
de Netelworth, and Maud his wife, during their lives, and the life of the
longer liver of them, and one year after, reserving 20s. a year Rent.

There was an Assize, 11 H. 6. between Thomas Thalworth, Knight, Richard
Stanhope, Trin. 11 H. 6. to. 105.
Knight, John Bows, and others, Demandants, and Thomas Segrave, and Galfr.
Segrave, concerning two Mess. twelve Acres of Land, and eight Acres of Meadow,
and the moiety of the Manor of Netylworth, with the Appurtenances in
Netylworth, Sulkholme, Warsop, Sterthorp, and Kellum.

Francis Molyneux, Esquire, Hill. 6 Eliz. apud Hertf. rot. 160.
and Robert Flecher, 6 Eliz. claimed against William Wild, Gentleman, the
Manor of Nettylworth, with the Appurtenances, and five Mess. five Tofts,...
Gardens, one hundred Acres of Land, eighty of Meadow, eighty of Pasture, sixty
of Wood, two hundred of Furz and Heath, and 3s. 4d. Rent in Nettylworth and
Warsop, who called to warrant Nicholas Denman, Esquire, (who had a share of Sir
John Hercyes Estate of Grove.) William Wild of Nettleworth married Ell^n,
daughter of Anthony Staunton of Staunton, Esquire, as in that place is noted.

Sir Gilbert Dethick alias Garter principal King of Arms, Autog. pen. Will.
Wild, Genesis
by his Letters Patents bearing date 16 October. 3 Eliz. granted to William Wyld
of Netleworth in the County of Not. that he and his posterity should bear
Gold, a Fece between three Hearts Heads razed sables, Horned and Langued Gules,
and for the Crest a Demi Buk cooped Sables, with a Crown and Ring about his
neck, Horned and Hoved Gold. In the year of our Lord 1575. and 15 of June,
Autog. pen. eund. W.W.
17 Eliz. Robert Cook Clarencieux, confirmed to Robert Wild of London,
Gentleman, fourth son of William Wild of Nettelworth, Gent. to bear Sables a
Chevron ingrailed, and on a Chief Silver three Martlets of the Field: the Crest
the same with the former, and on a Schedule annexed to the Patent were the
first Arms quartering these in the second place.

William Wild, and Alice his wife, were admitted Tenants at Maunsfeild Court
there held 7 Apr. 4 Eliz. to all the Lands and Tenements, Autog. Ib.
and other Hereditaments, which ought to descend to the said Alice after the
death of Richard Walker her brother.

Gervase Wild of Nettleworth in the Parish of Warsop, Autog. pen. eund. W.W.
Gent. 35 Eliz. enfeoffed Thomas Peake of Grayes Inn, and Paul Divall of
Edwinstow, in all his moiety of the Manor of Nettleworth, for the Jointure of
his wife Margaret, who was widow of Anthony Burgess of Notingham. This Gervafe
Wild, in his younger time, was bred a Spanish Merchant, and was some time a
Factor in Andaluzia, from whence being returned he was Captain of a Ship in
1588. against the Spanish Armado, where he made use of Arrows with long Steel
heads shot out of Muskets, some of which he left at Nettleworth, where he lived
to a great age 93. and his son William Wild, if he be now living (as he was in
1668.) is 80. this year 1673. whose son and heir William Wild is now Servant
to the Right Honorable the Marquess of Dorchester. Sir John Digby has not
long since made a Park at Nettleworth.

Blidworth. Bludword.
THe Book of Doomsday shows that the Archbishop of York, before the Conquest
had in Blidword a Manor which was rated to the Geld as nine Bovats. The Land
was then found sufficient for three Plows, or three Carucats. There after the
Conquest Archbishop Thomas had five Villains, having two Car. and one Mill
which was in Ludham, Pasture Wood three leuc. long, and one broad: Calvreton
was a Berue of this Manor, and both in the Confessors time were valued at 40s.

King John, 30 June, 2 Ioh. granted to William Briwer lx. Acres of Assart at
Blithewurth where Wood was not, Chart. Ant. M M. 5.
which were Essarted in the time of King H. 2. his Father.

I suppose this Lordship ever remained entirely as it yet does to the
Archbishops of York.

The Jury found at the Inquisition taken at this place, the Wednesday before
the Feast of St. John, Esc. 8 E. 1. n. 47.
before the Port Latin, 8 E. 1. mentioned in Arnall, before Galfr. de Neyvill,
and Henry de Perepunt, Justices of Assise by the Kings Writ open (or Patent)
that William the Archbishop of York, then held pleas of Trespass made upon the
Vert in the Wood of Blithworth, and received the Amercements in his Court of
Suwelle, as all his Predecessors had done, from W. de Gray, sometime
Archbishop of that See, but by what warrant they did, it was not found.

The Chapter of Southwell, Rot. Quo War. 3 E. 3.
3 E. 3. claimed Assize of Bread and Ale of their Tenants here amongst the rest.

The two Prebendaries of Oxton divide the Tithes here. Mss. I. M.


The Vicarage of Blythworth was eight Marks. It Is now 3l. 17s. 6d. value in the
Kings Books, and the two Prebendaries of Oxton continue Patrons.

Thurgarton and Lythe Hundred.
Thurgarton a Lee Wapentac
WAs in the Conquerours time two, Torgerton and Lyda which I suppose now only
make the two Divisions; the first contains the Townships from Nottingham down
the River Trent as far as Averham, and the other all below. In the Record of
Nom. Vill. 9 E. 2. the King is Lord of the Wapentach of Thorgarton and Lythe,
and so still continues as I think. The first Township we are to note in it
now, which was not in it then (being truly a part of Nottingham) is

Sneynton. Snotinton. Notinton.
THis Township is adjoining to, and part of St. Mary's Parish in Notingham, and
in Doomsday Book is called Notintone; and in other ancient Records Snotinton,
and Snodinton, as Notingham was Snodengaham, and Snotingeham, and was also the
Kings Land in the Conquerours time, which answered the Geld for one Car. The
Land of it was two Car. There eleven Vill. had four Car. and twelve Acres of
Meadow, it was then valued at 3l.

King John, in the sixth year of his Reign, granted to William Briwerre the
Manors of Cestrefeld in Derebisyre, with Bruminton, Chart. Ant. AA. 20.
and Witinton, and the Sok, and the whole Wapentac of Scarvedale, and many
privileges, and likewise his Manor of Snodinton in Notingehamsyre, to be held
in Fee Farm for 8l. per annum in number to the Exchequer, and likewise the
Manor of Arminster in Devonshire, and the Fishing of Kingswere in
Somersetshire, and the Service of Peter de Sandiacre, which he ought for the
Land which he had in exchange for the Land of Horseleg, the Fee Farm Rent of
all which was 112l. yearly paid into the Exchequer.

King John, 27 July, Claus. 15 Ioh. m. 2. and Chapter 15 Ioh. m. 3.
15 Ioh. granted to William Briwer the Custody of the Land, and heir of Baldwin
Wake, with the marriage of Isabell, the daughter of the said William, formerly
wife of the said Baldwin. Chart. Ant. Y. 3.
In the same year the said King granted to Richard, son of William Briewerre,
Cestrefeld, etc. and Snotinton, etc. and took homage of the said Richard for
these Lands, which the said William his Father held. Claus. 15 Ioh.


Joan Wake, who was the wife of Hugh Wake, had the custody of the Land, Test.
de Nev.
and heir of Hugh Wake, to wit, Cesterfeld, with the Wapentac belonging, except
16l. Land which William de Percy held in the name of one of the heirs of
William de Bruer, and the said Joan, with other heirs of William de Bruer, as
well out of the Manor of Cesterfeld, as out of other Lands in very many
Counties, held by the Service of three Knights Fees, as in Cesterfeld,
Sneynton, Axminster, Kingswere, in the County of Somerset, and this was of the
feoffment of King John.

Henry de Perpunt, and Annora his wife, in the former part of the Reign of
Edward the first, Pl. coram Rege, Mich. 13 E. 1. to. 28.
were attached to answer Henry Fitz- (or son of) Robert, William de Blackwell,
Richard del Hull, William Arnold, Walter le Chapeleyn, William de Lyndeby, Raph
and John his brother, Richard le F^nere, and Theobald his brother, Roger Bear,
Robert Fraunceys, and very many others, the Men or Tenants of the said Henry,
and Annora his wife, of the Manor of Sneynton, which is ancient Demesne of the
Kings Crown, why they, contrary to the Kings Precept, exacted other Services
and Customs of the said Men, than they were wont to perform when the said
Manor was in the hands of King John, viz. whereas they were wont to hold a
Bovat of Land for 4s. per annum, and Suit of Court from three weeks to three
weeks, for all Services, the said Henry, and Annora, exact for the said Bovat
of Land 13s. per annum. And whereas they were wont to plead by a Writ of right
close, and to have their Essoines according to the Custom of the Manor, the
said Henry, and Annora, would not suffer them to plead nor have Essoines; and
whereas they were wont to be amerced by their equals (or Peers [Pares]) and
that according to the quantity of the fault, they amerced them out of the Court
according to their own will; and whereas they were wont to have a common Part
(or Pound) in the same Town, they did not suffer them to have one. And also the
said Henry, and Annora, Taxed the said Men or Tenants one hundred Marks, where
they were not wont to be Taxed, and for the said one hundrd Marks took their
Cattle in Sneynton, and drove them out of the Liberty of Sneynton to Holme. The
said Henry, and Annora, by their Attorney pleaded, That the said Men were not
upon the Kings ancient Demesne, but were their Villains. The Court gave day
that the Book of Doomsday might be searched, wherein Notinton was found to be
the Kings Land, but in Easter Term, 15 E. 1. they got a Jury to find that
Sneynton was never called Notinton, but always Sneynton; and that Notinton was
a part of Notingham, on that side toward Arnchall; which surely is the most
evidently false of any thing that ever pretended to be called a Verdict, as may
be sufficiently discovered by what is here set down: but it served to get the
Tenants amerced, and finally to submit to what had been some while before it
seems attempting against them, for I find that in 4 E. 1. John de Sutton
^ayliff of Henry de Albiniaco, Inqu. tangent. Reg. 4 E. 1. ^ap. de T^^rg. and
Ly^.

Pl. de Banc. Pas. ^. 17 E. 1. to. 62.


contemned (or refused) to admit of the Kings Writs, which the Kings Sokemen of
Sneynton brought to him that year.

Henry de Perepont, and Annora his wife, 17 E. 1. offered themselves against
Robert de Tibetoft, and Eva his wife, that they should warrant to them the
third part of the Manor of Sneinton, which Hugh le Dispenser, and Isabell his
wife claimed in Dower. This Eva was daughter of Patricius de Cadurcis, Ex lib.
pen. Patr. Vic. Chaworth, per R. Glover. Inq. ad quod dam. 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13,
14 H. 6. I.
vulgo Chaworth.

There was an Inquisition taken at Nottingham the last day of March, save one,
13 H. 6. before Raph. Crumwell, Knight, Thomas Chaworth, Knight, Hugh
Willughby, Knight, John Bows, and Richard Bingham, and John Cokayn, Knight,
High Sheriff of Notts^. assigned by the King, by his Letters Patents dated 11
July, 12 H. 6. to enquire of concealments, and other things; at which time the
Jury found that Patricius de Chaworth was seized of the Manor of Sneynton,
with the Appurtenances, and that he demised it to William Bishop of Sarum for
his life, reserving 10l. per annum Rent; and afterward that be levied a Fine
of it in Michaelmas Term, 36 H. 3. to Henry de Albiniaco, to whom, and to Hugh,
brother of the said Henry, he granted interest in it for their lives; but
afterward to descend to himself and his heirs, by which means they would
entitle King Henry the sixth to it, as son of Henry the fifth, son of Henry the
fourth, Kings of England, son of the Lady Blanch, late Duchess of Lancaster,
daughter of Henry, late Duke of Lancaster, son of Maud, daughter of Patricius,
son of the said Patricius, named in the Fine: but they found that Henry
Perpount, Knight, held the Manor, and had received the Rents, issues, and
profits, twelve years last past, and that Edmund Perpount, Knight, had done so
for thirty years, and that other Ancestors of the said Henry Perpount had done
so since the death of the said Bishop, and Henry de Albiniaco* and Hugh. This
Inquisition is duplicated and called two Inquisitions, returned into the
Chancery the Eve of the Ascension, 13 H. 6. Henry Perpount, ^he second of June
following, offered himself to Traverse them.

I suppose this trouble was created by the Lord Crumbwell, with whom Sir Henry
Pierpont had great Suits, as in Gonaldston may be noted.

The Manor of Sneynton was bought by the first Sir Henry Perpont of R. de
Tibetot, B.
and has ever since continued in that Noble Family, and is now the Possession
of the Right Honorable Henry Marquess of Dorchester.

.... Warreyn was an ancient and great Freeholder here, whose Lands, by a
Marriage of a daughter and heir, came to... Roos, whose heir sold the Reversion
to the Earl of Kingston, the said Marquesses Father.

At the Assizes at Not. before William Thirninge, to. 82.
and Richard Sydenham the Tuesday after the Feast of St. Peter in Cathedra, 14
R. 2. William de Aderley was Cast concerning fourteen Acres of Land in
Sneynton, which was then found ancient Demesne, etc.

At the Assizes at Not. 10 H. 4. Sir Edmund Pirpount, and John de Burton, Cast
Thomas Ingram, concerning one Mess. and four Bovats of Land in Sneynton.

In the year 1234. R. the Prior of Lenton, and the Covent of the same,
confirmed to Robert, Regist. de Lent. 233*
son of Ingelram of Nottingham, and his heirs, all their Land and Meadow
belonging to it, with Toft and Croft, all which belonged to the Church of St.
Stephen of Sneynton, he paying them 13s. yearly. They granted, released, and
confirmed to this Robert Ingram, Knight, for his Counsel and Service, had and
to be had during his life 21s. 6d. issuing to them out of his Lands in Sneynton
and Nottingham.

Here were some Lands Sir John Byrons.

Queen Elizabeth, 17 June, 41 Eliz. granted to Henry Pierponte all the Tithes
of Corn in the Town of Notingham, Part. 17. pat. 41 Eliz.
and in the Town of Sneynton, yearly coming, late belonging to the Priory of
Lenton, then valued at xxl. per annum.

Colwick over and nether.
IN Colewi^, Godric had a Manor before the Conquest, which answered or was
rated to the Dane-geld or Tax at seven Bovats. The Land was one Car. There
afterward William Peverel (whose Fee it became) had one Car. in Demesne and
seven Vill. six Bordars, having three Car. or Plows. There was a Priest and a
Church, and two Servants, Lib. Dooms.
and one Mill 5s. half a Piscary or Fishing, and thirty Acres of Meadow, and
fifteen Acres of small Wood. In the Confessors time it was 20s. value, when
the great Survey was taken in the Conquerours 40s. and was then held by
Waleraun. Here was another Manor of the Land of the Taynes, wherein Alvric had
three, and Buge two, which made five Bovats for the Tax or Geld. The Land was
one Car. They held it of the King ( William) and there had two Car. or Plows,
one Sochm. on one Bovat, and six Villains, one Board. with two Car. There was
thirty one Acres of Meadow, and small Wood, eight Acres. In the Confessors time
this was valued at 25s. 4d. Another part went with Stoche of the Fee of
Goisfrid de Alselin.

William de Colwich, 20 H. 2. paid the Sheriff one Mark because he sold an
Horse to the Kings enemies. Pip. 20 H. 2.


Esc. 36 H. 3. n. 38.
Over Colwick was Peverels, and held by Reginald de Colewike of the King in
Capite, as one Carucat, for twelve barbed Arrows when he came to Not. Castle,
together with nineteen Bovats in Willughby on the Wolds, as there is noted, for
another Service.

Philip, son of this Reginald, was after his death, 36 H. 3. found his heir,
and to be then above forty years old. Philip died about 3 E. 1. and left it to
William his son and heir.

Esc. 3 E. 1. n. 21. (...). 6 E. 1. n. 47.
The Jury, 6 E. 1. found that Reginald de Colewyke, the Grandfather of William,
lived an hundred years; and that he, and Philip his son, Father of William, had
their Park enclosed with Hedge and Di^ch at their pleasure, without the
impediment of the Justice or Ministers of the Forest, and so held it all their
lives, as the said William then did, paying his twelve Arrows, as before is
said.

John de Colwyk, 7 E. 3. was found son and heir of William. Esc. 7 E. 3. n. 1.
Ge^ea^og. de (...) per S. Roper pen. R. Do^^. (...). Esc. 35 E. 3. p^r. 1. n.
53.
This John was a Knight, and married Ioane, daughter of Robert de Staunton
[Harold] by whom he had William de Colwyke, who held the Manor of Colewyke,
with the Advowson of the Church, jointly with Ioane his wife, whom he left a
widow, 35 E. 3. and Thomas de Colewike their son his heir; he held a Mess. also
in Elston of William de Thorpe, and half a Virgat of Land. His said wife Ioane
was the daughter of John Peche, Ex Geneal. praedic^.
and born at Kilnutt in Shropshire, by whom he had also a daughter called
Ioane, who was heir of her brother the s^id Thomas de Colwik, and carried this
Lordship to the Family of Byron (mentioned in Newstede) she being second wife
of Sir Richard Byron, as in that place is noted.

There was a presentment made against Richard Byron Chr. and Ioane his wife,
(...). cor. Reg. (...). 15 ^. 2. to. 20.
15 R. 2. for h^ndring the course^ of the Water of Trent at Over Colwick, which
was the right of the said Ioane, it seems as daughter of William de Colwik. The
Trent is there found to be one of the great Rivers of the Kingdom of England
for passage of Ships and Batells [that is, Boats] with Victuals, and other
Merchandises from the Castle and Town of Nottingham, to the water of Humbre,
and from thence into the deep Sea.

The Tayn-land I suppose to be called Nether-Colwyk, or Est-Colwyk, which came
also to Peverel, for I find, Esc. 11 E. 1. n. 3. p. ^^.
11 E. 1. that William de Novers, or de Nodariis, named in Willughby on the
Wolds, held the fourth part of a Knights Fee of that Honor in Est-Colwyk.

The Jury, 10 E. 3. found that John de Nowers held one Mess. and one Carucat of
Land, Esc. 10 E. 3. n. 9.
with the Appurtenances in Nether-Colwick, of the Lady Grace de Nowers Lady of
Stoke Goldington, by the Service of the fourth part of a Knights Fee, and that
John his son and heir was then of full age.

A Fine was levied at York, 12 E. 3. between John de Nowers of Nether Collewyk,
In Oct. S. Ioh. Bapt. 12 E. 3.
Quer. and John, the elder son of William Moigne of Carleton, Deforc. of
thirteen Mess. nine Bovats, and one hundred and sixty Acres of Land, sixty
Acres of Meadow, one Acre of Wood, and 15d. Rent, with the Appurtenancs in
Nether-Colwyk, Carleton, and Beston, which were thereby settled on the said
John de Nowers for life; and after his decease on William, son of Robert de
Iorce, and Margery, daughter of the said John de Nowers, and the heirs of their
bodies; remainder to the right heirs of the said John de Nowers. This came
after to the Family of Slorey, whose Arms were three Crosseletts pate upon a
Fesse, which I have seen upon some of their Seals.

There was a Recovery suffered, 4 H. 8. wherein Thomas Vrswick, Mic. 4 H. 8.
to. 634.
and Thomas Broun claimed against Robert Slory, the Manor of Colwyke, with the
Appurtenances, and six Mess. ten Cottages, six hundred Acres of Land, five
hundred of Meadow, as many of Pasture, four hundred of Wood, sixty of Marsh,
forty of Heath, and 10l. Rent in Colwyke Nowers, Over Colwyke, and Nether
Colwyke. Slory was a man of great possessions, B.
and his daughters and heirs married to Hussy and Wood, but Mr. Woods Ancestor,
to whom this Colwyk was allotted, sold it to the Ancestor of Sir John Byron,
who having the whole, sold it to Sir James Stonehouse, being of a very great
yearly value, but never got much above half the money, by reason of the
breaking out of the War, wherein it was stopped by the Rebels, but since the
return of the King, Richard, the present Lord Byron, has accepted of some
small part, and confirmed the Title of Sir John Musters, the present owner.

Some part of Nether Colwick is in Geedling Parish, which was that of the Fee
of Alselin.

The Rectory of Colwyke was heretofore 10l. value, and Mr. Byron Patron. Mss.
I. M.
It Is now 6l. 2s. 1d. and Sir John Musters Patron*

In a North Window of this Church was painted a Man in his Coat of Arms,
holding his Shield, whereon also was depicted Gules, three or four Fusils in
Fesse Arg. and two Cinquefoyles (or Mullets) in Chief Or. He was of the Family
of D' Aubeni, in Brant Broughton Church in Lincolneshire, there are diverse of
their Arms, and Byrons too.

Stoke Bardolf. And Carlton, etc.
IN Stoches, and Ghelling, Tochi (who was also Lord of Shelford and Lexington,
and many other places in this County before the Norman Invasion) was rated to
the Geld at three Carucats, and two Bovats, and two parts of a Bovat for his
Manor. The Land whereof was then accounted four Carucats. There Goisfrid de
Alselin (who succeeded the said Tochi in all those places) after the Conquest
had in Demesne two Car. fifteen Villains, Lib. Dooms.
six Servants, twenty one Bordars, having eight Car. or Plows. There was then
also a Priest and a Church, and a Piscary (or Fishing) and two Mills 20s.
thirty Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood three qu. long, and three qu. broad. This
was valued in Edward the Confessors time at 110s. and when Doomsday Book was
made at 6l. This Manor had Soc in Carentune, Ghelling, and Colwicc, as much as
paid the Geld Tax for fifteen Bov. The Land four Car. There thirty Sochm. had
ten Car.. and twenty Acres of Meadow, small Wood three qu. long, one broad.

The Barony of this Goisfrid de Alselin or Hanselin was very considerable in
these Counties of Not. and Derb. and also in Lincolneshire: howbeit it seems
it was very early divided, viz. before the fifth year of King Stephen, as in
Shelford does partly appear. Raph Hanselin had twenty five Knights Fees, and
Robert de Cauz (or Caltz) fifteen, as the Red Book in the Exchequer manifests.

Of the Posterity of Cauz notice may be taken in Lexington, which was the head
of his Barony, though they enjoyed a share here also, which descended from Cauz
to Birkin, and so to Everingham, B.
and so to Constable, and was sold by.... Fletcher to Gilbert Earl of
Shrowsbury, and was lately the Inheritance of the Earl of Kingston, by the name
of Everingham Fee, and remains yet to his son the Marquess of Dorchester, as I
take it.

Raph Hanselin had a son of his own name, who had a daughter and heir called
Rosa, Esc. 18 H. 6. and 3. part. (...). 19 ^. 6. m. 5. (...). Pip. 1^ H. 2.
married to Thomas Bardul, who, 18 H. 2. gave account of 25l. of the Scutage of
the Knights of the Fee of Raph Hanselin; his son and heir was Dodo or Down
Bardulf.

Pip. 11 (...) and ^ud^olch.
11 Ioh. Beatrix, the daughter of William de Warreuna, gave account of three
thousand five hundred Marks for having the Lands and Tenements, which were her
Fathers, and which ought to descend to her by Inheritance, and for having her
reasonable Dower which concerned her out of the Tenements which were Down
Bardulfs her late husband, and that she should not be distrained to marry her
self, and that the debts which her Father ought the King, might be raised out
of the Chattels which were common to her said Father, and Milisent his wife,
the day that he died.

Hubert de Burgo, Pip. 2 H. 3. Northamptes^i^^.
2 H. 3. would have it enrolled, that William, the son of Down Bard. granted
him the Manor of Portes^ad, with the Advowsons of the Churches, and other
things belonging to the said Manor. Hubert de Burgo, Pip. 3 H. 3.
3 H. 3. was Guardian of the heir of the said Down Bardolf, who it seems was
William Bardolf, who died about 4. E. 1. seized of the moiety of Shelford, held
of the King by half a Barony. He had a Mess. at Stoke, Esc. 4 E. 1. n. 41.
which is a member of Shelford, and one Carucat in Demesne, and the
Freeholders of Stoke, and the members, viz. Shelford, Gedeling, and Karleton,
and some in Notingham paid yearly 49s. 4d. and Suit of Court; here was a Batell
(or Bote) which carried men over Trent, which yielded a Mark yearly, William
Bardolf was then found his heir, Esc. 18 E. 1. n. 29. Esc. 32 E. 1. n. 64. Esc.
3 E. 3. n. 66. and n. 57.
who about 18 E. 1. left Hugh Bardolf his heir, who, 32 E. 1. left his son
Thomas aged twenty two years his heir; and Thomas Bardolf, 3 E. 3. left his son
John but seventeen years old.

There are some Genealogies of this Family which make Thomas, the son of Hugh,
to die without issue, and his brother William Bardolf to be Father of this
Thomas, but this agrees well with the time and age of the Parties, and I have
not seen sufficient authority to make the other certain.

The King, 11 E. 3. granted to John Bardolf, Par. 2. pat. 11 E. 3.
and Elizabeth his wife, daughter and heir of Roger Damory, the Manor of
Ilketheshall and Clopton in Suff. in exch^nge for the Manors of Ke^ington and
Faukeshall in Surrey.

Agnes, the wife of Thomas Bardolf, had this Manor in Dower, Esc. 31 E. 3. n.
48. Esc. 45 E. 3. n. 7.
and left it to her son John, 31 E. 3. who about 45 E. 3. left it with
Wyrmegey, and other great Manors which made up twenty nine Knights Fees
belonging to his Court of Shelford, to his son William Bardolf of Wirmegey Chr.
who, Esc. 9 R. 2. n. 11.
9 R. 2. did the like to his son Thomas Lord Bardolf, then but seventeen years
old, or little more; which Thomas was the last Lord Bardolf of the Male-line,
and Attaint in the time of Henry the fourth, in whose Reign, about 9 H. 4. he
died leaving two daughters, Anne, first married to Sir William Clifford, and
after to Sir Reginald Cobham; but his other daughter Ioane, who married Sir
William Phelips, was Lady Bardolf; Esc. 25 H. 6.
and then after her death, William Beaumont, son of Elizabeth, her daughter,
wife of John Viscount Beaumont, was found her heir.

William Viscount Beaumont died without issue, and his sister Jane married to
John Lord Lovell was his heir, who had Francis Viscount Lovell, slain in the
Battle of Stoke in this County, against the King, 16 June, 2 H. 7. by whose
Attainder (or it seems before) this Manor came to the Crown; he had two
sisters, Jane the elder married to Sir Brian Stapleton, and Frideswid to Sir
Edward Norreys, by whom she had Henry Norreys, to whom and to his heirs Males,
10 H. 8. the King granted this Manor of Stoke Bardolf, with Gedling, Crophill
Bishop, O. 10 H. 8. to. 34.
Newton, and Carleton, late William Viscount Beaumonts.

Goysfridus de Alselin Radulphus de Hanselin Radulphus Hanselin Rosa fill. and
haer-Thom. Bardul. Dodo Bardulf-Beatrix fill. Willielmi de Warenna relict. 11
Joh. Willielmus Bardulf, 2 H. 3. ob. 4. E. 1. Willielmus Bardulf ob. 18 E. 1.
Hugo Bardulf ob. 32 E. 1.-Isabella ob. 16 E. 2. 28 Maii. Thom. Bardulf aet. 22.
ad mortem patris, ob. 3 E. 3. Johannes Bardolf aet. 17. 3 E. 3. ob. 45 E.
3.-Elizab. fill. and haer. Rogeri Damory. Gulielmus Bardolf, ob. 9 R. 2. Thom.
Bardolf, aet. 17. 9 R. 2.-Avicia. Joana Bardolf, ob. 26 H. 6.-Willielmus
Phelips Dom. Bardolf, 9 H. 5. Elizabetha-Johannes Vicecomes Beaumont-Katherina
Ducissa Norfolc. ux. 2. Willielmus Vicecom. Beaumont, and Dom. Bardolf aet. 9.
26 H. 6. Attinct. per Parl. 4 Nov. 1 E. 4. Johannes Dom. Lovell.-Jana for. and
haer. fratris. Franciscus Vicecom. Lovell, occisus in bello de Stoke, 16 Jun. 2
H. 7. 1 Brian Stapleton mil.-Joana. Brianus Stapleton Richardus Stapl^ton,
miles.

2 Eduardus Norreys.-Frideswid. Johannes Norreys s. p. Henr. Norreys attinct.
12 May, 28 H. 8. Henricus Norreys restitut. 31 H. 8.




Reginaldus Cobham 2.-Anna-Willielmus Clifford, marit. 1.
Willielmus Bardolf, miles, 4 H. 6.


Willielmus.






Robert de Cauz.

King Edward the fourth, 15 E. 4. granted to Galiard de Durford Lord of Duras
and his hei^s Males, O. 15 E. 4. to. 22.
the Manor of Shelford, Stoke Bardolf, and Gedling, in this County, and others
in Derbishire.

Henry Norreys being Attaint about 12 May, 28 H. 8. it came again to the Crown,
and was after granted to the Lady Anne Stanhope, B.
great Grandmother to the first Earl of Chesterfeild, whose Posterity enjoyes
it, wi^h Shelford, to this day.

Here were many held shares of these Lands, as may be gathered from what is
already formerly set down: Hugh de la Basage (or Bastre) held in Carleton, ^
Gedeling, and Stoke, half a Knights Fee of the old Feoffment of William
Bardolf. And Reginald Vrsell, and Hugh de Tytheby held in Gedeling, Carleton,
and Stoke, another half Knights Fee of the old Feoffment of Robert de
Everingham.

Robert, son of Hugh de Titheby, gave an Acre in Carleton to Thurgarton Priory,
Reg. Thurg. 61. b.
for the health of his Soul, and Isolda his wife; to which Church Hugh, son of
Alred of Carleton, gave also a Toft and Croft, which were Auki's, and a Bovat
of Land in Carleton, which William and Robert his sons severally confirmed.

The Jury, 15 E. 1. found that Reginald de Haslacton held in Carleton, and
Colwick, Esc. 15 E. 1. n. 28.
of Robert de Everingham, the sixth part of a Knights Fee, valued then at five
Marks; the heirs of Richard Vrsell in Carleton, as much valued at 52s. Henry de
Whatton in Stokes and Carleton an eighth part of a Knights Fee valued at 44s.
William, son of Richard de Birton, in Birton a sixth part, valued at 66s. 8d.
Mr. Thomas Beck in Gedling a sixth part, Galfr. le Botiler in Stokes as much,
Alexander de Le in Gedling a tenth part, and William Mascy as much there also.

Pl. de Banc. Pas^. 5 E. 1. to. 2.
The Jury, 5 E. 1. found that two Tofts, and two Bovats of Land in Stoke, and
four Tofts and one Bovat in Gedling, were Frank Almaigne of the Rectors of
Gedling, and not Lay Fee of Galfr. de Botiler, who called Adam de Everingham to
warrant, which Adam was then Amerced.

Alexander de Whatton of Karleton, 12 E. 1. recovered against Henry, Pl. de
Banc. Hill. 12 E. 1. to. 18.
son of Richard de Watton, and six others, four Mess. four Bovats of Land, and
two parts of a Bovat, except one Acre, and twenty Acres of Land, and 5s. Rent
in Karleton and Colwyk. They had great Suits afterward about this Land, Hill.
19 E. 1. to. 54.
and 19 E. 1. pleaded Bastardy and Error.

At the Assizes at Not. 23 E. 1. Cecily, the daughter of Roger Millott, Assis.
23 E. 1. to. 24.
recovered her seisin of one Mess. and one Bov. of Land in Carleton near Not.
and William, son of Roger Milott, was Amerced.

A Fine at Westminster. the day after St. John Baptist, 8 E. 2. between Richard, son
of William de Basage, Fin. crast. S. Ioh. Bapt. 8 E. 2.
and Maud de Kirkeby, Querents, and William le Moigne the younger, Deforcient,
of one Mess. and twelve Acres of Land in Carleton by Not. settled them on the
said Richard and Maud for life; and after on Richard, son of Maud, and the
heirs of his body; remainder to William his brother, and the heirs of his;
remainder to the right heirs of Richard, son of William.

Another on the same day of the Term, 12 E. 2. between Robert Iorce the elder,
Fin. in crast. S. Ioh. Bapt. 12 E. 2.
and Idonia his wife, Quer. and Roger le Botiller, and Amicia his wife, and
John their son, Deforc. of sixteen Acres of Land in Gedling, and Stoke Bardolf,
settled them on the said Robert and Idonia, and the heirs of their bodies;
remainder to William, son of Robert, and the heirs Males of his body; remainder
to the right heirs of Robert.

The Jury, 29 E. 3. found that Philip de Somervill held, Esc. 29 E. 3. n. 4^.
the day that he died, 10l. Rent per annum in Shelford, Stoke Bardolf, Gedling,
Birton Iorz, and Neuton, of Adam de Everingham of Laxton, by the Service of a
pair of white Gloves; and that Iohane, the daughter of the said Philip, whom
Rese ap Griffith Chr. had to wife: and Maud, the daughter of John de Stafford,
and Cousin of the said Philip, whom Edmund, son of John de Vernon, had to wife,
were heirs of the said Philip. Rese left a son, 30 E. 3. his heir called also
Rese. Esc. 30 E. 3. n. 49. Esc. 13 R. 2. n* 6.


Here were diverse, 13 R. 2. who held of William Bardolf of Wirmegey, John de
Loudham a sixteenth part of a Knights Fee in Neuton and Shelford, John Lord
Gray of Codnar as much in Birton Iorce, William de Russeby, Hugh de Annes^^y,
Roger de Duffeild, and Thomas de Whatton, half a Fee in Carleton, Gedling,
Colwyk, and Stoke, John Burton and his Parceners a sixth part in Newton, John
de Babington a sixteenth part of a Knights Fee in Neuton. The Prior of
Shelford, and his Parceners a twelf^h part in Shelford, Roger de Stanbridge a
sixteenth part there, William de Wymondeswold a thirteenth part in Gedling and
Stoke, William Clark, and William de Kirketon a twentieth part in Carleton and
Gedling, John de Birton Chr. and Hugh de Annesley a twentieth part in Carleton.
This William Bardolf in his life time had the Advowson of the Priory of
Shelford, which was then valued at twenty Marks per annum, and the moiety of
the Advowson of the Church of Gedeling at ten Marks.

The Jury, 15 R. 2. returned it not to the Kings loss, to grant John de
Landfort, Esc. 15 R. 2. n. 76.
Vicar of the moiety of the Church of Gedling, and John Ward of Shelford,
license to give three Mess. twenty two Acres of Land, eight Acres and an half
of Meadow, and 26s. 8d. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Shelford and Stoke
Bardolf, to the Prior and Covent of Shelford.

Henry Plesyngton, Knight, and Isabel his wife, 27 H. 6. claimed against Alice
Leek one Mess. two Carucats of Land, thirty Acres of Meadow, Trin. 27 H. 6. to.
328.
and 43s. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Gedling and Stoke Bardolf. Edmund
Molyneux, Esquire, Mich. 30 H. 8. rot. 428.
30 H. 8. suffered a Recovery of three Mess. two Cottag. one hundred Acres of
Land, three hundred of Meadow, three hundred of Pasture, etc. and 4l. Rent, etc.
in Stoke Bardolf, Shelford, Gedling, Burton Iorce, and Newton, and called to
warrant George Gryffyth, Knight.

Gedling. Ghelling.
BEsides what has been mentioned before in Stoke Bardolf and Carleton of
Goisfrid de Alselins Fee, in the Conquerours great Survey there is mention of
another Manor in Ghellinge, which before his coming was one Dunstanes, and
answered to the Tax for nine Bovats and an half, and a third part of a Bovat.
Lib. Dooms.
The Land two Car. There afterward Roger de Bus^i, whose Fee it was, had two
Car. and nine Vill. one Board. having two Car. and ten Acres of Meadow, Pasture
Wood, two qu. long, one qu. broad. In the Confessors time this was 32s. value,
then 40s.

Richard de Normanvile, and Henry de Walleye, Test. de Nev.
held half a Knights Fee of Alice Countess of Augi in Carleton, Gedling, Stoke,
and Weston. Mich. 16 E. 4. rot. 115.
The Manors of Gedling and Weston were both by Fine and Recovery, 16 E. 4.
passed to Robert Roos of Laxton, Esquire, by Thomas Normanvile, Knight, and
Elizabeth his wife, with warranty in the Fine against Thomas Abbat of
Kirkestall, and his successors.

Thomas Bek held in Gedling, 15 E. 1. the sixth part of a Knights Fee of Robert
de Everingham then dead, Esc. 15 E. 1. n. 28.
whose son and heir Adam de Everingham was but seven years old at that time.

Fi^. apud Ebor. Hill. 2 E. 2.
By a Fine at York, 2 E. 3. Roger Boteler of Stok, and Amicia his wife, passed
twenty Acres of Land in Gedling to Roger Duket, and Margaret his wife, and the
heirs of their bodies; in default whereof the heirs of Roger Duket were to have
ten Acres lying in Podh^^h, and the heirs of Margaret the other ten lying it* a
place called Blesedale.

Pl. de Iur. and Assis. 3 E. 3. to. 17. and to. 20. in dors.
Alexander de Lee, son and heir of Alexander de Lee, son and heir of Alexander
de Lee, and Maud, the daughter of Gilbert de Brunneslegh (which last named
Alexander was also son and heir of Alexander de Lee, and Sarra his wife) 3 E.
3. claimed an Acre of Land in Gedling against William, son of Gilbert de
Gedling.

John de Cave of Not. 10 E. 3. held in Carleton by Gedling seven Mess. and
seven Bovats of Land of Hugh Bardolf, Esc. 10 E. 3. n. 19.
and his Ancestors. Ib. n. 22.
Roger de Pilley held then in Gedling one Mess. and one Bovat of Adam de
Everingham of Laxton. Richard Ingram held of him a Mess. and four Bovats in
Gedling; Ib. n. 70.
and so did Thomas de Whatton of Stoke Bardolf hold one Mess. and six Bovats of
the said Adam. Ib. n. 71.


The King, Feb. 5. 31 H. 8. granted to Michael Stanhope, Par. 6. pat. 31 H. 8.
Esquire, and Anne his wife, amongst other things, the Manor of Shelford, with
its members, and Appurtenances, late belonging to the Monastery of Shelford,
and likewise all the Woods called the Priors Park and Eshawe, containing one
hundred and forty Acres in Gedling. And the Rectories of the Parish Churches of
Shelford, Saxendale, Gedling, Burton Ioys, and North Muskam. Also all Manors,
Mess. Lands, Tenements, etc. in Shelford, Saxendale, Neuton, Brigford,
Gunthorp, Loudham, Cathorp, Horingham, Bulcote, Gedling, Carleton, Stoke,
Lamcote, Flintham, Long Colingham, Caunton, the Town of Not. Newark, Burton
Ioys, and North Muskam, to the said Monastery belonging.

The Parson of the Church of Gedling, 12 E. 2. had one hundred and ninety foot
long, Par. 1. pat. 12 E. 2. m. 6.
and twenty foot in breadth of Land, granted to enlarge the Churchyard of that
Church.

The Rectory of the Mediety of Gedling was twenty Marks, Mss. I. M.
and the King Patron. The Vicarage of the other Mediety was twelve Marks, and
the Prior of Shelford Patron; the Rectory is now 14l. 6s. 0d. ob. and the
Vicarage 6l. 16s. 8d. value in the Kings Books, and Philip Earl of Chesterfeild
Patron of both.

In the North I Will East Window,

Azure three Cinquefoyles Or, Bardolf quartering Azure, a Lion Ramp. and
flowers de Lis Or, Beaumont.

There is also,

Arg. on a Fesse double Cotised Gules, three Flowers de Lis of the Field,
Normanvile, quartering Azure, a Chevron between three Birds Arg.

In the East Window of the South I Will,

Azure, three Cinquefoyls Or, Bardolf.

In the Parsonage Chamber Window,

Lord Crumwell with Tateshal quartering Everingham.

Lambley.
LAmbley in the Book of Doomsday is said to be of the Tayn-land, where Vlchet
had a Manor before the Conquest, which paid the Tax for two Car. and as many
Bovats. The Land was three Car. Lib. Dooms.
Alden held it of King William the first, and there had one Plow, or Plow-land,
or Carucat, twenty Villains, three Bordars, having four Plows or Carucats,
three Sochm. with one Plow or Car. on half a Car. of Land, here were two Mills
20s. and twenty Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood one leu. long, four qu. broad. In
the Confessors time, and in the Conquerours, this kept the value of 60s. This
Aldene was Lord also of Crumwell, of which place the ancient owners of this
Manor took their name, the first of which whom I have seen any thing of, was
Raph de Crumwelle, son of Hugh de Crumwelle, Lib. rubr. in Scaccar.
who about 12 H. 2. held a Knights Fee of the Bishop of Lincoln, of the old
Feoffment. Raph de Crumwell, 22 H. 2. gave account of ten Marks of the
Amercements of the Forest. Rot. Pip. 22 H. 2.
The Inquisition taken before Ph. Mark (Sheriff of this County from about 12
Ioh. to 8 H. 3.) shows, Test. de Nev.
that Raph de Crumwell held the Town of Lamley in Fee Farm for 10l. per annum
of the honor of Tikehull.

Raph de Crumbwell, 5 H. 3. was son of Raph, son of Raph, son of Hugh, son of
Aldene; Pl. Trin. 5 H. 3. to. 22. Par. 2. pat. 11 H. 6. m. 13. Lib. de
Wellebek, page 68.
they were all Raphs down-ward to the last, who was Raph Lord Crumwell of
Tateshall, who was constituted Lord Treasurer, 11 H. 6.

They were sometimes called of Lamley, Hubert Fitz-Raph confirmed to Raph, son
of Raph de Lamly, for his Homage and Service, all the Land which the Uncle of
Raph, Thomas, son of Alueric, held of the said Hubert in Scartheclive in
Derbish.

The fourth Raph, I suppose, married Mazera, the daughter of Philip Marmion,
Antiq. Warw. p. 820.
by whom he had a daughter (and heir to her Mother) called Ioane, married to
Alexander de Frevile; but it seems by another wife, he had Raph de Crumwell,
who married Margaret one of the coheirs and Parceners of the Inheritance of
Nichola, Rot. pip. 16 E. 1. Buckss.
who had been the wife of Roger de Somery, as in the Pipe Roll of 16 E. 1.
appears, concerning the account of the Manor of Olney, which Isabell
Countess of Arundell held in Dower.

This Raph died about 27 E. 1. and left Raph his son and heir seven years old,
who, Esc. 27 E. 1. n. 26. Esc. 14 E. 3. n. 61. and part. 3. pat. 14 E. 3. m. 23.
14 E. 3. 12 Nov. was called Raph de Crumbewell the elder, and was then
Founding a Chantry in the Parish Church of the Holy Trinity at Lamley, to which
he gave one Mess. and 100s. yearly Rent in Lamley, having one hundred Marks
Land and Rent in Lamley and Crumbewell remaining over and above.

Raph the younger, I take to be Raph de Crumbewell, who married Avicia, the
daughter of Roger Beler, by whom he had Raph Crumwelle of Tatteshale, in right
of his wife, who was Matildis, daughter and heir of John, son of William
Bernak, ^i^. 18 ^. 2.
and Alice his wife, daughter and heir of Ioane (wife of Robert) de Dryby, and
daughter of Robert de Tateshale, by whom he had Raph, the Father of the Lord
Treasurer Crumwell before named, and diverse other Children, as in the Descent
in Crumbwell may be perceived.

Raph Lord Crumwell, who married Margaret coheir of the Lord Deincourt, had no
issue, so that his sister Matildis, whom he married to Sir Richard Stanhope
about 12 H. 4. became his heir, Ex Coll. I. B.
she was his second wife, and by him had a son called Henry Stanhope, who died
without issue, 31 H. 6. and two daughters, Ioane wife to Humfrey Bourghchier,
who was therefore styled Lord Crumwell, but had no issue that I have found; and
Maud, first married to Robert Lord Willughby of Eresby; Cla^s. 4 E. 4. m. 15.
secondly, to Thomas Nevile; and thirdly, to Sir Gervas Clifton; the said Maud
their mother died 33 H. 6.

Gervas Clifton, Knight, and Maud his wife, late wife of Robert de Willughby, 5
E. 4. granted to Anthony Wydevile Lord of Scales and of Newsells, Claus. 5 E.
4. m. 6.
the Manors of Candlesby, Halem, Lamley, Snowdon, Boston, Bleseby, Gippesmere,
Gourton, Dranfeild, Baseford, Quynton, Rasyn, Lucton, Belcheford, and Tuxford,
with the Rent of Deyncourt there, in the Counties of Linc. Not. Derb. and
Warw. also the Manor of Tumby, except the great Wood called Tumby Woods, or
Tumby Chase in the said County of Linc. which late were Raph Lord Crumwells,
together with the Advowsons of the Churches, Chapells, and Chantrys thereto
belonging.

By an Inquisition taken, 20 January, 19 H. 6. concerning the Manor of
Hetherset in Norfolk it appears, That this Lady Willughby Maud died 30 Aug. 13
H. 7. and that Sir William Knyvet at the time of the said Inquisition aged
sixty years, Inq. 19 H. 7. virtute ^fficii.
who was son of John, son of Elizabeth, daughter of Constantine Clifton, son of
John and Elizabeth, daughter of Raph Crumwell, Knight, (great Grandfather of
the said Lady Willughby), and William Fitz-William, Esquire, then aged thirteen
years and above, who was son of John, son of William, son of William, son of
John, son of John, son of Maud, another daughter of the said Raph Crumwell,
were found Cousins and heirs of the said Maud Lady Willughby.

This Manor, as in Arnall is said, was Sir William Hastings, who died 1 E. 5.
and his wife Katherin had the profits till 20 Apr. 12 H. 7. and then Richard de
Hastings his younger son. A Recovery was suffered, 21 H. 7. of the Manors of
Lamley and Bleyseby, and the Advowson of the Church of Lamley, etc. which
Thomas Iakes, Richard Reynold of London, Trin. 21 H. 7. rot. 493.
Goldsmith, John Wotton, and John Parker, claimed against Richard Hastings,
Esquire. Michael Purfrey, Esquire, and Nicolas Beamont, 5 Eliz. claimed against
Henry Earl of Huntington the Manor of Lamley, Pasch. 5 Eliz. rot. 146. Pasch.
17 Eliz. rot. 156.
etc. Francis Willughby, Esquire, 17 Eliz. claimed against Elizabeth Beamont,
widow, the Manors of Lamley and Bleyseby, etc. who called to warrant Henry
Earl of Huntington.

This Manor of Lamley fell amongst the coheirs of Sir Francis Willughby of
Wollaton, whereof Dorothy was married to Henry Hastings, second son of George
Earl of Huntington; and another of them to Mountague Wood, whose daughter Mary
Wilzey Wright married and enjoyes part, most of it being divided now amongst
several Freeholders.

Two Sheaves of the Demesne Tithes, seemed to belong to the Chappelry of Blyth,
Regist. (...) Novo (...) 214.
which King John granted to Walter Archbishop of Roan; but the Inquisition
taken at Blyth, 16 E. 3. returned that Roger de Heselarton, whom Raph de
Crumwell presented to be Parson of the Church of Lamley, took all the Tithes,
and paid a Mark yearly to the Church of Loudham in the name of the Chappelry of
Blyth, but whether for those Tithes or no, they knew not.

The Rectory of Lamley was 12l. when M. Hastings was Patron. Mss. I. M.
It Is now 10l. 16s. 3d. value in the Kings Books, and John Wood, Esquire,
Patron, for a sixth turn, according to the division made by the husbands of
the six coheirs of the Manor, Woods, Waste, and Advowson, whereof this
belonged to, and was sold by Henry Hastings, and Sir George his son; another is
in George Willoughby of Cossale, Esquire; two, viz. the Lord Spensers, and his
own, are in Edward, Grandson of Edward Willoughby of Booreplace in Kent;
another, viz. Mr. Pargiters, in John Marter of Normanton upon Sore, Clerk; and
the other in Wilsey Wright, viz. Mr. Mountague Woods of Lamley.

Burton Jorz. Bertune.
THe Conquerours great Survey shows tha^ there was in Bertune and Ludham, some
Land that was Sok to Gulnethorpe of the Fee of Roger de Busli, viz. twelve Bov.
ad Geld. The Land one Car. There four Sochm. two Vill. had one Car. There were
four Acres of Meadow; but besides this there is mention of a Manor in Bertune,
which was Sweynes before the Conquest, who paid for one Carucat, and a fourth
part to the Tax for it. The Land was two Car. There Goisfrid de Alselin, whose
Fee it afterward was, had one Sochm. of five Acres of Land, and five Villains,
one Bordar, one Servant, one Maid, together having three Car. There was a
Church and a Priest, sixteen Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood one qu. long, and one
qu. broad. In the Confessors time, and then at the taking the said Survey,
valued at one Mark of Silver.

The Family of Iorz were ancient owners here, which gave the Town the
distinction of Burton Iorce, which it yet retains. Galfr. de Georz, Rot. Pip.
30 H. 2. Warw. and Legrecest*
30 H. 2. gave account of xxs. that the Deed or Charter which he had of William
de Georz concerning the Land of Littlebury [Lughburgh] should be read in the
Kings Court. Agnes, who had been wife of Geoffrey de Georz, 13 Ioh. gave
account of 16l. 13s. 2d. for the Custody of the Lands, Pip. 13 Ioh. and rot.
11. Test. de Nev.
etc. Galfr. de Iorz paid two Marks for one Knights Fee in Birton,in the former
part of the Reign of Henry the third; afterward Richard de Iorz was found to
hold a Knights Fee of Oliver de Eyncourt, who held it of the King of the old
Feoffment.

Robert Iorce of Burton, son of Sir Richard Iorce, Knight, settled his Manor
of Burton by Bulcote, and thirty and two shillings Rent, Autog. pen. I. Walker
de Eperston, Genesis
with the Appurtenances in Hokkesworth, and three Mess. and five Bovats in
Gedeling, and forty Robertus de Jortz, 8 H. 2. Galfridus de Georz, 30 H.
2.-Agnes vidua superstes, 13 Joh....... de Jorz Galfr. de Jors Richardus de
Jorz, miles Dom. Robertus de Jorce, superst. 1 E. 2.-Isolda-Idonea superst. 12
E. 2. 1 Richard. de Jorz. 2 Robert. de Jorce miles.-Isabella fill. Will. de
Wastenes 18 E. 2.-Nicol. de Worteley mar. 2. 17 E. 3. Alianora, 18 E. 2.
Isolda, 18 E. 2. Marg. Johannes de Jorz-Matildis, 17 E. 3. Robertus de Jorce,
39 E. 3. Willielmus de Jorz aet. 9. An. 49 E. 3. Willielmus Jorz, s. p.

Johannes Cecilia-Robertus de Hawburgh. Robertus Hawburgh superst. 6 H. 7. s.
p.-Matild.

Willielmus Jorz Elianora-Johannes Walker. Henricus Walker Johannes Walker de
Eperston, 6 H. 7.-Margareta Gardner. Johannes Walker de Eperston, temp. H. 8.
Humfridus Walker ob. 20 Aug. 24 Eliz.-Katherina fill.....Throcmorton
relicta....Clark, ux. 2. Johannes Walker aet. 30. and ampl. 10 Jac.-Elianora
fill. Thom. Mather de Erleshagh. Johannes Walker de Eperston aet. 69.
1675.-Brigitta* fill. Ed. Andrews, Ar. de Pesbrook in Rutl. Johannes Walker
aet. 26. 1675.-Rebecca fill. Thom. Shirbrook de Oxton. Johannes Walker aet. 3.
1675. Elizab. aet. ^.








Cecilia.
Richardus de Jorce.
3 Will. Jorz-Agnes, 13 E. 2.




Willielmus, 30 H. 2.

and one shillings Rent in Ester-Leyk in this County, fourteen Mess. and
fourteen Virgats of Land, with the Appurtenances in Bakewell in Derbyshire, and
one Mess. and one Carucat of Land, and thirty two Acres of Meadow, and 13l. 3s.
2d. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Lughteburgh in Leicestershire, on Richard
his son, and the heirs Males of his body lawfully begotten; remainder to Robert
de Iorz, another son and his; remainder to William, another son and his;
r^mainder to the right heirs of the said Robert de Iorz the Father; on whose
Seal, as upon diverse others of his Family, is, A Bend charged with three
Waterbougets: This Deed bears date at Burton Iorce the Monday before the Feast
of St. Martin in Winter, 1 E. 2. the Witnesses were John de Herrys, Raph de
Crumwell, Raph de Crophill, Knights, William, son of Richard de Burton, Robert
de Burstall of the same Town, Thomas le Palmer of the same, Robert Iorce Cousin
of the said Robert in Lughburgh, Robert le Ster of the same, etc. Richard A^re
of Ebreston, gave and confirmed his Manor of Ebreston to Sir Robert de Iorce,
Aut^g. Ib.
and Isolda his wife, and the heirs of their bodies. Their second son Robert de
Iorz, afterward Knight, married (I suppose for his second wife) Isabell, the
daughter of Monsieur William de Whasteneys; after his death she was wife of
Nicolas de Worteley, on whose Seal 17 E. 3. is a Bend between six Marteletts
charged with three Lozenges voyded; Ib.
and on hers, her Picture holding in her right hand, hanging down, the top of
the Shield of Wastenes, viz. a Lion Rampant: and in her left, that of Iorz,
viz. On a Bend three Waterbudgetts: by her right shoulder is a Lion Rampant,
and by her left a Waterbudgett, her name circumscribed.

Robert Iorz of Birton, and Isabell his wife, by a Fine, Fin. a die Pasch. in
15. dies, 18 E. 2. and a die Pasch. in (...) men's.
18 E. 2. entailed Lands and Rents in Bulcote, Ester-Leke; and Eperston; and by
another the same Term in Birton Iorz, Stoke Bardolf, and Gedling, which he
settled on himself and his heirs Males, with remainder over to his daughters,
Margaret, Isolda, and Alianora, and the heirs of their bodies: but it seems his
son John had a son called Robert de Iorce, or Ioce, who left his son William de
Iorz his heir, Esc. 49 E. 3. n. 71.
49 E. 3. then but nine years old.

The Jury, 42 H. 3. found that William de Birton held ten Bovats of the Manor
of Loudham (except two, Esc. 42 H. 3. n. 23.
which his Ancestor gave in Frank-marriage with his sister) of the King,
whereof six lay in Loudham, and four in Burton, and for which he paid the King
yearly 7s. He held likewise in Birton of Richard de Gray of Codnor seven
Bovats, and as many of Adam de Everingham, and of them both forty Acres in
Demesne. And twelve Bovats of William le Marescall in Radclive for 18s. per
annum, and the Foreign service for the fourth part of a Knights Fee, and that
Richard his son and heir was then sixteen years old. That Williams Father, I
suppose, to be Richard, son of William de Birton, who paid 32d. for the tenth
part of a Knights Fee in Birton in the former part of Henry the third; Test. de
Nev.
and his said son Richards son, to be William, Esc. 27 E. 1. n. 26.
son of Richard de Birton of whom Raph de Crumwell is said, 27 E. 1. to hold a
Wong (cultur^m) containing fifteen Acres in Birton by the Service of one penny,
per annum.

Placit. de Banc. Trin. 10 E. 1. ^o. 37.
Raph de Crumwell, 10 E. 1. claimed before I. de Vaux Justice Itinerant in the
County of Not. against John de Burstall, whom Galfr. le Esquier of Birton, and
Margery his wife, called to warrant, and who did warrant to them one Mess. and
four Bovats of Land in Birton as his right, and called to warrant Nigellus de
Ridware, and Thomas his son, and then relinquished his warranty and answered
gratis, and pleaded that the said Raph in the time of Henry the third, was
never seized of the said Mess. and Land, and put himself on the Country to try.

Esc. 21 E. 3. n. 27.
William de Vpton Parson of the Church of Birton-Iorce, got an Inquisition, 21
E. 3. which found that one Mess. and two Bovats, and five Acres of Land were
the right of the Church of Birton Iorce, and so had been from the very
Foundation of it, and the Predecessors of the said William de Vpton held them,
and that Mr. Robert de Blundesden, sometime Parson of that Church, demised them
at Will to Robert Sareson of Birton Iorce, and that after the death of Mr.
Robert, John, son and heir of the said Robert Sareson, held them his life; and
his wife Cecilia after him unjustly occupied them, till John Clyde, the last
Predecessor of the said William, brought a Writ of V^rum against her
concerning the said Tenements, to be pleaded before the Justices of the Kings
Bench; during which time she passed them to Richard de Hegham, and Idonia his
wife, her daughter: but they perceiving by the continuance of the Process, that
their Estate in them would not be good, 19 E. 3. restored them effectually to
the Church without any fraud.

Richard Prior of Thurgarton and the Covent, Regist. de Thurg. 61. b.
granted and confirmed to William de Belloprato one Toft in Birton, with two
Acres of Land which Ailward held sometime before, so that he nor his heirs
should dispose of them no way without their consent, and for which he was to
pay 4s. yearly. Reg. de Thurg. p. 179.
That Covent in the year 1328. received of Robert de Iorz, for a certain place
in his Manor in which his Dovecote was situate, and for a place of Meadow 4s.
yearly, and as much of William de Holdernesse for a Toft and another place of
Meadow.

In the second year of Queen Mary, Mic. 2 Mar. rot. 431. vel 432.
Raph Leigh, and Raph Barlow, claimed against Thomas Knyveton, Esquire, the
Manor of Burton Iorce, etc. and called to warrant Marc Menell, Gent.

William Babthorp, Knight, Trin. 9 Eliz. rot. 560.
Christopher Twysilton, Esquire, John Langton, and Humfrey Shellow, 9 Eliz.
claimed against Richard Stapleton, Knight, and Brian Stapleton, Esquire, his
son and heir, and Elizabeth, wife of the said Brian, the Manor of Burton
Iorce, with the Appurtenances, and fifteen Mess. ten Cottages, twenty Tofts,
one Dovecote, twenty Gardens, five hundred Acres of Land, one hundred of Meadow,
one hundred of Pasture, forty of Wood, and one hundred of Furz and Heath, with
the Appurtenances in Burton Iorce, Gedlinge, Stoke Bardolf, Snainton, and
Colwicke. This helped to transfer it to the Family of Stanhope, with which it
continues.

Yet in the time of Henry the eighth, Exemp. pen. I. W. Ib.
John Walker of Eperston, Gent. Petitioned the King and Council for assistance
against Sir Bryan Stapleton of Burton, Knight, then too powerful in this County
(as his Ancestors also were) for his recovering the possession of the Manor of
Burton, whereof William Iorce died seized, and then ought to descend and come
to the said John Walker, as Cousin and next heir unto the said William Iorce,
that is to say, son of John, son of Henry, son of Elynor, daughter of William,
son of John, Father of Robert, Father of the said William* Iorce.

The Vicarage of Burton was eight Marks when the Prior of Shelford was Patron.
Mss. I. M.
It Is now 4l. 19s. 2d. value in the Kings Books, and the Earl of Chesterfeild
Patron.

In the North side of the Church is a plain Stone Tomb, whereon lies the Image
of an Armed Knight, on whose Shield is embossed a Bend* and on it three
Waterbougetts; and on one Shield on the South side of the Tomb, is, A Lion
Rampant Crowned; and upon another Shield the same with that on his Arm.

In the East Window of the Chancel is represented a woman praying, viz. on her
knees, with her hands held upwards: her upper Coat is, Paly of six Or and Gules
on a Bend sable, three Waterbougetts Arg.

In the same Window is,

Azure a Bend between six Escallops Arg. with a Mullett on the Bend,
Frecheville.

In the same also,

Azure a Fesse Arg. betw --

In another South Window,

Paly of six Or and Gules on a Bend sable, three Waterbudgetts Arg. Jorz, I
suppose.

In the North side of the Chancel, on a plain flat Alabaster Tomb, underbuilt
with ordinary Stone,

Here lies Ser Brian Stapiltun, Knight and Barinet, wyche dypartyd the second
day of Aprell, in the fourt year King Edward the syxt. The said Ser Brian had
to his ferst wife Dame Elsabethe Stapiltun, doughtar to the Lord Hare Skroup of
Bolton in Rychemondshyer, and by her he had Rechard hes eldest son. And the sam
Ser Brian had to his second wife Dame Jane Stapiltun, doughtar of Thomas Baset,
Esquere, of North Lofnam in Rotlandshyar, and by her he had Brian hes second
son.

At every corner is, Arg. a Lion Rampant sable, Stapleton.

On another Tomb like this on the South side of the Chancel,

Here lies the Body of Alis Rouse, doughtere of Francis Roos of Laxston in the
County of Notingham, Esquier, first wiffe to Brian Stapiltun, Esquire, younger son
of Sir Brian Stapiltun, Knight, after wiffe to Anthony Stapilton of Remson,
Esquire, last wiffe to Thomas Leeke of Hasland in the County of Darby, Esquire. The
said Alis was buried the 3d. day of January in the year of our Lord MVC.D.
AVE, perhaps 1595. is intended.

Upon a kind of a Tablet, Psalm 116.15. and Ps. 112.6.

In perpetuam virtutis memoriam Aliciae nuper charissimae conjugis Georgii
Lacock Generosi, quae coelo migravit 25 Augusti A. Dom. 1617. and aetatis suae
quinquagesimo.

Sancta Deo, Conjux sponso castissima, prolis
Cauta gubernatrix; Dulcis amica suis.
Hospita larga, tamen frugalior Hospita: tecto
Non fugiens alio; non aliena suo:
Pauperibus nutrix agilis: matercula servis:
Pacificans lites foemina, pauca loquens:
Consultrix juveni prudens: submissa minori,
Inter majores grata: venusta pari:
Cuncta ferens aequo: vita modo pace peracta,
Pacifice moritur: mortua pace viget.
Bulcote.
IN Bulecote Suencilt had a Manor before the Normans became possessed of it,
which answered the Dane-geld as two Car. and two Bov. and there was Soc of this
Manor, which answered to the Geld for fifteen Bov. and an half. Lib. Dooms.
The Land then being esteemed five Car. and an half. There, when it was become
the Fee of Walter de Aincurt, was in Demesne one Car. eight Sochm. eleven Vill.
twelve Board. and two Servants with three Car. or Plows. There was seventy six
Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood by places one le^. long, eight qu. broad, in the
Confessors time, and then the value was 4l.

In the former part of the Reign of Henry the third, Test. de Nev.
Adam de S. Maria paid two Marks for a Knights Fee, which afterward Reginald de
Annesley, Sibyl de S. Maria, and Adam de Ridewale, are certified to have held
of Oliver Deincourt in Bulcote.

Adam de S. Maria was son of Paganus de S. Maria, Regist. de Welleb. p. 49. Ib.
p. 163.
and was Lord of Roumarsh in Yorkshire, and Bulecotes, and Knyveton, in this
County. He gave one Acre and three Rodes of Meadow in the Medows of Bulecotes to
the Abbey of Welbek, for the Souls of Alice his wife, and Barth. his son, to
change their bodies from Lay Sepulture, which they had being interdicted, to
Ecclesiastical Burial; to his latter wife he had Albr^da the daughter of Jordan
de Chevercourt, who before was the wife of Robert de St. Quintin, and made Fine
to King John, 27 November. in the fifteenth year of his Reign, of three Palfreys,
Fin. 15 Ioh. m. 3.
that she might marry this Adam de S. Maria. He had three daughters, to whom
his Inheritance descended; his eldest was called Lucia, who was the wife of
Sir..... de Annesley; his second Sibylla, of whom was born the wife of Sir
Thomas de Bella aqua; and his third Isolda, of whom was born the wife of
Nigellus de Redewale.

In an old Copy which I have seen, Emma de Bellaphago granted to Lucia,
Sibylla, Pen. Harv. Staunton, Ar.
and Rosamund (instead of Ysouda) daughters and heirs of Adam de S. Maria,
Common in the Fields of Gunthorp and Ludham. But Richard, son of William de
Birton, Autog. pen. eund. H. S.
granted that Adam de Rydeware, and Ysoud his wife, should enclose the Wood of
Bulcot, which makes me suppose Isolda, mother of Nigellus de Rydeware, rather
than of his wife, as before is noted out of the Book of Welbek.

Paganus de Sancta Maria-........................... Nich. fill. Nothus Pagani.
3 Agatha. 2 Kath. Elizab. Johannes de Braythwell.
1 Rhagenildis-Rich. Bretel de Flintham. Richardus Bretel Michael.


Adam de S. Maria.-Alicia ux. 1.-Albreda fill. Jordani de Chevercourt relict.
Rob. de S. Quintin. Barth. de S. Maria, s. p. 3 Adam de Rydeware.-Isolda. 2
Sibylla. Nigellus de Redewale Tho. de Ridewale-Margareta, 10 E. 2. Johannes de
Rideware Johannes de Ridewale, 27 E. 3.


Tho. de Bella aqua-....
1 Rad. de Annesley-Lucia.
Jordanus.

Hugo Bretel Galfr. Monachus-Agatha haeres.-Mr. Humfr. cocus Regis Johannis. 1
Rhagenildis-Rich. Bretel de Flintham.


After this time I find there was some contention between Sir Richard de Iorce,
Autog. pen. eund. H. S.
and Richard, son of William de Birton, on one side, and Nigellus de Rydeware
of Bulcote, which was agreed by friends.

By a Fine, 10 E. 2. the Manor of Bulcote was settled on Thomas de Ridewale,
Fin. lev. Trin. 10 E. 2.
and Margaret his wife, and the heirs of their bodies; remainder to the right
heirs of Thomas de Ridewale, Regist. de Novo loco p. 103.
who had a son called John; and he another of the same name, as in Bulwell is
said, who, 27 E. 3. claimed some waste which his Grandfather took of Richard de
Oysell, in the time of King E. 1.

Annesleys part continued with that Family, as in Annesley may be partly
discovered.

Arnald de Munteney cast Thomas the son of Margery de Munteney at Not. the day
after All Souls, Pl. de Iur. and Assis. 8 E. 1. to. 9.
8 E. 1. concerning the third part of one Mess. five Bovats of Land, forty six
Acres of Land, six Acres of Meadow, twenty of Wood, and 3s. Rent in Bulecote.

Joan Mounteney, the daughter and heir of Thomas Mounteney Chr. sometime wife
of Thomas Fournivall Chr. 16 R. 2. confirmed to John Mounteney her son, Claus.
16 R. 2. in dorso.
the Manor of Bulcotes in this County.

There was a Fine, 7 H. 6. whereby Robert Wednesley, Pasch. 7 H. 6.
and Elizabeth his wife, passed the third part of the Manor of Bulcote to
Thomas Curson, Esquire, and Margaret his wife, and the heirs of Thomas quite
from the heirs of Elizabeth. Thomas Curson was a Justice of Peace, and resident
at Bulcote, Ex quodam Regist. de Novoloco pen. Dom. Byron. Fin. lev. Mich. 26
H. 6.
14 H. 6. By another Fine, 26 H. 6. between the said Thomas Curson, and
Margaret his wife, Quer. and John Montegomery, Esquire, and Richard Watteson,
Deforc. the Manor of Bulcote was settled on the said Thomas and Margaret for
life, without impeachment for waste; and after their decease on Alvered Berwyk,
Ex Autog. pen. Rob. Hottot de Flintham.
and Margaret his wife (who was daughter and heir of the said Thomas Curson)
and the heirs of the body of Margaret; for want of which on Hugh Sutton, son of
Henry Sutton of Averham, Esquire, and the heirs of his body; in default of
which on the heirs of the body of the said Thomas Curson; and in default of
such on the right heirs of Margaret, wife of the said Thomas. But they had a
son called Thomas Berwyk, who was Father of Avery, Ex Membrana pen; Harveyu^
Staunton, Ar.
Father of Gabriell Barwick, Esquire, who died 5 Nov. 1569. leaving his
daughters Anne, the wife of John Odingsells of Eperston, Esquire, and Briget,
the wife of Robert Staunton of Staunton, Esquire, his heirs. On the Seal of
Berwyk, is, Pen. eund. H. S.
Three Bears heads erased and Muzzled, hanging to his Deed of Manumission of
Villains, the latest I have seen.

William Staunton, son of Robert, Autog. pen. eund. H. S.
for the sum of 1500l. sold St. Mary Hall in Bulcote, 28 Eliz. to his Cousin
Gabriel Odingsells, as in Staunton is said.

The Family of Odingsells still keep their own share, B.
but sold that which they bought of Staunton to Simon Wood, a Citizen of
London, brother of John Wood of Woodborough, which Simon settled it on his
Grandchild Margaret Trafford, now the wife of Thomas Shipman of Scarrington,
Gent. who has it in her right.

I think it is in Burton Parish.

In the South East Window of the Church was,

A cross flory ingrailed between four Crossecrosletts.

And in the East Window of the Quire,

Arg. on a Bend.... three Popinjayes Or, Curson, impaling Ermine, two Bars
Gules.

In the same Window,

Or, a Chevron, Gules, a Chief indented Vert.

Loudham. Ludham. Gunthorp. Gunildethorp. Kathorp. Wulsthorp.
IN Gulnethorp Morcar had a Manor, which before the Conquest answered the Geld
or Tax for three Car. and three Bov. The Land being sufficient to maintain six
Plows, or six Car. There Roger de Busli (whose Fee it afterward became) had in
Demesne four Car. and five Sochm. on one Bov. and an half of this Land, Lib.
Dooms.
and forty Villains, seven Bordars, having sixteen Car. or Plows. There Toll,
and the Ferry-Boat [ navis] yielded ^0s. 8d. two Piscaryes, or Fishings 23s.
and there was one hundred and eighty Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood six qu. long,
and five qu. broad. In the Confessors time the value was 15l. when the great
Survey was made in the Conquerours 10l. Taylle 30s. it had Soc in Bertune and
Ludham. Roger de Bu^sli, Regist. de Blia, p. 104.
and Muriel his wife, in the year 1088. gave to the Monastery of Blyth, which
he Founded, two parts of the Tithes of the Hall in Ludeham and Gunnethorp in
Lands, and in Essarts, and in all small Tithes.

Raph de Bellafago, who in the Red Book of the Exchequer is mentioned, 7 H. 2.
to have had pardon for five Marks debt to the King, gave to God and the Church
of Lenton, Regist. de Lent. p* 87.
for the Souls of his Parents, and his Lord King Henry (1.) two Bovats of Land,
and a short Wong, and one Acre of Meadow in the Ker, with Duran his Man, who
then held that Tenor in the Territory of Gunthorpe: To this Deed were Witnesses
Remigius Prior of Shelford, Richard the Canon, Thomas de Bellofago, William de
Bellofago, Robert de Burton, William Bret, Gerv. de L^dham, Hugh, son of Simon,
and many others. He gave likewise to Lenton the Tithe of his Mill of Gunthorp,
which Mill was situate upon Trent, and 4s. yearly in his passage of Gunthorp.
Raph de Bellafago gave to God and the Canons of St. Peter of Thurgarton his
Brethren, Regist. de Thurg p. 61.
with himself where ever he should die, by the consent of Gilbert his brother,
the Church of Ludham, and Mill of Doverbec, with the Land lying to it, and all
its Customs and Rights, and all his Land of Wodburgh, in pure Alms for the
health of King Stephen, and for the Soul of his Son, and for his own Soul, and
the Souls of all his own Parents and Ancestors. Raph de Bellafago gave
Snellingmilne on Doverbec to Thurgarton Priory, Reg. de Thurg. p. 55. b.
and Emma de Bellafago confirmed the gift of her Uncle the said Raph.

Gilbert de Norfolck, 2 Ioh. gave account of one hundred Marks, and one
Palfrey, Rot. pip. 2 Ioh. Norf. and Sudfolch. Chapter ^ Ioh. m. 6.
for having the Land of the Inheritance of his wife, as long as he should live,
of whom he had sons which were dead. King John, 3 Oct. 7 Ioh. confirmed to
Emine de Bellafago the Manor of Ludham, with the Appurtenances, and her
Inheritance in Norfolk, viz. Flicham, in Crec, Fin. 7 Ioh. m. 11.
and Rudham, and Cassabile, her Dower of the Freehold, which was Gilbert de
Norfolchs, late her husbands: but if Emme de Beaufo died without issue, the Fee
of Ludham was in the King.

G. de Norf. by the entreaty and consent of Emme de Frivill his wife, Regist.
de Welbek, p. 164.
gave to the Canons of Welbeck quitance of his passage over Trent at Gunthorp,
as much as belonged to his part, and of his Gattley at Lowdham wholly.

Emma de Bellafago gave account of DC. Marks, 8 Ioh. for having her
Inheritance, Pip. 8 Ioh. Norfolch and Sudfo^ch.
viz. Ludeham, and also in Norfolch, and that she should not be distrained to
Marry. Notwithstanding her Deed to the King, she acknowledged Hubert de Burgo
Earl of Kent in the Kings Court to be her heir, who, Pl. Pasch. 11 H. 3.
11 H. 3. claimed against her, that she should hold Covenant with him
concerning the Manors of Gunethorp, Ludham, and Creke.

King Henry the third, Chapter 31 H. 3. m. 13.
December. 8. in 31 H. 3. at Clarendon, granted to Walter Byset, and his heirs,
the Manor of Ludham, until he the said Walter, or they, should recover their
Lands in Scotland.

In 43 H. 3. July 27. the King granted to Simon de Montefort Earl of Leicester,
Pat. 43 H. 3. m. 13.
and Alianor Countess of Leicester, the Kings sister, the Manor of Gunthorp,
with the Sok and all Appurtenances, for one hundred Marks of Land, part of
400l. per annum, which the said King was bound to Assign out of Escaets, or
other Lands, to the said Earl and Countess.

Henry Earl of Lancaster and Leycester, 3 E. 3. claimed the Town and Castle of
Leycester, Pl. Quo War. 3 E. 3. to. 27.
and all the Lands and Knights Fees held of that Honor, which were sometimes
Simon de Monteforts Earl of Leycester, and forfeited to the Crown, which King
Henry the third, Apr. 22. in the fifty third year of his Reign, granted to
Edmund his own son and his heirs, with all the privileges belonging to that
Honor; from which Edmund, the right descended to Thomas his son and heir, but
he dying without issue, the said Henry was his brother and heir, and claimed
the Towns of Goteham and Gunthorp, with the Members, to be of that Fee of
Leycester, of which this Sok has ever since been esteemed, though it was
formerly of the Honor of Tikhill; and King John granted the Church of
Loudeham, with the Chapel of Gunthorp to Walter Archbishop of Roan, and the
Canons there, with Bridgeford, and many other Churches, as of the Chapelry of
Blyth, afterward called part of the Free Chapel of Tikhill, though, 8 E. 2.
the Archbishop of York claimed to have ordinary jurisdiction and institution
in the Churches and Vicarages of Ludham, Par. ^. ^at. 8 E. 2. m. 27. dors.
East-Markham, West-Markham, Wheteley, Harworth, East-Bridgeford, and Walesby,
as Parochials and not annexed to the Kings Chapel of Tikhill.

The Tenency of this Manor was in Sir Peter de Montefort, slain also as Earl
Simon was, at the Battle of Evesham, 49 H. 3. a great Man in those days, p.
594.
as Mr. Dugdale in his Antiquities of W^rw^ckshire in diverse places shows.

Peter de Montefort (as it appears, 6 E. 1.) red^emed his Lands in Gunthorp of
Edmund the Kings bro^her, ^
according to the Decree of Kenilworth for two hundred and twenty Marks. This
Pe^er died 15 E. 1. leaving John de Montefort his s^n and heir, who was dead 24
E. 1. and whose son and heir John was slain in the Battle of S^rivelin 7 E. 2.
but he had another son called Peter, (...) 5.
who was first in holy Orders, but after his brothers death became a Knight,
and married Margaret, daughter of the Lord Furnivall; and by a Fine levied at
York, (...) 3.
12 E. 3. settled the Manor of Gunthorp on himself the said Peter de Montefort
Chr. and Margaret his wife, and the heirs of Peter on the body of the said
Margaret; remainder on John, son of Lora de Ollenhal^ (his Concubine or old
Miss) and the heirs of his body; remainder on Richard, brother of the said
John, and his; remainder on Alice, wife of ^ulc de Penebrugg, and the heirs of
her body; remainder to the right heirs of Peter.

The Jury, 11 R. 2. found that Baldwin Frevill, (...) R. 2. (...).
Knight, died seized of this Manor, and left Baldwin his son and heir; from
these Frevills it descended to the Family of Willoughby of Wollaton, according
to the Genealogy in that place. Sir Francis Willoughby conveyed it to the
Trustees or Feoffees of his Lady, B.
afterward Lady Wharton, whose heirs claimed it accordingly; and it was lately
Sir William Dalstons, the Lady Reresbyes, and... Munnings.

Emme de Beaufo, Cl^us. 7 H. 3. ^. ^0*
7 H. 3. required her Land in Cathorp to be replevyed to her, which Henry de
Lud^am, and Letice his wife, claimed against her.

There was a Family which took their Name from their Residence at Loudham,
whereof Eustachius de Ludenham, 16 Ioh. was Sheriff, or his Deputy, or
Undersheriff, as in Lambecote is noted, and was succeeded by Sir Walter de
Ludham, Knight, whose son Sir Walter was Father of Sir John de Loudham, who,
Esc. 12 E. 2. n. 45.
12 E. 2 died seized of one Mess. and three Virgats in Neuton and Shelford
jointly with Alice his wife (who was daughter of Sir Robert de Kirketon in
Holand, Knight, and Mother of Ioane, Ex Monumento apud Staunton.
the wife of Sir Geoffrey de Staunton, Knight) this Land was held of Thomas de
Bardolf for 10s. per annum. This Sir John de Loudham likewise held his Capital
Mess. in Loudham of the Prior of Shelford, by the Service of 12d. per annum,
and in the same Town one Mess. and five Bovats of Land and Meadow of Sir Peter
de Edensoure by the Service of the twentieth part of a Knights Fee, and 3s. per
annum, Esc. 12 E. 2. n. 45.
and likewise another Bovat of him by the Service of 12d. per annum, and 2l. of
Cummin. He held likewise jointly with Alice his wife in Loudham and Cathorp
seven Tofts, and five Bovats of Land of Sir Peter de Montefort by the Service
of the twentieth part of a Knights Fee; He held likewise one Bovat of the Prior
of Newstede for 2s. per an. and one and. of the Prior of Thurgarton for 2s. 6d.
likewise in Ludham, and diverse other parcels, besides six Mess. and twelve
Bovats in Bildsthorp held of Henry de Beaumonte John de Loudham was then found
his son and heir.

Eustachius de Ludham Vicecom. Not. and Derb. 16 Joh. Walterus de Ludham,
miles Walterus de Loudham, miles Johannes de Loudham, mil. ob. 12 E. 2.-Alicia
fill. Roberti de Kirketon, mil. ob. 1345. Johannes de Loudham, miles-Isabella
fill. and haer. Rob. Breton de Walton in Com. Derb. Johannes de Loudham, mil. s.
p. Tho. de Bekering-Isabella sor. and haer. Alicia fill. and haer.-Tho. de
Rempston, miles. Elizabetha-Johannes Cheyney, miles. Tho. Cheyney, miles aet.
26. an. 16 E. 4.-Anna fill. Joh. Parr, mil. and Eliz. Fitz patris Thomae.-Hugh,
ux. etiam Nich. Dom. Vaux, Elizabetha ob. 3 and 4 Ph. and Mar.-Thom. Dom. Vaux.
Willielmus Dom. Vaux de Harrowdon.


Brian Stapleton, mil.-Isabella. Richardus Bingham, junior-Margareta.

Tho. Folejamb-Margareta sor. and cohaer.
Joana ux. Galfr. de Staunton




Ex Coll. I. B.
This Sir John de Loudham married Isabell, the daughter and heir of Sir Robert
Breton of Walton in Darbyshire, and died seized about 11 R. 2. of the Manor of
Walton, and the Manors of Brimington, Esc. 11 R. 2. n. 34. Derb.
and Whitington, and Rodyche in that County, leaving John de Loudham his son
and heir, who was also a Knight, and about 14 R. 2. died seized of the Manor
of Walton, Esc. 14 R. 2. n. 36. Derb.
etc. leaving Isabell and Margaret his sisters and heirs. He had a wife called
Margaret, who before had been wife of Sir John Zouch, Esc. 29 H. 6.
Knight. Elizabeth and Margaret the Wives of William and John Chaworth, 29 H.
6. were found her Cousins and heirs; they were of the Family of Bowytt of
Repinghale, as in Wiverton may be observed.

Ex Coll. I. B.
Isabell, the sister and coheir of Sir John Loudham, was married to Thomas
Bekering, and Margaret to Thomas Folejambe. Isabell left a daughter called
Alice, the wife of Sir Thomas Rempston the younger, who had the moiety of this
Manor, and that of Billesthorpe, called Loudhams Manor, Esc. 37 H. 6.
and about 37 H. 6. left three daughters and heirs, as in Bingham is said:
Elizabeth, the wife of John Cheyney, Esquire; Isabell, of Sir Brian Stapleton;
and Margaret, of Richard Bingham the younger. This it seems was allotted to
Cheyney, Ex relat. Petri Broughton, Genesis
and descended to the Lord Vaux, who sold it and Billesthorp too, to Peter
Roos, as I suppose..... Roos sold both to Thomas Broughton, Esquire, of
Staffordshire. This is now the Inheritance and Residence of Peter Broughton,
younger brother of Sir Brian Broughton, who is now Lord of Bildsthorp, and
several other Manors in this County.

Regist. de Thurg. p. 67. b.
Gilbert the Clark of Ludham, gave to his son John a Toft and Croft, which he
held of William de Passi for 6d. per annum, and five Acres of Assart of Emme de
Bellafago, by finding a Lamp burning before the Altar of the blessed Mary at
Loudham, every day at the celebration of Mass. John, son of Gilbert de Ludham,
gave them to Richard de Ludham, and Agatha his wife, reserving 3s. per annum,
which he gave to Thurgarton Priory.

The King, 6 E. 6. Iun. 10. granted to Francis Earl of Shrowsbury, Par. 8. pat.
6 E. 6.
all the Rectories of East Markham, Little Markham, Lowdham, Walesby, Wheteley,
and Hareworth, with all oblations in Hasseley, Marteyne, Limpole, and
Plumtreefeild, late belonging to the Monastery of St. Oswald of Nos^ell in
Yorkshire, and parcel of the Prebend of Tikehull, Westminster.

This Rectory is now held by the Lord Marquess of Dorchester.

Mss. I. M.
The Vicarage of Lowdham was 8l. when the Abba^ of Westminster was Patron. It Is
now 4l. 18s. 4. value in the Kings Books, and the Lord Marquess of Dorchester
Patron.

In Lowdham Church: South I Will East Window,

Gules Crusuly, with a Fesse Or.

Chequy Or, and Azure a Fesse Gules, Clifford.

Bendy of six pieces Arg. and Gules, with a File of five Labels Azure,
Montefort.

Azure three Waterbougets Or, Roos.

Gules a Bend betwixt six Martlets Or, Mounteney: this is twice.

Or three Chevronels Gules, Clare.

England with a File of five Labells, and on each three Flowers de Lis.

England.

Or a plain cross Gules.

Barry of six Arg. and Azure, Lord Gray of Codnor.

These two last are in the South-West Window.

And Barry Ermine and Gules of six pieces, Kirketon.

Gules Crusuly with a Chevron Or, Kyme.

In the North Wall of the Chancell, on an old low Stone Tomb lies the Effigies
of an Armed Knight Cross-leg'd, with his Shield on his Arm, whereon is Embossed
a Bend Crusuly.

The Inscription on the side is, SIR ION, DTH LOUDhAm tITICI, etc.

In an high North Window in the Body of the Church, is, Chequey Arg. and Gules
a Bend sable, Bekering, impaling Arg. a Chevron sable with a Mullet pierced in
the dexter point of the same color, Rempston; this is transposed, and so is
the next, which should be Rempston impaling Bekering: but is on the upper part
Arg. a Bend Azure Crusuly Or, Lowdham; and on the lower half Bekering impaling
Rempston all the length of the Shield, against the other two.

Woodborough. Vdeburgh.
IN Udeburg the Book of Doomsday shows that St Mary of Sudwell had Sok to
Northwell, seven Bov. ad Geldam. The Land two Car.

There was half a Car. in Demesne, and two Vill. and two Bordars had one Car.
this belonged to Sudwell. Lib. (...)
Here one Clark had under the Archbishop (of York) whose Fee it was, one Bov.
ad Geldam. This concerned the Prebend of Woodborough in that Church, to which
it still belongs. Here were also several Manors of the Land of the Tayns, one
whereof before the Conquest Vlchel had, which paid to the Geld for three Bov.
The Land one Car. There Aldene (Ancestor of the Family of Crumwell named in
Lamley) after the Conquest had three Villains, having half a Car. This kept the
old value of 5s. 4d. Another Manor Vlchel likewise had, which paid for three
Bov. to the Tax or Geld. The Land whereof was two Car. he held it also after
the Conquest of the King, and there had one Car. and three Vill. one Board. with
one Car. and. and one Mill 20s. and one Virgar of Meadow, Pasture Wood two leu.
long, five qu. broad: In the Confessors time this was 20s. in the Conquerours
30s. Alvric in the Confessors time had another Manor, for which he was rated
to the Geld at five Bov. The Land two Car. which seems to be managed when the
Conquerours Survey was made, with three Vill. one Board. There was also a Mill
20s.

There was in Epreston and Udeburgh of Roger de Buslies Fee, and a greater
share of Raph de Limesies, as in Epreston will be noted, where the Family of
Samson the most ancient Tenants thereof chiefly resided.

Some of these Tayn-lands it seems came to be Peverells, of which Honor Henry,
son [rather brother] and heir of Raph de Wodeburge, Te^t. de Nev.
and the rest of his Parceners, 21 E. 1. were certified to hold half a Knights
Fee here, for which one only Suit was made to the Court by the said Henry.

John, the son of Robert de Cantelupe, and Maud wife of the said John, granted
all the Lands in Wodeburge, Autog. pen. Car. Laco^k, Genesis
which should happen to them after the death of Sir Raph de Wodeburge, Father
of the said Maud, to Henry de Wodeburge, and the heirs of his body; remainder
to the right heirs of Sir Raeph: Witnesses to this were Sir Walter de Ludham,
Sir Raph de Crumwell, Sir John de Heriz, Sir Richard Iorz, Sir William de
Arnale, Knights, Thomas de Rampston, Reginald de A^lacton, etc.

In an ancient Deed Emme, who had been wife of Raph de Wodeburch, Autog. Ib.
gave to Henry her son of Wodeburch, her Land of New Ham: Witness Galfr.
Anglicus, Raph de Harnale, etc.

Raph de Wodeburg, Knight, 54 H. 3. passed 10l. yearly Rent, Pen. ^und. C. ^.
which he had of the gift of William de Huntercumb, to Henry de Wodeburg his
brother, to be received of the Abbey of Stratford, during his life.

Walter de Huntercumb^, son of Sir William de Huntercumbe, Knight* (on both
whose Seals were two pair of Bars Gemelles, Ibid.
and the rest Billette) in the year 1275. agreed to give to Sir Raph de
Wodeburg, Knight, for one hundred and five Marks which he ought him, his
Freehold in West-Hammes, which happened to him of the Inheritance of Alice de
Bolebec his wife.

William de Huntyrcumbe gave to William de Wodeburk an hundred shillings Land,
Ib.
and yearly Rent in the Town of Rosse.

John Calsweyn quit-claimed to Henry de Wodeburgh his Uncle, Ib.
all the right he had in the Lands and Tenements which were Sir William de
Middiltons, Knight, his Uncle also in Rosse, and of Clementia the daughter and
heir of the said Sir William then likewise dead, which ought to come to him as
next heir.

William Sampson of Eperston, 19 E. 1. gave to the Lady Clementia de Wodeburg
his mother for her life, Ib.
all his Arable Demesne in Wodeburg.

Henry de Wodeburg, brother of Raph de Wodeburg, Ib.
granted all his Goods and Chattels in his Manor of Wodeborug, Anno 1316. to
William de Craye, and Margery his wife.

Paganus de Vilers of Kynalton, Knight, in 9 E. 3. passed two parts of the
Manor of Wodeborgh to Richard de Strelley, Ib. p^n. ^und. C. L.
and Elena his wife, and the Heirs and Assigns of Richard, which M^rgery de
Nowers sometime held for her life, of the inheritance of Sir William de Cray,
Knight, and 11 E. 3. the third part of the said Manor, which descended to him
the said Paganus, by right of Inheritance after the death of Clementia his
mother.

Alianor, sometimes wife of John de Lyston, in her pure Widowhood, Autog. pen.
^^nd. C. L^
9 E. 3. passed two parts of the Manor of Wodeburgh, which Margery de Nowers
sometime held for life of her Inheritance, to Richard de Strelley, and Elena
his wife.

Robert, son of Walter de Stretley, had Lands in Wodebur^, Ib.
which William de Midelton sometimes had to Farm; his son Sampson de Strelley
was Father of this Richard: on the said Robert de Stretleys Seal within a fair
Circumscription of his name, upon a large Shield, is, Paly of six. On Raph de
Wodeburgs, is, Barrulette a Stags head cabossed. And on Henry de Wodeborghs,
when he confirmed all his Freehold in Wodeb^rgh, which was sometimes Sir Raphs,
Ib. pen. C. L.
to Sir William de Cray, Knight, and Margery his wife, and the heirs of Sir
William, 8 ^. 2. within a Circumscription of his name (but not upon a Shield)
is a Bucks or Stags head cabossed. On Sir Pagan de Vilers his Seals are Six
Lioncells Rampant 3 2.1.

This Richard de Strelley, and Elena had a son and heir named William, Assis.
apud Not. 11 R. 2. to. 27. in dorso.
who died before his Father, and left a son called Robert, who died Childless,
and a daughter named Elena married to Ivo Ieke of Prestwold, who by a Fine at
York, 16 R. 2. settled this Manor on Thomas de Strelley, son of Richard and
Elena, Fin. apud E^or. Mich. 16 R. 2.
and the heirs Males of his body; remainder to Ivo and Elena, and the right
heirs of Elena. Thomas had a son and heir called Richard de Strelley, who had
also a son and heir Richard, 16 H. 6. who died without any Child, Ex eviden.
ejusdem C. L.
so that John Strelley his brother was enfe^ffed in this Manor about 25 H. 6.
who had a son called Robert Strelley of Woodborow, who, 9 H. 7. was bound to
Simon Digby, Esquire, in 40l. that he should neither Chevish nor borrow any
sum of Goods, or Money, of any persons, nor bind himself, nor Mortgage, etc.
He was, 23 H. 7. about to marry Agnes Whitladale of Tu^ford, Widow; but by a
former wife he had John Strelley, who married Elizabeth, I think the daughter
of Alverey Barwick, and by her had Henry Strelley, whose son Richard was his
heir, and married Isabell, the daughter of Anthony Samon, but 13 Eliz. his
brother Christopher Strelley was found his heir, who married Frances, the
daughter of Edward Boun, but he likewise being hopeless of issue, settled this
Manor on John Bold his sister Isabells son, whose son and heir Strelley Bold,
B.
sold it to Mr. George L^cock, whose son Philip Lacock pulled down the old
House, wherein was the Coat of Strelley, with a Cinquefoyle voided Gules in the
midst, in several windows, and has built another which his son Charles Lacock
now enjoyes, with his mother, who is Mary, sister of William Cartwright of
Ossington; and likewise of Frances, the wife of William Strelley of Arnall, son
and heir of the said Christopher Strelley by a second wife, after he had
disposed of his Inheritance as before is said. Mr. William Strelley left three
daughters but no son.

Walterus de Stredlegh-Cecilia cohaer. Rob. de Somervile. Robertus de Stretley,
miles-Hawisia. 2 Sampson de Strelley-Philippa-Lucia fill. and haer. Sewalli le
Foun. Richardus Strelley de Wooborough-Elena. Thom. de Strelley haer. masc. 11
R. 2. Richardus de Strelley de Woodborough Johannes Strelley, 25 H. 6. Robertus
Strelley, 6 H. 7. Johannes Strelley-Elizab. fill. Alueredi Berwick. Henr.
Strelley Rich. Strelley s. p. mort. 13 Eliz.-Isabella fill. Anton. Samon and
haer. Christoph. Strelley.-Fran. fill. Ed. Boun ux. 1. Willielmus Strelley de
Arnal^-Frances fill. Fulc. Cartwright. Filiae and haeredes. Maria ux. Mat.
Plowman de London. Fran. ux. Joh. Fothergill. Kath. ux. Joh. Medlam.

Isabell. ux. Bold.



Richardus de Strelley s. p. fill. and haer.

Willielmus Strelley fill. and haer. Robertus Strelley s. p. Ivo Jeke de
Prestwold-Elena.


1 Robertus de Strelley mil.-Eliz. fill. and haer. Will. Vavasor.


In Wodebourg was a certain great Bovat of the Kings Demesne of Arnall, Test.
de Nev.
which Hugh de Nevill held within the Farm of Arnall, by the gift of King John:
it answered 28s. 10d. having a little Bovat in Oxton which perfected it.

In Wodeburg was 34s. Rent of the Prebend, which was Galfr. the Canons, and
thirty Hens, which the Archbishop gave to Thomas de Ripun in his absence.

There are diverse Copyholders in Fee parcel of the Prebendaries Manor.

Here was a Manor in Wodeburgh, called Rempstons Manor, Fin. a S. Hill. in
15. dies, 2 H. 4.
which was by Fine, 2 H. 4. settled on William de Rempston, and Agnes his wife
for life; and afterward on Sir John Leek, Knight, John Folejamb, Norman
Olivere, and William Iorse, and the heirs of John de Leeke.

Roger de Houton gave the Land which he held here to the Priory of Thurgarton,
Regist. de Thurg. p. 41.
as in Hawton is said; this, I suppose, was of the Fee of Limosin, most of
which was held by the Family of Sampson.

Raph de Limesi gave to the Monastery of Hertford, a Cell of St. Albans, Mon.
Angl. vol. 1. p. 331.
the Tithes of Hugh Samson of Aperston, and of Torpe. The House of Mr. Wood is
in Eperston Parish, B.
and the Ex Copia Visitat. pen. Reason Mellish, Ar.
Robertus del Wood de Enfeild in Com. Hertf.-Elizab. fill. and cohaer. Willielmi
Slory. Robertus Wood de Colwike-Margareta fill. Edw. Mountague, mil. Justic.
Johannes Wood de Woodborow-Kath. fill. Will. Huson. Johannes Wood aet. 16.
1614.-....Chaworth. Montague Wood de Woodborough aet. 1673.-Brigitta fill. Rich.
Carell. 1 Johannes Wood 2 Mountagu. 3 Richard. Kath. Eliz. Brigitta.

Phil. Edw. Georg. Gervas.
Edw. Thom. Mountague. Simon. Gerard.


Tithes of that Land belonged to Hertford; Par. 2. pat. 29 H. 8.
and were granted, 29 H. 8. Feb. 9. to Anthony Denny, Esquire, and Ioane
Champernowne, as were all Mess. Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments whatsoever
in Lowdham, Woodborough, and Eperston, late belonging to the Priory of St. Mary
by Hertford. Anthony Denny, and Iohane his wife, Part. 14. pat. 37 H. 8.
37 H. 8. had pardon for alienating all these Tithes, great and small, in
Eperston, Woodborow, and Loudham, to Henry Strelley, Esquire.

The Freeholders in Woodborow in the year 1612. were Christopher Strelley,
Lib. Mss. libere tenent.
John Wood of Lamley, John Crofts of Oxton, William Owldney, John Clark,
Senior, Thomas Wire, Henry Alvie, Nicolas Lees, etc.

Ex Regist. paroch. de Woodbor.
In the year 1597. Febr. 27. James Chadock, or Chadwick, son of John Chadwick,
or Chadock, was baptized.

The Vicarage of Woodborough was eight Marks, Mss. I. M.
and the Prebendary Patron. It seems now to belong to those of Oxton, but being
worth little or nothing a fair Church is unsupplied.

Upon the top of the outside of the Chancel in the Stone, and in the Windows
are the Arms of Strelley,

Paly of six Arg. and Az. and that with a great Cinquefoyle Gules, for Strelley
of Woodborough.

Arg. a Chief Gules, and a Bendlet Azure, Crumwell.

In the Church in a North Window,

Gules on a Bend Arg. three Crosletts Flory sable, Reresby.

In the South side of the Chancel,

Quarterly sab. and Arg.

Gules a Cross Flore Arg.

Paly of six Arg. and Azure a Canton (or quarter) Gules.

In the North of the Chancel,

Gules a Fesse countercompony Or and Azure, between six Crossecrosletts Arg.

Gules a Lion Ramp. Varry, a File of three Labells Or, Everingham.

Gules a Bend between six Martlets Or, Monteney.

Painted on the Church Wall,

Wood impaling Montague.

Eperston. Epreston.
IN Epreston, and Udeburgh, Vlvric and Elsi had into their Hall (or Manor)
before the Norman Invasion, six Car. of Land rated to the Geld at three Car.
four Bov. There afterward Raph de Limesin (whose Fee it was) had in Demesne
three Car. and fourteen Sochm. on six Bovats, Lib. Dooms.
and a Ferding (or fourth part of a Bovat) of this Land, and twelve Vill. one
Board. having six Car. There was a Church and a Priest, and four Mills 77s. and
three Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood two le^. long, nine qu. broad. In King
Edward the Confessors time this was 5l. value, in King Williams when Doomsday
Book was made 7l.

In Epreston and Udeburgh, Vlviet had a Manor before the Conquest Taxed to the
Danegeld at. a Car. The Land of it being twelve Bov. There afterward Roger de
Busli (whose Fee it became) had one Car. and two Sochm. on two Bov. of this
Land, and three Vill. having one Car. and. There was a Mill 5s. 4d. and three
Acres of Meadow. In the Confessors time this was valued at five, in the
Conquerours at one Mark of Silver. It appears that some of Roger de Buslies Fee
in this place, Test. de Nev.
was held in the time of Henry the third, by Thurstan le Dispenser, and John de
Orreby, being the third part of a Knights Fee, of the Countess of Ewe or Augi,
then Lady of Tikhill.

But the greatest part of this Town was the Fee of Raph de Limosin, who was
Founder of the Priory of Hertford, or else a very near successor of his of
that Name, Mon. Angl. vol. 1. p. 331.
who gave the Tithes of Hugh Sampson (who held of him here) in Apurston, and
Thorp in Newark Wapentac, of the said Raphs Fee also, to that Monastery, as in
Woodborough is already noted. Antiq. of Warw. illust. per W. D. p. 228.
This Raph had to wife Hadwisia, by whom he had Alan de Limesi, the Father of
Gerard, who by Amicia his wife, had John de Limesi, who married Alice, the
daughter of Robert de Harecurt, and begat on her Hugh de Limesi; but he dying
without issue, as his Uncles Gerard and Alan did, this Barony was divided
between Hugh de Odingselles, a Fleming, who married Basilia, one of the
daughters of the said Gerard de Limesi, Grandfather of the last Hugh de Limesi,
and David de Lindesei, a Scot, who married Alianora, another of the daughters
of the said Gerard.

Gerard de Odingsells (son of Basilia, Test. de Nev.
and the said Hugh de Odingselles) had a Knights Fee here in Eperston, which
William Sampson held of him in the time of H. 3.

Hugh de Odingeselles (son of Gerard) 16 E. 1. impleaded Walter le Ken, and
fifteen others, Pl. de Banc. Mich. 16 E. 1. to. 10.
for throwing down his Ditch Bank at Eperston, who pleaded, That they had
Common in the Lands enclosed; and upon the same occasion, Pl. de Banc. Hill. 17
E. 1. to. 32.
17 E. 1. for throwing in four hundred Perches of his Ditch about his Wood in
Eperston, John de Heriz, and John le Provost pleaded that there Radulphus de
Limesi, fundator Prioratus de Hertford-Hadewisa. Alanus de Limesi Gerardus de
Limesi-Amicia. Johannes de Limesi.-Alicia fill. Rob. Harcurt. Hugo de Limesi s.
p.
Alanus s. p. Gerardus s. p. Hugo de Odingselles-Basilia. Hugo de Odingsells s.
p. Gerardus de Odingsells, mil. 23 H. 3. Hugo de Odingsells, 16 E. 1. Johannes
de Odingsells, 12 E. 2. mil. mortuus 10 E. 3.-Lucia-Emma, 12 E. 2. Edmundus de
Odingesells, 12 E. 2. Johannes de Odingsells, mil. ob. 27 E. 3.-Amicia fill.
Rog. Corbet. Johannes de Odingsels ob. 4 R. 2. miles-Alicia fill. Johannis S.
John, mil. Johannes de Odingsels, miles, ob. 5 H. 4.-Maria fill..... Bernak.
Edwardus de Odingsels, miles, ob. 5 E. 4.-Marg. fill. Joh. Cokain-Alicia soror
Henr. Sharp. Ex Cop. lib. Visitat. pen. Reason Mellish, Ar.
Gerard. de Odingsells fill. and haer.-Marg. fill. Henr. Sharp and soror Aliciae.
Henricus Odingsells-Alicia fill. Marg. Butler de Cobernes in Essex. Richardus
Odingsells-Alicia fill..... Brown. Johannes Odingsells-Anna fill. and cohaer.
Gabriel Barwick. Gabriel Odingsells-Kath. fill. Joh. Markham. Johannes
Odingsells-Eliz. fill. Willielmi Sutton de Averham. Johannes Odingsells s. p.
Emanuel de Eperston 1673.-... fill. Ric. Hacker, relict....Buckley. Elizab. fill.
and haer.-Johannes Leek ob. 1673. John Odingsels Leek aet. 2. 1674.

Gabriel Johannes Odingsels-... fill. Buckley. Paul.
Ed. s. p.


Henricus de Colle-Joana fill. Hen. Sutton, mil*








Will. de Solihull and Maxstoke.
Allanor ux. David Lindesei.



was Common of Pasture belonging to their Freeholds in G^naldeston.

The Manor of Eperston, 12 E. 2. by a Fine was settled on John de Odingseles*
Fin. lev. Hill. 12 E. 2.
and Emme his wife, for their lives; afterward on Edmund, son of the said
John, and the heirs of his body; remainder to the right heirs of John. This
John was succeeded by three of the same name, the first of which died, 27 E. 3.
his wife was Amicia; the daughter of Roger Corbet; the second died the 3 or 4
R. 2. and the third 5 H. 4. who was Father of Sir Edward de Odingsels, Lib. de
Fin. in Scac. fol. 219. Mich. 1^ E. 4.
whose son and heir Gerard de Odingsells, 11 E. 4. held the Manor of
Long-Ichinton in Warwickshire, and the moiety of the Manor of Epurston. It
seems this Sir Edward (to his latter wife) and his son Gerard married two
sisters, the daughters of Henry Sharp, from which latter marriage that branch
of this Family still remaining here are descended.

But the Posterity of Hugh Sampson, before named, held the far greatest share,
for Thomas Sampson in the former part of Henry the third, Test. de Nev.
is certified to have paid seven Marks for three Knights Fees and an half in
Eperston and Woodborough, of the Fee of Limesi; and at another time William
Sampson is said to hold in Eperston and Woodeborough for one Knights Fee of the
Ib.
Barony of Odingsells of the old Feoffment, viz. whereof his Ancestor was
enfeoffed before the death of King Henry the first, in whose time the first
Hugh Sampson lived; the second Hugh (whose Father I suppose was William) gave
account of ten Marks, Pip. 22 H. 2.
22 H. 2. of the Amercements of the Forest.

Regist. de T^^rg. p. 1.
William Sampson gave to God and the Church of St. Peter at Thurgarton, and the
Brethren there serving God, all his Land of Cressewell wholly, whatsoever was
contained between his Wood and the Wood of the Canons, by the consent of Hugh
his son and heir, and his other sons. This gift he made for the love of God,
and St. James the Apostle (in honor of whom the said Canons then founded an
Altar in their Church at Thurgarton) for the performance of a Vow which he had
formerly made, for the Souls of his Father and Mother, his own and all his: The
Witnesses were Hugh his heir, Walter de Wodeburgh, Mr. Anselm* the Canon,
Matthew the Clark, Peter the Provost, Stephen the Esquire.

Hugh Sampson, and William his son were Witnesses to Robert de Krioll's gift to
that Monastery. Ib.


William Sampson, Knight, son of Sir William Sampson of Eperston, Ib.
gave and confirmed to the said Canons of Thurgarton, a place of Land of his
Wood of Eperston containing two Acres by the Perch of twenty foot, lying on the
West side of the Croft of the said Canons, which is called Cressewell.

Chapter 24 E. 1. m. 4.
William Sampson, 24 E. 1. had Free Warren at Epereston.

John Sampson, son of Sir William Sampson, Knight, Claus. 5 E. 2. in do^s. m.
27. and Ex Autog. pen. Ioh. How de Langar, Ar.
5 E. 2. remised to Paganus de Tybetot, and Agnes his wife, and the Heirs and
Assigns of the said Paganus, all his right and claim in the Manor of Eperston,
etc. except the Lands and Tenements which Simon de Cruce held in Wodeburgh; the
Advowson of the Church he also remised with the rest: The Witnesses were Sir
Rob. de Clifford, Sir Ed. de Eynecurt, Sir Bawdewyn de Manners, Sir William de
Bereford, Sir Thomas de Monteney, Sir William de Eynecurt, Sir George de Thorp,
in the Feast of the Exaltation of the Cross at London, 5 E. 2. On his Seal this
John Sampson has a Fesse, Autog. pen. eund. I.H. Ar.
and one Mullett of six points in the dexter corner of the Scutcheon, within
the Circumscription of his Name, as William Sampson his Father had a Cross
Moline only. Autog. pen. Tho. Rosell, Ar.
Ever since this Manor has gone with Langar, as it yet does.

The Manor of the other Fee Robert Arre it seems gave Sir Robert de Iorce,
Autog. pen. I. Walker, Genesis
and Isolda his wife, and the heirs of their bodies, whose son Robert Iorz of
Birton (as there also is already noted) by Fine, 18 E. 2. settled Lands in
Bulcote, Fin. lev. Pasch. 18 E. 2.
Ester-Leek, and Eperston, and Lands and Rents in Birton Iorz, Stoke Bardolf,
and Gedling, on himself and Isabell his wife, and the heirs Males of his body;
with remainder to his daughters Margaret, Isolda, and Alianora, and the heirs
of their bodies respectively; remainder to the right heirs of Robert.

Nicolas de Worteley, and Isabell de Iorce his wife, Autog. pen. I. Walker.
by their Deed dated at Ebreston the Sunday after the Feast of St. Cedde the
Bishop and Confessor, 17 E. 3. passed their Manor of Ebreston, with all their
Natives, and all Lands, Tenements, and other Appurtenances there, to John de
Chetewinde, Knight, and John the son of Robert de Iorce, Knight, and Maud, wife
of the said John, son of Robert, and the heirs of the bodies of the said John
and Maud: The Witnesses were Sir Thomas le Wasteneyes, Sir Hardulph le
Wasteneys, and Sir Thomas de Longevyllers, Knights, Raph de Burton, John de
Burstall, Richard Ingram, William de Iorce, and others.

By a Fine, 18 E. 3. and afterward, Fin. lev. Mich. 28 E. 3. Hill. 19 E. 3.
19 E. 3. between John de Chetewind Chr. and John Iorce, and Maud his wife,
Quer. and Nicolas de Worteley, and Isabell his wife, Deforc. the Manor of
Epriston was settled for the use of John Iorz, and Maud his wife, and the heirs
of their bodies.

John Dunham, William Bliton, and Humfry Low, Autog. pen. I. W.
4 Aug. 6 H. 7. conveyed their Manor of Ebreston, with the Appurtenances, to
Robert Hawburgh, and Matilda his wife, for their lives; and after the death of
the longer liver of them, to John Walker, and Margaret Gardner, and the heirs
between them lawfully begotten; remainder to the right heirs of Robert. But
this Manor descended to John Walker the present owner, according to the Scheme
placed in Burton Iorce, which was drawn out of his Evidences, Apr. 28. 1675.

In 3 and 4 Ph. and Mar. Sir John Chaworth of Werton, Knight, Autog. pen. Tho.
Rosell de Radcliff, Ar.
and Harold Rosell of Radcliff upon Trent, Esquire, and John Rosell his son and
heir, agreed to divide Rosell Wood in Epurston Parish or Stephen Hage, which
was in Common between them, Sir John having one half by purchase, and Harold
the other by descent from his Ancestors: Sir John to enclose that next
Epurston, and Harold to have that next Halton Closes, being indifferently
divided by Henry Bykerstaff, and John Saunsom, Yeomen. Sampsons Woods in the
Forest are now called Saunsom Woods. The present Lord Chaworth sold his Rosell
Wood to John Dunkling, who has built a pretty little Brick-house there, and
makes it his Residence.

In 1612. John Walker, Lib. libere Tenent.
Gent. was a Freeholder or owner here, and his posterity still continue to
dwell here, as Ed. Hopkinson, and Ed. Wetherall, were also at that time.

The Rectory of Eperston was 14l. and the Lord Scroope Patron. Mss. I. M.
It Is now 13l. 1s. 8d. value in the Kings Books, and John Scroope, Esquire, the
last Patron.

In Eperston Chancell East Window,

Quarterly Gules, and Or a Mullett Arg. in the first, Vere.

Azure three Hedgehogs Arg. Heriz.

Arg. a Cross Moline sable, Sampson*

Azure a Saltier between four Martlets Arg.

Azure a Bend Or, Scroop.

In the South East Window,

Arg. a Bend Azure Crusuly Or, Lowdham.

In the South West Window,

Paly of six Arg. and Gules on a Chief Azure, a Fesse Dance Or, Hathersege.

North East Window,

Barry of six Arg. and Az. Gray of Codnor.

In the Church South I Will East Window,

Arg. a Fesse, and a Mullet in the dexter point Gules, Odingsells.

In the Steeple Window,

Paly of six Arg. and Az. Strelley.

In the South West Window of the South I Will of the Church,

Arg. a Saltier engrailed Gules, Tibtot.

Calverton. And Salterford.
IN the Conquerours Survey in Calverton was there certified to be a Berew of
the Manor of Blidworth of the Archbishop of Yorkes Fee, and it answered the
Dane-geld for six Bovats. The Land being twelve Bovats. There seven Vill. and
two Board. had two Car. Lib. Dooms.
There was a Church and a Priest, and two Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood eight
qu. long, three broad. This made up the ancient value of the Manor 40s. as in
Blidworth is noted.

Here was also a Manor which before the Conquest Vlvric had, which paid the
Geld for three Bovats. The Land was for one Plow (or one Car.) This afterward
was the Fee of Rogerius Pictavensiis, and here then were two Vill. and one
Virgat of Meadow. In the Confessors time it had been valued to 20s. but then
was 5s. 4d. In Caivreton of the Tayn-land, Alvric had one Car. which paid the
Dane-geld for three Bovats. There two Sochm. four Vill had two Car. In former
time this was valued at 16s. then at 10s. and the same Alvric continued to hold
it.

In Salterford a Berew of Granby of the Fee of Osbern Fitz-Richard (if this be
not mistaken for some parcel of or about Colston Basset) was as much as was
rated to the Tax or Dane-geld at six Bovats, and in the Conquerours time was
waste, as it is still, there being scarce any memorial of it left, but a place
called Salterford Damm in the Forest, near the beginning of the River Doverbek,
between Calverton and Oxton; there was Pasture Wood one leave long, four qu.
broad.

The Prior of Land (which Priory was Founded by the Bassetts) was certified to
hold the Town (or Village) of Salterford in pure Alms, Lib. feod. in Scac. pen.
Rem. Regis. Test. de Nev.
and so were the Chapter of Suwell, and the Prioress of Brewode to hold three
parts of the Town of Kalverton, of the Honor of Peverell; it seems William
Peverel got the Tayn-land here, as he did that at Woodborough.

That of the Fee of Roger Pictavensis was afterward accounted of the Honor of
Lancaster, Test. (...).
of which Honor William le Butiler held in Calverton and Crophill one Fee.
Likewise John de Vylers, who held of it one Knights Fee in Neubolt and Outhorp,
held the fourth part or one here at Calverton.

The Jury found that Paganus de Vilers, Test. de Nev. (...).
who was first infeoffed gave to Alan his son five Carucats of Land in Knights
Service. The same Paganus gave to the Hospital of Jerusalem, one Car. in
Bekaneshon in Alms. The same Pagan gave to William de Vilers his son the Land
of Newbold, to hold by Knights S^rvice, which William, the son of Paganus the
younger, then held by that Service. The same Pagan gave to Thomas de Vilers the
moiety of Uvethorp and the Land of Hole, and the Land of Calverton, in Knights
(or Military) Service, whereof Robert de Vilers held Hole, and the moiety of
Calverton, except one Carucat which William de Vilers held. The same Robert de
Vilers held also the Land of Calverton by the same Service, etc.

Raph de Vilers gave and confirmed to Robert his brother one Bovat of Land in
Calverton, Regist. de Werksop. fol. 98. cap. 1.
which Bernard held, reserving only one pound of Cummin, or three halfpence at
Easter: this he gave to the Priory of St. Cuthbert at Radford (by Wirkesop)
William de Vilers confirmed it, and so did Robert, son of Robert de Vilers, and
John, son of William de Vilers.

The fourth part of the Knights Fee of John de Vilers Lord of Outhorpe, B.
was the Inheritance of Sir Thomas Hutchinson, Knight, the moiety whereof did
descend to him from his Ancestors; the other moiety he bought, which was the
Inheritance of... Barton of Holme near Newark, the chief of which Family Sir
Thomas Barton, Knight, besides that Holme, had great possessions in Lancashire.

By a Fine, 5 E. 2. between Sampson de Stretley, and Philippa his wife,
Querents, Fin. lev. Pasch. 5 E. 2.
and William, son of Walter de Ludham, Deforc. forty Acres of Land, forty of
Wood, and 11s. Rent in Saltreford and Calverton, were settled on the said
Sampson and Philippa, and the heirs which the said Sampson should beget on the
body of the said Philippa; remainder to the right heirs of Sampson.

Godefrey Folejamb, 45 E. 3. who prosecuted against Sampson de Strelley Chr.
for taking the heir and Lands of William de Strelley of Woodburgh, Pl. de Banc.
Pasch. 45 E. 3. to. 199.
whom he affirmed to hold of him Lands and Tenements in Calverton, viz. six
Carucats of Land, and ten Marks Rent, by Homage, Fealty, and Scutage, etc.
surceasing his prosecution, was Amerced.

The Freeholders of Calverton 1612. were Christopher Strelley, John
Scurtivant, Lib. libere Tenentium in Com. Not.
Robert Cooper, John Lees, Thomas Leeson, Ed. Benet, John Barber, John Labrey,
Humfr. You Will, Euseby Marshall of Arnall, John Chaworth of Southwell, Esquire,
John Cressewell.

Colonel John Hutchinson, son and heir of Sir Thomas Hutchinson, had that which
he called the Manor of Salterford in the Forest.

Ex relatione Iohanis Story, genesis
At Calverton was born William Lee, Master of Arts in Cambridge, and heir to a
pretty freehold here; who seeing a woman knit, invented a Loom to knit, in
which he, or his brother James, performed and exercised before Queen Elizabeth,
and leaving it to.... Aston his Apprentice, went beyond the Seas, and was
thereby esteemed the author of that ingenious Engine, wherewith they now weave
Silk and other Stockings, etc. This.... Aston added something to his Masters
invention, he was sometimes a Miller at Thoroton, nigh which place he was born.

Mss. I. M.
The Vicarage of Calverton was eight Marks, it is now 4l. value in the Kings
books. The Prebendaries of Oxton should be Patrons, or the Chapter of
Southwell, but this like Woodborough is a great and populous Village, with an
empty Church, for the most part.

Oxton. Oston.
ELvod paid for his Manor in Oston, before the Normans came, to the Dane-tax
then in use after the rate of six Bovats; The Land of it being two Car. There
afterward Thomas Archbishop of York, had one Car. in demesne, and one Sochm.
one Vill. one Bordar having two Car. Of this Land the King had one Bovat, Lib.
Dooms.
[ viz. lying to Arnall,] the rest lay in Blidworth. In King Edward the
Confessors time this was valued at 40s.; when the book of Doomsday was made at
20s.

In Ostune of Roger de Buslies fee were two Manors, which Thurstan and
Odincale had before he came; and answered the Geld for one Car. The Land being
then accounted two Car. and an half. There Roger had two Car. five Villains,
six Bordars, having two Car. There was one Mill. 5s. 4d. In the Confessors
time this part was 40s. in the Conquerours increased to 60s.

In this Town before the Conquest was another Manor which Tori had, and was
rated for it to the Geld at four Bov. The Land being then found to be for
twelve Oxen (or twelve Bovats.) This afterward became the Fee of Walter de
Aincurt, and there was one Sochm. on one third part of a Bovat of this Land,
with one Bordar, had half a Car. and four Acres of Meadow. This in the time of
Edward the Confessor was valued at 16s. in the Conquerours at 5^. 4d.

This Town was anciently within the Forest, but at the great perambulation in
the time of King H. 2. left out: Regist. de Novo loc. p. 48.
Howbeit the men of the Town had Common in the Forest (except the Hays and
Demesne Woods of the King) for all manner of Cattle both before and after the
deaforesting, Brev. Reg. 4 E. 3. n. 26.
yet upon their claim about 8 E. 3. Judgment was respited, because the Court
considered that the Town being put out of the Forest, it was discharged from
the [ Putura] provisions of the Foresters, and every other burden of the
Forest, neither did the Kings Deer common within the bounds of the said Town,
nor had the men or Tenants of the Town any Land within the bounds of the
Forest, to entitle them to challenge any Common there: Whereupon the men
desired the Common to be arrented, and accordingly granted the King 5^. per
annum, for license of Commoning at all times within the Forest with all manner
of Cattle as they were wont, and so it was determined.

The Archbishops Fee the two Prebendaries of Oxton, who divide the Tithes here,
and in many other places besides, where they have shares, as at Calverton,
Blidworth, Woodborough, Crophill, etc. still continue their interest in, and
still have as they ever had, the usual privileges allowed, as in Southwell may
be discerned.

Roger de Buslies was held by Robert de Somerville, of the Lord Lovetot of
Wirksop. Test. de Nev.
Robert de Sumerville and his Son, (who was Robert also) 22 H. 2. gave account
to the Sheriff of x. Marks of the Amercements of the Forest. Pip. 22 H. 2.
Regist. de Wellebek, p. 165.
There was an agreement between the Abbot and Covent of Wellebek, and Robert de
Sumerville of Oxton, and Hugh de Capella, and Walter de Streitley, who had the
heirs of the said Robert to their Wives, that the Abbat and Covent should have
Common in the fields of Triberhagh, and Holebek; and further, for so many
Cattle as belonged to the Fee of Ivershagh, and that the men of Triberhagh and
Holebek should likewise have Common in the Fields of Ivershagh, ^an ancient
Hamlet it seems within the territory of Oxton,) and concerning some high ways
and the like. The witnesses were Robert Abbat of Neubo, Henry Prior of Wirksop,
Galfr. Luterell, Robert de Stokes, William de Stokes, Robert Lisieus, William
Basset, Galfr. Columbin, John de Leke, Richard his brother, Henry de Rolleston,
Tho. Sampson, Tho. de Wlrington, Hugh de Rodmerthwait, Mr. Robert de Sumervill,
Godfrey le Aungevin, Richard his brother, Hugh de Osmundthorp, Galfr. de
Sumerville, Thomas de Sumerville, the Wapentach of Thurgerton being then at
Iverischagh.

The Sheriff had a precept from the King 1 H. 3. dated 17 March, to give Tho.
de Somervill, Claus. 1 H. 3. m. 21.
seisin of the Land of Oxton, Woodberig, and Wiston, whereof his Father Richard
died seized, if the said Thomas was right heir of the said Richard.

Robert de Stretlegh, 36 H. 3. had free warren granted in his Manors of
Stretlegh, Char. 36 H. 3. m. 3:
Trowell and Oxton. It appears 8 E. 1. that this Robert son of Walter de
Stredley gave to God and the Church of Suwell four Selions of Land, Pl. Iur.
and Assis. 8 E. 1. to. 22.
lying to the Court of Mr. William de Clifford in Oxton.

Hugo de Capella had four Daughters and heirs, as in Carcolston is noted;
Cecilia wife of Walter de Cuily, Laderina of William Tesserand, Elizabeth, and
Amicia who was married to Sewall le Foun, as in Strelley is said, by whom she
had a Daughter Lucia, the wife of Sampson de Strelley, second son of the late
named Robert.

This Sampson by his second wife Philippa had Stephen and John, who died
without issue, Ex Coll. I.B.
and Robert Strelley, whose Daughters and heirs were Alice wife of Thomas
Basily of Radeclive on Trent, and Cecily of William Eland of Algerthorp, near
Baseford; by his first wife the said Lucia he had Richard de Strelley of
Woodborough, whose Grandchild Elena together with her Husband Ivo Ieke, Fin.
lev. Mich. 5 H. 5.
by a Fine 5 H. 5. passed the fourth part of the Manor of Oxton; and two Mess.
and twelve Bovats of Land, six Acres of Meadow, and 2.6d. rent in Oxton, to
William Babington and his heirs.

The Principal family of Strelley continued to be Lords here, till the division
made by the coheirs of John Strelley Esquire, which is noted in Strelley, when
as this Manor became Thomas Aiscoughs.

Sir Nicholas Strelley, Knight, 33 H. 8. claimed it against Francis Aiscough,
Hill. 33 H. 8. rot. 323.
Esquire. In another recovery 12 Eliz. Edmund Assheton Esquire, and Henry
Townerawe claimed against John Byron Esquire, the Manor of Oxton called
Strelley Manor; Hill. 12 Eliz. rot. 360.
and thirteen Mess. seven Cottages, twenty six Tofts, one Water-mill, one
D^vecote, twenty Gardens, four hundred Acres of Land, etc. in Oxton, who called
to warrant Anthony Strelley Knight. It is now parcelled; the most considerable
share seems to be that, which is now the inheritance of Mr. William Savile,
whose Ancestor I suppose had it of Sir John Byron, in exchange for Lindeby: But
before that last recovery I find that Lancelot Rolleston of Hucknall Torkcard
for the sum of 73l. 6s. 8d. by his Deed dated 10 July, A^togr. p^nes T^o.
Shirbrook. Genesis
8 Eliz. passed to Thomas Sherbroke the moiety of one Manor, and of one Mess.
etc. in Oxton; which Agnes, Widow of Robert Rolleston of Oxton, held for life,
and was sometime Sir Nicholas Strelleyes, and of late parcel of the inheritance
of Thomas Rolleston, deceased, Father of the said Lancelot, amongst which was a
parcel called Culy Park. And George purefey of Drayton in the County of
Leicester, Autogr. penes eand. T. S.
14 Eliz. sold to Thomas Sherbrooke, the fourth part of the Manor of Cula,
etc. in Oxton, and Calverton.

Hugh Son of John de Cuyly of Oxton, 6 E. 3. passed the third part of the
Manor of Oxton, to Roger de Cuylly by Fine; and by another levied 15 E. 3.
between William de Cuylly Parson of Estweyt Complainant, Mich. 6 E. 3. Fin.
lev. Mich. 15 E. 3.
and Roger de Cuylly Chr. Deforcient, the fourth part of the Manor of Oxton
was settled on the said Sir Roger for life, afterward on Maud, who had been
the wife of Hugh de Cuylly for her life, remainder to Roger, Son of the said
Hugh, and the heirs of his Body, for want of which to Thomas son of the said
Sir Roger de Cuylly for life, remainder to John younger Brother of the said
Thomas for life, remainder to the right heirs of the said Sir Roger. By another
Fine 50 E. 3. John Waltiers, and Ioane his wife, Hill. 50 E. 3.
remised and quit-claimed the Manor of Oxton from the said John and Ioane, and
the heirs of Ioane, to John de Stanhop, and Eliz. his wife, and the heirs of
Eliz. This Eliz. was the Sister and heir of John, Antiq. of Warwic. p. 80.
and Daughter of Thomas de Culy; her Hu^band was certainly John the eldest Son
of Elizabeth, the Daughter and heir of Stephen Malonel of Rampton, as in that
place will appear, but had not issue. John de Stanhop of Rampton, Past. 3 R. 2.
Pl. coram Rege Pasch. 3 H. 4. rot. 51. Warw. Leic. Not. Derb. Staff.
and Elizabeth his wife, by a Fine 3 R. 2. passed the Manors of Oxton and
Rampton in this County, three Acres of meadow in Burton upon Trent in
Staffordshire, the Manor of Bresigcotes in Darbyshire, of Radcliff [Cuylly] in
Leycestershire, and of Ansly in Warwickshire, to Raph Aderley and his heirs.

William Digby of Ketelbye in the County of Leicester, Autogr. penes T. S.
5 E. 6. for 176l. conveyed to Thomas Sherebroke of Oxton, all his Mess. Lands,
Tenements, etc. in Oxton.

The Granges of Yversage, and Lovell, Part. 10. pat. 34 H. 8.
or Loveley, belonging to the Monastery of Wellebek, 24 Apr. 34 H. 8. were
granted to Sir William Newenham, and Benedict his wife, and their heirs.

William Newenham, Gent. dyed 2 July, 3 Eliz. leaving Isabell and Benedict his
Sisters and heirs. 2. Lib. feod. in Scac. fol. 376.

Lib. 3. post mor. 4 Eliz. fol. 169.




In 4 Eliz. Benedict was seventeen years old, and married to Lancelot
Mounteforth; Isabell nineteen, and afterward married to Edward Samon: Which
Edward Samon, or one of his name, B.
about 41 Eliz. slew Thomas Leek, of Leek, Esquire; whose reputed Son Thomas
Leeke, for 880l. sold, and by his Deed bearing date 30 July, Autogr. penes Tho.
Shirbrok, Genesis
9 Iac. conveyed his moiety of the three Granges, Farms, Mess. etc. viz. Saint
Margarets in the Greaves, Oxton Grange, alias Eversedge Grange, or Darton
Grange, and Lovely Grange, to Rob. Shirbrook, Ex Cop. lib. visit at. pen.
Reason Mellish, Ar.
Gent. (son of the before named Thomas, who was son of Robert, second son of
Robert Shirebrook of Tibshelf, in Darbishire.)

This Robert Shirbrook of Oxton, had to Wife Mary, Daughter of John Savile of
Oxton, by whom he had Thomas, his only Son and heir, Autogr. penes T. S.
who together with his said Father, 29 July, 12 Car. 1. purchased a Farm in
Oxton, for 167l. of John Came of Eykering, and Mat. and James his Sons. This
Thomas Shirbrook married Elizabeth, the Daughter of Thomas Iopson, of Cudworth
in Yorkshire, Esquire, by whom he had many Children, and died 1653. There are,
as I take it, six Sons, and six Daughters. Robert the present owner, is yet a
Childless Widower, Thomas married Sara, his Cousin German, the Daughter of
Thomas Iopson of Cudworth, Henry, William, Richard, John, Mary, Elizabeth,
Anne, Margaret, Rebekah, Katherine: They suppose (and I have seen good probable
authority for it) that they are descended from one John Lowes, Ex lib. visit.
Com. Ebor. penes Rob. Shirbrook, genesis page 41.
alias Shirebrooke, who was Son of Nicolas de Laws, and Radegund his Wife,
Daughter of William Musters, and Alice his wife, who was Sister of Amicia, wife
of Isidor. de Reresby, and second Daughter and Coheir of John Deincourt, and
Amabilia his Wife, after-born Daughter and Coheir of Serlo de Plesley, and
Sister of Sarah Wife of Sir Robert de Willoughby, mentioned in Felley.

The above named John Savile, had to Wife Margaret the Daughter of Thomas
Tempest, Ex lib. pen. Reas. Mellish. Ar.
by whom he had many Daughters. William his eldest Son by his first Wife, the
Daughter of... Odingsells of Eperston, was Father of John, Father of the
present William, and John. Thomas Savile, another Son of the first John,
married Elizabeth daughter and Coheir of... Samon, of Darton Grange, which
still remains to their posterity.

Thomas Barret of Thoroton (whose Grandmother was Anne daughter of the said
John Sav^le has Lands in Oxton, descended to his Ancestor from.... Claxton,
who I guess had them by inheritance from.... Cade, who (I suppose) might have
them by inheritance from John Strelley of Lindeby, (named in that place) who
died 2 H. 7. seized of five Mess. 200. Acres of Land, fifty of Meadow, 100. of
Pasture, Ex Inq.
and 100. of Wood in Oxton, and of one Close essarted in Calverton, etc.

Anne, Sister of my Grandfather, Robert Thoroton, was married to Thomas Walker,
Son of Robert Custans (alias Walker, of this Town, who by her had a Son called
Robert Walker an Apothecary in London, who died young, yet increased his
Brother Williams patrimony here, and disposed considerable sums of Money very
charitably amongst his kindred and others; his Nephews Thomas, Robert, and
William, Sons of his Brother William, continue owners of the Land.

Roger Iackson is also an owner here.

The Vicarage of Oxton was 8l. it is now 6l. value in the Kings Books, and the
Prebendaries patrons.

Gunnolston. Gunnovelston. And the Spittle, or Hospital of Brodquske.
IN Gunnolvestone and Miletune, before the Conquest, Vlsi had a Manor, which
paid the Tax for two Car. and two Bov. and two thirds. The Land was for three
Plows (or three Car.) There afterward William Peverel, (whose Fee it was) had
in demesne one Car. and two Sochm. on three Bov. of this Land, seven Vill. two
Bordars, two Censors, having three Car. two Mills, 40s. ten Acres of Meadow,
Lib. Dooms.
pasture wood, five qu. long, three qu. broad. In the Confessors time this was
valued at 4l. when the Conquerours survey was made at 60s.

Of the Tayn-Land, likewise Soc to Wymarspole, which Aldene (progenitor of the
family of Crumwell) held, Eruvin the Priest, with four Sochm. had five Bovats
for the Geld: The Land twelve Bovats.

Here was Soc in Ernehale; there four Sochm. had one Car. and five Acres of
Meadow; and sixteen Acres of small Wood.

Raph de Limes^ (Lord of Eperston) had in Gunnulvestune five Bov. and one third
for the Geld.

Regist. de Lenton p. 1.
Erbert a Knight of William Peverels, in the time of H. 1. at the foundation of
Lenton Priory, gave to it (as other of William Peverells great men or Tenants
did,) two parts of the Tithes of his demesne here. He was shortly after in the
time of H. 1. also succeeded by two, who were Sisters and coheirs, Pl. in^erti
t^mporis Re^ Ioh. Pasc. to. 7.
(I suppose his daughters,) viz. Emma who had her part of the inheritance in
Gunnolveston and Keilmerse; and Ivicia who had hers in Molinton in
Northamptonshire, (probably Mileton before named in Doomsday) and Bilebourgh,
as in that place is noted. Emma it seems was wife of Ivo, Regist. de Lenton p.
1. and 8.
son of Robert de Heriz, who gave the same proportion of Tithes, at the
foundation of Lenton, out of his demesnes in Hesburne, and O^^^cropht, (in
Darbishire) as others of Peverels great Tenants did; and when that Robert gave
to it his Mill at Wystandon, this Ivo his son gave to the same Priory 10s. per
annum.

In the fifth year of King Stephen, this Ivo de Heriz gave account of several
sums of Money, Rot. Pip. 5 Ste^^.
of the old Farm (of the Counties of Not. and Dereb.) whereof therefore it is
like he was Sheriff before that time, and likewise of five great or led Horses,
that he might hold the Land of Welgehi in Fee-Farm, of two whereof he did
acquit himself to the King at Winchester, before Miles Earl of Gloucester, and
of the other three in Normandy.

The eldest son of this Ivo and Emme appears to be William de Heriz, mentioned
in Widmerpole, who married Adelina, the daughter and heir of Robert de Whatton,
as already is noted in Whatton also. Against this William, Raph de Crumwell,
descended of the forenamed Aldene, commenced suit before 24 H. 2. which
continued between the families till the time of H. 3. as in Widmerpole may be
observed. Rot. Pi^. 24 H. 2.


The Sheriff, Pip. 25 H. 2.
25 H. 2. accounted for 78s. 4d. for the Farm of the Land of William Heriz that
year, (which it seems was in the Kings hand.) Robert de Heriz 26 H. 2. gave
account of 100l. for having the Land of William his brother; Rot. Pip. 26 H. 2.
And Aelina who had been the wife of William de Heriz, owed an hundred Marks,
that she should not be compelled to marry, but to whom she pleased.

Ivo de Heriz son of this Robert, had an assize 1 Ioh. concerning the last
Presentation to the Church of Gunnolveston, Pl. Mich. 1 Ioh. ^o. 14. in do^so.
between him and the Archbishop, and Canons of Roan, to whom King John, when
he was Earl Moreton, had given it, amongst many other Churches in this County,
which they kept not long, for in 7 R. 1. and 9 Ioh. it appears that the said
Ivo had seisin of the Advowson of this. Pl 17. R 1 and 9 Ioh.


Raph son of (or Fitz) Simon, and Mabilia his wife, ^in. in div^rs. C^milat. 10
H. 3. Derb.
10 H. 3. released to John de Heriz the third part of the Manors of Winesfeud,
Tibescelf, Gonoldeston, and Widemarepol, which the said Raph claimed as the
reasonable dower of his said wife Mabilla, out of the freehold which was Ivo de
Heriz, her former husband's.

Ivo de Heriz gave and granted to Philip, son of Odo, for his homage and
service, Regist. d^ Thurg. p. 60.
two Bovats of Land in Gonalston, which Durand held, reserving 8s. per annum.
Which Land the said Philip gave to the Priory of Thurgarton; and John de Heriz,
son of Ivo confirmed it. Which John in the year 1235. made an agreement with
that Prior and Covent, that they should have fifty Cattle to have Common of
pasture in the Woods of Gonalston, and Thurgarton; and he the said Sir John
Heriz, Knight, and his heirs, fourscore; and the said Priory should have fifty
Swine, or in a fertile year of Acorns, in Thurg. Wood; sixty, without paunage,
and Sir John and his heirs, as many as they pleased without paunage, and if the
Priory should Essart (that is stock up and enclose) their Wood, it should be
lawful for him to enclose Gonalston wood, and the Priory should want their
Common.

The Lord of Gonalston, John, son of John, Ib.
son of Ivo de Heriz, released to that Priory all Homages, Wards, and Suit of
Court, and other services due for one Mess. and two Bovats in Gonalston, but
reserved the 8. per annum rent still. Esc. 2^ E. 1. n. 36.


The Jury in 27 E. 1. found that this John de Robertus de Heriz temp. H. 1.
Willielmus. Ivo de Heriz, 5 Steph.-Emma cohaer. 2 Robertus de Heriz 22 H. 2.
Ivo de Heriz-Mabilia-Rad. fill. Simonis, 10 H. 3. mar. 2. Johannes de Heriz, An.
1235. Johannes de Heriz, miles, defunct. 27 E. 1. Johannes de Heriz aet. 21.
an. 27 E. 1. mortuus 3 E. 3. Matildis de Heriz-Richardus de la Rivere,
mil.-Tho. de Baddeford mar. 2. Margar. sen.-Rog. fill. Rog. Beler and Alic. ux.
Joh. de Aylesford, mil. mar. 2.20 R. 2.-Margareta-Rob. de Swillington, mil.
mort. 15 R. 2. Rogerus de Swillington mil. mort. 5 H. 5.-Joana fill. Roberti
Nevil de Horneby, mil.-Joana fill. Steph. le Scroop, Ar. Marg. Swillington
defunct. 8 H. 6. s. p.-Johan. Gra de Ingleby in C. Linc. miles. Joh.
Swillington Chr. mort. 6 H. 5. Rob. Swillington, Ar. frat. and haer. specialis
Johannis, 6 H. 5.


Tho. fill. Rog. Beler-Marg. jun. Alicia, 17 E. 3. Eliz.
Sara-Jo. Garlik. Walterus Garlik.


Sara Henricus Pierpont Edm. Edm. Henricus Pierpont mil. 19 H. 6. Henricus
Henricus Pierpont, miles, 13 E. 4.






Henricus de Heriz mortuus 1 E. 1. s. p.
Willielmus de Heriz de Wiverton-Matild. fill. Rad. Basset de Drayton.

Philip. 1 Will. de Heriz s. p.-Adelina fill. and haer. Rob. de Whatton s. p.


Erbertus miles Willielmi Peverel Ivo de Heriz, 5 Steph.-Emma cohaer. Ivicia
Radulph Robertus fill. Amani temp. Regis Joh.
Rob. s. p.


Adam Swillington Joh. de Aylesford, mil. mar. 2.20 R. 2.-Margareta-Rob. de
Swillington, mil. mort. 15 R. 2. Rob. Thom. Eliz. consang. and haer. Marg. 8 H.
6.-Rob. Sampson de Com. Suff.



Heriz died seized of this Manor of Gonalston, and that of Widmerpole in this
County, and of Tibshelf, and South Wingfeild in Darbyshire; leaving his son and
heir, John de Heriz, twenty one years old, at the feast of St. Gregory in
March, then last past.

John de Heriz by Fine, 18 E. 2. settled these Manors on himself for life;
Es^. 3 ^. 3. n. ^7.
then to Roger Beler for his life; then to Roger, son of Roger Beler, and
Margaret the elder daughter of Richard de la Rivere, Knight, and the heirs of
their bodies; remainder to Thomas, son of Roger Beler, and Margaret the younger
daughter of the said Richard de la Rivere, Knight, (as in Widmerpole is said)
and the heirs of their bodies; remainder to the right heirs of the said John de
Herice, who in 3 E. 3. was dead, and Matilda de Herice, whom Richard de la
Rivere had to wife, was found his Cousin and Heir, and above thirty years old.
In 6 b. 3. there is mention of Richard de la Rivere, Lib. Fin. T^in. 6 E. 3.
and Matildis de Heriz his wife; Cousin and heir of John de Heriz. As also
there is in the Book of Newstede, where it is said, that they the said Richard
and Matildis, Cousin and heir of the said John de Heriz, ^
presented William Bernak to the Church of Gonalston, whereinto, upon tha^
presentation, he was admitted and instituted; but after the death of Richard de
la Rivere, Thomas de Baddeford, and the said Matildis de Heriz his wife,
alienated the Advowson to Richard de Willughby.

These Au^horities might make one reasonably conclude this Matildis to be
Cousin and Heir of Sir John de Heriz, who levied the Fine, 18 E. 2. howbeit in
the great Suit between the Lord Crumwell, and Sir Henry Pierpont, Knight, for
Wynfeld and Tibeschelf, Irrot. in Ranc. Hill. 19 H. 6. rot. 321. and rot. 13^*
and for Gonalston and Wydmerpole, about 19 H. 6. she is said to be the
daughter of the said Sir John de Heriz, and Mother of Margaret the elder, wife
of Roger, son of Roger Beler, before named, and of Margaret the younger, wife
of Thomas, the son of Roger Beler, mentioned also before, and of Sara, wife of
(John) Garlyk, who was Mother of Walter Garlyk, whose Estate, as heir general
of Sir John Heriz, John Archbishop of York, William Bishop of Lincoln, Thomas
Chaworth, Knight, Richard Vernon, Knight, Nicolas Dixon, Clark, and John
Taylboys the elder, Esquire, by Richard Waleden their Attorney pleaded that
they had, in the Assize of Novell disseisin, which the said Sir Henry Pierpoint
[arramavit] arrayed or brought against them at Whytwell (in Darbish.) the
Thursday next after the Feast of St. Nicolas the Bishop, before William
Babington, Knight, Thomas Greyseley, Knight, Thomas Fulthorpe, William Ascogh,
John Curson, Esquire, and Robert Cokfeld, Esquire, the Kings Justices, assigned to
take that Assise, where Sir Henry Pierpount pleaded that he was Cousin and heir
of the said Sir John Heriz, viz. son of Edmund, son of Edmund, son of Henry,
son of Sara, the sister of the said Sir John de Heriz; and that the said Roger,
son of Roger Beler, and Margaret his wife, the elder daughter of the said Sir
Richard de la Rivere, had a daughter called Margaret, married to Sir Robert de
Swillington, Knight, by whom he had Sir Roger Swyllington, Knight, who had a
daughter married to John Graa (of South Ingleby in the County of Lincoln) who,
Ex petitionibus, 23 E. 4.
together with his said wife ( Margaret also by name) intailed this Manor and
Wydmerpole, and the Advowsons of the Churches, by a Fine, 1 H. 6. upon
themselves, and the heirs of their bodies; remainder to the heirs of the body
of the said Margaret; remainder to Edmund Perpoynt, Knight; and after his death
to Henry Perpoynt, Knight, and the heirs of his body; remainder to the right
heirs of Henry Perpoynt, Knight: Margaret died without heir of her body;
afterward Edmund Perpoynt died; afterward the said John Graa; after whose
death the said Henry Perpoynt, Knight, entered, and had issue Henry Perpoynt,
Esquire, who had issue Henry Perpoynt, Knight, then heir of this Manor and
Advowson, and of the Manor of Wydmerpole, etc.

Elizabeth, Esc. 3 H. 6. n. 4^.
wife of Robert Sampson of the County of Suffolk, about 8 H. 6. was found heir
of Margaret, wife of John Gray, Knight, as in Boney is set down. Yet they
prevailed not here, for I find that Sir William Pierpont (son of Francis
brother of the last Sir Henry, Pas^. 5 H. 8. rot. 34^. and to. 459.
5 H. 8. suffered a Recovery of the Manors of Tybshelf, and Assheover, and
many other Lands in Darbyshire, and of the Manors of Sneynton, Wydmerpole,
Gonaston, and Bromwoodhouse, with the Advowsons of the Churches of Gonaston,
and Wydmerpole, and the Chapel of Bradbuske in the Parish of Gonaston in this
County, about which time he sold this Manor to...... Monox, an Alderman of
London, whose posterity, viz. Sir Humfrey Monox, or his son still enjoy it.

There was a Chantry or Hospital Founded there by..... Heriz, B.
called the Chantry or Hospital of Brodbusk in Gonaston, which through many
Patents of Concealments continues an Hospital at this day, and is called
Gonaston Spittle.

The Rectory of Gonalston was 10l. value, Mss. I. M.
and Mr. Monox Patron (which shows that older rate of Church livings was in the
former part of the Reign of King Henry the eighth.) It Is now 7l. 19s. 2d. in
the Kings Books, and Sir Humfr. Monox Patron.

On the North side of the Church* at Gunnalston.



In Gonaldston Church three ancient Stone Tombs low on the ground, two of
Knights crossleg'd: upon one of their Shields three Hedgehogs were imbossed;
the third is a Woman.

In the Chancel,

Quarterly Or and Azure.

Arg. a Chevron Azure, a File of five Labells Gules, Swillington.

Arg. on a Bend Azure three crossecrosletts Or.

Azure three Hedgehogs Or 2.1. Heriz.

Arg. on a Chevron Azure three Besants, a croslet Moline below Or.

In the North Window of the Church,

Gules three Waterbougetts Az. Roos of Hamlake.

In the East Window of the North I Will of the Church,

Party per pale Gules and Sable, a Lion Ramp. Arg. Belers.

Azure three Hedgehogs Or, Heriz.

Arg. a Chevron Azure a File of three Labels Ermine, Swillington.

In a North Window,

Paly of six Az. and Arg. a File of six Labels Gules.

In small Borders there is Heriz, and

Azure a Fesse Dancy and Crusuly Or.

And in another the last Coat, with

Or a Lion Ramp. sable interchangeably round the whole Pane.

On the Wall Painted,

Arg. on a Chevron sable between three Okenleaves, proper three Plates, and on
a Chief Gule a Bird between two Anchors of the first, quartering, etc.

The Crest a Stock-dove with an Oke-branch in her Beak, Monox.

Thurgarton. Turgaston. And Horspole.
THis place, with Horspole, and what belonged to it in Tideby, in the
Confesours time was valued at 3l. but when the great Survey was made in the
Conquerours at 4l. being then the Fee of Walter de Aincurt, Lib. Dooms.
who had in Turgaston and Horsepole in Demesne two Car. and ten Sochm. on nine
Bov. of this Land, which before the Conquest was Swains, whose Manor here paid
the Tax for three Plow-land or Car. and three Bovats. The Land being then found
to be six Car. (or for six Plows.)

Raph de Ayncurt for the (safety or) health of his Soul, and of his sons and
daughters, Regist. Thurg. p. 1.
and for the Soul of his Father, and of his Mother, and for the Soul of Basilia
his woman (or wife) and of all his Parents and Ancestors, Founded an House of
Religion at Thurgarton, and in (or at) the Foundation of that House, gave and
granted to the Canons there regularly serving God and St. Peter, by the Counsel
and entreaty of Thurstin Archbishop of York of pious memory, in pure Alms,
all Thurgarton and Fiskerton, and the Park by Thurgarton, and all the Churches
of his whole Land, to wit, of Graneby, etc. as in that place is already set
down; which Alms of his, he prayed all the sons of the Holy Church to maintain
and defend; and to his heirs, if they preserved and sustained it with all its
liberties, he left Gods favor, and his fatherly blessing for ever: but if any
did not, he should incur Gods anger, and his curse, except he repented.

King Henry the second commanded the Sheriff of Nottss. and the Men of the Soc
of Dunham, that the Canons of Thurgarton should well and peaceably hold their
Mills upon Trent. Regist. Thurg. p. 135.
He likewise confirmed to them what Raph de Ayincurt had given, and all the
forementioned Churches, viz. Graneby, Elmeton, Cotes, Swafeild, Haneword,
Scaupewick, Kirkeby, Braunceton, Tymberland, Blankeney, and of the gift of
William Fitz- (or son of) Ranulf, the Church of Blackwell; of the gift of
Matthew de Vilers, the Church of Warinton (in Lancashire) the Church of
Titheby, the Chapel of Crophill, and one Carucat of Land in the same Town of
his Demesne; of the gift of Gerard, son of Walter de Sutton, the Church of
Sutton (in Ashfeild) and two Bovats of Land in the same Town; of the gift of
William Carpintar, the Mill of Clive; of the gift of Henry Hosee, one Bovat of
Land in Egrum; of Robert de Cauz, the Mill of Doverbeck; of William de Bella
aqua, 2s. out of the Mill of Kirlington; of William Sampson, the Land called
Cressewelle; of Robert de Hoveringham, the Church of Hoveringham; of Raph de
Bellofago, the Mill of Doverbeek, which is called Snelling Milne, with the Land
and Meadow lying to it; of William de Bereville, one Bovat of Land in Kirkeby;
of Hugh de Hoveringham, seven Bovats of Land in Titheby, which Emme his
Grandmother, and Robert his Father gave; of Walter Willan of Lincoln, one
Bovat in the Fields of Lincoln; of Richard Poutrell, half a Carucat of Land of
his Demesne in Thurmeston, with one dwelling House in the same Town; of Raph de
Ayncurt, son of Roger, the Church of Winfeild; of Richard de Crioil, four Tofts
in Thurgarton, and two Tofts in Morton, which his son Robert confirmed; of
John, son of William, the moiety of the Church of Vvetorp, and for the Tithes
of Ailwine Hecche 27s. as the Charter of the Canons of the Hospital of St.
Sepulchers of Lincoln witnessed. The same King, 14 H. 2. Chart. Antiq. G. 14
H. 2.
granted to these Canons of Thurgarton forty Acres of Land in Tetheley, which
were then to be essarted, and ten Acres more in the same place which then were
essarted, free from Regard and all Customs (of the Foresters.) The gifts of
very many other Benefactors were confirmed by King Henry the third, Reg. Thurg.
p. 136. Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p. 94. Par. 2. pat. 14 E. 3. m. 30.
and other succeeding Kings, as Edward the third, who also confirmed those
which Robert de Vilers made of his whole Demesne and Capital Mess. in Vvethorp,
of the Toft which was Wulvetts, and that of Hugh de Lincolnes, and of five
Bovats of the Demesne of the said Robert in Vvethorp, and of two whole Bovats,
and four Bovats and an half in the said Town of Vvethorp, and that which
William, son of Paganus de Vilers, made of four Bovats, with Tofts and Crofts,
and other Appurtenances in the said Town of Vvethorp, and that of Raph de
Bellofago of the Church of Loudham, and the Mill on Doverbeck, with the Land
lying to it, and his whole Land of Wodeburg, and that which the said Raph, and
that which Emma de Bellofago made of Snelling Milne, with one Bovat of Land,
and the Meadow lying to the said Mill, and that which Gerard de Phanecurt made
of his Capital Mess. and all his whole Demesne, Homages, and Services of his
Freeholders, with Wards, Reliefs and Escaets, Villains and Coterels, and their
Catalls (or Chattels) and Sequels, Lands, and Tenements, which sometimes
certain Villains or Natives, and Coterels held of him in Vilenage, and of a
Windmill, with Suit to it, and of the Meadow, Wood, Fishponds, and all Demesns
and Tenements which the said Gerard held in Hikeling and Kinalton, and that
which the said Gerard made of the Homages and Services of all the Freeholders
of his Land, and his Fee of Kirkeby and Scapwyck (Lincolneshire) etc. and that
which Alice, the daughter of Raph de Berevile, made of one Toft and half a
Bovat in Scaupewyke and Kirkeby, and that which Henry Bisett, Ib.
son of William Carpintar, made of the passage of Briggeford, and the Toft
belonging to it, with William the Miller, and that which the said Henry made of
the Church of Adelington, and that which Hugh de Chaisneto made of one Bovat of
Land and Toft, which William de Adelington held sometimes of him in Saxendale,
and that which Oliver de Aencurt, and Matildis Peche his wife, made of four
Bovats in Boileston, and that which Adam de Pedworth, by the consent of
Matildis his wife, made of the Homages and Services of the Freeholders in
Hermeston, and of twelve Bovats there, and the Villains which held them, and
all their Chattels and Sequels, and that which Robert Peisun made of one Bovat
in Codington, and that which Gocelinus de S. Paulo made of the Church of
Hokesworth, and that which Walter, son of Walter, son of William de Aslacton,
made of five Bovats and an half, with Tofts and other Appurtenances in
Hokesworth and Aslacton, and that which Philip de Marton made of his Land and
Manor in Marton, with Homages, etc. and that which Alis de Aincurt, sometime
wife of Roger de Aincurt, made of her Land in Darnethorpe and Colingham, and
that which Roger, son of William de Houton, made of seven Bovats in Houton, and
that which Matthew de Vilers made to the said Canons, sometime at Fiscarton
upon Trent, of one Carucat in Crophull, and that which Walter de Stanton made
of one Toft, and two Bovats of Land, with Meadow lying to it in Crophill, and
many more that Philip de Marton, Knight, made in Haneword (Linc.) and that
which Roger de Aincurt made of the Services and Homages of diverse in Senouere
and Pillesley (Derb. and that which Walter, son of Stephen de Radeclyve, made
of two Bovats, and a quarter of a Bovat of Land, with Toft and Meadow in
Flintham, and that which Lisiard de Mustars made of that Bovat of Land which
was Vlskells in Leirton, and that which Adam Tisun made of that Bovat in Egaum,
Ib.
which Leveric Hog held, and that which Philip, son of Odo, made of all his
Land in Ganaldeston, and that which Raph, son of Walter, made of two Bovats in
Martineland, and that which Simon, son of Simon de Hoveringham, made of one
Bovat, with the whole Meadow and Appurtenances in Hoveringham, and that which
Benedict de Roldeston made of three Tofts, and one Bovat of Land in Roldeston,
and that which Hubert Fitz-Raph made of the Land which William, son of Gregory,
held of him in Scartheclive, and that which William, son of Gilbert Carpentar
of Schelford, and Mariot his wife, made of one Bovat in Timberland, and that
which Gaufr. de Maugruci made of Hugh, son of Amfrid, with one Bovat of Land in
Scaudeby, and that which Philip de Paunton, Knight, made of 15s. Rent, and the
Rent of six Capons of William, son of Reginald de Kercolston, and that which
Gerard de Fanecurt, made of the Service and yearly Rent of Thomas, son of
Gilbert, John, son of William, and William, son of Gilbert, out of the
Tenements which they held of the said Gerard in the Towns of Skreveton and
Kercolston, and of three Tofts in Kercolston, and that which William the Prior
and the Covent of Shelford made in exchange to the said Prior and Covent of
Thurgarton, of two Acres of Land in Gunthorp, for two in Shelford, and that
which Richard, son of Gervas de Wyvereton, made of one Bovat in Berneston, and
that which Richard de Wyvereton, Knight, made of one Toft, three Bovats of
Land, and two Acres of Meadow in Berneston and Wyvereton, and that which
William, son of Walter Punche, of one Toft, with the buildings in Berneston,
and twenty Acres, with the Appurtenances in the same Town, and that which Raph
de Rodes, Knight, made of 51s. to be received yearly out of two Bovats of Land
in Berneston, etc.

The Prior claimed view of Frank-pledge, 3 E. 3. Ib. 164. and ^ot. Quo War. 3
E. 3.
in their Manors of Thurgarton, Fiskerton, Crophull, Outhorp, Hickeling,
Graneby and Sutton, and Assize of Bread and Ale in Hickling and Hoxworth, which
last were also claimed, 8 E. 1. Pl. Ragem. 8 E. 1.
and that their Villains in Hokesword, Graneby, Crophill Buttiler, Outhorp,
Wiverton, Titheby, and Hickeling, should not do any Suit to the Kings Wapentach
of Bingham, for which they produced the Kings Charter dated at Marleburgh, 18
H. 3.

The Church of Thurgarton was valued in the year 1328. at twenty Marks per
annum. Reg. Thurg. p. 272.
There were then also nine Carucats of Land, each worth 40s. per annum, with
the helps of the Natives or Villains. Two Wind-Mills with Barail Mill, and
Snelling five Marks. The perquisites of the Court 40s. The Wood for Fuel, and
other profits, twenty Marks per annum. The Garden 40s. per annum: the sum 52l.
The Rents of Assize of the Freeholders were 57s. 10d. ob. The Natives or
Villains (which were such as we now call Husbandmen) paid each a Cock and an
Hen, besides their Rent in money, for a Toft and one Bovat of Land, which was
the ordinary and common proportion of their Farms, for which they paid 4 or 5s.
a piece more or less; of these there were then in Thurgarton about eighteen,
and the sum of their Rents was 4l. 11s. 2d. ob. The Cottagers were in number
about forty five, and each had a Toft, and some a Croft, 1 and two, three, or
four Selions of Land. Their Rents, besides Cocks and Hens, were usually 2 or
3s. a piece, more or less: the sum of these Rents then was 119s. 3d. ob.
Horsepoll, whereof the Family of Kirioll were Lords, and John Kirioll then
remained a Freeholder in it, and paid an half penny at Christmas, which made up
the Rents of the rest of the Freeholders and Natives there 49s. 0. ob. The sum
of all the Rents of Assize of Thurgarton and Horsepoll was then 15l. 17s. 5d.
The sum of Cocks and Hens in number six score and four 15s. 6d. These were
paid the second day in Christmas: and that day every one both Cottagers and
Natives, who gave Hens and Cocks, did eat in the Hall, and those who did not
had a white Loaf, a Flagon of Ale (or Beer) with one Dish (or Mess) from the
Kitchen. Every Native and Cottager gave 3d. in Reaping time, except one William
Spend^love, and Douce Doffaire, which joined at 3d. and worked together in
Harvest for one Toft, whereof each held half: the sum of all this Reaping
money was 15s. Every Native (or Husbandman) gave ob. for cleansing the Damm or
Pool of Barhil Milne at Pentecost, which made in all 9d. The Reve (Greve or
Provost) for the time being paid neither for Reaping, nor cleansing the Mill
Damm, nor Cock nor Hen. Edmund Freman, and Reginald his son (Freeholders) owed
to the Lord (of the Manor) for their whole Tenement three [ arruras]
Plowing-daies, with one Plow, which were then worth by the year 12d. one in
Winter, another in Lent; and the third in Summer; likewise for the said
Tenement three workings in Autumn for three days, viz. the first day with one
Man, the second with two Men, and the third with five Workmen, and one of
themselves in person; they were every day to have their refection: these works
in Harvest were valued at 13d. ob. which made the sum 2s. 1d. ob. All the said
Natives (or Husbandmen) were to Plow with their Plows three times at the
seasons beforesaid, every Native with one Plow one day in each season, or two,
two days with one whole Plow, if they held only one Bovat of Land. They were
likewise to Harrow as often as need was, and every Plow was to have four Loaves
called Boneloves the said three seasons; and the first day of Plowing in
Winter, and likewise in Lent, they were to have their diet at the cost of the
House, but when they Harrowed they were to have their refection or diet as
before, and every Harrower was to have a Brown Loaf [ bissum] and two Herrings
in the day. Likewise all the said Natives and Cottagers were to Reap from the
beginning of Harvest to the end every other day, viz. every Native with two
Men, and Cottager with one, except that in the first day of Autumn (or Harvest)
and the last, all the Natives (or Husbandmen) Reaped only with one Man. And the
first day in which they Reaped, every two were to have one brown Loaf, and two
toillects; the second day two brown Loaves, and one toillecte; and afterward
every day on which they Reaped, every two men to have three brown Loaves.
Likewise in (or on) the day of the great Bidripe, which was called the Priour
Bon, every Native was to find three Workmen, and Cottager one: but Richard, son
of William de Horspoll, that day was to find five Workmen, and one free
Servant. And it is to be known, that no man might work or carry on that day in
the Territory of Thurgarton but John Kiriell only. Likewise every Native
aforesaid was to carry every other day through the whole Harvest, every Native
with one Cart, viz. those days in (or on) which they did not Reap; and
likewise Hay in Hay-time, and every day were to have their refection. Likewise
every of the said Natives were to make carriage from the Foreign Granges thrice
in the year, each with one Horse, and every time they were to have each a small
Miche (or white Loaf.) And we must know that the work of every of the said
Natives was worth 13s. 4. per annum, and of a Cottager 20d. the sum of the
works was 15l. 10s. All the Reapers in Harvest, which were called Hallewimen,
with other workers in Harvest, were to eat in the Hall one day in Christmas, or
afterward at the discretion of the Celerer. Likewise every She-native (or
Villain) as often (or whenever) she took an Husband, or committed Fornication,
was to give a Marchet for the redemption of her blood 5s. 4d. and if she was
the daughter of a Cottager, she gave only half the said Marchet. Likewise every
Native paid for Paunage, when it was in the Park, for every Swine 3d. The
entire sum of the whole value of the Manor of Thurgarton, with the Church and
all profits, except Marchetts and Paunage when they should happen, was then,
viz. 1^28. fourscore and five pounds, and nine pence half penny.

There was a Chantry Founded in the Church of All Saints at Chesterfeild, and
8l. Rent issuing our of the Manors of Thurgarton, Fiskerton, Crophill, and
Kelum, about the 44 E. 3. Pat. 44 E. 3. p. 1. m. 10.
and in 42 E. 3. Pat. 42 E. 3. par. 1. m. 24.
one in the Church of St. Mary of Criche, and 6l. Rent issuing out of the
Manors of Thurgarton, Fiskerton, Moreton, Hoveringham, etc.

Ales, who had been wife of William Deyncourt Chr. 12 Ian. 9 H. 6. Fin. 9 H. 6.
m. 3.
had leave to Found a Chantry in the Coventual Church of St. Peter at
Thurgarton, and to give 6l. yearly to the Chaplain.

About the year 1445. Sir William Babington, Knight, Ex Mss. pen. Ric. Dom.
Byron. Ioh. Cutwolf. Pr. de Novo loco, p. 98.
Nicolas Wymbish, Clark, John Mykulberghe, Chaplain, and Robert Halome having
obtained license of the King, 25 Iun. 20 H. 6. to Found a Chantry of two
Chaplains at the Altar of St. Katherine in the Church of St. Peter of
Thurgarton, to pray daily for that King, and William Lovell, Knight, and Ales
his wife, and Raph Cromwell, Knight, and Margaret his wife, and the persons
before named, and for all their Souls when they should die; and for the Souls
of Ales, who had been wife of William Deincourt, Knight, (before mentioned) of
John Deincourt, Knight, and of Iohane his wife, etc. annexed it to the Chantry
of Ales Deincourt, before noted.

Thomas Dethick 28 H. 8. resigned the Priory of Thurgarton, Autog. pen. Harv.
Staunton, Ar.
and John Berwick was admitted Prior by the King.

The Priory of Thurgarton was granted to William Cowper the Kings Servant, and
Cecily his wife, and their heirs, 30 H. 8. Bill. signat. 29 and 30 H. 8.


Cecilia was daughter and heir of John Toll of Willielmus Cooper de
Thurgarton-Cecilia fill. and haer. Johannis Toll de London. Thom. Cooper de
Thurgarton-Elianor fill. Mich. Stanhop, mil. Willielmus Cooper-.... fill.....
Hutton Justic. Rogerus Cooper, miles-... fill.... Harpur. Cecil Cooper, Ar.-Sara
fill. Johannis Hotham, Baronetti. Cecil Cooper aet. 4. 1673.
Johannes Cooper-Doroth. fill. Hen. Gilbert. Carolus. Johan. Willielmus.
Dorothea.
Rogerus. Ann.
2 Drury s. p.
Thom. fill. and haer. occisus s. p. Ann. Joana.
Willielmus Cooper.-An. fill. Jac. Mering. Richard. Oliva s. p.

London: she had three sons, Thomas Cooper, Esquire, Ex Visit. R. C^^^er, pro
Will. Flower No^oy. 1509.
who married Elianor, one of the daughters of Sir Michael Stanhop; William, who
married An. daughter of James Mering of Rolleston; and Richard Cooper, and a
daughter called Oliva, wife of Ed. Sutton of Averham, but she died without
issue; her eldest brother the said Thomas Cooper, had Thomas Cooper his eldest
son, who was slain without issue; and William Cooper his second son, who was
heir to his brother, and married.... the daughter of Judge Hutton, by whom he
had Sir Roger Cooper a worthy honest Gentleman, whose fidelity and constancy to
the Royal interest weakened his fortunes, so that Cecill Cooper, Esquire, his
son, will have too hard a task to make this House and Demesnes entirely his
own, the Woods being also extremely wasted. His brother John Cooper, second son
of Sir Roger, was Carver to his Majesty that now is, King Charles the second,
and a very industrious person, but died 1672. in his Majesty's debt, having
been receiver general of the Royal Aid, and Additional supply, and Collector of
the Harth-money, etc. in this County.

The Rectory, and a great part of the Township of Thurgarton, B.
was granted by King Henry the eighth to Trinity College in Cambridge, of whom
the Coopers have usually held it in Lease; and Mr. John Cooper built a
Brick-house in the middle of the Town, upon one of the Farms, now almost all
enclosed.

Hoveringham.
SWayne, before the Conquest, had a Manor in Hoveringham, which answered the
public Tax or Geld for two Car. two Bov. Lib. Dooms.
The Land was four Car. There afterward Walter de Aincurt (whose Fee it
became) had one Demesne, two Car. and six Sochm. on three Bovats, and one third
of a Bovat of this Land, nine Villains, three Bordars, having four Car. There
was a Priest and a Church, and two Mills 40s. two Piscaries, 8s. and forty
Acres of Meadow. In the Confessors time it was valued at 4l. and when the Book
of Doomsday was made, at 10s. more, having Soc in Fiscartune, Mortune and
Farnesfeld.

Hugo de Hoveringham paid four Marks for two Knights Fees, Test. de Nev.
in the time of H. 3. he was a benefactor to Thurgarton, as was also Robert his
Father, and Hugh his Grandfather, and Emme his Grandmother, named in that
place, to which this Church was given, by Robert his said Father. They had
interest in Flintham, and Radcliffe on Trent, as in those Towns may be
perceived; as had also the Family of Gousell, Regist. de Rufford. penes Geor.
vic. Halifax. p. 47.
who continued here long after them, whereof Ruph de Gousle, son of Robert, had
a son called Sir Walter de Goushill, who married Matilda, one of the two
coheirs of Matthew de Hathersege, the other sister Cecilia was the wife
of...... Langford, Robertus de Gousle- Radulphus de Gousle, 10 Joh.- Walterus
de Goushill, miles-Matilda fill. and cohaer. Matthew. de Haverseche. Johannes sive
Walterus de Goushill, 53 H. 3.- Walterus de Goushill, miles, defunct. 20 E.
2.-Margeria. Thomas de Goushill Chr. defunct. 48 E. 3.-Agnes. Nicolas de
Goushull Chr. aetat. 60. an. 48 E. 3. defunct. 7 H. 4. ob. 16 R. 2. anno dom.
1393- Nicolaus de Goushull, Chr.- Robertus Goushill, miles-Elizab. fill. and
haer. Ric. Comitis de Arundell, relicta Thom. Mowbray Ducis Norfolk. Robertus
Wingfeild, mil.-Elizab. fill. and cohaer. Thom. Baro Stanley-Joana fill. and
cohaer.





Simon.



and mother of Nigellus, Quo War. 4 E. 2. rot. 2. Derb.
Father of Oliver, father of John, father of Nicolas de Langford, who lived 4
E. 3.

Regist. de Thurg. p. 56.
Matilda who had been wife of Sir Walter de Goushill, purchased of William, son
of Hugh de Hoveringham, a certain place in the West part of the Meadow of
Hoveringham, called Yirne, or Thirne, Ib.
upon which the Meadow of the Prior of Thurgarton, and John de Gousill abutted
on the West part, and the Common Meadow of Hoveringham on the East, for which
she gave him 40s. and a quarter of Barley, he reserving only a Penny rent
yearly, to be paid at Christmas to him and his heirs, which said rent Hugh
Sharp, and Matilda his wife, released to the Prior and Covent of Thurgarton,
to whom Simon de Gousil, son of Matilda first named, together with some other
Meadow, which his said mother gave him, conveyed it, Ib.
and Walter de Goushull, Knight, Grandson of the said Matilda (by her eldest
son Walter (or John) confirmed the gift of the said Sir. Simon, his Uncle.

The Jury, 20 E. 2. Esc. 20 E. 2. n. 47.
found that Walter de Goushull, and Matilda his wife, who 30 E. 1. Hill. 30 E.
1. Fi^. L^ber.
levied a Fine at York, to Lambert de Trickingham, then held in Hoveringham,
Flintham, Kneveton, and Radcliff on Trent, in this County; and the Manor of
Barleburgh, with its members, viz. in Cressewell, Whitewell, and Columbes, and
Kinwalinerst, Barleburgh, Woodhous, and Rouley, etc. in Darbyshire; and that
Thomas de Goushill, son and heir of the said Walter, was then above thirty
years of age. The Father of this Walter was certainly John de Gousehull (though
in some pleading or other I have seen it Walter also) for Adam de Gouschull, 4
E. 3. Q^o War. 4 ^. 3. rot. ^. Derb.
claiming free warren in Haverseche, in Darbyshire, makes Tho. de Gouschull,
son of Walt. son of John, son of Matilda, daughter of Matthew de Hathersege, to
be one of the heirs of the said Matthew, to whom it was granted, Oct. 25. 33 H.
3. as Nicolas de Langford, before named, was the other. And I find that 53 H.
3. Pl. de Iar. and Assi^. apud Derb. 53 H. 3. to. 18.
John de Gousell offered himself in a plea at Darby, against Peter de Monteford
(Lord of Gunthorp) and others, demanding by what right they exacted Common in
his Land of Hoveringham, seeing he had none in theirs, and they did no service
to him for it.

The Jury, 15 E. 2. Pl. de Banc. Trin. 15 E. 2. to. 42.
found that Stainwath was in Hoveringham, and not in Gunthorp; and that William
Baron, and others had forceably pastured the separate Grass of Walter de
Goushull, with their Cattle, to his damage 100s.

The Jury, 48 E. 3. Esc. 48 E. 3. n. 31.
found that Thomas de Goushill, Knight, with Agnes his wife, jointly held when
he died, the Manor of Kynwaldmersh, and two parts of Barleburgh, etc. and that
Nicholas de Goushill Chr. his son and heir was then above sixty years old.

In 7 H. 4. Esc. 7 H. 4. n. 7.
it was found that Nicolas Gouxhill Chr. held when he died, the moiety, of the
Manor of Kynwaldmersh, etc. and left Nicolas Gouxhill, his son and heir. The
seal of Sir Nicolas Goushill, of Hoveringham, Autogr. penes Tho. Shipman, genesis
to his deed concerning Lands in Flintham, dated 16 R. 2. is Barry of six, with
a Canton Ermine.

Sir Robert Goushill, Knight, by his wife Elizabeth Duchess of Norfolk (who
was daughter and heir of Richard, Earl of Arundell, Ex Geneal. dom. Byron. per
Sam. Roper.
and widow of Thomas Mowbray, Duke of Norfolk) had two daughters and heirs,
Elizabeth wife of Sir Robert Wingfield, and Joan wife of Thomas Baron Standley.

Anthony Wingfeld, Esquire, 5 H. 8. Trin. 5. H. 8. rot. 321. Derb.
suffered a recovery of the Manor of Barleburgh, with the Appurtenances in
Darbyshire: And at the same time Humfrey Wyngfeld, Esquire, Francis Hall, and
others claimed against him the moyeties of the Manors of Hoveringham, and
Flintham, rot. 325.
as in that place is said; which Arthur Hall is supposed, long after to fell to
Trinity College in Cambridge, to which it now belongs.

There was a Fine levied at York, 10 and 11 E. 3. Fin. apud Ebor. Mich. 10 E.
3. and postea Hill. 11 E. 3.
between Thomas de Hotot (mentioned in Radcliff) quer. and William de Hotot,
deforcient, of the Manor of Hoveringham, with the Appurtenances, two Mess. two
Tofts, six Bovats, and one Acre of Land, with the Appurtenances in Radecliff,
on Trent, and Kneveton, whereby the premises were settled on Thomas de Hotot
for life, remainder on Walter, son of the said William de Hotot, and on Alianor
his wife, and the heirs of their bodies, remainder to the right heirs of
William. Regist. de Thurg. p. 168. b.
In the 27 E. 3. William Buxhum, of Hekelinge, and Robert Cok, of Thurgarton,
Chaplains, and Roger oath Halle, of the same, Feoffees of Tho. de Hotot, gave
the Manor of Hoveringham, with the Homages, Rents, and Services of the
Freeholders, named in his Deed, to Robert, the Prior, and the Covent of
Thurgarton, and their successors.

This Lordship, Thurgarton tenements, and those in Flintham, which belonged to
this same Priory, now belong to Trinity College, in Cambridge, and Mr. Cecill
Cooper continues Grand Tenant to that Society, as his family has been
formerly.

In Hoveringham Church North I Will, Paly of six Arg. and Gules on a chief Azure a
fesse double dance, Or, Hathersege.

Or 3. Chevrons Gules A chief varry. ( St. Quintin perhaps.)



In the South I Will, and Chancel, Azure a fesse double dancy and Billitte, Or,
Deincourt.

On a Plain Stone in the South I Will, Nicolaus de Gozill miles, filius Thomae de
Gousell militis, qui obiit mortem die S. Priscae virginis, Anno dom. 1393.

Upon the Wall is painted, Here lies the body of Sir Nicholas Goushill, son of
Sir Thomas Gozill, which Sir Nicolas died in the year 1393. (St. Prisca the
Virgin is 18. January.)

By the Stone is a fair Tomb for Sir Robert Gousell, and the Duchess of
Norfolk his Lady, upon which are their statues, as by the Coronet on the Head
of hers is supposed. Under his Head lies the figure of a Blackamores Head
crowned, and part of the Body, with a wreath about the neck. About the Tomb
were the Arms of Leek, Langford, Babington, Chaworth impaling Caltofts,
Rempstons, and diverse others which were worn out in Mr. St. Lo Knivetons time,
Ex Coll. St. Lo Kniveton.
who notes that Sir Robert Gousell and the Duchess were married 2 H. 4.

Fiskerton. And Moreton.
OF the Soc of Horingham, in Fiscartune, and in Mortune, Walter de Ayncurt
(whose Fee it was) had in each half a Car. for the Geld, whereof the Soc
belonged to Sudwell, and in each he had one Car. and three Vill. having one
Car. (or Plow.) Here in Fiscartune was also a Manor which Tori had, before the
Conquest, rated to the Geld at two Car. two Bov. The Land whereof was then
certified to be five Car. There the said Walter had in demesne one Car. eleven
Vill. having four Car. There were two Mills, Lib. Dooms.
one Piscary, one Pessage, 46s. 8d. forty two Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood two
qu. long, one qu. broad. In the Confessors time this was 3l. value, in the
Conquerours, when the survey was taken, 4l. Walter had Soc in this Fiscarton,
six Bovats of Land, whereof the Archbishop had the Soc. There was some in
Gipesmare, and Mortun, which was of the Fee of Raph Fitz Hubert, and held by
the Lords of Annesley.

This Town of Fiskerton, Raph de Ayncurt gave to the Monastery of Thurgarton,
at the Foundation, as in that place is said. The Prior, 54 H. 3. Chapter 54 H. 3.
m. 4.
had Market and Fair granted in this Manor of Fiskerton.

There was a Chapel dedicated to the blessed Virgin Mother, founded within the
Court of the Canons of Thurgarton, upon the Trent, Regist. de Thurg. p. 10. and
11.
at Fiskerton, to which many persons gave Lands; as Robert de Birstall, who
gave six Selions on the East part of the sike of Morton in Wra, of his demesne,
and 3. others upon Irnore, in pure Alms, for the Souls of William, his father,
and Agnes, his mother, his own and his wives, and all his Parents departed.

Walter, son of Pagan de Aslacton, remised and quit-claimed all the right he
had in one Bovat and an half in Fisk. to the said Canons, which Lauretta, the
Daughter of Raph, the Parson of Roldeston, held of the said Prior and Canons of
Thurgarton, to whom Robert, son of William de Haeg, also released all his right
in the Lands of the said Lauretta, his Grandmother.

'Osbert de Haneworth, called also de Morton, Ib. p. 13.
was a Benefactor to the said Chapel, who had a Daughter married to Gaufr. de
Deresburgh, sometimes called Julian, and sometimes Golderon, by whom she the
said Julian or Golderon had likewise a daughter called Cecilia, married to
Robert, son of Savain de Kelum. She had half a Bovat in Morton, in
Frank-marriage, which in her widow-hood she gave to the said Priory, excepting
the third part of her Toft, and seven Rodes of Land and Meadow, which she gave
to Osbert* the Milner, with Alice her daughter. Hugh son of Galfr. de
Deresburg, brother to the said Cecilia, in the year 1248. confirmed her gift to
the Canons of Thurgarton.

Robert, son of Raph de Fiskerton, by the consent of Robert his son, for the
health of his own Soul, and the Soul of Agnes his wife, gave to the said Chapel
a Selion, which in times past Blacman, and Wolsi of Mortun, gave to the said
Canons for their brotherhood, and exchanged another, for which the Canons gave
him and his son 12s. and three quarters of Rye, and one of Barley. There were
many other small benefactors.

In the year 1328. the Tithes of the Demesne, and Natives of Fiskerton, Regist.
de Thurg. p. 174.
were valued at 100s. per annum. There were three Carucats of Land, each valued
at 26s. 8d. The fishing then there was 66s. 8d. The Water-Mill there 26s. 8d.
The Tithe of Roldeston Mill 3s. 4d. The perquisites of the Court 40s. The rents
of Assize of the Natives (each whereof for the most part held one Bovat and an
half of Land, and paid about 3s. and one Cock, and two Hens) amounted to 49s.
4d. and thirty Hens and Cocks, then valued at 1d. ob. a piece, 3s. 9d. The
rents of the Cottagers, 7l. 6.5d. ob. The Natives (or Husbandmen) and Cottages
here did more work than those of Thurgarton, I^.
and had less meat, except at Plowing and Harrowing, and at Boondays only in
Harvest, which were once in a week, during that time, with two men for every
Husband (or Farm) house, besides four other working days, in which there was no
refection allowed: when they had, viz. at the said Boons, every two had three
Boon-loaves with Campanage. On Saturdays they carried, and did no other work.
All the Customary (Tenants) both in Fiskerton, and Morton, one day in the year
found each a man to cleanse the Dam of Fiskerton Mill; and if it needed more,
they were to be allowed out of their other works. If any [ braciatrix
braciaverit cereviciam] Ale-wife brew Ale to sell, she must satisfy the Lord
for Toltester. If any Native or Cottager sold a Male youngling after it was
weaned, he was to give 4d. to the Lord. If any Native or Cottager having a
Swine above a year old, should kill him, he was to give the Lord 1^. and it was
called Thistelcak. The work of a Native was 12s. and of a Cottager 10^. They
were to carry to, or from the foreign Granges at the will of the Lord. And the
women paid Marchetts, as in Thurgarton. The value of the works was 6l. 19s. 9d.
The rents of Assize to the Priory in Morton, were but 9s. 7d.

Te^t. de Nev.
Roger de Ayncurt is certified to have held a Knights Fee in Morton, of Oliver
de Ayncurt, of the old Feoffment, (but it is Morton in Darbyshire.

The Family of Cressover, were owners and resident here. There was an agreement
between Henry de la Cressover, and Richard, the Prior of Thurgarton, R^gist. de
Thurg. p. 14.
that the Prior should have the Fishing of Holmsike, and a certain Barn or
Grange built upon the land of the Monastery, in the fields of Fiskerton, and
Morton, without any disturbance, and that only Henry, and his heirs, should
fish in Livpole, and Capelingpole, and that he and his Successors should have a
way under the Parc of the Prior and Covent toward Southwell, and they should
have reasonable passage for their Cattle of Fiskerton, through his Meadow on the
Trent bank, to their Ox-pasture. Will. de la Cressovere of Morton, by
Southwell, in 17. and 18 E. 3. Fi^ lev. Pas^h. 17 E. 3. and Hill. 18 E. 3.
by Fine conveyed his Manor of Morton and one Mess. and two Bovats in
Farnesheld, to Benedict de Normanton, excepting six Tofts, fourteen Bovats of
Land, 7s. 1d. rent, and the third part of a Mess. whereof he passed also the
reversion, part of it being then held by Clementia, who had been wife of John
de la Cressovere, and William, brother of John, for life, and some little by
Maud, and Amicia, daughters of the said John de La Cressovere.

Some of this Land, 15 R. 2. Esc. 15 R. 2. par. 2. c. 35.
belonged to the Priory of Thurgarton; and I find that Thomas de Normanton, 13
H. 4. Esc. 13 H. 4. n. 3^.
had interest here, but further I find not, and therefore suppose it might be
conveyed by him to the Priory, as Annesleys Land was. Viz. one Mess. two Tofts,
six Bovats of Land, Regist. de Thurg. p. 191. and 1^2.
which John de Horspole, Clark, Thomas. Normanton, of Normanton, and William
Snawe, Chaplain, had, of the Feoffments of john Willughby, Esquire, and Thomas
de Willughby, Knight, were, the Wednesday after Christmas, 13 H. 4. by their
deed then dated at Morton; whereto were witnesses Sir John la Zouch, Knight,
Sir Nicolas Strelley, Knight, Sir William Nevile, Knight, Sir John Birton,
Knight, etc.

Raph de Annesley, Knight, had two sons, Reginald, the elder, and Raph, Ib.
to whom his Father gave the said six Bovats in Morton; of this Raph came
Robert de Annesley his son and heir, of whom came John, the Father of another
John, who had a daughter and heir called Isabell, married to John Ashewell, to
whom by Fine she gave the said Land, who passed it to Richard de Winwyk, and
William de Gunthorp, they to Richard de Crumwell, he to John de Willughby, and
others, they to John de Horspole, and the rest as before is said.

There was an Assize 18 E. 1. Pl. de Banco Mich. 18 E. 1. to. 63.
between Robert de Annesley, Plaintiff, and Agnes, who had been the wife of
Henry, son of Sewall, Defendant, concerning a place of Land, sixty foot long,
and forty broad, in Fiskerton, and Morton; the Jury said that Robert was never
in seisin, but they found (that Term) that she unjustly obstructed a certain
way in Fiskerton, and Morton, to. 71.
so that the said Robert could not drive his goods directly from his Tenement
in Morton, to his pasture of Mardelok, and the More, etc.

Fiskerton Grange, 3 and 4 Ph. and Mar. was granted to Edward Fynes, 1. par.
Orig. 3. and 4 Ph. and M. to. 44.
Knight, Lord Clinton and Say, and Thomas Morryson; it was rated at 7l. 12s.
8d. and in the Parish of Rolston.

Quen Elizabeth 21 Ian. 4 Eliz. Par. 3. pat. 4 Eliz.
granted to Thomas Cooper, Esquire, and his heirs, B.
all the Tithes, and Demesne and Manor of Fiskerton, and Morton, and the
Capital Mess. called Ashwel-hall, in Morton, and a little Close called the
Park, and other Lands and Pastures belonging to it, and other Lands with the
Passage of Fiskerton, and two Water-mills on the River Greet, and Lands in
Gourton, and Bleseby, belonging to the Priory of Thurgarton, etc.

Sir Roger Cooper sold Ashwell-hall, and the Manor, and some Farms in Moreton,
Ex Autog. penes Hen Plumere, Ar.
1646. and the Manor of Fiskerton, and Moreton, and the Ferry at Fiskerton,
and the Tithes and Farms there, in the year 1649. to Huntingdon Plumtre,
Esquire, Dr. of Physic, whose son and heir, Henry Plumtre, Esquire, is the
present owner of the said Manor and Farms in Morton, and the Tithes of
Fiscarton. And I suppose Sir Roger sold some in Fiskerton, about or before that
time, to Thomas Atkinson, of Newark, which Robert Atkinson, his son, has since
sold to Samuel Ellis. And some more in Fiskerton was also purchased by Ed.
Standish, of Newark, of the said Sir Roger Cooper, which is also now the
possession of the said Samuel Ellis, all which was the Demesne: and Thomas
Cliffe, and John Cliffe, of Stoke, and John Cliffe, of Not. have purchased the
Ferry, Farms, etc. of Fiscarton, 1673. of the said Henry Plumtre, as I hear.

Gourton. Bleseby. No^^own. Gibsmere.
GOurton, Bleseby, and Noetown, I suppose, were involved in Suthwell, in
Doomsday Book, wherein is shown that Raph Fitz Hubert had in Gipesmare, and
Mortun, Land rated to the Geld or Tax at one Car. three Bov. of the Soc of
Sudwelle, which Land was three Carucats and an half, and both before the
Conquest, and at the time of making that survey in the latter part of the
Conquerours reign also was valued at 28s. This the Lords of Annesley held, and
it descended as in Moreton may be seen.

Robert de Burstall, Knight, gave to William, son of William, of ( Car)
Coleston, with Ales his daughter, Regist. de Thurg. p. 15. etc.
6s. 6d. rent in the Town of Gouerton, to be perceived of John, son of Hugh de
Gouerton, and his heirs, the sum of 4^. and of John, son of Albert, 2s. 6d.
which the said William, and Ales after him, gave to the Priory of Thurgarton,
and the said Sir Robert de Burstall confirmed. And also gave one Bovat of
Arable, with Meadow in the Fields, and Medows of Gouerton, and Bleseby, and all
his Meadow in Smething, and a Toft in Bleseby, and another Bovat in the said
Fields and Medows, and confirmed several Lands given to maintain the Fabric of
the Church of Thurgarton; as for example, one Wong, with the head-land upon
Brecum, lying between land of the Chaplain of Bleseby, on the West, and the
Land of Henry, son of Robert de Gipesmere, on the East, which Thomas, son of
Alan de Gouerton, sold to William de Blitheworth, for five Marks, who gave it
for the Soul of Robert de Oxon, Canon of Southwell, all or most of which John,
son of the said Sir Robert de Burstall, also confirmed. There were many other
parcels in this territory given to the said Fabric. Dru, son of John, son of
Richard de Gipesmere, gave five Selions, which his father had given before.
John, son of Hugh de Gouerton, gave an Acre of Meadow in Smething, and Richard,
called the Cementar, son of Hugh de Gourton, three Selions, and an Head-land,
and the like, which John, son of Robert de Burstal, confirmed also, to the said
Fabric, lying all in the fields of Gouerton and Bleseby.

By a fine, 13 E. 2. Fin. lev. Pas^h. 13 E. 2.
Robert de Burstall, of Birton, passed the Manor of Bleseby to John de
Crumbewell; and by another Fine 14 E. 2. Mich. 14 E. 2.
it was settled on Richard de Crumbewell, and the heirs of his body, for want
whereof it was to revert to the said John de Crumbewell, and his heirs. Alice,
who had been the wife of Robert de Cressover, then held the said Manor, for
term of her life. In the time of E. 3. it was Raph de Crumwells, as in Baseford
may be noted. Maud, the Cousin and heir of Raph Lord Crumbewell, widow of
Robert Lord Willoughby, levied a Fine, 21 E. 4. Fin. lev. Pasch. 21 E. 4.
of the Manor of Bleseby, with the Appurtenances, and of two Mess. four Tofts,
one hundred Acres of Land, twenty of Meadow, sixty of Pasture, and 29s. Rent,
with the Appurtenances in Bleseby, Gourton, and Gippesmere, to William
Hastings, Knight, William Chauntry, Dean of the College of the Newwork at
Leycester, William Moton, Esquire, William Grimmesby, Esquire, Robert Morn,
Clark, and Thomas Kebeell, whereby the premises were settled on her the said
Maud for life, and then to revert to the said William, William, William, etc.
and the heirs of William Chauntry. This came from the Family of Hastings, as in
Lambley may be discerned, to Will. Willoughby, of Wollaton, and is now the
inheritance of the Marquess of Dorchester, purchased I suppose, by his rather
Robert, Earl of Kingston.

There was a Fine levied 20 E. 3. Fin. lev. Mich. 20 E. 3.
between John, son of Thomas de Sireston, and Margaret his wife, Quer. by
William de Batheley, Keeper or Guardian of the said Margaret, and Thomas de
Sireston, and Amicia his wife, (mentioned in Streston) Deforcients, of two
Mess. one Bovat, and five Acres of Land, fifteen Acres of Meadow, and 7d. Rent,
in Bleseby, Gourton, and Gipsmer, whereby they were settled on the said John
and Margaret, and the heirs of their bodies, remainder to Thomas and Amicia,
and the heirs of Thomas.

Galfr. de Staunton, at the Assizes at Not. 31. E. 3. A^^i^. Cott. 31. E. 3.
to. 5^.
recovered his seisin of 2. Mess. 12. Bovats of Land, forty eight Acres of
Meadow, eight of Pasture, and 26s. 8d. Rent in Bleseby, Gouerton, and
Gippesmere, and Thomas Alweys was amerced. The Jury 32 E. 3. Es^. 32. E. 3. n.
41.
found that William de Staunton had an estate in two Mess. 240. Acres of Land,
and 48. of Meadow, and 40s. Rent in Gouerton, Bleseby, and Gibsmere, for the
life of John Alewys, according to a writing dated at Gouerton, 27 E. 3. which
Lands were held of the Archbishop of York, by the service of 16^. per annum,
and three appearances yearly at his Court of Southwell.

I find no mention of Noetown, and therefore suppose it only some houses which
are parcel of some of these Hamlets.

In the year of our Lord 1612. Bleasby, with Gibsmere, and Gourton, Liber
libere t^n.
had these for owners, viz. The Lady Arbella twenty nine Oxgangs, William
Cooper, Esquire, five Oxgangs and an half, Michael Grundy, of Thurgarton,
twenty six Oxgangs, William More five Oxgangs and an half, William Ferryman, of
Goreton, four Oxgangs, Richard Wightman, Gent. a Windmill, the Bailiff of East
Retford, seven Oxgangs, and John North, of Lowdham, two Crofts. Mr. John Grundy
is now resident at Bleseby.

The Vicarage of Bleisby was seven Marks. It Is now 4l. value in the Kings
Books, Mss. I.M.
and the Chapter of Southwell has the Patronage.

Halloughton or Hawton.
THis makes a Prebend in Southwell, as in that place is shown: it was called
the Lay Prebend, having nothing spiritual but the Tithes of its own Lands. B.


John Forest, Gent. son and heir of Richard Forest, brother of Roger Forest,
Esquire, who died 10 May, Lib. 2. (...) ^^2.
1 Mariae, seized of the Manor of Fleton in Huntingtonshire, and the Manor of
Halloughton or Haughton in this County, was under age at the death of his said
Uncle: he had both Land and Tithes.

Sir Charles Owseley or Wolseley had it in Lease lately, and I think still
has. The Prebend of Halton was 10l. Ms. I. M.
It Is now 8l. 17s. 6d. value in the Kings Books.

Southwell. Suell. And Sudwell.
THis place, with the Hamlets and Members of it, which make up that which is
now called the Soke, before the Conquest was a distinct Hundred, lying between
the two Hundreds of Torgarton and Lyde, with which it is now joined, and was
sometimes called Southwell Hundred (as out of Doomsday Book in Farnesfeld is
manifest) and sometimes (as I suppose) Cherlington Hundred, corrupted at length
into Chadlington Hundred, for so it is called in the Patent, 5 E. 6. Par. 7.
pat. 5 E. 6.
which gave license to John Earl of Warwick to alienate it, and this most
ancient and Noble Manor to John Beaumont, then Master of the Rolls, and his
heirs.

The Church is said by Sir Edward Cook to be founded or built by Paulinus the
first Archbishop of York, who Baptized King Edwin on Easter day; Mon. Angl.
vo^. 3.12^.
in the year of our Lord 627. which may likely enough be true; but certain it
is, that in the year 958. Ib. 129.
King Eadwy granted to his beloved Bishop Oscytel (who was also Archbishop of
York) part of his Land, at Sudwellan twenty Farms for an Heritage, with all
their Appurtenances; yet King Edgar, brother and successor of Eadwy, Lib. mag.
p^n. C^^it. de Southwell.
in the Certificate into the Court of Augmentation, is said to be the ancient
Founder. However the Conquerours great Survey reciting the Land of the
Archbishop of York in Snottinghamseire in Torgarton Wapentac shows, that in
Sudwelle, Li^. Dooms.
with its Berues, then numbered twelve, were twenty two Car. and an half, for
the Tax or Geld. The Land twenty four Car. There Archbishop Thomas had ten
Car. in Demesne, ten Sochm. seventy five Villains, twenty three Bordars, having
thirty seven Car. There were two Mills 40s. and a Fishgarth (Piscina) or Pool,
and a Passage 6s. Of this same Land held six Knights, four Car. and an half.
Three Clarks had one Car. and an half (according to my Copies, or four Car. and
an half, as Mr. Dugdales) of that were two Bovats in Prebend. Mon. Angl. vol.
3. part. 2. page 10.
Two Englishmen had three Carucats, and five Bovats. The Knights had seven
Car. in Demesne, thirty five Vill. twenty eight (or twenty three) Bordars,
having twenty one Car. and one Mill of 8^. (or as Mr. Dugdale's Copy 3s.) The
Clarks had one Car. and an half in Demesne, seven Vill. five Board. having three
Car. The Englishmen had four (or three) Car. in Demesne, twenty Vill. six
Board. having six Car. and an half. To Sudwelle belonged one hundred and
fourscore and eight Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood eight leuc. long, two
quarentens and an half broad (the half is wanting in the Monasticon Angl. vol.
3. part 2. page 10.) Arable Land five leuc. long, three broad. In the time of
King Edward the Confessor it was valued at 40l. and when the Book of Doomsday
was made at 40l. and 15^.

St. Mary of Sudwelle had a Manor in Croppehille, which had a Berue in
Hegelinge, which the Canons then had; and another Manor in Nortwelle; but how
many Prebendaries there were at this time, or whether they held their Prebends
distinct, or in Common, is not easy positively to determine: yet seeing that
in Woodborough it is recorded that a Clark (whom I take for the Prebendary of
that place) held under the Archbishop Lands which answered the Dane-geld for
one Bovat, Lib. Doom^.
it is most probable that every one enjoyed his own apart. Now because in the
White-Book of Southwell (still remaining with the Chapter) there is nothing of
the Foundation of the Prebends of Woodborough, Normanton, the three of Norwell,
the two of Oxton, that of North Muskam, that of South Muskam, nor of the
Sacrista, called Sakerson, and Segiston, and now Sexton; it may reasonably be
guessed, these, or the most of them, were in being then or near that time, viz.
the latter end of the Reign of King William the first.

Most of the rest, as by that Book appears, were not long after; for King
Henry the first, son of the said King William, gave to Thurstan Archbishop of
York, the Church of Dunham, Lib. A^b. pen. Cap. de Suthwell, p. 13. and p. 21.
that he might make it a Prebend in the Church of Southwell, and likewise
confirmed the gift which that Archbishop made of the Churches of his Manors
of North Leverton and Bekingham, to make another Prebend in that Church.

King Henry the second confirmed to his Clark Roger, the brother of Martin de
Capella, Ib. p. 26.
the Prebend which Roger Archbishop of York had made of the Land of Halton,
which William the Steward of the aforesaid Thurstan held, in the time of the
said King Henry the first, and afterward gave to the Church of Southwell.

Roger Archbishop of York certified King Henry the second, Lib. rubr. in Scac.
that his Predecessors did enfeoffe more Knights than they ought to the King,
not for the necessity of the Service which they did owe, but because they were
willing to provide for their Kinsmen and Servants.

Pavia, the daughter of Nigellus de Ramtun, by the consent of Robert Malovell
her son, Lib. Alb. p. 36.
not long after gave the Church of Ramton, with the Appurtenances, to make
another Prebend in this Church of Southwell.

Lib. Alb. p. 28.
And John Archbishop of York, in the year of our Lord 1289. made another of the
Church of Eton. And in the year 1291. William Rotherfeild Prebendary of
Bekingham resigning for that purpose, p. 24.
the said Archbishop at his request, and by the consent of the Chapters of
York and Southwell, did ordain the Church of North Leverton, before a part of
the Prebend of Bekingham, to be a distinct one of it self, and the Prebendary
to have his Stall in the Quire on the North side next that of the Sacrist, and
his place in the Chapter House duly assigned by the Chapter, and to have and
pay his Vicar Choral, as the other Canons used, and the said William
Rotherfeild to enjoy Bekingham, so divided, during his time, which made the
number of the Prebends Sixteen, as they now are, which have been, Mss. I. M.
and are thus valued, viz. l. 3. d. Norwell Overhall, or prima pars, was 42l.
is now 48 1 3 Norwell Palacehall, or secunda pars, was 30l. is now 27 19 7
Norwell tertia pars was 6l. is now 5 2 0 ob Normanton Prebend was 20l. is now
22 6 0 ob Halton or Halloughton was 10l. is now 8 -17 -6 Dunham before the
Survey taken by H. 8. was 45marks. is now 23 11 3 Rampton then also was 24mar.
is now 15 17 11 Woodborough is wanting in my Copy of the old, but is now 9 17
11 Eton before the Survey of H. 8. was 10l. is now -2 11 3 South Muskham then
also was 20mar. is now 13 4 7 Oxton prima pars was 40mar. is now 22 19 7 Oxton
altera pars was then also 40mar. is now 24 10 0 Beckingham was 20l. is now 16
15 10 North Muskham was 34l. is now -32 5 0 Sacrista was in elder time 30^. is
now -1 3 4 North Leverton was 5l. is now 4 17 11 in the Kings Books, and the
Archbishop of York is Patron of all.

Very great and many privileges were anciently granted to this Church by
several Kings, Lib. Alb. p. 1.
Archbishops, and Chapters of York, which Pope Alexander the third, in the
twelfth year of his Pontificate, viz. 1171. refers to in his Bull, wherein he
confirmed to the Canons of the Church of St. Mary of Southwell, amongst many
others, their ancient Liberties and Customs, to wit, the same which the Church
of York had of old, and were known to have then, and that the Churches of the
Prebends, and also those belonging to the Chapter should be free from Episcopal
Jurisdiction, and that they might institute fit Vicars in them without any
contradiction, as the said Archbishops and Chapters of York ever suffered them
and their Predecessors to do, who likewise granted to them, as was of long
custom observed, and also by the said Pope approved, that both the Clergy and
Laity of the County of Nottingham should at the Feast of Pentecost come to
their Church with solemn procession; and that every year according to the old
and rational usage of that Church, a Synod should there be celebrated, and that
thither the Chrisma should be brought by the Deans of the County from the
Church of York, to be thence distributed through the other Churches, etc.

There is yet, and from the beginning of this Church, I suppose, even has
been, at Whit sunday a certain small Pension paid from every Parish and Hamlet
in this County called the Pentecostall Offerings, In Camera Scaccarii in lib.
ordin. Hill. 27 Eliz.
whereof the Prebendary of the Sacrists or Sacriston Prebend has the tenth
part, and the residue is equally divided between the Commons of the Canons [
resident] and the Prebendary of the Prebend of Normanton.

The particulars are thus,

In the Deanery of Nottingham, s. d. Arnall 2 0 Ansley 0 16 Addenburgh 0 16
Bramcote 0 6 Bulcote 0 9 Bulwell 0 10 Burton Iorce 0 10 Bilborough 0 6 Basford
0 13 Beeston 0 18 Cotwick 0 8 Coffall 0 7 Eastwood 0 14 Eperston 2 6 Grefeley 2
2 Gonalston 0 16 Gedling cum Carieton and Stoke Bardolf -3 4 Hucknall Torcard 0
18 Hoveringham 0 13 Kirkeby in Ashfeild 0 20 Loudham 2 4 Lambley 0 16 Linby 0 9
Lenton 2 0 Maunsfeild 4 8 Mansfeld Woodhouse 2 6 Nottingham 13 4 Nuthall 0 12
Paplewick 0 12 Radford 0 13 Snenton 0 8 Selston 2 0 Stapleford 0 17 Strelley 0
8 Sutton in Ashfeild 2 0 Skegby 0 8 Teversall cum Stanley 0 15 Thurgarton 0 15
Trowell 0 14 Woolloughton 0 15 Sum 3 l 9 s 0 d.

The Deanery of Bingham,

s. d. Adbolton 0 3 ob Bingham 4 8 Bridgeford ad pontem 0 10 Bridgeford super
montem 0 18 Barton in fabis 0 18 Boney cum Bradinere 2 8 Broughton 0 10
Carcolston 0 14 Cortlingscock 0 7 Cotgrave 0 20 Colston Basset 0 18 Clifton cum
Glapton 0 18 Crophill Butler 0 12 Edwalton 0 6 Elton 0 12 Flintham 2 2 Gotham 0
13 Granbie 0 18 Hickling 0 18 Hauxworth 0 12 Holine Pierpont 0 20 Kynnalton 0
18 Kingston 0 8 Kayworth 0 12 Kneeton 0 8 Langar 0 14 Leake major 0 16 Leake
minor 0 8 Normanton super Sore 0 10 Orston 0 22 Owthorpe 0 12 Plumtree cum
Clipston 0 15 Ratclif super Sore 0 8 Ratclif super Trent 2 0 Rempston 0 7
Ruddington 0 16 Stanford 0 9 Screveton 0 14 Saxendale 0 6 Srarri^gton 0 8
Sutton Bonington 0 13 Shelford 0 20 Stanton 0 5 Theroton 0 10 Thrompton 0 10
Tithby 0 6 Tollerton 0 13 Wilford 0 18 Wisaw 0 13 Widmerpoole 0 14 Willoughby 0
13 Whatton 0 17 Sum 3 l. 2 s. 4 d.ob.

The Deanery of Newarke,

s. d. Averham 2 0 Balderton 2 0 Barneby 2 0 Caunton 0 -10 Cromwell 0 22
Clifton cum membr. 4 0 Eykring 2 0 Faringdon 3 0 Fledbrough 0 7 Cotham 0 10
Coddington 2 -0 Gretton 2 0 Hockerton 0 -12 Hawton 0 -15 Kilvington 0 8
Kneesall 2 0 Kellum 0 -16 Laxton 3 0 Marneham 3 0 Molebeck 0 18 Normanton super
Trent 0 20 Newarke 13 4 North Collingham 2 0 South Collingham 0 20 Ossington 0
16 Rolston 2 -8 Staunton Hiekirke 0 6 Sibthorpe 0 9 Shelton 0 -8 Elston 0 14
Sutton super Trent 4 0 Stoke 0 18 Scarle cum Biesthorp 2 8 Sierston 0 12
Thorney 0 12 Thorpe 0 -5 Winckburne 0 -9 Weston 2 0 Winthorpe 0 -8 Sum 3 l. 16
s. 7 d.

The Deanery of Redford,

s. - d. Allerton 0 12 Askham 0 12 Bottomsall 0 10 Bevercotes -0 -8 Blithe cum
Bawtrie and Awsterfeild 4 -4 Burton 0 -8 Babworth 0 -8 Bilsthorpe 0 16 Boughton
0 -8 Claworth 0 16 Cuckney 0 12 Carberton 0 8 Carleton 0 18 Clipston 0 16
Draiton magna 0 20 Est Redford 2 0 Elkesley 0 16 Edwinstow cum Budby 2 8 East
Markham cum Drayton 3 4 Everton 0 16 Egmonton 0 22 Finingley 0 8 Gamston 0 16
Gringley 0 14 Grove 0 14 Harworth 0 12 Headon 2 0 Kirketon 0 9 Little Markham
cum Milneton 0 12 Little borogh 0 7 Laneham 0 20 Misterton 2 0 Mattersay 0 12
Missen 0 10 North Wheatley 0 22 Ordfall 0 16 Rossington 0 12 Saundby 0 12
Stokeham 0 6 Sutton cum Lound 0 20 South Leverton 0 18 Sturton 0 20 Tuxford 3 0
Treswell 0 10 Walkeringham 0 12 Walesby 0 10 Welley 0 12 Warsop cum Sulkholme 2
4 West Redford 0 16 Workesoppe 3 0 Sum 3 l. 10 s. 2 d.

The Deanery or Jurisdiction of Southwell,

s. d. Beckingham 2 0 Blidworth 0 14 Cropwell Bishop 0 16 Calverton 0 12 Donham
0 19 Darlton 0 12 Eaton 0 10 North Leverton 0 12 Norwell 0 18 North Muskham 2 4
Oxton 0 14 South Muskham 2 0 South Wheatley 0 8 Rampton 0 20 Ragnell 0 18
Woodborow 0 20 Southwell 5 0 Halome 0 18 Halloughton 0 10 Ed^ngley 0 18
Kirtlington 0 18 Farnesfeild 2 0 Bleasby cum 0 21 Gouerton and 0 21 Gipesmere 0
21 Morton 0 12 Vpton 3 0 Sum 40s. 6d. Summa totalis 15l. 15s. 3d. ob.

King Henry the first being at Nottingham granted to Archbishop Thomas, Lib.
Alb. p. 14.
all his possessions and customs over all his Lands in Notinghamsyre, and
especially over those which belong to the Church of St. Mary of Suell, as he
held them better in the time of his brother [ William Rufus;] and if any
claimed upon the men which remained on those Lands, they should do such right
as the Canons of St. Peter [of Yorke] and in such place; and if upon this any
should do any injury, he should make the amends to the King himself.

The privileges of the Church of York, in this Kings Charter of confirmation,
Chart Ant. DD. n. 5.
are more particularly mentioned, which are also almost word for word,
rehearsed in an instrument of the Chapter of York, declaring the Freedoms and
Customs of that Church, granted by King Athelstan, carefully observed by his
successors, and confirmed by Apostolical Authority, to be very much infringed
by the Sheriff of Yorkshire, Lib. Alb. p. 18.
in the year of our Lord 1106. upon which Bishop Gerard made complaint to the
King, who thereupon sent Robert Bishop of Lincoln, Raph Basset, Geffrey Ridel,
Ranulf le Meschines, and Peter de Valoniis to York, that they might inquire
what were the said Customs of the Church of St. Peter, who to that end called
to them the most prudent Englishmen of that County, whom they caused to swear
by the Faith they ought to the King, to tell the truth, viz. Vitreth, the son
of Alwin, Gamel, the son of Swarterol, Gamel, the son of Grim, Norman the
Priest, William, the son of Vlf, Frenger the Priest, Vitreth, the son of
Turkill, Norman the son of Baling, Thurstin, son of Turmot, Gamel, son of Ormi,
Morcar, son of Ligulf, and Vlvet, the son of Forno, by right of inheritance the
Lagaman of the City (which may rather be interpreted Lawyer or Judge possibly,
as Recorder is now, than lawful-man, or freeman) who then also was Prefect,
and thus discoursed before them, Ausketinus de Bolomer the Praepositus of the
Northrideing, being his interpreter, That they all remembered and testified,
that all the Land belonging to the Prebends of the Church of St. Peter, was so
quiet and free, that neither the Kings Officer, nor any other could have Law,
nor take a distress there till the Canon of that Prebend was first required:
and if he refused, the Dean should set a day, and do right at the Church door.
And if any person whatsoever shall take and detain any man, though guilty and
convict of any Crime or wickedness whatever, from within the Porch, he shall
always be judge^ to make amends by six Hundreths; if from within the Church,
by twelve; if from within the Quire, by eighteen, every Hundredth containing six
pounds [the Kings Charter says eight pounds] and for every the said faults, or
any, shall be enjoined Penance as for Sacrilege. But if any should be so mad,
and instigated by the Devil, as to presume to take one from the Stone-Chair by
the Altar, which the English call Frithstol, that is, the Chair of quiet and
peace, for so wicked a Sacrilege no Judgment nor sum of money can acquit
him, but is by the English called Botelesse, i. e. without Emendation. These
Amends, Emendations (or Amerciaments) belong not to the Archbishop but to the
Canons, etc. Thus it goes on reciting many other like Privileges, besides
those of Soc, Sac, Toll, Them, Infangthef, Intol, Vtol, etc. as in the said
Kings Charter also may be seen; most (or all) of which the Church of Southwell
had and used as occasion required, and had them in other names (as the use of
words and things changed with the times) allowed and confirmed, and others
granted by succeeding Kings.

Lib. Alb. p 14.
King Stephen, by his Precept dated at York, directed to William Peverell of
Not. and the Sheriff and his Ministers, commanded that the Canons of St. Mary
of Suwell should have the Woods of their Prebends in their own hands and
custody, and thence take what they should need, as in King Henry's time; and
that his Foresters be forbidden to take or sell any thing there. King Henry the
second, Ib.
King Richard, King John, King Henry the third, all of them, and indeed those
Kings who came after them, made the several Archbishops in their respective
times, and this Chapter, very secure of their Liberties within the Forest of
Shirwood.

The Justices in Eyr were to hear and determine all Pleas touching the Chapter,
Canons, their Tenants and Servants at the South door of the Church, except
Pleas of the Crown, which they were to hear and determine at the House of any
of the Canons out of the Sanctuary, which was presented by the Wapentac of
Thurgarton and Lyth, and claimed by the Chapter, among other privileges
allowed in Air, before William Herle and his fellow Justices, the third year
of King Edward the third, Lewar. 3^. 3.
at which time, besides the Chapters view of Frank-pledge of all their Tenants
in Southwell, Northwell, South Muskham, North Muskham, Calneton, Oxton,
Calverton, Wodeborough, Crophill, Blitheworth, Halghton, Bekingham, Dunham,
Halam, Edingley, and Normanton, and their Court Leet held twice every year at
Southwell, for their Tenants residing in Southwell, Halum, and Newton, and
likewise that held in like manner for Edingley.

Robert Woodhouse, Prebendary of Norwell, claimed and had the like view of all
his Tenants in Norwell Woodhouse, Willoughby, and Middelthorpe, kept twice in a
year at Norwell, and Wayf in the said Towns. And Robert de Notingham,
Prebendary of Oxton and Crophill, the like of his in Oxton, Blitheworth,
Calverton, Woodborough, and Crophill, and Hickling, and Wayf also. Lambert de
Trikingham, Prebendary of Halton, the like of his there. Henry de Edenestow,
Prebendary of Oxton and Crophill, as before. Robert de Bridelington, Prebendary
of Woodburgh, the like of his in Woodburgh and Edingley. William de Barneby,
Prebendary of Bekingham, the like of his in Southwell and Edingley, held twice
a year at Southwell, and of those in Bekingham held twice a year there. William
de Newark, Prebendary of North Muskham, the like of his in North Muskham,
Calneton, South Muskam, North Carleton, Normanton by Southwell, held twice a
year at North Muskam, and Wayf as the rest. Thomas de St. Albano, Prebendary of
Dunham, the like of his Tenants in Dunham, Derleton, Wymton, Ragenhull, held
twice a year at Dunham. John de Sandale, Prebendary of Normanton, the like of
his in Southwell and Normanton, kept likewise twice a year at Southwell. The
Courts of the Prebendaries were all subject to that of the Chapter, and Causes
upon Error, or other lawful reason, might be removed thither, and there
determined.

The Lands and Tenements of this Church either belonged to the Prebendaries
resident, called the Commons of the Church, or to the several Prebends, or to
the Fabric called our Ladies works, or to the Vicars Chorall, or to the
Chantry Priests.

The Residentiaries Commons, it seems, were but short, Lib. Alb.
and therefore for their Augmentation Walter Archbishop of York, about the
fifth year of King Henry the third, conferred the Church of Rolleston upon
them, which he obtained of the Prior and Covent of Thurgarton, who had it of
Henry, the son of Thomas de Rolleston, Knight, and of Iollanus de Novavilla,
which said Henry confirmed it also to the Chapter; and Benedict, the son of
Thomas de Rolleston, Knight, for the sum of twenty Marks sterling, did
likewise confirm what his Predecessor Sir Henry had done. But the provision of
the Residentiaries was very slender still, and therefore John Archbishop of
York in the year 1291. did by the good will and submission of Mr. John Clarell,
Sir William de Rotherfeud, and Sir Richard de Bamfeud, Canons of Southwell,
decree and ordain, That the portions of Corn and Hay in the Parish of Vpton by
Southwell, which theretofore belonged to their Prebends, should for the future
be for the Commons, or common uses of the Chapter and Canons resident, the
Chapters of York and Southwell consenting, and King Edward the first confirming
the same.

The Fabric had diverse parcels of Land in Southwell and Normanton, Ib.
and Henry de Southwell gave a Rent of forty shillings a year due to him from
Robert Wulrington, for Lands which he held of him in Stretton in the Clay. Sir
Walter Mallett of Weloby, Knight, gave seven Acres on the West side of his Wood
Thirneclive, four and twenty foot to the Perch. Robert, the son of Beatrix de
Bella aqua, gave three Bovats of Land in Normanton. Thomas de Radclive, Rector
of Flintham, gave one Oxgang in Flintham; and several less parcels were given
in other places by many other pious persons, too many in number, and too small
in quantity, to be here recited.

The Vicars Chorall had likewise Lands of good value in Southwell, Edingley,
Farnesfeild, Muskam, and other places near by, many of which were conveyed to
the Chapter the 16 R. 2. Esc. 16 R. 2. p. 1. n. 150.
by Richard de Chesterfeild, and William Gunthorp, Cler. besides Rawmersh in
Yorkshire, and the Priory Alien of West Ravendale in Lincolneshire, which was
given to this Church by King Henry the sixth, in the seventeenth year of his
Reign, for the sum of three hundred Marks, which he received of John
Archbishop of York, and to relieve the poverty of this Church, which was at
that time so great, that of about sixty persons, Canons, Vicars, Chaplains,
Chantry-Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, Choristers, and other Ministers which
belonged to it, there was scarce subsistence for forty. This Priory the said
King did uphold to be of the value of fourteen pounds per annum above all
reprisals, and if it should be recovered from this Church, or be defective in
that sum, he promised Lands of that value some where else; and likewise
granted the said Archbishop or Chapter, or their successors, license to
purchase twenty-pounds a year more, notwithstanding the Statute of Mortmain.
These Vicars had likewise in this County the Rectory of Knesale, to which that
of Boughton was united, and the union confirmed by the Chapter of York in the
year 1403. besides the sums of 4l. per annum from the respective Prebendaries,
and the College for their habitation at the East side of the Churchyard, upon
part whereof, about the year 1379. at the charge of Richard de Chesterfeild,
Mon. Angl. vol. 3. p. 14 and 15.
Canon of this Church, it was builded; the remaining part of the said
Churchyard being large enough for Processions, and Burials, and other things
there to be done; and the house anciently built for their dwelling being old
and ruinous, and situate far from the Church, and the way between dirty and
deep, that they could not so commodiously attend Divine Service, but dwelt
scattered abroad in the Town before the said building of it. John, Archbishop
of York, appropriated the Rectory of Barneby near Newark, for the more
plentiful sustentation of the Choristers. The Church of St. Elen of Wheatley
was given by Geoffrey Archbishop of York to find Lights, and confirmed by
Walter Thancy Archdeacon of Not. and also by Pope Innocent.

In this Church were many Chantries Founded, and those Priests had also some
Lands in Common, and an House at the North-West side of the Churchyard for
their residence, which is now in Lease to Mr. Robert Butler, and his dwelling
House.

Three of these were Founded by Mr. Robert Lexington, Ib. Lib. Alb.
Canon of this Church, the two first at the Altar of St. Thomas the Martyr, for
the health of his own Soul, and his Ancestors, and for the Souls of King John,
of Brian de Insula, of his Father, Mother, Brothers, Sisters, Parents, Friends,
Parishioners, all his Benefactors, and for all the faithful departed, and also
for all the living for whom he was any way obliged to pray, or of whom he had
ever received any thing either willingly or against their wills, for the
performance whereof he gave the Church, and some Lands in Barneburgh near
Doncaster, which he had of Henry de Novomercato, and were confirmed to him by
Adam de Novomercato, brother of the said Henry, to the Chapter of Southwell for
the augmenting the Divine Worship in that Church, and the sustenance of two
Priests, two Deacons, and two Subdeacons, to minister in their Order, and to
follow the Quire, as Vicars according to the Order of Walter Gray Archbishop
of York, dated at Oxton in the twenty sixth year of his Pontificate; and
likewise to pay half a Mark yearly toward Lights, Ornaments, and other
necessaries for the said Altar; and to find twenty seven pounds of Wax to make
one Light for the great Altar, and thirteen pounds to make two for the said
Altar of St. Thomas the Martyr, to burn on the day of his Passion and
Translation; the remainder to be for the use of that Altar as occasion should
require: which Advowson and Lands were likewise released to the Chapter by
Thomas, the son of Sir Thomas de Bella aqua. And the succeeding Rectors of
Barneburg did accordingly by the Decree of the aforesaid Archbishop pay
quarterly to the said Priests forty shillings, to the said Deacons twenty, and
to the said Subdeacons sixteen and eight pence, besides the Wax and half Mark
before mentioned. The third Chantry was likewise at the Altar of St. Thomas the
Martyr in the new work, for the Soul of the said Robert de Lexington the
Founder, and for the Souls of his Father, Mother, Brothers, Sisters, Parents,
Ancestors, Successors, Parishioners, Benefactors, and of all the faithful, for
which he gave to the Chapter of Southwell sixty and four shillings of yearly
Rent issuing out of eleven Oxgangs of Land held of him by several persons in
Newton, and one Oxgang in Saxendale, together with Homages, Services, Reliefs,
Wards, etc. and sixteen shillings of like Rent in Laxton Morehouse. The Priest
who did the Service, and might sometimes Read, sometimes Sing, which stirred up
most devotion, was to have all the said Rents, and half the Reliefs, and other
profits happening out of the aforesaid Tenements and the other half was to be
for the Commons of the Canons resident.

Another Chantry was Founded at the Altar of St. Peter in the same Church by
Richard de Sutton, Canon there, and also of Lincoln, about the year of our
Lord 1260. at which time the Vicars of this Church of Southwell, granted to him
by their Instrument sealed with their common Seal, together with that of the
Chapter, for themselves and their Successors, that so often as Mass for the dead
Brethren and Benefactors of that Church should be there celebrated, there
should a special Prayer be said for the said Richard Sutton; and another for
the Souls of Robert de Sutton his Father, and Alice his Mother. And that they
would find a Wax Light to burn for his Soul at the Mass of our Lady daily there
celebrated for ever. Oliver de Sutton, Prebendary, and afterward Bishop of
Lincoln, and Ernald de Calneton were his Executors, and purchased of Philip,
the son of Baldwin de Paunton, Rents and Lands in Holme, which they settled
upon Henry de Newark, Archdeacon of Richmund, Prebendary of North Muskham,
Pat. 18. E. 1. n. 11.
and upon his Successors Prebendaries of North Muskham, to pay six Marks
yearly, viz. twenty shillings every quarter to the Priest performing the
Office. And lest the Rent should be ill paid by his Successors the said Henry
de Newark, by his writing bearing date at Muscam, November... 1288. granted to
the Chapter of Southwell, power to sequester the Prebend in case of Failer.
John, the brother of Richard de Sutton, Canon of Suthwell, was Rector of
Lexington, (...) de Li^^. p. 43.
Anno 1259.

Sir William de Wydington, Knight, founded a Chantry at his Chapel of St.
Nicholas, in Est Thorp, during his own life, but after that, at the Altar of
St. Nicolas, in the Church of Suthwell, to which he gave Rents thereabouts, to
the sum of six pounds and eight Shillings yearly; which were confirmed to the
Chapter of Southwell, by Simon de Gryngethorp, and Clementia his wife.

Andrew, the Bailiff of Southwell, in the time of Walter, Archbishop of York,
founded a Chantry at the Altar of St. Stephen there, and gave many parcels of
Land to it, in several Townships thereabouts.

In the year 1275. or shortly after, Henery le Vavasor, Prebendary of Norwell
Palishall, founded another Chantry in this Church of Southwell, at the Altar of
St. John Baptist; though in the white Book, p. 327. where his Deed is
registered, it is written St John the Evangelist.

After the death of Sir Henry de Notingham, about 29 H. 3. Anno Domini 1245.
Robert Lexington founded a Chantry at the Altar of St. John the Evangelist,
where the bones of the said Sir Henry Not. do rest, to pray for his Soul. And
procured Lands in Helpringham, and other places in Lincolneshire, for the
Monastery of Sixill, who were therefore obliged to pay ten Marks yearly, to the
Chapter of Southwell, for that purpose; as did also William Rosell, and his
heirs, twenty Shillings for a Tenement, which he held of the said Robert
Lexington, in Warksop and Raph, the Chaplain, son of Goscelinus de Willoughby,
the sum of half a Mark yearly, for one in Carleton.

In the year 1395. William de Gunthorp, Prebendary of Southwell, prevailed with
the Chapter to give four Marks of the Sixill Rent, toward the maintenance of a
Chaplain to celebrate the Mass of our Lady every day by note, in the Chapel of
St. Mary, on the North side of the Church, and there to pray for the souls of
Sir Henry de Notingham, Edward, late King of England, Philip his Queen, their
Children, Thomas, late Bishop of Norwich, John de Rolleston, Hamon de Barsham,
and for his own when he should dye, and all the faithful departed: for the
performance whereof, and to pay the Chaplain of the Chantry of St. John
Baptist, 13s. 4d. yearly, to pray daily for the Soul of the said Sir Henry
Not. (to which he would have the said Chaplain sworn at his entrance) he gave
3. Messuages, fourscore Acres of Land, fifteen Acres and an half of Meadow,
twenty Acres of Pasture, a fishing in Trent, and four shillings Rent, with the
Appurtenances, in North Carleton, and Sutton upon Trent.

There was another Chantry at the Altar of St. Mary Magdalen, founded by Mr.
Robert de Oxton, which had five pounds per annum from the Monastery of Welbeck.

Another about King Henry the fourths time, by Thomas Haxey, one of the
Prebendaries, which had Lands in Bekingham, Bolc, Bartholey, Normanton, and in
the Burgage of Southwell.

And another by Laurence Booth, Archbishop of York, at St. Cuthberts, for two
Priests, which had twenty Marks per annum out of Battersay, paid by the
Archbishop of York, for the time being.

The Predial Tithes of the whole Parish of Southwell, are divided amongst the
3. ancient Prebends, viz. Normanton, and the two of Norwell, B.
viz. Overhall and Palacehall, in the manner.

The Town and Fields of Southwell, with the Hamlets of Est Thorp, West Thorp,
and Normanton, are one part. Halam, Farnesfield, Greaveslane, Edingley, and
Osmundthorp, another part. And Gourton, Gibbesmere, Bleseby, Moreton,
Fiskerton, and Notowne, the third part. And to avoid all cavil for inequality,
the Prebends change from one to another every three years, so that it is now
called the Current Tithe.

The Site of the Town of Southwell is divided into the Burgage, now contracted
into Burridge, which takes that part of the Town from the Marketplace, to the
River Greet, and the Prebendage and Church.

After the dissolution of Monasteries, the Collegiate Church of Southwell was
reputed and taken for the head Mother Church of the Town and County of
Nottingham; Lib. mag. pen. Capit. de Southwell.
wherein is seeds Archiepiscopalis, and was so allowed by King Henry the eight,
by an Act of Parliament about 34 H. 3. But about 2 E. 6. amongst the Colleges
this Chapter was dissolved, and the Manor and Prebends granted to John, the
then Earl of Warwick, after Duke of Northumberland, and by him sold to John
Beaumont, Master of the Rolls, and Father to Francis Beaumont, B.
who was Judge of the Common Pleas, 5 E. 6. and from John Beaumont, they were
brought again to the Crown by conveyance, or otherwise, and so to the said Duke
of Northumberland, whose they were at his Attainder, and by Queen Mary restored
to the Archbishop and Chapter again. But Queen Elizabeth in her statutes for
this Church, Mon. A^g^. v^l. 3. part. 2. p. 16.
bearing date 2 Apr. 27 Eliz. faith it was founded by her father King Henry the
eighth.

The King, 35 H. 6. Febr. 21. granted to Will. Both, Archbishop of York, and
his successors, Chart. 35 H. 6. n. 18. m. 12.
return of Writs, within and upon all and singular their Demesnes, Lands,
Tenements, and Fees, etc. to which Charter Laurence Both (his brother) then
Keeper of the Privy Seal, amongst others was a witness.

The Archbishops of York, besides a great Leet over many townships, B.
have a Sessions of peace (kept by turns at Southwell, and Scrooby,) by
Justices of the Peace, of their own nomination, though under the Kings
Commission.

They had a very fair Palace here at Southwell, which stood on the South side
of the Churchyard, within a Park of excellent ground, called the little Park,
or the new Park, which was demolished in the late rebellion; some think it was
built by Cardinal Wolsey, and if it were not, I should guess at the
Archbishops Bothes, for they, or one of them, builded or caused to be builded
a Chapel joining to the South-wall of the Church, at the West end, called
Bothes Chapel, which by negligence in the late Wars, and since, is now utterly
ruined, as is also a very fair Marble Tomb in it, whereunder it is like one of
them lies buried.

King Edward the sixth, the sixth of January, 3 E. 6. Part. 9. pat. 3 E. 6.
granted to John, Earl of Warwick before-named, the Manor of Southwell, and
all hereditaments, known by the name of Chadlington Hundred, and the Farm of
Land and Hereditament called Hokerwood, or Hokerwood Park, containing 120.
Acres, and all pasture Woods, and Pastures lying in Southwell in the tenure of
Galfr. Lee, and all those Hereditaments called Chequer Silver, Water Silver,
Hidage, and other hereditaments, known by the name of Chadlington Hundred, and
five Acres, and three Roods of Meadow, in one piece called Dersinge, in
Southwell, and the Park of Hexgrave, and the Park of Norwood, then in the
tenure of Sir John Markham; and the New Park, in the tenure of Galfr. Lee, and
two Corn-Mills, situate on the River Greet, under one Roof, and the Water-mill
at Vpton, and a Fulling-mill in Southwell, and the fi^l^ing and passage of the
Water at Hefilford, in the tenure of Richard North, etc. but they still remain
to the Archbishop and Church.

Hexgrave Park, it is likely, was made by Walter, Archbishop of York, in the
time of H. 3. because then it was called the wood of Hekesgrave, concerning
which Thomas de Bella aqua, and likewise Robert de Bellaiaqua, Lib. Alb. p. 39.
quit-claimed all their right to the said Archbishop in the said Wood, and
released all the Ditch, with the Wood upon it, between the said Wood, and the
Field of Kertlington. Ib. p. 40.
The like did Hugh Picot, for ten Marks, and a Nag of three Marks price,
received by him of the same Archbishop. Sir Hugh Cartwright had this Park in
Lease, I suppose, wherein his son Hugh dwelt till he died, but since, I think,
it is demised to... Stern, younger son of the most Reverend Richard, the
present Lord Archbishop of York, and to Frances his wife, one of the
Daughters of William Cartwright, of Normanton, deceased, and of Christian his
wife, Daughter of the said Sir Hugh, or to some body for their use.

Norwood Park was purchased in the late unhappy times, by Mr. Edward C^ud, who
built a pretty Brick house in it, and since his Majesty's return, is become
Tenant to the Archbishop of York, as I guess.

This Town of Suelle or Southwell, gave name to a very considerable Family, a
Branch whereof continued their residence here, till the time of King H. 6. as
by comparing several places of this Book, where there is occasional mention of
some of them, may be gathered; besides whom I find about the latter end of the
Reign of H. 3. Sir Simon de Suelle, E^ Lib Ca^tar. Ioh. Dou^, Ar.
Knight, the prime witness to a Deed of Peoffment, whereby John, son of
Benedict de Hokerton, conveyed some small parcels of Land, to John, the Rector
of the Church of Hokerton, and his heirs.

Autogr. p^n. Eub. Southwell. Ep. durat.
John de Slamundeshey, son of Mr. Simon de Slamundeshey, for a certain sum of
Money before hand, by his Deed bearing date at Slamundeshey, the Thursday next
after the Feast of the Conception of the blessed Virgin Mary, 9 E. 1. granted
and confirmed to his beloved and special John de Suthewelle, Clerk, and his
heirs, a Mess. with the Appurtenantes, in the Borough of the Town of Suthwell,
which had been Simon le Charpenters of Suthwell. To this were witnesses Sir
Hugh (son of Oto or) Fitz Otes, the Kings Senescal, Sir Peter de Huntingfeld,
the Kings Marescall, Sir Galfr. de Neuband, Chancellor of the Kings Exchequer,
Adam de Clare, Roger de Stokes, Richard de Hereford, Clarks of the Kings
Chancery, John de la Cressover, Robert de Slamundeshey, Chaplain, Simon le
Charpenter, William de Eton, Hugh Tankard, and William le Rus, and others.
Nicolas de Skipton granted two Selions of Land in the Fields of Suthewell,
Autogr. penes R. S.
to John de Suthwell, Clark, and to Alice the daughter of Richard de
Mareschall, of Northwell, to hold to the said John, his heirs, and Assigns, and
if he happened not to have an heir, to the said Alice for her life, and after
her decease, to Matildis mother of the said John, for hers, and after her death
to Gilbert, brother of the said John, and to his heirs, and Assigns, for ever.
Peter, Autogr. penes R. S.
son of Mr. Gilbert de Eton, returning from the parts beyond the Seas into
England, at Canterbury, the Friday next before the Feast of St. Margaret, the
Virgin, 21 E. 1. released to John de Suwell, the Kings Clark, [ D^mini Regis
Clerico] (which is supposed then to signify Secretary) and to his heirs and
Assigns, all his right in one Toft, with the Appurtenances in the Borough of
Suwell, lying in Pottergate, between the Toft of the said John, and the Toft of
Mr. Benedict de Halum: The witnesses were William de St. Oswald, William de
Billingesley, Adam de Brom, Clarks of the Kings Chancery, John Quarrel, Richard
de Clayton, and Paulin Attebarre, and many others. The same Peter made another
release, bearing date at Suthewell, Autogr. penes R. S.
the Sunday next after the feast of St. Vincent the Martyr, 4 E. 2. to the same
John de Suthewell, the Kings Clark, of the same Toft, and of all other
Tenements, Tofts and Crofts in the said Borough or Town of Suthewell, wherein
the said John was enfeoff'd by Henry de Normanton, Chaplain, Autogr. penes.
cu^. (...). ^. S.
or any others. Ioane, the Daughter of John de Suthwell, the Kings Clark, being
then two and twenty years old, by her Deed dated at Suthwell, the Saturday next
after the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, 34 E. 1. released to the said
Ioh. her Father, and to Alice his wife, her Mother, and their heirs, a Toft and
Croft, etc. in Southwell.

Now there was another John Suthwell, Knight, (but whether son, or how
otherwise related to the former, I have not found,) to whom the King 7 Iun. 13.
E. 1. Vasc. 13. ^. 1.^ 4.
committed the Senescalcy (or stewardship) of Gascoigne. And 2 Iun. 17 E. 1.
V^s^. 1^ E. 1. ^. 13.
for his acceptable and commendable services, and especially for putting
himself, at the Kings instance, hostage for the freeing his most dear Cousin
Charles, the illustrious Kings of Sicily, then lately in Arragon, the said Sir
John de Suthwell had the Castle of Bordeaux, and whatever there belonged to the
King by reason of the incroachment or increment [ incurramenti] coming to him
by the Commission of Arnald Beonard de Lados, Knight, deceased,) and whatever
the King had otherwise acquired there, granted to him for his life. And the
same year, viz. 17 17 E. 1. Vas^on 17 E. 1.16.15.
Iun. 27. had a Mandate from the King to depute a fit person for the custody of
his Forest nigh Bordeaux, with daily wages to be paid him as long as the King,
and he the said Constable should please.

John de Suthwell, 22 E. 1. Rot. Vasc. 22 E. 1. m. 15.
had Letters from the King, dat^d July 16. at Portsmuth, to attend him with
Horse and Arms at that place the first of September following, to pass over
with him for the Relief of Gascoign; and so had Roger de Huntingfeud, Roger
Fitz-Osbert, Reymund de Clyvedon, William Trussell, Roger de Lascells, Peter
Roscelyn, Michael de Poning, and others.

Margery du Mareys, 19 E. 2. Pl. de Banc. Trin. 19 E. 2. rot. 192. Sur.
impleaded Walter At Brugge of Lambeth, and Rose his wife, because they,
together with Thomas de Waltham of Wandlesworth, Rose de Suthwell, and Robert
de Suthwell, took and carried away Rose and Margaret, daughters and heirs of
John de Suthwell, then under age, and found at Wandlesworth, whose marriage
belonged to the said Margery.

John de Suthwell, 20 E. 2. Vas^. 20 E. 2. m. 32.
then being in Gascoigne, had power to confederate or make League with any who
desired the Kings friendship.

This name of Southwell chiefly flourished in the Southern Counties, viz. Norf.
Suff. Suss. Surrey, Ex Script. R. S. praedict.
Essex, etc. whereof John Southwell served in Parliament for Lewis in Sussex,
28 and 29 H. 6. whose Grandson Richard Southwell married Amy, daughter and
coheir of Sir Edmund Wichingham, by whom he had the Manor of Wood-Rising in
Norfolk, where his posterity had a Noble House and Seat. This Richard was
Father of Sir Robert Southwell, who married Vrsula, daughter and coheir of
John Bohun of Midhurst in Sussex, but had no issue: so that his brother Francis
Southwell, second son of the said Richard, was his heir; which Francis was
Father of Sir Robert the M^ster of the Rolls in the time of H. 8. and also of
Sir Richard Southwell, Privy Counselor, and one of the Executors of that
King. Sir Richard had a son of his own name seated at Horsham St. Faiths in
Norfolk, who also had a son of the same name and place, who was Father of Sir
Thomas Southwell of Polylong in the County of Cork, Knight, one of the Privy
Council of Munster, sent over into Ireland by King James, and accompanied
thither by his brother Anthony Southwell, who was Father of Robert Southwell of
Kinsale in the said County of Cork, Vice Admiral of Munster, who is Father of
Sir Robert Southwell, now one of the Clarks of his Majesty's Privy Council, not
unfit to be styled Domini Regis Clericus like his Predecessor John de
Southwell. There is also in the County of Lymerick, Sir Thomas Southwell,
Baronet, descended from those of Barum-Hall in Suffolk.

There is in Southwell a chief Inn now, Autog. pen. Will. Wimondesold, Ar. de
Southwell.
and long since called the Saracens-Head, which being an Escaet; Thomas
[Arundell] Archbishop of York, gave to John Fysher of the Borough of Suthwell,
and to Margaret his wife, and their heirs, by the name of a Mess. lying between
the Mansion of the Prebend of Oxton and Crophille, and the Mess. sometime Henry
At Bars in Southwell, by his Deed bearing date 20 Oct. 19 R. 2. whereunto
his Seal of Arms is still Appendant, viz. within a Bordure engrailed,
quarterly, in the first and fourth a Lion Rampant, the second and third Cheque.
The Crest a Gryphins (or such like) Head between two wings erected out of a
Coronet. The Supporters two Lions Sejeaunt.

This John is most frequently styled Master John de Southwell alias Fysher, Ib.
and so was John his son, who, it seems, died without issue: for Thomas
Suthwell, Clark, conveyed all the Lands and Tenements in Suthwell, Vpton, Ib.
and Halom, which descended to him by right of inheritance after the death of
John Fisher of Suthwell Henricus Gobet de Southwell-Isabella, 37 H. 6.
Margareta cohaer. 37 H. 6.-Johannes Wymondesold de Southwell. Ex Chart. W. ^.
Ar. and copia visitat. H. St. George.
Willielmus Wymondesold 21 E. 4. fine prole.-Agnes fill. Rob. Leek de Arnall vel
Cortingstok. Leonard Wymondsold de Southwell superst. 23 H. 8-Elizabetha.
Johannes Wymondesold-Isabella fill. Ric. Chawe, 23 H. 8.-Joanna fill.....Hall de
Grancham, 33 H. 8. Edwardus Wymondesold-Anna fill. Johannis Billingay de Hougham
Com. Linc. 1 Edmund. Wymondesold-Johanna fill. Willielmi Leek de Halum. Will.
Wymondesold-Francesca fill Ric. Scot de Bishopdik Hall Ebot. Will. Wymondesold
aet. 45.1676.-Anna fill. Joh. Pertiward de Putney. Willielmus Wimondesold aet.
8. May 1676.
Edm. Matthew. cives Rich. Tho. London.

2 Will. Wymondesold-Magdalena fill. and haer. Joh. Allington and..... ux. fill.
and coh.... Elkin, Alderm. de London. Elkin Wimondesold-Jana fill. Abraham
Dawes, mil. Dawes Wimondesold miles.-Jana fill. unica Rob. Coke de Hyncham in
Com. Glouc. mil. ex secunda ux. Robertus. Richardus. Jana-Walterus Clarges, Bar.

Elizab.


Hug^.

Johannes Chamberlan-Lucia fill. and coh.

his Father, and of Margaret his wife his Mother, to certain Feoffees,
reserving to himself and his heirs nine shillings sterling yearly to be paid at
Lammas, with a clause of distress, which said Rent of 9s. he afterward passed
to John Gunthorp, Tho. Vrkyll, and Rob. Billesfeild, Chaplains, and their
heirs, to whom, 28 H. 6. Henry Gobet of Suthwell, Ib.
and Isabell his wife, then holding the possession of the said Lands and
Tenements, confirmed it on condition that they should cause an Obit to be
celebrated amongst the Vicars of the Quire of the Collegiate Church of the
blessed Mary at Suthwell, for the Souls of the said Thomas Suthwell, and of his
Father and Mother, and for the Souls by name of the said Henry and Isabell, of
John Wymeswold, and Margaret his wife, and of John Chamberlen, and of Lucia his
wife, for ever in the form contained in the writing of the said Thomas.
Margaret and Lucia were daughters and heirs of the said Henry Gobet, Ex Chart.
W. W.
and Isabell his wife; from which Margaret the said Inn, and diverse Houses and
Lands hereabouts, came by Inheritance to William Wymondesold, Esquire, the
present owner, according to this Descent. He has lately built in East Thorpe a
part or Hamlet of Southwell, the Seat of his Ancestors.

The owners of Southwell and East Thorp in 1612. are said to be Gervas Lee, Ex
libro lib. tenent.
Esquire, Matthew Palmer, Gent. Ed. Wymondswold, Esquire, John Alvie, John
Banes, Henry Ballard, Gent. William Ballard, Gent. George Lacock, Gent. Ed.
Manysty, Gent. Robert Porter, Francis Wyld, Francis Dodson, Richard
Blackbourne, Richard Turner, besides the Church and Prebendaries.

Sir Matthew Palmers son and heir William Palmer, Esquire, married.... the
sister of Sir John Digby, and had a son Matthew, who died a Bachelor; but his
other son John Palmer married.... the daughter of the Lady Hauvile, and by her
had two daughters; since her death he married again, and lives in London,
having parted with all or most of his interest here.

Ed. Lacock, Clark, younger son of the before-named George, married Sarah the
daughter and heir of William Roos of Egmanton, by whom he had two daughters and
heirs, Elizabeth, wife of John Dickinson of Claypole in Linc. and Deborah, wife
of my Cousin John Ouseley, Rector of Panfeild in Essex, who in his said Wives
right is still owner here.

Normanton.
IN Normentune before the Conquest Vlf had two Bov. and an half ad geldam. Lib.
Dooms.
The Land one Car. There afterward Gislebert de Gand (who had Vlfs Estate in
this County) had four Vill. with one Car. or Plow. The Soc was in Southwell. In
the Confessors time the value was 16s. in the Conquerours 8s.

There was a Fine levied, 17 E. 3. and afterward, 18 E. 3. Fin. a die S. Hill.
i^ 15. dies, 17 E. 3. and similiter Hill. 18 E. 3.
between Henry de Southwell, Clark, Querent, and Benedict, son of Richard de
Normanton, Deforc. of one Mess. five Tofts, seven Bovats of Land and an half in
Normanton by Southwell, whereby these were settled on the said Henry for life;
and after his decease on Isabell, daughter of the said Benedict, and the heirs
of her body; remainder to Alice, sister of the said Benedict, and the heirs of
hers; remainder to the said Benedict, and his heirs.

There is in Normanton an ancient Capital Mess. with a good Demesne belonging
to it, B.
the Seat of the Hunts, mentioned in Hokerton, one whereof was a Merchant of
the Staple in Nottingham, in the time of Edward the fourth. Henry Hunt the last
heir, son of Edmund, dying without issue, it fell to his Aunts in respect of
the half blood, who sold it to Mr. James Palmer; and it was afterward the
Inheritance of Sir Matthew Palmer, Knight.

William Cartwright the Lawyer, who married Christian, one of the daughters of
Sir Hugh Cartwright, Knight, built an House of Brick and Stone there, which is
the Inheritance of William his son.

John Marler Rector of Normanton upon Sore has some interest here; and here a
Branch of the Family of Leek of Halam has resided.

Halam, Edingley, Greaveslane, Osmundthorp, Farnesfeild, Vpton, and
Kirtlington, are members or Hamlets of the great Sok of Southwell.

Robert Ribald, 9 Ioh. gave to William Ribald, Fin. 9 Ioh.
one Car. of Land in Notinghamscir, to wit, in Halum, Edinfeild, and in
Farnefeild, to be held by the free Service of xxs. etc. if the said William
died without heirs of the wife he had married, the Land was to return to the
said Robert and his heirs.

In Halam is an ancient Capital Mess. and a good Demesne, all Freehold, the
Inheritance of Leek of Halam, of which Family Adam Leek had a Monument in
Southwell Church; but William Leek lately deceased, viz. 1673. son and heir of
Herbert Leek, being left by his Father in as much debt as this old Seat was
worth, and having married.... the heir of.... Bolles of Osberton, removed
thither, and sold his interest here at Halam to Richard Loyd, Esquire, who was
high Sheriff of this County the last year 1673. and has built a fair House
there of Brick and Stone where he now resides.

Most of these Hamlets are either small Freeholds, or Copy-holds of the Manor
or else of the Chapter of Southwell.

Thom. Leek de Granby- Johannes Leek de Grandby- Ex Co^ia lib. visit. pen.
Reason Mellish, Ar.
2 Thom. Leek de Osmundthorp- Alexander- Joh. Leek de Osmundthorp- Ric. Leek-
Laurentius Leek de Osmundthorp.- Tho. Leek- Johannes Leek de-Osmundthorp 1665.





1 Willielmus Leek de Halam ob. 1493. fill. and haer- 1 Johannes Leek de Halam
Eliz. fi.... Mercer de Winkburne. Will. Leek-Eliz. fill. and haer. Hen. Cooper
de Edingley. Adam Leek de Halam.-Eliz. fill. and coh. Martini Smith de Darlton.
Will. Leek de Halam.-Susan. fill. Herbert. Lakin de Humberston. Herbert. Leek de
Halam.-... fill. Rob. Mirfin de Thurcroft Ebor. Willielmus Leek de Osberton ob.
1673.-... fill. and haer.... Bolles.
Willielmus-Leek.



2 Alexander- Will. Leek de Normanton- Will. Leek de Normanton.-Barbara fill.
Car. Yarborough de Willoughby. Carol. Leek-aet. 10. 1614.

Tho.- Will- Jac. Leek de-Ann. Balderton. Franc. Leek de Balderton.- Georgius
Lascells.-... fill. and haer.

Tho.-Em. fill. and haer. Fr. Leeming. Rob. Mat. -Franc. Cleric. Marg.-Laur.
Sturtivant.
-Tho. Will.




3 Robertus Leek.


In Halam 1612. the owners were William Leek senior, Gent. and William Leek
junior, Gent. William Cowper, junior, William Astlyn, Thomas Leek, Gent. Thomas
May; but not long since Mr. William Loscoe had interest here and at
Farnesfeild.

John, the son of Tho. Chamberleyn of Polington, by Fine, 20 E. 3. and
afterward, 21 E. 3. Fin. lev. Pasc. 20 E. 3. and Trin. 21 E. 3.
passed to Thomas de Metheley of Thornehill, and his heirs, the Manor of
Eddinglee by Southwell, with the Appurtenances, except 49s. and 3d. Rent, and
the Rent of a pair of Gloves in the same Manor, which Simon Iorce of
Lughteburgh, and Margaret his wife, held for term of life, together with the
Reversion after their decease, and the Homages, and all the Services of Richard
de Willughby, John de Loudham, Knights, John de Bella aqua, Thomas de Nevill,
Knights, and diverse others, and their heirs, for Lands which they held of the
said John in the said Manor.

In Edingley 1612. William Cartwright, Gent. was owner of one Mess. one
Cottage, Ex lib. praedict. lib. ten.
one Water-mill, one Garden, twenty two Acres of Meadow, and sixteen Acres of
Pasture. Then in Osmundthorpe was Lawrence Leek, Gent. owner. In Greaveslane
William Beeston, Gent. Stephen Tailor, and Richard Bennet. In Farnesfeild
Edward Coppinger of Hexgrave Park, Gent. Charles Butterworth, Gent. Nicholas
Farrington, John Watson, junior, William Leak, John Cooper, Richard Gunthorpe
were owners.

The Book of Doomsday shows that in Franesfeld, the King had one Bovat of Land
for the Geld near Snotingham, Soc to his Manor of Grymston, and that Walter de
Aincurt had Soc to his Manor of Horingham in Farnesfeild two Bovats for the
Geld, whereof one was in the Soc of Sudwell, and the other of the Kings Soc,
yet belonged to the Hundred of Sudwell. There was one Car. in Demesne. In the
time of King Edward the Confessor this was valued at 5s. in the Reign of the
Conqueror when the Survey was taken at 18s.

There was in Osmutthorp Soc to Nortwell, which belonged to St. Mary of
Sudwell, Lib. Doo^^.
as much as was rated to the Dane-geld at four Bovats. The Land two Car. There
four Sochm. had two Car. eight Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood; four qu. long,
three broad.

Though there be mention of seven Sochmen in Opeton and Colingham in the Book
of Doomsday, which belonged to the Manor in Rolleston of the Fee of Odo Bishop
of Baion; yet Vpton is certainly involved amongst the twelve Berues of
Southwell, of which it is an Hamlet, wherein I have not found any great
possessions of note.

The Jury, 12 E. 3. Esc. 12 E. ^. n. 14.
said that Will. Melton Archbishop of York when he died, held three parts of
two Mess. two Bov. and six Acres of Land in Vpton by Southwell, of Peter del
Wyche, and the heirs of John de Wimbishe, by the Service of 10s. 6d. ob. per
annum; and that William, son of Henry de Melton, Cousin of the said William,
the Archbishop, was his next heir.

There was in Vpton a Capital Mess. and a good Demesne of Freehold Land, B.
which was heretofore the Inheritance of the Pakenhams, from whom it came to
Oglethorp. It is now John Truemans, who has built a pretty little House there.
The residue consists of small Freeholds, but most Copy-holds of the Manor of
Southwell.

The owners 1612. are said to be John Trewman of Stok Bardolf, Owen Oglethorp,
Ex lib. lib. (...)
Thomas Pride, George Pride.

The Rectory is appropriate to the Chapter of Southwell, and was lately in
Lease to Mr. Burnell of Winkeburne; after whose death the Chapter augmented the
small Vicarage 20l. per an. as I have heard about the year 1667. or 1668.

There are Vicarages of the Chapters Patronage in this Soc, viz. Southwell
which was 10l. is now 7l. 13s. 4d. Farnesfeild which was eight Marks, is now
4l. Edingle which was ten Marks, is now 4l. Vpton which was eight Marks, is now
4l. 11s. 5d. value in the Kings Books.

Kertlington. Doomsd. Cherlington.
I Suppose this the ancient meeting place of Southwell Hundred (mentioned in
that place) and that it is corrupted into Chadlington Hundred, because of the
very long disuse of this place. However the Conquerours Survey shows that in
Cherlington, Lib. Dooms.
Vlf a Saxon (whom Gis^ebert de Gand succeeded in the chief part of his Estate
in this County) had three Bov.. for the Geld. The Land two Car. But the Soc
belonged to Southwell the Manor of the Archbishop. There Gislebert had one
Car. four Vill. having two Car. one Mill 16s. In the Confessors time the value
of this was 40s. in the Conquerours when the Survey was taken 30s.

The Red Book in the Exchequer shows, Lib. rubr.
that William de Bella aqua held a Knights Fee of the Archbishop of York, and
half one of Walter de Ayncurt. One of that name married a daughter of John Lord
Deincourt, named in Granby and Sutton.

In 22 H. 2. Rot. pip. 22 H. 2.
William de Beleu gave account of twenty Marks of the Amercements of the Forest.

Hugh Bardulf, 10 R. 1. Pip. 10 R. 1. Ebor.
gave account of an hundred Marks, for having the Custody of the Land and heirs
of William de Bella aqua, and to have their marriages; William had a son called
Rod. de Bella agua temp. Regis Steph. and Willielmus-Beatrix de Bella aqua lib.
Alb. 176. de Southwell. Willielmus de Bella aqua. Willielmus de Bellewe
tertius-... fill. Johannis Dom. Deincourt. Thom. de Bella aqua-Alicia Thom. de
Bella aqua- Johannes de Bella aqua, miles, 18 E 3.-Isabella. Lucia fill. and
haer.-Johannes de Burgh, senior. Thom. de Burgh- Johan. de Burgh-Katherina, 5
R. 2. Margareta fill. and haer-Johannes le Zouch mil. mar. 1-Johannes Lowdham,
mil. sine prole. Elizabetha fill. and haer.-Nic. Bowyt de Ripingale, miles.
Elizab. consang. and haer. de Corp. Joh. de Bella aqua and Isab. ob. 20 Mar. 17
H. 7.-Will. Chaworth mil. mar. 1.-Joh. Dunham Ar. mar. 2. Thom. Chaworth sine
prole. Joana haer. frat.-Johannes Ormund.
Joh. Dunham, mil. fill. and haer. aet. 28. 18 H. 7-Jana fill. Tho. Thurland de
Gamelston, milit. ux. 1.-Bennet fill. God^. Foljamb, ux. 2. Johannes Dunham
obiit juvenis Kath. ux. Rad. Okeover, and Hen. Leigh de Rushall, Ar. Fran. ux.
Joh. Hazelwood. Anna ux. Georgii Meverell Maria ux. Tho. Grantham de Com. Linc.

Johannes Chaworth-Margareta. Tho. Chaworth s. p. ob. 25 Dec. 2 H. 7.



Tho. Burgh de Colthorp Ebor. Claus. 33 H. 6. m. 21.- Thom. Burgh, 33 H. 6.
Joana-Guido Roucliff. ^rian. Roucliff, Bar. Scaccar.



Johannnes fill. and haer. 1297.

Adam, miles. Robertus-Dionysia. Hugo.
Radulphus.

William, Reg. Ruff. p. 14. and 15. and 84.
and ^e one Thomas de Bella aqua, whose wife was Alice.

John de Bella aqua, son and heir of Sir Thomas de Bella aqua, Reg. de
Wellebek, p. 165.
granted that he, his heirs, or Assigns whosoever should hold his Manor of
Kirtelington, should be obliged to pay every year to the Church of St. Mary,
and St. James at Wellebek, and the Canons there serving God, six shillings of
Silver for a Toft and Bovat of Land which he held of them, which were sometimes
Raph, the Priest's of Dukmanton. His Deed bore date at Kirtelington, the
Thursday next after the Ascension, 1297. where were present as witnesses Sir
Thomas de Furnival, W. de Cressy, W. de Goushull, R. de Furraus, Knights, S. de
Bella aqua, his brother or Cousin (German) H. de Fauconberg.

Mss. I. Bo^n. and Lib. Alb. 325.
After Sir John was Thomas de Bella aqua, (possibly his brother:) the last of
the Lords of this Manor, of this name, was John de Bella aqua; whom for want
of better light, I must suppose, son of Thomas.

Ex. Inq. 18 H. 7.
Sir John Annesley, Knight, and Robert Annesley Parson of the Church of Holme,
were seized of the Manor of Bolton, upon Derne in Yorkshire, and the 18 E. 3.
gave it to John de Bella aqua, and Isabell his wife, and the heirs of their
bodies, on whom this Manor was also settled by Fine 20 E. 3. and 11 H. 4.
Mich. 20 E. 3. Pas^h. 11 H. 4. to. 309.
was an execution of it, and several times after. They had a daughter Lucia
their heir, married to (John) Burgh, who left Thomas, and he John, (upon whose
seal is a fesse Dance, Autogr. (...), C. ^. 11.
and on Katherin his wives, impaled with that, a fesse dancy between six
escallops 5 R. 2.) whose daughter and heir Margaret, was wife of Sir John
Zouch, Knight, (son of William Lord Zouch of Totnes) and after of Sir John
Lowdham, Knight, by whom she had no issue, but by her first husband left a
daughter and heir, Elizabeth married to Nicolas Bowett o^ Ripinghall, who left
two daughters, Elizabeth, wife of Sir William Chaworth, and Margaret, of his
brother John Chaworth, whom the said Margaret, wife of Sir John Lowdham, and
formerly of Sir John Zouch, about 29 H. 6. Esc. 29 H. 6.
left her heirs, but each of them having a son, Thomas Chaworth, who both of
them dyed without issue, the said Elizabeth wife of Sir Will Chaworth had a son
by her second husband, John, the son of Robert Dunham, called Sir John Dunham,
Knight, who became inheritor of this Lordship after her death, which was 20
Mar. 17 H. 7. he the said Sir John Dunham being at the time of the taking the
Inquisition, Ex Inq.
viz. 18 H. 7. about 28. years of age. He died 9 Sept. 30 H. 8. and by his
first wife Jane, daughter of Thomas Thurland of Gameleston, Ex Copia visit.
pen. Reas. Mellish, and Car. Lacock.
had a son who died young, and four daughters who became his heirs: his second
wife was Benett, the daughter of Sir Godfr. Folejambe.

The principal Manor here was allotted to Fr. the wife of John Hasilwood, B.
Esquire, whose Grandchild sold it to John More, Doctor of Physic.

I find that John Dunham, Esquire, 3 H. 8. Mich. 3 H. 8. rot. 660.
suffered a recovery of the Manors of Kirtlington, and Rughagh, and great
quantities of Land in Kirtlington, Rughagh, Hockerton, Halam, Edingley,
Osmundthorpe, Normanton, Middlethorp, Cawnton, Harlesey, Kyrsall, Darleton,
Drayton, Dunham, Ragenhull, and Wymton, and called to warrant John Dunham,
Knight.

Another small Manor here which Sir John Dunham bought in, was alloted to
Katherine, B.
another of the four daughters of Sir John Dunham, first married to Raph
Okeover, of Okeover, Esquire, and after to Henry Leigh, of Rushall, Esquire,
and was by Edward her son and heir (afterward Sir Edward Leigh) sold to Sir
Edward Stanhope, Knight, the Surveyer, who also purchased the Park of
Kirtlington, called Belleu Park, so that this small Manor, together with the
Park, was sold by Sir Edward Stanhope, of Grimston, his son, to the right
Honorable the Earl of Kingston, who sold the Manor to the said Doctor More,
but left the Park to his son and heir, the Right Honorable the Marquess of
Dorchester, and now all Kirtlington, (except the said Park) is the inheritance
of John More, son and heir of John More, brother of Sir Edw. More, a Scotch
Baronet, Nephew and heir to the Doctor: which Sir Edw. having only daughters 4.
I think the said John, his brother, succeeded by the settlement of his Uncle
the said Doctor, and has made a very fair Park, into which he has taken part
of Hockerton Lordship, whereof he was also Proprietor, which he left well
stored with Deer, to his said son John, who had married....... Constable,
sister to the Earl of Dunbarr..

Raph, son of Simon, by the assent of Agnes his wife, quit-claimed from him and
his heirs, Regist. ^ Thurg. p. 18.
Paulin, son of Roger, son of Cuthing, of Kirtlington, with all his Sect, to
St. Peter of Thurgarton, and the Canons there serving God, for which the said
Canons gave him fifteen shillings of Silver.

There was a Manor in this Town, held by the family of Pigot. Sir Hugh Pigot
had a daughter and heir, it seems, called Isabell, Cop. (...). pen. Ca^. Lacock.
married to the first Sir Robert Sutton, of Averham, with whose posterity it
continued long: but he had a wife named Alice, as in that place may be noted.

There were two Fines levied 22 H. 6. Fin. lev. Trin. 22 H. 6.
one between Thomas Chaworth, Knight, Quer. and Thomas Curson, Esquire, and
Margaret his wife, Deforcients; and the other between the said Sir Thomas
Chaworth, Knight, Querent, and Richard Sutton, Esquire, and Katherin his wife,
Deforcients; of the Rent of a pound of Pepper in Hardeby, and of the Manor of
Kirtelington, called Pigot Hall, with the Appurtenances, except seven Mess. one
Toft, two hundred Acres of Land, forty of Meadow, ten of Pasture, and twenty of
Wood, with the Appurtenances, in the same Town of Hardeby, and North-clifton in
the same Manor. They granted besides the said Rent and Manor, to the said Sir
Thomas Chaworth and his heirs, the Homages and Services which Sir John Pigot,
Knight, and his heirs, ought them for all the Tenements which he held of them
in Herdeby.

William Sallowe died seized of Lands here, about 12 H. 4. Esc. 12 H. 4. n. 25.
which seem to have been the inheritance of some younger branch of the Family
of Bella aqua.

Thomas Flaxley, 11 H. 4. Esc. 11 H. 4. n. 13. and 14.
had some concern in the conveying these Lands, as appears by an Inquisition,
Ad quod Damnum. George Sallowe succeeded in them, who is called of Staunton, by
Sandiacre, and had one Thomasia to wife: he died 5 H. 5. leaving his daughter
and heir, Esc. 6 H. 5. n. 15.
Agnes, the Manor of Allesworth, and this in Kirtelington, Halom,
Osmundthorpe, Normanton, Eddingly, and Hockerton.

Agnes Marmion, about 3 E. 4. Esc. 3 E. 4. n. 14. and 24.
left this Manor and Allesworth, and the Manor of Lamcote, by Radcliff, to
Agnes, the wife of Thomas Pilkington, then above twenty six years of age.

Ex libro lib. ten.
In Kirtlington, about the year 1612. the owners were Maryon Hasselwood,
Esquire, Sir Edward Stanhope, Knight, Richard Air, Widow Longman, Laurence
Leak, of Osmundthorpe, William Leek, of Normanton, Gentleman, George
Cartwright, of the same, Gentleman, etc.

The Vicarage of Kirtlington is 6l. 13s. 4d. in the Kings books.

Rolleston.
THe Book of Doomsday shows that in the beginning of the Norman Government,
Rolleston contained three Manors, each belonging to a several Lord. One was
then of Thomas, the Archbishop of Yorkes Fee, where Aluric had for his Manor
four Bov.. for the Geld or Tax. The Land was for one Plow which he had there,
and five Vill. There were twelve Acres of Meadow, in former time it had been
20s. then was 10s. value. Another (and that much the best) was of the Fee of
Odo Bishop of Bayon, which before he came, was Godwins, and rated to the
Dane-geld at two Car. and an half, and the fourth part of a Bovat. The Land
being six Car. There Lesoardus the man, or Tenant of this Bishop had one Car.
and eleven Vill. and nine Board. having four Car.. There were four Mills 27^.
and sixty eight Acres of Meadow. In King Edward the Confessors time this was
valued at 8l. then, viz. in the Conquerours at 4l. 10s. To this Manor belonged
seven Sochm. in Opeton and Colingham. Lib. Doo^s.
The third was of the Fee of Walter de Ayncurt, who succeeded Tori, whose
Manor here paid the Tax, as eleven Bov. and a quarter. The Land was two Car.
There was one Car. in Demesne, eight Vill. six Board. having three Car. three
Bov. There was a ^riest, and a Church, thirty two Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood,
four quarters long, two broad. In the Confessors time this was 40^. then 60^.
There was Soc of this Manor in Calun.

Malgerus de Rolleston was a benefactor to Rufford Monastery, Regist. de
Rufford, p. 1. Lib. Rabr.
whose gifts King Stephen being at Wirchesop confirmed. Thomas, his son, held
two Knights Fees, of Walter de ^yncurt. Henry, Regist. de Rufford, p. 37.
son of Thomas de Rolleston, confirmed to the Monks of Ruford, whatsoever his
Grandfather Malger gave, or his father Thomas, in Kelumshrubs, between the
bounds of Muskham and Hegrum, which Thomas, son of this Henry, and also
Benedict, son of that Thomas de Rolleston, confirmed. Ib. p. 35.


Benedict de Rolleston, Knight, gave and confirmed to God and the Church of St.
Peter, at Thurgarton, Regist. de Thurg. p. 14. b.
and the Canons there serving God, several Lands in Rolleston, in the Tenures
of several persons, so free, that neither he nor his heirs should for the
future claim or challenge any aid of the said Tenements, or the Natives, or
Villains who held them, or their sequells or Cattle, to make their eldest sons
Knights, or marry their eldest daughters. Dionysia his Lady also released her
dower in those Lands, Ib.
which her said husband gave. Benedict, son of Thomas, held of Oliver de
Eynecourt, in Rouleston and Kelum, Test. de Nev.
a Knights Fee and an half, of the old feoffment.

The Jury found that the Lady Amflisia de Roldeston, who had been wife of
Iollanus de Nevill, (a Justice Itinerant 18 H. 3.) held her Land in the
Wapentag of Turgartun, Ve^edict. de singul. Wapent. Not. and Derb.
of the Honor of Richmond, (whither it seems the Lands of the Bishop of Bayons
Fee in this place were transferred,) and that the value was ten Marks per
annum; but they did not know whether she was of the Kings gift, or the Earl of
Chesters. Iolanus de Novilla gave to the Priory of Thurgarton, Reg. Thurg. p.
14.
the whole Tithe of his Mill of Roldestun, by the consent of his heir John, and
of his wife Amfelisa, to whose dower that Mill belonged, in pure Alms for the
souls of his father, and mother, and brother R. saving to himself the Multure
of his house of Roldestun. This gift he made when he took his journey from
Roldeston to Jerusalem.

John de Nevill held one Knights Fee, Test. de Nev.
of the Honor of Richmond, in Roleston, with the Appurtenances, of the old
Feoffment, viz. whereof his Ancestor was infeoff'd in the time of King H. 1.

The Jury, 4 E. 1. Inq. tang. Reg. 4 E. 1.
found that Roger de Eynecurt, the Earl of Lincoln, Andrew de Nevill, and
Henry de Perpunt, claimed certain Royalties in Rolleston, but they knew not by
what warrant.

Andrew de Nevil, 9 E. 1. In Bandel. de E^son. Hill. 9 E. 1. to. 52. in dorso.
offered himself the fourth day against Hugh de Babington, and Ioane his wife,
in a Plea that they should hold covenant with him, made between them concerning
the Manor of Roldeston, with the Appurtenances. Sir Hugh de Babington, and Sir
Henry de Perpoint, 10 E. 1. Esc. 10 E. 1. n. 26.
held one Knights F^e in Rolleston, Cotington, Barneby, and Colingham, of the
Honor of Richmond, for 10^. per an. etc.

Iollanus de Nevil, 3 E. 3. Pl. de Quo War. 3. E. 3. to. 6. in Dorso.
summoned to answer the King by what warrant he claimed to have free warren in
all his Demesne Lands in Roldeston, pleaded that King Edward the first, 26 May,
in the thirty fifth year of his reign, granted a Charter to him the said
Iollanus, and his heirs: but the Jury finding that the said Iollanus put no
custody in the said Warren, and that he permitted any body to course at their
pleasure, without license either asked or obtained, the Judgment was that he
should lose it. There was a Fine then levied at Nottingham, viz. the Monday
after the Feast of St. Martin, 3 E. 3. between the said Iollanus de Nevill,
Quer. and Henry Gernoun, and Alice his wife, Deforcients, of one Mess. with the
Appurtenances in Roldeston, by which it was passed to the said Iollanus.

Regist. de Thurg. p. 188.
Sir William Nevill, Knight, of Rolleston, granted license to the Prior and
Covent of Thurgarton, to make obstruction in the water of Greet, (the Land of
the said William being on both sides the water) in a place called Old
Milnestede, in the fields of Rolleston, or in any other place of the water,
between that and their Meadow, called the Priour Carre, and to make a Mill Damm,
and build a Water-mill, 5 R. 2. paying him and his heirs 6l. 8^ per annum. This
Sir William Nevill was a witness, Ib.
15 R. 2. and 16 R. 2. to the writings, whereby Mr. Richard de Wynwick, and
William de Gunthorp, Clarks passed to that Monastery, by the Kings License,
several Lands in Rolleston, Southwell, Edingley, Farnesfeld, Bleseby, Gourton,
Gypesmere, Morton, and Halum.

Ex. Ca^^. I. B. Ar. and Ac. 123.
This man's Grandchild, Sir Thomas Nevill, of Roldeston, married Elizabeth, the
daughter of Sir William Babington, the Judge, by whom he had many daughters
married to the principal Gentry of that time; besides his sons, one whereof
William Nevill married..... the daughter and heir of Thomas Palmer, Esquire, of
Holt, in Leicestershire, which occasioned the remove of this family to that
place.

Anselm Blount, and John Smalley, claimed against John Kellam, Gentleman, and
William Wilson the Manor of Rolstun, with the Appurtenances, etc. 6 Eliz. and
20l. Rent, Pas. 6 Eliz. ret. 840.
with the Appurtenances in Rolston, Farneton, Newark, Codington: and Barneby,
and another recovery was suffered 12 Eliz. in both which Sir Thomas Nevill,
Hill. 12 Eliz. rot. 141.
Knight, was called to warrant.

B.
Sir Thomas Nevill, of Holt, the said William Nevills (great) Grandchild in the
time of Queen Elizabeth, sold this Manor to.... Lodge, an Alderman of London,
from whom by mean conveyance it is become the inheritance of Robert Sutton,
Esquire, (Lord Lexington of Averham) descended from Elizabeth wife of William
Meringe, Esquire, one of those daughters of Sir Thomas Nevill before-named, she
being Mother of Margery, the wife of Thomas Basset, of Fledburgh, whose
daughter Katherine, was the wife of Sir Thomas Sutton, of Averham, and Ancestor
of the said Robert, whose only son Robert, the present Lord Lexington, under
age at this day, viz. Mar. 27. 1674. continues owner of the whole Township
enclosed by his father about 18. years since, saving that which Mr. Wimondswold
of Southwell has, which may possibly be that of the Churches Fee.

By a Fine at York, 2 E. 3. Fin. lev. apud Ebor. Mich. 2 E. 3.
between Thomas de Radeclive, and Alice his wife, Quer. and William de
Radeclive, Chappelan, Deforc. one Mess. fifty Acres of Land, ten of Meadow, 2s.
and 6l. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Roldeston, were settled on the said
Thomas and Alice for life, remainder to Adam, son of John Biyonden, and to
Ioane his wife, and the heirs of their bodies; remainder to the right heirs of
the said Thomas.

Sir William Babington, Knight, about 33 H. 6. Esc. 33. H. 6. n. 23.
was seized of the Manor of Rolleston, called Babington Manor, and of the
Manor of Lenton, called Elm Manor, and that of Bramcote, called Karr Manor,
and one in Oxton called Yke, (or rather Ieke) Manor, as in that place may be
guessed. William Babington, Esquire, was then found his son and heir.

Sir William Pierpount, Knight, 23 H. 7. Trin. 23 H. 7. rot. 116.
suffered a recovery, wherein Richard Emson, Knight, Brian Stapleton, Knight,
Thomas Emson, Esquire, George Stapleton, Esquire, Edward Bulstrode, Esquire,
Henry Pyerpont, Esquire, Richard Drewell, Esquire, and Roger Pyerpont, Esquire,
claimed the Manors of Rolleston, Barton in le Beans, and Kirkeby in Ashefeld,
with the Appurtenances, and twenty two Mess. twelve Tofts, eight hundred and
ten Acres of Land, two hundred and ten of Meadow, two hundred and fifty of
Pasture, one hundred and ten of wood, and 4l. 3s. 4l. Rent in Rolston, Barton
in le Beans, Kyrkeby in Ashefeld, Newark, Rolleston, Codington, Balderton, and
Skoke.

Mr...... Pierpont has the Rectory, and some Cottages, I suppose, in Lease
from the Church of Southwell.

The Vicarage of Rolston was 8l. it is now 10l. 1s. 3d. value in the Kings
books, Mss. I. M.
and the Chapter of Southwell continues in the Patronage.

Starthorpe.
IN Staretorpe, before the Normans came, one Swayn, (Lord also of Aygrum, and
several other Towns, in which he was succeeded by Gislebert de Tyson) had for
his Manor nine Bov. ad Geldam. The Land two Car. Lib. Dooms.
There the said Gislebert had afterward one Car. and twelve Vill. four Board.
having four Car. and an half, and one Mill 5s. and six Acres of Meadow. This in
the Conquerours time kept the value it had in the Confessors, viz. 60^.

Adam de Tysun, and William his son, both benefactors to Rufford, Reg. Ruff. p.
1.
whose gifts were confirmed by King Stephen, were the next that succeeded in
this inheritance, that I have yet discovered.

Hubert Hosatus (or Hose Rector of the Church of Egrum, gave to that Monastery
of Rufford, Ib. 30.
for the souls of Henry Hosatus, his father, and of Avicia, his mother, (whom I
suppose sister of William Tysun, called the Uncle of Henry Hose, brother of the
said Hubert) who will be again named in Averham, Ib. 37. b.
in the year of our Lord 1218. three Acres of Meadow in the territory of
Startorp, in the Meadow called Eyngemer, on the West part stretching from the
South into the North from the Land of Startorpe, which his said brother Henry
Hosatus, gave to him the said Hubert, and his heirs. The witnesses were Mr.
Hugh, son of Swayn, then Chappellan of Egrum, Matthew the Parson of Kelum,
Henry de Tuc, Peter, son of Maurice de Kelum, Adam de Kellesholt, Hervey de
Muscam, Mr. Philip de Brambelle, Robert de Sandeburne, Nicolas de Monteburg,
Raph Tysun.

Sir Henry Hosee, in times past, was Lord of Averham, Regist. de Novo loco, p.
229.
and the same Henry gave that Manor to Robert de Laxton; and the same Henry
gave to Hubert Hosee his brother, the whole Town of Sterthorp, doing the
foreign service, except seven Bovats of Land, which the same Henry Hosee had
given before, to Mauger de Stanton, and Gauter Hosee. Of Mauger de Stanton came
Galfr. of whom came William de Stanton, which William, gave to the Ancestors of
Sir Gerard de Hedon, with his daughter, two Bovats of Land, parcel of the said
seven Bovats, with two Bovats Hugh Damysell held. The said William de Stanton
gave to the Ancestors of Sir Galfr. de Stoke two Bov. of the said seven, which
John Clark held; and the same William de Stanton gave, with Margaret his
sister, to Roger de Thourleby three Bovats of Land, parcel of the said seven;
which three John le Ward, Hugh de Stanton, and Robert in the Willughes held:
and it is to be noted, that by the said Hubert Hosee, or his heirs, the whole
residue of the Town of Sterthorp in Demesne and Service, came to the possession
of the Abbat and Covent of Durford, of whom afterward the said Robert de
Lexington acquired all those things, with the Services of the Freemen and
Villains, and thereof enfeoffed the Prior and Covent of Newstede, to whom he
also gave Routhorne and Scardeliff, Ib. 227.
with the Appurtenances in Darbyshire. They esteemed the seven Bovats of the
Fee of Stanton to be the third part of the Town of Sterthorp, and therefore
would have those Freeholders to pay the third part of the burden in Scutages,
and the like charges. In the time of Edward the third, Hugh de Stanton held one
Bovat; William de Kelum one; John de Maunsfeld one; Hugh Damysell two; Robert
in le Willoghes and his heirs one; John le Ward one.

The Jury, 9 E. 2. which were Robert de Lamley, Ib. 146.
Robert de Rolleston, Henr. de Rolleston, John de Halum, Walter de Walour,
William Basage, Richard de Iorz, Robert de Burstall, Richard de Basage, William
Kyriell, Henry Gernonne, and John in le Wro, found that the Prior of Newstede
held two parts of half a Knights Fee in Sterthorpe, of the Fee of Moubray (to
which Family it seems it was very anciently transferred and that John de
Maunsfeld, Robert in le Wellues, and William, son of Richard de Kelum, and the
Parceners, held the third part of the said half Fee, and that Walter de
Gousill, and Raph de Crophill, Collectors of the Scurage for the Kings Armies
in Scotland, in the twenty eighth, thirty first, and thirty fourth years of
King Edward the first, received for the said two parts only, of the Prior and
of William de Stanton, and John de Maunsfeld for the third, as their
Acquittances, 9 E. 2. also show.

The possessions of the Priory of Newsted at the dissolution Rented at 22l.
19s. 1d. ob. were by King Henry the eighth, B.
granted to the Master and Fellows of Trinity College in Cambridge, from whom
the Family of Faunt of Foston in Leicestershire, still have them in Lease.

The Abbat of Rufford had a Grange here granted to the Earl of Shrowsbury with
Rufford, 29 H. 8.

Aram. Averham. Aygrum. Egrom.
SWayn mentioned in Starthorp, for his Manor here in Aygrum, paid to the
Common Tax or Geld, as three Carucats. The Land whereof was then known to be
six Car. Gislebert Tyson (whose Fee it became after the Norman Invasion) had
here in Demesne two Car. and eight Sochm. upon six Bovats of this Land, Lib.
Dooms.
and twenty one Villains, sixteen Bordars, having twelve Car. Here was then a
Church and a Priest, and one Mill 5s. and eighty Acres of Meadow, small Wood
eight qu. long, four broad. In the Confessors time the value was 6l. and when
the Conquerours great Survey was taken 10l. There were appendant to this Manor
five Sochm. in other Hundreds: it had Soc in Crumwelle.

Adam Tisun, 5 Steph. gave account of ten Marks of Silver for a Plea of Duel
between him and the Man of Hugh de Luvetot, Rot. pip. 5 Steph.
and of 32l. and 2s. for the debts of his Father, Pip. 5 Steph. Ebor.
and of fifteen Marks of Silver, that he should not plead concerning his Land
until the son of Nigellus de Albini should be a Knight. Adam Tisun gave to God
and St. Peter of Thurgarton, Reg. Thurg. p. 18.
and the Canons there serving God, that Bovat of Land in Egrum, which Leuric
Hog held; and Henry Hoset would have the Men of the Honor of Egrum to know, Ib.
that by the consent of Avicia his wife, he confirmed that Bovat which Adam
Tisun gave to that Church, free and quit of all secular Service, for the safety
of Henry, son of the Empress, and for his own safety, his wifes, and all his.
Henry Hose for the safety (or health) of the Souls of his Father, Mother, Ib.
and Ancestors, his own, and his wifes, confirmed to the said Monastery the
said Bovat, which the said Leuric Hog held, as the Charters of Henry Hose his
Father, and those of his Ancestors did witness.

William Tisun gave to God and the Brethren of Ruford, Regist. de Rufford, p.
37.
all his Land in Hecthus of Aghrum; Adam Tisun his Father confirmed it: so did
Henry Hose, son of Henry Hose, who, 13 Ioh. levied a Fine at Westminster to
Walter the Abbat of Rufford of sixty Acres in Egrum, Fin. lev. Mith. 13 Ioh.
whereof there had been contention between them in the said Court, whether they
lay within the bounds mentioned in the Charter of William Tysun, Uncle of the
said Henry, which the Abbat produced.

Hugh Hose brought to Matthew Abbat of Rufford the Testament (or device) of
Henry Hose his brother, Ib.
who with tears and grief of heart at his death repented that he had disquieted
the Monastery, and with tears (also) begged their pardon, and earnestly
besought his heirs, that they should permit the Monks to hold their Lands in
peace, whereof discord had been between them: of this the said Hugh was a most
faithful witness, having the said devise of his brother sealed with the Seal of
Iocelin the Queens brother, who by the Kings command brought the body of the
said Henry into this Land, and the said Iocelin had the devise sealed.

Isabell, wife of William le Herper, sometime wife of Raph, son and heir of
Ranulph, had Land in Egrom about 7 H. 3. Claus. 7 H. 3. m. 2.


Raph de Chesneduyt, and Maud his wife, 27 H. 3. Pl. de Banc. cor. Rob. de
Lexington and Soc. suis T^in. 27 H. 3. to. 2.
claimed against Robert le Sauvage the Manor of Egrom, except 100 Acres of
Land in Scarethorpe, as their right and inheritance, etc. He called to warrant
John de Gatesden, who came and warranted, and said, That Maud while she was
sole and in lawful power, gave the said Manor to him and his heirs for ever,
for the Service of two Knights Fees, whereof there was a Fine between them in
the Kings Court, before the Justices at Bermondesey. Maud and her husband
pleaded, that she never was selfed of that Manor, so that she might enfeoff
the said John thereof, and said that when the said Fine was made between them,
and after, the said Maud was in the Custody of the said John, and the said
Manor likewise. Robert also produced the Chartel of the said Raph, of his
quit-claiming the Manors of Egrum and Edling.

Robert le Sauvage acknowledged that he granted to Robert de Lexington the
Manor of Egrum, Ib. to. 24.
which he held for term of life of John de Gatesden, and remised, etc. and for
this the said Robert de Lexington acquitted the said Robert le Sauvage of a
great sum of money, wherein he was bound to Aaron the Jew of York. The said
John de Gatesden acknowledged that he gave to the said Robert de Lexington the
said Manor of Egrum, Ib.
and by his Letters Patents produced before the Justices, commanded the said
Robert le Sauvage that he should be intending to the said Robert de Lexington,
as he was to himself.

Robert de Lexington had Free Warren here about 27 H. 3. Pat. and chapter 2^ and 28
H. 3. m. 2. Te^i. de^ev.
This Manor was found in the time of H. 3. and E. 1. to be of the Honor of
Moubray.

Anno 1250.34 H. 3. C^ron. sir. Will. ^ugdale, Cians. 34. H. 3. m. 15.
the fourth of the Kalends of June died Robert de Lexington the Kings Clark,
Spelm. Gloss. in v^ie Iusticiarius, ex Florilego.
and special (or spiritual) Counselor, who continuing long in the Office of a
Justice, heaped up to himself ample possessions, and enlarged the Kings
Treasures. The same year his eldest brother John de Lexington (who 18 Sept. 31
H. 3. Rot. sin. 31 H. 3. m. 2.
undertook the Custody of the Seal) went from the Court, and the Seal was
committed to P. de Riovallis, and Mr. W. de Kilkenny, but 37 H. 3. May 15 it
was committed to P. Chaceport, and him again. This John de Lessington was Lord
Keeper, first, in 22 H. 3. secondly, Spelm. Glos. in voce Cancellar. Regist. de
Novo lo^o 2^3.
26 H. 3. and thirdly, 32 H. 3. etc.

Sir Robert de Lexington was an Ecclesiastical person, and one of the Kings
Justices, and died without heir of himself, and had three brothers, and two
sisters as follows: John, elder brother of the said Robert, and Lord after
him, who also dyed without heir of himself. Peter de Laxton, Parson of
Gedlinge, likewise died without heir of himself; and so did Henry de Laxton,
Dean, and after Bishop of Lincoln. Cecilia, the sister of Sir Robert de
Lexington, was married to one Sir Richard [rather William] de Marcham, of whom
came Sir Robert de Marcham. Alice, the other sister of the said Robert de
Lexton, was married to Richard (it should be Roland) de Sutton upon Trent, who
had two sons both Knights; his eldest was Sir William de Sutton, and the other
Sir Robert de Sutton, Regist. de Ruff. p. 13.
to whom his said Uncles gave the Manor of Averham, in old writings called
Egrom.

Robert de Sutton, son of William de Sutton, granted, confirmed, and
quit-claimed, Ex ipso Autog. pen. Rob. Dom. Lexington.
to the said Robert, son of Roland de Sutton, the said Manor of Egrum, with
the Advowson of the Church, and Knights Fees, etc. as Sir John de Lessington
held it, and also the whole Land of Kelum, with the Appurtenances, to be held
of him and his heirs, for the Service of two Knights Fees, etc.

Richard de Sutton, Canon of Southwell, mentioned in that place, Lib. Alb. 28.
was son of Robert de Sutton, and Alice his wife, Reg. Ruff. Lib. pen. (...).
Laco^k, etc. Reason Mellish.
who also had a son called John, Parson of Lexington, but I find it was another
elder Robert, and Alice; and in the Pedigree of this Family this Robert de
Sutton is said to have married Isabell, daughter and coheir of Sir Hugh Picot,
Knight, as in Kirtlington is noted, by whom he left issue Sir James Sutton,
Knight, and died 1286. Which Sir James married Agnes, daughter and heir of Sir
John Bar^y of Torlaston, and died 1304. leaving Richard Sutton his son, who
married Alice, daughter and heir of Sir Richard Bingham of Bingham the elder,
Knight, and died 1339. who left John Sutton his son and heir, who married
Ioane, daughter and heir of Henry Musters of Sierston, by whom he had Rowland
Sutton his son and heir, and died 1^69. I suppose he had no Children that
continued to succeed by her, as in Syerston is noted. And I something doubt
concerning some of the rest of the heirs; yet forasmuch as this Genealogical
Scheme comes as near the truth as the most I have seen, I shall follow it with
such notes as have occured pertinent to insert.

By a Fine levied at York, 30 E. 1. Fin. lev. in Oct. 5. Mich. 30 E. 1. apud
Ebor.
between James de Sutton, and Agnes his wife, Quer. and Hugh Barry, Parson of
the Church of Rotyngton, Deforc. the Manor of Egrum was settled on the said
James, and Agnes for life; remainder to Richard their son, and the heirs of his
body; remainder to Robert, brother of Richard, and the heirs of his; remainder
to the right heirs of James: on the back of which Fine many persons put to
their several claims, Adam de Kelesholt his, John de Bray, and Cecily his wife,
Thomas de Longevylers, and Ioane, Margery, and Elizabeth, daughters of Agnes de
S. Cruce, theirs, Hugh Huse his, William, son of Richard, son of Robert de
Kelum, his, William, son of Adam de Kelum, his, Thomas de Roldeston, Thomas de
Charwalton, Robert, son of John le Clerk, of Kelum, theirs.

Richard de Sutton, son of Agnes, who had been the wife of James de Sutton,
Knight, was, 19 E. 2. Esc. 19. E. 2. n. 65.
found her heir, and above thirty years old. King Edward the third at Clipston,
20 Apr. 9 E. 3. Pat. 9. E. 3. m. 21.
granted to Richard de Sutton of Averham, that he during his whole life, should
not Robertus de Laxton- Richardus de Laxton-Matildis. Rolandus de
Sutton.-Alicia. 2 Robertus de Sutton mil. ob. 1286.- Jac. de Sutton ob.
1304.-Agnes fill. and haer. Joh. Barry. Richardus de Sutton ob. 1339.-Alicia
fill. and haer. Ric. de Bingham, senioris. Johannes de Sutton ob. 1369.-Joana,
10 E. 3. fill. Hen. Musters-.... Rolandus de Sutton ob. 1397.-Kath fill. Hen.
Hasty, mil. Henric. Sutton de Averham ob. 1416.-Margareta fill. Hug. Hussy de
Flintham, mil. Richardus Sutton ob. 1468.-Kath. fill..... Fitz-Williams de
Aldewark. Robert. Sutton. ob. 1500.-Eliz. fill. Tho. Stanley-Isabel. fill. Tho.
Burgh, mil. Gart. Henr. Sutton ob. ante patrem-Aliela fill. Nicolai Byron de
Colwyck, mil. Thom. Sutton, mil. ob. 1526.-Kath. fill. Tho. Bassett de
Fledburgh. Henr. Sutton, mil.-Alicia fill. Franc. Hall de Grantham-.... Domina
Pierpont s. p.- Will-Sutton-Anna fill. Joh. Rodney Willielmus Sutton,
miles-Susanna fill. Tho. Cony de Basingthorpe Com. Linc. Rob. Sutton, Ar. creat.
Baron. Lexington-Eliz. fill. Geo. Manners-Anna fill. Guide. Palms, mil. de
Averham, 21 Car. 1. ob. 1668. Oct. 13. de Haddon, mil. s. p. relict. Tho.
Brown, Bar.-Maria fill. Ant. St. Ledger, mil. ob. 1669. Rob. Dom. Lexington aet.
12. 1674. Brigitta aet. 11. 1674.-.... Da^ey. Anna ob. infans.
Henr. Sutton-Mabil. Faunt fill. Henry.-Edw. Manesty mar. 2. Willielmus Gerv.
Rob. Sutton-Kath. Shitburne. Rob. Ric.

Ric. Sutton-... Stanhope. Rob. Sutton-.... Rawson.

Nic. Edm. Joh.
Edw. fill. and haer. Oliva fill. Will. Cooper s. p.
Alicia fill- Hen. Harington. Joh. Edm. Harington. Marc. Henr.








Robertus 30 E. 1.

Isabella fill. and cohaer. Hug. Picor, ux. 2.- Alicia, ux. 1. Rich: de Sutton
Can. de Southwell 1260. Johanes Rector de Lexington 1259.
1. Will. de Sutton miles-Matildis Robertus de Sutton-Joana relict. 2. E. 1.
Ric. de Sutton- Johan. de Sutton 16 E. 2.-Margareta fill. and cohaer. Joh. de
Somery Dom. de Dudley. Johannes de Sutton Dom. Dudley- Joh. de Sutton Dom.
Dudley- Johannes Dom. Dudley- Johannes Dom. Dudley, 8 E. 4.-







Rob. de Lexington Baro. Joh. de Lexington-Cust. Sig. H. 3. Hen. Decanus and
Episc. Line. Steph. Petrus. Cecilia-Ric. de Marcham, potius Willielm. Robertus
de Marcham.- Richardus s. p.



be compelled to take up Arms against his will.

Regist. de Novo ^oco p. 149.
John de Averham, 21 E. 3. was found to hold Lands in Averham only, whom the
Collectors charged with the payment of 6l. for three Knights Fees of John de
Moubray, viz. in Averham, Kellum, and Crumbwell one, in Sterthorpe, Winkeburne
and Deynthorp one, and in Alkeley and Finningley one, and therefore was only to
pay his proportion for the Land he held.

The Jury, 50 E. 3. Es^. 50 E. 3. n. 60.
found that John de Sutton of Averham died 44 E. 3. and left his son and heir
Rouland de Sutton twenty one years of age, by some other wife (I guess) than
the heir of Musters, as in the forenamed Scheme, which makes this Rouland
marry Katherine, daughter of Sir Henry Hasty, Knight, and by her 1397. leave a
son and heir called Henry Sutton, who married Margaret, daughter of Sir Hugh
Hussy of Flintham, and died 1416. having Richard Sutton his son and heir, who
lived long, and married Katherine, daughter of.... Fitz-Williams of Aldewark,
by whom 1468. he left Robert Sutton his son to succeed him, who married
Elizabeth, daughter of Thomas Stanley of Pype, by whom he had a son Henry
Sutton, who died before him the said Robert, who lived till 1500.

Sir Thomas Burgh, Knight of the Garter, gave a Legacy, 18 Febr. 1495. to
Isabell Burgh, wife of Robert Sutton of Averham.

This Henry Sutton, by Alice his wife, daughter of Sir Nicolas Byron of
Colwick, left a son who was Sir Thomas Sutton, who died 1526. and by Katherine
his Lady, daughter of Sir Thomas Basset of Fledborough was Father of Sir Henry
Sutton.

I find Thomas Sutton of Averham, Esquire, 12 R. 2. and that Henry Sutton of
Averham, I^ Co^^. I. R.
Esquire, 14 H. 4. was the son of John.

John, son of Robert de Willughby, late Lord of Cresby, and Katherine his wife,
4 H. 5. Claus. 4 H. 5. m. 12. and 15.
granted to Henry de Sutton, and others, all his Lands, etc. in Averham,
together with the Manors of Kyrtelington, Clifton, Herdeby, and Kelum.

Sir Henry Sutton had three Wives: first, Alice, daughter of Francis Hall of
Grantham; second, the Lady Pierpont, by whom he had no issue; and the third
Alice, daughter of Sir Henry Harington, Knight, the relict of... Flower, by her
he had John Sutton, and four sons more, Marc, Edmund, Henry, and Harington, and
a daughter named Anne, first, wife of Walter Haddon, Master of Requests; and
then of Henry Cobham, brother of William Lord Cobham; by his first wife Alice
he had Edward Sutton his eldest son, who married Oliva, the daughter of William
Cooper of Thurgarton, without issue; his second son, and afterward his heir,
was William Sutton, who had to wife Anne, daughter of John Rodney of Buckwell
in Somersetshire, by whom he had Sir William Sutton of Averham, Knight, and
three sons more, Nicolas, Edmund, John, and three daughters, Jane, Elizabeth,
Olive.

Sir William married Susan, daughter of Thomas Cony of Basingthorpe in
Lincolneshire, on whom he begot Robert Sutton, Esquire, and three sons and four
daughters more, Richard, Henry, Gervas; Alice, Susan, Elizabeth, Mary.

Robert to his first wife had Elizabeth, daughter of Sir George Manners of
Haddon in Darbyshire, sister to John now Earl of Rutland; his second was Anne,
daughter of Sir Guy Palms, and widow of Sir Thomas Brown of Walcott in
Northamptonshire, Baronet, by whom she had two daughters, Elizabeth, and Anne,
widow of....Lord Pawlett, since married to... Stroud; his third was Mary,
daughter of Sir Anthony S. Ledger, Warden of the Kings Mint, by whom only he
left issue, Robert, Bridgett, and Anne born after his death, which was Oct. 13.
1668. his Lady died at Paris Sept... 1669. from whence she was brought and laid
by him at Averham, Sept. 25. 1669. He very much increased his Patrimony, ever
kept a plentiful sober House, and was much out of purse for King Charles the
first, who created him Lord Lexington of Averham 21 C. 1.

Richard Sutton his brother married.... Stanhope, half sister of Philip first
Earl of Chesterfeild, and had a son Robert Sutton, who was Captain of a Troop
of Horse, which he carried into Portugal: he died without issue Male.

Henry Sulton, next brother of the Lord Lexington, married Mabel, daughter of
Henry Faunt, and has several sons, Robert, William, Gervas. Robert married
Katherine Shirbourne, and has issue Robert, and Richard.

The Rectory of Averham was 16l. Mss. I. M.
But is now 20l. in the Kings Books, and the Lord Lexington is Patron, as his
Ancestors the Suttons have been.

In the Church upon a small Monumental Stone,......... obiit vi. Kal. Octobr.
Ao. Dom. mo. ccco. viio.

Upon a fair Tomb, M. S.

Illustrissimo Do Gulielmo Sutton de Averham Equiti Aurato, Generis nobilitate,
virtutum dotibus ornatissimo, Qui post annos xxvii. cum conjuge amantissim^
peractos, octo filiorum totidemque filiarum pater factus, Deo dilectus, patriae
charissimus, suis desideratissimus, cita nec improvisa morte obiit in Christo,
Anno Dom. MDCXI. aetatis suae LII. D. Susanna conjux Moestissima, Officii and
peitatis ergo P.

Siste, morae nec te pigeat, nisi nosse recuses
Quo juvet exemplo vivere, quove mori.
Vive Deo, patrie, vicinis, conjugi, amicis
Charus: quoque ortus sanguine vive memor.
Et quocunque vocet fati Deus impiger ito;
Alea ceu vitae jacta suprema foret.
His titulis surgit lapis hic: sic vixit obitque
Suttonus, quali carmine dignus Eques.
Sir William Suttons Corpse here Toombed sleeps,
Whose happy Soul in better mansion keeps.
Thrice nine years lived he with his Lady fair,
A lovely, noble, and like virtuous pair.
Their generous offspring (Parents joy of heart)
Eight of each sex; of each an equal part
Ushered to Heaven their Father, and the other
Remained behind him to attend their Mother.
On the outside of the Steeple, there is cut in Stone Sir Thomas Suttons Arms,
which was Arg. a Canton Sable, and his Ladies, viz. 3. Piles and a Canton
Varry, which was Bassets of Fledborough, nigh which was T. S. and two Tuns.

Kelham. Kelum. Doomsd. Calune. And Park Lathes.
THis place the Book of Doomsday shows to have been of several Seigniories, the
most considerable was of the Fee of Roger de Busli, where in Lyde Wapentac,
before the Conquest Turchill and Godric are said to have had in Calun ten Bov..
ad Geld. for two Manors. The Land whereof was three Car. There afterward
Turold the man (or Tenant of Roger had one Car. and seven Sochm. on five Bov.
of this Land, Lib. Dooms.
and three Vill. and three Bordars, having two Car.. There were twenty two
Acres of Meadow, small wood sixteen qu. long, and seventy four Virg. broad. In
King Edward the Confessors time this was valued at 60s. in King Williams at
28s. Another great parcel of this Township was of the Fee of Walter de Ayncurt,
and Soc to Rolleston, which answered the Geld or Tax for nine Bovats, and one
third of a Bov. The Land being two Car. and an half. There eighteen Sochm. and
three Board. had seven Car. and an half, and sixteen Acres of Meadow, small wood
nine qu. long, fifty Virg. (or rods broad. Another part was of the Fee of Raph
de Buron, where Osmund, before the Norman invasion, paid to the Geld, as two
Bov.. for his Manor. There William the Man (or Tenant) of Raph, had one Car.
and two Bordars, with two Oxen plowing, and nine Acres of Meadow, Lib. Dooms.
small wood eight qu. long, twelve Virg. broad. In the Confessors time this
was 4s. in the Conquerours 15s. value. Another parcel in Calum was of the Fee
of Gislebert Tysun, which before the Conquest was Alurics, who had two Bov. ad
Geld. for his Manor. The Land whereof was six Bovats. There were two Sochm.
one Board. with half a Car. and six Acres of Meadow, small wood eight qu. long,
fourteen Virg. broad. In the Confessors time 16s. value, at the time of the
Conquerours survey 3s. Another parcel was of the Land of the Taynes, which
Vlchell before the Conquest had, his Manor being then rated to the Geld at one
Bov. and two thirds of a Bovat. The Land six Bovats. There Aldene (progenitor
of the family of Crumwelle) afterward had two Vill. two Board. with one Car.
and six Acres of Meadow, small wood eight quarters long, and eight Virgats
broad. In the Confessors time 20s. value, in the Conquerours 10s.

That of Roger de Buslies Fee, Lord of the Honor of Tikhill, was held by
Gilbert de Chelum, whose gift to the Priory of Rufford King Stephen confirmed,
Reg. Ruff. p. 1.
and William de Tulc, or Tuk, who for five Marks sold his, in the presence, and
by the consent of Raph Silvain his Lord, Ib. 35.
who also confirmed to the brethren of Rufford, all that Land of the Fee of
Tikhill, which Gilbert de Kelum, and William de Tulc, held of him in the
territory of Kelum, from the west side of Buggewonge, (and that also) tilled
and untilled unto the bounds of Wyncheburne, etc.

William del Tulc, son of William del Tulc, Reg. Ruff. p. 30.
confirmed the forementioned Land, which his father gave, in which the
Sheep-house or Lathe, [ Bercaria] of the Monks was situate, (which I take to
be the original of Parkelathes) a Grange or Hamlet in this Lordship, belonging
to that Monastery, which was made up by the Gifts of many several persons.
William Tuke, son of William Tuke, of Kelum, gave twenty four Acres of his
Demesne, measured by the Perch of sixteen foot, lying between the Wong which
Malger de Rolleston gave the said Monks, Ib. 39.
and five Bovats, which Malger de Staunton bestowed on them; which twenty four
Acres stretch from the west into the east, viz. from Souhtwell way, which is
the bound between the fields of Wynkeburne and Kelum, unto the wood of Kelum.

Willielmus del Tulc- Will. de Tuk, 7 R. 1.-Sibylla. Henr. de Tuc 1218.
Walterus de Tuk, miles, 1244.- Walterus de Took, miles, 1290.- Henricus Tuke,
17 E. 2.- Simon Tuke, 11 E. 3.-




Samson. Robertus. Rogerus
Robertus. Rogerus
William de Took, 7 R. 1. Rot. Pip. 7 R. 1.
gave account of two Marks, for having his Land again, whereof he was disseized
for being in Nottingham Castle, as most of our Nottinghamshire Gentry were at
that time, with Earl John. William Took, 7 Iohannis, Pip. 7 Ioh.
owed three Marks for convincing twelve Jurors by twenty four, which twelve had
made a false oath as was said, concerning the Novell disseisin, which Robert de
Took made him of seven Bovats of Land, with the Appurtenances in Chelune. The
same year William de Took owed xxs. of the sixth scutage of the Honor of
Tikhill. Ib.


The next year, 8 Ioh. Robert de Took owed half a Mark for having the record of
the Assize of Nov: disseisin. Pip. 8 Ioh.


Walter Tuke, son of Henry Tuke, of Kelum, after some suits made a concord with
the Abbat and Covent of Rufford, Regist. de Ruff. p. 35.
concerning common of pasture, the Friday after the feast of St. Alban, Ib. 38.
1244. concerning the adjustment whereof Sir Walter Tuke, Knight, son of Walter
Tuke, made an agreement also with Henry, the Abbat, at the feast of the
Nativity of the blessed Mary 1290. which he refused afterward to seal, and
therefore it was preserved by the Monastery to his disgrace.

The Jury, 17 E. 2. Esc. 17 E. 2. n. 15.
found that Hen. son of Walter Touk of Kelum, and his ancestors held of Edm. de
Cressy, and his Ancestors, the Manor of Kelum, by the service of half a
Knights Fee, which the said Edmund, and his said Ancestors held of the Honor
of Tikhill.

By a Fine levied at York, 11 E. 3. Mich. 11 E. 3.
Simon, son of Henry Touk, of Kelum, passed the Manor of Kelum, to Thomas de
Cophous.

John Touc 19 H. 6. Esc. 19 H. 6.
had a Certiorari concerning Lands in North-clifton, South-clifton,
Northwell-woodhous, Ossington, Holme, Northmuskam, Sutton and Kellome, and
Robert Touc, 23 H. 6. Esc. 23 H. 6.


The principal Manor which was Tukes, from that family came to Folejambe, B.
where it continued till our times, and then was sold to Sir William Sutton,
father of Robert Lord Lexington, and to.... Empringham, whose share of this
Manor was parcelled amongst many, but was all at length purchased in by the
said Robert Sutton, afterward Lord Lexington, son of the said Sir Will.

By an Inquisition, 3 December. 19 H. 7. it appears that Elizabeth, Ex I^q.
Fitz-VVilliams widow, who had some interest in Kelom, died 22 July that year,
leaving Thomas Fitz-VVilliams, son of her son Thomas Fitz-Williams, her Cousin
and heir seventeen years old. By another Inquisition taken in Lincolneshire,
Ex. Inq.
10 Sept. 18 H. 8. it appears that Thomas Fitz-VVilliams, Esquire, of Aldwerk,
died 11 Sept. 5 H. 8. (but by another Inquisition taken 20 Ian. 6 H. 8. it
seems he died the Friday next after the feast of the Nativity of the blessed
Mary) leaving William, his son and heir four years old, 16 August, who died 26
Aug. 7 H. 8. His sister Alice was wife of James Folejambe, and fourteen years
and six Months old, and his sister Margaret was wife of Godfrey Folejambe,
twelve years old, 18 H. 8. heirs of the Manor of Kellom, in this County, and
of the Manor of Vlceby in Lincolneshire, De le Hay in Hartfordshire, with
Lands in Therfeld, Thorp Constantin in Staffordshire, Newton upon Derwent in
Yorkshire, with Lands in Wykersley, and in Alderwerk, besides in that County
the Manors of Adwyk, Holinghall, Ferburn, and Lands in Thryber, the Manors of
Aldwerk, Dalton, Thorp, Astley, Penyston, Holey Hall, Huland, Swayne,
Skelmerthorp, Haldenby, Steton, Milford, Lumley, Mikelfeld, Bereby, etc.

Roger de Cressy confirmed to the Monastery of Rufford, Regist. de Ruff. p. 32.
all the Land of his Fee of the Honor of Tikhill, from the West side of
Buggewang, to the bounds of Winkeburne, tilled and untilled, in the territory
of Kelum, and in other places, which Alice, the daughter of Raph, son of
Gilbert de Kelum, and Gilbert her husband, and Tecent her sister, and Maurice
her husband, and Isabel sister of the said Alice and Tecent had given in that
Lordship, according as their several Chartels expressed. Alice had a second
husband named James, Reg. Ruff.
and Isab. a son and heir called Walter, but all this part of Tikhill Fee came
at length to this Tecent or Tissanda, and her heirs. This Maurice de Kelum, and
Tyssanda his wife, who lived in the time of R. 1. had a son and heir named
Walter, who by the consent of his mother, Regist. de Wellebek, p. 40 and 41.
and Pl. apud Westminster. Trin. 44 H. 3.
of whose inheritance it was, gave the Advowson of two parts of the Church of
Kelum, with an Acre of Land in that place, and 8s. Rent in Flikisthorp, by
Hodsat, to the Abbey of Wellebek.

Walter had a son and heir named Robert, who died without issue, Oliva and
Sibyll being his sisters and heirs, of which the first had no issue. Adam de
Kelsold, son of William, married Sibyll, who 9 Ioh. gave a Mark for a Writ of
right concerning half a Knights Fee in Kelum, Fin. 9 Ioh. m. 5.
with the Appurtenances. They had first, Walter, who died without issue; and
secondly, Matthew, his brother and heir, father of Adam without issue, and of
Andrew, his brother and heir, without issue also; and Gilbertus de
Kelum-Alafia. Radulphus- Tecent-Mauritius de Kelum. Walterus de Kelum haeres-
Robertus s. p. Oliva s. p. Sibylla-Adam de Kelsold. 1 Walterus haeres s. p. 2
Mathaeus fr. and haer.- Adam de Kelsold s. p. Andreas fr. and haer. s.p.
3. Rogerus de Kelsold avunculus and haeres Andr. petens, 44 H.3.- Adam de
Helsolt, 9 E. 1.


Petrus 1218- Petrus. Willielmus 1260. Henr. de Kelum
Willielmus.
Gilbertus de Chelum-Adeliza-Jacobus de Chelum marit. 2. Isabella. Walterus.


Richardus. Willielmus.
thirdly, Roger de Kelesold, who claimed the premises, 44 H. 3. against the
Abbat of Wellebek, as Uncle and heir of the said Andrew. Adam de Kelesolt, son
of the last mentioned Roger, 9 E. 1. Pl. and Ls^on. 9 E. l. 10.54. Mic. 5 Job.
also claimed interest in Kelum.

There was a Fine levied 5 Ioh. between Richard, Abbat of Welbek, and Alexander
Prior of Shelford, concerning the Advowson of the Church of Kelum, whereby it
was concluded that the said Abbat, and his successors, should have one moiety,
and the said Prior, and his, the other.

Maurice de Kelum had a son called Peter, who also had one of the same name,
Peter de Kelum, who confirmed his Ancestors gifts, as his Uncle William did
also, to the Monastery of Rufford. Regist. de Ru^f. p. 27 and 36.


Agatha de Thucke held half a Knights Fee in Kellum, Tist. de Nev.
by the occasion of the wardship of the heir of Peter de Kellum. Ib.
Walter Thucke then was also certified to hold half a Knights Fee there.

This Manor continued long in the family of Kellum. In a recovery 16 H. 8.
Hill. 16 H. 8. rot. 127.
Robert Broun, Esquire, and others claimed against John Kellum, and Etheldreda
his wife, five Mess. etc. in Kellum, Newark, etc. and in another 26 H. 8.
Pasch. 26 H. 8. rot. 103.
Robert Curson, Esquire, Gyles Heron, Esquire, John Fysher, Gent. and Robert
Andrew, Gent. claimed against John Kelham, Esquire, the Manor of Kelham, with
the Appurtenances, and ten Mess. ten Tofts, twenty Gardens, four hundred Acres
of Land, etc. in Kelham.

Deyncourts Fee here was held by the Families of Staunton, and Rolleston, as in
those places may be perceived; and Tysuns went with Averham, from whose ancient
Lords, viz. the Lexingtons, it descended by inheritance to the present Lord
Lexington, as in that place is shown.

Walter de Amundevilla testified that Gilbert de Kelum, Regi^t. de Ruff. p. 39.
by the consent of Alase his wife, gave in pure Alms to God and the Monks of
Ruchford, twenty Acres in the territory of Kelum, nigh the Parc of Hugh de
Muscam. Amongst the witnesses were R. the Priest of Wymundetorpe, Malger de
Houcton, and Hawisia his wife, W. de Amundevill, I suppose him the said Walter,
Lord of Winthorpe, as in that place is said.

Will. son of Thomas de Monteburgh, of Egram, released and quit-claimed to that
Monastery all his right of Common of Pasture, Ib. p. 36. and p. 34.
in the Essarts made in the territory of Egram, on both sides the Redegate,
until the Justices came to Nottingham, in 20 H. 3. and likewise in
Kelumshrubs, where the wood stood.

Thomas de Roldeston, (son of Malger, I guess) confirmed the gift of his father
in the Shrubs, Regist. de Rufford, p. 39. b.
and other places of the territory of Kelum, and promised the Monks that he
would make them a Chartell, (or Deed) sealed with his own seal, when he should
be made a Knight, that which he then made, being sealed with the Seal of the
Chapter of Southwell, as very many in those times were, upon the like account.

Ib. 42.
Benedict de Rolleston. son of Thomas de Rolleston, confirmed to the Monks of
Rufford, three Bovats of Land in Kelum, which they had of the gift of Elias de
Wytthechirche, and Ydonea his wife, Ant of the said Benedict, and the homage
and service of the heirs of Walter Ormal, which they had of the gift of Alan
(son of Hugh) de Rodmarthwayt, and all the Lands which they had of his Fee in
the year 1254. whosoever gave them; reserving to himself and his heirs 5^.
yearly Rent; and the foreign service, at two times in the year, viz. the feast
of the Holy Cross, after Easter, and St. Martin in Winter.

Richard, son of James de Sutton, 3 E. 3. Pl. de Iur. and Assis. Not. 3 E. 3.
to. 6. in dorso.
recovered against Edmund de Cressy, Simon, son and heir of Henry Touc, of
Kelum, who held of the said Richard, by Knights service, seven Bovats of Land,
and half a Mess. in Kelum, and by doing suit at the Court of the said Richard,
at Averham, from three weeks to three weeks.

Richard de Willughby, 27 E. 3. Cart. 27 E. 3. m. 8.
had free warren in Beeston, Sutton Passeys, Kelome and North Carleton.

At the Assizes at Nottingham, 31 E. 3. Assis. Not. 31 E. 3. to. 48.
Roger de Bakewell recovered his seisin of two Mess. two Bov. of Land, and
twenty Acres of Land; and fifteen of Meadow in Kelum, and Thomas, son of
Eustachius de Kelum, was amerced.

In a recovery 6 H. 8. Hill. 6 H. 8. rot. 139.
Robert Lawrence, Clark, George Barton, and Martin Cape claimed against Lucia
Robertson, Widow, two Mess. two Tofts, three Cottages, one Barn, one Dovecote,
three Gardens, one hundred Acres of Land, sixteen of Meadow, twenty of Pasture,
6s. Rent, and the Rent of 1l. of Cumin in Newark, Kellom, and Codington, who
called to warrant Henry Robertson, son and heir of Thomas Robertson.

A great part of the Town and Fields of Kelham, B.
were of long time the inheritance of Robertson, an ancient Gentleman of that
Town, all which by the death of John Robertson, the last heir Male of that
house, did descend to his sisters and coheirs and their heirs, who have all
since sold their inheritances to the said Mr. Sutton (late Lord Lexington.)

The Abbey of Roughford had diverse Farms there, which together with
Parkelathes, and the said Abbey were, 6 Oct. 29 H. 8. Pat. 29 H* 8. Pat. 1.
granted to George, Earl of Shrowsbury, from whom by descent, and mean
Conveyance it came to Sir William Sayvile, Baronet, who sold his interest here
to Mr. Sutton, the said Lord Lexington, who became Lord and owner of the whole
township and territories of Kelham, and in effect of the whole Island of
excellent ground, between the two currents of Trent, that by Newark, and that
by Aram and Kelham, where he has since the wars built an house, which he made
his Mansion, Aram House being ruined, but there is still a fair Park well
stored in that Lordship.

The Rectory of Kellome was xx. Mss. I. M.
Marks when the Abbat of Welbeck was Patron: it is now 19l. 8s. 4d. value, in
the Kings books, and the Lord Lexington Patron.

Hockerton. Ocretone. And Hocretone.
THere was a small parcel in Ocretone Sok to Nortwell (which belonged to St.
Mary of Sudwell) of the Fee of the Archbishop of York, which at the time of
the Conquerours Survey answered the Geld for one Bova^. There was then one
Villain, one Bordar, and two Acres of Meadow. In Hocretune before the Conquest
Vlsi and Turchill paid to the Tax or Geld for one Plow-land (or Car.) for their
Manors, the Land whereof was two Car. and an half. There afterward Roger de
Busli had in Demesne two Car. eleven Villains, Lib. Dooms.
three Board. having four Car. There was Meadow of twenty six Acres. There was a
Church. Pasture Wood one leu. long, four qu. and four Virg. broad. In King
Edward the Confessors time this was 4l. value, then in the Conquerours 3l.
Another Manor in this Town before the Normans came Tori had, which paid for
three Bov. to the Geld. The Land was one Car. There afterward Walter de
Aincurt (who succeeded Tori in all or most places) had one Car. five Vill. five
Board. having half a Car. and sixteen Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood one leu.
long, one qu.. broad. In the Confessors time valued at 20s. in the Conquerours
at 15s.

Regist. de Ruff p. 50.
A. (Alan) Earl of Britan gave to Richard, son of Bostarne, a certain Wood [
Broccellam] called Rahag in Fee to him and his heirs, to increase a Knights Fee
which he had there beyond Trent.

Rocelin, son of Richard, for the remedy of his own Soul, Ib. 49.
and his Wifes and Childrens, and for the Souls of his Father and Mother,
Brothers and Sisters, gave the Wood called Rahaghe to the Monks of Ru^ford in
pure Alms.

Conan, Duke of Britan and Earl of Richmond, confirmed to God and the Church of
St. Mary at Ruford, the gift which Roscelin, son of Richard, and Raph his
brother, gave to the said Church, to wit, the Wood called Rahage: To his Deed
dated at Wassingburc were Witnesses Robert de Gant, Roger de Mumbrey, Hamon
Botereux, Peter Botereux, Baldwin de Gant, William de Vesci, Gaufr. de Gant,
Raph, son of Richard, Wygan, son of Rad.

Ioslenus, son of Roselinus de Roldeston, confirmed to the said Monks all the
Land of his Fee called Rahage, tilled and untilled, as his Father had given it.

Raph, son of Richard, in the presence of the Chapter of Suell (now Southwell)
faithfully engaged himself, Ib. 51.
that he would warrant the Land of Rahage, as the Alms of Roselin his brother
to the Brethren of Ruford, and make them have the Charter of the Earl of
Richmond and Confirmation gratis, as speedily as he could, receiving of them
for the business two Marks of Silver.

The Chapter of Southwell likewise certified that Alured de Walur granted in
their presence to the Brethren of Ruford two Bovats of Land in Hocretun, Reg.
Ruff. 51.
with their proper dwelling Houses, and other Appurtenances, reserving 6s. per
annum to himself and his heirs: and that this was done by the consent of
Basilia, the wife of Gumbert, and Adelina his own wife their daughter.

Basilia de Hokerton-Gumbertus. Adelina-Aluredus le Walur de Neware. Johannes
le Walur 1183.- Henricus le Walur- Willielmus le Walur, 6 E. 1.- Walterus le
Walur- 9 E. 2. Henricus le-Alicia, 19 E. 2. Walur.
Henricus, 9 E. 2. Agatha-...de Stokes. Johannes de Stokes. Magota, 19 E. 2.



Robertus. Milo- Alicia. Margareta.



Adelina, wife of Alured le Walur of Newerc, daughter of Basilia de Hocurtun,
Ib. 50. b.
and Milo her son, confirmed to the said Monks the said two Bovats in Hokirton,
which they held in the life time of the said Alured, and the Monks should only
pay 5s. per annum; for which concession they gave her 22s. and one Cow, and one
Calf, and ten Lambs, and released a Toft in that Town, which they held in her
said husbands life time, for which they were to have 10d. of their yearly Farm
remitted; she and her son [ Affidaverunt] did pass their credit in the hand of
William le Tuke to observe this Covenant without any deceit, and because they
had not a Seal of their own, put to the Chapters Seal of Southwell.

Adelizia and Margaret, daughters of Miles le Walur, in their Widow-hood and
free power, released to the said Monks the said 5s. per annum, for the said two
Bovats: The Witnesses were Eustachius de Ludham then Sheriff of Not. William
de Staunton, William le Butiler, Robert Vavassor, Robert de S. George, Thomas
de Roleston, Peter de Kelum, Gaufr. the Constable of Newerch, Alan Roald, Henry
le Walur.

In the year 1183. John, son of Alured le Walur, Reg. Ruff. 49.
by the grant and good will of Miles his brother, granted the said Monks
eighteen Acres of Arable Land lying not far from a Wong of theirs on the East
side of the Town of Wodehus for ten years, and in the hand of Hugh Folenfant
passed his credit, that they should enjoy the Land: the pledges were Cog
Battle, and Robert, son of Basilia, and Hugh de Osmundthorpe: amongst the
Witnesses were Robert de Furnewx, and Philip his brother, Hugh de Builli, Hugh
Folenfant, Robert, son of Gumbert, Gerebert de Hodneskill, Richard Barete.

Ib. 53.
Henry le Walur of Hokyrton confirmed the Wong [ culturam] which John le Walur
his father gave.

Raph de Hokerton (son of Thomas) by the consent of his son Roger, Ib. ^2. b.
gave to the Monks of Rufford all the Land he had in Wudehus from the West part
of the Ditch which was about the Chapel, for 8s. per annum, and two Acres and
an half in another place, viz. nigh Hokerton Meadow on the East, and the Common
Pasture of Hokerton; the Witnesses were Roger le Gross [crasso] Roger le Megre
[macro] (Canons of Southwell, who lived in the time of King Stephen) Malger the
Priest of Winkeburne, William the Priest of Kelum, Maurice de Kelum, William de
Tulcba, Hubert the Clark of Winkeburne, Paulin de Osmentorp, Richard, son of
Gumbert, Norman de Suella, Stori de Winkeburne, Ingeram the Clark, Roger
[monetar^o] the Minter.

Goafrey le Angevin, for the Souls of his Father Henry, Ib.
and of his Mother Aubrey, gave to the said Monks that Wong in Hocreton, which
he held of John, son of Adam, son of Griffin de Hocreton, in the West Field,
lying between a Selion (or Land) which they had of the Land of Alfred le Walur,
and five Acres which they held of the Land of John le Walur; The Witnesses were
Adam de Bella aqua, Robert his brother, William le Butiler of Hocreton, Robert
the Clark of Winkeburne, John le Walur of Hocreton, Raph, son of Thomas, of the
same Town. This was confirmed by the said John, son of Adam de Hocreton: Ib.
to whose Deed these were Witnesses, viz. Gaufr. the Parson of Hocreton, Gaufr.
de Iorz, William Pincerna of Hocreton, Richard de Lesington, Robert his son,
John le Walur of Hocreton, Raph, son of Thomas, Remboud, son of John de Criche,
Gilbert, son of Adam, Gilbert Pincerna.

Habert de Hokerton, son of Gilbert, gave and confirmed to God and St. Mary,
Ib. 50.
and the Monks of Rufford, four Selions of Land in the Territory of Hokerton;
which Monks were of their Charity to give him yearly, during his life, at the
Feast of S. Michael, a pair of Shoes [ sotularium] or 4d. And moreover granted
him their brotherhood, and that after his death they would do for him as for a
Convert. And because he had not a Seal, he caused the Seal of the Chapter of
Suell, for a Testimony to be hung at his Chartel: The Witnesses were William
the Canon of Muscham, Alan, the Canon of Pickering, Matthew Barum, Ingeram, the
Chaplain, Henry Anselm, Alexander, Chaplains, Gaufr. the Parson of Hocreton,
and the Lady Matilda of the same Town, who gave her consent, as Witnessed also
Raph de Suella, sisters son [ sororio] of Hub. de Hocurton.

William le Butiler of Hecreton sold to Robert, Parson of Alreton, Ib. 53.
for eight Marks of Silver, all the Farm Rent which the Monks of Rufford were
wont to pay him for the Land which they held of his Fee in Rahag wudehuse (viz.
8s.) which the said Parson bestowed on the said Monks, and the said William
confirmed. Here were three successively of that name.

William Pincerna of Hokerton, 22 H. 2. Pip. 22 H. 2.
gave account of two Marks of the Forest Amercements. Test. de Nev.
William le Buttiler in the former part of the Reign of Henry the third, paid
for one Knights Fee in Hokerton two Marks; and afterward Hugh le Butiler is
certified to hold a Knights Fee here of the Countess of Ewe Lady of Tikhill. Ib.


John le Botiler, 6 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Mic. 6 E. 1. to. 11.
impleaded William le Walur that he should do him Service, and Suit his Court
at Hokerton, and pay 2s. 9d. ob. for two Bovats which the said William
acknowledged to hold of him, but paid only 2s. 8d. for all Service. William le
Walour had two sons, Ex libro cart. Ioh. Boun, Arm. pen. meips. R.T. p. 35. and
37.
Walter and Henry, and a daughter Agatha. Walter had Henry.

In the year 1302. John le Buteler Lord of Staynton settled his whole Manor of
Hokerton, with all its Appurtenances, and with the Villanages, Villains, their
Chattels and Sequels, and with all the Services of the Freeholders of the said
Manor, as well in Kelum, as in Hokerton, together with Wards, Reliefs,
Escaets, Suits of Court, and the Advowson of the Church of Hokerton, so
entirely as the said John or his Ancestors held it, on Andrew his son, and
Elena, daughter of Alexander de Holm, and the heirs of their bodies, reserving
to himself, during his life, ten Marks sterling yearly.

Willielmus le Butiler five Pincerna de Hocretun-superst. 22 H. 2. Willielmus
le Butiler- Willielmus Pincerna, miles- Hugo le Butiler- Johannes le Buteler
Dom. de Staynton 1299.- Andr. le Boteler, 3 E. 3.-Elen. fill. Alexandri de Holm
1302. Johannes Boteler- Johan. Boteler-Margareta, 40 E. 3. Elizabetha 16 R.
2.-Joh. de Briggeford. Sara 3 H. 6.-Willielmus Multon de-Rousby Com. Linc.
Christiana-.... Alford. Robertus Alford unus consang. and haer. Joh. Botiller,
9 H. 7.



Willielmus, 42 E. 3.- Henricus Botiller 9 R. 2. Will. Botiller de Tikhill
capellan. 24 H. 6.









The Jury, 18 E. 2. Esc. 18 E. 2. n. 99.
found it not to the Kings loss to grant Andrew le Botiler of Hokerton, that he
should enfeoff William Ayremine, Clark, of or in one Mess. one Car. of Land,
and 40s. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Hokerton, which were held of the King
in Capite, as of the Honor of Tikhill, by the Service of the tenth part of a
Knights Fee.

The Jury, 23 E. 3. Esc. 23 E. 3. par. 2. n. 20.
found it likewise not to the Kings loss if he granted Rich. de Marnham to give
to the Prior and Covent of Thurgarton one Mess. one Bovat, and fifteen Acres of
Land, and two of Meadow, held of John de Odingselles in Eperston, and there
would remain at Hokerton and Rohagh one Carucat of Land held of John de Belewe.

Ex Mss. praedict. Cartarum I. Boun, Ar. p. 38.
John Boteler of Hokyrton, 40 E. 3. granted to John Boteler his son, and
Margaret his wife, during the life of the said John the Father, one Mess. and
one Car. of Land called Marnham Land, with the Appurtenances in Hokyrton, and
also forty shillings Rent yearly to be perceived, viz. 20s. out of the Lands
and Tenements which Robert Roughshankes held, 13s. 4d. out of the Lands and
Tenements of William, son of Thomas de Hokyrton, and 6s. 8d. out of those of
Henry, son of John Boteler in the same Town; and he likewise gave him eight
Acres of Meadow in Hokyrton, and ten Cart-loads of Thorns out of his Wood of
Hokyrton yearly at their pleasure, with Wards and Relief, and other
Appurtenances.

John Stanhop of Rampton, Eschaetor, 49 E. 3. Gross. Fin. 49 E. 3. m. 7.
gave account concerning the Lands and Tenements which were lately John le
Botilers of Hockerton, 16 April that year.

Robert Alford, Mss. Cart. I. Boun, Ar. p. 3 P.
9 H. 7. one of the Cousins and heirs of John Botiller, sometime of Hokerton,
viz. son of Christian, daughter of Sara (3 H. 6. wife of William Multon of
Rowsby in Lincolnshire) daughter of Elizabeth (as I take it 16 R. 2. wife of
John de Briggeforth) daughter of the said John Botiller, released to John Hunt,
of Nottingham, Merchant, in his possession, being all his right and claim in
one Mess. three Bov. of Land and Meadow in Hokerton, sometimes the said John
Botillers.

The Manor of Hokerton, about Richard the seconds time, came to John de
Bridgeford, B.
and so to.... Bowman, and.... Alford, of whom Sir John Dunham, Knight, bought
it, and in the partition of his Lands it was allotted to Katherin his daughter,
married to Henry Leigh of Rushall, Esquire, whose son and heir Edward Leigh
then Esquire, after Knight, sold it by parcels to John Boun, Esquire, Father of
Gilbert Boun, Sergeant at Law, and to others.

Thomas de Bella aqua, and Roger (Robert.) de Cruche held half a Knights Fee in
Hokerton, Test. de Nev.
of the Fee of Oliver Deyncurt.

Bellewes part lies near to Kirtlington, and is a great part of the Demesnes
used with Kirtelington House, B.
and I suppose makes a good share of the Park.

The first of the Family of Criche is John, Father of Reinband, whom I have
taken notice of* Reg. Ruff. p. 50.
the next Gaufr. de Cruche, who gave to the Monks Johannes de Criche- Galfridus
de Cruce- Robertus de Cryche- Richardus de Cryche 1299.-Christiana relict. 5 E.
2. Richardus de Cryche-Magota 18 E. 2.-Margetia 44 E. 3. Johannes de
Cryche-Margareta 44 E. 3. Johannes de Cryche, 14 H. 4.- Richardus de Cryche
fill. and haer. 1 H. 6. de Halom, 9 H. 6.
Willielmus 33 E. 3.-Cecilia ob. 12 H. 4. s. p.
Robertus capellanus.
Marjoria. Agnes. Alicia.

Reinbaldus- Beatrix.


of Rufford the Homage and Service of Beatrix, daughter of Reinbald his
brother, and her heirs, with the Farm of 40d. which she ought him yearly for
two Bovats of Land which she held of him in Hokerton. Robert de Cryche, son of
Gaufr. de Cryche, passed a Toft and some small parcel to John, Mss. I. B. p.
19. Ib. p. 21.
son of John de Criche. Richard de Cryche, son of Robert, in the year 1299.
confirmed to Margery, Agnes, and Alice his sisters, some small parcels their
father the said Robert gave them.

Mss. I. B.
To this Robert de Criche and his heirs in the year 1296. did John le Botiler
Lord of Hokerton give and confirm Robert Gervays of Southwell, son of John, son
of Sibyll de Hokerton his Native (or Villain) with all his Goods moveable and
immovable, and all his Chattels acquired, and to be acquired, with all his
Sequels; yet afterward he gave him liberty to be promoted to the Clergy, and
receive Ecclesiastical Tonsure, and released him lest he should suffer any
repulse from the Ordinaries by reason of his Servitude. Christian, Ib. 24.
sometime wife of Richard de Criche of Hokerton in her widowhood, Iun. 7. 1328.
released to Richard de Criche her son, all her claim in her said husbands
Lands. Robert, son of Richard de Criche of Hokerton, and Hugh Gervays of the
same, Chaplains, 44. E. 3. conveyed to Richard de Criche of Hokerton, and
Marjory his wife, and to John, son of the said Richard, and to Margaret his
wife, and the heirs of the bodies of the said John and Margaret, the Capital
Mess. and all Lands, Rents, Farms, Medows, Pastures, Buildings, etc. and
another Mess. called Gervays place, which they had of the gift and feoffment of
the said Richard de Criche, who, in 33 E. 3. settled two Mess. on William de
Criche his son, and Cicely his wife, who died without issue at Welbek, 12 H. 4.
Richard, son and heir of John Criche, 1 H. 6. July 1. released to Robert
Warsop, Clark, and Robert Southwell, all his claim in 2s. Rent issuing out of
two Mess. in Rohagh, and out of all the Lands which John Lawrence sometimes
held, and which Richard de Criche his Grandfather, whose heir he then was, gave
to John Coke of Maplebeck, and Alice his wife, and the heirs of their bodies,
with remainder to himself and his heirs. John, Mss. I. B. Ar.
son of John Criche the elder of Hokerton, 14 H. 4. released to John Briggeford
of Hokerton, Robert Warsop, Parson of West Retford, and Robert Southwell, all
his right in all the Lands in Hokerton, which they had of the gift and
feoffment of the said John Criche his Father.

All Criches Lands were purchased by John Hunt, Merchant of the Staple, B.
whose brother Edmund Hunt was Father of Thomas Hunt of Robertus Boun-...fill.
and haer. Ric. Tibtost Richardus Boun de Baukewell Com. Derb. 22 H. 6.-
Christoph. Boun de Bakewell 5 E. 4.-Emma fill.... Page de Castleton, 2. R. 3.
Thurstanus Boun de Hulme juxta Baukwell, 16 H. 7.-Joana fill....Brodhurst. Will.
Boun de Hulme-Joanna fill. Will. Goodwin. Edwardus

Isabel. fill. Rad. Marshall de South Carleton. Dorothea fill. Will. Clerkson,
Ar.-Ed. Hunt. Bound-Isabella cohaer. Johannes Boun-Barbara fill. Joh. Leck de
Edelmton.-Maria fill. Joh. Neubold. Gilbertus Boun serve. ad legem.-Maria fill.
Ed. Forset de Billesby Com. Linc. s. p.-Millecent fill. Joh. Waring, Ar.
Johannes Boun Ar. ob.-Maria fill..... s. p. Slatier S.T.P. Gilbertus Boun.-Eliz.
fill. Hen. Bedell. Maria ux. Car. Shelley. An. ux. R. Thoroton Authoris. Barbar.
ux. Joh. Story.
Anna-Nic. Crouch.
Franc. ux. Chr. Strelley s. p. Anna ux. Joh. Arnall. Georg.
Katherina cohaer.-Rob. alvy. Anna cohaer.-Hen. Gonaston.



.... Hunt- Johannes Hunt mercator 1 E. 4. Ed. Hunt merc.-Stap. Thom. Hunt de
Normanton juxta Southwell.



Normanton by Southwell, who married Isabell, the daughter of Raph Marshall,
and of Katherin his wife, daughter of Thomas Nevill of Rolleston, by whom he
had Edmund Hunt, who upon his marriage with Dorothy, the daughter of William
Clarkeson of Kirketon, Esquire, 10 H. 8. intailed this Manor to the heirs of
their two bodies; for want of issue Male, it descended to his three daughters
and heirs, Isabell, the wife of Edward Boun; Katherin, of Robert Alvey; and
Anne, of Henry Gonaston, whose daughter Anne was married to Thomas Mason, from
whom Ed. Mason the present Rector of Hokerton is descended, but the said Henry,
3 E. 6. sold his part to the said Edward and Robert his Parceners.

Robert Alvey had a daughter named Anne, wife of Robert Goodhall of Hollewell
in Lincolneshire, by this venture, and a son called Henry Alvey, Doctor of
Divinity, and Fellow of, and Benefactor to St. John's College in Cambridge,
Fuller Ecclesiast. History.
and President of Trinity College in Dublin; but his eldest son by this match
(I guess) was Edward Alvey, Father of... the wife of... Bell, Ancestors of that
name in Linne: which Edward about 18 or 20 Eliz. sold his part also, so that
all Hunts Land became the inheritance and possession of the said John Boun,
Esquire, from whom it descended to Gilbert Boune, Esquire, his son, afterward Sergeant
at Law, my wifes Father, who sold his interest here to John More, (...) of
Physic, whose Nephew John More, Lord also of Kirtlington, together with that,
left the possession of this whole Township to John More his son and heir, the
Doctor also having purchased a Farm in this place held of the Prebend of North
Muskham, which is supposed to be that belonging to Southwell of the Archbishop
of Yorkes Fee, as it is like he did Rohagh, etc. belonging to Rufford, and with
it granted to the Earl of Shrowsbury.

The Rectory of Hockerton was xl. when Mr. Wiat and Mr. H. Alford were Patrons.
Mss. I. M*
It Is now 9l. 9s. 4d. value in the Kings Books, and Thomas Brereton, Esquire,
Patron.

Winkeburne. Wincheburne.
IN Wincheburne before the coming of the Normans, Swayne had for his Manor
twelve Bov. for the Geld. The Land three Car. Gislebert de Tysun (whose Fee it
became afterward) had in Demesne two Car. and fifteen Sochm. on four Bov. of
Land, Lib. Dooms.
and seven Vill. five Board. having seven Car. There was a Church, and sixteen
Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood one leu. long, and half a leu. broad. In King
Edward the Confessors time the value was 100s. when the Book of Doomsday was
made 60s. Five Taynes held two Bovats of this Land, one of them was Senior, who
belonged not to Swain.

Adam Tyson gave the Town of Winkeburne to the Knights Hospitallers of St.
John's of Jerusalem, Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p. 546.
to whom Henry Hosatus gave the Churches of Wynkeburne and Egrom in this County
which King John confirmed, as it seems Roger Moubray had done, Ib. 510.
to which Family Tysuns Fee was transferred.

The Prior of St. John's of Jerusalem, 8 E. 1. Rot. de Rag. and de quo War.
cor. 1. de Vallibus and socits suis apud Not. crast. animarum, 8. E. 1. to. 2.
in dorso.
claimed Free Warren in his Demesne Lands in Ossington and Winkeburne, and
Emendation of the Assize of Bread and Ale in the Towns of Malington and
Winkeburne, by the Charters of King H. 3.

King Edward the sixth, 19 July, 2 E. 6. Par. 4. pat. 2 E. 6.
granted to William Burnell, and Constance his wife, all that his whole Manor,
Rectory and Church of Wynkeburne, with its Rights, Members and Appurtenances,
late belonging to the Hospital of St. John's of Jerusalem in England, as
parcel of the late Preceptory of Newland in the County of York, and the
Advowson and right of Patronage of the Vicarage of the Church of Wynkeburne,
and all Hereditaments whatsoever in the Towns, Fields and Hamlets in Wynkeburne
and Malebeck to the said Manor and Rectory belonging, and the Wood called
Mausey Wood containing fourscore and eight Acres; and another Wood called
Estspring containing forty six Acres; and another containing twenty six, called
the Coppe, belonging to the said Hospital and Preceptory; and the Rectory and
Church of Malebeck, with the Advowson of the Church belonging to the said
Hospital and Preceptory, paying for Winkeburne lxxixs. viid. and holding the
Rectory of Malebecke in Socage, of the Manor of Southwell by Fealty only.

Walter Jones, Clark, and Henry Needham, Gent. and William Burnell, Pat. 12
Eliz. par. 1.
junior, Oct. 30. 12 Eliz. had pardon of alienation for acquiring of William
Burnell, Esquire, all the Manors, Lands, Tenements, Tithes, and Hereditaments
of the said William Burnell in Wynkeburne, to the use of the said William (the
younger) and his heirs Males. This continues still with the Family.

Maplebeck. Malebec.
THe great Survey made in the time of King Willliam the first, shows that part
of Maplebeck was of the Soc of Maunsfeld the Kings own Land, viz. as much as
paid the Tax for two Bov. the Land four Bov. Lib. Dooms.
There three Sochm. had one Car. But the greater part of Mapleberge was Soc to
Chenesale and Cheversale (now Kneesall and Kersall) which answered the Geld for
fourteen Bov. The Land being four Car. There had Gislebert de Gand (whose Fee
it was then become) one Car. and nine Sochm. on ten Bov.. of this Land, and
five Bordars, having four Car. and thirty Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood one leu.
long, and three qu. broad.

This was held anciently by the Burdons. John Burdon was a Witness to the
Charter of Anneissa, Regist. de Ruff. p. 17.
the daughter of William the Constable of Chester, wife of Eustace Fitz-Iohn,
and great Grandmother of Roger the Constable of Chester.

John Burdon (probably son of the former) by the Concession and Confirmation of
John his heir, Regist. de Ruff. p. 45, etc.
gave to the Monks of Ruchford for the health (or safety) of his Soul, his
wifes and Childrens, and for his Lord Roger the Constable, and for the Souls of
his Lords John the Constable, and Richard his father, and for the souls of his
own father and mother, and all his Parents, and Ancestors, one Bovat of Land in
the territory of Mapilbech as entire and free as himself had it, with all the
Appurtenances, and namely Pasture for one hundred Sheep, five Cowes, and one
Bull, and eight Oxen, and ten Swine, and one Horse, and one Masage, situate on
the West part of the Town for building the Houses, in which are contained
fourteen Selions, and several other Sarts, one having sixteen Selions, another
six, besides Shrubs belonging to it: when he gave it, the Monks received him,
his heir John, and his own wife, into their Fraternity, and to Sepulture, and
his body to be buried under their Roof. For the better security of this Alms he
was to procure the Confirmation of the Constable of Chester, and did put to the
Seal of the Chapter of Southwell, together with his own Seal to this Chartel.

Roger the Constable of Chester did accordingly confirm it, Reg. Ru^f. p. 46.
to whose Charter were Witnesses Richard Chester his brother, John Burdun the
younger, Hugh Dispenser, Thomas his brother, William de Lungvillers, and others.

William Burdun, and Roger his brother, were Witnesses to John Burdons Deed,
and I supppose his sons. William Burdun, 7 R. 1. Plac. 7. R. 1. to. 13.
complained of Hugh de Redmerstweit that he drew Agnes the wife of him the said
William into pleading in the Court Christian, contrary to the Kings
prohibition, he came and acknowledged it, and was Amerced three Marks, and
forbidden to draw her into Plea.

John Burdon (son of this John the Benefactor to Rufford as I guess) married
Alice, Regist. de Elida p. 92.
daughter of William de Bucton, who gave Lands in that Johannes Burdon-
Johannes Burdon- Regist. de Bli. p. 92.
Johannes Burdon-Aeliz fill. Willielmi de Bucton. Johannes Burdon 1224.- Johannes
Burdon, miles- Johannes Burdon de Bucton, 6 E. 2.- Johannes Burdon Dom. de
Malebeck, 2 R. 2. 11 R. 2.- Nicol. Burdon, miles, 4 H. 4.-Millecent fill.....
Bekering-Joh. Markham, mil. Justic. de Banc. mar. 2.-Eliz. fill. and cohaer.
Joh. Cressy, ux. 1. Elizabetha filia and haeres-Robertus Markham, mil. Robertus
Markham de Cotham, mil.-Jana fill. and haer. Egid. Daubeney ex Maria^ fill. and
cohaer. Sim. Leek de Cotham.
Johannes Markham, mil. Capit. Justic.-Margar. cohaer, Sim. Leek. Elizabetha
filia and haeres-Robertus Markham, mil.




Robertus 14 H. 3. Basilia- Amabilia-Hingram Bluet.

Willielmus. Rogerus.
Willielmus 7 R. 1.-Agnes.

Town to Blyth Monastery, and brought a good augmentation to this Family (as in
that place will be noted) and by her had a son named also John Burdon, who in
the year 1224. confirmed his mothers gift to that Monastery; and likewise his
sister Basilia's, and her daughter Amabilia's, the wife of Hingram Bluet,
Regist. de Ruff. p. 46.
as did also John Burdon his son; he also made agreement with the Abbat of
Rufford, concerning his Fathers and Grandfathers gifts to Rufford, and
augmented them, and at the entreaty of William the Abbat his Kinsman he gave
him and the Covent, Robert, son of Gaufr. the Carpentar, with all his Chattels,
for which the said Abbat gave him half a Mark of Silver, and a quarter of
Wheat: The Witnesses to this were Robert de Muscam, Hugh and Robert his sons,
etc.

John Burdon likewise confirmed to those Monks the gift which Hugh de Muscham
made in the territory of Mapelbek, Reg. Ruff. p. 46.
viz. a Wood called Miclehage, which the said Hugh held of the Fee of Gilbert
Earl of Lincoln, paying only 4d. for it yearly to the men of Mapelbek.

Regist. de Blida.
William Burdon was long Prior of Blyth, he was there 1273. and 1300.

John Burdon, son and heir of Sir John Burdon, Knight, Reg. Ruff. p. 93. Ib. 88.
was resident at Bucton, 6 E. 2. and in 2 R. 2. John Burdon was Lord of
Mapelbek.

Nicolas Burdon, 4 H. 4. Ex libr. 2. 4 H. 4. in offic. ducat. f^l. 8. Ex Coll.
I. B. Ar.
did Service in the Battle of Shrowsbury, where he was slain, his wifes name
was Milicent. Sir Nicolas Burdon, Knight, married Millesent, the daughter
of.... Bekering, by whom he had a daughter and heir Elizabeth, married to Sir
Robert Markham, Knight, son of John Markham the Judge, and Elizabeth, the
daughter of Sir John Cressy his former wife, which Sir John Markham afterward
married the said Millecent, widow of Sir Nicolas Burdon, and by her had Sir
John Markham the Chief Justice, who married Sir Robert Markham his Nephew both
by his brother and sister, to his wifes Niece Ioane, the daughter of Sir Giles
D'aubeney, and heir to her mother Mary his wife, one of the daughters and
coheirs of Simon Leek of Cothum, Esquire, as in that place is shown.

By a Fine, 23 H. 6. Fin. lev. Mich. 23 H. 6.
the Manors of Mapulbek and Bughton, and the moiety of the Manor of Caunton,
were settled on Sir Robert Markham, Knight, and Elizabeth his wife, and the
heirs of their bodies; remainder to the right heirs of Elizabeth. With the
Family of Markham of Cotham this Manor continued, B.
till Sir Robert Markham, Knight, the destroyer of that Family, sold it to the
Earl of Clare, with whose posterity it remains.

There was a very fair House at this Town built by some of the Markhams, which,
as the Tradition is, cost near as much as the whole Lordship was sold for,
which in the year 1666. the present Earl pulled down and sold the Materials,
whereof amongst others I bought some small part, which I used in rebuilding my
own House at Carcolsion.

Robert Filiol of Mapelbek gave to Rufford, Reg. Ruff. p. 46. b.
with his body, certain small parcels there, which Thomas the husband of Serith
his daughter confirmed.

There was a Fine at York, 28 E. 1. Trin. 28 E. 1.
between Durand de Wydemerpol, Quer. and Alan de Threngston, and Elena his
wife, Imped. of 10s. Rent, with the Appurt. in Mapulbek, the right of Durand,
for which he gave them 10l. sterling.

The Manor or Grange here parcel of the possession of the Abbey of Rufford, was
granted with that Monastery, 29 H. 8. to the Earl of Shrowsbury.

Kneesale. Chenesale.
ULF whose Lands after the Conquest became the Fee of Gislebert de Gand, had in
Chenesale and Cheversale twelve Bovats for the Geld. The Land of his Manor was
for four Plows, or so many Car. Lib. Dooms.
There Gislebert had in Demesne three Car. eight Sochm. on three Bov. of Land,
and sixteen Vill. four Board. having twelve Car. There were twenty two Acres of
Meadow, Pasture Wood one leu. long, half a leu. broad. In the Confessors time
it was 8l. value, in the Conquerours 6l. having Soc in Almentun and Mapleberg.

The Constables of Chester held this Manor very anciently, Reg. Ruff. p. 17,
and 18. Test. de Nev.
and when they were Earls of Lincoln are certified to have held of the Fee of
Gilbert de Gaunt three Knights Fees in Kneesall, with the Appurtenances of the
old Feoffment. The Church was given by some of the first Constables to the
Priory of Norton in Cheshire of their Foundation, Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p. 185.
as in Radclive on Sore is noted.

The first Constable of Chester was Nigellus, who with his five brothers Hudard
(Ancestor of Nigellus Constabularius Hugonis Comitis Cestr- Willielmus
Constabularius- Will. Constable. sine prole. Matild. vel Agn. ux. Alberic Gredeley.
Anneissa-Eustach. fill. Joh. Richardus Constab. Cestr.-Albreda de-Will. de
Clarofagio Lisures.-Avicia fill. Will. de Taneia. Joh. Lacy Constab. Cest. Pip.
12 H. 2. Ebor.-Alicia Vere ux. Will. Mandevill suit fill. Aliciae de Essex
Amitae Commit Will. and sor. Com. Alberici. Rot. de dominabus pueris, etc.
Rogerus Constab. Lacy dictus Hell. ob. 1211.-Matilda de Clare. Joh. Lascy
Constab. Cestr. Com. Linc. jure ux. ob. 1240.-1 Alicia fill. Gilberti de
Aquila-2 Margareta fill. Rob. de Quanci. Edmundus Constab. Cestr. non Com. Linc.
quia matter supervixit. ob. 1258.-Alecia fill.... Marchionis de Saluces. Henricus
Lacy Com. Linc. Constab. Cestr. ob. 1310. aet. 60.-Margareta fill. Will.
Longespe. Alesia fill. and haer. ob. 1348. aet. 67. s. p.-Thom. Com. Lanc. mar.
1.-Ebulo le Strange mar. 2.



Eustachius. Ric. Cestr. Lent. 131. Gaufr. Lent. 46. b. Rob. Constab. Reg.
Lent. 131.
Robertus Hospital. Sara ux. Rob. Alford. Aubrea de Lisures ux. Hen. Biset,
Lent. 46. b.



.... de Lusoriis- Toraldus de Lusoriis 1088.-Beatr. Will. de. Lisoriis.
Fulco de Lisoriis 1088-Albreda. Rob. de Lisoriis Pip. 5 Steph.-Albred. sor.
Will. de Vesci.-Hen. de Lacy. Richardus Constab. Cestr.-Albreda de-Will. de
Clarofagio Lisures.-Avicia fill. Will. de Taneia.


Ilbertus de Lacy-Havisia. Rob. de Lacy-Matild. Rob. de Lisoriis Pip. 5
Steph.-Albred. for. Will. de Vesci.-Hen. de Lacy. Robertus Lacy s. p.-Isabella.
Ilb.-Alic. de Gaunt s.p.


the Duttons) Edward, Wolmer, Horswin, and Wolfan came with Hugh, whom William
the Conqueror made Earl of Chester, to hold as free by his Sword, as himself
all England by his Crown; which said Earl Hugh gave this Nigellus the Barony of
Halton, to which belonged nine Knights Fees and an half, and a fourth part, and
a fifth part of a Fee, by the name of the Constabelry of Chester, and made him
his Marshall and Constable, so that whenever the said Earl should move his
Army toward Wales, the said Nigellus and his heirs should go first in, and
come last out.

William the Constable, son of this Nigellus, Founded an House of Canons at
Runcorne 1133. (he was very old then) and was buried at Chester, where he died.

William the younger his son, who succeeded in the Inheritance, transferred the
Canons to Norton, and died without heirs of his body, leaving his sisters Agnes
and Matilda his heirs.

The story makes Agnes married to Aubert Grelly, but certain it is that
Anneissa, Reg. Ruff. p. 17, and 18.
daughter of William the Constable of Chester, was second wife of Eustace
Fitz-Iohn, and over-lived him, whose son and heir by her was Richard Constable
of Chester, who married Albreda, Regist. de Blid. p. 106.
the daughter and heir of Robert de Lisures, son of Fulc de Lisures, and of
Albreda his wife.

This Robert de Lusoriis, 5 Steph. Pip. 5 Step.
gave account of viiil. vis. viiid. that he might marry the sister of Ilbert de
Lacy.

Ilbert Lacy who lived in the Conquerours time, Mon. Angl. vol. 1. p. 859, and
906.
begot of his wife Havisia, Robert Lacy, who by Matilda his wife had Hilbert
and Henry, and Founded a Monastery at Pontefract, their principal place of
residence, where he was buried in the time of William Rufus. Ilbert his son had
to wife Alicia Gaunt, but no issue; Henry his other son married ( Albreda it
seems) the sister of William Vesci Governor of Berwic, and by her had Robert
Lacy his son and heir, who died about 4 R. 1. 1193. and having no issue by
Isabell his wife, Albreda, the daughter of Robert de Lisoures, his sister by
the mothers side, became his heir, and carried a very great inheritance to the
Constables of Chester, though besides her husband Richard before named, she had
one called William the Ancestor of the Fitz-Williams, named in Plumtre. By her
husband the said Richard she had John Laci Constable of Chester, and Robert the
Hospitaler, and Sara, wife of Robert de Alford, and Aubrea de Lisures, wife of
Henry Biset. Regist. de lent. 46. Ex libr. in offic. Ducat. sub ti^ulo Com.
Not. cap. 2.


In the year 1186. Garner de Naples, Prior of the House of the Hospital of
Jerusalem in England, by the consent of the Chapter, granted to John Constable
of Chester and his heirs, their whole Town of Knesale, which they had of the
gift of the said John, to be held of their House by the Rent of two Marks of
Silver yearly, yet so as that at his death, and likewise at the death of each
of his heirs, the third part of his and their substance which they shall have
in Knesale, shall remain to their said House of Hospitalers, for the health of
his or their Souls. This John had to wife Alice Vere, who was also married to
William Mandeville; Rot. de Dominabus pa^^is and pullis in State. Regist. Ruff.
17.
she was daughter of Alice de Essex, Aunt of Earl William, and sister of Earl
Alberic. Adelicia, sometime wife of John Constable of Chester, granted and
confirmed to the Monks of Rufford, her whole Land of Almeton, which belonged to
her Fee of Cnesale, which was of her Dower, according as it was confirmed in
the Charters of the said ^ohn her Lord, and Roger de Laci her son, reserving
10s. per annum Rent. This John is said to be slain in the Holy Land the fifth
of the Ides of October. 1183. but that agrees not well with what before is set
down, Mon. A^gl. vo^. 1. p. 860.
except Robert Lacy his Uncle over-lived him, and the Hospitalers Deed should
be dated 1168. instead of 1186.

This John had several sons, Eustachius, Richard, Regist. L^nt. 131.
Chester, Gaufr. Robert, Constable of Chester; but his eldest son Roger Lacy
the Constable, for troubling the Welsh, got the name of Hell: he with a sudden
raised Company of Shoomakers and Players, relieved Ranulf Earl of Chester
Besieged in a Castle in Wales, for which the said Earl gave him and his heirs
the Dominion and Advowson of those kind of people, which it seems this Roger
gave to his Senescal, one of the heirs of Hudard, whom his brother Nigellus,
before-named, made Senescal of his Barony, because the Duttons Jurisdiction and
Inheritance is excepted, out of the Statutes, 39 Eliz. and 1 Iac. concerning
Vagabonds and Rogues.

This Roger married Matilda de Claere, sister of the Treasurer of the Church of
York, and by her had John the second, Constable of Chester, whom he left to
succeed him 1211. after whose death the said John took to wife Alesia, daughter
of Gilbert de Aquila, and after her death Margaret, the daughter of Robert de
Quenci, Niece of Ranulf Earl of Chester, and by-her was made Earl of Lincoln
1221. 5 H. 3. on whom he begot Edmund de Lacy Constable of Chester, but not
Earl of Lincoln, because his mother over-lived him. John died the eleventh of
the Kal. of August 1240. 24 H. 3. and his son Edmund 1248. after he had
begotten his son Henry de Lacy Earl of Lincoln, on his wife Alesia, daughter
of the Marquess of Saluces in Italy; her mother after the death of her husband
the said Marquess, was married to Menfred, son of Frederic the Emperor, who
begat on her Constancia, wife of Peter, son of James King of Arragon.

In the year 1282. King Edward gave to Henry de Lacy Earl of Lincoln, for his
Service, two Cantreds in Wales, viz. of Roos and Roweignok. He had by Margaret,
daughter of William Longespey, Edmund de Lacy, junior, who died young, and
John, who was slain by a fall from a Tower in Pontefract Castle, before he was
marriageble, and Alise his daughter and heir, who at nine years old was
betrothed to Thomas of Lancaster King Edwards Nephew, son of Edmund Earl of
Lancaster his brother, which Thomas Earl of Lancaster her husband was beheaded
in the year 1321. and she after married her old Love Ebulo le Strange, but had
no issue; her Father the said Henry Earl of Linc. died 3 E. 2. 1310. aged sixty
years, having settled a great part of his Estate, 22. E. 1. for want of heirs
of his said daughter Alesia, on the heirs of the said Thomas Earl of Lancaster
her husband; and thus ended this Noble Line.

Henry Earl of Lincoln died sei^ed of this Manor of Knesale, ^sc. 4 E. ^1. n.
5.
and the Wapentak of Allerton, and other Lands of the Fee of Gaunt and Tikhill.
The heirs of John Burdon held of him a Knights Fee in Maplebeck, Kirketon, and
Bucketon; John de Ki^nesa^e in Kirnesale a (...) part; Raph de Welwike, John de
Calneton, Robert Coly, and Richard Freman, a fourth part in Kenesale; Margery
Foliot a Fee in Grimston, with its members; Richard de Sutton a Fee in Alerton;
William Fitz-William three parts of a Fee in Weston, Sternethorp, Sutton, and
in ^ieworth; in Cotum by Dunham, Marneham, Batheley, Muscham, Karleton,
^keggeby, another Fee; in Mareton, Hareworth, and Lympole half a Fee; in
Plumtre by ^areworth a sixth part of a Knights Fee; in S^yrap and Vlcotes a
fourth part; in Costerthorp and Hardwick another Fee; in Claverburgh and Hayton
the fourth and eighth part of a Fee; in Clumbre a sixth part, in Allerton a
third, in Drayton a fourth, and an eighth part, etc.

John de Felton, 3 E. 3. Q^o War. 3 E. 3.
claimed to have view of Frank-pledge and Weyf, and Free Warren in his Manor
of Knesale.

Thomas Earl of Norforlk and Suffolk, and Marescal, 6 E. 3. Claus. 6 E. 3. m.
17.
passed to the King and his heirs the Manor of Knesall, with many others in
several Counties.

The Jury, 34 E. 3. Esc. 34 E. 3. n. 85.
found that William de Bohun Earl of Northhampton held when he died the Manor
of Knesale, by the Charter of King Edward the third, and that Humfrey de Bohun
was his son and heir.

The Jury, 1 H. 4. Esc. 1 H. 4. n. 51.
found that Alianor, wife of Thomas late Duke of Gloucester, one of the
daughters and heirs of Humfrey de Bohun late Earl of Hereford, died feised of
this Manor of Knesale. Anne, wife of Edmund Earl Stafford, Willielmus Boun
Com. Northampton- Humfr. de Bohun Com. Hereford-Essex and Northampton.
Alianor-Tho. de Woodstock Dux Glocestr. Anna-Edmundus Com. Stafford. Humfr. Dux
Buckingham- Humfr. Stafford- Henricus Dux Buckingham- Edmund. Dux Buckingham
attinct. 13 H. 3.



Joana at. 15. 1 H. 4. Isabella aet. 13. 1. H. 4.



Ioane then aged fifteen years, and Isabell thirteen, were her three daughters
and heirs. In 4 H. 4. Esc. 4 H. 4. p. 48.
they found that Edmund Earl of Stafford when he died held the Manor of
Knesale, of the inheritance of Anne his wife, and that Humfrey his son and heir
was then one year old; she the said Anne afterward 7 H. 4. Mic. 7 H. 4.
was wife of John [William] le Bourghchier, Chr. Humfr. Duke of Buckingham
about 38 H. 6. Esc. 38 and 39 H. 6.
died seized of the Manors of Radcliffe on Sore, Knesale, and Colston Basset,
leaving Henry, son of Humfrey, son of the said Duke, his heir.

The Manor of Knesall, late Edmund Duke of Buckinghams, 13 H. 8. Orig. 13 H.
8. to. 36.
was granted to John Hussy, Knight, and the heirs males of his body. John Lord
Hussy was attaint in Parliament, 31 H. 8. and in 3, or 5 E. 6. this Manor and
many others were granted to Edward Fynes Lord Clinton and Say, Lord Admiral of
England, and his heirs.

Robert, Earl of Kingston, had it, and with his posterity it continues.

There was a Chantry founded at the Altar of St. Nicolas in Knesall, by one
John Chapman, of the City of York, Public Notary, who held Lands while he
lived in Kneesall, Ampton and Allerton, which were granted by Queen Eliz. 18
Eliz. Pat. 18 Eliz. par. 2.


To John Mershe, Esquire, and Francis Greneham, Gent. there was a recovery 17
and 18 Eliz. (...). 17 and 18 Eliz. rot. 345.
wherein John Meringe, Gent. and John Burton claimed against William Meringe,
Knight, two Mess. one hundred Acres of Land, five hundred Acres of Pasture in
Knesall, who called to warrant Thomas Meringe, Esquire, son and heir of the
said William.

In the year 1612. the owners of Kneesall were reckoned to be Samuel Hartop,
Liber lib. t^^.
Gilbert Rosse, Gent. Robert Clark, and William Walhead.

Mss. I. M.
The Vicarage of Knesall was ten Marks, when the Vicars Choral of Southwell were
Patrons; it is now ten Pounds value in the Kings Books, and the Church of
Southwell retains the Patronage.

Kernesall. Kersal. Cheuersale.
THis was a Member as it were of Knesale, yet there was a Grange or Hermitage
in Kersale, Regist. de Lent. p. (...).
which Hugo de Burun, a great benefactor, and afterward Monk of Lenton held,
who gave Land in Almeton, to that Monastery; but I suspect this Hermitage of
Kersale might be in Lancashire.

Richard, son of Robert de Croxton, confirmed to the Canons of Stanley Park,
Regist. de ^ass. p. ^^
(otherwise called Dale-Abby) the whole gift which his brother John made to
them of all his Land in Mickleverge, in the territory of Kirnesale, which the
Abbat and Covent released to Avicia sometime wife of Sir John de Kirnesale, and
her heirs.

Robert Walensi^, son of Rob. Walensis, ^.
of Kirneshal, gave four Acres of Arable Land in an essart of Kirneshal, to the
Monastery of Rufford, with his body, paying the Lord of the Fee 6d. per annum,
which it seems was one Thomas de Ywardeby, Clark, who wrote to Sir William de
Sutton, and Sir Robert his brother, Knights, John Burdon, John de Kirmshale,
Rob. Maleshover, Richard Freman, and Henry, son of Silvester de Kirmshale,
stiling them Noble and discreet men, that he had released to the Monks of
Rufford, all his interest in the said Land, which Robert Walensit gave of his
Fee, and likewise the 6^. per annum Rent due to him and his heirs, and
diligently entreated them that they would bear testimony to that Deed of
release, sealed with the same seal with which his Letters to them were sealed,
because they knew certainly that he had not a seal in which his proper name was
contained.

Silvester de Kirneshale, Reg. R. (...).
son of Henry de Laxton, gave to the said Monastery of Rufford one Acre of
Arable Land in Kirneshale, of his Wong which lay on the North part of the way,
which leads from Kirneshale, to the wood called Bergelhage; the witnesses were
Robert de Laxton, Mr. Peter, and Mr. Stephen his brothers, Raph, son of Henry
de Laxton, his own brother, William, son of John de Kalnatheton.

Robert Broune, Esquire, Thomas Smith, Richard Bevercotes, Gent. and others, 17
H. 8. Hilla^ 1^ 8. rot. 1^.
claimed against Robert Kellome, and Cecily his wife, the Manor of Kyrneshall
alias Cressall, with the Appurtenances; also four Mess. two hundred Acres of
Land, one hundred of Meadow, one hundred of Pasture, forty of Wood, one hundred
of More, and 8s. 8d. Rent in Kyrneshale.

Richard Bevercotes, Gent. died 8 Ian. 38 H. 8. seized of the Manor of
Kyrsall, Li^. 2. (...) 105.
held of the Manor of Allerton; Alice wife of Thomas Massingberd was his
daughter and heir.

In another recovery 12 Eliz. William Mason, and William Oglethorp claimed
against Bryan Burkytt one Mess. six Tofts, two Barns, T^i^. 12 Elliz. ^^. 143.
one Garden, two Orchards, one hundred Acres of Land, thirty of Meadow, ten of
Pasture, four of Wood, forty of More, and 4s. 4d. Rent with the Appurtenances
in Kneesall, Kyrkesall, alias Kyrsall, and Malabecke, alias Maplebeck, who
called to warrant Richard Whyting, Gent. and Stephen Broun, Gent. and Elizabeth
his wife.

B.
Part of the Hamlet was a Grange parcel of the possession of the Abbey of
Rufford, and granted therewith to the Earl of Shrowsbury; the residue has the
reputation of a small Manor, and has been a long time the inheritance of....
Robertson, and his ancestors, until lately that by the death of John Robertson,
the last heir Male of that family, it fell to the share of... Garnon his
Nephew, and one of his heirs, who has sithence sold it.

Calneston. Caunton cum Bestorp. Erleshagh. And Deane Hall.
PArt of Calneston was Soc to Nortwell of the Fee of the Archbishop of York,
which is certified to be two Bov. ad Geldam. The Land four Bov. There one
Sochm. and five Board. had one Car. and an half, and two Acres of Meadow, Pasture
Wood three qu. long, and two broad. Another part was Soc to Laxington, of the
Fee of Goistrid Alselin, Elb. Doo^s.
and answered the public Tax or Geld for six Bov. The Land being three Car.
There eight Sochm. ten Board. had five Car. There was a Mill 2s. and eight Acres
of Meadow, Pasture wood one Leuc. long, four qu. broad. Besthorp likewise
another Hamlet was part of the Kings ancient Demesne, viz. two Bov. Soc to
Maunsfeld, and also Soc to Grimscon, a kind of a Berne of Maunsfeld. Of this
there were four Bov. ad Geld. The Land one Car. There four Sochm. two Board. had
two Car. and twenty Acres of Pasture wood. Another part of this Besthorp was
Soc to Laxington, which answered the Geld for two Bov. The Land being half a
Car. There one Sochm. and one Board. had half a Car. and half an Acre of Meadow.

Hugh Bardolf, 7 R. 1. Pip. 7 R. 1.
accounted for 28s. 4d. of the issues of Caunton, which was Nicolas de Aiviles,
for the half year.

Thomas de Muschamp held in North-Muschamp and Calneton one Knights Fee of the
Honor of Robert de Everingham, T^st. de Nev.
the successor of Goisfrid de Alselin, as in Lexington will be noted. This Fee
came afterward to Robert de Calneton, and the Prior of Newstede, Reg. de Novo
loco p. 141.
and others; they were to pay their shares of the aid, 22 E. 3. to make the
Kings eldest son a Knight.

John de Eyvill in the 16 E. 2. granted to Thomas de Longvylers, Knight, the
homage and foreign service of Richard de Herthill, of Calneton, and his heirs,
and of Robert de Calneton, and his, and of William Barry, and his, which
Nicolas de Eyvill, Knight, sometimes held of the said John, for the third part
of a Knights Fee, for which Richard de Hertill, and Robert de Caunton, and
Elizabeth, sometime wife of William Barry, paid yearly a mark, viz. each of
them 4s. 5d. and. of a Penny.

The Jury, 22 E. 8. found that Robert de Calneton, Richard Herthill, and Thomas
Barry, held in Calneton the third part of the whole Knights Fee of Muscham.

By a Fine, 10 H. 4. Fin. lev. Hill. 10 H. 4.
between John, son of Thomas Barry, of Teresalt, and Elizabeth his wife, Quer.
and Robert de Whittington, and Agnes his wife, Deforcients, the third part of
the Manor of Caunton, with the Appurtenances, was settled on the said John,
and Elizabeth, and the heirs of their bodies, remainder to the right heirs of
John.

Robert Blyton, 7 H. 6. Esc. 7 H. 6. n. 30.
was found to be son and heir of Robert Blyton of Ledenham, in the County of
Lincoln, who held a Mess. and some parcel of Land in Newark, and was resident
at Caunton, and above thirty years old, at the taking that Inquisition after
his said Fathers death.

In a recovery 9 Eliz. Brian Birkett, Hill. 9. Eliz. rec. 146.
and George Anderson, claimed against William Whitmore, Gent. the Manor of
Caunton, with the Appurtenances; and two Mess. two Cotag. three Tofts, one
Windmill, five Gardens, one hundred and forty Acres of Land, twenty of Meadow,
twenty of Pasture, sixteen of Wood, and 8s. Rent, with the Appurtenances in
Caunton, Middlethorp, Harlesey, and Norwell, who called to warrant Robert
Markeham, Esquire, (named in Maplebecke.)

The principal Manor, B.
or Capital Message was.... Whitmores, and by the marriage of the heir of....
Whitmore, not long since came to the family of the Bromes, whose Grandchild
Thomas Brom, (of Carcolston) sold it to Mr. Richard Hacker, of Flintham, and
his son John Hacker, has lately sold it to Sir Francis Willoughby, Lord of
Wollaton, or his son Francis, since deceased.

Another ancient Capital Mess. and a good Demesne thereunto belonging, B.
was lately Warins inheritance.

That of the Archbishops Fee may be supposed chiefly to belong to the Prebend
of North-Muskham in the Church of Southwell.

Here were very many several parcels in Besthorp, Caunton, and Erleshagis given
to the Monastery of Rufford, by sundry persons in the former part of the Reign
of H. 3. as Hugh, Regist. de Ruff. p. 80, etc.
son of Richard, son of Kyre de Calnathon, three Acres of his fathers gift, and
two of his own. Thomas de Muschamp, son of Thomas de Muschamp, released 6s. of
yearly Rent, which the Monks were wont to pay for the Land, which they had of
the gift of William, son of William de Besthorp, in Besthorpe, of his Fee. The
same Thomas confirmed a Wong in the territory of Herleshawe, lying between the
Land of Nic. Lupus, and Will. Redhyve. Eda, daughter of Will. son of Will. de
Besthorp, gave the Land which her Father gave her of the Fee of Roger de
Ayncurt, of Knapthorp, which the said Roger also confirmed. Thomas de Bella
aqua, for the Soul of Alice his wife, confirmed an Acre in the fields of
Erleshawe, which they had of the gift of Hugh, son of William de Calneton,
lying by the Land of John de Erleshawe, that which was Roberts, son of Richard
de Mydilthorp. In the year 1260. Nicolas Lupus, son of William Lupus, gave all
his Land in Besthorpe, and all he held of the said Monks, which was confirmed
by Hugh Fitz-Raph. Nicolas Dayvill gave certain parcels, four Selions and an
half, and one Gore of Arable Land in Calneton, to the said Monastery.

Anno 1250. William, son of William de Besthorpe, and Mary his wife, released
the third part of his Land in Besthorpe, which was assigned to his said wife
for dower, on condition that the Monks should give to the said Mary every day
one Conventual Loaf, and one Loaf ( puerorum) of the Boys or Children, and one
Loaf ( famulorum) of the servants, or household Bread; and for drink, three
quarters of Oats, and one of Barley, two quarters of Oats at Michaelmas, and
one quarter of Oats and one quarter of Barley at Easter, as long as she should
live. Besides they granted her a Toft which they had of Stephen de Besthorpe,
and the Toft of Henry Plesence, etc. This Stephen was son of Richard de
Besthorpe, and Placentia his wife, and had elder brothers which were abroad, so
that the Land which they held of the Fee of Hugh Fitz-Raph, was not secure
without pledges. His mother Placentia married one Henry, who was (thereby as I
take it) called Henry Plesence, and so his posterity had that surname. There
were diverse other like benefactors, and small observable passages.

Hugh de Caunton had Hugh, and he Robert de Caunton.

By two Fines, 11 H. 6. and 13 H. 6. Fin. lev. Trin. 11 H. 6. and Trin. 13 H. 6.
the Manor of Beesthorp was conveyed to Richard Byngham. The first was between
Richard Byngham, John de Leck, of Halum, and John de Leek, Chaplain, Quer. and
Robert Stonham, Esquire, and Mary his wife, Peter de la Pole, and Henry Heth,
Deforc. The other between the same Plaintiffs, and John Tyrell, Knight, and
Katherin his wife, Def. who warranted against the Abbat of Westminster, and his
successors.

Most of the Monastery of Ruffords Lands here passed to the Earl of Shrowsbury
at the dissolution by the name of the Manor or Grange of Besthorpe, at which
place is now the dwelling of Mr. Thomas Bristowe, something improved by the
taking down of Maplebeck House, which was near it, though he had built here a
little before: he formerly resided at Elston, where he is likewise an owner.

Erleshaw or most of it is Mr. Thomas Mathers sons, who lived and died at
Bingham.

All that Message or Farm called Deane hall, belonging to the Preceptory of
Neuland in Yorkshire, of the yearly value of lxs. was, 16 Aug. 38 H. 8. Pa^. 3.
pat. 38 H. 8.
granted with Shireokes, near Worksop, and other things, to Robert Thornehill,
and Hugh Thornehill, Gent. and their heirs, paying yearly for Deane hall vis.

William Cornwall 9 Eliz. claimed against Anthony Else 13l. 6s. 8d. Hill. 9
Eliz. rot. 159.
Rent with the Appurtenances in Beysthorpe, South Muskham, and South Carleton.

The Priory of Newstede at the dissolution had Lands in this Lordship of
Caunton, B.
Rented at 2l. 6s. 8d. and 10s. Rents of Assize.

There was a Capital Mess. and another Mess. and Cottage in the several tenures
of John Wilhouse, Pat. 6 Eliz. par. 6.
and John Lee belonging to a Chantry in Caunton, granted 29 Apr. 6 Eliz. among
many others things, to William Poole, and Ed. Downinge, and their heirs. So
there was a Barn called Kirkelath, which was sometimes the Guild-house, Pat. 18
Eliz. par. 2.
and belonged to the Guild called St. John's Guild, and Trinity Guild in
Caunton, 30 Mar. 18 Eliz. granted with very many other things to John Mershe,
Esquire, and Francis Greneham, Gent.

The owners of Cawnton cum Membris in 1612. were Sir John Thorold, Knight, Lib.
libere ten.
Sir John Stanhop, Knight, Henry Broom, Gent. Anthony Rookesby of Deane-Hall,
Gent. Thomas Bristowe, Henry Mather of Erleshall, Richard Tailor, William
Wolhouse, Thomas Shipman, John Greaves, Rowland Sudbury, Richard Cook, John
Johnson, Richard Shipman, Richard Greaves, Raph Waddington, George Procter,
John Bristowe of Elston, William Waring, Gent. John Bristowe of Malebecke, and
the Bishop of Chichester.

The Vicarage of Caunton was 6l. it is now 4l. 2s. Id. value in the Kings books,
Mss. I. M.
and the Chapter of Southwell has the patronage, as formerly it had.

Knapthorp. Chenapetorpe.
HEre was some in this Township also Soc to Laxington, viz. one Bov. ad Geld.
waste, the Land two Bov. but the principal Manor was of the Fee of Walter de
Ayncurt, which before the Conquest Tori had, and answered the public Tax or
Geld for it, as three Bov.. Lib. Dooms.
The Land being then returned sufficient for one Plow, or one Car. There Walter
had in Demesne one Car. five Vill. three Board. having one Car.. and two Acres
of Meadow, Pasture Wood eight qu. long, two broad. This kept the old value 20s.
Here was another parcel in Chenapecorpe, of the Tayn-land, which Alden
(progenitor of the family of Crumwell) held of King William, which paid the Tax
for 2. Bov. The Land whereof was 6. Bov. He had here 1. and 4. Car. Board.
having 1. Bov. in the Car. and 4. Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood 2. qu. long and
1. broad. This also kept the old value, which it had in the time of Edward the
Confessor, viz. 10s. 8d.

This Manor of Deincurts Fee continued to a branch of that noble Family,
whereof diverse had the name of Roger. The first I can fix any certain time to,
was Roger de Ayncurt 22 H. 2. Rot. Pip. 22 H. 2.
who then gave account of x. Marks of the Amercements of the Forest. The next
was Robert, whose son Roger is certified to have held of Oliver Deincurt in
Knapthorpe, of the old Feoffment, Ex Coll. G. B.
and Annora Deyncurt who in the former part of the Reign of H. 3. paid for half
a Knights Fee here, Test. de Nev.
I Nigellus- Oliverus 9 R. 1.-.... fill. sen. and cohaer. Rad. fill. Ertaldi.
Nigellus de Langford- Nicol. de Langeford- Nigellus de Langeford-Cecilia fill.
and cohaer. Mathaei de Haversege. Nigellus de Langford- Oliverus de Langford,
miles- Johannes de Langford, miles- Nicol. de Longeford mil. 4 E. 3.-Alicia
sor. Ed. Butler. Nicol. de Langford miles-Alicia fill. and cohaer. Nicol. de
Langford, miles-Margareta fill. and cohaer. Nicol de Langford, miles-Joana
fill..... Warenne. Radulphus de Longeforde, miles-Margareta fill.... Melton.
Radulphus Longeford, miles-Isabella fill. Tho. Ferrers, mil. de Tamworth. Nicol.
Langford, mil. s.p. Rad. Langford, mil.- Nicol. Langford, mil.-Margeria fill.
Ed. Traftord, mil.-Thom. Gerard. mar. 2.-Joh. Port mat. 3* Rad. Longford,
mil.-Dorothea fill. Anth. Fitz-Herbert, mil. Cap. Just. Nicol. Longford Ar.
1569.-Elizab. fill. Rad. Okeover ux. 1.-Martha fill. Roberti Southwell mil. ux.
2.-Marg. fill. Tho. Markham de Allerton ux. 3.





Henr. Rad. Aluredus Rector de Longford.










Walterus de Ayncurt temp. Conq.-Matildis. Rad. de Ayncuria fundator prioratus
de Thurgarton-Basilia. Walterus de Ayencurt Baro, 14 H. 2.- Rogerus de
Ayencurt- Robertus- Rogerus Deincurt- Rogerus Dayncourt-Joana fill. Will. Thorp.
Johannes Dayncourt- Rogerus Deincourt-Matild. 18 E. 2. Nicol. de Langford
miles-Alicia fill. and cohaer. Joana-Johannes Nevill, cohaer. mil.
Willielmus-


Normannus de Sulney- Aluredus de Soleni, mil.- Willielmus de Sulney, mil.-
Aluredus de Soleni-mil. Edm. Apelby-Agnes. mil. Nicol. de Langford,
miles-Margareta fill. and cohaer. Alicia cohaer.-Tho. Stafford-Joh. Mulshoe mar.
2.
Johan. s. p. Hermetrida ux. Rob, Lathbury, mil.





Johannes-



suppose his wife; his son was also Roger, who by his wife Ioane, the daughter
of William de Thorpe, had John Deyncourt, Knight, who 4 E. 2. Cart. 4. E. 2. n.
29.
had free warren granted in Morton, Haseland Gildford, in Darbyshire, and in
Knapthorpe in Notess. of which about 16 E. 2. Esc. 16 E. 2. l. 46.
he left Roger Deyncourt his heir then above thirty years old, but it seems he
had another son named William, who was after Lord Deyncourt, as in Granby may
be noted.

By a Fine 18 E. 2. Fin. lev. Pasch. 18 E. 2.
between Roger Deyncourt, and Matilda his wife, Quer. and Elena daughter of
John Deyncourt, Deforc. the Manor of Knapthorp, with the Appurtenances, and
fifty Acres of Land, and the third part of a Meff. in Erleshagh, were settled
on Roger, and Maud, and the heirs of their bodies, remainder to the right heirs
of Roger, who claimed free warren, and Infangthef here, 3 E. 3. This Roger had
two daughters and heirs, Alice the wife of Nicolas, son of Sir Nicolas de
Langford in Darbyshire, who by her had Nicolas, and William, and Ioane his
other daughter and heir, who was the wife of Sir Robert Nevile Lord of Scotton
in Lincolneshire, who by her had Sir Philip Nevile, who on Sara his wife begot
a daughter and heir named Maud, married to Sir John Bussy, Knight.

By a Fine 6 R. 2. Fin. lev. Hill. 6 R. ^*
the moiety of the Manor of Knapthorp was settled on John Bussy, and Maud his
wife, and the heirs of their bodies, with remainder over to the right heirs of
John. This John was beheaded at Bristow, 1 H. 4.

John Bussey, Esquire, son of John Bussey, Knight, 28. H. 6. Ex Coll. G. E.
Claus. 28 H. 6. n. 23.
ratified etc. to Agnes Sutton, daughter of Hamon de Sutton, late wife of the
said John Bussy, Esquire, John Viscount Beaumont and others, his whole estate
in the Manor of Parkehall, and in Lands there, and in North Wynfeld, Pillesly,
Stretton, Asshover, Bramton, Chesterfeld, Hasland, Braylesford, Tapton and
Skeggeby, and in the Lands in Knapthorpe, excepting the Advowsons of the
Churches of North Wynfeld and Marton

There have been recover^es of this moiety of the Manor of Knapthorp. Thomas
Archer 11 H. 7. T^in. 11 H. 7. rot. 298.
claimed against John Bussy, Knight, and Edward Bussy, the moiety of the Manor
of Knapthorpe, and one hundred Acres of Land, sixty of Meadow, one hundred of
Pasture, sixty of Wood, and 20s. Rent in Knapthorp, and Barneby; and the same
term, the same Thomas Archer claimed the same parcels against John Bussy, rot.
299.
the younger, Knight, and Edward Bussy; and 16 H. 7. Mich. 16 H. 7. rot. 197.
Reginald Gayton, and Thomas Archer, offered themselves against Edmund Bussy,
and Alice his wife, concerning the same parcels. Richard, William, and John
Gresham, and Thomas Gresham, Clark, in 22 H. 8. Pasc. 22 H. 8. rot. 357.
claimed against John Bussy, Esquire, the Manors of Knapthorp, Balderton,
Codington, and Barneve, with ^he Appurtenances, etc.

John Brende, and William Layton, 4 E. 6. Mich. 4 E. 6. rot. 807.
claime^ against William Paget, Knight of the Garter, Lord Paget of Beaudesert,
and Richard Cowper, Gent. the Manors of Balderton and Knapthorp, etc. Thomas
Forster, and William Park, 3 and 4 Ph. and Mar. claimed against Anthony
Forster, Pasch. 3 and 4 Ph. and Mar. rot. 545.
the Manors of Balderton and Knapthorp, etc. with the Appurtenances in those
two places, and in Codington, Barneby, Farndon, Stoke, Elton, Syresson,
Rolleston, and Holme, who called Christopher Alyn, Knight.

William Mason, and Andrew Hatchett, 7 Eliz. Mich. 6 and 7 Eliz. rot. 347.
claimed against Robert Constable, and Christian his wife, the Manor of
Knapthorpe, etc. who called Gyles Forster, named in Balderton.

Ex Coll. G. E.
The forenamed Nicolas de Longford, by Alice his said wife, the coheir of
Roger Deyncourt, had for his heir his son Nicolas de Langford, who married
Margaret, one of the daughters and Coheirs of Edmund Apelby, Knight, and Agnes
his wife, one of the Sisters and Coheirs of Sir John Sulney, by whom he had Sir
Nicholas, Henry, and Raph Longford, and Alured Parson of Langford.

This latter Sir Nicolas married Ioane, daughter of... Warren, and had Raph
Langford, Knight, the husband of Margaret, daughter of.... Melton, and father
of Sir Raph Langford, who had to wife Isabell, daughter of Sir Thomas Ferrers
of Tamworth, and who had Sir Nicolas without issue, and Sir Raph Langford;
whose son Nicolas Langford, the husband of Margaret, daughter of Sir Edmund
Trafford, died before him, leaving behind him a son, who was Sir Raph Langford,
and married to Dorothy, daughter of Sir Anthony Fitz-Herbert, the Chief
Justice. Margaret, this last Raphs mother, was afterward married to Thomas
Gerard, and Sir John Port. Nicolas Langford, his son, had three wives,
Elizabeth daughter of Raph-Okeover, Martha of Sir Robert Southwell, and
Margaret of Thomas Markham of Allerton.

This descent of the family of Langford was esteemed very correct, which made
me insert it, howbeit I do not find that Anthony Fitz-Herbert was ever Chief
Justice, and therefore I doubt there may happen some other mistakes.

By an Inquisition taken 15 June, 5 H. 8. Esc. 5 H. 3.
after the death of Sir Raph Langeford, Knight, it appears that he by his Deed
dated 14 Ian. 2 H. 8. did enfeoffe Anthony Fitz-Herbert Sergeant at Law, by
Covin and deceit between him the said Sir Raph, and Galfr. Bishop of Coventry
and Lichfeild, to defraud the King of the Custody of diverse Manors in Derby,
Not. and Lincolneshires, of which he otherwise had died seized, viz. in
Derbss. the moiety of the Manors of Kinwaldmersh and Hathersege (divided
between this family and that of Gousil, as in Hoveringham is noted) the Manors
of Langford, Malmerton, and Bubinton, (which with several others came to this
family by the elder daughter and coheir of Raph, son of Ertald, and were
parcel of the purpart of Oliver, son of Nigellus ancestor of it, who 9 R. 1.
Rot. Ph. 9 R. 1.
enrolled the division made between him and John Salicheverel in the Exchequer)
the moiety of the Manors of Newton Sulney, Norton, North Wynfeild, Pillesley,
Barleburgh, Whitwell, Cressewell, Normanton, Pinkeston, Blakwell, Wingerworth,
Dukmanton, Boythorp, Brampton, Calton, and Edynsore, and Lands in Hasland, and
Assheover, likewise Lands in Basford in this County, and Knapthorp, which
Nicolas de Langeford, senior, Knight, gave to Raph Langford, Gent. and the
heirs of his body, remainder to himself the said Nic. and his heirs, after
whose death the reversion of the said Lands in Knapthorp descended to this Sir
Raph Langford, as son and heir of the said Sir Nicolas the elder, which Sir
Raph died 1 Febr. then last past, and Raph Langford his Grandchild son of his
son Nicolas, was found his heir, and four years old.

This Manor (at least Bussyes part) came to Sutton, B.
the great Merchant of the Staple a^ Lincoln, in the time of H. 7.

Ambrose Sutton, the great waster of that house, sold the reversion of it, with
the rest of the jointure of his mother, to William Thorold, Esquire, of Marston
in Lincolneshire, father of Sir Anthony Thorold, and great Grandfather of Sir
William Thorold, that now is of Marston.

Knapthorp was in our times sold by Sir John Thorold, Sir Anthonies younger
son, to Sir Ioh. Thorney, Sir Francis Thorney's father, and is now the
inheritance of John Thorney, Esquire, son of Francis, son of Sir Francis, as I
take it.

South Muskam. And South Carleton.
IN Muscham and Carletun, a Manor belonging to St. Mary of Sudwell, before the
Conquest, answered the public Geld or Tax, as four Carucats and five Bovats.
The Land was then returned sufficient for nine Plows and an half, or nine Car..
There Archbishop Thomas, whose Fee it was, had two Car. in Demesne, twenty
Sochm. seven Vill. sixteen Board. having six Car. there was a Mill 2s. and sixty
six Acres of Meadow, and fourscore Acres of small wood. In the Confessors time
it was valued at 15s. Lib. Dooms.
In the Conquerours, when the survey was taken, at 10s. Here was another Manor
of the Land of the Taynes which Sortebrand had before the Normans came, and for
it paid the Geld as six Bov. The Land being one Car.. Sericus held it of King
William, and had there one Sochm. two Board. with two Oxen in Plow, and twelve
Acres of Meadow, Pasture wood one qu. long and one broad. In King Edward the
Confessors time this was also rated at 16s. but in Kings Williams at 5s.

There is a descent in the Monasticon Vol. 1. p. 963. which is also in the
Register of Beauvale (the latter part whereof is erroneous) that Robert de
Muskam, Senescal of Gislebert de Gaunt, was father of Hugh de Muskam, who was a
benefactor to Rufford, Regist. de Ruff. p. 1.
whose gifts King Stephen confirmed.

This Hugh in the presence, and by the consent of his Lord Henry (Murdac)
Archbishop of York, ^b. 53.
who lived in that Kings time, gave to that Monastery all that part of the Land
of his Fee of Muscam, which on the west side of his Park was shut in with the
bounds of three Villages, viz. Kelum, Winkeburne, and Thorpe (now Middlethorp)
and the seat of a Grange in his Park (which with what was noted in Kelum, made
the Hamlet or Grange called Parkelathes) and the Land on the South side of his
Park, where the house of Fulc stood, and a Wong of his Demesne, near his Park
on the East side called Geniwode; which last gift he made, when he rendered
himself to the fellowship of the Monks, and by the hand of Mat. the Abbat; all
which and sundry others, Rob. de Muschamp his son and heir confirmed, as he did
also what his father gave in Shipley in Darbyshire, adding to the new work of
the Church of Rufford, Ib. p. 30.
and after the finishing thereof to the light of that Church, for the Souls of
his father, and mother, his own, and his wifes, and for the Soul of Fulco de
Castilon, the brother of his wife, half a Mark of Silver of the Farm, which
Rob. de Sipley was to pay the said Monks for ever. To this Deed of Robert, son
of Hugh de Muscamp, were witnesses, Roger the Prior of Ruford, John the
Celerer, Roger de Novavilla, Ernisius the Monk, Ioslenus de Novavilla, and
others.

Robert de Sipley, and William, his son and heir, swore upon the holy Gospels
in the presence of their Lord Robert de Muscam, that they and their heirs would
yearly at Pentecost owe half a mark of Silver to the Monks of Ruford, for what
the said Monks had in Sipley. The witnesses were Robert de Muscam, Hugh his
brother, Hugh and Robert, sons of the said Robert, Walter de Scekebi, Adam the
Clark of Muscam, William de Derby, G. Parvo, (small or little) the Cellerer of
Ruford.

Likewise Gilbert, son of Fulco de Kelum, in the presence of his Lord Robert de
Muscham, Ib. 29.
and in his Court quit-claimed to the Monks of Rufford, the Toft of Fulc his
father called Brunecroft, in the territory of Muscam, in pure Alms free and
quiet, as the Chartels of Hugh de Muscham, and Robert his son testified; and
over and above gave them two Acres and an half of Arable Land, lying on the
South part of the way which leads from the corner of the Park of Muscham
toward Carleton, which Richard his brother gave them, and all that Wong in the
territory of Karleton, which Robert de Muscham gave to the said Monks, with
Robert his son buried at Ruford. The said Gilbert gave also eleven Acres and an
half in the territory of Kelum, etc. The witnesses were William de Muscam
Archdeacon of Derbi, William Botiler of Hokerton, Walter Fitz-Pagan of Newerc,
and Ganfr. his brother, Yvo le Walur, William, son of Warm de Newerc, Peter
Beuwaleth, and Alan his brother, Henry, son of William de Kelum, Henry Ormal,
Richard, son of Robert de Kelum, Peter de Kelum, Hugh the Clark of Calnadton,
Raph, son of Thomas de Hokerton.

It appears that the sons of Robert de Muschamp died without issue. Hugh,
Regist. de Dale, p. 36.
eldest son of Robert de Muschamp, by Idonea his wife had no, heirs, neither
had his brother Robert by Agnes, the sister of Almeric de Gassi, Knight, not
their brother Andrew, because Raph de Greseley 15 Ioh. (as in Greseley is
shown) made Fine to the King of five hundred Marks for having the Land which
was Robert de Muschamp's, Fin. 15 Ioh. par. 1^ m. 11. and m. 4.
father of Isabella, wife of the said Raph, and that he might marry Agnes his
daughter, to Robert Lupus (Love:) which marriage either came not to perfection,
or Rob. Lupus died without issue; for Hugh Fitz-Raph, and Agnes his wife,
daughter and heir of Raph de Greseley, in 12 H. 3. Rot. Pip. 12 H. 3*
gave account of 15l. for their relief of three Knights Fees, which the said
Raph de Gresele, held of the Honor of Peverell, Not. viz. two in Claindon,
and one in Gresele, with the Appurtenances.

Hugh Fitz-Raph for the safety (or health) of his own Soul, and the Souls of
his two wives, Regist. de Ruf. p. 53. b.
and of Raph and Hugh his sons, and all his ancestors and successors gave to
the Monks of Ruford, a certain part of his Wood of Muschamp, near the Grange,
with the Land in which the Wood stood, and certain Arable Land, viz. that part
of Wood and Land which lay on the South and West part of the new ditch, which
the Monks made from the corner of Bugwong, (named in Kellum.) Raph
Fitz-Nicolas, Test. de Nev:
and Hugh-Fitz-Raph, gave account of the gift of the Prelates granted to the
King to marry, etc. Hugh Fitz-Raph held in Muschampe and Carleton, Ib.
one Fee of the Archbishop of York, of the old Feoffment.

Hugh de Muscham in the time of H. 2. held two Fees of Roger Archbishop of
York of the old Feoffment, that is, Lib. Rubr: in Scuce:
whereof his Ancestor was enfeoffed before the death of King Henry the first.

This Hugh Fitz-Raph left no son to succeed him, but the Inheritance went to
Eustachia, daughter of his son Raph, who was first married to Nicolas de
Cantelup, and after his death to William de Ros of Ingmanthorp.

Ex libro Cartarum de Terris Scroporum pen. Rob. Cotton, mil. 1609. and in
manibus Dom. Will. de Howard, 1615. fol. 29.
Raph Fitz-William Lord of Grymesthorpe, for a Release which Sir William de Ros
of Ingmanthorp, and Eustachia his wife, made for themselves and their heirs to
the said Raph, concerning Lands and Tenements which they had in Nesham and
Morton upon Swale, gave to William de Ros, son of the said William and
Eustachia, all his Manor of South Muscham and Carleton in the year 1286.
whereof a Fine was levied in 15 E. 1. Fin. lev. Trin. 15 E. 1. Ib. fol. 27.


William de Ros of Ingmanthorp, Knight, by his Indenture, 16 E. 2. granted to
Galfr. le Scrop, and Ivetta his wife, during their lives, the Manor of South
Muskham, and of Karleton, and afterward, 17 E. 2. released; which Isabell, Ib.
fol. 28.
wife of William de Ros also did, and so did Robert de Ros of Ingmanthorp,
Knight, to Henry le Scrop, Knight, 25 E. 3. Ib. fol. 30.


King Edward the third settled by Act of Parliament on Galfr. le Scrop and his
heirs two hundred Marks per annum, Claus. 30 H. 6. m. 21.
to maintain the state of a Bannerer, which the said Galfr. took by the Kings
Precept. Chron. series Will. Dugdale.
He was a great Judge in the Reigns of Edward the second, and Edward the third;
he died about 14 E. 3. Esc. 14 E. 3. n. 35.
seized of this Manor, and left Henry le Scrop his son and heir, who was Lord
Scrop of Masham, who had a sister Ivetta married to John, son of John Hotham of
Bondeby, son of Peter, brother of the great John Hotham, Bishop of Ely, and two
sisters more, Constance, wife of Galfr. and Beatrix, wife of Andrew Lutterell,
and a brother Galfr. Scrop.

Galfridus le Scrop Chr. ob. 14 E. 3.-Ivetta Henricus le Scrop Chr.- Stephen le
Scrope Chr. de Masham-Margeria. 1 Henricus s. p. 2 Galfr. le Scrope Chr. s. p.
3 Steph. s. p. 4 Johannes le Scrop de Masham-Eliz. fill. Tho. Chaworth. Thom. le
Scrope- Thom. le Scrope- Elizabetha-Henricus le Scrope, 12 H. 7.



Jana-Henr. Fitzhugh.
Andr. Lutterel-Beatrix. Galfr. Lutterell-Constanc. Galfr. Ivetra ux. Joh.
Hotham.

Henry le Scrop about 16 R. 2. Esc. 16 R. 2. n. 28. par. 1.
left this Manor to Stephen le Scrope his son and heir, who, about 7 H. 4.
Esc. 7 H. 4. n. 52.
left it to his son Henry, who died without issue, as did Galfr. and Stephen
his brothers, so that it came to his brother John Lord Scrope of Masham, Inq. 1
H. 6.
the fourth son of the said Stephen, which John married Elizabeth, daughter of
Thomas Chaworth, named in East Bridgeford, whom he left a widow, Esc. 34 H. 6.
Thomas being then his son and heir, who was Father of Thomas, Father of
Elizabeth, wife of Henry le Scrope, 12 H. 7. as in Bridgeford is noted.

John Savage, Clark, and William Holgyll, Clark, 24 H. 8. Mich. 24 H. 8. to.
335.
claimed against Humfr. Coton, Gent. and William Strelley the Manors of South
Muskham and Carleton, etc. and called to warrant James Strangwayes, Knight.

John Marshall, 34 H. 8. claimed against William Poulet, Trin. 38 H. 8. rot.
138.
Knight, Lord St. John, two parts of the Manor of South Muskham divided into
five.

John Marshall; 4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. claimed against Christopher Wyvell, Mich.
4 and 4 Ph. and Mar. rot. 730.
Esquire, the fifth part and a moiety of a fifth part of this Manor. Hen.
Marshall, Esquire, 2 Eliz. claimed against Dorothy Esshe the fifth part of the
fifth part of the Manor of South Muskam, etc. with the Appurtenances in South
Carleton and Holme. Nicolas Strelley was owner of the fourth part of the Manor
of South Muskam, B.
25 H. 8. It came after to the possession of Raph Marshall, a Merchant of the
Staple at Lincoln, in whose Family it continued till Raph Marshall in our
times sold it (and all other the Lands that belonged to the Family, being a
fair Inheritance) to John Rotheram, a six Clark of the Chancery; and it was
lately the Inheritance of Sir William Willoughby, Baronet, descended from John
Rotherams sister, as in Normanton on Sore, or Selston, may partly be seen;
which Sir William having no legitimate issue, for names sake, gave the Lands he
inherited here to Mr. Francis Willoughbies son of Wollaton, and his they now
are.

South Carleton, heretofore the Seat of the Marshalls, he bought of Willoughby
Pond, and as I think gave it, with other purchased Lands, to his natural issue,
which were Richard Revell alias Willoughby, and Hugh Willoughby (who died 1675.)

Gernon or Garnon had a good Freehold here (where the Family has continued
above four hundred years) not very great or eminent, and so has that of
Scrimshire.

Richard Skrymsher, Thomas Skrymsher, Henry Sutton, Esquire, William Skrymsher,
Clark, and Robert Hewes, 17 H. 8. Trin. 17 H. 8. rot. 334.
claimed against Reginald Fawcett, two Mess. four Tofts, one hundred Acres of
Land, twenty of Meadow, and twenty of Pasture, with the Appurtenances in South
Muskam, and Carleton. William Skrymsher, Esquire, Lib. 2. sced. fol. 265.
died the 20 Ian. 3 and 4 Ph. and Mar. Maud the wife of Henry Marshall (named
before) was his daughter and heir; he had Lands in South Muskam, North Muskam,
and Carleton.

The Rectory is appropriated to the Church of Southwell, and makes a Prebend
called South Muskam Prebend, which Henry de Sewell, Clark, augmented (in the
time of Henry the third) by the donation or gift of three Tofts in the Town of
Suell, Regist. de Ruff. p. 77.
to Mr. William de Marcham, Canon of that Church, and to his successors Canons
of the Prebend of Suth Muschamp, etc. The Witnesses to the Chapters Certificate
of his Deed were, Mr. William de Marcham, Sir Robert de Lexington, Richard de
Sutton, Canon of Suell, Mr. Peter de Lexington, Sir Henry de More, William the
Sacrist, Thomas de Barra, Chapiains, John de Augir, Robert de Barra, John de
Suwell, Clark, and others.

The owners or Freeholders of South Muskham and South Carleton in 1612. are
said to be William Willoughby, Lib. lib. tenent. pen. meips. R.T.
Knight, Raph Barton, Esquire, Thomas Powdrell, Esquire, the heirs of Thomas
Greaves, Henry Garnon, Henry Saxton, Francis Wortley, three Mess. three
Cottages, three pounds, and seventy seven Acres of Land.

Mr. William (son of William) Wolhouse, sold his Lands at North Muskham very
lately to Mr. William Welby, and has since purchased Firbeck (Com. Ebor.) of
Sir Francis Fane.

The Vicarage of South Muskham was eight Marks, Mss. I.M.
but now is 4l. value in the Kings Books the Prebendary continues Patron.

In the East Window of the Chancel, Sable a Chevron between three Roses Arg.

There is the Arms of the Sea of Canterbury impaling Arg. three Bores Heads
erased and erected Sable, Booth, I doubt mistaken for the Arms of York, as they
are with Archbishop Lee's again in the same Window; and in the Hall Window of
Newstede the Sea of Canterbury impales Savage, who was Archbishop of York
also, but not of Canterbury that I know of.

France and England quarterly.

Az. a Bend Or, Scroop.

And the same again with a Label of three points Arg. Lees is a Cross
engrayled, quartering a Fesse and Billette Or.

North Muscham. Holme. And Batheley.
THat part of Nord Muscham which was of the Soc of Suwell paid the Tax or Geld
for one Car.. It was a very great Township, but the Hamlets Holme and Batheley,
which were involved with it, are not named in Doomsday Book, which shows that
St. Peter de Burgo had a share here, which paid for ten Bovats. The Land four
Car. There was then in Demesne one Car. and two Sochm. on two Bov. and an half
of Land, five Vill. and three Board. having one Car. and an half, and two Mills
20s. and one waste, [ wastam] and half a Piscary, and thirty Acres of Meadow: In
the Confessors time the value was 60s. then 40s. but the principal and
greatest share was of the Fee of Goisfrid de Alselin, Lib. Dooms.
whereof before the Normans came one Vlvric had for his Manor three Bov. to
the Geld. The Land four Car. There in Demesne was one Car. and four Vill. seven
Board. having one Car. and an half; there was a Mill 10s. and twelve Acres of
Meadow: In the Confessors time 40s. then 30s. There was another part rated to
the Geld at two Car.. The Land four Car. In Demesne were three Car. six Sochm.
five Vill. two Board. with two Car. There were two Mills 20s. forty Acres of
Meadow, forty Acres of Wood, in former time 100s. value, then 4l. Tochi held it
for a Manor. There was Soc four Bov. ad Geldam. The Land one Car. It was then
( viz. when the Conqueror took the Survey) waste, there were twelve Acres of
Meadow. There was Soc in Carleton one Bov. of Land for the Tax, there were two
Sochm. having nothing. Here was another Manor of the Land of the Tayns which
Sinvard had before the Conquest, and paid to the Geld for three Bovats. The
Land being certified then to be sufficient for three Plows, or three Carucats.
There Siuvard afterward had two Bordars, and one Mill 10s. and twelve Acres of
Meadow: In the Confessors time this was but 4s. in the Conquerours 16s. value.

Baldwin de Paunton held a Knights Fee in North Muscham of the Abbat of
Peterburgh, Test. de Nev.
and Thomas de Muschamp held another of the Fee of Robert de Everingham, whose
Ancestor Raph de Alselin Founded Shelford, to which Monastery this Church
belonged, and was appropriate, and with it, 29 H. 8. granted to Sir Michael
Stanhope, Knight, B.
or at least within a year or two after, as in Shelford may be observed.

Philip de Panton, Fin. lev. 4 Ioh.
by a Fine at Not. the Tuesday next after the Feast of St. Peter and Paul, 4
Ioh. granted to Adam de Merchamp one Carucat of Land in Muschamp, in Badeleg,
and in Holme, and to his heirs for ever, paying 20s. per annum.

Baldwin de Paunton was Sheriff five or six years, beginning about 24 H. 3.
Rot. pip. 24 H. 3. etc.
Philip de Paunton his son likewise, 21 and 22 E. 1.

By a Fine levied at York, 27 E. 1. Fin. lev. apud Ebor. Mich. 27 E. 1.
Philip de Paunton granted to John de Haryngton and his heirs, which he should
beget on the body of Matildis, daughter of the said Philip, the Manor of
Paunton in the County of Lincoln, paying a Rose yearly; and for want of such
issue, to return to the said Philip and his heirs.

In 3 H. 5. Pasc. 3 H. 5. rot. 114. Et Mich. 3 H. 5. rot. 110
there was the execution of a Fine levied, Trin. 34 E. 1. between Richard, son
of John de Haryngton, and Amicia his wife, Quer. and John de Harington, Deforc.
of the Manor of Muskham, (...) Pasch. 8 H. 6. to. 312.
with the Appurtenances, and of 20l. Rent in Harington and Aswardeby in
Lincolneshire. The Jury, 18 E. 2. found that Richard de Harington held the
Manor of North Muskham of John de Haryngton by the Service of 2s. per annum;
and that John de Haryngton, son and heir of Richard, was then above seventeen
years old. John de Haryngton Chr. who held Grendon in Northamptonshire as the
right of Elizabeth his first wife, by whom he had two daughters Anne, wife of
John Caruell, and Isabell of Hugh Fairefax, had also a daughter Alice by his
second wife, who it seems about 51 E. 3. Orig. 51 E. 3. to. 6. Linc.
was a coheir of his Estate at Paunton in Lincolneshire, and Wissenden in
Rutland, and here at North Muskham.

Philip de Paunton, Knight, had a son and heir called Thomas, who had three
sons, Baldwin, and two John's; Baldwin the eldest by Ioane his wife, had a son
named John de Paunton, who left Alice his wife a widow, and had no issue; she
was after married to Thomas Tachewell of Wissenden, against whom William de
Exton, and Margery his wife, Cousin and heir of the said John de Paunton, late
husband of the said Alice, were Plaintiffs at the Assizes at Okeham, 2 R. 2.
Assis. apud Okeham i^ Com. Rutl. Pasc. 2 R. 2. to 16.
for Lands in Wissenden, which Margery was daughter of John, son of the elder
John, son of Thomas de Paunton.

William Fayrfax, and Elena his wife by a Fine, 32 H. 6. Fin. lev. Hill. 32 H.
6.
wherein William Marschall, Robert Doyle, Esquire, Stephen Marschall, and
Francis Furnivale, Clerk, were Complainants, conveyed the Manor of North
Muskham, called Haryngtons Manor, with the Appurtenances in North Muskham,
Batheley, and Holme, to the said William Mareschall and his heirs.

William Skypwith, and Thomas Bingham, 37 H. 6. Fin. 37 H. 6 rot. 426.
claimed it in a Recovery against William Fayrfax, Esquire, Robert Doyle,
Esquire, and the rest. In another, 6 H. 7. Pasc. 6 H. ^. rot. 455.
William Lamister, Chaplain, and John Maxhcy, Chaplain, claimed against Richard
Curteys, Esquire, the Manor of North Muskham, with the Appurtenances, and six
Mess. two hundred Acres of Land, twelve of Meadow, fourteen of Pasture, and 16s.
Rent, with the Appurtenances in North Muskham and Newerk.

Robert, son of Thomas, son of Alexander de Muskham, Regist de Dale, p. 100.
gave to God and the Church of Stanley Alexander de Muscham- Lib. Alb.
Southwell, p. 407, 408.
Thom. de Muskham, Thom. de Muscham, miles-Margareta. Tho. de North
Muscham-Isabell. Thom. de Muscham- Tho. de Muskham, 17 E. 2.

Emma ux. Godefr. Marescalli. Robertus.
Robertus- Adam.
Hugo- Ric. 126;.-Margeria. Robertus de Almton-Margeri. Willielmus de Muskham,
10 E. 2.-Beatricia relict. 10 E. 3.
Richardus Persona de Egrum.


Hugo de Almton Radulphus

Park, and the Canons there (of the Order of the Praemonstratenses) serving
God, in pure Alms, the moiety of the Mill of Bathker, with the Site and Sequel,
Water, and the Fishing of the whole Water, and work of the men of the Land of
Sir Thomas his Father, and of their heirs, with three Selions of Land extending
from the said Mill to the Kings Street, saving the Multure of the House of his
Father, which Thomas his brother, who was a Knight, confirmed, as he did the
gifts of William, son of Raph de Batheley, of all his Lands in Muskham, Holme,
and Batheley, and the Services and Homages of Henry de Batheley his brother,
and of Hugh de Holme, and Adam the Clark of Muskham and their heirs, and the
gifts which Roger de Batheley his brother had made likewise. This Sir Thomas
gave to those Monks all his claim in a place called Gosewong, where their
Grange stood, and liberty to enclose it. He had a daughter named Emma, the wife
of Godefr. Marescall (possibly the Ancestor of the Family of that name here
seated) and a son called Thomas, Lib. A^^^^. de S^^t^well, p. 407.
who confirmed and added to the said Monastery of Dale, as did his son Thomas
de North Muskham.

Thomas, son of Thomas de Muskham of Shenlee, by a Fine, 17 E. 2. Fin. lev.
Trin. 17 E. 2.
settled two parts of the Manor of North Muskham on Henry de Edenstowe, Clerk,
and Robert his brother, during their lives, except two Marks of Rent in the
said Manor. By another Fine at York, 10 E. 3. Fin. lev. apud Ebor. Pasch. 10
E. 3.
Edmund de Coventre, and Margaret his wife, passed to them the Manor of North
Muskham, excepting five Marks 3s. 4d. Rent in the said Manor. By another Fine,
16 E. 3. Fin. lev. Pasch. 16 E. 3.
and afterward, 18 E. 3. Trin. 18 E. 3.
the said Henry de Edenestowe, Clerk, and Robert his brother passed the Manor
of North Muskham, except 42s. 6d. Rent, and the Rent of half a pound of Pepper
in this Manor to the Prior of Newstede in Shirewood, together with the Homages
and services of the Abbat of Rughford, and of Roger Deincourt, Knight, and Maud
his wife, and diverse others, to the intent that the said Prior and his
successors should for ever find two Chaplains daily to celebrate in the Church
of the blessed Virgin Mary at Edenstowe, one in honor of the said Virgin, and
the other for the wholesome estate of them the said Henry and Robert, whilst
they should live, and afterward for their Souls, and for the Souls of John
their father, and Cecily their Mother, their Brothers, Sisters, Parents,
Friends, and Benefactors.

King Edward 6. March 20. 7 E. 6. Pat. 7 E. 6. par. 8.
granted to Leonard Brown, and Anthony Trappes, Gent. all that Mess. and
Tenement, and all Lands, Medows, Pastures, and Hereditaments in the tenure o^
William Holme, lying in North Muskam, late belonging to the Priory of Newstede,
and several Rents issuing out of Lands and Tenements in Caunton, to the said
Priory belonging.

Thomas de Crumbewell, Presbyter, gave to the Monks of Rufford, Regist. de
Ruff. p. 57.
for their Pitance, on the day of his Anniversary, all the Lands which he held
in the territory of North Muscamp, Holme, and Bathele, viz. of the gift of
Robert, son of Thomas de Muschamp, (which cost him thirty six Marks) and ten
Selions, which he had of Adam, son of Ioslan de Bathele, and three of William,
son of Adam de Holme, and one of Adam, son of Robert de North Muscamp, etc.

Regist. de Thur. p. 79.
Robert de Lysurs, Rector of the Church of Crumwell, for twenty four Marks of
Silver, bought of John, the Abbat of Stanley Park, and that Covent, their
moiety of their Mill of Batheker, which they bought of Rob. son of Sir Thomas
de Muskam, Knight, with the Appurtenances; (as before is mentioned) which the
said Robert de Lysurs gave to God and the pitance of the Canons of Thurgarton,
reserving to the Abbey of Dale a penny yearly, and the Tithes of the said
moiety, and fishing, and the multure of their house at Batheley.

March 13. 7 E. 6. Par. 13. pat 7. E. 6.
the Grange of Batheley, and all Mess. Lands and Tenements in that place, late
belonging to Dale Abbey, were granted to Thomas Farneham, and Thomas Morrison,
and their heirs.

Ex Autogr. penes Will. Scrim^hire.
The Vicars of the Canons of the Church of Southwell, confirmed the gift which
Sir Richard de Sutton (Canon of that Church) made to Hugh de Mortun, his
Chamberleyn, of 1. Mess. with Croft and Palet in Batheley, and 22. Acres of
Arable Land, and an Acre and an half of Meadow, in the fields of Muschamp,
Batheley, and Holme, to be held of the said Vicars for 10s. per an. To their
Deed dated 1262. besides and before the Chapters seal, was their own seal put,
in the Circumference whereof is, Commune sigillum Vicariorum Suuell.

Regist. de Thurg. p. 86. b.
William, son of Galfr. de Batheley, gave to the Church of Thurgarton, and the
Monks there 6s. yearly Rent, out of the Lands which Thomas his son held of him
in Batheley, and what should happen to him or his heirs by reason of reliefs,
fealties, or escheats, or otherwise by the means of Northcroft, all which Adam
the Prior of Thurgarton, in the year 1270. released to the said Thomas,
excepting the said 6s. per annum Rent.

In Batheley there yet remains a branch of the family of Scrimshire, Ex Autogr.
penes Will. Scrimshire de Batheley.
which have been resident and owners of Land in these Hamlets and Towns of
Muskams, above four hundred years. The first I have taken notice of was Hugh le
Skirmessour, and Christian his wife, about King John's time; most of them have
been named William.

There is a piece of a Genealogy, In Libr. Genealog. pen. Chapter Lacock Genesis
which makes one Geffrey Scrimsher marry an heir of Muscam, not above five
descents above Maud, the heir Female married to Henry Marshall (as in
South-Muskam is noted) but I have seen nothing of authority sufficient to
confirm the truth of it.

William Schrimshire of South Muskham had a son called Robert, Autogr. Ib.
who married Agnes the daughter of.... White, and of Ioane his wife, of
Batheley, about 4 H. 6. and there settled, to whom William Skrimschire of South
Muskam, his brother released some small parcel, 3 E. 4. on whose seal is the
Image of a man in a long Coat, and in his hand an half Pike or Javelin with a
Barbed head, in his left hanging down a Shield, on which seems to be a Cross
Molin, or Florette. From this Robert Schrimshire of Batheley, is descended
William Scrimshire, yet under age, on whose behalf his father in Law Mr. John
Wright in the year 1669. took a journey into Scotland, and endeavored to
procure for him by his Majesty's favor the estate of the Earl of Dundee, the
principal of this name, fallen to the Crown for want of heirs, in which journey
he met the Sheriff of Staffordshire, Edwin Schrimshire of Aquilate, descended
from these in this County, as his Patent for his Crest dated about 26 Eliz.
which he showed me affirms, attempting the same for himself: but being grown
acquainted with this young man, and having no Children himself, he appeared
willing to assist the said Mr. Wright, on this newly discovered Kinsmans
behalf, but after some expense of time and money, the business fell to nothing.

At the Assizes at Nottingham, 4 H. 4. rot. 74.
John de Newton Prebendary of the Prebend of North Muskham in the Church of St.
Mary of Southwell, recovered his seisin of 25s. Rent service in North Muskham;
and Robert, son of Simon de Hulme, was amerced 12l. for damage.

John de Beauver passed to Adam de Everingham, Regist. de Rufford. p. xiviii.
his heirs or assigns two Oxgangs (or Bovats lying next the sun of his five
Bov. in Holme, and amongst the rest two Acres extending toward the Park of
Robert Constable, etc. The witnesses were Gerard Salvayn, Robert Constable,
Robert Torny, Raph Foliot, etc.

The Hamlet of Holme seems to be on the other side of the Trent, but is not so,
B.
for that betwixt North Muskam and Holme, is but a new stream, and the old
current was beyond the utmost part of Holme, and that ditch now dried up, is
still the Limits between the Wapentaks of Thurgarton a Lee, and Newarke. Holme
did belong to Sir Thomas Barton, a man of great possessions in Lancashire,
whose ancestor a Merchant of the Staple, built a fair stone house, and a fair
Chapel like a Parish Church at this place. In the Windows of his house was this
posie, I thank God, and ever shall,
It is the Sheep has paye^ for all.
A thankful and humble acknowledgement of the means whereby he got his estate,
which now remains to the Lord Bellasis, sometime Governor of Newark, as I take
it. The Lands belonging to Rufford (being a Grange) were granted at the
dissolution, 29 H. 8. to the Earl of Shrowsbury.

John Gelston had Lands here, which Edmund Claxton of Balderron got, and left
to his three daughters mentioned in Thoroton, some whereof came to Scrimshire.

Lib. libere ten. pen. meips. R. T.
The owners of North Muskam, Batheley and Holme in 1612. are thus set down: The
Bishop of Chichester, and Church of Lincoln, Sir John Stanhope, Knight, Raph
Barton, Esquire, Fowlk Cartwright, Esquire, Julian Cardinal, Widow. The Town of
Newark, Francis Leak, Knight, Anthony Brackenbury, John Lilly, Roger
Skrimshawe, Adam Wheatcroft, William Levesye, Raph Johnson, Barnabas Lillye,
William Merryweather, Stephen Howes, Raph Barton, William Johnson* senior, John
Bradley, William Skrimshawe, Ieffrey Fisher, Richard Wittengton, Edward Trevis,
Widow Mortone, William Wolhouse, Nicolas Johnson, Peter Johnson, and Richard
Farneworth.

M^s. I. M.
The Vicarage of North Muskham was ten Marks, is now 5l. 6s. 8d. value in the
Kings Books, whereof the Prebendary continues Patron still. But there is
another Vicarage which was 8l. when the Prior of Shelford was Patron, Ib.
it is now 4l. 19s. 7d. value in the Kings Books, and his Majesty's Patron.

In the East Window of the North I Will of North Muskam Church,

Arg. two Bendletts engrayled Sable, Ratcliff, Quartering Gules a Cross
engrayled Arg. Lee. And Arg. a Mullet Sable, Ashton, The fourth as the first.

Azure on a Fesse between three Bucks heads Cabossed Or a Mullet Sable,
impaling the former Quarterings, with the second and third cotes repeated in
the bottom, to make up six.

Azure three Bucks heads Cabossed, Or (without the Fesse) Quartering the six.

In a North Window of the same I Will,

Arg. a Mullet Sable, Ashton. And Gules a Cross engrayled Arg. Lee.

Gules a Lion of Engl. in chief, the rest broken.

Arg. three Bores Heads Couped, two and one Gules.

Az. on a Fesse between three Bucks Heads Cabossed Or a Mullet Sable, supposed
to be Gernons.

In the East Window of the South I Will,

The same impaling Arg. on a Saltier engrailed Sable nine annulets Or, Leeke.

In a South Window,

Or on a Fesse Gules, three Waterbougets Ermine. Bingham impaling Gules, a
Saltier Ermine. Nevill of Rolleston.

In a high South Window,

Azure six Eagles Heads Erased, three and three, Or, impaling Arg. three Bores
passant Sab. two and one.

Norwell. And VVoodhous. And Middlethorpe.
N Nortwell, St. Mary of Sudwell had twelve Bov. ad Geldam for a Manor. The
Land was for six Plows, or six Carucats. Lib. Doom^.
There were two Car. in Demesne, and twenty two Vill. three Bordars, having
seven Car. There was a Church and a Priest, and one Mill 12d. one Piscary, 73.
Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood 2. Leuc. long, 2. broad (or 1. rather broad. Mon.
Angl. vol. 3. p. 10 par. 2.
) In the Confessors time 6l. value, in the Conquerours 100s. It had Soc in
Osmunthorp, Wilgebi, Calneston, Ocretune, Vdeburgh. There are three Prebends
belonging to the Church of Southwell, (as in that place is said) which have
their denomination, and a good part of their provision from this place, viz.
Norwell Overhall, Norwell Palace Hall, or Palyshall, and Norwell tertia pars,
or other Prebend. The first is the chief and the best in that Church.

John Clarell Prebendary, 41 H. 3. Chapter 41 H. 2 m. 13.
had freewarren, Market and Fair in Northwell.

John de Thoresby, Canon of Southwell, Prebendary of the Prebend of Northwell,
3 E. 3. Quo War. 3 E. 3.
claimed free warren in all his Demesne Lands at Northwell, and a weekly Market
every Thursday, and a yearly Fair for three days, the Eve, day and morrow after
the Feast of the Holy Trinity, and emendation for breaking the Assize of Bread
and Ale.

Will. de Melton 3 E. 2. Chapter 3 E. 2. n. 2.
Prebendary of Southwell (after viz. 17 E. 2. Archbishop of York) had
free warren in Northwell Woodhouse, etc. which 3 E. 3. Robert de Woodhouse
claimed, as in Southwell is said.

Nicolas Brett, and Ioane his wife (whose dower it was) 49 E. 3. Fin. lev.
Pasch. 49 E. 3.
by Fine passed to Nicolas Dymok the third part of a Mess. five Tofts, two
hundred Acres of Land, and six of Meadow, with the Appurtenances in Northwell,
and Northwell Woodhouse, and the Advowson of a certain Chantry of two Chaplains
in the Church of Northwell. By another Fine 4 H. 4. Mic. 4 H. 4.
John, son and heir of William Dymok, conveyed to Nicolas Conyngston, one Mess.
five Tofts, two hundred Acres, etc. as before: and by another 14 H. 4. Mich. 14
H. 4.
between Nicolas Conyngston, and William Babington, Quer. and Thomas Dymok, Chr.
and William Dymok, and Cecily his wife, and John Lysours, and Ioane his wife,
Deforc. the said parcels were settled on the said Nicolas Conyngston, and his
heirs.

William de Northwell, Clark, settled by Fine, 12 E. 3. on Henry, Esc. 19 H. 6.
son of Richard Graving, of Northwell, and on Elizabeth his wife, and the heirs
of the bodies of the said Henry and Elizabeth, 7. Mess. 2. Bov. one hundred and
thirty seven Acres of Land, twenty four of Meadow, with the Appurtenances in
North Clifton, and South Clifton, Northwell Woodhouse, Ossington, Holme, North
Muskham, Sutton, and Kellum.

John Cromwell, son and heir of William Cromwell, late of Northwell, 1 E. 4.
C^aus. 1 E. 4. n. 14.
remised his right in a certain Mess. called Parkers Place, and in a Toft, and
five Acres of Land, and in a Toft and Croft, and seven Acres of Land,
theretofore called Kendalls Lands, and in eight Acres and an half of Land in
the Town and fields of Northwell, to Mr. John Porter Prebendary of the Prebend
of Northwell, called Palyshall, and his successors.

William Clifton, 1 H. 7. Fin. 1 H. p. rot. 70.
Prebendary of the Prebend of Paleshall, in Northwell, offered himself the
fourth day against Elizabeth Banaster, Widow, James Banaster, Clark, William
Banastre, and John Banastre, concerning a Plea of one Mess. three Tofts, one
hundred Acres of Land, twenty of Meadow, forty of Pasture, with the
Appurtenances in Wodehouse, near Norwell.

B.
A Capital Mess. and good Demesne called Norwell Woodhouse, was the inheritance
of Sir Thomas Williamson Baronet.

Mr. Laurence Scurtivant is Tenant to the Prebendary of Palacehall, and Mr. Ed.
Lee, son of Gervas, to Overhall.

Middlethorp, Mr. Hacker of Flintham had interest in.

The two Vicarages of Northwell were eight Marks a piece, Mss. I. M.
now Overhall is 4l. 12s. 6d. and the other 4l. 12s. 11d. in the Kings Books,
and the Prebendaries Patrons, viz. altera pars, or tertia pars, as I think, and
not Palacehall.

In the East Window of the North I Will, and in other Windows of Norwell Church
are,

Azure, Semy de Lis Or, and England. And England, with a File of three Labels,
Az. and England, quartering Az. Semy de Lis Or.

In the other North Window,

Chequer Or and Azure.

And in the East Window of the South I Will,

Arg. a spread Eagle Sable.

In the Chancel,

England, and that with a File as before, and France and England quarterly, and
Az. on a Fesse Cotised Or, three Libards Heads Gules, Lee of Norwell. Ex Autogr.
These Arms within a Border Gobone Erm. and Sab. October. 6. 1564. 6 Eliz. were
granted by Sir Gilbert Dethick alias Garter, to Elizabeth Lee, daughter of John
Lee, of Stanford Lincolsh. wife to Sir John Lion, Knight, Alderman of London,
and her posterity for ever.

On a Monument for Gervas Lee, Esquire, in Norwell Chancel.

Az. on a Fesse Cotised Or, three Libards Heads Gules, Lee. Quartering, Sable a
Lion Ramp. between three Crosletts pate Or, Ayloff. and Arg, a Lion Ramp. Gules.

And Sab. a Chevron Gules between three Crosletts Elory Or, with a Crest,
Pieria, a Demi Queen of Mauritania, party per pale Arg. and Gules, holding in
her right hand a Diamond Ring proper.

Willoughby. VVilgebi.
IN Wilgebi there was Soc to Nortwell, of the Archbishop of Yorks Fee, Lib.
Dooms.
as much as answered the Tax before and after the Conquest, for three Bov. and
an half. The Land one Car. There were four Sochm. three Vill. having two Car.
and sixteen Acres of Meadow.

In Wilgebi there was also of the Fee of Roger Pictavensis, where before the
Conquest Eruvin had five Bovats of Land for a Manor. The Land (being then
returned to be sufficient) for so many Oxen. There were two Car. with one Vill.
six Board. and four Acres of Meadow, when the Conquerours survey was made, being
then valued at 10s. but in former times had been 20s. value. This if it belong
not to Willughby, by Walesby, of the Soc of H^^^^ton, in Bassetlawe Hundred, I
doubt should have been noted at Willughby on the Wolds in Rushcliff Hundred,
where Erwin was certainly an owner, and Roger Pictavensis also, as in that
place may be seen.

The most ancient owners which I have light upon in this place were the family
of Malet, Sir Walter, named in Southwell.

By a Deed without date, Robert, son of Alan Malet of Wilheby, passed to Hugh
Lysurs, Ex Autogr. penes Pen. Whalley, A^.
the Land sometime Henry Malet's, and Lands some time Alan Malets, and Lands
which he had of the gift of Henry Malet, his brother.

Stephen de Weston 8 E. 2. conveyed to Henry, son of Sir Thomas Malet, Knight,
of Wyleby.

Peter de Lysurs, and Ioane his wife, 4 E. 3. were concerned in Lands, Ib.
sometime Robert Malets. John Lysurs, 50 E. 3. was of Willughby.

Sir Thomas Rempston, Knight, Richard Bingham, Thomas Leek, of Newark, William
Scrimshire, etc. 21 H. 6. conveyed to William Foljambe one Mess. etc. in
Willughby, which they had of the gift of John Lysours, or of Peter Lysours,
father of the said John.

By a Fine 33 H. 6. Fin. lev. Pasch. 33 H. 6.
William Foljambe, and Nanarina his wife, conveyed two Mess. sixty Acres of
Land, six of Meadow, and six of Pasture, with the Appurt. in Willughby, in the
Parish of Norwell, and North Carleton, to John Markham, John Stanhope, and
William Waren, who 34 H. 6. passed them to Laurence Hatfeild, and Alice his
wife, Autog^. pen. P. W. Ar.
who 36 H. 6. conveyed their Lands in Norwell, Willughby, Sutton upon Trent,
and North Carleton, to Richard Bingham, the Justice, Sir Richard Tunstall,
Knight, John Stanhope, John Wasteneys, Esquire, and William Warren.

Ex Coll. I. B. Ar.
This Laurence Hatfeild had another wife the daughter of William Marshall, by
whom he had Stephen Hatfeild, and John, both Merchants of the Staple, in the
time of R. 3. Stephen it seems married Elizabeth, the half sister of Edmund
Molyneaux, by whom he had Henry Hatfeild, who in the year 1527. making his
Will, settled Lands on Bartholomew, Autogr. pen. eund. P. W.
his brother, with some remainder to the heirs males of his Uncle Edmund
Molynux. Howbeit before he died, which was about seven years after, viz. Iun.
27.26 H. 8. he had by his wife Alice, one of the sisters and coheirs of Sir
John Hercy, Elizabeth, six years old, and Barbara two, his daughters and heirs,
both afterward married to Thomas, and William sons of Richard Whalley, of
Screveton, Esquire, as in that place is said.

Henry Ward, about 18 R. 2. Esc. 18 R. 2. n. 98.
had the Manor of Willughby. Thomas Ward 1 H. 5. conveyed the Manor of
Willughby, Autog^. pen. eund. P. W.
to Richard Stanhope, etc. On his seal within the circumscription of his name
is a Bend within a Bordure engrayled, and is usually blazoned Arg. a Bend Az. a
Board. engrailed sable.

John Bekard, 26 H. 6. had part of the Manor of Welowby, and 4 H. 7. enfeoff'd
Sir Robert Markham, Sir Gervas Clifton, John Stanhope, John Markham, Esquire,
Thomas, Robert, Richard Molyneux, Gent. etc.

There was a recovery 24 H. 7. Mich. 24 H. 7. rot. 416.
wherein Stephen Hatfeild, William Clayton, Clark, and Christopher Smith,
Chaplain, claimed against Robert Belwode, and Agnes, his wife, five Mess. one
Garden, one hundred Acres of Land, nineteen of Meadow, one hundred of Pasture,
twelve of Wood, and 4s. 4d. Rent with the Appurtenances in Willoughby, North
Carleton, and Newarke, and the fourth part of the Manor of Willoughby, with
the Appurtenances, and seven Mess. five Gardens, five Acres of Land, one of
Meadow, ten of Pasture with the Appurtenances in Willoughby,, North Carleton,
Norwell, and Newark. Another 5 H. 8. Pa^^^. 5 H. 8. rot. 154.
wherein the same persons claimed against Katherin Bekard almost the same
parcels, and fourth part of the Manor of Willoughby. Another recovery was 6 H.
8. Pa^^^. 6 H. 8. rot. 149.
where the said Stephen Hatfeld, etc. claimed the like parcels, and fourth part
against Edward Wait, and Dorothy his wife. And another 8 H. 8. M^^^. 8 H. 8.
rot. 310.
where they claimed the like parcels, and fourth part of the Manor against
Elizabeth Bekard.

The one moiety of this Lordship descended from Thomas Whalley, before named,
and Elizabeth his wife, to Peniston Whalley, of Screveton, Esquire, as in that
place may be seen, who sold it to Sir William Willoughby, Baronet, who left it
with some other of his purchased Lands, to Hugh Willughby, his natural son,
under age, now deceased, 1675. The other moiety came to the family of
Yarborough, by the daughter and heir of the said William Whalley, and Barbara,
with which part of it still continues.

North Carleton. OR Carleton upon Trent.
THis Carleton (of which name (as well as Willughby) there are so many in this
County, that they are difficultly distinguished) in the Book of Doomsday, I
find to be of very many parcels, some belonging to Norwell, some to Willughby,
some to Besthorp, some to Sutton upon Trent, some to Crumbwell, and some to
Laxton, and that the principal, Lib. Dooms.
which was rated to the Dane-geld at one Car. The Land one Car. There four
Sochm. had two Car, twenty Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood, four qu. long, and
four broad. This was the Fee of Goisfrid de Alselin.

In Carlentune, of the Land of the Tayns, before the Conquest Vlchel had for
his Manor three Bov. for the Geld. The Land six Bovats. Aldene (progenitor of
the family of Crumwell) held it of the King ( William the Conqueror.) There
were two Board. having three Oxen Plowing (or draught Oxen) and ten Acres of
Meadow, Pasture Wood two qu. long, and half a qu. broad. In elder time 10s. when
the Conqueror made the survey 5s. 4d. value.

Robert de Everingham was certified to hold a Knights Fee of W. Archbishop of
York, Test. de Nev.
in Nord-Carleton of the old Feoffment. Lib. seod. in Scan.
The Prior of the Temple held one Bovat of Land in North Carleton, in frank
Almaign, of the Fee of Robert de Everingham of the old Feoffment.

Guychard de Charun (Lord of Sutton) by his Attorney, 53 H. 3. Pl. I^^. and
Asside diverse. con. apud Deiy. coram G. Pre^^^^^ soc. san, 53 H. 3. rot. 18.
offered himself against Mr. John Clarel (Prebend of Norwell) in a Plea, by
what right the said John exacted Common in the Land of the said Gwichard, in
Kerleton, seeing that he had none in his, neither did the said John do any
service whereby he ought to have Common.

Thomas de Lanum about 30 E. 1. Esc. 30 E. 1. n. 11.
left his son Roger, then above sixty years old, his heir of what he held here
of Guichard de Charun, viz. one Toft, twenty seven Acres of Land, six of Meadow,
and 7s. Rent.

John de Crumbwell 2 E. 3. Chapter 2 E. 3. n. 63.
had Market and Fair in North Carleton.

Richard de Willughby in 27 E. 3. Chapter 27 E. 3. n. 8.
had privilege of free warren in Beeston, Sutton Pass is, Kelum, and North
Carleton; though it might be suspected by a recovery which Richard Bingham, and
Margaret his wife suffered 31 H. 6. Trin. 31 H. 6. rot. 44^.
(amongst many others, concerning Lands belonging to the family of Willughby)
that in North Carleton there was only one Mess. ten Acres of Land, two Acres,
and one Rode of Meadow, with the Appurtenances; but it seems these were not all,
but some particular parcel wherein Margaret had interest, for by a Fine 26 E.
3. Fin. lev. Mich. 26 E. 3.
William, son of John de Blyton, of Ledenham, and Ioane his wife passed to
Edmund de Willughby, and his heirs, one Mess. and the moiety of a Mess. and 80.
Acres of Land, 24. of Meadow, 6s. 6d. Rent, and the passage over Trent, with the
Appurtenances in Carleton, by Crumwell, which moiety and parcels (or the other
moiety in the same words) by another Fine before that, viz. 25 E. 3. Fin. lev.
Trin. 25 E. 3.
Sir John Burdon, of Mapilbek, Chr. and Elizabeth his wife, conveyed to John de
Askam, Clark, and John de Anlep, Clark, and his heirs.

Queen Elizabeth 28 Eliz. granted amongst other things to Thomas Jones, Pat. 28
Eliz. par. 14.
and Edward Batherick, and their heirs, one Mess. and eighty Acres of Land,
twenty of Meadow, thirty of Pasture, with the Appurtenances in Carleton upon
Trent, and Sutton, late in the tenure of John Sturtevant, given to sing Mass in
the Church of Southwell.

The several parts of this Township most comconly followed, as I suppose, the
several Towns to which they belonged, as Willughby, Crumwell, etc.

Peniston Whalley, Esquire, (named in Willughby) sold most of his share here,
to William Summers, whose widow married (as I remember) to John Douglasse, of
Newark.

George Fox, and William Sturtivant, and Charles Yarborough, lib. libere ten.
were also owners here, 1612.

Crumwell.
BEsides that part of Crumuuelle which was Soc to Aygrum of the Fee of
Gislebert Tysun, which was two Bov. ad Geldam, the Land four Bov. where two
Sochm. had one Car. there was a Manor of the Tayn-land, which Alden (whose
posterity took their name from this place) held of the King, paying to the Geld
(or Tax) for it as two Carucats, and six Bovats. The Land of it was four
Carucats. Alden had then there one (Plow or) Car. and five Sochm. on one
Carucat of this Land, and eight Villains, two Board. having four Car.. There was
a Church and a Mill 12d. and one Piscary (or Fishing) Meadow six qu. long, and
three Broad. In King Edward the Confessors time this was valued at 60s. when
the Conquerours Survey was made at 40s.

The Bishop of Lincoln it seems became supreme Lord of it, Test. de Nev.
because Raph de Crumbewell is certified to hold half a Knights Fee of him here
of the old feoffment, that is, whereof his Ancestor was enfeoffed before the
death of King Henry the first, in whose time Alden or Haldoen (who is most
likely to be the Thayn in King Williams time, or his son of that name) was
living, as in Lambley and Widmerpole may be gathered.

This Noble Family continued Lords of this place in the Male Line till the
death of the last Raph Lord Crumwell, who it seems was Lord Treasurer of
England, 11 H. 6. and Lord Chamberlain of the Household, 30 H. 6. Chapter 30 H. 6.
n. 19. m. 20.


By an Inquisition taken, Inquis.
20 Iun. 13 H. 7. after the death of the Lady Willoughby, who died the last day
save one of Aug. then last past (being Niece and Heir of the last and great
Lord Crumwell) William Knivet, Knight, then aged fifty six years, and William
Fitz-Williams, Esquire, aged seven years, were found her Cousins and heirs of the
Manor of Crumwell, with the Appurtenances in Carleton, and the Advowson of the
Church of Crumwell, and Lands in Baseford, as in Lamley is partly shown. By
another Inquisition taken at Newarke 6 December. 8 H. 8. it appears that Sir
William Knyvett (of Norfolk) died 25 November. 7 H. 8. seized of the moiety of
this Manor and Advowson, Ex Inq.
with the Appurtenances in Carleton by Crumwell, and the moiety of the third
part of the Manor of Baseford, and that Edmund Knyvet, aged seven years and
more at the taking the said Inquisition, was found his Cousin and Heir, viz.
son of Thomas, son of Edmund, son of the said Sir William Knyvet.

The moiety of this Manor, B.
together with the moyeties of Plumptre and Basforth, 17 H. 8. were in
feoffment to Robert Strey, Chaplain.

William Shurbourne, and Henry Rockeden, 28 and 29 H. 8. Pasch. 28 and 29 H. 8.
to. 109.
claimed against William Hollys the younger, Gent. the moiety of the Manor of
Crumwell, with the Appurtenances, and the moiety of forty Mess. three Mills,
four hundred Acres of Land, two hundred of Meadow, three hundred of Pasture, one
hundred of Wood, two hundred of Furz and Heath, and 10l. Rent in Crumwellys;
also the moiety of the Advowson of the Church, who called to warrant Edmund
Knyvet, Esquire.

This moiety is descended to the Earl of Clare, who has now also the greatest
part of the other moiety which was Sir Thomas Williamsons, Banonet, excepting
that which Mr. Robert Hoyes, Tanner of Newark, bought of the said Sir Thomas,
and still keeps.

The Rectory of Crumwell was twenty Marks when Mr. Fitz-William was Patron.
Mss. I. M*
It Is now 13l. 2s. 3d. in the Kings Books, and the Earl of Clare Patron.

Aldene sive Haldoenus de Crumwelle temp. Conq.- Hugo de Crumbwell- Radulphus
de Crumwell temp. H. 2.- Radulphus de Crumbwell- Radulphus de Crumwell, 5 H.
3.- Radulphus de Crumwell.......-Mazera fill. and un. cohaer. Ph. Marmion.
Radulphus de Crumwell ob. 27 E 1.-Margar. un. particip. haer. Nicolae ux. Rog.
de Someri. Radulphus de Crumwell aet. 7.27 E. 1.- Radulphus de Crumwell, jun.
14 E. 3. mil. 24 E. 3.-Amicia fill. Rogeri Beler. Radulphus de Crumwell de
Tateshale, miles, 46 E. 3.-Matildis fill. and haer. Joh. fill. Will. Bernak, and
Aliciae fill. and haer. Joannae ux. Rob. de Dryby fill. Rob. de Tateshale.
Radulphus Crumwell-Elizab. Radulphus Dom. Crumwell de Tateshall.-Marg. sor. and
cohaer. Will. fill. Joh. Dom. Deincurt frat. Rad. fill. and haer. Will. sen.
Matild. 12 H. 4. ob. 33. H. 6.-Ric. Stanhop, mil. Henr. Stanhop ob. 31 H. 6. s.
p. Humfr. Bourchier-Joana. Matild. Dom. Willughby de Eresby, ob. 30 Aug. 13 H.
7. nx. 2. Tho. Nevill. 1. Rob. Willughby. 3. Gerv. Clifton.-Elizabeth. Johannes
Kn^vet. Willielmus Knyvet, miles, ob. 7 H. 8.- Edmund. Knyvet- Thom. Knyvet-
Edmund. Knyvet aet. 7.8 H. 8.






Willielmus- Robertus, miles, s. p.
Thom. Johan. s. p. Johannes Clifton-Elizab. Constant. Clifton.- Matild. Dom.
Willughby de Eresby, ob. 30 Aug. 13 H. 7. nx. 2. Tho. Nevill. 1. Rob.
Willughby. 3. Gerv. Clifton.-Elizabeth.

-Matilda. Joh.- Joh.- Willielmus Fitz-Williams- Willielmus Fitz-Williams-
Johannes Fitz-Williams- Willielmus Fitz-Williams-






Tho. Joh. s.p. Will.-

Johannes de Crumwell-Idonia fill. and coh. Rob. de Veteriponte.-Rog. de
Leiburne mar. 1.
Alex. Frevill-Joana haer.

Simon, Reg. Ruff. 43.




Ossington. Oschinton.
OSmund before the Norman Invasion had a Manor in Oschinton rated to the Tax
or Dane-geld at six Bovats. The Land three Car. There afterward Raph de Buron
(whose Fee it was become) had three Car. four Sochm. on half a Bovat of this
Land, sixteen Villains, six Board. having six Car. and eighteen Acres of Meadow,
Pasture Wood two leu. long, Lib. Dooms.
one leu. broad: In the Confessors time this was valued at 3l. in the
Conquerours when the Survey was taken at 40^. It had Soc in Almentune.

Hugh de Burun, and Hugh Meschines his son, his younger son Roger also praising
the Act, Leg. Lent. p. 3.
gave the Church of Oscinton in the year 1144.9 Step. to the Monastery of
Lenton, as in that place and Cotgrave is already shown.

Roger de Burun gave his body to God and the Church of the Holy Trinity at
Lenton, Ib. p. 118.
and there took the habit and Religion of the Cluniac Monks, that God might
avert the scourge of His wrath from him, due for the very great multitude of
his sins; and for the Soul of his Lord King Richard the first, his Ancestors
and Heirs, and likewise for his own, gave and granted to God the said Church of
Lenton, and religious Brethren there serving God, the whole Town of Oscington,
with all its Appurtenances. Howbeit it seems he had given it to the Hospitalers
of St. John's of Jerusalem before, which occasioned Suits among the Religious,
especially for the Church.

Walter Smallet by his Deed enrolled, 5 Ioh. for the Souls of King John, Pip. 5
Ioh.
the Queen, Roger de Burun, his Father, Mother, and their Ancestors, confirmed
the Town of Oscinton to the Hospitalers, retaining nothing but the Prayers of
the House of that Hospital.

The Prior of Lenton, 9 Ioh. produced the gift of Hugh de Burun, Plac. 9 Ioh.
to. 11. in dorso.
and confirmation of Roger, as it is before mentioned. The Prior of the
Hospital of Jerusalem pleaded that they had seisin of the Town of Oscinton
where the Church is situate, of the gift of Roger de Burun, who gave them that
Town, and produced his Charter testifying the same; and also another Charter,
which especially spoke concerning the Church. The Prior of Lentons Attorney
knew not that he should put himself on the Jury, before he had the advice of
his Master, and therefore day was given till fifteen days after Easter, at
which time, viz. 10 Ioh. the Jury found that Roger de Burun presented the last
Parson, Pasch. 10 Ioh. to. 9.
which died, to the Church of Oscington, and therefore the Brethren of the
Hospital should have their seisin, and the Prior of Lenton be in mercy. Yet not
very long before Roger Archbishop of York admitted and instituted Galfr. the
Clark, Regist. de Lent. p. 118. b.
Parson of this Church upon the presentation of the Prior and Monks of Lenton,
and gave them 2s. a year as a Pension out of it. There was a Fine levied at
Leycester the Monday after the Feast of St. Andrew that same year, viz. 10 Ioh.
between Peter Prior of Lenton, Fin. lev. apud Leycest. Mich. 10 Ioh.
and Robert the Treasurer of the Prior of the Hospital of Jerusalem, concerning
the Advowson of this Church, which the Prior of Lenton released to the
Hospitalers, and they gave to Lenton the moiety of the Advowson of the Church
of Huneswrthe of their gift. The Hospitalers enjoyed this whole Township in
pure Alms, with privileges Spiritual and Temporal. Charles Duke of Suffolk, 34
H. 8. Pat. 34 H. 8. par. 5.
had license to alienate the Manor and Rectory of Ossington to Richard
Andrews, Gent. and his heirs. Edmund Cartwright Hugo Cartwright- 3 Emundus-An.
fill. Tho. Cranmer sor. ob. 1 Mar. Tho. Archiep. Cant.-Agnes fill. Ric. Andrews
ux. 2. ob. 3 and 4 Ph. and Mar. 2 Georg. Cartwright de Ossington.-Doroth. fill.
and haer. Will. Molyneux de Hawton, postea nupta.. Dabrige-court. Will.
Cartwright de Ossington.-Gracia fill. and cohaer. Tho.-Will. Dabridgcourt
Dabrigecourt de Langdon mar. 2. Hall Com. Warw. 1 Fulc. Cartwright de
Ossington, Ar.-Mari. fill. Hen. Pierpont, mil. Will. Cartwright de
Ossington.-Kath. fill. and coh. Will Marshall de Com. Essex. Will. Cartwright
fill. and haer. aet. 35. 1674. Georgius.
Geo.-Christian fill. Christ. Beresford. Georgius. Carolus.
Francisc. Tho. Joh. Gervas. Fran. ux. Williel. Strelley. Mari. ux. Ph. Lacock.
Grac. Fulc. Stephenson. Anna. Jane. Kath.
2 Tho.- 3 Will. 4 Hugo mil.-Mari. fill and haer. Will. Cartwright de Eddingly.
Christian.-Will. Cartwright de Normanto^. Will. Cartwright de Normanton.-Eliz.
fill. Tho. Charlton de Chillwell.

Mari. ux. Brookesby Doroth. Thom. Brom. Chris. ux. Tho. Barton de Holme, mil.
Elizab. ux. Chr. Beresf.
Georg. Edm. Rob. Eliz.
1 Hug. Cartwright de Mallings in-An. fill. Cant. de Royney Com. Bodf. and.....
de Ossington, fill. and haer. s. p. Bond.-Jana un. ex 17. fill. Jo. Newton, mil.
renupta. Jacobo Fitz-James. Eliz. ux. Regin. Peckham.- Franc. fill.
Reginaldi.-Will. Cartwright de Norwell 1614. Th. Cartwright fill. and hae.
Franc. Cartwright



2 Georg. 4 Roland. 1 Will. Cartwright fill. and haer.-Jennet fill....Legate. Ed.
Cartwright de Norwell. Franc. fill. Reginaldi.-Will. Cartwright de Norwell 1614.



(who after the dissolution of Monasteries had Malling in Kent) married Anne,
sister of Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury. This Edmund died seized of
this Manor and Rectory, 21 July, 1 Mar. but it seems he had another wife
Agnes, the daughter of Richard Andrews, who died 18 Aug. 3 and 4 Ph. and Mar.
This Manor and Rectory continue with the posterity and name of the said Edmund
Cartwright to this day.

In the Chancel on a Plate of Brass fixed in a Marble Gravestone, this
following Inscription in Capital Letters,

MARY PIEREPONT, daughter to Sir Henry Pierepont of Holme Pierepont, Knight, in
the County of Nottingham, and wife to Fulk Cartwright of Ossington in the same
County, died the 8 day of March 1670.

On the South side of the Chancell at Ossington.


Of your Charity pray for the Soul of Reynold Peckham of Wrotham in the County
of Kent, Esquire, which deceased the xxi. day of July, in the year of our Lord
God M. CCCCC. L. Whose Soul God pardon.


At the upper end of the Chapel on the North side of Ossington,

Here rests the Bodies of William Cartwright, Esquire, late Lord of this
Manor of Ossington, Patron of this Church; and of Grace his wife, youngest
daughter and coheir of Thomas Dabridgcourt of Langdon Hall in the County of
Warwick, Esquire, by whom he had issue Mary, married to Thomas Rockly, Fulk,
Dorothy married to Thomas Broom; George deceased; Thomas, Christian, William,
and Elizabeth deceased; William, John, Elizabeth, and Hugh: and deceased the
last of December, in the year of our Lord 1602. He was Son and heir of George
Cartwright, and of Dorothy sole heir of William Molineux. The aforesaid Grace
departed this life the 20 day of March, in the year of our Lord 1633.

At the upper end of the Chancell on the North side at Ossington.


A PROSPECT OF OSSINGTON HOUSE FROM THE FIELD ON THE WEST SIDE AS IT now is,
some part having been ruined in the late rebellious war.


Sutton upon Trent.
IN Sudton of Roger de Buslies Fee there was Soc to Gresthorpe one Bov. ad
Geld. but the Sok was waste. There was six Acres of Meadow, and some was Soc to
Scacheby one Bov. ad Geld. the Land half a Car. There one Sochm. had one Car.

Before the Conquest William, son of Scelward, had a Manor in Sudton, Lib.
Dooms.
which was chargeable to the public Taxation of that time for two Car. and six
Bovats. The Land was five Car. This afterward was given to Earl Alan of
Richmond, whose Man or Tenant there called Herveius had two Car. or Plows,
thirteen Sochm. on the moiety of this Land, and seventeen Villains, three
Bordars, having eight plows (or Carucats.) There was a Priest and a Church, and
three Fishings, and one hundred Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood one leu. long,
half a leu. broad. This kept the ancient value 4l. The Posterity of this Hervey
took their Surname from this place, as it is very probable, because the next
owner, I have had any notice of, was of that name. Hervey de Sutton, and Robert
his Man, 22 H. 2. Pip. 22 H. 2.
gave account of five Marks of the Amercements of the Forest.

Hervey de Sutton, and his heir Robert, gave to the Canons of Radeford (near
Wirksop) the Church of Sutton, Ex Regist. de Wirks. fol. 101. b. Cap. de Sutton
1. Ib. fol. 102.
and the right of Patronage thereof, and whatsoever other right they had
therein. And there was a Fine levied at Nottingham, 20 H. 3. between Walter
Prior of Wirksop, and Richard de Sutton of the said Advowson, whereby it was
declared to be the right of the said Prior, as that which he had of the gift of
Hervey de Sutton, Father of the said Richard, Regist. de Novo loco 225.
whose heir he then was, his elder brother Robert Herveius homo Comitis Alani
tenuit Sutton, 14 W. 1.-........-..........- Herveius de Sutton, 22 H. 2.-
Richardus de Sutton haer. 20 H. 3.- Agnes-Gilb. de Muscamp. Adam de Muscamp.
Johannes de Sutton.
Steph. de Coverham-Marger. Steph. de Coverham.
Alicia. -Guichard. de Charrons-Maria. Guichardus de Charron-Alicia, 3 E. 2.
Bertram. Mounboucher, 3 E. 3.-Joana, 3 E. 2. Bertram. Mounboucher ob. 12 R. 2.
Chr.-Isabel. fill. Ric. Willoughby, mil.-Christ. sor. Joh. de Woderington Chr.
ux. 2. Bertram. Mounboucher ob. 1 H. 4.- Bertr. Mounboucher ob. 2 H. 5.-
Bertram. Mounbocher ob. 4 H. 6. s. p.

Henr. Heton Chr.-Isabella-Robertus Herbotell mar. 2. Robertus Herbotell ob. 22
H. 6.- Bertram. Harbotill ob. 2 E. 4.- Robertus Herbotell aet. 9. 2 E.
4.-Richard. Harbotel, mil.-Jana fill. Hen. Willoughby, mil. de Wollaton. Ex
Coll. I. B. Ar.
Georgius Harbotell, 20 H. 8. Alianora-Thom. Percy. Maria-Edward. Fitton.
Edward. Fitton, miles. Georgius. Anthonius.







Steph. de Charron, 34 E. 1.
...Faber-Eliz. Willelmus de Caunton. Johan. Joh.

Robertus fill. and haer. ob. ultra mare ante patrem s. p. Rolandus de
Sutton-Alicia sor. and cohaer. Rob. Dom. Lexington.




being dead beyond the Sea before his Father without issue.

This Church King Edward the first, in the thirty second year of his Reign,
being at Strivelin, 25 Ap. licensed to be appropriate to the Monastery of
Wirkesop. The Writ of Ad quod Damnum was returned the year before, 31 E. 1.
Esc. 31 E. 1. n. 102.


Richard de Sutton who held a Knights Fee in Sutton, Test. de Nev. Regist. de
Novo loco p. 8. and 225.
Carleton, and Meringe, had five daughters and heirs; first, Agnes married to
Gilbert de Muscam, by whom she had Adam de Muscamp, and John (I suppose called
also of Sutton;) secondly, Margery married to Stephen de Coverham, by whom she
had Stephen; thirdly, Alice without issue a Benefactress to Newstede, to which
place she gave one Bovat in Sutton upon Trent, which the Earl of Richmond
confirmed; she made Margery de Coverham her sister, her heir, of whom Thomas de
Sutton their Uncle, the Parson (who was a great Benefactor also to Newstede)
acquired their parts, as also of Agnes, whose purparts were conveyed to Henry
de Gloucestre Parson of Sutton, from whom they descended, to John de Gloucestre
his brothers son his heir, which John enfeoffed Hugh de Normanton, who
re-infeoffed him, and Ioane his wife, who had the moiety of the Manor of
Sutton upon Trent, and 3 E. 3. Quo War. 3 E. 3. to. 13.
claimed the privileges accordingly.

The Jury, 18 E. 1. P^. de Banc. Mich. 18 E. 1. to. 67.
in the Assize found that John de Sutton not compelled by force or fear, but of
his own Will made the writings to Henry de Gloucester Parson of Sutton,
concerning one Mess. and thirty Acres of Land, and two of Pasture in Sutton, in
which Deeds (or Chartels) he sold his Manor there.

Fourthly, Mary, another of the daughters and heirs of Sir Richard de Sutton,
was married to Guichard de Charron, who, 4 E. 1. Inq. tang. Reg. 4 E. 1.
Wa^e^t. T^urg. and Lyc.
with Adam de Sutton (whom I suppose the son of Agnes, and Gilbert de Muscamp
before named) claimed several royalties in Sutton. He had Free Warren granted
here 18 E. 1. Chapter 18 E. 1. m. 7.
By his wife the said Mary he had a son named Stephen, who enfeoffed his said
Father in this Land, which he settled on Guichard de Charun his son by a second
wife, to whom and to Alice his wife, his brother the said Stephen de Charrun,
by Fine, 34 E. 1. passed his Manor of Sutton upon Trent, Fin. lev. T^in. 3 E.
1.
which the said Gwischard the younger, and Alice his wife, by another Fine, 3
E. 2. Fin. lev. Trin. 3 E. 2.
settled on Bertram de Mounboucher, and Ioane his wife (their daughter) and the
heirs which the said Bertram should beget on the body of the said Ioane,
reserving 20l. per annum, during the life of the said Gwischard; and after his
death a Rose at Midsummer to his heirs. Bertram and Ioane, 3 E. 3. claimed a
Market here every Monday, and a yearly Fair for two days, viz. the Eve and
Feast day of St. James the Apostle, and Free Warren which King Edward the
second granted, 7 Aug. 2 E. 2. Chapter 2 E. 2. n. 51.
at Northampton to Guichard de Charrun, father of the said Ioane, whose heir
she was.

There was another daughter of the said Sir Richard de Sutton, Regist. de Novo
loco p. 8. and 225.
fifthly, ( Elizabeth) who was married to a certain Smith, by whom she had
William de Caunton, and John de Caunton, and John de Caunton, was heir of her
Purpart, and enfeoffed diverse Tenants; William Bevercottes had the state of the
said John de Calneton, 3 E. 3. and at the said time he with John de Gloucester,
Quo War.
John de Bolyngbrok, Peter Foune, and Robert de Lanum prayed that they might be
admitted to Fine, and use the privileges in Common, which could not be
parcelled, and were admitted accordingly.

It seems that Bertram de Mounboucher, son of this Bertram and Ioane, married
Isabell, the daughter of Sir Richard Willoughby of Wollaton to his first wife;
and afterward Christian, the sister of Sir John de Woderington, and died
leaving his son Bertram, who was by his first wife, his heir, 12 R. 2. Esc. 12
R. 2. n. 36.
and also a daughter called Isabell, first married to Henry Heton Chr. and
afterward to Robert de Herbotell, Esquire, by whom she had Robert Herbotell,
who died 22 H. 6. and was Father of Bertram Herbotell, who, 2 E. 4. Esc. 2 E.
4. n. 11.
left his son Robert nine years old heir of this Manor by descent from the
said Isabell his great Grandmother, who, 5 H. 6. Esc. 5 H. 6. n. 4.
died seized of two parts of this Manor called South Hall, together with the
Reversion of the third part, which fell to her after the deaths of three
Bertram Mounbouchers, viz. her brother, who died 1 H. 4. Esc. 1. H. 4. n. 3^.
his son her Nephew, 2 H. 5. Es^. 2 H. 5. n. 3.
and the last Bertram, son and heir of her said Nephew, who died without issue,
4 H. 6.

George Harbotell, 20 H. 8. Fin. 2^ H. 8. ^. 1^.
left his two sisters heirs of the Manor of Dalton Travers in Northumberland,
and of this also, viz. Alianor, who was married to Thomas Percy, and Mary late
the wife of Edward Firton.

There was a Recovery, 30 H. 8. Mich. 3^ H. 8. ^. 521.
wherein Raph Byrkheved, and Christopher Harbotell claimed against Alianor
Percy, widow, the moiety of the Manor of Sutton, etc. and another 3 and 4 Ph.
and Mar. Pas^. 3 ^ 4 P^. and Mar. n. 4^3.
wherein Robert Thomson, and Richard King, claimed against John Smyth the
Manor of Sut^on upon Trent, etc. and 6l. Rent, with the Appurtenances in
Sutton upon Trent, Strarnethorpe, and Wested, who called Edward Fytton, Knight.

John Meringe of Sutton married Dorothy, the daughter and coheir of John
Smith, and by her had William Meringe of Sutton, Father of John, Father of
William, fourteen years old 1674. she was after married to Nath. Lodge.

Gloucesters Manor continued in that name and Family long; Henry Gloucester,
20 H. 7. Pas^. ^^ H. 7. ^. 114.
suffered a Recovery to Edward Stanhope, Knight, of the Manors of Sutton upon
Trent, and Carcolston, with the Appurtenances, and fourteen Mess. two hundred
Acres of Land, forty of Meadow, one hundred of Pasture, and 26s. 8l. Rent in
Sutton and Carcolston. These were shortly after Sir William Merings, as in
Carcolston is said.

This was Mr. Richard Hackers of Flintham, his son John sold it not long since
to Hugh Shepherd, B.
who has built a pretty little House and lives there.

The Jury, 2 E. 1. Esc. 2 E. 1. n. 17.
found that Robert de Sutton held a Manor in Sutton of Wiscard de Charron and
his heirs; he held likewise Warsop and Eykering, etc. he was son of William
Sutton, son of Roland, whom I suppose to be a younger son of Harvey de Sutton
before named, and marrying the sister of Robert de Lexington, advanced his
posterity thereby, a^ in Warsop, and other places of this Book may be noted:
This Robert de Sutton left his son and heir, Richard de Sutton, then, viz. 2 E.
1. eight years old; Who afterward had a son called John, who married one of
the coheirs of John de Somery Lord Dudley, and his posterity becoming Lords
Dudley, this Manor and Warsop (as in that place will appear) shortly came to
be the inheritance of the Lords Ros of Hamlak.

The Jury, 26 E. 3. Esc. 26 E. 3. n. 53.
found that William Lord Roos of Hamelak, when he dyed held Orston, and the
Manor of Warsop jointly, with Margaret his wife, and the Manor of Sutton upon
Trent, of Philip Queen of England, as of the Honor of Richmond, and that
Thomas de Roos was his brother and heir. Thomas de Roos of Hamelak, Chr. 7 R.
2. Esc. 7 R. 2. n. 68.
held it when he died jointly, with Beatrice his wife, as he did Screveton,
parcel of Orston, and also Warsop. John de Roos, Knight, was then found their
son and heir, who about 17 R. 2. Esc. 17 R. 2. n. 49.
left it to his brother William, and so it descended, (as in Orston may be
seen) to Roger Earl of Rutland, B.
who sold it to Fulc Cartwright, Esquire, Lord also of Ossington, where William
Cartwright, Esquire, his son resides, who has an house here also.

Lib. lib. ten. p^n. mei^s. R. T.
The owners of this Sutton, 1612. are said to be Gilbert, Earl of Shrowsbury,
who I suppose, had the Rectory, and what belonged to Wirksop, which his Grace
the Duke of Newcastle sold to... Clark, Fulk Cartwright, Esquire, Mrs. Lodge,
Thomas Lee, Gent. Edward Sudbury, Senior, Thomas Truswell, Senior, William
Truswell, Thomas Childers, Barth. Cade, etc.

M^s. I. M.
The Vicarage of Sutton was ten Marks when the Prior of Wirksop was Patron: it is
now in the Kings Books 5l. 6s. 8d. value, and the Duke of Newcastle Patron.

Gresthorp. And Normanton.
THese both were of the Fee of Roger de Busli after the Conquest, before which
they were in many hands. In Gresthorp, Dunning and Gran. for their two Manors
answered the Tax for six Bov. and an half, Lib. Dooms.
and a fourth part of a Bovat. The Land was two Car. There afterward in King
Williams time, Roger the Man (or Tenant) of the said Roger de Busli had two
Car. and four Sochm. twelve Vill. one Board. having five Car. There were three
Mills 20s. and twelve Acres of Meadow, and four Acres of Pasture Wood. This part
retained the old value 3l. having Soc in Sudton.

In Normentune before the Conquest five Taynes, Iustan, Durand, Elward, Elmar,
and Alsi had every one his hall, and every one was chargeable to the Dane-geld
for one Bov. and the fifth part of a Bov. The Land was twelve Bov. There
afterward Roger, the Man of Roger de Busli had nine Sochm. four Board. having
three Car. and twelve Acres of Meadow. In the Confessors time the value was
10s. in the Conquerours 6s. Here was also a parcel Soc to Scacheby, half a Bov.
ad Geldam. There two Vill. and two Board. had one Car. Another part was Soc to
Fladburg, of the Bishop of Lincolnes Fee, which was six Bov. ad Geldam. The
Land twelve Bov. There eleven Sochm. had three Car. and six Acres of Meadow.
Here was also a parcel Soc to Dunham, the Kings Land, which was one Bov.. to
the Geld. One moiety of this Land belonged to Bodmeschell, and the other to
Dunham, it was then waste, Pasture Wood three qu. long, two broad.

These townships, as most or all of that Rogers did, came to William de
Lovetot, who gave amongst the rest this Church of Normanton to the Priory which
he founded at Radeford, by Wirksop, in the time of H. 1. as in that place will
be shown. Matildis de Lovetoft his great Grandchild, (who was sometime wife of
Gerard de Furnivall) gave the Manor of Gresthorp, with the Appurtenances, and
Whistan in Yorkshire, except the Advowson of that Church, to Alda, who had been
wife of William de Furnivall, (her son) in lieu of her dower, in the Manors of
Grengeley, Whystan, and Gresthorp, during her life, but it seems that before 52
H. 3. Pl. de Iur. and Assis. apud Ebor. Hill. 52 H. 3.
Thomas de Furnivall had disseised the said Alda of her freehold in the said
Whystan and in Handesworth.

Thomas de Furnivall the elder, 19 E. 2. Com. Hill. 19 E. 2. to. 3.
held the Manor of Gresthorp.

William Farnell (Lord of half Bochumsell, if not mistaken for Furnivall) held
in Normanton and Gristhorpe, Test. de Nev,
the fourth part of a Knights Fee of Matilda de Lovetot, and she of the
Countess of Ewe, and she of the King, of the old Feoffment.

The Jury, 6 E. 3. Esc. 6 E. 3. n. 68.
found that Thomas de Furnivall, senior, when he died held the Manor of
Wirkesop, and this of Gresthorpe, of Philip Queen of England, as of the honor
of Tikhill, and that Thomas de Furnivalle, son of the said Thomas de
Furnivalle, the elder, was then his heir.

Michael de la Pole, 28 E. 3. Chapter 28 E. 3. n. 2.
had free warren in Gresthorpe. Michael de la Pole, 7 R. 2. settled the Manor
of Greysthorpe, Esc. 12 R. 2. n. 178.
with Rents of Assize, and seven Bovats of Land in North Clifton* on Michael de
la Pole, his son, and Katherin his wife. The Jury, 7 H. 5. Esc. 7 H. 5. p. 234.
found that Katherine, who had been wife of Michael de la Pole, Earl of
Suffolk, when she died held the Manor of Gresthorpe, with the Appurtenances in
Gresthorp, Sutton, Normanton, and North Clifton; and that Katherine, Elizabeth
and Isabell, daughters of Michael de la Pole, son of the said Earl, and the
said Katherine, were her Cousins and heirs. The Jury, 28 H. 6. Esc. 28 H. 6.
found that William late Duke of Suffolk, when he died held jointly with Alice
his wife then living, the Manor of Gresthorp, and Normanton, etc. and that
John Duke of Suffolk was his heir.

This Manor was lately Scymour Daniel's and his son William Daniel, as I
think, sold it to Edward Phynney.

There was a Chapel in Gristhorp, founded in the Honor of St. James, become
ruinous and converted into a Cottage and Barn, Pat. 16 Eliz. par. ^^
which Queen Elizabeth, among other things, 2 Apr. 16 Eliz. granted to
Alexander Rigby, and Percival Gunston, Gent. and their heirs; and the next
year, 22 Iun. 17 Eliz. Par. 5. pat. 17 Eliz.
to John Sonkey, and Percivall Gunston, certain parcels of Land, and Meadow in
Gristhorpe, called Priest Land, containing sixteen Acres, and one little Croft
called Priests Yard, given for the sustentation of a Priest in the said free
Chapel of Saint James in Gresthorpe.

The owners of these Towns 1612. are said to be Thomas Deane, Nicolas Tailor,
Simon Gyles, Thomas Walker, Richard Gray, Richard Weighton, William Shepherd,
Richard Cossen, Gregory Sudbury, John Ryley.

Mss. I. M.
The Vicarage of Normanton was eight Marks when the Prior of Wirksop was Patron:
it is now 4l. 5^. 0d. in the Kings Books, and An. Darlin (or Daniel) Patron.

Weston.
WEstune was also of the Fee of Roger de Busli, in which before the Conquest
Elmer, Elwin, Osbern, Grim, Edric, Stenulph, had each man his hall, and each
one Bov. of Land. They paid the Tax amongst them for six Bov. and an half. Lib.
Dooms.
The Land was (for four Plows, or) four Car. There after the Conquest Fulc,
Robert, and Turold, the men of Roger de Busli, had four Car. and an half, and
one Sochm. fourteen Vill. three (or four) Board. having three Car.. There was a
Church, one Mill, thirty Acres of Meadow, Pasture wood half a Leu. long, and as
much broad. In the Confessors time this was valued at 70s. when Doomsday Book
was made in the Conquerours time at 50^. There was Soc in Odesthorp and Redford.

The next successor of that Robert, (who also held Grove of Roger de Busli)
whom I have noted was Gerbert de Archis Lord also of Grove, the head of his
Barony, in the time of King H. 2. Gilbert de Archis, son of Gerbert, 28 H. 2.
Pip. 28 H. 2.
paid L. Marks fine, for the Land of his father. Gilbert de Arches gave the
Church of Weston to the Monastery of Blithe, Regist. de Blid. p. 89.
(which Roger de Busli founded) and Gilbert de Arches, his son, confirmed his
fathers gift. There was an agreement between the Monks and Gilbert de Arches,
that they should present to the Archbishop the next vacancy Humfr. (de
Tikhill,) the Clark of Ostrefeild, if he should be living, or some other fit
Clerk, at the request of the said Gilbert, to be Parson of Weston; which they
did it seems, and after him R. de Caneton: Ib. p. 90.
and upon their presentation of Raph de Wadwrd, Walter Archbishop of York gave
him institution, reserving an annual pension of five Marks to the said
Monastery to increase Hospitality, by his Instrument dated at Scroby, 4 Id.
June, in the thirty fourth year of his Pontificat.

Robert de Hersin, son and heir of Theofania, daughter of Gilbert de Arches
released to Theobald the Prior, and to the Covent of Blithe, all his right in
the Advowson of this Church of Weston, for which they received him and his
heirs in (to) all the benefits and Orisons which should from thenceforth be
(made or) done in that Church (of Blithe) for ever. Mr. Robert de Hersin, and
Walter de Bakepuz, by their instrument dated on St. Simon and Iude's day, 1255.
at Blithe, certified the Dean and Chapter of York, of their release. Walter de
Bakepuz, and Elizabeth his wife, also released to Theobald the said Prior.

Malvesinus (de Hercy, Test. de Nev.
father of the first named Robert) and William Ruffus paid four Marks for two
Fees in Grove, Ordeshale, and Weston, in which places Hugh de Hercy, Knight, 3
E. 3. Quo War. 3 3 E. 3. rot. 20.
claimed free warren as son of Hugh, son of Hugh de Hercy, brother and heir of
the said Robert; to whom King H. 3. 10 December. in the thirty ninth year of his
reign granted it. Hugh de Hercy, and Alice his wife, by a Fine 15 E. 3. Fin.
lev. Trin. 15 E. 3.
settled the Manor of Weston, and five Marks, and 12d. Rent in Cusseworth, on
John de Hercy, and Ioane his wife, and the heirs of their bodies, remainder to
the right heirs of the said Hugh.

Eustachius Morteyn, son and heir of Robert Mortein, 2 E. 2. Lib. de Fin. Fol.
192. Mic. 2 E. 2.
had three parts of a Knights Fee in Grove, and four parts in Weston, then in
the Kings hands. This Robert de Morteyn was son of Eustachius, and Eincina,
Regist. de Welbek, p. 171.
daughter and heir of William Ruffus, who married Isabell, the other daughter
and heir of Gilbert de Arches, and gave Weston Mill to the Abbey of Welbek.

The interest of the family of Morteyn was sold to that of Hercy in this place,
which descended, as in Grove may be seen, B.
to Sir John Hercy the last male of that noble race, who limited it to Sir
William Meringe, his sisters son, and he sold it to Peter Roos of Laxton, whose
unthrifty son Gilbert Roos, sold it to Sir John White. I take it to be Sir
Brian Broughtons at this present, Iun. 26. 1674.

Roger de Weston, whom I suppose a successor of Fulc, first named, released
also to God, Regist. de Blid. p. 89.
St. Mary of Blithe, and St. Katherine, and the Monks there serving God, his
claim also in the Church of Weston; and so did Sir Richard de Weston, who was
to be received into the good Deeds and Orisons of that Church, and his heirs
also.

Robert de Perpoynt was Lord here, 9 E. 2. Nom. vill. Chapter 9 E. 2. n. 46.
and had free warren granted that year, with whose posterity then, and now
seated at Holme, according to the descent in that place inserted, it moved and
remains.

That which Turold, the man of Roger de Busli had, who had also Hodsak, it
should seem by a Fine levied in the Kings Court at Clarendon, the Monday after
mid-lent, 5 Ioh. between Cecily, (daughter of Gervas de Clifton) who had been
the wife of Roger de Creissi, and William de Creissi, concerning her reasonable
dower in Hoddishac, Gedling, Kelum, Weston, Rampton, and Marcham, that this
Weston was inherited by those Lords the successors of that Turold.

The family of Normanvile held this, which occasioned the distinction of Weston
Normanvile, and Weston Hercy, which yet remains in the Town, divided by the
Brook. Sir Thomas Normanvile, 16 E. 4. passed this with Gedling, as in that
place is noted, to Robert Roos of Laxton, from which family it came to Sir
Brian Broughton, as above is said.

Richard de Colingham, by a Fine levied before William Herle, Esc. 12 R. 2. n.
178.
and his fellow Justices Itinerant at Nottingham, 3 E. 3. estated two Mess. one
Toft, one hundred thirty two Acres of Land, and twenty of Meadow, with the
Appurtenances in Weston, and Normanton upon Trent, on Hugh de Normanton for his
life, and after on John, son of the said Hugh. These Lands were held of William
Basset, as of his Manor of Fledburgh.

Since the dissolution (if not before) the Patronage of Weston Church is come
to the family of Clifton.

Mss. I. M.
The Rectory was 16l. it is now 19l. 2s. 11d. value, in the Kings books, and Mr.
Clyfton formerly, and lately Sir Gervas Clifton Patron.

Marnehams.
THese are two Hamlets, but were both the Fee of Roger de Busli, Before he came
with King William. In Marneham were two Manors the freehold of Aluric and
Dane, who paid the Geld or Tax of that time for six Bov.. and. Lib. Dooms.
The Land was two Car. There Fulc the man of Roger, before named had one Car.
and there were one Sochm. having twelve Acres of Land, and ten Vill. four Board.
having four Car. and an half. There was Meadow, forty Acres. In the Confessors
time this was 40s. in the Conquerours 20s. value. In the other Marneham in the
Saxon government Vlsi had for his Manor, which paid the Dane-geld for two
Caruc. Land for four Plows, or four Car. There in the Norman times Roger de
Busli had in Demesne four Car. and two Sochm. on forty Acres of Land, and
twenty Villains, having seven Car. one Mill 4s. one Fishing, and 24. Acres of
Meadow, small Wood half a leu. long, and so much broad. In King Edward the
Confessors time this was 4l. in King Williams 3l. value.

Raph, son of William de Walichvill, sent in his Certificate to King Henry the
second, L^b. Rubr. in Scacc.
amongst the rest of the Barons, which shows that he did hold in the life of
King Henry the first, by the service of one Knights Fee, and that Robert de
Chaurcijs held at that time that which he did before by the same service, with
the daughter of the said William, excepting two Carucats of Land, whereof the
King made his Plea. Robert de Chaurces 14 H. 2. Rot. Pip. 14 H. 2.
gave account of one Mark for one Fee of the aid for Maud the Kings daughter.

William de Kawres, son of Robert de Kawres, for his Souls health, and the Soul
of Agnes his wife, by the consent of his heirs, gave to God, St. Mary, and St.
Cuthbert of Radeford, and the brethren and their servants, Regist. de Wirksop,
fol. 105.
and their carriages, free-passage in his Ferry Boat of Marnham, without
custom or demand; which Robert, son of William de Kawirs, confirmed to the
said Canons, and which the Prior of Wirkesop claimed in Air, 3 E. 3. Quo War.
3 E. 3.
and had accordingly.

King John, 5 Ioh. and 6 Ioh. Feb. 26. gave (or confirmed) to Robert de
Chaurcis, Chapter 5 Ioh. m. 1. n. 1. Chapter 6 Ioh. n. 42.
and his heirs, the Manor of Marneham, and Wadworth, for the service of one
Knights Fee, which were the inheritance of the said Robert, and of William, his
Father.

William de Chawurcis, 14 H. 3. Pl. de Banc. and Assis. 14 H. 3. to. 16.
acknowledged that he then ought to Alice Countess of Augi, or Ewe, fifty five
Marks of the Fine made between them. The King 28 H. 3. Pat. 28 H. 3. par. 1. n.
4.
confirmed the gift and grant, which Alice Countess of ( Ewe or) Augi, made to
Robert de Lexington of the custody of the whole Land, which was William de
Chaurces in Marneham, with the Appurtenances; it should seem this William was
then dead, having married one of the sisters and coheirs of Thomas, son of
Robert, Baron of Alfecton, by whom he left a son Thomas de Chaurcis in
minority, 26 H. 3. Rot. Pip. 26 H. 3.


Robert de Lathum had to wife Ioane, (whom other Authors call Amicia) the other
coheir, and gave a great Fine for having the custody (or wardship) of Thomas
de Chaurcis, Nephew, and one of the heirs of Thomas, son of Robert (de
Alferton) until he should come to be of age, saving to the King all Wards,
Escaets, Marriages and Advowsons of Churches, and the Marriages of other the
heirs of the said Thomas, if he should chance to dye before he came of age.

Thomas de Chaworth, 34 H. 3. Pl. de Banc. Hill. 34 H. 3. rot. 2. in dorso.
had a suit against the Bishop of Lincoln, for taking Toll of passengers to
his passage at Marneham, Thomas de Chaworth 41 H. 3. Chapter 41 H. 3. m. 2. m. 3.
had Market and Fair granted at Marneham Chaworth, and free warren, which he
had also at Alfreton, and Norton, Osberton, and Edwalton, as there is noted, as
here ought also the mistake, Monastic. Angl. vol. 2. p. 607. which supposes
this Marneham to have been the Land of Robert Fitz-Ranulph, Baron of Alfreton,
and founder of Beauchief Priory in Darbyshire, and from William, his son, who
was father of Robert, father of Alice, the wife of William de Cadurcis (son of
William de Cadurcis) to have first by inheritance come to this noble family,
which by what I have here set down, appears to be manifestly otherwise.

The first Robert de Chaurces held a Knights Fee of William de Albeni in
Leicestershire; his Grandchild, Lib. Rubr.
the second Robert (whom I supposed father of William, who married the great
coheir, though it seems by Mr. Glovers Book, he was his brother) kept not so
true to the Crown, but that there is a note of his returning to his fidelity,
and the Kings trust, Pen. Patric. vicecom. Chaworth.
in the first year of King H. ^.

Thomas, son of William de Chaworth, was a great benefactor to Beauchief, Mon.
Angl. vol. 2. p. 609. and 611.
and gave several parcels of Land in Alfreton, and Norton, and Grenehull, (an
Hamlet of that Sok) and Wodesetes, and little Norton, and other places in that
County of Derby.

Thomas de Chaworth, son of William de Chaworth, confirmed the gifts of Thomas
de Chaworth, his Grandfather, and other his Ancestors in Alfreton, Norton,,
Wymundwold (Leicestershire) and Marneham, all which were confirmed by the King
9 E. 2. Par. 1. pat. 9 E. 2. m. 3.


The Jury, 20 E. 1. Esc. 20 E. 1. n. 77.
found that Thomas de Chaworth had new erected his old Weres ( Gurgites) at
Marneham, to the damage of the Town of Nottingham, one Mark, because the Boats
could not pass as they were wont.

Thomas de Chaworth settled the Manor of Marneham, by a Fine 12 E. 2. Fin.
lev. Pasch. 12 E. 2.
on Thomas de Chaworth, his son, and the heirs of his body, which he should
beget on Ioane his wife, reserving his own life in it, and excepting a passage
over Trent in the same Manor, with a remainder to the right heirs of himself;
and by another Fine likewise 3 E. 3. at Nottingham, this Manor, and Osberton,
wherein he gave his said son the remainder in Fee.

This younger Thomas died before his father, and had a second wife named
Margaret, after his death, 47 E. 3. Claus. 47 E. 3. m. 23.
married to William de Spaigne of Boston, by whom he this said younger Thomas,
had William de Chaworth, who was eighteen years old at the death of his Grand
father, the said elder Sir Thomas, which was about 42 E. 3. being a very old
man.

This William de Chaworth married Alice, the daughter and heir of Sir John de
Caltoft, Lord of East Bridgeford, as in Wiverton is said, where there is also
an account of this excellent family with which this Manor, viz. both the
Hamlets of Kirk Marneham, and Ferry Marneham, or North, and South, Great, and
Little Marneham continued till Elizabeth, the daughter and heir of Sir George
Chaworth, was married to Sir Anthony Copes, son of William, with which family
it still continues.

Sir Thomas Chaworth had a Market every Thursday, and a yearly fair of two
days, viz. the Eve and day of the decollation of Saint John Baptist, granted 22
Mar. 24 H. 6. Chapter 24 H. 6. n. 9. m. 11.
at Marneham Chaworth, with license to impark two hundred Acres of Land and
Wood of his Demesne at Wiverton, and free warren there.

John de Lessington about 41 H. 3. Es^. 41 H. 3. n. 12.
and after him his brother and heir, Henry de Lessington Bishop of Lincoln, 42
H. 3 died seized of the fourth part of a Knights Fee in Marneham, Es^. 42 H. 3.
n. 7.
held of Richard de Weston for a pound of Pepper yearly; Richard de Marcham,
and William de Sutton, were found the heirs of the said Bishop.

Robert de Markham (son of Richard) 17 E. 1. Esc. 17 E. 1. n. 24.
left a Capital Mess. seven Bovats of Land in bondage, etc. in this Marneham,
held by the service of the eighth part of a Knights Fee, and one pound of
Pepper, of Richard de Weston, to his three daughters and heirs, Cecilia wife of
John de Bray, then aged thirty years, Bertha wife of William Lungevillers, and
Agnes of William de Sanctacruce, with Tuxford, and the rest of his share of the
Lord Lexingtons Lands. This parcel I suppose came to the family of Willughby of
Wollaton afterward. Richard Byngham, and Margaret his wife, (the Widow of Hugh
Willoughby) 31 H. 6. Trin. 31 H. 6. to. 454.
suffered a recovery of eight Mess. eight Bovats of Land, eight Acres of Meadow,
and four of Pasture, with the Appurtenances in North Marneham, South Marneham,
Skegby, and Sutton upon Trent, as they did at that time of diverse other Lands
belonging to that family.

Mo^. Angl. vss. 2. p. 532.
John the Constable of Chester, is said to have given this Church to the
Templers.

The Rectory and disposition of the Vicarage of Marneham late belonging to the
Preceptory of Egle in Lincolneshire, parcel of the possessions of the Priory of
Saint John's of Jerusalem, was granted 20 June, 36 H. 8. Pat. 36 H. 8. par. 12.
to Thomas Babington, and John Hide, and all Lands, Medows, etc. to the Rectory
belonging, then in the tenure of Andrew Norwell, Esquire.

Queen- Elizabeth granted it 5 Aug. 33 Eliz. Pat. 33 Eliz. ^ar. 1^.
Anthony Babington of Kinston being Attaint, to Peter Wilcox, and William Wyn,
Gent. together with the reversions of that Manor, and a Mess. in Aldesworth,
and some other Lands of the said Anthony.

The owners of Marneham in 1612. are said to be Sir William Cope, Knight, Adam
Nicholson, Lib. libere ten.
John Harrison, and John Hanson.

The Vicarage of Marneham was 10l. when the Bailiff of Egle was Patron; Ms^.
I.M.
it is now 8l. 9s. 2d. value in the Kings Books, and Sir Anthony Cope Patron.

Fledborough. Fladburge.
THis Manor was Godeva's the famous Countess of Earl Leuric of Mercia, and by
them given with Newark, (as in that place is shown) in the time of Edward the
Confessor to the Church of Stow in Lincolneshire.

The Book of Doomsday shows that Godeva the Countess, for her Manor in
Flodburg, answered the Dane-geld (or public Tax) for one Car. and three
Bovats. The Land then being certified to be sufficient for four Plows, (or four
Car.) There after the Conquest Nigellus the Man or Tenent of the Bishop of
Lincoln whose Fee it then was) had two Car. and an half, Lib. Dooms.
and sixteen Vill. five Sochm. on one Bov. of Land, having five Car. There were
five Plows (or Car.) There was then a Priest and a Church, and one Mill 12d.
Pasture wood one leu. long, and half one broad. In the Confessors time it was
8l. when the survey was made in the Conquerours but 5l. value. It had Soc in
Normentune, and in Estoches, and in Doomsday Book is accounted in Berndeslaw
Wapentak.

Nigellus de Fleburg held of the Bishop of Lincoln three Knights Fees. Lib.
Rubr.
Nigellus de Flaburg 22 H. 2. P^p. 22 H. 2.
gave account of x. Marks of the Amercements of the forest.

Nigellus de Lysurs held of the Bishop of Lincoln in Normanton, Fletburgh,
Test. de Nev.
Stokum and Darnethorp, three Knights Fees of the old Feoffment.

John de Leysures 19 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Pasch. 19 E. 1. to. 10.
impleaded Peter de Warkerley, Bailiff of the Bishop of Lincoln, and many
others, for taking many of his goods at Fledburgh; who pleaded that as Bailiff
of the said Bishop he seized the said Manor into the Bishops hands as chief
Lord, after the death of Nigellus de Lysures who was his Tenent, for that Alice
the wife of the said Nigellus, was thought to be with child.

John de Liseus, 14 E. 3. (...). 14 E. 3. ^. 4^.
had view of Frankpledge granted in Fledburgh; and 15 E. 3. (...). 15 E. 3. ^.
5.
Free Warren there and in Woodcotes; and 16 E. 3. (...). 1^ E. 3. (...).
18 Iun. all manner of liberties of a Leer Infaengethef, (...). 16 E. 3. n. 3.
and Outfangenthef, etc. He Founded a Chantry, 17 E. 3. E^c. 17 E. 3. (...).
in the Church of Fledburg, to which he gave one Mess. three Bov. of Land; and
afterward King Edward the third being then in the parts of Normandy in the
twentieth year of his Reign, Pat. 1^ E. 3. par. ^0. n. 31. (...). Rot. p.
(...). 20 E. ^ n. 13.
he obtained license dated 6 Nov. to appropriate the Church of Fledburgh, to
certain Chaplains for that purpose.

John de Lyseux Lord of Fledburgh, Ex Autog. pen. Rob. Atkinson de Newark, Genesis
34 E. 3. had to wife Isabella, by whom he had a son called James de Lyseus,
who, 38 E. 3. had to wife Maud, as in Brodholme is shown, who it seems had no
issue Male, because this Manor, Ib.
and other Lands then settled, came to the Bassets, there mentioned to be of
Normanton.

William Basset the elder, Ib.
6 R. 2. is styled Lord of Fledburgh, on whose Seals are Three Pales, and a
Canton Varry. His wife Margaret, 11 H. 4. was a widow. Ib.


Richard Stanhope, Knight, 10 H. 6. Claus. 10 H. 6. m. 17.
granted to William Basset, Esquire, son and heir of Thomas Richardus Basset de
Normanton- Willielmus Basset, senior, 6 R. 2.-Marg. relict. 11 H. 4. Thom.
Bas^et- Willielmus Basset defunct-20 H. 6.-Katherina sor. Ric. Stanhope-....
Tunstall mar. 2. Thom. Basset aet. 34.17 E. 4.-Margeria fill. Will. Mering.
Richardus Basset, miles-Elizab. fill. Joh. Dunham, Ar. Johannes, Bas^et. ob. 20
Maii, 36 H. 8.-Agnes fill. Tho. Dom. Burgh, 21 H. 8. Edwardus Basset ob. 22
Eliz.-....-Eliz. fill. Georgii Lassels ux. 2. Johannes Basset-Anna fill. Fran.
Rodes. Clinton. Henr. Edw.


Willielmus Basset de Muskham- Katii.



.... Basset- Richardus Basset, 38 E. 3.


Basset, a certain yearly Rent of 12l. to be perceived out of the Manor of
Fledburgh, and his Lands in Starnethorpe, Normanton, Woodcotes, Est Drayton,
Dunham, and Stokhum, which lately were the said Tho. Bassets. Will. Basset, ^.
m. 18.
son of Thomas Basset of Fledburgh, 10 H 6. released to Sir Richard Stanhope,
Knight, and his heirs, all his right in his Manor of Fledburgh, and Advowson
of that Church, and all his Lands, Tenements, Rents, etc. in Fledburgh,
Starnethorpe, Normanton, Woodcotes, Est Drayton, Dunham, and Stokhum in this
County, Bernangle, Sutton, and Wilmincote in Warwickshire. A^i^. ^^^wic. p. ^^4.
Katherin, the relict of William Basset of Fledburgh, demised Newhall, a member
of Sutton in Warwickshire, 10 H. 6. for twenty one years. Katherin Tunstall
(the sister of Richard Stanhope) who had interest here, and was dead, 17 E. 4.
I suppose was that relict of William Basset the younger; and Thomas Basset,
who, by the Inquisition, is found to be then thirty four years old, viz. 17 E.
4. I take to be son of William the younger.

This Thomas married Margery, the daughter of William Mering, E^ Coll. ^. E. Ar.
and Elizabeth his wife, daughter of Thomas Nevile of Rolleston, by whom he had
Sir Richard Basset his eldest son, and William Basset of Muskham, who had two
daughters, Katherin, the wife of Guy Fairfax, and after of Ed. Bussy, which Guy
had by her Thomas Fairfax, who married the daughter of Ed. Thurland, Esquire;
the other daughter of the said William Basset was married to Thomas Poutrell,
and brought him Frances the wife of John Dethick, Besides these two sons the
said Thomas Basset had Edward a Clergyman, and several daughters, one married
to William Beaumont of Cole Orton, and Katherin to Thomas Sutton of Averham.

Richard Basset, Knight, had to wife Elizabeth, daughter of John Dunham, and by
her had John Basset, who married Agnes, daughter of Thomas Lord Burgh, and died
20 of May, Ex Inq. pen. R. Atkinson, Genesis
36 H. 8. leaving Edward his son and heir above twelve years old. He held the
Manors of Adlingflet in Yorkshire, Saxelby in Lincolnshire, Fledburgh, and
Normanton, and Lands in Fledburgh, Normanton, Woodcotes, Stokam, Sterthorp, Est
Drayton, South Clifton, and North Clifton, and Lands, viz. fourteen Acres in
Ragnell and Darleton, and the Manor of Skegby, and Normanton, Mess. Lands and
Tenements in Welley and Grimston. Edward died 22 Eliz. and left John, Clinton,
Henry, Edward, and daughters. John married Anne, the daughter of Francis Rodes,
and after he had sold all the rest, sold Fledborough to the Feoffees of the
then Earl of Shrowsbury in the beginning of King James B.
his Reign, since when this goodly Manor came to the possession of Robert Earl
of Kingston, and now remains to the Right Honorable Henry Marquess of
Dorchester his son and heir.

The owners of Fledbrough, Kinshah, Woodcotes, Lib. libere ten.
and Normanton, 1612. are said to be John Basset, Esquire, William Reason of
Askham, Gent. Augustine Earl, Esquire, Rutland Mollineux of West Markham,
George Stowe, Edward Mercer, Hersy Lassells, Gent.

The Rectory of Fledburgh was 10l. and Mr. Basset Patron: Mss. I. M.
It Is now 9l. 7s. 6d. value in the Kings Books, ^^d the Marquess of Dorchester
Patron.

Skegby. Scacheby. And Woodcotes. And Strathaw.
HEre in Scacheby before the Normans were Masters, Alwold and Vlchel for their
Manors had Land sufficient for two Plows and an half, Lib. Dooms.
or two Car.. And paid in the Assessment for the Dane-geld for one Car. There
afterward two Men or Tenants of Roger de Buslies (whose Fee it was) had in
Demesne three Car. seven Vill. two Board, having three Car. There was sixteen
Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood half a leu. long, three qu. broad. In Edward the
Confessors time it was 48s. in William the Conquerours 40s. value. There was
Soc in Sudtone and Normentune.

John (or Robert) de Avill, and John de Nuvelors, Test. de Nev.
held of the Countess of Ewe one Knights Fee of the old Feoffment; they held
also one Fee of Thomas Fitz-William, and of the Countess of the new, in Skegby,
because they took it with the marriage of the sisters of the said- Thomas.

John de Lessington about 41 H. 3. Esc. 41 H. 3. n. 12.
held sixty Acres of Land in Strathaw of Matilda de Lovetot, and sixty in
Skeghawe of John de Eyvill. This part descended with Tuxford, as in that place
may be seen, through Marcham, Lungevillers, and Mallovell, to Sir Richard
Stanhope.

In 9 E. 2. the two Marnhams, Fledburgh, and Skegeby, answered for a whole
Villa, Nom. Vill.
the Lords then being Thomas de Chedworthe, John de Deivile, John de Lisours.
The Wapentach of Thurgerton and Lythe at that time returned a great many
considerable Townships together, to answer for a Villa, of which this is the
least, the other Hundreds did not so.

There are within this Parish and Township two small Hamlets, Skegby and
Woodcotes, B.
both heretofore Bassets Inheritance, and part of Fledborough. Woodcotes became
the Inheritance of Rutland Molyneux, a younger Grandchild of Sir Edmund
Molyneux the Judge. And Skegby is now the Inheritance of Ed. M^llish, Esquire,
by the gift of William Reason his Uncle.

Bassetlaw Hundred. Bassetlawe Wapentak, Bernedeslawe. Bersetlaw, etc. Doomsd.
Iul. 1. 1674.
THis Wapentac is as great as three of the former, and contains therefore three
Divisions, South Clay, North Clay, and Hatfeild, though not long since made so.
Oswardebec Soc was in Doomsday Book called a Wapentak, as hereafter will be
noted, containing all (or most of) the North Clay Division of this. In that
Record besides the names above, it is called Bernedsetlawe; and in Nomina
Villarum, Nom. Vill.
9 E. 2. Bersetelowe, the King being then Lord of it.

Robert de Perepont, Richard de Willughby, and Richard de Whatton, 12 E. 2.
Pat. 12 E. 2. par. 1. m. 19. in dorso.
were assigned Justices to enquire of the transgressions made by John de Lanum
one of the Kings Bailiffs of the Wapentach of Berteselowe.

SOUTH-CLAY Division.
Bildesthorp.
THis place in the great Survey returned in the time of King William the first,
is mentioned only as Soc to Rugford, which before that Kings time was the
Freehold of Vlf, as many other good Lordships were, which by the said King
William were made the Fee of Gislebert de Gand, as this also was, which paid
the Geld (or Tax) for two Car. The Land being found sufficient to employ six
Plows (or six Car.) There were thirteen Sochm. six Bordars, Lib. Dooms.
having six Car. and four Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood one leu. long, and one
qu. broad. There was Soc in Wirchenfeild as much as paid for one Car. to the
Geld. A Berue then waste, and now unknown.

Lib. feod. in Scac. Test. de Nev.
Galfr. Tregoz held the whole Town of Bildesthorpe in Demesne of the Soc of
Maunsfeld, of the gift of Robert de Greule with his daughter in Frank-marriage,
and did no Service there for it, nor any where else.

Sir John de Lowdham about 12 E. 2. Esc. 12 E. 2 n. 45.
died seized of six Mess. twelve Bovats of Land, four Acres of Wood in
Bildisthorp, which he held jointly (as he did many other Lands) with Alice his
wife, of Sir Henry de Beaumont by the Service of the sixteenth part of a
Knights Fee, leaving his son John de Lowdham his heir; with which Family this
Land, which afterward, viz. 29 H. 6. Esc. 29 H. 6.
had the reputation of a Manor, descended, as in Lowdham may be seen.

In a Recovery, 17 H. 7. Trin. 17 H. 7. rot. 426.
George Fitzhugh, Dean of Lincoln, and others claimed against Thomas Cheyne,
Knight, the Manors of Lowdham, Laxton, Bylsthorp, Carcolston, and Hikeling,
with the Appurtenances in those Towns, and twenty Mess. five hundred Acres, etc.

There was a Quare Impedit, 16 H. 8. Mich. 16 H. 8. rot. 630.
between Godfr. Folejambe, Knight, Quer. and Anne Cheyne, widow, and Thomas
Huddleston, concerning the Advowson of the Church of Billesthorp. The
Folejambes might possibly keep some interest here from Thomas Folejambe, who
married Margaret, the sister and coheir of Sir John Loudham, by whom they had
Walton in Darbyshire.

Lib. 2. sced. fol. 108.
Elizabeth Vaux, widow, 20 November. 3 and 4 Ph. and Mar. died seized of the
fore-recovered Lands, William Vaux Lord Harrowdon her son and heir being then
of full age. The Lord Vaux sold all these Lands which were Cheyneys, and this
is now the Inheritance of Sir Brian Broughton, Knight and Baronet, elder
brother of Peter Broughton of Lowdham.

Lib. libere ten.
Gilbert Roos of Laxton had it in 1612. or then abouts.

Lib. Mss. I. M.
The Rectory of Byllesthorp was 13l. when the Lady Chenie was Patroness: It Is
now 5l. 1s. 8d. value in the Kings Books, and Sir Brian Broughton Patron.

William Chapel, Lord Bishop of Cork and Ross in Ireland, spent some time
here with Gilbert Benet, Rector of this Church, during the Rebellion, and in it
lies buried.

Eykering. Doomsd. Echering.
THere was of the Soc of Maunsfeild the Kings ancient Demesne in Echering two
Car. which paid the Geld for two Bov.. Pasture Wood six qu. long, four broad.
And some little Soc to Laxton of Goisfrid de Alselins Fee, which paid the
Danegeld but for half a bovat, Leb. Dooms.
and was waste. Besides these parcels here were two Manors of the Fee of
Gislebert de Gand, whereof before the Conquest Ingulf had one, which paid the
public Tax for six Bov. The Land of it being two Car. There afterward William
the Man (or Tenant) of Gislebert had one Car. three Sochm. on three Bov. of
this Land, and two Vill. three Board. having two Car. There was a Church, and
three Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood six qu. long, four broad: In the Confessors
time this was 20s. value, when the Conqueror made his Survey 16^. The other
Manor Echebrand had, which also defended it self for six Bovats to the Geld.
The Land likewise two Car. This Manor Echebrand held of Gislebert still, and
had there one Car. and six Sochm. on four Bov. of Land, and two Vill. two Board.
having two Car.. There was three Acres of Meadow, and Pasture Wood, six qu.
long, and four broad, and value both before and after the Conquest like the
former, viz. 20s. before, and 16s. after.

King William the Conqueror was Uncle to this Gislebrict de Gaunt, who was
succeeded by his son Walter de Gaunt, Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p. 850.
Father of Gilbert the Earl of Lincoln, and of Robert.

Earl Gilberts daughter and heir Alice the Countess, was married to Simon de
St. Liz, who had no issue.

Gilbert de Gaunt gave to God and St. Mary of Rufford, Regist. de Ruff. p. 5. b.
and the Monks there serving God, in increase of his first Donation, his whole
Demesne in Eikering.

Earl Simon gave to that Monastery the right of Patronage, of the Mediety of
the Church of Eikryng.

Alice the Countess, daughter of Earl Gilbert de Gant, for the safety of her
Soul, and Earl Simons her Lord, confirmed to God, St. Mary, and the Monks of
Rufford, the whole right of Advowson and Patronage of half the Church of
Eykryng, which belonged to her Fee, as free and quiet as ever Walter de Gant
her Grandfather, and Gilbert de Gant her Father had it.

Robert de Gant certified that Earl Gilbert his brother in his own Court [
disrationavit] cleared his Demesne of Eikring of Purpresture, and in the same
Court gave it. all to the Abbey of Rufford.

William de Aubani granted to Gilebert and William, sons of Wulsi, Ib. p. 7.
ten Acres of Land in the Fields of Heicring, to be held of him and his heirs
by them and theirs, by the yearly Service of 12d. Mahuld de Sanliz, and William
her son were Witnesses (his own wife and son, as I suppose. Ib.
) Gilbert de Scheigebi gave to the Monks of Rufford ten Acres, which his Father
held of William de Albani, for which he only took of them a Mare and her
progeny, and they were to receive him into their Fraternity to sepulture when
he made his end, if it could be done regularly. Wiliam de Aubeni confirmed
this, and what they held of his Fee, for which he was to be concerned in all
the Benefits of the House, and when he died to have service performed for him
as for one of their own Monks.

Aeliz de Cundey, and Roger her son, gave to God and the Church of St. Mary at
Rufford two [ Mansuras] dwellings, containing two Acres, viz. that which was
Arnewies, and that which was Turchil Prats in Eicring; the same also gave Hugh
Bardulf, and Hugh his heir.

Wulsi, son of Wlf de Eycring, Ib. 10.
gave three Acres to the Monks of Rufford, which he held of them, which were of
the Demesne of Walter de Gaunt, and Earl Gilbert de Gaunt his son, belonging to
that part of the Demesne of Rufford which the Monks held, who for the love of
God, and brotherly Charity were to keep Godwin, son of the said Wulsi, till he
should be of age, in their House, and there if he would be made a Convert, he
should be received in the Order of Converts, but if he would not they should
keep the Land.

Gaufr. de Eycring for the health of his Soul, and his wifes, and for the
health (or safety) and honor of Walter his brother, whom the Monks of Rufford
took into their Congregation, gave them a certain parcel of Land between the
bounds of Eycring and of Cratele, called Elfe Lands of Eicring: to his Deed
(whereto he affixed the Seal of his Lord Gilbert de Gaunt Earl of Lincoln) his
own son Henry de Eycring was a Witness.

Roger de Meinill, Ib.
by the Consent of Agnes his wife, who was the daughter of Hosbert de Capella,
gave one Acre, and one Rode of Land.

Robert de Bella aqua, and Dionysia his wife, gave two Tofts, and Ranulf, son
of Ranulf Heleweis, who held them, with his Chattels and whole Sequel, saving
to them and their heirs, their other Servants. William de Bella aqua, son of
William de Bella aqua, released 2s. yearly, which he was wont to receive of the
said Monks for two Tofts in Eycring: and so did Thomas, son of William de Bella
aqua. Regist. de Ruff.


Sibylla, the daughter of Richard le Angevin, confirmed all the Land which her
Cousin William le Angevin (whose heir she was) gave to the Monastery of
Rufford, with his body, viz. the Homage and Service of Alan de Wilgebi, 3s. of
Silver yearly, and one Bovat which Roger de Lunde held, and the said Roger with
his Sequel, and one Toft which Matildis de Camera held, with the said Matildis
and hers, reserving to her self and her heirs a pound of Cummin seed at
Candlemas, and 12d. which ought to be paid to Sir Richard Foliot and his heirs,
for that Bovat which Roger de Lunde held: to her Deed were Witnesses Thomas de
Bella aqua, Robert le Vavasor, William le Botither, etc.

Robert Scarlett, and Beatrix his wife, in the presence of their Lord Roger de
Hayra, Ib. 12.
and of their Lady Matildis de Hereford his wife, and in their hands, before
the Alin^ot of Aicring by Wood and Wand [ lignum and baculum] rendered and
quit-claimed to the Monks of Rufford, those two Bovats of Land in Aicring,
which sometime had been Ougrims, the Forester of Walter de Gant, for which the
Monks gave him a She-Goat, and his wife a Cow, and granted them the Toft for
4d. per annum, during both their lives: to their Deed they also put to the Seal
of their said Lord Roger de Hayra, Cog de Karlaton was a Witness.

Ib. 10.
Raph de Hereford, son of William de Hereford, confirmed to the Monks of
Rufford all the Land which they had of his Fee, viz. nine Bovats which were
Angots, and afterward Osbert de Capella's and his son John's, and all the Land
called Brakyns^ort, and the Land called John's Wood, and a Bovat and an half
which was Herbert Scakells, and two Bovats which they had of the gift of
William Andegavensis, with the Toft adjoining, which were sometimes Reginalds,
the son of Wyot of Cratle, and a Toft which was sometimes Hermers, and Wyots
Wood which they had of the gift of Beat le Turner, daughter of Robert, son of
Wyot; and the Land which they had of the gift of Roger de la Hay, and of
William Scakell, or of any other of his Men of Eycring: Sir Robert de
Lexington, and Sir Henry his brother were Witnesses.

Raph de Hereford in the presence of the Court of Earl Simon, recognized and
rendered to the said Monks the Alms of Earl Gilbert, in the hand of Abbat Elias,
whereof Controversy had been between them. Robert, son of Raph de Hereford,
was to hold some of those Lands, during his life, by another agreement between
him and the Abbat.

William, son of Richard Foliot, demised to Walter de Winkeburne 10l. Land in
Ekeringe, for term of his life, which Walter afterward thereof infeoffed Hugh
de Birne and his heirs, and afterward the said William enfeoffed thereof
Walter de Stirkeley, and Alice his wife, and their heirs, who, 10 E. 1. Pl. de
Banc. Mich. 10 E. 1. to. 14.
recovered their seisin accordingly, the Jury finding, as before is said, that
Walter de Winkeburne had but Estate for life.

Henry de Eykring held a whole Knights Fee here. Test. de Nev.
And the Abbat of Rufford the fourth part of one. William de Sutton held the
twentieth part of a Fee of Gilbert de Gaunt in Eykring.

There was an agreement made in the year 1242. the day before the Ides of May,
Regist. de Ruff. p. 13.
between Gaufr. the Abbat of Rufford and the Covent on the one part, and
William de Sutton, and Matilda his wife, on the other, upon a Controversy
concerning the common Wood of Eykring, viz. the Abbat and Covent granted to the
said William de Sutton, and Matilda and their heirs, all that Essart which the
said William had made on the West part of the Wood called the Common Wood, and
abutted on the Essart toward the South which Raph de Hereforth gave to Rodland
de Sutton, Father of the said William, saving to the said Monks Common of
Pasture, after the Corn and Hay should be carried away; to whom the said
William and his wife granted another portion of Land, with the Wood therein
growing upon the like terms. But the whole Wood between the said Lands, with
the Land in which it stood, even to the bounds of Winkeburne, was to be equally
Common to the Monastery, and the said William and Maud, and their heirs, and
each party was to have their proper Forester, and nothing to be taken without
the consent and view of the other party, who was to have Tree for Tree, etc.

Robert de Sutton, son of William, 2 E. 1. Esc. 2 E. 1. n. 17.
left his son Richard eight years old, his heir of this Manor, Warsop, and in
Tuxford, etc. as in Sutton is said. Richard de Sutton, 34 E. 1. Chapter 34 E. 1. m.
20.
had Free Warren granted at Ekering.

The Jury, 16 E. 2. Esc. 16 E. 2. n. 72.
found that John de Somery held the Manors of Warsop and Ekering (except the
Advowson of the Churches of the said Towns) for term of life, of John de Sutton
(son of Richard) and that Margaret then aged thirty years, wife of the said
John de Sutton, and Ioane aged twenty nine, the wife of Thomas Bottetourt were
sisters and heirs of the said John de Somery (Lord Dudley) who had Lands in the
several Counties of Warwick, Stafford, Berks, Surry, Southampton, Worcester,
Buckingham, Rutland, and Huntington.

John, son of William de Ros of Hamlak, 3 E. 3. Rot. Quo War. 3 E. 3.
claimed Free Warren in all his Demesne Lands at Eykring, which, 12 E. 3. Esc.
12 E. 3. n. 41.
he left with Warsop to William de Roos his brother and heir.

This Manor descended with Orston, Warsop, and Sutton upon Trent, to Roger
Earl of Rutland, who sold it, and so it was the possession of Robert Earl of
Kingston, B.
and continues the inheritance of the Right Honorable the Marquess of
Dorchester his son.

That which the Monastery had came with Rufford from the Earl of Shrowsbury, by
descent, to the present Lord Hallifax.

In the year 1612. here seemed to be many Freeholders, viz. John Bristowe of
Malebeck, Lib. libe^e. ten.
Francis Bristowe of Morton, John Greaves of Beestrop, George Bilby, Richard
Tomson, George Reasby, Richard Foster, William Johnson, John Wright, Thomas
Tomson, Randolph Camme, William Bunbie, Richard Brimscall, Roland Birkett,
William Wager, Raph Frith, Thomas Cooper.

The Rectory of Eykering was twenty Marks when the Lord Ros was Patron: Mss. I.
M.
It Is now 9l. 16s. 0d. ob. value in the Kings Books, and the Lord Viscount
Hallifax Patron.

Welley. Grymston. Doomsd. Creilege. Cratela.
WElhay is not found in Doomsday Book, which shows that in Creilege before the
Conquest Rolf had a Manor which defended it self for two Car.. to the
Dane-geld. The Land being then accounted four Car. There after the Conquest
Gislebert de Gand had two Car. twenty two Vill. two Board. having nine Car. and
twenty six Acres of Meadow, Lib. Dooms.
Pasture Wood half a leu. long, and so much broad. In King Edward the
Confessors time this was 6l. when King William made his great Survey the value
was but 3l.

Reg. de Ruff. p. 1.
Gilbert de Gaunt Earl of Lincoln gave this Cratela or Cartela to the
Monastery of Rufford, which he Founded, which gift King Stephen confirmed, and
King Henry the second, and so did Rohesia the Countess his wife, sister of
Roger Earl of Clare, reserving to her self the Service of Hugh, son of Raph,
concerning the exchange which Raph, son of Remigius, his Father and he took of
Earl Gilbert her Lord in Torp by Schendelbi, and in Barton (on Humber) one Car.
of Land, for which grant the Monks gave her eight Marks of Silver; Witnesses
were Roger de Clara Earl of Hereford, Alan de Perci, etc.

Aliz the Countess, and Earl Simon her husband also confirmed the exchange
which was perfected in the Court of Earl Simon at Foudringhei (now also become
the possession of the Lord Halifax) held in the year of our Lord 1174. when the
said Hugh, Ib. 8.
and Raph his brother, sons of Raph, son of Remigius, granted and confirmed to
the Monks of Rufford all that Donation which G. de Gant their Lord made of
Cratela his Grange, with the Appurtenances, for which they had not only the
Land in Thorp before mentioned, and the Carucat in Barton; but the Monks gave
them thirty Marks of Silver, and one hundred and twenty Lambs and a Palfrey:
Witnesses were the Earl Albric de Dammartin, Philip de Kima (the Steward)
William Malduit, Fulc de Lisures, Gaufr. Riddel, Richard de Pec, etc.

Agnes, the wife of Gaufr. de Eicring, gave to those Monks four Bov. in
Cratele, which were of her marriage, reserving to her self and her heirs, half
a Mark of Silver yearly: to her grant she affixed the Seal of the Chapter of
Southwell: her son Henry de Eicring confirmed her gift, for which the Monks
gave him a Mark of Silver, and two Acherser of wheat.

Ib. 7.
Raph, son of Remigius, it seems held of Hugh de Muscam in Cratele Lands for
his life, who also confirmed them to Rufford. Raph himself gave in perpetual
Alms to that Monastery the Land which he had tilled between the waters of
Hugeles and Fulfit, reserving only Common there, as the Monks had: The
Witnesses were Edri, Turchill, Remigius, Hucca, Gamell, Chig. William, Vlchill,
with others.

William de Amundevill also released to the Abbey of Rufford his right and claim
in Cratela, Ib.
as Earl Gilbert had given it, for which he was received into the Fraternity of
the House; and when he should die, the Monks were to do for him as for one of
themselves, and he had thirty Marks of Silver, and ten Cows, but he received
only ten Marks, and the ten Cows, till he should procure the said Hugh, son of
Raph, to come into the Court of Earl Simon to perfect the forementioned
exchange, which he did, as before is noted, else he should have given back both
his Money and Kine.

The Abbat of Rutford, 9 Ioh. accounted for ten Marks for license to make
houses, Pip. 9 Ioh.
and set down Hedges on his Land near Welhag, upon the great way to defend his
Wood, which the Men of Welhag were wont to steal, yet so as he should not stop
the Kings Highway.

The Township of Welhah, 11 Ioh. gave account of twenty Marks for throwing down
the Houses of the Monks of Rucford. Pip. 11 Ioh.


Wellhagh it is likely was in the great Survey of King William involved in
Cratela, though it has usually gone with Grymeston, of which I find part was
Soc to Maunsfeld the Kings great Manor, viz. two Car. which paid the Geld for
half a Car. and four Bov. It was a Beru, Lib. Dooms.
and the King had in Grymeston two Car. eight Vill. one Board. having..... The
King had also a Manor in Grymeston rated to the Geld at four Bov. of Land. The
Land two Car. (It was, or had) a Beru in Maunesfeld* There three Sochm. three
Board. had two Car. two Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood half a leu. long, four qu.
broad. Soc of this Manor in Grimston one Bov. ^. to the Geld, the Land two
Bov. There two Sochm. had half a Car. There was Soc also in Schidrintune, in
Wilgebi, and Walesby, in Besthorpe, and Carleton, and in Franesfeild.

There was an Assize in the time of King John between the Abbat of Rufford, and
William, Mich... Ioh. to. 10 in dorso.
son of Robert, and others, concerning Common of Pasture in Grymston and
Wellehagh, etc. The Abbat pleaded that they could not claim nor have any Common
of Pasture in the Pasture of the said Abbat, nor he in theirs, because the said
Pastures were of diverse Baronies (or Lordships) viz. of the Barony of Robert de
Cundy, and the Barony of Gilbert de Gaunt, and that bounds were made between
them, that neither Barony could have Common in the other; and produced the
Letters of King John, which testified that he gave the Monks of Rufford license
to erect a Bank between their Wood of Besehall, and the Town of Welhagh, and
between the Ditch or Bank and the Town of Welhagh to build as many Houses as
they pleased for their Men to lodge in, to keep their Wood; and further the
Abbat said that it was otherwise pleaded between them before Hugh de Nevill,
and Simon de Pateshull, and their fellows concerning the same Commons; and that
they then fell into the Kings hands, and then were adjudged to pay the Abbat
damage, etc. and the said Men pleaded, That it never was before the said
Justices, and thereupon put themselves upon the Jury.

Henry de Say, 1 H. 3. Claus. 1 H. 3. m. 12.
had the Manor of Grimston, which was Robert Bardolfs as long, etc. Howbeit I
take the Family of Foliot to have had it long before.

Reg. Ruff. 6.
Simon de St. Liz, the Earl, confirmed to the Monastery of Rufford two Bov.. in
Holme, which Elias Foliot gave, which Hugh and Swane held.

Jordan Foliot, 13 H. 3. Rot. pip. 13 H. 3.
gave account of five Marks because he was not protected. Richard Foliot, 36 H.
3. Chapter 36 H. 3. m. 23.
had Free Warren in Grimston, and 48 H. 3. Pat. 48 H. 3. m. 63.
had power to Embattel the dwelling House of his Manor of Grimeston; in 52 H.
3. Chapter 52 H. 3. m. 1.
he had Market and Fair at Wellehagh.

In the year 1290. Richard Foliot, Knight, remitted to the Abbat of Rufford all
complaints and exactions, Reg. de Ruff. p. 12.
which he had against the Monks, so that no body should trouble them in his
name; and he promised them on his Military Faith, that he would procure Sir
Jordan his son to confirm the Confirmation he made of Tenements in Welhai, if
possibly he could. The Jury, 27 E. 1. Esc. 27 E. 1. n. 44, and 49.
found that Richard Foliot held the Castle of Horeston for his life, and
likewise held of his son Jordan, who was his heir, the Manor of Grimston, and
Welhawe, and Hamlet of Besthorpe, with the Soc of Grimston, and Members, and
that Jordan was above fifty years old, and died within five weeks of his
Father, leaving his wife Margery behind him, and his son and heir Richard
Foliot then about fifteen years old, and that he had Lands in several Counties,
Yorkshire, Norf. etc.

Margaret Foliot 4 E. 3. Claus. 4 E. 3. m. 39. and 41.
had Market and Fair in Wellehagh. The Jury, 4 E. 3. Esc. 4 E. 3. n. 14.
found that Margery Foliot held when she died the Manor of Grymeston, of the
inheritance of Margery, and Margaret, daughters of Richard Folioth, of Thomas
de Thornhaw, as of his Manor of Thornhaws, by the service of one Knights Fee;
and that Margery aged then seventeen years, the wife of Hugh de Hastings, and
Margaret sixteen, the wife of John de Camoys, daughters of Richard Foliot, were
then her heirs; and that there was at Welhawe, stallage of the Market and Fair
on Saint Swithuns day there, valued at 40s. yearly.

Hugh de Hastings 21 E. 3. Esc. 21 E. 3. n. 52.
was found heir of his Father Hugh de Hastings, who held the Manor of Grimston.

An. who had been wife of Sir Hugh de Hastings, Knight, (and of Thomas Lord
Morley) left her son Edward Hastings, Knight, 5 H. 6. Esc. 5 H. 6. n. 52.
her heir, and above forty four years of age.

John, son of Edward Lord Hastings and Stotevile, Knight, 14 H. 6. Claus. 14 H.
6. m. 7.
released to Robert Clifton, Knight, and others, and their heirs, his right in
the Manor of Grimston, and Township of Welhawe, and in other Manors in
Yorkshire, Norf. and Suff. By virtue of that Feoffment (which it seems Edward
had made before) John Hastings, Esquire, 16 H. 6. Esc. 16 H. 6. n. 34.
was found heir of his Father the said Sir Edward.

Hugh Hastings, Knight, made his Will 14 December. 32 H. 8. which was proved 9
Febr. following, Alenger 22.
viz. 1540. whereby it appears that he had Lands in Elsing, and Wesenham in
Norfolk; in Fenwyk, Norton, Mosseley, Smeton, South Caves, Snayth, Pollington,
Askerne, Elmeshall, Thorpe in Balne, Barneby upon Don, Cusseworth, and Bramwick
in Yorkshire, Elias Foliot- Jordanus Foliot, 13 H. 3.- Richardus Foliot, miles-
Jordanus Foliot-Margeria superst. 27 E. 1. Richardus Foliot aet. 15. an. 27 E.
1.- Margeria aet. 17. 4 E. 3.-Hugo de Hastings. Johannes de Hastings, 21 E. 3.
Hugo de Hastings, miles-Anna-Thom. Dom. Morley mar. 2. Edward. de Hastings,
miles, Dom. Hastings and Stoteville, aet. 44. and ampl. 5 H. 6.- Johannes
Hastings, 16 H. 6.- Hugo Hastings, miles-Katherina. Johannes Hastings 1540.
Anna. Elizab.
Martinus.



Joh. Camoys-Margareta aet. 16. 4 E. 3.





the Manors of Wellowe, and Grimston in this Country, and in Whitley, etc. his
Wifes name was Catherin, he had a son called John, and two daughters, Agnes and
Elizabeth, and a brother named Martin Hastings, a Nephew called Laurence, and
Hugh, and William Hastings his Cousins.

The Jury, in Assize 10 E. 3. Pl. de Sanc. Mich. 10 E. 3. rot. 18.
found that John Enneston dyed seized of thirteen Mess. seven Tofts, thirteen
Stalls, fourscore and ten Acres of Land, seven of Meadow, and 3s. 10d. Rent in
Grimston, and Knesale, and that he had two Wives, viz. Maud, on whom he begot
Agnes, the wife of John in the Lane of Eckering, and Alice the second wife, on
whom he begot Alice, Joan, and Margaret, which two latter dying without issue,
Alice recovered their purparts as heir of the whole blood.

There was a recovery 8 H. 8. Trin. 8 H. 8. rot. 415.
wherein William Basset, Esquire, Richard Basset, Knight, Thomas Sutton,
Knight, Edward Basset, Clark, and John Hall, Clerk, claimed against Richard
Clark, Edward Beresford, and William Robertson, the Manor of Grimston, with
the Appurtenances; and three Mess. fourteen Tofts, two hundred Acres of Land,
twenty of Meadow, and 19s. 8d. Rent with the Appurtenances in Grimston and
Welhagh, who called to warrant Richard Stanhope, Esquire, son and heir of
Edward Stanhope, Knight.

Roger Norton, and Francis Gardener, 16 Eliz. Trin. 16 Eliz. to. 144.
claimed against Rowland Tailor, one Mess. one Garden, 46 Acres of Land, five
of Meadow, 7. of Pasture with the Appurt. in Welley and Grimston, who called
Edward Basset, Esquire.

The freeholders in Welley and Ampton, 1612. are these: Lib. libere ten.
Michael Clarkson of Kirton, Gent. James Bacon of Welley, Gent. Hugh Tailor,
Seth Batcheler, John Lownd, Thomas Lownd, Simon Grange, Stephen Camme, Richard
Cook, John Tailor, Thomas Kitchen, Robert Gibson, Richard Birket, Henry
Vauntinge, Richard Radford, William Walkeden, William Smith, Miles Cosson, John
Fresure, Widow Stanfeild, Robert Gillowe of Ampton.

Almton. Ampton. Dooms. Almentune.
THis Township in the Book of Doomsday is represented to be Soc to several
other Manors of differing places and Lordships. Here was Sok to the Kings
great Manor of Maunsfeld one Bov.. for the Geld; Lib. Dooms.
to Lexington of the Fee of Goisfrid de Alselin, two Bov. ad Geldam, that was
then waste; to Oschinton, of Raph de Burons Fee, as much as answered the Geld
for three Bov. The Land was one Car. There two Board. had one Car. and to
Chenesale, and Cheversale, of the Fee of Gislobert de Gand, one Bov. ad Geldam.
The Land two Bov. There two Sochm. one Board. had two Car.

This last parcel with Knesale, belonged to the Constables of Chester, and
Anneyssa the daughter of William, Constable of Chester, Regist. de Ruff. p. 17.
gave to the Church of Saint Mary of Ruchford, and the brethren there living,
all the Land she had in Helmetun, viz. two Bov. and an half in perpetual Alms
for the health (or safety) of her Soul, her Fathers and Mothers, and Children,
and also for the Soul of Eustace (son of or) Fitz-Iohn her Lord, who in his
life time promised it; in recognition (or acknowledgment) of this gift she
received of the brethren ten and eight Marks.

John the Constable of Chester, Ib.
for the health of his Soul, and of his Wife and Children, and of his Father,
and of his Grandfather Eustace, and all his Ancestors, gave and confirmed to
God, Saint Mary, and the Monks of Ruford, all the Land which he had in Elmetun,
reserving to himself and his heirs xs. per annum, and foreign service, except
the enemy of the King, (and in time of War) which he and his heirs would
acquit, and the Land defended it self against foreign service, for two Bovats
and an half, and if it should happen that he could not warrant it to them, they
should have all the Cattle and whatever was builded upon it safe, and over and
above forty Marks of Silver for the exchange of that Land, within half a year
before they should be disseized of the Land, for which concession they gave him
twenty Marks of Silver, in the beginning of that agreement.

Adelecia his wife confirmed it as in Kneesale is said, so did Roger the
Constable, son of John, Ib.
Constable of Chester, and John de Laci Earl of Lincoln, and Constable of
Chester, son of Roger, who also released to the Monks suit of Court for ten
Bovats, which they held of him in Almeton, and for the Lands which Robert de
Lexington gave them in Buketon.

Henry de Lasci Earl of Lincoln, and Constable of Chester, confirmed the gift
of John, Ib. 18.
the Constable, his Ancestor, reserving the 10s. per an. and the small foreign
service, viz. aid of the Sheriff and the like, yet to be free from scutage, and
all services and exactions, that by reason of scutage might be exacted of those
Tenements, by him or his heirs for ever.

There was a Fine levied at Nottingham, the day after Saint John Baptist, 16 H.
3. between Galfr. de Almeton, and Alice his wife, Richard Friday, and Letice
his wife, and Hugh Freman, and Ioane his wife, Petents, and Simon, Abbat of
Rufford, Tenent of ten Bovats of Land in Almeton, which they released to him
and his successors. Alice daughter of Walter Freman of Kneshale, confirmed to
the Monks of Rufford, all her right and claim which she had or should have in
ten Bovats of Land, with the Appurtenances in Almeton, which she claimed by a
Writ of right against the Abbat and Monks in the Court of John Constable of
Chester. In whose Court at Bukton the Saturday after the Ascension, 41 H. 3.
she (as all the other forenamed parties likewise did) swore upon the holy
(Gospels,) and bound their Lands, and goods, in the sum of 100l. a piece, to
submit to the Jurisdiction of the Archdeacon of Nottingham, without any appeal
or privilege of Court, to be compelled by Ecclesiastical censures to make the
security greater.

Hugh de Almeton, son of Alexander de Muscam, Ib. 23.
gave and confirmed to Hugh, his Nephew, son of Thomas de Muscham, six Bovats
of Land which he had and held in Fee in Almeton as his inheritance, paying
yearly to Sir Thomas de Muscham, his Nephew also, and his heirs, 3s. per annum.

Ib. 19.
Richard, son of Hugh de Muscamp, in Almeton exchanged Common of Pasture, with
the Monks, in a certain Close which they had on the North part of the Grange of
Almeton, and gave certain parcels, which Robert, son of Richard Muscham, and
after him Margery his wife confirmed. This Richard de Muschamp in the year
1263. agreed with the Abbat of Rufford concerning selling Oaks in Almton wood,
viz. he the said Richard to have twenty, and the Abbat for twenty four Bovats
which he had, a hundred forty and ten, and neither party at that time to have
any more, nor afterward without mutual consent, for the performance of which
agreement both parties submitted to the coercion of the Archdeacon of
Nottingham.

William, son of Robert de Almton, about 10 E. 2. begun to parcel it: at length
most or all of it came to the Monastery, as did also that of Raph de Burons Fee.

Hugh de Buron considering out of the reason given him of God, the life of this
sliding age to be short and troublesome, Regist. de Lent. p. 72.
and that he that gives to the poor of Christ lends to God, that day when
the Lady Albreda his wife was buried, for her Soul, his own, his Sons and
Daughters, and all his Ancestors, by the consent of his sons, Hugh and Roger,
gave to the Church of the holy Trinity at Lenton, his Land of Almeton, which
gift he and his beloved sons laid on the greater Altar, in the presence of
Humfr. the Prior and the Covent of Brethren. Hugh Rosell gave to the brethren
of Ruford all the Land which he held in Elmeton, Regist. de Ruff. p. 18.
in Fee and Inheritance, by the consent of his Lord, Hugh de Burun, and Roger
his son, reserving 10s. at the feast of Saint John Baptist. Raph Rosell, son of
Hugh Rosell, confirmed to the Monks of Ruford, his whole Land of Halmeton, viz.
twelve Bovats, reserving 6s. to himself, and his heirs, at Midsummer, and 6s.
to the Prior of Lenton, at the feast of Saint Martin, in Winter: but there was
a Fine levied in the Kings Court at Doncaster, the Wednesday after the Feast of
Saint Margaret, 4 Ioh. between Peter Prior of Lenton, and Ernis Abbat of
Rufford, who called Raph Rosell to warrant the twelve Bovats in Elmeton, for
which he and his heirs were to have but 4^. per annum, and the Prior of Lenton
6s. who had also thirty five Marks of Silver of the Abbat for the bargain. Raph
released also afterward the 4s. Rent, and so most of this Township became the
possession of the Monastery of Rufford, and with it is become the inheritance
of the Lord Visc. Hallyfax.

Laxton. Lexington. And Morehouse.
TOchi before the Norman invasion had a Manor in Laxington, which discharged
it self to the public imposition or Geld of that time, for three Car. The Land
then being found to be six Car. There afterward Walter the Man (or Tenant) of
Goisfrid de Alselin (whose Fee King William made it) had one Car. 22. Vill.
seven Board. having five Car. five Servants, Lib. Dooms.
one Maid Servant, and forty Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood one leu. long, half a
leu. broad. In the Confessors time the value was 9l. in the Conquerours 6l. It
had Sok in Schidrington, Wilgebi, Walesbi, Echering, Almentune, Chenaptorpe,
Calneston, Besthorpe, and Carleton.

The Fees of this Goisfrid de Alselin were divided early, I suppose in the time
of H. 1, or sooner, between Raph de Alselin or Hanselin, and Robert de Calz
(perhaps son of this Walter before-named) which Robert was a witness to the
foundation Charter of Lenton, made by William Peverell in that Kings reign, and
had a son 5 Steph. Pip. 5 Step.
named Walter, whom I take to be Father of Robert de Canz, who sent his
Certificate to King H. 2. as other Barons did, 12 H. 2. which shows that he had
fifteen Knights Fees, Lib. Rubr.
for which he was to answer the King. Raph de Alselin had twenty five, as in
Shelford his chief seat is noted.

This place was the principal Mansion and Head of the Barony of Robert de Calz,
Mon. Ang. vol. 2. p. 534.
who as Anneis his mother did, gave something to the Knights Hospitallers of
Saint John's of Jerusalem. He left his wife a Widow, being fifty years old or
more, about 33 H. 2. she was daughter of Richard Basset, and sister of William,
Rot. de Dominabus pueris and puellis in Scace.
and had a d^ughter wife of Raph Fitz-Stephen, Chamberlain to King H. 2. who 6
R. 1. Pip. 6 R. 1.
gave account of 12l. 10s. for the Knights Fees of Robert de Calz, in the
Scutage for Redemption of that King.

Her name was Matildis de Cauz, Mon. Ang. vol. 1. p. 657.
and she had another Husband called Adam, son of (or Fitz) Peter, who it seems
5 R. 1. Pip. 5 R. 1. Ebor.
had a Duel with Simon de Lacells, and recovered twenty four Car. of Land in
Birkin in Yorkshire, of which place his posterity, and himself too, I suppose,
had their name.

Matildis de Cauz gave the Town of Ronstone (in Lincolneshire, Mon. Ang. vol.
2. p. 547.
in which County a good share of this Barony lay) with the Advowson of the
Church to the Knights Templars, and it belonged to the Preceptory of Temple
Bruer, (i. e. on the Heath) to which Robert de Everingham afterward gave and
confirmed that Manor. Her husband Adam Fitz-Peter, and she gave to God, and
Saint John, and the Monks of Pontefract, half the Mill of Stainburgh, to which
Deed Thomas Fitz-Peter, and Roger Fitz-Peter, his brothers, Walterus temp.
Will. 1.- Robertus de Calz temp. H. 1.- Walterus de Calz 5 Steph.-Anneis. Rob.
de Cauz, 12 H. 2.-... sor. Will. Basset fill. Ric. Basset aet. 50. 33 H. 2. Rad.
fill. Steph. Camerar. H. 2.-Matildis de Cauz-Adam fill. Petri de Birkin. Johannes
de Birkin-Joanna. Tho. de Birkin, 11 H. 3.-Joana-Hen. de Longcamp, 15 H. 3.
Rob. de Everingham, 15 H. 3.-Isabel. sor. and haer. Tho. Adam de Everingham ob.
9 E. 1.- Robertus de Everingham obiit 15 E. 1.- Robertus. Adam de Everingham
Chr. sen. ob. 15 E. 3.-....-Margareta ux. 2. Adae-Johannes de Eyvill mar. 1
Adam de Everingham Chr. ob. 8 Febr. 11 R. 2.-Joana fill. and haer. Joh. de
Eyvill. Willielmus de Everingham ob. vivente patre 43 E. 3.-Alicia fill. Joh.
Gray de Codnor. Robertus de Everingham fine prole. Katherina aet. 23.11 R.
2.-Joh. fill Tho. Etton, mil. 1 Milo Etton, miles- Fin. Hill. 13 H. 6.
Isabella 13 H. 6.-Joh. Roos. Robertus Roos. Elizab. fill. Willielmi Middleton,
mil. Willielmus Roos-Elianor fill. Christoph. Wainsford, mil. Humfr. Roos ob. 17
Jul. 13 H. 8.-Anna fill. Ric. Restwold-Margareta Linne ux. 2. de Southwyk Com.
Northampt. s. p. Willielmus Roos-Maria Eliot. Barnard. Roos de Egmanton.- Will.
Roos de Egmanton-Sara fill. and cohaer. Joh Samon de Tuxford. Sara Roos un.
haer. W. Roos de Egmanton.-Edm. Lacock S. Theol. Baccalaur. Roos Lacock ob. in
puerit. Eliz. fill. and coh. Ed. Lacock ux. J. Dickinson de Clayp. in Lincoln.
Debor. fill. and coh. Ed. Lacock and Sarae ux. ejus.-J. Ouseley Rectore de
Panfeld in Essex. Johannes Ouseley. Edmundus. Maria.




Franciscus Roos de Laxton aet. 15. 13 H. 8.-Elizab. fill. Tho. Scrimshire.
Petrus Roos-... fill. Jac. Harvey, mil.-Brigit. un. haer. Rob. Roos de mar. 2.
Ingmanthorp, ux. 2. Anna ux. Griff Markham, mil. Gilbert. Roos.-..Orrell-Pet.
Killegrew mil. mar. 2....ux...Thomas de Com. Essex.
Pet. Roos deKnesale.-Franc. fill....... Marshall. Gilb. Roos de Knesale ob.
1661.-Eliz. fill. August Hind de Laxton-More-house. Gilbert. Roos aet. 14.
1670. Pet. aet. 11. 1670. Maria. Franc. Troth.


Tho. Roos.-....... fill. Main waring-An. Pickston ux. 2. Ed. Petrus- Franc.
Roos.-Eliz. fill. Pet. Orell de Southcave Ebor. Joh. Roos de Laxto^.-Jan. fill.
Tho. East. de Carberton. Fr. Roos aet. 22. 1670. Joh. 15. Tho. 13. Pet. 8.
Eliz. 18. Mar. 16. Sara 12. Jana 6. an. aet.
Franc. Petrus. Valent.
Johan. Roos.-Eliz. Roos de Weston. Will. Roos de Laxton.-Anna-Grisilda
relict...... Cooper ux. 2. Joh. Roos aet. 8. 1666.


....ux. Fairfax de Gilling..... ux. Broughton..... ux. Stapleton.....ux.
Scrimshire de Norbury..... ux. Maxfeild..... ux. Whitmore.




Eliz. 11 H. 6.-Joh. Northwood. Margareta-Rob. Moresby. Anna-Robertus Rowcliff.
2 Ivo. 3 Willielmus. 4 Alexander.
Will. Elys mil.-Joana-Joh. de Waterton mar. 2.
Agnes fill. Joh. Lungvillers-Reginaldus de Everingham Chr. ob. 22 R. 2.- Joana.
Edm. de Everingham ob. 22 R. 2. in custodia Regis s. p. aet. 15.

Rob. Georg. Edm. Alex. Nicol.




Petrus. Rogerus. Willielmus. Robertus.

Aeliz.
Essulf- Petrus- Rad. fill. Steph. Camerar. H. 2.-Matildis de Cauz-Adam fill.
Petri de Birkin. Thom. Rogerus.

Rob. de Aivile- Robertus de Eivile- Robertus- Johannes de Eyvill 9 Joh.- Joh.
de Eyvill- Robertus de Dayville- Johannes de Eyville- Adam de Everingham Chr.
ob. 8 Febr. 11 R. 2.-Joana fill. and haer. Joh. de Eyvill.









and Robert his son, amongst the rest were Witnesses. He likewise gave and
confirmed to them half a Bovat in Fareburne. His son John for the health of his
own Soul, and of Ioane his wife, and for the safety of their bodies, gave and
confirmed to the said Monks thirteen Acres of Meadow in Smethall, which his said
Father gave, and two Oaks every year against Christmas in his wood of Byrkin,
and one Buck in his Park, in the Feast of Saint John before Port Latin, and
half the Mill of Stainburg, with the suit belonging to the moiety of the Mill.
Peter, and Roger, and William, his brothers, were witnesses amongst the rest to
his Deed.

The Land of Matilda de Calz, viz. Lessinton with the Appurtenances, was in the
Custody of Richard de Lessinton, who 7 Ioh. Pip. 7. Ioh.
gave account of 7l. 17s. 6d. of the Rent of Assize of Lessinton, of the term
of Saint Michael the year before, and of 43l. 0s. 4d. of the Rent of Assize
that year, and of 30l. 18s. 10d. of Corn of that Manor sold, and of 40l. of
Bacuns sold, and of 25. Marks of the Scutage of 12. Fees and an half, and for
8. Oxen bought, 100s. by the Kings writ. Richard de Lessinton, and Robert his
son for him, 9 Ioh. Pip. 9 Ioh.
accounted for 16l. Rent of Assize for half a year of Lessington, the Land of
Matilda de Cauz. Richard de Lessington 9 Ioh. Rot. pip. 9 Ioh.
ought two hundred Marks for having the Kings favor, and seisin of his Lands
whereof he was disseised by occasion of the custody of the Kings Forest, 30l.
and 15s. being computed to him, which Brian de Insula took of the Chattels of
the said Richard sold.

In 13 Ioh. Pip. 13 Ioh.
this was called the Barony of Lexington, whereof Brian de Insula for the
Scutage that year gave account the other was not yet in being, and Robert,
afterward Lord Lexington, son of Richard before-named, had his name from his
Ancestors residence, and holding Lands here of this family of Cauz: but the
most of his Land he purchased in other places, as in this Book may easily be
noted.

Fin. 4 H. 3. m. 3.
To this Barony of Cauz belonged the custody of the Forests in the Counties of
Not. and Derb. which Matildis de Cauz had by inheritance, and John Earl Morton
(afterward King) confirmed to her and her husband Raph Fitz-Stephen, and her
heirs, as in the Forest book is noted, and in that place may be recited more
particularly. It appears that in the beginning of the reign of H. 3. for a
small Fine the said Matildis had seisin of her Lands her self, Pip. 2 H. 3.
and in 4 H. 3. Pip. 4. H. 3.
that Matilda de Cauz ought fourscore Marks for having seisin of the custody of
the Forests of Not. and Derb. which belonged to her by right of inheritance.

The Sheriff 14 May, 8 H. 3. Fin. 8 H. 3. m. 6.
was commanded to take into the Kings hands all the Lands which were hers the
said Matildis Cauz, who had been the wife of Raph Fitz-Stephen, and was then
dead.

Ib.
John de Birkin 8 H. 3. the heir of Matildis de Cauz, having made Fine to the
King of three hundred Marks for his relief of the Lands which were hers, and
for having the custody of the Forests of Notss. and Derb. which concerned him
as his inheritance, did his homage, 25 May, to the King, who certified Robert
de Lexinton, etc.

Thomas de Birkin, son and heir of John de Birkine, 11 H. 3. Fin. 11 H. 3. m. 1.
made Fine of two hundred Marks. for having seisin of the Lands which were the
said John's, with the Bayliwik of the Forest of Shirewood, and 12 H. 3. Pip. 12
H. 3.
22 October. gave account of the two hundred Marks accordingly.

Robert de Everingham, and Isabell his wife, sister and heir of Thomas de
Birkin, 15 H. 3. Fin. 15 H. 3. m. 8.
made the like Fine of two hundred Marks for the same seisin, and did homage
November. 21. The Jury, 36 H. 3. Esc. 36 H 3. n. 62.
said that Isabell de Everingham, and her Ancestors had the custody of the
Forest of Shirwode; and for that, the foreign service of twelve Knights Fees
and an half was released to her Ancestors by the Kings Ancestors. Her son Adam
de Everingham, had the suit with William Burdolf, mentioned in Shelford, for
the Advowson of that Priory.

The Jury, 9 E. 1. Esc. 9 E. 1. n. 5.
said that Adam de Everingham held when he died of the King in Capite the
moiety of the Barony of Shelford, where he had a free Court from 3. weeks to 3.
weeks, the Custody of Shirewood, this Manor, that of North Leverton, and
Gedling, and that Robert de Everingham was his son and heir; who about 15 E. 1.
Esc. 15 E. 1. n. 28.
left all these matters to his son Adam; who 4 E. 2. Esc. 4 E. 2. n.
had an Ad quod Damnum returned for settling the Manor of Westburgh in
Lincolneshire, on Thomas de Suthwell, etc. By a Fine 7 E. 3. Fin. lev. Pasc. 7
E. 3.
he settled this Manor of Laxton on himself for life, and then to Adam de
Everingham his son, whom 15 E. 3. Esc. 15 E. 3. n. 38.
he left his heir. He had other sons Robert, Edmund, Alexander, and Nicolas.
This Adam de Everingham Chr. 33 E. 3. Esc. 33 E. 3. n. 50.
had an Ad quod Damnum returned concerning his settling 10l. and 9s. rent in
Gedling, Nottingham, Colewyke, Stoke Bardolf, Schelford, Neuton, and Carleton
by Gedling, and eight Marks, and 6s. 8d. Rent issuing out of the Lands and
Tenements of the said Adam in Gedling, on William his son, and Alice his wife
(daughter of John Gray of Godnor.) William it seems, 43 E. 3. Esc. 43 E. 3. n.
20.
died before his said Father, and so did Robert, son of this William; Adam died
8 Febr. 11 R. 2. Esc. 11 R. 2. n. 22.
his son Reginald de Everingham Chr. was his heir male, and then aged thirty
years; which Reginald by his wife Agnes, the daughter of John Lungvillers, Esc.
22 R. 2. n. 19. Fin. 22 R. 2. m. 14.
Lord of Hoghton upon Idell, had a great estate, but no issue by her; but by
another wife called Ioane, he had Edm. de Everingham, who died at 15. years of
age, in the Kings custody, without issue, so that Ioane, and Katherine, his
elder brother William de Everinghams daughters were his heirs, as they were
their Grandfathers, the said Adam, son of Adam, etc.

Ioane was married to Sir William Elys, who died at Saint Albans in his journey
toward Calis, and had a son by her called Robert; Ex Coll. St. Lo Kniveton; c.
147.
she after married John de Waterson. Catherin was wife of Sir John Etton, son
of Sir Thomas, which Sir John had several sons, Miles, Ivo, William, Alexander;
but this Manor descended to the four daughters and heirs of Sir Miles Etton,
who died before his father the said Sir John, who held this Manor of L^xton,
with the Advowson of the Church, and the Manors of Egmanton, and North
Leveeton, by the courtesy of England, after the death of his wife the said
Katherin, till 11 H. 6. Esc. 11 H. 6. n. ^9.
that he left it to his Grandchildren, Elizabeth the wife of John Northwood,
Isabell of John Roos, Margaret of Robert Moresby, and Anne of Robert Roucliffe.

AC. 130
The posterity of this John Roos got all, or most of this Manor by purchase or
otherwise; his sons name was Robert Roos, and he had to wife Elizabeth,
daughter of Sir William Midleton, and by her William Roos, who married Eleonor,
daughter of Sir Christopher Wainsford, who brought him Humfrey Roos, who for
his first wife, had Anne, daughter of Richard Restwold, and his second was
Margaret Linne of Southwyke in Northamptonshire; S. 16.
he died 17 July, 13 H. 8. leaving Francis Roos his son, by his first wife; his
heir, which Francis, by Elizabeth his wife, daughter of Thomas Scrimsal of
Morbery, in the County of York, had Peter Roos, who first married.... the
daughter of Sir James Harvey, Qu eresi non Norbury. in. Com. Staff.
by whom he had a daughter married to Sir Griffin Markham, and after to his
second wife had Brigit, the only heir of Robert Roos of Ingmanthorp, by whom he
had Gilbert and Peter. This woman after her husbands death married one Richard
Clark, and as the inhabitants say, by her own misfortunes and the wicked
unthriftiness of her son the said Gilbert Roos, the last Lord of Laxton of this
noble race, was reduced to so great poverty, that she gleaned Corn amongst
other poor people in Laxton Field. Peter Roos her husband, had a brother named
Thomas, of whom there are many Grandchildren yet alive, and six sisters
married, one to... Fairfax of Gifling, another to... Broughton, another to...
Stapleton, (named in Burton Iorz,) another to... Schrimshire of Norbury,
another to..... Maxfeild, another to... Whitmore. Gilbert Roos married.... the
daughter of... Orrell, afterward wife of Sir Peter Killegrew, and by her had
two daughters, one married to... Thomas of the County of Essex, who had part of
North Leverton with her, the other never married.

Peter Roos of Knesale, his brother, had to wife Frances, the daughter of...
Marshall, and by her four daughters, and a son, Gilbert Roos, who married
Elizabeth, the daughter of Augustine Hind of Laxton Morehouse, and died 1661.
and left issue, Gilbert, Peter, Mary, Frances and Troth.

There was a Quare impedit recovered, 13 E. 4. Mich. 13 E. 4. rot. 109.
by Richard Roos, Esquire, against Isabell Roos, Widow, Robert Roos, Esquire and
William Roos, Chaplain of the Advowson of the Church of Laxton.

The Earl of Kingston had the Manor of Laxton, which remains with his
posterity.

That Manor of Lexington which was held by, and gave name to the Lord
Lexingtons Ancestors, descended to his heirs, as in Tuxford, and other places
will be shown.

Sir Brian Broughton, Knight and Baronet, has I suppose all or most of it,
bought of the Lord Vaux, as Bildsthorp and Lowdham were, or perhaps of his
Kinsman Gilbert Roos.

B.
The Rectory of Laxton, was appropriated to the College of Jesus in Rotheram,
founded there by Thomaes Rotheram, sometime Bishop of Lincoln. There was a
Chantry in the Church of Laxton, to which Lands in Laxton did belong.

Near this Town lies a small Hamlet called Laxton Morehouse, where there was a
small Chapel and Lands which belonged to a Guild there. Laxton Morehouse is now
the inheritance of Augustine Hind, Gent. descended from one of that name,
Alderman of London, and Elizabeth his wife, after his decease married to Sir
John Lion, Alderman of London also; she was a Lee, as in Norwell may be noted;
she made her Will 10 Ian. 1566. which was proved 21 Ian. 1569. by which it
appears Henry Lee was her brother, and that by Augustine Hind she had four
sons, Roland, Austine, Edward and John, and two daughters, one married to
Edward Gresham, who had Richard, and the other to.... Dodsmore.

The owners of Laxton Town 1612. are said to be the Lord Vaux, Gilbert Roosse,
Esquire, Lib. libere ten.
Francis Rosse, Gent. Augustine Hynde, Thomas Chapel, Thomas Beedam, John
Shipton, John Samon, Richard Smith, Robert Grene, Rowland Tailor, Edward Snow,
Thomas Tailor.

The Vicarage of Laxton was 10l. when the College of Rotheram had the
Patronage, Mss. I. M.
it is now 11l. value in the Kings books, and William Peirpoint, Esquire, Patron.

In Laxton Church three old low cross legged Stone Tombs. Upon an Alabaster
grave Stone beyond an old Tomb is,

A Shield with 7. Mascles voyded, 3.3.1. and... 1398. cujus animae, etc. On a
Blew grave Stone in Brass is cut,

Hic jacet Dominus Rogerus Marcaunt, quondam Rector hujus ecclesiae, qui obijt
17. die December. An. Dom. 1438. On a kind of a Pew there is engraved a Shield
with five weeping eyes on it, and Robert Trafford, Vic. de Laxton, hoc fieri
fecit Anno Domini 1532.

All the Lions of Everingham (whereof there are diverse both cut and painted)
seem to be Chequey Arg. and Az. and not Varrey, as the opinion generally is
they ought to be. There is one upon the Breast of the man's effigies on an
Alabaster Tomb on the South side the Quire, and one imbost on a Shield of one
cross legged in a Stone Tomb, between two Wives, on the North side the Quire,
but the Image of that Wife on the South side is cut in Wood.

In the South West Window of the Church,

Gules a Lion Rampant Arg. with a File of three Labels, it should have been
Varry (or Cheq.) for Everingham, but the Colors are decayed, as they are in
Az. on a Bend. Arg. between 2. Cotises and 6. Lioncels Ramp. Or 3. Mullets Sab.
Boun Earl of Northampton.

Arg. a Cross Sarcele Or, formerly perhaps Gules.

Arg. a Chevron Gules.

Barry of six Arg. and Az. Gray of Codnor.

Sable a Bend between 6. crossecrosletts Arg. Longvillers.

Below on a flat Stone... 3. Waterbougets, Ros.

And Barry of 6. Gray.

And on the Wood-work of the Roof of the Body of the Church, 3. Waterbougets,
Ros.

In the East Window of the Choire,

Or, a Manch Gules, with a File of 3. Labels Arg. Hastings of Pembrok, which
also impales with Gules a Lion Ramp. Cheq. Arg. and Az. or else Varry,
Everingham.

Everingham impaled with Or a Fesse Gules, six Flowers de liz. 2.2.2.
Counterchanged, D' aivile.

In the upper Windows of the Church, 1490. Orate... Johannis... Agnetis....

On the outside of the Church on the top near the Battlement cut in the
Stone....... impaling a fretty, and there also A Bend between 6 crossecroslets,
Lungvillers.

On the East end of the North I Will that again, A Chequey with a Bendlett,
Bekering.

On the sides of the Chancel East Window,

A Lion Ramp. Cheq. for Everingham, and that impaling 2. Flowers de Lis above,
two upon a Fesse, and 2. below it, Deivile.

Kirketon And Willoughby.
KIrketon is not very clearly found in Doomsday Book, except a place there
named Schidrington be for it, and that is there said to be of diverse Fees, one
parcel Soc to Grimston, the Kings Land, which answered the public taxation for
two Bov. So there was in Wilgebi, and Walesby, two Bov. ad Geldam. The Land one
Car. There four Sochm. had one Car. Wood four Perches long, and four broad.
Another parcel of Schidrington was Soc to Laxington, Lib. Dooms.
of Goisfrid de Alselins Fee, and rated to the Geld at two Bov. The Land was
four Bov. There five Sochm. had one Car. In Wilgebi there was a Garden or Yard
(Ortus) belonging to Laxington. There was also a Manor in Wilgebi, which Tochi
the Lord of Lexintune had before the Conquest, rated to the Dane-geld at one
Bov. and an half. The Land for four Oxen was waste. There was half a Mill, and
twelve Acres of Meadow, which afterward became likewise the Fee of Goisfrid de
Alselin. Another parcel in Schidrinton and Walesby was Soc to Tuxferne of Roger
de Buslies Fee, and that paid the Geld for two Bov. The Land being for six
Oxen. There five Sochm. and one Board, had two Car. Another was of the Fee of
Gislebert de Gand, where Ragenale in Schidrinton had two Bov. for the Tax in
his Manor. The Land whereof was half a Car. There four Vill. had two Car.
Pasture wood one qu. long, one broad. This in the Confessors time was 20s. in
the Conquerours 10s. value.

Jordan Fitz-Alan Lord of Tuxford was Sheriff of these Counties in the fourth
year of King Stephen. Rot. Pip. 5 Steph.


Halan Fitz-Iordan gave to Galfr. de le Phremunt the Land of Wallesby, and of
Circheton, Reg. Ruff. p. 94.
in Fee for half a mark of Silver yearly.

William, son of Gaufr. de le Fremunt, Ib. 97.
the younger, sold to Hugh Bardulf for five Marks of Silver all his inheritance
in Notinghamsir, viz. all the Land which his brother Gaufr. had in Kirketon,
and Walesby, and in Bestorpe, and in Birchewude: The witnesses were Hugh de
Bobi, Henry de Wicheton, Henry de Norhanton, then the Kings Justices, William
de Perci then Sheriff of Yorkshire, whereby I suppose it was 5 Ioh.

Galfr. de le Fremunt held two Knights Fees in the time of H. 2. of the old
feoffment of the Barony of Robert de Cauz, Lib. Rubr.
and one of the new.

Matilda de Chauz being in her own free power, Regist. de Ruff. p. 94.
without husband, confirmed to Hugh Bardulf, all the Land which Gulfr. de le
Fremunt held of her Ancestors in Kirketon, Walesby, Wilgheby, Bestorp, and
Birchewude, viz. that which William, son and heir of the said Galfr. gave the
said Hugh in those said Towns, to be held of her and her heirs, by the service
of half a Knights Fee, for which the said Hugh gave her an hundred shillings
Esterling.

Hugh Fitz-Raph for the safety of his Soul, Ib. 89. and 90.
and of Agnes his wife, and Hugh his son, gave to God, St. Mary, the Church and
Monks of Rufford, his whole Demesne in Kyrketon, with all the Appurt. which he
had of the Fee of William le Fremunt, in exchange for all that Land which the
said Monks sometime had in the territory of Muscham, on the East part of his
Park of Muscham, and all the residue which he had of the said Fee in Kirketon,
Wilgebi, Walesby, Bestorp, and in all other places wheresoever, as well in Men
as in Homages, Wards and Reliefs, Issues and Customs and Eschaets, and in all
other things, which by reason of the said Land could fall or happen, except the
Advowson of the Church, to be held of him and his heirs for 30s. per an. which
Rent he afterward also released, of which they paid but 20s. yearly, during
the life of the Lady Margaret de Furnes, Ib. 102.
who held the moiety of that Land in dower.

Ib. 101.
To the Venerable (or worshipful) and most beloved Lady in Christ Oliva de
Mungeban, her devoted Knight Hugh Fitz-Raph sent notice, that for his profit he
had delivered to the Monks of Rufford, the Lands which he had of her Fee in
Walesby, and Kirketon, and earnestly begged that she would be pleased to accept
of them as Atturneys, to do the customs and services which he ought, and was
wont.

The Lady Oliva of Tuxford, daughter of Alan Fitz-Iordan, Regist. de Ruff. p.
89.
in her Widowhood confirmed to the Monks of Rufford, all the Land which Hugh
Fitz-Raph gave them in Kirketon, and Walesby, belonging to her Fee of Tuxford,
viz. 7. Bovats, with the Appurt. they paying the half Mark of Silver, which the
said Hugh did for all services, except the foreign, and suit to her Court at
Tuxford, which was to be done by Reginald, son of Robert Carpentar of Walesby,
and his heirs, for which they gave her two Marks of Silver.

Robert de Lexinton for the health of the Soul of his Lady Oliva de
Montebegonis, and of his own, his Fathers, Mothers, and ancestors, released to
Simon, the Abbat, and Monks of Rufford, the half Mark yearly which they were
wont to pay him for the seven Bovats of the Fee of Tuxford, which they had of
the gift of Hugh Fitz-Raph, but reserved suit to his Court at Tuxford.

Alan, son of William Lancelene of Kirkton, granted and confirmed to Richard,
Ib. 99.
son of Robert de Laxinton, his whole Wood of Kirketon, with the Land in which
it stood, reserving [ Argenteum] a Silver Penny within the twelve days of
Christmas yearly.

Robert de Laxton for the health of his Soul, and for the Souls of Richard his
father, Ib. 101.
and Matilda his mother, gave and confirmed to the Monastery of Rufford, the
gift which the said Richard his father gave to them, viz. one Bovat in Walesby,
which William the Clark held, and two Tofts with a Croft and Meadow adjoining in
Kirketon, and twenty Acres of Arable, with Meadow, etc. and the Wood which the
said Richard de Laxton had of Alan Lancelene. He likewise granted them the Wood
which his father had of the Fee of Alice de Bosco, sometimes wife of John
Burdun, and a Toft in Welhagh, which Gumbert held of his father. He likewise
granted about two Acres of Meadow, to the Fabric of the Church at Rufford, Mr.
Peter, Mr. Stephen, and Sir Henry his brothers were Witnesses, and Mr. William
de Marcham.

Adam de Everingham, son and heir of Robert de Everingham, Regist. de Ruf. p.
90. b.
Knight, released all foreign and other services to the said Monks for Lands
which they held of his Fee in Kyrketon, Wylughby, Walesby, Besthorp, and one
Acre in Almeton.

Thomas de Maresey, about 26 E. 1. Esc. 26 E. 1. n. 42.
left his son Thomas, his heir of some Lands here.

John Burdun about 4 E. 2. Esc. 4 E. 2. n. 51.
held in Maplebek, Kirketon, and Bucketon, one Knights Fee of the Fee of Gaunt.

The Monastery of Rufford got many several small parcels, Reg. Ruff.
which made the Monks interest here to be the most considerable, yet the
Advowson of the Church remained with the heirs of Hugh Fitz-Raph, and William
de Douseby was Parson here, Regist. de Novo loco p. 220.
upon the presentation of Nicolas de Cantelup about 16 E. 3. notwithstanding
this had been esteemed a member of the Chapelry of Blyth, and given by King
John to Walter Archbishop of Roan, amongst many others, as Bridgeford,
Gonaldeston, etc.

John le Vavasor was Rector of the Church of Kyrketon, Regist. de Ruff. p. 93.
and acquired many parcels of Land of Robert, son of Robert Fraunceys of
Kyrketon, which Sir Robert de Streley, and Elizabeth his wife, and Robert de
Streley, Knight, their son, confirmed to Robert, and John, sons of the said Sir
John Vavasor, which the said John, his son, passed to Robert, son of Robert
Lancelene, 6 E. 2. John Burdon of Bucton, son of Sir John Burdon, Knight, Henry
de Sutton of Wyleby, and others being Witnesses.

Hugh Fitz-Raph gave the Homage and Service of John Burdon, Ib. p. 51.
for the Lands which he held of him in Kirkton, Willughby, Walesby, and
Besthorp. Roger Burdun confirmed the homage and service of Iohel de Kirketon,
which Robert de Scelford gave to the said Monks. Robert, son of Galfr. de
Kirketon, passed a Toft and one Bovat in Kirketon, to Robert, son of Nicolas,
the Baker of Tuxford, which Richard, son of Took, sometimes held of the said
Galfr. his father in Vilenage, who gave it to Albreda his wife, and the said
Robert his son, after her decease; and Robert the Baker gave it to the Abbey of
Rufford.

In the year 1369. there was an agreement between the Prior and Covent of
Newstede, and the Abbat of Rufford, Regist. de Ruff. p. 102.
that the Prior should have 13s. 4d. a year for releasing the Common he
challenged in Kirketon Park by reason of his Parsonage of Tuxford.

There was a Fine 37 H. 3. between Galfr. the Abbat, and Osbert Sylvan,
concerning 4s. which he was to pay the Abbat yearly for a Mess. and two Bovats
in Wilheby, for which upon failer he might distreyn at Thorp in Yorkshire.

All the Manor and Grange, Land and Tenements of Rufford, were granted with
the Monastery at the dissolution to the Earl of Shrowsbury, as in that place
will be noted.

The Family of William Clarkson, Esquire, B.
has had a fair Capital Mess. and goodly Demesne in Kirketon, and Willoughby,
for many descents. The first I have noted was John Clerkson, Ex Coll. I. B. Ar.
husband of Margaret, by whom he had William Clerkson Esquire, who married
Isabell, daughter of George Nevill of Ragnal, Esquire, who bore him Dorothy,
the wife of Edmund Hunt of Normanton, Esquire, and Barbara married to Cuthbert
Bevercotes, Esquire, and Leonard, and John, but the eldest was Michael
Clerkson, Esquire, who had to wife Saunch, the daughter of John Poutrell,
Esquire, and by her John Clerkson, who married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir
George Rodney, who bore him several sons, Michael married Dorothy, daughter of
William Har^up, and by her had William Clarkson, Esquire, who married
Elizabeth, daughter of Robert Williamson of Great Markham, and by her had John
Clarkson, who married Sarah, daughter of Sir Raph Knight, Knight.

The owners of Kirton 1612. were Gilbert Earl of Shrowsbury two Oxgangs, Lib.
l^^. ten. penes meips. R. T. 1674.
Michael Clarkson two Oxgangs, The Bailiff and Burgesses of East Retford one
Oxgang, William Ingham one Oxgang, Henry Wright one Oxgang, John Eastwood half
an Oxgang, Robert Ingham two Cottages and almost half an Oxgang, John Lucas one
Cottage and two Acres of Land.

The Rectory of Kirkton was 10l. when Mr. Turwhait was Patron: Mss. I. M.
It Is now 7l. 14s.9d. ob. value in the Kings Books, and the Earl of Clare
Patron.

Egmanton. Agemanton.
IN Agemanton, before the Normans became Lords, were two Manors, which
Tarchetell and Vlmar had, Lib. Dooms.
which were charged in the Geld (or Assesment of those times) as four Bovats
and an half, and a third part. The Land being then found to be three Car. There
afterward Roger de Busli had three Car. and thirteen Vill. and nine Board.
having eight Car. there were two Mills 30s. The value in the Confessors and
Conquerours time was 4l. having Soc in Hedune, Vptone, Gamelstune, and in Misne.

In the time of King Henry the first, there were two brethren of the Kings
Family (or Court) stout men, N^^. Argi. vel. 1.775. ^el. 2.193.
whereof one was Earl of Clare, the other of Arundell, and the third brother of
them was Nigellus de Albanei, then a young man of good disposition and great
hope, carrying the Kings Bow, who, when he was made Knight, for his honesty,
was enfeoffed by King Henry the first, first of all, of Egmanton in the Forest
of Sherwode, with the Parks and Appurtenances, which Town after a little time
Nigellus gave to his special friend Robert de Aivile, which the King hearing
inquired of the said Nigellus if it was so, who answered it was, and that now
the King had two honest Knights where before he had but one.

This Nigellus by his Mother was a Mowbray, and had the Estate of Robert de
Molbray, whom William Rufus took at Bamburgh, and beheaded at Winsore, and
seized his (Counties or) Earldoms of Northumberland, and Nottingham, and
Marshall, and other Lands and Possessions, and disinherited his Progeny, so
that the Posterity of this Nigellus de Albany, who married Gundreda, the
daughter of Hugh de Gurnay in Normandy, and had in that Country sixscore
enfeoffed Knights, and as many in England, had the Surname of Mowbray, Roger
Molbray his son being the first, who by Alice de Gant had Nigellus de Molbray,
who married Mabilia, daughter of Edmund Earl of Clare, and got on her four
sons, William de Molbray, Robert, Philip, and Roger, etc. Of this Family did
that of D'aivile hold this Manor.

It is noted that of the Posterity of this Robert de Aivile, from the time of
St. William Archbishop of York, R^gist. de Novo loco, p. 224.
viz. 18 Steph. there had been two Roberts, and two John's de Eyvill, who had
the Advowson of the Church of Egmanton by inheritance, until the time of King
Henry the third, that John de Eyvill gave it to the Priory of Newstede in
Shirewood, to which it was appropriated by Pope John the 22d. and by the
license of King E. 2.

It seems that John de Eyvill, Robert de Vypont, John de Vescy, William
Marmion, Com. Hill. 3 E. 1. to. 5.
Adam de Newmarch, Baldwin Wac, Robert de Wilgheby, Robert de Wolrington,
Richard de Sees, were Rebels with Simon de Montefort Earl of Leicester, and
hindered Robert de Nevil the Sheriff of Yorkshire from executing his Office,
from Michaelmas, 48 H. 3. until the Battle of Jews, when William de Bozale was
made Sheriff of that County by the said Simon de Montefort.

John de Eyvill, 7 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Pasc. 7 E. 1. to. 5.
by the judgment of the Court was to hold to him and his heirs the Manor of
Egmanton, against Clementia de Lungevillers, to whom he had given the Manor of
Barneburgh in Yorkshire, for her life, in exchange. Quo War. 3 E. 3. to. 18.
in dors.
John de Eyvill had Free Warren granted here, 9 Iun. 9 E. 1. who had a son of
the same name his heir, who married Margaret, who was latter wife (after his
decease) of Adam de Everingham Lord of Laxton, who claimed diverse liberties
here in her right, Regist. de Novo loco, p. 267.
3 E. 3. and married his son Adam de Everingham to Ioane de Eyvill her daughter
and heir of this Manor, which by a Fine, 17 E. 2. Fin. apud Ebor. Trin. 17 E.
2. viz. a die S. Ioh. Bap. in 15. dies.
between John de Eyvill, and Margaret his wife, and Ioane their daughter,
Querents, and Hugh de Scalton, Deforc. was settled on the said John and
Margaret, and Ioane, and the heirs of Margaret, excepting one Mill, two hundred
and two Acres of Land, twenty three of Meadow, sixty of Wood, 100s. and 20d.
Rent in the same Manor; to which Fine several persons put to their claims, as
Thomas de Burton of Egmanton, and Heldreda his wife, and John their son theirs,
William, son of Lawrence de Weston, Thomas Deyvill of Egmanton, Robert
Fourmery, John Fourmery, Thomas del Celer, William del Celer, and Thomas
Trompour, theirs.

There having sometimes before been Suits about Common of Pasture in the East
Park, Regist. de Novo loco p. 268.
Adam de Everingham Lord of Egmanton, sold to Henry Deyvill a certain place of
Wood beneath his Park of Egmanton, called the East Park, to cut down the Wood
thereof, according as it was assigned by certain bounds, in which Park Sir
Thomas de Lungvillers, the Prior of Newstede, Thomas Deyvill, Henry Deyvill his
son, Robert Formery, and all the Commonalty of the said Town had Common for all
manner of Cattle, who all, 15 E. 3. agreed that Sir Adam should enclose it with
an Hedge for three years, in which time they would only Common with their
Horses after Michaelmas; but after the term of three years the Fence to be
thrown down, and they to Common in it as before.

This Manor, 24 E. 3. Fin. lev. Trin. 24. E. 3.
by a Fine between William de la Pole the elder, and John de Chesterfeild,
Plaintiffs, and Adam de Everingham of Laxton Chr. and Johan his wife, Deforc.
was settled on the said Adam and his heirs, with warranty from Ioane and her
heirs. It descended to the heirs of them both, as in Laxton may be observed,
and afterward was.... Northwoods.

Sir Richard Stanhop of Rampton (descended of Lungvillers) had the moiety of
the Manor of Egmanton which about 14 H. 6. Esc. 14 H. 6. n. 28.
descended to his heir John, son of his son Richard Stanhop, as in Rampton may
be noted.

Sir John Basing, Knight, about 24 H. 6. Esc. 24 H. 6.
was seized of certain Lands here: Alice, wife of Thomas Macworth, Esquire, was
his sister and heir.

The great Manor was the Inheritance (and perhaps is) of.... Popham, B.
by the marriage of the daughter and heir of Sir Sebastian Harvey, late
Alderman of London.

The Park now called Egmanton Hall, was purchased and built by Nicolas
Poutrell, Sergeant at Law, and by him given to Thomas Markham of Allerton his
Cousin by their mothers, whose heirs sold it to Francis Williamson, Esquire,
once Sheriff of this County, whose Nephew Francis Williamson, Clark of the
Assizes, had it by his Uncles gift, but since it was the Honorable Francis
Pierponts, and if Alisamond his widow be dead, who had it in Jointure, is
Robert Pierreponts of Not. his son's.

Lib. libere ten.
The owners of Egmanton Town in 1612. are said to be Gilbert Earl of
Shrowsbury,.... Makworth, Gent. Hardolph Wastneyes, Esquire, Henry Wright,
Francis Thornchill, John Sudbury, William Ireland, John Gascoigne, Robert
Pople, Richard Law, John Bale, John Gilbert, Thomas Sudbury, Mrs. Cardinal,
widow, Edward Mason, Gent.

There was, 13 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Trin. 13 E. 1. to. 12.
a pleading for a Mess. in Egmanton, which the Parson claimed as free Almain,
and Henry Burdon, as lay Fee, but it was not then determined for defect of
Jurors.

John Bellowe, and John Bellowe, July 6. 37 H. 8. Pat. 37 H. 8. par. 8.
had license to Alienate the Rectory and Church of Egmanton, with the
Appurtenances (sometimes belonging to the Priory of Newstede in Shirwood) to
Robert Thornehill, Esquire, and his heirs.

The Vicarage of Egmanton was 5l. when the Prior of Newstede was Patron: Mss.
I. M.
It Is now 4l. 6s. 0d. ob. value in the Kings Books, and Sir Brian Broughton is
Patron.

Tuxford. Tuxfarne.
IN Tuxfarne before the Normans dispossessed the Saxons, were two Manors which
Fluin and Vlmar had, which were rated to the public payments of those times at
twelve Bovats. The Land being then found sufficient for ten Plows, Lib. Dooms.
or ten Car. There afterward Rogerius de Busli (whose Fee it was) had four
Car. and thirty two Vill. and two Board. having fourteen Car. and one Mill 10s.
8d. In King Edward the Confessors time the value of this was 10l. in the
Conquerors when the Survey was taken 8l. it had Soc in Sch^drinton and Walesby.

Regist. de Ruff. p. 94.
When Halan, son of Jordan, gave to Galfr. de le Phremunt the Land of Wallesby,
and of Circheton in Fee and Inheritance to him and his heirs (as in Kirketon is
noted) and the Sarts, and [ Alnatas] Osier, or Alder holts, which belonged to
it, for half a Mark of Silver yearly, he furthermore ordered that whether he
was present or absent the said Galfr. should prosequut his Pleas if need were,
and maintain his Men (to or) at the Cunty, and the Triding, and the Hundred:
The Witnesses to this Charter were Iohel, and Michel, and Galfr. and Henry, the
Priest of Marcham, and Thoca the ( praepositus) Reeve of Tuxford, and the rest
of that Town. This Halan I should rather suppose great Grandfather than Father
of Oliva, daughter of Alan, son of Jordan, named in Kirketon, but that she was
old, as in West Markham may be noted; she it seems was married to Roger de
Monte Begonis, who, 7 H. 3. Claus. ^ H. 3. m. ^.
had Estovers in his Woods of Wirsop, Tukesford, and Legerton, as he was wont;
but she was before, Reg. de Novo. lo^o p. 289.
viz. 1179. (26 H. 2.) wife of Robert de St. John, (or St. Martin;) and Roger
de Munbegun, 2 Ioh. gave account of five hundred Marks, Rot. Pip. 2 Ioh. Linc.
and Ebor.
for having her to his wife with her Inheritance, of which Fine Eustachius de
Vesci was pledge for three hundred m. and Raph de Mara for one hundred Marks.

This Roger was son of Adam de Munbegun, and 9 R 1. Regist. de Croxton penes
p^anobil. I^^. Com. (...) Rot. pip. 9 R. 1. Linc.
ought King Richard the first five hundred Marks for having seisin of his Land,
whereof he was disseized for the Service of Earl John, which the King then held
in his hand, whether William de Albeni restored to him the said Roger that Land
of his which the King gave the said William or not. I do not find that this
Oliva had any Children by either (or any) of her husbands.

Henry de Munedegen, 18 H. 3. Pip. 18 H. 3. Li^^.
next heir of Roger de Montebegonis paid for relief in Lincolneshire, etc.
After his death I guess she sold this Manor, Warsop, etc. to Robert de
Lexington, who, 20 H. 3. Chapter 20 H. ^. m. 8.
had a confirmation of it from the King, and 21 H. 3. Chapter 21 H. 3. m. 3.
the said Robert made a Charter to John de Lexinton his brother of the Manor
of Tuxford, and Hamlet of Warsop, of which 41 H. 3. Esc. 41 H. 3. n. 12.
he died seized, and of the Land in Leslinton held of Adam de Everingham, which
descended from their Father Richard, son of Robert de Lexinton, named in
Kirketon, which Richard had the Custody or Baylywick of the Barony of Lexinton,
which belonged to Matilda de Cauz, and brought up his sons so fortunately, that
Robert, who was a Clergyman Canon of Southwell, became a great Judge and
Baron, making this place the principal Seat of his Barony, which he left to his
said brother John, who was Lord Keeper, and the eldest son, and had to wife
Margery Merlay, as in Averham is said, but no issue; for Henry de Lessinton,
the youngest brother, aged above sixty years, 41 H. 3. Dean, and after Bishop
of Lincoln was heir to his brother the said John Lord Lexington (Peter and
Stephen their brothers, both Clergymen, being I suppose dead before) and the
year following, viz. 42 H. 3. Esc. 42 H. ^. n. 7.
Richard de Marcham, and William de Sutton were found the next heirs of the
Bishop, who held this Manor and the rest, and the Wong and Wood called
Herteshorne in Knesale, of Edmund Lascy for a Sparrow-Hawk or 2s. yearly, etc.

The partition of Lexingtons Lands was made, 43 H. 3. by Fine between William
Sutton, Ex Coll. I. B. A^.
son of Rolande (of whom the Lord Dudley descends) and Richard Marcham, son
of William.

Robertus de Laxton. Richardus de Lessinton-Matildis. Joh. de Lexington custos
sig. H. 3.-Margeria de Merlay s. p. Ric. de Marcham vel Willielmus.-Cecil.
Robertus de Marcham mort. 17 E. 1.-Sarra fill. and cohaer. Jordani de Snitterton
Com. Derb. 42 H. 3.....de Bekering-1 Cecilia aet. 30. an. 17 E. 1.-Joh. de Bray
mar. 2. Tho. de Bekering mil. ob. 19 E. 2.- Tho. de Bekering Chr. ob. 26 E. 3.-
Johannes de-Joana. Bekering. Tho. de Bekering ob. 1 R. 2.- Tho. de Bekering ob.
4 H. 6.-Isabella sor. and cohaer. Joh. de Lowdham, mil. Alicia de Bekering aet.
30. and ampl. 4 H. 6.-Tho. de Rempston, mil.




Willielmus de Lungvillers.-2 Bertha. Joh. de Lungvillers ob. 25 E. 1. s. p.
Tho. de Lungvillers-Chr. aet. 19. 25 E. 1. Joh. de Lungvillers Chr.-Eliz. Tho.
de Lungvillers Chr. Agnes ux. Reginaldi de Everingham.
Rob. Malovell-Eliz. Steph. Maulovell- Johannes Stanhop.-Elizabetha fill. and
haer.-Rogerus Arden mar. 2. Joh. Stanhop fill. and haer. s.p.-Eliz. fill. Hen.
Pierpont, mil. Eliz. ux. 1.-Ric. Stanhop mil.-Matilda for. and haer. Rad, Dom.
Crumwell.




Willielmus de Sancta cruce.-3 Agnes aet. 24. 17 E. 1. 1 Joan. ux. Joh. de
Baiocis and Rob. Hacthorn. 2 Marger.-Petr. Foun. Joh. Foun s. p. Eliz.-Thom. de
Mering. Franc. de Mering.-

3 Eliz.-Joh. de Barkworth. Joh. de Barkworth, 28 E. 3.


Richardus de Marcham fill. and haer. s. p.
Rob. Dom. Lexington, Bato de Tuxford. Hen. Episc. Linc. Petr. Step. Alic. ux.
Roll. de Sutton ut in Aram.


Richard de Marcham held of the King in Capite half a Knights Fee, Ex B^nd. de
(...) in cort. Esc. H. 3. n. 73.
which Margaret, sometimes wife of John de Lexinton, at the time of his (the
said Richards) death had in Dower, and half a Knights Fee in Lexinton, and the
Culture (or Wong) and Wood in Knesale, and in Strathaw three Cultures of John
de Eyvile, and in Marnham (Marcham) and Allerton. Robert de Marcham his brother
and heir was thirty five years old at the time of the Inquisition.

Robert de Markham about 17 E. 1. Esc. 17 E. 1. n. 24.
left the Park, Manor* and Advowson of the Church of Tukesford, which Margery
de Merley, widow of John de Lessington had in Dower, etc. to his three
daughters and heirs, and their issue, viz. Cecilia, wife of John de Bray, then
thirty years old his eldest daughter, John, son of William de Longvillers, and
of Bertha, sometimes his wife, another daughter of the said Robert, and Agnes,
twenty four years old, wife of William de Sancta Cruce.

Robert Lord Lexinton made two Families of his sister Suttons sons, William the
eldest had Warsop, etc. as in that place will be noted; and Robert had Egrom or
Averham, as in that place is said.

Robert, son and heir of William de Sutton, gave to Mr. William de Laxton for
sixty Marks of Silver and 1d. per annum, Regist. de Ruff. p. 90. b.
his Park of Tukesford, which the said William de Lessington, Dean of Lincoln,
gave to the Monks of Rufford. And Joan de Sutthon, late wife of Robert de
Sutthon, released to the Abbat all claim by reason of Dower in the Park of
Tukesford, concerning which she had impleaded him by the Kings Writ, which is
called Vnde nichil habet, before Mr. Roger de Seyton and his Fellows at
Westminster, 2 E. 1. which was not long after her husbands death. Her son was
Richard, Father of John, who marrying an heir of Sumery, had a son by her
called also John de Sutton, whose Posterity were of the same name Lords Dudley
four Descents more; and about 8 E. 4. Esc. 8 E. 4. n. 68.
John Sutton Lord Dudley had a Petition concerning Warsop, and 10l. Rent in
Tuxford, which shows it.

This Manor of Tuxford was divided into three parts, by the forenamed three
daughters and heirs of Robert de Marcham, whereof the first Cecilia, besides
her husband John de Bray, had another, I suppose named Thomas de Bekering,
Knight, who begot Thomas de Bekering, Knight, who left his son and heir Thomas
de Bekering twenty years old 19 E. 2. Esc. 19 E. 2. n. 72.
which last Thomas, with the rest of the coheirs, 3 E. 3. Quo War. 3 E. 3. to.
8. and 14. intus.
claimed Free Warren, etc. in their Demesne Lands in Laxton, Hertshorne,
Morehouse, Estheued, Tuxford, etc. and Ian. 2. 26 E. 3. Esc. 26 E. 3. n. 44.
left this third part or Manor of Tuxford to John his son and heir then but
fourteen years of age, which John afterward was a Knight, and had to wife
Ioane, living in the time of King Richard the second, Esc. 11 R. ^ n. 7.
but whether he was Father or Brother of Sir Thomas de Bekering, who died in
the parts beyond the Seas the Thursday after the Feast of St. Barnabas, 1 R. 2.
leaving Thomas de Bekering his son and heir of this Land, I cannot yet
certainly determine, but suppose him his brother, which agrees best with the
time. Thomas the son had to wife Isabell, the sister and coheir of Sir John de
Lowdham, as in that place is said, and died about 4 H. 6. Esc. 4 H. 6. n. 25.
leaving Alice, the wife of Sir Thomas de Rempston their heir, then above
thirty years old, who had three daughters and heirs, Elizabeth, wife of John
Cheiney; Isabell, of Brian Stapleton; Esc. 37 H. 6.
and Margaret, of Richard Bingham the younger, as is often already noted.

The second part or share of this Manor which was Bertha's, descended to her
son and heir John de Lungvillers, who, about 25 E. 1. Es^. 25 E. 1. n. 52.
left it to Thomas de Lungvilers his brother (or as some Copies, his son) and
heir then nineteen year old. Sir Thomas de Lungvillers, 8 E. 3. Esc. 8 E. 3. n.
57.
had a return of a Writ Ad quod damnum, concerning his giving a place in
Tuxford of one hundred feet in length, and fifty five in breadth, and five
Marks yearly Rent issuing out of that Manor, to a certain Chaplain to
celebrate in that Church. John de Lungvillers, 26 E. 3. Esc. 26 E. 3. n. 39.
was found son and heir of Thomas, and then above twenty six years of age. John
de Lungvillers, 32 E. 3. Esc. 32 E. 3. n. 72.
was like to have pardon for acquiring of John Faun one Mess. and a void Lane
adjoining in Tuxford, which he was to give to three Chaplains celebrating
Divine Service in that Church. The year before he had license from the King,
dated 8 Febr. 31 E. 3. Mon. Angl. vol. 3. p. 90. Pat. 31 E. 3. par. 1. m. 25.
that seeing a former grant which he had from that King, to Found a College in
the Parsonage house of five Chaplains, whereof one should be Warden, and to
give them and their successors the Advowson of the Church, to pray for the
healthy estate of him the said John whilst he should live, and for his soul
when he should die, and for the Souls of Thomas de Lungvillers his Father, and
of all the faithful departed daily for ever, took not effect, he might then
give the said Advowson to the Prior and Canons of Newstede in Shirewode, to
find five Chaplains, viz. three in the Church of Tuxford, and two in that of
Newstede to pray accordingly, who had also leave to receive the said Advowson,
and Appropriate the Church to the Uses of themselves, and their successors for
ever. John de Lungvillers, 35 E. 3. Esc. 35 E. 3. par. 1. n. 121.
was found to have held this part of Tuxford, and many other parcels in Laxton,
Morehouse, Skegby, Strathagh, Houghton, Allerton, Little Drayton, Carleton,
Elkesley, Grimston, Welhagh, Kirketon, Walesby, Stretton, Fenton, and
Littleburgh, small parcells, and in Egmanton jointly with Elizabeth his wife,
one Mess. one Dovecoat, one Windmill, two Car. of Land, twenty two Acres of
Meadow, 12l. ob. Rents of Assize, etc. he left Thomas his son and heir, who it
seems had no issue, so that his sister Agnes, the wife of Reginald de
Everingham was his heir, and she having no issue (though her husband had by his
second wife Ioane a son Edmund, who died without issue Male.) This Land
descended to Sir Richard Stanhop of Rampton, as heir of her the said Agnes, 22
R. 2. Fin. 22 R. 2. m. 14.
viz. son of Elizabeth, daughter of Stephen Maulovell, son of Elizabeth, sister
of John Lungvillers, Father of the said Agnes, as in Rampton will be further
declared.

The third share which Agnes de Sancta Cruce had, was likewise divided into
three more parcels, she having three daughters married, and two twins Cecily
and Margaret born sixteen or seventeen years after the last of the former
three, Esc. 25 E. 1. n. 51.
which twins I suppose died unmarried. Joan the eldest was first married to
John de Bayeux, and after to Robert de Hakthorne; Margery, the second, to Peter
Foun, who had issue John his son and heir, but he had no Child, so that
Elizabeth his sister, wife of Thomas de Mering, 32 E. 3. Esc. 32 E. 3. n. 15.
was found heir of her brother the said John Foun. And Elizabeth, the third
daughter of the said Agnes, was married to John Barkworth, Knight, who, 28 E.
3. Esc. 28 E. 3. n. 5.
left that share to John Barkeworth his son and heir. Edward de Lovetot, 37 E.
3. Fin. Mich. 37 E. 3.
held the Lands which were John's, the son and heir of John de Barkeworth, and
of Elizabeth his wife, the third part of the third part of the Manor of
Tuxford; and Ioane the sister and heir of John, Ex mag. lib. de Fin. fol. 201.
son of Robert de Barkworth, held the same by the same Service of the third
part of the third part of half a Knights Fee of the King in Capite. Simon de
Burgh, and Joan his wife, 48 E. 3. Fin. lev. Trin. 48 E. 3.
levied a Fine of the third part of the Manor of Little Markham, and the third
part of the third part of the Manor of Tuxford to Thomas de Wolton, and Walter
Dautre, Clarks, and their heirs. Sir Robert de Swyllington Chr. entailed the
like, or same third part of the Manor of Little Markham, and third of the
third of Tuxford on Raph Crumwell, Knight, for life; remainder to William
Crumwell his son, and the heirs Males of his body; remainder to Thomas and
John, brothers of the said William successively, and their respective heirs
males. William it seems had Sir Robert Crumwell, Knight, his son and heir, who
dying without issue male, as did the said Thomas and John his Uncles, Raph Lord
Crumwell found himself concerned in the Inheritance, as son of Raph, son of the
first Raph, whose heirs had the last remainder in the said Intayl, and did his
homage 21 H. 6. Orig. 21 H. 6. to. 5.


William Deyncourt Chr. 18 E. 3. Fin. lev. Trin. 18 E. 3.
had ten Marks yearly Rent in Tokesford passed to him by Fine from John, son of
William de Roos of Ingmanthorp, and from Ioane his wife. Robert, son of Robert
Deyncourt, Knight, 2 H. 4. Ex mag. lib. de Fin. fol. 208. Pas^. 2 H. 4.
held ten Marks Rent issuing out of two parts of the Manor of Tukesford. This
Rent came to be afterward the Lord Crumwells also, as in Lamley may be
perceived.

Iohane, who had been wife of William Lassells, about 6 H. 5. Esc. 6 H. 5. p.
218.
dyed seized of the 3d. part of the 3d. part of the Manor of Tuxford; Will.
Lassells was her son and heir. It appears, 15 E. 4. Esc. 15 E. 4.
that Ioane Lassells when she died held of the endowment of John Lassells, her
late husband, of the Inheritance of Robert Lassells of Soureby, Esquire,
deceased, twelve Mess. in Tuxford, etc. There was a Recovery, 19 H. 8. Trin. 19
H. 8. to. 147.
in which Nicolas Metcalf, Clark, the Master, and the Fellows and Scholars of
St. John's College in Cambridge, claimed against Roger Lassellys, Esquire, the
third part of the third part of the Manor of Tuxford, with the Appurtenances
in Tuxford, Little Markham, Drayton, and Cleyborowe, and fourteen Mess. six
Tofts, one Mill, four hundred Acres of Land; forty of Meadow, one hundred of
Pasture, six of Wood, and 10s. Rent in the said places.

B.
St. John's College in Cambridge had a Manor there, by the grant of Richard
Bishop of Winchester, about 20 H. 8.

John de Sutton of Houton, about 13 H. 4. Esc. 13 H. 4. n. 3.
had interest in the Manor of Little Markham, Tuxford, Milton, and Bevercotes:
so had John de Tuxford, 14 H. 4. Esc. 14 H. 4. n. 16.
in Little Markham Manor, etc.

The Jury, 31 H. 6. Esc. 31 H 6.
found that Katherin, wife of John de Tuxford, was seized of the sixth part of
the Manor of Little Markham, with the Appurtenances; which Manor extends it
self in Tuxford, West Markham, Bevercote, and Milneton. John Caxton, and Alice,
wife of Beleyard de Barde, were Cousins and heirs of the said Katherin, viz.
the said John was son of Elizabeth, daughter of the said Katherine; and the
said Alice, daughter of Margaret, daughter of the said Katherin.

By an Inquisition taken 9 November. 24 H. 8. it appears that John Caxton of
Tukysford lived 19 E. 4. and had a son named Richard Caxton, Ex Inq.
who married Isabella, the daughter of Thomas Vavasour of Deneby, and left
Agnes, the wife of John Sutton, his daughter and heir forty years old, 23 H. 8.
he had Lands in Tukysford, Little Markham, Milneton, and Bevercotes. Barbara, B.
after the death of Alice her sister, was sole daughter and heir of.... Sutton,
and married to Francis Harrington, Esquire, who by her had four daughters,
heirs to their mother Anne, wife of William Arnall, Gent..... of Sir William
Bodenden.... of Henry Balgge, Esquire, and.... the eldest of Thomas Pell.

That part of Tuxford which descended with Rampton to the Family of Stanhope,
was by Saunchia, daughter and heir of Richard Stanhope, and John Babington her
husband sold about the latter end of the Reign of Henry the Eighth, to John [or
Thomas] White, Esquire, whose Grandchild Sir John White purchased in most of
the rest, and his Grandchild John White, Esquire, of Cotgrave, is now Lord
there. The Rectory was appropriated to the Priory of Newstede, and 37 H. 8.
granted to Trinity College in Cambridge: The old Rent was 21l. 14s. 4d. it is
now in Lease to the Honorable Richard Lord Byron.

At this Town Mr. George Came dwelt, who acquired a good Estate in Lands and
Leases hereabouts, whose only daughter and heir Anne is now wife of Harvey
Staunton of Staunton, Esquire.

The Freeholders in 1612. are said to be Gilbert Roosse, Lib. libere ten.
Esquire, John White, Esquire, Henry Foster, Gent. James Thornehill, William,
Thomas, John Watmongs, Dyons Vston, Francis Smith, Thomas Mason of Egmanton,
Gent. Mrs. Freman, etc.

The Vicarage of Tuxford was x. Marks when the Prior of Newstede was Patron:
Mss. I. M.
it is now 4l. 14s. 7d. value in the Kings Books, and the Patronage belongs to
Trinity College in Cambridge.

In the East Window of the Chancel is,

Orate pro anima Thomae Gunthorpe Prioris de Novo loco in Schirewood, qui
cancellam istam aedificavit, Anno Dom. 1495.

In the South Windows were the Arms of Newstede Priory, and quarterly France
and England, and his own; and on the Seats, viz. Gules on a Bend Azure between
two Lions heads crased Arg. three Besants A Bordure Gobony Arg. and Az. and
under written, Arm Thomae Gunthorp Prioris de Novo loco in Schirewood; these
are something different from those at Stapleford, for there the Lions heads are
thought to be Wolfs heads; and the Bezants, Libards heads. And here was also,
Arm Johannis Lungvillers Patroni istius Ecclesiae, viz. Sab. a Bend between
six Crossecroslets Arg. which are upon the Shield of an old Effigies, on an
ancient Tomb, toward the North side of the Chancel. And on the outside on the
top of the Church, where there is also, A Cross Moline pierced square, and
three Lioncels Rampant 2.1.

In the South I Will within is,

Quarterly Or and Gules on a Bend Sab. three Escallops Arg.

And Sab. a Cross Sarcele (or Flory) Or, impaling... broken; and the former
also impaling on a Chief Arg. three Mullets pierced Sab. the rest broken.

In an upper Window of the body of the Church are four or five impaled in one
Shield: The first is, Quarterly Or and Sab. with something in Bend Arg. The
next, A Fesse between six Crosse-croslets (which take up half.) The next, Arg.
a Chevron Sab. The next, Cheque Arg. and Gules; and the next some Bend broken
away.

In an upper North Window,

Gules a Cross Formy ( or Pate) Arg. quartering Or a Cross ingrayled Sab.
impales Arg. a Chief Gules, with a Bendlet Azure, Crumwell. Upon a Surcoat of
John Stanhop,

Azure a Cross Moline Or, in the next Window.

Upon a flat Stone in the North I Will at the East end,

Obitus Ricardi Stanhope, fill. and haer. Ricardi Stanhope de Rampton, Militis,
qui obiit secundo die mensis Martii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici sexst decimo.
Cujus animae, etc.

Upon it is drawn his Picture, with the Arms of Lungvillers only.

By the East Wall a fair Tomb with two Statues lying on it, but basely broken,
and on the top of it, Gules a Chevron Varry between three Lioncells Ramp. Or;
the Crest an Eagles (or Falcons) head and wings Azure, out of a Coronet Or.

The Inscription this,

Hic jacet Johannes White, miles, filius and haeres Thomae White, Armig. (servi
quondam Philippi and Mariae Regis and Reginae Anglie) and Agnetis Cecill,
sororis Willielmi Cecill, Baronis de Burghleigh summi Anglie Thesaurarii; qui
quidem Johannes obiit infestum nativitatis Domini Anno 1625.

Dorothea uxor charissima praedicti Johannis White, filia Johannis Harpur de
Swarkeston in Com. Derb. militis, in piam posteritatis memoriam and spem certam
futurae resurrectionis monumentum hoc posuit. Obiit die Ano.

It was never filled up.

West Markham, OR, Little Marcham
WAS of the Fee of Roger de Busli; one Manor in it before the Conquest Eduin
had which paid to the public Taxation or Geld as nine Bovats. The Land four
Car. There Goysfrid the Man or Tenant of Roger had one Car. and nine Vill. and
five Board. having three Car. Lib. Dooms.
There was a Church, and one Mill 16s. This in King Edward the Confessors time
was 3l. when the great Survey was made in King William's 4l. value. In West
Mercham, before the Conquest, Godric had a Manor which paid but for four Bov.
to the Tax, though the Land was returned two Carucats. There Roger de Busli had
afterward two Car. four Vill. two Board. having two Car. and sixteen Acres of
Meadow, Pasture Wood five qu. long, three qu. broad. The value of this continued
40s. Aron held it. Here were other parcels Soc to this, one which had six Bov.
to the Geld. The Land three Car. Soc in Tuxfarne. There six Sochm. five Vill.
had four Car. and an half. There were sixteen Acres of Meadow. Another paid for
one Bov. to the Geld Soc in Grave, and one Bov. ad Geld. Soc in Farne, and one
Bov. ad Geld. Soc in Drayton. The Land half a Car. There three Sochm. had two
Car.

There was a Composition made between the Church of West Marcham, Regist. de
Novo loco p. 289.
and the Chapel of Tuxford at Lanum, before the Lord Richard (perhaps it should
have been Roger) Archbishop of York, in the year of our Lord 1179. 5 Calend.
December. (26 H. 2.) that the said Church of West Marcham should have in Tuxford
of seventy three Bovats, each one Thrave of Corn, and the Chapel of Tuxford the
rest of the Tithe Corn; and the said Church was to have the small Tithes of
those living on that Land, viz. Calves and Foals, Lambs, and Goats, and Piggs,
and Eggs at Easter; and the men thrice in the year were to go with their
Offerings to West Marcham, viz. on All Saints day; and that of the Purification
of St. Mary; and at Easter; and to be Confessed there in Lent, and receive
Communion there at Easter; and the bodies of the husbands and wives to be
buried there; and the said Church was to have two parts of the Tithe Corn
growing on the Demesne of Tuxford, and likewise of all the Essarts that then
were or should be, and the Chapel of Tuxford was to have the remaining third
part, and all the small Tithes, and Confession, and Communion, and Offerings,
and the bodies of all dwelling on the Demesne, and in the Town (except the
husbands and wives on the said seventy three Bovats;) and all the Tithe of
Flax, Milk, Wool, Hens, Geese, Apples, Gardens, and all Churchings, and
Weddings of the whole Town of Tuxford the said Chapel was to have; and that
this agreement might be firm, Robert de St. John (then it seems husband of
Oliva Lady of Tuxford) Patron of that ground, made his Affidavit in the hand of
the Lord Archbishop of York; and so did Henry the Priest of Marcham, and
William the Parson of Tuxford, and Jacob instead of his Master Walter de
Constanciis, Chaplain of Tykhill, and Richard, Parson of Walesby: The
Archbishops Seal was put to it, and so was Robert de St. John's, and the said
Jacobs. This was certified by Thomas de Maryng Abbat of Barlings, and that
Covent to be in their Registry, 4 Iun. 1307.

It seems probable that the successors of that Aron, mentioned in Doomsday
Book, took their name from this place, howbeit the first I can certainly fix on
was Sir Richard de Marcham, Ex Coll. I. B. Ar. Regist. de N^vo loco p. 228.
or William, who married Cecilia, the sister of Robert Lord Lexington, as
before is in several places noted, by whom he had Richard and Robert, but what
sons else I have not yet discovered. Robert de Marcham was a great Man, B.
and had an Esquire named Robert de Fowich, 2 E. 1. he confirmed his Uncle the
said Robert de Lexingtons gift of Lands in Scardcliff, Rothorne, and Sterthorp,
to the Priory of Newstede; he held when he died about 17 E. 1. Esc. 17 E. 1. n.
24.
a Capital Mess. in West Marcham, and sevenscore Acres of Arable Land in
Demesne, and twenty of Meadow, and a Water-Mill, paying the Prior of Monkebreton
8d. per annum, and the Nuns of Wallendewelles 6d. etc. This Manor was divided
amongst his daughters and heirs, as in Tuxford may be discovered, with which it
continued in the several branches as they were sub-divided.

Agnes de Sancta cruce had a Freeholder William de Marcham, who held of her
two Bovats of Land and an half, 29 E. 1. Es^. 29 E. 1. n. 51.
when she left her share to her daughters, as in Tuxford is described. From
this William de Marcham, possibly a younger brother or Cousin of Robert, might
descend the Ancestors of Sir John Markham the Judge, who had a Monument in
Markham Church, Ex Coll. Fr. Markham.
with this Inscription, Orate pro anima Johannis Markham, Iusticiarii, qui
obiit in festo S. Silvestri, Anno Dom. 1409. His Fathers name was Robert, Ex
Coll. I. B. Ar.
and his Grandfathers John, both Lawyers; John married the daughter of Nicolas
Bothomsell, and Robert, of Sir John Caunton. The Judges posterity may be noted
in Maplebeck and Cotteham.

John Stanhope, Knight, 9 H. 6. Pasch. 9 H. 6. rot. 139.
in a recovery claimed against William Lassells, Esquire, the Manor of Little
Markham, with the Appurtenances. This surely is miswritten, John for Richard,
or Knight for Esquire.

Ex Coll. I. B. Ar.
John Stanhope (son of Richard, son of Sir Richard) married Elizabeth, the
daughter of Sir Thomas Talbot, and by her had several sons, one son named
Henry, the husband of Ioane, the daughter of Henry Rochford, Esquire, who
brought him a son named Edmund Stanhope, who by Alice his wife had a daughter,
Margaret, the wife of Thomas Skessington, Esquire, she died the first day of
January, Lib. 2. post m^r. fol. 15.
31 H. 8. seized of the third part of the Manor of Little Markham, and of
Lands in Darlington, and Ryton; her husband had them by the Courtesy or Law of
England, till July 29. 35 H. 8. that he died, leaving William Skevington son
and heir of the said Margaret to succeed, who was above one and twenty years of
age at the death of his Mother.

Thomas Rayner of East Drayton, and Emme his wife, 7 H. 6. Fin. lev. Hill. 7 H.
6.
by Fine passed to John, son of Henry de Drayton, and to Alice his wife, one
Mess. twenty six Acres of Land, four of Meadow, with the Appurtenances in Little
Markham, quit from the heirs of Emme.

lib. libere ten.
The owners of West Markham cum Milneton, in 1612. are said to be Rutland
Molyneux, Mr..... Leake, Francis Chapman, Cler. Robert Belyalde, Richard
Salmon, Thomas Pettinger, William Haslaby, William Owldham, Richard Whitlam,
Senior and Junior, Thomas Heslaby, Lawrence Spyby, William Turtale, Anthony
Cawthorne, Thomas Butler, Henry Wright of Egmanton, the Master and Fellows of
St. John's, the Master and Fellows of Trinity Colleges in Cambridge.

Ms^. I. M.
The Vicarage of West Markham was 8l. when the Abbat of Westminster was Patron:
It Is now 7l. 12s. 1d. value in the Kings Books, and the Earl of Clare Patron.

East Markham. OR, Great Markham.
THere was in Marcham, of the Kings Land Soc to Dunham, which answered for
three Car. and an half to the Geld. The Land ten Car. There twenty five Sochm.
and fifteen Vill. had ten Car. There was a Church and a Priest, forty Acres of
Meadow, and some small Wood. Another Manor in Marcham, Frane, before the
Conquest had, Lib. Dooms.
which answered the Tax for three Bov. The Land being two Car. There afterward
Turold the Man or Tenent of Roger de Busli whose Fee it was made, had one Car.
and one Vill. with two Oxen in Plow. This then kept the former value it had in
the time of Edward the Confessor, viz. 20^. Two other Manors in Marcham,
Godwin and Vlchel had, before the Conq. which were publicly Taxed at seven
Bov. and an half. The Land three Car. and an half. There afterward Vlchel and
four Sochm. and two Board. had one Car. and an half. This also kept the old
value 16s. and was of Roger de Buslies Fee.

The Family of Cressy of Hodsac, were successors of Turold as in Weston is
noted, and had likewise the most considerable interest here, where a branch of
that name also continued. Ex (...).
I find Anno Domini 1272. William de Cressy of Marcham, and that 6 E. 3. Roger
de Cressi held half a Knights Fee there. Ex A^^og, penes, ^. Atki^son, Genesis and
Tho; Re^^, Ar.
William de Cressy of Markham, 38 E. 3. had on his Seal within the
Circumscription of his name 3. Crescents on a Bend. Sir William and Sir John
Cressy of Hoddishac, had a Lion Rampant, with a forked Tail:

Avicia, daughter of Ranulf the Sheriff, (wife of Jordan de Chevercourt) by the
spontaneous assent of Letice her eldest daughter, Regist. de Blid. p. 84.
and Ranulf de Novoforo (or de Novomercato) her said daughters husband, and
their heirs, and of Mabel her second daughter, and her heirs, and likewise of
Albreda, her third daughter, and Robert de St. Quintin her husband, and their
heirs, gave to the Church of St. Mary at Blithe, and the Monks there, William,
son of Gaufr. de Marcham, and his heirs, and one Bovat of Land yielding 6s.
yearly, which he held of her, which she assigned for the refection of the Monks
in the day of her Anniversary; that by their intercession her Soul in Heaven
might have refection with celestial meat and drink, etc. Ranulf de Novoforo,
and Letice his wife, confirmed the gift.

Fulc, son of Roger de Est Marcham, gave to the same Monastery a Toft and
Croft, and six Selions of Land in Est Marcham.

Richard de Marcham granted the said Monks 20s. per annum, I^.
for the moiety of the Mill at Murihild Bridge, which the said Prior and Monks
granted to him and his heirs; which payment he took his oath he would perform;
whether Thomas Fitz-William would warrant to them the suit to it or no, and his
heirs were to do the like, and never to implead the said Monks concerning the
said suit to that Mill.

Nigellus de Marcheham the Man (or Tenent) of William de Lyneham, of the Manor
of Marcham, 9 E. 1. Pl. forins^ 9 E. 1. rot. ^ in dorso.
offered himself the fourth day against the said William de Lyneham concerning
a Plea; Why seeing the King lately commanded the said William, that he should
not exact of the said Nigellus other customs and services than ought, and were
wont to be done in the times past, in which this Manor was in the hands of the
Kings of England; he yet ceased not to distreyn the said Nigellus, to perform
the said undue services; in contempt of the King, and to the manifest damage of
the said Nigellus, etc.

Robert, son of John de East Marcham, and Isabell his wife, Roll. Pip. 17 E. ^^.
(or sister) acquired one Bovat of Land there, of Robert, son of John de
Saundeby, 17 E. 2. and Anabella, daughter of John de Saundeby, perquired
thirteen Acres,. of Robert de Saundeby in the same Town.

James, son and heir of Richard Bosevill, of East Markham, 15 R. 2. Pl. coram
Rege apud Noct. Trin. 15 R. 2. rot. 43.
released to John de Markham (the Judge) and his heirs, all his right in all
the Tenements, etc. which were Adam de Lynhams, in the Town and Fields of East
Markham, and which were Henry Cressys there.

The King 29 Ian. 15 R. 2. Fin. 15 R. 2. m. 13.
took the homage of Robert Cressy of East Markham, who married Isabell,
daughter and heir of Constantia, who had been wife of William Paunton, deceased.

Richard Topcliffe, Esquire, 1 Eliz. suffered a recovery of the Manor of East
Markham, Pasch. 1 Eliz. to. 130.
and Robert Williamson, Gent. 14 Eliz. another of the same with the
Appurtenances in East Markham, Pasch. 14. Eliz. rot. 1051.
West Markham, and Sutton on Lound, who called Richard Topcliffe.

Johannes Williamson de Walkringham- Egidius Williamson-Kath. fill. Rob.
Thornehill, mil. Rob. Williamson-Eliz. fill.... Rither-Anna fill.... Stokeham ux.
2. Rob. Williamson de Great Markham.-Faith fill....Aiscough. Thom. Williams^n
Baronettus. Eliz. fill. Ed. Hussy de Hunnington, Bar.-...fill....Halys superst.
1674. ux. 2. Thom. Williamson, Bar.-....fill. and cohaer.....Fenwick. Robertus-
Jana-Johannes White.
Eliz.-Willielmus Clarkson.
Barnabas de Loundhall.- Franciscus-
Joh. Williamson de Gainsburgh.-Jana fill. Chr. Dobson ux. 2. Ric. Williamson,
mil. Mr. supply. Libellor.-

Ric. Williamson-Marg. fill. Rob. Thornhill sor. Kath.

Robert Williamson in the time of Queen Elizabeth, Ex Cop. Rot.
paid for Lands in Great Markham, late Richard Topcliffs, and sometimes William
Cressyes, 6s. 8d. being then held by the service of a whole Knights Fee; and
Robert Markham, Esquire, then also paid for Lands there sometime... Cressyes, B.
held by half that service 3s. 4d. Robert Markham sold his to... Hewyt; and
Robert Williamson was Grand-fa^her of Sir Thomas Williamson, Baronet, father of
Sir Thomas, the present owner.

The owners in 1612. are said to be William Hewet of London, Lib. libere ten.
Knight, Robert Williamson, Esquire, Widow Bowyer, Original Bellamy of
Langford Grange in Yorkshire, Gent. William Turnell, Henry Wright of Egmanton,
Brian Birket of London, James Bellamy, William Rayner, Thomas Iackson, Robert
Dunston, Richard Dunston, Alexander Rayner, Thomas Bellialde, James Dunstone,
Robert Grene, Richard Gunthorp of Kirsall, William Cook, etc.

These Churches of East and West Marcham, seem to have been annexed amongst
many others, as in Lowdham, and other places may be observed, to the Kings
Chapel of Tikhill.

King Philip, and Queen Mar. 10 Nov. 3 and 4 Ph. and Mar. granted to the Abbat
and Covent of St. Peter at Westminster, Par. 5 Pat. 3 and 4 Ph. and Mar.
amongst other things the Advowsons, Donations, and Rights of Patronage of the
Chapels of East Markham, Drayton, Bevercotes and Houghton in this County, late
belonging to the Cathedral Church of St. Peter at Westminster.

The Vicarage of East Markham was twenty Marks value, M^s. I. M.
when the Abbat of Westminster was Patron. The Rectory is now said to be 11l.
18s. 6d. ob. in the Kings Books, and the Earl of Clare Patron.

In great Markham Church, collected by St. Lo Kniveton,

Sable a Bend between 6. crossecrostets Arg. Lungvillers.

Ermine a Fesse Gules betwixt 3. Rats Sab. impales with party per Fesse
indented Or and Azure, on the upper part something Gules, which he supposes
was intended for Markham.

Sable a Bend betwixt 6. Escallops Or, Folejamb. Impales with Arg. on a Bend.
Az. 5. Crosletts Or, Lowdham, and in the same Shield with Arg. a Chevron
between 3. Cocks Gules Arg. a Talbot Ermines.

Upon a Tomb in the Chancel,

Orate pro anima Johannis Markham, Iusticiarij, qui ob. in festo Sti.
Silvestri, Anno Domini 1409.

In a Window,

Orate pro anima Thomae Cressy civis London Over it is Sab. a Chevron Ermine
between 3. Stars Arg. And Arg. on a Bend, Cotised Sable 3. crescents Or,
Cressy.

Upon a fair Marble Tomb,

Hic jacet Domina Millicensia Mering quondam Vxor Willielmi Mering, militis,
quae ob. 17 Sept. 1419.

Upon that Tomb Mering impales with Bekering. And in the Window by it, Arg. 3.
Palmers staves Gules. Burdon impales with the same Cheq. Arg. and Gules a Bend.
sable, Bekering. It seems she was first wife of Sir Nicolas Burdon, then of Sir
John Markham, and last of Sir William Mering. Markham, viz. party per Fesse Or
and Az. a demi Lion Ramp. Gules impales with Arg. a Lion Ramp. Sable qu.
Furche, Cressy of Hodsak, and Arg. a Saltier Gules impales with that Lion Az.
3. Chevrons and a chief Or.

Gules 2. Lions passant Or.

Arg. fretty Az.

Darleton. Derlington. Ragnall. Ragenhill. And Kingshaugh.
THe Book of Doomsday shows that Derlington and Ragenhill were two of the four
Bernes of the Kings great Manor of Dunham: the other two Wymenton and
Swarnesterne, are now totally lost, except the remembrance of some Closes of
Wympton, or Swensterne yet continue.

The men of Derleton and Ragenell, 11 H. 3. Claus. 11 H. 3. par. 2. vel 3. m. 7.
had Pasture for their Cattle in the Wood of Kingshaugh, as they were wont in
the times of King Henry the second, and King John, until the said King John
made the houses be built, and the Wood enclosed, and a Park made thereof, which
was in the time of King Rich. 1. his brother, Pl. Mich. 6 R. 1. in Recept.
Scac. ap. Westminster.
against whom, when he was Earl John, he made War in this place.

Baldwin (or Brian) de Insula, Chr. 14 H. 3. Claus. 14 H. 3. m. 16. and m. 12.
had a grant of the Haie of Kingshagh, to him and his heirs.

King Edward the first left to Farm to the men of Ragenhall and Darleton the
said Towns for, Rec. Mich. 5 E. 1.
etc.

There was an Inquisition taken at Blithewath, 8 E. 1. Esc. 8 E. 1. n. 47.
before Galfr. de Nevill, and Henry de Perepunt, Justices of Assize, by the
Kings open Writ, amongst other matters, if Galfr. de Langley, by his own
Authority held the Township of Derleton and Kingeshay, and a certain part of
the Town of Bolewell deafforested, so that the Kings Ministers could not make
their attachements, and do other things belonging to their office there. The
Jury said that Galfr. de Langele held only Kingeshay deafforested, and that it
was of the Kings Demesne, and that he held neither Derleton, nor Bolewell, but
that the King held in Demesne a certain part of Derleton, and William de
Valence another part, and that it was out of the bounds of the Forest.

Before that Galfr. de Langele had Kingshawe, viz. 43 H. 3. Chapter 43 H. 3. m. 3.
Simon de Montefort Earl of Leicester, and Alianor the Countess, the Kings
sister had it.

George Duke of Clarence 3 E. 4. Claus. 3 E. 4. m. 9.
by virtue of the Kings Letters Patents to him granted, was to receive 14l.
yearly of the Farm of the Manors of Derlington and Ragenhill, by the hands of
the Sheriff of Not. and Derb.

Ranulf (son of or) Fitz-Engelr. the Sheriff, 2 H. 2. Rot. Pip. 2 H. 2.
gave account of 7l. of the firm of Derlinton.

William Fitz-Randulf 20 H. 2. Pip. 20 H. 2.
gave account of 8l. and 8d. of the Assize Rent of Derlinton.

Philip Minekan who had Clipston, and the Hays, etc. 9 Ioh. ought that half
year to answer the King for this Farm, Pip. 9 Ioh.
as the Sheriff said.

Roger de Ros (Cyssar Regis) 29 H. 3. Pip. 29 H. 3.
gave account of the issues of the Manor of Kingshawe.

Isabell who had been the wife of John de Castre, 17 E. 2. Pip. 17 E. 2.
had the Kings pardon for the transgression which she made in acquiring
together with her said husband the Manor of Kingshaugh.

There was a Recovery in the Court of Dunham, 13 and 14 H. 6. Hill. 13 H. 6.
rot. 109. Hill. 14 H. 6. rot. 119.
which was then Henry Lord Greys (of Codnor) and Margaret his wifes, and
William Lucys, Knight, and Elizabeth his wifes, between John Moreby, and
Eustachia his wife, and John Fordham, and Matilda his wife, Plaintiffs; and
John Brauncepath, the elder, and Ioane his wife, and Thomas Brauncepath,
Defendents, of six Mess. ten Tofts, one hundred Acres of Land, and sixty of
Meadow, with the Appurtenances in Dunham, Ragenhyll, and Wympton.

In another recovery 10 H. 7. Mich. 10 H. 7. rot. 102.
Robert Nevyll claimed against Hugh Fordham six Mess. etc. in the same places,
and Lanam.

Richard Nevill, Gent. John Hewet, Yeoman, and Thomas Nicolls, Yeoman, 38 H. 8.
Trin. 38 H. 8. rot. 332.
suffered a recovery of the Manor of Kingshawe, and Lands in Darleton,
Dreyton, Tuxford, and Newark, and called William Mering, Esquire.

Augustine Earl 8 Eliz. suffered another of the said Manor of Kingshawe,
Pasch. 8 Eliz. to. 445.
with the Appurtenances; and called William Mering, Knight. Kingshaw is now the
inheritance of Sir Richard Earl under age, Grandchild of Sir Richard Earl of
Thragelthorpe in Lincolnshire.

William Nevile of South Leverton, Ex Coll. I. B. Ar.
brother of Thomas Nevill of Rolleston, had a son named George, who married
Isabell, the daughter of John Croftes of Ragnall, and his heir, and thereby
became owner and resident at this place: he had by her many children; Robert
Nevill, his son who succeeded him, married the daughter of... Woodford, and
begot on her several sons and daughters; Robert his eldest, was husband of
Alice, daughter of Thomas Boswell of Chete in Yorkshire, and father of George
Nevill, who had to wife Barbara, one of the sisters and heirs of Sir John Hercy
of Grove, where the chief residence of his posterity has by that occasion been
for the most part since, and that of Ragnall is now the possession of Robert
Mellish, Esquire, father of Reason Mellish.

Francis Meverell, Esquire, dyed 16 December. 7 Eliz. and left Samson Meverell,
Lib. 2. sced. fol. 540.
his son and heir within age: he had the Manors of Throwley, and Froddeswell
in Staffordshire, Tiddeswell in Darbyshire, and this Manor of Darleton.

The owners of Ragnell Town (all which held in ancient Demesne of the Manor of
Dunham) 1612. are said to be Gervas Nevill, Lib. libere ten.
Gent. Hugh Dobson, Gent. William Addye, Robert Nevell, Edward Clark of
Gringley, George Fetch, Augustine Hawkesmore, the heirs of Francis Stone,
Gilbert Nevell, Esquire, William Hawkmore.

Dunham. Wimenton. Swansterne.
KIng Edward the Confessor had a Manor in Duneham, with the four Beruits,
which answered the Geld for five Car. of Land and an half. The Land being then
returned to be sufficient for twelve Plows, or twelve Car. There King William
had in Demesne two Car. fifty Vill. three Board. had ten Car. one Mill 3s. one
Fishing 10s. 8l. one hundred and twenty Acres of Meadow, Lib. Dooms.
Pasture Wood six qu. long, and four broad. In the said King Edwards time it
did yield 30l. and six sextaries of Honey; in King William's 20l. with all
which there belonged to it: having Soc besides the four Berues, Ragenhill,
Wymenton, Derlington, and Swarnesterne in Drayton, Marcham, Greenleige,
Ordsall, Grave, Hedune, Vptone, Normentune.

Lib. Alb. de Southwell, p. 13 and 21.
King Henry the first, gave to Thurstan, Archbishop of York, the Church of
Dunham, that he might make it a Prebend in the Church of Southwell, as in that
place is already said.

Ranulf Fitz-Engelram the Sheriff, 2 H. 2. Pip. 2 H. 2.
accounted for 60l. Lands in Duneham, given to the Earl of Flanders.

Regist. de Ruf. p. 47. b.
Raph Pluchet gave to the Monks of Rufford, for the Souls of his Father, and of
his Mother, and his Brother, and all his ancestors, one Toft in Dunham, on the
South part of the Town, contiguous to the Gyldehous, four Perches long, and as
many broad, and the said Monks were not to receive any more Land in that Town,
but by the favor and good will of himself and his heirs: the Witnesses were
Gilbert de Archis, Suain de Hoiland, Robert de Draiton, William de Draiton,
Richard de Laxton, Thomas Clerk of Hedon.

King Henry the third 4 H. 3. Pat. 4 H. 3. m. 4. v^l. ^.
commanded Roland de Sutton, Adam de Muscamp, Henry de Rolleston, William
Rufus, and Robert de Lexington, Clark, that they should go together to
Kingshagh, and there assign to the men of the Sok of Dunham, their Pasture to
the Brook there running, as they ought, and were wont to have, before the Wood
of Kingshagh was made a Park, and as it was acknowledged at Not. before H. de
Burg, the Kings Justice, and to prohibit the said men on the Kings behalf, that
they passed not that Brook toward the Wood by (reason or) occasion of having
Pasture, etc.

The men of Dunham and Marcham, 5 H. 3. Cla^^. 5. H. 3. m. 7.
had Common of Pasture between Dunham and Marcham, and the Wood of Kingshag,
where the Park was not.

The men of Dunham Soc and Manor, Tenants of ancient Demesne, Claus. 1. H. 1.
m. 8.
ought to be quit of Murder, Pontage, and all other Fines with the Cominalty of
the County.

Raph Fitz-Nicholas 11 H. 3. Cl. 11 H. 3. par. 4. ^. ^.
had to him and his heirs the Manor of Dunham, which was Reginalds Dammartin
Earl of Boloigne. The men of Dunham said, Test. de (...).
that the Earl of Bolon had 50l. Land, of the gift of King Henry, who gave it
to Earl Matthew, and the Earl held it on his wifes behalf, and there was in it
10l. Land, which B. de Insula had, for the keeping of Kingshag in Derleton.

King Henry the third confirmed 42 H. 3. Car. 42 H. 3 par. 1. ^. 5.
to his beloved brother, and faithful William de Valence, the Manor of Dunham,
which before he had granted to Raph Fitz-Nicolas, and his heirs, and which
Robert, son and heir of the said Raph, after the death of him the said Raph,
restored and quit-claimed for himself, and his heirs, to the said King to the
use of the said William, his brother, 50l. per annum, used to be paid out of it
to the Exchequer, according to a former extent of that Manor.

The Jury, 17 E. 2. Es^. 17 E. 2. n. 75.
said that Adomar of Valence Earl of Pembroke, held when he died the Manor of
Dunham, with the Sok: the passage over Trent was then valued at 10l. per annum.
John de Hasting^, and the two daughters of John Comin were found the next heirs
of Adomar of Valence, who was Lord here in 9 E. 2.

William de Valence, Number. 2 ill Ex (...) Georgil^^s Sai^^. per To. Grove.
who was brother of King H. 3. by the mother, married Ioane, daughter of Warin
de Monte Caniso, and Ioane his wife, one of the sisters and heirs of William
Marescall Earl of Pembroke, which occasioned him that title: by her he had
Audomar of Valens Earl of Pembrok, who married Mary, the daughter of Guy de
Chastillon Earl of St. Paul, but he died without issue: his sisters were
Isabell, wife of John de Hastings, and Ioane of John Comin of Badenagh, who by
her had two sons, John, and William, but both died childless, and two
daughters, Elizabeth wife of Richard Talbot, and Ioane of David Strabolgy, Earl
of Athol, who had David Strabolgy, Earl of Athol, who by his wife Katherine,
daughter of Sir Henry de Bellomonte, left a son, David also Earl of Athol, who
by Elizabeth his wife, the relict of John Malwain, had two daughters, his
heirs, Philippa wife of John de Halsham, and Elizabeth Willielmus de Valentia
frater uterinus H. 3. Regis Angl. Com. Pembr. and Weshford jure uxoris.-Joana
fill. Warini de Montecaniso and Joanae un. sor. and haer. Willielmi Marescal
Com. Pembrok. Joana-Johannes Comin de Badenagh. Joana-David de Strabolgy Comes
de Atholl in Scotia. David de Strabolgy Comes Atholl-Katherina fill. Henrici de
Bellomonte. David de Strabolgy Com. Atholl-Eliz. relicta Joh. Malwain.
Philippa-Johannes de Halsham. Johannes le Scroop-Elizabeth-Thom. Percy mar. 2.
Henricus Percy de Atholl, miles- Tho. Burgh, Ar.-Eliz.-Will. Lucy Chr. 14 H.6.
Tho. Burgh, sen. miles. Edw. Burgh, miles-Anna fill. Tho. Cobham, mil. Thom.
Burgh, miles, creat. Dom. Burgh per H. 8.-Agnes fill. Will. Terwhyt, mil.
Willielmus Dom. Burgh-....fill. Ed. Dom. Clinton. Henricus fill. and haer.
occisus sine exitu.




Henr. Dom. Gray de Codnor ob. 17 Jul. 22 H. 6.-Margar. Ric. Year Henr. Dom.
Gray ob. in vigil. Pasch. 10 H. 7. sine prole legitima-Katherina.





Ric. Talbot-Elizab. Johannes s. p. Willielmus s. p.
Johannes de Hastings.-Isabella. Maria fill. Guide. de Chastilon Com. de St.
Paulo.-Audomarus de Valentia Com. Pembr. s. p.

first wife of John le Scroope, Chr. who 15 R. 2. Lib. de fin. fol. 206. Pasch.
15 R. 2.
held this Manor in her right, and afterward wife of Thomas Percy, whom I
suppose father of Henry Percy de Atholl, Chr. who 4 H. 5. Hill. 4 H. 5. to. 480.
claimed against Robert Thorley, and others, the Manor and Soc of Dunham, and
had two daughters and heirs, Fin. 11 H. 6. m. 13.
Margaret, first wife of Henry Lord Gray of Codnour, and after of Richard Vere;
and Elizabeth, first wife of Thomas Burgh, Esquire, and after of Sir William
Lucy, viz. 13 H. 6. as in Darleton may be noted. The Lord Gray had by her
Henry, the last Lord Gray of Codnour, who 5 H. 7. Mich. 5 H. 7. rot. 410.
suffered a recovery of this Manor, together with Estwait, Touton, Barton and
Radcliffe, as in some or all of those places is noted, and died on Easter Eve,
10 H. 7. at which time notwithstanding it appears by an Inquisition taken at
Not. the Thursday after Palme-Sunday, before William Perpoint, Ex Inq.
Knight, Edward Stanhope, Knight, and Raph Agard, in the 24 H. 7. that Edward
Burgh, Knight, entered and held this Manor, after the said Lord Greys death, as
his Cousin and heir: he was son and heir of Sir Thomas de Burgh, Knight, son of
Elizabeth, the other daughter of the said Henry Percy D'atholl, and had to wife
Anne, the daughter of Sir Thomas Cobham, Ex Coll. I. B. Ar.
Knight, by whom he had Thomas Burgh, Knight, created Lord Burgh by King H. 8.
and made Knight of the Garter by Queen Elizabeth, which Thomas Lord Burgh
married Agnes; daughter of Sir William Terwhit, Knight, who brought him William
Lord Burgh, whose wife was...the daughter of Edward Lord Clinton, and his
eldest son Henry was slain without issue.

The owners of Dunham in 1612. are said to be Gilbert Earl of Shrowsbury,
Gervas Markham, Lib. libere ten.
Esquire, Hugh Dobson of Ragnell, Gent. Thomas Worsley, Robert Iackson, Martin
Worsley, Robert Balding, George Owing, Robert Berridge, William Hawksmore,
Robert Ellis, John Baldinge.

The Vicarage of Dunham was x. Marks, Mss. I. M*
and is now 4l. 13s. 4d. value in the Kings books, and the Prebendary Patron.

There is a free Chapel in Ragnell, B.
and another in Derleton, now in use.

Laneham. Lanum.
IN Lanum with its Berues, which were Ascam, Beckingham, Saundeby, Bolum,
Burton, Wateleg and Legreton, the Archbishop of York had a Manor, Lib. Dooms.
which was charged to the public Geld as nine Car. and two Bovats. The Land
was for twenty seven Plows, or so many Car. In the Demesne of the Hall were ten
Bovats of this Land, the rest was Soc, when the Conquerours great Survey was
made. Archbishop Thomas had there four Car. and an half, thirty five Vill. 6
Board. having sixteen Plows, Carucats, or Plow-Lands. There was a Church and a
Priest, and two Piscaries (or Fishings) 8s. one Mill 16s. Pasture Wood three
leu. long, one leu.. broad, one hundred Acres of Meadow. In the before named
Berues belonging to this Manor, were thirty eight Sochm. seventeen Vill.
twenty Board. having fourteen Car.. There were other thirty three Sochm. six
Vill. fifteen Board. having fifteen Car. these with their Land two Knights held
of the Archbishop.

The Jury, 7 E. 1. Esc. 7 E. 1. H. 22.
found that Walter (Giffard) Archbishop of York, held of William de Belu in
Lanum, one Toft, and sixteen Acres, and Godfr. (Giffard) Bishop of Worcester,
was then found his heir.

William de Melton was Prebendary of Southwell, 3 E. 2. Chapter 3 E. 2. n. 2.
and had free warren in Northwell Woodhouse, as in that place already is noted.
In 17 E. 2. Ch 17 E. 2. n. 32.
William de Melton Archbishop of York, had free warren in Southwell, Lanum,
Scroby, Askham, Sutton, and Plumptre.

There was a Fine 25 H. 6. Fin. lev. Pasch. 25 H. 6.
between Robert Ayscogh, Doctor in Decretis, Richard Sutton, Esquire, Thomas
Nevill, and Richard Chaterley, Over. and Henry Boson, otherwise called Henry
Bosom; Esquire, and Alice his wife, John Wastenes, Esquire, William Nevill of
South Leverton, and John of the Vicars, Deforc. of the Manors of Orston, and
Lanum, with the Appurtenances; and of six Mess. two Cottages, eight Tofts,
fourteen Bovats, one hundred forty six Acres of Land, forty four of Meadow, with
the Appurtenances in Orston, Lanum, and Newark, thereby acknowledged to be the
right of the said Robert.

Another Fine was levied the day after all Souls at Westminster, 34 H. 6. Fin.
lev. Mich. 34 H. 6.
between Richard Earl of Salisbury, John Earl of Shrowsbury, Raph Crumwell,
Knight, Richard Byngham, one of the Justices of the Kings Bench, Hugh Hercy,
Esquire, Thomas Moygne, John Thornhagh, Robert Braton, and Thomas Coke,
Chaplain, Quer. and William Nevyll, and Johan his wife, Deforc. of three Mess.
five Tofts, one hundred and fifty Acres of Land, thirty of Meadow, 5d. Rent, and
the moiety of a Dove-cote with the Appurt. in Lanum, Rampton, and South
Leverton, thereby passed to the said Thomas Moygne.

William Whorwood 37 H. 8. Pasch. 37 H. 8. rot. 471.
claimed for the King against Robert Archbishop of York, the Manors of
Scroby, Ravenskeld, Lanum, Askham, Sutton, and North Soke, etc.

In Laneham Town 1612. were many owners, Lib. libere ten.
Gervas Bellamy, Gent. Gervas Booth, Gervas Gilby, Leonard Vpsall, William
Baynby, Robert Draper, Rob Farrowe, Greg. Sowby, Greg. Bellamy, Will. Vpsall,
Original Cottam, Rowland Hall, Augustine Draper, Thomas Scarborrow, Gervas
Sibthorp, Widow Minnet, John Sowkyn, Gervas Markham of Dunham, Esquire, Oliver
Bowyer of Great Markham, Original Bellamy of the same, and diverse others.

The Vicarage of Lanum was 7l. value, Mss. I. M.
and the Chapter of York had the Patronage. It Is now 5l. 3s. 4d. in the Kings
Books, and the Dean and Chapter of York Patrons.

East Drayton. And Askham.
AScham was a Berue of Lanum, and involved with (...). Drayton was a Berue of
the Kings Manor of Dunham, and in it answered the Geld for two Car. and three
Bov. The Land being five Car. Lib. Dooms.
There sixteen Sochm: and seventeen Vill. had thirteen Car. and twenty Acres of
Meadow. There was Pasture Wood one qu. long, half so much broad. These with
Lanum belonged to the Archbishops of York, B.
who had the Tithes also appropriated, Nom. vill.
yet 9 E. 2. East Drayton answered for an entire Villa, and the King, and
Adomar of Valence were then Lords. The King was also by the death of the
Archbishop of York, then Lord of Lanum and Askham, wherein Adam de Everingham,
and Stephen de Bro... were likewise Lords.

Thomas Reyner, and Robert Ripars, 9 H. 4. Pl. de Banc. Trin. 9 H. 4. rot. 39.
impleaded very many for eating their Grass in a place at Drayton, called
Oldlands, in which the Tenants pleaded they ought to have Common every third
year.

In a recovery, 7 H. 8. Trin. 7 H. 8. rot. 344.
Humfr. Hercy, Esquire, Robert Nevill, the younger, Esquire, and Robert Rayner,
claimed against Nicolas Martyn one Mess. and an half, two Tofts, eighty Acres
of Land, seventeen of Meadow, twelve of Pasture, and sixty of More, with the
Appurtenances in East Drayton,

The most considerable share of Drayton, I suppose was John Rayners, who was
Sheriff of this County, and proclaimed the King at his return, 1660.

The owners of East Drayton 1612. are said to be Sir Robert Swift, Knight,
Nicolas Reynor, Lib. libere ten.
Gent..... Meverell, Gent. Edward Ormerod, Cler. the wife of... Fox, John
Barthropp, Richard Marshall, Senior, William Gabatus, Junior, William
Northefolke, Richard Gabatus, Robert Pharrow of Laneham, Henry Swift, George
Sturgeous, William Hawksmore of Ragnell, John Ward, George Rayner, William
Mynnett, Robert Mynnet, Edward Rayner, etc. and Sir Nicolas Sanderson, Knight.

Mss. I. M.
The Vicarage of Est Drayton was ten Marks: It Is now 9l. 3s. 4d. value in the
Kings Books, and the Dean and Chapter of York have the Patronage, which the
Chapter had formerly.

In the South I Will of East Drayton Church within a Garter,

Azure three Flowers de Liz Ermine quartering quarterly Or three Pallets Sab.
and Or a Lion Ramp. Azure, Lord Burgh. Arg. three Bars Azure.

Rampton. Rameton.
IN Rametone, before the Normans came, seven Taynes had seven Manors or
Mansions, which paid the public Tax for two Garucats, three Bovats, and one
third part of a Bovat. The Land was seven Car. and an half. There after the
Conquest Roger de Busli with his four Men (or Tenants) had three Car. eleven
Sochm. eight Vill. six Board. having five Car. and an half. Lib. Dooms.
There was a Church, three Fishings and an half 3s. 6d. there was sixty five
Acres of Meadow. In King Edward the Confessors time the value was 54s. in King
Williams when the Survey was made four shillings less: there was Soc, and in
Madressey.

Robert Malluvell, and his wife, and son, confirmed to God and St. Mary,
Regist. de Elid. p. 79.
and the Monks of Blithe, the Land which Nigellus de Ramton, Father of his wife,
and the wife of the said Nigellus, gave to that Church, viz. the Land which
Robert the Uncle of Nigell held in Ramton, paying 2s. yearly to the Church of
Blithe on St. Dionysius day.

The Sheriff, 12 H. 2. Pip. 12 H. 2.
accounted for Cs. of the Relief of Robert Malovell in the Honor of Tikhill.

Adam de Benningfeild, and Gundreda de Monasteriis his wife, 6 R. 1. Placit. in
Recept. Seat. Mich. 6 R. 1. to. 6.
claimed against Robert Malluvell, and Pavia his mother, seven Bovats of Land
in Ramton, with the Appurtenances, as those which the said Gundreda recovered
in the Court of King Henry against Robert Malluvell, Father of that Robert, as
those which Stephen, the elder brother of that said younger Robert, gave her in
Dower, and thereof she brought the handwriting which testified it; and they
said that after Robert had disseised them in the War of Earl John, with whom he
was at Kingshagh against the King, he said he was disseised by that Earl, and
therefore the Land was taken into the Kings hand by Hugh Bardolf. And the said
Robert pleaded that he had made Fine with the King, concerning having his
peace, and his Lands, and brought the Kings Letters to the Sheriff of Not. for
this Land which testified it. The Lord Chancellor said that he had it from the
Kings own mouth, that he should give seisin of their Lands to all those who
were disseized by Earl John; and seeing it appeared that Adam and Gundreda were
so, it was adjudged more Authentic what the King commanded by word of mouth
than by Letters: and they had their seisin restored.

Robert Malluvel, and Raph de Wudeburc, 6 R. 1* Pip. 6 R. 1.
gave account of twenty Marks for having the Kings good will, being both of the
number of such as made Fine for being the Knights, or Men of Earl John. The
same Robert Malluvell also accounted for twenty Marks for having his Lands, and
the Kings peace.

William Rufus, 3 Ioh. gave the King twenty Marks and a Palfrey, Pip. oblat. 3
Ioh. m. 1.
for having the custody of seven Bovats of Land, with the Appurtenances in the
Town of Ramton, by the Kings Bailiff, which were the Kings by reason of the
Children of Gundreda de Monasteriis, which Land Pavia the Grandmother of the
said William claimed against the said Gundreda, so that the said Children
should not be Eloigned from their right by that Bayliwick till their age.

There was an Assize, 5 Ioh. to try whether Stephen the Father of Robert
Mallovell died seized of seven Bovats of Land in Ramton, Mic. 5 Ioh. to. 12.
with the Appurtenances, etc. which Land Adam de Beddingfeld held, who came and
said that Steph. did die seized, but it was as of the marriage of Gundred des
Musters his wife, etc.

Roger Malluvell, 11 Ioh. gave account of a swift running Palfrey (or Courser)
and two Leis of Greyhounds, Pip. 11 Ioh. Ever. wic.
for having the Kings Letters deprecatory to Maud de Muschans, that she should
take him for her husband.

Robert Malluvell in King John's time, claimed against Roger Mauluvell one Bovat
of Land with the Appurtenances in Ramton as his right; Ex A^tique rot. de Pl.
de Banc. temport Regis Ioh.
Roger by his Attorney said, That Robert gave him that Land by his Deed (or
Chartel) and offered to put himself on the Grand Assize, etc. Robert came and
said, that he was not in his own power when he made that Chart, nor knew his
own sense, for that he was then in the custody of the said Roger his Uncle, who
took care of him in his infirmity, when all his other friends left him, and
therefore begged the consideration of the Cour^, whether that gift should be
established, and offered a Mark for having an Inquisition, whether that Chart
was made in the t^me before mentioned, or when he was in his own power.

There was a Fine, 9 Ioh. between Hugh le Butiller, and Robert Malluvell, Fin.
lev. Mic. 9 Ioh.
to whom the seven Bovats in Ramton were thereby then conveyed.

Robert Maluvell of Rampton, son of Stephen, son of Pavia, 8 H. 3. Pl. de Banc.
Mic. 8 H. 3. incipiente 9. Quint. di Quind. to. 7. in dorso.
claimed Lands in Rampton, which the said Pavia his Grandmother held in the
time of King Henry the second, against Richard (Maluvel) son of the said Pavia.

Robert Maulovel, 12 H. 3. Pl. de Banc. Mich. 12 H. 3. to. 14.
was attached to answer Roger Maulovel by what warrant he intruded himself into
twenty four Acres of Land with the Appurtenances in Rampton, which ought to
remain to the said Roger, by a Fine made between the said Roger, and Richard
Maulovel his brother. The Land was Mortgaged for ten Marks.

Stephen Malluvell I suppose son of Robert, Test. de Neve
because he is certified to hold a Knights Fee in Rampton of the Countess of
Ewe of the old feoffment, and paid two Marks for it in the time......- Nigellus
de Ramton- Pavia fill. and haer.-Robertus Malluvell. Steph. Malluvell-Gundreda
de Monasteriis-Adam de Benningfeld mar. 2.6 R. 1. Robertus Mallovell superst. 8
H. 3.- Stephen Maulovell- Robertus Mallovell-Eliz. fill. Tho. de Lungevilers,
mil. Stephen Maulovel- Elizab. fill. and hear.-Joh. Stanhope fill. Ric. Stanhop
Burgensis de Newcastle-Rogerus Arden mat. 2. Joh. Stanhop s. p.-Eliz. fill. Tho.
and sor. and haer. Joh. Cuilly. Ric. Stanhop miles.-Elizab. ux. 1.-Matild. sor.
and haer. Rad. Dom. Crumwell. Ric. Stanhope, Ar. ob. mar. 2.10 H. 6.-Eliz. fill.
Joh. Markham, mil. Johannes Stanhope, Ar.-Eliz. fill. Tho. Talbot de Bashall in
Com. Lanc. mil. Thom. Stanhope-Maria fill.... Jerningham. Edw. Stanhope,
miles-Adelina fill. Gerv. Clifton, mil.-Eliz. fill. Fulc. Bourchier Dom.
Fitz-Warin. Ric. Stanhop fill. and haer.-Anna fill. and coh. Joh. Strelley.-Joh.
Markham, miles. Saunchia fill. and haer.-Johannes Babington. Originalis
Babington-....fill....Galley. Johannes Babington-... fill.... Bussy de Hather.
Johannes Babington-... fill. Hercy Nevill-Anthonius Eyr mar. 2.- Barbar. fill.
and cohaer-..Boswell. Will. More S.T.P. mar. 2. s. p. Eliz. fill. and
cohaer.-Gerv. Eyr, miles. Anthonius Eyr de Rampton, Ar.-Lucia fill. Joh. Digby,
mil.-... fill. Joh. Packington, Bar. Lucia.
Maria- Joh. Newton, Bar.
Eliz. fill. and cohaer.-Gerv. Eyr, miles. Anthonius-



Tho. Markham de Allerton-
Michael Stanhop, mil. de Shelford.- Anna Ducissa Somerset.

Henr. Stanhope. Joana fill. Henr. Rocheford. Edm. Stanhope- Margar. fill. and
haer. ux. Tho. Skeffington.-




-Matilda-
Rad. Arden.





Rob. Malluvell. Roger. Ric.....- Willielmus Rufus 3 John


Robertus.
of Henry the third. Ex Coll. I. B.
This Stephen, or a son of his of the same name, was Father of Robert
Malluvell, who married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Thomas de Lungvilers, and by
her had Stephen Malovel, the Father of Elizabeth, who had to her first husband
John Stanhope, the son of Richard Stanhope, a Burgess of Newcastle; and to her
second Roger Arden, by whom she had Raph Arden; but her eldest son and heir was
John Stanhope of Rampton, who married the heir of Cuily, Antiq. Warwick. p. 80.
as in Oxton is noted, but had no issue, for Richard Stanhope, 22 R. 2. Fin. 22
R. 2. m. 14.
was found to be of full age, and the heir of Agnes, the wife of Reginald de
Everingham Chr. who was daughter and heir of John Lungvillers, whose sister
Elizabeth was mother of Stephen (Malovel) Father of Elizabeth, mother of the
said Richard Stanhope, who thereby became heir of both Families, Mallovell and
Lungvilers, as in Turford is shown already, to whom also the third part of that
Manor likewise descended from the heirs Female of the Families of Marcham and
Lexington:

At the Assizes at Not. 29 E. 3. Galfr. de Cotes Parson of the Church of
Ketelby impleaded Roger de Maloell of Rampton, to. 45.
John Braytoft, Henry Wright of Lanum, and Henry Bear of Torkesey, concerning
his Freehold in Rampton, viz. a Were, etc. They came not, but William Heron
answered for them, that Stephen Maloell was sometime seized of the Manor of
Rampton, of which that Were was part, which he held of Queen Philip, as of the
Honor of Tikhill, and thereof died seized; after whose death the said Queen
seized the said Manor into her hand, by reason of the minority of Elizabeth,
daughter and heir of the said Stephen, and conferred the Marriage and Custody
of her the said Elizabeth, on Roger de Bellocampo, etc. The Jury found that the
said Galfr. was disseized by John Braytoft only, but the Judges could not
proceed to Judgment (by reason of the forementioned Wardship) without the
Kings knowledge.

The Manor of Rampton, with the Appurtenances, was by Fine, 38 and 39 E. 3.
Fin. lev. Trin. 38 E. 3. and Hill. 39 E. 3.
between Will. de Eton, Vicar of the Church of Rampton, and John, son of Robert
de Lanum, Plaintiffs, and John de Stannop, and Elizabeth his wife, Deforc.
settled on the said John and Elizabeth, and the heirs of their bodies;
remainder to the heirs of the body of Elizabeth; remainder to Richard Stannop
for life; remainder to the right heirs of Elizabeth.

Peter Malovell, and Thomas his brother, 39 H. 3. Pip. 39 H. 3.
had a Writ, etc.

The Jury, 20 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Pasch. 20 E. 1. to. 13.
found that Simon Maulovell of Rampton, and John Furmery were not blameable for
eating the Acorns with their Swine in the Woods of Robert de Musters in
Tyreswell, in which they claimed Common, etc.

There was a Fine levied at York, 16 E. 2. Fin. lev. apud Ebor. Pasch. 16 E. 2.
between John Maulovell of Rampton, and Katherine the daughter of William Ablot
of Pokelington, Plaintiffs, and Raph Maulovell of Rampton, Deforc. of one Mess.
sixty Acres of Land, thirteen of Meadow, with the Appurtenances in Rampton,
which were thereby settled on the said John and Katherine, and the heirs of
their bodies; remainder to the right heirs of Katherine: To this Fine Robert
Maulovell of Rampton put to his claim.

There were Covenants of Marriage, Ex Coll. I. B. (...)
3 R. 2. made between Sir Edmund Pierpont, Knight, and John his brother on the
one part, and John Stanhope on the other, for the Marriage of John Stanhope his
son and heir with Elizabeth, sister of the said Sir Edmund, but whether it took
effect or no is uncertain, but that he had no issue is certain, and that he had
to wife the heir of Cuily that year, as by the Fine noted in Oxton, and what is
s^id before out of Mr. Dugdale's An^iquities of Warwickshire appears, though
his wife might die that year, and a new match be treated on. Sir Richard
Stanhope was brother and heir of John, who married Cuily, but could not be son,
as in that place is supposed, because it is evident he was son and heir of
Elizabeth, the daughter and heir of Stephen Malouvell in 22 R. 2. as before is
noted. This Sir Richards first wife was Elizabeth, but by others said to be
Ioane, F. 1^3.
the daughter of Robert, and sister of Raph (Staveley, or) Staley, by whom he
had diverse Children, Richard, Thomas, James, Elizabeth, and Agnes.

There were Covenants of Marriage, 10 H. 4. between Sir Richard Stanhope, and
Sir Nicolas Strelley, for the marriages of Agnes, daughter of Sir Richard, to
Robert Strelley, son of Sir Nicolas.

The Covenants of Marriage between Sir Richard Stanhope, and Sir Raufe
Cromwell, for Mand, sister of the sa^d Sir Raufe, to the said Sir Richard, were
dated 12 H. 4. By her he had Henry Stanhope, who died without issue, 12 Aug. 31
H. 6. and was buried at Lamley; and Matilda, first married to Robert Lord
Willoughby; secondly, to Thomas Nevile; and thirdly, to Sir Gervas Clifton: and
Ioane married to Humfrey Bourchier, as in Lamley is noted.

Sir Richard Stanhope, 5 H. 6. covenanted with Sir John Assheton, and Elizabeth
his wife, I. B.
sometime wife of Sir Thomas Talbot of Bashall in Lanc. for the marriage of
John Stanhope his (Grandson) Neph^w, to Elizabeth, daughter of the said Sir
Thomas Talbot.

Sir Richard Stanap, about 14 H. 6. Esc. 14 H. 6. n. 28.
died seized of this Manor of Rampton, half Egmanton, and the third part of
Tuxford, the Manors of Skegby, and South Cotum, etc. leaving the said John
Stanap his heir, viz. son of his son Richard Stanap, Esquire, whose death was
on the second of March, 10 H. 6. as by his Tomb in Tuxford may be seen, whereon
is only the Coat of Lungvilers, viz. A Bend between six Crossecroslets, which
(notwithstanding in a Window of that Church there is on the Surcoat of John
Stanhope, Azure a Cross Moline Or) was most constantly used by this Family,
whilst they continued Lords of this place, for their paternal Coat, perhaps
sometimes counterchanging the colors, for I have not seen the Arms of the
present Earl of Chesterfeild borne by any but the posterity of Sir Michael
Stanhope.

Elizabeth, the daughter of John Markham, was wife of Richard Stanhope,
Esquire, and when she died, viz. about 16 H. 6. Esc. 16 H. 6. n. 20.
held two parts of Longvilers Manor in Tuxford, settled on her by Sir Richard
Stanhope. John Stanhope, son and heir of that Elizabeth, was then also found
Cousin and heir of Sir Richard Stanhope, viz. son of Richard Stanhope, Esquire,
son of the said Sir Richard.

John Stanhop, Esquire, 14 May, 33 H. 6. Orig. 33 H. 6. to. 18.
paid Relief for Lands in Rampton, Tuxford, and Egmanton, which, till that
year, Matilda, the wife of his Grandfather the said Sir Richard Stanhope, held.
This John's eldest son was Thomas Stanhope, Esquire, who by his wife Mary, the
daughter of Edward Ierningham of Summer Laytun in Suff. was father of Sir
Edward Stanhope; and his second son Henry Stanhope, 17 E. 4. married Ioane, the
daughter of Henry Rochford, Esquire, of Stoke in Lincolnshire, by whom he had
Edmund Stanhope, whose daughter and heir Margaret, was wife of Thomas, son of
Sir William Skoffington.

Sir Edward Stanhope had to his first wife Adelina, daughter of Sir Gervas
Clifton, by whom he had Richard Stanhope, Esquire, his eldest son; and Sir
Michael Stanhope, who seconded by his son Sir Thomas, raised a greater Family,
as in Shelford may be observed. Sir Edwards second wife was Elizabeth, daughter
of Fulk Bourchier Lord Fitz-Warin, by whom he had Anne, the wife of Edward
Seymour Duke of Somerset, Lord Protector in the time of Edward the sixth, by
whose means her brother Sir Michael Stanhope (a great Courtier before) might
receive some assistance for advancing his fortune, though he lost his head, as
in Shelford is said. Sir Edward Stanhope's Lady was after his death married to
Sir Richard Page.

Richard Stanhope, Esquire, eldest son of Sir Edward married Anne, one of the
four daughters and coheirs of John Strelley, Esquire, afterward married to
Sir John Markham: by her the said Richard had one only daughter and heir
Saunchia, wife of John, son of Anthony Babington, which John was Father of
Original Babington, who had to wife....the daughter of.... Galley, and by her
had John Babington of Rampton, who married Elizabeth, daughter of... Bussy of
Hather, who brought him John Babington, whose wife was.... the daughter of
Hercy Nevyll of Grove, Esquire, afterward married to Anthony Eyr, whose son
Sir Gervas Eyr, married Elizabeth, one of her daughters and coheirs by John
Babington; Barbara the other was wife of John Boswell of Edlington near Tikhill
in Yorkshire, of whom Sir Gervas Air purchased the other moiety of this
Manor; the Lady Eyr after Sir Gervas was dead married William More, D. D. by
whom she had no child: to Sir Gervas she bore Anthony Eyr, and Mary, wife of
Sir John Newton of Hather, Baronet; Anthony first married Lucia, daughter of
Sir John Digby of Maunsfeild Woodhouse; and since he was chosen to serve in
Parliament as Knight for this County,.... the daughter of Sir John Packington,
Baronet.

In 1612. the owners of Rampton Town are said to be the heirs of John
Babington, Lib. libere ten.
Esquire, the heirs of George Smith, the heirs of Francis Kitchen, John Hutton,
Prebendary, Francis Busshy, Esquire, Robert Sampson a Plowland and an half,
John Brown as much, Richard Legate a Plowland, William Barneby, Edward Procter
the like, John Legate, Roger Fenton half a Plowland, Thomas Cotton as much,
William Leggat six Acres, Anthony Fenton a Cottage, etc.

The Vicarage of Rampton was 8l. It Is now 10l. value in the Kings Books, and
the Prebendary continues Patron.

Stokeham. Doomsd. Estoches.
IN Estoches in Berndeslaw Wapentak, as it were Soc to Flodburg, Godeva the
Countess paid the Tax or Danegeld, Lib. Dooms.
in the time of King Edward the Confessor, for six Bovats of Land, and a
third, and a fifteenth part of a Bovat. The Land being then returned sufficient
for twelve Oxen, or twelve Bovats. There after the Conquest Nigellus the Man
(or Tenant) of the Bishop of Lincoln, whose Fee it was (which Nigel had also
Fledburgh) had five Sochm. and four Board. having three Car. and six Acres of
Meadow, and small Wood. In the Confessors time this was 20s. value, in the
Conquerours 10s. This place seems to have descended with Fledborough to the
Families of Lysures and Bassett, as in that place may be seen.

The Manor of Stokeham about the eleventh year of Queen Elizabeth, B.
was the Inheritance of William Swift, Ancestor to Sir Robert Swift, and was
afterward Sir Robert Amstrudders, who married the daughter of the said Sir
Robert Swift.

The owners of Stoakham Town in 1612. are said to be Sir Robert Swift, Knight,
Lib. libere ten.
Original Brown, Original Byeron, John Bellamye, Edward Clarke, Anne Boil.

Headon. Hedune. And Vpton.
SOme in Hedune was joined with Grove, of the Soc of Dunham, the Kings Manor,
and there was Soc to Grove in Hedune particularly of the Fee of Roger de Busli,
which paid the public Imposition for one Bovat. And besides that, there was in
Hedune of Roger de Buslies Fee a Manor, where before the Conquest Godric, and
other six Thaynes had each Man his Hall, amongst them were eight Bovats, and
one third of a Bovat for the Geld. The Land was five Car. and an half. Lib.
Dooms.
There (after the Conquest) William the Man of Roger had two Car. fourteen
Sochm. nine Vill. six Board. having sixteen Car. there was twenty six Acres of
Meadow, Pasture Wood five qu. long, four broad. In King Edward the Confessors
time, and then the value was 2l. having Soc in Vptune as much as paid the Geld
for half a Bovat. The Land two Bov. There were then three Sochm. and two Board.
with one Car. and two Acres of Meadow. In Vptune also Soc to Dunham there was
one Bov. of Land for the Geld. The Land... There four Sochm. and two Board. had
one Car. and an half, and three Acres of Meadow, Pasture. Wood two qu. long, one
broad. Egmanton had Soc in Markham, and belonging to that was there in Vptune,
as much as answered the Geld for two Bovats of Land and an half. The Land two
Car. There nine Sochm. and two Board. had four Car. and six Acres of Meadow. This
had Soc in Mercham; and in Hedune there was Soc to Mercham, one Bov. for the
Geld. The Land two Bov. and two Acres of Meadow. There one Sochm. had two Bovats.

William the Man or Tenant of Roger de Busli held of his Fee in Outhorpe, where
a Family, who had their name from their residence at this place, had some
interest, as is there noted. Hugh de Hedon, son of Fulc, gave to the Monastery
of Blithe a measure of Wheat then called Acrased, Regist. de Elid. p. 78.
and Acrasset of Blithe (i. e. Seed for an Acre) to be paid yearly on the Feast
of St. Katherin the Virgin and Martyr. Hugh, son of Hugh de Hedun, confirmed
it, and added 12d. yearly Rent to be paid at the same time. Simon de Hedun
confirmed the gift of Hugh his Grandfather of a quarter of Wheat yearly at the
Feast of St. Katherin, and the 12d. yearly Rent, which Hugh his Father gave.
Hugh de Heddun, 14 H. 2. Pip. 14 H. 2.
gave account of 10l. of the relief of his Land in the honor of Tikhill; and 6
R. 1. Pip. 6 R. 1.
being one of those Knights Fined for being with Earl John, he then gave 10l.
for having seisin of his Land, viz. one Knights Fee in Heddon. He paid four
Marks, 8 R. 1. Pip. 8 R. 1. Everw.
for two Knights Fees which he held of the honor of Tikhill. Hugh de Heddon, 7
Ioh. Pip. 7 Ioh.
gave account of ten Marks in the sixth Scutage of the honor of Tykehull. Simon
de Heddon, 43 H. 3. Pip. 43 H. 3. Pip.
was Sheriff of this County, and his son and heir Gerard de Hedon after him, 51
H 3. and 53 H. 3.

Roger de Essex, and Simon de Heddon, 54 H. 3. Pip. 54 H. 3. Somerset and
Dorset.
were Executors of Brian de Insula. Gerard de Hedon had a Charter of Free
Warren in his Manor of Hedon, granted by King Henry the third. Rot. de Ragman.
8 E. 1. to. 1. in dorso.


The Jury, 24 E. 1. Esc. 24 E. 1. n. 42.
found that John de Hedon had this Manor and Advowson of the Church; seven
Acres of Meadow in Rampton, and Rents in Vpton 8s. etc. and that Simon, son of
Simon de Hedon, was his next heir, and fifty years of age. In the Pipe Roll for
Yorkshire, 29 E. 1. Pip. 29 E. 1. Ebor.
Simon is said to be son and heir of John de Hedon, and 14 E. 2. Pip. 14 E. 2.
brother and heir.

There was a Fine levied at York the day after St. John Baptist, 31 E. 1. Fin.
lev. Trin. 31 E. 1. apud Ebor.
between Laurence de Chauworth, and Agnes his wife, Pl. and Nicolas de Hedon,
Deforc. concerning the Manor of Hedon near Retford in the Cley, which was
thereby settled on the said Nicolas for life; remainder to Agnes de Iors, and
the heirs of her body; remainder to the right heirs of Nicolas. Another Fine
was levied at the same place between the same persons in the Octaves of St.
John Baptist, 32 E. 1. Ib. Trin. 32 E. 1.
whereby the said Manor and Advowson of the Church were settled on the said
Nicolas for life; remainder to the said Laurence, and Agnes, and the heirs of
Agnes.

There were two Fines at Not. the Monday after St. Martin, Fin. apud (...). 3
E.
3 E. 3. one between Edmund Wasteneys Chr. Quer. and Simon Iorce of Wimondwold,
Deforc. of this Manor and Advowson, which Laurence de Chaworth then held for
life, which after his decease were by that Fine settled on the said Edmund and
his heirs. The other was between Simon de Iorce of Wymondwould, and Mariot his
wife, Pl. and Edmund Wasteneys Chr. Deforc. whereby the premises were after the
death of the said Laurence settled on the said Simon and Mariot for life, and
after their decease on Robert, son of the said Edmund, and the heirs of his
body; remainder to William, Johannes Wasteneys de Hedon-.... fill.... Bussine.
Robertus Wasteneys-Eliz. fill. Tho. Nelson, Merc. Stapulae Ebor. Georgius
Wasteneys-Eliz. fill. Willielmi Blithe. Georgius Wastneys-Anna fill. Ric. Basset
de Fledburgh, mil. Georgius Wastneys-Maria fill.... Melford. Gervasius Wastnes
superst. 1575.-Jana fill. Leon. Reresby de Thriber. Hardolf Wastenes, Bar. 18
Dec. 22 Jac.-Jana fill. Gerv. Air de Kighton Ebor. Hardolf Wastneys, Bar. ob.
1673. s. p.-... fill.... Chicheley. 2 Johannes-... fill....Ireland. Edmund.
Wasteneys, Bar.-... fill.... Sandys.
3 Georgius.

Johannes. Anna.
Galfr. Will. Dalison de Scoteney C. Linc.-Anna.
2 Barthol.



Thomas, Edmund, Brethren of the said Robert successively, and the heirs of
their bodies respectively; remainder to the said Edmund Wasteneys, and his
heirs for ever.

Robert le Wasteneys, and Flora his wife, by a Fine, 24 E. 3. Fin. lev. Trin.
24 E. 3.
between them and John de Knyveton, Parson of Radecliff, etc. settled this
Manor and Advowson to the said Robert and Flora, and the heirs of the body of
the said Robert; remainder to Edmund his brother, and the heirs of his;
remainder to the right heirs of the said Robert.

Who succeeded Robert I have not seen, but it remains the Inheritance of Sir
Edmund Wastenes, Baronet, to whom it descended on this Manor it seems.

Vpton was held by Raph Tilly, and Sibyll his mother. Test. de Nev.
Philippa de Tilly held of the Countess of Ewe in Vpton and Markham a Knights
Fee of the old Feoffment. The Jury, 36 H. 3. Esc. 36 H. 3. n. 56.
found that the Lady Philippa de Tilly had in Demesne in Vpton six Bovats of
Land with Meadow belonging thereto, and that she died in the Feast of St. Peter
ad Cathedram, 32 H. 3. and had sons and daughters, but they remained in
Normandy, so that the Land Eschaeted to the King, who had given the Honor of
Tikhill to Edmund his son, who it is like gave Tillyes Land to Eymer or Aymo de
Tromberge, named in Thrumpton. Aymo Thurnebert, 37 H. 3. Chapter 37 H. 3. m. 4.
had Vpton, and six Bovats of Land, and other six Bovats, etc. granted. He was
Lord of Vpton, of whose Fee the Town of Routhorn (in Darbyshire) was held by
the Foreign Service for one Knights Fee, Regist. de Novo loco in Shirw. p. 168,
169, etc.
as was said. He had four daughters his heirs, whereof three were married, viz.
to Thomas de Chalers, Baudwin de Collum, and William de S. Iorge, and the
fourth, to one Richard de N. and the same Eymer held of Tikhill four Knights
Fees by Foreign Service, and Suit of Court, and Ward of the Castle, and making
four Perches of the Causey of Tikhill, and the said Town of Routhorn was in the
possession of one Raph Tilly, and Sibyll his mother, by Eschaet, and they
enfeoffed one William, son of Walkelin. And afterward the said Town came to
the possession of one Robert le Savage, who married Hawisia, sister of the said
Raph Tilly. Which Robert de Savage afterward of it enfeoffed one Robert de
Lexington, who gave it to the Priory of Newstede in Shirwood.

The King, 10 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Pasch. 10 E. 1. to. 28.
claimed against Alienor Thurnberd, William de S. George, and Elizabeth
Thurnbard one Knights Fee in Vpton. They pleaded that they held it not entire,
because one Baldwin de S. George, and Basilia his wife (who it seems was widow
of the said Aymo de Thurnberd) held the third part of it in Dower.

The King, 20 E. 1. Pl. cor. Rege Pasc. 20 E. 1. to. 38.
claimed against Baldwin de Colne, and Alianor his wife, William de S. George,
and Margaret his wife, and Thomas de Scalariis, and Elizabeth his wife, eight
Bovats of Land, two parts of a Mess. and... Acres of Meadow in Vpton in the
Cley, as his right, etc. They said they held them severally and not jointly.

Another Plea concerning the premises there was, 21 E. 1. Ib. Trin. 21 E. 1.
to. 5.
wherein the Parceners said they were daughters and heirs of one Eymo
Turrenberd, who died seized, etc. William de Collum Lord of Vpton sold it.

Robert de Wolrington was Steward of Sir Thomas de Chalers, and Sir Baudwyn de
Collum, Reg. de Novo loco p. 170.
and receiver of their Scutage for the Army of Scotland, 4 E. 2.

There was a Fine levied in the Octaves of the Purification of the blessed
Mary, 21 E. 3. between John de Bolyngbroke, Reg. de Novo loco p. 171.
Quer. by Robert de Bolyngbroke (or Bekyngham) put in his place, etc. and
William de Collum Chivaler, Deforc. of the moiety of the Manor of Vpton near
Hedon in the Clay, with the Appurtenances, which the said William acknowledged
to be the right of the said John, as of the gift of the said William, excepting
one Knights Fee and an half, and a fourth part in the said moiety. And he
granted to the said John, the said Fee and half, and fourth part, together with
the Homages and Services of the Prior of Newstede in Shirwode, and his
successors, of John de Warren Earl of Surrey, Galfr. Poutrell, John del Ker,
William de Goteham, Henry the Chaplain of Thurmeston, William Cressy of Great
Marcham, Robert de Eton of Tyreswell, and of their heirs, for all the Tenements
which they formerly held of the said William de Collum in the said moiety, to
have and to hold to the said John and his heirs for ever, etc.

There was a Fine, 18 R. 2. Fin. lev. Pasch. 18 R. 2.
between John de Markham, Quer. and Robert Goderich, and William de Notton,
Deforc. of the Manor of Vpton by Hedon, with the Appurtenances, whereby it was
conveyed to the said John and his heirs.

This John de Markham had Bothumsell Manor the next year, viz. 19 R. 2. and
with his posterity both of these continued till about 8 Eliz. that Robert
Markham, Esquire, conveyed them with Elkesley to the possession of William
Swyft, Esquire, Father I suppose of Sir Robert Swift. I find Robert Swifte paid
3s. 4d. for his Lands in Vpton in the time of Queen Elizabeth, late Robert
Markhams, and Thomas Denmans, held by the Service of half a Knights Fee.

The owners of Headon cum Vpton in 1612. are said to be Robert Swift, Knight,
Lib. libere ten.
Hardolph Wastneyes, Esquire, Thomas Nicholson 20s. William Hawksmore, Henry
Swifte, Alexander Bellamy a Cottage, William Colt, Cott. William Nicholson,
Cott.

There was a Cottage in Vpton by Hedon belonging to the Free Chapel in Vpton,
18 Eliz. Par. 2. pat. 18 Eliz.
granted among other things to John Mershe, Esquire, and Francis Greneham, Gent. 30
March, and their heirs.

The Rectory of Hedon was 20l. and Mr. Wastnes Patron. M.I. I. M.
The Vicarage of the same Town was ten Marks, and the Rector Patron. The
Rectory is now 15l. 12s. 6d. value in the Kings Books, and Sir Hardolfe
Wasteneys Patron, as he is also of the Vicarage, which is now 4l. 3s. 4d. in
the Kings Books.

Gamston. Gameleston upon Idle.
IN Gameleston was some of Roger de Buslies Fee, which was Soc to Agemanton, of
which one Garden, and one Sochm. belonged to Marcham, and one Garden ( ortum to
Etton. But the greatest part was of the Fee of Rogerius Pictavensis, two
Manors whereof before the Conquest were the freehold of Gamel and Swain, Lib.
Dooms.
and answered the Taxation for one Car. The Land being then eight Car. There
Roger had in Demesne two Car. and seven Sochm. on two Bov. of this Land, and
three Vill. one Board. having three Car. and an half. There two Mills yielded
40s. twenty or twenty eight Acres of Meadow, twenty Acres of small Wood. This
kept the value it had in the time of King Edward the Confessor, viz. 4l.
Another Manor Chetelberne had before the Conquest, which paid for one Bov. to
the Geld. The Land one Car. That Manor Chetelberne had of Roger Pictavensis,
and there had one Car. two Board. and three Acres of Pasture Wood. In King
Edward the Confessors time this was 20s. 8d. in the Conquerours but 10s. value.

The owners of this place had their name it seems from Matersey or Maresey in
this County, where they founded a Monastery of Gilbertines, to which they gave
this Church, and were likewise Lords of Heton by Lancaster.

Rogerus de Maresey- Ranulf de Maresey, 1 John 7 R. 1. Isabella relict. 12 Joh.
Rogerus de Maresey, 9 H. 3. and 18 H. 3.- Ranulf de Maresey- Thom. de Marsey
ob. 26 E. 1.- Thom. de Mersay. Phil. de Chauncy-Isabella. Gerard de Chauncy ob.
15 E. 2. Isabella de Chauncy... aet. 1. an. 15 E. 2.-Georgius Monboucher.
Nicol. Monboucher infra aet. 24 E. 3.-Margareta, 39 E. 3. 1 Bertram. Monboucher
s. p. 2 Georg. s. p. 3 Rad.-Margareta sor. Tho. Foljamb relict. Jo. Cokfeld.
Jo. Burgh-Isab. Matild. ux. Joh. Kevermond.









Hugh Bardulf 7 R. 1. Pip. 7 R. 1
gave account of Cxviiis. vi^. of the issue of Gameleston, which was Ranulf,
son of Rogers, for the whole year. Ranulph de Maresi 1 Ioh. Pip. 1 Ioh.
gave account of fifty Marks for having his Land, which was in the Kings hand
after the death of his Father. Isabell who had been wife of Ran. de M^resey, 12
Ioh. Pip. 12 Ioh.
gave account of thirty eight Marks, and one Palfrey, that she should not be
constrained, etc. Eustace de Mortein, 8 Ioh. held two Knights Fees in
Gameleston, Pip. 8 Ioh. Test. de Nev.
with the heir of Ranulf de Marisco, for the Custody (or Wardship of whom, he
gave 100l. that year. Roger, son of Ranulf (de Marese^y) paid four Marks in the
Scutage of Montgomeri 9 H. 3. Pip. 9 H. 3.
for two Knights Fees in Gameleston, and in after times Ranulf, son of Roger,
paid for two Fees in Gamelston. The Jury, 26 E. 1. Lanc. Test. de Nev. Lib.
feod. Her* Commit. Lan^. in offic. ducat. fol. 14. b. Esc. 26 E. 1. n. 42.
found that Thomas de Maresey held in the town of Gamelston one Mess. nine
score Acres of Arable Land, etc. when he died, and diverse Lands in Hatfeild,
Houghton, Kirkton, West Retford, Misen, Meresey, Kirkeby, Walesby, Wilheby, of
the Honor of Lancaster, and that Thomas de Maresey was his son and heir: he
had also a Capital Mess. and five Bovats of land in Everton, held of the
Archbishop of York.

Isabell was daughter of Sir Thomas de Marsey, M^n. Ang. c^l. 2. p. 811.
and wife of Sir Philip de Chauncy, who confirmed the gifts of her ancestors in
this and other places, to the Priory of Marsay or Mattersey in this County, (in
the Monasticon mistaken and said to be in Lincolneshire.) The Jury, 15 E. 2.
Esc. 15 E. 2. n. 47.
found that Gerard de Chauncy held the Manor of Houghton, and two parts of the
Manor of Gamelston of the Earl of Lancaster, and that he overlived Isabell de
Chauncy his mother, whose heir he was of these Lands, and that he left Isabell
de Chauncy his daughter and heir one year old, the Friday after the Feast of
the Annuntiation then last past: he had the Manors of Willughton, Swynhope,
etc. in Lincolnshire.

George Monbocher Lord of Gameleston, left his son and heir Nicholas under age,
Regist. de Blid. p. 156.
who in 24 E. 3. was in the Custody of Thomas Cok, Knight, by the gift of the
Earl of Lancaster.

Nicolas Mounboucher, Chr. about 8 R. 2. Esc. 8 R. 2. n. 27.
dyed seized of this Manor, and that of Hoghton upon Idle, which with the
Manor of Bylynggay in Lincolneshire, and many other Hereditaments in this
County, 39 E. 3. were settled on him, Ex Autog. pen. meips. R. S.
and Margaret his wife, and the heirs of their bodies, remainder to the right
heirs of the said Nicolas, on whose seal within the Circumscription of his name
is A Chevron between 3. Pitcheri, with 3. Feet. Within a Border charged with
roundells. The Deed was dated at Hoghton, the Thursday after the Feast of St.
George the Martyr, 39 E. 3. These Manors of which he died seized extended
themselves in the Towns of Houghton, Gamilston, Flintham, Willughby, Walesby,
Elkeslee, Kyrton, Grimston, Welhagh, Almton, Drayton, Barneby, Everton, Mysyn,
Clareburgh, West Retford, and Morton in this County, and Maresey and Thorpe, as
the book of Fees of Henry Earl of Lancaster in the Duchy office shows. This
Sir Nicolas Monbocher had issue Bertram, George, Fol. 32. Esc. 4 E. 4. n. 33.
(aged fifteen years 8 R. 2.) Raph, Isabell, and Matilda. Bertram dyed before
his Father without issue, and so did George after his fathers death, and Raph
entered as his brother and heir, and married Margaret, the relict of John
Folejambe, the sister of Thomas Cokefeild, but had no issue. Isabell had for
her husband John Burgh, Esquire, and Matildis John Kevermond, who 5 H. 5. Hill.
5 H. 5.
levied a Fine of these Manors, to Thomas Folejambe, the elder, Esquire,
Robert Thornhagh, William Foljambe, and William Webster, Chaplain.

Margaret Cokefeild held for her life the Manors of Houghton upon Idle, and
Gameleston of the honor of Lancaster, by the Rent of 40s. for Ward of the
Castle of Lancaster, the reversion in 4 E. 4. Esc. 4 E. 4. p. 764.
belonged to Thomas Thurland, William Gull, William Babington, and their heirs.

Thomas Thurland about 13 E. 4. Esc. 13 E. 4. n.
left these Manors, and West Drayton, to William Gull, Clark, and others: his
Cousin and heir Thomas Thurland was then twenty one years old.

This Manor was sold by.... Thurland, the late unthrift of that Family, B.
to Thomas Markham, Esquire, eldest son of Sir John Markham of Cotham, by his
latter wife the relict of Richard Stanhope, and one of the sisters and coheirs
of John Strelley of Strelley, Esquire; it is now with Houghton the inheritance
of the Right Honorable the Earl of Clare, who has also Thurland House in
Nottingham, where lived Thomas Thurland, the great Merchant of the Staple, and
thereby the raiser of that Family.

This Church was accounted as part of the Chapelry of Blithe, Regist. de Novo
loco p. 206, etc.
but it appears, 16 E. 3. that the Prior of Madersay was Patron, of whom
Richard de Willoughby obtained it, and presented Rog. de Willughby, who was
Parson of Gameleston at that time.

The owners of Gamston 1612. are said to be Sir John Hollys, Lib. libere ten.
Knight, Sir Robert Swifte, Knight, Robert Meunell, Esquire, (of Staffordshire)
Robert Brett.

The Rectory of Gamylston was twenty Marks when the Prior of Mathersay was
Patron: Lib. Mss. I. M.
It Is now 11l. 16s. 5d. ob. value in the Kings Books, and the King Patron.

In Gamulston Church in a Window,

Orate pro bono statu Magistri Thomae Thurland, Ar. and Isabellae uxoris ejus,
and pro anima Elizabethae uxoris ejus.

Upon a fair Tomb in the Chancel,

Hic jacet Thomas Thurland, Ar. Dom. de Gamstone, qui ob. in die S. Gervasii
and Protasi Anno Christi 1497.

Upon which Tomb in diverse places was Ermine upon a Chief Gules, 3 T. Arg. and
upon that in the middle a Mullet.

In a Window,

Richard Thurland, and Alice his wife.

There Thurland impales Willughby of Wollaton; and Gules a Saltier Ermine,
Nevill of Rolleston.

There is Arg. a Chevron between three Pitchers (or Fleshpots) Gules within a
Bordure sable Bezanty: that is also upon the Shield of a Stone Statue on a
Tomb, Monboucher.

In the North Window of the Chancel,

Arg. a Cross Chequey Or and Gules, Cokfeild, impales Sable a Bend between six
Scallops Or, Foljambe.

On the Surcoat of a Man there,

Ermine on a Fesse Azure three Eglets displayed Or.

On the Surcoat of a Woman,

Vert a Chevron Gules between 3 Garbes Arg.

In the North Window of the Church,

Or three Bendlets Azure with quarterings, impaling Gules on a Fesse Dancette
Arg. between six Lioncells Rampant Or three Martlets sable, with quarterings.

Arg. a Mullett sable impaling vert a Chevron Or between three Befants.

Thurlands Chief is indented, and upon it a file of three Labells instead of
the three Taus.

Adelocum, vel Agelocum Antonini. Eton. Eyton. Attune. Idleton.
IN Attune, which Roger de Busli became possessed of after the Conquest, were
before that change ten Manors; ten Taynes had each man his Hall; they then
between (or amongst) themselves paid to the Dane-geld (the Public Tax of that
time) for six Bovats, one half, Lib. Dooms.
and one sixth part of a Bovat. The Land being then known to be four Carucats.
There Fulco the Man of Roger had one Car. and fourteen Vill. nine Board. having
seven Car. and two Mills 20s. and sixty Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood five qu.
long, and three broad. In King Edward the Confessors time the value was 6l. in
the Conquerours when Doomsday Book was made but 3l. Here was some also in this
Town of the Archbishop of Yorks Fee Soc to Sudton, and Lound, and Scrooby, and
Madrissey, etc. which paid the Geld for two Car.

Robert de Wolrington, and John de Eyton, held the whole Town of Eyton of Alice
Countess of Augi for two Knights Fees. John de Heton paid for a third part. Ib.


Ramietta, wife of Thomas de Wurlington, 7 R. 1. Pip. 7 R. 1.
gave account of 40s. for having 20s. Rent, with the Appurtenances, in
Hardeshull, and in Redford, and in Etton, whereof he was disseised for being
with Earl John. Thomas de Wlverton, and Ramietta his wife, 10 R. 1. Pip. 10 R.
1.
gave account of twenty Marks for having one Knights Fee, with the
Appurtenances in Etton, three Bovats, and one third of a Bovat less. Thomas de
Wulrinton, 4 Ioh. Pip. 4 Ioh.
gave account of one Mark, that the Assize which was summoned between him and
Ramietta his wife, and Alice, the daughter of Alexander, might be taken before
Hugh Bardulf and his fellows. There was a Fine levied at Doncaster the Tuesday
after the Feast of St. Mary Magdalen, 4 Ioh. Test. de Nev.
between Robert, Fin. lev. 4 Ioh.
son of Richard, Petent, and Thomas de Wilfrinton, and Rametta his wife,
Tenants, of three Bovats, and the third part of a Bovat of Land, and the third
part of two Mills, and the third part of the Advowson of the Church, with the
Appurtenances in Etton, which the said Robert remised to Thomas and Rametta,
and their heirs, for which they granted him and his heirs one Bovat in
Ordeshall, and six Perches of Meadow in Eton, which lie in the East part of
Ydele by Eton Spring, and 12d. Rent in Bevercotes, and the Service of Roger de
Bevercotes, and six Tofts and an half in Retford, and Common of Pasture in Eton
for the Demesne Cattle of the said Robert, and Paunage for his Demesne Swine in
the Woods of Eton, and Estovers there to build his Houses, and to burn in his
House for his own use by the view of the said Thomas or his Forester.

Robert de Ripariis, son of Robert de Ordeshal, 13 H. 3. Pl. de Banc. Pasch. 13
H. 3. 5. ^eodomad. to. 14. in dorso.
claimed against Robert de Wlrincton, son and heir of Thomas de Wlrincton, and
Rametta, the third part of the Manor of Eton. Thomas de Wlverthon, and Rametta
his wife, gave to the Canons of Radeford the Church of Eton, with all the
Appurtenances. Ex Regist. de Wirkesop fol. 84. c. Cap. 1. Ib. Cap. 6. Cap. 8.
Robert, son of Thomas de Wlvrington, confirmed the gift. Robert, son of
Herbert de Wolrington, released all his right in the Advowson of the Church of
Eton near Ordesale, to the said Canons of Wirkesop, by his Deed dated at London
21 October. 1286. to which were Witnesses Elias de Sutton then the Kings Justice,
Robert de Swillington, Canon of Lincoln, Gerard de Heidon, Robert de Morteyn,
Roger de Beltoft, Knights, etc.

Robert, son of Herbert de Wolrington, remised to the Prior and Covent of
Wyrksop all his claim in the Advowson of the Church of Eton by Ordesale; Pl. de
Banc. Mich. 14 E. 1. to. 13.
and also by another Deed of the same date, viz. 1 October. (rather 21 October. as
before) 1286. to John Archbishop of York, who it seems carried it, for in the
year 1289. he made it a Prebend in the Church of Southwell, as in that place
may be observed, and so it still continues; though, 15 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Hill.
15 E. 1. to. 14.
the Prior had judgment to hold the Advowson by reason of the default of the
said Robert de Wolrington, who put himself on the grand Assize.

Robert Violett of Ordeshale, and Elizabeth his wife, held certain Lands in
Ordeshale of Robert de Wolrington, by doing Suit to his Court at Eton from
three weeks to three weeks, in 20 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Mich. 20 E. 1. to. 32.


By a Fine, 7 E. 2. Fin. lev. Trin. 7 E. 2.
between Robert de Wolrington, and Margery his wife, Quer. and Henry, son of
Roger de Bradburne, Deforc. the Manor of Eton by Hedon was settled on the said
Robert and Margery, and the heirs of their bodies; remainder to the right heirs
of the said Robert.

The Jury, 19 E. 2. Esc. 19 E. 2. n. 62.
found that Robert de Wolrington of Eaton, held two parts of the Manor of
Eton, and the Reversion of the third part, which Agatha his mother held in
Dower of the Honor of Tikhill, by the service of two parts of two Knights
Fees, and 13s. 4d. to the Castle of Tikhill for Ward fee, and that he had four
daughters by his said wife Margery, his heirs of this Manor, Elizabeth the
first eleven years old and above, Alianor nine, Isabell eight, and Alice seven
and upwards: But Robert de Wolrington was his son and heir of his other Lands
in Eton and Stretton, etc.

In 21 E. 3. Esc. 21 E. 3. n. 55.
it was not found to the Kings loss if he granted John de Wystowe, Chaplain,
license to give two parts of a Mess. in Eton by Retford to the Mansion of Mr.
Gilbert de Welton, Prebendary of the Prebend of Eton in the Church of St. Mary
of Southwell, and the third part of a Mess. and one Acre and an half of Land,
and half an Acre of Meadow in the same Town, to Henry de Swinstede, Vicar of the
Church of Eton, and there remained over and above to the said John, one Mess.
and thirteen Acres of Land in Eton.

The Jury, 37 E. 3. Esc. 37 E. 3. c. 22.
found that John Ward, outlawed for Felony, held in Eton the fourth part of a
Mess. four Acres of Land, and half an Acre of Meadow of Mr. John de Welton;
Robert Breretwisel, and Henry de Bolyngbroke, by the service of 1d. q, for Ward
fee, and that they held of Queen Philip, as of the Honor of Tikhill.

In the time of Henry the sixth, the Tenants of John Leverwick held a third
part, John Cut a third part, and Thomas Wortley another third part. Shortly
after this time it became the inheritance of Sir John Savage, B.
who enfeoffed Sir Thomas Chaworth, and others, of two parts, and Sir William
Babington, and Thomas Nevill, of the third, to the use of Hugh Hercy.

Humfr. Hercy, Esquire, 8 H. 8. Pasch. 8 H. 8. to. 502.
claimed against John Daniel of Eton three Mess. eighty Acres of Land, twelve
of Meadow, twelve of Pasture, with the Appurtenances in Eton.

In the disposing of Hercyes Lands this Town was allotted to ( George) Markham,
B.
who was the Nephew of Sir John Hercy. It was after by that Markham conveyed
unto, and became the Inheritance of Thomas Markham of Allerton. It was lately
the Inheritance of Nicolas Stringer, whose father purchased it of Mr.
Pilkington, to whom it was Mortgaged by the feoffees of Mr. Markham, and now
continues the possession of Francis Stringer, Esquire.

Ex Co^iae visit. penes Reas. Mellish, Genesis
Johannes Stringer- 2 Ricardus Stringer-Maria fill. Joh. Poutrell de Westhalum.
Robertus Stringer de Eaton alias Idleton-... fill....Hales, Eborac. Nicol.
Stringer de Eaton 1614.-Maria fill. Valentin. Hartop de Com. Leic. Nicol.
Stringer-... fill. Fran. South, mil. Franciscus Stringer-... fill. Joh. Newton,
Bar.
Anna-Tho. Jobson. Eliz.-Joh. Copley.


Joh. Stringer fill. and haer.

Robert Watson, 8 Eliz. claimed against Edward Rosse two Mess. two Tofts, Trin.
8 Eliz. rot. 130.
two Gardens, thirty Acres of Land, and one Acre of Wood, with the
Appurtenances in Eton by East Retford, who called to warrant Edward Blakenall.

The owners of Eaton Town in 1612. are said to be Nicolas Stringer, Lib. libere
ten.
Gent. Edward Pilkington de Stanton in Com. Derb. Esquire,... Hublat, Gent.
John Blaknall.

The Vicarage of Etton was 4l. 13s. 4d. or seven Marks, Mss. I. M.
and so it still continues in the Kings Books, and the Prebendary Patron.

Grove. Grave.
SOme part in Grave, as before is noted in Hedune, was ancient Demesne of the
Soc of Dunham; but the principal part was of the fee of Rog. de Busli, viz.
that which before his coming, was the Freehold of Alwin and Osmund, Lib. Dooms.
and paid for four Bovats and an half to the Common Taxation of those times.
The Land then being known to be three Car. There afterward Robert the Man of
Roger had one Car. and an half, and ^^x Vill. three Board. one Sochm. having two
Car. and an half. There was a Priest and a Church, and eight Acres of Meadow,
Pasture Wood one leu. long, and half so much broad: It kept the value of 40s.
having Soc in Ordesale and Ranby.

The next successor of Robert, which I have yet found, was Gerbert de Archis,
who, 22 H. 2. Rot. Pip. 22 H. 2.
gave account of ten Marks of the Forest Amercements, whose son Gilbert de
Arches, 28 H. 2. Pip. 28 H. 2.
gave account of fifty Marks for the Fine of his Fathers Land; he had a son
called also Gilbert de Arches, as in Weston may be observed.

Malvesin (de Herci) and Theophania his wife, and William Ruffus, and Isabella
his wife, 11 Ioh. Pi^. 11 Ioh.
gave account of fifty Marks, and two Palfreys for having two Knights Fees,
with the Appurtenances, which were G^lbert de Arches, father of the said wives,
who were his heirs. Malvesin de Hersey, 5 H. 3. Fin. 5 H. 3. m. 10.
was Constable of Tykhill. He, in 17 H. 3. Chapter 17 H. 3.
had a Release for two Knights Fees which he ought to the Castle of Tykehull.

Gilbert de Arches (who gave his whole Land of Gledethorp to God and the Church
of St. James at Wellebek, Regist. de Welbek p. 52.
and the Canons of that place) was Lord of Grove near Retford, and had the
Barony of Grove entire: he begat two daughters, Theophania and Isabella, and so
was the Barony divided between the said two daughters. There came one who had
the Surname of Hercy and married Theophania, the first begotten of whom was
then ( viz. about the latter end of Edward the second) Sir Hugh de Hercy. A
certain Knight called William Rufus married the second daughter Isabella, and
begot of her a certain daughter Eyncina by name, who was married to one of the
Surname of Mortayn, who begot on her two sons William and Robert de Morteyn.
The said Eyncina, after the death of her husband, gave to Robert her son the
Manor of Grove, because William his brother was heir, and Robert had not
whereof he might live. Of William the elder the Inheritance descended to Sir
Roger de Morteyn, who then was as son and heir; from Robert the second son, the
Inheritance of Grove descended to Stacy de Morteyn, who then was as son and
heir.

The Jury, 27 E. 1. Esc. 2^ E. 1. n. 3.
found that Robert de Morteyn held in Grove, etc. doing homage and fealty to
Hugh de Hercy, and paying to Tykhill Os. yearly for Ward Fee, etc. and left
Eustachius de Morteyn his son and heir above thirty years old.

Grave and Hedon made an entire Villa, 9 E. 2. and Hugh de Hercy, Eustachius de
Morteyn, Nom. Vill.
and Laurence de Cheworthe were then Lords.

Hugh de Hercy the younger, 16 E. 2. Par. 1. pat. 16 E. 2. m. 19.
had pardon for acquiring the Manor of Grove held in Capite of the King of the
Honor of Tykhull.

The King, 10 E. 2. Scot. 10 E. 2. m. 1.
wrote from Woodstok, 27 of June, to Robert de Perpount, John Deincourt, and
Hugh de Hercy, for two thousand footmen, of which two hundred Miners to be
chosen out of Not. and Dabyshires, and to be led to Newcastle upon Tyne by the
said Robert and Hugh.

Gerbertus de Archis Baro de Grove- Gilbertus de Arches, 28 H. 2.- Gilbertus de
Arches- Theophania-Malvesinus de Hercy. Robertus de Hercy fill. and haer. 39 H.
3. ob. s. p. Hugo de Hercy- Hugo de Hercy- Hugo de Hercy, mil. 3 E. 3. 40 E.
3.-Alicia. Johannes de Hercy, miles, 15 E. 3.-Joana, 15 E. 3. Robertus de Hercy
fill. and haer. 33 E. 3. Tho. de Hercy-Elizab. 40 E. 3. Willielmus Hercy-.....
relict. Will. de Saundeby Tho. Hercy, miles-Kath. fill. Tho. Comberford,
mil.-Joh. Constable mar. 2. Hugo Hercy, miles-Elizab. fill. and cohaer. Simonis
Leeke. Hugo Hercy-Margeria fill. Ric. Bingham Justic. Humfr. Hercy-Joana fill.
Joh. Stanhope. Humfr. Hercy-Eliz. fill. Johannis Digby de Ketelby, mil. Joh.
Hercy mil. ob. 12 Eliz. s. p.-Eliz. fill. and haer.Joh. Stanley, mil. s. p. 5
Georg.-Nevill.-Barbar. Johannes Nevill-Gertruda fill. Ric. Whalley, Ar. Hercy
Nevill-Brigitta fill. Henr. Savile de Lupset. Gilbert. Nevill-Marg. fill. Tho.
Bland de Kipax Park, mil.-....relict. Marmad. Dorrell ux. 2. Edward.
Nevill-Maria fill....Scott de Camberwell. Edward. Nevill. mil.
1674.-fill.....Holt relict..... Kiderminster. Anna-Johannes Millington.....
Anthonius-



1 Johan Mering.-Kath. 2 Nicol. Denman.-Ann. 3 Henr. Hatfeild.-Alic.-Robert.
Markham. 4 Ed. Bussy.-Jan. 6 Johan. Little bury.-Ursul. Franc. Mackworth.-7
Elen. Fran. Hotham, mil.-8 Mari.



Marmaduc Constable.







2 Baldwin. de Hercy 1219. Willielmus Ruffus-Isabella. Eustachius de
Morteyn-Eyncina. 2 Robertus de Morteyn- Eustachius de Morteyn fill. and haer.
aet. 30. and ampl. 27 E. 1.
1 Will. de Mortein fill. and haer.- Rog. de Morteyn.






Eustachius de Morteyn by a Fine levied at York, 2 E. 3. Fin. lev. Pasc. 2 E.
3. Ebor.
passed the Manor of Grove to Mr. Henry de Clyf, who by another, 5 E. 3. Hill.
5 E. 3.
settled it on Hugh de Hercy, and Alice his wife, and the heirs of Hugh. Hugh
de Hercy, Knight, 3 E. 3. Quo War. 3 E. 3.
claimed to have in his Manor of Grove, Park, Infangenthef, Gallows, and Free
Warren, in his Demesne Lands of Grove, Ordeshale, and W^ston, as son of Hugh,
son of Hugh, brother of Robert de Hercy, as in Weston is noted. By a Fine, 15
E. 3. Fin. lev. Trin. 15 E. 3.
between Thomas de Everingham, Parson of Berkin, and Richard de Ampcotes,
Parson of Scalleby, Plaintiffs, and Hugh de Hercy, Deforc. the Manor of Grove,
and one Carucat in Ravenesfeild, and the Advowsons of the Churches of West
Retford, Ordesale, and Grove, were settled, viz. two parts on the said Hugh for
life; remainder to John his son, and the heirs which his said son should beget
on Ioane his wife; remainder to the right heirs of Hugh. The third part with
the Advowson of West Retford on the said John de Hercy his son, and Ioane his
wife, and the heirs of their bodies; remainder to the right heirs of the said
Hugh. John Hercy, Knight, son and heir of Hugh Hercy, Knight, 33 E. 3. sold the
marriage of Robert his first begotten son, Ex Coll. I. B. Ar.
and if he failed, of Thomas his second son, to Richard Stanhop, Burgess of
Newcastle upon Tyne.

By a Fine, 40 E. 3. Fin. lev. Pasch. 40 E. 3.
between Hugh de Hercy Chr. and Alice his wife, and Robert de Musters, Parson
of the Church of Kyrtelington, Quer. and Richard, Parson of the Mediety of the
Church of Tyreswell, and John, Parson of the other moiety of the Church,
Deforc. the Manors of Grove and Weston in the Clay, with the Appurtenances,
and the Advowsons of the Churches of the said Manor of Grove, Ordesale, and
West Retford, were settled on the said Hugh, Alice, and Robert, for life;
remainder to Thomas, son of John de Hercy, Knight, and to Elizabeth his wife,
and the heirs Males of their bodies, etc. remainder to the right heirs of Hugh.

Ex Coll. I. B. Ar.
Who succeeded this Thomas I have not certainly found, but not very long after
his time, William Hercy (perhaps his son or Nephew) who married.... the relict
of William de Saundeby, sold some of his Inheritance, and left a son called Sir
Thomas Hercy, who married Katherine, the daughter of Sir Thomas Comberford,
afterward wife of John Constable, and mother of Marmaduk Constable; this Sir
Thomas had Sir Hugh Hercy, who had to wife Elizabeth, one of the daughters and
coheirs of Simon Leek of Cotham, Esquire, by whom he had Hugh Hercy, Esquire, husband
of Margery, daughter of Sir Richard Bingham the Judge, and father of Humfr.
Hercy, Esquire, who begot on his wife Ioane the daughter of John Stanhope, Humf.
Hercy, Esquire, who married Eliz. daughter of Sir John Digby of Ketelby, and by her
had Sir John Hercy, the husband of Elizabeth, daughter and heir of Sir John
Stanley (or Sir James) but having no issue this Sir John Hercy disposed his
great Patrimony amongst his eight sisters; to Barbara the wife of George
Nevill, he gave this Manor of Grove (though she was the fifth daughter of his
Father); Ex Co^. visit. pen. Charol. Laco^k, Genesis
Katherine his eldest sister, was wife of John Meringe; Anne the second, of
Nicolas Denman; Alice the third, of Henry Hatfeild, and afterward of Robert
Markham, Sergeant at Arms; Jane the fourth, of Edmund Bussy of Hather in
Lincolneshire; Vrsula the sixth, of John Littlebury of Higmore in the same
County; Ellen the seventh, of Francis Macworth of Empingham in Rutland; and
Mary the eighth, of Sir Francis Hotham of Scorburgh in Yorkshire.

George Nevill was son of Robert, named in Ragnell, and by the said Barbara
Hercy had John Nevill his son and heir, husband of Gertrud, one of the
daughters of Richard Whalley of ( Welbeck, or) Screveton, Esquire, who brought
him Hercy Nevill, who by Brigitt, the daughter of Henry Savile of Lupset in
Yorkshire his wife, was father of Gilbert Nevill, whose wife was Margaret, the
daughter of Sir Thomas Bland of Kipax Park in Yorkshire, by whom he had Edward
and Anthony (a Major for the King in the late Rebellion) and several daughters;
he afterward married..... the widow of Sir Marmaduc Dorrell, who before that
had been wife of.... Clapham, and was after some years married to Colonel....
Sandys. Edward Nevill was husband of Mary, the daughter of.... S^^it of
Camberwell in Surrey, and by her left issue Sir Edward Nevill now of Grove,
Knight, who married.... the sister of Sir Robert Holt of Warwickshire, the
relict of.... Kiderminster, who had him in tuition after his fathers death.
Anne Nevill, elder sister of Sir Edward, is wife of John Millington, Barrester
at Law:.... the younger is....

The Rectory of Grove was 10l. when Mr. Hersey was Patron: Mss. I. M.
It Is now 11l. 14s. 2d. value in the Kings Books, and Edward Nevile, Esquire,
(now Knight) Patron.

Truswell. Tireswelle.
IN Tireswelle, and a place now unknown, called in the Book of Doomsday
Cledreton, before the Normans invaded this Kingdom, Godric and Vlmar had each a
Manor, besides that which belonged to the Kings Soc of Mansfeild in Cledreton,
which answered the Geld for twelve Bovats, the Land being four Car. There
twenty two Sochm. and eleven Vill. had nine Car. These Sochmen paid 20s. to the
Dane-geld of Custom. In that which was Earl Alans Fee of Richmond in Cledreton,
Lib. Dooms.
Godric and Vlmar had seven Bovats, and one third of a Bov. for the Geld. That
Land held Earl Alan and Roger de Busli until the making of the great Survey by
King William the Conqueror. The Land then was eleven Car. the value 20s. In
Cledreton Soc to Treswell of Roger de Buslies Fee were three Bovats and an
half, and two fifths of a Bovat for the Geld. That Land had Roger, and there
had seven Villains, having one Car. and an half. There was half a Church,
Pasture Wood one qu. and an half long, 1 qu. broad; and Meadow one qu. and an
half long, one qu. broad: of this Wood and Meadow Roger had the moiety; the
value was 10s. The Land one Car. In Treswell, Godric's Manor answered the
public Taxation for six Bovats of Land, and a third part, and a fifteenth part
of a Bovat. The Land was four Car. There Roger the Man of Roger de Busli had
two Car. and fourteen Vill. and five Board. having five Car. Meadow four qu.
long, one qu. and an half broad. This in King Edward the Confessors time, and
then also kept the value of 50s. That Manor in Tireswell, which Vlmar had
before the Conquest, paid then for six Bovats, and one third to the Common
charge. The Land being then four Car. Afterward Robert de Musters the Man of
Earl Alan had one Car. eight Vill. five Board. having four Car. forty Acres of
Meadow, Pasture Wood four qu. long, one qu. and an half broad. This also
retained the old value it had in the time of King Edward the Confessor, viz.
40s.

The Family of Musters or de Monasteriis the posterity of this Robert had their
residence here.

John de Mustiers of Tireswell, Chivaler, 22 E. 3. Pl. de Banc. Mich. 22 E. 3.
rot. 590.
said that his Ancestor John de Mustiers was seized of 3s. Rent in Sibthorp (as
in that place is already mentioned) in the time of King Richard the first, and
from him the right descended to Robert his son and heir, Regist. de Sibthorp
pen. meips. R. T.
and from Robert to John his son and heir, but John died without issue, so that
William was his brother and heir, who likewise left Robert his brother his
heir, which Robert was father of John de Mustiers who then claimed.

By a Fine at York, 1 E. 3. Fin. lev. Mic. 1 E. 3 apud Ebor.
William de Mustiers settled the Manor of Tireswell, and the Advowson of the
moiety of the Church of the said Manor on himself for life, and after his
decease on John, son of Robert de Mustiers, and on Alice his wife, and the
heirs of the bodies of the said John and Alice; remainder to the right heirs of
John. William de Musters, 3 E. 3. Rot. Quo War. 3 E. 3.
claimed to have emendation of the Assize of Bread and Ale broken in his Manor
of Tyreswell.

In an Assize, 21 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Hill. 21 E. 1. to. 26.
between Adam de Eyvill, Plaintiff, and Robert de Musters, Defendant, for
Common of Pasture in sixscore Acres of Wood, with Swine in the time of (Pesson)
Paunage in Tireswell, the Jury found that the Ancestors of Thomas de Eyvill,
and of the said Robert were Parceners of the said Town in Lands, Woods, and
Commons, etc. and that the said Robert disseized the said Adam of the said
Commons, and required a special verdict.

It seems the forenamed Sir John de Musters had a son and heir called Henry de
Musters, Knight; Ex Coll. Will* Dagdalt Norroy;
whose first wife was Alice, but by his second who (...) Elizabeth, daughter of
Sir Brian Thornton, he had an only daughter and heir named Elizabeth, who was
first married to Alexander de Robertus de Musters homo Comitis Alani-.....de
Musters-.....de Musters- Johannes de Musters temp. R. 1.- Robertus de Musters-
Johannes de Musters s. p. Willielmus s. p. Robertus de Musters- Johannes de
Musters Chr.-Alicia, 1 E. 3. Henricus de Musters, miles-Alicia ux. 1.-Eliz.
fill. Briani Thornton, mil. Elizabetha Musters unica fill. and haer.-Alexander de
Moubrey mar. 1.-Joh de Wandesford de Westwik in Com. Ebor. mar. 2. ob. 1395.
Elizab. fill. and haer.-Will. Gascoigne capital. Justic. 2 H. 4.-Jana ux. 2.
Willielmus Gascoigne, miles-Jana fill. and haer. Henr. Wyman. Willielmus
Gascoigne, miles-Marg. fill. Tho. Clarell relict. Joh. Fitz-Williams. Willielmus
Gascoigne, miles, prout in Whatton-Jana fill. and haer. Joh. Nevill, mil.


Joh. de Wandesford de Kirtlington in Com. Ebor. natus 1370.









Moubrey, and after his death to John de Wandesford of Westwike in Yorkshire,
by whom she had a son and heir called John de Wandesford of Kirtlington in that
County, born about 45 E. 3. of whom there is a Family still remaining, but by
her husband Moubrey she had a daughter and heir Elizabeth, the first wife of
Sir William Gascoigne the Chief Justice, by whom she had Sir William Gascoigne
the father of Sir William, etc. whose Family had interest here.

Sir William Gascoigne the younger, Knight, and Margaret his wife, 7 H. 8. Mic.
7 H. 8. to. 616.
suffered a Recovery of the Manor of Tyreswell, and Advowson of the Church,
also of ten Mess. two hundred Acres of Land, one hundred of Pasture, sixty of
Wood, 60s. Rent with the Appurtenances in Tyreswell to Sir John Cut, Sir
Richard Cholmeley, Sir Henry Wyott, Richard Broke, Sergeant at Law, Miles
Gerard, and John Wood.

This part of Treswell, which belonged to the Family of Musters, was called the
West Hold, and was of Richmond Fee, as the other which was of Tikhill Fee was
called the East Hold, being that Manor which Roger the Man of Roger de Busli
had, which, as the rest of his Lands did, came to William de Lovetot Lord of
Wirkesop in the time of H. 1. who gave his part of the Church here to the
Priory he there Founded, as in that place will be shown. Reginald Tailbois, 6
Ioh. put in the place of Gerard de Furnivall, Pla^. 6 Ioh. Term. Hill. to. 1.
and Matildis his wife (daughter and heir of William de Lovetot, Grandson of
the former) offered himself against Hugh Ridell, then under age, in a plea of
right concerning the fourth part of a Knights Fee, with the Appurtenances in
Tireswell, and Hugh prosequuted not, etc. Galfr. Rydell, 3 E. 3. Pl. de Iar.
and Assis. apud Not. 3 E. 3. to. 70. and to. 90.
claimed the Manor of Tireswell, as Cousin and heir of Alice de Loveton, who
was seized in the time of H. 3. as son of Hugh, son of Hugh, son of the said
Alice de Lovetot, great Grandmother of the said Galfr.

There was a Fine, 1 E. 2. Fin. lev. Trin. 1 E. 2.
between Roger de Morteyn, and Cecilia who had been wife of Richard de la
Rokele, Quer. and Simon de Walcote, Deforc. of the Manor of Tyreswell, whereby
it was estated on Roger and Cecilia for life; remainder to Nicolas, son of the
said Cecilia for life; remainder to John, brother of the said Nicolas for life;
remainder to the right heirs of Roger.

Another was levied at York, 16 E. 2. Fin. apud Ebar. Pasc. 16 E. 2.
between Raph de Crophill, and Matilda his wife, Quer. and Alan de Hothum,
Clerk, Deforc. of the Manor of Tyreswell, thereby settled on the said Raph and
Maud for life; remainder to Raph his son, and the heirs of his body; remainder
to John, another son, Chart. irrotul. and recogn. coram Will. Herle apud Not.
3 E. 3. to. 2.
and the heirs of his; remainder to Nicolas, brother of the said John, and his
heirs for ever.

Robert, son of Avicia, daughter of Thomas de Eyvill, Knight, by his Deed dated
at Not. on Saturday the morrow after St. Ceadde the Bishop, 4 E. 3. remised
and released to Roger de Crophull, and Raph de Crophull, father of the said
Roger, and the heirs of Raph, all his right in the Manor of Tireswell, with
all the Appurtenances, with general warranty; for which release and warranty
Thomas de Furnivall, senior, in acquittance of the said Roger and Raph, paid
the said Robert and Avicia his said mother 106l. 13s. 4d.

This Manor held of the Honor of Tikhill, was John Merburyes, and Agnes his
wifes, Esc. 14 H. 6. n. 32. and 16 H. 6* n. 43.
as in Arnall is seen. Walter Devereux, son of Walter, son of the said Agnes,
married Elizabeth daughter and next heir of John Merbury.

In 9 H. 8. Trin. 9 H. 8. to. 131.
Robert Fingham, Thomas Elton, Chaplain, and Seth Godley, Chaplain, claimed
against John Roper, and John Lascells, fourteen Mess. fourteen Gardens, five
Tofts, two hundred Acres of Land, one hundred of Meadow, one hundred of Pasture,
eighty of Wood, and 100s. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Tireswell, and the
moiety of the Manor of Tireswell, with the Appurtenances, who called to
warrant Walter Devereux of Ferrers and Chartley, Knight.

John Babington, and Saunchea his wife, 23 H. 8. Pasc. 23 and 24 H. 8. to. 127.
claimed against Anthony Babington, Esquire, one hundred Acres of Land, and ten
of Wood, with the Appurtenances in Trysswell upon a formedon.

There was a Quare impedit, 27 and 29 H. 8. Pasch. 27 H. 8. rot. 176. and Mich.
29 H. 8. to. 422.
recovered by John Hercy, Esquire, against Edward Archbishop of York, together
with Sir William Gascoigne the elder, Knight, and Edward Sail, Clark, of the
Advowson of the Church of Tyreswell called the West Part.

Sir John Hercy had both the Parts of Manors, B.
and gave the West Hold to John Littlebury, and the East Hold to Edward Bussy.
Both the Manors came to the hands of Peter Roos, Esquire, and by his heir
Gilbert Roos the greatest part was sold to Peter Broughton, Esquire, and so
were the inheritance of Thomas Broughton his Nephew.

In 1612. Truswell had many owners, viz. George Leggatt, William Porter, Thomas
Howton, Nicolas Steedman, senior, Augustine Steedman, Palamedes Gilby, Gregory
Vickers, Lib. libert ten.
one Mess. one Cottage, one Garden, one Orchard, sixty eight Acres of Land,
John Hoggard, Thomas Sibthorp, John Chambers, Cott. Rowland Hall, Cott. etc.
many more Cottages, and some other owners.

John the Prior of St. Cuthberts of Wirkesop by Fine, 33 E. 1. Fin. lev. Trin.
33 E. 1.
conveyed the Advowson of the Mediety of the Church of Tyreswell to William the
Dean and the Chapter of York, and their successors.

Each Mediety or Rectory of Truswell was xl. the Chapter of York having the
Patronage of one, Mss. I. M.
and Mr. Gascoigne of the other. The East Part Rectory is now 8l. 1s. 5d. ob.
and the Dean and Chapter of York Patrons: And the West Part 9l. 16s. 0d. ob.
value in the Kings Books, and Mary Saunderson Patron.

NORTH-CLAY Division.
Cottham. And Cotes. Aug. 5. 1674.
THese places are the first in the Division of Bassetlow Hundred or Wapentak,
called the North Clay, wherein I have not met with so many Notes as some
Readers may expect of desire, though more than most will trouble themselves to
go through where they are not concerned.

In Cotune of the Fee of Roger de Busli, one Hardulph before the Conquest had a
Manor which defended it self in public payments as the Dane-geld and the
like, Lib. Dooms.
for four Bovats. The Land of it in those times was certified to be sufficient
for two Plows, or two Car. There afterward Fulco the Man or Tenent of Roger de
Busli had eight Vill. with four Car. (Plows or Plowlands.) This in King Edward
the Confessors time when a former Survey was taken, like that in King
Williams, was valued, as it was also then at 16s.

Regist. de Wellebek, page 174.
William, son of Remigius de Ingham, and Maud his wife, and Roger his son, gave
to Herbert, son of Adelard, and to Agnes his wife, and their heirs, all the
Land of his Fee in Cotes, both within the Town and without, to be held of them
and their heirs, by the Rent of two Marks yearly, which Land the said Herbert
and Anneis gave to the Abbey of Wellebek. Ib.
The gift of the Land was confirmed by the said William, son of Remigius, to
the brethren of Wellebek; and Richard, son and heir of William, son of Remigius
de Hingham, released the said two Marks of Rent issuing out of Chotes yearly to
the said Abbey.

The Jury, 2 E. 1. Esc. 2 E. 1. n. 17.
found that Robert de Sutton (one of the heirs of the Lord Lexington) who had
by that means Warsop, Tuxford, Sulkholme, Allerton, and Eykering; had also in
Cotum eight Bovats of Land, which with the Cottagers then yielded 6l. per
annum, a certain Fishing, and a Windmill. In 17 E. 1. Esc. 17 E. 1. n. 24.
Richard de Sutton his son, is said to have held of Robert de Markham then
dead, (who came of the elder sister of the Lord Lexington) a Manor in Cottum
of 10l. per annum value. The Jury, 22 R. 2. Esc. 22 R. 2. n. 19.
said that Reginald de Everingham, Chr. and Agnes his wife, (the heir of the
family of Lungvilers, and partly of Lexington too) had Lands in North Cotum and
South Cotum: in the latter is reckoned eight Mess. ten Bov. of Land, twenty
four Acres of Meadow, and two Fishings. The Manor of South Cotum came to the
family of Stanhop of Rampton, Esc. 14 H. 6. n. 28.
as heirs of the said Agnes.

These Hamlets are of the Sok of Oswardbek, and in the Parish of South
Leverton. B.
The Priory of St. Mary of Torkesey had a good part in Cotum. There was a free
Chapel dedicated to the Holy Trinity.

The owners of Cothame Town in 1612. are said to be Thomas Keyworth, Thomas
Munke, Lib. libere ten.
John Clarke, John Theaker, William Brown, Richard Cobb, Robert Smith, Thomas
Wilson, Cottag. Chr. Clark Cott. John Cob, Cott. and John Chaworth.

South Leverton. Legreton.
BEsides that Legreton accounted as a Berew of Lanum, of the Archbishop of
Yorkes Fee, I find no other mentioned in Doomsday book. This South Leverton is
a principal Hamlet of Oswardbec Soc, B.
Lib. Dooms.
in which it was at that time I suppose included, that Soc being accounted a
Wapentak then, and contained all this North-Clay Division, and Rampton and
Tireswell (now esteemed) in the South-Clay, most of it (if not all) besides the
Archbishops, was either of Roger de Buslies Fee or ancient Demesne, Soc to the
Kings great Manor of Maunsfeld, with which that Soc or Manor of Oswaldbek,
and this Manor of Leyrton were granted, 22 H. 3. to Henry de Hastings, and Ada
his wife, Esc. 12 E. 2. n. 123.
and the heirs of Ada, (as in Maunsfeld may be noted,) with which family it
descended.

Lisiard de Musters held thirteen Bovats in Legreton paying 10s. yearly. Test.
de Nev.
Lisiard de Musters (called in 4 R. 1. Pip. 4. R. 1. Regist. de Thur. p. 19.
de Monasterijs) gave to the Priory of Thurgarton that Bovat of Land in
Leyrton, which was Vlfkells, viz. that which Adam and Ernis held; Roger de
Capella confirmed it, of whom the said Adam and Ernis held it; and so did Henry
de Capella. Ib. p. 178.
This was in the year 1328. divided, and Henry de Wentelane, and Emme Arnwy,
then paid each of them 2s. 2d. for each of them paid half a Bovat (to the said
Monastery) in Leverton.

The Jury, 24 E. 1. Esc. 24 E. 1. n. 63.
found that Robert de Hayton when he died held Lands here, viz. one Mess. three
Bovats, five Acres, etc. of John de Hastings in Socage for 18s. 7d. Rent, and
that Thomas and Robert his sons were his heirs, as in Hayton will also be noted.

The Jury, 8 E. 3. Esc. 8 E. 3. n. 68.
found that Thomas Latymer Bouchard held when he died jointly with Lora his
wife 30l. and 12d. Rent for term of life, whereof in South Leverton 11l. 9s.
4d. ob. q. in Cotom 22s. 2d. ob. in Stretton, Fenton, Littelburgh, Clareburgh,
Wellum, Morehouses, Wheatlye, Wyston, North Woodhouse, etc. certain Rents of
the freeholders, and Oswardbek Court then held of the King by reason of the
minority of Lawrence, son and heir of John de Hastings. In 22 E. 3. Esc. 22 E.
3. n. 47.
Lawrence de Hastings late Earl of Pembrok was found to have held the said Rent
of the freeholders, and a certain Wong in South Leverton containing an Acre
and an half, and half Rood, and other very small parcels in some of the other
Towns.

Laurence Moigne, and Elizabeth his wife, who 10 H. 6. Fin. Hill. 10 H. 6.
had the Manor of Hayton, and Marshall Hall, had also something in South
Leverton.

John Wimbish, and Ioane his wife, 3 H. 8. Pasch. 3 H. 8. rot. 433.
suffered a recovery of twenty Mess. one Dovecote, one thousand Acres of Land,
three hundred of Meadow, one hundred of Pasture, one hundred of Moor, and 46s.
Rent with the Appurtenances in South Leverton, North Leverton, Cotom, East
Retford, West Retford, Wellum, Moregate, Clareburgh, Norwell and Heydon; which
Simon Stalworth, Clark, John Byron, Esquire, Richard Basset, Esquire, Edward
Bussy, Esquire, Gyles Husey, Esquire, and others claimed against them.

In 14 H. 8. Pasc. 14 H. 8. rot. 203.
the same persons with Hamond Sutton, Gent. and others claimed against the said
John Wymbyshe, and Johan his wife the moiety of the said twenty Mess. one
Dovecote, one thousand Acres, etc. in the said places.

Humfr. Bentley, Gent. 36 H. 8. Pasc. 36 H. 8. rot. 357.
claimed against Thomas Wymbyshe, Esquire, twenty Mess. etc. in the said places.

William Oglethorp, and John Mason, 11 Eliz. Pasch. 11 Eliz. to. 719.
claimed against William Bette, and Isabell his wife, two Mess. two Tofts, one
Dovecote, two Gardens, eighty Acres of Land, thirty of Meadow, twenty of
Pasture, six of Wood, forty of Marsh, and 2s. 1d. Rent with the Appurtenances
in South Leverton, and Cotham, who called Robert Harryson, Gent.

Ed. Pickering, Gent. and William Caryer 17 Eliz. Mich. 16 and 17 Eliz. rot.
130.
claimed against Hugh Monnock, Robert Caworth, and Alexander Sampson, three
Mess. three Tofts, three Gardens, one hundred Acres of land, thirty of Meadow,
thirty of Pasture, and four of Wood with the Appurtenances in South Leverton,
and Cotham by Cotes, who called John Bussy, Esquire.

There was a fair house and Demesnes, B.
with diverse Tenements and Farms heretofore of long time the inheritance of
Nevile of South Leverton, sold in our times by the Neviles now of Mattersey,
unto the Right Honorable the Earl of Kingston, with whose posterity it
continues.

In 1612. the owners of South Leverton Town are said to be William Keyworth,
Lib. libere ten.
Thomas Sampson, Edward Barker, Henry Sampson, William Sampson, Alexander
Carrier, Hugh Husband, Robert Porter, Edward Carrier, Cott. Thomas Tongue, etc.

The Vicarage of South Leverton was eight Marks, Mss. I. M.
and the Chapter of Lincoln had the Patronage. It Is now 6l. 13s. 4. value in
the Kings Books, and the Dean of Lincoln Patron, as he is of Maunsfeld, with
which it is like this Church passed to that of Lincoln, by the gift of King
William 2. Rufus, noted in Maunsfeild.

Little Greeneley. Greenlege.
THe greatest part of this Hamlet was of the Soc to Dunham the Kings Land, to
which there belonged in Greeneleig^, as much as answered the ordinary Tax of
that time, viz. before the Conq. for two Bovats, ^ib. Dooms.
and the sixth part of a Bovat. The Land being then also two Car. There five
Sochm. and one Board. had two Car. and Pasture Wood four qu. long and four
broad. Another less parcel in Greeneleig was of the Archbishop of Yorks Fee,
and Soc to Sudton, and Lund, and Scroby, etc. being as much as paid to the Geld
for one Bov. and.

Mr. Alan de Bolleshoure brother and heir of Henry Norreis gave to his Nephew
Henry Norreis and his heirs, Regist. de Wellebek. p. 166.
all his Land which he had in the Clay, viz. in Greenley, and in Stretton, in
Wyston, in Fenton, in Leieton, paying yearly to him and his heirs, a pair of
Gilt Spurrs at Whitsontide for all services. And he gave him likewise the
moye^y of the Mills of Redford, with the Suits, works, Fishings, and all
Customs, paying to him and his heirs yearly four Marks of Silver: and he would
acquit the said Henry and his heirs against the King concerning 20s. and a pair
of Gilded Spurrs, and other 20s. against the Lords of Wheteley. The King 30 E.
1. Ex lib. de Finibus fol. 189. b. Mich. 30 E. 1.
granted Alexander le Norreys upon his Fine leave to give to Richard de Fenton
during his life, with remainder to the said Alexander and his heirs, one Mess.
eighty Acres of Land, and ten Acres and four of Meadow, with the Appurtenances
in Greeneley; which were held of the King in Capite. The Jury, 9 E. 2. Esc. 9
E. 2. n. 15.
found that Alexander le Norreys held of the King in Capite (or Chief) by the
service of a pair of Gilt Spurrs in Greenely, Retford, and Wiston, one Mess.
sixty six Acres of Land, etc. and in Claworth of Robert de Hardreshull one
Mess. thirty Acres of Land, etc. by the service of 24s. per annum, and that
John le Norreys, son of the said Alexander, was his next heir.

Robert Blackwall, Clark, one of the Masters of the Kings Chancery, Robert
Lytton, Knight, John Morton, Esquire, William Bolling, Gent. and Roger Bryde,
Clark, 15 H. 7. Pasch. 15 H. 7. rot. 287.
claimed against John Bolore, son and heir of William Bolore, one Mess. eighty
Acres of Land, eleven of Meadow, forty of Pasture, and 12s. Rent with the
Appurtenances in Gryngley, East Radford, and Wellom.

John Hercy, Esquire, 1 Febr. 35 H. 8. Pat. 35 H. 8. par. 18.
had license to alienate one Mess. fourscore Acres of Land, twelve of Meadow,
forty of Pasture, and 12s. Rent with the Appurtenances in Grinley, East
Retford, and Wellome, to John Clark and his heirs.

Lion Sherbroke 8 Eliz. Pasch. 8 Eliz. to. 147.
claimed against Brian Clark one Mess. one Toft, one Garden, one Orchard, 100.
Acres of Land, 100. of Meadow, 100. of Pasture, one hundred of Wood, and one
hundred of Furz and Heath, with the Appurtenances in little Grynley by Grove,
East Retford, and Wellom.

There were fifteen Oxgangs of Land of the Soc of Oswaldbek in this place, B.
which were anciently the inheritance of Henry Norreys, and of late the
inheritance of Robert Waring of Witford, Gent. named in Staunton. It is within
the Parish of Clareburgh.

East Retford. Redeford.
THis is an ancient Bo^ough, and sends two Burgesses to serve in Parliament,
yet I find nothing of it in Doomsday Book considerable, saving that in Redford
was a Mill belonging to Sud^on, of the Fee of the Archbishop of York.

In the record of Nomina Villarum 9 E. 2. the King is certified to be Lord of
it.

Regi^t. de Elid. p. 5.
The men of Retford by the consent of the Burgesses of Nottingham, ought to take
Thurtoll, (viz. p^ssage Toll) through these bounds, viz. at the Head. (or
Townesend) of Velhagh, at Mirell Brigg, at Wyston, and in all other places
where the Burgesses of Notingham were wont to take.

Roger Archbishop of York founded, and built, and dedicated a Chapel under the
name of the Virgin Mary and All Angels, Ex veteri Capia sive Exemplari pen. Mr.
Luddington vicarum de East Retford. Mon. Angl. ^ol. 3. p. 137.
near the greater Church of York; in which (Chapel) he placed thirteen Clarks
of several orders, viz. four Priests, four Deacons, four Subdeacons, and one
Sacrist, to celebrate divine (service) according to the constitution of that
Church of St. Peter; for whose support he gave the moiety of the Church of
Otteley, the Church of Everton, the Church of Sutton, with the Chapel of
Scrooby, and the Church of Hayton, the Church of Beardsey. The Church of
Claverly was of the gift of Wiliam Scoty, that of Hoton of William Panel, that
of Harewood of Amicia de Rumelly, and that of Thorpe of Adam de Bruis, and
Ievetta de Arches his wife. Hamo the Chanter of York was by the said
Archbishop Roger made Sacrist of the said Chapel of St. Mary and All Angels,
that in it he might dispose and order the Service, and procure and minister to
the Chaplains, Deacons, and Subdeacons, what the Archbishop had constituted
for their Food and Raiment, etc. Every Priest was to have yearly ten Marks,
every Deacon 100. and every Subdeacon six Marks of Silver by the hand of the
Sacrist, who was also to have yearly ten Marks, (though the Rents whereof he
was made procurator should happen to fall short to the rest) and the surplusage
of all the Rents, but was to act with all diligence according to the will and
direction of the said Archbishop.

In the year 1258. Mr. Gilbert de Tyva was made the Sacrist by Sewall
Archbishop of York, and on the Saturday next after the Feast of St. Martin,
inducted into the possession of the Church of St. Swithin of Retford. Mon. Angl
vol. 3. p. 139.
The same year the 4th (or 3.) of the Nones of May, the said Archbishop Sewall
ordained the Vicarages of Sutton, Everton, Hayton, Clarburgh, and Redford; and
likewise of Thorp Arches, Colingham, Beardssey, Otteley; Calverley, and Hoton
Painell in Yorkshire, in which ordination it is expressed that if any of the
said Vicars should happen to have less than 10. Marks per annum, the Vicarage
was to be augmented as it should please the Archbishop.

The Vicar of Redford was to have 100s. of the Alcarage, and the small Tithes,
viz. of Chickens, Pigs, Geese, and the Bread and Wine, (or Ale or Beer) which
should happen to be brought to the Altar: And the Sacrist was to give to the
poor of that Town the Tithes of the Mills.

Philip de Houlecotes* Cousin and heir of Mr. Alan de Bolleshoure mentioned in
Little Greeneley) gave the moiety of the Mills of Retford to the Abbey of
Wellebek, Regist. de Wellebek, p. 166.
according to the tenor of the Charters of King Richard 1. and King John, for
the sustentation of two Chaplains in the Church of Wellebek, and of one in his
Church of Stirape, to celebrate divine service for ever, for the Soul of the
said Philip, etc. Alicia de Stirape, eldest daughter of Gerard de Stiraepe, Ib.
p. 167.
Knight, confirmed the gift which the said Philip de Houlecotes, her brother,
made of the moiety of the Mill of Retford, which belonged to her. Hamelin de
Buggethorp, and Margaret his wife, confirmed to the said Abbey the gift of the
moiety of the Mills of Retford, and all other donations which the said Philip
de Houlecotes, their predecessor, had made.

The King 11 H. 3. Apr. 17. gave to the Abbey of Wellebek, the Mills of
Ratford, Ib. p. 278.
to be holden of him in Fee Farm for 10l. per annum, saving to the heirs of
Raph Tessun, if he should recover his inheritance in Watelegh 40. per annum,
which the said Abbat and Canons were to pay besides the said 10l. per annum.

Hubert de Burgo Earl of Kent, Justice of England, considering the love of God,
and for the safety of his own soul, and of his wifes Margaret the daughter of
the King of Scotland, and of their heirs, gave to God and the Church of St.
James at Wellebek, and the Canons there serving God, and to serve God, 40s.
yearly Rent which he had out of the Mills of Ratford, which Raph Tessun was
wont to receive; and likewise granted that his Men of Wheteley should do Suit
to the said Mills of the said Abbat and Covent, according as they ought and
were wont.

Ib. p. 43. and 44.
It was adjudged in the Exchequer, 8 May, 47 H. 3. that the Men of Retford
should do Suit to the Mills of the Abbat and Covent of Wellebek at Retford
duly as other the Kings Burgesses and Sokemen then did, and it was there noted
that the Men of Retford, who would be called Burgesses, were the Kings
Sokemans, and so called in the Doomsday. Hugh Levyn, and other men of Retford,
withdrew themselves from the Suit, whereupon the Abbat, 4 E. 1. Com. term. Mich
4 E 1. to. 1. in dorso.
procured a Precept (or Writ) to the Sheriff to distrain them according to the
former Judgment.

The King (H. 3.) for the bettering of his Borough of Retford, Regist. de
Wellebek p. 41.
granted to the Burgesses thereof, that they and their heirs for ever should
have every year one Fair there to endure for eight days, viz. the Eve, day,
and morrow of the holy Trinity, and five days following. They, 30 H. 3. Claus.
30 H. 3. m. 2.
had Acquittance from Tallage. They, in 44 H. 3. Chapter 44 H. 3.
had a Fair, and other liberties granted. And in 7 E. 2. Chapter 7 E. 2. n. 26.
the Borough had a Fair. And 46 E. 3. Chapter 46 E. 3. n. 5.
the Town had a Fair.

They Petitioned the Parliament at Westminster, 4 E. 3. after the Feast of St.
Kath. concerning pardon of their Burgesses there.... by reason of their
Poverty. There was a Charter of confirmation of the Liberties of the Town of
Retford, 9 E. 3. Pl. cor. Reg. apud Ebor. Hill. 9 E. 3. to. 4.
by which it was granted that the Inhabitants of the said Town, to wit, the
Burgesses and their heirs resident in the said Borough should not be put in
Assizes, Juries, or any recognizances with Foreiners, by occasion of their
Foreign Lands and Tenements.

The Jury, 6 E. 1. I^c. 6 E. 1. n. 24.
found that Walter Prat held a Mansion (or dwelling House) in Retford of John
Prat his brother in free Burgage, likewise of Thomas, son of Raph de Hayton,
two Acres. of Meadow, and of diverse other small parcells in several places, and
that Adam Prat was his only son and heir, and then seven years old.

to. 6.
At the Assizes at Not. 30 E. 3. John at Vykers recovered his seisin of one
Mess. and one Toft in East Retford, and Walter, son of Adam Prat, and others
were Amerced. In another Assize he recovered against the said Walter, and
others, four Tofts, two hundred and sixty Acres of Land, sixteen of Meadow, and
16^. Rent in Greneley, Ordesale, Thurmeton, Tylne, Wellum, Wellum Morehouse,
Blithe, Stirap, Serleby, Thoreworth, and Hodesake.

There was a Fine levied at Westminster, 48 F. 3. Fin. lev. Trin. 48 E. 3. and
postea Mich.
between Thomas de Southorp, Vicar of the Church of East Retford, and Robert de
Loversdale, Vicar of Everton, Quer. and John de Walton of Retford, and Alice
his wife, Deforc. of thirteen Mess* four Tofts, one hundred twenty three Acres
of Land and an half, eight Acres of Meadow, 9s. 8d. Rent, and the moiety of two
Mess. with the Appurtenances in East Retford, West Retford, Ordesale,
Babbeworth, Wellum-Morehouse, Wellum, Everton, Eton, Milneton, Hoghton, and
Little Markham, whereby most of the said Lands were settled on the said John
and Alice, and the heirs of their bodies; remainder to Elias de Thoresby, and
Ioane his wife, and the heirs of their bodies; remainder to the right heirs of
Alice.

The Jury, 8 R. 2. Esc. 8 R. 2. n. 54.
found it no damage if the King granted Mr Richard de Raucliffe, Parson of
Cloun, William de Burgh, Parson of Babworth, and Peter le Cook, Chaplain,
license to give to the Prior and Covent of Wirksop, and their successors, five
Mess. and the moiety of three Mess. with the Appurtenances in East Retford for
ever, to find a Chaplain to pray for the good estate of the said Richard,
William, and Peter, whilst they should live, and daily to celebrate for them
all when they should be dead, in the Church of that Priory. The Lands were held
of the King in Free Burgage by the service of 9s. 2d. yearly, paid by the hands
of the Bailiffs of East Retford, as parcel of the Fee Farm of that Town. In the
same year, viz. 8 R. 2. Esc. 8 R. 2. n. 60.
there was another return of an Ad quod damnum, that the King might grant to
John Liola, Parson of West Retford, Thomas, Vicar of Clarburgh, Thomas, Vicar
of East Retford, John de Treyswell, Chaplain, Hugh de Tylne of Retford, William
de Burgh, Parson of Babworth, John Atte-Vikers, and Thomas de Besthorp, license
amongst them severally to give to the Bailiffs and Community of East Retford,
and their successors for ever, nine Mess. five Tofts, and 8s. Rent in East
Retford held of the King in free Burgage by the service of 1d. per annum, to
find two Chaplains to officiate at the Altars of St. Mary, and the holy Trinity
in the Church of East Retford, according to the Ordinance of the Archbishop of
York.

At the dissolution the Abbey of Rufford had a Grange here. B.
The Abbey of Wellebek had Lands then Rented at 2l. 17s. 4d. The Priory of
Radford by Worksop had Rents of Assise 7s. 6d. and Lands valued at 3l. 11s. The
Priory of Mattersays Lands here were 13s. 4d.

The Town and Borough of East Retford is the Kings Town, and has been an
ancient Borough, Ex vi^a. Norro^ 1614.
as appears by a Grant made by King Edward the first, who granted the Town in
fee Farm to the Burgesses of the same, paying ten pounds per annum, giving them
power to choose Bailiffs for the Government of the said Town. Henry the third
granted them a Fair. Edward 3. exempted them from all Tolles and foreign
services. Henry the sixth gave them a Court of Record to hold plea of Action
without limitation of sum, and to use the Office of Escheator, and Clark of
the Market: All which privileges have been from time to time confirmed by the
several Kings and Queens of this Land; and King James in the fifth year of his
Reign did not only confirm all former grants made by his predecessors, but
also incorporated it anew by the name of Bailiffs and Burgesses, and appointed
the same to be governed by two Bailiffs, and likewise twelve Aldermen to make a
Common Council for the Town; also they have a Common Seal, with power to alter
it at their pleasure. And that the said two Bailiffs for the time being, and
the learned Steward shall be Justices of the Peace and Quorum within the said
Borough. Gilbert Earl of Shrowsbury was High Steward, and Sir Richard
Williamson, Knight, learned Steward. Since then Sir Gervas Clifton has been
High Steward, and Sir Hardolph Wastenes (who in his younger time was a
Barrester at Law) learned Steward. At this time his Grace the Duke of
Newcastle, as I take it, is High Steward, and John Millington, Esquire, learned
Steward. They have a Town Clark, and two Sergeants at Mace.

The Vicarage of East Retford was 5l. when the Sacrist of St. Mary's at York
(called also St. Sepulchers) was Patron: Mss. I. M.
It Is now 5l. 5s. 0d. in the Kings Books, and the Earl of Devonshire Patron.

In the Church North I Will on a Marble Gravestone,

Hic jacet Johannes Smith, Merser, de East Retford, qui obiit 26. die Maii,
Anno Dom. 1496. Cujus Animae propitietur Deus, Amen.

On another raised three Foot high, Circumscribed,

Hic jacet Johannes Bowly,.... qui obiit... mensis Aprilis, Anno Dom. 1455.
Cujus animae propitietur Deus, Amen.

In the middle two Coats, on each Three Crescents upon a Bend.

On a Gravestone at the East end of the Quire,

Hic jacet Johannes....Vicarius de East Redford, Rector de Hayton and Orsall,
qui obiit 28 December. Anno 1502. Cujus, etc.

In the old Quire,

Hic jacet Johannes Denman, Armiger, qui obiit 16 November. Anno Dom. 1517.
Cujus, etc.

On it is twice cut, A Cinquefoyle upon a Chevron.

In a West Window France and England, and Sab. Fretty Arg. a Carpentars square
Or, and Sab. Fretty Arg. an Ax Shaft Or, and head Arg.

There was Gules a Chief Arg. Hercy quartering Leek.

And Gules a Saltier Ermine, Nevill, impaling Arg. a Chevron between three
Stars (or Mullets) pierced Sable; and under the same all in one Scutcheon, Arg.
upon a Bend Azure three Crescents Arg.

Bollome.
BOlum in the Book of Doomsday is certified to be one of the Berues of the
Archbishop of Yorks great Manor of Sok of Lanum. In Bolum likewise there was
a Manor of Roger de Buslies Fee, Lib. Dooms.
which Turvert had before the Conquest, for which he paid to the Danegeld as
seven Bovats. The Land being then two Car. There were four Sochm. four Board.
having three Car. To this Manor lay six Bovats for the Geld, of which the Sok
was in Saundby. The Land two Car. There Gaufr. the Man of Roger had one Car.
two Sochm. four Vill. three Board. having four Car.. Meadow eight qu. long, two
broad. Pasture Wood one leu. long, three qu. broad. In King Edward the
Confessors time this was valued at 40s. in King Williams at 50s.

The Mill of Bolum was of the Demesne of Gringeley, Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p. 51.
and by Emme the wife of William de Luvetot, Founder of the Church of St.
Cuthbert near Wirksop, with the Consent and Confirmation of Richard de Lovetot
her son, given to that Monastery to buy Wine for the use of the Mass, together
with an Essart of Asaley to make Wafers.

William de Lovetot, son of Richard, Regist. de Wirksop fol. 2. a. Cap. 3. Mon.
Angl. vol. 2. p. 52.
also confirmed that gift of his Grandmother, and so did Matilda de Lovetot,
wife of Gerard de Furnivall, only daughter and heir of the said William Lord
Lovetot, which said Matilda de Luvetot confirmed also to the said Monastery,
all Bollum in Lands and Meadow and Mill, to which Richard de Luvetot her
Grandfather had given it.

King Henry the eighth by his Letters Patents dated 28 October. 36 H. 8. O. 36 H.
8. par. 8. m. 4.
granted to Robert Swyft, and William Swyft and their heirs, the Manor of
Bollome, and two Mills in Bollome within the Parish of Hayton, one called a
Walk Mill, and two Gardens within that Parish called the Chapel, and the
Old-yard, and five Tofts in East Retford, etc. all which, and many other Lands
and Tenements then granted, were late belonging to the Priory of Wirkesop; B.
and from Swyft it was conveyed to Francis Worteley, and Mary his wife, and the
heirs of Mary, 7 Eliz. It was lately the Inheritance of Francis Worteley,
Knight and Baronet.

The Tithes of the Mills of Bolum were part of the Vicarage of Clarburgh, Ex
veter, Exempl. pen. Timoth. Luddington, Vicar. de East Retford. Test. de Nev.
by the Ordination of Sewall, Archbishop of York 1258.

The Archbishop of York gave the Church of Bolum, with the Appurtenances,
which might be worth ten Marks, and belonged to a Prebend at York (viz. in the
Chapel of St. Mary and All Angels, mentioned in East Retford) to William de
Lanum in the absence of the Prebendary.

Wellome.
WEllum and Suventon of the Kings great Soc of Maunsfeild, lying in Oswardbek
Wapentak, afterward called only Oswardbek Sok, Lib. Dooms.
paid the Geld or Tax as five Bov.. The Land two Car. Five Sochm. one Vill. one
Board. had two Car. Meadow one qu.. long, one qu. and ten Perches broad, Pasture
Wood nineteen quar. long, and two qu.. broad, the value 10s. 8d. Of the
Archbishops great Sok of Sutton, Wellum and Suventon answered for five Bovats.
being near alike to the former parcel.

Matilda de Luvetot, sometime wife of Gerard de Furnivall, Mon. Angl. vol. 2.
p. 55. Et Reg. de Wirksop fol. 9. b.
gave to the Canons of Radford (near Wirksop) for the safety of her Soul, and
of the Souls of her sons, Thomas de Furnivall, and Gerard his brother, her
whole Land which she had in the Territory of Wellum, with the Homages and
Services of the Men and their Sequells, etc.

There was a Suit, 5 E. 2. Pl. de Banc. Hill. 5 E. 2. to 35. in dorso.
for Lands in Wellum, Clareburgh, and Bolum, partible amongst heirs Males. Adam
Prat of Redford who lived in the time of Henry the third, had three sons, John,
Walter, and Thomas: John had Thomas Prat the Plaintiff, Adam, Robert, and
William: Walter had Adam, John, and Thomas; and Thomas, the son of the first
named Adam, had Thomas Prat of Retford, the Defendant.

There was a Fine at York, 9 E. 3. Fin. lev. apud Ebor. Hill. 9 E. 3.
between John, son of John de Boughton, and Constantia his wife, Plaint. and
Richard, son of Walter de Bildeswath, Def. of five Mess. three Tofts, two
hundred sixty nine Acres of Land, and forty two Acres of Meadow, and 50 and 6s.
and 8l. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Wellum, Ha^ton, Grenley, and
Clareburgh, whereby they were settled on the said John and Constantiae, and the
heirs of their bodies; remainder to the right heirs of John.

It appears, 8 E. 3. Esc. 8 E. 3. n. 68.
that in Wellum with Morehouses 49s. Rent was yearly paid by the Freeholders to
the Lords of Oswaldbeck Sok.

Humfrey Hercy, Esquire, 8 H. 8. Pasc. 8 H. 8. rot. 504.
claimed against John Brig of East Retford one Mess. eighty Acres of Land,
twelve of Meadow, forty of Pasture, and 12s. Rent, with the Appurtenances in
Grynley and Wellom.

The Priory of Wirksop had chief Rents in Wellome 21s. 6l. and Lands there
Rented at 5l. 5^. 8d. besides 5l. 7^. 8d. in the Parishes of Clareborough, B.
Bolome, Wellome, and Hayton. The free Chapel of Tilne, in the Parish of
Hayton, had Lands here, and so had the free Chapel of our Lady and All Saints,
called Sepulchers Chapel near the Minster at York.

George Lesemore, and John Strangman, 13 Iul. 37 H. 8. Par. 8 p. t. 37 H. 8.
had license to give a Mess. and Tenement in Wellome, late belonging to the
Priory of Worksop, to Richard Richardson, junior, of Clareborough, and Alice
his wife, and their heirs. Gabriel Richardson, Gent. 1 Ian. 7 Eliz. had license
to give it to Chr. Twiselton, Par. 1. pat. 7 Eliz.
and Anne his wife, George and Brian Twiselton, and their heirs. Mr. Edmund
Brown built a pretty House at Wellome, and left two daughters his heirs about
1673.

Tilne North and South.
THe Kings great Soc of Maunsfeild extended it self into Oswardebek Wapentak,
to which was belonging in Tilne as much for the Geld as was in the same Town,
Lib. Dooms.
of the Archbishop of Yorkes Fee belonging to Sudton, viz. two Bovats and. The
Land one Car. There two Sochm. one Vill. one Bordar had six Oxen in their Plow
(or six Bovats in their Carucat.) There was a Mill 32s. and six Acres of Meadow,
the value was 40^. It Is like the Archbishops part was about the same value,
for he had in Tilne a Mill also yielding 30s. which is said to belong to Lanum.

King Henry the thirds Precept to the Sheriff of Not. dated 1 December. 5 H. 3.
Fin. 5 H. 3. m. 9.
shows that King John gave to Roger de Lanum, Father of Thomas de Lanum (who
then had paid his Fine of five Marks, and done his Homage for it) four Marks
Rent, with the Appurtenances in two Woods, and one Mill in Tylne, which the
Sheriff was then to give the said Thomas seisin of accordingly. The Jury, 30 E.
1. Esc. 30 E. 1. n. 11.
found that Thomas de Lanum held Lands in Tylne, in Hayton, and Clareburgh
Church, and in Carleton upon Trent, twenty seven Acres of Land, etc. and that
Roger de Lanum his son and heir was then above threescore years old. Roger de
Lanum held twenty Bovats of Land in Tilne, with the Mill, Lib. feod. in Scac.
penes Rem. Regis.
of the gift of Thomas de Lanum, and paid yearly 40. and Thomas was enfeoffed
by King John for a Sparhawk, and it was of the Soc of Oswaldbek.

It appears by the return of the Ad quod Damnum, 32 E. 1. Esc. 32 E. 1. n. 104.
that Roger de Lanum enfeoffed Robert le Power, and Roger his son, of 13s. 4d.
Rent in North Tilne, and South Tylne, held of the King as of the Soc of
Oswardbek, paying a Sparrow-Hawk yearly to the Exchequer on the Feast of St.
James the Apostle. The Jury, 18 E. 2. Esc. 18 E. 2. n. 45.
found that Robert Power of Tylne held in Tilne 13s. 4d. of the King in Capite,
as in petty Serjeanty by the Service of 2^. yearly to the Exchequer for a
Sparrow-Hawk. And one Mess. and two Bovats of Land of the Archbishop of York,
for 2^. per annum, and Suit to Lanum Court. And twenty Acres at Lound of Sibyl
de Furneis by the Service of 4d. and that John his son and heir was then above
twenty nine years old. The King, 24 Apr. 49 E. 3. Gross. Fin. 49 E. 3. n. 26.
took the Homage of William Power, son and heir of John Power deceased for
Lands in Tilne. There was a Fine, 30 H. 6. Fin. lev. 30 H. 6. Mich.
between Raph Crumwell, Knight, William Stanlowe, and Johan his wife, and
Richard Illingworth, Plaint. and John Pouer, Def. of the Manor of Tylne, with
the Appurtenances, twelve Mess. four Tofts, two hundred Acres of Land, forty of
Meadow, forty of Pasture, forty of Marsh, two of Wood, and 10^. Rent, with the
Appurtenances in Tylne, Hayton, Clareburgh, Wellum juxta Clareburgh, Wellum
Morehouse, Grynley, East Retford, and Ordeshall, which the said John
acknowledged to be the right of the said William. Isabell, who had been wife of
William Pouer, mother of the said John, held part in Dower, and the third part
of the Manor of Tilne.

There were Lands in Tylne in the year 1460. belonging to the Priory of
Wirkesop, Regist. de Wirksop fol. 88. a.
whereof every Acre contained eight Virg. Rods; or Roodes.

Par. 4. pat. 2 E. 6.
King Edward the sixth, Aug. 3. in the second year of his Reign, granted to
Robert Swift, and William Swift, and their heirs, amongst other things the free
Chapel of Tylne in the Parish of Hayton, with the Appurtenances in East
Retford, Wellum Morehouse, Bollome, Tylne, Hayton, and Ordesall.

Hayton.
THis place I find not expressed in Doomsday Book, howbeit it appears to be
much as the rest of these Townships of the Fee of the Archbishop of York, viz.
of the North Sok. The Church Archbishop Roger gave to the Chapel which he
Founded near the Minister at York, as in Retford has been noted, Ex vneri
copia pen. T. L. Vicar. de Ruf. and Mon. Angl. vol. 3. p. 139.
and Sewall the Archbishop 4 (or 3) of the Nones of May 1258. ordained that the
Vicar of Hayton should have the Altarage and Land of the Church of this Town,
with a Garden, and that the Sacrist of the forementioned Chapel, should give
yearly to the poor of this place three Marks.

Adam, the Chaplain of Radeford, gave to God and St. Mary of Blyth, Regist. de
Elid. p. 101.
and the Monks there serving God, all his Rents and Lands which he bought, and
held of John Fleming of Claverburgh, of Richard, son of Thomas Hasart, and
Dieva de Biam, and of Nicolas, son of Thorald, in the Town of Claverburg, and
all the Land which he likewise bought and held of William, son of Hubert de
Haiton, of Maud, the daughter of Ernald de Tilne, of Thomas, son of Richerius
de Haiton, of Hugh, son of Took, of Albreda, daughter of Roger de Haiton, and
of Alunna, daughter of Roger de Haiton, in Haiton.

Robert de Everingham for the health of his Soul, and of Isabell his wife,
Regist. de Wirksop fol. 90. a. Cap. 60.
quit-claimed to Walter the Prior of Wirkesop, etc. the Suit to his Court of
Leyrton, for the Land held of his Fee by that Priory in the Town of Hayton.

Robert le Ventrer, and Matilda his wife, 17 E. 1. Fl. de Banc. Mich. 17 E. 1.
to. 18.
acknowledged one Mess. two Bov. of Land, and two Acres of Meadow in Heyton, to
be the right of Robert Pauleyn, and his heirs for ever.

Hugh, son of Osbert of Laxton Morehouses, and Isabell his wife, and John, son
of Richard le Grunger of Laxton Morehouses, and Alice his wife, by Fine, 10 E.
2. Fin. lev. Mich. 10 E. 2.
conveyed to John de Markham of Wyston, and his heirs, twenty seven Acres of
Land, six and an half of Meadow, and 8s. 4d. ob. Rent, with the Appurtenances in
Hayton, Tylne, Clareburgh, North Leverton, Lound, and Schaftworth.

The Jury, 24 E. 1. Esc. 24 E. 1. n. 63.
found that Robert de Hayton held one Mess. and seven Bovats in Hayton, and
Claverburgh of the Archbishop of York in Socage, and Lands in South Leverton,
Misterton, Lound, and in Clumber a Water-Mill, and eighty Acres in West
Retford, and that Thomas and Robert were his sons and heirs, the elder being
two years old at the Feast of All Saints, and that several others held of him
the said Robert de Hayton.

The Jury in 4 E. 2. Esc. 4 E. 2.
found it no damage if the King granted Robert le Power license to give one
Toft, and three Acres of Land, with the Appurtenances in Hayton, to Henry de
Sibthorp, the Vicar of that Church, and his successors, to augment the
sustentation of a certain Chaplain, etc.

The Jury, 17 E. 3. Esc. 17 E. 3. n. 2.
found that John de Carewell of Hayton held, when he died, two Mess. and
fourscore Acres of Land in Hayton and Clareburgh, of the Archbishop of York,
by making two appearances at his Court at Lanum. And that John, son of the said
John de Carewell, was his son and heir.

Laurence Moigne, and Elizabeth his wife, levied a Fine, 9 H. 6. Fin. lev.
Pasc. 9 H. 6.
of the Manor of Hayton, with the Appurtenances, and four Mess. sixteen Tofts,
four hundred sixty five Acres of Land and an half, ninety two of Meadow and an
half, and 46s. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Hayton, Clareburgh, Wellum
Morehouse, Lound, Walkringham, Misterton, and Stokyth, whereby they conveyed to
Gilbert Grayff, Clerk, and others, and warranted against the heirs of the said
Elizabeth.

The Jury in 14 H. 6. Esc. 14 H. 6. n. 22.
said that Raph Makarell, and Margery his wife, had the Manor of Hayton, and a
Capital Mess. a Horse-Mill, one hundred Acres of Land, forty of Meadow, and 60s.
Rent in Stretton and Fenton in the Clay, and Lands in Misterton, and Stokyth,
and Walkringham, etc. and that Hugh Makarell was son and heir of the said Raph.

By an Inquisition taken 21 September. 14 H. 7. it appears that John
Fitz-William, Inq.
Lord of the Manors of Athewyk, Warenhall, and Potter Newton in Yorkshire,
died the 4 of January, 13 H. 7. seized of the Manor of Hayton, and that of
Stirton called Makerells Manor, and Lands in Stokwith, Walkringham, Moregate,
Styrap, Blyth, Misterton, Lownde, Clareburgh, and Wellum, and that John
FitzWilliam, son of his son John, was his Cousin and Heir, and above nine years
old.

By another Inquisition taken 9 November. 4 H. 8. is shown that John Fitz-William
of Athewyk, Inq.
Esquire, died 25 Sept. 4 H. 8. leaving Anne Fitz-William his daughter and heir
one year five months and two days old, to whom he left the forementioned
Manors and Lands, and several others. Another Inquisition, 8 October. 20 H. 8.
shows that Anne Fitz-William died, 9 September. 7 H. 8. seized of this Manor,
Stirton, etc. and that Thomas Pogge, son of Thomas, son of John, son of John,
son and heir of Cecilia, sister of Margery, mother of John, father of John,
father of John, father of the said Anne, was one of her Cousins and heirs: and
Richard Laken, son of Andrew, son of George, son of Elizabeth, one of the
daughters and coheirs of Agnes, another sister of the said Margeries; and
William Winslowe, son of Cecilia, the other coheir and daughter Nicol.
Fitz-William-Margeria- Johannes Fitz 13 H. 7.-William ob. 4 Jan.- Johannes Fitz
antre patrem.-William ob.- Johannes Fitz 25 Sept. 4 H. 8.-William ob.-Eliz.
Anna Fitz-William ob. 9 Sept. 7 H. 8. s^ne prole.


Agnes-Tho. Flower. Rogerus Flower- Richard. Flower- Rogerus Flower- Richardus
Flower infra aet. 22 H. 8. consang. and haer. Annae Fitz-William.




Cecilia-....Poge. Joh. Poge- Johannes Pogge- Thom. Poge- Tho. Pogge un.
consang. and haer. Annae Fitz-William, 20 H. 8.



Agnes- Eliz. fill. and haer.- Georgius Laken- Andreas Laken- Richardus Laken
alter consang. and haer. Annae, 20 H. 8.


Cecilia fill. and haer.- Willielmus Wynslowe alter consan. and haer. Annae, 20
H. 8.


of the said Agnes, were found Cousins and Heirs also of the said Anne
Fitz-William. Another Inquisition taken 29 July, 22 H. 8. finds Richard Flower
then under age Cousin and heir of the said Anne, viz. son of Roger, son of
Richard, son of Roger, son of Thomas Flower, and Agnes his wife, daughter of
the said Margery.

John Flower, Gent. 11 Eliz. claimed against John Poge the Manor of Heyton,
Hill. 11 Eliz. to. 325.
with the Appurtenances, and one Mess. one hundred Acres of Land, twenty of
Meadow, and thirty of Pasture, with the Appurtenances in Clerburgh, Est Retford,
Welhom, Lownd, and Stokwyth, which Raph Cromewell, Knight, Lord Cromewell, and
others, gave to Nicolas Fitz-Williams, Esquire, and Margery his wife, etc.

John Clay, 22 H. 7. Mich. 22 H. 7. to. 103.
suffered a Recovery of two hundred Acres of Land, ten of Meadow, two hundred of
Pasture, ten of Wood, and 10^. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Hayton and
Clarburgh.

The King, 16 Aug. 38 H. 8. Par. 3. pat. 38 H. 8.
granted to Robert and Hugh Thornhill, and their heirs, a Mess. in Hayton in
the tenure of Thomas Peke, and a Grange there in the Tenure of Richard Peke,
both lately belonging to the Monastery of Wirkesop.... which Grange they had
l^cence 29 October. that year to settle on Richard Pecke for life; Par. 11. pat.
38 H. 8.
remainder to Humfr. Pecke his son and heir.

King Philip and Queen Mary, 12 November. 5 and 6 P. and M. Par. 2. pat. 5 and 6
P. and M.
granted to Nicolas Archbishop of York, and his successors the right of
Patronage of the Churches of Wyfall, Gamston, Bothomsell, Heyton and Greeneley.

B.
The Grange and Lands belonging to Wirksop were rated or rented at the
Dissolution at 3l. 15s. 4^. and 2s. chief Rent. The Chantry of St. John of
Mattersey had Lands here granted to Reeve and Cotton in Fee, 7 E. 6.

The Freeholders of Hayton Town in 1612. are said to be William Lord Cavendish,
Lib. libere ten.
Sir Francis L^ck Knight, Francis, Gargrave, Gent. William ^essop, Gent. (of
Darbyshire).... West, Gent. Iervas Markham of Dunham, Gent. Nicolas Padley,
George Worsley, John Garlic, Robert Williamson, Charles Wood, William
Sowthworthe, Thomas Eastwood, Francis Aukeland, Cott. George, Humfrey, and
William Padley, each a Cottage.

The Vicarage of Haiton was eight Marks when the Sacrist of St. Mary's at York
was Patron: Mss. I. M.
It Is now 4l. 15s. 5d. value in the Kings Books, and the Earl of Devonshire
Patron.

Clarborough.
CLarburge and Tillne were part of them of the Kings great Soc of Maunsfeild,
as much as answered the Tax for two Bovats. The Land one Car. There also two
Sochm. one Vill. one Board. had six Oxen in Plow (or six Bov. in Car.) and two
Mills 32s. six Acres of Meadow, Lib. Dooms.
the value was 40s. There was in Claverburth belonging to Sudton of the
Archbishop of Yorkes Fee, which paid the Geld for six Bovats and an half. The
Meadow was four Quarent. and an half long, and so much in breadth, and at the
time of the Conquerours Survey forty five Acres, Pasture Wood two leu.. long,
two leu, broad. In Oswardbec Wapentac the Kings part of this Town may probably
be that Cledreton, noted in Truswell. There was of the Fee of Roger de Busli in
Claverburch a Manor which before the Conquest one Reginald had, which paid the
Geld or Tax for two Bovats. Lib. Dooms.
The Land of it being two Car. There afterward Fulco the Man of Roger had half
a Car. eight Vill. one Board. with one Car.. and seven Acres of Meadow, Pasture
Wood four qu. long, two broad. In the Confessors time this was 6s. value, in
the Conquerours 20. There also Vlchill had half a Bovat for the Gi^^. with Sac
and Soc. The Land being sufficient for two Oxen, (or two Bovats). The very same
Vlchill himself held it of Roger, and had there two Bordars, with two Oxen, and
one Acre of Meadow, Pasture Wood two qu. long, one bro^d. This continued the old
value it had before the Conquest, viz. 16l. In Claverburge also of the Land of
the Taynes was a Manor which Vlmer (named in Truswell) held for one Bovat and
an half to the Geld, with Soc and Sac without an Hall. The Land three Bov. The
same Vlmer held it of the King (William) and there had two Vill. three Board.
with half a Car. and three Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood six leu. long, three
broad. In the Confessors time the value was 3s. when the Conquerours Survey
was taken 2. There was another parcel which Archill did hold in this Town in
the time of King Edward the Confessor then valued at 4s. in King Williams,
Erwin held it valued at 2^. there being two Vill. and six Acres of Meadow.

Ernald Flamang of Claverburg, by the consent of his heir Roger, Regist. de
Wirkesop, fol. 88. b. Cap. 1.
gave to the Church of St. Cuthbert of Radeford the fourth part of the Church
of Claverburg, and one Bovat in Drayton, and a certain part of Land in the
Field of Bolum: Roger his son was Witness. John Flamang of Claverburg ratified
the gift of Arnald Flamang his Grandfather. Ib. Cap. 2.
Adam, son of John Flandrensis of Claverburgh, Ib. Cap. 12.
granted to the Canons of Wirkesop all the Land which they held of his Fee in
the Territory of Hayton, and of Claverburg. There was another Charter of like
import of Adam le Fleming, dated 5 Non. July, Ib. for. 90. Cap. 10.
1244. to which were Witnesses Sir Simon de Hedon, Robert de Wlfrington, and
Robert de Ripariis, Ib. Cap. 13.
Knights. John, son of Adam le Fleming, released his right to the said Canons.
Adam, the Chaplain of Radeford, named before in Hayton, gave to Blyth what he
bought and held of John Flemenge (the elder) and others, Regist. de B^ld. p.
101.
in Clarburgh and Haiton, as there is set down.

In the year 1258. 3 vel 4 Non. May, amongst the rest of the Churches belonging
to the Chapel of St. Mary and All Angels, Ex vel. Copia pen. T. L. Vicar. de
Ea't Retford.
called Sepulchers, near York Minster, Sewall Archbishop of York ordained that
the Vicar of Clarborough should have the Altarage, with a Toft and Croft lying
next to the Churchyard, and the Tithes of the enclosed Crofts of the Town, and
the Tithe of the Mills of Bolum, and should find honest sustentation for the
Chaplain of Greeneley, and to another Chaplain, if he should serve at
Clareburgh, Weslum, and Bolum, and the Sacrist of the forementioned Chapel
should give to the poor of this Parish five Marks yearly.

Test. de Nev.
Thomas Fitz-William held of Alice, Countess of Augi, Lady of Tikhill, in
Clareburghe, and West Drayton, three parts of a Knights Fee, and she of the
King of the old feoffment.

John de Boughton gave half a Mark, 3 E. 3. Pl. de Iur. and Assis. apud. Not.
3 E. 3. to. 1.
for license of Concord with Robert de Stokham, and Matilda his wife,
concerning a plea of Covenant of five Acres of Land, three Rod of Meadow, and
two parts of a Mess. with the Appurtenances in Clareburgh, and they had a
Cirograph, (viz. a Fine.)

Sir Robert Waterton, Knight, whose sister and heir Jane was wife of Leo Lord
Wells, Ex Chart. indentat. partitionis pen. Mr... Temple.
and by him had four daughters and heirs, had Lands in Clareburgh, Wellum,
Wellowe, Amton, Scaftworth, Gringley, Walesby, and Boughton in this County, the
Manors of Metheley, and Woodhall in Metheley, Barley, and Houghton, and Lands
in Potterton in Yorkshire, the Manor of Dobbledyke, and Lands in Gosberton,
Pinchbek, Spalding, Quadring, and Waterton in Lincolneshire, of which a
partition was made by consent, 26 Apr. 2 H. 7. between Sir Christopher
Willughby, Knight, son of (Robert Lord Willoughby, and) Cicely, the first
daughter; Sir Robert Dymmock, Knight, son of (Sir Thomas, and) Margaret, the
second; and Thomas Lawrence, Esquire, son of (Sir James Lawrence, and) Elianor,
the third; and Katherine, first wife to Sir Thomas de la Laund, Knight, and
after to Robert Tempest, Esquire, the fourth daughter and heir of the said Jane
Lady Wells, sister and heir of the said Sir Robert Waterton.

Alexander Banester, and Marmaduk Fankys, 28 H. 8. Trin. 28 H. 8. to. 145.
claimed against William Banester twenty Mess. ten Tofts, four hundred Acres of
Land, forty of Meadow, one hundred of Pasture, and forty of Furz and Heath, with
the Appurtenances in Clareburgh, Wellum Morehouse, Bollome, Tylne, and Ordsall.

Thomas Denman, and Thomas Dawes, in another Recovery, 16 Eliz. Mich. 15 and 16
Eliz. to. 353.
claimed against Francis Denman, Clark, two Mess. etc. in Clareburgh.

The Freeholders in Clareburghe Town 1612. Thomas Fee, Gent. Alexander
Sherbrook, senior, Lib. libere ten.
John Sherbrooke, senior, de Gringley Parva, Edward Clark of the same, Thomas
Seaton, Thomas Sowtheworthe of Wellam, George Brown, Richard Otter of Wellam,
William Barker, John Otter of Clarebroughe, Richard Sowthworthe, William Aston,
Charles Oxenforthe of Bole, Alverey Keyworth of Moregate, William Childers of
Moregate, Robert Parnell, William Howl, Richard Elsam, John Spybye, Thomas
Eastwood, John Garlic of Heaton, Dennys Huddlestone, Richard Harpham.

The Vicarage of Clareburgh was 8l. when the Sacrist of St. Mary's Ebor. was
Patron; Mss. I. M.
It Is now 9l. 15s. 5d. value in the Kings Books, and the Earl of Devonshire
Patron.

North Leverton.
LEgreton is certified to be a Berew of the Archbishop of Yorkes great Soc of
Lanum, and no other mention can I find of it in Doomsday Book.

There was a Fine at Not. the Saturday after the Feast of the Apostles Peter
and Paul, 4 Ioh. Fin. lev. 4 Ioh.
between Gilbert de Everingham, Pet. and Robert de Everingham, Tenant of one
Bovat of Land, with the Appurtenances in Leghirton, which Gilbert remised to
the said Robert, and he for it gave the said Gilbert in Helpirthorp one Bovat,
of which Land twelve Carucats made one Knights Fee. This Manor continued to
the Family of Everingham, as in Laxton may be discerned.

Robert, son of Alexander, 31 H. 3. Inter. plac. de Iur. and Assis. in Com.
L^icest. 31 H. 3. cor. R.
called to warrant Adam de Everingham, concerning fourteen Acres of Land in
North Leirton, Thurkelby, etc. in recept. Scac. to. 22.
which Simon, son of Alexander, claimed against him.

Richard, son of Moysy, 10 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Pasch. 10 E. 1. to. 34.
by his Attorney claimed against William de Knapton, and Matild. his wife, one
Mess. and one Car, of Land in North Leyrton, to whom he afterward remitted his
whole right.

By a Fine, 2 E. 2. Fin. lev. Trin. 2 E. 2.
between Adam, son of Robert de Everingham, and Claricia his wife, Plaintiffs,
and Thomas de Staynton, Deforc. the Manor of Leverton, with the Appurtenances,
was settled on the said Adam and Claricia, and the heirs of their bodies;
remainder to the right heirs of Adam.

Robert de Dyggeby, and Sibyll his wife, 2. E. 3. Fin. lev. apud Ebor. Mic. 2
E. 3.
levied a Fine at York of the Manor of Leyrton to Adam de Everingham of
Laxton. By another Fine at York, 11 and 12 E. 3. Fin. lev. apud Ebor. Mich. 11
E. 3. and Hill. 12 E. 3.
between Adam de Everingham, the elder, Quer. and Nicolas de Scalton, Parson of
Laxton, Deforc. this Manor was settled on the said Adam for life, and after
his decease, the moiety, with the Appurtenances toward the East, to Adam de
Everingham, the younger, and the heirs Males of his body; remainder to Robert
his brother, and his; remainder to Edmund his brother, and his; remainder to
Alexander his brother, and his; remainder to Nicolas his brother, and his;
remainder to the right heirs of the said Adam de Everingham, the elder. The
other moiety was likewise intailed much after the same manner.

George, son of Adam de Everingham, made a Deed of release 28 May, 7 H. 4. Pl.
de Banc. Mic. 8 H. 4. to. 28.
to Robert de Waterton, son of William Elys Chr. and to the heirs of the said
Robert, son of William, and heir of William, son of Adam de Everingham, Knight,
concerning his whole right, etc. in the Manor of North Leverton, and other
Lands; which Manor Robert de Elys was to have for life, Ib. to. 34.
after the decease of Robert de Waterton, etc.

In a Recovery, 9 H. 7. Trin. 9 H. 7. to. 154.
Robert Moresby claimed against John Babington, Knight, the Manor of North
Leverton, with the Appurtenances, seventy five Mess. one thousand Acres of
Land, six hundred of Meadow, eight hundred of Pasture, forty of Wood, 8l. Rent,
and Rent of fifty Cocks and one hundred Hens, with the Appurtenances in North
Leverton, Cotes, Habilsthorp, Bole, and Bekingham.

William de Chadworth Chr. in the time of Edward the first, gave the Manor of
North Leverton to Elen, the daughter of John de Bosevill, and the heirs of her
body; which Elen, 3 E. 3. Pl. de Iur. and Assis. cor. W. de Herle, 3 E. 3. to.
26.
had a son and heir named Thomas Shadworth.

B.
The Manor of North Leverton was heretofore William Willoughbyes; and after
Katherins, the wife of John Eaton; and after Christopher Kendalls. Lib. 3. post
mort. fol. 165.
After the death of Christopher Kendall, Esquire, 25 Oct. 3 Eliz. who held the
Manor of North Leverton of the Archbishop of York of his Manor of Scrowby,
called the North Soke, by fealty, and 2s. per annum, Marmaduk Kendall his son
and heir was found of the age of nineteen years and seven Months. It was of
late the Inheritance of Peter Roos, B.
and since of Thomas Broughton, Esquire.

.... Norton of Yorkshire had Lands there which came to the Crown by his
Attainder in the Northern Rebellion, and were granted to Appleby and Shepston
in Fee 22 Eliz.

The Freeholders of North Leverton Town 1612. were many, Lib. libere ten.
viz. the heirs of Edward Nightingale, John Cotton, William More, Alvered
Gelland, Roger Fretwell, Henry Parnham of East Retford, Nicolas Colton, John
Spencer, William Butler, Peter Saw, John Hopkinson, Thomas Bunby, James
Husband, Edward Burden, John Draper, etc.

The Church is appropriated to, Mss. I. M.
and makes a Prebend in the Collegiate Church of Southwell, as is there noted.
The Vicarage of North Leverton was ten Marks, but is now 5l. value in the Kings
Books, and the Prebendary continues Patron.

Littleburgh. Segelocum.
HEre was a famous passage over Trent, and near it have been found some old
pieces of Roman Antiquities, Coyns, or the like, as I have heard, which I
suppose determined this place to be the Agelocum, corrupted from Adelocum, or
Segelocum of Antonine, Britannia impress. Londini per Radul. Newbery. 1587.
which yet Mr. Cambden thought once was to be sought for in vain any where but
on the Banks of the River Idle (or Idle) now Eaton signifies Water Town, and is
upon that River, and may as well by that reason be called Idleton; and Id or Yd
in the British Language signifies Seges, Corn, and Ydlan, Dictionar. I. Davies.
Area ubi reponuntur collectae segetes, which in these parts we call a
Stack-yard, so that it seems the River Idle had its name from Corn, with which
the neighboring Fields ever abounded, and Adelocum was intended by the Romans
for the place upon Ydel, after the broad pronunciation of Ai for I, which is
still frequent in this Country, as Segelocum after the signification, Idle
signifying a Granary amongst the Britains. Ib. in vore Granarium.


Littleburgh was of the Soc of Maunsfeild, the Kings great Manor, as much of
Oswardbec Soc was, whereof this was also part, and answered the Danegeld or Tax
before the Conquest for four Bov. The Land being one Car. Lib. Dooms.
There fourteen Sochm. two Vill. four Board. had afterward five Car. Meadow
three qu. and ten Virg. long, two qu. broad; this Soc was in the Conquerours
time valued at 10s.

King John being at Not. when he was Earl Moreton, gave to the Church of
Wellebec, Regist. de Wellebek 231.
and the Monks there, whatever belonged to him of the Church of Littilburgh,
with the Appurtenances, viz. the Advowson and Presentation, and the very Church
to be converted to their proper uses, as much as belonged to him or his heirs,
and G. Archbishop of York appropriated it accordingly to that Abbey.

Hugh, son of Hugh de Stretton, gave twelve Acres of Meadow which he held of
Roger de Trehampton in the Marsh of Lee, Regist. de Wellebek p. 173.
and two Fishings in the Water of Trent, viz. one called Gosegarth.... the
Church of Littilburgh, and the other called Wlvetgarth, which is between
Littilburgh and Cotes, to that Abbey of Wellebec, to be held in Fee Farm of him
and his heirs for 5s. per annum. Raph, son of Roger de Treanton, confirmed to
that Abbey ten Acres of Meadow in the Marsh of Lee, Ib. p. 172.
which Hugh, son of Hugh de Stretton, gave.

In the year of our Lord 1253. the Tuesday after.... the Court of Oswardebec
was held at Stretton, and an Inquisition made by the Oaths of twelve lawful
men, John de Applesthorp, Elias Hakun, etc. whether the Abbat of Wellebec ought
to make the Stone Bridge between Littilburgh and Leverton; and the Jury found
that one Adam Abbat of that place of his own will made that Bridge for the
easement of a certain Grange, which that House had beyond the Trent, but never
did it as due, neither ought he to make it, and therefore was quit for ever.
The like Inquisition was made at Retford the Saturday after the Feast of St.
Matthew the Apostle, 18 E. 1. before John de Annesley then High Sheriff by the
Kings Precept (or Writ) upon the Oaths of good and lawful Men of the Wapentak
of Bersetlawe, viz. Elias de Wheteley, and others, who found as before, and
that Stretton and Fenton ought to make the said Stone Bridge. There were
certain Tenants of small parcels of Land which were to repair the Stone Bridge
between Littilburgh and Happlesthorp. To the first Inquisition William de
Eaton, Bailiff of the Court of Oswardbec, under his Master John de Raygate,
then the Kings Escaetor, put his Seal, with the Juries; to the latter the said
Sheriff.

The Freeholders in Littlebroughe Town 1612. are said to be Robert Sherbury,
Lib. libere ten.
William More, William Turuell of East Markham, Richard Rawlin, John Deane,
Thomas Wright, John Bercock, Edward Horley, Thomas Truswell, Henry Bromeheade,
Thomas Bingham, John Quippe, Clerk, Edward Clark, Thomas Cartwright, John
Calton, George Holmes, Thomas Nettleship, and Thomas Seaworth.

Fenton.
OF Oswardbec Soc in Fenton half a Carucat was the Kings Land and Soc to
Maunsfeild. But in Oswardebec Wapentac Roger de Busli had in Fentune three
Manors, Lib. Dooms.
which before the Conquest Vlfac, Leuric, and Grim had, and paid to the Geld
(or Tax) for one Bov. of Land, and the third part of a Bovat. The Land was
waste, except one Bordar. In the Confessors time the value of this was 5s.
There also had Speranoc two Bovats and. for the Geld. The Land one Car. Sac and
Soc without an Hall.

This was waste too. There was six Acres of Pasture Wood, and kept the same
value it had in the time of the Confessor, viz. 10s. 8d.

There was a Fine, 24 H. 3. Fin. in diverse. Comitat. and non apud Westminster. 24 H.
3. Derb.
between Robert de Aldwerk, and Isabell his wife, Quer. and Ranulf de Fenton,
Tenant, of seven Bovats of Land, and 7s. 1d. Rent in Fenton and Sturston, etc.
The Jury, 23 E. 1. Esc. 23 E. 1. n. 35.
found that Thomas de Normanvile held in Egmanton seven Bovats of Land in
Bondage, and two Tofts of John de Eyvile, then in the custody of Roger de
Moubray, by the service of a Rose, and that he held likewise the Manor of
Fenton of several mean Lords, and that Edmund his son and heir was then about
four years old.

An ancient Gentleman called Fenton had his House and Lands here, of which name
I have seen one Pedigree beginning with Sir Richard Fenton Lord of this place,
and ending with Katherine, wife of Sir Rich. Boil Earl of Cork in Ireland.

Another in the Visitation of Norroy 1614.

Tho. Fenton de Fenton- Ex Copia ^isit. pen. Reas. Mellish, Genesis
Willielmus de Fenton-....fill.... Abdy de Abdy in Com. Ebor. Thom. Fenton de
Fenton-Jana fill. naturalis...Nevill de South Leverton. Laurentius Fenton de
Fenton-Katherina fill. Joh. Legate de Sturton. Nicolas Fenton de Fenton
1614.-Gracia fill. Steph. Casely de Com. Devon. Willielmus Fenton de Fenton
1614.-Sarah fill. Will. Tacy de insula Vectis.-... fill.... Monteford de
Littleburgh ux. 2. Willielmus Fenton fill. and haer. aet. 19. 1614.- 2 Georgius.
3 Francisc. 4 Carolus. Maria ux. Will. Estrop de Com. Linc. Elizab. Gracia.
2 Thom.
2 Carolus.




The greatest part of this Hamlet was the Inheritance of Sir Francis Thornagh,
B.
Knight, descended unto him from Francis Thornagh his Grandfather, and Sir John
Thornagh his father: his House and Seat was here, and is now possessed by John
Thornbagh, Esquire, his Grandchild, eldest son of his son Francis, who married
Elizabeth, one of the daughters and coheirs of John S. Andrew of Gotham,
Esquire, by whom he left issue the said John and others: he was a valiant man,
and a Colonel of Horse for the Parliament, in whose service he lost his life by
a Scotch Lance, as it is said, at the Battle begun near Preston in Lancashire,
between Duke Hamilton and that Party; his widow was afterward married to
William Skeffington, Esquire, and is yet living with him.

Johannes Thornhaugh- Averey Thornhagh de Fenton-Ellena fill. and haer....Ripers
de Leversall Ebor. John Thornhaugh de Fenton-Eliz. fill. and haer. Briani Bailes
de Potters Newton, Ebor. Johannes Thornhagh, miles, de Fenton-....fill. Fran.
Rodes Justic. Franc. Thornhagh, miles, aetat. 21. 1614.-Jana fill. Joh. Jackson
de Hickleton Ebor. mil. 1 Francis Thornhaugh occisus in praelio de
Preston.-Eliz. fill. and cohaer. Joh. St. Andrew de Goteham, Ar.-Will.
Skeffington, Ar. mar. 2. Johannes Thornhaugh, Ar.-...fill. Earl.
2 Henr. 3 Johan. 4 Ant. Penelope. Jana.
Eliz. ux. Joh. Jackson, mil. Brigitta ux. Willoughby Hickman.




Sturton. Streton. Estreton.
THere was belonging to Maunsfeild in Estreton, as much as was charged to the
Geld at two Car. The Land being six Car. and in King Williams time there twenty
four Sochm. eleven Vill. seven Board. had eight Car. Meadow one leu. long, Lib.
Dooms.
one qu. broad, Pasture Wood one leu. long, and five qu. broad. This Soc was
valued at 40s. In Oswardbec Wapentak likewise of Roger de Buslies Fee, there
were in Estreton two Manors which Speranoc and Archill were possessed of
before the Norman invasion, who discharged the public Taxation or Dane-geld
for four Bov. and an half. The Land then being known to be two Car. and an
half. There were two Vill. two Sochm. two Board. having seven Bov. in a Car. or
seven Oxen in Plow, and eight Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood six qu. long. and
three quar. and an half broad: in the Confessors time, and then also this
yielded two Marks of Silver.

Thomas, son of Hugh de Stretton, gave to the Church of Blyth one Acre of Land
in Clachescroft, Regist. de Blid. p. 81.
which one Robert held of him, and the whole Gare, which was in Neuvinge, and
an Acre of Meadow at Sanbrige. The Jury, 28 H. 3. Esc. 28 and 29 H. 3. n. 31.
found it not to the Kings loss if he granted Thomas de Stretton leave to
enclose his Wood of Stretton, with the Wong or Culture, and thereof to make a
Park. John de Stretton about 15 E. 1. Esc. 15 E. 1. n. ^0.
was hanged for Felony, who held two Acres and an half, and half a Mess. with
the Appurtenances, of Walter Oliver, and half an Acre of Land of William, son
of Adam de Stretton, and one Acre of Meadow of Nigellus, son of Richard de
Stretton, and one Rode and an half of John Remay of Fenton, and the Jury
likewise found that the Township of Stretton should answer the King for his
year and day.

Henry le Noreys held fifteen Bovats of Land in Greeneley, six Bovats of Land
in Stretton, Lib. se^d. in Scacc. pen. Rem. Regis.
and one Bovat in Leyrton, of the Fee of Thomas de Stretton, by the service of
two Gilded Spurrs, which Thomas only paid, and it was of the Soc of Oswaldbek.
The Jury, 30 E. 3. Esc. 30 E. 3 3. n. 59.
found that Alexander, son of Henry le Norreis of Claworth, had diverse
Tenants, who held of him in Stretton in the Clay by homage and fealty and 14s.
Rent, and that Alexander held them of King E. 2. in capite, and that William
Prat of Stretton was cousin and heir of Walter.

The Jury, 7 R. 2. Esc. 7 R. 2. n. 61.
found that Thomas le Prat then dead, was once seized of 22s....d. and one
Pound of Pepper Rent of Assize, issuing out of certain Lands and Tenements in
Stretton, Fenton, South Leverton, and Wiston, together with Lands in Grenly by
Retford, etc. and that Beatrix wife of John de Croftes, daughter and heir of
William le Prat (then also dead) son and heir of the said Thomas le Prat, was
his Cousin and heir.

Philip de Baggesoore 3 E. 3. Pl. de Iur. and Assis. apud Not. 3 E. 3. to. 25.
in dorso. and to. 17. in dorso. Pasch. 15 Eliz. to. 152.
who married Hawisia, the daughter and heir of Thomas, son of Nigellus de
Stretton, who lived in the time of E. 1. claimed.....in Stretton in the Clay.

Roger Smith, and Erasmus Smith, 15 Eliz. claimed against Thomas Sturton, Gent.
four Mess. three Cotag. one Dovecote, five Gardens, three Orchards, two hundred
Acres of Land, sixty seven of Meadow, one hundred of Pasture, with the
Appurtenances in Stourton, Fenton, and Littelborowe. This Thomas Stourton was
son of Thomas, and married Frances, Ex Cap. visit. pen. Reason Mellish.
the daughter and heir of... Smith of Whillcots in Rutland, by whom he had four
sons, Roger, his eldest of Sturton, whose daughter Elizabeth died unmarried,
John Sturton of London his second, who had Humfr. and other children, Edward
Sturton of Norbrough in Leicest. his third, who was Father of Erasmus, of whom
came, as I remember, Edward Stourton of Spalding in Lincolnshire, Doctor of
Physic, and Thomas Sturton of Ireland, the fourth.

Rog. de Osberton is said to have held the whole Town of Stretton of Alice the
Countess of Ewe. Test. de Nev.
Roger Monachus paid two Marks for one Knights Fee there, in the time of H. 3.
Roger de Osberton gave with Elizabeth his daughter in Frank-marriage to Simon
de Whitington, Rent in Stretton, which Galfr. de Dethek, son of Elena, daughter
of the said Simon and Elizabeth claimed 3 E. 3. Pl. de Iur. and Assis. ap.
Not. ^ E. 3. rot. 85.


There was a Fine levied at Westminster that year, viz. 3 E. 3. Fin. lev. Mic.
3. E. 3.
between John Darcy le Cusin, Quer. and Raph de Boselingthorp, and Isabell his
wife, Deforc. of the Manor of Stretton in Le Clay, with the Appurtenances;
which was thereby settled on the said Raph and Isabell for life; remainder to
the said John Darcy, and his heirs; to which John de Boselingthorp put to his
claim. The Jury, 30 E. 3. Esc. 30 E. 3. n. 33.
said that John Darcy held the Manor of Kirkeby in this County of the King in
Capite of 20l. value; and the Manor of Stretton, of the heirs of the Earl of
Pembroke in Socage, by the service of 48s. per annum, and of William Prat the
fifth part of a Knights Fee, by the service of 3s. 2d. and that John Darcy was
then his son and heir, as in Kirkeby in Ashfeild is noted, with which this
Manor descended. In 37 H. 6. Esc. 37 H. 6.
Margaret who had been wife of John Darcy, Knight, was found to have held in
Dower the Manor of Stretton in the Clay, called the Upper Hall, in which there
was 40s. Rent of Assize issuing out of the Lands of diverse Freeholders in
Wyeston, Littilburgh, and Stretton, and in it likewise was part of the passage
over Trent, at Littilburgh, which was worth above all reprises 5s. per annum,
and in it likewise a Court which besides the Stewards Fee yielded nothing, she
was then dead, her husband died the Saturday after the feast of the Ascension,
32 H. 6. (which cannot be 25 Mar. as in Kirkeby, but possibly of May) William
Darcy his Grandchild, son of his son Richard, was found to be his heir, and
then nine years old, viz. in the Feast of the Epiphany, 37 H. 6. when the
Inquisition was taken at Nottingham, after the death of the said Margaret.

King H. 8. by his letters patents dated the first of May, 32 H. 8. Par. 4 pat.
32 H. 8. and par. 1. O. 32 H. 8. r. 109.
granted to George Lascells, Esquire, and his heirs, the Manor of Sturton,
with the Appurtenances; and all Mess. Lands, etc. in Sturton, Wiseton, Whetley,
and Littlebrough, which were late Thomas Darcies, B.
Knight, Lord Darcy Attaint. His Grandchild Sir George Lassells, Knight, was of
great years, but left only a daughter and heir married to Sir Francis Rodes,
whose son and heir Sir Francis Rodes married Anne, one of the daughters of Sir
Gervas Clifton, mother of the present Sir Francis Rodes, Baronet; and another
of his sons named Clifton Rodes, who has some interest in this place, married
Letice, another daughter of the said Sir Gervas Clifton, but had no issue by
her, he since married Elizabeth the daughter of Mr. John Scrimshire of Cotgrave.

Here was a Manor called Makarells Manor, which descended to Fitz-Williams,
as in Hayton may be observed. Ex Cop. Rot. pen. meips.
William Fitz-Williams, and George Fitz-Williams, paid in the time of Queen
Elizabeth for Lands in Scretton alias Scurton, sometime Walter Olivers, and
Philip de Sherfords, held by the service of two parts of one Knights Fee, and a
sixth part, 5s. 6d. ob. dim. q.

At the Assizes at Nottingham 4 H. 4. to. 75.
John de Willughby recovered his seism of two Mess. one Toft, one hundred and
sixty Acres of Land, forty of Meadow, with the Appurtenances in Stretton in the
Clay, and John Dogode, and Cecily his wife, were amerced.

The Priory of Matersey had also Lands here, B.
granted by King H. 8. to Sir Anthony Nevill, Knight, with the Monastery, which
Lands after came to Sturton of Sturton, and afterward became the inheritance
of John Millington, Esquire.

The Vicarage of Styrton was xx. Marks, and the Chapter of York had the
Patronage: Mss. I. M.
It Is now 5l. 7s. 3d. ob. value in the King books, and the Dean of York Patron.

West Burton.
PArt of this was a Berue of the Archbishop of Yorkes Soc of Lanum, besides
which there was a Manor which Speranoc had before the Conq. which paid to the
Geld for six Bov. The Land two Car. There afterward Goysfrid, lib. Dooms:
the man of Roger de Busli (whose Fee it was) had one Car. one Sochm. one Vill.
two Board. having one Car.. there was one Fishing yielded two hundred Ecles
small Wood, one qu. long, one broad. In King Edward the Confessors time the
value of this was 20s. in the Conquerours 40s. having Soc in Evereton and
Herewelle.

In the record of Nom. Vill. the fourth part of Bole, and the half of Burton,
answered for a whole Villa, of which John de Nassington Canon of York was then
Lord, viz. 9 E. 2. Nom. Vill. 9 E. 2*
Before that time, 56 H. 3. Chapter 56 H. 3. m. 7.
Mr. Simon de Preston had Market and Fair at Burton in le Clay. This I suppose
to be the Archbishops Fee.

In the said record of Nom. Vill. 9 E. 2. Saundeby, and the half of Burton,
Nom. Vill.
answered for a whole Villa, and the King and Robert de Saundeby were then
returned Lords; but the most ancient Lord of this place, (after the record of
Doomsday book) whom I have yet found, Regist. de Wirksop, fol. 92. b. ca. 1.
was Gaufridus de Malquinci, who gave to the Canons of Radeford, (near Wirksop)
the Church of St. Elen of Burton; his wifes name was Matildis: his Nephew
Gaufr. de Paveli was a Witness, and confirmed the Charter of the said Gaufr. de
Mauquinci his Uncle, Ib. cap. 2.
and gave Lands in Saundeby to that Priory. Richard de Rutington gave to the
said Canons, Ib. cap. 3.
and confirmed the Advowson of the Church of St. Elen of Burton upon Trent, (as
both this and Burton Iorz may well be called, though neither of them now retain
that Addition,) and remitted likewise his whole right and claim in all the
Lands and Tenements which Gaufr. Mauquinti his Ancestor gave them. This Gaufr.
and Matildis seem to lie buried at Ruddington, where they had interest and are
named, as in that place may be seen, in Flauforth Church in the Fields. There
was a Fine at Westminster 17 H. 3. Fin. lev. Tri. 17 H. 3.
between Walter Prior of Wyrkesop, Quer. and Richard de Ritinton, Deforc. of
the Advowson of the Church of Burton, Regist. de W^rksop. fol. 93. a. cap. 7.
and cap. 13, 14 and 15.
which was appropriated to that Monastery, to which also Richard de Rutington,
son and heir of William de Rudington, gave and confirmed Lands in this Burton
upon Trent.

The Prior of Wyrkesop 53 H. 3. Pl. de Iur. and Assis. in diverse. Com. apud
Derb. cor. G. de Preston, 53 H. 3. to. 19.
offered himself against Robert de Saundeby concerning the Plea ( Quod
permittat) that he should permit him to have Common of Fishing in the water of
Burton.

Henry de Ednestow, and the Clark his brother, 16 E. 2. Pl. de Banc. Trin. 16
E. 2. to. 5.
granted by their Deed that if they might peaceably possess thirty Acres in
Burton in the Clay, which they bought of Philip do Baggesoure, and Hawisia his
wife, without the interruption of them the said Philip and Hawisia, and their
heirs; that then the recognizance of forty Marks, acknowledged by the said
Philip in the Common Bench should be of no force.

In a recovery 20 H. 6. Mich. 20 H. 6. r. 124.
Katherin who had been the wife of William Sheffeild, claimed against Henry
Warwike three Mess. one Toft, and four Bov. of Land in Burton and Stretton in
the Clay. In another 20 H. 7. Pasch. 20 H. 7. r. 329.
Robert Nevill, William Clarkson, John Elton, Chaplain, and John Shaa, claimed
against William Spylman, and Anne his wife, the Manor of West Burton, with the
Appurtenances; and three Mess. four Tofts, one hundred and forty Acres of Land,
forty of Meadow, sixty of Pasture, and 20s. Rent with the Appurtenances in West
Burton, Bole, Styrton in the Cley, Lytilburgh, Grynley, Sa^onby, East Retford,
Wellom, Wellom Morehouse, Clareburgh, and Moregate.

The Rectory of Burton 36 H. 8. Par. 5. O. 36 H. 8. to. 57. and par. 20. pat.
36 H. 8.
late belonging to the Priory of Workesop, and all Mess. Mills, Houses,
Edifices, Lands, Tenements, Medows, etc. to it belonging, were granted to
William Nevill, B.
Gent. and his heirs, 3 March. Both the Manor and Rectory were late the
inheritance or possession or at the disposition of Edward Nevill of Grove,
Esquire, father of Sir Edward.

Lib. libere ten.
The owners of West Burton Town in 1612. are said to be Gilbert Nevell, George
Holmes, John Williamson, Gent. Edward North of Watkeringham, Esquire, Robert
Sturton of Sturton, Anthony Dickens of Bole, Thomas Oxenforth of Bole, Richard
Cave of Bole, Anne Birch^ of Bole and Thomas Bingham of North Wheatley.

Hablesthorp. Absthorp.
THis place I find not in Doomsday. In Nom. Vill. 9 E. 2. Nom. Vill.
North Leverton, Hablesthorp, and Cotes, answered for one whole Villa, whereof
Mr. Lodovic de Bellomonte, and Adam de Everingham were then Lords.

B.
This whole Hamlet of Hablesthorp, makes a Prebend in the Cathedral Church of
York, and was of xl. value.

Mss. I. M. Lib. libere ten.
The owners of Hablestrop Town 1612. are said to be Michael Bland, Gent. John
Hewett of London, Gent. John Clark, Robert Cottham, Thomas Tailor, Widow Munke,
Widow Rye, William Sooby, John Chaworth, William Fox, Abraham Gelland, John
Thoracton, Henry Parnham, Anthony Chaworthe, John Thorneaughe, Esquire.

VVheatley's. VVateley.
THere was in Wateleg besides what was a Berue of Lanum, the Archbishop of
Yorks great Manor, of the Kings Wapentac or Soc of Oswaldbec, which then
belonged to Maunsfeld, as much as paid the Geld or Tax for two Bov. The Land
two Car. Lib. Dooms.
There six Sochm. one Vill. had two Car. Pasture Wood one leu. and one fourth
long, one qu.. broad. In King Edward the Confessors time it was valued at 3s.
in the Conquerours at 7s. But the principal part of this place was of Roger de
Buslies Fee, where before his coming five Tayns had five Manors which answered
to the Geld for nine Bovats. The Land eight Car. There Roger had in Demesne
four Car. four Sochm. twenty five Vill. having twelve Car.. and five Acres of
Meadow, small Wood one leu. long, one qu. broad. This continued the ancient
value 8l.

Martin de Watelega 5 Steph. gave account of 46^. 8d. of the Pleas of G. de
Clinton. William, Pip. 5 Steph.
son of Robert de Waytele, gave to the Monks of Blyth 7s. ^d. Regist. de Blid.
p. 85.
Rent which he was wont to receive of certain Tenants for Lands in Waytele,
which he sometimes passed to Ela de Warenna for seven Marks of Silver.

But it seems Raph Taisun (of which name one had pardon 5 Steph. by the Kings
Writ for 9s. 9d. in the Sheriffs account) was owner of Wetele, Pip. 5 Step.
Test. de Nev.
which Eschaered to the Crown, and sometimes Brian de Insula had it in Ward,
and then it was valued at 26l. 13d. King John let Nicholas de Lettris hold it,
and then it was valued at 30l.

The King 4 H. 3. Claus. 4 H. 3. m. 12.
commanded the Sheriff of Notss. to give Roger de Monte Begonis possession of
the Land of Oswaldebec, and the Manor of Wateleg, which was John Malherb his
brother's, both which King John had granted to the said Roger, the first in
Fee, the other for life only, but the Sheriff was then to keep Claworth in the
Kings hand still.

Hubert de Burgo, 13 H. 3. Claus. 13 H. 3. m. 12. Test. de Nev.
had the Manor of Watle, which he held of the Countess of Ewe or Augi; as Raph
Teisun was also said to do. John de Burgo, 44 H. 3. Chapter 44 H. 3.
had free warren in Wacley. John de Burgo the elder, (son of Hubert Earl of
Kent) 2 E. 1, Pat. 2 E. 1. m. 10 and 24.
granted the Manor, of Wheteley, with very many other in several Counties, to
the King in Fee, who then granted the said John for life, the Tower of London,
and Castle of Colchester, and hundred of Tendering, 18 December. at St. Martins in
London. Mr. Philip Boulton 6 E. 1. m. 9. Pl. de Banc. Pasch. 6 E. 1. to. 69.
remised to the King and his heirs, ten Marks Rent of the gift and grant of
John de Burgo, son of Hubert de Burgo, sometime Earl of Kent, issuing out of
Tenements in Misterton, Stretton, Misne, and Bolum, belonging to the Manor of
the said John, viz. of Whetelaye.

In Nom. Vill. 9 E. 2. Nom. Vill.
Whetley and the fourth part of Bole answered for an entire Villa, whereof the
King was Lord.

Regist. de Fill. p. 30.
Gaufr. de Mauquinci gave to God, and the Canons of Felley 12d. yearly, in that
Bovat of Land which Roger, son of Swan, held of him in Whetley, for his own
soul, and Maud his wifes. The Witnesses were the Prior and Covent of Wirkesop,
Will. son of Rich. de Rudington, Galfr. de Paveli, Joel the Chaplain of
Wirkesop, Thomas the Dean, Math. the Clark, etc. Laurence de Pavelli about 11
E. 2. Esc. 11 E. 2. n. 39.
held 40s. Land and Rent in Whetley of the Archbishop of York, by the service
of suit to his Court from three weeks to three weeks.

Michael de la Pole Earl of Suffolk held before his forfeit the Manor of
Normanton, Rec. Mic. 14 R. 2. to. 32.
and Weston, and Lands in South Whetley.

There was a Fine 2 H. 6. Fin. lev. Pasc. 2 H. 6.
between Matthew Horneby, Esquire, Quer. and John Spenser of Winterton, and
Isolda his wife, daugther and heir of Robert Knight of Stokwyth, Deforc. of
three Mess. thirty Acres of Land, and the moiety of one Acre of Meadow, with the
Appurtenances in South Bek Whetelay, whereby the premises were made the right
of Matthew, quit from the heirs of Isolda.

The Rectory was part of the Chapelry of Tykhill, and disposed with that, as in
Lowdham and other places may be noted.

Lib. libere ten.
The owners in South Wheatley Town 1612. are said to be Charles Markham, Gent.
and Thomas Markham, Gent. in North Wheatley, Gilbert Earl of Shrowsbury, Thomas
Osborne, Thomas Bingham, John James, Thomas Cartwright, and Henry Bromehead.

Mss. I. M.
The Rectory of South Wheatley was xl. and is now 6l. 14s. 2d. value in the
Kings books, the Patronage still belonging to the Chapter of Southwell.

Ib.
The Vicarage of North Wheatley was ten Marks when the Abbat of Westminster was
Patron: It Is now 3l. 18s. 11d. ob. value in the Kings Books, and the Marquess
of Dorchester Patron.

Claworth. Clavord.
IN Clavord of the Kings Soc of Maunsfeld in his Wapentac of Wardebec or
Oswaldbec, was one Car. and six Bov. for the Geld. Lib. Dooms.
The Land three Car. Twelve Sochm. one Vill. eighteen Board. had ten Car. Meadow
two quarent. long, one qu. and an half broad. The value in the Conquerours time
was 26s. 4d. at which time there was of Roger de Buslies Fee, which before the
Conquest Grumchell had, who paid for his Manor to the Geld as two Bov. The
Land four Bov. There Fulco the Man of Roger had three Sochm. three Board. with
three Car,. Meadow two quarent. and an half long, and eighteen Perches broad,
Pasture Wood three qu. and ten Perches long, and as much broad. The value of
this in King Edward the Confessors time was 4s. then in King Williams 5s.

In the record of Nom. Vill. 9 E. 2. Nom. Vill.
Clauworth and Wyston answered for a whole Villa. The King, Thomas de Latymar,
and Robert de Hardeshull, are there certified to be Lords.

This Robert and his ancestors had their name, as in Mr. Dugdale's Book of
Warwickshire may be seen, page 777^
from a place called Hartshill in that County, where it seems they had their
principal or most usual residence. The ^^rst notice that I can take of any of
them in relation to this County is 2 H. 2. Pip. 2 H. 2.
when Ranulf Fitz-Engelram the Sheriff accounted for Lands granted to Robert,
son of Hugh, in Claword, C. and xiis. and the like, I Ioh. to William, Pip. 1
Ioh.
son of Hugh, viz. C. and xiis. in Clawrd. William de Hardredesfeild, 10 Nov. 6
H. 3. Fin. 6 H. 3. m. 9.
made Fine for having the Town of Claworth which concerned him as his
inheritance. Robert de Hardreshull 10 H. 3. made Fine for his relief, and had
the Land which William his father held of the King in Capite in Claworth. Will.
de Hardredeshull 31 H. 3. Cor. Mich. 31 H. 3. to. 3. in dorso. Lib. feod. in
Scacc. diverse. Inq.
paid a Mewed Spar-hauk into the Exchequer, for certain Lands which he held in
Claworth of the King. Berta de Herdreshill held the whole Town of Claworth,
except six Bovats of Land which were held in Dower. William, son of Robert,
held one hundred and 12s. Land in Claworth, Test. de Nev.
paying yearly a Mewed Sparhawk: it was then in the Kings hand, and William de
Hardreshill made Fine of one hundred Marks for it, but then had not found
Pledges, which it seems he did ere long; for the Sheriff of Warwick and
Leycestershires, 8 H. 3. Pip. 8 H. 3. Warw. and Legrecest.
put into his account that Will. de Hardredeshill ought twenty Marks for his
relief, for having Claworde in Notess. by the pledge of the Earl of Chester,
and Falkes de Breant. His Fathers name was Robert, and so was his sons. Robert
de Hardreshull 10 H. 3. Fin. 10 H. 3. m. 1. and Claus. etc.
made Fine and had seisin, etc. as before is noted.

Nicolas de Hekham Dean of Lincoln in 9 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Pasch. 9 E. 1. to.
59.
recovered the presentation to three parts of the Church of Claworth against
Robert de Hardreshull, who in 51 H. 3. recognized it to be the right of the
said Dean, (another said that Robert de Austrit, ancestor of the said Robert,
recognized in the time of King Henry.) Henry, son of Nicolas Daubeney of
Claworth, claimed Lands in Claworth, 3 E. 3. Pl. de Iur. and Assis. ap. Not.
3. E. 3. to. 65.
as par^ible amongst heirs Males, against his brother William, son of the said
Nicolas. The Jury, 11. R. 2. Esc. 11 R. ^. n. 106.
found it not to the Kings loss if he granted license to Nicolas Daubeney
Parson of the Church of Claworth, to gives one Mess. one hundred and twenty
Acres of Land, with the Appurtenances in Claworth, to a Chaplain of a certain
Chantry by him to be founded in that Church, which Mess. and Lands were held of
Robert de Herdsill of Claworth, by the service of 11s. per annum, and two
appearances at the Kings turn of Bersedelaw, which Robert held them over of the
heirs of John de Hardesill, Chr. by the service of a Sore Sperhawk, and they of
the King in Capite.

By a Fine levied at Westminster 9 E. 2. Fin. lev. Trin. 9 E. 2.
in the Octaves of the holy Trinity, John de Sandale passed the Manor of
Claworth Wodehouses, with the Appurtenances, to John de Heydon, who by another,
the morrow after St. John Baptist, settled it on Margery de Willughby for her
life, and after on Thomas, son of the said Margery, and the heirs of his body,
remainder to John brother of Thomas, and the heirs of his, remainder to
Katherin, sister of John, and the heirs of her body, remainder to the right
heirs of the said Margery.

Thomas de Bernardeston and his heirs had free warren granted 26 Ian. 21 E. 3.
Ex. Rot. Cha^t. 21 E. 3. m. 13. n. 29.
in all his Demesne lands in Whetelaw in Yorkshire, Great Cotes in
Lincolneshire, Clauworth and Wodehous in this County, Kedyton in Suffolk and
Essex, and Bernardeston in Suffolk.

Thomas le Latimar of Werdon, 3 H. 2. Chapter 3 E. 2. n. 8.
had free warren in Claworth, Heyton, and Wyston.

By an Inquisition taken at Nottingham 24 Sept. 6 E. 6. it appears that
Thomas Wawyn alias Leche, Esquire, died 18 Apr. then last past, seized of the
Manor of Claworth, Ex Cop. Inq.
and Lands in Wyeston, and Bole, and in Saunby, and Fishing in Everton: his
wifes name was Barbara, his son Charles Wawyn alias Leche, was then, viz. at
the taking the Inquisition, aged thirteen years four Months and eleven days.
William Mason, and Nicolas Fenton 16 Eliz. claimed against Charles Wawen, Hill.
16 Eliz. to. 449.
Gent. John Lyllyman, and Brian Whitwell, one Toft, sixty Acres. of Land,
twenty six of Meadow, thirty of Pasture, and 140. of More, with the
Appurtenances in Claworth and Wyeston, who called Robert Law, Senior, Gent,
and Thomas Law, son and heir of the said Robert and Robert Law, junior, son
of the said Robert.

William Hastings, Esquire, Anthony Fitz-Herbert Sergeant at Law, John Port,
Esquire, John Talbot, Doctor of Divinity, and John Both, Chaplain, 14 H. 8.
P^s^^. 14. H. 8. r. 328.
claimed against John Norres, and Richard Norres, four Mess. one hundred and
32. Acres of Land, 36. Acres of Meadow, and fifty of Pasture, with the
Appurtenances in Claworth: the Ancestors of Norreys are some of them mentioned
in Little Greeneley, and thereabouts.

John Burgon also suffered several recoveries 20 H. 8. and afterward, of one
Mess. and diverse parcels of twenty or thirty Acres of Land, etc.

Mr. Wawen is still a considerable owner there, and the Dean of Lincoln Patron.

Robert Tipheved, who about 27 E. 1. Esc. 27. E. 1. n. 68.
was hanged for Felony, held in Claworth the fourth part of a Mess. and of one
Bovat of Land which the King had in his hand a year and a day.

B.
The Prior of Matersey had a Grange and good Lands there, part whereof was
granted to Sir Anthony Nevill 4 November. 31 H. 8. Par. 3. pat. 31. H. 8.
with the site of the Monastery of Mattersey, the residue have been passed
sithence. Sir Anthony Nevill 3 and 4 Ph. and Mar. Apr. 8. had license to
alienate certain Mess. Lands and Tenements in the Towns, Par. 4. pat. 3 and 4
P^. and Mar.
Fields and Parishes of Stirton, Clayworth, and Wieston, to the use of Julian
Portington, one of the daughters of John Portington, for term of her life, and
after her decease to the use of Alexander Nevill, son of the said Sir Anthony,
who settled Lands also in Mattersey to the use of himself for life, and after
to the said Julian for her life, and then to the said Alexander.

Thomas Markham the younger son of Sir John Markham, B.
by the heir of Strelley had Lands there, which he conveyed to Sir Griffin his
eldest son, (not very long since dead) but upon his Attainder they were passed
to Sir John Harington, 30 June 2 Iac. and since sold to others, Par. 11. pat.
2. Iac.
in which Patent of Sir Griffins estate, were granted the Manors of Gamulston,
and Claworth, and four Mills, two Corn-mills, and two Walk-mills, and other
Mess. Lands and Tenements in Claworth, Weyston, and Saunby, and 100l. Rent
issuing out of the Manors of Laxton, Weston, Sutton, and Knesall, and other
Lands in Laxton, Weston, Sutton, and Knesall, and the Rectory of Laxton, and
the Manor of Egmanton, and the Manors of Laxton, Laxton Morehouse, and
Knesall, and the Park of Knesall.

The owners of Claworthe Town in 1612. are said to be Gilbert Earl of
Shrowsbury, Thomas Wawyn, Esquire, Nicolas Stringer, Gent. Peter Dickenson,
senior, Robert Hydes, John Ward, senior, Raph Calton, senior, Thomas Woodcock,
Richard Lillyman, Edward Whitwell, Nicholas Bett, William Venson, one Mess. one
Toft, one Garden, one Orchard, fifteen Acres of Land, Anthony Bingham, Richard
Iackson, William Bett, William Donnel, John Elton, John Fox.

The Rectory of Claworth was 24l. Lib. Mss. I. M.
It Is now 26l. 10s. 10d. value in the Kings Books and the Dean of Lincoln
continues Patron.

Wigston. VViston.
IN Wiseton of the Kings Soc of Oswardebek belonging to Maunsfeild also, was
one Car. for the Geld. The Land two Car. Seven Sochm. seven Vill. four Board.
had six Car. Lib. Dooms.
Meadow two qu. long, two broad, Pasture Wood fourteen quar. long, four broad.
The value in King Williams time was 10s.

In Wiston were four Bovats of Land and an half, Test. de Nev.
which anciently were wont to yield 10s. which the King the [ Great]
Grandfather of King John, gave to one William le Harper paying 15d. per annum,
and his heirs continued to hold it.

The Jury, in 3 E. 3. Esc. 3 E. 3. n. 20.
found that John de Bekering held of the King in Capite, fifteen Acres of Land
in Wiston, by the service of 1d. ob. per an. and that he likewise held there
one Mess. forty five Acres of Land of Sir Thomas le Latymer of the Sok of
Oswardebek, by the service of Suit of that Court from three weeks to three
weeks, and 7s. 6d. Rent, and that John de Bekering, son of the said John, was
his heir, and twenty two years of age, viz. of the said fifteen Acres held of
the King; but as to the forty five Acres held of Sir Thomas le Latymer, they
were partible between the said John, son of John, and Thomas, Robert, Leonard,
and William, brothers of the said John the younger, and coheirs of the said
John de Bekering. Ioane who had been wife of John de Bekering, 9 E. 3. Ex Magno
Lib. de finibus fol. 197, 198. Pasc. 9 E. 3.
holding Lands which were the said John's, gave the King 6d. for a pair of Gilt
Spurrs, for fifteen Acres of Land, with the Appurtenances in Wyston, which John
de Bekering, father of the said John, late her husband, held of the King in
Capite.

John, son and heir of Alexander le Norreys, 16 E. 2. Ib. fol. 193. Pas. 16 E.
2.
had ten Acres, and 2s. Rent in Wyston, etc.

The Jury, 3 E. 3. Esc. 3 E. 3. n. 48.
also found that John de Markham when he died, held Lands and Tenements in
Wyston of Thomas le Latymer, by the service of 2s. 4d. and two appearances at
his Court yearly for all services, and that he held likewise other Lands in the
same Town of Alan de Bekingham, by the service of 5d. per annum, and that
Elizabeth twelve years old, and Cecilia ten years old and upwards, were the
daughters and heirs of the said John de Markham.

The Priory of Mattersey 20 E. 4. Esc. 20 E. 4. n. 96.
had Lands in Wyeston by Claworth, which were granted to Sir Anthony Nevill
with the site of that Monastery by King H. 8. The Priory of Wirkesop had Lands
here, at the dissolution rated at 5l. 3s. 0^.

The owners of Wiston Town 1612. are said to be Oliver Bromhead, B.
Anthony Whitwell, Thomas Smith, Thomas Draper.

Bole.
BOle and Bolum are not distinguished in Doomsday Book, being both there
written Bolum, and some of the Archbishop of Yorkes Fee, Lib. Dooms.
and some of the Fee of Roger de Busli. There was a Manor in Bolun which Vlmer
had before the Conquest, and answered the Geld as one Bov. and an half for it.
The Land one Car. There Roger de Busli had one Car. and the fourth part of a
Church, and two Mills, 32s. and ten Acres of Meadow: this continued the old
value it had in the Confessors time, viz. 40s.

The application of this record is so uncertain, that what is set down for
Bollum may possibly belong to this place, and this to that.

The Manor and Rectory of Bole, do make a Prebend in the Cathedral Church of
York, Mss. I. M.
valued heretofore at xx. Marks.

The Jury, 17 R. 2. Esc. 17. R. 2. n. 101.
found it no damage if the King granted to William Rothewell of Bole, leave to
give and assign to Gilbert Tynne Vicar of the Church of Bole, and his
successors, eight Acres of Land, and six of Pasture, with the Appurtenances in
Bole, to help to sustain them, which Lands were held of John Danby, Clark, as
of the Prebend of Bole, by two appearances at the Court of Bole, and paying 2d.
And the said William held a Mess. and twenty Acres of Land, and Pasture, with
the Appurtenances, of John Duke of Lancaster, as of the Honor of Tykhill, and
the said William held a Mess. and one Acre. of Land in Bole of Mr. Thomas
Arundel Archbishop of York, as of his Manor of Scrooby paying 5d. per annum,
and some other small parcels there, of the said Prebendary, Duke, and
Archbishop.

The owners of Boale Town in 1612. are reckoned, The Lady Elizabeth Gilby,
Widow, Lib. libere ten.
Hugh Hodgeson, Charles Oxenford, Iennat Asheton, Widow, Katherine Gregory,
Widow, Charles Asheton, Anthony Dickens, William Rodgers, Dorothy Birche,
Widow, William Bradley, Edward Kirkeby, Richard Carre, John Frances, Henry
Broomehead of Wheatley.

The Vicarage of Boole was five Marks: Mss. I. M.
It Is now 4l. 13s. 4d. value in the Kings Books, and the Prebendary continues
Patron.

Saundeby.
SOc to Maunsfeld in Wardebec Wapentac in Saundeby one Villan held one Garden
to find Salt for the Kings Fish in Bigredic. The rest of Saundeby was a Berue
of the Archbishops great Soc of Lanum.

Gaufrid de Mauquincy gave to the Church of St. Peter at Thurgarton, Regist. de
Thurg. p. 21. b.
and the Canons there in pure Alms, Hugh, son of Aufrid, with his Land, viz.
one Bovat which he held in Saundebi, with the Appurtenances; for his own Soul,
and the Souls of his Father and Mother, and for the Soul of Matilda his wife,
and of all their Parents departed.

Robert de Saundeby 11 H. 2. Pip. 11. H. 2. Tikehull.
ought his relief for two Knights Fees of Tikehull Honor. Hugh de Saundebi 7
R. 1. Pip. 7 R. 1.
gave account of twenty Marks for having 8l. Land, which was his Fathers in
Marcham, and in Sandebi, and in Burton, and in Bekingham, and in Misterton, and
in Babewurd, and in Wellum, and in Warshop, and in Wudehus, and in Greseley,
and in Quikene, and in Tikehull. Hugh de Sandebi 2 Ioh. accounted for twenty
Marks for having seisin of his Land in Saundebi, Pip. 2. Ioh.
whereof he was disseised by occasion of Earl John. Alice sometimes wife of
Hugh de Sandeby, 5 Ioh. ought twenty Marks and one Palfrey, Pip. 5 Ioh.
for having the custody of the Land and heir of the said Hugh, until the said
heir should be of age to hold the Land. The Sheriff, 25 H. 3. Pip. 25 H. 3.
Test. de Nev.
accounted for a Mark of William de Saundeby for having a Precept or Wri^.
William de Saundeby paid for half a Knights Fee and a ninth part 15s. In Nom.
Vill. 9 E. 2. Nom. Vill.
Saundeby and the half of Burton, answered for a whole Villa, and the King, and
Robert de Saundeby, were certified to be Lords.

By a Fine 8 E. 2. Fin. lev. Hill. 8 E. 2.
between Robert de Saundeby, Quer. and Isabell de Musters of Basingham, [Linc.]
Deforc. the Manor and Advowson of the Church of Saundeby, were settled on the
said Robert for life, remainder to Thomas, son of the said Robert, and to
Isabell his wife, and the heirs of their bodies, remainder to the right heirs
of the said Robert. By another Fine 2 R. 2. Fin. lev. Pasc. 2. R. 2.
this Manor and Advowson were settled on Bertram de Saundeby, and Ioane his
wife, and the heirs of the body of the said Bertram, remainder to Meliora, wife
of Adam de Rotherfeild, Chr. and the heirs of her body, remainder to William de
Saundeby and his heirs. John Tee, and Meliora his wife, 18 R. 2. Fin. lev.
Pasc. 18 R. 2.
by Fine passed the Manor of Saundeby, with the Appurtenances (except four
Mess. three Tofts, two Bovats of Land, and 10s. Rent,) to William de Saundeby
and his heirs, wherein it seems the said Meliora had interest for her life.
Elizabeth, the wife of Hugh Hercy, held the moiety of the Town of Saundeby by
two parts of the service of one Knights Fee, In quodam roculo de feod. nuper
deliberato Cancellario Ducat. etc.
and held in Saundeby, Misterton, Holbek Woodhouse, and Burton, one Fee, and
the eighth part of a Fee, and paid for Ward of the Castle xs. xvd. and for the
meat of the Watchmen 9d. and for Common Fine 10s. and to the Sheriffs aid 9d.

Sir John Markham the Chief Justice, Elizabeth, one of the daughters and heirs
of Simon Leke, late of Cotum, Esquire, widow of Hugh Hercy, late of Grove,
Esquire, Richard Willoughby, Esquire, Gervas Hercy, Esquire, and Geoffrey
Staunton, 11 November. 6 E. 4. Fin. 6 E. 4. m. 3.
had license to purchase Lands, to Found a Chantry of one Chaplain in the
Church of St. Martin of Saundby.

In 10 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Trin. 10 E. 1. to. 76.
because it was found that William, son of John de Saundeby, demised to
William, son of Hugh de Saundeby, one Mess. and one Bovat and an half of Land
in Saundby for life; and afterward by levying a Fine, remised to him his whole
right in the premises, the Court judged the said William, son of Hugh, to be
discharged, and William, son of John, to be amerced.

Alice, Ioane, and Sarra de Saundeby, 17 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Mich. 17. E. 1. to.
84. vel 48.
who were Plaintiffs concerning one Mess. thirty two Acres of Land, and six of
Meadow in Saundby, did not prosequute, etc. against Hugh de Hercy, who called to
warrant Oliver Bishop of Lincoln; therefore Hugh and the Bishop were without
day, and the women Amerced.

There was granted to Philip Hobbie, amongst other things, 3 Apr. 35 H. 8. Par.
9. pat. 35 H. 8.
all Manors, Mess. Lands, etc. in the Towns, Fields, and Parishes of Saundby,
Clifton, Rampton, Cotham, Retford, and Sturton, late belonging to the Monastery
of Torkesey in Lincolneshire.

Robert Markham, Esquire, and George Chaworth, Esquire, 18 Eliz. Hill. 18.
Eliz. to. 153.
claimed against John Syddenham the Manor of Saundby, with the Appurtenances,
and eight Mess. etc. in Saundby, Burton, Bole, Mysterton, Heyton, Welham, etc.
and free Fishing in Babworth, who called to warrant Thomas Grene, Esquire.

The Queen, 11 Sept. 32 Eliz. Par. 13. pat. 32 Eliz.
granted the Chantry in the Parish Church of Saundeby to Edward Downeing, and
Roger Rant, having one Mess. and ninety Acres of Land, and another with seventy
six Acres, and two Cottages then valued at Cxiiis. iiiid.

In Queen Elizabeth's time Henry Leeke, Esquire for his Lands in Saundeby, late Sir
John Hercys, held by the service of a Knights Fee, and the eighth part of a
Fee, paid 7s. 6d.

B.
Sir John Hercy disposed it to.... Hotham, his Nephew, with the Advowson of the
Church there; it came after to Leek; and lately to.... Elwish, who sold it to
James Forsett a Londoner. It was the Earl of Kingstons, and now remains with
his posterity the Right Honorable the Marquess of Dorchester.

The owners of Sawnby Town in 1612. are represented thus, Iervas Elwaies,
Knight, Lib. libere ten.
Thomas Wawine of Claworth, Esquire, John Symons, Gent. the heirs of Shadford,
the heirs of William Smith, Robert Carnhill, and George Netleship.

The Rectory of Sandby was 16l. when Mr. Hersy was Patron: Mss. I. M.
It Is now 14l. 9s. 2d. value in the Kings Books, and the Marquess of Dorchester
Patron.

Beckingham.
BEchingham was a Beru of Lanum, the Archbishop of Yorks Sok. There was also a
Manor of Roger de Buslies Fee, which before his time Osbern had, and
discharged the Geld or Tax for it as three Bov. The Land one Car. Lib. Dooms.
There Goisfrid the Man (or Tenant) of Roger had one Plow, or Car. and fifteen
Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood seven qu. long, one broad. In the Confessors time
this was valued at 10s. in the Conquerours at 16s. when the great Survey was
taken.

Roger, son of Alexander, 9 H. 3. Fin. 9 H. 3. m. 2.
had an Attaint upon an Assize between Roger de Beutoft, and Petronilla his
wife, etc. concerning Tenements in Beckingham.

In an Assize, 12 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Hill. 12 E. 1. to. 18.
Thomas de Bekingham juxta Saundby was Plaintiff, Roger de Beutoft, Henry le
Ken of Beutoft, and Walter le Clerk, Defendants, concerning Common of Pasture
in Beckingham in twenty Acres of Wood and More, which the Jury found for the
Plaintiff.

The Jury, 18 E. 1. Es^. 18 E. 1. n. 61.
found that Alan de Bekingham was Appealed concerning the death of Peter de
Dynington by Eva, wife of the said Peter, in the thirteenth year of Edward the
first, before the Kings Justices, and he pleaded that he was a Clerk and a
member of the Church, so that he could not, nor would answer there; whereupon
the Justices took an Inquisition Ex officio, which found that he was culpable
concerning the said death, and therefore he was reposed in Nottingham Gaol, and
there died; and that he held Lands in Bekingham of William Justice, and that
John de Bekingham was his son and heir, who by the Kings favor, 20 E. 1. Pl.
de Banc. Mi^h. 20 E. 1. to. 4.
had seisin granted of two Tofts, twenty two Acres of Land. four Acres of Wood,
and 13d. ob. Rent in Bekingham, which were seized into the Kings hands, by
reason of the death of Peter de Dynington, whom the said Alan his father slew,
and afterward died in Prison before he was Convict, etc. the Lands were held
of Robert de Beltoft, and Guerrina his wife, who had seized them as their
Escaet by a Jury.

Alice and Isabell, sisters of John de Beltoft, 24 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Trin. 24
E. 1. to. 24.
recovered their seisin of seventeen Acres of Wood, and one Acre and three
Roods of Meadow in Bekingham, and Roger de Beltoft, and others were in mercy,
(or amerced. Ib. to. 25.
) The Jury then found that Hugh, son of Roger de Bekingham, enfeoffed Idonea
his daughter of (or in) one Mess. one Mill, and one Carucat of Land in
Bekingham, etc. wherefore she was (dismissed) without day, and John Winter, and
Elizabeth his wife, in mercy.

Nom. Vill.
In 9 E. 2. Bekingham was half a Villa, and the King and Chapter of Southwell
were returned Lords.

There was a Fine levied at Westminster, 5 E. 2. Fi^. lev. ^asc. 5 E. 2.
between Robert, son of Alan de Bekingham, Quer. and Robert, son of Robert de
Bekingham, and Cecilia (his wife) daughter of Henry de Sutton, Deforc. of one
Mess. eighty four Acres of Land, twenty of Meadow, five of Wood, and 8s. Rent,
with the Appurtenances in Bekingham, whereby they were settled on the said
Robert, son of Alan, for life, and afterward on the said Robert, son of
Robert, and on Cecily, and the heirs of Robert, son of Robert. The Jury, 18 R.
2. Es^. 18 R. 2. n. 66.
found it not to any damage if the King granted to John Bekingham of Bekingham
in the Clay, Esquire, that he might give two Mess. two Tofts, fifty Acres of
Land, ten of Meadow, six of Wood, and 6s. 8l. Rent, with the Appurtenances in
Beckingham, to the Chaplain of the Chantry of the blessed Mary in the Parish
Church of Beckingham in the Clay, all which were held of Thomas Archbishop of
York in Socage, paying 3s. yearly. There was the like return of another Ad quod
damnum that year, Ib. n. 69.
that the said John might give four Mess. twelve Tofts, one Windmill, two
hundred and sixty Acres of Land, fifty of Meadow, twenty and four of....
shillings Rent, with the Appurtenances in the said Bekingham, to the Prioress
of Brodholme, all which were likewise held of the said Thomas Archbishop of
York in Socage for 2^. per annum, for all services. And there was another that
he might give one Mess. twenty four Acres of Land, Ib. n. 74.
five of Meadow, with the Appurtenances in the said Bekyngham in the Clay, to
Richard Vicar of that Church, which were likewise held in Socage of the said
Archbishop, paying 12^. per annum.

Elizabeth, wife of Philip Darcy Chr. 1 H. 4. Mic. 1 H. 4. rot. 180.
claimed against Thomas Darcy diverse Lands in Bekingham and Walkringham.

In another Recovery, 4 and 5 H. 8. Pas^. 4. and 5 H. 8. rot. 116.
John Wylloughby, Esquire, John Markham, Esquire, Robert Molyneux, Esquire,
Robert Sheffeild, junior, Esquire, John Dawney, Esquire, John Thymylby of
Beillesby, Robert Sheffeild of Scotter, and Stephen Hatfeild, claimed against
Robert Belwode, and Agnes his wife, six Mess. fifty eight Acres of Land, eleven
of Meadow, eight of Wood, with the Appurtenances in Bekyngham in le Cley. In
another, 32 H. 8. Pasch. 32 H. 8. to. 342.
William Spurr claimed against John Mounson, senior, Esquire, two Mess. one
Cottage, one hundred and forty Acres of Land, forty of Meadow, forty of Pasture,
and four of Wood, with the Appurtenances in Bekyngham and Boil. In another, 12
Eliz. Trin. 12 Eliz. to. 144.
Robert Brown, and Richard Fraunces claimed against Barth. Fraunces, three
Mess. two Cottages, two Tofts, six Gardens, six Orchards, one hundred Acres of
Land, forty of Meadow, eighty of Pasture, twenty of Wood, and twenty of Marsh,
with the Appurtenances in Beckingham, who called to warrant Thomas Mounson,
Gent.

All that Tenement lying in Beckingham, late belonging to the Priory of
Brodholme, and late in the Tenure of William Spur, and all Lands and
Tenements with it demised, Feb. 24. 34. H. 8. Par. 11 pat. 34. H. 8.
were granted to John Williams, Knight, and Edward North, Knight, and to the
heirs of Edward, Par. 8. pat. 34 H. 8.
who had then also license to alienate Lands there in the Tenure of William
Spenser to William Spur and his heirs, whose daughter and heir was married to
Sir Brian Lascells, Knight, who procured her to convey her Land in Beckingham
to Gervas Lascells, his younger son, B.
whose Grandchild and heir enjoyed it.

John Beer, and Henry Lawrence, and the heirs of John, 36 H. 8. Par. 24. pat.
36 H. 8.
had two Mess. etc. in Beckingham, late belonging to Brodholme, late in the
Tenure of William Marshall, and Thomas Else, extended at 15s. 4d. together
with a Mess. etc. in Walkringham, belonging to Wirksopp at 7s. per annum,
granted in the same Patent amongst many other things.

The Chantry of Beckingham, 6 E. 6. Par. 5. pat, 6. E. 6.
Ian. 2. then in the Tenure of William Mering, was granted to Thomas Reeve, and
George Cotton, who, Ian. 23. had license to alienate the whole to Robert
Harryson and his heirs.

The Church of Beckingham, as in Southwell may be seen, together with the
Lands, etc. anciently did and do still belong to, and make a Prebend in that
Collegiate Church, notwithstanding that 4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. Ian. 19. Par. 11.
pat. 4 and 5 Ph. and Mar.
Hugh Thornebill had license to alienate the Capital Mess. and all Glebe Lands,
Tithes, etc. late belonging to that Church to George Nevill, and others, for
the use of himself the said Hugh and Elizabeth his wife, and the heirs of the
said Hugh, on the body, or upon the body of the said Elizabeth begotten.

The owners of Beckinghame Town 1612. are thus set down, Sir Richard
Williamson, Knight, Lib. libere ten.
Sir Bryan Lassels, Knight, the Church of Southwell, Francis Williamson of
Walkringham, Gent. John Hall, Roger Nettleship, John Damms, Hamond Calton,
Roger Hall, Martin Hill, Nicolas Noddell, John Dawson, James Tailor, William
Halles, John Fraunces, Charles Hall, Richard Hodgeshon, Robert Noddell, Gyles
Maire, etc.

The Vicarage of Bekingham was ten Marks: Mss. I. M.
It Is now 6l. 5s. 5d. value in the Kings Books, and the Prebendary continues
Patron.

In this Town was born William Howell, Dr. of Laws, who compiled the History of
the World; and as I hear, since the death of Sir Edward Lake, is made
Chancellor of the Diocese of Lincoln 1674.

Alderman Mennell purchased Lands here, which are now his sons.

Gringeley. Greenelege.
THere was of the Kings Land in Greeneleg Soc to Maunsfeld in Wardebec Wapentac
two Bov.. for the Geld. The Land one Car. Lib. Dooms.
There six Sochm. one Vill. one Board. had two Car. Pasture Wood six qu. long,
four qu. broad, valued at 10s. But there were seven Manors which seven Taynes
had in Greeneleya, which were, after the Conquest, of the Fee of Roger de
Busli, and were charged to the Geld for three Car. The Land being eight Car.
There Roger the Man (or Tenant) of Roger de Busli, had three Car. and ten Vill.
and six Board. having eight Car. there was a Church, and one Piscary of a
thousand Eeles, and forty Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood one leu. long, three qu.
broad. In King Edward the Confessors time this was valued at 10l. and when the
Conqueror made his Survey but at 4l.

This Roger, the Man of Roger de Busli, was succeeded here, as in other places,
by William de Lovetot, as in Coleston is noted, who Founded the Priory of
Wirkesop, Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p. 50.
to which he gave, amongst the rest, the Church of Gringelai, which his son
Richard de Luvetot confirmed and gave in Gringeley by the Church on the East
side, Ib. p. 51.
a Mess. (or Mansure) on the South side another for the proper Houses of the
Canons, with a certain space to make an Orchard, as it was enclosed by the
Bank, and the whole ( gravam) graffe, as it was encompassed with the Bank, and
one Mansure without the Bank [ at vinas]. These things Matildis de Lovetot
also confirmed, Ib. p. 55.
and gave to that Priory the Windmill at Gringeley, with the Suit of the whole
Township, so that the Suit should be done as anciently it was wont. This Mill
which was situate on the West side of the Town, Regist. de Wirksop fol. 11. a.
she gave for the Soul of Sir William de Furnivall, her (younger) son, to whom
she gave this Manor; and he, 37 H. 3. Chapter 37 H. 3. m. 9.
had Market and Fair granted in it. Gerard, son of Gerard de Furnivall, Ex
libro magno de trans^ript. diverse. Chart. pen. Arth. Agard, fol. 194.
released to Henry, son of Richard, King of Almaine, and his heirs, all the
right and claim he had or should have in the Manor of Gringeley, and Lands and
Tenements in Wiseton, Claworth, Misterton, Walcringham, and Stokheyth, which
were sometimes William de Furnivalls his Uncle. Thomas de Furnivall by his Deed
dated at Canterbury on St. Simon and Iudes day 50 H. 3. released this Manor to
Sir Henry, Ib.
eldest son of the Illustrious King of Almaine, being part of his Fee of
Tikehill, to have to him and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten; and in
default thereof to remain to Sir Edward, the eldest son of the Illustrious King
of England, and his heirs: The Witnesses were Sir Hugh de Bigod, Roger de
Mortuomari, Roger de Leyburne, Robert Walerand, Roger de Clifford, etc. The
Jury, 8 E. 1. Esc. 8 E. 1. n. 72.
found that the Prior of Wirkesop ought to perceive the Tithes of the yearly
Rents of Malt, and of Paunage, of Hens, Eggs, and of all other issues coming
out of the Manor of Grengeley, and that all the Priors of that place his
predecessors were wont to have them, and were seized thereof in the time of
Matilda de Lovetot, William de Furnivall, and their Ancestors, Lords of the
said Manor of Grengeley, until it came to the hands of Sir Henry de
Allemania, whose Bailiff took the said Tithes from John the Predecessor of the
said Prior, and the Bailiffs of Constancia, wife of the said Henry, then
unjustly detained. By a special Verdict taken in an Assize, in the fourth year
of King Edward the first, father of King Edward the second, Pl. de Banc. Hill.
19 E. 2. to. 31.
(in the nineteenth of whose Reign there was another hearing) it appears that
Matilda de Lovethot was seized of the Manor of Gringele, and gave by her Deed
to the Prior of Wirksop a Windmill there; which Matilda afterward gave the
said Manor to William de Furnivall her son, who put himself into the
(possession of the) said Mill all his life, and died without heir of himself,
whereby the said Manor reverted to the said Matilda, who again enfeoffed the
said Prior of the said Mill and died; after whose death John de Vescy seized
the said Manor, and ejected the said Prior, and so held until the Battle of
Evesham, where he was taken; and then came Thomas de Furnivall, whose right and
inheritance the aforesaid Manor ought to have been, and compounded with Edward
the first, and Henry de Alemaine, viz. that the said Thomas should enfeoffe the
said Henry of the said Manor to hold to him and the heirs of his body;
remainder to King Edward the first; which Henry died without heir of himself,
and the King gave the said Manor to Constancia, wife of the said Henry in
Tenency. And the Jury found precisely that John de Vescy, and his servants, did
unjustly eject the said Prior out of the said Mill. And afterward the said
Prior, in the fifth year of King Edward the first, complained that before
judgment given, Richard, son of Albred, with forty others, by the Command and
Mission of Henry de Luffenham, Constable of Tikhill, with force and arms pulled
down the said Mill, etc. William de Anne, Constable of Tikhill, made it appear,
and the Prior denied not, that the Mill then ( viz. 19 E. 2.) stood not where
it did of old on the soil of the Prior, but two Selions off, on the soil of
the King. Therefore the Prior had order, if he pleased, to build it where it
formerly stood, and to recover the Suit to it by the Common Law. There was more
ado afterward concerning this Mill, Esc. 4 E. 3. n. 91.
and Suit to it in the former part of the Reign of E. 3. Claus. 5 E. 3 part. 1.
m. 27.


Simon de Bereford, 3 E. 3. Claus. 6 E. 3. m. 37. Quo War. 3 E. 3.
claimed to have in the Manor of Gringele Emendation of Bread and Ale, Free
Waren, Park, Wrek, and Weyf.

William de la Pole granted this Manor of Gringeley on the Hill to King E. 3.

It was granted to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, B.
together with Wheatley, as part of Tikhill, where it continued till it was
sold away by King James.

The Rectory of Grenelay or Gryngeley, late belonging to the Monastery of
Worksop, with the Rectory of Adenburgh, and other things, was granted, 7 E. 6.
May 4. to Sir James Folejambe, Knight, and his heirs, by the Kings Letters
Patents, paying yearly for the Rectory of Adenburgh 18l. and for that of
Gryngeley 22l. 13s. 4d.

Lib. libere ten.
The owners of Gringley super montem in 1612. are thus set down, George Dawson,
Arthur Gray, Edmund Cross, William Gamstone, senior, Thomas Sturton, William
Walsham, Henry Wild, Francis Williamson de Walkringham, Gent.

Mss. I. M.
The Vicarage of Gringley was 8l. when the Prior of Wirksop was Patron: It Is now
7l. 18s. 4d. value in the Kings Books, and the Earl of Devonshire Patron.

Everton. Scaftworth. Harwell.
IN Evreton of the Archbishop of Yorks Sok of Sudton was one Car. and. of a
Bovat, and in Scaftord one Car. ad Geldam.

Lib. Dooms.
In Evretone and Hereuuelle of the Fee of Roger de Busli in Oswardebec Wapentac,
Soc to Burton, there was two Bov.. ad Geldam. The Land one Car. There one
Sochm. had half a Car. and one Acre and an half of Meadow, Pasture Wood one qu.
long, one broad. And likewise in Heruuelle and Evretone Sok to Grengeley three
Bov.. ad Geldam. The Land one Car. There one Sochm. one Vill. had half a Car.
and three Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood hve qu. long, two qu. broad.

Roger Archbishop of York, who lived in the time of King Henry the second,
Mon. Angl. vol. 3. p. 137.
gave the Church of Everton to the Chapel which he Founded near York Minster,
as in East Retford is said, and his successor Sewall in the year 1258.
ordained that the Vicar of Everton should have the Altarage, Ib. 139.
and the whole Land of the Church, with an enclosure in Harwell Inge, or half a
Mark out of the Purse of the Sacrist, and the Tithe of the Hay beyond the Town
of Scaftworth, directly toward Bawtrey, and the Tithe Hay of Birthinge, and
the said Sacrist was to find a dwelling House for the said Vicar, or to give
him half a Mark yearly for a House, and there the said Sacrist was also to give
to the poo^ ^^ree Marks per annum.

William de Haplisthorp at Darby, 53 H. 3. Pl. de Iur. and Assis. apud Derb. 53
H. 3. to. 16.
offered himself the fourth day against Simon, son of William, concerning a
Plea of one Mess. and the moiety of one Bovat in Everton, and against Sigrida
de Sutton, Adam and Jordan her sons, of one Mess. and one Bovat in the same
Town, and against Robert, son of Gilbert de Hayton, and Cecilia his daughter,
of the moiety of a Bovat, except two Acres, and they came not, etc.

The Jury, 26 E. 1. Esc. 26 E. 1. n. 14.
found that John Freschevede held in the Town of Herewell one Bovat of Land in
Demesne, seven Natives (or Villains) holding five Bov. in Villenage: Of the
Manor of Wheatley he held also of the King in Capite, paying 12d. per annum,
and making two appearances at the Court of Wheatley; and that he was a Bastard,
and had no heirs, and therefore the Land was taken into the Kings hands as an
Eschaet. Another Inquisition found that he held six Bov. of Land, and 20s. and
1d. Rent in Herewell, and that William was his father, and infeoffed him of the
said Land and Rent to hold to him, and the heirs of his body; in default
whereof to Simon de Freskenade, and Arnald his brother, and their heirs, to
whom the Land ought to descend; and that Arnald died at the Feast of the
Purification of Mary, 26 E. 1. Esc. 26 E. 1. n. 42.


Thomas de Maresay, mentioned in Gamelston, held about that time in Everton a
Capital Mess. in Demesne, and held five Bovats of Arable Land in Socage of
Thomas Archbishop of York, paying 6s. 2d. per annum, and Suit of Court.

There was a Fine levied, 19 E. 2. Fin. lev. Pasch. 19 E. 2.
between James Spinay, and William de Cliff, Clark, Quer. and Robert Spinay,
Clark, Deforc. of the Manors of Everton and Scaftworth, thereby settled on the
said James, and the heirs of his body; remainder to William his brother, and
the heirs of his; remainder to Alice his sister, and her heirs. William de
Cliff, and James de Spinay, Pl. de Banc. Mich. 6 E. 3. to. 66.
in an Assize taken 2 E. 3. recovered their seisin of one Mess. and forty Acres
of Land, and twenty of Meadow in Scaftworth, and twenty Marks for damage against
John de la Cressover, and William his son, and others.

The Jury, 33 E. 3. Esc. 33 E. 3. n. 38.
found that John de Gray of Rotherfeild held when he died one Toft, with a
certain Garden, and sixty Acres of Land, ten of Meadow, with the Appurtenances
in Everton of the Archbishop of York by the service of 8s. per annum, and that
John his son was his next heir.

John Helwys, Clark, and John Hanley, 21 H. 7. Mich. 21 H. 7. to. 412.
claimed against John Cley, Esquire, one Mess. three Tofts, eighty Acres of
Land, twelve of Meadow, 2s. Rent, and two Fishings in the water of Idell, with
the Appurtenances in Skafteworth and Raunswell.

Reginald Pegge, George Emeryson, and Henry Wyat, Esquire, 22 H. 7. Mich. 22 H.
7* to. 102.
claimed against Richard Wyat, Clark, and John Scotte, Esquire, one Mess. one
hundred and twenty Acres of Land, forty of Meadow, eight of Wood, and 2s. and
6d. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Everton, Harewell, Sturton, and Clayworth,
who called John Clay to warrant: these are named again in Finningley.

John Twyselton, Edward Lee, Raph Rowlett, and others, 11 H. 8. Trin. 11 H. 8.
to. 338.
claimed against Roger Copley, Esquire, the third part of the Manor of
Scaftesworth, with the Appurtenances, and the third part of twenty Mess. ten
Cottages, three hundred Acres of Land, forty of Meadow, twenty of Wood, three
hundred Acres of More, and 3s. 4d. Rent, with the Appurtenances in
Scaftesworth, Clareburgh, Wellome, Walesby, Boughton, and Grynley. Ib; to. 369.
The same persons claimed against Richard Devenysshe, Esquire, the like third
part and parcels. Hill. 11 H. 8. to* 442.
The same persons also claimed against Sir Richard Carew, Knight, the like
third part and parcels.

John Markham, Knight, Seth Snawsell, Thomas Langton, John Chapman, William
Burdon, Clark, Adam Langley, and others, 19 H. 8. Mich. 19 H. 8. to. 142.
claimed against Edmund Molyneux, Robert Chaloner, and Richard Chirden, fifteen
Mess. one hundred Acres of Land, one hundred of Meadow, one hundred of Pasture,
one hundred of Heath, two hundred of More, two hundred of Marsh, and a certain
Fishing, also the moiety of the Manor of Herwell, with the Appurtenances in
Herwell and Everton, and called to warrant Thomas Wentworth, Knight. John
Markham, Knight, Edmund Molyneux, Esquire, Seth Snawsell, Esquire, Robert Chaloner,
Raph Aunger, and others, 20 H. 8. Mi^h. 20 H. 8. to. 314.
claimed against Thomas Wentworth, the younger, Esquire, and Anne his wife, six
Mess. three Cottages, one hundred Acres of Land, sixty of Meadow, forty of More,
fifty of Marsh, and 15d. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Everton and Herwell,
and called to warrant Thomas Wentworth, Knight.

George Lassells, Esquire, 37 H. 8. Hill. 37 H. 8. to. 315.
claimed against Richard Towneley, Esquire, the Manors of Gatford, Everton,
and Harwell, with the Appurtenances, and one hundred and twenty Mess. forty
Tofts, one Dovecote, one hundred and twenty Gardens, one hundred and twenty
Orchards, two thousand Acres of Land, two hundred of Meadow, one thousand of
Pasture, two hundred and fifty of Wood, one hundred of More, forty of Turbary,
and 40s. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Gateford, Everton, Harwell, Worsop,
Shyreokes, Est Retford, West Retford, Grynley, Hayton, Wellome, Moregate, Bole,
Babworth, Ordesall, Styrton, Eton, Milneton, Little Markham, Blyth, Ravenskill,
Torworth, Madersey, and Kylton.

Robert Northfeild, 2 Eliz. claimed against Christopher Twiselton, Pasch. 2
Eliz. rot. 328.
Esquire, the Manor of Scaftworth, and one Mess. four Tofts, and^ with the
Appurtenances in Mattersey, Scrowby, Everton, and Harwell.

There was a Mess. and certain Houses, Lands, etc. late belonging to the Priory
of Matersey, in Everton, 24 July, 4 and 5 Ph. and Mar. granted to William
Rigges, Par. 16. pat. 4 and 5 Ph. and Mar.
Esquire, and William Buckbert, Gent.

The principal House and Lands in Everton, at this day belong to the
Corporation of Newarke, B.
and were demised to Mr. Rogers their Tenant.

They have a Manor in Harwell, which was Wentworths heretofore I suppose.
Thomas Magnus bought it and gave it Anthony Gylby, who was Lieutenant Colonel
to Sir John Digby in Newark Garrison, and as I take it is now Tenant.

The owners of Everton cum Scaftworth in 1612. are thus set down, Lib. libere
ten.
the Lady Portington, widow, George Nevell, Gent. Robert Williamson, Timothy
Broomehead of North Wheatley, Richard Drew, senior, Robert Howton, Roger
Harrison, Robert Flower, Peter Hallam, Nicolas Bonner, Stephen Wood, John
Cowper, Richard Drew, Henry Flower, Widow Hill, John Booth, John Wilson,
William Hollingworth, Thomas Richardson, Hercy Norfolk, William Fitz-Williams,
Gent. Sir George Chaworth, Nicolas Sanderson, Henry Webster, Gent. George
Tomkinson, John Hydes, Thomas Broomehead, Robert Catstine, Richard Bridge,
William Rogers, Esquire, Edward Reins.

The Vicarage of Everton was ten Marks when the Sacrist of St. Mary's at York
was Patron: Mss. I. M.
It Is now 7l. 2s. 3d. ob. value in the Kings Books, and the Earl of Devonshire
Patron.

Walkeringham.
IN Walthringham of the Kings ancient Demesne of Maunsfeld in Oswardebec Soc
was as much as paid the Geld for twelve Bov.. The Land four Car. Three Sochm.
two Vill. three Board. had four Car. Meadow six qu. long, four qu. broad, Wood
eight qu. long, four broad, the value 20s. Of Roger de Buslies Fee there was a
Manor which Adestan had, Lib. Dooms.
and paid for it to the Geld or Tax of those times as ten Bovats. There Roger
the Man of Roger de Busli, had four Sochm. one Vill. five Board. having two Car.
Meadow two qu. long, one broad, Wood four qu. long, one broad. In King Edward
the Confessors time this was 20s. value, in the Conquerours 15s.

William de Lovetot, who in the time of Henry the first, Founded the Monastery
of Radford near Wirksop, gave to it the Church of Walcringham, amongst the rest
which he held of the Honor of Blyth, the Seat of the said Roger de Busli,
whose Man or Tenant Roger, the said William succeeded in his Tenency in this
County, and Richard de Luvetot his son, and William his Grandchild, and Matilda
de Lovetot, daughter and heir of the latter William, Mon. A^gl. vol. 2. p. 52.
and wife of Gerard de Furnivall confirmed, as she did the gift of a Mess. in
Walcringham of one Acre without the Graffe or Ditch of Gringley, and three
Bovats of Land, with the Appurtenances which Nicolas Ingeniator gave to the
said Monastery, and her father the said William de Lovetot confirmed, and the
Mill of Walfrey, with a certain Mess. or dwelling House, likewise two Tofts in
Walcringham which William, son of Ketelber, and Robert, son of Wlstan, sometime
held, etc.

Most of the Kings ancient Demesne was given to the Priory of Newstede in
Shirewode at the foundation, by King H. 2. before which time, Regist. de Novo
loco p. 253.
viz. in the Reigns of William Rufus, H. 1. and King Stephen, the names of
certain of the old Tenants were Took, Armwy, Wilac, Arkep. Gamel, Grim, Wace,
by whom many others were enfeoffed, and were Tenants at the time of the
enfeoffment of the Priory, of which number were Henry Briton, and Henry de
Shepewik, from whom the an^^stors of Henry de Trent in Walcringham were
enfeoff'd, who were to pay for every. Bovat of Land one Mark, and for every
half Bov. of Land half a Mark. This Henry was the son and heir of Thomas de
Trent, and dyed in the pestilence, 1349 and 1350. leaving a daughter and heir
called Ioane two years old, concerning whom Sir Richard de Trent Canon of
Wirkesop, and brother of the said Henry, applied himself to Friar Hugh de
Colyngham then Prior of Newstede, and showed him the Chartels of his Ancestors,
and paid him two Marks of Silver in the name of the marriage, and Wardship, or
Custody of the said Ioane, who was committed to Henry de Winchelse of
Misterton, and Walter, son of Lambert de Stoketh, as deputed Tutors. Afterward
came one Ivo of the Isle of Haryholme, and claimed the Custody of the said
Ioane, in the name of his wife as next in blood, being Kinswoman and Aunt of
the said Ioane, but he was shown before the Priors Counsel learned in the Law,
that Henry de Shepewyk was the Kings Tenant in Walcringham, from whom and
others then Tenants, the Ancestors of the said Ioane were enfeoff'd, and that
the said Henry de Shepewyk granted for himself and his heirs, and surrendered to
the Prior and Covent and their successors, all his Lands and Tenements, with
all the services of all his Tenants in Walcryngham, and Walcr, and Shepewyk,
etc. which excluded the said Ivo from his petition and further prosecution.

Mon. Ang. vol. 2. p. 318. and Test. de Nev.
King John when he was Earl Morton gave to the Priory of Newstede, 7l. Land, and
6d. Land in Walcringham, and in Misterton, and Sepewik, and in Walcre, besides
the 100s. which his father King H. 2. gave in Sepewik, and in Walcringham.

Regist. de No^ooc. p. 194.
At the Assizes at Nottingham, before William Skypwith, and his fellow Justices,
the Tuesday after the Feast of Sr. Margaret the Virgin, 27 E. 3. the Prior of
Newstede had a Verdict that Richard de Halum late Prior, and all his
predecessors, beyond the time of memory were seized of 15s. 2d. yearly Rent,
with the Appurtenances in Walcringham, and likewise the then present Prior, and
therefore Roger Darcy, Chr. John de Okeburne of Walcringham, and Godwin
Greyveson, or [ fill. praepositi] were cast in 10. Marks damage, etc. and the
Prior to have his seisin.

Ex libro Roberti Cutwolf prioris de Novoloco temp. H. 6. per. Ric. Dom. Byron.
The Prior and Covent of Newstede, 4 H. 6. demised the dwelling house of the
Manor of Walkringham, with all houses built beneath it, and one hundred and
eighteen Acres and one Rode of Arable Land, and sixty Acres of Meadow, and a
certain great Croft enclosed, called the Southewod of the Demesne belonging to
it, to Nicolas, son of William Tomkynson, for thirty years, paying nine Marks
yearly, if the said Nicolas should so long live, whose father the said William
held it likewise when he died, with the Stock upon it, whereof an Inventory was
taken after his death, viz. an Ox Teme, and a Horse Teme, with all things
belonging to each Plow: A Bull, and a Bore, and Swine, etc. In the Hall a Basin
and Ewer, and a Table Mensal with two Tristals, etc. In the Chapel, one
Missall, one Chalice, one white Chesulbe [ Casula] with the whole ornament for
the Priestly vestment, one Phial of Lead, one Sakrebelle, three Coverings for
the Altar, one Corporas, one Lead to put Holy water in in the Chapel; then
follows the number of Acres sown with Wheat, Barley, Beans, and Pease, etc.

Reg. de Novol. p. 197.
Roger de Gringeley it seems was a Bastard, and purchased a Mess. and six Acres
of Land, and three Rodes, and one Acre and one Rode of Meadow in Walkringham,
whom William de Anne Constable of Tikhill, and Bailiff of the Manor of
Gringeley, affirmed to be the Kings Villain although a Bastard cannot be called
a Villain, and took the Tenements into the Kings hand, as the Kings precept to
Richard Wynferthing, and Richard de Iken, Auditors of the Accounts of the
issues of the Kings Manor of Gringley expresses; yet the said Rogers Land in
Walcringham Eschaeted to the Prior of Newstede, he dying without heirs, except
some little which his brother Richard had with him jointly.

Matilda Daynet (or Daynel) 4 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Hill. 4 E. 1. to. 26.
claimed against the Prior of Wirksop the Advowson of the Church of
Walcringham, whereof her Ancestor was seized in the time of King Henry, that
Kings Great Grandfather, but 8 E. 1. Pl. de Iur. and Assis. ap. Not. in Cras.
animae 8 E. 1. to. 5.
it appears that the Prior of Wirkesop had more right to hold the Advowson of
this Church than Matilda Danyell. The said Prior of Wirksop 14 E. 1. Chapter 14. E.
1. m. 29.
had free warren in Walkringham, and Herthewik.

In an Assize 12 E. 1. Pl. cor. Rege Hill. 12 E. 1. to. 18.
William de Hamilton Parson of the moiety of the Church of Waltringham was
Plaintiff, and Richard de Wildhaver of Misterden, and twenty others, Defendents
for their Common in Waltringham, where it was complained that the Defendents
had dug Turfes in a certain Marsh and made Ditches which hindered the Common,
but the Jury found that the Defendents might lawfully do it, and judgment was
accordingly for them.

Thomas Midleton, Esquire, William Thwayt, junior, Raph Hopton, Esquire, James
Strangways, Esquire, and Robert Curtoys, Chaplain, 16 H. 8. Trin. 16 H. 8. rot.
121*
claimed against William Malyverer, Knight, the Manor of Walcringham, with the
Appurtenances, and one hundred Acres of Land, twenty of Meadow, one hundred of
Pasture, and 20s. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Walkringham and Bekyngham.
Thomas Peek, and William Woodmerpole, 6 Eliz. at Hertford, Hill 6 Eliz. apud
Hertford to. 1 ^ 6*
claimed against Robert Williamson two Mess. ten Tofts, two Dovecotes, six
Gardens, six Orchards, four hundred Acres of Land, two hundred of Meadow, eighty
of Pasture, one hundred of Furz and Heath, and 6s. Rent, with the Appurtenances
in Walkeringham and Beckingham, and called to warrant Edm. Malyverer, Knight.

King Henry 8. by his Letters Patents dated 18 November. 36 H. 8. Par. 24 pat. 36
H. 8.
granted to Sir Richard Lee, Knight, and his heirs, the Grange and Firm of
Walkeringham, and all Lands, Medows, and Pastures there, late belonging to the
Monastery de Rupe alias Roch in Yorkshire, then extended at 114s.

King H. 8. granted amongst other things 25 November. 38 H. 8. Par. 12 pat. 38 H.
8.
to Lawrence Harward, and Stephen Termpte, the Capital Mess. Grange, and all
Hereditaments, with their Rights and Appurtenances in Walkeringham, late
belonging to the Priory of Workesop, and many Acres of Land in the several
Fields where the North Field is called Shepick Field, from the Hamlet decayed,
as I suppose, called Scepewick, all which parcels were then in the Tenure of
Giles Smith.

Richard Iervis 20 November. 4 and 5. Ph. and Mar. had pardon granted for
acquiring by the last will of Richard Iervis his father, Par. 15. pat. 4 and 5
Ph. and Mar.
to himself and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten, the Manors of
Walkeringham alias Walker, Mysterton, Stokewith and Gunthorp, etc. late
belonging to the Monastery of Newstede.

One Gervas sold these Lands to the Earl of Kingston. B.


By an Inquisition taken at Nottingham 18 Iun. 3 and 4 Ph. and Mar. after the
death of Roger North, Esc. de Anno 3 and 4 Ph. and M. par. 1.
Gent. who died seized of five Mess. and the moiety of another Mess. ten
Cotages, nine Tofts, and the moiety of another Toft, one Windmill, mill, one
Dovecote, two Gardens, and the twelfth part of the passage of the River Trent
at Littlebrough Ferry, and of three hundred Acres of Land, 84. of Meadow, one
hundred and ten of Pasture,... of Wood, and 2s. Rent, with the Appurtenances in
Walkringham, Beckingham, Stourton, Burton, and Littlebrough, it appears that he
dyed the ninth of April then last past, at Walkeringham, and that Edward Lord
North was his son and heir, and above three years old at the time of the
Inquisition. I suppose Lord should have been left out, for I find Edward son
and heir of Roger North did fealty for Lands in Walkringham, 22 May, 18 Eliz.
etc.

Ex cop. vis. per. Reason Mellish, Ar.
Rogerus North de Walkringham- Rogerus North de cadem- Thom. North de
Walkringham- Rogerus North de Walkringham-Eliz. fill. Ant. Staunton. Edward.
North de Walkringham.-Doroth. fill. Tho. Wray de Richmond. Carol. North miles
fill. and haer.-Doroth. fill. Will. Burnell de Winkburne. Carolus North aet. 2.
an. 1614. Edward.
Tho. Rog. Joh. Edw. filiae 5. maritat. viz. Jud. ux.-Tho. Tuke. Doroth.
ux.-Rob. Royston. Eliz. ux.-Tho. Forster. An. ux.-Thom. Sturton. Mar.
ux.-Franc. Thornhill.


Rogerus North de London Haberdash.- Thom. North de London-Christian. Edward.
North, mil. Dom. North. de Carthidge.-Alicia fill....Squier.




King E. 6. granted to Sir Michael Stanhope, Knight, and John Bellowe, 18
August, 2 E. 6. Par. 4 pat. 2 E. 6.
amongst other things, certain Mess. in East Retford, and also Messuages,
Lands, and Tenements, late in the Tenure of Giles Horbury, Robert Kesghley,
Thomas Stocom, etc. in Walkeringham, late belonging to a Chantry in the Chapel
of Padham in the County of Lancaster.

The owners of Walkeringham Town about the year 1612. are thus set down; Lib.
libere ten.
Sir Thomas Iervas, Knight, Edward North, Esquire, Francis Williamson, Gent.
William Clark, junior, Robert Williamson, Thomas Stokham, William Theaker,
Robert Hawksworth, Robert Woodhouse, one Mess. one Garden, one Orchard, thirty
three Acres of Land, Richard Wright, Roger Drayton, Giles and Edward Tomkinson,
etc.

Mss. I. M.
The Vicarage of Walcringham was 8l. when the Prior of Wirksop was Patron: It Is
now 7l. 11s. 5d. ob. value in the Kings Books, and the Patronage belongs to
Trinity College in Cambridge.

Misterton. Stockwith. Gunthorp.
IN Munstreton of the Kings Soc of Maunsfeld, there was also a good share which
paid the Geld for five Bov. and. The Land one Car. There five Sochm. six Vill.
one Board. had one Car. Meadow one qu. long, half so much broad. Lib. Dooms.
The value in the time of K. Will. when the survey was taken, was 7s. At which
time there was also in Munsterton of the Fee of Roger de Busli, that which
before the Conquest five Taynes had for five Manors, which paid the Geld or
Tax for thirteen Bov.. The Land two Car.. There Roger had 8. Vill. 5. Board.
having 2. Car.. There was a Church, Meadow three qu. long, one qu.. broad. Lib.
Dooms.
In the Confessors time the value of this was 20s. In the Conquerours when the
survey was taken, 21s. more, or 2s. or 20s. (for every Copy I have differs.)
There was also in Munstretune of the said Rogers Fee, Soc to Gringeley, seven
Bov.. ad Geldam. The Land twelve Bovats. There were five Sochm. one Vill. five
Board. having one Car.. Meadow four qu. long, half one broad, Pasture Wood four
qu. long, one qu.. broad.

Will. de Lovetot gave the Church of Misterton, with Gringley, and Walcringham,
and the rest to the Monastery of Wirksop, which he founded, as in those and
other places is noted.

It was enrolled in Michaelmas Term, Regist. de Novoloco i^ Sh. p. 25.
7 E. 2. that King Henry the elder ( viz. H. 2.) And King John King of England,
and when he was Earl Morton, gave to the Canons of Newstede fifteen pound Land,
in which were contained two parts of the Town of Walcringham, and the third
part of the Town of Misterton, with Stokketh, and Walcreth, and the whole Fee
which the said Canons held was of the Kings ancient Demesne, in the Soc of
Oswardbek, and they had Writs of having Tallage of their Tenants in
Walcringham, Ib. 20.
Misterton, and Papulwyk, when King E. 1. made all his Demesnes throughout
England to pay Tallage, and granted to the great men who held any of those
Demesnes to have reasonable Tallage, and made Mr. Adam de Hamundesham, and Sir
Richard de Furneys, Assessors and Collectors, and they made Richard de Whatton,
and Walter Olyver Collectors. In the Tallage Assessed 32 E. 1. and 35 E. 1.
Misterton was 10s. Walcringham 24s. and certain in Papulwyk 13s. 2d.

Test. de Nev.
It appears also in other records that the Prior of Newstede had two parts of
the Town of Walkringham, and eleven Bovats of Land in Misterton, of the gift of
the said Kings, as before is shown.

In an Assize 18 E. 1. Pl. cor. Reg. Mich. 18 E. 1. to. 68.
it also appears that the Prior of Newstede, Robert de Hayton, and Constantia
de Byerne, were chief Lords of the whole Town of Misterton, but that the
Freeholders had Common in twenty Acres of More, which the said Lords had
enclosed. The suit it seems continued; for 35 E. 1. the said Prior, Regist. de.
Novol. in Sb. p. 184.
Constantia, and Thomas, son of Robert de Hayton, complained that Roger Oily
Parson of the Church of Misterton, Robert de Levesham, William Doynell, Hugh le
Fouler, Roger, son of Nicolas, etc. unjustly etc. but the Jury found, that it
was the Common soil of the freeholders and that the Lords had nothing in it
but as Fre-holders, according to their proportions, etc. and so the Lords were
cast, though some Lawyers did not like the Verdict.

Nom. Vill.
Misterton 9 E. 2. answered for an entire Villa, and the King, the Prior of
Newstede, and Thomas de Hayton were returned Lords of it.

The Jury, 24 E. 1. Esc. 24 E. 1. n. 63.
found that Robert de Hayton when he died held six Bovats in Misterton of the
Lord of Gringley, and six Bovats in Capite of the Lord of Tikhill Castle then
in the Kings hand, and that Tho. and Rob. his sons, were his heirs.

The Jury, 14 H. 6. Esc. 14 H. 6. n. 22.
returned that Thomas Belwode, John Greystoke, Clark, and William Farceux,
Vicar of the Church of Misterton, were seized of the Manor of Hayton, and held
two Mess. five Bovats of Land, and Meadow, and 4s. Rent in Misterton and
Stokkyth, and two Bovats in Walkringham, and by their Deed passed them to Raph
Makarell, and Margery his wife, named in Hayton, where the descent of some of
these Lands may be further discerned.

Market and Fair 12 H. 3. Claus. 12 E. 3. m. 10. par 1. Regist. de Novol. p.
193.
was proclaimed to be in Stoketh Town. The Prior of Newstede 17 E. 3. Pl. cor.
I. Stonore and sociis suis ap. Westminster. Hill. 17 E. 3. to. 143.
recovered against John, son of Hugh le Fouler of Misterton, 2s. 6d. Rent,
which Mr. Thomas de St. Alban Rector of the Church of Misterton died seized of,
who was a Bastard, as the Prior supposed, and had no heir.

Robert de Haldenby, and Alured Vicar of Athelingslet, by an Assize taken 10 R.
2. Pl. cor. Reg. Mich. 1^ R. 2. rot. 79.
recovered their seisin as well of the moiety of 7. Mess. fourscore Acres of
Land,..... as of 63s. Rent, service issuing out of the said moiety, against
John Morley, his wife, and their son, in Misterton, with 10^. damage, for which
12 R. 2. they prayed execution and had it, etc.

Walter de Eogheler in 5 E. 3. Ex Magno libr. de fin. fol. 197. Mic. 5 E. 3.
held the moiety of a Bov. in Misterton, which lately was Raph Damyots, an
Idiot, by the service of 8s. per an. of the Manor of Gringeley, then in the
Kings hand.

By a Fine at Leicester the Wednesday after the Feast of St. Andrew, 10 Ioh.
John Chamberlayn, Fin. lev. ap. Leic. 10 Ioh. Mich.
and Orencia his wife, passed to John de Levesham, and Emme his wife, and
Martin de Minsterton two Bov. and the fourth part of a Bov. in Misterton, for
which the said John and Emme passed to John and Orencia, and the heirs of
Orencia, the fourth part of a Bovat and a Toft which Walter Hobel held, and one
Bovat which Walter, son of Hugh held, which were to be held of the said John
and Emme, by the free service of paying 6d. per annum.

Robert Barnetby, and Margery his wife, 14 H. 6. Hill. 14 H. 6. to. 126.
claimed against John Boys, Esquire, and four others, five Mess. forty Acres of
Land, eleven of Meadow, 2s. 2d. q. and a pound of Pepper Rent in Misterton.

John Orston, Clark, 9 E. 4. Pasch. 9 E. 4. rot. 123.
claimed against Nicolas Gaynesford, Esquire, 16s. Rent, with the Appurtenances
in Misterton.

Robert Thornehill, and Leonard Warcappe, 29 Iun. 38 H. 8. Par. 3. pat. 38 H. 8.
amongst other things had a piece of Land called the Laund, and a Windmill,
and Lands and Tenements in Misterton, in the Tenure of Henry Stokwyth, late
belonging to the Priory of Axholme in Lincolneshire, and a Close called the
Nun Close, in the Tenure of the said Henry Stokewyth in West Stokewith,
between a Close of Land of Sir Thomas Wentworths, Knight, on the West, and one
called Sharecroft, by the Meadow of Nicolas Denman on the East, and a Selion of
Land, in the Tenure of the said Henry Stokewith, and Common of Pasture in
Stockwith, and a Mess. and Lands in Mysterton, late belonging to the Priory of
Hevenings in Lincolneshire, and a Cottage in Misterton, late belonging to the
Priory of Wirkesop, granted to them and their heirs.

June 27. 7 E. 6. Par. 10 pat. 7 E. 6.
a Close of Land in Misterton, in the Tenure of Humfrey Stockwith, Gent. late
belonging to the Priory of Wirkesop, was granted to Robert Dudley, Knight, and
William Glaseour, Gent. and to the heirs of Robert.

John Air, senior, Gent. John Air, junior, and John Routh, 2 and 3 Ph. and
Mar. claimed against George Conyers, Mich. 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. rot. 538.
Gent. one Mess. sixty Acres of Land, 20. of Meadow, 100. of Pasture, five of
Wood, with the Appurtenances in Misterton.

The Chantry of Misterton, 2 E. 6. then dissolved, was let to Farm to Robert
Thornehill, Gent. John Flower, Gent. 4 and 5 Eliz. claimed against Hugh
Thornehill, Lib. dimiss. cantar. in offic. ducat. fol. 7. b. Mich. 4 and ^ Eli.
r. 622.
Gent. one hundred Acres of Land, twenty of Meadow, and forty of Pasture, with
the Appurtenances in Misterton and Walkringham.

John Standley, Gent. and Hugh Childers, 6 and 7 Eliz. Mich. 6 and 7 Eliz. rot.
449.
claimed against Richard Childers one Mess. two Cottages, three Gardens, one
Orchard, twenty Acres of Land, six of Meadow, ten of Pasture, forty of Turbary,
and one hundred of More, with the Appurtenances in Misterton, Moregate, and
Clarbourgh.

William Mason, Gent. and Tristram Dayntree, 18 Eliz. Pasc. 18 Eliz. rot. 740.
claimed against Humfrey Stockwith, Gent. one Mess. one Toft, one Garden,
sixteen Acres of Meadow, twelve of Pasture, with the Appurtenances in West
Stokwyth, and Misterton.

Robert Williamson, 19 Eliz. Mich. 18 and 19 Eliz. to. 752.
claimed against Thomas Coringham one Mess. two Tofts, eighty Acres of Land,
thirty of Meadow, ten of Pasture in Misterton.

.... Peake, and.... Broxham, 19 Eliz. Hill. 19 Eliz. to. 141.
claimed against.... Williamson diverse Lands in East Stokwith, who called to
warrant Edward Stokwith, Gent.

Edward Wymark, Gent. 25 Febr. 29 Eliz. Par. 4. pat. 29 Eliz.
had the Priors Close then divided into two, in Stockwith, belonging before to
Newstede, and Lamp-land in Misterton granted with many other small parcels of
Land.

In 21 Eliz. Par. 9. pat. 21 Eliz.
September. 22. twenty Acres in the Town and Fields of the Marish of Misterton,
in a place there called Bleford, sometime given by Thomas Darnall for
observation of his Obit, were amongst many other things granted to Edw.
Grimston, senior, and Edward Grimston, junior, and their heirs.

Haytons Manor came to Poge, and after the time of Henry the eighth Cogans; B.
Tongue, and Pettinger had Lands of that Tenure.

About the year 1612. the owners of Misterton Town are said to be Sir Thomas
Iervas, lib. libere ten.
Knight, Darcy Poge, Gent. Francis Williamson of Walkeringham two Mess. one
Cott. three Tofts, one Dovecote, three Gardens, ninety Acres of Land, John
Baxenden, senior, Arnall Reasby, Gent. the heirs of Thomas Thornehill, Thomas
Dawson, the heirs of.... Wilbore, Robert, two John's, Hugh, and William Tongue,
Thomas Sirringham, senior, William Dickenson, William Howton, Percivall
Clifton, Anne Norfolk, Edward Wilbore, Edward Edlington one Windmill, thirty
seven Acres of Land, the heirs of.... Conyers, widow Tompkinson, William
Ellwick, Robert Spavold, widow Stoakham, the heirs of Pettinger, Roger Gregory,
Gent. Edward North, Esquire, and above forty more.

In the Town of Stockwith the owners then were..... Moseley of Carberton, Ib.
Gent. William Brownelowe, Gent. Simon Hall, Gent. Thomas Wakefeild, Thomas
Wilbore, Richard Fish, Philip Andrew, Barnabas Williamson of Bothomsell, Gent.
widow Coggan, and fifteen others.

Mss. I. M.
The Vicarage of Mysterton was 10l. and the Chapter of York had the Patronage:
It Is now 10l. 5s. value in the Kings Books, and the Dean and Chapter of York
Patrons.

Misne. Myssen.
THe King had in Misne, which seems to be of the Soc of Flintham, three Bov. ad
Geld. Tofts had it. There were six Vill. with three Car. Soc in Circeton. Here
was of Roger de Buslies Fee one Bov. ad Geldam, Lib. Dooms.
belonged to Ettone, but of the Tayn Land in Misna, Cnut before the Conquest
had a Manor which paid to the Geld for one Bov. and an half. The Land three
Bov. Ernuvin had there four Vill. with half a Car. two Sochm. with one Car. and
a Fishing 3s. Pasture Wood one qu. long, one broad. The value of this was 8s.
Here was Soc three Bov. ad Geld. the Soc of Chiricton. There six Vill. had
three Car. This Kirketon is in Lincolneshire, and therefore it may reasonably
be guessed this place was named Misen, because it is intermixed, or in the
middle between the two Counties.

The Family of Maresey Lords of Gamelston had some interest here, as in that
place is noted.

Pope Celestin committed a Cause between A. Abbat and the Covent of Welbek,
Regist. de Welbek p. 129.
and Mr. R. de Sempingham, and the Canons of Marishey, concerning the Churches
of Bolton, and Marishey, of Misne, and Gameliston, and Helkisley, to W. Abbat
of Derley, and Mr. Simon de Apuleia, Chancellor of the Church of York, and Mr.
G. Canon of Southwell, before whom this composure was made at Blithe on St.
Nicholas day 1192. viz. the said Abbat and Covent renounced to the said Mr. R.
and the Canons of Marishey (or Mattersey) all the right which they claimed in
the said Isle and Churches, except that of Helkesle, which was to remain
entirely to Wellebec.

It was found by the Jury, 18 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Mich. 18 E. 1. to. 68.
that Thomas, son of Sabina de Mysne, and ten others had disseised Thomas de
Eyvill of his Common of Pasture in about two thousand Acres of Wood, Pasture,
and More in Mysne. And upon that came the Earl of Cornewalls Bailiff and said,
That the Wood and Soil, in which the said Thomas claimed Common, was the said
Earls, and of the ancient Demesne of the Crown, etc. and that all those upon
whom the said Thomas brought the Assize, were Sokemen of Misne, which was a
member of the Manor of Kirketon in the County of Lincoln, and that the said
Sokemen could not be brought into other judgment without the said Earl, who
held the said Manor of the King to him and the heirs of his body begotten, and
that the said Sokemen were of the County of Lincoln, and not of the County of
Notingham; and required Judgment that it should not proceed, for that it
touched the King, and the Earl his Lord: Therefore the Sheriff was commanded to
distrein the Jury of the said Assize to be at Notingham the morrow after All
Souls, to certify the Justices concerning certain Articles, etc.

Robert Attekirke of Finningley, 18 E. 1. Cor. Rege Mich. 18 E. 1. to. 66.
retracted himself from his Writ against Edmund Earl of Cornwall, Constantia
de Beierne, and Mr. John de Clarell, and others, for four hundred and fivescore
and ten Acres of Marsh, and ten Acres of Meadow, with the Appurtenances in
Mysene.

The Jury, 26 E. 1. Esc. 26 E. 1. n. 42.
said that Thomas de Mariesay had six Bovats in Misen, amongst many other
parcels in other places, held of the Honor of Lancaster.

John Scot Chr. 5 Febr. 7 H. 4. Fin. 7 H. 4. m. 5.
had license to grant the Manor of Mysne, with the Appurtenances, to the Prior
and Covent of Mathersey, and their successors, etc. who had the said Manor, 7
H. 4. Par. 1. pat. 7 H. 4. m. 14.
accordingly.

Queen Eliz. 2 Apr. 38 Eliz. Par. 9. pat. 38 Eliz.
granted to William Borne, and James Orange, Esquire, the Grange of Myss^n,
with its rights and Appurtetenances, of the value of 21l. per annum, in the
occupation of Thomas Fowe, late belonging to the Monastery of Mattersey in Fee
Farm.

King James, 2 Mar. 2 Iac. Par. 10. pat. 2 Iac.
granted to Sir John Ramsey, Knight, and Thomas Emerson (amongst other things)
the Chantry of Myssen, paying 10l. 2s. per annum. The same King, 29 October. 2
Iac. Par. 17. pat. 2 Iac.
granted to Lawrence Baskervile, and John Styler, the Rectory of Myssen,
sometime belonging to the late Priory of Mattersey, of the yearly value of 7l.
18l. 4d.

The Manor of Misne was.... Legates, and since Sir Matthew Palmers. B.


Mr. Nicolas Terwhyt has now interest there.

Mss. I. M.
The Vicarage of Mesyn was ten Marks when the Prior of Mathersay was Patron:
It Is now 6l. 4s. 7d. value in the Kings Books, and his Majesty Patron.

Oswardebec Sok. Oswaldbec.
IT appears in the Book of Doomsday that Oswardebec, before the Conquest, was a
Wapentac, containing all the Towns between the Rivers of Idel and Trent,
beginning with Rameton and Treswell, and so to Retford, which is now called the
North Clay Division of Bassetlaw, with the Addition of those first named Towns,
most of which Wapentac of Oswardbec was either of the Fee of Roger de Buslie,
or Soc to the Kings great Manor of Maunsfeld, except some parcels belonging to
the Archbishop of York, as in the particular Townships immediately foregoing
which make it up, may be observed, and as in South Leverton is already said.

King John confirmed to Roger de Montebegonis, the whole Land of Oswaldbec,
with the Appurtenances, which he gave him when he was Earl Moreton for the
service of a Knights Fee. Roger de Munbegun, 1 Ioh. Chart. Antiq. G. 8. Oblat.
1. Ioh. m. 10. Ebor.
gave the King half a Mark of Silver for having Oliva, who had been wife of
Robert de St. John, with her whole Land and her inheritance; she was Lady of
Turford; and cost him more, as in that place may be seen. The King, 10 H. 3.
Claus. 10 H. 3. m. 9.
assigned to Oliva, who had been wife of Roger de Montebegonis, the Manor of
Oswardebec in the name of Dower, as the said Roger held it July 20. it was then
worth 40l. and 19s. per annum. Test. de Nev.
Galfr. Gyny had then also seisin of Land of the gift of the said Roger in that
Soc. Roger de Monte Bogonis had Oswaldbeck, Fin. 12 H. 3. m. 6.
Barthon, Brademere, and Bulewell in this County, Bughdon, Haverbergh,
Stratton, with the Soc, and Medeburne in Leicestershire. Henry Monegoden was
heir of Roger de Montebegonis, and 13 H. 3. Pat. 13 H. 3. m. 10.
Oswardebek was granted to the King.

The King, 22 H. 3. Pat. 22 H. 3. m. 5.
granted to Henry de Hastings, and Ada his wife, and to Ada in Fee, for her
reasonable part happening to her of the inheritance which was John's, late Earl
of Chester her brothers, of the County (or Earldom) of Chester, the Manor of
Bromesgrave in the County of Worcester, the Manor of Bolsover, with the Castle
in the County of Darby, the Manor of Maunsfeld, with the Soc, and the Manor
of Oswardebec in this County, the Manors of Worfeild, Stratton, and Cuverdoure
in the County of Salop, the Manors of Wiggington and Wolverhampton in the
County of Stafford. Henry de Hastings held the whole Town of Oswaldbeck, with
the Soc, Test. de Nev.
viz. Oswaldebeck (now scarcely known) Leyrton, Stretton, Littilburg, Weteleg,
Sudbeck, Wiston, and Wellam, in exchange of the King for Lands which he had in
the County (or Earldom) of Chester, and he had of it yearly 38l. and 19s. It
descended with this Noble Family of Hastinges, as in Maunsfeld and South
Leverton may be partly observed.

The Jury, 15 E. 3. Esc. 15 E. 3. ^. 21.
found no damage if the King granted Hugh de Hastings license to acquire to
himself of Laurence de Hastings Earl of Pembrok, the Sok and Demesne of
Oswaldebeck, with the Appurtenances. The Jury, 13 R. 2. Esc. 13 R. 2. n. 30.
found that John de Hastinges, late Earl of Pembroke, by his Deed before his
death, enfeoffed Walter Amyas, etc. in his Sok called Oswaldebekesoken. And 21
R. 2. Esc. 21 R. 3. n. 10.
that Richard Earl.... held this Sok of the Dowry of his wife. Philippa, wife
of John de Hastings, Earl of Pembrok (son of John) 2 H. 4. Esc. 2 H. 4. n. 54.
died seized of it, Edmund late Earl of March was her Cousin and Heir.

The Jury, 12 H. 4. Esc. 12 H. 4. n. 34. p. 122.
said that William de Bellocamp Lord Aburgavenny, when he died held jointly
with Ioane his wife, the Sok called Oswaldbeksoken; and that Richard de
Bellocampo was his son and heir. Ioane, who had been wife of William de
Bellocampo, Knight, Lord Bergavenny held this Sok, when she died about 14 H. 6.
Esc. 14 H. 6. n. 35.
leaving Elizabeth, daughter of Richard de Bellocamp, Earl of Worcester her
son, her heir, which Elizabeth was married to Edward Nevill, Knight, a younger
son of the Earl of Westmerland, by whom she had George Nevill Lord Bergavenny,
which Edward and Elizabeth held this Sok, 17 H. 6. Antiq. Warw. per W. Dagdale
p. 740: Fin. Trin. 17 H. 6.


George Nevyle Lord Bergavenny, 18 H. 7. Hill. 18 H. 7. to. 456.
suffered a Recovery of the Manor of Oswardebek Soke, with the Appurtenances,
and eight Mess. three hundred Acres of Land, one hundred of Meadow, one hundred
of Pasture, and 20l. Rent, with the Appurtenances in South Bek, Wheteley,
Stretton, South Leverton, Fenton, Cotom, Clareburgh, Wellum Moregate, Grenley,
Wyston, Wodhouse, and Lyttilborough, to Sir Reginald Bray, Sir Edward Poinings,
Sir Thomas Fenys, Sir John Pecche, Knights, John Mordant, James Hobart, etc.

In the year 1612. John Thorneaughe, Knight, Lib. libere ten.
was Bailiff of the Kings Liberty of Oswaldbek Sok.

HATFEILD Division.
NOw follows Hatfeild Division of this great Wapentac of Bersetlow, which is
that which lies on the West side of the River Idle; and as the South and North
Clay Divisions, which lie on the East side, have ever been famous for plenty of
Corn, so this for Woods and pleasant Waters, insomuch that in it alone have
been Founded wellnigh as many Monasteries as in the whole County besides, for
in it were the Abbeys of Rufford, and Wellbeck, the Priories of Wirkesop,
Wallingwelles, Blyth, and Mattersey, which are not far short of all the rest,
as by this Catalogue of their values taken before that of the 26 H. 8. may
appear, Mss. I. M.
wherein Lenton is 620l. per annum, Thurgarton 350l. Shelford 200l. Newstede
240l. Felley 44l. Beauvale 200l. Brodholme 10l. Rufford 220^. Welbeck 300l.
Wirksop 240l. Wallingwelles 78l. Blyth 107l. and Mathersey 50l. per annum.

Rufford. Rugford on the River Maun.
IN Rugforde before the Norman Invasion Vlf (whose Lands in these parts became
the Fee of Gislebert de Gand) had a Manor which defended it self in paying to
the Dane-geld or Tax of that time for twelve Bovats. Lib. Dooms.
The Land of it being then known to be sufficient for four Plows, or four Car.
There Gislebert had in Demesne one Car. ten Vill. having three Car. There was
twenty Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood one leu.. long, one leu. broad. In the
Confessors time it was 6l. value, in the Conquerours when the Survey was taken
60s. it had Soc there and in Bildesthorp, and in Wirchenfeild.

Gislebert de Gaunt, son of Baldwin Earl of Flanders, Mon. Angl. fol. 1. p. 833.
came with William the Conqueror his Uncle into England, and took to wife
Alice de Montefort, and had issue Walter and Robert, and died in the time of
William Rufus, and was buried at Bardeney. Walter his eldest son took to wife
Matilda, daughter of Earl Stephen of Britanny, and begot Gilbert his eldest son
(who afterward in his wifes right was Earl of Lincoln) and Robert. Gilberts
wife was Roesia Countess of Lincoln, by whom he had Alice married to Simon de
St. Liz Earl of Huntington and Northampton.

Gilbert Earl of Lincoln Founded the Abbey of Rufford of the Cistercian Order
in the year 1148. about the thirteenth of King Stephen, Mon. Angl. vol. 1. p.
848.
which said King, for the Soul of King Henry his Uncle, Regist. de Ruff. p. 1.
and his other Ancestors, and for the health (or safety) of his own Soul, and
of Queen Matilda his wife, and Eustace his son, and his other Children,
confirmed the gift of Gilebert de Gant; which he made to God and the Church of
the blessed Mary at Rievalls, and the Monks there serving God, of the Manor of
Ruford: to his Charter dated at Lincoln were Witnesses Robert the Chancellor,
and Earl Simon, and Earl William of Arundell. By another dated at York, to
which were Witnesses the said Robert the Chancellor, Earl Simon, and Robert de
Ver, Ib.
he confirmed to the Abbat and Monks of Ruford, the gift which Gilbert de Gant
made to them of the Land of Cratela (wherein we suppose Wellehagh was in the
Book of Doomsday included, as in that place is noted.) By another dated at
Wirchesop, wherein the Bishop of Durrham, Ib.
and Richard de Luci, and William Peverell, and Richard de Camuil were
Witnesses, he the said King Stephen confirmed to the Church of St. Mary of
Rufford, and the Monks there serving God, the gifts which Hugh de Muscam, and
Adam Tisun, and William Tisun his son, and Gaufr. de Stanton, and Malger de
Rolleston, and Gilbert de Chelum, and Raph Silvan made of Lands of their Fees,
part whereof was in Kelum, as the Charter of Confirmation made by King Henry
the second manifests, in which the said King Henry the second also granted
that those Monks should have their proper Forester to keep their Wood as Walter
de Gant had in the time of King Henry the first, Cart. Ant. CC. 18 H. 2.
that Kings Grandfather, and that they should freely and peaceably take of the
Forest whatever was needful for their own use, and that no man of his own Wood
might give or sell without their license, as it was in the time of King Henry
the first his said Grandfather; and besides all the forementioned gifts, he
confirmed that of Galfr. de Eicring, and Rocelinus, and Raph his brother, of
the Wood called Rahage; and likewise granted the Land which Raph de Hocreton
held called Wudehus, and granted them all free Customs and Liberties, Soc, Sac,
Tol, and Them, and Infangetheof, etc.

King Henry the third confirmed all the forementioned gifts and enlarged their
privileges, Mon. Angl. vol. 1. p. 848.
besides several others mentioned in his Charter, as the gift of Robert Furnell
of the mediety of Mortone, which is next Bomeshill, which Adam de Wellum, and
his other Men, in times past held; and that gift of Raph de St. George of his
moiety of Mortone next the Town of Bomeshill, which Hugh de Stretton and other
his Men (or Tenants) held; that of Raph de Hereford of his whole Land which he
had in Ekering; that of Raph de Furnell of all the Land which they had of the
gift of his Ancestors in Bomeshill; that of Ranulph, son of Roger de Maresey,
of a certain part of Land and Meadow in Hocton, with the water of Hiddell, as
far as that Land extended it self; that of Hugh Fitz-Raph of all his Demesne in
Kirketon, Wilegby, Walesby, and Bestorp; of William, son of (or Fitz-) William,
Land which they held in Bestorp, of John Burdon in Maplebek; that of Elias de
Whitchurch, and Idonia his wife of three Bovats in Kelum; that of Thomas de
Rolleston of Land in Kelum; that of Lanceline de Stocks, and Amicia his wife,
of the moiety of the Manor of Albeney; that of Hugh Folenfant, and Richard
Folenfant, of certain Lands in Moretone; that of Robert, son of Waltheof de
Morneshalle, of the moiety of the Town of Brithrithefeud.

John de Vescy made also a Deed of Confirmation to Thomas de Stayngrene, Mon.
Angl. vol. 1. p. 849.
Abbat of Rufford, etc. of eight Bovats in Roderham, and the whole Demesne of
his whole Manor of Roderham, with all the Appurtenances. and the Advowson of
the Mediety of the Church of that Manor; with the Homage and Service of Thomas
de Furnivalle and his heirs; for Land which William de Vescy, father of him the
said John, gave to William de Furnivall, Uncle of the said Thomas in Roderham;
and the Service of William de Cantelup, for Lands which the said William de
Vescy gave him in the said Manor; and with all the right he could have in the
Tenements which Hugh Frassell of Roderham, sometime Parson of the Church of
Penyeston, held of the Fee of the said John de Vescy in Roderham; and with the
Homage of Will. Lovel, son of Will. Lovel, for the Tenement which he held of him
in Roderham, and the Mill of the same Town; and the Homage and Service of the
heir of John de Lexington, for the Land which was sometimes Raph Tillyes, with
the Lordship of half the Market, and Fair, and the Homages, and Services, etc.
of the Freeholders in Roderham; except the Homage of John de Dayvill, for the
Tenement which Thomas de Dayvill held in Anstan, and the Homage of Nicholas de
Lyvet, for the Fee which he held of him in Hoton near Roch Abbey.

Raph Tilly forfeited the moiety of the Manor of Roderham to King Henry the
third, who granted it to John de Lexington, Pl. de Quo war. apud Ebor. 21 E. 1.
to. 6. in dorso.
and he gave it to the Abbey of Rufford.

The Abbat of Rufford, 13 E. 1. Chart. 13 E. 1. m. 78. and 80.
had Free Warren in Rufford, Cratela, Eykering, Almton, Rohagh, Parklathes,
Kirketon, Tuxford, Foxholes, and Morton, in the County of Not. and in Brampton
and Brithefeild in Darbishire; and in Roderham and Carlecotes in Yorkshire.

Alice the Countess confirmed Earl Gilbert her fathers gift, and so did Earl
Simon her husband, Regist. de Ruff. p. 2.
of all his Land in Rufford, with all the Appurtenances, and namely thirty
Acres of Meadow upon the Bank of Trent, and his Land of Cratela, etc. as in
Wellagh, and other places is noted already.

In the year of our Lord 1159. there was an agreement made between the Abbat of
Rufford, Ib. p. 7.
and Thomas, son of Paul (or Thomas Paul) Canon of York, at the Feast of St.
Michael, in the presence of Roger, Archbishop of York, and Elred Abbat of
Rievalls, and others: That the Church of Rufford, which appeared to be a Mother
Church, should pay no more Tenths after the death of the said Thomas, to whom
the Abbat of Rufford gave ten Marks for the Tenths of ten years, and was to pay
a Mark of Silver yearly during his life; which was also ratified by the said
Archbishop Roger and his power Legantine.

The House and Site of the Abbey of Rufford, with all buildings and Lands
belonging to it, viz. three hundred and four Acres of Arable, and six hundred
and forty of Pasture, and sixty of Meadow, and three Water-Mills, and the whole
Fishing were by Indenture, under the great Seal of the Court of Augmentations,
bearing date Mar. 20.28 H. 8. Par. 1. pat. 29 H. 8.
demised to Sir John Markham, Knight, and his Assigns, for twenty one years
from the Feast of St. Michael then next following, paying 22l. 8s. per annum.
But King Henry the eighth by his Letters Patents bearing date October. 6. in the
twenty ninth year of his Reign, in consideration that by an Act of his
Parliament held at Dublin in the Kingdom of Ireland the first of May, in the
twenty eighth year of his Reign, the Castles, Lordships, Honors, Manors,
Hundreds, and Lands, etc. of George Earl of Shrowsbury and Waterford, within
that Kingdom, were settled on the Crown, and being unwilling to diminish the
state, honor and dignity of the said Earl, he granted the Site of Rufford and
all his Lordships, Manors, and Granges of Rufford, Ekering, Bildisthorp,
Warsop, Walesby, Allerton, Wellugh, Notingham, Almeton, Kirsale, Mapulbek,
Besthorp, Boughton, Kelham, Codington, Parkelathes, Kirketon, Sterthorpe, Est
Retford, Holme, Foxholes, Lytilborough, Rohagh, Southwell, and Morton, in this
County, and his Lordship of Rotherham, and Lands there and in Thurleston,
Charlecotes, and Wynleden in Yorkshire, with the Rectory and Patronage of the
Vicarage of Rotheram, and all his Lands in Brampton, Birchefeld, Abney,
Chesterfeld, Shirbroke, and Glossopdale in Derbyshire, with the Rectory of
Glossopdale, and Advowson of the Vicarage late belonging to the Abbey of
Basywark in Wales in the County of Flint, as they came to his hands, by reason
and pretext of a certain Act of dissolving certain religious Houses in his
Parliament begun at London November the third, in the twenty first year of his
Reign, and then adjourned to Westminster, and by diverse Prorogations continued
till Febr. 4. in the twenty seventh year of his Reign, with all their
Appurtenances; and Lands in Albourne, and Dudmandale alias Barton in
Leicestershire, late also belonging to Rufford; and all Lands wheresoever,
whereof Thomas Dancaster late Abbat of Rufford, was seized in right of his said
Monastery, all which were of the clear yearly value of 246l. 15s. 5d. sterling,
and no more, to the said Earl, his heirs and Assigns, for the tenth part of a
Knights Fee, and 46l. 15s. 5d. into the Court of Augmentations for tenths.

B.
Sir George Savile, son of Sir Henry Savile of Barrowby in Lincolneth (named in
Screveton and Sireston) married Mary, daughter of George Earl of Shrowsbury,
Grandchild of the said George, the Patentee to his first wife, by whom he had
Sir George Savile, Knight and Baronet, the husband of Anne, the daughter of Sir
William Wentworth of Wentworth Woodhouse, Baronet, and by her, Father of Sir
William Savile, Baronet, who married.... the daughter of Thomas Lord Coventry,
Lord Keeper in the time of King C. 1. by whom he had Sir George Savile,
Baronet, who much enlarged and adorned this place, and is since created
Viscount Halifax, by King C. 2. about 19 C. 2. he married the Lady Dorothy
Spenser, daughter of the Earl of Sunderland, and by her has sons, George and
William, and a Child or two more, as I remember; his second wife is Gertrud,
daughter of the Honorable William Pierpont: His brother Henry Savile is of the
Bedchamber to his Majesty C. 2. and his sister Anne was married to the Lord
Windsor.

This place has often entertained King James, and King Charles his son, being
very pleasant and commodious for hunting in the Forest of Shirewood. There was
some distance from the house toward the South a pleasant large pool, through
which the little River Maun had its course, which is now confined to its
Channel, and carried along the top of the Bank or Damm, and the place of the
Pool made dry ground, and thereby more Profitable, Pleasant, and Healthful than
before, though some still think otherwise.

Clipston.
BEfore the Norman Conquest Osberne and Vlsi had two Manors in Clipstune,
which paid the Geld for one Car. The Land was two Car. There afterward Roger
de Busli had in Demesne one Car. and an half, Lib. Dooms.
and twelve Vill. and three Board. having three Car. and an half, and one Mill
of 3s. Wood, by places Pasturable one leu. long, and one broad. In the
Confessors time the value was 60s. when the Book of Doomsday was made in Kings
Williams 40s.

This it seems shortly after became the Kings Demesne, for in 5 Steph. Jordan,
Rot. Pip. 5 Steph.
son of (or Fitz) Alan, who ought Cs. of the Farm of the past year, either he
or his Father the said Alan, gave account of Cs. of the Farm of the Manors of
Clipeston, but Osbert Sylvan (the then Sheriff) was to pay it for him.

William Fitz-Ranulf Sheriff in 20 H. 2. Pip. 20 H. 2.
gave account of the Assize of the Kings Demesnes, and amongst the rest
Clipston 32s. 8d.

William Briewerre 2 Ioh. Pip. 2 Ioh.
gave account of the year past, and of the Costs of carrying the Kings Bacons
from Clipeston to Northampton, xs. and xd. and to the Chaplain of Clipeston,
20^. of his Livery, from the Sunday next before the Feast of St. Nicholas,
until the Sunday next before the Feast of the Ascension, by the Kings Writ, and
likewise 20s. to him from that time till St. Michael.

The Township of Maunsfeld 2 Ioh. Pip. 2 Ioh.
ought fifteen Marks for having their Pasture in the Parc of Clipeston, as they
were wont to have in the time of King Henry (2.) father of that King (John)
before it was enclosed to make a Park.

Philip Minekhan 9 Ioh. had the houses of Clipeston, Pip. 9 Ioh.
with the Hays, and with the Custody belonging to them, and 20l. Land which
were Vi'on de Fontibus, which before were committed to Galf. Georz, and Rich.
de Lessington, so that he might only have 100s. to sustain him in the Kings
service, and might answer the King concerning the residue, and concerning the
Town of Clipston; but the Sheriff answered for Clipston, and the said Philip
ought to answer for Carleton and Derleton, for the half year, as the Sheriff
said.

Clipston was burned it seems and repaired again before 5 H. 3. Claus. 5 H. 3.
m. 7.


The King, 31 H. 3. Orig. 31 H. 3. m. 1.
committed to Robert le Vavassur Sheriff of Nottingham, the Manors of
Derlington, Retford, Clypston, and Ragenhall, to be kept as long as it should
please the King. Nom. Vill.
His Grandchild King Ed. 2. Mar. 5. in the ninth year of his reign, directed
his Writ from Clypston, to the Sheriff of Nottingham and Derb. for making that
Record called Nomina Villarum and earundem Domini, in which Clypston was
returned half a Villa, and the King Lord of it.

The Hunters (or Hunts-men) of the Town of Kings Clipston 1 E. 3. Claus. 1. E.
3. par. 2. m. 1. dorso.
had Common of Pasture there, for all sorts of Creatures and their Cattle,
except for Goats, in the Kings Hay of Berkeland, in recompense of the like
Chase, which they had before in the soil of the Park of Clipston, at the
enclosure of it, and also they might have Fugeria and Folia (which one Forest
book calls Gorstegrasse and Leaf) in the said Park of Clipston, paying 13s.
4d. per an.

Clipston Manor and Park 2 E. 3. Claus. 2 E. 3. m. 26. and m. 16. and Rot.
sin. m. 6. and Claus. 3 E. 3. m. 33.
were by the King committed during his pleasure, to be kept by Robert de C.....
so that he should answer to the Exchequer for the issues, and keep the Manor
in repair at the Kings cost and the Parcpale at his own, receiving for the
reparation of the said Pale Timber of the dry Wood there, and taking every day
for himself, the Parcars, and makers of the said Pale 7d.

Galfr. de Kneveton 16 July, 22 H. 6. Par. 2. Pat. 22 H. 6. m. 2.
was made Keeper of the Castles at Nottingham and Rokingham, and the Manor of
Clipston, and the Lodge of Beskwode in Shirewood, for life.

This Manor with Maunsfeild and Lyndeby, was settled on Edm. Earl of Richmond,
and Jasper Earl of Pembroke, in the time of H. 6. Esc. 3^ H. 6.
and in 5 H. 8. Par. 2. pat. 5 H. 8. m. 18.
with others, on Tho. Howard Earl of Sucrey, at his creation into the dignity
of Duke of Norfolk, Febr. 1. but came again to the Crown, as in Maunsfeld may
be noted. Edward the sixth passed it to John Earl of Warrewike, B.
and Henry Sydney, as the possessions of Jasper Duke of Bedford, It came again
to the Crown, and there remained till King James his time, that it was passed
to the Feoffees of Gilbert Earl of Shrewsbury. It is now the inheritance of his
Grace William Duke of Newcastle, and within the Parish of Edenestowe: there is
scarcely any ruins left of the Kings old house, except a piece of a thick
Stone Wall, and the Park is also cleared of all the Gallant Oaks wherewith it
was well furnished before the late Rebellion.

The Jury, in 10 E. 3. Esc. 10 E. 3. n. 3.
said that Peter Witheberd of Kings Clipston, had a Mess. and one Bov. in
Warsop, and two Mess. and two Bov. and an half in Kings Clipston, by the
service of 2s. 6d. per annum, according to the Custom of the Manor of Kings
Clipston of the ancient Demesne of the Crown, and that Will. Wyththeberd was his
son and heir, and above thirty years old. William Witheberd, son and heir of
William, 7 R. 2. Esc. 7 R. 2. n. 133.
was found to have aliened a Bovat, and two Mess. to John Wytheberd his
brother, without the Kings license, which John did no service.

The Jury, 15 R. 2. Esc. 15 R. 2. par. 1. n. 84.
said that the Town of Clipston in several parcels of accounts of Collectors of
fifteenths, etc. appeared ever to have been Taxed amongst the Buroughs and
Demesnes of the King. John Bever about 11 H. 4. held (...) Toft and Bovat in
Clipston, in free-Bur^^^^ by the service of 12d. per annum, as parcel of 4l.
10s. per annum, the Farm of the Town of Clipston.

There are Customary Tenants in Clipston, though not quite in ancient Demesne.

Edenstow. Thoresby. And Carberton.
OF the Kings great Manor of Maunesfeild, there was in Edenestow, one Car. ad
Geld. The Land two Car. Lib. Dooms.
There was a Church a Priest, and a Berue, four Board. had one Car. Pasture Wood
half a leu. long, and half a leu. broad. In Carberton two Car. In Turesbye fix
Bovats.

The men of Edenstowe 9 H. 3. Fin. 9 H. 3. m. 4.
had the Pasture and Hays of the King Billehag and Bircland. The men of
Edenestowe 14 H. 3. Lib. 14 H. 3. m. 2.
make Fine with the King for having the Kings Pasture there, which nevertheless
they could not have, because it was to the hurt (or Nuisance) of the Forest. In
the Nom. Vill. 9 E. 2. Edenstow and Carberton answered for a whole Villa, Nom.
Vill.
whereof the King was Lord. There was license granted 1 E. 3. Par. 1. pat. 1.
E. 3. m. 18.
to H. E. that he might take away houses in the Town of Edenstowe, within the
Forest of Shirewood, and carry the Timber thereof out of the Forest, without
hindrance from the Foresters.

The Dean and Chapter of the Church of St. Mary of Lincoln, 3 E. 3. Quo War. 3
E. 3. rot. 1. in dorso.
said that they were Parsons of the Churches of Edenestow and Orston, and by
reason of the Rectory of the said Churches had diverse Tenants within those
Towns belonging to their Parsonages, and whereof they said that they and all
their Predecessors time out of mind, had had view of Frank-pledge in Edenstow,
and amends of the Assize of Bread and Ale broken of their Tenants in the said
Town, and likewise of their Tenants in Orston.

Hen. de Edenstow, Clark, and Rob. his brother, gave their Manor of North
Muscam, to the Priory of Newstede, (as in those places is shown:) and the said
Henry about 14 E. 3. Esc. 14 E. 3. n. 43.
was also giving one Mess. and one Bovat of Land, with the Appurtenances in
Edenestowe, to two Chaplains in the Church of the blessed Mary of Edenestow,
which Mess. and Bovat were held of the Church of Lincoln, for 14d. per annum,
and there remained over to the said Henry ten pounds Land in Burton and
Stretton, held of the Church of York, by the service of 6d. per annum.

The Town of Edenstow, within the Forest of Shirewode, 4 H. 4. Par. 2. pat. 4
H. 4. m. 29.
had confirmation of a Fair there to last every year for two days, and likewise
in 13 H. 6. and 13 H. 6. m. 14.


The Hospitals of St. Leonard in Chesterfeld, 12 H. 3. Claus. 12 H. 3. m. 14.
were to have two Oaks delivered in the Kings Wood of Carberton, toward the
repair of their Chapel.

The men of Carberton complaining against the Abbar of Welbek, Ex Coll. Sa.
Roper, Ar. Petitiones in princip. Regni E. 2. ad Consil. Regis.
said their Town was ancient Demesne, where no writ was current, except the
Kings small Writ Close, by which they could get no remedy against the said
Abbat, except by petition, which therefore they did exhibit in French, by the
Command of Wanter de Langeton, late Treasurer of England, to the Kings Counsel
at Northampton, within fifteen days of St. Michael, in the beginning of the
Reign of King E. 2. wherein it was shown, that the said Abbat in Welbek had
enclosed a certain parcel of Land called Carberton Storth, of twenty four Acres
of Arable Land, lying near the Gate of the said Abbey, in prejudice of the said
Town, because they were wont to have Common therein, and to the disherison of
the King, etc. and likewise the said Abbat stopped ^he Course of the running
water, by making Damms and fitting it to his house, etc. and likewise enclosed
two places of Wood in Rumwood in the Forest of Shirewood, where they also were
wont to Common, etc. The Counsel ordered the parties to follow the suit in the
Kings Bench, and the petitions were delivered to Roger le Brabazon and his
fellow Justices, before whom the Abbat easily answered, the soil was his own,
etc.

The Royalties and Wastes of Edenstowe and Carberton, are the inheritance of his
Grace the Duke of Newcastle by Agreement, his servant Captain John Mazine has
builded at Carberton, and Mr..... Moseley had a seat there, whose daughter and
heir is married to Mr...... Flower.

Half of Thouresby went with Peverell Thorp, as in that place will be shown.
Thoresby was the Earl of Kingstons, B.
and is now one of the places of residence of the Honorable William Pierpont,
his second son.

The Vicarage of Edenstowe was 12l. It Is now 14l. value in the Kings Books,
Mss. I. M.
and the Patronage remains with the Dean and Chapter of Lincoln.

Allerton. Alreton.
THis is also in the Parish of Edenestowe, yet there were in Alreton two
Manors, one of the Fee of Roger de Busli, where before the Conquest Alwold
paid for two Bov.. to the public Tax. The Land one Car. There in King Williams
time five Sochm. and one Vill. had two Car. and one Mill of 6s. 8d. Lib. Dooms.
The value of this continued as in the time of the Confessor 20s. The other of
the Fee of Gislebert de Gand, which was one Wades before the Conquest, and
answered for five Bov.. to the Geld. The Land three Car. There William the Man
(or Tenant) of Gislebert had one Car. six Sochm. on two Bov. of Land, and three
Vill. having six Car. There were two Mills 16s. Pasture Wood one leu. long,
four qu. broad. In the time of King Edward the Confessor this was 40s. value,
when the Survey was taken in the Conquerours 30s.

The Fee of Gaunt in this and diverse other places became the Inheritance of
the Constables of Chester, as in Knesale may be seen, and accordingly descended
to the Earl of Lancaster, who in the Record of Nom. Vill. 9 E. 2. is returned
Lord of this place. Nom. Vill.


The Jury, 4 E. 3. Esc. 4 E 3. n. 38.
said that Edward Earl of Kent held when he died the Manor of Allerton under
Sherewode of the Honor of the Castle of Donnington, and in 26 E. 3. Esc. 26 E.
3. n. 54.
they said that John Earl of Kent left it with the Wapentaks of Risecliff and
Plumtre on the night following St. Stephens to Ioane his sister and heir, wife
of Thomas de Holland Chr. and in 35 E. 3. Esc. 35 E. 3. par. 1. n. 104.
the Jury likewise said that the said Thomas held at his death, of the
Inheritance of Ioane his wife, 40s. Rent here, and a Water-Mill, and that
Thomas his son was his heir. In 9 R. 2. Esc. 9 R. 2. n. 54.
they found that Ioane Princess of Wales died seized of this Manor and the
Wapentag of Plumtre, and 10s. Rent in Rodington, which Rent was held of the
King as Earl of Chester, and parcel of the Castle and Manor of Donyngton, and
that Thomas Holand, son and heir of the said Ioane, was then above thirty years
old. And in 10 H. 4. they said that Edmund de Holland Earl of Kent held when he
died in Fee tail, the Manor of Allerton in Sherwood, and that Edmund, son of
Alianor Countess of Marth, Ioane Duchess of York, Margaret, wife of John Earl
of Somerset, Alionor, wife of the Earl of Sar. and Elizabeth, wife of John
Nevill, were his heirs. And in 1 H. 6. Esc. 1 H. 6. p. 324.
they found that this Elizabeth had a son and heir called Raph Nevill then
above sixteen years old, and that she enfeoffed Sir John Etton Chr. Edmund
Hastings Chr. and others in this Manor. And in 4 H. 6. Esc. 4 H. 6. n. 36.
the Jury said that Ioane, who had been wife of John Gray Chr. died seized in
Fee Tail of the third part of 35s. 8d. Rent issuing out of this Manor, and
that Henry Gray her son and heir was then seven years old and more. In 5 H. 6.
Esc. 5 H. 6. n. 52. 16 H. 6. n. 34.
they said that Raph Earl of Westmerland had this Manor, and in 16 H. 6.
Further I cannot yet trace this Seignory.

William de Sutton, and Matilda his wife, Regist. de Ruff. p. 88
gave to the Monastery of Rufford Raph Viel of Alreton their Native (or
Villain) with his whole Sequel, and all his Chattels. Robert de Sutton (son of
that William) 2 E. 1. Esc. 2 E. 1. n. 17.
left Richard de Sutton his son and heir eight years old (as in Sutton upon
Trent, Eykring, and Warsop, etc..) who held the moiety and a part more of the
Town of Allerton of the Earl of Lincoln, by doing Suit at his Court at
Allerton from three weeks to three weeks. By a Fine, 18 E. 2. Fin. lev, Trin.
18 E. 2.
John de Sutton (son of that Richard) passed the Manors of Aykeringe and
Alverton under Shirwode, and the Advowsons of the Churches, to Hugh le
Despenser Earl of Winchester and his heirs.

The Jury, 17 E. 1. Esc. 17 E. 1. n. 24.
said that Robert de Marcham (the other sharer of the Lord Lexingtons Lands)
held in Allerton a Water-Mill, and Lands there of William, son of Thomas
(Fitz-William) paying to the Master of the Hospital of Nusham 14s. per annum.
And in 25 E. 1. Esc. 25 E. 1 n. 52.
they found that John de Longvilers (one of the heirs of the said Robert, as in
Turford may be seen) held the moiety of the Water-Mill and Natives (or
Bondmen) in Allerton of William Fitz-William. Sir William de Bevercotes,
Knight, and William de Marcham of Laxton were of this Jury, at the taking the
Inquisition.

Sir John Markham to his third wife had Anne, B.
one of the four sisters and heirs of John Strelley, Esquire, the relict of
Richard Stanhope of Rampton, by whom she had only a daughter Saunchia, married
to John Babington, but to Sir John she brought sons William Markham of Okeley
her eldest, who married Elizabeth, one of the daughters of Sir Edward
Mountague, by whom he had only two daughters: she was the relict of Richard
Cave; and Thomas Markham of Allerton her second son, Standard Bearer to Queen
Elizabeth's Band of Pensioners, who married Mary, daughter and heir of Rice
Griffin of Dingley slain at Norwich, by whom he had Sir Griffin Markham
Knighted at Roan, but at length banished, and very many other children, of
which George Markham of Allerton married Judith, daughter and heir of John
Withernwick of Claxby in the County of Lincoln, Esquire, by whom he had Thomas
Markham of Allerton slain, (or fighting on the Kings part driven with many
others into the Trent and drowned) at Gainsburgh in the year 1643. being a
Colonel and much lamented.

But besides Sir Griffin, and his brother George before named, Thomas Markham
of Allerton, son of Sir John, had other sons, viz. Robert Markham who died at
Rome; William, Ex Copia visitat. 1614.
and John who had to wife Mary, daughter of Sir Robert Markham of Cottham,
whose children died without issue; Thomas and Charles Twins. Charles had a
daughter Anne the wife of Thomas Waterton of Waterton in Yorkshire, and of Sir
John Middleton, Knight. This Thomas Markham had four daughters married, viz.
Elizabeth to Ed. Sheldon of Beoly, Anne to Sir Francis Smith of Wotron, Jane to
Sir John Skinner of Castle Comps, and Marg. to Nicolas Longford of Longford,
His son George Robertus Markham de Cottham miles.-Joana fill. Egidii D'aubency
and Mariae secundae uxoris ejus, cujus haer. ipsa suit. Johannes Markham,
miles-Alicia fill. Willielmi Skypwith, militis. Johannes Markham de Cottham
miles, ob 1558. 1 Eliz.-Anna fill. Georg. Nevil mil. ux. 1.-Margeria fill. Rad.
Langford, mil. ux. 2.-Anna fill. and cohaer Joh.Strelley, Ar.-Ric. Stanhop mar.
1. Johannes Markham ob. ante patrem.- Willielmus Markham- Tho. Markham de
Allerton.-Maria fill. and haer. Ricei Griffin. Griffin Markham miles, exul.-Anna
fill. Petri Roos de Laxton, Ar. Georg. Markham de Allerton.-Judith fill. and
haer. Joh. Withernwik. Tho. Markham de Allerton occisus apud Gainsburgh
1643.-Ursula fill. Will. Clopton de Sledwick in Episc. Dunelm.-Henricus Nevill
alias Smith de Holt, marit. 2. Tho. Markham de Allerton Ar. aet. 30. 1670.-Anna
fill. Will. Nevill alias Smith fill. Henrici praedicti de Holt. Thom. Markham
aet. 5. 1670. Maria. Ursula. Anna.

Georgius Markham de Wirkshop Lodge, aet. 54. 1670.-Eliz. fill. Marmad.
Tunstall. Georgius aet. 11. 1670. Kath. Eliz.

Rob. Will. Joh. Thom. Carol.
Saunchia ux. Johannis Babington.



had, besides his eldest son Thomas before spoken of, a son called George
Markham of Wirksop Lodge, who married Elizabeth, daughter of Marmaduk Tunstall
of Wycliff and Hutton, and by her had a son George, and two daughters Katherin
and Elizabeth; his sister was Katherin, and seems to be almost twenty years
younger than he; his elder brother the said Thomas Markham when he was slain
left a son of his own name about three years old by his wife Vrsula, one of the
daughters of William Clopton of Sledwick in the Bishopric of Durrham, after
his death married to Henry Nevill alias Smith of Holt, to whom she brought
Henry, Anne, and Vrsula. Her son Thomas Markham now of Allerton married Anne,
daughter of William Nevill alias Smith, son of the said Henry her husband, on
whom he has begotten a son of his own name also, and three daughters, and may
have more.

The owners of Ollerton in 1612. are set down to be the Lord Vaux, Lib. libert
ten.
George Markham, Gent. Thomas Stirrup of Normanton, Gent. James Bacon of
Wesley, William Walheade, Mary Huddleston, widow, William Yarwood, Robert
Hooton, Robert Bullock.

Boughton. Bucton.
THis Town as Alreton was of two Fees, viz. G. de Gands, and Roger de Buslies,
who had that Manor in Bucheton which Eduin had before the Conquest, and
answered the Geld for three Bov. The Land of it being then three Car. There the
said Roger had in Demesne one Car. and two Vill. and one Board. with one Car. or
Plow. Lib. Dooms.
In King Edward the Confessors time this was 20s. value, in King Williams when
the Survey was taken 10s. Another Manor like this before the Norman Invasion
Vlf had, which likewise defended it self to the Dane-geld for three Bov. the
Land being also three Car. There Gislebert de Gand had three Vill. one Sochm.
one Board. having three Car.. there was four Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood three
qu. long, and three broad: The value as the former 20s. in King Edward, and
10s. in King Williams time.

Aeliz, the daughter of William de Bucton, Regist. de Blid. p. 90.
gave to the Monastery of Blithe (which the said Roger de Busli Founded) the
Advowson of the Church of Bucton, and three Bovats of Land which Alan de Bucton
held, and three Acres of her great Meadow called Bradeng, lying between the Town
and the water called Fulbek, and Common in every Pasture where her own Cattle
fed; she had been wife of John Burdon Lord of Maplebek, as in that place is
noted. John Burdon, son and heir of Alice de Bucton, Ib. 92.
confirmed his mothers gifts in the Court of Tikhill 1224. to the said
Monastery. Basilia de Bucton, the daughter of John Burdon had a Culture or Wong
of forty Acres given her by Aeliz her mother in the Fields of Bucton, which lay
between the Field of Walesby, and the Land of the Monks of Ruford, and
stretched from the way which is between Allerton and Walesby, to the way which
is between Allerton and Bucton, which she gave to the Prior and Monks of Blyth;
and Amabilia her daughter, who had been wife of Hyngram Bluet confirmed it.
John Burdon, son of John Burdon, confirmed also the gifts of Aeliz his
Grandmother, and Basilia his Aunt.

Regist. de Blid. p. 129.
William, son of William de Mering in Bucton, by his Deed dated at Bucton the
Friday after Sr. Thomas day, 17 E. 1. granted to the Prior and Covent of Blithe
to pay to Sir John Burdon, and Matilda his wife, and their heirs 2s. per annum,
which they were wont to pay to him; and the Prior and Covent paid the 2s. Ib.
92.
Rent accordingly to the said Sir John Burdon, and Matilda his wife, and the
heirs begotten between them, by the said Assignment of William, son of William
de Mering in Bucton. William, son of Eudo de Bucton, gave to the Monks of Blyth
one Acre and an half lying between their Land, and the Land of Robert de
Lexinthon, which he bought of John de Malesours, and Ivetta his mother.

There was a Fine at Leicester the Thursday after the Feast of St. Andrew, 10
Ioh. Fin. lev. 10 Ioh.
between Walter, son of Ivo, Petent, and William Malesour, and Ivetta his wife,
Tenants, of five Bovats of Land, with the Appurtenances in Bucton, whereof they
called Alice de Bucton to warrant, who came and called John Burdon to warrant,
who came and did warrant, viz. the said Walter remised all his right to the
said William and Ivetta, and the heirs of the said Ivetta.

John Burdon held four Bovats of Land in Demesne in Buketon of the Honor of
Tikhill by the service of one Horse, Test. de Nev.
and one Sack when the Constables (of Chester) ought to go into Wales in the
Kings Service. He held half a Knights Fee in Bucton of the Earl of Lincoln of
the old feoffment.

The Jury, 11. R. 2. Esc. 11 R. 2. n. 7.
found that Thomas de Bekering (mentioned in Tuxford) held some Rent of Assise
in Bughton of the heir of John Burdon of Maplebek, by the Service of a Rose per
annum.

This Manor came with Maplebek to the Family of Markham, as in that and other
places may be noted.

Robert Wood, and Nicolas Blunston, 8 Eliz. claimed against Thomas Markham,
Pasch. 8 Eliz. rot. 145.
Esquire, the Manor of Boughton, with the Appurtenances, and ten Mess. eight
Tofts, one Mill, one Dovecote, sixteen Gardens, three hundred Acres of Land,
two hundred of Meadow, two hundred of Pasture, forty of Wood, one hundred of
Marsh, forty of Alders, and 30s. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Boughton,
Kirketon, and Wallesby, and called to warrant Robert Markham.

Ex Copia Rot. Auxil.
There was received in the time of Queen Elizabeth by the Collector of Thomas
Markham, Esquire, (of Allerton) for his Lands in Boughton, late Sir Robert
Markhams, Knight, and sometime Nicolas Burdons, held by the Service of three
parts of one Knights Fees, 2s. 2d. ob. dim. q.

By an Inquisition taken, 29 Oct. 38 H. 8. it appears that Michael Clarkeson
died 9 Oct. 38 H. 8. seized of Boughton Grange, Lib. 2. post mort. fol. 105.
and by Saunchia his wife had a son named John Clarkeson his heir aged sixteen
years May 22. then past. This Family had their most usual Residence at
Kirketon, as in that place may be seen.

Lib. libere ten.
The owners of the Towns of Houghton, Walesby, Willoughby cum Boughton 1612. are
thus set down, Sir John Hollys, Knight, Michael Clarkson, Gent. of Kirton,
Prebendary of Southwell, Richard Hurst of Walesby two Oxgangs, Mrs. Talbott one
Oxgang and an half, William Baker one Oxgang and an half, Richard Brown half
an Oxgang, John Walker the like, William Caede of Boughton an Oxgang and an
half, Anne Brown, widow, half an Oxgang, Richard Hooton, Thomas Stocks, James
Johnson, George Markham, Gent. three Tenements in Boughton.

Budby.
THere were in Buteby of the Soc of the Kings great Manor of Maunsfeld two
Carucats. B.
It still continues a Member of Maunsfeld, and consists of ancient Demesne
Copyholders of that Manor, and is within that Parish, and since the Forest got
the use of Lime is become a pretty Town.

Perlethorp. Peverelthorp.
THis Town is not thus named in Doomsday Book, howbeit there is of the Fee of
Roger de Busli a Town called Torpe, which I judge may be this, in which, before
the alteration made by King William the Conqueror, Lib. Dooms.
Thurstan and Vlmer had two Manors which answered the Geld or Tax as ten
Bovats. The Land was enough for three Plows (or three Car.) There Richard the
Man of Roger had four Car. and five Vill. and four Board. having two Car. and an
half, and seven Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood.... qu. long, and four broad. In
the time of the Confessor the value was 40s. in the Conquerours but 20. having
Soc in Glethorpe.

King Henry the second gave the Nuns of Haverholme 4l. Test. de Nev.
Land in Orston in exchange for the Manor of Peverelthorpe.

Thomas de Bussey, 9 H. 3. Pl. de Banc. Mic. 9 H. 3. to. 5. in dorso.
claimed against Robert de Veteriponte the Manor of Peverelthorpe, and the
moiety of the Manor of Turesby, whereof Vmfry de Bussey his father was seized
in Demesne in the time of Henry the second. Robert de Vipont, 10 H. 3. Pl. de
Banc Hill. 10 H. 3. to. 6.
answered to the like claim that he could not, nor ought to plead because the
King ought to warrant him that Land, and produced the Charter of King John,
which witnessed that he gave the said Robert that Land. In Easter Term
following Robert offered himself against Thomas de Bushey the fourth day, Ib.
Pasch. 10 H. 3. to. 9.
but he came not and was amerced, and Robert dismissed. This Robert de
Veteriponte married Idonia, Pl. coram Rege Mich. 4 H. 3. to. 1. Ebor.
the daughter and heir of John, son and heir of Richard, son and heir of
Jordan, son and heir of Ernald, brother of Roger de Bully (or Busli) whose only
son Roger died without issue in the time of Henry the first, and in her right
therefore, 4 H. 3. claimed the Castle and Town of Tikhill against Alice
Countess of Augi or Ewe, who in 14 H. 3. Pl. de Banc. Mich. 14 H. 3. to. 28.
Leicest.
was found to be daughter of Henry, son of John, son of Henry, son of Beatrix,
sister and heir of Roger de Buylly, who died without issue in the time of H. 1.
But they agreed, as in Stanford upon Sore is noted, before that time by the
Fine in 6 H. 3. Fin. lev. Hill. 6 H. 3.
concerning Tikhill Castle and Town, for six Knights Fees to the said Robert
and Idonea, whereof part was in Peverelthorp.

Roger de Clifford had the Custody of Isabella, the elder daughter and coheir,
and Roger de Leyburne of Idonia, the younger daughter and coheir of Robert de
Veteri Ponte [son of John (or Ivo) son of the said Robert and Idonia] as
appears by a Partition made between them, 52 H. 3. The King, 11 E. 1. The
Baronage of Engl. p. 349. vol. 1. Ex Coll. St. Lo Knivet. D. 190. Pl. cor. Rege
apud Acton Burnelli. l Octab. S. Mich. 11 E. 1. to. 2. in dorso.
by John le Fawkener claimed against Roger de Leyburne, and Idonia his wife,
and Isabell, who had been wife of Roger de Clifford, the Manor of
Peverilsthorp, but upon producing Kings John's Charter bearing date the twenty
sixth day of May in the eighth year of his reign, made to Robert de
Veteriponte; ancestor of Idonia and Isabella, they recovered it against the
King. The Jury, 12 E. 1. Esc. 12 E. 1. n. 17.
said that Roger de Leyburne held the Manor of Peverelthorp of the inheritance
of Idonia his wife, and diverse others in several Counties, and that John his
son and heir was then four years old.

There was a Fine levied at York 30 E. 1. Fin. lev. ap. Ebor. Mic. 30 E. 1.
between John de Crumbwell, and Idonia his wife, Quer. and Gilbert de
Ellesfeld, Deforc. whereby the Manors of Kymbreworth in Yorkshire, of Eyworth
in Bedfordshire, and the moiety of Wyntreslowe in Wiltshire, and Peverelthorp
in this County, were settled on the said John and Idonia, and the heirs of
their bodies, remainder to the right heirs of Idonia. John de Crumbwell 2 E. 2.
Chapter 2 E. 2. n. 49.
had free warren in Malteby, Peverelsthorp, and Stavely. (Darbysh.) The Jury
found it no damage, 7 E. 3. Esc. 7 E. 3. n. 36.
if he gave two Acres in Penreth in Cumberland to the Priory there, and that
there remained over to him this Manor, which with Thuresby in 9 E. 2. answered
for half a Villa, Nom. Vill.
whereof the King and the said John were returned Lords. The Jury, 8 E. 3. Esc.
8 E. 3. n. 66.
said that Idonia de Leyburne held when she died the Manor of Peverelthorp
jointly with her husband John de Crumbwell, by reason of the Fine before noted,
of the honor of Tikhill, and that here was a certain Capital Mess. two hundred
Acres of Arable Land, twenty of Meadow, etc.

Edward le Despenser in 10 E. 3. Ex lib. mag. de fin. fol. 198. Mich. 10 E. 3.
was Tenent of the Lands which were Idonia de Leyburnes, Niece, and one of the
heirs of Ric. son of John, and gave for the relief of the said Idonia,
concerning the moiety of the fourth part of her inheritance, viz. for this
Manor, and the third part of Stavele in Darbyshire, etc. The Jury, 16 E. 3.
Esc. 16 H. 3. n. 49.
found that Edward le Despenser held this Manor jointly with Anne his wife,
and that Edward was his son and heir. In 4 H. 5. they said that Constance who
was late wife of Thomas sometime Lord le Despenser, Esc. 4 E. 5. p. 193 and p.
194.
held when she died in dower of the inheritance of Isabell the wife of Richard
Beauchamp of Burgavennie, Knight, the third part of two parts of the Manors of
Kimberworth and Bautre, etc. and the third part of the Manor of
Peverellesthorp.

It came to le Despenser and so to.... Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, B.
and so to Richard Nevill, and so to George Duke of Clarence, and to Richard
Duke of Gloucester, and after to the Crown; Sir John Byron had it, and Mr.
Lodge sometime an Alderman of London. It was the Earl of Kingstons, and is his
sons. It is within the Parish of Edenstowe, as Thouresby is.

The Manor of Perlethorp sometime parcel of the possessions of Edward, son of
George Duke of Clarence, and late in the Tenure of John Byron, Knight, with
Knesal and Clipston, etc. 16 November. 5 E. 6. Par. 7. pat. 5 E. 6.
were amongst other things granted to Ed. Fynes Lord Clinton, and Say, and his
heirs.

Walesby.
WAlesby was with Kirketon, or Schidrintune, and Wilgebi, of several Fees, as
in that place may be seen, viz. some of it the Kings Land, with Wilgebi, Soc to
Grymeston; some Roger de Buslies, Soc to Tuxferne; Lib. Dooms.
some Goisfrid de Halselins, Soc to Laxinton. In Walesby two Bov. ad Geldam.
The Land four Bov. There two Sochm. had one Car. Some of the Fee of Roger
Pictavensis, Soc to Hoctune, half a Bov. ad Geld. The Land four Bov. In the
Conquerours time waste, Soc.

In Kirkton and several other places may be discovered how this place in part
was disposed of amongst others.

Reginald Vrsell gave to the Monks of Rufford in pure Alms the service which
Robert de Lexinton was wont to do him, Regist. de Russ. p. 94.
for one Bovat of Land which he held of him in Walesby, viz. a pair of Spurs of
Iron, or 2d. yearly, with all Reliefs, Wards, Eschaets, etc.

William Lancelene gave to William, son of Eudo de Hibaldestan, with Cecilia
his daughter in Frank-marriage, and their heirs, Ib.
one Bov. of Land in Walesbi, with the houses and men, who held the Land, with
all their Children and Cattle, etc.

Raph de Wadeland in Walesby, gave to the Monks of Rufford, the whole service
which John de la Cnause of Walesby, William his brother, Ib.
William, son of Henry, Nicholas his brother, Robert D'aubeney, and Richard,
son of Philip, ought him for their Lands and Tenements they held of him in
Walesby, with Homage, Wards, Reliefs, Rents, Suits of Court, etc. Several
others gave to that Monastery, which made it the most considerable owner, and
with it at the dissolution did all these Lands pass to the Earl of Shrowsbury,
as in Rufford may be observed.

The Jury, 26 E. 1. Esc. 26 E. 1. n. 42.
said that Richard, son of Marion de Walesby, held in Walesby six Bovats freely
for 3s. 9d. per annum, of Thomas de Maresey Lord of Gamelston; some also went
with Houghton to Lungvilers, as in Tuxford may be seen.

The Church or rather Chapelry was as part of the Chapelry of Blyth, Regist. de
Novol. p. 106.
given by King John to Walter Archbishop of Roan and his successors, and the
Canons in that Church. It continued a member of the free Chapel of Tikhill, as
in Lowdham, and East Markham, etc. may be guessed.

William Davenport of Brom Hall, Esquire, in 1 H. 8. Hill. 1 H. 8. to. 147.
claimed against William Bradborne one Mess. eighty Acres of Land, twenty of
Meadow, sixty of Pasture, twenty of Wood, and 3s. 10d. Rent, with the
Appurtenances in Walesby, Wellawe, and Kyrton.

William Mason, and Owen Shipley, 9 Eliz. claimed against William Ingham two
Mess. two Tofts, Hill. 9 Eliz. to. 555.
two Gardens, fifty Acres of Land, etc. in Walesby and Willughby, who called
Robert Markham, Esquire.

Mss. I. M.
The Vicarage of Walesby was 8l. when the Abbat of Westminster was Patron: It Is
now 6l. 1s. 3d. value in the Kings Books, and the Lord Viscount Hallifax Patron.

Bevercotes.
I Find not this place in Doomsday Book, howbeit it is certain it was of the Fee
of Tikhill, for William de Bevercotes held a Knights Fee here of Alice Countess
of Ewe, as of that Honor, Test. de Nev.
and paid two Marks for it in the former part of the Reign of H. 3.

In the year 1224. William de Bevercotes confirmed to the Monks of Blyth all
the Tenements and gifts which Roger de Bevercotes, Regist. de Blid. p. 106.
and Robert his son (often written Bevereus) his Ancestors gave, except the
Foreign service of one Bovat of Land, which Robert del Eschaler held in
Bevercotes, Rogerus de Bevercotes- Robertus de Beverell, 11 H. 2.-Joana.
Willielmus de Bevercotes defunctus 11 Joh.-Helewisa. Willielmus de Bevercotes
1224. miles-Isabella. Willielmus de Bevercotes- Ex Coll. I. B. Ar.
Willielmus de Bevercotes, miles, 35 E. 1.- Johannes de Bevercotes, miles 4 E.
2.-Margeria. Willielmus de Bevercotes, 3 E.-Joana fill. Ric. Byron. Johannes de
Bevercotes sine prole-Elianora. Richard. de Bevercotes-Avicia. Johannes de
Bevercotes-Joanna. Richardus de Bevercotes-Anna fill. Joh. Holingworth.
Alexander de Bevercotes-Anna fill. and haer. Willielmi de Staynford. Willielmus
de Bevercotes-Margareta fill.....Serleby. Cuthbertus de Bevercotes-Barbara fill.
Will. Clerkson. Will. de Bevercotes-Cecilia fill. and cohaer. Joh. Constable de
Kinalton, mil. Cuthbertus de Bevercotes-Agnes fill. and haer. Rob. Holt de
Stubley. Willielmus de Bevercotes ob. juvenis s. p. Maria ux. Rutlandi Molyneux
s. p. Brigirta ux. Joh. Colly s. p.


Richard.-
Thom. de Bevercotes- Rich. Byrkets de Newark- Alicia fill. and haer. ux. Tho.
Massingberd.
Anthon. de Ordsall- Samuel-



Kath. ux. Robert. Cumberworth.
Richard. Thom.









and of one Bovat which Raph Rap held in Elkeslay, and except the Suit of his
Mill of the same men.

Robert de Bevrecote, 11 H. 2. Rot. Pip. 11 H. 2.
ought relief for one Knights Fee of the Honor of Tichehella. Robert de
Beverell, 9 R. 1. Tichehella. Pip. 9 R. 1.
is certified to owe 20s. for having his Land, viz. 12s. Land which was taken
into the Kings hands for Earl John. Robert de Beverell, 5 Ioh. Pip. 5 Ioh.
ought 10l. for his Fine and Relief of one Knights Fee which he held of the
Honor of Tikehull. Ioane who had been wife of Robert de Bevercote, 11 Ioh.
Pip. 11 Ioh.
gave account of xx. m. and one Palfrey for having such seisin of the Land,
with the Appurtenances, which the said Robert sold to her before he took her to
wife.

Simon, son of Fulc, 11 Ioh. Pip. 11 Ioh.
gave account of 30 m. for having the Land which was Robert Beverells in
Bevercote, and Milneton, and Marcham, which ought to descend to him from the
said Robert, as he said.

Ib.
Helewisa, who had been wife of William, son of Robert, 11 Ioh. gave account of
C. and xx. m. and iiii. Palfreys that so she might have peace of Peter Burgess,
to whom the King had commanded her to marry.

William de Bevercote, 35 E. 1. Pat. 35 E. 1. m. 25. Scot. 1, 2 and 3 E. 2. m.
3. n. 9.
was Chancellor of Scotland. King Edward the second in the beginning of his
Reign, sent to Robert Clifford his Warden, William de Bevercote his
Chancellor, and Mr. John de Weston his Chamberlain of Scotland, certain
Petitions exhibited by diverse men of that Country to him in Parliament at
Westminster, to the intent that the men might be before them the said Robert,
William, and John at Berwick upon Tweed within a Month of Easter, and be
recompensed out of the Kings Money and Victuals in those parts, according to
their several deserts and the Kings honor.

In the view of the Account of Walter de Goushull, and Reginald de Aslacton,
Collectors of Scurages, 28 E. 1. and afterward, it is said that Sir William de
Bevercotes held the Manors of Bevercotes, Markcham, Milneton, and Elkesley,
for one Knights Fee; and that in 4 E. 2. Visies Compori etc. 4 E. 2.
Sir John de Bevercotes held the said Manor, and so did when the view was
taken, and that the said Walter de Goushull, who was Collector for the Scurages
of Scotland, Nort. and Derb. 28, 31, and 34 E. 1. received, 31 E. 1. of John
Bevercotes 40s. for one Knights Fee in Bevercotes of the Honor of Tykhull.
William de Bevercotes, 3 E. 3. Quo war. 3 E. 3.
claimed to have Free Warren in all his Demesne Lands of his Manor of
Beverescote.

There was a Fine, 26 H. 6. Fin. lev. Trin. 26 H. 6.
between William Staynford, Quer. and Richard Bevercotes, Esquire, Def. of the
Manor of Bevercotes, with the Appurtenances, and of five Mess. one Mill, one
hundred sixty and eighteen Acres of Land, eighteen Acres of Meadow, and 14s. 5d.
Rent, with the Appurtenances in Milton, Houghton, Elkesley, Little Markham,
Great Markham, and Walisby, whereby they were settled on the said Richard for
life; remainder to Alexander Bevercotes, and Anne his wife, and the heirs which
he should beget on the body of the said Anne; remainder to the right heirs of
the said Richard. William Wilbram, and Ioane his wife, held the Premises
(except the Manor and one Mess. and 14s. 2d. Rent in Milton and Houghton)
during the life of Ioane.

There was an Inquisition taken, Lib. 2. post mort. sol. 197.
9 Ian. 3 E. 6. after the death of Cuthbert Bevercotes, who died the sixteenth
of October. then last past, and held the Manor of Bevercotes of the Honor of
Tykhill, Cuthbert Bevercotes, junior, was his Cousin and next heir, nine years
old the fourteenth of May then also last past.

There was a Fine, B.
8 Ioh. betwixt Raph Fitz-Simon, the Dean and Chapter of Rothomag, and William
de Bevercotes, touching the Advowson of the Chapel of Bevercotes.

The last heir Male Cuthbert Bevercotes died without issue Male, and having a
daughter called Mary, he married her to Rutland Molyneux, younger son to John
Molyneux, Esquire, son and heir to Sir Edmund Molyneux, one of the Judges of
the Common Pleas, and in marriage conveyed to them this Bevercotes, and his
other Lands. Rutland Molyneux sold Bevercotes to the Earl of Clare lately
deceased, and it is the Inheritance of the Earl of Clare that now is (his
Grandson.)

Houghton. Hoctone.
THere was a Manor in Hoctune which became the Fee of Roger Pictavensis, Lib.
Dooms.
and before the Conquest was Baldric's, who for it paid the Geld as twelve
Bovats. The Land then being four Car. but was waste when the Survey was taken
in the time of King William the first. There were sixteen Acres of Meadow,
Pasture Wood one qu. long, eight Perches broad. In the time of King Edward the
Confessor the value of this was 60. in the Conquerours 20^. it had Soc in
Walesby.

This came to be of the Fee of Lancaster, as the rest of Roger Pictavensis his
Lands in this County did.

The Family of Maresey (or Mattersey) held it, as in Gameleston is already
shown. Yet the Chapel was accounted to belong to Tikhill, as in many places may
be noted.

Henry Earl of Lancaster and Leicester, 3 E. 3. Quo war. 3 E. 3. to. 27.
claimed to have in the Towns of Bothumsell, Gameleston, Hoghton, Crophull, and
Holme, with all their Members which are of the Fee of Lancaster, return of all
Writs, Pleas of Withernam, view of Frankepledge, with all things which to view
belong, Waif and Stray, etc. and all Freedoms and Privileges, etc.

The Jury, 35 E. 3. Esc. 35 E. 3. par. 1. n. 121.
found that John de Lungvillers had in Houghton two Mess. and half a Car. of
Land, ten Acres of Meadow, and two Water-Mills, which he held of Nicolas
Monboucher by the Service of a Rose, and Thomas de Lungvilers was heir of the
said John, as in Tuxford is also shown.

Upon the River Idle lies Houghton in Common Appellation called Houghton
Lungvillers. B.
It came to Mallovell Lord of Rampton by the marriage of the heir of
Lungvillers, and afterward to Stanhope, in which Family it continued till John
Babington, and Saunchia his wife, daughter and heir of Richard Stanhope, sold
it to Sir William Hollis, or his father, great Grandfather to the Earl of
Clare, the Seat of which Family it still continues.

Anthony Stapleton, and John Stanley, Gent. 29 H. 8. claimed against John
Babington, Esquire, and Saunchia his wife, the Manors of Hoghton, Laxton, and
Egmanton, with the Appurtenances, and forty five Mess. etc. in Hoghton, Laxton,
Egmanton, Little Markham, Milneton, South Marneham, Walesby, Ellesley, South
Leverton, Cottum, and East Retford.

Sir William Hollys, and the Lady Elizabeth his wife, sister of Thomas
Scopeham, mentioned by Mr. Dugdale in his Book of Warwickshire at Coventry
Cross, I take to be the Parents of this William Hollys the younger, who became
the Willielmus Hollis, miles, Major Civit. London-Elizab. fill. Georgii Scopham.
Willielmus Hollis de Houghton, mil. 1 E. 6.-Anna fill. and haer. Joh. Densell
Serve. ad legem. Densel Hollis-Elianora fill. Edm. Dora. Sheffeild. Joh. Hollis,
mil. Com. Clare-Anna fill. Tho Stanhope, mil. Johannes Com. Clare-Eliz. fill. and
cohaer. Horat. Dom. Vere de Tisbury. Gilbertus Com. Clare-..... fill. Willielmi
Pierrepont.....: Dom. Houghton.

Densel creat. Dom. Hollis, 13 C. 2.

Gerv. Hollis-Franc. fill. and haer. Petri Frechevile. Frechevile Hollis-Eliz.
fill. and haer. Joh. Kingston de Grimsby. Gerv. Hollis magist. Supplic. libell.
C. 2. Frechevile Hollis, miles.



Joh. mil. Thom. mil.

Good Sir William, and married Anne, the daughter and heir of John Densill of
Cornwall, Sergeant at Law, by which Lady (for he after her death had also to
wife Jane, daughter of.... Grosvenor) he had Denzill Hollis, and Gervas, who
married Frances, daughter and heir of Peter Frechevile of Stavely in
Darbyshire, and Elizabeth his wife, only daughter of gentle Sir Gervas Clifton,
and Mary his wife, daughter of Sir John Nevill, by whom the said Gervas had
Frechevile Hollis, who married Elizabeth, daughter and heir of John Kingston of
Grimsby in Lincolneshire, which Frechevile Hollis was father of Gervas Hollis,
one of his Majesty's Masters of Requests, a great Lover of Antiquities, whose
son Sir Frechevile Hollis lost an Arm in the Dutch War at Sea, and since that
his life. Densill Hollys, son of Good Sir William married Elianor, daughter of
Edmund Lord Sheffeild of Butterwick, and by her had Sir John Hollys, created by
King James Baron of Houghton, July 9. in the fourteenth year of his Reign, and
in the twenty second year Earl of Clare, 2 November. Anne the daughter of Sir
Thomas Stanhope was his wife, and bore him John Earl of Clare, and Densill
Hollis, who married Dorothy, sole daughter and heir of Sir Francis Ashley,
Knight, of Dorchester, Sergeant at Law, by whom he has issue William, etc. He
was by this King, in the thirteenth year of his Reign, created Lord Hollis of
Ifeild in Sussex. His brother the said John Earl of Clare married Elizabeth,
eldest daughter and coheir of Sir Horatio Vere, Lord Vere of Tilbury, and by
her had Gilbert the present Earl, whose Countess is.... the daughter of the
Honorable William Pierrepont.

West Drayton.
OF Roger de Buslies Fee in Drayton Suen and Vlstan paid to the Geld for their
Manors, before the Conquest, as four Bov.. The Land whereof was two Car. There
afterward two Men of Rogers had one Car. eight Vill. one Board. having two Car.
Lib. Dooms.
There were three Mills 5s. and seven Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood three qu.
long, half a qu. broad. In the Confessors time this was 30s. value, in the
Conquerours when the Survey was made 17s. 4d. Here was then also of Roger
Pictavensis his Fee, which before the Conquest was Swains, who answered the Tax
for his Manor as two Bov. and one third. The Land being one Car. When Doomsday
Book was made Vsi (or Vlsi) held this of Roger Pictavensis, and had here half a
Car. and one Vill. one Board. with half a Car. Here were three Acres of Meadow,
Pasture Wood one qu. long, half a qu. broad. In the Confessors time the value
was 10s. then but 5s. 4d.

Thomas Fitz-William held of the Countess of Augi (or Ewe) in Clarborough,
Test. de N^v.
and West Drayton, three parts of one Knights Fee, as in Clarborough is noted;
this was Roger de Buslies, and the Family of Maresey held that of the Lancaster
Fee, as in Gameleston and other places may be observed.

Merriell Bridge.
THomas Fitz-William gave to the Church and Monks of Blithe the Rent of 40s.
sterling per annum, Regist. de Blid. p. 98.
viz. his moiety of the Mill of Mirihil Bridge, with the whole Suit, and all
things belonging to him by reason of that Mill, for 30s. and one half Mark
yearly, in which the Archbishop of York was held bound to him for himself and
his successors, for a Tenement which he held of him in Plumtrefeld, and one
Mark of Silver, which William, son of H. de Adwic, was held to him, for a
Tenement, which he held of him in Adwic, to be paid to the said Monks by the
hands of the said William, and his heirs every year at the Purification of the
blessed Mary, etc. Richard de Marcham obliged himself by Oath to pay 20s.
yearly to the Monks of Blithe for the moiety of the Mill of Mirihild Bridge,
Regist. de Blid. p. 84.
which they granted to him and his heirs, who were to do Homage and Relief, and
take their Oaths to pay the said 20s. per annum, whether Thomas Fitz-William
did warrant the Suit to the Mill or not, else the Prior to re-enter into the
possession of the whole Mill.

Murilde Brigg, 3 E. 3. Pl. Coron. and de Ragaman. 3 E. 3. to. 5. in dorso.
Circa finem magni bundelli.
was to be repaired, etc.

This Bridge lies at the entrance of this small Township in York Rode Way
betwixt Tuxford and Scroby; the Town is in the Parish of Elkesley, and the
Chapel esteemed part of Tikhill as the rest. In the beginning of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, B.
this Manor was the Inheritance of William Swift.

The owners of West Drayton in 1612. are set down thus, Lib. libere ten.
Robert Swift, Knight,.... Meverel, Esquire, Robert Brett, Richard Whitlam,
senior, Nicolas Whitmore, William Simpson, Richard Whitlam, junior.

Bothumsell. Bodmeschel. And Lound Hall.
IN Bodmeschell Earl Tosti had twelve Bovats for the Geld. The Land eight Car.
But after the Conquest the King had there five Vill. and one Board. with two
Car. and one Mill. 8s. and forty Acres of Meadow, Lib. Dooms.
Pasture Wood half a leuc long, and four qu. broad. In the time of Edward the
Confessor the value was 8l. when King William took the Survey but 60s. This
Manor had Soc in Elchesleig, both Mortunes, Babword, Oglesthorp, and
Ordeshale, Ranesby, and Sudershale, Raneby, Madrisseig, Lund, and Barneby.

In 9 H. 3. Pip. 9 H 3.
of the Scurage of Mungumery Raph de St. George, and Richard de Furnells, gave
account of two Marks concerning one Fee in Bodemescill. Richard de Furnell,
Regist. de Wellebec p. 230. Ib. 162.
son and heir of Robert de Furn. (which Robert was husband of Isabell, daughter
of Jordan de Chevercourt) released all his right in the Chapel of Bomeshull to
the Abbey of Wellebec, and acknowledged it to belong to the Mother Church of
Helkesley of that Abbeys Patronage. The same did Raph de St. George. The said
Raph and Richard are said to hold this Fee in Bodmescill of the King in Capite;
Test. de Nev.
but in a later Inquisition Robert de Furneus, and Robert de St. George, are
said to hold it of the Honor of Lancaster of the old feoffment. Robert (de St.
George) 18 H. 3. Pip. 18 H. 3. Lanc.
gave five Marks for relief of the Lands which Raph his father held in
Lancashire. The Jury, 30 H. 3. Es^. 30 H. 3. n. 36.
said that Robert de St. George, late husband of Petronilla, held in the Town
of Bodmeshill, with the Sok, two Car. of Land and an half of the King in
Capite, by the service of half a Knights Fee, whereof he had in Demesne fifty
Acres, etc. he held diverse Lands in Lincolneshire. Raph de St. George his son
and heir was then fifteen years old. The King that year, viz. 30 H. 3. Pip. 30
H. 3. Lanc.
committed the Custody of the Lands and heirs of the said Robert de St. George
to Robert le Norreis. In the Scurage of Wales, 39 H. 3. and 44 H. 3. Pip. 39 H.
3. and 44 H. 3.
Raph St. George, and Robert Furnels, paid 40s. for one Knights Fee here, and
one in Lancashire.

That moiety of this Manor which belonged to the Family of Furnalls, descended
with it, as in Carleton in Lindrick will be noted. The Jury, 25 E. 1. said that
Richard de Furnous, Esc. 25 E. 1. n. 51.
and Richard de Boselingthorpe, held a Knights Fee in Bothemsell of Edmund Earl
of Lancaster paying 10^. per annum to the Ward of that Castle. And in 19 E. 2.
Esc. 19 ^. 2. n. 77.
the Jury said that Richard de Boselingthorp held this Manor when he died by
the Law of England of the Inheritance of Isabella his quondam wife, and that
John de Boselingthorp was their son and heir, which John, 5 E. 3. Chapter 5 E. 3.
m. 33.
had a Charter of Fee Warren for Bothmeshull.

Raph Brasebrigg Chr. 19 R. 2. Fin. lev. Mich. 19 R. 2.
by one Fine passed the Manor of Bothumsell to John de Markham, and Elizabeth
his wife, and the heirs of John, and by another 110l. Rent in Bothumsell.
Robert Fletchar, and William Bull, 8 Eliz. claimed against William Swyft, Trin.
8 Eliz. to. 441.
Esquire, the Manors of Bothumsell, Vpton, and Elkesley, with the
Appurtenances, and twenty Mess. etc. in the said Towns, Little Morton, Morton,
Morton Grange, and Milneton, likewise free Fishing in the water of Idele in
Bothumsell, and Elkesley, and called to warrant Robert Markham, Esquire.

That which was Fitz-Hughes Lord of Carleton, was the Inheritance of....
Williamson, B.
son of Barnaby Williamson; so was Lound Hall which lies upon the River Idle
over against Houghton, but is in this Parish, and was formerly (if not mistaken
for Lound by Sutton)....Freestons, and before that Strelleyes, and of Tikhill
Fee.

Ed. Elwyse, and Nicolas Johnson, 7 E. 6. Hill. 7 E. 6. rot. 314.
claimed against William Elwyse two Mess. one Garden, one Orchard, sixty Acres
of Land, one hundred of Meadow, two hundred of Pasture, forty of Wood, and
Fishing in Idell in Hawton, Lound, who called to warrant Edward Thyrland.

William Nevile, and George Anderson, 6 Eliz. (...) 6. Eliz. m. 156.
claimed against Martin Smith the Manor of Hawghton Lownde, with the
Appurtenances, etc. who called to warrant John Elves, Gent.

Lib. libere (...).
The owners of the Towns of Elkesley with Bothumsell 1612. are thus set down,
Sir Robert Swifte, Knight, Barnabas Williamson, Gent. Edward Sharp, Nicolas
Sharp, John Marncham, John Beardsall, Thomas Sharp, Robert Brett.

(...). I. M.
The Vicarage of Bothumsell was eight Marks when the Abbat of Welbeck was
Patron, now I know not what it is.

The Predial Tithes and Glebe of the Rectory of Bothumsell, Queen Eliz. 24
Febr. 20 Eliz. (...). 6. pat. ^0 Eliz.
granted to Edward Earl of Lincoln, and Christopher Gowf, Gent. and their
heirs in Fee Farm.

Elkesley. Elchesleig.
OF the Kings Soc of Bodmeschell in Elchesleig were four Bov. ad Geldam. The
Land two Car. There was a Church and a Priest, and six Sochm. with one Car. and
an half, Lib. Dooms.
one Mill 4s. and a little small Wood. Here was a Manor of the Tayn-land,
which before the Conquest Vlchel had, and it answered the Geld (or Tax) for
four Bov. The Land being then two Car. Afterward Erwin the Priest held it of
the King ( William) there four Vill. had one Car. and an half. In the time of
Edward the Confessor it was valued at eight, in the time of King William the
Conqueror when the survey was made at 10s. Aschill held it before, Erwin then.
In this Town also of the Fee of Roger de Busli were two Manors, which before
his time Lochre and Vlchel had, paying the Tax for four Bovats. The Land
whereof was two Car. There Claron had one Car. and three Vill. one Bordar
having one Car. and an half. This kept the ancient value of 26s.

Claron was a Witness to Roger de Buslies foundation Charter of Blyth, dated
1088. as in that place may be seen.

Regist. de B^id. p. 84.
Raph, son of Arnold de Flameng, by the consent of Roger and Thomas, his heirs,
gave to Adam de Wellum and his heirs, his whole Meadow which he had on the part
of the Sic from Muriel Bridge, viz. that which was called Arnold Holme,
reserving 6d. per annum to himself and his heirs, for which gift the said Adam
gave him two Marks of his Cattle. Ib. 83.
John Fleming gave to Adam de Wellum, all the Meadow which he had between the
Mill of Elkeslay, and the Bridge of Twifort, paying him and his heirs one Sput
( Calcariam) of Lincoln, or 4d. at Christmas, for all services yearly. Ib. 101.
Adam de Wellum by the consent of his heirs, for the health of his Soul, and of
his Fathers and Mothers, and of Eve his wifes, the Mother of his Children, and
also of Orenta his second wifes, and all his ancestors, etc. gave to the Church
of St. Mary of Blyth the whole Meadow entirely, which is situate between the
Mill of Erkesley and Bierkelont for ever. Ioh. le Flemenc of Claverburr,
Regist. de Blid. p. 83.
gave to God and the Church of Blyth, the whole service which Gamel de Harewrt
and his heirs did him for the Meadow they held of him in Locheng, and besides
confirmed the Meadow which Adam de Wellum, and Elyas his son, gave that Church.

Gaufr. son of Rainald de Kirketon, gave to the Monks of Blyth one Selion, Ib.
which lay the fourth from the Court of the said Monks in Elkeslay at the West.
Gerebert de Elkeslay gave them three Dales of his Land in Elkeslay, one Dale in
Tunfurlang, Ib.
and one Dale beyond the Chimin (or way) of the Castle, and one Dale between
the Chimin of the Castle, and the Chimin of Twiford. Thomas Fraunces of
Elkesley sold to the Prior and Covent of Wirksop, Regist. de w^rk^. Io^. 82. n.
Cap. 9. Chapter de Coder.
all his right in the Wood and Pasture of Coder, with the Appurtenances; Sir
Robert de Furneus, and Sir William de Bevercotes, etc. were Witnesses.

The Family of Bevercotes had interest here, as in that place may be observed.
And the Jury, 35 E. 3. Esc. 35 E. 3. par. 1. n. 121.
found that John de Lungvilers had three Tenements and two Bovats here held of
the Abbey of Rufford.

Thomas de Shitlome 3 E. 4. Mich. 3 E. 4. rot. 386.
and before that in 36 H. 6. Hill. 36 H. 6.
claimed against Hugh Marsyn, James de Shawe, and Robert Gilbert, three Mess.
twenty Acres of Land, and four of Meadow, with the Appurtenances in Elkesley.

John Babington, and Saunchea his wife, 24 H. 8. Mich. 24 H. 8. rot. 127.
claimed against Robert Sharp, two Mess. two hundred Acres of Land, twenty of
Meadow, and one hundred of More, with the Appurtenances in Elke^ey.

William Mason, and Owen Shipley, Tri. 9 Eliz. rot. 360.
9 Eliz. claimed against William Swyft, Esquire, the Manor of Elkesley, with
the Appurtenances; and four Mess. eight Tofts, one Dovecote, ten Gardens, three
hundred Acres of Land, etc. with the Appurtenances in Elkesley, and
free-fishing in the water of Palter: who called Cuthbert Bevercote, Esquire.

Sir John Markham, Knight, Lib. 3. post mor. fo. 114
held the Austin Friars in Newark, the Manors of Cotham, East Markham,
Bothumsell, and Elkesley.

Sir Robert Swyft, Grandchild of William, lately died seized of this Manor. B.


The Grange of Elkesley belonging to the Priory of Mattersey, was granted 22
Nov. 38 H. 8. Par. 12. pa. 38 H. 8.
to John Bellowe, and Robert Bigott.

The whole Rectory and Church of Elkesley, with the Appurtenances late
belonging to the Monastery of Welbek, 17 July 4 E. 6. Par. 4. pat. 4 E. 6.
was granted to Richard Winlowe, and Richard Field, and their heirs.

The Vicarage of Elkesley was ten Marks when the Abbat of Welbeck was Patron:
Mss. I. M.
It Is now 6l. 16s. od. ob. value in the Kings Books, and the Earl of Clare
Patron.

Gledthorp Grange. And VVarsop.
GLethorp was Soc to Thorp (Perlthorp) of Roger de Buslies Fee, and answered
the Tax for four Bov. The Land being six Bov. There four Sochm. had two Car.
Pasture Wood one qu. long, Lib. Dooms.
and one Broad. In Waresop of the Soc of Maunsfeld was one Bov. which a certain
blind man held of the King in Alms, where he had one Bordar, with six Oxen in
Plow. And here was of the Tayn-land one Bovat, but the greatest part of
Waresoppe, was of the Fee of Roger de Busli, and before the Conquest the
freehold of Godric, and Lemot, and Vlchel, who answered the Geld for three
Car. for their three Manors. The Land being six Car. and an half. There Roger
in Demesne had three Car.. six Sochm. on two Bov. of this Land, and fifteen
Vill. eleven Board. having three Car. There was a Priest and a Church, and one
Mill, 16d. and half the seat of a Mill, Pasture Wood five qu long, four broad.
In King Edward the Confessors time the value was 64. then when the Survey was
taken in the Conquerours 4s. less.

Regist. de Welleb. p. 89
Gilbert de Arches (Lord of Grove by the consent of Gilbert his son and heir,
gave to the Church of Wellebec, together with his body, his whole Land of
Gledethorp; Ib.
and Thomas, son of Raph de River, gave his whole Land there, reserving 8s. per
annum to himself and his heirs, for which the brethren gave him three Marks of
Silver and 20 ^. He did affy or promise to hold this bargain with his right
hand, in the hand of Walter de Sidenham. Andrew, son of Thomas de la Rivere,
confirmed the said gift of his Father, and by another Deed released the 8s per
annum.

Ib.
Oliva, daughter and heir of Alan Fitz-Iordan (Lord of Tuxford) in her
Widowhood and lawful power, after the decease of Roger de Montebegonis,
sometimes her husband, (as before him was Robert de St. John) gave to the
Church of Wellebec, and Canons there, etc. a certain Meadow in Warsop, which was
called Bradheng.

A Grant or Donation 17 H. 3. Chapter 17 H. 3.
was made to Robert de Lexington of the Parc of Karleton and Crumbwell, and of
the Manor of Warsope, with the Advowson of the Church, and the Mill of
Hilueton, which he had of Oliva Fitz-Iordan.

In 52 H. 3. Claus. 52 H. 3. m. 3. in dorso.
it seems Robert de Sutton was Lord of the Manor of Warsop, which Margery
sometime wife of John de Lexinton held in dower, and which the King had given
to Queen Alianor his Consort, for the redemption of the said Robert de Sutton,
according to the Edict of Kenilworth. Robert de Sutton son and heir of William
de Sutton, deceased, who held the Manor of Warsop of the King in Capite, did
his homage 53 H. 3. Claus. 53 H. 3. m. 13. in dorso. Ib. m. 12. in seed. pend.
But there was some strife between the King, and the Noble Robert de Sutton,
concerning the Presentation to the Church of Warsop. The Jury^, 52 H. 3. Esc.
52 H. 3. n. 33.
found that Robert de Sutton was above twenty seven years old at his fathers
death, and that there was 3. Car. in Demesne, and freeholders, etc. The Jury,
20 E. 1. Esc. 20 E. 1. n. 13.
said that Margery de Merlay held the Manor of Warsop, with a Garden, and
eight Bov. of Land, etc. of the inheritance of Richard de Sutton, son of the
said Robert.

In 16 E. 2. Esc. 16 E. 2. n. 72.
they said that John de Somery held Warsop and Ekering of John de Sutton, (son
of Richard) which John de Sutton then had to wife Margaret, one of the sisters
and heirs of the said John de Somery; and Thomas Bottetort had Ioane, the
other. Richard de Sutton, 1 E. 2. Esc. 1 E. 2. n. 112.
had an Ad quod Damnum to settle this Manor and Advowson on the said John and
Margaret, and their heirs, and then there remained the Manor of Ekering, and
5. Marks yearly Rent in Allerton under Sherwood, and the Manor of Sutton upon
Trent.

The Jury, 2 E. 3. Es^. 2. E. 3. n. 12.
said that John Nuns of London, acquired the Manor of Warsop in Fee of John
de Sutton. John art Nuns 3 E. 3. Q^^ War. 3 E. 3.
claimed to have a Market here every Tuesday, with Toll and Stallage, and other
things belonging to a Market. John de Nuns Citizen of London, 3 E. 3. Rot.
Cha^t. coram Will. Herle 3 E. 3. to. 2. in dor.
passed his Manor of Warsop, with the Advowson of the Church, and with the
Parc of Plesele, in the County of Derby, to Sir John de Roos, Knight, and his
heirs.

This Manor with Ekering and Sutton, continued with the Lords Roos and their
heirs the Earls of Rutland, as in those places may be noted. The last Earl
George gave this to William Willughby, late Lord Willughby of Parham, his
sisters son.

John, son of William de Ros de Hamelak, 11 E. 3. Cart. 11 E. 3. m. 32. n. 63.
had confirmation of free warren in his Demesne Lands in Tuxford, Warsop, and
Aston, and that he and his heirs for ever might freely and without impediment
run through the Kings whole Forest in this County, at the Fox, Wolf, Hare, or
Cat, except the Kings Demesne Warrens, this was dated March 20.

The Abbat of Wellebec confirmed to Hugh, son of Robert del Estapilton and the
heirs of his body, remainder to Robert, Regist. de Wellebec, p. 254.
brother of the said Hugh, etc. one Mess. with a Toft, and one Bov. of Land in
the territory of Warsop, which the Monks had of the gift of Eva Murdac wife of
Hugh Brett, which she had by right of inheritance for her part of William de
London her brother, named in Nettleworth. Walter le Brett 9 E. 1. In bundell.
de Eston. Assis. and al. Pl. Hill. 9 E. 1. to. ^. Ib. to. 56.
claimed against John de Lascelles six Bov. and two Acres of Land, and one of
Meadow in Warsop, and against the Abbat of Wellebec other lands there: he was
son of Richard, son of Eva, who had another husband Thomas de Lascelles in the
time of H. 3. and gave the Land to Richard de Lascelles, who thereof enfeoff'd
the said John, against whom the Plaint was brought.

Gledethorp with Welbek is the inheritance of his Grace the Duke of Newcastle.

The owners of Warsop in 1612. were said to be Roger Earl of Rutland, William
Kitchen, Lib. lib^re ten.
Will. Barker, John Whitehead, Adam Hawkesworth of Holmefeild, John Tailor,
John Butcher.

The Rectory of Warsop was 20l. when the Lord Roos was Patron: Mss. I. M.
It Is now 22l. 15s. 2d. value in the Kings Books, and William Willoughby Patron.

Sulkholme. Suckholme.
Mon. Ang. vol. 2. p. 35.
KIng Henry, the son of King William, gave to the Priory of St. Oswald of Nostle
in Yorkshire, three Bovats in Warsop and Sulkholme, and two parts of a Bovat of
Land, which King H. 2. also confirmed.

The Jury, 2 E. 1. Esc. 2 E. 1. n. 17.
said that the Prior of Sr. Oswald paid to the Lords of the Manor of Warsop,
for the Town of Suckholme, two Marks yearly. In the Record of Nom. Vill. Nom.
Vill.
9 E. 2. Warsop and the Sok answered for an entire Villa, whereof at that time
the King, John de Somery, and the Prior of St. Oswald, were certified to be
Lords.

The Prior, 3 E. 3. Quo War. 3 E. 3.
claimed all sorts of Privileges: But the Jury could not find that in the
Manor of Sulkholme he or his predecessors had Infangtheif or Gallows; he had
view of Frankpledge there, but it never happened in the Juries knowledge that
ever Bread was baked there to be sold, that they might have had emendation of
the Assize.

The Demesne and Manor of Suckholme, late belonging to the Priory of St.
Oswald, 1 July, 37 H. 8. Par. 3. pat. 37 H. 8.
was with all the Appurtenances granted to Margaret Leek the Widow of John
Leek, Gent. for life, remainder to Henry Leek her son and heir, and the heirs
of his body, remainder to the right heirs of the said Margaret, then extended
at 11l. 13s. 9d. ob. per annum.

Lib. libere ten.
It was in 1612. the possession of Sir Charles Cavendish, and is now his sons,
the Duke of Newcastles. Here dwelt before the Wars Mr..... Lukin, father of Mr.
William Lukin, and Sam. sometimes of Christ's College in Cambridge, it is now
the place of residence of Mr. John Rolleston, Secretary to his Grace the said
Duke of Newcastle.

Exemp. pen. Henry Plumptre, Ar.
In 49 H. 6. and of the retaking his Royal power again the First, John Craven
enfeoff'd William Craven his son, John Bride, junior, Thomas Chaterton,
Chapellan, Richard Merser of Wersop, Richard Colyngworth of the same, Raph
Bekwith, Thomas Bekwith, Robert Craven, and Walter Graver, in all his Lands and
Tenements, Rents and services, with the Appurtenances in Sukholme, Witness
William Champen of Sukholme, John Plumtre of the same, etc.

Norton. Cuckeney. Langwath. Bonbusk. Walley. Milnethorp. Holme Howbeck
VVoodhouse. Hatfeild. Colingthwait Belgh (or Bellers) Grange.
THe Principal part of Cucheney (the chief of all these, and perhaps some other
small Hamlets) was the Fee of Hugh Fitz-Baldric, and before the Conquest the
freehold of Swen, who then answered for his Manor to the Geld (or Tax) as two
Car. The Land four Car. (when the Conqueror took his survey one. Lib. Dooms.
) Richard held it of Hugh, and there had in Demesne two Car. and three Sochm.
on two Bov. of Land, and ten Vill. five Board. having three Carucats (or Plows.)
There was a Priest and a Church, and two Mills 8s. Pasture Wood four quar.
long, and four qu. broad. This kept the value it had in the time of King Edward
the Confessor, viz. 30s. In Cuchenay there was also of the Fee of Roger de
Busli, where before the Conquest Alric and Vlsi had two Manors answering the
Tax for one Car. The Land whereof was sufficient for two Plows or two Car.
There afterward Goisfrid the Man (or Tenent) of Roger had one Car. and nine
Vill. having three Car. Pasture Wood two qu. long, two qu. broad. In the
Confessors time this was 20s. value, then when Doomsday Book was made 2s. less.

Ioceus de Flemangh came to the Conquest of England, Mon. Arg. vol. 2. p. 598.
in the time of William Duke of Normandy, and acquired in Cukeney the third
part of a Knights Fee, Regist. de Welleb. p. 1. and 292. Test. de Nev.
and the said Ioce (afterward frequently called Cost) begot a certain son
Ric. by name. In the same Town of Cukeney there dwelt (or remained) a certain
man who was called Gamelbere (or Gamelkere) who was an old Drenghe (or
Dreyinghe) before the Conquest (interpreted by the learned Sir Henry Spelman, a
Knight, or one that held Lands as it were by Military (or Knights) service) and
(accordingly) he held two Carucats of Land in the same Town, In Glossar.
of the King in Capite, for such service of shooing the Kings Palfrey upon four
feet, with the Kings Nails (or shooing Materials) [ de Cluario, or Cloera
Domini Regis] as often as he should lie at his Manor of Maunsfeld, and if he put
in all the Nails [ incloaverit] the King should give him a Palfrey of four
Marks (or he was to have the Kings Palfrey, giving the King five Marks of
Silver, as the Jury in 3 E. 3. Esc. 3 E. 3. n. 108.
found the service; as he was also if he lamed the Horse, pricked him, or shod
him strait, etc. [inclaudet or includat] as it was found 23 E. 1. Esc. 22 E. 1.
n. 5.
not so agreeably.) And if an Army should be in Wales, he was to do service
according to the quantity of two Carucats of Land, and likewise for Homage.

Gamelbere dyed without heirs of himself, and the Land was an Eschaet in the
hand of King Henry the first. And that King gave that Land to Richard, son of
the said Ioce and his heirs, to be held of him by the said service. And the
said Richard took a wife in Nottingham, by name N. and begot on her a son
called Richard; she died, and this Richard took another wife, Cousin of the
Earl of Ferrers; and that Earl would not give him his Cousin unless he would
give his said Cousin, and her heirs of her to be begotten, some Land. And the
said Richard, before he married Hawise, the Cousin of the Earl, gave her and
the heirs of her to be begotten, two Carucats of Land in Cukeney, which the
said King gave him by the said service; (which some will think had relation to
the name of Ferrers.) And the said Richard on her begot a certain son, by name
Thomas; and the said Thomas was nourished in the Kings Court, and after the
death of Richard his father, held that Land by the service aforesaid of the
said King well and in peace until the old War: and then he made himself a
Castle in the said Land of Cukeney; for this Thomas was a warlike man (or
Soldier) in the whole War. And after the said War, the Kingdom of England
being p^cified, and King Henry the second Reigning, he Founded the Abbey of
Welbeck. This Thomas took to wife Emma, and begot on her a daughter Isabell by
name. After the death of the said Thomas, the said Isabell his daughter was in
the Custody (or Wardship) of the King, by reason of the two Carucats of Land in
Cukeney. And the said King gave the Custody and Marriage of the said Isabell to
Simon Fitz-Simon, who married her, who gave the Mill of Cukeney, with the
Appurtenances, and Custom, and Works lying to it, to the Abbey of Welbeck; and
all their Land in Deystorth and Bastegate, and their whole Land which they had
at Langwaith, and one Bovat in the Field of Cukeney upon Hattefeild, etc. And
the said Simon begot on the said Isabell three daughters, viz. Agnes, Isabel,
and Petronilla (or Parnell) and after the deaths of Simon and Isabel their said
three daughters were in the Kings Custody; and the King gave their Custody and
Marriage to Sir Walter de Fawcomberg; and the said Walter himself married the
said Agnes the eldest; and gave Isabell the second to Walter de Riebof to wife;
and Petronilla the third he gave to Stephen de Faucomberg his brother to wife,
with the said two Carucats in Cukeney, which he held of the King, reserving to
himself and his heirs the Advowson of the Abbey of Welbek, quit from the said
Petronilla and her heirs, as appears by a Fine levied between them in the Kings
Court. The said Walter and Agnes confirmed to the said Abbey all the gifts of
the said Thomas de Cukeny, and Simon Fitz-Simon, and Isabell his wife, as did
Gerard de Glanvill, and Emme his wife, etc.

Peter, son of Walter de Faucomberg, released from himself and his heirs to the
said Abbey all the right in that demand, which he had against the said Abbey
concerning the prestation or performance of one Palfrey to him, to be done of
every Abbat newly made or created.

Walter de Faucomberg, son and heir of Peter de Faucomberg, likewise released
all that demand which he exacted concerning the Palfrey, etc.

Walter, son of Walter de Faucomberg, granted to the said Abbey all the right
and claim which he had in that Toft upon Humbre in Whiten.

John de Faucomberg, son of Walter de Faucomberg, confirmed to Simon, son of
Galfr. de Whiten, the Lands and Tenements given to the said Abbey in Whiten, and
that demand concerning one Palfrey, or the value as before.

Joceus le Flemangh venitad Conquest. Angl.- Rich. temp. W. 1.-N. de Not. ux.
1.-Hawifia consanguin. Comitis de Ferrariis ux. 2. Rich. de Cukeney- Rich. de
Cukeney- Tho. de Cukeney- Willielmus Goschire.- Joana 8 E. 1.-Rob. le Porter.
Joh. suspensus An. 1200. Ric. Germanus de Cukeney.- Isabella. Thom. de
Cukeney.- Radulphus de Cukeney-


Rich.

Rad. Silvan-Margareta. Osbertus Silvan- Rad. Selvein- Osbert. Seilvan miles,
1246.- Radulphus Salvayne.-Marger. fill. and cohaer. Nic. fill. Anketini Malory.
-Anketinus Salvayn. Anketinus Salvayn mil. de Thorp.





Thomas fundator Abb. de Welbek-Emma. Emma ux. Gerardi de Glanvill. Simon
Fitz-Simon-Isabel. Walterus de Faucomberg.-1 Agnes. Per. de Fauconberg-
Walterus de Fauconberg.- Walterus de Fauconberg- Johannes de Faucomberg.



Walterus de Rieboef.-2 Isabella. Stephanus de Faucomberg.-3 Petronilla.
Willielmus de Fauconberg.-Ida fill. Adae de St. Martino. Hen. de Fawcomberg. 38
H. 3.- Willielmus de Faucomberg, 8 E. 1. ob. 29 E. 1.-... fill. Matildae Dom. de
Goushull. 1 Johannes stultus, 23 E. 1. aetat. 23 an. 2 Henricus de Fauconberg,
miles.-Elena fill. Dom. Rob. de Hertford. 3 Willielm.




Hugo.



Stephen, who married the third daughter Petronilla, begot on her a son named
William. This William was in the Custody of King John, and the said King gave
his Wardship (or Custody) and marriage to Adam de St. Martin, and the said Adam
gave to the said William, Ida his daughter to wife, and the said William begot
on the said Ida a son Henry by name. Between the said Henry, and William, son
of Thomas, a certain Fine was levied of all Lands and Tenements in Cukeney, and
the said Henry took up the said Land, and gave for relief to the King 100s. and
to the said King did Homage. The said Henry begot a son by name William, who
took to wife the daughter of Matilda, Lady of Goushull, and begot on her three
sons, John, Henry, and William. The aforesaid William, father of the said John,
Henry, and William, released to the said Abbey his whole right concerning all
Customs and Services, and concerning the prestation (or giving) of a Palfrey at
every removal or creation of the Abbat of the said Abbey, as appears by the
Fine. That John the first begotten of the said William was a Fool, neither
could he hold the Land of his father. But Henry the second son made Fine with
the King for the said Land, with such condition that he should sustein his
elder brother, but he died shortly after. And so the said Henry held the said
Land, and afterward espoused the daughter of Sir Robert de Hertford, Elena by
name, and as it is more fully found in the Book of Memorand's in the Exchequer,
31 E. 1. William de Faucomberg, Knight, son and heir of Sir Henry de
Faucomberg, Knight, granted for himself and his heirs to the Abbey and Covent of
Welbek, all and all manner of Common which they had in Burneflat, etc.

Petronilla, daughter of Simon Fitz-Simon, in 2 Ioh. Pip. 2 Ioh. Lincol.
ought 20s. for having her imparlance [ Loquela] in the Kings Court at
Westminster against R. (W.) de Faucomberg, and Agnes his wife, and Walter de
Rieboef, and Ysabel his wife, concerning her reasonable part of the xxth. part
of one Knight in Kukeney, and the sixth part of one Knights Fee in Hocwell.

Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p. 600.
Sir Henry de Fawconberg, Knight, by his Deed dated at York the last day of
September Anno Dom. 1329. 2 E. 3. (mistaken for 3 E. 3.) passed to John de
Hotham, Bishop of Ely, his whole Manor of Cukeney, with the Appurtenances,
together with the Knights Fees and Advowsons, as well of the Abbey of Wellebecke
as others, with all his Lands and Tenements in Holbeck by Cukeney, as well
those which he lately acquired in Fee of Thomas de Furneux, as others, etc. in
the Towns or Hamlets of Cukeney, Langwath, Bondbusk, Holbeck, Woodhouse,
Milnethorpe, Cloun, and Norton, or otherwhere in this County, etc. all which
the said Bishop conveyed to the Abbat and Covent of Wellbeck, in the time of
the Justices Itinerant at Notingham, 4 December. 1329. 3 E. 3. by his Deed then
enrolled.

Henry de Faucomberg, 10 E. 2. Chapter 10 E 2. n. 38.
had Marker and Fair granted at Cokeney, and (his Grandfather) Henry de
Faucomburge in 38 H. 3. Rot. Vasc. 38 H. 3. Par. 2. m. 12.
had Free Warren there.

The process of the Land of Cukeney of the Honor of Tikhill was as follows.

Ioceus le Flemingh came to the Conquest of England in the time of William Duke
of Normandy, Lib. de Welbek. p. ^. Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p. 597.
and got in Cukeney the third part of a Knights Fee; and the said Ioce begot a
certain son by name Richard. This Richard took a wife in Notingham, by name N.
and begot on her a certain son, by name Richard. This Richard enfeoffed the
House of Welbek of the whole third part of a Knights Fee aforesaid, viz. of the
Land of Langwat, with the Hay of Cukeney, reserving to himself the Capital
Mess. in Cukeney, and nine Bovats of Land, and did the Service to the chief
Lords of the Fee of Tikhill for the said Abbat and his successors. This
Richard begot a son named Richard, who confirmed the gift of his father. This
Richard begot a son, by name Thomas. This Thomas impleaded the Abbat of
Wellebek concerning the third part of a Knights Fee, and at length there was a
final concord made between them before the Justices Itinerant at Bristoll, so
that the Abbat should give him 10s. per annum, for making Suit to the Court of
Tikhill, for the said Abbat and his successors. This Thomas begot a certain
son, by name William Goschite. This William begot a certain daughter, by name
Ioane, and enfeoffed the House of Welbek of six Bovats of Land, reserving to
himself two Bovats of Land and the Capital Message; afterward he sold all his
right to John his brother, who for Theft (or Larceny) was hanged at Notingham,
and his Land was an Eschaet in the hands of the Lords of Tikhill. Afterward
came Ioane, the daughter of the said William; and impleaded the Lords of
Tikhill concerning the said Land, and got it before the Justices at Nottingham,
and enfeoffed Robert le Porter of Welbek, who afterward married her. That
Robert afterward enfeoffed Henry de Screveton of that Land. That Henry
enfeoffed Petronilla de Sulkholm, and afterward married her; Henry died
without children. And the said Petronilla feoffed Benedict de Thornebiry, who
afterward married her. That Benedict after the death of Petronilla, sold his
whole right to the Abbat and Covent of Wellebek by the Kings license. And the
Abbat did Suit at the Court of Tykhill from three weeks to three weeks for the
said Land.

Memorandum, Anno Dom. 1201. 2 Ioh. the day of the Translation of St. Martin,
John, son of Thomas de Cukeney, was convict by a certain appealer, viz. Raph de
Edenestowe, and afterward hanged, and the Justices to deliver the Goal were
Raph de Frechevile, William de Mortein, Hugh de la Chapele, Simon de Hedon.

Ioane, the daughter of William, son of Thomas, 8 E. 1. Assis. in Com. Noth. 8
E. 1. to. 10.
offered her self the fourth day against Aymon Earl of Gevenne, and Constancia
his wife, in a plea of fifteen Acres of Land, and 20. Rent, with the
Appurtenances in Cokenay, which she claimed as her right, etc.

Raph Silvan was brother of Thomas the Founder of Wellebek; Regist. de Wellebek
84, and 85, and 296.
his son Osbert Silvan had the Manor of Woodhouse, and Raph Silvan was his son
and heir, and had a son and heir Osbert Selvan, all of them Benefactors to that
House.

Robert Pyrpount, 3 E. 3. Pl. de Iur. and Assis. apud Not. 3 E. 3. to. 18. in
dors.
offered himself against Anketin Salveyn concerning a plea of the Manor of
Wodhous near Cokeney, with the Appurtenances, except one Mess. and twelve Acres
of Land in that Manor, and he came not, etc. Ib. to. 25.
Robert Perpount Chr. pleaded likewise for Land in Kirkeby in Asshefeld.
Anketine Salveyn it seems, 15 E. 1. Orig. 15 E. 1.
was son and heir of Raph Salveyn, and Margery his wife, one of the daughter;
and coheirs of Nicolas, son of Anketine Malory. This Family of Silvans seem to
have had their Name from their residence at this Manor in these Woods.

Regist. de Wellebec p. 208.
Barth. Monboucher Chr. of the County of Northumberland, and Robert Martell of
this County, and others, 15 July, 6 R. 2. personally undertook in the Kings
Chancery for Edmund Perpont Chr. under the pain of 1000l. that he should not do
or procure any mischief to the Abbat of Wellebec, his Canons or Men of his
Council, or Men summoned in a certain Assize of Novel disseisin between the
said Abbat and him, to be taken before the Justices of Assize at Not.

King Henry the eighth for the sum of 617l. 6s. 8d. July 15. 32 H. 8. Par. 8.
pat. 32 H. 8.
granted to George Perpoynt of Walley in the County of Derby, Esquire, the Manors
of Bondbusk, Langwith, Howbeck, and Woodhouse, with the Appurtenances, (except
the Tithe of Nether Langweth) late belonging to the Monastery of Welbeck; Sir
George Pierpont likewise bought the Tithes of Corn and Hay in the Towns of
Cuckney, B.
Norton, Hatfeild Grange, Milnethorpe, Howbeck, Woodhouse, Bonbusk, and
Colingthwait; and in 6 E. 6. the Manor of Cuckney, with all the Appurtenances,
and the Granges of Hatfeild and Colingthwait. Langwith and the Park are now the
Inheritance of William Earl of Devonshire. The rest descended to Robert Earl of
Kingston, who dwelt at his ancient House of Woodhouse the most part of forty
years, but his son and heir Henry the Marquess of Dorchester resides at Holme
by Not.

The owners of Norton Cuckney Town in 1612. are said to be Robert Perpoint,
Lib. libere ten.
Esquire, Geoffrey Snowden, William Barker, John Iepson, one Mess. one Cott.
two Orchards, forty Acres of Land, and Richard Sandford.

The Vicarage of Cukney was 10l. when the Abbat of Welbeck was Patron: Mss. I.
M.
It Is now 9l. 8s. 6d. ob. value in the Kings Books, and the Marquess of
Dorchester Patron.

Wellbeck.
THis Monastery was begun in the time of King Stephen, who confirmed the gift
which Raph de Bellafago made to God and the Church of St. James at Wellebek of
the Land of Clun of his Fee, afterward, viz. 1 Ioh. called Hungreclun, Regist.
de Wellebec 218. Cart. Ant. 1 Ioh. EE. 25. Regist. de Welb. p. 84.
as appears also by the Deed of Raph Silvan, and Margaret his wife, directed
to Henry Archbishop of York (who lived in that Kings Reign) wherein they gave
and confirmed to (Lord, or) Sir Gerlo Abbat of Neuhus, and the Order of the
Praemonstratenses, and namely to the place of the Abbey which his (the said
Raphs) brother Thomas had begun, in pure Alms all their part which they had in
that place, and the Wood which was between the Rivulet and the Cart-way which
leads from the place of the Abbey unto Belgh, etc. But the Founder Thomas (de
Cukeney) son of Richard, Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p. 599.
directed his Charter of Foundation to Roger Archbishop of York, who lived in
the time of Henry the second, wherein he gave and granted to Sir Berengarius
Abbat of Wellebec, and to all his successors, and the Brethren of that place,
there according to the Order of the Praemonstratenses regularly serving God, by
the Counsel of Sir Serlo Abbat of Neuhus, in free and quiet and perpetual Alms,
the place of the Abbey of Wellebec, where the Church of St. James was Founded,
and the whole Land which is from the place of the Abbey unto a place called
Belgh, and Belgh, and whatsoever was within the bounds of that place, in
Medows, in Pastures, in Woods, in Lands Tilled, and his whole Sart nigh Belgh,
viz. where Galfr. Hugh, and Druing lived, and the remaining part of the Sart
which he had there. And further as much as belonged to him, the Church of St.
Mary of Cukeney, in which Parish was the place of the said Abbey, and the Church
of St. Helen of Euwell (Derbss.) and the Church of Whitene, which were Founded
in his Fee, with all which belonged to them, the Mill also of Languat, and the
whole Land of Hirst, and Common of Pasture of his Land. All these things he
gave to God and the Church of St. James at Wellebec, and to the said Abbat
Berengar, etc. for his own Soul, and his fathers, and mothers, and all his
Ancestors, and all theirs from whom he had unjustly taken their (Goods.) All
these things he gave by the consent of Emme his wife, and Raph Silvan, and
Richard his brothers: The Witnesses were William Prior of Radford, Austin the
Sub-Prior, Fulc the Canon of that place, Hugh, son of Sewal the Canon, Osbert
Silvan the Canon, William the Presbyter, Galfr. de Tivereshat, Peter de
Scardeclyve, William de Bolesovere, William de Calum, Hugh, the said Thomas his
son, Rodb. Avenell, Rodbert, son of Gaufr. Gilbert, son of Rodbert, Rodbert,
son of the Sheriff, Raph Bar, William, son of Glai, Roger de St. Audoeno,
Robert de Willeby, Henry de Auring, Walter de Sidenham, Raph de St. Mary,
Walter de Bakepuez, Roger de Wauton, Raph, the Clark of Warsop, Richard de
Flintham, William his brother, Hugh, the Painter, Swan the ( praepositus)
Provost of Normandy, William, son of Gilbert, Raph de Mainill.

King Henry the second confirmed the Founders gifts, Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p. 602.
and the before mentioned gift of Raph Silvan, and besides that of one Bovat
which was Leuric de Hirsts, and one Bovat, and one dwelling House in Norton,
which lay to that Bovat, which Leveric de Hirst held, and Common of Pasture of
the Land of Raph Silvan of Norton, and of Wodehous, and all other things which
the same Raph reasonably gave. And likewise of the gift of Richard, son of
Richard, son of Ioce, his Culture of Bassegate, of the gift of Richard his son,
his whole Land of Langwath, with all the Appurtenances, and one Bovat of Land
with it, one Toft in Cukenei, which was Edwins, and several Wongs (or Cultures)
and his Mill of Cukeney, with the Toft, and Pasture for five hundred Sheep, and
the whole part of the Land of Tho. de Gledthorp which the Monks held in Fee
Farm of the said Thomas and his heirs for 8s. and the whole part of the Land of
Verbert de A^ches, which they likewise held in Fee Farm for 5s. of the said
Verbert, and his heirs for all Services, with the Appurtenances of the said
Town of Gledthorp. And the Land of Cotes (Linc.) which they held in Fee Farm of
William, son of Ren^r, and his heirs, for a Mark, as his Chartel (or Deed) and
that of Herbert, son of Alard, witnessed. Of the gift of Peter de Cotes, the
Church of Cotes, and the Lands and Medows, as the Deed (or Chartel) of the said
Peter witnessed; and the Land of Cressewell which was Raph Cordus his, which
they held in Fee Farm of John de Aiencurt, and his heirs for 5s. per annum. Of
the gift of Simon Fitz-Simon, and Isabell his wife, two Bovats of Land of their
Demesne in Hertewell, and the Church of the said Town of Hertewell, which they
confirmed to them, and the space of Wood, etc. as before.

Robert de Manill, sometimes Lord of Whitewell in the County of Derby, Reg. de
Welbek p. 300.
gave to the Church of Welbek a Quarry in his Land, where ever it could be
found most convenient, to build the Church of St. James, and other offices, and
free ingress and egress for those that carried necessaries for the building.

Walter de Goushull, Knight, granted a Quarry through the whole More between
the Town of Whitewell and Belgh, and other-where in the said Common Pastures of
the Parish of Whitewell, where ever it could be found, and free leave to
discover, dig, work, and carry, etc. as the Charter of the said Robert de
Menill his ancestor mentioned without contradiction.

Raph de Basset, by the consent of William Basset his father, Regist. de We^b.
p. 91.
and Matildis his mother (whose Inheritance they were) gave to the Canons of
Wellebek his Mills of Languat, the condition whereof was, That the Men of the
Town of Languat, and of Hoghton, were to make the House and Damm of the Nether
Mill at their cost, and to grind the Corn of their proper Wanage (or Tillage
at the sixteenth grain, and what they bought at the twentieth; and the Abbat
and Covent were to make the Upper Mill and Damm at their costs; and it was
lawful for the said William Basset and his heirs to Fish in the upper Pool
whenever they would, as the Abbat did.

Walter de Haincourt, by the consent and favor of John his son and heir, Ib.
p. 107.
gave to God and the Church of St. James at Welbec the whole Land which Gaufr.
de Kressewell held of his father, and Raph his son of him, free from all
service belonging to him (except five Shillings yearly, and three [ preces]
Boons of one Plow or Carucat, and three [ preces] Boon days in harvest, viz.
the first, with one Man; the second, with two; and the third, with as many as
shall be found there daily reaping.) And free from all service to the King
(except Dana-geld, or the Kings Common Aid) by his command should be levied
through the whole Country in every County; likewise the Sheriffs and the Kings
Bailiffs [ praepositi] the Canons were to pay for that Land. This grant he made
at the entreaty, and by the consent of the said Raph, son of Gaufr. who
surrendered the Land to him that he might grant it to the said Church of St.
James, and the Canons, who gave the said Raph a Mark of Silver, and four Goats:
The Witnesses were Robert the Presbyter, William de Cukeney, and Thomas Lord of
Cukeney, etc.

Oliver de Eyncuria, son of John de Eyncuria, gave to the said Church of
Wellebek the Tithe of his Multure of his whole Mill at Cressewell, and of the
issues and profits which Olyver Deyncourt his son recognized, 16 H. 3. before
S. de Segrave and his fellow Justices Itinerant.

Roger Deyncourt gave to the Church of Welbek to sustain three Canons to
celebrate Divine Service in that Covent, Reg. Welb. p. 301.
his whole Land and Meadow in Wynefeild, with Common of Pasture in Loghagh
(except the Advowson of the Church of Wynfeld, and the Land which belonged to
the Bovat of the Parkhuse, etc.)

John de Eyncourt, Rector of the Church of Wynefeld, brother of Sir Roger de
Eyncourt, sometimes Lord of the Park of Morton (Derbishire) for the health of
his Soul, and the Soul of the said Roger his brother, Lord and Ancestor, and of
the Lady Alice, wife of the said Roger, confirmed the gifts of his said
brother, viz. his whole Land of Winnefeld, etc. and the homage of William de
Eyncourt, brother of the said John, and of the rest of the Freeholders, and
Services of the Natives, with their Sequels; and that whoever should hold the
Manor of Park should defend the said Land from all Suits, etc. Roger de
Eyncurt, brother of the said Sir Roger, Lord of Park, made the like
confirmation.

William Deincourt was called Basset, Reg. Welb. p. 302.
after whose decease John Deyncourt entered.

Sir Richard de Wyverton for forty nine Marks of Silver given him by Galfr.
Fitz-Peter, gave to the Abbey of Wellebek the Town of Dukmanton (in Derbysh.)
which Sir Richard Basset confirmed, and so did Henry de Stuteville, Mon. Angl.
vol. 2. p. 602.
and Leonia de Reins his mother, of whose Barony it was held.

There were many Benefactors of several Counties: most of this County are noted
in the places where the Lands lay, as this Sir Richard de Wiverton is in
Colston Basset.

King Edward the first by his Charter bearing date at York, 5 Apr. 19 E. 1. Chapter
19 E. 1. m. 49. Reg. de Welbek. p. 221.
granted the Abbat and Covent of Wellebec and their successors Free Warren in
all their Demesne Lands in Whyten, Filingham, Ingham, and Cotes in the County
of Linc. Whatton, Aslacton, Flintham, Kniveton, Yvershagh, Gledthorp, Hatfeild,
Hirst, Belgh, Cukney, Colingthwait, Languat, Cloune, Norton, Milnethorpe,
Swaynthorp, Vlecotes, and Stirape in this County, Dukmanton, Winefeld, Newbold,
and Cressewell in Darbyshire. The same King by another Charter dated at
Keneylleworth, 1 June, 29 E. 1. granted his whole part of the Wood and Soil of
Roumwood, between the Wood of the said Abbat, and the Parc of Thomas de
Furnivall, extending it self by the Kings Highway between Wirkesop and Warsop
toward the West, and containing sixty Acres by the Perch of the Forest,
together with that place of Land which was called Carberton Storth by the said
Wood, paying 28s. per annum for all Services: which last the said Abbat had
license to enclose, and make a Park of, and to destroy and sell the Wood, and
Essart the Soil, or otherwise to make profit as he should see convenient; and
by this warrant, 3 E. 3. they claimed, etc. where the Jury found the Abbat, Quo
War.
and all his Predecessors and Canons (but not their Tenants, or Men) quit from
Toll of all things which they could secure to be their own Demesne, and from
Bridges, except the Town Bridge of Nottingham was broken.

The Composition between l. de Nottingham, Abbat of Wellebech, Mon. Angl. vol.
2. p. 601.
and the Covent of that place, and John de Hothum, Bishop of Ely, bearing date
29 December. 1329.3 E. 3. was to this effect, viz. That for the Manor of
Cukeney, with the Appurtenances, and two Mess. one hundred and twenty Acres of
Land, eight of Meadow, six of Wood, with the Appurtenances in Holbeck by
Cukeney, which the said Bishop gave to the said Abbat and Covent; they the said
Abbat and Covent without any compulsion freely bound themselves and their
successors to find eight Canons in their Abbey, daily to celebrate Divine
Offices for the Soul of Edward King of England, Grandfather of the then King,
and for the Soul of Edward late King of England, father of the said then King,
for the wholesome estate of the Lady Isabell Queen of England, the said Kings
mother, and of her children, and chiefly for the state of the King, and the
Lady Philippa his Consort, Queen of England, while they lived, and for their
souls when they should die: Also for the souls of Alan and Maud, father and
mother of the said Lord John de Hothum, Bishop of Ely, and for the souls of the
children of them the said Alan and Matildis then dead, and of the living when
they should die, and for the Soul of Friar (or Brother) William de Hothum,
sometimes Bishop of Dublin, for the state of the Lady Mary de St. Paul,
Countess of Pembroke, and her Soul when it should be separated from the body,
and also for the Soul of Peter de Gaveston, late Earl of Cornwall, and for the
Souls of Sir John de Wogan, and Isabell his wife, and for Sir Raph Camoys, and
Elizabeth his wife, and for their Souls after death, for Sir John de
Fawconberg, and for his Soul after his decease, and especially for the
healthful state of the said Lord Bishop while he should live, and afterward
for his Soul, and for all theirs who had faithfully served him, and bestowed
benefits upon him, and for all the faithful departed. And besides this, they
and their successors to celebrate in their Abbey, as long as the world should
endure, the Anniversary of the said Lord Bishop, with such solemnity as the
Anniversary of their first and principal Founder, as well in Alms to the poor,
as in Divine Obsequies, was wont in times past to be celebrated, and every day
whereon Commemorations of the dead should be read in their Chapter House, his
Soul should therein be absolved by name. And when any of the said eight Canons
should by sickness, or other lawful cause, be hindered from celebrating, another
Canon of their House should faithfully supply his turn. And when any of those
eight should go the way of all flesh, another Canon should immediately be put
in his place. They were also to swear that they would never diminish the number
of eight, but maintain the said celebration for ever decently, and that they
would never obtain any thing of the Pope, or the K. of England, or the superior
of the Order of the Praemonstratenses, or of any other whereby any thing should
be subtracted from the said celebration. And every new Abbat before the Covent
should do him obeisance, or he be install^d in the Monastery, and every Novice
before he should be admitted to probation in their Monastery, should be bound
by the same Oath, faithfully to keep every Article of the said ordination
according to his utmost power for ever. Furthermore if their said Order (which
God forbid) should by any emergent chance be suppressed, or transferred to any
other Order, then they willed and granted by the Tenor of the said agreement,
that the said Bishop or his heirs without any obstacle might enter, and
peaceably enjoy the said Manor of Cukeney, and two Mess. one hundred and
twenty Acres of Land, eight of Meadow, six of Wood, with the Appurtenances in
Holbeck by Cukeney. But that the present ordination might last for ever without
any diminution, the said Abbat and all the Priests of the Covent, with Candles
burning, and Stoles hung at their necks, solemnly excommunicated all and every
one that should weaken, break, diminish, or violate, or procure the said
ordination or any part of it to be weakened, broken, diminished, or violated by
any means, or presume to go against it in any thing: subjecting themselves and
their successors in this to the Jurisdiction and cohercion of the Abbat of
Neuhus, father of their Abbat, and of the yearly Visite^s, that if in their
Visitation they found any thing of this ordinance violated or diminished, they
might proceed against them as guilty of Perjury and excommunicate. And lest
oblivion should obolish what gratitude had charitably instituted, This
Ordination was every year on All Souls day to be read through in their
Monastery in the presence of all the Brethren. But King Henry the eighth, 26
Febr. 30 H. 8. Par. 2. pat. 30 H. 8.
granted to Richard Whalley and his heirs, the Site of the Abbey of Welbeck,
and all the Houses and Lands beneath the Site of it, and the two Granges
called Bellers Grange, and Hirst Grange, and the several Closes and Groves,
etc. Queen Elizabeth, 20 May, 1 Eliz. Par. 1. pat. 1 Eliz.
granted license to Richard Whalley, Esquire, and William Whalley, Gent. to
alienate the House and Site of the Monastery of Welbeck, by the name of the
Demesne of the Manor of Welbeck, and the said two Granges Bellers and Hurst,
and the Grange of Gledethorpe, and the Manor of Norton, and the Grange called
Hardwick Grange, to Edward Osborne, Citizen and Cloathworker of London, and his
heirs. She, 9 Febr. 42 Eliz. Par. 15. pat. 42 Eliz.
granted to Robert Booth, Esquire, and Ranulph Catterall, Gent. the whole
Site, etc. which sometime was belonging to, and parcel of the Lands late of
Richard Whalley, Esquire. It is now, Nov. 11. 1674. the Mansion House of his
Grace the Duke of Newcastle, of whose Noble Achievements I ought to have given
some particular account, but that the Duchess his wife, not long since dead,
has done it far beyond my hopes in her famous Books, especially that of his
Life, besides what himself has communicated to the World in several Poems: and
his most excellent pieces concerning Horsmanship both in French and English,
whereof he is so great a Master, that though he be above eighty years of age,
he very constantly diverts himself with it still, insomuch that he is thought
to have taken as great pleasure beholding his great store of choice
well-managed Horses (wherewith his fine stables are continually furnished)
appear to exercise their gifts in his magnificent Riding-house, which he long
since built there of Brick, as in elder time any one could take to see the
religious performances of the Monks in the Quire of the great Church of St.
James, now utterly vanished, except the Chapel for the house was any part of
it, which of late years also has lain buried in the ruins of its roof, the
want whereof does a little diminish the glory of this brave Palace: yet seeing
that neither the Wisdom, nor Piety, nor Charity of those formerly concerned
here, nor their Right, Title, nor Propriety, nor indeed of God himself, could
in this place secure or preserve a Church against a King and Parliament,
professing the same God and the same Religion; I cannot perceive how the most
obstinate and zealous pretenders to Religion and property of this time, can
justly wonder though his Grace be not much concerned for the ruinous Chapel.
The woods, especially those nigh the house are better preserved. Regist. de
Wilb. p. 60.
The number of the Acres of the woods of the Abbey of Wellebek were, Of the
first foundation of the house in Woods about the house sixscore Acres. Of the
gift of the King of England in Roumwood fivescore and ten Acres. Of the gift of
Richard, son of Richard, in the Hay of Cukeney fourscore Acres. Of the gift of
Thomas de la Rivere in Hesellund eight Acres. Of the gift of Brian de Insula in
the Wood of Eskeshagh fourscore Acres. These Acres were measured by the King
Perch, containing twenty four Feet. The sum is three hundred thirty eight
Acres, sixscore to the hundred.

VVorksop. VVirchesop. And Radford.
ELsi before the Norman invasion had two Manors in Werchesope, which pai^ ^o
the Geld as three Car. The Land being then sufficient for eight Plows or eight
Car. There afterward Roger de Busli (whose Fee the Conqueror made it) had one
Car. in Demesne, Lib. Dooms.
and twenty two Sochm. on twelve Bovats of this Land, and twenty four Villains,
and eight Board. having twenty two Car. and eight Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood
two leu. long, three quar. broad. In the time of Edward the Confessor this was
valued at 8l. when the survey was taken in the Conquerours at 7l. In Rolneton
(nigh Wirksop) also of Roger de Buslies Fee were two Manors before the
Conquest, which Vlsi and Alchill had, and paid the Geld for one Car. The Land
two Car. There afterward Roger the Man (or Tenant) of Roger de Busli had one
Car. and four Sochm. on two Bov. of this Land, and one Board. with one Plow or
one Car. There were two Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood six qu. long, and three
qu. broad. In King Edward the Confessors time 20s. value, in the latter part
of the Conquerours 10s. There was one Bov. ad Geld. Soc, and then waste.

This Elsi was one of those who were noted in the Book of Doomsday to have Soc,
and Sac, and Toll, and Thaim, and the Kings Customs of 2d. and particularly
upon Werchesoppe, and he is there called Elsi, son of Castbin, but the third
penny of the Earl was not his.

This Roger the Man of Roger de Busli held very many Manors of him in this
County, in all which in the time of H. 1. succeeded William de Luvetot who had
Sheffeild and Halumshire in the County of York, Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p. ^5.
(as in Carcolston may be seen) and was a principal man in Huntingtonshire,
where he left a Barony to his second son Nigellus de Lovetot, as in Wishou is
noted.

Here the third of the Ides of May in the third year of King Henry the first,
Ib. p. 50.
he founded a Monastery for Canons of the Order of St. Austin, in the Church of
St. Cuthbert of Wirkesop, to which he afterward by the concession and
consideration of Emme his wife, and of his sons (or Children,) granted and
confirmed by his [ breve] writing, his gift which he had made to God and the
holy Church, and the Canons of St. Cuthbert of Wirkesop in perpetual Alms.
First the whole Chapelry of his whole house with the Tithes and Oblations. Then
the Church of Wirkesop in which the Canons were, with the Lands and Tithes, and
all things belonging to that Church, and the Fish Pond and Mill (by or) nigh
that Church, and the Meadow by the said Mill and Fish Pond. And furthermore all
the Tithes of the pence of all his set Rents as well in Normandy as in England.
In the Field of Wirkesop one Carucat of Land, at Inwar, and the Meadow of
Catala. And all his Churches of his Demesne of the Honor of Blithe, viz. the
Churches of Gringelai, of Misterton, of Walcringham, of Normanton, of Coleston,
of Wylgeby, of Wyshou, and his part of the Church of Tyreswelle, with all
Lands, Tithes, and things belonging to the said Churches. And likewise the
Tithe of his Paunage, and of Honey, and of Venison, and of Fish, and of Fowl,
and of Malt, and of his Mills, and of all things of which Tithes were wont or
ought to be given. This was directed to T. Archbishop of York.

Thurstan Archbishop of York, Alexander Bishop of Lincoln, and Walter Espec,
and Alan de Perci, and others were Witnesses to King Henry the first
confirmation of this gift, which William de Luvetot made.

William de Luvetot in the Pipe Roll of the fifth of K. Steph is said to give
account of the half year of the Farm of Blithe, Pip. 5 Step.
and of 236l. of the Pleas of G. de Clinton, and for the Land which Robert de
Calz had with his mother, and of two hundred Marks of Silver, that the King
should pardon him the Pleas whereof he was impleaded at Blithe.

His son Richard de Lovetot 2 H. 2. Rot. Pip. 2 H. 2.
gave account of twenty Marks for the marriage of his wife, whereof ten were in
the Treasury, and ten he then ought, and one Norroy-hawk and one Gerfalcon; her
name was Cecilia, and she gave the Church of Dinisiey (in Hertfordsh.) to this
Covent, Mon. Angl. vol. 1. p. 51.
which amongst the gifts of her husbands father, and of others was confirmed by
Pope Alexander the third in the second year of his Pontificate, Ib.
Anno Domini 1161. This Richard de Luvetot confirmed the said William his
Fathers gift, to God and the Church of St. Cuthbert of Wirkesop; adding his
part of the Church of Claverburgh, and two Bovats of Land in Herthewik at
Vtwar, and in Wirkesop, the Land which was Wulvet the Priests, and Hugh his
brothers (to wit) that between the way and the Park, and Impecroft, to make a
Holt for Twigs [ virgultum.] He confirmed also his own proper gift which he
made to that Church after the death of his father, viz. the whole site of the
Town of Wirksop, near the Church, as it was shut in by the great ditch unto the
Meadow of Bersebrigg. And without the Ditch the seat of a Mill, with one
dwelling house, and the Meadow of Buselin, which is between the [ virgultum]
Holt of the Church and the Water. But on the other part of the Water toward
the North, the Meadow and Land, by the bound of Kilton, from the Water unto the
way under the Gallows, toward the South, and by the Crosses which he himself,
and William his son, erected with their own hands, unto the Moore, that is the
mucky and moist plain, the Land also toward the South, from the Head of the
Causey, beyond the Plain, as it was girt in by a Ditch to the water. In Mauton
the Mill with the Fish Pond. And all Sloswik. He confirmed also the gift of his
mother Emme, which she gave by his concession to the Church of St. Cuthbert,
viz. the Mill of Bolum, etc. He also granted that the said Canons should have
two Carts straying in his Park of Wyrkesop for dry Wood, whatever they should
find lying except Green, and Timber, [ viridi and Materie] he confirmed the
Land of Thorp, of the gift of Walter le Hayer, and the grant of Roger his son.
This Deed of confirmation he made by the consent of William his son, who
offered it together with him on the Altar, for the Souls of his father and
mother, for himself and his said son William, also for all his Parents as well
living as dead. The Witnesses were Robert de Meisnill, and Robert his son,
Leonius de Maleverer (it should rather be de Malnuers) and Michael his son,
Henry de Luvetot, Robert de Somervill, and Robert his son, Raph de Luvetot,
Jordan de Revenell, and Thomas his son, Raph de Tortesmains, Fulco de Traiton,
Odo de Eston, and Matthew his son, Nigellus son of Godard.

His said son William de Luvetot, on the day of his fathers burial, Regist. de
Wirks. fol. 2. cap. 4.
gave and confirmed to God, Saint Mary, and Saint Cuthbert, and the Canons of
Radeford, the Tithe of all his Rents, which he then had, or ever should have,
and wheresoever on this side or beyond the Sea. He survived not very long, for
Raph Murdac the Sheriff, 27 H. 2. Rot. Pip. 27 H. 2.
gave account of 42l. 12s. 10d. of the issues of the Land of William de Luvetot.

Matilda de Luvetot who was daughter of Walter Fitz-Robert, Rot. de Dom. pueris
and puellis Dom. Regis in Scacc. Rot. de Hertfordser.
and wife of William de Luvetot, and then twenty four years of age, and had by
the said William one daughter, who was then also seven years old, and in the
Custody of Raph Murdac, was certified 32 H. 2. (or thereabouts) to have the
Town of Dineley (in Hertfordshire) in dower, which was valued at 12l. per annum.

Matilda the daughter and heir of William de Lovetot was by King Richard the
first, Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p. 50.
married to Gerard de Furnivall, who came out of Normandy.

Girard de Furnivall 2 Ioh. gave the King four hundred Marks, Obl. 2 Ioh. m.
14. Ebor. Pip. 3 Ioh. Ebor.
that he should take the Homage of Gerard his son, concerning the Barony, which
was William de Luvetots, father of his said sons wife, and that he might hold
in peace his Land, so as he then did, and the Land whereof his said wifes
father was seized in his Demesne as of Fee, on the day upon which he was alive
and dead.

King John by his Charter dated at Nottingham 12 Mar. in 2 Ioh. Char. 2. Ioh.
in dorso.
forbad Gerard, the son of Girard de Furnivall, and Matildis his wife, the
daughter and heir of William de Lovetot to be put in Plea, concerning any
freehold which they held, and whereof the said William was seized when he
died, as long as she should be under age.

The said King, 4 Ioh. Pat. 4. Ioh. m. 11.
certified G. Fitz-Peter, and the Barons of the Exchequer at London, that
Gerard de Furnivall had rendered Conan, son of Giuomar de Leon, whom he took at
Mirabell, to the said King, who gave him to the said Gerard, to help his
journey to Jerusalem, and redeemed him of him for 400. Marks of Silver; which
the said Gerard gave the King a Fine, for Gerard his son, and his wife, the
daughter of William de Luvetot, concerning the Land of the said William, etc.
The said King, 20 May, 5 Ioh. rendered to Gerard de Furnivall, Pat. 5 Ioh. m. 10.
and Matilda his Wife, the heir of William de Lovetot, the whole Land of the
said William, with the Appurtenances.

Gerard de Furnivall 9 Ioh. gave account of 1000l. and fifteen Palfreys for
having peace of the Lands, P^^. 9 Ioh. E^erwiser.
which Nigellus de Luvetot (named in Wishou) claimed against him, and besides
he quit-claimed to the King the Town of Nieweport, and restored the Charter
which he had concerning the same Town.

Gerard de Furnivall at the request of his wife Matildis de Luvetot granted to
God and the Church of St. Mary, Regist. at Wirks. sol. 6. a. Cap. 13.
and St. Cuthbert of Radeford, and the Canons there, for the health of his
Soul, and of his said wifes, and of his mother Audel, and of his brother Galfr.
and all their ancestors and successors, Pasture for forty Cattle in his Park of
Wyrkesop, every year from the Close of Easter, till the Feast of St. Michael.

Matilda de Lovetot daughter and heir of William de Luvetot, gave a Mark of
yearly Rent, Regist. de Wirk. fol. 5. b. 6. a. cap. 11.
out of her Mill of Wyrkesop, to be received yearly on the day after St. Luke
the Evangelist, for a pitance for the use of that Covent, who then ought to
celebrate the Anniversary of Sir Gerard de Furnivall sometimes her husband. Her
brother Sir I. de Lovetot in Conq. Angliae- Willielmus de Luvetot fundator de
Wirksop temp. H. 1.-Emma. Richardus de Luvetot Baro de Sheffeld vel
Halumshire-Cecilia. Willielmus de Lovetot-Matild. fill. Walteri fill. Rob.-
Matildis de Lovetot sola haeres-Gerard. fill. Gerard. de Furnivalle. Thomas de
Furnivalle- Gerardus de Furnivalle fill. and haer. s. p.-Matild. sor. and
cohaer. Rich. fill. Joh. fill. Galf. Justic. de Hibernia.-Will. de Bellocampo
Com. Warw. mar. 2. Tho.-Bertha relict. 7 E. 1. Tho. Dom. Furnivall infra aet. 1
E. 1. ob. 6 E. 3.-Joana fill. Hug. le Dispenser 1 E. 1. ux. 1.-Eliz. fill. Petri
Montefort relict. Will. Com. Sarum.-Will. de Monteacuto Com. Sar. marit. prior.
Thom. Dom. Furnivalle ob. 13 E. 3.-Joana Eynecia fill. and cohaer. Theobaldi de
Verdun relicta Will. de Mountague ob. 8 E. 3. aetat. 30. ann. and 2. men's.-
Thom. dictus Hasty Dom. Furnivall ob. 39 E. 3. s. p.-Margareta, 17 E. 3- Will.
Dom. Furnival haeres frat. ob. 6 R. 2.-Thomas. ob. 10 H. 4. Joana Dom.
Furnivalle sola haer. ux. 1.-Tho. Nevill Dom. Furnivall jure uxoris, Thesaur.
Angl. Frater Rad. Com. Westmorl. ob. 8 H. 4.-Ankareta fill. le Strange de
Blakmer.-Richard. Talbo: mar. 1. Matilda Dom. Furnivall sola haer. aet. 17. and
nupta 10 H. 4.-2 John Talbot Dom. Furnivall, 7 H. 5. jure uxoris, postea Com.
Salop.-Marg. fill. Ric. de Belocamp. Com. Warw. ux. 2. Johannes Talbot Com.
Salop-Eliz. fill. Jacobi Botiler Com. Ormond. Joh. Com. Salop-Catharina fill.
Hen. Stafford Duc. de Buckss. Georg. Com. Salop-Anna fill. Will. Dom. Hastings
ux. 1.-Eliz. fill. and cohaer. Ric. Walden de Com. Cant. mil. Franciscus Com.
Salop.-Maria fill. Tho. Dom. Dacre de Gillesland ux. 1.-Gracia fill. Rob.
Shakerly. Georgius Com. Salop.-Gertruda fill. Tho. Com. Rutland ux. 1.-Eliz.
fill. Joh. Hardwick de Hardwick in Com. Derb.-Will. Cavendish mil. a quo Com.
Devon. and Dux Novicast. 2 Gilbertus Com. Salop-Maria fill. Will. Cavendish,
mil. Aletheia-Tho. Com. Arundell. Henricus Comes Arundell-Eliz. fill. Esme
Stuart Duc. Lenox. Thom. Dux Norfolc. Henricus Dom. Howard, Comes Marescal.
Angl.- Bernardus Howard.

Maria-Will. Herbert Com. Pembr. Eliz. s. p.-Hen. Gray Com. Cant.
1 Franc. fill. and haer.- 3 Edw. 4 Hen. Talbot-...fill. Will. Reyne^ and sola
haer. Gertrud. fill. and haer.-Rob. Com. Kingston. Henr. Marchio Dorchest. Will.
Pierpont. Franc.



Anna haeres matris-Petrus fill. Will. Compton ex quib. Com. Northam.

Gilb. Talbot de Grafton, mil. Gart.-Eliz. Greystok-Andrea Cotton ux. 2. Gilb.-
Joh. Talbot antecess. moderni Com. Salop.

Humfr. Christoph.
1 Gilbertus Talbot.-Joana fill. Tho. Duc. Glocest. Ankareta fill. and haer. s. p.



Will. de Monteacuto Com. Sarum.


Gerardus de Furnivall-Christiana Ledec. Gerard. de Furnivall.- Lora de
Furnivalle fill. and haeres.-Gerardus Uflet.

Willielmus de Furnivall.
Ernulphus de Mandevill.

Nigellus de Lovetot Baro in Com. Hunt.-Margareta. Rich. ut in Wishou- Rog. de
Lovetot. Nigel. Rob. de Coleston- Will. de Lovetot.



Ernulph de Mandevill was a Witness to this.

Ib. fol. 4. cap. 8.
After the great controversy concerning many demands on both parts between her
and Wall. the Prior and the Covent of Wyrkesop, the said Mat. in her free
Widowhood and lawful power on the day of the translation of St. Thomas the
Martyr, 33 H. 3. confirmed all the gifts of William de L. her father, and
Richard de Luvet her Grandfather, and Gerard de Furnivall her quondam Husband,
Ex Chron. de Wirks^p inter Collectan. S. Lo Knivet. Ar. D. 126.
who was entombed at Ebrard in Normandy in his own Demesne, which is called
Furnefall; he begot Thomas, Gerard, and William. Thomas was slain in the holy
Land by the Saracens, and his brother Gerard after his death returned from
thence: But the said Maud his mother taking it ill that her son Thomas should
remain amongst Heathens, sent back the said Gerard that he might bring the
Bones of the said Thomas his brother, by which means he was intombed in this
Monastery on the North side, with his Helmet adorned with Gemms, and a noble
Carbuncle upon his head. The said Sir Gerard her son lay on the South side
under a Marble Stone next the Chapel of St. Peter, and the said William their
brother, in the middle of the Chapel of the blessed Mary, not far from Maud the
wife of John first Lord of Furnivall, in a Tomb of Stone inscribed thus, Me
memorans palle, similis curris quia call, De Fournivalle, Pro Wilielmo rog^
psalle.

These Chronicles of Wyrksop are not exact in this descent, which I suppose
misled Mr. Robert Glover in the draught of that noble Pedigree, which he
designed for George late Earl of Shrowsbury, and Earl Marshall of England, Lord
Talbot, Furnival, Verdun, Lovetoft, and Strange of Blackmer, Knight of the
Garter, etc. 22 Eliz. 1580. wherein he makes Ger. son and heir of this Thomas
de Furnivall to be father of Thomas, etc. which he was not.

He indeed married Maud, the sister and coheir of Richard Fitz-Iohn
Fitz-Geoffrey, the Justice of Ireland, who was afterward married to William
Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, by whom she had Guy Earl of Warwick, twenty six
years of age, and above, 26 E. 1. Esc. 26 E. 1. n. 41. Antiq. War. 314.
her heir, which shows that her former husband the said Gerard de Furnivall had
none by her: Regist. de Wirksop, fol. 12. a.
but it further appears, for Gerard, son and heir of Thomas de Furnivall, gave
with his body the third part of the Mills of Bradfeld, with the suit of his men
of the Sok of Bradfeud, to this Monastery; and Thomas, Ib.
son and heir of Thomas de Furnivall, confirmed this gift which Gerard de
Furnivall his brother had conferred; Regist. de Wirksop, fol. 12. b.
and Bertrea or Bertha, sometimes wife of Thomas de Furnivall in her Widowhood,
for the health of her Soul, and of the Souls of Sir Thomas de Furnivall her
quondam husband, and of Sir Gerard his brother confirmed 4l. of Silver, to be
taken out of her Mill at Bradefeld yearly, during her life.

Thomas de Furnivall Lord of Halumschire, son and heir of Thomas de Furnivall,
Ib. fol. 5. cap. 9.
confirmed to these Canons all Lands, etc. in which they were seized in the
time of Matildis de Luvetot his Grandmother.

The Prior of Wyrkesop, 53 H. 3. Pl. de Iur. and Assis. ap. Derb. 53. H. 3. to.
16.
offered himself the fourth day against Thomas de Furnivall in a Plea,
wherefore he made waste, sale, and destruction of his Park of Wirksop, by which
means the said Prior for the future could not as he ought, have two Carts to
bring dry wood every day to the Monastery, etc.

There was a license 54 H. 3. Pat. 54 H. 3. m. 31.
granted to Thomas de Furnivall, to build a certain Castle at his Manor of
Sheffeild in the County of York.

Thomas de Furnivall, son of Thomas de Furnivall, confirmed with his body
present, Regist. de Wirksop, fol. 12. b.
the yearly rent of six Marks out of the Mill of Bradefeud, viz. that Rent
which the Canons had of the gift of the Lady Bertr. de Furnivall his mother
during her life.

Bertra who had been wife of Thomas de Furnivall, 7 E. 1. Pip. 7 E. 1.
was Fined 40s. because she retracted or withdrew her self, etc.

Thomas, son and heir of Thomas de Furnivall, 1 E. 1. Claus. 1 E. 1. m. 10.
was under age, and married to Ioane, the daughter of Hugh le Dispenser.

Thomas de Furnivall the third Lord of Hallumshire, and of Wyrkesop, Regist. de
Wirks. fol. 8. b. 9. a.
confirmed to this Priory eight Marks of yearly Rent, out of his Mills of
Wirkesop, and 30s. 6d. in the name of the Tithe of his Rents of his Manor of
Wyrkesop, and 10s. in the name of the Tithe of his Manor of Glesthorp, of old
constituted or set in this County, and twelve Marks of his Mills of Bradefeld
per annum, and five Marks yearly Rent of his Mills of Brekesherth, and also 60.
and 6s. and 1d. in the name of Tithe of the yearly Rents of his Manor of
Sheffeld in Hallumshire in the County of York, and Pasture for 40. Cartel in
his Park; and this bore date at Nottingham the Thursday after the Feast of St.
Augustine the Apostle of the English, An. Dom. 1328. 2 E. 3.

Thomas de Furnivall, senior, 19 E. 2. Com. Tri^. 19 E. 2. to. 7.
atturned in his place William de Sheffeld, and Adam, son of Henry de Sheffeld,
to prosequnt in the Court of the Exchequer, concerning a debt which the said
Thomas had paid to the King by Roger de Somervill Sheriff of Yorkshire.

It appears also in 19 E. 2. Com. Hill. 19 E. 2. r. 3.
that the said Thomas de F. senior, was amerced as a Baron in several Courts
before the 14 E. 2. but he pleaded he was no Baron, neither did he hold his
Land by Barony nor part of a Barony, whereupon several Inquisitions were taken
by Robert de Nottingham, Remembrancer of the Exchequer assigned thereto, viz.
one at Rotheram, where it was found that the said Thomas de F. senior held the
Manor of Sheffeld in the County of York, of the King in Capite by Homage only,
and the Manor of Whystan of Galfr. Luterell in Capite, by the service of three
Fees and an half of a Knight by right of inheritance. Another at Nottingham the
Saturday next before quindena Paschae, where it was likewise found that he held
the Manors of Wyrkesop and Gresthorpe, with the members in this County of the
King, as of the Honor of Tykhull, by the service of four Fees, and the fourth
part of a Knights Fee, by right of inheritance, after the death of Thomas de F.
his quondam father, whose heir he was. And the third Inquisition was taken
before the said Robert de Not. at Darby the Friday before, where it was found
that the said Tho. de F. senior held in the County of Darby the Manor of Eyum
of the King of the Honor of Peverell, of the Castle of the High Peke 1. f.
which Manor he bought of Roger Morteyn. And that he held the Manor of
Middelton of Thomas de Chaworth, by the Service of half a Knights Fee, and that
he had of one Richard de Bernake, who held it of the said Thomas by the same
Service. And that he held the moiety of the Town of Bracington, as parcel of
the Wapentac of Wyrkesoorth, which was an Eschaet of the Kings by the
forfeiture of Thomas late Earl of Lancaster, by the Service of finding two
Frank-pledges in that Wapentach; and that a certain Ancestor of him the said
Thomas de Furnivall had that moiety, and held it to him and his heirs, by the
gift of a certain Earl of Derby, who held that Wapentach of King Henry the
third, Grandfather of the King (viz. Edward the second) in Fee Farm for ever,
and the said moiety of the Town of Bracington gave to the said Ancestor of the
said Thomas de F. in Frank-marriage, with a certain daughter of the said Earl.
And the said Thomas de F. senior, held of Nicolas de Langford, as of his Manor
of Haversedge in the said County, an Hamlet called Bauntford, etc. but none by
Barony, or part of a Barony, etc.

Yet it appears that he was called to all the Parliaments, as other Barons
were, as for example in the 23 E. 1. Claus. 23 E. 1. m. 9. in dorso. and m. 3.
in dorso.
to one to be held at Westminster the first of August; and to another the same
year the Sunday next after the Feast of St. Martin in Winter; and that at St.
Edmunds (Bury) the day after All Souls, 24 E. 1. Claus. 24 E. 1.
and that in 12 E. 2. Claus. 12 E. 2. m. 29.
and that in 13 E. 2. Claus. 13 E. 2. in dorso.
and in 14 E. 2. Claus. 14 E. 2. in dorso.
to that to be held at Westminster three weeks after the Nativity of St. John
Baptist, both Thomas de Furnivall, senior, and Thomas de Furnivall, junior,
were summoned.

Thomas de Furnivall, senior, 6 E. 3. Esc. 6 E. 3. n. 68.
held this Manor, with the Appurtenances, and Gresthorp, as in that place is
noted.

The Jury, 28 E. 3. Esc. 28 E. 3. n. 39.
said that Elizabeth de Monteacuto held the Manor of Wyrksop of the endowment
of Thomas de Furnivall her quondam husband, and of the Inheritance of Thomas de
Furnivall, who then was Cousin and heir of her said husband, viz. son and heir
of Thomas de Furnivall, son and heir of Thomas her husband. She was daughter of
Peter de Montford, and widow of William, Antiq. of Warwicks.
son of Simon de Montacute, and mother of William de Montacute, Earl of
Salisbury: There is a Monument of Marble for her yet standing on the North side
of the Quire at Christ's Church in Oxford.

Thomas de Furnivall, junior, was above forty years old at the death of his
father, which was the day after the Purification 1332. He married Ioane, the
eldest daughter and coheir of Theobald de Verdun Lord of Alveton Castle in
Staffordshire, Baron of Webley in the County of Hereford, the relict of William
de Mountague. This Thomas de Furnivall Lord of Alveton in Staffordshire died at
Sheffeld the day before the Ides (it should be Nones) of October 1339. the
Inquisition says the Thursday next before the Feast of St. Dionis, Mon. Angl.
vol. 1. 913.
13 E. 3. which is on Oct. 9. leaving then his son and heir Thomas de Furnivall
about seventeen years old, whose brother William de Furnivall (which afterward
was his heir, Esc. 14 E. 3. n. 26.
and did his Homage, 39 E. 3.) was born at Alveton Castle the tenth of the
Kalends of September 1326. Their father who died about 14 October. Anno Dom.
1339. was buried the Monday within the Vtas of the Ascension of our Lord next
following, in the Abbey of Beauchief by the Abbat of Crokesden: his said wife
Ioane, the Lady of Alveton, died in Childbed 6 of the Nones of October. 1334. of
the age of thirty years and two Months, and was honorably buried the seventh
of the Ides of January following at Crokesden, amongst her ancestors of the
Family of Verdun Founders of that place.

Her son Thomas de Furnivall, 17 E. 3. Esc. 17 E. 3. n. 54.
had an Ad quod Damnum for settling the Castle and Manor of Sheffeld, and in
18 E. 3. Esc. 18 E. 3. n. 22.
the Castle and Manor of Alveton, to the use of him the said Thomas, and
Margaret his wife, and the heirs of their bodies, as William de Furnivall (his
said brother and heir) had, 40 E. 3. Esc. 40 E. 3. n. 26.
to settle the Manor of Farneham in the County of Bucks, to the use of him the
said William, and Thomasia his wife, and the heirs of their bodies.

William de Furnivall Chr. dyed the twelfth of April, 6 R. 2. Esc. 6 R. 2. n.
41.
seized of this Manor, etc. Thomasina his wife held the Manor of Coggeshalis
in Elmedone in Essex, and the Manor of Dagworth in Suffolk. Ioane, the
daughter of the said William, wife of Thomas de Nevill was then found his heir,
and above fourteen years old.

This Thomas Nevill was brother to Raph first Earl of Westmerland. He was
Treasurer of England (but is not in Mr. Dugdales Catalogue, which makes these
Chronicles of Wirksop more doubtful) and in right of his wife, Ex Chron. de
Wirksop inter Coll. S. Lo
Lord Furnivall; he was buried here most magnificently, Kniveton. Chron. series
Orig. Iur.
and lies in the middle above the Quire. He died the Monday next before
Palmsunday, 8 H. 4. Esc. 8 H. 4. n. 62.
leaving behind him another wife, who was Ankaretta, daughter of John le
Strange of Blackmere, and widow of Richard, son of Gilbert Talebot, and mother
of the famous John Talbot: she and he in her right held the Manor of Swynden
in Wiltshire, and the third part of the Manor and Hundred of Shryvenham in
Barkshire of the Dotation of Richard Talbot Chr. her former husband: the heirs
of the said Thomas de Nevill were then found to be Matilda and Ioane his
daughters.

Thomasia, who had been wife of William Furnivall Chr. died on the Feast of St.
Margaret the Virgin being Saturday, 10 H. 4. Esc. 10 H. 4. n. 25.
Matilda was found Cousin and heir, and aged seventeen years, viz. the daughter
and heir of Ioane, the daughter and heir of the said William and Thomasia, and
the said John Talbot had then taken her to wife.

This John was brother of Gilbert Lord Talbot, and after the death of
Ankaretta, his said brothers daughter, his heir. He was in his said wifes right
Lord Furnivall, and had respite of Homage 7 H. 5. Fin. 7 H. 5. m. 1.
Febr. 12. He was created by King Henry the sixth at Windsor, May 20. 19 H. 6.
Earl of Shrowsbury. He was Earl of Weishford in Ireland by Inheritance, and
created Earl of Waterford 17 July, 24 H. 6. and Steward of that Kingdom, and
afterward Marshal of France most worthily, where he wan so many Battles, and
was so formidable to the French during the twenty four years of his most
glorious Warfare there. He was slain at the Siege of Chastilion the fourth of
the Ides of July, Anno 1453. as also was his son John Talbot Viscount Lisle,
whom he had by his second wife Margaret, the daughter of the famous Richard
Beauchamp Earl of Warwick. The body of our Noble Earl was brought over and
buried at Whitchurch; after whose death Bordeaux was presently taken by the
French, and an end made of that War, and the Civil Wars begun here by the Dukes
of York and Somerset.

John, the second Earl of Shrowsbury (his son by his first wife the forenamed
Matilda), was a most excellent young man and most like his ancestors, he fell
in the Battle of Northampton the sixth of the Ides of July 1460. fighting on
the part of King Henry the sixth, who was then taken Captive by his
Adversaries. Elizabeth, daughter of James Botiller Earl of Ormond, was his
wife, and Sir Humfr. and Sir Christopher Talbot his brothers. He was buried
here and had Inscriptions upon his Tomb Prose and Verse, etc. He and his father
were both Knights of the Garter, as these Earl usually were, and he, 35 H. 6.
was Lord Treasurer. He had sons John, James, Gilbert of Grafton, Knight of the
Garter and Banneret, father of John, father of John, etc. of whom the present
Earl of Shrowsbury is descended, and Christopher, another son of this great
Earl, who was Archdeacon of Chester, and Rector of Whitchurch nigh Blackmere,
and George Anne, the daughter of this second Earl, was wife of Sir Henry Vernon
of Haddon.

His said son John Talbot, the third Earl of Shrowsbury, Weishford, and
Waterford, was born on the Eve of St. Luke the fourth hour after midnight 1448.
he married Katherin, daughter of Henry Stafford, Duke of Buckingham, and died
in the City of Coventry the fourth of the Kalends [it should be Ides] of July
1473. and was buried in the Chapel of St. Mary at this Wirksop. The Inquisition
says his death was on the Saturday next after the Feast of the Nativity of St.
John Baptist, 13 E. 4. Esc. 13 E. 4. n. 52.
otherwise 28 of June (which is 4 of the Ides of July) and that George his son
and heir was then above three years old.

This George, the fourth Earl, was also Knight of the Garter, and a great man
with King Henry the eighth. His first wife was Anne, the daughter of William
Lord Hastings, Chamberlain to King Edward the fourth, by whom he had his eldest
son Francis, and many children; his second wife was Elizabeth, daughter and
heir of Sir Richard Walden of Kent, by whom he had a daughter Anne, the heir of
her mother, married to Peter, son of Sir William Compton, to whom she brought
Henry Lord Compton (Ancestor of the Earl of Northampton) and was after married
to William Herbert Earl of Pembroke. This Earl George died the twenty sixth of
July 1538. and was buried at Sheffeild.

To his son Francis Earl of Shrowsbury did King Henry the eighth, 22 November. 33
H. 8. Par. 4. pat. 33 H. 8.
grant the whole Site and Precinct of the Monastery or Priory of Worksop, and
all Mess. and Houses, and several Closes and Fields, and four Acres of Arable
in Manton in the Parish of Worksop, etc. to hold to him and his heirs of the
King in Capite by the service of the tenth part of a Knights Fee, and also by
the Royal service of finding the King a Right Hand Glove at his Coronation, and
to support his Right-arm that day, as long as he should hold the Scepter in his
hand, paying yearly 23l. 8s. 0d. ob. Rent. His first wife was Mary, daughter of
Thomas Lord Dacres of Gillesland, she died 28 March 1538. His second was Grace,
the daughter of Robert Shakerley.

This Earl Francis was also Knight of the Garter, as was also his son and heir
George, whose first wife was Gertrude, daughter of Thomas Lord Ros. and Earl of
Rutland, by whom he had Francis, Gilbert, Edward, and Henry, Katherin, the wife
of Edward, son and heir of William Herbert Earl of Pembroke, Mary, the wife of
Sir George Savile, Ancestor of the Lord Halyfax, and Grace, married to Henry
Cavendish, eldest son of Sir William Cavendish, whose widow this Earl George
took to his second wife: she was Elizabeth, the daughter of John Hardwick of
Hardwick in the County of Derby, Esquire, and first married to... Barlow of
that County; next to Sir William Cavendish, by whom only she had issue; then to
Sir William St. Low; and lastly to this great Earl: she adorned these Counties
with the magnificent Houses of Chattesworth, Hardwick, Oldcotes, and this
Worksop Manor, and with her Illustrious Offspring the Families of the Earls
of Devonshire, and Duke of Newcastle. The four sons of the Earl her husband,
before named, three whereof were Earls, all failed of issue Male, so that the
Lands of this mighty Earldom, and this Lordship, became divided.

Francis married Anne, daughter of William Earl of Pembroke, without issue. His
brother Gilbert Earl after him, married Mary, daughter of Sir William
Cavendish, and of the said Elizabeth the Countess his Mother-in-law, by whom he
had three daughters and heirs; Mary, wife of William Herbert Earl of Pembroke,
without issue; Elizabeth, of Henry Earl of Kent, she was acquainted with the
great Antiquary I. Seldom, and accused for cutting down the best Oaks of all
England, both here and at Sheffeild, she also left no child; and Aletheia, the
wife of Thomas Earl of Arundell; she bore him Henry Earl of Arundell, who by
his wife Elizabeth, daughter of Esme Stuart Duke of Lenox, begot Thomas, since
the Kings return restored to the Dukedom of Norfolk; and Henry Lord Howard and
Earl Marshall of England his brother, who manageth all this Noble Inheritance
for him, whilst he remains not so capable of such affairs in Italy.

King Edward the sixth, September. 2. 1 E. 6. Par. 5. pat. 1 E. 6.
granted to Henry Bishop of Lincoln, the Reversion of the Rectory of Worshop,
and all Tithes of Corn and Hay, etc. in the Hamlets of Slosewick, Ratcliff,
Retford, Kilton, Reton, Scorton, and Clummer, within the Parish of Worsopp, and
Eastbarton [Osberton] and all other Hamlets within the said Parish of Worsopp
to the said Rectory belonging, and all that yearly Rent of 35l. reserved upon
the demise A SOUTH-WEST PROSPECT OF THE CHURCH OF RADFORD BY WORKSOP A. 1677.
A SOUTH PROSPECT OF WORKSOP MANOR
The old Abbey Gatehouse at Radford by Workshop as it now is A. 16^6.
made to William Chastelyn, Merchant of London, to hold to him and his
successors in pure and perpetual Alms.

A good part of the Church is yet standing, in which lay William de Lovetot the
Founder, Ex Chroni^. de Wi^ks^p.
on the North side by the wall at the lowest step tending to the high Altar, he
died 7 Id. Apr. Richard de Lovetot his son is buried below his father, under a
white stone at the left side of Sir Thomas Furnivall; William Lovetot, son of
Richard, by the lowest step in the same pavement. The last Thomas Furnivall
lies in a Tomb of Alabaster beyond the principal Quire on the North side, and
William on the South side. Ioane, the wife of Thomas Nevill, was buried above
the principal Quire, and lay with her Image of Alabaster very near her husband;
Maud their daughter was buried in the Chapel of St. Mary, before the Image of
the blessed Mary near the side of the Stall.

Thomas de Furnivall, son of Bertha, buried at the barefoot Friars in
Doncaster, died the fourth of the Ides of May.

The Inscription upon the Tomb of John, the second Earl of Shrowsbury, in this
place was thus,

Sepulchrum magnanimi ac praepotentis Domini Domini Johannis Talbot, Ex Coll.
Rob. Glover in Geneal. magna borum Commit.
Comitis Salopie secundi, ex regio sanguine ducentis originem. Qui Henrico Regi
fidissimus, Bello apud Northamtoniam gesto, ante signa strenue pugnans, honesta
morte cecidit die decimo Julii, Anno Dom. nostri Jesus Christi 1460.

Et Metrice sic,

Salopie (...) lapis hic tegit ossa Johannis,
Cui nil^^ antiquius quam fuit alma fides.
Hic ut serviret Regi, tormenta subivit
Intrepidus ferri sanguineamque necem.
Ergo licet parvum condat sua viscera saxum,
Virtus Angligenum lustrat in omne solum.
Gayteford.
This was an Hamlet belonging to Workesop. John de Gayteford, 6 E. 3. Esc. 6.
E. 3. n. 68.
held the fourth part of a Knights Fee in Gayteford nigh Wirksop of Thomas de
Furnivall. Thomas de Gayteford, 40 E. 3. Esc. 40 E. 3. n. 18.
held the Manor of Gayteford of Thomas de Furnivall (the last, then dead) by
the Service of the fourth part of one Knights Fee.

There was a Fine levied the day after All Souls day, 16 H. 7. Ped. Fin. Mich.
16 H. 7. in diverse. Comitat. indorsat. Bu^dell. Hog Heyto^ Fogge.
between Edward Grysacre, Clark, and Richard Bristowe, Quer. and Thomas Knight,
Esquire, and Elizabeth his wife, and John Towneley, Knight, and Isabell his
wife, Deforc. of the Manors of Gaitford and Harwell, with the Appurtenances,
and one hundred Mess. twenty Tofts, one thousand five hundred Acres of Land,
one hundred of Meadow, five hundred of Pasture, two hundred of Wood, twenty of
More, ten. of Turbary, and 40s. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Gaitford,
Harwell, Worsop, Shiriokes, East Retford, West Retford, Grynley, Hayton,
Wellome Wellome Morehous, Bole, Babworth, Ordesall, Stirton, Eton, Milneton,
Little Markham, Blyth, Ravenskill, Torworth, Madersey, and Everton, whereby the
premises were settled on the said Thomas and Elizabeth, and the heirs Males of
their bodies; remainder to the heirs of the body of Elizabeth; remainder to the
said Isabell, the wife of the said John Towneley, and the heirs of her body;
remainder to John Gaitford, son of Richard Gaitford, and the heirs of his body;
remainder to Agnes, sister of the said John (Gaitford, and) wife of James
Whitaker, and the heirs of her body; remainder to Elizabeth, wife of Thomas
Comberton, sister of the said John Gaitford, father of the said Elizabeth, wife
of the said Thomas Knight, and the heirs of her body; remainder to the right
heirs of the said John Gaitford, father of the said Elizabeth, wife of the said
Thomas Knight, for ever.

George Lassellys, Esquire, 37 H. 8. Hill. 37 H. 8. rot. 315.
claimed against Richard Townely, Esquire, the Manors of Gatford, Everton, and
Harwell, with the Appurtenances, and one hundred and twenty Mess. forty Tofts,
one Dovecote, 120. Gardens, one hundred and twenty Orchards, two thousand Acres
of Land, two hundred of Meadow, one thousand of Pasture, two hundred and fifty
of Wood, one hundred of More, forty of Turbary, and 40s. Rent, with the
Appurtenances in Garford, Everton, Harwell, Worsop, Shyreokes, East Retford,
West Retford, Grynley, Heyton, Wellome, Moregate, Bole, Babworth, Ordesall,
Styrton, Eton, Milneton, Little Markham, Blyth, Ravenshill, Torworth,
Maddersey, and Kylton, and three Mess. two hundred Acres of Land, etc. in
Aneston and Woodesettys in Darbyshire.

Richard Iesoppy, and William Mason, 14 Eliz. Hill. 14 Eliz. rot. 1074.
claimed against James Tailor, and others, twelve Mess. ten Tofts, etc. in
Worksop and Gateford, who called Brian Lassells, Esquire. His son Sir George
Lassells of Gateford and Styrton had a daughter and heir-named Elizabeth, who
was married to Sir Francis Rodes of Barleburgh in Derbyshire, who had a son
named Sir Francis Rodes, who had to wife Anne, daughter of Sir Gervas Clifton,
and by her had Sir Francis Rodes, Baronet, High Sheriff of this County 1671.
whose Grandmother (the said Sir George Lassells his daughter) took to her
second husband (though she had very many Children by her first) one Mr....
Lockart a Scottish man, and encombred the Estate with Suits in his minority.

Shireokes another Hamlet.
WIlliam de Lovetot the Founder, and Richard de Lovetot his son, Mon. Angl.
vol. 2. p. 54.
gave most of it to the Monastery, viz. the Mill and several dwelling Houses
and Bovats of Land, and the Land between the Water and the River toward the
South, and the way which leads to Holm Ker from the Ford which was by the
Potters House, and twenty and two Acres beyond the said River from the South,
between the way of Holmker and the bound of Thorpe and Colmancrofts.

King Henry the eighth, 16 August, 38 H. 8. Par. 3. pat. 38 H. 8.
granted to Robert Thornehill, Esquire, and Hugh Thornehill, Gent. all that
Manor, Demesne, or Grange, with the Appurtenances of Sherokes beneath the
Hamlet of Sheroks in the Parish of Worksoppe. And all Mess. Lands and Tenements
in Sheroks, Gatford, and Derfolde, and all Tithes in those Hamlets of the
yearly value of 17l. 13s. 4d. And a Mess. Lands and Tenements in Hayton in the
Tenure of Thomas Peke, late belonging to the Monastery of Worksop, etc. to hold
to them and their heirs, paying yearly for the Manor of Sheroks 35s. 4d. ob.
It came from Thornehill to.... Hewitt, B.
a Citizen of London, whose Posterity still enjoy it. Sir Thomas Hewitt had it.

Sloswicks.
Robert of Coleston, whose Surname was Lovetot, Regist. de Wirksop fol. 8. b.
by the Concession of Hugh his heir granted to this Priory of Radford the whole
compass of the Court, which was his fathers in Slaswic. Robert de Lovetot gave
the Church of Coleston, Ib. fol. 14. a.
and the whole Town of Sloswic, as is already set down in Coleston and Wishou,
both which the Founder and his son had given before, and the rest of the
Supreme Lords of their Posterity confirmed.

Queen Elizabeth, 27 Apr. 18 Eliz. Par. 3. pat. 18 Eliz.
granted to Roger Manners and his heirs, the Rectory and Church of Graneby,
late belonging to Thurgarton Priory. The Rectory and Church of Boney, late
belonging to Olvescroft in Leicestershire. That of Annesley exchanged with
William Bolles (who had Felley) a Tenement in Cossall, late belonging to
Newstede; a Mess. in Bradmere, late belonging to Lenton Priory; and all that
Tenement lying in the Hamlet of Sloswik (within, or) beneath the Parish of
Warsop in the Tenure of James Burgess; and all Lands and Tenements in
Sloswick, in the Tenure of Peter Horwood, late belonging to the Monastery of
Workesop.

Osberton.
IN Osberneston of the Land of the Taynes before the Conquest were two Manors,
which Eluuine and Vlviet had, and paid the Geld as one Car. The Land being
sufficient for four Plows (or four Car. Lib. Dooms.
) Afterward Swan and Vlviet held of the King (William the first) and had there
five Sochm. having four Plows or Car. and a Church and twenty Acres of Meadow,
Pasture Wood six qu. long, three broad. In the Confessors time the value was
60s. in the Conquerours 10s.

Mauvesinus de Hercy held the whole Town of Osberton of the Countess of Augi,
I^ libr. Feodor. Test. de Nev.
by the Service that he should be her Despencer, and the heirs of Alfreton had
the Land and defended it by such Service.

Robert, son of Ranulph, by the consent of William his heir, gave to God and
the Church of St. Mary and St. Cuthbert at Radeford the Church of Osberton.
Regist. de Wirksop, fol. 35. b.
The said William conf^rmed his fathers gift, and so did Robert, son of
William, the gift of the said Robert his Grandfather. Walter Archbishop of
York appropriated it. Ib. Cap. 4.
Thomas de Chawrth confirmed the gifts and confirmations which his Ancestors
had made, Ib. fol. 36. b.
viz. the gift of Robert Fitz-Ranulph of the Church, with all the
Appurtenances, and the confirmation of William his son, and of Robert, son of
the said William, together with the Land which the said Robert, son of the said
William de Alfreton; Grandfather of him the said Thomas de Chawrth,
quit-claimed, lying between Appelhayheved, and the Wood of Osberton, which Land
was formerly in contention between the said Robert, son of the said William de
Alfertun, and Robert de Pyckburn, sometimes Prior of Wyrkesop; and there was
also a Fine levied of this Advowson, 47 H. 3. between Thomas de Chawrth, and
John Prior of Wyrksop.

Thomas de Chewrth Lord of Osberton gave and granted to the said Prior and
Covent, that way in Osberton which lay between the Churchyard of the same Town
on the West, and the Manor of the Prior and Covent of Wyrksop on the East, and
stretched it self in length from the South corner of the said Churchyard to
the North corner.

Roger de Osberton in the time of Henry the third held a Knights Fee of the
Honor of Tikhill. Test. de Nev.


Thomas de Chaworth, 3 E. 3. Quo War. 3 E. 3.
claimed Free Warren in his Demesne Lands at Marncham, Edwalton, and Osberton.

Thomas Dynham, Gent. 31 H. 8. Mich. 31. H. 8. rot. 423.
claimed against Johan Fitz-William, widow, the third part of the Manors of
Marneham and Osberton, with the Appurtenances, etc. and the third part of the
Manors of Alfreton and Norton in Darbyshire, and to. 423.
all which continued long to the Family of Chaworth, of which that Joan was
part of an heir, as in the Descent may be observed.

King Henry the eighth, 3 July, 32 H. 8. Par. ^. pat. 32 H. 8.
granted the Grange called Osberton Grange, lying in Osberton in the Parish of
Worksop (which was not so anciently as what is here noted shows) to Robert
Dighton, Esquire, and his heirs amongst other things, together with Graveslane
in Oxton, Hardwick Grange, and Hardwick Wood, late belonging to the Priory of
Wirksop, paying for the Lands in Oxton 2s. for Osberton Grange 7s. and for the
Land in Hardewick 9s. 5d.

Matildis de Luvetot confirmed to the Monastery the whole Village of Herthwik,
M^^. Angl. vol. 2. p. 51.
given by her Ancestors before.

Robert Dighton, 12 August, 32 H. 8. Par. 7. pat. 32 H. 8.
had license to alienate Hardwick Grange and Wood, with all Houses, Buildings,
and Hereditaments in Osberton, Hardwick, and Worksop, belonging to it, to
Richard Whalley and his heirs. And all Mess. Lands and Tenements in Oxton, and
Osberton Grange, and the Houses, etc. in Osberton, Hardwick, and Worksop, to
William Bolles, and his heirs.

It was lately William Leekes, son and heir of Herbert Leek, late of Halam,
which William had it by his wife, who was of the Family of Bolles of Osberton,
by whom he has left a son or two to preserve the Inheritance.

Ratcliff
IT seems was another Hamlet of Wirksop, but I have not met with any further
memorable concerning it.

Kilton.
Regist. de Wirks^^, fol. ult.
THere was a Controversy moved between Sir Thomas de Furnivall and his Tenants
of Kylton on the one part, and Richard Rolston, otherwise called Chamberlayn on
the other, about the way of leading the draught Beasts of the Tenants of Kelton
to the Pasture of Romwod, appeased on this manner, 4 Apr. 1301. That the
Tenants of Kylton ought to drive their Cattle backward and forward ( fugare and
refugare) by the way of Bresbrig, and so by the way of Radford, and from
Radford by the way unto Southcotes, belonging to the Priory of Wirkesop, and
from thence unto Bryndhastedys, and so by the said bounds and limits to Kylton.
This was entered in the Court Roll of the said Sir Thomas Lord Furnivall the day
and year abovesaid.

Matthew Field, William Meredith, and Richard Springham, 8 Eliz. Mic. 7 and 8
Eliz. rot. 756.
claimed against Edward Casteling twenty Mess. twenty Cottages, two Dovecotes,
twenty Barns, twenty Gardens, twenty Orchards, five hundred Acres of Land, one
hundred and fifty of Meadow, three hundred of Pasture, twenty of Wood, and two
hundred of Furz and Heath in Worksop, Wylloughby, Kylton, Skafgreves,
Clarburgh, and Retford of the Clay, also the Rectory of Willoughby upon the
Woldes, and Advowson of the Vicarage of Willoughby, and the Tithes of Corn and
Hay in Willoughby.

Scofton.
IN Thorp, Scoteby, Lib. Dooms.
and Rounton were two Car. Soc to the Kings great Manor of Maunsfeld.

There was a Writ of false Judgment, 21 H. 8. Pasch. 21 H. 8. rot. 159.
between Elizabeth Fenton, widow, Plaintiff, and John Hill, Thomas Capstoke,
and Robert Johnson alias Robert Smith, concerning three Mess. two hundred Acres
of Land, forty of Meadow, twenty of Pasture, four of Wood, and 10s. Rent, with
the Appurtenances in Scofton, in the Kings Court of Maunsfeild in Sherwood.

The prime Capital Mess. in Scofton has for some time belonged to the
Iesoppes. B.


Ryton.
IT appears, 30 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Mich. 30 E. 1. to. 74.
that Stephen Malovel gave a Mess. two hundred and sixty Acres of Land, and
seven of Meadow in Renetone nigh Wirksop to Alice, the wife of Ranulph de
Huntingfeld, who bound himself to John de Melsa in C. Marks by a Statute
Merchant, and failing in payment the Sheriff caused the Land to be extended at
a reasonable price, viz. 4l. 9s. 1d. and put the said John in seisin, in which
he stood for a year and more, until the said Ranulph and Alice disseised him,
etc. Upon this came William de Dogmerfeld, who said he was the Kings Bailiff of
his Manor of Maunesfeld, and that Renetone was a member of the Kings said
Manor, and the Tenements put in view, Ancient Demesne, etc. In this are
Recorded very many of the Customs of Mansfeld, which shows that they are as
like Freeholders as Copyholders can be.

Reyton has been and still is the place of Residence of a Family-named Air,
viz.

William Air of Reyton descended from Air of Hope in Com. Derb.-Anna fill. and
haer. Dom. de Reyton. Ex Copiae lib. visit. pen. Reason Mellish.
Edm. Air de Reyton.-Margeria fill. Rob. Coyney de Weston Coyney Staff.
Robertus Air de Reyton.-Dorothea fill. Georgii Columbel de Darley Derb.
Georgius Air de Ryton superstes 1614.-Anna fill. Rob. Spark de Nantwich Ches.
Rob. Air fill. and haer. aet. 11. 1614.-Elizab. fill. Will. Saunderson de Blithe.
1 Will. Evre natus 1626. 2 Georg. 3 Gervas. 4 Robert. Franc.
2 Will. 3 Joseph. 4 Thom.




Clumber
HAd three Bov. of the Soc of Maunsfeld, and in Clumber were two Manors of
Roger de Buslies Fee, which before the Conquest Adeluvol and Vlchil had, and
paid as for five Bov. to the Geld. Lib. Dooms.
The Land being two Car. Part of it, viz. two Bov. was waste which Fulc held.
In the other Vlchel had under Roger one Car. and one Mill of 12d. Pasture Wood
two qu. long, one qu broad. In the Confessors time this was 20s. when Doomsday
Book was made 4s.

Regist. de Welb. p. 60.
The Woods of Clumbre were of the Sokage of Maunesfeld and Wodehouse, and the
bound begun at Suthones, and extended it self by the way which was called
Kirkegate, and led to Wirksop, unto the Cross, which divided the Fee of the
King, and the Fee of the Lord of Wirkesop, and the Fee of Tikehull. And toward
the East is the Kings Wood, which Wood Thomas de Hayton, Elias, son of Hubert,
of the same, and Peter de Clumbre held of the King and of the Sokage of
Maunesfeld.

In lib. f^od.
Adam de Hayton, and William, son of Hubert, held two parts of one Car. in
Lunde, Clumber, Retford, and Misterton, of the Honor of Tikhull, for a Horse
and Sac to the Constable, when he should go into Wales, and paid no Scutage.
About the time of H. 6. Robert Hekeling held the third part of a Knights Fee in
Lunde and Clumber.

King H. 8. 23 Mar. 36 H. 8. Par. 8.36 H. 8. pat.
granted to Roger, and Robert Taverner, and their heirs, a Mess. and Lands in
Clumbre, late belonging to Newstede at 11s. per annum.

The same King 22 November. 38 H. 8. Pa. 12. pat. 38 H. 8.
granted to John Bellowe, and Robert Bigot, the Rectory of Carcolston, and
Advowson of the Vicarage, and a Mess. in Clumber, with the Appurtenances; and
the Tithe Corn and Hay in the Fields of Screton, then in the Tenure of Richard
Whalley, Esquire, late belonging to the Priory of Worksop, as in Carcolston is
also noted.

Lib. libere ten.
The owners of Works. 1612. are thus set down, Gilbert Earl of Shrowsbury, Sir
Bryan Lassels, Knight, of Gateford, Thomas Bowls of Osbarton, Esquire, George
Air, Gent. Bryan Tailor, Gent. Edward Needham, George Hodgekyne, George Low,
John Snowden, Rob. Mandevill, Chr. Champne senior, Thomas Longley, John
Hatfeild, Richard Hatfeild, Robert Low, John Dunston, William Iervas, William
Goodridge, William Horsfold, and John Rain.

The Vicarage of Wirksop was twenty Marks when the Prior was Patron: Mss. I. M.
It Is now in the Kings Books 12l. 4s. 2d. value, and the last Patron Sir
Francis Rodes.

Carleton in Lindric. And VVallingwelles.
IN Carletune before the Norman Conq. six Tayns had each his Hall, or Manor,
and amongst them paid the Geld for two Car. The Land was four Car. This
afterward was Roger de Buslies Fee, Lib. Dooms.
and Turold (de Cheverchort I suppose) his Man or Tenent had there one Car. and
two Sochm. and sixteen Vill. and three Board. having four Car. there was a
Church and two Mills of 21s. and twenty Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood one leu.
and an half long, and half one broad. In the time of Edward the Confessor the
value was 4l. when the Conquerours survey was taken 30s.

Raph de Cheurolcurt by the consent of his heirs, Mon. Angl. v. 1. p. 502.
gave and granted, and by his Charter confirmed to Almighty God and the Virgin
St. Mary his glorious mother, a place in his Park of Carletun by the Wells (or
Fountains) and Stream (or River) of the Wells, whose name should be called St.
Mary of the Park, to make and build there an habitation for holy Religion, so
free that this place should not depend on (or belong to) any other place, in
honor and memory of the blessed and glorious Virgin Mary, the Mother of God,
and for all religiously serving God and St. Mary, and living Regularly in that
place, for the remission of all his sins and safety (or health) of his Soul,
and of his Father and Mother, and of all his heirs and Parents (or Friends)
preceding or subsequent, and also of all them who for the love of God and St.
Mary should help and maintain the said place. He gave also the River of the
Wells to the profit of the place, and to make mills, and Pasture in the same
Park for all their Beasts with his, and feeding (or paunage) for ninety Swine
in the same Park, and a way through the middle of the Park at the South part,
freely to go out and return to husband their Corn, and draw them home. And the
whole Land which Gunwat held of his Fee in Lands Tilled and Sarted, and in
Medows and Marshes, and the Essart of Thori, and the Essart of William, son of
Lefwin, and the Culture of Ruhstoch of his Demesne, and the Essart of Ernwi in
the middle part of the Holm, by the way: And in West Holm five Acres in one
place, and four in another, and the Meadow which was Godric Palmars, and eight
Acres of his Demesne in Hayecroc, and Common in the Field of Carletun in the
Brec, and Common of Pasture for all their Beasts every where, and the whole
Shrub of Sicam to Sart (or Stock up) which is in length from the Culture of
Rustoch into the Ditch of Lindrit, and in breadth from the Park to the Essart
of Theobald. All these things he gave freely to them who should serve God and
St. Mary in this place, etc. with a great blessing upon his heirs that should
love and maintain his Alms, and a very great curse upon those that should
attempt to disturb, diminish, or straighten it. The witnesses were Herbert the
Prior of Pontefract, Alexander his Nephew, Luke the Parson of Carletun, Simon
de Cheurolcurt, Jordan and Richard his brothers, Hugh, son of Ernald, and
Nicolas his brother, Ernald, son of Claron, Blundel, Godric, Modi, Walter de
Lettewelle, and Swarawell the Miller.

Mon. Angl. v. 1. p. 659.
Raph de Caprecuria, and Beatrix his sister, gave to God and St. John, and the
Monks of Pontefract, the Town of Barnesley, Jordan and Richard his sons
consenting. This gift was made in the presence of Henry de Lascy who was a
Witness; and also Maud his mother. Ib.
Jordan de Capreolocuria confirmed the gift which his Aunt Beatrix, and Raph de
Capreolocuria his father made in all things. This was done in the Chapel of St.
Mary Magdalen in Doncaster, before the Kings Justice Richard de Luci (which
shows it was H. 2. and the Witnesses were Roger Archbishop of York, Henry de
Lascy, William de Vesci, Robert the Clark of the Sheriff, Turstan de Sutton,
Mr. Robert Morel, William Vavasor, Jordan Foliot, Richard Bagot, Robert
Despenser, John, son of William, the Almoner. Jordan de Cheurecurt 11 H. 2. Pi.
11 H. 2.
ought...... of the relief of one Knights Fee in Karleton.

Regist. de Blid. p. 84.
This Jordan de Chevercourt it seems married Avicia, the daughter of Ranulph,
the Sheriff named in Markham, who had several daughters, Letice, Mabel (whom I
guess, was wife of Raph de Saint George) Albreda, Isabell.

Aubrea, the daughter of Jordan de Chevercourt, Regist. de Welbek p. 162.
sometime wife of Robert de St. Quintin, gave to the Abbey of Wellebek the
whole Land which Roger, son of Robert de Langholt, held of her in the territory
of Carleton, for the health of the Soul of Jordan de Chevercourt her father,
and of Raph her brother's, and of Robert de St. Quintin her husband's. Ranulph
de Novomercato, and Raph de St. George, were Witnesses.

Robert, son of Ranulph de Novomercato, resigned to his said father, Ib. 163.
the service of Thorald, son of Hugh, which he gave him, and confirmed the gift
which his Father made of the same, to the Abbey of Wellebek. The said Ranulf,
and Letice his wife, gave to that Abbey the Rent of 5s. 10d. out of Lands in
Carleton. Ib.
Letice de Chevercourt the relict of Ranulf de Novomercato, confirmed it in her
Widowhood. Ib. p. 62.
The Lady Julian, daughter of the Lady Letice de Chevercourt in her Widowhood
gave to Roger de Osberton and his heirs, the whole Land which she had of the
gift of the Lady Letice de Chev. in Demesnes and in Services in the Town of
Carleton and Swaynthorpe.

Isabell, the daughter of Jordan de Chevercourt, at the request of her husband
Robert de Furnals gave to the Abbey of Wellebek the Land which Henry son of (or
Fitz) Warin held of her in the territory of Karleton.

Albreda de Chevercourt, the wife of Adam de Sta Maria, Ib. 163.
gave with her body to be buried at Wellebek the Rent of 14d. of the service of
Thorald de Carleton, which she kept in her hand when she gave the Rent of 12d.
of the same service for the safety (or health) of her former husband Rob. de
St. Quintin, for whose Soul and to change his body from lay Sepulture into
Ecclesiastical, she also gave the service of Thorald de Karleton for the third
part of one Bov. in Karleton* to this Richard de Furneus was Witness.

The Sheriff, 6 R. 1. Pip. 6 R. 1.
gave account of 32s. and 4d. of the Land of Robert de St. Quintin, and of 11l.
of his Cattle sold, being one of the Kings enemies, of the Honor of Tikehill.
Robert de St. Quintin 7 R. 1. Pip. 7 R. 1.
gave account of ten Marks for having his wifes Land again. Robert le Vavasor
10 R. 1. Pip. 10 R. 1.
of forty Marks for the Custody of the Land of Robert de Furnell, and for
marrying his heir, [ viz. his Wardship.] Richard de Furneus was son and heir of
Robert de Furn. as in Bothumsell is noted. Robert de Furnell, Test. de Nev.
and Thomas de Lanc. are certified to have held two parts of a Knights Fee in
Linderik, in the time of H. 3.

The Prioress of Wallondewelles, 31 H. 3. Pl. de Iur. and Assis. in Com.
L^icest. 31 H. 3. cor. Rog. de Thurkilby and soc. suis in recept. Scacc. r. 13.
took nothing by the writ against Thomas de Lync. (or Lanc.) and Julian his
wife, concerning the Plea for obstructing a certain way in Kerleton, so that
she could not have her high way with her Carts from her house to her Granges,
because the Jury said that she never had a way as belonging to any Tenement
there, except by permission of the said Thomas and Julian. Hugh de Serleby,
Galfr. de Blithe, Henry le Norreis, and Elias, son of Maud, the Recognizers
came not, and therefore were amerced.

It was found in 4 E. 1. Inq. tangen. Dom. Regem 4 E. 1. Hundr. de Bersetlow.
that the Kings ancestors had one Manor in Carleton, belonging to the Crown,
which was wont to yield 10l. per annum, of which King John gave to one
Eustachius de Ludham and his heirs 30s. yearly. And King H. 3. gave the residue
of the said Rent to one Algret the Cross-bow-man [ Albalestario] by his
Charter, and the said Algret gave that Rent to the Abbat de Rupe, who then held
it, and paid the King 6d. yearly.

The Prior of Wirkesop had one Bovat of Land in Carleton, of the Fee of Tikhill.

Roch Abbey had 8l. 10s. Rent in Carleton of the Kings Demesne, and twenty Acres
of Meadow of the Fee of Tikhill. There was a confirmation 37 H. 3. Pat. 37 H. 3.
m. 26.
to the Abbat of Roch, of liberties or privileges in the Manor of Carleton in
Lindrick, which sometime was the Kings Demesne.

Carleton in Lindric was of the Sok of Maunsfeld, Test. de Nev. tem. R. Ioh.
whereof Henry Corbin had 33s. 4d. and Philip Minecan answered to the Exchequer
concerning the rest.

The Jury, 28 H. 3. Esc. 28 and 29 H. 3. n. 25.
said that Gerard de la War who had been the Kings [ Hobler, Balistarius]
Cross-bow-man, had of Carleton in Lindrick two Bov. and an half in Demesne,
containing fifty eight Acres, etc. likewise he had in Sokage twenty two
Bovats.. of a Bov. which men held of him. This he had during his life for his
service of the Kings gift.

Walter de Ludham had there five Bov. and the fourth part of a Bov. and 8s.
Rent and 6l. of the Mill per annum.

Walter de Furneus 8 E. 1. Pl. de Iur. and Assis. and de Coron. 8 E. 1. to. 10.
in dorso.
was summoned to answer Hugh de Grenley in a Plea that he should hold the
Covenant between them concerning the Manor of Carleton in Lindrik, with the
Appurtenances, except fifteen Acres of Land, twenty and three Acres of Wood in
the same Manor, afterward they agreed, and Hugh gave half a Mark for license
of Concord, and the said Hugh remised to the said Walter and his heirs all
manner of action which could concern him by reason of that agreement, and the
said Walter acknowledged that he ought the said Hugh twenty Marks to be paid
five Marks every quarter of the year, which if he did not pay accordingly, the
Sheriff was to cause it to be done out of his Lands and Chattels, etc.

The Parson of the Church of Carleton in Lyndrike, 20 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Pasch.
20 E. 1. to. 6.
recovered damages of Richard Furneyes Lord of that Town, for destroying and
depasturing his Corn there, in a certain place then called the Parsons Breck,
with his Cattle, when it was ready to be reaped, which was manifestly
injurious, so that it could not be sustained by Birlawe [viz. the orders or
laws of the Township.]

The Jury, 23 E. 1. Esc. 23 E. 1. n. 95.
found it not to the Kings loss if he granted license to the Abbat and Covent
of Roch (or Rupe) to give to Sir Richard de Furners ten pounds Land and Rent,
with the Appurtenances in Carleton in Lindrike, held of the King in Capite, by
the service of a pair of Gilt Spurrs or 6d. per annum.

There was a Fine levied at York in the Octaves of St. Martin, 31 E. 1. Fin.
lev. apud Ebor. Mich. 31 E. 1.
between Richard de Furneus, and Sibylla his wife, Quer. and William de Cressy,
and Ioane his wife, impedients, of the Manor of Carleton in Lyndryk, with the
Appurtenances; whereof a Plea of Warantia Chartae was summoned between them in
the said Court, viz. the said William and Joan recognized the said Manor to be
the right of Rich. and remised and quit-claimed it from themselves and the
heirs of Ioane, to the said Richard and Sibyll, Autog. pen. Will. Clifti
and the heirs of Richard. On the Seal of Richard de Furneus, within the
circumscription of his name, appendant to a Deed dated 1 E. 1. is, On a Chief
the upper part of a Lion Rampant.

The Jury, 2 E. 2. found that Richard de Furnes Turold. de Cheverchort 1088.-
Radulphus de Cheverolcourt- Jordanus de Chevercourt-Avicia fill. Ranulfi
vicecom. Radulphus de Chevercourt. Isabella Rob. de Furnals. Richardus de
Furnariis- Robertus de Furnell- Walterus de Furneaus, 8 E. 1.- Richard. de
Furneaux ob. 2 E. 2.-Sibylla. Willielmus de Furneux 23 E. 3. s. p. Sibylla-
Thomas le Latymer.
Joana ob. 23 E. 3. post fratrem-Henricus de Ravensworth. Henricus Fitz Aug.
20.-Hugh ob. 10 R. 2.-Jana fill. Hen. Dom. Scrope de Marsham. Henricus Dom.
Fitzhugh ob. 11 Jan. 3 H. 6.-Eliz. fill. and haer. Roberti Gray and haer.....
Marmi^^. Willielmus Dom. Fitzhugh ob. 22 October. 31 H. 6.- Henricus Fitzhugh
ob. 8 Jan. 14 E. 4.- Richardus Fitzhugh ob. 3 H. 7.- Georgius Fitzhugh ob. 4
H. 8. sine prole.










Albreda ux. Rob. de St. Quintin and Ad. de St. Mar. Mabel. Leticia-Ranulf de
Novo foro. Robertus de Novo mercato. Juliana.

Richard. Simon de Chevrolcurt.
Beatrix. Bodinus de Ravensworth s. p. Bardolf- Akarius- Harveus- Henricus-
Ranulfus de Ravenswath-Alicia fill. and haer. Adae de Staveley. Henricus-
Ranulfus s. p. Hugo-Albreda. Henricos fill. Hugonis. Joana ob. 23 E. 3. post
fratrem-Henricus de Ravensworth.









when he died held 10l. Esc. 2 E. 2. n. 37.
Land and Rent in le Kingston of the King in Capite, by the service of a pair
of Gilt Spurrs or six pence yearly. And that the said Richard together with
Sibyll his wife, jointly feoff'd by Fine, held the Manor of Carleton of the
Castle of Tikhill, and the moiety of the Manor of Bothumsell of the Earl of
Lancaster, and that William was his son and next heir; and that the said
Richard dyed the Wednesday next before the Feast of St. Luke the Evangelist
that year, and then his son. William was above twenty one years of age.

Nom. Vill.
In 9 E. 2. Carleton answered for a whole Villa, and the Lords were certified to
be William de Fourneaux, and Sibylla de Fourneaux. Sibylla, 3 E. 3. Rot. Quo
war. 3 E. 3.
claimed for her life Infangthef, Gallows, and Park, in the Manor of Carleton
in Lyndryk.

Ib.
Thom. de Carleton then also claimed the Amends of the Assize of Bread and Ale
broken of his Tenants in Carleton in Lyndryk.

William de Fountayns of Kingholm (brother and heir of Richard, Pl. de Iur. and
Assis. apud Not. 3. E. 2. r. 64. in dorso.
son of William, son of Richard, son of Ivo, son of Richard, who lived in King
John's time) claimed against William de Furneus 3 E. 3.10l. Rent, with the
Appurtenances in Carleton in Lyndryk, etc.

The Jury, 23 E. 3. Esc. 23 E. 3 par. 1. n. 38
found that William Furneaux held when he died 10l. Rent, with the
Appurtenances in Carleton in Lyndryk, etc. and that Thomas le Latymer then aged
twenty six years, son of Sibyll le Latymer, one of the sisters, was one heir of
the said William; and Ioane his other sister then living, whom Henry, son of
Henry de Ravenswath, had to wife, was his other heir.

The Jury, 27 E. 3. Esc. 27 E. 3. n. 25.
said that this Ioane, sister of the said William de Furneax, over-lived her
brother but a month, and had a son named Henery heir of her, and her said
husband Henry, son of Henery de Ravenswath, (who was called Henry Fitzhugh)
his Grandfather, Ex Coll. Rob. Glover.
who outlived his father, being son of Hugh, brother and heir of Ranulf, son
of Henery, son of Ranulf, son of Henery, son of Harvey, son of Akaris, son of
Bardolf, brother and heir of Bodin de Ravensworth. Akarius, son of Bardolf,
founded Iorevault, and Harvey his son was a great benefactor to it. Mon. Angl.
v. 1. p. 869.


The Jury, 30 E. 3. Esc. 30 E. 3. n. 39.
found that Thomas Latymer held when he died the moiety of the Hamlet of
Kingeston in Carleton, and the Manor of Carleton, which extended it self into
Beyghton, and the moiety of the Manor of Bothumsell, and that Henry, son of
Henery de Ravenswath, was his next heir.

The Jury, 10 R. 2. Esc. 10 R. 2. n. 16.
found that Henry Fitzhugh died seized of a certain Manor in Carleton, called
Kingeston, held of the King, and of the Manor of Carleton in Lindrik, held of
John Duke of Lancaster, as of the Honor of Tikhill, and of the moiety of the
Manor of Bothumsell, held also of him of the Honor of Lancaster, and that
Henry Fitzhugh, Knight, was his son and heir.

The Lands which were Henry Fitz-Hughes, Chr. in the Counties of York,
Northumberland, Not. and Cambridge, were to be seized 22 Sept. 10 R. 2. Pin.
10 R. 2. n. 5.
Henry Fitzhugh, Chr. 3 H. 6. Esc. 3 H. 6. pa. 248.
left his son and heir William Fitzhugh, Chr. of full age: William Fitzhugh,
Knight, son of Henry, 31 H. 6. Fin. 31 H. 6. m. 17.
left Henry Fitzhugh his heir of full age, 15 Febr. Patron of the Abbey of St.
Mary of Iorevaux, etc. and Staveley and Brunsall, Advowsons in Yorkshire, and
many Lands and Manors there. Henry Fitzhugh Lord of this Manor 12 E. 4. Esc.
12 E. 4.
left his son Richard his heir, fourteen years old. Richard Fitzhugh Lord
Fitzhugh dyed 3 H. 7. leaving his son and heir George half a year old, Ex
Coll. St. Lo Knivel.
who dyed without issue about 4 H. 8.

Thomas Fenys, Knight, Lord Dacre, 5 H. 8. Pasch. 4 and 5 H. 8. r. 341.
suffered a recovery of the moiety of these Manors, and called to warrant
Alice Fenys, Widow: and Gregory Fynes alias Fenys, Lord Dacre, and Anne his
wife, 13 Eliz. Trin. 13 Eliz. r. 1548.
suffered another of the Manors of Bothumsall, Carleton Kingeston, and
Carleton Baron, etc.

Queen Elizabeth 8 Mar. 22 Eliz. Par. 4. pat. 22 Eliz.
granted to John Molyneux, Esquire, the Lordships or Manors of Carleton
Kingston and Carleton Baron, and all singular Mess. Lands, etc. in Carleton in
Lindrick, Worsop, Ellesiey, Normanton, Little Morton, Wallingwells, Auste,
Reyton, and Reyton Grange, in the Counties of Not. and York, or other-where in
this County, then extended at 27l. 17s. 7d. per annum, which were late the
possessions of Thomas Lord Dacre, Great Grandfather of Gregory, the then Lord
Dacre, or of Thomas Lord Dacre, father of the said Gregory.

Sir John Molyneax the Grandchild of that John, B.
leased it for eighty years to one.... Halsey, and since that Vivian Molyneax,
Esquire, son and heir of that Sir John, sold the inheritance of it to Sir
Gervas Clifton, Knight. and Baronet, who has in effect all the rest of the Lands
in Carleton, save what belongs to the Monastery of Wallingwelles, the site
whereof and much of the Lands 19 Feb. 5 E. 6. was demised to John Frankwell,
Esquire, for twenty one years at the yearly value of 12l. 13s. 3d. and by Queen
Eliz. 5 Aug. 6 Eliz. Par. 6. pat. 6 Eliz.
granted to Richard Pype of London, Lether-seller, and Francis Bowyer, Grocer,
and to the heirs of Richard Pype, who afterward as I suppose was Sir Richard
Pype, and father of Humfrey, father of Richard Pype, Esquire, whose inheritance
and place of residence it was in my time, but his Nephew and heir.... Pype,
has sold it not very long since to Major Sam. Tailor, who for some time had
the oversight of the Moll at Tangier, for our present Sovereign King Charles
the second.

The Jury, 10 E. 2. Esc. 10 E. 2. n. 120.
found it not to the Kings loss if he granted John de Loudham license to give to
Thomas de la Grene of Carleton, 30s. Rent with the Appurtenances in Carleton in
Lindrick, etc. It seems Sir John Loudham with this Rent of Assize granted to
this Thomas de Carleton one Mess. called White Hall, Orig. 7 H. 5. to. 28.
and one Carucat of Land there held of the Manor of Kingston in Carleton, and
by the Custom of the Manor partible amongst all the sons.

Thomas de Carleton had a son Henry de Carleton (which Henry, and Mary, his
wife, the Jury, 13 R. 2. Esc. 13 R. 2. n. 11.
found were seized of 23s. Rent, and the White Hall, etc.) and that Henry had
four sons Thomas, John, Henry, and Walter de Carleton, Esquire, who had two
sons, Hugh de Carleton fifteen years old, and John de Carleton thirteen,
coheirs and parceners of the said Walters part, whereof 6 November. 7 H. 5. they
had livery according to the Custom of the Manor.

Thomas Carleton, Esquire, when he died about 7 H. 5. Esc. 7 H. 5. p. 226.
held the 30s. Rent and the White Hall in Carleton in Lindrick, and Walter
Carleton was his son and heir. W. [Walter] Carleton, son and heir of Thomas de
Carleton of Lyncolne, 14 H. 6. passed this parcel to Raph Makarell, Esquire,
and Margery his wife.

Thom. del Green vel de Carleton Clericus- Henricus de Carleton, 13 R.
2.-Maria. 1 Tho. de Carleton- Walterus de Carleton, 14 H. 6.
2 John 3 Henr. 4 Walt. de Carleton- Hugo de Carleton aet. 15. 7 H. 5. Johannes
aet. 13.



The owners of Carleton in Lindrick 1612. are thus set down, Lib. libere ten.
Sir Gervas Clifton, Knight, Sir John Moyneux, Knight, Humphrey Pype, Esquire
of Wallingwells, John Buck, Clark, Robert Glossop, and Sam. Simpson.

The Rectory of Carleton was 20l. It Is now 15l. 13s. 4d. value in the Kings
Books, Mss. I. M.
and as it has been remains in the Cullation of his Grace the Lord Archbishop
of York.

Hodsok with the Hamlets.
IN Odesache Vlsi before the Normans came had a Manor for which he paid to the
Dane-geld for two Car. The Land being then known to be sufficient for four
Plows (or four Car.) There afterward Turold the Man of Roger de Busli (whose
Fee it then was become) had two Car. and three Sochm. on four Bov. of this
Land, Lib. Dooms.
and twelve Vill. having twelve Car. There were two Mills of 16s. 4d. and eight
Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood one leu. long, and half one broad. The value in
former time and then also was 3l. It had Sok in Blyth of three sorts, as in
that place will be noted.

That Turold the Man of Roger I take to be Thorald de Lisoriis, brother of Fulc
de Lisoriis, both Witnesses to Roger de Busli's Charter of foundation of the
Manastery of Blyth dated 1088. and both concerned in this place, Regist. de
Blid. p. 105. and 106.
in which Fulco gave two Bovats to that Priory, and two which Roger Escossard
held of him in Hodesak.

Pagan, son of Cossard, granted the Land of Hodesar, Ib. 88.
which Fulco de Lisouriis gave to St. Mary of Blyth as Alms, which Land Cossard
held of the said Fulco, Ib.
etc. Raph Cossard gave to that Monastery six Acres of his Demesne in
Cossard-thorpe, which his Grandfather Roger gave, and three Acres and a Toft,
which Walter Cossard his father gave. The Sheriff, 6 R. 1. Rot. pip. 6 R. 1.
accounted for 22s. 8d. of the Chattels of Raph de Cossard-thorp sold, being
one of the Kings enemies. Raph Coshart 7 R. 1. Pip. 7 R. 1.
gave account of five Marks for having seisin of his Land of Cossard-thorp,
which was taken into the Kings hands for his being with Earl John. Henry de
Cossardthorp (called also Henry Cossard, Regist. de Blid. p. 87.
son of Raph Cossard) gave to the Prior and Monks of Blithe, Roger de
Cossardthorp, son of Thorald, and Beatrix his mother, with her whole sequel,
and their whole Land in Cossard Thorp, paying him and his heirs 2s. per an.
This is an Hamlet of Hodsac now called Costrop.

But the next Lord of Hodsac that I have found was Roger de Cressey, who gave
to God, Ib. p. 77.
St. Mary, and the Monks of Blyth, half a Bovat of Land in Oulecotes, and the
Tithes of all his Mills of the Soc of Hodesac, and the Monks granted him
perpetually four Masses in a week for himself, his Ancestors and Successors,
as well living as dead. This gift the said Roger made upon the Altar at Blyth
before many Witnesses, which was confirmed by his son William de Cressi.

William de Cressi, 2 Ioh. Obl. 2 Ioh. m. 14.
gave the King twenty Marks, and one Palfrey, that he might justly, and
according to the Custom of England, be brought off from the Dower which Cecily,
the daughter of Gervas de Clifton, claimed against him. Cecily, who had been
wife of Roger de Cressi, Ib. m. 21.
2 Ioh. gave the King forty Marks, and one Palfrey, for having her reasonable
Dower which concerned her of the Freehold, which was the said Rogers in this
County. William de Cressi, 3 Ioh. pleaded that Cecily was not the wife of Roger
de Cressi, Mic. 3 Ioh. to. 12. in dorso.
so the cause was transmitted to the Archbishop of York, who signified she was
lawfully married to him. But William said he signified his own will against
right and Ecclesiastical custom, and offered pledges to try it, etc. and had
day given, etc. There was a Fine at Clarendon the Monday after Midlent, 5 Ioh.
between Cecily, Fin. 5 Ioh.
who had been wife of Roger de Cressi, Petent, and William de Cressi, Tenent,
concerning the reasonable Dower of the said Cecily, which she claimed against
the said William of the gift of her said husband Roger in Hoddishac, Gedling,
Kelum, Weston, Rampton, and Marcham, all which she quit to the said William and
his heirs for half a Knights Fee in Melton, and five Acres of Meadow in Lokenges
for her life.

W. de Cressi gave to the Monks of Blithe the Damms of his Mills from the Bridge
of Gildenebriges unto the Land of Suain Sarpesive in the same state they were
Anno Dom. 1225. and gave them free firmage [ firmuram] of the Damm of the Mills
of Westcroft in his Land, Reg. de Blid. p. 77.
paying out of that Mill of Westcroft half a quarter of Rye at Mich. yearly to
him and his heirs. He released likewise to them 12d. yearly, which they paid
him for Land in Holm, etc. William, Test. de Nev.
son and heir of Roger de Cressi, who was in Ward of Alice, Countess of Augi
(in the former part of Henry the third) held of her the whole Town of Hodsok,
with the Soke by one Knights Fee. William de Cressi, son of Roger de Cressi,
confirmed two Bovats in Hoddesak, Reg. de Blid. p. 77.
with the Appurtenances, which Fulc de Lisoriis gave to the Almoner of St. Mary
of Blyth, etc. and all the Lands, Rents, and Possessions which the Monks had
acquired of him or his Ancestors from the beginning of the world till the Feast
of St. Martin, 1273.

William de Cressi, Knight, granted for himself and his heirs to the Religious
men, Ib.
the Abbat of St. Katherin of Roan, and the Prior and Covent of Blyth, and
their successors, that from thenceforth they might Hang Thieves taken within
their liberty of Blyth, who deserved hanging, on the Gallows of Emmeslawe,
without any contradiction or claim of him or his heirs, saving that he or his
heirs should Hang the Thieves taken within their Liberty of Hodisac, which
should deserve hanging on the said Gallows. And that if the said Gallows should
be thrown down, it might be lawful for the said Prior and Covent, and their
successors to make new ones, or set up and repair the old ones as they should
please.

William de Cressi, son and heir of Sibylla de Cressi, 6 E. 1. Fin. Pasch. 6 E.
1. fol. 286. b. Linc.
made his Fine before the Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer of 40s. for his
relief of the Lands which he had by Inheritance of the said Sibyll his mother.
Rot. Pip. 10 E. 1. Linc.
She was it seems daughter and heir of John de Braytoft.

William, son of Roger de Cressi, 13 E. 2. Fin. Pasch. 13 E. 2. fol. 291. Linc.
made Fine with the King of 40s. concerning his relief for certain Lands and
Tenements which he held in Surflet of the King in Fee Farm, paying 40s. per
annum, for all service, by pretext of a Charter of King Richard the first, made
to Walter de Braytoft, Ancestor of the said William de Cressi.

Rogerus de Cressi Dom. de Hodesac temp. H. 2.-...ux. 1.-Cecilia fill. Gerv. de
Clifton. Willielmus de Creffi 2. Joh.- Rogerus. de Cressy-Sibylla fill. and
haer. Dom. Willielmus de Cressy, 9 E. 1.-Joana. Hugo de Cressy. Johannes de
Cressy, miles, 21 E. 3. and 6 R. 2.-Agnes. Hugo de Cressy ob. s. p. temp. H. 4.
Johannes de Clifton Kath. miles, 2 H. 4.-Rad. Makarell mar. 2. Johannes de
Markham miles.-Elizab.
Kath.-Joh. Erghom, mil. Elizab.-.... Vavasor.
Joanna.
Rogerus. Hugo.


Walterus de Braytoft Com. Linc.- Johannes de Braytoft- Rogerus. de
Cressy-Sibylla fill. and haer.


Edmund de Cressy, Knight, held this Manor for his life, and in 3 E. 3.
claimed the Privileges. Yet I find that Hugh de Cressy, son and heir of
William, son of Roger de Cressy, 9 E. 3. Ex Chapter Autog. ap. Clifton. Fin. Pasch.
9 E. 3. fol. 294. b. Linc.
gave the King 40s. for ^is relief of the Manor of Kysegate in the Town of
Surflete in Lincolneshire.

There was also a certain Hugh de Cressy, who, 9 E. 2. Esc. 9 E. 2. n. 107.
Par. 2. pat. 9 E. 2. m. 18.
had license to give seven Mess. and four Bov. of Land in Blyth and Hodesake to
three Chaplains in the Chapel of St. John the Evangelist near Blyth; etc.
because the said Hugh had committed Felony.

There was a Fine, 21 E. 3. Eln. lev. Pasch. 21 n. 3.
between John, son and heir of Hugh de Cressy of Rysgate Chr. Quer. by Raph de
Quadryng his Guardian ad Lucrandum, and Richard de Colishull, and Ioane his
wife, Deforc. of the Manor of Hodisak, with the Appurtenances, which Edmund de
Cressy Chr. held for term of his life, of the Inheritance of the said Ioane,
and which after his decease should have reverted to the said Richard and Ioane,
and the heirs of Ioane, but by that Fine was settled on the said John and his
heirs. By and her, 1 R. 2. Fin. l^v. Mich. 1 R. 2.
between John de Annesley Chr. Peter de Dalton, Clark, Robert de Morton, and
John de Kyneton, Clarks, Quer. and John de Cressy Chr. and Agnes his wife,
Deforc. of the Manor of Hodesak, etc. whereby it was settled on the said John
and Agnes, and the heirs of John de Cressy.

The Jury, 7 R. 2. Esc. 7 R. 2. n. 26.
found that John de Cressy Chr. died seized of this Manor, and that Hugh de
Cressy was his son and heir. And in 9 H. 4. the Jury said that Hugh, Esc. 9 H.
4. p. 97.
son of Sir John de Cressy Chr. when he died held in Fee Tail the Manor of
Risgate, and the fourth part of the Manor of Braytoft in Lincolneshire, and
the Manor of Hodsak, etc. and that Katherin, late wife of John de Clifton Chr.
and Robert Markham were his heirs.

The Partition was made at Retford, 10 H. 4. between Sir John Markham (the
elder Judge) and Raph Makarell, Ex Autog. ap. Clifton.
who married Katherin the relict of Sir John Clifton, as in Clifton may also be
seen. The Manors of Risegate, Braytoft, and Exton in Lincolneshire (of which
last Hugh de Cressy of Oulecotes held the moiety for his life) fell to the
share of the Judges posterity, and since Sir Robert Markham of Cotham destroyed
the Family, Cressy Hall in Lincolneshire became the Seat of Sir Edward Heron,
Knight of the Bath, whose son Sir Henry Heron now has it, and all or most of
these Lands. Hodsak yet remain to the Family of Clifton, and is now the
Inheritance of William Clifton under age, only son of Sir Clifford Clifton,
Knight, son of Sir Gervas Clifton, Knight and Baronet. Raph Makarell, Autog.
ap. Clifton.
7 H. 5. had on his Seal within his name Three Fishes erect 2. and 1. I suppose
Makarells. Sir John Markhams Seal, 10 H. 4. is Party per Fesse, and on the
upper part a Demi Lion Rampant, and so are the Arms in Sedgebrook Hall in
Lincolneshire set up by Sir John Markham the Lord Chief Justice (his son by
another venture, as in Maplebec is said) who built the House, from whom it is
descended to Sir Robert Markham, Baronet, only there is A Border Arg. for a
difference, the upper part is Or, the other Azure, and the Demi Lion Gules; but
now they only make a Chief of the upper half, like the Seal of Richard de
Furneux, mentioned in Carleton.

Regist. de Blid. p. 103.
In the year 1188. on the Eve of St. James in the Monastery of Blyth was there
an agreement between R. de Pauliaco Prior of Blyth, and Galfr. son of Richard
de Hodesac, who confirmed Wlmerus de Hodesac- Richardus de Hodsac- Galfridus de
Hodisoc 1188.- Rogerus de Hoddishoc- Thom. de Hodesak. 31 E. 1.- Johannes de
Hodsak- Custancia-Henr. de Grendon. Henricus de Grendon, 18 E. 3.-Isabella.
Willielmus.
Will. de Grendon Rector de Babworth, 31 E. 1.


Willielmus.



to that Priory all the Land which Wlmer his Grandfather gave, and the moiety
of the Meadow called Fleucesheng, which Richard his father gave, and engaged
himself to pay yearly to the said Priory 18d. whether with the Aid or help of
the Prior and Monks he could hold that Land or nor.

Adam de Novomercato confirmed to Roger, son of Galfr. de Hodishoc the whole
Land of Wermeswrth, with the Appurtenances, Ex Chart. apud Clifton.
which Henry de Novomercato his brother sold him.

William de Cressy Lord of Hoddesak, and Thomas, son of Roger de Hoddesak in
the year 1272. agreed concerning the Chapel of the Town of Hoddishac, saving to
the said Thomas his wife and heirs, free ingress to hear Divine Service; the
rest he released to the Community of the Town of Hoddisac.

Thomas de Hoddesac, and William de Grendon, Rector of Babworth, 31 E. 1.
agreed that the said Thomas should give his whole Manor of Wermundesworth,
with the Advowson of the Church, etc. and whatsoever the said Thomas had in
Hoddesok, Woodhouse, Holme, Blyth, and Flyxthorp, to Henry de Grendon, brother
of the said William, and Custancia, daughter of John, son of the said Thomas
and their heirs, and the said William was after forty days to re-infeoff the
said Thomas in the said Manor, etc. for life, and to sustain the said Custance
with meat and drink, etc. Henry de Grendon, and Isabell his wife, 18 E. 3. gave
and conveyed to Custance de Grendon (his mother) and William her son 34s. 8d.
yearly Rent out of their Lands in Blyth, together with the whole Rent of Holme,
and 5s. and one pound of Cummin in Flixthorpe.

Hermeston.
IN the time of William Archbishop of York, who lived 18 Steph. William de
Clarifagio, and Avicia his wife, Regist. de Wirksop fol. 73. b. cap. 1.
who was daughter and heir of William de Tanaia, gave to the Church of St.
Cuthbert of Radeford three Bovats of Land in Hermedeston, with the Common of
that Town, for the Souls of William de Tanaia, and Hugh de Luvetot, and for the
Redemption of their own Souls, and of all their Parents (Friends) as well
living as dead: Witnesses were Robert de Lusoriis, Oto de Tilli, Robert Britt
of Stiveley.

Ex Copia lib. visit. pen. Reason Mellish, Ar.
Christopherus Cressy de Firbecke- Willielmus Cressy de Holme ob. apud Blyth
1555.-Jana fill.... Hanfard. 3 Nicol. Cressy-...fill.... Everingham. 1 Franc.
Cressy-... fill, and cohaer....Park de Stainford- Gervasius Cressy de Holme ob.
1652.-Margareta fill.....Kiddall de Fereby. Park Cressy ob. 1659.-... fill....
Smith de East Recford ux. 1. Sussana fill. Joh. Gaynsford de Crowhurst in Sur.
ux. 1 Gervas. Cressy. Will. Greaves de Not.-Anna. 2 Hugo.
Johannes Cressy aet. 27. 1662.

2 Hugo. 3 Nicol. 4 Robert. 5 Petrus.
2 Hugo- 1 Robert. Cressy de Wilford 1575.
Robertus. Rogerus.

Ib. cap. 2.
King Henry the second commanded Hugh de Cressy that his Canons of Radeford
should hold well and in peace and rightly the three Bovats in Hermodeston,
which Avicia, the daughter of William de Taney, and William de Clerfay, gave,
else the Steward of Tikehill should see right done.

In the time of Roger Archbishop of York (which was in the Reign of Henry the
second) Roger de Creisi confirmed the gift of the said three Bovats which Aviza
his Aunt made to that said Church.

William de Cressi confirmed the gift of Avicia de Tanai, and the confirmation
of Roger de Cressi his father concerning it.

Avicia, the daughter of William de Taincio, Regist. de Elid. p. 102.
in the presence and by the consent of William de Clerofagio her husband, gave
to the Monks of Blyth, Holme, and all the Land belonging to it.

These I suppose were descended from some younger son of the great Cressies,
whereof I have seen mention of many, before and about the time of the marriage
of the heirs General.

One Branch had Residence at Markham, as in that place may be observed. Another
at the following Dulcotes, whereof there is this entry, Ib.
Henr. Cressy de Ouldcotes-Allcia fill.... Odingsells de Eperston ux. 1.-Kath.
fill. Ric. Smith de Walkringham. Jana-...Hublethorne. Maria fill. Leon.
Shalcrosse de Shalcrosse C. Derb.-1 Will. Cressy de Oulcotes 1614. Rogerus
Cressy fill. and haer.-Elizab. fill..... Elcock Rectoris de Barlunbury. 2 Will. 3
Leonardus-... relict. tandem haer....Staple-aet. 24. 1614. ton. Fr. Hen. Joh.
Hug. Mari. Eliz. Kath. Jan. Briget Goodyere.- Susan.-Carol. Wilson.
2 Hugo. Eliz.



These Hamlets belonging to Hodsak (as it also is) are in the great Parish of
Blyth, viz. Costhorp, Flyxthorp, Hermeston, Woodhouse, Holme, etc. There is now
only one fair old House, with a private Chapel to it in Hodsak, to which there
is a fair Park, and other goodly Woods and Demesnes. The Rentale of Hodsok, 6
E. 3. shows that then Raph de Normanvile held in Weston and Gedling one Knights
Fee, Autog. ap. Clifton.
William de Cressy at Melton half one, Roger de Cressy at Marcham another half
one, and Simon Touk at Kelum one Knights Fee by Foreign Service, etc.

Styrap. And Oulcotes Cressy.
IN Estyrap before the Conquest were three Manors which Leving, Torchill and
Leuric held, paying for seven Bov. to the Danegeld. The Land being sufficient
for four Plows or four Car. There afterward Bernard the Man of Roger (de
Busli, Lib. Dooms.
whose Fee it was) had one Car. nine Sochm. seven Vill. five Board. having three
Car. and an half. There was six Acres of Meadow, and ten Acres of Pasture Wood.
In the time of Edward the Confessor the value was 50s. in the Conquerours but
25s. There was also Soc one Bov. ad Geld. then waste.

Fulc de Lisoris for the love of God, and for his Soul, Regist. de Elid. p. 105.
and for the Souls of Albreda his wife, and of his Ancestors, gave to God, and
St. Mary of Blyth, and the Monks there serving God, half the Town of
Billinglay, and the whole Land which he had in Curtingestor, and four Bovats in
Dulecotes, and two Bovats in Marton, and two Bov. in Blyth, and one place in
Serlecroft to make a Mill, and the Multure of Farewrd, and of the whole Soc
belonging to it, and one Cart-load of Wood daily in Billay. Furthermore he gave
to the Alms of St. Mary of Blyth in perpetual Alms four Bovats of Land in
Stirap, and two Bov. in Hodesac, and one dwelling House in Tikeill, and the
tenth penny of his Rent of Notinghamsir, and the tenth Swine of his Paunage,
and the tenth measure of his Malt. And of Sceby, and of Plumtre, and of
Harewrd, and of every Plow of his Demesne one Acresset of the Corn of Wheat or
Rye or Oats, with Command to his heirs to maintain his Alms, as they would be
made partakers of all the benefits of that Church. His son Robert de Lisoriis
confirmed his fathers gift, and so did Albreda, daughter of the said Robert de
Lisoriis increasing one Bovat of Land in Vlecotes, which Sparro held by the
consent of William de Clarofagio her husband. Her son John, Ib. p. 106.
the Constable of Chester, also confirmed all the gifts and Alms which Fulco de
Lisoriis, and Robert his son, gave, and the Bovat in Vlecotes which his own
mother the said Albreda de Lisoriis gave.

Torardus de Lisoriis (brother of Fulco) gave all the Land which he had in
Billinglay, by the consent of his son William, for his Soul and his wife
Beatrices, and all his children and friends, on condition that one Priest in
the Church of Blyth should perpetually serve God for the Redemption of his
Soul, and of all his Parents (or Friends.) William de Tanet was witness.

John, the Constable of Chester, gave to God and the Church of St. James at
Wellebek, Regist. de Wellebek p. 127.
and the Monks there serving God, the whole Land which William Wytherscote held
in the Town of Dulkotes of his Fee, with all the Appurtenances, as well in Wood
as in plain and arable Land, and with all his Sarts, and whatever could then be
Sarted in the said Town of his Fee, and the whole Meadow of Locheng as well new
as old, viz. that which the said William held, and that which he held in his
own hand, to sustain one Lamp night and day before the Altar, and to buy Wax in
that Church. Roger Constable of Chester, confirmed the gift of his Father in
the same words, and so did Will. Fitz-William, that which the said John
Constable of Chester his brother made; and likewise Thomas, son of William, son
of (or Fitz) William, confirmed the gift which the said John Constable of
Chester, brother of the said William, his father, made of that Land which the
said William Wytherscote held in Hulecotes.

Alan Castellan gave to the Church of Wellebek four Acres of Arable Land in the
territory of Hulecotes by the long Ford, Ib. p. 131.
between Hulecotes and Blyth, toward the North, of the Fee of William de
Cressi, yielding 17.d. Cecily, daughter of Alan Castle, by the consent of
Roger de Osberton her husband, released the 12d.

William de Cressi, son and heir of Roger de Cressy, confirmed the gift of the
said four Acres of Arable, in the Fields of Holme, and the whole Meadow which
the said Alan held in Locheng. William de Cressi Lord of Hodesak, son and heir
of Sir Roger de Cressi, Ib. p. 134.
in the year 1273. confirmed to that Church and those Monks all the Lands etc.
of his Fee, of whose gifts soever they were, within the Town (of Dulecotes) and
without, together with free Chiminage to carry their Hay and Corn, through his
Fee, as well of their Grange of Hulecotes, as other-where, excepting the way
before his Manor of Hodesak.

By a Fine 4 E. 2. Fin. lev. Mic. 4 E. 2.
Hugo de Cressi settled the Manor of Oulecotes, and one Mess. one Car. of
Land, and 18s. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Great Morton by Babworth, on
Robert Russel of Tikehull, and Cecily his wife, and the heirs which he should
beget on the body of the said Cecily, remainder to the right heirs of Robert.

Robert Russel 9 E. 3. Hill. 9 E. 3.
granted a Mess. and twenty one Acres of Land, with the Appurtenances, to
Laurence Mynyot for the life of the said Laurence. By an Inquisition taken at
Newark, on Thursday 5 July, 2 H. 5. (where Stirap was pleaded to have been an
Hamlet of Oulcotes: but the Jury found it otherwise, viz. a Town of it self) it
appeared that Robert Russell, and Cicely had a son named Robert Russell, who
had a daughter, Sibyll, the wife of John Longespy of Dunham, and a son named
Edmund Russell of Oulecotes, who gave the Manor of Oulecotes, and Lands in
Stirap to Sir John Cressy Lord of Hodesak, who gave the Manor of Oulecotes to
Hugh, son of William Cressy of Wadington, and the heirs Males of his body,
which Hugh gave it to Thomas Hercy, Chr. and others, 9 H. 4. betwixt whom and
the said John Longespy was a special Assize, 2 H. 5. concerning Lands in
Oulecotes and Stirop.

Ex Inq.
Hugh Cressy held a Knights Fee in Oulecotes in the time of H. 6. and after him
Christopher Cressy. There was a Recovery 20 E. 4. Trin. 20 E. 4. rot. 113.
wherein William Hynde claimed against Nicolas Worteley the Manor of Oulecote
with the Appurtenances, and one Mess. one Car. of Land, 18s. Rent, etc. in
Great Morton by Babworth.

Gervase Cressy 8 H. 8. Pasch. 8 H. 8. rot. 436.
suffered a recovery of the same to Richard Sutton, Adam Holland, Henry Waren,
and William Clarkson.

Rot. Auxil.
In Queen Elizabeth's time Henry Cressy paid 3s. 4d. for Lands in Oulecotes late
Sir John Byrons, and formerly Christopher Cressyes, held by the service of half
a Knights Fee.

John the Constable of Chester was Lord of the Fee of Oulecotes by Blyth.
Regi^t. de Wellebec, p. 3.5 Ib. p. 3 6.


Gerard de Sterape begat Gerard, who begat Philip de Oulecotes, Lord thereof,
who held the Manors of Oulecotes and Sterap, for one Knights Fee, which Philip
died without heir of his body, but had five sisters who divided the inheritance
amongst them, being heirs of the said Philip their brother, the first whereof
was called Alice de Sterap, the second Margery (or Margaret) the third Isabell,
the fourth Iuliana, and the fi^th Constance.

Alice had three sons out of Matrimony, viz. Ingeram to whom she gave three
Bov. in the Town of Sterap.

Hamelin de Buggethorp married the second sister, and begot on her Galfr. who
begot Ingeram de Oulecotes, who held the Manor of Oulecotes, and gave it to
Roger de Arci (about 2 E. 1. ^l. de (...) Mic. 2. (...). ^ill. 8 (...).
) with all his Lands in Vlecotes, and Stirap, and Blyth, on condition that the
said Roger de Arci should procure him to be made a Knight at his own charge,
and find him and his three Men, and three Horses meat, drink, and clothes,
during his life.

The third sister Isabell took an husband Thomas de Stretton, Knight, who died
without children, and in her widowhood sold part of her Inheritance to the said
Ingeram, and Norman de Sterap, and part to the Abbat of Welbec.

The fourth sister took an husband Galfr. de Barneby, who begot on her Norman
de Sterap, who begot Thomas, who begot John, who begot Robert de Sterap, who
gave some Land to the Abbey of Welbek.

The fifth sister Constantia took an husband Daniel of Newcastle, who begot her
son and heir John de Adham, who had part of the Inheritance in Northumberland,
likewise Apeltan in Sterap fell to him, and one Bovat of Land, and the Meadow in
Lokinton; but the Lord of Oulecotes held that part, because the said John would
not do him homage as all the other sisters did.

The Sheriff, 6 R. 1. Rot. ^ip. 6 R. 1.
gave account of 32s. 3d. of the Land of Philip de Vlecot the Kings enemy of
the Honor of Tikehill. Robert de Veteriponte, 9 R. 1. Pip. 9 R. 1.
ought 4l. and 4d. of the firm of Stirap and Vlecotes, which were Arnald de
Diest's the whole year of the Escaets, which were delivered to the Knights (or
S^uldiers) of Flanders. Philip de Hulecote, 1 Ioh. Obl. 1 Ioh. m. 12. n. 1.
gave the King 100l. and a War Horse, which he paid the King John at Xantes,
for having Johan (daughter and coheir of Robert de Mesnill) the sister of the
wife of Sewall, son of Henry (Progenitor of the Shirleys) whom the King had
granted before to the said Sewall, to be married to his Nephew, who was dead.

This Philip de Vlecotes was a very great Man all the time of King John, and
Sheriff of Northumberland, etc. and had Writs to free him from Scutages, as in
the Pipe Rolls of that time is evident. He was a Justice Itinerant 3 H. 3. in
Cumberland, Westmerland, and Lancashire. In 4 H. 3. Chron. ser. W. D^gd. Claus.
4 H. 3. m. 1.
October. 13. he was made Steward of Gascoigne and Poictou. His five sisters and
Gerardus de Styrap- Gerardus de Styrap-Matilda, Reg. de Blid. p. 73. Philip.
de-Joan. fill. and coh. Rob. Ulecotes de Mesnill, 1 John post. 6 R. 1.1 ux.
Walt. de Goder-Joh. 5 H. 3. vill. -1 Alic. Ingeram de Styrap.-Dionysia relict.
1278. Reg. de Blid. p. 76. Richardus de Stirap- Willielmus de Stirap- Rich. de
Stirap petens, 10 E. 2.



Hamelin de Buggethorp fill. Will. de Audreby Regist. de Blid. 73.-2 Marg.
Galfr. de Burgethorp.- Ingeramus de Oulecotes, mil. 2 E. 1.8 E. 1.
Reginald. frater Ric. Capellani de Blid.-Aleonora.
Galfr. de Barne-by-4 Julian. Normanuns de Stirap.- Thom. de Stirap- Johannes
de Stirap- Robertus de Sterap.



5 Daniel de Novocastro.-Constan. Johannes de Adham.
3 Tho. de Stretton, mil. s. p.-Isab.


heirs, before named, 5 H. 3. Claus. 5 H. 3. m. 17.
had the Lands of the said Phil. de Vlcotes the day that he went into Poictou,
by the Kings Precept, and Galf. de Gurdon had the custody of the Land and heirs
of Stephen de Muschamp in Biermare, which Philip de Vlcotes gave him. Walter
Crec, Hugh de St. Bermero, Ib. m. 18.
and Galfr. de Cressy, were then Knights of the Family of Philip de Vlcotes.
Walter de Godervill, 8 H. 3. Pip. 8 H. 3.
gave account of two hundred Marks for having to wife Ioane, who had been wife
of Philip de Vlecote. Raph Musard, 10 H. 3. Pi. 10 H. 3.
had Isabell her sister to wife, and the King took his Homage, and granted that
he should have seisin of their Lands, which were his wifes the said Isabells
Inheritance.

John, son and heir of Roger de Arcy, 15 E. 1. Pl. cor. Reg. Mich. 15 E. 1. to.
24.
recovered by the Judgment of the Court against Constancia de Bierne, William,
son of Jordan de Tikhull, and two others, his seisin of two Mess. sixscore
Acres of Land, twenty of Meadow, five Marks Rent, and the fourth part of a Mill
in Vlcotes, Styrap, and Blyth.

Ingeram de Vlcotes, 20 E. 1. Pl. cor. Reg. Trin. 20 E. 1. to. 15. Regist. de
Welbek p. 132.
was amerced, and John recovered by a special verdict. Richard de Styrap, son
of William, son of Richard, son of Ingelram, son of the Lady Alice de Styrap,
in 10 E. 2. Pl. de Banc. Pasc. 10 E. 2. rot. 196.
claimed against the Abbat of Wellebek five Acres of Land in Stirape and
Oulecotes.

Matthew de Blyth, and Agnes his wife, 23 H. 6. Fin. lev. Trin. 23 H. 6.
levied a Fine of the Manor of Styrop, with the Appurtenances, and two Mess.
eight Tofts, one hundred and thirty Acres of Land, forty of Meadow, six of Wood,
and 53s. 8d. Rent, and the Rent of a pound of Pepper, and a pound of Cummin,
with the Appurtenances in Styrop, Owlecotes, Staynton, Ferwarth, Plumtre, and
Barneby, and of the Fishing of South More, also of half a Mill, with the
Appurtenances in the Town of Owlecotes, to John Talbot, Knight, son and heir of
John Earl of Shrowsbury and his heirs, whereby the said Matthew and Agnes
warranted [against all] and quitcalmed from themselves and the heirs of the
said Agnes.

Thomas Marshall, son of Richard Marshall of Newark, has a Lease at Styrap
under the Duke of Norfolk, and resides there.

Queen Elizabeth, 10 July, 5 Eliz. Par. 5. pat. 5 Eliz.
granted to Robert de Hitchcock and John Gifford, amongst other things the
Grange of Vlecotes, late in the Tenure of Hugh Cressy, and belonging to the
Monastery of Welbek, and that Mess. in Sturrope in the occupation of Richard
More, late belonging to the Monastery of Roche in Yorkshire.

The owners of Stirroppe, Owlcotes, Lib. libere ten.
Norney, and Farworth 1612. are thus set down, Gilbert, Earl of Shrowsbury,
Iervas Clifton, Knight, George Chaworth, Knight, William Cressye of Owlcots,
Gent. John Robinson alias Milner of Stirrup, John Hellaby, Thomas Peace of
Owlcots, William Fysher, Thomas Walker, Richard Nicols, Robert Stoakham, Henry
More, Thomas Darbyshire, William Monk, Cottag. Nicolas Langforth, Cott. Robert
Poicey, Cott. William Midlham, Samuel West, and George Wagstaffe.

Blithe. Blide.
I Find little of Blyth in the Book of Doomsday, saving that here was Soc to
Odefach one Bov.. ad Geldam. The Land one Car. There four Vill. and four Board.
had one Car. and one Acre of Meadow. Lib. Dooms.
And that here was likewise Soc to the Kings Manor of Maunsfeld, as much as
paid the Geld for one Carucat. And also as much Soc to the Kings Manor of
Bodmescill. Yet this was the Seat of Roger de Busli (so often mentioned) who
after the Conquest was far the greatest owner in this County, whereof he had a
full fourth part or more, besides what he had in other Counties, the Castle of
Tikhill in Yorkshire was his chief House, to which the Castle and Honor of
Blithe, and all Lands and Manors of his Fee depending thereon had special
relation.

Roger de Buusli, and his wife Mariel, for the stability of William King of the
English, Regist. de Blid. p. 104.
and of his Successors, also for the Soul of Queen Matildis, and for the
health of their own Souls, by the advice of their Friends, gave and granted to
God and St. Mary of Blyth, and the Monks there serving God, the Church of
Blyth, and the whole Town entirely, with all Appendixes and Customs as the Men
of that Town did to himself, viz. to Plow, Carry, and Reap his Corn, to cut and
make his Hay, to give Marchet, to make the Damm of the Mill. Furthermore he
gave to the said Monks Toll and Passage from Radeford unto Thornewad, and from
Frodestan unto Hidist. He gave them fair and Market in the said Town absolutely
and Freely without any retention. Further he gave them all the Dignities which
he had in that Town, viz. Soc and Sac, Tol and Them, and Infangtheif, Iron and
Ditch, and Gallows, with all Liberties as he then held them of the King. Over
and above, he gave them Elleton, and what ever belonged to it; Becton, and
whatsoever belonged to that, and what he had in Barneby. He gave them also the
Tithe of twenty three Carucats of his own labor, whereof two were in Wateley,
and in Marneham two and an half. In Apleby two parts of the Tithe of the Hall
in Lands, and in Essarts, and in all small Tithes. In Lacton the same, and in
Clifford, and in Bingham, and in Salteby Garthorp, and in Berscaldeby, and in
Brugeford, and in Ludham and Gunnthorp the same, and in Clipeston the Tithe of
one Plow (or Carucat) and two parts of the Tithe of Crocheston. All these
things he granted for ever to the said Church of Blyth, for the building of the
place, and for the food and raiment of the Monks there serving God, and his
Mother; excepting that every year out of all these should be given to the
Church of the Holy Trinity at Roan (de Monte Rothomagi) forty shillings of
English money: The Witnesses were Gilbert the Presbyter, Richard the Presbyter,
William the Presbyter, Fulco de Lasoriis, Thoraldus his brother, Ernold de
Buu^li, Godefr. the Steward, or Sewer ( Dapifer), Turold de Cheverchort,
Claron, Raph Novifori, Pagan, Gladicus, Robert Dispensator, W. de Drincort.
This Donation was made in the year of our Lords Incarnation 1088. He died 4 Id.
Ian. 1099. Ex Chron. Glouc.


The Barony of Blithe (viz. the Tenants of that Honor) 5 Steph. Pip. 5 Steph.
gave account of 20l. for the forfeiture of the Wall of the Castle of Blithe.
Eustace Fitz-Iohn paid it to do the work of the said Castle by the Kings Writ,
and they were quiet.

King Henry the second confirmed to the Monks of Blyth their Fair and Market of
Blyth, Reg. de Blid.
and their Toll and Passage between Thornewad and Radeford, as Roger de Bulli
gave it, and as King Henry the first, the said Kings Grandfather confirmed it,
and that they should have all their Customs in the Wood of Lindric; and the
said King Henry the second prohibited also, that the Men of the said Monks
should not go to the Shire and Hundred, nor to the Wapentac, nor to any
pleading, except at the Castle of Blyth.

Roger de Bully left no heir of his body, as in Perlethorp may be noted.

Alice the Countess of Augi, who by agreement with Idonea de Veteriponte, In
lib. feod. Test. de Nev.
daughter of John de Bulli (noted in Stanford on Sore) had the Castle of
Tikhill, had nothing in these Counties (of Not. and Derb.) in Demesne, but she
had in Knights Services thirty nine Fees, a third and a fourth part of a Fee,
whereof twenty three Fees and a third part yielded yearly 17l. 17s. 10d. for
Guard of the Castle of Tikhill, viz. every Fee 10s. 8l. for the meat of the
Watchmen of the Castle, and other five Fees and an half, and a fourth part did
no Service, except Scutage and Relief when it happened. She the said Alice
Countess of Eu released to God, Reg. de Blid. p. 10^.
St. Mary; and the Monks of Blyth, the Prise of Oxen and Cows at Blithe Fairs,
so that neither she, her heirs, nor any of them should be able to make any
Prise at the Feast of St. Dionis in the said Fairs.

The Prior of Blithe held the whole Town of Blithe in Demesne in pure Alms of the
Honor of Tikhull, except 40s. which the Abbat of Roche held in that Town in
exchange of the Mill of Serleby. The same Prior held the whole Town of Bucketon
of the same Honor in pure Alms of the Fee of John Burdon of the new Feoffment.
The same Prior had also the whole Town of Elton in like manner of the Fee of
Roger Bully. The same Prior held five small Bovats in Bevercotes of the Fee of
William de Bevercotes in pure Alms, etc.

The Prior of Blyth, 10 E. 3. Pl. cor. Reg. ap. Northt. Trin. 10. E. 3. Ib. sub
titulo Rex Not. rot. 17. and Pl. cor. Reg. Mich. 10 E. 3. to. 17.
was impleaded by Adam de Fyncham the Kings Attorney, that he took Toll, v^z.
Thorough Toll of Passengers at West Retford, Ordesale, and Twiford brigg,
whereas he ought only to take between the four Waters of Radford, Thornewath,
Fradestan, and Idell. The Prior said the Liberty was allowed him in the Plea of
Quo warranto before William Herle, 3 E. 3. etc.

There was an agreement between the Prior and Covent of Blyth, Regist. de Blid.
p. 7.
and William the perpetual Vicar of the Church of Blyth, dated at Scroby 12
Call. Aug. 1287. concerning certain parcels of Tithes in a place called Wet^roft
in Blithe, and two Cultures, or Wongs of the Manor of Hoddesak, and a Close
called Stubbing, also Tithe Wool and Lamb in a place called Northenaye, which
is on the North part of the Bridge and Water of Blyth, all which were then
valued at 24s. and the said Vicar for peace and quietness sake released to the
said Prior and Covent, who granted to the said Vicar and his successors, that
he and his Chaplain for the time being should be yearly twenty four days
solemnly arrayed in the Quire with the Covent at Mass, as the solemnity should
require, and on those days with the Prior and Covent be conveniently provided
for and have honest refection. They also granted him a quarter of Rye yearly at
Michaelmas, and Pasture for four Cows, with those of the Priory, if they were
his own, and assigned him many small matters in which the Vicarage was to
consist, as (amongst the rest) in the Bread which is called Maynport through
the whole Parish in oblations of Wax, and in oblations coming with Children to
be Baptized, and with their Crismals. Likewise in their Tithes of Piggs, etc.
and the Corn and Hay of the Closes (except^ fore excepted) and in Tithes of the
Merchants, (or Chapmen) and Servants, and in Tithes of Flax and Hemp; in Cerage
(or Waxshot) in Eggs in Lent, in white and other small Tithes; and he was
likewise to have an House to dwell in, as his predecessors the Vicars were
wont to have. The Vicar for the time being was to serve the Church of Blyth by
himself, and by another fit- Presbyter, and the two Chapels of Baut^e and
Hoystrefeld by two other fit Presbyters, which was to be his whole burden, and
the said Vicar was to have of the Prior of Blyth every year, eight days before
Easter a Robe of the price of 20s. or 20s. whether the said Vicar would choose.

The Parish of Blyth is exceeding large, having besides the Hodsocks, B.
and Blyth, Serleby, Barneby on the Moore, Rauskill, and Torworth.

The Site of the Priory and the Demesnes, 3 July, 35 H. 8. Par. 4. pat. 35 H. 8.
were granted to Richard Andrews, and Will. Ramsden, who Iul. 25. had license
to alienate it to Richard Stansfeild and his heirs, it was the Inheritance of
Mr. William Saunderson.

Isabell, who had been wife of John Gresham, and before him of John Cook, Ex
lib. 3. ^c ed. fol. 23.
died 14 Aug. 5 Eliz. seized of the Manor of Blyth, and of diverse others in
Yorkshire, Essex, Middleser, and Northamptonshire, Richard Cook her son and
heir was then twenty two years old.

The Manor of Blyth is now the Inheritance of William, Grandchild and heir of
Sir Gervas Clifton, Knight and Baronet.

Some of the Cressyes built an Hospital in Blyth, which is now called Blyth
Spittle, and is in the gift and disposition of the Lord of Hodsak.

The Rectory was granted by King Henry the eighth, to Trinity College in
Cambridge, so which it still belongs.

William Mason, and William Oglethorpe, 12 Eliz. claimed against George Bingley
nine Mess, Trin. 12 Eliz. rot. 150.
etc. in Blyth, Sturrop, Olcotes, Norney, Torworth, Farworth and Serleby, who
called to warrant Rob. Law, senior, Gent. Tho. Law, son and heir apparent of
the said Robert, and Robert Law, junior, son of the said Robert, senior.

Alexander de Bedick in parochia de Washinton in Episc. de Duresme 1333. Jana
fill. Ric. Cancellarii. 2 Jacob. de Bedick alias Saunderson.-Margareta fill.
Walteri Wilton de Eskdale. Alexander Saunderson-Maria fill. Joh. Filton Rob.
Saunderson-Eliz. fill. Tho. Staveley de Stanhop. Johannes Saunderson de Tikhill
Com. Ebor.- 2 Henr. vel Johannes Saunderson- 1 Rob. Saunderson de Ewes in Com.
Ebor.-... fill.... Midlthwait de Peniston Ebor. 2 Christoph. Saunderson de
Stirap.-Dionysia fill.... Barbar de Rowly. 2 Robertus Saunderson gemellus de
Guilthwait and Blyth.-Eliz. fill. Ric. Car. de Burterthwait Hall Ebor.
Willielmus Saunderson natus 19. Sept. 1586.-Anna fill. Edw. Gill. de Lightwood.
Rob. Saunderson aet. 8. 1614. occis. pugnans pro rege apud Not. Brigg.
1645.-Maria fill. Gerv. Bosvile de Wermsworth. Rob. Saunderson de Serleby ob.
1658.-Maria fill. and haer. Ant. Topham S. T. P. Decanus Lincoln. 1 Robertus. 2
Anthonius. Maria.
Franc. Tho. Marshall.
Marg. ux. Rob. Mellish. Anna ux. Jacobi Lane. Eliz. ux. Rob. Air.
Rob. Episc. Lincoln.-Anna fill. Hen. Nelson Rectoris de Hougham.
1 Nicol. de Sheffeild.-
1 Johannes de Ewes.- 3 Henr.
2 Johan. de Midhop. 3 Nicol. de Gouchill.
1 Willielmus Saunderson fill. and haer.-Joana fill.... Lamplou Ebor. Nich.
Saunderson-Anna fill. Will. Soudon de Ashby Linc. Rob. Saunderson de Saxby
Linc.-Kath. fill. Vincent Grantham de Goltho Linc. Nic. Saunderson, mil. and
Baronet. Vicecom. Castleton.-Mildreda fill. and haer. Joh. Hiltoft and haer.
Clermont de Frampton. Nicol. Vic.-Fran. fill. Geo. Manners Castleton. de Haddon.
Georg. Vicecom. Castleton.-Gracia fill. Henrici Bellasi^ 1 Georgius. 2 Nicolaus.
3 Carolus.









1 Thom. de Bedick alias Saunderson fill. and haer.-Maria fill. Walteri Grindall.
Johannes de Bedick alias Saunderson-Jana fill. Joh. Guilford, mil. Joh. s.p.
Jana fill. and haer.-Rob. Hilton Dom. de Bedick jure ux.



Dr. Robert Saunderson, the late Right Reverend Lord Bishop of Lincoln, of
this Family, was the most diligent collector of Genealogies I ever knew in
these parts, especially of Lincolneshire, where he continued Rector of Boothby
Paganell a long time, and being also Prebendary of Southwell served as one of
the Clarks in the Convocation for the County (or Arch-deaconry) of Not. in the
former part of the long Parliament.

Lib. libere ten.
The owners of Blyth Town 1612. are thus expressed, William Sanderson, Gent.
William Wood, Christopher Crosdale, Thomas Chaulner, Richard Smith, James
Dawson, Robert Metcalf, William Andrews, George Rogers, Edward Mortone, Robert
Tibbott, Robert Air, Gent. George Air, Gent. William Gregory of Barneby,
Gent. Robert Worthin, John Marshall, John Chadwick, Cler. Richard Bingly,
junior, William Brown, Nicolas Heppensall, Thomas Iudson, John Stirk, Peter
Tibbott, Richard Barneby, Iervas Ingleby.

Serleby. Barneby on the More. Ranskill. And Torworth.
A Luric had a Manor in Serleby before the Conquest which paid the Geld for
one Bov. and an half. Lib. Dooms.
The Land being then one Car. There Gislebert the Man of Roger de Busli, whose
Fee it was afterward, had one Car. and five Vill. and eight Board. with three
Plows or Carucats, and one Mill of 3^. The value was 20s. in the Conquerours
time as it had been in the Confessors.

Matilda de Mules, 10 R. 1. Pi. 10 R. 1.
ought one Mark for license to make a Ditch between the Wood of Serleby, and
the Fields. Matild de Moles in the former part of the Reign of Henry the third,
Test. de Nev.
paid one Mark for half a Knights Fee in Serleby; and another time Hugh de
Serleby paid 30s. for three parts of a Knights Fee in Serleby of the Honor of
Mumbray.

Ex Copia lib. visit. pen. Reason Mellish.
Hugh de Serleby married Matild de Moles, to whom Roger de Mowbray gave the
Manor of Serleby in the time of King John (or before.) There was a Fine levied
at Leicester the first Monday after the Feast of St. Andrew, 10 Ioh. between
Osmund the Abbat of Roch, Fin. lev. 10 Job. apud Leic.
Petent, and Thomas de Sandale, and Matild his wife, summoned to warrant to the
said Abbat one Bovat of Land, with the Appurtenances in Torthewrth, whereof the
said Abbat and Covent had the Charter of the said Matild in these words, Be it
known that I Matildis de Moles have given, and, by this my Charter confirmed to
God and St. Mary of Roch, and the Monks there serving God, one Bov. of Land,
with the Appurtenances in Torthewrthe, viz. that which was Alexander Crassi's,
and one Culture of Land of thirty and eight Acres in the territory of the said
Town, and Pasture for an hundred Sheep every where in the Common Pasture of the
said Town; and furthermore, all the Lands which the Men of Blyth held of Hugh
de Moles my brother, and afterward of me, in the Fields of Serleby and
Torthewrthe, and all the Rents of those Lands, etc.

In Turdeworde before the Conquest Brixi and Caschi had two Manors which paid
to the Geld for six Bov. The Land being one Car. Lib. Dooms.
Afterward Azo the Priest had it of Roger de Busli, and it was waste. There
was Pasture Wood one leu. long, and one qu. broad. In King Edward the
Confessors time this was valued at 20s. in the Conquerours at 3s.

Hugh de Molis for the health of his Soul, Regist. de Blid. p. 88.
and of his fathers and mothers Souls, and also of his Predecessors, gave to
the Church of St. Mary of Blyth five Bov. of Land and an half, with all their
Appurtenances in Tordeord, viz. two Bov.. which Osbert held, and one which
Reginald held, and one which Robert held; and one Bovat which his own mother
held, on condition that the Children of Henry de Bilbi should hold the said
Land of the said Monastery by right of Inheritance, yielding to the Monks a
pound of Pepper yearly at Blyth Fair for all Services, saving the Foreign
Service. This gift he made to those Children for the payment of eight Marks,
which he ought them of the divise ( de divisione) of Henry their father. Ib.
Hugh de Moles granted and released to God, St. Mary, and the Monks of Blyth,
Robert, son of Siward, who was his Man and Native: he renounced also his claim
which he had against Ginet Magnus of Blyth, and Thomas Leman, and all his
brothers and sister, and their whole Progeny then present and to come, this
claim he quit before the Kings Justices at Blyth, viz. Hubert Walter and others
who were with him when the King caused him to gather the tenths through England.

Maud, the daughter of Henry de Wincester, Ib. p. 82.
by the consent of Richard de Lindesey her husband gave to the Monks of Blyth
the whole Meadow which lay to that Bovat of Land which fell to her in Blyth of
the Land of Hugh her brother: This Alms she gave that day in which the said
Monks took her for a sister.

Matildis de Moles in her widowhood granted to Robert de Kelesolt the firm of
three Acres which Roger Knodi held of her in the Fields of Torrewrd, and the
whole Service, Ib.
etc.

William, son of William de Kelesalth, gave to the Prior and Covent of Blyth
12d. Rent to be received yearly of Roger Cnodis and his heirs for three Acres
of Land in the Fields of Torthewrd.

Serleby and Tordworth, 9 E. 2. answered for half a Villa, Nom. Vill.
and Hugh de Serleby was then Lord.

The Jury, 29 E. 1. Esc. 29 E. 1. n. 47.
said that Hugh de Serleby held the Manor of Serleby, with the Hamlet of
Tortheworth by the Service of a Knights Fee of Roger de Moubray then dead. This
Hugh was son of Robert, son of the first Hugh, and Matildis de Moles, and his
son was Oliver de Serleby, who, 3 E. 3. Quo War. 3 E. 3.
claimed to have Free Warren in all his Demesne Lands of Serleby and
Thoresworth granted to Hugh de Serleby, 25 E. 1. Chapter 25 E. 1. m. 2.


Serleby has been anciently enjoyed by one of that Name until our time, B.
that ( Anthony) Serleby, Esquire, the Lord of that Lordship, and of Hugo de
Serleby-Matild. de Moles. Robertus de Serleby-Susanna. Ex Copia lib. visit.
pen. Reason Mellish, Ar.
Hugo de Serleby-Alicia. Oliverus de Serleby-Alicia. Johannes de Serleby-Joana
soror Jacobi Kinalton persona de Hedon. Nicol. de Serleby temp. H. 4.-Marjoria
neptis Thom. Aldham de Tikhill. Johannes de Serleby, 23 H. 6.-Agnes. Willielmus
de Serleby-Agnes fill. Willielmi Burton de Kinesley Ebor. Johannes de Serleby-
Hugo de Serleby-Margareta. Thom. de Serleby-Joana fill. Tho. Rockesby de
Somercliff-Grange Ebor. Willielmus de Serleby- Antonius de-Gertruda fill. Rad.
Leek de Hasland, postea ux. Serleby s. p. Geo. Chaworth, mil. and tandem Rad.
Bulloke. 1 Jocosa. 2 Isabel. 3 Elizab. 4 Doroth. 5 Maria.
2 Nicolas. 3 Hugo. Joana. Doroth.
Muriel. Elizab.
Robertus. Johannes.
Willielmus.



2 Willielmus.


2 Willielmus.
Hugo de Moles s. p.
Harthill and Woodhall in Yorkshire, having no issue, estated them both upon
Gertrude his wife, the daughter of ( Raph) Leek of Halland, Esquire for her life,
and twenty one years after, whereupon the heir of the Family and Name being
poor has sold it to Mr. William Saunderson of Blyth.

She was afterward wife of Sir George Chaworth, which easily brought Harchill
and Woodhall to that Family, so that it was very lately the Inheritance of my
Lord Chaworth, who indeed is descended from a daughter of Serleby, as in
Wiverton may be seen. The Arms of Serleby, which are at Annesley, are Gules a
Cross Moline Arg. charged with Mulletts of six points Sable, and over all a
Bendlets Countercompony Arg. and Azure.

In Barneby of Roger de Buslies Fee were two Manors which before he came were
Turverts and Sores, Lib. Dooms.
who paid for them to the Geld as one Bov.. The Land was for four Oxen (or four
Bovats.) It was waste. There was one Acre of Meadow, Pasture-Wood one qu. long,
half a qu. broad. In the time of Edward the Confessor the value was 10s. in
the Conquerours 12d. There was some of Barneby with Lund Ancient Demesne of the
Soc of Bodmescell.

Adam de Barneby, by the assent and will of his wife and his heirs, Regist. de
Bli^. p. 94.
quit-claimed to the Monks of Birth, all the right he had in the More of
Barneby which the Prior had enclosed within his Court, and within his Walls,
and released to them for ever all Nuisance which should happen to his Fee from
the Walls and Waters of the said Prior.

William, the Chaplain of Gameleston, released to Sir William the Prior of
Blyth his whole right in the whole Land of Barneby within the Town and without,
except that Bovat which Wyot held. Ib.


Wyot de Barneby released to the said Prior and Covent in the year 1235. all
his right in the Wood of Barneby, Ib.
and in one Rood of Land within the enclosure of their Manor of Barneby, viz.
that Rode next the two Rodes which Rob. son of Richard, gave, saving to him the
said Wyot, and his heirs, only Common Pasture of Herb and Acorn for the Cattle
of his own rearing [ nutriture] with Common of Feuger, and Common of dry Boughs
prostrate on the earth by blast of wind or age, so that neither the said Wyot
de Barneby, nor his heirs should without the special license of the Prior
stretch forth his or their hand to any Vert, or Green [ viride] in the said
Wood.

Thomas the Clark of Barneby released also his right in the said Wood of
Barneby, so did Walter, son of Thomas de Barneby, all that he pleaded to belong
to seven Bovats or Oxgangs which he the said Walter, and Robert, and William
Leman, held of the said Prior and Covent, whereof he impleaded them by the
Kings Writ in the time of Stephen de Segrave, saving to him his Common Pasture
and Herb and Acorn of (or for) his proper Cattle of his own nurture (or
rearing) while the said Wood should endure, which it was lawful for the said
Prior and Covent to Assert and Till, when ever they should please, without the
impediment of the said Walter or his heirs, and when the fruits were carried
off, the said Walter, with the rest of the Men of the Town were to have Common;
for this the said Prior and Covent gave him six Marks of Silver. Several others
released what they had in the Wood called Ravelound.

Reg. Blid. p. 10.
....the daughter of William Frer, of Barneby, made Fine with Sir William
Burdun, Prior of Blithe, for Leyerwith (mulct for incontinence) and for having
license of marrying her self whither she would; she gave 2s. 6d. the Thursday
in Easter week 1290.

Roger, son of Randulf, son of Roger de Maresey, Ib. p. 121.
granted and confirmed the whole gift of his Fee in the Town of Barneby, as his
Ancestors had made it, Ib. p. 122.
to God and St. Mary, and the Monks of Blyth, to whom Thomas de Maresey also
released all demand of Homage, Fealty, and Suit of Court.

Raneschell was of Archbishop Thomas his Fee, with Ostone, and paid to the
Geld as four Bov.. Lib. Dooms.
The Land one Car. It was waste before the Conquest, and so continued in King
Williams time. Godric held it before, and the said Thomas Archbishop of York
after the Norman change.

Lib. libere ten.
The owners of Serleby, Torworth, and Fartworth in 1612. are thus set down,
George Chaworth, Knight, 13l. 6s. 8d..... Wood, Gent. 20s. Richard Newcombe,
junior, three Oxgangs, John Dobson, Richard Ollyver 13s. 4d. Robert Sturton
20s. Anthony Denton 20s. Henry Hawson, Thomas Chawner, Robert Tibbott, Richard
Newcombe, senior,.... Cartwright of Wheatley,... Brown, widow, Mrs. More,
widow, 13s. 4d.

The owners of Barneby Town 1612. are thus, Sir Peter Fretwell, Ib.
Knight, Robert Air, John Lyllye, Thomas Crumwell, Robert Vpton, Thomas Meare,
Raph Wilson, Andrew Barrett, Alderman and Burgesses of Newark, Roger Gregory.

The Vicarage of Blyth was twenty Marks, when the Prior of Blyth was Patron:
Mss. I. M.
It Is now 14l. 9s. 4d. ob. value in the Kings Books, and the Patronage belongs
to Trinity College in Cambridge.

Harworth. Farworth. Plumtre. Limpole. Hesle. And Marton.
BEfore the Conquest in Hareword Wade, Vlfiet, and Vlstan paid to the Geld for
one Carucat of Land, for their three Manors. The Land whereof was two Car.
There afterward Fulco the Man of Roger de Busli (whose Fee it was) had one
Car. and eight Vill. and one Board. with three Car. There was a Church, Lib.
Dooms.
Pasture Wood one leuc long, one broad. The value in King Edward the
Confessors time was 40s. and when the Conquerours Survey was made 30s. having
Soc in Martune one Car. ad Geld. The Land two Car. There ten Vill. had five
Car. Pasture Wood, one leu. long, half a leu. broad.

Fulco de Lisoriis was the Tenant or Man of Roger de Busli it seems, Regist. de
Blid. p. 106.
and gave to the Priory of Blyth two Bovats in Harewrd, and the Multure of
Harewrd, and of the whole Soc belonging to it (part whereof was the Hamlet
called Plumtre) which Robert de Lisoriis his son, and others of his posterity
confirmed, as before in Oulecotes, and other places may be perceived.

Raph Fraser, the Kings Marescal, gave to the Monks of Blyth two Bovats which
Gamel held of him in Harewrd: Ib. p. 103.
which gift was confirmed by Henry Cossard, the son of Raph Cossard, Ib. p. 88.
named before in Hodsak.

Thomas Fitz-William, Test. de. Nev.
and Albreda de Bassingburne held the whole Town of Harworth of Alice Countess
of Ewe (or Augi) by the service of one Knights Fee. Albreda de Bassingburne
held in Brigford and Hareword two Knights Fees by reason of the Wardship of the
heirs of John Biset. Ib.
She held but half a Knights Fee here. Ib.


In 9 E. 2. Hareworthe with the Soc answered for an entire Villa, Nom. Vill.
whereof William Fitz-William was then certified to be Lord.

The Jury, 14 E. 3. Esc. 14 E. 3. n. 35.
said that Galfr. le Scrop (named in South Muscham) held in Hareworth of Gerard
de Seginton by the Service of 1d. per annum, a Capital Mess. one hundred and
ten Acres of arable Land, ten of Meadow, etc.

This Town and the Hamlets have been of long time the Inheritance of Moreton, B.
an ancient and worshipful Family, until Anth. Moreton, Esquire, (who paid in Queen
Elizabeth's time 3s. 4d. for half a Knights Fee in Harworth, sometime Henry
Bisets) wasted the Estate; he was Father of Robert Moreton who sold Hareworth
to Mr. William Saunderson.

Reg. de Blid. p. 74.
Hamo de Burton gave to the Monks of Blithe one Bovat of Land in Farewad, which
Robert de Farewad gave him for his Service. Elias de Moles gave them the Land
which Hamo Buche held of him by 10l. Rent, Ib.
and that which Elys Pin held of him for 2d. ob. and Pasture for two hundred
Sheep in his Land of Farewad, and Common Pasture in all his Commons. Elyas, son
of Robert de Farewad, Ib.
gave to the said Monks five Acres of his Land which Haco, son of Roger, held
of him, and three Rods [ virgas] of Land which Elys Pin held of him. Elyas, son
of Elyas de Farewad, gave them one Culture of his Land in the territory of
Farewad called Hevedlands, as it bore in length and breadth from the Street
which leads toward Bautre, unto the Street of Tikehill. Elias de Farewat, son
of Elias, confirmed it, so he did other gifts of his father, and released 18d.
Rent which Elias, son of Alewy of Stirap, was wont to pay his said father for
half a Bovat of Land in Farewad, which his said father sold to Mr. John, son of
Alice de Styrap, for a Mark of Silver which he gave him in his great need.

Ingeram de Stirap gave to Friar William de Well. Reg. de Blid. p. 76.
Prior of Blyth, and the Monks there, a certain Culture of Land in the
territory of Farewat, with all the length and breadth as it lay between the way
which leads from Blyth to Tikhill, and the Land of Robert, son of Beatrix de
Stirap, and abutted on one head on the head-land of the said Prior and Covent,
and on the other on the way which leads from Stirap toward Serleby. Dionysia
the relict of the said Ingeram also released all her right of Inheritance or
otherwise.

By a Fine at York, 13 E. 2. Fin. lev. 13 E. 2. Mich. apud Ebor.
the Manor of Farewath was settled on Hugh de Serleby for life; remainder to
Oliver, son of the said Hugh, and to Alice his wife, and to the heirs of their
bodies; remainder to the right heirs of the said Hugh.

John Flandrensis of Claverbure gave to God, and the Monks of Blyth, Reg. de
Blid. p. 98.
Raph, son of Balde of Heselay, and his whole Sect, and the whole Land which he
held of him in Heselay, viz. nine Acres. Gaufr. son of William le Hoser
released the nine Acres in Heselay, which the said John Flandrensis gave to the
Monks of Blyth.

William, son of (or Fitz-) William, son of (or Fitz-) Goderic gave those Monks
one Mark of yearly Rent of the three which the Lord Archbishop of York was
bound to pay him for Plumcrefeld. Reg. de Blid. p. 98.


Robert Strey, Chaplain, Thomas Elys, and William Bradford, 17 H. 8. Tr^n. 17
H. 8. to. 116.
claimed against Charles Moreton, Esquire, one Mess. ninety five Acres of Land,
thirty four of Meadow, twenty six of Pasture, and ten of Wood in Limpole and
Hesley.

Peter, son of Will^am de Marton, gave to the Monks of Blithe one Carucat of
Land [ invigedun] with all Appurtenances, Reg. de Blid. p. 101.
and further granted them Timber in his Wood to make them lodgeings [
Herbergagia] and convenients for fire, and a Toft in the same Town, and free
Multure in the Mill of the same Town. They were to receive him into their
Society when God should give it into his heart. Agnes, Ib. p. 13.
the wife of Nicolas de Marton did Fealty to the Prior of Blyth the Friday next
after the Ascension of our Lord 1289. in the name of Roger her son then under
age, for two Bovats of Land in Marton, which the said Roger claimed to hold of
the said Prior, and acknowledged to owe 4s. per annum, and gave for relief 8s.

There was a Fine levied, 5 E. 3. Fin. lev. Pasc. 5 E. 3.
between Hugh de Hercy Chr. Quer. and Thomas de Multon of Kirketon Chr. Deforc.
of the Manor of Marton near Bautre which Gerard de Sekinton, and Joan his
wife, held as dower of the said Ioane, and another 40 E. 3. and afterward 43
E. 3. Mich. 40 E. 3. and 43. E. 3.
between Robert de Morton of Bautre, and Joan his wife, and William Street,
Quer. and Hugh de Hercy Chr. Deforc. of the Manor of Marton by Bautre, which
the said Hugh acknowledged to be the right of the said Robert, and was after
the death of Joan, the wife of Gerard de Sekyngton, who held it in Dower, and
had demised it to Anna le Despenser to revert to the said Robert, and Ioane his
wife, and William, and the heirs of the said Robert.

The Moretons did Found an Hospital in the uttermost edge of the Parish near
Bautrey Town in Yorkshire, B.
to which there is also a Chapel yet standing, wherein they of the Family have
used to be buried, and amongst the rest there lies Katherin (daughter of John
Boun, Esquire, by his first wife, and so) half sister of Gilbert Boun, Sergeant
at Law, who was widow of George Moreton, elder brother of the before named
Robert, who sold Hareworth, which George died long before the said Anthony his
father. These Moretons bore Quarterly Gules and Ermine the first and last
charged with each a Goats Head Erased Arg.

The Church of Harewode, with the Chapel of Serleby and of Marton, with all
their Appurtenances, Reg. de Novo loc. p. 206.
were by King John granted to the Church of Roan, with many others, as part of
the Chapelry of Blyth, and with that of East Markham, and the rest came, 6 E.
6. to the Earl of Shrowsbury, as in Lowdham and other places is noted.

The owners of Marten, Hesley, Lib. libere ten.
and Harworth, in 1612. are thus set down, Gilbert Earl of Shrowsbury, George
Chaworth, Knight, Anthony Morton, Esquire, William Gregory for Lands in Hesley,
William Weste, Esquire, Thomas Wright of Rossington, George Wagstaffe of
Harworth, James Hall of the same, Henry Stryng, Nicolas Strea, John Robinson,
Jews Weste.

The Vicarage of Harworth was 11l. when the Abbat of Westminster was Patron:
Mss. I. M.
It Is now 5l. 9s. 7d. value in the Kings Books, and the Duke of Norfolk Patron.

Auclid. Alkeley. And Finingley.
IN Feningley before the Conquest Swayn answered the Tax or Geld at six Bovats
for his Manor. The Land whereof was three Car. There afterward Gislebert
Tyson (who had most if not all the said Swayns Lands in this County) had half a
Car. and fifteen-Vill. four Board having five Car. and an half, Lib. Dooms.
Pasture Wood two leu. long, two broad. In the Confessors time this was valued
at 40s. and when the Conquerours Survey was taken at 41s.

The Lands of this Gislebert Tysons Fee in this County did afterward belong to
the Family of Moubray, as in Averham, Kelum, Winkburne, and Sterthorp, may be
observed.

The Jury after the death of Roger de Moubray, 29 E. 1. Esc. 29 E. 1. n. 47.
found Nicolas de St. Elena, and Alice Touke, to have held of him certain Lands
and Tenements in Alkeley and Fyningley by the service of one Knights Fee.

Fyningley and Alkeleye, 9 E. 2. answered for half a Villa, Nom. Vill.
the Lords then certified being Walter Touk, and William de St. Elena. But in
the former part of the Reign of K. Henry the third, Test. de Nev.
Roger, son of Richard, is certified to have paid two Marks for one Knights Fee
in Finhingle.

Hugh de Clyderhowe, 11 E. 3. Pl. de Banc. Hill. 11 E. 3. to. 71.
recovered his seisin of a House, and a Mill in Alkeley, into which Hugh de
Eland had intruded himself, saying they were his own; and also recovered 10l.
for his damages.

Guy Fairfax, 14 E. 4. Claus. 14 E. 4. m. 20.
had some interest here.

Thomas Darcy, Knight, Lord Darcy, Henry Wyat, Esquire, Richard Wyat, Clark,
and John Scott, 21 H. 7. Pasch. 21 H. 7. rot. 142, and rot. 144.
claimed against John Cley the Manor of Blythe, with the Appurtenances, and
ten Mess. three hundred Acres of Land, etc. in Blyth, Ranskyll, Torworth,
Norney, and Sterap, also the Advowson of the Church of Fynnyngley.

Reginald Pegge, George Emerysson, and Henry Wyat, Esquire, 22 H. 7. Hill. 22
H. 7. rot. 409.
claimed against Richard Wyat, Clark, and John Scott, Esquire, one Acre of
Land, and the Advowson of the Church of Fynningley, who called to warrant John
Cley, and Margaret his wife.

Margaret, who had been wife of John Clay, 35 H. 8. Trin. 35 H. 8. rot. 144.
claimed against Thomas Fayrfax, Sergeant at Law, the Manor of Fynnyngley,
also the Advowson of that Church.

John Wormeley, Gent. and John Park 9 Eliz. Hill. 9 Eliz. rot. 136.
claimed against Richard Fenton, Gent. one Mess. thirty Acres of Land, ten of
Meadow, forty of Pasture, etc. in Aukeley, and called to warrant Thomas
Fayrefax, Esquire. John Park, 10 Eliz. claimed against Richard Fenton the
Manor of Fynnyngley, Mich. 9 and 10 Eliz. rot. 706.
with the Appurtenances, and twenty Mess. twenty Tofts, etc. in Fynnyngley, who
called Thomas Fayrefax.

Hugh Jones, and John Ingham, 17 Eliz. Pasch. 17 Eliz. rot. 355.
claimed against Richard Shirbourne, Knight, the Manor of Awkeley and
Finningley, and diverse Lands in those Towns, who called John Hopwood.

The Manor was divided between Sherburne, and Frobisher, B.
and besides Frobisher had the Grange (of Finninglay) which belonged to the
Priory of Mattersey. The Queen, 18 November. 34 Eliz. Par. 12. pat. 34 Eliz.
granted the said Grange to Martin Frobisher, Knight, and his heirs; and 10
Febr. 40 Eliz. Par. 5. pat. 40 Eliz.
she granted it to Peter Frobisher, Esquire, Cousin and Heir of Sir Martin.

The owners of Finningley cum Auckley in 1612. are thus expressed, Francis
Frubiser, Lib. libere ten.
Gent. Richard Sherborne, Gent. William Fribiser, Gent. Clare Gregory, widow,
Nicolas Greson, John Tomson, Bryan Mole, Edward Fowler, William Marselande Chr.
Sampoll, Edward Birkett, Richard Norton, William Atkin, William Mowldson,
William Iackson, widow Copstacke.

The Rectory of Finningley was twenty Marks when Mr. Wiat was Patron; Mss. I. M.
It Is now 13l. 5s. 7d. ob. value in the Kings Books, and John Gibbons, or
Robert Harvey, Esquire, Patron.

Scrooby.
IN the Book of Doomsday Scrobye is only a Berue (or Hamlet) of Sudton, the
Archbishop of Yorkes Manor.

William de Melton Archbishop of York, 17 E. 2. Chapter 17 E. 2. m. 32.
had Free Warren in Southwell, Lanuth, Scroby, Askham, Sutton, and Plumtrie.

William Whorwood, 37 H. 8. Pasch. 37 H. 8. rot. 471.
claimed for the King against Robert Archbishop of York the Manors of
Scrobye, Raveneskeld, Lanome, Askham, Sutton, and the North Soke, and twenty
Mess. twenty Tofts, ten Dovecotes, twenty Gardens, one thousand Acres of Land,
five hundred of Meadow, five hundred of Pasture, five hundred of Wood, one
thousand of Furz and Heath, and 20l. Rent, and passage over Trent; and several
Fishing and Free Warren in the said Manors, with the Appurtenances in Scrobye,
Raveneskeld, Lanome, Askham, Sutton, North Soke, Calff Holme, Bownyng,
Dunwardeynge, Westwode, Hayton, Clareburgh, Tylne, Everton, Scafteworth,
Welholme, Bole, Whetle, Cavome, Everton, Carr and Carr, except the Advowsons of
the Hospital of St. John in Notyngham, and of the College of Sybthorpe, the
Rectory of Kenalton, and the Advowson of the Church of the Vicarage of
Kynalton, the Advowson of Carleton in Lyndrick, and except the Advowson of the
Chapel of St. Mary in Southwell, also except the Advowson of the Church of
Barton in the Beans, with the Appurtenances.

Here, within memory, stood a very fair Palace, a far greater House of receipt,
B.
and a better Seat for provision than Southwell, and had attending to it the
North Soke, consisting of very many Towns thereabouts: It has a fair Park
belonging to it. Archbishop Sands caused it to be demised to his son Sir
Samuel Sands, since which the House has been demolished almost to the ground.
The Church (a fair one too, if not ruinous) is Appropriated to the
Archbishopric of York. Mr. Francis Saundes is the present Tenant.

Lib. libere ten.
The Freeholders in Scroby cum Ranskill Towns 1612. are set down thus, John
Ashetone, Richard Torre, William Thorpe, Anthony Denton, Stephen Wells, Thomas
Hudson, Simon Bucke, James Law, William Smith,... Fitz-Williams, Gent. Thomas
Crumwell of Sutton upon Lound, Robert Smith.

Mattersey. Mersey. And Thorpe.
IN Madrisseig of the Kings Soc of Bodmeschell, which before the Norman
Invasion, was Earl Tosti's, was as much as answered the Geld for eleven Bovats.
Lib. Dooms.
The Land being sufficient for three Plows or three Car. There twelve Sochm.
two Vill. three Board, had six Car.. Meadow three qu. long, one broad, Pasture
Wood one leuc long, one qu.. broad. Here was also of Roger de Busli's Fee Soc
to Rametone one Bov. ad Geld. There was one Sochm. and two Acres of Meadow.
Another part of this Township was a Berue of the Archbishop of Yorkes great
Soc of Sudton, with Scroby and Lund.

Here was a Family who had their name from this place, who were Lords of
Gameleston in this Wapentac, as in that place may be seen, and of other places
in this County, Lancashire and Lincolneshire, who Founded a Monstery here of
Gilbertines before the year 1102. as in Mysin may be noted.

The Prior of Marsey held two Bovats of Land in pure Alms, T^st. de Nev.
of the Fee of Thomas the heir of Roger de Maresey in the time of H. 3.

Isabell de Chauncy, daughter of Thomas de Marsey, Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p. 811.
in her widowhood, for the safety (or health) of her Soul, and of the Soul of
Sir Philip de Chauncy, sometimes her husband, and for the Souls of all her
Ancestors, remised, confirmed and quit-claimed to God, and St. Helen of the
Isle of Marsay, and the Prior and Covent of the House of Marsay there serving
God, her whole Demesne, with all Homages and Services of the Towns of Marsay
and Thorpe, and all Lands, possessions and Tenements which they had and held of
the gift and Feoffment of her Ancestors in the Villages (or Towns) of Marsay
and Thorpe, Gameleston, Elkesley, West Retford, Misyn, and Boulton, or
other-where of her Fee, with the Advowsons of the Churches of Mersay,
Gameleston, Misyn, and Bouleton, with free Court of their Tenants in the said
Towns, etc. The Witnesses to her Deed were Sir Hugh de Hercy. Sir Robert de
Saundeby, Sir Laurence de Chaworth, Knights, Robert Pouer, Robert de Wlrington,
Robert de Lanum, Robert de Bekyngham, Henry de Sutton, John Fitz-Raph, William
de ^^beny, and others, which was about the latter part of the Reign of E. 1. or
beginning of E. 2.

The Prior of Mathersey, 35 E. 1. Chapter 35 E. 1. m. 17.
had free warren in Mathersay and Thorpe. The Prior of Mathersey of the Order
of Sempringham, 3 E. 3. Quo War: 3 E. 3.
claimed to have for himself and his Men quittance in City and Borough, in
Markets and Fairs, in passage of Bridges and Ports of the Sea, and in all
places through England from Toll and Pontage. There was an Ad quod Damnum, 4 H.
4. Esc. 4 H. 4. n. 22.
for Market and Fair to be kept at Mattersey.

Mathersey and Thorp, 9 E. 2. answered for an entire Villa, Nom. Vill.
whereof the King and Earl of Lancasser were then found to be Lords.

Robert de Sumervill, son of Robert de Sumervilla, granted to the Abbey of
Wellebek, Regist. de Welbek p. 172.
that the Canons, their Brethren and Men, and all their matters should be
carried over Ydele, in the Boat at his passage of Madersey, as often as they
should come there, by the passers [ passoribus] of his Fee freely and quietly,
so that nothing should be exacted of them for that passage. Raph de Sumervill
was witness.

The Abbat of Beacheif, 31 H. 3. Pl. Iur. and Assis. in Com. Leic. 31 H. 3.
cor. Roge^o de Thurkelby to. 18.
claimed against Roger de Osherton four Bov. of Land, and 3s. Rent in Mareseye
as the right of his Church, and Roger came and demanded view, etc.

John Markham, Knight, Sneth Snawzell, Esquire, and others, 22 H. 8. Mich. 22
H. 8. rot. 112.
claimed against Thomas Wentworth, Knight, and Isabell his wife, three Mess.
two Co^tag. sixty Acres of Land, forty of Pasture, two hundred of More, and 1d.
Rent, with the Appurtenances in Mattersey, and Mattersey Thorp, Barneby, and
Ranby, and called to warrant Thomas Wentworth the younger, brother of the said
Thomas Wentworth, Knight.

The King, 4 November. 31 H. 8. Par. 3. pat. 31 H. 8.
granted to Anthony Nevill, Esquire, and Mary his wife, the Monastery, Manor
and Rectory of Mattersey, with Blakawe Grange there, and Claworth Grange, etc.
the Monastery to them, and the heirs Males of the said Anthony, the Manor and
Lands in Thorp, Wyeston, and Stirton to him and his heirs [see Claworth]

The Church was appropriated to the Priory about 8 E. 1. to repair the Priories
then losses by a sudden fire. B.
It was the Inheritance of John Nevill, Esquire, by descent from Sir Anthony
Nevill his great Grandfather, to whom it was conveyed from the Crown. Sir
William Hickman married.... the daughter and heir of.... Nevill, and now
enjoyes it.

A Mess. and Tenement in Mattersey, and another in Heyton, belonging to the
Chantry of St. John of Mattersey, were, amongst other things, 18 May, 7 E. 6.
Par. 13. pat. 7 E. 6.
granted to Thomas Reeve, and George Cotton.

The owners of Mattersey and Thorpe Towns in 1612. are thus expressed, Lib.
libere ten.
Alexander Iessop of Mattersey Thorp, senior, Henry Iessop of the same, Richard
Eltonhead, Gent. Thomas Robinson of the same, Alexander Iessop, junior, of the
same, John Iessop, of the same, John Hall of Bekingham for Lands in Mattersey
Thorp, Henry Bower, Anthony Nevell of Mattersey Abbey, Esquire, Thomas Hall of
Mattersay, Bartholomew Hall, of the same, Thomas Dawson Robert Oldfeild, John
Ellyot; Robert Hodgeson, Thomas Wood, Robert Fletcher, all of the same; William
Chapman, Gyles More, William Staynton, William Atkingson, Peter Scot, Robert
Chapel, Henry Holmes, William Hamond, Raph Waddington, junior, Gent. Tho.
Drew, Robert Williamson, Robert Whitehead, William Milner, Raph Bing, senior.

The Vicarage of Mathersey was 8l. It Is now 6l. 8. 9d. value in the Kings
Books, Mss. I. M.
and is in the Collation of the Archbishop of York, as it has been.

Sutton. And Lound.
THe Archbishop of York, when the great Survey was made in the time of King
William the first, had a Manor in Sudton, of which Lund, and Scrobye, and
Madrisseig, were Berues, Lib. Dooms.
which answered the Geld for one Carucat, six Bovats, before the Conquest. The
Land then being known to be six Carucats. There afterward the Archbishop had
two Carucats in Demesne, fourteen Villains, six Bordars, having six Carucats.
There was Meadow of seven Acres, Pasture Wood half a leug, and eight quarentens
long, eight qu. and an half broad. In the time of King Edward the Confessor it
was valued at 8l. and in King Williams time likewise, having Soc in Etton,
Tilne, Wellom, and Suuenton, Greenleig, Scaftord, Evarton, and Claverburch,
which Land was for twelve Plows (or twelve Carucats) and then were there thirty
eight Sochm. with eighteen Villains, twenty Bordars, having twenty five Plows
(or twenty five Carucats). In Lunde and Barnebye Soc to the Kings Manor of
Bodmeschel were six Bovats.. ad Geldam. The Land.... There three Sochmen had
one Carucat, and three Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood two qu. long, half a
quarenten broad. Of Roger de Busli's Fee in Lund was a Manor which was Vlchels
before the Conquest, who paid for it to the Geld as two Bovats. The Land one
Carucat. There after the Conquest in Demesne was one Carucat, and six Villains,
with two Carucats, and five Acres of Meadow, Pasture Wood six qu. long, two
broad. The value of this in the Confessors time was 20^. in the Conquerours
but 10s.

The Manor of Sutton continues with the Nort Soke to the Archbishopric of
York.

The Jury, 24 E. 1. Esc. 24 E. 1. n. 63.
found that Robert de Hayton died seized of nine small Bovats in Lound held of
Tikhill.

By an Inquisition taken at Nottingham the Thursday after Palmsunday, Ex Copia
Inq.
23 H. 7. before Sir William Perpoint, Knight, Sir Edward Stanhope, Knight, and
Raph Agard, it appears that John Strelley of Lindeby (named in that place) died
seized of the Manor of Sutton on Lo^nd, then valued at 10l. beyond all
reprises. John Port, Sergeant at Law, Thomas Coken, Knight, German Pole,
Esquire, Percivall Strelley, and William Blake, 16 H. 8. Trin. 16 H. 8. rot.
444.
claimed against Nicolas Strelley of Lindeby, Esquire, and Elizabeth his wife,
one Mess. forty Acres of Land, twenty of Meadow, sixty of Pasture, four of Wood,
and eighty of Furz and Heath, with the Appurtenances in Lownd. Robert Hekeling
held the third part of a Knights Fee in Lunde and Clumber.

John Freiston, Esquire, in the time of Queen Elizabeth paid 20d. for his Lands
in Lound, Ex quod am rotulo Aur.
sometime John Styrley's held by the fourth part of a Knights Fee.

The Jury, 30 H. 3. Esc. 30 H. 3. n. 36.
said that Gilbert de St. George held half a Bovat in Lound of Robert de St.
George Lord of Bodmeshill.

Alice, who had been wife of Robert, son of Eustachius de Lund, 18 E. 1. Pl.
^^r. Reg. Mich. 18 E. 1. ^o 64.
withdrew her self from her Writ against the Archbishop of York, and others,
for one Mess. sixty Acres of Meadow, and ten Acres of Land, with the
Appurtenances in Lound and Sutton. By a Fine, 19 E. 3. Fin. lev. Pasch. 19 E. 3.
between Thomas, son of Adam de Lound, Chaplain, Quer. and Walter Power, Parson
of the Church of Wark, Deforc. the said Thomas settled one Mess. twenty four
Acres of Land, fourteen of Meadow, four of Turbary and 3^. 6d. Rent in Lound
nigh Mathersey, on himself for life; then to his brother William for life; then
to his brother Robert for life; then to Thomas, son of his brother Robert, and
the heirs of his body; remainder to Margery, sister of the last Thomas, and the
heirs of hers; remainder to Elizabeth her sister, and the heirs of hers;
remainder to the right heirs of the said Thomas, son of Adam de Lound.

Thomas Palmer, sometime Parson of Blaunkeney, 16 R. 2. Esc. 16 R. ^. par. 1.
n. 148.
had in Ad quod Damnum to give to the Dean and Chapter of Lincoln two Mess.
one Toft, one Bovat, thirty five Acres of Land, and one Rood of Land, two Acres
of Meadow, and 5s. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Sutton by Retford in the
Cley, and Lound, whereof twenty Acres in Lound were held of Tikhill by doing
Suit at the two great Courts of Barsetlowe, and one Message, and fifteen Acres
and one Rood of Land, and two of Meadow, and 5s. Rent in Lound by Suit at the
two great Courts of Bothumsell. And that Message, Toft and Bovat in Sutton
were then held of Roger de Weston, Prebendary of the Prebend of Clarburgh by
the Service of 3s. 6d. and doing Suit at the Court of the Prebend of Clarburgh.

Thomas Vavasor, 8 E. 4 was against John Perin, Hill. 8 E. 4. rot. 102.
in a Plea for one Message, and two Bovats of Land, with the Appurtenances in
Lound. By an Inquisition taken at Retford, 14 October. 4 H. 8. it appears that
William Vavasor dyed 28 Apr. 3 H. 8. leaving his son and heir Thomas Vavasor
twenty years old at the Feast of the Assumption of the blessed Mary the Virgin,
Ex. Inq.
last past, before the Inquisition, which found that he had thirty three Acres
of Land, five Acres and one Rood of Meadow, and two Acres of Wood, with the
Appurtenances in Lound, and one Message, and two Acres in Styrton, and a
Windmill in Burton. All which Thomas Vavasor of Deneby in Yorkshire, Ex Inq.
altera.
who dyed 2 Ian. 22 H. 8. left to Roger Vavasor his son and heir then aged
sixteen years twenty weeks and five days, who married Elena, the daughter of
Thomas Reresby. Margaret (Wombell) was wife of Thomas Vavasor, and over-lived
him, as appears by the Inquisition taken at Tuxford, 16 Aug. 23 H. 8. and had
the Manor of Deneby, which extended it self into Deneby, Newhall, and
Mekesburgh, and the Manor of Stanseby, with Lands in South Kirkby and Bentley
in the said County of York.

Robert Brokysby, John Allot, Clark, and Thomas Shawe, 23 H. 8. Hill. 23 H. 8.
rot. 148.
claimed against Thomas Wentworth, Knight, and Isabell his wife, eight
Messuages, one hundred and forty Acres of Land, sixty of Meadow, eight hundred
of Pasture, one hundred of Common of Pasture, and 12d. Rent, with the
Appurtenances in Sutton by Lownd, Wyeston, Lownde, Missen, Misterton, South
Clifton, and North Clifton, and called to warant Thomas Wentworth, junior,
brother of the said Thomas Wentworth, Knight.

The King, 7 March, 4 E. 6. Par. 9. pat. 4 E. 6.
granted to Walter Iobson, and his heirs, all that Message and Tenement, with
the Appurtenances, and all Lands, etc. in Lownd, in the Tenure of Cuthbert,
Clark, late belonging to the Chantry of St. John in Mattersey.

The owners of Sutton cum Lownde (at least that of Tikhill Fee) in 1612. are
thus set down, Lib. libere ten.
John Colbye, Thomas Hamond of Lownde, Nicolas Hamond of Lownd, Gent. Richard
Ellis, Edward Hartshorne of the same, Raph Smith, Henry Mattersey, William
Redshay, senior, of Lownde, Henry Goodcoot, Thomas Wadsley, William Atkinson,
widow Ratcliff, William Redshaye, junior, the heirs of.... Freeston, Thomas
Crumwell of Sutton, Nicolas Stringer of Sutton, Gent.

The Vicarage of Sutton was 10l. when the Sacrist of St. Mary's at York was
Patron: Mss. I. M.
It Is now of the same value in the Kings Books, and the Lady Sara South
Patroness.

West Retford.
THis Town seems part of East Retford, being only divided by the River Idel. It
was of the Fee of Roger de Busli, and in Doomsday Book is joined with
Odesthorp, which is now unknown. There was Soc to Clumber in Odesthorp and
Retford, one Bov.. ad Geldam. The Land four Bovats.... the Soc in Clumber was
waste. There was Soc to Westune, half a Bov. ad Geldam. The Land four Bov. Lib.
Dooms.
There was one Villain, one fourth of a Mill, and four Acres of Meadow. But of
the Tayn-land Vlmer had two Bov.. ad Geldam in his Manor. The Land one Car.
There was in Demesne one Car. and half a Mill 4s. and ten Acres of Meadow. In
the Confessors time this was valued at 40s. in the Conquerours but at 4s.
Robert de Mortayne, 4 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Hill. 4 E. 1. to. 68.
by concord in a Plea for Common granted to John de Beringworth, Parson of the
moiety of the Church of West Retford and his successors, Common of Pasture in
his Pasture of West Retford, with all manner of his animals in all places as
freely as himself and predecessors ever had. Robert de Hayton (as in that
place is noted) held some Lands here.

The Jury, 26 E. 1. Esc. 26 E. 1. n. 42.
found that Thomas de Maresey Lord of Gameleston held in West Retford eight
Bovats freely for 6s. per annum.

This place for the most part went with Weston and Grove, as in those places
may be observed, until the last Sir John Hercyes disposition of that estate,
who, it seems, caused this Manor to be settled on his sister Anne, the wife of
Nicolas Denman.

I find Edward Darrell, son of Sir Thomas married Barbara, Ex Cop. visit. pen.
Reason Mellish, Ar.
daughter and coheir of Francis Denman, who, in the year 1614. had by her
three sons, 1. Thomas then aged sixteen years, 2. Brian, and 3. Edward.

In 1612. these were owners in West Retford, Lib. libere ten.
Edward Dorrell, Gent...... Podge, Gent. Philip Collye, Thomas Lincoln, Isabel
Sloswick, John Colbye of Sutton, Robert Gellande, George Tompson, Thomas
Merebeck, William Booth, William Tomson, Thomas Gellande, widow Ienyver,
Richard Ellis.

The Rectory of West Retford was twenty Marks when Mr. Hersy was Patron: Mss.
I. M.
It Is now 9l. 13s. 4d. value in the Kings Books, and John Dorrell, Esquire, the
last Patron.

Dr..... Darrell has given his Estate here to Found an Hospital, which, since
his death, is built where the Manor stood, for a Master....

Billeby. And Ranby.
IN Billeby before the Conquest Trunchell had a Manor which paid to the Geld
for six Bov. The Land then three Car. There afterward Ingram the Man of Roger
de Busli, whose Fee it was, Lib. Dooms.
had one Car. nine Vill. and one Board. having three Car. and six Acres of
Meadow. In the Confessors time this was valued at 40s. in the Conquerours but
at 20s.

This Ingram may well be supposed the Ancestor of the Lords of Auferton,
whereof Ranulf, Rot. pip. 2 H. 2. and postea.
son (...) Engelram (or Ingram) was Sheriff of these Counties of Not. and
Derb. in the beginning of Henry the second, and his sons Robert and William
likewise.

Regist. de Welbek p. 136.
Idonea de Blacquell, the wife of William, son of (or Fitz-) Ranulf, gave to
the Canons of Wellebec, the whole part of her Mill of Blackwell, with her body,
half of that Mill, with the whole Suit, and all Customs belonging to that half,
to sustain and make yearly the Anniversary of Sir William Fitz-Ranulf her Lord,
and her own Anniversary for ever.

Isabella, the daughter of William Fitz-Ranulf, sometime wife of John de
Orreby, Ib. p. 137.
gave and confirmed to the Canons of Wellebec the Mill of Bileby, which William
Fitz-Ranulf her father gave, with his body there to be buried, and the moiety
of the Mill of Blackwell, which Idonea her mother gave to the said Canons, with
her body there to be buried also.

Gilbert, son and heir of John de Orreby, gave to the said Canons all his right
and claim in diverse Tenants of Bileby, Ib. d. p. 136.
with their sequels, etc.

Thomas de Chaworth, Knight, called chief Lord of the Town of Bilby (being heir
of the elder House, Ib. p. 308.
as in Weverton may be seen) granted to the said Canons full and free Power to
make and repair their Damm (or Pool) of Bileby as often as need should be, and to
take and dig Turf and Earth on both sides of it, with free passage to carry it
through the Alderholt (Alnetum) of Bileby, without the impediment of him, his
heirs or assigns, as long as the Custody of the Town of Bileby should be in his
hands, or of his heirs or assigns. Sir Thomas de Chaworth held half a Knights
Fee in Billeby, and in 4 E. 2. Visus Compot. Scutag. 4 E. 2. Rot. feod. mil.
Sir Thomas de Chaworth, son of Sir William, held it. And in the time of Henry
the sixth, or Edward the fourth, Thomas Chaworth held three Fees in Alfreton,
Norton, Bilby, and Ranby.

John de Orreby, and Thurstan Despencer, held in Bilby the third part of one
Knights Fee, Test. de Nev.
and a twelfth part of the Countess of Ewe, or Augi, Lady of Tikhill. Bilby, 9
E. 2. answered for half a Villa, Nom. Vill.
whereof John de Orreby was then Lord.

In Queen Elizabeth's time Edward Osborne, Knight, Ex. Rot. Auxil.
Alderman of London, paid for his Lands in Bilby, late Sir William Hewetts, and
before time John de Orrebyes, and Thurstan Dispensers, sometime Thomas
Chaworths, held by the Service of a third part and a twelfth part of a Knights
Fee 2s 9d. q.

Richard Appleby, 11 Eliz. claimed against Edward Osborne, Hill. 11 Eliz. rot.
809.
and Anne his wife, the Manors of Bilby and Ranby, which William Gresley,
Esquire, and others, gave to Richard Appleby, and Elizabeth his wife, etc.

Sir Edward Osborne, Knight and Baronet, the Aldermans heir sold it to Sir
Gervas Clifton, Knight and Baroner, B.
and it continues with his posterity.

Ranby is an old decayed Town, where certain Oaks lately grew called Ranby
Oaks. It was most of it waste in the Conquerours time, some of it was of the
Soc of the Kings Manor of Bodmescell, Ranesby, and Sudershale, answered the
Geld or Tax for five Bov. The Land was one Car.. waste. There was also of that
Soc in Raneby two Car. ad geldam. Lib. Dooms.
The Land four Car. waste. There was also of Roger de Busli's Fee Soc to Grove
one Bov.. ad geldam. The Land one Car. in Grove waste. Soc also in Eton one
Bov. of Land to the Geld. It went it seems with Bilby, with which, part of it
is Parish to Blyth, and part of Ranby to Babworth. B.


Babworth. Moreton. And Normanton.
SOC to the Kings Manor of Bodmeschell which Earl Tosti had before the
Conquest, in Babworth, Oglesthorp, and Ordsall were six Bov. of Land and an
half for the Geld. The Land three Car. was waste, except that there were one
Vill. and two Board. with half a Plow, or Car. There were ten Acres of Meadow.
There was a Manor in Babword of Roger de Busli's Fee, which Vlmer had before,
Lib. Dooms.
who paid for it as two Bov. and an half. The Land being two Car. There
Goisfrid the Man of Roger had one Car. and one Board. with half a Car. Pasture
Wood two qu. long, one broad. In the Confessors time this was 40s. value, in
the Conquerours but 10s.

It seems the Family of Saundeby had very anciently some interest here, as in
that place may be observed. Babbeworth in 9 E. 2. answered for half a Villa,
Nom. Vill.
and the Earl of Lancaster, and Robert de Saundeby were then certified to be
Lords of it.

William de Grendon held half a Knights Fee in Babworth of the old Feoffment of
the Honor of Lancaster. Test. de Nev.


The Jury in 30 H. 3. Esc. 30 H. 3. n. 36.
found that William de Grendon held of Robert de St. George Lord of Bodmeshell
in Babworth two Bov. and an half, and paid 3s. 4d. per annum.

Robert de Swillington, 22 E. 1. Chapter 22 E. 1. m. 11.
had free warren granted in Babworth.

There was an Assize taken before William Skippewyth and his fellows at
Nottingham, 28 E. 3. Regist. de Novo loco cap. 36. fol. 199. Assis. apud No^t.
28 E. 3. to. 42.
between Sir Thomas de Grendon Chr. and Henry de Grendon of Warmesworth his
brother concerning the Manor of Babword, with the Advowson of the Church,
which the said Henry acknowledged to be the right of the said Thomas, who
afterward sold it to Sir William Trussebutt and his heirs, who within three
years of his possession gave the Advowson of the Church of Babbeword to the
Priory of Newstede, and that he did by the Kings license, and the license of
Sir Thomas de Saundeby Chief and Mesne Lord, whose Charters the Cannons had.

Sir Robert Trussebutt, son and heir of Sir William, entered after the death of
his father into the said Manor and Appurtenances and Rents, Regist. de N^vo
loco p. 200.
but claimed nothing concerning the said Advowson, nor meddled any thing with
it. And the Prior and Covent of Newstede in the life of Sir William Trussebutt
presented to the said Church of Babbeword one William Dobyn of Burgh, Clark in
the Kings Chancery. And the said Sir Robert T^ussebutt within two years after
the death of the said Sir William his father, by the counsel of his friends,
sold the said Manor of Babbeword, with the Appurtenances, to Sir Richard de
Willughby Lord of Wollaton, and his heirs, making mention in his Deed of Sale,
saying thus, with the Advowson of the Church of the said Town. Yet the said Sir
Richard de Willughby made no claim, but the said William de Burgh continued
Rector upon their presentation, having held the Church above two years before
the Sale, and four years after.

In Queen Elizabeth's time Richard Wortely paid for his Lands in Babworth, Ex
Cop. Rot.
sometimes William de Grindons, held by the service of half a Knights Fee 3s.
4d. B.
It was within memory sold to Sir Gervas Elwis.

Moretons.
THere was Soc to the Kings Manors of Bodmeschell in one Moreton, and the
other Moretune ten Bov. ad Geldam. The Land four Car. There seven Sochm. one
Board. had four Car. Pasture Wood two qu. long, one broad. Of Roger de Busli's
Fee in Norther Moreton were two Manors, which before the Conquest Alfrid and
Lufchell had, paying to the Geld for two Bov. The Land two Car. was waste,
Pasture Wood one qu. long, half one broad. In the Confessors time the value
was 16s.

The Jury, 30 H. 3. Esc. 30 H. 3. n. 36.
said that Thomas de Stratton held of Robert de St. George in Moreton two Bov.
and an half of Land for 16s. per annum, and Richard Abbat the third part of a
Bovat in the same Town for 5s.

Robert le Vavasor of Morton near to Retford, married Matildis, Regist. de
Welbek.
the sister and heir of James, Matthew, and Roger, sons of John, brother and
heir of Adam and Robert, sons of Gley the Britain, Lord of the Manor of
Stiteley and Mekesburgh, which Gley had a brother who begot Mabilia de Brochton
of Craven, who had to her husband John de Mounden, who begot on her a son named
also John, which second John had two daughters Matildis and Agnes, who dyed
without heirs, so that John le Vavasor, son of the said Robert, claimed to be
heir of the said sisters, and left the inheritance to William le Vavasur his
son and heir.

It appears, 5 E. 3. Pl. de Banc. Trin. 5 E. 3. rot. 152.
by a Writ of Certiorari that Isabella, who had been wife of William de Saxam,
recovered by a Writ of Cui in vita against Henry le Scrop one Mess. and 100.
Acres of Land in Little Morton, as her right and marriage.

William, son of Gilbert de Normanton, by Bommsell (perhaps the same with
Norther Moreton) did Fealty to William Burdon Prior of Blyth, Regist. de Blid.
p. 16.
for half a Bovat with one Mess. in Normanton by Bothamsell, and acknowledged
to owe 4s. per annum, and gave 8s. for Relief.

Normanton Grange belonged to Welbeck. B.


The owners of Babworthe Town in 1612. are thus set for^h, Gilbert Earl of
Shrowsbury, Lib. libere ten.
William Lord Cavendishe, Robert Swifte, Knight, Matilda Bevercotes, widow,
William Iessop, Gent. Nicolas Young of Babworth, Anthony Johnson, Bryan
Sturges, Philip Collye, Robert Hemsworth, Robert White.

The Rectory of Babworth was 20l. when the Prior of Newstede was Patron: Mss.
I. M.
It Is now 14l. 19s. 7d. value in the Kings Books, and Sir Edward W^rteley the
last Patron.

Ordeshall.
THere was in Ordsall Soc of the Kings Manor of Dunham one Bov. ad Geldam.

The Land one Car. There two Sochm. had one Car. and three Acres of Meadow, and
three Acres of Wood. There was also Soc to Grove one Bov.. for the Geld. The
Land one Car. Lib. Dooms.
Of the Tayn-land there was one Bov. ad Geldam. The Land was for four Oxen,
Erwin held it. At the making of Doomsday Book it was waste. There were in
Ordsall of the Fee of Roger de Busli four Manors, which before his coming with
King William, Osward, Turstaun, Oderic, and Thurstan had, and paid to the Geld
as four Bovats for them. The Land being four Car. There afterward the Men (or
Tenants) of Roger, had three Car. and five Vill. and two Board. having two Car.
there was Meadow of sixteen Acres, Pasture Wood one qu. long, half one broad. In
the Confessors time the value of this was 28. in the Conquerours 24s.

The principal part of Ordesall went with Grove. In 30 H. 3. Esc. 30 H. 3. n.
36.
Mauvesinus de Hercy was found to have held some here of Robert de St. George
Lord of Bodmeshell, viz. two Bov. for 5s. 4d. per annum.

Robert de Bakere of Retford, 18 E. 1. Pl. cor. Reg. Mich. 18 E. 1. rot. 66.
was Plaintiff in an Assize against Hugh de Hercy, Def. because he hindered him
from Fishing in the Water of Iddell of Ordeshale unto Suthall. The Jury said,
That the said Hugh did not hold the said Fishing in his several, together with
Robert Morteyne, because, said they, that all who hold Lands abutting on that
Water, Fish in it at their pleasure unto the Thread [ Filum] of the Water, as
they of Greeneley on the East part, and they of West Retford on the West part,
and they of Wellum on the East part; they said further that a certain part of
West Retford was of the Fee of Lancaster, and abutted on the said Water, and
they of that Fee Fish there unto the File (or Thread) of the Water, etc. Hugh
was amerced.

Upon the disposition made by Sir John Hercy this Ordesall tell to the share
of... Mackworth. It after came to Bevercotes, B.
a younger brother of the House of Bevercotes, a Lawyer of good note here, of
the learned counsel at York, and sometimes Feodary of this County, and by the
marriage of one of his daughters and heirs, it went to Thomas Cornwallis, who
sold it to the Lady Worteley Countess of Devonshire, and she estated it on Sir
Edward Wortley her second son.

There was another part of this Township which belonged to, and went with Eton,
as in that place may be perceived.

The Jury, 9 E. 1. In bundell. de Esson. de male veniend.

Quin. Hill. 9 E. 1. to. 4. in dorso.


found twenty four Perches of Land, and three in breadth, twelve Perches of
Marish in length, and three in breadth, with the Appurtenances in Ordeshale, to
be Frank Almoigne, belonging to the Church of Eton in the Clay, and not lay Fee.

John de Ripariis, 18 E. 2. Fin. lev. Trin. 18 E. 2.
levied a Fine to Henry de Faucomberge of the Manor of Ordishale, and of one
Mess. two Tofts, one hundred sixty one Acres of Land, twenty three of Meadow
36s. and 3d. Rent, and the moiety of a Bovat of Land, with the Appurtenances in
Eton, Retford, Gameliston, Clareburgh, Hayton, Wellum, Stretton, Bekingham,
Claworth, Fenton, East Drayton, West Markham, and Bughton. Another Fine was
levied at Not. the Monday after the Feast of St. Martin, 3 E. 3. Fin. lev.
apud. Not. Mic. 3 E. 3.
between John de Bolyngbrok, Quer. and John de Ripariis of Loversale, Deforc.
of the Manor of Ordesale, with the Appurtenances, and five Tofts, one hundred
eighty eight Acres of Land, twenty seven of Meadow, and 22s. 3d. Rent, with the
Appurtenances in Ordesale, Eton, Retford, Gameleston, etc. whereby the said
John de Ripariis of Loversale, granted for himself and his heirs, that the said
Manor, with the Appurtenances, except two Mess. twenty seven Acres of Land,
and three of Meadow in the said Manor, which John de Ripariis of Ordesale held
for term of his life, and that one Mess, twenty four Acres of Land, and three
of Meadow in the said Manor, which Adam le Barkere, and Dionysia his wife, held
for the life of the said Dionysia, and that one Mess. and three Acres of Land,
with the Appurtenances which Robert Dokerel held for his life, and twenty four
Acres of Land, eighteen of Meadow 21s. and 3d. Rent, with the Appurtenances in
the said Towns of Eton, Retford, Gameleston, Stretton, Bekyngham, Fenton, East
Drayton, West Markham, and Bughton, which the said John de Ripariis of Ordesale
held for his life, and that one hundred twenty two Acres of Land and an half,
and four Acres of Meadow and an half in the said Towns of Ordesale and Eton,
which John, the son of John de Ripariis of Ordesale, held for his life, and
five Tofts, forty one Acres of Land and an half, etc. in Ordesale, which
Richard, son of John de Ripariis of Ordesale, held for term of life, of the
Inheritance of the said John de Ripariis of Loversdale, should remain to the
said John de Bolyngbrok and his heirs.

The Manor of Ordesall in Ordesall with the Appurtenances, and two Mess. and
8s. Rent, with the Appurt. in East Retford, Wellum Morehouse, and Eton, which
John de Bozon, and Elizabeth his wife, held for the life of the said Elizabeth,
of the Inheritance of William de Saundeby were by Sir John de Leeke Chr. by
Fine, 18 R. 2. Fin. lev. Hill. 18 R. 2.
passed to Robert Wycliff, Clerk, John Woderove, John de Gaitford, and Richard
de Wetewong, Clerk, and the heirs of Richard.

These same parcels which Peter Assheton, and Elizabeth his wife, held, during
the life of the said Elizabeth, were by Robert Wycliff, Clark, 11 H. 4. Fin.
lev. Hill. 11 H. 4.
by another Fine settled on Thomas, the son of Philip Darcy Chr. and the heirs
Males of his body; remainder to the right heirs of the said Philip Darcy Chr.

There was a Recovery, 11 H. 7. Pasch. 11 H. 7. rot. 135.
wherein James Strangways, Knight, claimed against John Dennam the same Manor
and parcels.

In an Assize, 18 E. 1. Pl. de Banc. Pasch. 18 E. 1. to. 63.
the Jury found that Robert de Furmeston held in common with Robert, son of
John, Common of Pasture in two hundred Acres of More, and... in Ordesale, in
which Robert, son of Richard, son of Thomas de Retford, claimed to have Common,
and by the said Robert de Furmeston to be thereof disseized, but Robert de
Retford was cast.

The owners of Ordsall Town in 1612. are thus set down, Maud Bevercotes, widow,
Lib. libere ten. pen. meips. R. T.
Thomas Cornwallis, Esquire, William Mackworth, Esquire, Nicolas Johnson, Richard
Templeman, Stephen Coe, Clark, Richard Walshe, William Rosse, Richard Oldham,
John Sprigg, Nicolas Stones, William Denham, Mrs. Booth, Richard Brownley.

The Rectory of Ordesall was 24l. when Mr. Hersy was Patron: Mss. I. M.
It Is now 19l. 18s. 11d. ob. value in the Kings Books, and Sir Francis Wortley
the last Patron.

In the Church,

Filius Armigeri mihi matter militis haeres, Nomine sum Denman, art magister
^eram.

Pastorem Ordsalie Maria regnante remotum Restituit princeps Elizabetha gregi.

Continuo and feci caperet Retfordia fructus Progredier si qui Religione
student.

Pauperibus struxisse domos Ordsalia novit, Mole sub hac tandem mortuus ecce
cubo.

Mortuus! ah fallor, vitam traduco beatus, Terra cadaver habet, spiritus astra
colit.

Rossington
I Suppose is in Yorkshire, but the Church it seems is in the Arch-deaconry of
Nottingham.

The Rectory was 10l. and the Major of Doncaster Patron: Mss. I. M.
It Is now 11l. 1s. 3d. ob. value in the Kings Books, and the Corporation of
Doncaster still have the Patronage.

in Plump (...) Isle these anti^ul Monuments The Lusecipliens in (...) out




Notingham. Snodengaham.
JOhn Rowse, Ex Hist. I. Rows. Warwicens.
Canon of Oseney, in his History written to King Henry the seventh, says, That
King Ebranc builded Notingham upon Trent upon a dolorous Hill, so called from
the grief of the Brytans, of whom King Humber made there a very great slaughter
in the Reign of Albanact.

If it was so the British name is utterly lost, for nothing can be more
manifest than that this is of Saxon original, Diction. Sax. Somneri.
importing a woody, or Forest dwelling, or habitation in Dens or Caves cut in
the Rock, whereof there are very many still to be seen.

In the time of King Edward the Confessor in the Borough of Snotingeham were
one hundred seventy and three Burgesses, Lib. Dooms.
and nineteen Villains (or Husbandmen). To this Borough lay six Carucats of
Land to (or for) the Kings Geld (or Tax), and one Meadow, and small Wood six
quarentens long, and five broad. This Land was parted between thirty eight
Burgesses, and of the rate or rent [ censu] of the Land and of the works of the
Burgesses yielded 75s. 7d. and of two Minters [ Monetar.] 40s. Within it had
Earl Tosti one Carucat of Land, of the Soc of which Land the King was to have
two pence, and the Earl himself the third. (Afterward when William the
Conqueror surveyed) Hugh the Sheriff, the son of (or Fitz-) Baldric, found one
hundred thirty six men dwelling there, (when Doomsday Book was made, toward
the latter end of his Reign) there were sixteen less. Yet that Hugh himself
made thirteen dwellings or mansions in the Land of the Earl, in the new
Borough, which were not there before, putting them in the cense or rate of the
Old Borough.

In Snotingham in the Demesne of the King was one Church, in which lay three
Mansions of the Borough, and five Bovats of Land of the above said six
Carucats, with Sac and Soc, and to the same Church five Acres of Land and an
half, of which the King had Sac and Soc. The Burgesses had six Carucats to
Plow, and twenty Bordars, and fourteen Carucats (Plows, Carts, Draughts, Teams,
or Plowlands.) They were wont to Fish in the Water of Trent, and at that time
made Complaint that they were prohibited to Fish.

In the time of King Edward (the Confessor) Snotingham yielded in Rent 18l.
when Doomsday Book was made 30l. and 10l. of the Mint, [ de Moneta.]

Roger de Busly had in Snotingham three Mansions, in which were Seated eleven
Houses. The Rent 4s. 7d.

William Peverel had forty eight Merchants Houses (or Tradesmens.) The Rent
36s. and thirteen Houses of Knights (or Horsemen) [ equitum] and eight Bordars.

Raph de Burun had thirteen Houses of Knights, in one of these dwelt one
Merchant.

Guilbert four Houses.

Raph, son of (or Fitz-) Hubert, had eleven Houses, in these remained (or
dwelt) three Merchants (Shopkeepers or Tradesmen.)

Goisfrid de Alselin had twenty one Houses.

Acadus the Priest [ Presbyter] two Houses. In the Croft of the Priest were
sixty Houses, and in these had the King Sac and Soc.

The Church with all things which belonged to it, was 100s. per annum value.

Richard Fresle had four Houses.

In the Ditch [ fossata] of the Borough were seventeen Houses, and other six
Houses.

The King granted to William Peverel ten Acres of Land to make an Orchard.

In Snotingtun had King Edward one Carucat of Land, with the Geld. The Land two
Carucats. There (when the Survey of Doomsday Book was made) the King had eleven
Villains (or Husbandmen) having four Carucats, and twelve Acres of Meadow, in
Demesne nothing. In the time of King Edward the Confessor, and then likewise
the value of this was 3l. which is now called Sneinton, as already is noted in
that place, in the beginning of Thurgarton Hundred.

There is no mention at all in this most exact survey, of the Castle of
Nottingham, which is therefore concluded to be built by William Peverel, or
King William the first, his father, though it is supposed there might have been
some old Fortress there before. He also builded the Monastery at Lenton, as it
seems he did another at, or near Northampton, Regist. St. Iac. de Northampt.
dedicated to St. James, the Registry whereof certifieth that he died the fifth
of the Kalends of Febr. 1113. 11 H. 1. and the Lady Adelina his wife the
fourteenth of the Kalends of February 1119. 18. H. 1. and that Sir William, son
of the said William Peverel, died 16 Kal. May, 1100. 12 William Rufus, which
cannot be true, except he had another son William, for I find that William
Peverell, at the entreaty of his faithful wife Adelina, Reg. de Lent. p. 114.
gave to the Monastery of Lenton at (or nigh) the very Foundation, the Churches
of Hecham and Randia: To which Deed were Witnesses Robert de Ferrariis, Avenell
de Haddon, Robert, son of Drogo, Robert, son of Warner, Raph Hanselin, etc.
William Peverell his son, by ill advice, took them away for a long time, but
repenting, Ib.
he for love of the Worship of God, and for the safety of the Souls of his said
father and mother, by the consent of his heir William the younger, restored
them again: The Witnesses to this Deed were Hugh de Burun, William Avenell,
Adam de Morteyn, Oddo de Boney, Robert de Heriz, Gilbert de Macuinci, Norman de
St. Patricio, etc.

In the fifth year of King Stephen, William Peverel of Nottingham gave account
of 23l. 6. 8d. of the Pleas of the Forest. Rot. pip. 5 Steph.
And the Sheriff in his account that year of the Dane-geld, says, That
Adelina, the mother of William Peverel of Notingham, was pardoned 18. by the
Kings Writ, which shows there is some Error in that said Register of St. James
of Northampton, concerning the time of her death, as there is also a manifest
one in the Computation of the year of our Lord, and of the Kings Reign in all
the three, which may justly lessen the credit of that part of it.

Anno 1155. King Henry the second disinherited William Peverel, Chron. Roff.
per Edm. de Haddenham.
because of poison given to Ranulph (Earl) of Chester.

About those times there were three Peverels of great note, viz. Peverel of
Dovor, and Peverel of London, and our Peverel of Notingham, who is certainly
intended by the last noted Chronicle, as may further appear by an Instrument
(yet remaining in Sir John Cotton's Library) Sealed by Henry Duke of Normans,
etc. (afterward King Henry the second) being then at the Divises, to Ranulph
Earl of Chester, Ex vera Copia in Genealog. magna Ric. Dom. Byron ex ipso
Autog. in Bibl. Cotton. extract. per Sam. Roper, senior. Ar.
wherein he gave him, besides the said Earls own Inheritance in Normandy and
England, wholly as his Ancestors ever had it (that in Normandy very
particularly recited) the whole Honor of Earl Roger Pictavensis wherever,
and all the said Duke Henry's Honor of Blye, wherever it was in England, and
the Honor of Eye, as Robert Malet, Uncle of the said Earl Ranulphs mother ever
had it. Moreover he gave him Stafford and Staffordesir, and the County (or
Earldom) of Stafford wholly whatever he had there in Fee and Inheritance,
except the Fee of the Bishop of Chester, and of Earl Robert de Ferrariis, and
of Hugh de Mortuomari, and of Gervas Paganell, and except the Forest of Canoc,
which he (the said Duke) then retained in his hand. He gave him the Fee of Alan
de Lincoln, who was (also) Uncle of the said Earls mother, and the Fee of
Ernis de Burun as his own Inheritance, and the Fee of Hugh de Scoteiney
wherever it was, and the Fee of Robert de Chalz wherever it was, and the
whole Fee of Robert Fitz- (or son of) Odo, and the whole Fee of Norman de
Verdun, and the Fee of Robert de Stafford wherever it was, and 30l. Land
which the said Duke Henry had in Grimesby he gave him, and Notingham Castle,
and the Borough, and whatever the said Duke had in Nottingham in Fee and
Inheritance he gave to him and his heirs, and the whole Fee of William Peverell
wherever it was, unless he could [ dirationare se] clear himself in the said
Dukes Court of the wickedness and Treason, except Hecham. And if Engelram de
Albamarl^ would not take with the said Duke, nor Earl Simon, and he the said
Duke could take the said Hecham by force, he would restore it to the said Earl
Ranulph if he would have it, and Torchesci and Oswardebec Wapentac, and Derby,
with all the Appurtenances, and Maunsfeld with the Soch, and Roclar with the
Soch, and Stanley by Coventre with the Soch, and of Belvar he would hold him
right as soon as he should be able as of the said Earls Inheritance, and to the
said Earls six Barons he would give each an hundred pound Land, which they
should choose of those which the said Duke should happen to get of his enemies,
and to all the said Earls friends [ parentibus] he would restore their
Inheritance, whereof he had power, etc. Howbeit the said Earl Ranulf of Chester
did not enjoy any long possession of those places in this County, for the
Sheriffs answered to the King for the profits of the Lands of William Peverell,
and the Scutages of the Tenants of his Fee, as in the Pipe Rolls of Henry the
second, and the succeeding Kings may be seen, and in diverse other places of
this Book for the rest.

Margaret, the daughter and (at length) heir of William Peverell of Nottingham,
Antiq. Warw. per Will. Dugdale p. 784. Et Pl. ^or. Reg. Mich. 25 H. 3.
was wife of William Earl of Ferrars and Derby, son of Robert the younger Earl
of Ferrars and of Nottingham, and she had a son Robert Earl of Ferrars, who in
the time of King Henry the second, perhaps, because he could not inherit, was
the more willing to burn Nottingham, which he did it seems, together with his
son William, Grandson of the said William and Margaret, Anno D^^. 11^^.
which said William Earl of Ferrars the Grandson was outed of his Earldoms of
Nottingham and Derby by King Richard the first, who gave them to John Earl of
Moreton (afterward King) his brother, who thereupon it is like grew more
willing to interest himself in these parts, which he did by granting a Charter
to this Town of Nottingham, and some way or other pleasing of the Gentry of the
Country so well, that he led the most of them into Rebellion, as in sundry
places of this Book, concerning diverse particular persons of them, may be
observed.

But of these Peverells I have found no more* saving that there was a Fine in
the Kings Court at Nottingham the Friday after the Feast of St. Bartholomew, 4
Ioh. before I. Bishop of Norwic, Hugh Bardulf, John de Gestling, Mr. Roger
Arundell, Hugh de Bobi, the Kings Justices, and others, then there present,
between William Peverell, Petent, and Beatrice de Curcon, Tenant, of two Bovats
of Land in Palterton, thereby passed to her and her heirs, paying 6d. per
annum. etc.

It Is certain then that from the beginning of the Reign of Henry the second,
this Castle of Nottingham has for the most part belonged to the Crown, neither
is there any place anything near so far distant from London that I know of in
all England, which has so often given entertainment and residence to the Kings
and Queens of this Realm since the Norman Conquest.

It is said that in the year 1194. Chron. Cestr.
King Richard being first loosed from his bonds, the Castles of Nottingham and
Tykehull resisted with force, but the Castles of Lancaster and Merleburg, and
Mount Michael rendered themselves.

King John in the sixth of his Reign commanded Reginald de Clifton, that
immediately upon sight of his Letters he should deliver to Robert de
Veteriponte the Castle of Nottingham, etc. Pat. 6 Ioh. m. 7.
The like Command at that time had Hugh de Nevill for the Castle of the Pec;
William de Briewer for that of Bollesour; and Sampson de Straclee (Strelley)
concerning the Castle of Hareston.

Raph Fitz-Nicholas, 10 H. 3. Liberat. 10 H. 3. m. 1.
was Warden of Nottingham Castle (he was Steward to William de Ferrariis Earl
of Derby it seems. Antavar. p. 785.
)

King Henry the third being at Windsor, 29 April, 32 H. 3. Fin. 32 H. 3. m. 4.
committed to Robert le Vavassur the Countys of Nottingham and Derb. to be
kept, paying to the King 100l. per annum at his Exchequer for the issues of the
said Counties, besides fifty Marks which he was to pay every year to the Warden
[ custodi] of Nottingham Castle for the keeping thereof.

After the Battle at Jews between King Henry the third, and the Barons, for
determining the strife Edward the Kings eldest son was delivered for Pledge,
and afterward was freed from that Custody, for the safety of whom, and of the
Kingdom, the King, 49 H. 3. Pat. 49 H. 3. m. 87.
committed to his said son the Castles of Dovor, of Scardeburgh, of Baumburgh,
of Notingham, and of Corff, as Hostage for five years.

The same King Henry the third by his Precept dated at Westminster, October. 18.
56 H. 3. Claus. 56 H. 3. m. 2.
Commanded his Bailiffs and Burgesses of Nottingham, without delay, to make a
Posterne in the Wall of the said Town near the Castle toward Lenton, of such a
breadth and height that two Armed Horsemen, carrying two Lances on their
shoulders, might go in and out, where W. Archbishop of York had appointed it,
who made the King understand that it was expedient for him and his heirs, and
for the Castle and Town.

B.
Now for that the Castle, Park, and Medows belonging thereunto are not within
the County of the Town, I will express what I mean touching them in this place.
When this Castle was built I certainly find not, but doubtless it was by
Peverell. In the Record of Doomsday there is no mention of a Castle, only I
find there that William Peverell had license from the King to include ten Acres
Ad faciendum Pomerium, which after the Forest measure contains above fifty
Statute Acres, and that I conceive to be near the proportion of the Old Park of
Nottingham, but this is only my conjecture, which I will be bold to retain till
some body tell me where those ten Acres do lie after the measure of that time,
which was long before the Statute De terris mensurandis.

It appears, 1 H. 4. Esc. 1 H. 4.
that Thomas Moubray Duke of Norfolk held 20l. Rent out of Nottingham Castle,
with the Style and Title of Earl of Nottingham, granted by King Richard (the
second) and that Thomas Moubray, Knight, son and heir of the said Duke was then
fourteen years old.

B.
The exactest Survey I find of this Castle, and the Appurtenances to it, is the
account of Ieffrey Knyveton, Constable of the Castle, and Clark of the Forest,
25 H. 6. First, twenty four Acres of Meadow called the Kings Meadow; a Close
called Castle Appleton; a Close called the Constable Holme; a piece of Meadow
called the Milne Danune; a piece of Meadow called the Milne Place; two pieces of
Meadow lying by the Kings Bridge, and the Roch-Yard; the Castle Hills without
the Castle Walls; the outer Ward within the Castle Walls; the Dove-coat; the
Pindage of the Castle; the Castle Milnes; the Conygarth which I conceive to be
the old Park; and the Castle it self, which in that account answered nothing,
being the habitation of the Constable.

The Castle and the Park of Nottingham were granted to Francis Earl of Rutland,
Ib.
in the later end of whose time many of the goodly buildings were pulled down,
and the Iron, and other materials, sold; yet there was left enough at the
beginning of the late Rebellion, to make it chosen by King Charles the first,
as the fittest place for the setting up his Royal Standard, which, as I
remember, was there erected on Monday, August 22. Anno Dom. 1642. but shortly
after the Kings departure Sir John Digby dismissed those Soldiers of the
Trained Bands of this County which only were left there, and so it soon became
a Garrison for the Parliament, which it continued till the end of the War,
after which the last Governor Captain Thomas Poulton had Orders and Money
given him to pull it down, yet some parts of it though ruinous were not utterly
demolished at the return of King Charles the second, since when the Duke of
Buckingham (whose mother the Duchess was only daughter and heir of the said
Francis Earl of Rutland) sold it to the Marquess of Newcastle, now also made
Duke, who this present year 1674. though he be above eighty years of age, has
a great number of men at work pulling down and clearing the Foundations of the
old Tower that he may build, at least, part of a New Castle there. The Park
Pale he Repaired at his first entrance.

The Rectory of the Castle of Nottingham was 6l. Now I find nothing of it, Mss.
I. M.
but the Brewhouse Yard is a Constablery, wherein there are many houses, some
in the Rock, others out of it, all which, being now of no Parish, are a great
Receptacle for Fanatics, and other like people, who would not live conformable
to the Laws.

It seems the Conqueror, or one of his sons, gave the Dominion of Nottingham,
B.
and the Forest, to William Peverel his Bastard son, and in that time it
changed the name from Snotingham to Nottingham. For William Peverell in the
Foundation of the Priory of Lenton (which was Founded in Henry the first his
time, before the death of William, Henry the firsts son) where the words are,
Pro salute Domini mei Henerici Regis, and Matildae Reginae uxoris ejus, and
filii eorum Willielmi, and filiae little Matildae, he gives to this Monastery
the Tithe of his Fish, of the Fishing of Nottingham; and further gives them (
Concedente Domino meo Henrico) the Church of St. Mary, of the English Borough
of Nottingham, the Church of St. Peter, the Church of St. Nicholas, the Church
of Radford, with many others.

The first Charter to this Ancient Borough appearing on Record, or that I could
ever hear of, was made by Henry the second, and it is Burgensibus de
Nottingham, and he thereby gives them all those Free Customs which they had in
the time of King Henry his Grandfather, viz. Tholl, and Theme, and
Infangtheife,

a Table of References.
1 St. Marys Church

2 St Peter's Church

3 St Nicholas Ch:

4 Stony Street

5 Hollow stone

6 Fisher gate

7 Carter gate

8 Barker gate

9 Beller gate

10 Beller gate hill

11 Short hill

12 Malin Hill

13 Leene bridge

14 Narrow Marsh

15 High Pauement

16 Week day Cross

17 Middle Paument

18 Law Pavement

19 Castle gate.

20 Broad Marsh

21 Litster gate

22 Chesterfield lane

23 Gray Friars

24 Walnut Lane

25 Finkhill street

26 Jew lane

27 Hundgate

28 Spaniel Lane

29 Friar lane

30 Wooller lane

31 St James lane

32 Bearward lane

33 Chapel Bar

34 Angel Row

35 Friar Row

36 Sheep lane

37 Long Rom

38 Malt Cross

39 Corn Market

40 Butter Cross

41 Market mall

42 Smithy Row

43 Rotten Row

44 Cuckstoole Row

45 Timber hill

46 White Friars

47 Wheeler gate

48 St Peter gate

49 Peck lane

50 St Peter lane

51 Pepper street

52 Bridlesmith gate

53 Hen Cross

54 Sadler gate

55 Cow lane

56 B^ekside

57 Gridlesmith gate

58 Swine gate

59 Chandler lane

60 Linby lane

61 Warfar gate

62 Flesher gate

63 Pilcher gate

64 Hallifax lane

65 Byard lane

66 Mont hall gate

67 Vault lane

68 Mont lane

69 Brightmore hill

70 Fish shambles

71 Shamble lane

72 Goose gate

73 Hockley

74 Woolpack lane

75 Beck lane

76 Colepit lane

77 Broad lane

78 Rosemary lane

79 Nemark lane

80 Millstone lane

81 St Mary gate

82 Fair maiden lane

83 Pennyfoot lane

and Toll from the ( Ductu) way beyond Rempston unto Redford in le North, and
from Thurmeston unto Newarke, of all passing the Trent; by the same Charter he
grants to them, That all men coming ad forum de Nottingham cum quadrigis and
summagiis suis a vespere di^i veneris usque ad vesperum diei Sabbati non
namentur nisi pro firma Regis.

By all this it clearly appears they were a Corporation before, and had those
Free Customs, kept a Market, and paid a Ferme to the Crown.

King John, when he was Earl Mortayne, had all Nottinghamshire, and the Forest,
in a kind of Regal manner, and in that time he granted to the Burgesses of
Nottingham a Charter of Liberties to the same effect, as he did in the first
year of his Reign, for that when he was King has relation to the Charter he
granted, cum essemus Comes Mortayne; and I have seen that old Charter without a
Seal. In his Charter as King, he grants them in effect, what his father had
granted, and what they held in the time of his great Grandfather; and further
gives them Gildam mercatoriam, and appoints that whoever should by them be
constituted ( Praepositus) Bailiff of that Borough, should pay the Kings Ferme
at his Exchequer at Easter and Michaelmas, and forbids the infringing of these
Liberties upon forfeiture of ten pounds.

In the Charter of Henry the third the Ferme is expressed to be 52l. blank, and
for that Farm they had by that Charter the aforesaid Town given to them and
their heirs (a phrase in that ancient time including Successors) and further
that they should take Trouage, and have Coroners.

Edward the first granted unto them that they might elect a Major and two
Bailiffs Secundum consuetudinem utriusque Burgi, and that their Major should be
Escheator within the Borough. The distinction of the Boroughs continues to this
day, and are called the English and the French Borough. In the English Borough
bloodshed is but 6s. 4d. in the French Borough it is 18s. And in the Plea Rolls
of Common Pleas, M. 5 E. 2. there is a Custom within the English Borough of
Nottingham, That Infants after fifteen years may sell their Lands as if they
were of full age.

From Edward the first till the 27 H. 6. they continued Burgesses in their
Corporation, and then the King made the Borough a County, and turned the
Bailiffs into Sheriffs, and incorporated them by the name of Major and
Burgesses, in which plight they continue at this day.

There was a Chapel dedicated to St. James, wherein the Court of the Honor of
Peverell, as it seems, used to be kept, but King Edward the second, in the
ninth year of his Reign, discharged it from that burden, by his Charter to the
Friars Carmelites. There is a Lane in Nottingham called St. James's Lane at
this day, whereabouts that Chapel stood.

This House of Friars Carmelites, called the White Friars (whose site is
betwixt St. James's Lane and Friar Lane, and denominates that Row of building
toward the Market place to be the Friar Row) was, as I conceive, some
Religious House of Monks before Henry the seconds time, for in the first year
of Henry the second [rather 5 Steph.] there is mentioned Monachi de Nottingham,
which must either be the Monks of Lenton, or some Religious persons here, who
after became Friars Carmelites, whose Order was instituted Anno Dom. 1161.
which fell to be about 7 H. 2. They are called Carmelites, a Monte Carmel, the
place where Elias lived, and they pretend to imitate the strictness of Elias
his life.

The Situation of this Town, with the Streets, Lanes, and remarkable places,
is most aptly described by John Speed's Map, to whom I referr those that desire
more exactly to know it.

Besides the Friars Carmelites, before observed, there was in Nottingham, near
the Leene, in a place called the Broad Marsh, an House of Friars Minors,
otherwise called the Gray Friars, that were professed to live after the Rule of
St. Francis.

There were three Rules of this St. Francis, two of the Minors, and the third
of the Capuchins that pretend they imitated their St. Francis in his strictest
way. The two Minors do not differ in Rule, nor otherwise, save that upon a
Garboyle amongst them, some of them would needs have a Dispensation to take
Lands and Possessions, as Abbeis, and other Priories had, and the rest would
not: whereupon those that took Dispensations were called Fratres Gaudentiae;
and those that would not, had the name of Fratres Observantis.

There was besides an Hospital Founded by John Plumtre about Edward the thirds
time, consisting of two Priests, and diverse poor men, and the Site of it is
near the Bridge of Nottingham called Town Bridge, or the Leene Bridge, which
is to be repaired at the charge of the Town and the whole County, for in the
Air Rolls of 3 E. 3. called Ragman, there is this presentment, Pons de Not.
vocat. Tunebridge in defect. villae and totius Comitatus.

There was also an House called St. John's on the North side of the Town, parcel
of the Possessions of St. John's of Jerusalem, who were Knights of a Religious
Order vowing Chastity, and most of their younger time living in Wars against
the Turks and Saracens, before the Turks grew great.

There was also in the Church of St. Mary a Guild or Fraternity of six Priests,
dedicated to the Holy Trinity, and their House in the high Pavement is called
Trinity House at this day. There was in the same Church the Chantry of St.
Mary, the Chantry of St. James, and Amyas Chantry, who was a man of value in
this Town, about Edward the thirds time, his House was on the long Row, and
from him called Amyas Place, from whom it came to Allestree a Merchant of the
Staple, and is now the Inheritance of Henry Sherwin.

There was in St. Peter's Church the Gild of St. George, and the Chantry of St.
Mary in St. Peter's Church, and another Chantry there, and in the Church of St.
Nicholas there was the Gild or Fraternity of the blessed Virgin Mary.

Besides these Seated in the Town, These Religious Houses had Land and Houses
in Nottingham. The Rectory of St. Mary's was appropriated to the Priory of
Lenton, the Monasteries of Rufford, Newstede, Wirkesoppe, Thurgarton, Bevall,
and Shelford, in the County of Nottingham; Swinshead, and Sempringham, in
Lincolneshire; Kings Mede, Dale, and Darley, in Darbyshire; and Geroldine or
Garrowden Monastery in Leycestershire.

The Town is now Governed by a Major, a Recorder, six Aldermen, two Coroners,
two Sheriffs, two Chamberlains, and a Common Council of persons, whereof six
are by a late Order to be such as have not born the Office of Sheriff or
Chamberlain. The Major has a Clark called the Majors Clark, and commonly the
Town Clark. The Sheriffs have an Officer called the Steward. The Major has a
particular Court of Pleas of Land, he has two Sergeants at Mace. The Major and
Sheriffs have also there an ordinary Court of Pleas besides, which they keep on
Wednesday every fortnight. The Sheriffs have each of them two Sergeants at
Mace, and a more inferior Officer called a Bill-bearer. There is an Officer of
the Town called the Scavenger, that looks to the Pavement and Streets of the
Town, and attends upon the Majors wife. There is a Cook attends the Major at
the Provision of the Town, and two Pinders of the Town, the one of the Fields,
the other of the Medows; he that is of the Fields, is also Woodward for the
Town, and attends and answers at the Forest Courts. The Town is within the
Metes and Bounds of the Forest, but not within View and Regard: The Town has
long made that claim of discharge, and it has been allowed them in Air.

There are very fair Possessions belonging to the Corporation, some in general,
and some for particular uses, as for the maintenance of their Free School, and
their costly Trent Bridges, called Heathbet Bridges.

It was a rich and flourishing place when the Staple was up at Calays, since it
has been destitute of any gainful or beneficial Trade.

Yet since the late War, wherein this Town happened to be of the Conquering
side, there are many Houses new builded, and the greatest part of the good
Barley which grows in the Vale of Belvoyr, and the adjacent parts, is there
converted into Malt, yielding thereby, as I suppose, more profit to the place
than ever Wool did heretofore, or the Manufacture of colored cloth, which it
was famous for long before Calais became subject to this Crown.

There is a place on the high Pavement near the corner of St. Mary's
Churchyard, called the Kings Hall, which is not within the County of the Town;
in that Hall the Assizes, and Sessions, and other like businesses for the
County are held, and under it, and by it is the Goal or Prison; but whether
this be the Prison which King John erected at Nottingham, Liberat. 3 Ioh. m. 5.
about the t^ird year of his Reign, or that which is lower in the Street under
the Towns Hall, where the Assizes, etc. for that County are kept, I cannot
certainly determine.

The Reparation of the Bridge of Nottingham, 10 Ioh. was undertaken by the
Brethren of the Hospital of St. John in Nottingham. Pat. 10 Ioh. m. 3.


In the year 1241. Walter Gray Archbishop of York sent to Robert Alwin, Mon.
Argl. vol. 2. p. 451.
Master of the Hospital of St. John Baptist at Nottingham, and to the Fathers
there serving God, a Statute Rule for the Brethren and Sisters of that
Hospital: first, that they should provide two or more Chaplains to celebrate
Divine Service for ever, etc. This Master and Brethren, 36 H. 3. Chapter 14 H. 3.
vel 36 H. 3. m. 26.
were to have two Cart Loads of Wood out of the Woods of Hugh Nevil in Arnhall.

The Lepers of the Hospital of St. Leonard at Nottingham, 10 H. 3. Claus. 10 H.
3. m. 9.
had reasonable Estover of dead Wood to be gathered in the Forest of Nottingham.

The Jury, 30 E. 1. Esc. 30 R. 1. to. 102.
found it not to the Kings loss if he granted license to John le Paumer of
Nottingham, and to Alice his wife (who was sister and heir of Hugh de
Stapleford, son of Robert de Stapleford of Nottingham) to give 6l. 13s. 5d.
Rent, with the Appurtenances in Nottingham, to a certain Chaplain to celebrate
Divine Offices for their Souls, etc. in the Chapel of St. Mary on Hethebethe
Brigg, where there is one Arch, yet known by the name of Chapel Arch. This
Alice outlived her Husband, who was call John le Palmer the elder, Ex Chart.
H. Plumptre, Ar.
and had interest at Algarthorp by Basford, as in that place may be observed.

There have been many considerable persons resident in this Town, and many
Traders and Officers here, from whom Families of good esteem and worship have
sprung. From Raph Bugge of this place descended the Willoughbies of Wollaton
and Risley, the Binghams, Bugges of West Leke; and I suppose Big of Stanford
upon Sore, as in several places of this Book may be seen.

The Jury, 32 E. 1. Esc. 32 E. 1. n. 126.
found it not to the Kings loss if he granted to Richard de Willughby, that he
might give five Marks Rent, with the Appurtenances in Nottingham, held of the
said Richard, to a Chaplain in the Church of St. Peter at Nottingham, etc.

Bugge Hall in Nottingham descended to Sir Richard de Bingham, Knight, Ex
Chart. H. Plumptre, Ar.
of which name some continued in this Town till the Reign of Edward the third,
or after, whereof one Adam, son of Adam de Bingham of Nottingham, 13 E. 2. Ex
libro Cartar. I. B. Ar.
passed to Richard de Bingham of Nottingham his brother, a Message on the high
Pavement, situate between the Lane by St. Mary's Churchyard, and a Tenement
of Sir Richard de Willughbies, afterward given to the Chantry of Sutton
Passeyes; and John, son of Richard de Bingham of Nottingham, 21 E. 2. conveyed
it to Henry de Bauk^well, and Alice his wife, to whom Cicily and Alice,
daughters of Richard de Bingham, and Robert, son and heir of Richard de
Bingham, also, 22 E. 3. released it, so that afterward it had the name of
Bakewell Place, and 4 R. 2 was passed to Thomas de Botalle of Nottingham, whose
son Mr. Roger Bottale, Ex todem Registro catarum I. Boun, Ar.
Archdeacon of Cardygan, 3 H. 5. settled it on John Bottale his brother, and
the heirs of his body, which John had a daughter called Ioane Bureley, widow,
who, together with William Molyneux, son and heir of Nicolas Molyneux, 37 H. 6.
conveyed it to Richard Campyon, who, 1 E. 4. released it to John Hunt of
Nottingham, Merchant, as did also, 5 E. 4. Richard Bingham the Judge, who had
been enfeoffed thereof, together with John Manchestre, then dead, by Thomas
Kay, son and heir of Thomas Kay, sometime of Nottingham, from which John Hunt
it came by Inheritance, according to the Descent in Hockerton to Gilbert Boun,
Sergeant at Law, who made it his Mansion House, from whence, after he had been
imprisoned at Darby a year or more, by the first setters up of the late horrid
Rebellion in these parts, he was, with the loss of all he had, violently
expelled by the Governor of Nottingham.

There was an House over against this, which in 17 E. 3. belonged to Robert
Wolaton, and Alice his wife; and in 27 Eliz. is said to lie between the House
of Nicolas Kinnersley, Gent. and Ioane his wife (but since Sir Thomas
Hutchinsons) and the Common Hall of the County, which said House was by Francis
Leeke of Sutton in le Dale in the County of Darby, Esquire, then conveyed to
John Boun, Father of the said Gilbert, who some years before the said
Rebellion, gave it to be used by the Country at the Assizes as an Hall, for the
more convenient Trials of Nisi Prius, and it was made with Arches open to the
Street on that side for that purpose, as it remains at this day, so that the
other Hall adjoining, is free for Criminal Causes, or other business of the
Crown.

Beyond this new Hall was a pleasant little Garden, which the Lady Katherine
Hutchinson (the relict of the said Sir Thomas) much affecting, about the Kings
Return purchased of John Boun, Esquire, the Sergeants elder son, to enlarge her
own, to which it was contiguous, as she did also (perhaps for the Gardens sake,
wherein she takes great delight) the dwelling House, but that she shortly after
sold to Robert White the present owner, who in the place of an old Barn or
Stable has built a pretty New Brick House facing St. Mary's Churchyard.

There was a Fine levied at Nottingham the Monday next after the Feast of St.
Martin, 3 E. 3. Fin. lev. apud. Not. 3 E. 3.
between Walter, son of Robert Ingram, Quet. and Robert Ingram, Chivaler, and
Orframma his wife, Deforc. of four Messuages, one Oven, forty Acres of Land,
six Acres of Meadow, and 100. Rent, with the Appurtenances in Nottingham, which
were then settled on the said Walter Ingram, and the heirs of his body;
remainder to the said Robert, and Orframma, and the heirs of Robert. John
Ingram of Nottingham, 4 R. 2. conveyed to Sir Gervas Clifton, Knight, Hugh de
Willughby, Raph de Adurley, Richard de Gifford of Nottingham, Thomas Martell,
Thomas Whatton, Ex Chart. H. Plumptre, Ar.
Raph de Adurley, junior, and Thomas Ingram, Chaplain, all his Lands, Rents,
and Services in Sneynton, and other where in England, etc. Edmund Ingram of
Nottingham, 8 R. 2. passed all his Lands, Rents, and Services in Sneynton, to
Sir Edmund Perepunte, Knight, and his heirs, and likewise the yearly Rent of
eight Marks issuing out of all Lands and Tenements in Nottingham, and
Willeford, and Whatton: The Witnesses were John Samon of Nottingham, John
Croweshawe, of the same, Henry de Plumptre, then Bailiff of Nottingham, Robert
de Whatton, John de Burton, etc. I guess that my Lord Marquess of Dorchesters
House, wherein his Grandfather Sir Henry Pirrepont dwelt, on the top of St.
Mary Hill, was Sir Robert Ingrams, for in 13 E. 2. St. Mary Lane is said to
lead from the Kings Hall to the Tenement of Robert Ingram, Ex Regist. Chart. I.
B.
etc. he is named in Sneynton also, if that Robert was not his father, or other
Ancestor, as by the time he should.

Luke de Crophill, Clark, Regist. de Tourg. p. 64. b.
son of Gregory de Crophill, gave one Message in Nottingham, which William de
Stoke sometime held of him, to the Priory of Thurgarton in pure Alms. William,
son of Roger de Crophull, 5 E. 3. passed a Croft, etc. to William, Ex Autog.
inter Cartas H. plumptre.
son of William de Crophull in Nottingham of which place they were both then
Inhabitants: The Witnesses were Laurence le Spicer, the Major, Robert de
Morewode, Bailiff, Robert de Crophull of Nottingham, Roger de Botehale, Nicolas
de Shelford, etc. On the Seal of Arms of Nicolas de Crophill of Nottingham,
within the Circumscription of his name, 35 E. 3. is, A Lion Rampant, as there
is on the Seal of John Crophull of Nottingham, Skinner, 16 H. 6. and at other
times, Ib. Ex Autog. omnia.
empaling A Chevron between three Bulls heads Cabossed. Many of the chief men
of Nottingham had Seals of Arms within a fair Circumscription of their names,
as Hugh le Spicer, son of Laurence le Spicer of Nottingham, which Hugh married
Ioane, the daughter of William de Amyas, and had upon his Shield a Cross
Formie, and on a Chief three Palletts, 8 E. 3. As Robert de Morewode, 9 E. 3.
had A Chevron between three Holly Leaves slipped erect. And Roger de Hopwelle
of Nottingham also, 44 E. 3. had A Bend ingrailed between two Crossecrosletts.
Richard Samon, and Thomas de Amyas, 5 E. 3. were Bailiffs of Nottingham, and 40
E. 3. John Samon was Major. These Samons had interest in Gotham, and some of
them settled at Annesley Woodhouse, whereof I have found the Entry set down in
the following Page.

The Arms of this Family at length were; Three Samons in pale, which quartered
with Arg. a Bend ingrailed Azure between a Mullet, and an Annulet Gules, which
are in the South Window of St. Mary's Church, and supposed to belong to St.
Almond, or Samon of Nottingham.

Ex Copia visit. pen. Reason Mellish.
Johannes Samon de Nort. benefactor Eccles. B. Mariae-Joana. Richardus Samon-
Johannes Samon- Thom. Samon de Annesley Woodhouse temp. H. 7.-Cicelia fill. Joh.
Babington de Dethick. Rich. Samon de Annesley Woodhouse.-Jana fill. Phil.
Draycot de Paynesly in Com. Staff.-Jana fill. Alex. Mering de Collingham ux. 2.
Anthonius Samon de Annesley Woodhous.-Maria fill. Thom. Antwisel Leicest. 1 Edw.
Salmon-Isab. fill. and cohaer. Will. Newenham, mil..... Samon cohaer.-Johannes
Savile de Darton Grange in Oxton.
2 Johannes. 3 Wilfrid. 4 Thom. Isabell. Mary.
Milecent. ux. Rog. Ferenden alias Arundel. Joh. Samon. Nicol. Isabel. Catharin





In the time of King Richard the second here flourished Henry de Plumptre,
Autog. pen. H. Plumptre de Not. Ar.
and two John's de Plumptre, brothers, as their several Wills do intimate;
Henrys Testament bears date 1408. which year he died, in which he gave a Legacy
to his sister Elisota, and another to John de Croweshawe his younger brother,
besides very many other, as one to Thomas his brothers son, and another to
Elizabeth his own wifes daughter; John his son and heir, and Margaret then wife
of the said Henry, were his Executors, and Thomas de Plumptre, Chaplain, a
Witness.

John de Plumptre's Testament was dated 1415. not long before his death, Ib.
he also gave a Legacy to his sister Elisota, and another to his brother John:
His Executors were John de Plumptre, his Cousin, and Thomas de Plumptre,
Chaplain, his Cousin also; John Plumptre, junior, was a Witness. This John the
Testator had license, 16 R. 2. to Found a certain Hospital or House of God,
Mon. Angl. vol. 2. p. 448.
of (or for) two Chaplains, whereof one should be Master or Warden of the said
Hospital, or House of God, and of (or for) thirteen Widows broken with old age,
and depressed with poverty, in a certain Message of the said John, with the
Appurtenances in Nottingham, and to give the said Message, and ten other
Messuages, and two Tofts, with the Appurtenances in the said Town, to the said
Master or Warden, and his successors, viz. the one Message for the habitation
of the said Chaplains and Widows, and the rest, for their sustentation, to pray
for the wholesome estate of the said John, and Emme his wife whilst they should
live, and for their Souls afterward. In the year 1400. July 12. seeing that
God had vouchsafed him to build a certain Hospital at the Bridge end of
Nottingham in Honor of God, Ib.
and the Annuntiation of his Mother the blessed Virgin, for the sustenance of
thirteen poor women, etc. he proposed ordain a Chantry, and willed that it
should be at the Altar of the Annuntiation of the blessed Virgin Mary in the
Chapel built beneath the said Hospital, and should be of two Chaplains
perpetually to pray for the state of the King, of him the said John de
Plumptre, and Emme his wife, and of the whole Community of Nottingham, etc. who
with the Prior of Lenton, after the death of the said John the Founder, were to
present to it, and each of the said two Chaplains were for their stipends to
have 100s. yearly paid in money out of the said ten Tenements, and two Tofts in
Nottingham. After the dissolution of Monasteries, in 2 E. 6. Sir Gervase
Clifton, Sir John Hersey, Ex Chapter H. Plumptre, Ar.
Sir Anthony Nevile, Knights, and William Bolles, Esquire, Commissioners for
the Survey of Colleges, Chapels, etc. certified that no poor were then to be
found in this Hospital, and that the Lands were then wholly employed to the
benefit of one Sir Piers Bursdale, Priest, Master thereof. Afterward both the
Hospital and Chapel became ruinous and demolished, and the very materials
imbezilled, till after diverse Patents of the said Mastership, Nicolas Plumptre
of Nottingham, 24 Eliz. obtained one, and with the Fines he received, made some
reparations, and brought in some poor, but after his decease during the
Masterships of Richard Parkins of Boney, and Sir George his son, who it seems
were trusted successively, for Henry Plumptre, son and heir of the Nicolas, in
his nonage, having then married Anne, the daughter of the said Richard, and
sister of the said Sir George Parkins, both the Hospital and Tenements
belonging to it grew into great decay, until after Sir George's death that
Nicolas Plumptre, son and heir of Henry, last named, became Master by a Patent
5 Car. 1. and made some repairs and amendments, which yet were not judged
sufficient by his brother and heir Huntingdon Plumptre, Doctor of Physic, who
also succeeded him in the Mastership, which he obtained 1645. (being then
eminent in his profession, and a person of great note, for wit and learning, as
formerly he had been for Poetry when he Printed his Book of Epigrams and
Batrachomyomachia) for in the year 1650. he pulled the Hospital down, and
Rebuilt it as it now appears,

Hospitalis B. Mariae Virginis ad finem Pon^is Nottingh: (vulgo voca^)
PLVMPTRES HOSPITAL a Borea zephyro Prospectus


Over the Gate of the Hospital at the Bridge-end,
Xenodochium hoc cum sacello adjuncto in honorem Annunciationis B. Virg. Mariae
pro 13. pauperiorum Viduarum and 2. Sacerdotum alimonia Johannes de Plumptre,
fundavit A. D. 1390. Quod (temporis diuturnitate jam pene confectum)
instauravit denuo, and hac qualicunque structura se sibi restituit Huntingdonus
Plumptre ex familia fundatoris, Armiger, and ejusdem Hospitii Magister, A. D.
1650.

Will. de Plumptre- Thom. de Plumptre temp. Regis Joh.-Avicia. Willielmus de
Plumptre superst. 15 E. 1.- Paulinus de Plumptre dictus le Clerc. temp. E. 1.-
Henricus de Plumptre- Willielmus de Plumptre, 3 E. 3. and E. 3.- Henricus de
Plumptre de Not. ob. 1408.-Eliz. ux. 1.-Margar. Johannes de Plumptre ob.
Apr....1471.-Helena fill....Strelley de Woodborough. Henricus de Plumptre de
Arnale.-Matilda fill. and haer. Rob. Medocroft and Joanae ux. ejus fill. and
haer. Joh. Knaresburgh de Kyme in Com. Linc. Henricus Plumptre ob.
1508.-Elizabetha-Mauritius Orrell marit. 2. 18 H. 8. Johannes Plumptre ob.
1552.-Katherina fill. Joh. Kyme de Stykford junioris Com. Linc.-Agnes ux. 2.
Nicol. Plumptre ob. Sept. 13. 1597.-Anna fill. and haer. Joh. Sharp de Frisby C.
Leic. and Mariae uxor. fill. Will. Saunders de Welford C. Northt. ob. Apr. 16.
1580.-Elianor ux. 2. ob. 1602. Henricus Plumptre ob. Jul. 26. 1642.-Anna fill.
Rich. Parkins de Boney ob. Apr. 22. 1639. Nicol. Plumptre ob. 1644. s.p.
Huntingdon Plumptre Med. D. ob. 1660.-Jana. fill. Ric. Scott Ebor. ux.
1.-Christina fill. Ric. Brook, mil. de Norton in Com. Cestr. and Cath. ux. fill.
Hen. Nevil de Billingbere. Henricus Plumptre de Not. Ar. aet. 30. 1674-Maria
fill. Thom. Blayney, Ar. Herefordensis ob. 1673. Christina Plumptre not Jun.
1673.
Richardus.




Johannes, 2 H. 7.
Thomas Capellanus.

Johannes de Plumptre fundator Hospitalis ob. 1415.-Emma. Johannes vir Annae.
Elisota.






and advanced the Rents, so that the monthly allowance to the poor is double to
what it was anciently. His son and heir Henry Plumptre, Esquire, is now Master
or Guardian, being so made by his present Majesty, 24 Car. 2. 1672. upon the
resignation of the Patent by George Cartwright, who had it in trust for him it
seems, and was more kind than Sir George Parkins was to his Grandfather. In the
Will of Henry de Plumptre dated 11 H. 4. 1408. before mentioned, it appears
that his dwelling House was a Tenement called Vout Hall, which, with two other
Tenements; a Garden and Teyntor within it in Vout Lane, all adjoining to the
said Mansion House, he left to his said wife Margaret for life; remainder to
his said son John, and the heirs of his body lawfully begotten; for default
whereof; these and all other the Tenements in diverse places of Nottingham,
settled on the said John in like manner, were to be sold by the Executors of
the said Henry, and the money disposed by them for the good of his Soul. His
Body he ordered to be buried in the Chapel of All Saints beneath or in the
Church of St. Peter in Nottingham. Autog. pen. H. P.
Henry de Cotegrave, and William de Beston of Nottingham, Executors of the
Testament of William Colyer of Nottingham, 12 R. 2. confirmed to Henry de
Plumptre of Nottingham, and his heirs, seven Cottages in Hundegate. Henry
Plomtre, son and heir apparent of Henry Plomtre, Ib.
late of Arnall, and Cousin and heir of Thomas Plomtre, late of Nottingham,
Chaplain, 3 H. 7. Anno 1488. demised to Ed. Hunte of Nottingham; Merchant of
the Staple of the Town of Calis, five Cottages in Hundegate, which were late
John Plomtre's, father of the said Henry the elder, and of the said Thomas.

Thomas Poge was Major of Nottingham 9 and 10 H. 5.

In 23 H. 7. Thomas Poge of Misterton, Gent. conveyed to Henry Plumptre of
Nottingham, Gent. one Message, and thirteen Cottages, whereof the Message and
nine Cottages lay together in the North side of the Churchyard of St. Mary in
Nottingham, where now is situate the chief Mansion House of Henry Plumptre,
Esquire, the Front whereof was rebuilt by his father the said Doctor Plumptre,
who was son of Henry, son of Nicolas* son of John, son of the said Hen.
Plumptre, who had it of Mr. Poge. To this House it seems belonged a certain
Chapel or Oratory, with a Quire adjoining to it, in the North side of St.
Mary's Church called the Chapel of All Saints, which in the year 1632. Ian. 19.
was confirmed to Henry Plumptre, Esquire, Autog. pen. H. P.
and Nicolas Plumptre, Gent. and Huntingdon Plumptre, Doctor of Physic, his
sons, and the rest of the inhabitants of that House to hear Divine Service,
Pray, and Bury in, by Richard then Archbishop of York under the Hand and Seal
of Francis Withington Master of Arts, Surrogate of William Easdale, Dr. of
Laws, Vicar General in Spirituals of the said Archbishop.

Besides these before mentioned many persons and Families of good note have
been here resident, Ex lib. Cart. I. B. Ar.
and sprung from this place, John de Tannesley, and Thomas de Mapurley, named
in Basford, flourished here in the latter part of the Reign of Richard the
second. Galfr. Knyveton was Major 25 H. 6. And before that, viz. 19 H. 6.
William Halyfax, on the backside of whose House, now Ed. Holymans, is a blind
Lane called I suppose from him Halyfax Lane. In 37 H. 6. Thomas Thurland was
Major, and a great Merchant; his large House is now the Earl of Clares, as is
also the Town of Gameleston, where some of his posterity are noted.

Richard Mellors, Bell-founder, Ex Aupen. G. Gregory Ar.
lived in the time of Edward the fourth, his wifes name was Agnes, and after
his death styled the Lady Mellors, and Dame Agnes Mellors, being a Vowess it
seems; she gave to the Free School at Nottingham diverse Lands and Tenements of
good value; her son and heir Robert Mellors followed the same Trade, and was
also a Benefactor to the School, Ex Chart. G. G,
to which by his last Will bearing date 16 Iul. 1515. he gave a Close which he
bought of one William Page lying in Basford Wong, and an House in
Bridelsmithgate which he bought of the same person, or else the money which
should be gotten for it; but if the School should not be kept according to the
Foundation as it was granted, his heirs should re-enter and have the said
Close, with the Appurtenances, again. He was Burgess in Parliament for this
Town, and had to wife Julian, daughter and heir of.... Mapurley, after his
death married to one Nicolas Quarneby; Elizabeth the only daughter and eir of
this Robert Mellors, was married (perhaps by her Father-in-laws procurement) to
(his Nephew) Humfrey Quarneby, who was son and heir of his brother Thomas
Quarneby, Ib.
and of Elizabeth his wife, one of the two daughters and coheirs of Henry
Tickhill, and Margaret his wife, one of the daughters and coheirs of Thomas
Pembrug, which said Henry Tickhill was son of Robert Tickhill, and Agnes his
wife, daughter and heir of Henry Wychard of Chaddesden near Darby. This Humfrey
Quarneby was also Alderman of this Town, and served for it as Burgess in
Parliament; his son and heir Robert Quarneby had two daughters and heirs,
Elizabeth, wife of John Kyme (descended from a branch of the House of Kyme of
Friskeney in Lincolneshire) and Mary the wife of Thomas Blyth of
Espley-Wood-Hall. Ib.
John Kyme by his wife the said Elizabeth had two sons, John, who married
Gertrude, the daughter of John Rosell of Radcliffe, Esquire, but had no issue;
and Philip who died a Bachelor; and two daughters, Anne; wife of John Hunt of
Aston in the County of Darby, who left no Child; and Mary, wife of George
Aston, who had two daughters, Mary married to one John Major, who lived in
London; and Elizabeth, whom her Grandfather the said John Kyme made his heir,
and married to John Gregory of Nottingham, Gent. son and heir of William
Gregory, Alderman, who by Grazing raised a very considerable Estate from the
lowest beginning, yet it seems he was descended from a younger branch of the
Family of Gregory of Highhurst in the County of Lancaster, Ex visit. Laur.
Dalton Norroy 1567.9 Eliz.
who bore for their Arms Party per pale Arg. and Azure, two Lions Rampant
averse (which some call endorsed, viz. back to back) Counterchanged; howbeit in
the year Adam Gregory de Highhurst in Com. Lanc.-... fill. and cohaer. Adae
Ormeston de Ormeston Com. Lanc. Will. Gregory de Highhurst.-Doroth. fill....
Parre de Kempenhaugh in Com. Lanc. 2 Hugo Gregory-Maria. Thom. Gregory de
Overbroughton Com. Not.-Dorothea Beeston. Johannes Gregory de Broughton
Sulney.-Alicia. Willielm. Gregory Alderm. de Not. ob. 1650.-Anna fill. Adae
Jackson. Joh. Gregory de Not. Genesis ob. 1654.-Eliz. fill. and Cohaer. aet. 62.
1675. Georgius Gregory Ar. Vicecom. 1666. aet. 36. 1675.-Susanna fill. Martin.
Lister, mil. Georgius Gregory aet. 6. 1675. Johannes aet. 4. Richardus aet. 2.
Susanna aet. 9. 1675.
Philip.-Eliz. fill. Ric. Philips-... de Picton Castle in Com. Pembr. ux..1.
Franc.-Marg. fill. Rog. Waldron de East Bridgeford. Edw. Eliz.-Will. Davenport
de Bramhall in Com. Cestr. Ar. Anna-Gervas. Shipman. Winif^.

Joh. Edw. s. p. Hen. de Boston in Nova Anglia.
Joh. Alton de Not. Medicus ob. 1629.-Eliz. fill.... Brightman. Elena ux. Thom.
Bray. Geo. Alton ob. 1620.-Maria fill. and cohaer.-Tho. Hodgson marit. 2. Joh.
Gregory de Not. Genesis ob. 1654.-Eliz. fill. and Cohaer. aet. 62. 1675. Joh.
Major-Maria. Anna-Henricus Roos de Sneynton.



1 John Gregory de Highhurst superstes 1567. 9 Eliz.-Anna fill and cohaer.
Georgii Anneslow de Rodington in Com. Salop. Gilbert. Lionel. Rich.


Henricus Tickhill.-Margareta fill. and cohaer. Thom. Pembrug. Anna-Thom.
Lathom. Elizab. cohaer.-1 Tho. Quarneby. Humfr. Quarneby Alderman. and
Burgensis in Parliamento pro Not.-Elizabetha fill. and haer. Rob. Quarneby de
Not.-Francesca. Maria-Tho. Blythe de Espley wood hall. Elizab. cohaer.-Joh.
Kyme de Not. ob. 1631. Geo. Alton ob. 1620.-Maria fill. and cohaer.-Tho.
Hodgson marit. 2. Anna-Joh. Hunt de Aston. Johan Kyme s. p. Gertud. fill. Joh.
Rosell.




Tho. Quarnby de Derby.- Elizab. cohaer.-1 Tho. Quarneby. 2 Nic.-Juliana
Mapurley.-Robertus Mellors mar. 1. Humfr. Quarneby Alderman. and Burgensis in
Parliamento pro Not.-Elizabetha fill. and haer.

Ric. Mellors de Not.-Agnes. 2 Nic.-Juliana Mapurley.-Robertus Mellors mar. 1.
Joh. Kyme de Burgh Com. Linc.-de Joana. Johannes Kyme de Stikford Com.
Linc.-Beatrix fill. Will. Jowytson. Kath. ux. Joh. Plumptre de Not. Johan
Kyme.-Beatrix. Johan Kime dictus senior. Tho. Kime de Stykforth.-Julian.
Elizab. cohaer.-Joh. Kyme de Not. ob. 1631. Willielmus.




1662. when William Dugdale, Esquire, Norroy King of Arms, made his Visitation,
George Gregory, Esquire, son and heir of the said John and Elizabeth, not
exhibiting such sufficient proof as since he has, thought fit to take a grant
of the Arms and Crest he now uses from the said Norroy, in relation to his
Descent from the Ancient Family of Kyme. He has the last year, viz. 1674.
rebuilt most of the old Mansion House, which is esteemed one of the best Seats
in the whole Town, having also a pretty Gloss besides the Gardens adjoining to
it. His Grandfather the said George Alton, was son of John Alton an eminent
Physician in Nottingham, who had a daughter named Elen, wife of Thomas Bray of
Eyam in the County of Derby, to whom she bore...., the wife of John Martin,
Gent. a considerable owner in Nottingham, and Elizabeth, who having ten
thousand pounds of her said Grandfather Dr. Alton's Estate to her Portion, was
preferred in marriage to the Honorable Francis Pierreponte, Esquire, third son
of Robert Earl of Kingston, which said Francis built a fair House, wherein he
lived and died himself here at Nottingham, which remains the principal dwelling
of Robert Pierrepont, Esquire, his son and heir. Humfrey Quarneby, before
named, had a daughter called Margery, wife of John Gregoria, related to those
of that name now seated at Barneby on Dun in Yorkshire, Alderman also of this
Town, whereof he was Major 29 Eliz. which John had a son William Gregory, who
was Town-Clark, and served in Parliament as Burgess, and a daughter.... wife of
William Greaves, who had Robert Greaves, Town-Clark also, and Burgess, who for
his loyalty to King Charles the first, being in Newark Garrison, suffered great
loss of his interests here; his brother William Greaves was Parson of Nutthall,
and left three sons of good rank in this Town, William, who is Alderman and
Register of the Archdeacons Court; John, and Edward Greaves the Apothecary;
Humfrey their Uncle, brother of the said William the Parson and of Robert the
Town-Clark, has a son John Greaves, Parson of Whitwell in Darbyshire.

William Skeffington, Esquire, and Elizabeth his wife, the relict of Francis
Thornhagh, reside in this Town in an House on St. Mary Hill, purchased of
Thomas Mucklow of Broughton Sulney, who had it by the marriage of one of the
daughters and heirs of Alderman Parker, of which name and kindred there are now
two John Parkers Aldermen, the one a Mercer, the other an Apothecary, of which
Trade there were lately above twenty more than formerly have been, when the
gains and employment were greater, whereof Adrian Gardener was the oldest, who
brought up many sons very well, his eldest is Mr. Robert Gardener of Sleeford
in Lincolneshire; his two youngest, which were by a latter wife, were Doctors,
Joseph of Physic, who died at Nottingham, and James of Divinity, who is now
Subdeane of Lincoln, and Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Monmouth. Thomas
Charleton, Esquire, named in Chillewell, married Tabitha, the daughter of
William Nix, Alderman, whose House in Bridlesmith Gate is now the dwelling of
the said Thomas, who has built there, as Mr. Samuel Stables (named in
Maperley) who was successor of Alderman Stables has done, nigh the Swine
Green.

William Toplady, son and heir of Alderman Francis Toplady, Vintner, was one of
the first leaders of this Dance of building new Fronts in this Town, which has
been of late very well followed, as I hope it will be still, because many
people of good quality from several parts, make choice of habitations here
where they find good accommodation, which must be no small advantage to the
place. Here are Counselors at Law, Edward Bigland, Esquire, William Savile,
Esquire, and James Farewell, Esquire, son of Sir John Farewell, and half brother
of Richard Slater of Nutthall, Esquire. Atturneys, Mr. Raph Edge, Alderman, son
of Walter Edge of the same profession, Laurence Athorpe, Vinc. Beverley, Arthur
Ricards, etc. The Free School flourishes under Mr. Cudworths care, who married
Mr. Alderman Christopher Halls daughter. There are many Gentlemen, and persons
of good Estates, and great Traders besides these, concerned and owners in this
Town, with the particular recital of whom I cannot now further tire the Reader.

The Vicarage of St. Mary's was twenty Marks, Mss. I.M.
and so was the Rectory of St. Peter's; and the Rectory of St. Nicolas ten Marks
when the Prior of Lenton was Patron: St. Mary's is now 10l. 5s. value in the
Kings-Books, and the Marquess of Dorchester Patron. St. Peter's 8l. 8s. 6d. and
the King Patron, as he is also of St. Nicholas, which is but 2l. 16s. 8d.
value. This Church is now almost rebuilt of Brick: it was demolished in the
Rebellion for the safety of the Castle.

In St. Mary's Church, South I Will,

....... Richardi Samon, quondam Majoris and Aldermanni istius villae, qui obiit
xviii. die mensis Decembris, Anno Dom. M. CCCC. LVII.

And in the Window of the same I Will, and on a Tomb,

Arg. a Bend Azure between a Mullet pierced, and an Annulett Gules, Samon.

Orate pro anima Johannis Salmon, and Agnetis uxoris ejus.

On the first Earl of Clare's Tomb, H. S. E.

Johannes Hollies de Houghton Equ. Aur. Denzilli F. Willielmi N. in Baronem
Houghton, nec non in Comitem de Clare, per Regem Jaco^um crectus, uxorem duxit
Annam Thomae Stanhope de Shelford Equ. Aur. Filiam, e qua Filios Johannem
postea Comitem de Clare Denzillium in Baronem Hollies de I field in Comita^^
Susserie, per serenissimum Regem Carolum II. promotum, Franciscum qui coelebs
obi^t; As Car^lum, Willielmum and Carolum in cunis demortuos:

Filias etiam

Eleonoram Olivero Vicecomiti Fitz-Williams ac Comiti de Tyrconel; Arabellam,
Thomae Wentworth de Wentworth-Woodhouse in Com. Ebor. Baronetto (postea vero in
Vicecom. Wen^worth, and Comitem de Strafford evecto,) Copulatas; ac Elizabetham
ante nuptias defunctam Suscitavit. Diem obiit II.I. Octobris, Anno Dom.
M.DC.XXXVII.

On the second Earls Tomb, H. S. E.

Praenob. Johannes Comes de Clare (Johannis F. Denzillii N) Vxorem duxit
Elizabetham Horatii Vere Equ. Aur. Baronisque de Tilbury (in re bellica
clarissimi) filiam et cohaeredem; Equa Filios Johannem in canis demortitum, at
Gilbertum postea Comitem de Clare:

Filias vero

Annam, Edwardo primogenito Theophili,
Comitis Lincolnie; Elizabetham,
Wentworthio, Comiti de Kildare;
Arabellam, Edwardo Rosseter de
Somerby in Com. Linc. Equ. Aur.
Matrimonio conjunctas;

Mariam in cunis, alteram Mariam ante nuptias defunctas; Eleonoram superst.
Katherinam, and Margaretam in coelibatu direptas; Susannam, Johanni Lort de
Stackpole-Court in Agro Pembr. Baronetto desponsatam;

Franciscam infantulam exanimem;

Dianam, Henrico Bridges, filio and haeredi Thomae Bridges de Keynsham in Com.
Summers. Equ Aur. enuptam; Penelopen, Jacobo Langham de Entesbroke in Com.
Northampt. Baronetto, copulatam; Dorotheam and Franciscam in teneri state
sublatas Procreavit. Diem obiit secundo Januarii, Anno Domini M. DC. LXV.

In the Chancel on a Black Marble Gravestone, cut in two Brass Plates,

A Fesse between three Spread-Eaglets, with a Crest, viz. a Dog tied to a Tree:
And Anno Dom. 1607. In memoria aeterna justus erit.

Nicholas Kinnersley, Esquire, and his mother
Dear Amye, their Corpse this Stone does here cover:
They live now with Christ, in whom they did trust:
Their Bodies do wait the rising of the Just.
On another Brass Plate,

Hic jacet Radulphus Hansby, Art. Mr. quondam socius Johannensis Cantab.
ibidemque Taxator, Hujus Ecclesiae vicarius and Bartonensis in Fabis Rector.
Qui obiit November. xx. Anno Dom. 1635.

Hansbius hac cecidit terra, lapsum extulit aura, Quo jacet hic casu surgit in
Astra suo.

On a Monument,

Johannes Alton in Artibus Mr. ob solertiam, prudentiam, experientiam,
medicorum (apud boreales saltem parts) facile princeps, uxorem habuit Elizab.
Brightman, quae apprime modesta erat foemina, venerabilis matrona, and pro
morum suavitate apud omnes gratissima, ex ea duos suscepit liberos, Georgium,
and Eleonoram uxorem Thomae Bray, Armig. matremque Elizabethae Bray, quae nupta
Fran. Pierreponto summae pietatis observantiae and gratitudinis ergo, hoc
Monumentum in defunctorum memoriam qua fieri potest sempiternam, propriis
sumptibus erigi curavit. Obierunt uterque circiter annum Aetatis suae
octogesimum; Ille autem 22. de Febr. Anno Dom. 1629. Haec decimo November.
Annoque Dom. 1638.

On a Gravestone,

Johannes Alton, and Elizab. uxor ejus charissima hic consepulti jacent,
egregium par amantium, quos una eademque domus ut vivos ita mortuos tenet. Diem
and Annum utriusque obitus, supra positum dabit monumentum.

On an Alabaster Gravestone,

Here lies the body of John Cave, Gent. the fourth son of Roger Cave of
Stanford in Northamptonshire. He died the 3d. of May 1639. in Joyful hope of
Resurrection to Eternal Life.

On another course Stone,

Here lies interred the body of George Hutchinson, Esquire, who died the 30. day
of March, Anno Dom. 1635. being about the age of 59 years and 3. Months. He
had to wife Katherin Russell, Genesis by whom he had issue John, Mary, Anne, and
Katherine.

Hic reposita sunt ossa Georgii Lacock, Genesis qui decimo die Martii, Anno Dom.
1647. in manus Dom. Jesu Christi salvatoris ejus emisit spiritum, Annoque
Aetatis suae 83. qui ante obitum, hoc sequens Epitaphium hic insculptum
irimandavit.

Nascimur, Querimur, Morimur.

Here lies the body of Anne Gregory, the wife of William Gregory, late
Alderman of Not. She died the 7. day of March 1664. in the 81. year of her age.

Here lies the body of Elizabeth, late wife of Robert Bingham, Esquire, Steward to
the Right Honorable Henry Lord Marquess of Dorchester. She dyed the 6. of
March, Anno Dom. 1670. in the 54. year of her age, after she had been married
22. years. She was one of the daughters of Francis Blaney of Kinsham in the
County of Hereford, Esquire.

In the body of the Church,

Here lies the body of Francis Toplady, late Alderman of this Town. He dyed
the 28. day of June 1665. the 84. year of his age.

On a Pillar,

Near this place lies the body of William Flamstead, Gent. late Steward and
Town-Clark of Nottingham, who for his exemplary piety, eminent parts and
singular fidelity lived much desired, and died no less lamented the 38. year
of his age, August 24. 1653.

The Memory of the Just is blessed.

On a Brass Plate in the North I Will,

Exuviae Josephi Gardener Med. D. Qui obiit Mar. 4. 1669.

On another,

Hic jacet Hen. Farington servus fidelis D. H. Plumptre, qui obiit Jul. 16.
1645.

On a Gravestone in the North I Will,

Domus aeterna Johannis Plumptre, Anno M. D. LII. defuncti.

The Arms,

A Chevron between two Mulletts, and an Annulett.

On an Alabaster Gravestone in the South I Will,

To the memory of Margaret, late the virtuous wife of William Greaves, Gent.
one of the Aldermen of Nottingham, who died the fifth day of March, Anno Dom.
1671.

Here also lies buried Margaret, late daughter of the said William and
Margaret Greaves: she departed this life the xxiii. day of January, Anno Dom.
1668.

In a Window of the South I Will,

Quarterly Gules a Lion Ramp. Or; and Cheque Or and Azure, all within a Bordure
engrailed Arg. quarterly France and England; and that again, impaling quarterly
Or, a Spread Eagle Sable, and Gules a Lion Ramp. Arg.

Gules a Saltire Arg. Nevil.

In a high Window of the middle, and on an old Tomb,

Azure a Cross pate, with a Basis and supporting Laces between four Mulletts
of six points within a Bordure engrayled Or.

By the West Doora large Table intended for the Arms of the Earls of Not.

1. Quarterly Gules a Lion Ramp. Arg. and Varry Or and Azure 3. as 2.4. as 1.
William Peverell created by Will. Conq.

2. England with a Bendlet Azure, John Plantaginet, by R. 1.

3. John Mowbray, by R. 2. Gules a Lion Ramp. Arg.

4. Gules a Chevron and Crosletts pate Arg. William Lord Barkly, by R. 3.

5. Quarterly France and England within a Bordure also quarterly Ermine and
Counter-compony Or and Azure, an inescutchion of Peverell. Henry Fitz-Roy, by
H. 8.

6. Gules a Bend between six Crossecroslets Fitche Arg. charged with a Mullett,
Charles Lord Howard, by Q. Eliz.

And the Towns Arms,

Gules three Crowns Or with a Cross Raguled and Trunked Vert set in the lowest.

In St. Peter's Church: The East Window of the North I Will,

ARg. two Bars Azure three Torteauxes in Chief impaling Azure a Cinquefoyl Arg.
Gules seven Mascles voyded Or 3.3.1. Azure a Lion Ramp. Or.

Quarterly Arg. a Chief Gules and Bendlet Azure, and Cheque Or and Azure a
Chief Ermine, Crumwell and Tateshall.

In a high South Window of the middle I Will,

Sab. two Bars nebule Arg. on a Chief Gules a Lion of Engl.

Arg. a Saltier engrayled sab. between four Roses Gules.

In a North high Window,

Paly of six Arg. and Azure an Annulet Gules, Strelley.

Arg. a Chevron between two Malletts pierced, and an Annulett Sab. Plumptre.

There are diverse Marks and Letters in Shields, with Crosses, and the like.

In the Chancel East Window,

Barry of six Arg. and Azure, Gray. Arg. a Fesse Varry between three Flowers de
Lis.

On a Monument, Memoriae Sacrum

Pientissimae conjugis Margaretae Domini Mathaei Saunderii Shanctoniensis in
agro Leicestrensi, Equitis Aurati filiae: Quae cum optimis naturae dotibus ex
instinctu praedita, tum virtutibus parentum cura diligentiaque summum quasi ad
vestigium aucta, quintum and vicesimum aetatis annum agens Johanni Lockeo
Regiensi in sedibus Hertfordianis, Generoso, nupta est. Quo cum ut piissime
conjunctissimeque suum uxoris per tres annos conjugale munus obiit, sera sibi,
cita suis, carnem hic depositura, se ad plureis penetravit, quarto Idus
Septembris, Anno Verbi incarnati 1633. Cui officii and amoris ergo monumentum
hoc maritus ille moestissimus extruxit.

Eja age, siste, locum tenet hunc matrona sacratum Clara, venusta, pudens,
religiosa, gravis.

Ergo jacent charitas pietasque, sed astra vicissim Hac poterant alia non
reperire via.

Margarita jacet non Annis dempta, sed anni Vt spectes animum dant obiisse
senem.

Above these Inscriptions are the Arms of Locko and Saunders impaled, viz.

Arg. a Bend between two Waterbougets Sable, Locko.

Party per Chevron sab. and Arg. three Elephants Heads erased Counterchanged,
Saunders.

On another Tomb for a second wife are impaled the same Arms of Locko,

With Gules on a Fesse Arg. between three Crescents Or, as many Escallops
Azure, Ellis of Grantham.

The Inscription,

Ad memoriam sempiternam Janae suae Dom. Thomae Elisio de Granthamia in finibus
Lincolniensibus, Equiti aurato, unique a Conciliis Domino Regi in provincia
Boreali, minoris natu filiae, morum pariter and formae spectabilis venustate,
sibique post quadrennium interrupti foelicissimi conjugii, paribus auspiciis in
secundi tori matrimonium collocatae: cui (ut fere quae sunt cordi maxim)
vertente biennio, Nottinghamie accidit humanitus fato praematuro cedere
calendis sextilibus; Annosque jam haud uno viginti amplius habenti ad humanae
salutis M. DC. XXXIX. Johannes Lockeus Hertfordiensis de Rigia, Generosus,
monumentum hoc desiderii and conjunctionis ergo consecravit, sanctissimaeque
conjugi superstes dissidium luctuosus deflet.

Elysia de Gente redux I Jana: sed ebeu Cur haec lux quae dat gaudia, curta
daret!

Ne coelum invidiae: quanquam juvenisque vigensque Serior, optarim, viseret
umbra polos.

Image chara diem, melior neque munus, obivit: Redditaque Elysiis, ortaque
dignatuis.

On another Monument, P. M. S.

Viri apprime venerabilis Georgii Cotes, bonarum Artium fere omnium
thesaurarii: principis artis and instar omnium Theologiae cimeliarchi, gregis
egregii custodis: denique ut ingenii ut vitae cultum instituerint, omnibus
merito exemplaris, Cujus Pectus pietatis Sacrarium, fuere. Cujus Lingua
spiritus tuba, fuere. Cujus Manus Christi erogatrix, fuere. Cujus Domus
Religionis Schol^, fuere. Cujus Vita morum consura fuere.


Qui ut annos quatuor and viginti, summa fide summaque diligentia curam hujus
ecclesiae sustinuerat, exantlato labor ad patriam rediturus; mortale quod erat
servandum heic deposuit, caetera perennier; luctum amicis, and sui ingens
desiderium suis, adeoque bonis omnibus relinquens; e corporis evolavit vinculis
III. Call. December. Anno post natum Christum mdcxl. Aetatis autem suae LIII.

Cui nepos ejus Samuel Cotes hoc in pii doloris and perpetuum juxta patrui
meritorum, suisque superstitis amoris moerenti moerens monumentum P.

There are diverse Latin Verses on the same subject, as there are also some in
English, after the following Inscription cut on Brass,

In hope of a joyful Resurrection lies interred the body of Mr. Edward Allott,
Bachelor of Physic, and practitioner in Surgery, who dyed the 6. of June
1636. being aged 33. years.

On a Table,

Arg. a Lion Ramp. queve furche sab. Cressy, impaling Barry of six Arg. and
Azure nine Mulletts Gules 3.3.3. Jesop. And William Cressy, son of Hugh Cressy,
one of his Majesty's Judges of Kings Bench in Ireland, was married to
Elizabeth, daughter of George Iessop of Brancliff in the County of York, Esquire,
died the ninth of March 1645.

On a Gravestone,

Lector, in hoc tumulo requiescunt ossa Ricardi Elkini medici, pluribus haud
opus est.

Obiit Maii 19. Anno Dom. 1650. aetatis suae 85.

On a Monument,

Here lies Mary, the wife of John Wileman, Gent. daughter to Henry and
Elizabeth Sherwin, who died in Childbed the 21. of August 1648. in the 27. year
of her age, and had issue one only daughter.

Some Verses follow.

Upon another, D. O. M.

Johannes Volusenus Westmonasterii natus, Oxonie educatus, SS. Theology
professor, Decanus a Ripis, Beati Petri Westmonaster, and beatae Mariae
Lincoln. Praebendarius, Parochialis Ecclesiae de Burnston Vicarius, and Rector
Ecclesiae de Beedall hic in domino requiescit.

Obiit Febr. 19. 1634.

Here John Wilson sleeps, in trust
That Christ will raise him from his dust:
Serve God with fear, thou can not tell
Whether thy turn be next. Farewell.
Disce mori.
Here lies the body of Robert Moseley, Master of Arts, and a faithful
Minister of Jesus Christ, he died the 20. of December. 1643.

Here lies the body of Jane, the wife of Thomas Reyner, who died the 18. of
July 1666. in the 41. year of her age.

In the South I Will of the Church,

Hic jacet corpus Johannis Coombe, Generosi, civitate Exon. nati, olim
Comitatus Notting. Registrarii, qui ab huc luce (expectans meliorem) migravit
undecimo die mensis Octobris; Anno Dom. 1667. and Aetatis suae sexagesimo
septimo.

Resurgam I. C.

On the middle of the Almshouse in Stony Street,

Henry Hanly, Esquire, whose Body is interred in the Church of Bramcote in the
County of Nottingham, caused this Almeshouse to be erected for 12. poor people,
and did give one hundred pounds yearly forth of his Ancient Inheritance, Lands
at and near Bramcote aforesaid, for pious and charitable uses to continue for
ever. Namely, XLl. for the maintenance of the said 12. poor people. XXl. for a
weekly Lecture in this Town. XXl. for a Preaching and Resident Minister at
Bramcote. Vl. to the poor of Bramcote. Vl. to the poor of Wilford. XXs. to the
poor of Beeston. XXs. to the poor of Chilwell. XXs. to the poor of Attenborrow
and Toton. XXs. to the poor of Stableford. XXs. to the poor of Trowell. XXs. to
the poor of Wollaton. And IVl. to the poor Prisoners in the Goales for the
County of Nottingham yearly for ever. And one third Bell to the aforesaid
Church of Bramcote.

This pious, most charitable, and at this time most seasonable Donation, as it
deservedly perpetuates his memory to be honored by all Posterity, so it gives
a most worthy example for imitation. He died the 10. day of June 1650.

The Arms above are,

Arg. a Fessa Gules between three Goats current Sab. bearded, ungued and Armed
Or, the Crest a Goat of the same.

On Mr. Barnaby Wartnabies Beadhouse,

As God above out of his love has given to me store,
So I out of my Charity gave this House to the poor.
Let Us pray for one another so long as we do live:
That we may to Gods glory go, to him that this did give.
Barnaby Wartnaby, Anno Dom. 1665.

There is in the Town Hall at Nottingham the Kings Arms fairly drawn over the
seat which the Judge in Circuit sits in; and at other times the Mayor, etc. On
each side of the Kings Arms, are those of the Benefactors, with Inscriptions
under them.

Gules in the Sinister point, an Annulet Arg. a Bordure sable with Estoiles Or.
Over all in a Canton Ermine, a Lion Rampant of the first.

Underneath is thus written,

Sir Thomas White, Merchant Tailor, sometime Alderman of the City of London,
gave to this Town of Nottingham 40l. to be paid every fifth year, and to be
lent Gratis to four young men Burgesses and Tradesmen for the term of 9.
years. He died Anno Dom. 1566.

Arg. on a Chevron between three Garbes sab. three Estoiles of five points of
the first, impaling Gules and Arg. divided by a pale ingrailed Or between four
Lions Rampant Counterchanged.

These be the Arms of John Wast, and Winefride his wife, late Brewer of
London, which has given to the maintenance of a Free School in this Town of
Not. 3. Tenements in the City of London 5l. by the year: On whose Souls Jesus
have mercy.

Sixteen Coats quartered, whereof the first is,

Or two Bars Azure on a Chief quarterly two Flowers de Liz of France, and one
Lion of England.

The second is, Gules three Waterbougetts Arg. etc. Earl ^f Rutlands.

Rogerus Manors vir illustris, serenissimae Reginae Elizabethae Somatophylax
dignissimus, Comtiis Thomae Rutlandie filius, in perpetuam eleemosynam huic
villae Nottinghamie quinque minas dedit per annum. In cujus tam largi muneris
Major Fratresque hic ejus affixerunt insignia, Anno Domini 1601.

Sable a Chevron Or between three Crossecrosletts Fitche Arg. quartering six
Coats more.

The Arms and Achievements of Sir George Peckham, late of Denham in the
County of Bucks, Knight. who out of his noble disposition to works of Charity and
Piety, by his last Will and Testament gave to the Town of Nottingham one
hundred pounds of lawful English money, the use and benefit to be yearly
distributed to the poor inhabitants there by the discretion of the Major and
Aldermen of the said Town for the time being, and departed this life the 23.
day of July, Anno Dom. 1635.

Or two Bars, and a Lion Passant in Chief Azure.

William Gregory, Gent. sometime Town-Clarke of this Town of Nottingham, did by
his last Will and Testament in the year of our Lord God 1613. give and...
eleven small Tenements, with the Appurtenances called the White Rents, situate
at Hundgate end, within the said Town of Not. for poor aged people to dwell in
Rent-free, and 40s. yearly for ever toward the reparation of the said
Tenements, etc.

Party per pale Arg. and Azure two Lions Ramp. back to back Counterchanged,
Gregory, quartering sable a Chevron between three Spear heads within a Bordure
Arg. Urmeston, all which impales Or on a Chief Vert a Lion Passant of the
first, Alton, quartering Gules a Chevron between ten Crossecrosletts Or, Kyme.

William Gregory, Gent. late one of the Aldermen of this Town, gave in Anno
Dom. 1650. the sum of LIIs. yearly toward the relief of the poor of the
Parish of St. Mary's in Not. and John Gregory, Gent. his son did give the like
sum of LIIs. more for the same use yearly for ever, to be paid out of the
Rents of four Tenements lying in Barker Gate; and bestowed in Bread 2s. every
Sunday.

Ermine a Gryphin Sergreant queve now Gules, Grantham, impaling Arg. on a
Chevron sable three Bucks heads Cabossed Or, Boughton.

The most pious and virtuous Lady Lucy, wife of Sir Thomas Grantham, did of her
Charity give two hundred pounds at several times to this Town, the use thereof
to be employed for the setting forth of poor Burgesses Children Apprentices
for ever.

William Greaves Major 1671.

Arg. a Fesse Gules between three Goats in course sable, borned, bearded, and
hoofed Or.

The Arms of Henry Hanley, Esquire, Founder of the Hospital in Stony Street within
this Town of Nottingham, who endowed the same with forty pounds per annum out
of his Lands in Bramcote in the County of Nottingham, for the maintenance of
six Men, and six Women, Anno Domini 1650.

William Iackson Major 1673.

The Forest of Shirewood
EXtends it self into the Hundreds of Broxtow, B.
Thurgarton a Lee, and Bassetlawe. When this Forest of Shirewood was first made
I find not; the first mention of it that I do find is in Henry the seconds
time, but I conceive it a Forest before, for William Peverell in the first year
of Henry the second [ which is mistaken for the fifth year of King Stephen]
does answer de Placitis Forestae in this County. It seems he had the whole
profit and command of this Forest for his Estate, which, after coming to the
Crown, the Sheriff, 8 H. 2. in the account of his Farm prays to be discharged
of 4l. in vasto Forestae; and in the tenth year of the same Kings Reign he
prays the like discharge of 4l. for the waste, as also allowance of 6l. 5s.
paid to the Constable, eight Foresters, and a Warrener, and to the Canons of
Shirewood for Alms 40l. which I conceive to be the Prior and Monks of Newstede,
then newly Founded by Henry the second. In the next year the Sheriff of the
County Randulphus filius Engelrami answers de censu Forestae; and in the
twelfth year, Robert de Caltz Lord of Laxton, a Fermor, answers for it 20l. and
15 H. 2. Reginaldus de Luci answers the like sum of 20l. pro censu Forestae,
in both which years Robert Fitz-Randulph was Sheriff. In the ancient written
Forest Books of this County there is the Copy of a Charter made by King John
when he was Earl of Morteyne to Matilda de Caux, and Raph Fitz-Stephen her
husband, and to her heirs, of all the Liberties and Free Customs which any of
the Ancestors of the said Maud held at any time in Notinghamshire and
Derbyshire, viz. all the Forest of Notinghamshire and Derbyshire, as their
Ancestors ever held the same. It came to John Birking as heir to this Maud, so
to Thomas Birking his son and heir, about 11 H. 3. and shortly after to
Everingham, who thereby claimed Custodiam Forestarum Regis in Com. Not. and
Derby, which I conceive contains no more but this Forest of Shirewood, the rest
being disafforested by Henry the third, in the sixth year of his Reign, in the
sum of the Statute of Carta de Foresta. With this Everingham heir to Birking
and Caux it continued till Edward the first's time, and then was seized as
forfeited. Since the Guardianship has been granted by the Princes to Noblemen
and Gentlemen as a Character of their especial favor, the state of this
Fostership of Everinghams, and of the whole Forest appears in an Inquisition
taken by Geoffrey Langley, the Kings then Justice in Air of his Forests beyond
Trent; for the Forest-Officers of Shirewood there find that there be three
Keepings in the Forest, First, Between Leene and Doverbecke. Secondly, The High
Forest. The Third, Rumwood. Robert Everingham, chief Keeper of the Forest,
ought to have a chief Servant Sworn, going through all the Forest at the costs
of Robert, to Attach all Trespasses, and present them at the Attachements
before the Verderors. In the first Keeping between Liene and Doverbecke he
ought to have one Forester riding with a Page and two Foresters on foot; and
there be two Verderors, and two Agisters. In this Keeping there be three Hayes,
Beskwood Hay, Lindeby Hay, and Willay Hay. The second Keeping is the High
Forest. In this Robert Everingham is to have two Foresters riding with two
Pages, and two Foresters on foot, and there be also two Verderors, and two
Agisters. In this Keeping are two Hayes, Birkeland and Billahay, and the Park
of Clipston, and in these Hayes and Park two Verderors, and two Agisters. In
the third Keeping Rumwoode, Robert Everingham ought to have one Forester on
Foot, and there be two Woodwards, one of Carburton, another of Budby, and two
Verderors, and two Agisters. Robert Everingham ought also to have a Page
bearing his Bow through all the Forest to gather Chiminage. The Perambulation
of this Forest was upon the Commission of 16 H. 3. thus set forth, viz. At
Coningswath Ford, so by the Highway toward Wellay Hagh toward Nottingham,
leaving out the Close of the Town of Wellay, from thence by that way to
Blackstone Haugh, from thence to that place where the River of Doverbecke goes
over that way, and so from thence as the River of Doverbeck goes into Trent.
Westerley from the Ford of Coningswath by the water called Maiden to the Town
of Warksope, and so by the same water to the Park of Plesley Hagh, so up the
same River to Otter Brigge, from thence by the great Highway of Nottingham to
the Mill Ford, from thence to Mayneshead, from thence betwixt the Fields of
Hardwick and Kirkeby to the corner that is called Nun Carre, from thence by the
Assert of Ewan Brittayne to the Earl Stigh, and from thence to Stolegate, from
thence by the great Highway under the Castle of Annesley, from thence by the
great Highway to the Town of Linbye, through the midst of the Town to the
water of Liene, so to Lenton, and from thence by the same water, as it was wont
of old time to run into the water of Trent, and so along the River of Trent to
the fall of Doverbecke, saving Wellay Hay, and other the Kings Demesne Woods in
the County of Nottingham. This I have the rather done that most men may know
when they are within, and when without the Forest. And although there were some
deafforestations after, yet were they resumed, so as the old Perambulation
stands at this day without any remarkable alteration. There have not been many
Justice Seats in this Forest of Shirewood; those that I have met withal I shall
here observe. The first was in Henry the second's time before Hugh Bishop of
Durrham, Robert Bishop of Lincoln, and Robert Earl of Leicester. The next I
find was in Henry the third's time before Robert Nevill and his fellows
Justices. The next after that was 15 E. 1. before William Vescy and his
fellows; and of this Justice Seat the Rolls are extant with the Chamberlains of
the Exchequer in the Tallye Office, as also the Rolls of the next Justice Seat
of 8 E. 3. before Raph Nevill and his fellows. The next Justice Seat I can meet
with is 21 H. 7. before Simon Stalworth, and John Collier, Clarks, Robert
Nevill, and John Port or Porter, and before them as Deputies and Lieutenants of
Sir Thomas Lovell, Guardian and Chief Forester, and Justice of the Forest of
our Lord the King of Shirewood. But this Seat I cannot find Recorded in any
place, although I made diligent enquiry for it upon a claim there for the Town
of Nottingham, and upon conference with William Noy, the late Attorney General
to his Majesty that now is, he told me it was no where to be found where he had
seen. I have seen some claims, as the beginning of another Justice Seat for
this particular Forest, 26 H. 8. before Thomas the first Earl of Rutland, but
no further proceeding therein that I could learn. The last upon Record in the
Exchequer in the same Tally Office is a Book, wherein is entered the Claims and
Commencement of a Justice Seat here before the then Lord Crumwell, the Kings
then Chief Justice in Air of his Forests on the North side of Trent. The state
of this Forest at this present consists of a Warden, his Lieutenant, and his
Steward, a Bow-bearer, and a Ranger, four Verderors, twelve Regarders, so
reduced to the number of twelve by an Ordinance made in Edward the first's time
by William Vescy and his fellows, four Agisters, and twelve Keepers or
Foresters in the main Forest; besides there are now four Keepers in Thorney
Woods, where anciently there were but two, one of the North Bail, another of
the South, they are all reduced under the Chief Forestor the Earl of
Chesterfeild and his heirs, whose Father Sir John Stanhoppe had the same
granted in Fee, with liberty to destroy and kill at their pleasures, reserving
an hundred Deer in the whole Walk. There are also besides the Forest-Keepers
three in Beskwood Park, that before Edward the third's time was an Hay or Wood
uninclosed, but sithence it was imparked, the general Keeper of the Park has
had the Command of the other Keepers, as I presume the general Forester of the
Hay had before, for I find Richardus de Strelley was Forester there 2 E 3.
There is also one other Keeper of Nottingham Park, one other of Clipston
Park. The twelve Forest Keepers are these, One of Maunsfeilde, one of
Maunsfeild Woodhouse, one of Annefley Hills and Newstede, one of Papplewicke,
one of Rumwood and Oswald, one of Rughford, one of Billahay, one of Birkeloud,
one of Calverton, one of Farnesfeilde, one of Langton Arbor and Blidworth, and
one of Sutton in Ashefeild. The Castle and the Park of Nottingham was granted
to the late Earl Francis of Rutland, and is now the Inheritance of the Duchess
of Buckingham his daughter and heir. Clipston Park is now the Inheritance of
the Earl of Newcastle, who is the present Warden of this Forest, and his are
also the perpetual placing of the Keeper of Romwood and Oswald. The Keepership
of Rughford is the inheritance of Sir William Savile Lord of Rughford. Annefley
Hills, Papplewick and Newsteede are granted to Sir John Byron Lord of
Newsteede, and the rest of the Walks are in the disposition of the Warden of
the Forest. There are besides as members of the Forest several Wood-wards for
every Township within the Forest, and for every principal Wood one.

It would not be impertinent to set down how that in the beginning of the Reign
of King Henry the second, Ranulph the Sheriff, Hugh de Buyrun, Pat. 55 H. 3. m.
13. Inspex.
Raph de Hanselin, Robert de Perreriis, Raph de Annesley, Galfr. de le Fremunt,
Raph de Heronvill, Hugh Fitz-Wlviet, Robert de Hoveringham, Alexander
Fitz-Toche, Simon Fitz-Richard, Robert de Ripera, Richard de Croxton, William
de Herys, Walter de Amundevill, Sampson de Stereley, Gervas Fitz-Richard de
Muey, Ingelram, the brother of the Sheriff, Hugh Fitz-Roger, William
Fitz-Reyner, Hugh Fitz-Albred, Hardewin, and Gaufr de Staunton, swore at
Nottingham in the presence of Robert Earl of Leicester, who on the part of the
King Commanded them that they should tell the truth concerning the Customs and
Liberties which the Land of the Archbishop (of York) which is in
Nottinghamshire, and the Archbishop himself had in the same Shire, in the time
of King Henry the elder ( viz. the first) and the year and day wherein that
King Henry the first was alive and dead. And after they had sworn, they said,
That the whole Land of the Archbishop was without the Forest, which was
contained between the bounds underwritten: As Doverbeck falls into Trent, and
on the upper part from the water of Doverbeck unto Ciningeswad, as the way of
Blyth goes, and all that Land which is beyond Ciningeswad, and beyond the
aforesaid way, was out of the Forest unto Bykersdike, so that no Forester of
the Kings could intermeddle on the Kings part concerning that Land, but the
Archbishop and his men did freely both Essart and do what they would with it
as their own. And out of the aforementioned bounds in the old Forest, the
Archbishop did Hunt nine days in the year, viz. three against Christmas,
three against Easter, and three against Whit sunday, through the whole Wood of
Blythworth, and in that Wood of Blythworth the Archbishop, and his Canons, and
his men, had all their Attachments without waste [ guasto] and had their proper
Foresters, and Aieryes of Hawks, and Paunage: This was Sealed by Robert Bishop
of Lincoln, and Hugh Bishop of Durrham. John Romanus Archbishop of York, 15
E. 1. by Hugh de Stapleford his Attorney, had great pleading before William de
Vescy, Thomas de Normanvile, and Richard de Crepping, Justices in Air,
concerning his holding Pleas of Vert in his Court of Southwell, and many other
Privileges: As William de Melton, one of his successors, Archbishop of York,
by William de Southwell his Attorney, had, 8 E. 3. before Raph de Nevill,
Richard de Aldeburgh, and Peter de Midleton, as may be seen at large in the
Rolls of both these Justice Seats in the Tally Office. But I shall not be
further particular in exhibiting any further Collections on this subject,
because the pleasant and glorious condition of this noble Forest is now
wonderfully declined. And there is at present, and long has been, a Justice
Seat, which is not yet finished, and therefore cannot now be rendered a good
account of, held under my Lords Grace the Duke of Newcastle, Justice in Air of
all his Majesty's Forests, etc. Trent North, wherein it seems his Deputies or
Lieutenants have allowed such and so many claims, that there will not very
shortly be Wood enough left to cover the Bilberries, which every Summer were
wont to be an extraordinary great profit and pleasure to poor people, who
gathered them and carried them all about the Country to sell: I shall therefore
at this time say no more, May 24. 1675.

FINIS.

















The INDEX of the Names of Persons.


Acadus 488. Acclum 184. Acland 30, 31. Adwik 444. Adderley 277, 298, 493.
Adelington 303, 146. Adys 182. Adam 168. Adham 471, 472. Addy 388. Albani 38,
72, 113, 114, 115. -- 156, 187, 195, 277, 325, 363, 368, 379, 380. Albamarle
489. Adeluuel 463. De Albin 20. Allestre 153, 491. Allot 482, 503. Almton 348,
372, 373. Alchill 244, 453. Alexander 135, 168. Aldham 476. Alneto 73, 111,
124, 125, 190. Alford 333, 335, 338, 339. Alsop 266. Alfer 233. Alfrid 484.
Alfag 3, 210, 233, 260. Algar 8, 28, 37, 50, 72, 110. Alselin or Halselin, or
Hanselin 2, Amyas 242, 491, 493. Amys 156, 178. Amundevill 32, 33, 34, 183,
184. -- 186, 187, 331, 370, 506. Ampcotes 402. Amstrudder 394. Anderson 341,
445. Andrews 96, 197, 251, 253, 284, 331, 355, 430, 474, 475. Anglicus 291.
Angevin 42, 97, 255, 369. Anlep 353. Antwysell 7. Or Entwisell 494. Angot 369.
Annesley 38, 43, 65, 97, 99, 101. -- 115, 125, 221, 222, 228, 234, 238, 241,
249, 251, 252, 253, 254, 255, 257, 265, 268, 270, 281, 286, 28^, 308, 322, 415,
4^8, 506. Anneslow 498. Apsley 79. Arden 381, 392, 393. Apleby 343, 344, 414,
483. Applesthorp 415. Arre 285, 295. Armstrong 26, 29, 31, 34, 38, 39. -- 119,
140, 221, 222. Armine 101, 192, 333. Ashby 213, 216.


The INDEX of the Names of Persons.
A
AAron 255. Abrincis or Auerenge 133, 134, 450. Ablot 393. Abbat 5, 18, 145,
213. Abdy 415. Abys 193. Acadus 488. Acclum 184. Acland 30, 31. Adwik 444.
Adderley 277, 298, 493. Adelington 303, 146. Adys 182. Adam 168. Adham 471,
472. Addy 388. Albani 38, 72, 113, 114, 115. -- 156, 187, 195, 277, 325, 363,
368, 379, 380. Albamarle 489. Adeluuel 463. De Albin 20. Allestre 153, 491.
Allot 482, 503. Almton 348, 372, 373. Alchill 244, 453. Alexander 135, 168.
Aldham 476. Alneto 73, 111, 124, 125, 190. Alford 333, 335, 338, 339. Alsop
266. Alfer 233. Alfrid 484. Alfag 3, 210, 233, 260. Algar 8, 28, 37, 50, 72,
110. Alselin or Halselin, or Hanselin 2, 145, 146, 147, 279, 280. -- 283, 341,
347, 372, 373, 377, 440, 488, 506. Almaine 424. Aluric 209, 216, 219, 220, 233,
244, 260, 262, 278, 282, 296, 323, 329, 363, 475. Alvey 120, 121, 154, 293,
319, 335. Alweys 309. Amyas 242, 491, 493. Amys 156, 178. Amundevill 32, 33,
34, 183, 184. -- 186, 187, 331, 370, 506. Ampcotes 402. Amstrudder 394.
Anderson 341, 445. Andrews 96, 197, 251, 253, 284, 331, 355, 430, 474, 475.
Anglicus 291. Angevin 42, 97, 255, 369. Anlep 353. Antwysell 7. Or Entwisell
494. Angot 369. Annesley 38, 43, 65, 97, 99, 101. -- 115, 125, 221, 222, 228,
234, 238, 241, 249, 251, 252, 253, 254, 255, 257, 265, 268, 270, 281, 286, 28^,
308, 322, 415, 4^8, 506. Anneslow 498. Apsley 79. Arden 381, 392, 393. Apleby
343, 344, 414, 483. Applesthorp 415. Arre 285, 295. Armstrong 26, 29, 31, 34,
38, 39. -- 119, 140, 221, 222. Armine 101, 192, 333. Ashby 213, 216. Ascough
93, 105, 230, 234, 243, 244, 245. -- 246, 298, 301, 386, 390. Askam 353. Asgill
247. Asseballoks 157. Aslacton 3, 40, 85, 123, 136, 137, 138. -- 143, 169, 171,
255, 280, 291, 303, 307, 442. Aslacby 169. Aston 7, 19, 20, 158, 190, 297, 413.
Ashton 257, 298, 350, 393, 421, 480, 485. Astlyn 320. Alton 497, 498. -- 500.
Athorpe 499. Atkin 479. Atkinson 196, 201, 221, 308, 481, 482. Arnall 121, 123,
124. -- 128, 209, 220, 235, 236, 291, 335, 383. Arnald 39, 172, 180, 237, 240,
276. Audeley or Alditheley 53, 80, 81, 114, 185. Avenell 218, 220, 450, 488.
Aldric 207. Aylric 171, 231, 239, 247, 447. Aylston 33. Aylward or Elward 285,
361. Ayloff 129, 130. Aylesbury 12, 100, 101, 149. Ailesford 44, 300. Alyn 193,
237. Aluuin 2, 210, 238, 244, 313, 400, 492. Alewin 233. Alden 4, B. 39, 95,
195, 216, 244, 282, 290, 299, 329, 342, 353, 354. -- Algod 233. Azor 2, 42, 49,
75, 102, 209, 254, 475. Alsi or Elsi 167, 361. Achard or Agard 27, 86, 236,
259, 389, 481. Almar or Elmar 242, 361, 362. Aldeburgh 241, 507. Alwold 366.
Alured 41, 180. Aldred 230. Augi or Ewe Earls 3, 33. Archill 413, 416.
Archbishop of York 2. Archer 169, 185, 235, 344. Arches 5, 83, 362, 388, 400,
401. -- 407, 446, 451. Avetson 8. Averham 328, Alfreton or Fitz-Ranulph or the
Sheriff 18, 40, 64, 81, 101. -- 242, 245, 270, 302, 363, 385, 387, 388, 419,
435, 461, 483, 505. Attebarre 317, 318. Attemilne 26. Attebek 185. Asteley 33,
271. Ashmole 57. Ashwell 101, 186, 308. Attebrig 105, 318. Akworth 105.
Arundell 115, 144, 318, 421, 489, 494. Ashley 115, 443. Aufeild 119. Auvington
or Alverton 156. Ausger 165. Arnegrim 168. Armegri 172. Agemund 192. Algarthorp
234. Attewode 241. Attecarre ibid. Aldesworth 244. Agarston 250. Aungevin 297.
Athelstan 313. Aquila 338, 339. Arnewi 368, 406, 426. Aukeland 412. Aldewark
415. Aunger 426. Arkep ibid. Apuleia 430. Audreby 472.
B
Bacon 372, 438. Batcheler 372. Baddeford 300. Bache 250. Bausaw 249. Berhis
ibid. Balok 216. Bales 192, 416. Baldok 170. Banes 319. Bardelby 170. Barde
383. Batherick 353. Baumburgh 170. Balde 476. Bakewell 331, 492. Baker 133,
244. -- 439, 484. Bardsey 75. Barionas 54. Barlow 4, 45, 46, 48, 270, 285, 458.
Baxter 4, 204. Baynby 390. Odo Bayon Bishop 2, 127, 184, 185. Babington 9, 10,
12, 26, 30, 31, 66, 67, 87, 93, 95, 100, 101, 129, 130, 151, 153, 154, 185,
192, 198, 205, 206, 207, 209, 236, 238, 262, 269, 370, 281, 298, 301, 305, 323,
324, 350, 364, 383, 392. -- 394, 398, 404, 414, 437, 438, 443, 445, 494.
Bachepuz 23, 223, 274, 362, 450. Bagot 119, 142, 464. Baggesoure 416, 418.
Balgge 383. Badlesmere 103, 115, 116, 198. Balding 389. Bale 380. Ballard 94,
196, 319. Baliol 144, 241, 264. Baling 313. Baieux 189, 381, 382. Baldric 442.
Babthorp 237, 285. Barra 347. Barber 296, 474. Barkworth 32, 134, 189, 381,
382. Barry of Teversalt 239, 254, 255, 268, 269. -- 341, 450. Barry of
Torlaston 3, 33, 41, 42, 43, 49, 71, 84, 85. -- 123, 181, 190, 198, 326, 327.
Bardolf 24, 44, 63, 119, 127, 147, 207, 279, 280. -- 282, 289, 321, 341, 368,
371, 375, 377, 391, 397, 398, 489. Barthorp 390. Barum 333. Barrett 118. --
136, 157, 158, 298, 332, 477. Barnetby 429. Bamfeild 314. Banaster 8, 173, 260,
261, 351, 413. Banning 87. Barton 51, 254, 263, 265, 296, 331, 347, 349, 350,
355. Barsham 316. Basage 280, 281, 325. Baseford 218, 233, 234. Basingburne
149, 150, 253, 477. Basingham 180. Basset 7, 8, 13, 14, 30, 38, 80, 83, 101,
114, 127, 190, 208, 297, 313, 373, 451. Basset of Drayton 9, 11, 12, 20, 65,
80. -- 100, 101, 300. Basset of Fledburgh 189, 195, 196, 324, 327, 328, 363,
365. -- 372, 395, 406. Basily 64, 92, 93. -- 145, 297. Barneby 314, 394, 471,
472, 475, 476. Barneston 81, 98, 99. Berridge 389. Bernardiston 420. Bernars
266. Barnak 241, 243, 261, 262, 283, 300, 354, 457. Baynam 230, 231.
Baskerville 431. Basing 380. Bateman 219. Bathesworth 11. Battle or Batheley
309, 332, 348, 349. Barkby 11. Barkeley 8, 38, 184, 208, 502. Barker 406, 413,
446, 450. Bailey 100, 101. Baynbrigg 11, 19. Baxenden 430. Beauchamp 80, 115,
210, 236, 264, 393, 431, 440, 455, 458. Bedik 474. Beddingfeild 391, 392.
Belloprato 285. Beale 126. Bean 75, 140, 154. Beaumont 42, 87, 94, 110, 111,
118, 236, 242, 253, 257, 279, 280. -- 282, 283, 289, 310, 316, 344, 365, 367,
388, 389, 418. Beaurepayt 241. Beardmore 235. Beardsall 445. Beauleu 52, and
Bellaaqua 111, 190, 235, 237, 244, 286, 287, 302, 314, 315, 317, 320, 321. --
333, 334, 341, 368, 369, 390. Bedewynde 167. Bell 98, 335. Beedam 376. Bec 64,
100, 124, 204, 272, 281. Bekard 352. Becket 138. Beckingham 112, 178, 396, 421,
422, 423, 480. Bedell 335. Beckeford 210. Bellamy 386, 390, 394, 396. Bellasis
198, 350, 474. Bellingeham 130. Bekering 30, 31, 144, 176, 177, 289, 290, 337,
377, 381. -- 382, 387, 420, 421, 439. Belmes 255, 256. Bellers 19, 40, 44, 63,
130, 181, 252, 283, 300, 354. Beltoft 399, 422. Belyald 385, 386. Bellard 117,
145. Bellowe 42, 126, 135, 176, 191, 192, 380, 428, 445, 463. Belet 119, 127.
Belwode 352, 423, 429. Belesby 63, 136. Bellafago 158, 286, 288, 289, 302, 450.
Bernard 221, 223, 296. Bereford 25, 295, 424. Bercoche 415. Bear 277, 393, 423.
Berg 33. Berevile 303. Bendish 28. Benwalet 345. Berisford 45, 47, 355, 372.
Bermingham 264. Berwyk 8, 157, 287, 291, 294, 305. Benet 168, 296, 320, 368.
Bertram 71, 113, 144, 263. Bette 406, 420. Bethel 204. Bevercotes 76, 77, 270,
340, 341, 260, 378, 399, 437, 441. -- 442, 445, 473, 484, 485. Beverley 499.
Beringworth 482. Beningworth 27, 184. Besthorp 341, 342, 408. Beston 210, 320,
497, 498. Billingsley 317. Best 51, 269. Billing 44, 150, 257. Billidge 126.
Bigg or Bugg 3, 23, 24, 27, 35, 42, 63, 77, 79, 144, 145, 166, 221, 222, 492.
Bilby 475. Bugo 181, 185, 278. Bigot 126, 135, 424, 445, 463. Billesfeild 319.
Billingay 318. Bilbourgh 231. Bigland 28, 499. Biley 209, 243. Bingham 23, 24,
30, 31, 34, 66, 71, 72, 83, 93, 100, 118, 120, 122, 125. -- 143, 144. -- 145,
153, 165, 166, 167, 171, 180, 221, 222, 243, 246, 259, 277, 289, 290, 327, 342,
348, 351, 352, 364, 382, 390, 401, 402, 415, 418, 419, 420, 492, 493, 500. Bing
481. Bingley 474, 475. Birkin 279, 373, 374. -- 375, 505. Birch 418, 421.
Bildeswath 410. Birchwood 209. Bird 26. Biset 114, 146, 149. -- 150, 206, 288,
303, 338, 339, 477. Bishop 213. Blackwell 101, 244, 273, 276, 407, 483. Blake
26, 126, 257, 481. Bland 249, 250, 401, 402, 418. Blaknall 400. Blackbourne
319. Blacman 307. Blanchard 177. Blayney 496, 500. Blyth 142, 220, 235, 395,
464, 472, 497, 498. Blitheworth 309. Blyton 295, 341, 353. Blodworth 142.
Blount or Blund 38, 55, 318, 324. Blundel 464. Bluet 38, 337, 438. Blundesden
285, 439. Boiville 82, 86, 117, 122, 145. Bold 291. Bolles 8, 210, 238, 253,
254, 271, 320, 461, 462, 463. Boney 33, 43, 49, 51, 205, 218, 488. Bonner 426.
Bows 229, 274, 277. Boues 14, 28, 29, 31, 33, 244* Boniton 7, 8, 9, 26, 86.
Boni 217. Bosom 114, 117, 119, 124, 128. -- 130, 137, 166, 167, 169, 172, 178,
198, 228, 390, 485. Brailesford Braybrook 101, 149, 151, 184. Braytoft 72, 393,
46^. Breydeston 191, 243. Bradburne 50, 399, 441. Bradmere 46, 49. Bradley 350,
421. Brackenbury 350. Bradwar 33. Bradford 478. Brabazon 149, 150, 207, 436.
Brauncepath 387. Braunston 117. Bray 87, 186, 189, 210, 326, 364, 381, 432,
498, 500. Bramcote 209. Brand 155, 158, 163, 166, 209, 210, 344. Brandreth 125.
Bracebrigg 444. Bradshaw 16. Breant 419. Bret 12, 80. -- 99, 100, 101. -- 149,
153, 193, 206, 254, 270, 274, 288, 350, 398, 444, 445, 446, 469. Brereton 335.
Bretel 133, 287. Brettevile 180, 190. Breton or Briton 31, 78, 175, 209, 218,
247, 249, 252, 254, 255, 256, 262, 265, 268, 270, 289, 290, 390, 426, 506.
Bredon 125. Brightman 498, 500. Brige 249, 250, 410, 426. Bryd 270, 271, 407,
447. Bridsale 122, 195, 196. Bridgeford 333, 334, 335. Bridges 499.
Bridelington 314. Brikesard 260, 261. Brinkle 145, 185. Brinsley or Brunnesley
79, 217, 247, 248. -- 249, 250, 282. Brixi 475. Brimscall 369. Brinley 269.
Brudenell 184. Briewer 24, 29, 62, 207, 209, 229, 256, 275, 276, 435, 489.
Bruere 169. Brewerne 63, 64. Broc 234, 252. Broke 404, 496. Brocock 122, 128.
Brodey 33. Brodhurst 335. Brokesby 118, 138, 142, 157, 166, 194, 355, 482.
Brookman 129, 130. Bromford 32, 33. Brom 123, 125, 261, 317, 341, 342, 355.
Bromley 14 Brokelsby 146. Broughton 83, 157, 159, 290, 362, 368, 374, 376, 380,
404, 414, 484. Brown 198, 217, 247, 278, 294, 327, 328, 331, 340, 341, 349,
394, 405, 410, 413, 423, 439, 475, 477. Broxholme 42, 176, 191, 430. Broxtow
232, 233, 243, 244, 2^5, 390. Brunsell 121, 125. Bruntz 119. Brun 180, 193,
229, 247. Brus 103, 407. Bolebek 291. Bulby 123. Bulmer 313. Bulloke 476.
Burdet 14, 19, 20, 94. Burdon 87, 176, 336, 337. -- 339, 340, 353, 378, 380,
387, 414, 425, 434, 438, 439, 473, 477, 484. Butley 115, 272, 493. Burnell 171,
176, 336, 321, 428. Burgh 3, 184, 198, 221, 264, 279, 288, 321.322, 327, 328,
365, 382, 389. -- 397, 398, 407, 408, 418, 419, 484. Burgess 274, 461, Burgon
420. Burton 40, 92, 137, 146, 154, 199, 277, 281, 285, 286, 287, 288, 295, 308,
379, 476, 493. Butler of Hockerton 332, 333. -- 345, 369. Butler of Werington,
or Crophill 77, 96. -- 261, 262, 269, 296. Butler 24, 26, 79, 94, 110, 129,
133, 136, 150, 179, 185, 248, 268, 281, 282, 294, 315, 385, 391, 414, 455, 458.
Butteto^t 369, 446. Butcher 446. Byron 2, 28, 29, 30, 53, 55, 64, 79, 82, 93,
94, 95, 101, 158, 172, 198, 218, 230, 231, 235, 247, 250, 256, 257, 259, 260,
261. -- 277, 278, 298, 327, 328, 329, 340, 355, 372, 373, 383, 406, 440, 471,
488, 489, 506. Bussy 53, 55, 114, 115, 158, 171, 172, 173, 177, 181, 183, 184.
-- 186, 187, 191, 193, 195, 261, 262, 269, 343, 344, 365, 392, 394, 401, 402,
404, 406, 439. Bohun E. of Hereford 103, 236, 329, 340, 376. Bohun of Midherst
318. Bohun of Nottingham and Hockerton 122, 127, 246, 291, 335. -- 478, 493.
Bucke 467, 480. Bucton or Boughton 45, 211, 336, 410, 413, 438, 439.
Buggethorpe 407, 471, 472. Bursfall or Bristow 123, 173, 190, 285, 295, 307,
309, 325, 342, 369, 460. Busli 2, 82, 112, 235, 288, 332, 439, 440, 473, 488.
Biyonden 325. Byern 11, 429, 431, 472. Byfeild 123, 234. Bosco or Bois 18, 20,
63, 254, 268, 378, 429. Bobi 377, 489. Bothomsell 176, 385. Bordiney 18.
Bourchier 147, 236, 283, 340, 354, 392, 394. Bolton 29, 418. Bochart 38, 220,
Bouchevaler 146. Buxam 39, 307. Bougham 51. Both 53, 55, 57, 217, 262, 316,
390, 420, 426, 482. Bond 66. Boselingthorpe 417, 444. Bosvile 68, 69, 178. --
194, 386, 388, 392, 394, 414, 474. Bromestere 72. Bromehead 415, 419, 421, 426.
Bude 78. Bending 81. Brikesard 82. Botereux 332. Botery 98, 223. Botale 493.
Botelesford 99, 168. Bower 481. Bowyt 101, 290, 321, 322. Bowdon 125. Boil
394, 415. Belver 136, 349. Bekwith 447. Burneton 158. Bythelane 168. Botild
185. Brownelow 185, 430, 485. Borell 193. Bull 25, 444. Buller 192. Bentley
199, 406. Boston 199. Bowman 201, 334. Burrowes 212. Brodebent 212. Bowyer 220,
386, 390, 466. Burgunville 235, 246. Bothweyt 249. Bucley 253, 294. Bourne 259,
431. Bramton 270. Briminton 270. Bolingbroke 274, 360, 396, 399, 485.
Bykerstaff 295. Butterworth 320. Brambelle 324. Bulstrode 324. Byrksheved 360.
Birker 369, 372, 386, 479. Birne 369, 394. Bunby 369, 414. Bozale 379. Bodenden
383. Breretwisel 399. Bolore 407. Bolling 407. Bolleshoure 406, 450. Bowly 409.
Buckbert 426. Bursdale 494.
C
Cabald 240. Cabivin 114. Callis 51, 221. Cape 331. Cade 159, 164, 259, 298,
361. Caily or Kaili 187. Cagy 195. Caisneto or Cheney 30, 31, 33, 75, 104, 119,
120, 144, 146, 188, 256, 289, 290, 303, 367, 368, 382. Chesneduyt 326. Callow
93. Calswein 291. Camvill 195, 433. Campion 493. Came 157, 159, 204, 369, 372,
383. Cambden Viscount 102. Cantelupe 191, 233, 239. -- 242, 243.250, 291, 378.
Canwyke 154. Capella 124, 128, 229, 230, 242, 267, 297, 310, 368, 369, 406,
449. Capell 240, 242, 243. Capendale 55. Capstoke 462, 479. Caltoft 12, 80,
100, 101, 108, 149. -- 151, 153, 198, 364. Calton 415, 420, 423. Carewell 411.
Car or Ker 178, 396, 421, 474. Cardoil 24. Caruell 348. Carell 292. Carleton
180, 280, 369, 464, 466, 467. Cardinal 350, 380. Carnhill 422. Catstine 426.
Carpentar 146, 149, 150, 302, 303, 317. Cartwright 87, 95, 138, 155, 159, 166,
185, 291, 317, 319, 320, 323, 350, 355. -- 361, 415, 419, 477, 497. Carrier
406. Carter 240. Carey 55, 74, 104, 105, 425. Cave 123, 189, 282, 418, 500.
Castle 471. Castre 387. Caxton 383. Caseley 415. Castilon 345, 388, 389.
Catesby 244. Castledine 120, 140. Cavendish 87, 91, 186, 187, 234, 265, 266,
267, 412, 455, 458, 484. Caschi 475. Catterall 452. Caunton 176, 315, 339, 340,
341, 342, 359, 360, 362, 385. Cawthorne 385. Caworth 406. Campania or Champaign
24, 195, 447. Chause 440. Chawe 318. Chaumpneys 169, 463. Camera or Chamber 78,
122, 127, 211, 273, 369, 404. Champernon 293. Chamberlain 145, 249, 318, 319,
320, 429, 462. Champion 83, 136. Charun 188, 352, 359, 360. Chaceport 326.
Chaddesden 241. Chadworth 414. Chadwick 293, 475. Chapman 340, 385, 425, 481.
Chapel 273, 368, 376, 481. Chaplan 232, 276. Challon or Jalland 117, 120, 40,
142, 482. Challoner 425, 426, 475, 477. Charnels 124, 158, 167. Chastelyn 460,
462. Chalers 396. Chatterton 447. Chaterley 390. Chauntry 309. Chaundos 252.
Chaurcis or Chaworth 12, 25, 26, 29, 64, 68, 80, 81, 96, 98, 100, 101. -- 103,
105, 107, 108, 115, 125, 130, 136, 149, 151, 153, 187, 192, 193, 198, 213, 214,
242, 253, 259, 261, 262, 270, 277, 290, 292, 295, 296, 300, 321, 322, 346, 363,
364, 366, 395, 399, 400, 405, 418, 422, 426, 457, 461, 472, 476, 477, 478, 480,
483. Charleton 85, 207, 211, 219, 355, 498. Charles 261. Charer 247. Chauncy
397. -- 480. Chaunny 255. Chauencurt 250. Chauomer 249. Child 96. Childers
361, 413, 430. Camoys 371, 452. Chetelberne 397. Chirden 425. Cholmeley 404.
Cauz 80, 147, 155, 193, 218, 260, 279, 302, 373, 374. -- 375, 377, 453, 489,
505. Celer 379. Cecill 84, 115, 116, 197, 384. Chamberlain 14. Chesterfeild
241, 257, 315, 379. Chesterfeild Earls 147, 282. Chester Earls 2, 4, 150, 489.
Chevrecourt 28, 286, 287, 385, 444, 463, 464, 465. -- 473. Chester Constables
10, 28, 149, 206, 336, 338. -- 364, 372, 470. Chetewinde 295. Chig 370. Clare
Earls 147, 290, 379. Clare 317, 338, 339. Claron 464, 473. Clay 5, 117, 271,
412, 425, 479. Claipole 171. Clayton 260, 261, 317, 352. Clerfay 338, 469, 470.
Clermont 474. Cliffe 117, 309, 402, 425. Clyvedon 318. Clifton 31, 192, 283,
351, 354, 430, 489. Clifton of Clifton 5, 12, 14, 19, 41, 42, 43, 44, 51, 53.
-- 66, 72, 74, 76. -- 77, 82, 87, 98, 147, 148, 172, 180, 186, 205, 221, 222,
233, 237, 250, 251, 261, 271.283, 352, 354, 362, 363, 371, 392, 393, 394, 409,
417, 443, 460, 466, 468, 472, 474, 493. Clarell 68, 69, 314, 350, 352, 403,
431. Clarges 318. Clark 30, 70, 92, 117, 194, 212, 219, 267, 268, 281, 293,
325, 326, 340, 361, 372, 374, 376, 388, 394, 405, 407, 408, 413, 415, 418, 422,
428, 482. Clifford 3, 53, 55, 76, 167, 193, 195, 257, 279, 280, 290, 295, 424,
440, 442. Clinton 68, 340, 389, 453. Clarkson 273, 335, 378. -- 386, 418, 439,
441, 471. Clement 187. Cludd 237, 317. Clyde 285. Clyderhowe 479. Clumber 463.
Clapham 402. Clopton 128, 438. Claxton 118, 151, 298, 350. Cob 405. Cobham 279,
280, 328, 389. Collet 6, 265. Coleby 130, 221, 223, 482. Cockfeild 51, 192,
217, 233, 235, 245. -- 249, 301, 397, 398. Codyngton 186. Cok 7, 8, 98, 307,
397. Cox 217, 248. Coleman 6. Cole 97, 267. Coke 5, 11, 142, 148, 240, 260,
266, 288, 310, 318, 335, 342, 372, 386, 390, 408, 474. Cokesey Coe 485.
Coventrey 435. Cokein 147, 277, 481. Coyney 462. Cogan 430. Colegrim 165.
Colston or Kercolston 97, 123, 124, 146, 166, 303, 309. Collum 396. Colwick 34,
35, 49, 191, 261, 262, 278. Comberton 460. Comberford 401, 402. Comin 260, 261,
272, 388, 389. Colton 414. Colt 94, 396. Columbell 6, 12, 38, 39, 212, 238,
249, 250, 297, 462. Colyngworth 447. Collingham 180, 190, 195, 363, 426.
Compton 101, 174, 175, 181. -- 192, 455, 458. Colishull 468. Coly 339, 441,
482, 484. Colier 220, 259, 497, 506. Congham 168. Conyers 68, 196, 264, 266,
429, 430. Cony 178, 184, 327, 328. Constable 53, 55, 57, 60, 75, 197, 322, 338,
349, 401, 402, 441. Conyngston 350, 351. Constentin 51, 261, 262. Constanciis
384. Cordon 32. Coringham 430. Cope 101, 108, 364. Cordus 451. Corbet 294.
Cordell 128. Cooper 79, 147, 148, 268, 296, 305. -- 308, 309, 320, 327, 328,
344, 369, 374, 426. Coombe 503. Copley 67, 68. -- 69, 233, 234, 400. Cophouse
330, Coppinger 174, 320. Cosby 26. Cosen 362, 372. Coppindale 16. Cotton 13,
34, 79, 145, 175, 179, 181, 269, 346, 394, 412, 414, 423, 455, 480. Cotes 393,
451, 503. Cottam 390, 418. Cotgrave 99, 497. Cornwallis 485. Corbin 464. Cortin
126. Cornwall 50, 342. Cray 291. Cranewell 155. Cradeley 11. Craven 447.
Crawshaw 493, 494. Cranmer 43, 92, 93, 95, 138. -- 142.143, 181, 169, 355, 356.
Crevequeur 213, 214. Cressover 146, 308, 309, 317, 425. Cressy 52, 54, 72, 93,
94, 175, 176, 195, 238, 241, 242, 243, 249, 251, 270, 322, 330, 331, 337, 362,
385, 386, 387, 396, 465, 467, 468. -- 469. -- 470, 471, 472, 474, 475, 503.
Crew 184. Creon 83, 174. Crec 472. Crepping 507. Crisp 30. Criol vide Kiriell
Cromwell 14, 29, 39, 44, 54, 68, 69, 110, 111, 129, 130, 192, 198, 233, 235,
236, 244, 257, 259, 262, 277, 282, 283, 285, 291, 299, 305, 309, 349, 351, 352,
354. -- 381, 382, 390, 392, 393, 410, 412, 440, 477, 480, 482, 506. Crophill 6,
7, 236, 284, 325, 404, 493. Crofts 387, 416. Cropley 167. Crok 137, 171.
Crosland 79, 98. Cross 425. Culy 124, 297, 298, 392, 393. Crosdale 475.
Cukeney 448. -- Culpeper 43, 184, 260, 261. Cudworth 499. Cumberworth 441.
Curson 50, 70, 181, 192, 207, 217, 253, 258, 287, 301, 331, 489. Curtis 257,
348, 426. Cundi 195, 368, 370. Costock or Curtingstok 28, 29, 30, 33, 82, 220.
Cossard 466, 477. Cost 256, 448. Cossale 216, 228, 244, 247, 262. Cutiler 195.
Cutts 247, 399, 404. Crouch 335. Cruce 143. Croxton 210, 340, 506. Cryche 255,
334. -- 335, 333. Crouer 268. Cressewell 296, 451. Custans 299. Coventre 348.
Coverham 359, 360.
D
D'ancaster 435. Dayntry 430. Damyot 429. Dams 423. Dammartin 370, 388.
Damysell 325. Dalston 289. Dagworth 272. Damory 252, 279. Danvers 241. Daft
210, 234. Dallington 158. Dennys 136, 142. Dacres 104, 455, 458, 466. Dautre
382. Day 77, 240. Dale 77. Daltpart ibid. Dalton 468. Damport 12, 212, 441,
498. Daniel 361, 362, 399, 427. Daincourt 2, 33, 69, 73, 74, 88, 92, 100, 101,
104, 105, 110, 111. -- 134, 137, 144, 150, 153, 156, 177, 190, 206, 241, 255,
270, 283, 286, 295, 298, 302, 303, 305, 307, 321, 323, 334, 341, 342, 343. --
349, 354, 382, 400, 404, 451. Daivile or Deivile 171, 187, 190, 212, 262, 263,
341, 342, 366, 374. -- 377, 379, 403, 404, 415, 427, 430, 434. Davidvill 256.
Danby 40, 186, 421. Dand 273. Dane 363. Dawney 423, 424. Dawson 423, 425, 430,
475, 481. Darby 50, 117. Darbyshire 472. Darcy 9, 221, 263, 264. -- 265, 266,
269, 327, 328, 417, 423, 427, 471, 472, 479, 485. Darleton 205. Darling 5, 6,
362. D'aubeney 7, 133, 156, 165, 175, 176, 183, 193, 196, 278, 337, 419, 438,
440, 480. Dawes 318, 413. D'avenant 27. Dabridgecourt 221, 222, 355. Dean 302,
415. Denman 274, 396, 401, 402, 409, 413, 429, 482, 485. Depeden 173. Denham
100, 485. Denny 293 Delves 96, 151, 207, 211. Denton 477, 480. Denzill 443.
Derley 33, 38, 249. Del Hulle 243, 276. De la Hay 175, 259, 369. De la Pole 5,
236, 259, 270, 361, 379, 419, 424. De la War 464. De la Rode 237 De la Laund
50, 112, 211, 413. De la Vache 258, 272. De l' Hou 166, 171, 180. Del Held 249.
Despenser 20, 38, 104, 115, 116, 170, 180, 277, 293, 336, 437, 440, 455, 456,
464, 473, 478, 483. Deisney 136, 157, 158, 162, 164, 174, 183, 187, 194, 238.
Dekne 180. Dethick 10, 45, 50, 207, 220, 255, 274, 305, 351, 365, 417. Devereux
24, 404. Devenishe 425. Devyn 128, 172. Diddesworth 40. Dichfeild 219. Digby
53, 94, 167, 273, 274, 291, 298, 319, 392, 394, 401, 402, 414. Dighton 245,
462. Dixie 5, 251. Deresburg 307. Dickens 418, 421. Dive 18, 19, 20, 171, 183,
184, 185, 187, 191, 217, 265. Dixson 45, 300. Dogode 417. Dormer 154. Doyle
348. Dofaire 304. Dodington 35, 51. Dodson 319. Draicote 26, 494. Draiton 388,
428. Dobson 386, 388, 389, 477. Draxe 267. Doble 79. Dod 27. Draper 20, 98,
129, 130, 133. -- 140, 390, 414, 421. Dryby 354. Drewell 324. Dudley 7, 105,
361, 369, 429. Drew 426, 481. Dugdale 14, 57, 289, 498. Die 471. Digges 54.
Ducket 75, 282. Drury 76, 77, 217. Dickinson 166, 319, 374, 420, 430. Durant
170, 288, 299, 361. Dymock 193, 196, 350, 413. Dynington 422. Dumine 206.
Dunning 361. Downeinge 217, 257, 342, 422. Done 269. Dogmarfeild 270, 462.
Drinkurt 270, 473. Durford Lord Duras 280. Duffeild 281. Dunstan 281, 386, 463.
Dryby 283. Dunkling 295. Dunham 295, 321, 322, 334, 365. Douglasse 353.
Dodimore 376. Dou^eby 378. Dorrell 401, 402, 482. Donnell 420, 429. Dynham 461.
Dobyn 484. Dokerel 485.
E
Earl 5b. 6a. 191, 192, 259, 366, 387. Edric 362. Eaton 45, 74, 173, 244, 317,
393, 396, 399, 414, 415. Eboraco 191. Eland 64, 92, 93, 234, 235, 297, 479. Ely
191. Else 168, 266, 309, 342, 374, 375, 389, 414, 423, 478, 482, 502. Eltoft
119. Etton 374, 375. Elwick 430. Eckinfeild 267. Erchin 220. Erneys 186.
Everard 169. Everingham 24, 145, 186, 279, 280, 281, 282, 341, 347, 349, 352,
373, 374. -- 375, 377, 379, 380, 382, 390, 393, 405, 411, 413, 414, 418, 469,
505. Eurion 204. Evermue 173, 187. Eyr 5b. 53, 55, 62, 270, 323, 392, 394, 395,
429, 462. -- 474, 475, 477. Echebrand 368. Elkin 318, 503. Elloll 269.
Eltonhead 481. Elton 253, 404, 418, 420. Elston or Aylston 172, 173, 177. Edri
370. Eykring 368, 369, 370, 433. Empringham 330. Enderby 119. Engaine 100, 155.
Elcock 470. Elwais 422, 444, 445, 484, East 374. Estwait 237, 249, 379, 412,
413. Elsi 2, 31, 84, 167, 293, 453. Elsam 413. Estan 31. Eston 5, 20, 454.
Esthorp 415. Esseburne 216. Estchurch 51. Esshe 346. Elrington 5b. Eliot 374,
481. Elric 260. Ekleshale 7. Edlington 430. Eccleston 211. Entwysell or
Antwysell 7, 494. Elkesley 445. Emerson 229, 425, 431, 479. Eadmonson 12.
Easdale 497. Egerton 221, 222, 232. Elvod 13, 297. Elward 361. Edenstow 262,
314, 348, 418, 436, 449. Edmonds 16. Edensoure 289. Erwin 34, 206, 216, 299,
351, 413, 484. Esquier 285. Elwin 34, 362, 461. Erleshawe 34. Ellershawe 42,
69. Ellesfeld 44. Eschaud 51, 52, 103. Eschaler 441. Egioke 55, 61, 74, 188.
Empson 76, 87, 324. Evelin 87. Elingham 105, 219, 223. Espec 114, 115. -- 453.
Essewellethorpe 168. Evers 212, 213, 268. Exton 348.
F
Fader 135. Fairwell 499. Farewath 478. Fane 212, 213, 347. Fancourt 73, 75,
83, 123, 124, 134, 303. Faunt 325, 327, 328. Falconer 9, 179, 201, 440. Faueley
268. Fastolf 104. Farceux 429. Farborne 75. Fawcet 347. Fairfax 105, 241, 348,
365, 374, 479. Farington 320, 500. Farndon 248. Feilding 78. Felton 339. Fenton
95, 394, 406, 415. -- 420, 462, 479. Ferrers 2, 6, 23, 34, 63, 94, 97, 144,
237, 266, 273, 343, 448, 488, 489. Feuere 277. Ferrour 238. Fenepar 95.
Fitz-Albred 506. Fitz-Ertald 50, 343. Fitz-Herbert 8, 14, 23, 34, 39, 50, 74,
167, 232, 233, 249, 270, 343, 344, 420. Fitz-William 2, 3, 6, 22, 232.
Fitz-Jordan 377, 378, 380, 435, 446. Fitz-Aman 231, 300. Fitz-Nicolas 88, 345,
388, 489. Fitz-Nigell 18. Fitz-Otes 317, 489. Fitz-Hubert 2, 39, 41, 43, 49,
52, 110, 205, 206, 248, 262, 303, 488. Fitz-Raph 43, 127, 206, 239, 250, 342,
345, 377, 378, 434, 480. Fitz Roger 229, 506. Fitz-Baldric 2, 165, 447, 488.
Fitz-Stephen 80, 206, 373, 374, 375, 505. Fitz-Simon (de Kyme) 442, 448, 449,
451. Fitz-Richard 2, 98, 110, 506. Fitz-Robert 454. Fitz-James 355. Fitzhugh
104, 198, 222, 264, 289, 346, 367, 444, 465. -- 466 Fitz-John 336, 338, 372,
473. Fitz-Randolph 259, 265, 266. -- 267. Fitz-Roy 502. Fitz-Reyner 506.
Fitz-Warin 147, 392, 394, 464. Fitz-Geoffrey 455, 456. Fitz-Osbert 41, 318.
Fitz-Payn 207, 345. Fitz Peter 229, 373, 451, 454. Fitz-Williams 20, 49, 67,
68. -- 87, 108, 138, 141, 186, 198, 210, 233, 245, 261, 262, 283, 327, 330,
339, 346, 353, 354, 366, 385, 411, 412. -- 417, 426, 434, 437, 443, 444, 461,
471, 477, 478, 480. Fitz-Wlviet 506. Fillol 221, 222, 337. Fee 413. Fillingham
5, B. 98. Filton 474. Fiskerton 307. Fish 79. Fisher 42, 318, 331, 350. Finch
53, 54, 57, 76. Fyndern 13. Fingham 404. Finchfeild 30. Fyncham 473. Fleming or
Flandres 32, 198, 218, 411, 413, 445, 447, 449, 478. Flaubergh 181. Fletcher
154, 179, 250, 270, 274, 444, 481. Fleetwood 43. Flamstede 500 Foliot 167, 339,
349, 369, 371. -- 464. Flete 169. Flintham 133, 134, 450. Flower 105, 107, 248,
328, 412. -- 426, 436. Frank 83, 87. Franceis 20, 53, 54, 62, 169, 237, 250,
267, 277, 378, 423, 445. Frankeleyn 42. Frankewell 466. Frane 41, 95, 192, 385.
Frassell 434. Fremund 133, 377, 380, 506. Frer 477. Freman 256, 339, 340, 372,
383. Frevile 221, 222, 282, 288, 289, 354. Fredghis 30, 71, 84, 92, 168.
Freschenede 425. Frescheville 43. -- 46, 49, 55, 66, 138, 187, 207, 251, 270,
443, 449, 477. Fretwell 414, 477. Frognell 141. Folvile 92, 93. Folenfant 332,
434. Foljambe 3^, 74, 76. -- 77, 181, 184, 187, 188, 198, 206, 222, 236, 245,
246, 249, 266, 269, 273, 289, 290, 292, 296, 321, 322, 330, 352, 367, 386, 397,
424. Foulshurst 24, 262. Fowler 429, 479. Foun 188, 189, 229, 230, 297, 360,
381, 382. Fordham 387. Forest 310. Fortescue 257. Forde 258. Foot 248. Foster
183, 344, 369, 383, 428. Forset 335, 422. Fowich 384. Fox 19, 25, 242, 353,
390, 418, 420. Foxcroft 105. Fitton 359, 360. Fowe 431. Furbisher 479. Furmery
211, 212, 268, 379, 393. Furmeston 485. Furneaux 81, 322, 332, 361, 377, 410,
429, 434, 444, 445, 449, 464, 465, 469. Furnivalle 121, 128, 186, 287, 289,
322, 348, 361, 404, 409, 410, 424, 434, 451, 454, 455. -- 456, 457, 460, 462.
Fynes 154, 188, 194, 308, 340, 440, 466. Field 445, 462. Fenys 193, 432, 466.
Fenwick 386. Frape 194. Frop 249. Fulwood 221, 240. Fulthorpe 301. Faukonberg
231, 240, 241, 322, 448, 449. -- 452, 485. Flint 237, 257. Fyncheden 241. Forno
313. Frenger 313. Flaxley 323. Farnham 349. Farneworth 350. Fledbourgh 364.
Frith 369. Friday 372. Fresure 372. Fraser 477. Fetch 388. Farrow 390. Fontibus
435. Freston 444, 481, 482. Fresle 488.
G
Gainsford 429, 469. Gelland 414, 418. Galley 392, 394. Gabatus 390. Gaiton
344. Gamel 313, 370, 397, 426, 477. Garlyk 300, 412, 413. Gaytford 270, 460,
485. Gameleston 205, 42^. Gamelkere 447. Gybon 172, 479. Gamble 173. Garewey
155. Garthorp 102. Garret 79. Gatton 71, 231. Gatesden 326. Gadde 8. Gargrave
412. Guard 33. Garneys 230. Gardener 284, 295, 372, 498, 500. Gascoigne 68, 69,
76, 141. -- 380, 403. -- 404. Gassi 239, 345. Gasgill 30. Gaunt 2, 137, 140,
143, 265, 319, 321, 332, 339, 345, 368, 370, 379, 433, 437. Gaveston 229, 452.
Gauy 170, 173, 177, 178. Gerningham 54, 392, 394. Genevere 263. Gernon 97, 325,
323, 341, 347. Gernet 95, 97, 100, 269. Gelland vide Challon Gerold 7. Gervays
334, 427, 430, 463. Gibthorp 245. Gifford 148, 390, 472, 493. Gelsthorp 85,
142, 192, 244. Gelston 350. Gilbert 217, 266, 305, 380, 445. Gerard 8, 343,
344, 404. Gestling 489. Gilpin 95. Gill 474. Gladwin 31, 211, 220, 250.
Glaseour 429. Gloucester 33, 122, 123, 126, 189, 360. Gledethorp 451. Gilby
390, 404, 421, 426. Glover 248, 252. Glamorgan 42, 49. Glanvill 448. Glay 268,
450, 484. Golhall 174. Glossop 466. Gousell 92, 134, 179, 195, 305, 306. --
322, 325, 442, 448, 451. Gipesmere 309. Glapwell 270. Gourton 125, 309. Gozelin
82, 218, 242, 254. Grant 136, 149. Granger 273, 411. Grange 372. Gratton 241,
248, 249, 251. Gravesend 155. Graver 447. Grant Mesnill 2, 13, 64, 218. Gran
361. Grantham 12, 79, 136, 321, 322, 474, 505. Grays 41^. Graving 351. Green
7, 44, 68, 168, 171, 201, 250, 376, 386, 422, 466. Grenescot 8. Greenhill 256.
Grenehod 216. Gregory 193, 219, 421, 430, 475, 477, 478, 479, 497, 498. -- 500,
504, 505. Grindal 474. Gryngethorp 316. Greaves 173, 201, 342, 347, 469, 498,
500, 502. Greyveson 427, 479. Grendon 6, 26, 81, 469, 483, 484. Grenley 270,
464. Grenehaugh 181, 251, 267, 269. -- Greneham 179, 340, 342, 396. Gresham 75,
98, 344, 376, 474. Greseley 212, 239. -- 265, 345, 483. Greinville 33.
Greenefeild 151. Gibson 372. Gillowe ibid. Grevill 367. Greystok 429, 455. Gray
7, 8, 19, 25, 26, 40, 44, 46, 49; 50; 51, 72, 73, 74. -- 78, 80, 92, 98, 110,
111, 140, 187, 190, 205, 207, 208. -- 211, 221, 222, 226, 232, 237, 241, 257,
262, 285, 290, 300, 301, 315, 362, 374, 377, 387, 389, 425, 455, 465. Grice
136. Griffith 26, 53, 199, 221, 222, 281. Griffin 176, 437, 438. Grimston 40,
145, 430. Gringeley 190, 427. Gross 333. Grimsby 24, 309. Grim 242, 313, 362,
415, 426. Gorram 134. Golding 81. Godly 404. Gurnay 379. Gurdon 472. Golhall
33. Gostwyke 98. Grundy 134, 309, 310. Grunchell 238, 242, 419. Grysacre 460.
Grunchetell 243. Grelley or Gresley 83, 338. Gonaldeston 257, 335. Goniell 153.
Gobion 78, 267. Gobet 318. Godwin 29, 62, 72, 171, 172, 211, 323, 335, 385.
Godeva the Countess 2, 196, 364, 394. Goderville 472. Godard 454. Goda the
Countess 2, 52. Guilford 474. Gull 398. Godric 8, 18, 23, 28, 34, 67, 71, 84,
96, 102, 209, 232, 246, 278, 329, 384, 394, 396, 397, 402, 446, 463, 464, 477,
478. Godeham or Goteham 26, 33, 34, 396. Goodcote 482. Goodhall 63, 335. Giles
362. Gunby 68. Gunston 362. Godeselow 79. Godenoure 92. Gunthorp 126, 134, 308,
315, 316, 319, 320, 324, 383, 386. Gyon 220.
H
Hakthorn 189, 381, 382. Hagh 171, 172, 182, 195, 261, 262, 307. Hamstrelley
157, 158, 162, 173. Haines 142. Hamine 110. Haccham 94, 147. Holford 79. Halys
386, 400. Haford 16, 117, 137. Halloughton 74. Halfhead 194. Hamelyn 220.
Hampton 39. Hamelton 241, 259, 426. Hamond 172, 481, 482. Harold 6, 41.
Hamundesham 429. Haddock 269. Halsey 179, 466. Handley 51, 209, 210. -- 425,
504, 505. Halsham 388, 389. Handelby 136. Handsacr 98, 100. Hanston 142. Hacker
77, 81, 93, 123, 133, 135, 151, 154, 217, 294, 341, 351, 360. Haliwell 95.
Halifax 497. Haldenby 429. Hamstede 10. Hankinson 96. Haneworth 307. Harcourt
19, 69, 116, 230, 271, 293, 294. Hansart 245, 469. Haywood 193. Harestan 73,
177, 187. Hardreshull 406, 419. -- Hardewin 506. Hardewick 25, 182, 187, 234,
267, 270, 455, 458. Hargrave 19. Harington 43, 50, 181, 269, 327, 328, 348,
383, 420. Harteshorne 482. Harpur 50, 84, 87, 126, 135, 305, 326, 384, 420.
Harpham 413. Hartup 84, 340, 378, 400. Harvy 46, 374, 376, 380, 479. Harthill
190, 191, 198, 206, 243, 341. Hartwell 64. Harwar 24. Hasty 327, 328. Hastings
8, 68, 69, 147, 148, 221, 223, 236, 240, 248, 272, 283, 309, 371. -- 377, 388,
389, 405, 406, 420, 431, 437, 455, 458. Henson 83, 96, 125. Hall 29, 64, 119,
129, 135, 154, 157, 306, 318, 327, 328, 372, 390, 404, 423, 430, 478, 481, 499.
Halum 217, 238, 305, 317, 325, 426, 427. Hakun 415. Hasilrig 7. Hasilwood 321,
322, 323. Hawkins. Hascuil 94. Haslaby 385. Haxey 316. Hacunthorpe 242.
Harbotell 359. -- Hauvile 319. Hawson 477. Hawksmore 388, 389, 390, 396.
Hawksworth 127, 136, 156, 171, 428, 446. Hawton or Houton 180, 190, 292, 303,
331, 404. Hayra 369. Hayer 454. Hawburgh 284, 285, 295. Haber 196. Hecche 303.
Heath or At Heath 80, 100, 101, 149, 150, 153, 219, 342. Hebbe 31. Hemmington
29. Henning 185. Hengham Hellaby 472. Hengston 19, 20. Herteford 11, 448, 449.
Helge 78, 143. Henoure 33, 267. Helewis 368, 425. Helyun 158. Hemery 7.
Hemsworth 484. Hemflete 147. Heron 77, 264, 269, 331, 393, 468. Heranville 506.
Heriz of Stapleford 211. -- 212, 218, 488. Hesket 269, 271. Herle 140, 249,
252, 314, 473. Harris 87, 211. Herbert 455, 458. Heriz of Gunnaston 33, 35, 39,
40, 43, 80, 81, 87, 98, 100, 110, 137, 140, 198, 218, 232, 238, 255, 284, 291,
293, 299, 300. -- 488, 506. Heselarton 283. Hilary 73, 187. Hill 423, 426, 462.
Hind 24, 374, 376, 471. Hide 9, 364, 420, 426. Hobel 429. Hollingworth 173,
212, 426, 441. Holland 2, 41, 72, 87, 260, 261, 388, 437, 471. Holt 401, 402,
441. Holdernesse 285. Hollis 147, 233, 234, 353, 398, 423, 439, 443. -- 499.
Holcroft 253. Holyman 497. Hilton 63, 474. Hiltoft 474. Hopton 427. Hilliard
245. Hobby 193, 422. Hobart 432. Hotot or Hotoft 32, 92, 114, 128, 134. -- 146,
155, 158, 307. Hopwelle 493. Hoyes 353. Hopkinson 295, 415. Hopwood 479. Horton
29. Horneby 419. How 81, 104. -- 115. Howes 350. Howson 192. Hough 185. Howton
426, 430, 438, 439. Hou 156, 166, 171, 180. Hothum 68, 147, 148, 229, 305, 346,
401, 402, 404, 422, 449, 452. Horley 415. Hoveringham 92.94, 98, 134, 302, 303,
305, 506. Hutchinson 12, 35, 77, 79. -- 98, 119, 120, 138, 147, 208, 234, 296,
493, 500. Horbury 428. Highlord 219. Hikling 95, 238, 259, 463, 481. Hitchcock
472. Hickman 12, 101, 416, 480. Hicks 219. Holme 41, 42, 86, 87, 94, 154, 333,
348, 349. Holmes 154, 415, 418, 481. Hoge 143, 303, 325. Helgot 218. Hose or
Hussy 27, 33, 128, 133. -- 135, 158, 192, 238, 242, 243, 244, 278, 302, 324,
325, 326, 327, 336, 340, 386, 406. Hoser 478. Hunston 64. Hunt 55, 230, 238,
246, 259, 319, 335. -- 378, 493, 497, 498. Hudson 480. Humlak 207. Huddleston
96, 367, 413, 438. Huntercumbe 291. Hungerford 231. Hundon 211. Hutton 194,
305, 394. Huntindon 114. Huntingfeild 317, 318, 462. Hathersege 305, 306, 307,
343. Haddon 328. Hatton 188, 229. Hatfeild 86, 129. -- 30, 138, 167, 209, 352,
401, 402, 423, 463. Homaz or Humez 74, 207, 208. Howard 229, 435, 455, 458,
502. Hockewold 210. Hodle 157, 169. Hodsak 469. -- Hasard 9, 12, 411. Hokerton
317, 333, 334, 345, 433. Hekham 419. Hanmer 145. Hansby 500. Hayton 406, 408,
411, 425, 429, 430, 463, 481, 482. Haplesthorp 425. Hanson 364. Hatchet 344.
Hauker 9, 10. Harward 427, 445. Hereford 270, 317, 369, 434. Hereward 210.
Herdeby 124, 190, 194, 205. Hedon 78, 79, 205, 242, 325, 395. -- 399, 413, 449.
Heppensall 475. Hegham 285. Heydon 85, 420. Heton 359, 360. Hercy 88, 130, 175,
178, 184, 189, 230, 274, 352, 362, 388, 390, 399, 400, 401. -- 404, 407, 408,
410, 422, 461, 471, 478, 480, 482, 484, 485. Horsepol 304, 308. Hostiarius 2,
209, 216. Holbrooke 159. Horsey 129, 130. Horsfeld 463. Hoppescotes 3. Hobman
201. Harding 210. Harrison 4, 188, 237, 364, 406, 426. Hectredebire 46.
Hodgekinson 201. Hodges 55, 62 Hublat 400. Hutt 67 Hodgeson 421, 423, 481, 498.
Hodgekin 121, 463. Hoggard 404. Howyt 124. Horwood 461. Huwelle 157, 193, 413,
423. Hewyt 166, 386, 387, 418, 461, 483. Helpston 167, 178, 181. Hyrst 190,
439, 450. Holstock 195. Hubaud 213. Huson 292. Hewes 346. Hucca 370. Husband
406, 414.
I
Jake 230, 283, 291, 292. Jenison 197, 204. Janes 105, 119, 269. Jepson 450.
Jenkin 79. Jenkinson 230, 237. Insula 38, 43, 49, 84, 121, 191, 208, 249, 254,
265, 315, 375, 387, 388, 395, 418, 453. Jenyver 482. Jessop 412, 460, 462, 481,
484, 503. Ingham 379, 405, 441, 479. Ingram 178, 277, 282, 295, 483, 493.
Ingulf 368. Iken 427. Ironmonger Ireland 76, 77, 129, 130, 380, 395. Ireton 12.
Jorz 9, 26, 31, 33, 42, 82, 281, 283, 284. -- 291, 292, 295, 320, 325, 333,
395, 435. Jobson 298, 400, 482. Jokin 67. Jones 87, 336, 353, 479. Illingworth
4, 44, 45. -- 47, 147, 253, 257, 264, 265, 410. Ilerton 269. Ireis Inglefeild
272. Ingleby 69, 75, 475. Ingeniator 426. Illing 2. Isham 45, 79. Johnson 51,
92, 126, 201, 209, 342, 350, 369, 439, 444, 462, 484, 485. Jackson 51, 126,
152, 209, 212, 268, 386, 389, 416, 420, 479, 498, 505. Joy 201. Jay 251. Justan
361. Jarvis 427, 430, 463. Judson 475. Jowytson 498.
K
Kay 493. Kirkton 129. -- 130, 137, 157, 160, 161, 166, 169, 289, 290, 378,
445. Killegrew 374, 376. Kniveton 4, 26, 39, 45, 79, 101, 134, 153, 154, 285,
396, 435, 490, 497. Knapton 413. Knight 97, 378, 419, 460. Knaresburgh 496.
Knevet 233, 283, 353, 354. Knodi 475. Kevermond 397, 398. Kitchen 372, 394.
Kyme 3, 216, 231, 232, 234, 235, 240, 290, 299, 370, 496, 497, 498. --
Kellesholt 324, 326, 330. -- 475. Kellet 185. Kelham 122, 188, 307, 324, 325,
326, 329, 330. -- 332, 333, 340, 345, 433, 450. Kempe 230. Kineston 14.
Kingston 443. King 360. Keworth 41, 42, 87, 88, 405, 406, 413. Kebeel 244,
309. Kervile 53, 55. Ken 293. Kendale 98, 120, 351, 414. Kaynes 100. Kiriell
110, 295, 303, 304, 325. Kercheval 117, 120. Kiddall 469. Kilvington 125. Kirk
125, 126, 240, 431. Kinnersley 493, 499. Kynardesey 169. Kirkeby 199, 281, 421.
Kelsterne 204. Karlile 206. Ker 209, 210, 249; 396. Kymmerley 237, 238, 242,
243; 244. Kirkby 248. Kighley 268, 428. Kilkenny 326. Kirnesale 339, 340.
Kidermister 401, 402. Kyneton 468. Kinalton 476.
L
Labrey 296. Lacock 179, 286, 291, 319, 355, 374, 500. Lamley 282. Layton 344.
Lancelene 378, 440. Lacy 2, 11, 66, 73, 97, 137, 150, 193, 338. -- 339, 372,
464. Lane 372, 474. Lanum 352, 360, 367, 393, 409, 410, 480. Landfort 281.
Langford 87, 137, 151, 175, 176, 233, 255, 267, 305, 306, 307, 343. -- 437,
438, 457, 472. Langholt 464. Lamister 348. Lambecote 95, 244. Lake 118, 423.
Lakin 320, 411, 412. Latimer 228, 406, 419, 420, 465, 466. Lathbury 343.
Lawthorp 191. Lathum 64, 101, 108, 242, 363, 498. Laverok 14. Law 201, 380,
420, 474, 480. Laxton or Lexington 145, 189, 260, 262, 315, 316, 325, 326, 327,
333, 340, 347, 359, 360, 363, 364, 366, 369, 375, 378, 380, 381. -- 384, 388,
393, 396, 405, 434, 435, 437, 439, 440, 446. Lawrence 228, 331, 335, 413, 423.
Lascells 154, 173, 174. -- 183, 318, 320.365, 366, 373, 382, 384, 385, 404,
417, 423, 426, 446, 460, 463. Langholme 257. Langham 499. Langley 255, 258,
387, 425, 463. Langwath 194. Langton 9, 171, 210, 263, 265, 266, 285, 425, 436.
Leman 475, 476. Lenton 220. Leonard 186. Leech 40, 172, 238, 247, 270, 420.
Leeson 296. Lee 100, 194, 205, 254, 281, 282, 293, 296, 297, 317, 319, 342,
351, 361, 425, 426. Leigh 253, 321, 322, 334. Ley 210. Leget 26, 394, 404, 415,
431. Leleshanc 254. Lemynge 244, 320. Leke or Leeke 9, 10, 13, 14, 23, 24, 25.
-- 26, 29, 33, 40, 42, 43, 44, 51, 55, 61, 66, 74. -- 77, 86, 92, 94, 97, 120,
129. -- 146, 165, 167, 170, 171, 173, 174, 175, 176, 178, 180, 182, 183, 187,
188, 197, 209, 219, 221, 222, 248, 256, 270, 281, 286, 292, 294, 298, 320. --
323, 335, 337, 342, 350, 385, 401, 412, 422, 447, 462, 476, 485, 493. Lemyngton
8, 261, 262. Lettewelle 464. Lettris 144, 258, 418. Jews 4, 74, 248. --
Leverwyk 399. Leveret 199. Levenad 41, 43, 228, 251, 262. Leidet 128, 455.
Leyburne 3, 136, 171, 424, 440. Lesemore 410. Leicester 96, 158. Leviet 65.
Lymar 30, 41. Limesi 2, 179, 190, 293, 294. -- Lin 374, 376. Lindesey 293, 294,
475. Linacre 25, 270. Linley 267, 268. -- Lincoln 303, 482, 489. Lichelade
256. Littleton 221, 223. Lion 112, 194, 351. Liola 408. Lisours 28, 67, 68,
149, 193, 195, 206, 297, 338. -- 339, 349, 351, 364, 365, 366, 370, 394, 467,
468, 469, 470, 473, 477. Lister 174, 179, 498. Leuric 49, 137, 174, 185, 187,
196, 209, 248, 268, 364, 415, 471. Leuuin 2, 8, 13, 137, 168, 220, 408. Leuing
471. Leuesham 429. Leventhorp 141. Leunord 6. Lessingham 158. Lockart 460.
Lochre 445. Lodge 324, 360, 361, 440. London 144, 274, 446. Longman 323.
Longchamp 157, 174. Lord 123, 173. Lort 499. Loscoe 320. Lovel 7, 20, 30, 110,
111, 179, 279, 280, 305, 434, 506. Loversdale 408. Lound 369, 372, 481. Lovet
85. Lovetot 18, 31, 32. -- 33, 34, 28, 40, 73, 118, 119, 121, 122. -- 124, 128,
142, 146, 158, 165, 188, 192, 255, 263, 297, 325, 361, 366, 382, 404, 409, 410,
424, 426, 453, 454, 455. -- 461, 462, 469. Luffenham 424 Lutterell 42, 54, 63.
-- 71, 86, 101, 257, 297, 346. Lukin 447. Lucas 261, 262, 379. Lucy 138, 387,
389, 433, 464, 505. Lungvilers 148, 189, 262, 263, 295, 326, 336, 341, 364,
366, 374, 377, 379, 381. -- 382, 383, 392, 393, 437, 440, 442, 445. Longespe
338, 339, 471. Loughton 138. Low 50, 230, 295, 463. Loudham 31, 51, 94, 95,
100, 101, 144, 145, 150, 157, 158, 161, 165, 175, 205, 234, 255, 281, 288, 289.
-- 291, 295, 296, 320, 321, 322, 332, 367, 381, 382, 386, 464, 466. Lincoln
Bishop 2, 18, 218. Lemot 446. Levesey 350. Ligulf 313. Lisle 11. Lillyman 420.
Lilly 350, 477. Lokesle 26. Lock 502. Littlebury 32, 33, 401, 402, 404. Lowes
298. Lumley 50. Loods 271. Loyd 79, 319. Lufchell 484. Lumby 95. Luston 149.
Lyvet 434. Losuard 184, 185, 323. Luda 221. Lupus 239, 345. Lyneham 385, 386.
Lytton 407.
M
May 320. Manchester 249, 493. Maisterman 240. Mailard 220. Manley 212. Matley
ibid. Maisterson 210. Mainwarin 188, 374. Maire 423. Major 497, 498. Maresco
186. Mara 174, 254, 380. Machin 126. Marriot 119. Mackworth 112, 217, 244, 380,
401, 402, 485. Mabbot 96. Mather 284, 342. Massingberd 340, 441. Makarell 53,
54, 411, 429, 466, 468. Maleverer 427, 454. Malebisse 84, 154, 241. Malory 19,
25, 26, 49, 165, 221, 222, 448, 450. Maxfeild 374, 376. Maxhey 348. Maunsfeild
24, 27, 50, 75, 325. Mandeville 229, 264, 338, 339, 455, 456, 463. Manors 24,
49, 87, 111, 240, 253, 258, 295, 327, 328, 455, 458, 461, 474, 504. Manysty
319, 327. Manthorpe 253. Manfrid 177, 339. Maperley 157, 158, 212, 232, 235,
497, 498. Maunuers 41, 86, 87. -- 88, 94, 95, 198, 273, 454. Marcaunt 376.
Marneham 334, 445. Mason 209, 335, 340, 380, 383, 406, 420, 430, 441, 445, 460,
474. Marmion 95, 196, 228, 229, 244, 282, 323, 354, 379. Marys 258, 318. March
42. Marseland 479. Mareslee 267. Martell 54, 66, 207, 210, 241, 450. Marsyn
445. Mantell 218, 265, 266. Marten 33, 204, 303, 390, 478, 498. Mazine 436.
Malquinci 66, 67, 417, 419, 421, 488. Maleshour 340, 439. Mallovell 148, 161,
298, 311, 366, 381, 382, 391, 392. -- 393, 442, 462. Malwain 388, 389. Malherb
218, 418. Maltby 117. Mauduit 20, 80, 370. Maugruci 303. Marc 14, 42, 43, 205,
209, 247, 249, 252, 282. Mareschall 51, 92, 94, 98, 117, 120, 129, 138, 158,
164, 235, 285, 296, 317, 335, 346, 347, 348, 349, 352, 355, 374, 388, 389, 390,
423, 472, 474. Margetson 159. Massey 50, 281. Mattersey or Maresey 133, 378,
397. -- 425, 430, 431, 434, 442, 477, 480, 482. Meaux 72, 165, 462. Meschines
313. Megre 333. Melford 395. Melton 87, 249, 320, 343, 358, 390, 479, 507.
Mercinton 26. Mercer 320, 366. Mershe 179, 340, 342, 396. Meisnill 14, 264,
266, 270, 285, 368, 399, 423, 450, 451, 454, 471. Mellors 235, 497, 498. --
Mendre 207, 208. Mendham 99. Merryweather 350. Meringe 8, 94, 100, 119, 123,
167, 188, 189. -- 191, 194, 198, 199, 230, 259, 305, 340, 360, 380, 382, 384,
387, 401, 402, 423, 439, 494. Merebeck 482. Mere 212, 477. Milner 249, 472,
481. Milward 14, 16, 50. Midleham 472. Middleton 83, 136, 137, 168, 178, 248,
250, 291, 374, 376, 427, 437, 507. Millot 281. Millington 8, 248, 250, 255,
401, 402, 409, 417. Milles 238. Molyns 193. Molineux 13, 83, 129, 134, 138,
140, 142, 154, 179, 181, 182, 183, 250, 261, 262, 267, 269. -- 274, 281, 352,
355, 366, 385, 423, 425, 426, 441, 442, 466, 467, 493. Morcar 75, 112, 288,
313. Mordant 432. More 112, 113, 128, 129, 154, 188, 309, 322, 335, 347, 392,
394, 414, 415, 472, 477, 481. Mower 154. Moresby 374, 376, 387, 414. Morehagh
247. Morell 247, 464. Morgan 157, 158, 211. Morin 38, 118, 119, 121, 122. --
124, 134, 142, 155, 156, 157, 165, 166, 171. Morley 7, 50, 371, 429. Morison
242, 243, 308, 349. Mortein 35, 50, 153, 154, 218, 220, 221. -- 228, 229, 234,
362, 397, 399, 400, 401, 404, 449, 482, 485, 488. Mortimer 3, 216, 424, 489.
Morewode 493. Morton 175, 268, 307, 349, 350, 407, 475, 477, 478. Moriton Earl
2, 6, 17, 41, 238. Moxly 177. Multon 149, 150, 151, 158, 333, 334, 478. Moton
24, 53, 54, 309. Malet 2, 49, 78, 82, 314, 351, 355. Mekisburgh 242. Merbury
236, 404. Meeres 183, 184, 477. Meredith 462. Metham 9, 76, 241, 258, 259.
Methley 133, 136, 171, 174. -- 222, 241, 320. Meverell 26, 321, 322, 388, 390,
444. Mellish 81, 99, 221, 366, 388, 474. Modi 464. Moge 178. Moulton 5, 6.
Mowldson 479. Magnus 171, 197, 199, 426, 475. Mounden 484. Mounson 194, 196,
269, 423. Montfort 18, 267, 288, 289, 290, 298, 306, 379, 387, 415, 433, 455,
457. Mountfaltrell 206, 218. Muskham 156, 157, 188, 195, 239. -- 250, 324, 331,
337, 341, 345, 347, 348. -- 359, 360, 370, 373, 388, 391, 433, 472. Moss 219.
Moston 50. Moyz 206, 229, 230. Moigne 278, 281, 309, 390, 406, 411. Monachus
133, 288, 417. Monox 301, 302, 406. Moubray 8, 39, 187, 306, 328, 332, 336,
379, 403, 404, 415, 475, 479, 490, 502. Moles 475, 476, 478. Mole 479. Mough
240. Mountague 115, 117, 292, 437, 455, 457. Moseley 436, 503. Mulshoe 343.
Musard 43, 44, 472. Musters 44, 66, 153, 156, 165, 168, 171, 172, 173, 210,
249, 278, 298, 303, 326, 327, 391, 392, 393, 403. -- 405, 421. Montalt 233.
Morneshale 434. Michell 228, 230, 231. Minekan 387, 435, 464. Misterton 173,
429. Misne 430. Monte 243. Monte Begonis 378, 380, 418, 431, 446. Monteburg
324, 331. Moyle 257. Moysier 229. Monings 138, 289. Monboucher 49, 87, 221,
222, 245, 246, 359. -- 397.442, 450. Monk 235, 405, 418, 472. Montgomery 23,
50, 148, 235, 287. Markham 54, 128, 130, 165, 166, 167, 168, 172, 175, 176. --
180, 181, 189, 190, 197. -- 198, 221, 222, 230, 231, 232, 237, 258, 265, 266,
269, 294, 317, 326, 327, 337, 341, 343, 344, 347, 352, 364, 366, 374, 376, 378,
380, 381. -- 384, 385, 387, 390, 392, 393, 394, 399, 401, 402, 405, 411, 412,
419, 420, 421, 422, 423, 425, 426, 434, 437, 438. -- 439, 441, 444, 468, 480.
Murdac 39, 111, 188, 244, 256, 345, 446. Murrey 87. Marler 4, 283, 319. Marwood
5. b. Medocroft 496. Metcalf 5. b. 382, 475. Middlethwait 474. Monteney 11,
175, 177, 178. -- 212, 287, 293, 295. Montecaniso 11, 14, 388, 389. Mucklow
498. Muscegross 18, 20. Mucy 507. Munjoy 26, 94. Mundevill or Amundevill vide.
Mynnet 390, 471. Musson 79. Mykelberghe 305.
N
Naples 339. Naht 249. Newmarch 11, 124, 136, 137, 140, 141. -- 191, 315, 379,
385, 464, 465, 469, 473. Newbold 270, 317, 335. Neubell 240. Newark 185, 197,
314, 315, 345. Nassington 417. Neville 20, 53, 54, 66, 68, 72, 82, 88, 110,
121, 130, 136, 141, 157, 158, 163, 171, 175, 178. -- 183, 184, 185, 189, 194.
-- 198, 209, 223, 235, 236, 244, 247, 248, 267, 269, 271, 275, 292, 308, 314,
320, 323, 324, 335, 343, 345, 354, 365, 370, 379, 387, 388, 390, 393, 394, 401.
-- 402, 403, 406, 415, 417, 418, 420, 421, 423, 426, 437, 438, 440, 445, 455,
460, 480, 481, 489, 496, 507. Neusam 71. Newcombe 477. Newnham 298, 494. Nelson
395, 474. Nettleworth 274. Neuthorp 20, 238. Newton 167, 266, 355, 392, 394,
400. Norreis 279, 280, 406, 407, 416, 420.421, 444, 464. Nix 219, 499.
Nicholson 364, 396. Nicols 387, 472. Norfolk 288, 390. Norton 250, 372, 479.
North 101, 104, 120, 134, 158, 163, 309, 317, 418, 427, 428. -- 430. Northfeild
426. Northwood 374, 375, 379. Norwell 351, 364. Nottingham 18, 23, 88, 92, 220,
235, 314, 316, 456. Noy 506. Notton 396. Norhanton 377. Normanville 38, 44,
150, 281, 362, 415, 470, 507. Normanton 195, 308, 317, 319, 360, 363, 484.
Norman 117, 313. Needham 210, 336, 463. Nightingale 414. Newdigate 182. Neile
26, 273. Nettleship 415, 422, 423. Nodariis or Nowers 35, 278, 291. Nutthall
205. Nutthill 43. Noddell 423. Nutkin 172. Nuncormesby 173. Nuvelors 366.
Nuns 446.
O
Octon 255. Odincar 35, 37, 95, 127, 149, 297. Odingsells 158, 287, 293, 294.
-- 298, 334. Oily 429. Oelage 217. Ogle 178. Oglethorp 76, 77, 320, 340, 406,
474. Okeour 50, 94, 151, 321, 322, 343, 344. Okeburne 427. Ormerod 390. Olgi
110. Oldfeild 481. Oliver 97, 120, 292, 416, 417, 429, 477. Oldney 122, 127,
142, 293. Olive 84. Osgod 4, 10. Osmund 95, 256, 329, 355, 400. Osmundthorp
297, 332, 333. Osborne 268, 419, 4^2, 483. Osberton 417, 461, 464, 471, 480.
Osberne Fitz-Richard 2, 110. Osbert 362. Oteway 249. Oysell 247, 259, 287.
Omesby 177. Ormond 12, 100, 101, 321. Orleans 42. Onley 248. Outhorp 29, 78. --
123, 130, 146, 153, 154, 244. Owldham 385, 485. Ormal 331, 345. Ordric 137,
484. Orange 431. Orme 74, 173, 313. Ordeshal 399. Ouseley 310, 319, 374. Orston
55, 118, 250, 429. Orrell 374, 376, 496. Orreby 101, 115, 116, 233, 235, 293,
483. Otter 413. Oulecotes or Ulecot 407, 471, 472. -- Osward 484. Overton 265.
Oxford 78, 413, 418, 421. Oxton 316. Owtram 118, 122, 123, 127. O Nele 147.
Otringham 154. Orlingberg 156. Ougrim 192, 369. Owing 389.
P
Pabham 127. Pabenham 100, 101. Pack 55. Parkhurst 53, 55. Pare 4, 26. Pacy
119. Pedworth 303. Pedwardyn 172, 174. Pevrel 2, 19, 29, 41, 50, 52, 54, 62,
102, 116, 217, 218, 258, 278, 298, 373, 433, 488, 489, 490, 502, 505. Peake
274, 370, 427, 430. Penythorn 201. Pensax 150, 236, 247, 267, 268. Pendock 42,
85. -- 86. Peniston 129, 133. Padley 412. Paganel 128, 143, 184, 186, 230, 231,
489. Page 94, 335, 394, 497. Paget 28, 344. Pakenham 181, 320. Packington 392,
394. Pagen 233. Palms 74, 212, 213, 237, 327, 328. Palmer 7, 10, 40, 125, 157,
158, 234, 235, 257, 262, 285, 319, 324, 431, 463, 481, 492. Pancester 235.
Paunton 124, 252, 303, 315, 347, 348, 386. Pauleyn 411. Paulet 328, 346.
Paveley 65. -- 112, 144, 218, 252, 417, 419. Passelew 10, 186. Pateshull 370.
Parr 289, 498. Pargiter 221, 223, 283. Parnell 413. Peckham 355, 356, 504.
Penbrugg 289, 497, 498. Parratt 236. Paramour 158. Parnham 414, 418. Peysun
185, 303. Pain 165, 177. Peyto 130. Pettinger 385, 431. Percy 174, 185, 195,
208, 359, 360, 377, 389, 453. Pettiward 319. Peshale 271. Parker 86, 119, 120,
167, 193, 232, 253, 283. Parkins 29, 42, 45. -- 46, 47, 48, 49, 85, 232, 494,
496. Park 344, 409, 479. Patric 6, 32, 33. Peace 472. Pell 383. Pierpont 30,
39, 40, 41, 42, 50, 51, 53, 54, 63, 64, 72, 77, 79, 83, 86, 87. -- 88, 89, 90,
91, 93, 103, 115, 118, 185, 188, 198, 230, 236, 237, 249, 256, 265, 266, 270,
275, 277, 300, 301, 323, 324, 327, 328, 355, 356, 362, 367, 376, 380, 387, 389,
393, 400, 435, 436, 443, 449, 450, 455, 481, 493, 498, 500. Pegge 31, 479.
Perers 191, 265, 506. Perin 481. Perte 33, 34. Passeys 220, 237. Passi 290.
Paschail 237. Paston 74, 101, 102, 108, 115, 116, 188, 192. Pec 370, 412. Peche
19, 110, 111, 278, 303, 432. Pickston 374. Pigot 3, 9, 10, 13, 14, 16, 17, 19,
20, 31, 33, 155, 192, 207, 240, 317, 322, 32^, 327. Phyhney 361. Pimme 10, 207.
Pin 478. Pinkney 273. Pilley 282. Pillesley 265. Pilewin 172. Pinguant 10. Pipe
219, 466. Pity 40, 255, 256. Phelips 279, 280, 498. Phyllipot 198, 199.
Plucket 88, 388. Plumpton 76. -- 77, 119, 198, 236, 241, 273. Portington 420,
426. Portsmouth 273. Port 7, 8, 9, 147, 148, 237, 343, 344, 420, 506. Porter
120, 145, 178, 186, 256, 319, 351, 404, 406, 448, 506. Potloc 14. Pouer 249,
255, 265, 269, 410, 480, 481. Polfen 244. Pole 12, 19, 24, 98, 101, 128, 173,
184, 199, 221, 222, 248, 257, 270, 342, 481. Pouger 38. Poge 411, 412. -- 430,
482, 497. Pople 380. Popham 167, 380. Poycey 472. Poyne 46. Poning 318, 432.
Plungiun 33, 40, 255. Plesence 342. Plesington 281. Plesley 254, 255, 298.
Pocklington 186, 191. Pond 346. Poutrell 13, 14, 19, 33, 34, 44, 66, 181, 182,
207, 210, 217, 230, 244, 267, 269, 303, 347, 365, 378, 396, 400. Pikeringe 270,
406. Pilkinton 19, 94, 95, 244, 323, 399, 400. Poulton 79. Pouchin 154. Pugil
265. Pulteney 33, 34. Punche 303. Purefoy 167, 243, 283, 298. Pusey 5, 62, 251.
Plumptre 49, 66, 70, 216, 237, 265, 308, 447, 491, 493, 494, 496. -- 497, 500.
Prat 368, 408, 410, 416. Pictavensis 2, 34, 64, 82, 84, 97, 296, 351, 397, 440,
442, 489. Pride 320. Peter Burgh Abbat 2. Preston 255, 417. Proctor 342, 394.
Provost 293, 295. Prudhom 135. Pynkeston 240, 243.
Q
Quinci 18, 20, 338, 339. Quadring 138, 468. Querneby 235, 497, 498. -- Quippe
415.
R
Rap 442. Rascal 247. Ravenser 241. Raynald 180, 283. Raherst 81. Rabacy 53,
54. Rabaz 165. Rale 51. Rant 422. Radcliff 11, 14, 92, 94, 127, 134, 178, 220,
257, 303, 314, 324, 482. Radford 118, 219, 372. Rag 26. Rampane 11. Rasen 95,
366. Ravensworth 465. -- 466. Raven 5. Rawlin 415. Rawson 147, 148, 327. Rainer
87, 385, 386, 390, 455, 503. Rain 463. Ranesford 172. Radinden 18, 19, 20.
Ramsden 474. Rampton 311, 391. Ramsey 199, 229, 431. Ridel 80, 313, 370.
Richardson 24, 27, 28, 410, 426. Ricards 499. Rither or Rider 79, 241. Rigges
426. Ria 43, 88, 115, 418. Ribald 319. Rerisby 255, 289, 298, 369, 395, 430,
482. Revel 234, 251, 346. Remay 416. Remigius 370. Revenell 454. Reve 34, 145,
412, 423, 480. Restwold 374, 376. Roald 332. Rodes 52, 54, 55, 103, 304, 365,
417, 460, 463. Rodney 13, 108, 327, 328, 378. Robinson 201, 472, 478. Robertson
331, 341, 372. Roissalt 243, 249. Rolleston 47, 87, 156, 177, 180, 190, 243,
250, 257, 297, 298, 303, 314, 323, 325, 326, 329, 331, 388, 433, 434, 447, 462.
Rogers 421, 426. Ropley 262. Roper 14, 174, 260, 404. Rosell 14, 19, 30, 42,
64, 77, 82, 83, 85, 87, 92, 93. -- 138, 140, 142, 230, 231, 243, 245, 247, 250,
261, 262, 295, 316, 373, 497, 498. Ros or Roos 25, 31, 87, 103, 114, 115. --
196, 239, 241, 250, 260, 277, 281, 286, 290, 319, 340, 346, 361, 362, 368, 369,
374. -- 376, 382, 383, 387, 400, 404, 414, 438, 446, 485, 498. Roschett 149.
Roscelyn 318, 332. Rivere 40, 217, 300, 301, 446, 453. Rivers Earl 104, 105.
Ripariis 262, 390, 399, 413, 416, 485, 506. Ripon 292. Ryboef 231, 232, 242,
448. Rideware 110, 111, 247, 285, 286, 287. -- Rixton or Rishton 13, 14.
Rievallis 326. Rigby 269, 271, 362. Ruddington 35, 65, 66. -- 265, 417, 418,
419. Romanus 507. Rowlett 425. Royston 428. Rumeli 143, 407. Rosseter 499.
Roughshankes 334. Rotherfeild 311, 314, 421. Rodemerthweyt 270, 297, 331, 336.
Rempston 20, 23, 26, 29, 30. -- 31, 33, 41, 42, 44, 72, 74, 83, 93, 119, 123,
144, 173, 198, 208, 236, 289, 290, 291, 292, 351, 381, 382. Retford 485.
Richmond Earl 2, 65. Redshay 482. Redhyve 341. Redinges 242. Reins 4, 34, 39,
51, 141, 254, 262, 263, 426, 451. Rothwell 194, 421. Rotheram 5, 51, 103, 171,
346, 376. Rockley 267, 356, 404. Rockold 137. Rokeby 8, 342, 476. Rokeshaw 55.
Rockedeu 353. Role 18, 65. Roll 66. Rochford 385, 392, 394. Rufus 209, 362,
388, 391, 392, 400, 401. Russell 40, 174, 250, 265, 471, 500. Rus 317. Rowse
488. Rotour 210. Rotsey 42. Russeby 281. Russelep 50. Riseley 209, 221, 222.
Ryley 57, 362. Routh 68, 69, 429. Roucliff 76. -- 77, 321, 374, 376, 408. Rolf
78, 370. Rupe 136. Ryvell 137.
S
Salm 2. Sablello 171. Sacheverell 9, 12, 13, 20, 24, 27, 28, 34, 39, 49, 50.
-- 79, 87, 93, 101, 157, 159, 207, 208, 209, 230, 231, 243, 257, 259. St.
Andrew 5, 16, 18, 19. -- 20, 33, 34, 74, 238, 267, 415, 416. St. Audoeno 110,
450. St. Alban 314. St. Amand or Samon 20, 40, 238, 29^, 298, 374, 376, 385,
493, 494. -- 499. St. Bermer 472. St. Lo 54, 72, 458. St. Elena 479. St. Maur
or Seymour 18, 20, 23, 50, 147, 394. St. Ledger 115, 116, 327, 328. St. George
332, 396, 434, 444, 464, 481, 484. Sta. Cruce 326, 364, 381, 382, 384. St. John
20, 43, 104, 105, 380, 384, 431, 446. St. Peter or Seimpere St. Liz 114, 177,
368, 370, 371. St. Oswald 317. St. Paul or Seimple 63, 94, 127, 136, 156, 166,
169, 171, 264, 303, 479. St. Patric 218, 244, 245, 488. Sto. Medardo 154. St.
Martin 249, 380, 448. St. Michel 258, 259. St. Quintin 286, 287, 385, 464. Sta.
Maria 133, 153, 286, 450, 464. Safred 218, 233. Saynton 171, 201. Salvain or
Silvan 73, 153, 244, 349, 378, 433, 435, 448. -- 449, 450. Sallowe 244, 322,
323. Saluciis 151, 338, 339. Salisbury 149, 262. Sampson 4, 42, 44, 53, 54,
291, 292, 293, 294, 295, 297, 300, 301, 302, 394, 406. Saunders 98. Sands 402,
480. Sandale 314, 420, 475. Sandwich 95, 204. Sandiacre 14, 177, 220, 276.
Sarpesive 467. Saville 68, 77, 87, 118, 128, 142, 172, 178, 259, 298, 331, 401,
402, 435, 458, 494, 499, 506. Saw 414. Sapcotes 269. Sareson 240, 285. Savage
25, 74, 111, 167, 187, 189, 240, 243, 253, 259, 262, 266, 270, 326, 346, 396,
399. Saucusamar 94. Sauce 41. Saunders 496, 502. Saundeby 386, 401, 402, 417,
418, 421, 422, 480, 483, 484, 485. Saunderson 390, 404, 426, 462, 474. -- 475,
476. Saundeford 450. Saunsfaile 142. Saxendale 94, 146. Saxton 347. Saxam 484.
Say 257, 371. Seaworth 415. Sail 404. Sauuin 8, 10, 18, 50. Sbernecroc 171,
177. Sbern 34. Scelward 359. Scroope 63, 100, 101, 104. -- 149. -- 151, 154,
222, 295, 300, 346. -- 389, 465, 477, 484. Scopham 443. Scarlet 369. Scakell
ibid. Screveton 124, 127, 129, 449. Scot 79, 318, 401, 402, 425, 479, 481. Sees
379. Segrave 6, 29, 38, 54, 209, 229, 274, 477. Seldom 458. Seel 201. Serleby
25, 100, 101, 441, 464, 475, 476. -- Seman 9, 10, 171. Shakerley 455, 458.
Seliok 270. Sheldon 151, 437. Shelton 167, 171, 249. Shipley 345, 441, 445.
Shipman 39, 86, 118, 119, 120. -- 134, 143, 287, 342, 498. Shipton 376. Shirley
7, 8, 11, 13, 14, 23, 46, 80, 471. Sherford 417. Shrigley 253. Sibthorpe 23,
24, 41, 78, 94, 136, 138, 145, 146, 158, 165, 167, 168. -- 172, 178, 181, 390,
404, 411. Sherard 122. Sherbury 415. Sheffeild 33, 40, 42, 123, 151, 207, 211,
257, 418, 423, 443, 456. Sherbrook 271, 284, 298, 407, 413. Sherwin 12^, 491,
503. Skeffington 19, 20, 123, 154, 159, 228, 385, 392, 394, 415, 498. Skipton
317. Skipwith 142, 176, 192, 348, 438, 484. Seuville 11. Sewell 42, 142. Smith
14, 46, 75, 98, 105, 119, 151.199, 201, 232, 320, 340, 352, 360, 372, 376, 383,
394, 405, 416, 421, 422, 427, 437, 438, 445.462, 469, 475, 480, 482. Snaynton
30, 276. Snitterton 266. Soket 7. Shawe 204, 418, 445, 482. Shepston 414.
Slater 246, 335, 499. Somery 11, 80, 81, 327, 354, 361, 369, 381, 446, 447.
Slamundeshey 317. Slory 278, 292. Skinner 437. Somerset 7. Sloswick 482.
Snawsell 425, 480. Somervill 42, 49, 93, 124, 229, 255, 267, 270, 281, 297,
454, 480. Sowby 390, 418. Sowkin 390. Souleby 210. South 55, 62, 482. Souden
474. Southworth 219, 412, 413. Southorp 408. Skeggeby 268, 345, 368. Skerington
119, 120, 121, 123. Smalley 191, 324. Small 186, 345. Snowden 450, 463. Snow
158, 163, 308, 370, Southwell 314, 317, 318, 319, 333, 335, 343, 344, 347, 375,
507. Southwick 150. Spinay 425. Spaigne 101, 364. Spicer 70, 493. Spendelove
304. Spenser 20, 50, 221, 222, 230, 271, 283, 414, 419, 423, 435. Speranoc 415,
416. Spyby 385, 413. Sitwell 50. Siward 2, 6, 23, 242, 347. Sprigg 118, 485.
Springham 462. Springate 129, 171. Spigurnell 267. -- 268. Spylman 418. Speed
234. Spark 462. Spalding 102. Stafford 11, 80. -- 81, 100, 115, 116, 281, 340.
-- 455, 458, 489. Stanbridge 281. Stanley 8, 97, 216, 217, 261, 306, 327, 328,
401, 402, 443. Stanford 3, 14, 150, 169, 181, 205, 441. Stanfeild 372, 474.
Stanlowe 257, 410. Staples 235, 499. Stanhope 8, 51, 54, 68, 69, 79, 94, 141,
144, 147. -- 176, 192, 209, 230, 232, 237, 250, 257 259, 262, 265, 274, 280,
282, 285, 298, 305, 322, 323, 327, 342, 347, 350, 352, 365, 372, 379, 380, 381,
382, 383, 385, 389, 392, 393, 398, 401, 402, 405, 437, 438, 443, 481, 499, 506.
Staplewin 13, 211. Stalworth 406, 506. Stapleton 25, 26, 30, 31, 72, 75, 77,
83, 87, 119, 142, 144, 145, 241, 279, 280, 285, 286, 289, 290, 324, 374, 376,
382, 443, 446. Stapleford 13, 14, 66, 205, 211, 212, 213. -- 237, 265, 492,
507. Stayngrene 434. Staunton of Staunton Harold 7, 8, 24, 26, 27, 278.
Staunton of Staunton Lymar, or on the Wolds 41, 46, 96, 136. Staunton 97, 303,
481. Staunton of Staunton 3, 31, 33, 50, 52, 118, 133, 155, 157. -- 165, 166,
167, 171, 1^3, 178, 181, 190, 249, 253, 274, 287, 289, 309, 325, 329, 332, 383,
422, 428, 433, 506. Stathum 50, 95, 257. Stockton 25, 26, 129, 130, 173.
Stocks 439. Stokes 6, 19, 24, 41, 125, 128, 155, 156, 165, 171, 173, 177, 178,
180, 181, 190, 297, 317, 332, 434, 493. Stoketh 426, 429, 430. Stonham 342.
Story 6, 17, 24, 41, 129, 135, 154, 335. Stonehouse 278. Strelley 5, 14, 20,
29, 50, 64, 81, 93. -- 95, 124, 129, 130, 167, 176, 189, 206, 207, 210, 211,
217, 220, 221, 222, 229, 230. -- 232, 234, 236, 238, 241, 243, 249, 255, 258,
259, 261, 262, 265, 266, 291, 292. -- 297, 298, 308, 335, 346, 355, 378, 392,
394, 398, 420, 437, 438, 444, 481, 489, 496, 506. Strouxton 125. Stircley 82,
205, 369. String 478. Stringer 399, 400. -- 420, 482. Stroud 328. Strong 8.
Strange 102, 193, 455, 457. Strangman 410. Stut eville 49, 51, 186, 250, 254,
262, 263. -- 265, 451. Strabolgy 389. Sturgeous 390, 484. Stourton 257, 414,
416, 417, 418, 425, 428, 434, 477. Stopford 34. Suen S. Swain 2, 305, 324, 325,
336, 397 447, 461, 479. Suencilt 286. Sutton of Sutton in Ashfeild 4, 7, 9, 75,
128, 262, 266, 267, 302. Sutton 136, 157, 158, 183, 195, 220, 277, 344, 378,
383, 399, 464. Sutton of Sutton on Trent 42, 133, 166, 172, 188, 189, 192, 194,
213, 255, 270, 287, 294, 305, 315, 322, 324, 326, 327. -- 330, 331, 340, 347,
359.369, 372, 380, 381, 388, 390, 405, 423, 437, 446, 471, 480. Stuart 455,
458. Sutterton 138. Swillington 3, 4, 7, 40, 41, 44, 300, 301, 382, 399, 484.
Swarawell 464. Swinstede 399. Sulney 54, 72, 233, 343. -- Seginton 477, 478.
Seyton 381, 413. Sotehill 60, 68, 76, 77, 185. Spur 423. Stepi 64. Swift 74,
188, 390, 394, 396, 398, 409, 411, 444, 445, 484. Skirlaw 81. Scoteiney 489.
Scrimshire 83. -- 346, 347, 349, 350, 351, 374, 376, 417. Sudbury 118, 342,
361, 362, 380. Stirap 129, 407, 438, 471, 472. -- 478. Sturmin 136. Stevenson
142, 250, 355. Sonkey 145, 362. Spavold 430. Stridelington 168. Syerston 172,
309. Strangewayes 185, 264, 346, 427, 485. Shardelow 191. Sturtivant 193, 351,
353. Stow 194, 366. Symson 201, 444, 467. Southcolme 207. Shirbourne 233, 327,
328, 353, 479. Shepherd 240, 243, 360, 362. Selston 243. Skiffelyn ibid. Spot
244. Stephen 248. Sautcliffe 254. Staveley 259, 393, 474. Strykland 260, 261.
Staynesby 268, 270, 273. Swinslow 268. Skarsbreck 269. Sidenhale 270. Stern
273, 317. Stuffyn 273. Sidenham 277, 422, 4^6, 450. Shellow 285. Ster ibid.
Sharp 294, 306, 445, 496. Swarterol 313. Shelley 335. Sortebrand 345. Seric
345. Strey 353, 478. Summers 353. Stenulph 362. Shelford 378, 493. Scalton 379.
Stokeham 386, 428, 430, 472. Stone 388, 485. Steedman 404. Symons 422. Shepewyk
426, 427. Siringham 430. Sydney 435. Shitlome 445. Sulkholme 449. Stirk 475.
Sore 476. Street 478. Stratton 484.
T
Talbois 234, 245. -- 257, 300, 404. Tannesley 497. Taverner 463. Tamworth 223,
236. Talbot 25, 87, 90, 121, 165, 175, 385, 388, 389, 392, 393, 420, 439, 455.
-- 457, 458, 472. Tankard 317. Tanner 183. Tanai 68, 338, 469, 470. Tate 8.
Testard 249. Tateshal 198, 283, 354. Tailour 9, 10, 72, 240, 320, 362, 372,
376, 418, 423, 446, 460, 463, 466. Tempest 43, 44, 55, 141, 298, 413. Temple
38, 39, 169, 197, 251. Templeman 485. Teversale 238. Thekeston 207. Theaker
405, 428. Teverey 13, 34, 39, 212, 213. -- 214, 216, 237. Them 170. Thornhill
157, 161, 173, 207, 342, 380, 383, 412, 423, 428, 461. Thornebury 449. Thurstan
297, 313, 484. Thalworth 274. Thornton 73, 186, 209, 269, 403, 418. Thurland
39, 55, 229, 232, 321, 322, 398, 445, 497. Thirninge 277. Thoroton or
Thurverton 117, 118, 120, 122. -- 125, 127, 128, 129, 145, 154, 166, 299, 335.
Thoresby 350, 408. Thirleby 57, 157, 325. Tibbott 475, 477. Tibtot or Tiptoft
54, 63, 82, 103, 104. -- 115, 116, 186, 277, 295, 335. Tinneslawe 274. Thies
260, 261. Thorpe 38, 167, 173, 179, 180, 181, 186, 278, 295, 343, 480. Thorley
389. Thistleton 158. Thymelby 63, 64, 423. Thorney 19, 20, 154, 195, 344, 349,
371, 390, 415, 416. -- 418, 432, 498. Tored 180. Torald 33. Thorold 53, 55, 60,
74, 76, 87, 118, 138, 140, 157, 158, 161, 165, 176, 185, 329, 342, 344. Tikhill
362, 472, 497, 498. -- Tiphead 420. Tilman 230. Tochi 78, 279, 347, 373, 506.
Todeni 2, 114, 115, 171, 177, 195. Tongue 430. Tony 104. Trussell 318. Truswell
361, 408, 415. Trafford 120, 287, 343, 344, 376. Tromberg 14, 396. Tomkynson
427. Tomson 204, 360, 369, 479, 482. Tomlinson 269. Thomas 374, 376, 383.
Trusbut 19, 114, 115. -- 195, 247, 484. Toll 305. Topcliffe 178, 386. Toppelady
499, 500. Topham 474. Torcard 35, 46, 95, 207, 220, 256, 265. Torre 480.
Tortesmains 454. Touton 243. Turvile 7, 24, 34, 39, 415. Turnell 386. Tunstall
264, 352, 365, 438. Turner 122, 319, 369. Tilli 13, 14, 68, 396, 434, 469.
Tylne 408, 411. Tynne 421. Tesson 407, 408, 418. Tyson 2, 303, 324, 325, 329,
336, 433, 479. Tyva 407. Tregoz 367. Trewman 204, 320. Trehampton 183, 184,
414. Traily 114, 115. Trappes 349. Travers 156, 350. Trekingham 157, 160, 314.
Tresham 155. Trent 426, 427. Trowell 3, 14, 206, 216. Trunchell 483. Traiton
454. True Love 250. Touke 11, 14, 23, 155, 190, 270, 324, 329. -- 331, 333, 428,
426, 470, 479, 506. Threngston 337. Throkmorton 250, 284. Thrumpton or
Thurmeston 13, 23. Tirrell 44, 257, 342. Tori 120, 156, 177, 307, 323, 332,
342. Tortus 51. Turtale 385. Thwaits 53, 55, 59, 87, 427. Tocotes 55. Tyrwhit
63, 154, 194, 378, 389, 431. Turmot 313. Torlaston 79, 84, 123. Tydeswell 82.
Turold 467. Turchil 72, 82, 177, 313, 329, 332, 370, 470. Turchetil 82, 379
Tytheby 98, 205, 280. Timperley 118. Tesserand 124, 297. Toti 127. Tosti Earl
444, 488. Top 147, 232. Trentham 147. Townerawe 298. Towneshend 147, 148.
Townley 426, 460. Turstan 149, 313, 439, 484. Turvert 168, 171, 181, 409, 476.
Turget 195. Tumby 210. Tyssington 241, 257. Twysilton 285, 410, 425, 426.
Tuxford 383.
U
Vale 33, 40, 255. Valence 386, 388, 389. Valoines 115, 116. Vaux 5, 75, 115,
116, 120, 174, 175, 210, 249, 285, 289, 290, 368, 376, 438. Vavasor 35, 50,
143, 155, 180, 205, 217, 229, 230, 232, 238, 244, 292, 316, 332, 369, 378, 383,
435, 464, 481, 482, 484, 490. Vaughan 149. Vernon 32, 33, 54, 115, 117, 128,
172, 212, 281, 300, 458. Ventrer 411. Vaunting 372. Veynour 178, 257. Ufflete
128, 455. Vickers 404, 408. Vilers 33, 39, 49, 75, 76. -- 78, 83, 95, 97, 115,
116, 191, 291, 296, 302, 303. Vipont or Veteriponte 3, 65, 379, 439, 440, 473,
489. Vitreth 313. Verdun 7, 50, 54, 82, 236, 260, 261, 455, 457, 489. Venson
420. Vesci 63, 263, 332, 338, 339, 379, 380, 424, 434, 464, 506, 507. Ullenhale
or Ollenhale 289. Viel 437. Verly 180. Vere 103, 104, 195, 208, 250, 338, 339,
389, 443, 499. Vertebrand 216. Ulfric 2, 49, 82, 96, 137, 179, 184, 185, 216,
250, 293, 296, 347. Ulchet 8, 52, 95. Ulchel 185, 210, 216, 256, 290, 366, 370,
385, 412, 445, 446, 463, 481. Ulchetel 30. Ulmer 34, 250, 379, 380, 402, 403,
413, 421, 439, 482. Vincent 24, 101, 257. Vic 43. Vulf 51, 65, 217, 313, 319,
321, 338, 367. Vinir 67. Ulfac and Unfac 67, 415. Ulstan 477. Ulviet 71, 92,
96, 121, 153, 313, 461, 477. Underwood 83. Ulric 98. Umfravile 114, 115, 229.
Vow 165. Unspac 168. Ulsicilt 211, 220, 229, 238, 299, 332. Ulvod 219. Ulsi
Swen 231, 447, 453, 467. Uston 237, 383. Vout 249. Utlagh 263. Urswicke 278.
Ursell 280, 281, 440. Upton 285, 477. Ulskell 303. Urkyll 319. Upsall 390.
W
Wade 477. Wagstaffe 472, 478. Wace 426. Warcape 429. Wandesford 403, 404.
Wainsford 374, 376. Wager 369. Wadworth 362. Waddington 342, 481. Wake 256,
379. Wandesley 249, 250, 255, 265. Wawton 210, 450. Walton 408. Walgrave 19^.
Warner 82, 207, 218, 220, 263, 488. Wartre 249. Waleden 300, 455, 458.
Waldeshef 33 Wakebrug 97, 154, 212, 257. Walkelin 33, 40, 86, 121, 137. Waleis
14, 19, 51, 63, 169, 173, 340. Walesby 440. Walhead 340, 438. Walleye 281.
Walkeden 5, 6, 372. Walrond 151, 278, 424, 498. Walmesley 68, 69. Walker 105,
274, 284. -- 295, 299, 362, 472. Walour 325, 332. -- Walpole 158, 163. Walsh
73, 74, 485. Walsham 425. Warkerley 364. Waltham 318. Walters or Wells 221,
222. Walter 475. Waryn 29, 38, 79, 146, 157, 158, 171, 209, 212, 249, 277, 335,
341, 342, 352, 407, 471. Warren 279, 280, 396. Ward 9, 75, 122, 126, 154, 211,
238, 281, 325, 390, 399, 420. Warlet 205. Waterton 187, 257, 374, 375, 413,
437. Watenhow 220, 237, 242, 249. Wates 94. Watson 79, 173, 201, 287, 320, 400.
Walichville 101, 363. Watmong 383. Warburton 24, 119, 176. Wartnaby 504. Warsop
335. Watervile 19. Wast 504. Wawyn 420, 422. Warwick 43. Webster 426. Web
204. Welond 158. Wentworth 104, 141, 426, 429, 435, 480, 482, 499. Wentelane
406. Welton 399. Wednesley 287. Wermundesworth 51. Weston 28, 29, 123, 190,
194, 206, 362, 364, 379, 442, 481. Wetewong 485. West 230, 261, 262, 412, 472,
478. Wheteley 173, 415, 418. Whalley 83. -- 93, 120, 123, 126, 127, 128, 129.
-- 132, 133, 135, 136, 142, 154, 171, 173, 178, 209, 232, 250, 352, 353, 401,
402, 452, 462, 463. Whatton 33, 39, 40, 64, 119, 120, 122, 124, 125, 140, 142.
-- 146, 210, 238, 281, 282, 299, 367, 429, 493. Whyteing 341. White 84. -- 96,
152, 352, 383, 384, 386, 484, 493, 504. Wiverton 81, 99. -- 105, 119, 303, 451.
Whitecoumbe 199. Whitwell 420, 421. Whitteberwe 240. Whithalgh 232. Wigfall 70.
Whitehead 446, 481. Wightman 173, 174. Whitaker 460. Whitladale 291. Widdowson
14. Welby 117, 150, 193, 347. Wellebof 95, 244. Weighton 362. Welwyk 339.
Woolhouse 244, 342, 347, 350. Woderove 485. Wogan 452. Wolton 382. Woderington
359. Wollaton 238, 242, 493. Willoughby 4, 5, 6, 24, 29, 33, 35, 39, 49, 64,
97, 123, 130, 167, 175, 178, 179, 190, 192, 208, 209, 210, 213, 217, 219, 221.
-- 228, 229, 230, 232, 234, 237, 241, 243, 244, 251, 253, 265, 273, 277, 283,
289, 308, 309, 316, 320, 331, 341, 346, 347, 352, 353, 359, 364, 367, 369, 398,
417, 420, 422, 484, 492, 493. Willoughby of Eresby 54, 223, 227, 233, 247, 255,
258, 271, 283, 298, 328, 354, 379, 413, 446, 450. Wilbram 442. Wilbore 430.
Wileman 126, 503. Willows 125, 325. Wytham 207. Wilkinson 125. Wilson 75, 324,
405, 426, 477, 503. Williamson 270, 351, 353, 378, 380, 386. -- 409, 412, 418,
423, 425, 427, 428, 430, 444, 445, 481. Wilac 426. Wilcox 364. Wilford 23, 42,
54, 82, 88, 103, 121, 123, 126. Win 364. Winwyk 308, 324. Wintringham 76, 77.
Winter 126. Wastenes 50, 78, 79, 270, 284, 285, 295, 352, 380, 395. -- 396,
409. Windesore 435. Winchester 475. Wood 92, 120, 166, 221, 223, 278, 283, 287,
292. -- 404, 426, 475, 481. Woodborough 291, 295, 391. Woodhouse 78, 169, 265,
314, 428. Woodcocke 420. Woodhall 249. Wombell 482. Wolsi 307, 316. Wormeley
479. Wotton 147, 149. Wulrington 297, 314, 379, 396, 399. -- 413, 480.
Wytherscote 470, 471. Withernwick 437, 438. Withebeard 436. Wren 145.
Wydmerpole 33, 38, 40. -- 41, 44, 167, 178, 188, 337, 427. Wycliff 485.
Wicheton 377. Wyche 320. Wichingham 318. Wydington 316, 497. Wild 158, 163,
273, 274. -- 319, 425. Wildehaver 427. Wyldeker 171. Wynchford 133. Winslowe
411, 412, 445. Wirce 2, 187. Winferthing 427. Winchelse 426. Wire 293. Wyat 7,
98, 404, 425, 479. Wymondeswold 281, 318. -- Wymark 188, 430. Wyman 403. Wylne
7. Wingfeild 135, 306. Winkburne 256, 257, 333, 369. Wedgewood 19. Westwood
249. Wells 19, 39, 221, 222, 413, 478, 480. Wetherall 295. Whode 19. Whorwood
390, 479. Writtesley 245. Worthy 20. Worteley 5, 251, 284, 285, 295, 347, 399,
409, 471, 484, 485. Wyshou 33. Whittington 341, 350, 417. Whitchcot 55, 184.
Whitmore 134, 341, 374, 376, 444. Whitchurch 75, 331, 434. Whitlam 385, 444.
Wright 83, 93, 94, 117, 166, 174, 221, 240, 283, 349, 379, 380, 385, 393, 415,
428, 478. Whethill 98. Whetecroft 350. Wymbish 123, 136, 173, 181, 236, 305,
320, 406. Worsley 128, 389. Wyneston 143. Wyvill 185, 346. Whytle 193.
Wydeville 233, 283. Wystowe 399. Wychard 497.
Y
Yarborough 320, 352. Yvetoft 254. Yole 55, 250, 296. Young 145, 257, 484.
York 193. Ywardeby 340. Yarwood 438.
Z
Zouch 19, 50, 79, 94, 130, 174, 208, 209, 228, 233, 240, 243, 265, 290, 308,
321, 322.
Mistakes in the placing of some Cuts.
Page Page That in 58 should be in 59 59 60 60 58 107 108 108 107

This Mark -- in the Index does denote, that the number whereunto it is affixed
does referr to the Page wherein the thing is principally spoke of.

The INDEX of Towns Names, or Places.
Rushcliff Wapentac 2. --

ADbolton 52, 62. -- 64, 88, 92, 234, 312. Barton 5, 29, 43, 49. -- 52, 54,
186, 209, 218, 312, 324, 389, 431, 479. Boney 41, 42, 43. -- 49, 67, 312, 461.
Boniton 5, 6. -- 9, 29, 38, 44, 312. Bradmere 31, 42, 43, 46, 49. -- 51, 65,
67, 207, 222, 253, 431, 461. Bridgeford West 52, 54, 62. -- 86, 103, 234, 312.
Clifton 2, 34, 41, 49, 51, 52. -- 66, 71. -- 103.207, 312. Costock or
Curtlingstok 5, 9, 28. -- 31, 52.64, 231, 260, 312, 470. Edwalton 13, 64. --
67, 312, 363, 461. Flauforth 65. -- 66. Goteham 5, 9, 17. -- 22, 29, 52, 288,
312, 493. Glapton 52. -- 66, 312. Keyworth 20, 41. -- 49, 52, 63, 64, 67, 69,
85, 86, 88, 312, 339. Kinston 5, 7, 8. -- 10, 20, 29, 55, 312. Leke East and
West 3, 8, 9, 22. -- 31, 44, 75, 188, 284, 285, 312. Normanton upon Sour 2, 4.
-- 6, 7, 29, 51, 251, 312. Normanton by Plumtre 41, 52, 63, 64, 67. -- Plumptre
2, 23, 41, 65, 66, 67. -- 70, 312, 353, 437. Radcliff on Sore 8, 9, 10. -- 55,
81, 312, 340. Rempston 5, 28, 29. -- 260, 312. Rudington 35, 49, 65. -- 67, 69,
71, 144, 207, 252, 312, 417. Stanford 2. -- 3, 22, 31, 45, 312. S^^unton on the
Wolds 41. -- 44, 45, 52, 54, 67, 75, 136, 170, 222, 312. Sutton Boniton 6. --
9, 20, 23, 44, 267, 312. Thorpe 6, 37. -- 218. Thrumpton 13. -- 10, 20, 24,
212, 303, 312. Widmerpole 39. -- 41, 44, 75, 89, 299, 300, 301, 312. Willoughby
31, 34. -- 35, 38, 41, 52, 222, 278, 312, 351, 453, 462. Wisou 31. -- 33, 35,
37, 42, 121, 123, 192, 267, 312, 412, 453. Wilford 51, 52. -- 103, 312, 493,
504.
Binghamshou Wapentak 71. --

Aslacton 26, 100, 113, 119, 120, 121, 130, 136, 137. -- 140, 170, 303, 451.
Basingfeild 25, 41, 52, 63, 64, 71, 85, 86. -- 88. Bingham 24, 26, 27, 31, 71,
72, 75, 119, 130, 142, 143. -- 146, 312, 473. Bridgeford East 100, 127, 145,
148, 149. -- 192, 207, 282, 288, 303, 312, 473. Broughton Sulney 37, 54, 72. --
75, 312. Boughton Grange 86, 88. Barneston 100, 102. -- 110, 303, 304.
Carcelston 26, 31, 33, 73, 75, 113, 114, 117, 118, 119, 120. -- 130, 145, 152,
165, 171, 188, 192, 303, 312, 337, 360, 367, 453, 461, 463. Colston Basset 11,
75, 80. -- 100, 231, 312, 340. Clipston 69, 71. -- 144, 165, 312. Cotgrave 29,
30, 71, 82. -- 94, 97, 98, 144, 145, 147, 218, 231, 260, 312. Crophill Bishop
72, 95. -- 100, 140, 279, 297, 310, 313, 314. Crophill Butler 96. -- 98, 100,
252, 253, 296, 302, 304, 305, 312, 442. Elton 112. -- 140, 146, 312, 473.
Flintham 33, 121, 123, 127, 132. -- 140, 148, 153, 170, 171, 192, 282, 303,
305, 306, 312, 451. Gamston 52, 54, 62. -- 71, 86, 103. Granby 49, 72, 73, 97,
98, 102, 103, 110. -- 174, 253, 296, 302, 304, 312, 461. Hickling 44, 72. --
95, 110, 111, 174, 187, 188, 303, 304, 310, 312, 314, 367. Hawksworth 123, 136.
-- 137, 170, 171, 303, 304, 312. Holme Pierpont 41, 88. -- 95, 188, 312, 442.
Kinalton 18, 71, 73, 75. -- 83, 110, 144.312, 479. Newbold 75. -- 78, 80, 83,
217, 296. Kirketon 127. -- 267. Kneveton 85, 130, 132, 140, 153. -- 169, 172,
252, 286, 306, 312, 451. Lambcote 85, 88, 92, 95. -- 145, 148, 234, 256, 260,
282, 323. Langar 51, 52, 100, 102. -- 110, 140, 218, 312. Newton 31, 95, 117,
143, 144, 145. -- 148, 207, 279, 281, 282, 314, 315, 375. Orston or Horskinton
113. -- 117, 119, 120, 124, 127, 140, 155, 170, 272, 312, 361, 369, 290, 436,
439. Outhorpe 71, 78. -- 97, 98, 144, 146, 296, 303, 304, 312, 395. Radcliff on
Trent 92. -- 98, 207, 209, 231, 234, 285, 305, 306, 312, 389. Saxendale 25, 26,
75, 98, 145, 146. -- 147, 148, 256, 282, 303, 312, 315. Scarrington 113, 114,
119. -- 137, 312. Screveton 113, 114, 118, 119, 124, 125, 126, 127. -- 177,
267, 303, 312, 361, 463. Shelford 45, 94, 95, 100, 143, 145, 146. -- 197, 279,
281, 282, 303, 312, 331, 375, 433, 492. St. Aubre 's 102. Sutton 110. -- 140,
304. Staunton 113, 114, 117. -- 118, 154. -- 170. Titheby 97, 98. -- 302, 303,
304, 312. Thoroton or Thurverton 113, 114, 117. -- 119, 137, 155, 170, 312.
Torlaston 3, 42, 63, 71, 84. -- 117, 120, 312. Whatton 119, 120, 136, 140. --
312, 451, 493. Wareberg 71, 84. Wiverton 26, 75, 81, 97, 98. -- 102, 105, 110,
119, 188, 303, 304.
Newark Wapentak 156. -- 190.

Alverton 156, 165, 166. -- 167. Balderton 177, 178, 183. -- 191, 196, 312,
324, 334. Barneby 49, 183, 184. -- 186, 188, 193, 196, 312, 315, 323, 324, 344.
Brodholme 194, 195. -- 197, 423, 433. Besthorpe 191. -- 312. Clifton North and
South 7, 33, 121, 191, 192. -- 194, 195, 312, 328, 330, 351, 361, 365, 422,
482. Coddington 179, 183, 185. -- 186, 191, 193, 196, 303, 312, 323, 324, 331,
344, 434. Collingham North and South 2, 75, 167, 185, 190. -- 193, 195, 282,
303, 312, 320, 323. Cotham 25, 110, 111, 174. -- 179, 193, 196, 302, 312, 445.
Dalington 114, 156, 165, 166. Dernethorp 136, 190. -- 303, 328. Elston 33, 75,
167, 171, 172. -- 178, 179, 183, 186, 192, 193, 196, 278, 312, 344. Farndon
170, 183. -- 196, 312, 324, 344. Flawburgh 156, 165, 166. -- 167, 171. Flaufore
185, 193. Gretton or Girton 191. -- 193, 196, 312. Hawton 175, 180. -- 186,
190, 196, 303, 312. Hareby 124, 192, 193, 194. -- 195, 196, 322, 328.
Kilvington 158, 160, 165. -- 167, 186, 196, 312. Landford 74, 88, 89, 187. --
193. Mering 188. -- 191. Newark 148, 165, 167, 178, 179, 185, 186, 191, 193,
195, 196. -- 254, 282.312, 324, 331, 352, 387, 390, 445, 477. Scarle 191. --
193, 196, 312. Shelton 3, 167. -- 169, 171, 190, 312. Sibtherpe 119, 123, 136,
137, 144, 167, 168. -- 172, 193, 312, 403, 479. Sireston 171. -- 177, 178, 179,
183, 186, 193, 196, 312, 344. Spaldford 7, 191, 193. -- 194, 196. Staunton 156.
-- 165, 167, 312. Stoke 75, 167, 172, 174, 177. -- 179, 183, 186, 193, 196,
256, 312, 324, 344. Thorney 191, 193. -- 195, 196, 312. Thorpe 167, 174, 179.
-- 193, 312. Wiggesley 186, 191. -- 193, 194, 195, 196. Winthorpe 185, 186. --
196, 312.
Broxtow Wapentak 205. --

Annesley 49, 192, 251. -- 254, 311, 461, 506. Annesley Woodhouse 252, 253. --
493. Aldesworth 9, 207, 219, 232, 233, 244. -- 323. Algarthorp 233, 234. Arnal
209, 217, 235. -- 272, 292, 299, 311. Attenborow 43, 51, 205. -- 207, 218, 231,
311, 424, 504. Baseford 69, 233. -- 246, 283, 311, 344, 353. Beauvale 240. --
251, 257, 433, 492. Bestwood 218, 244, 258. -- 435, 505, 506. Beston 207, 210.
-- 311, 331, 352, 504. Bilburgh 229, 231. -- 232, 311. Blidworth 275. -- 297,
313, 314, 506, 507. Bramcote 66, 167, 205, 207, 209. -- 220.231, 311, 324, 504.
Brinsley 247. -- 249, 250, 251. Broxtow 3, 228, 232.233, 244. Bulwell 228, 231,
236, 243, 246. -- 311, 387, 431. Bullwell Park 228, 247. -- 258, 262.
Chillewell 43, 51, 66, 205, 206. -- 209, 218, 231, 504. Cossale 35, 220, 222,
228. -- 231, 244, 253, 262, 311, 461. Eastwood 208, 209, 212, 231, 237. -- 311,
389. Felley 206, 229, 253. -- 268, 273, 433. Greseley 238. -- 240, 243, 311,
421. Hempshill 231, 243. -- 247. Hucknall Torcard 63, 73, 75, 95, 188, 207,
251, 256. -- 260, 262, 266, 311. Hucknall Huthwait 266. -- Hardwick 45, 264,
265. -- 339, 452, 462. Kighton 217. -- Kimberley 231, 238, 243. -- Kirkeby in
Ashfeild 45, 51, 186, 256, 262. -- 311, 324, 450. Kirkeby Woodhouse 45, 252,
253, 262, 265. -- Lenton 6, 29, 42, 49, 65, 67, 81, 82, 105, 206, 210, 212,
217. -- 220, 223, 229, 244, 246, 260, 277, 311, 324, 355, 433. Lindeby 218,
258. -- 272, 311, 435, 505. Mapurley 235. -- Maunsfeild 266, 267, 271, 272. --
311, 341, 367, 368, 402, 405, 410, 414, 415, 428, 431, 435, 462, 463, 472, 489,
506. Maunsfeild Woodhouse 77, 266, 272, 273. -- 311, 463, 506. Morton 217. --
Nettleworth 163, 272, 274. -- Newstede 211, 212, 228, 229, 247, 257, 260. --
325, 379, 383, 384, 396, 426, 427, 429, 433, 492, 506. Newthorpe 218, 238. --
243, 251. Nutthall 244. -- 311. Paplewick 218, 260. -- 311.429, 506. Radford
218, 219. -- 246, 256, 312. Selston 240, 249, 250. -- 267, 271, 312. Skekby
267.272, 312. Stapleford 13, 207, 211. -- 218, 231, 312, 504. Strelley 64, 229.
-- 232, 297, 312. Sutton Passeis 209, 220. -- 331, 352, 492. Sutton in Ashfeild
7, 266. -- 268, 270, 272, 302, 312, 506. Teversalt 254, 262, 268. -- 311.
Touton 136, 205, 206, 207. -- 218, 389, 504. Trowell 192, 209, 216. -- 231,
247, 297, 312, 504. Wandesly 248, 251. Watnow Chaworth and Cauntlou 167, 218,
231, 242. -- 244, 251, 266. Wollaton 35, 209, 220. -- 234, 312.
Thurgarton a Lee Wapentak 276. --

Averham 192, 302, 303, 312, 325. -- 331, 336, 381. Batheley 316, 339, 347. --
Besthorp 272, 341. -- 373, 377, 378, 434. Bleseby 95, 233, 252, 283, 309. --
313, 316. Bulcote 148, 153, 158, 252, 253, 282, 285, 286. -- 311. Burton Jorz
147, 148, 192, 252, 281, 282, 283. -- 295, 311. Calverton 92, 110, 231, 234,
275, 296. -- 297, 298, 313, 314. Carleton by Nottingham 75, 146, 148, 181, 186,
222, 256, 279. -- 280, 375. Carleton South 231, 342, 345. -- Carleton North, or
on Trent 188, 272, 314, 316, 331, 339, 352. -- 373, 410. Cathorpe 148, 282,
288. -- Caunton 24, 148, 282, 312, 314, 322, 337, 341. -- 373. Colwick over and
nether 35, 75, 188, 254, 256, 278. -- 279, 280, 285, 311, 375. Crumbwell 282,
312, 325, 328, 353. -- Deanehall ^4, 328, 341. -- Easthorp 316, 319. Edingley
313, 314, 316, 319. -- 320.323. Eperston 92, 285, 293. -- 311. Earleshagh 322,
341. -- 343. Farnesfeld 305, 313, 314, 316, 319, 320. -- Fiskerton 97, 110,
303, 304, 305, 307. -- 316. Fledburgh 312, 361, 364. -- Gedling 54, 75, 147,
148, 181, 256, 279, 280, 281. -- 285, 295, 311, 362, 375, 467, 470. Gibbesmere
95, 172, 252, 253, 283, 309. -- 313, 316. Gourton 95, 252, 283, 308, 309. --
313, 316. Gresthorpe 121, 359, 361. -- 456, 457. Gunnoldston and the Spittle
39, 40, 44, 89, 218, 231, 232, 299. -- 303, 311. Greaves Lane 316, 319, 320,
462. Gunthorp 148, 282, 283, 286, 288. -- 303, 306, 473. Hexgrave 317.
Hockerton 111, 312, 323, 332. -- Horspoole 300, 304. Hoveringham 92, 135, 148,
282, 302, 305. -- 307, 311, 320. Halloughton or Hawton 310. -- 311, 313. Holme
75, 178, 186, 315, 330, 344, 347. -- 351, 434. Halum 313, 314, 316, 318, 319.
-- 323. Kelham 156, 192, 207, 260, 274, 305, 312, 328, 329. -- 333, 351, 352,
362, 434, 467, 470. Kirsall 322, 336, 338, 340. -- 372, 434. Kneesale 10, 12,
312, 315, 336, 338. -- 341, 372, 380, 420, 440. Knapthorpe 110, 111, 146, 342,
373. Kirtlington 192, 244, 302, 313, 319, 321. -- 328, 334. Lambley 236, 282.
-- 311. Loudham 148, 150, 252, 275, 282, 285, 286, 288. -- 293, 303, 311, 473.
Maplebek 272, 312, 336. -- 337, 341, 342, 378, 434. Marneham 9, 64, 192, 312,
339, 363. -- 443, 461, 473. Muskham South 239, 251, 310, 311, 313, 314, 342,
345. -- 377. Muskham North 147, 148, 262, 282, 310, 311, 313, 314, 315, 330,
339, 341, 347. -- 351, 436. Moreton 252, 303, 305, 307, 313, 316, 434.
Middlethorp 314, 322, 341, 350. -- Notowne 309. -- 316. Normanton by Southwell
310, 314, 316, 319. -- 323. Normanton 9, 121, 312, 316, 361. -- 363, 364, 365,
366, 419, 453. Norwood 317. Norwell 310, 311, 313, 314, 316, 341, 350. -- 352.
Norwell Woodhouse 314, 330, 350. -- Ossington 82, 218, 260, 312, 330, 336, 351,
355. -- Osmundthorp 316, 319, 320, 323. Oxton 92, 96, 124, 229, 231, 234, 275,
297. -- 310, 311, 313, 314, 324. Parklathes 329, 331, 434. Rolleston 185, 207,
303, 308, 312, 314, 323. -- 344. Rohag 322, 332, 333, 334, 335, 433, 434.
Salterford 92, 110, 296. -- Skegby 339, 344, 359, 361, 364, 366. -- 382.
Sneynton 186, 276. -- 285, 301, 312, 493. Starthorp 262, 274, 324. -- 326, 328,
365, 434. Southwell 46, 95, 145, 254, 272, 275, 297, 307, 309, 310. -- 313,
321, 332, 340, 341, 390, 414, 434, 479. Stoke Bardolf 54, 75, 148, 256, 279 --
285, 395. Strathaw 366. -- 382. Sutton upon Trent, and Sternthorp 123, 188,
312, 316, 330, 339, 351, 352, 359. -- 361, 364, 366, 420, 446. Thurgarton 13,
73, 75, 78, 94, 95, 97, 98, 103, 110, 136, 153, 180, 191, 295, 299, 302. --
306, 307, 309, 314, 433, 492. Upton 313, 314, 317, 318, 319, 320. -- 323.
Weston 88, 113, 186, 312, 339, 362. -- 402, 419, 420, 467, 470, 482. Westhorp
316. Willoughby 314, 351. -- Winkeburne 312, 328, 336. -- Woodborough 31, 180,
235, 288, 290. -- 293, 294, 295, 297, 303, 310, 313, 314. Woodcotes 365, 366.
-- Wulsthorp 288. --
Bassetlow Wapentak 367. --

Allerton 2, 10, 312, 339, 340, 381, 405, 434, 437. -- 446. Almton 218, 260,
338, 339, 355, 372. -- 373, 378, 397, 413, 434. Askham 312, 390. -- 479. Auclid
328, 479. -- Babworth 312, 408, 421, 422, 426, 444, 460, 483. -- Barneby 397,
444, 472, 473, 474, 475. -- 480, 481. Bevercotes 270, 312, 383, 386, 441. --
473. Bilby 9, 483. -- Bildesthorp 312, 367. -- 434. Belgh or Bellers Grange
447. -- 451, 452. Blyth 112, 146, 288, 312, 362, 395, 408, 411, 426, 433, 438,
440, 441, 453, 460, 467, 468, 469, 470, 472. -- 475, 479. Bole 316, 414, 417,
418, 421. -- 422, 423, 426, 460, 479. Bollome 390, 409. -- 411, 413, 419.
Boughton 312, 315, 337, 339, 372, 378, 413, 425, 434, 438. -- 485. Budby 272,
439. -- 505. Beckingham 267, 270, 310, 311, 313, 314, 316, 390, 414, 421, 422.
-- 427, 428, 485. Bonbusk 447. -- Bothumsell 272, 312, 361, 412, 442, 444. --
466, 472, 480, 481, 483. Burton West 66, 231, 312, 390, 417. -- 421, 422, 428,
482. Carleton in Lindric 272, 313, 444, 463. -- Carberton 272, 313, 436. --
451, 505. Cledreton 402. Clarborough 339, 382, 397, 407, 408, 410, 412. -- 418,
425, 430, 432, 443, 454, 462, 479, 481, 485. Claworth 267, 270, 312, 419. --
424, 480, 485. Clipston 272, 313, 435. -- 440, 473, 505, 506. Clumber 272, 339,
458, 463. -- 481, 482. Cuckney 421, 447. -- 451. Colingthwait 447. -- 451.
Costhorp 467. -- Cottam 339, 393, 405. -- 422, 432, 443. Cotes 405. -- 414,
418. Cratela 368.370. -- Darleton 313, 314, 322, 365, 385, 387. -- 388, 435.
Dunham 209, 302, 310, 311, 313, 314, 322, 361, 387, 388. -- 394, 400, 484.
Drayton East 313, 322, 365, 382, 384, 386, 387, 388, 390.397, 485. Drayton West
313, 339, 413, 442. -- Eaton or Idleton 311, 313, 398. -- 408, 414, 426, 460,
481, 485. Edenstow 262, 272, 313, 436. -- Eykring 272, 312, 368. -- 373, 405,
434, 446. Egmanton 262, 313, 375, 379. -- 382, 393, 394, 397, 415, 420, 443.
Elkesley 313, 382, 397, 430, 442, 443, 444, 445. -- 466, 480. Everton 124, 313,
397, 407, 417, 425. -- 460, 479, 481. Farworth 470, 472, 474, 479. -- Fenton
382, 406, 415. -- 416, 432, 485. Finningley 313, 328, 479. -- Gamelston 313,
379, 397. -- 412, 420, 430, 442, 480, 485. Gledthorp 400, 446. -- 451, 452.
Grimston 272, 320, 339, 341, 365, 370. -- 377, 382, 397, 440. Greenley Little
388, 406, 408, 410, 413, 416, 426, 432, 460, 481, 485. Gringley on the Hill
121, 126, 313, 409, 412, 424. -- 425, 428, 453. Grove 274, 313, 362, 384, 388,
400. -- 482. Gateford 642, 460. -- Gunthorp 427, 428. -- Hayton 339, 407, 409,
410, 411. -- 420, 422, 426, 460, 479, 480, 485 Harworth 288, 290, 313, 339,
470, 477. Hermeston 469. -- Hesle 290, 477. -- Hablesthorp 414, 418. --
Hatfeild Division and Grange 433. -- 397, 447.451. Hedon 78, 270, 313, 379,
388, 394. -- 400. Harewell 124, 417, 425. -- 460. Hodsak 54, 55, 362, 408, 467.
-- 470.472, 473, 474. Holme 447. -- 467. -- 469, 471. Holbeck Woodhouse 88,
186, 421, 422, 447. -- 452. Houghton 375, 382, 386, 397, 408, 434, 439, 440,
442. -- Kilton 426, 458, 460, 462. -- Kirkton 313, 339, 377. -- 380, 382, 397,
434, 439, 441. Kingshaugh 366, 387. -- Laneham 313, 390. -- 409, 411, 417, 422,
479. Laxton 312, 341, 367, 368, 372, 373. -- 377, 381, 382, 420, 440, 443.
Laxton Morehouse 315, 376. -- 381, 382, 411, 420. Leverton South 231, 272, 313,
390, 405. -- 411, 416, 431, 432, 443. Leverton North 231, 303, 310, 311, 313,
375, 380, 411, 413. -- 418. Langwath 447. -- 451. Littleburgh 231, 313, 382,
406, 414. -- 417, 418, 428, 432, 434. Lound 399, 406, 411, 412, 444, 463, 481.
-- Lound Hall 444. -- Limpole 290, 339, 477. -- Markham East Great 288, 290,
313, 362, 385. -- 388, 395, 421, 467, 470. Markham West Little 288, 290, 313,
381, 382, 383, 384. -- 386, 408, 426, 443, 460, 485. Marton 290, 339, 470, 477.
-- Moreton 397, 434, 444, 471, 483. -- Mattersey 9, 313, 391, 397, 399, 420,
426, 430, 431, 433, 444, 460, 480. -- 481. Mattersey Thorp 397, 480. -- 481.
Milneton 383, 408, 426, 442, 443, 460. Misterton 260, 313, 411, 419, 421, 422,
424, 427, 428. -- 453, 463, 482. Misne 313, 379, 397, 419, 430. -- 480, 482.
Mirthil Brig 385, 407, 444. Norton 447. -- 451. Nornay 474, 479. Normanton or
North Morton 388, 466, 483. -- Ordsall 313, 362, 388, 399, 400, 402, 408, 410,
413, 426, 444, 460, 464. -- Osberton 9, 64, 363, 458, 461. -- Oswardbeck 272,
405, 406, 410, 412, 414, 415, 429, 431. -- 489. Oulecotes 140, 339, 451, 467,
470. -- 474. Perlethorp or Pevrel-thorp 3, 439. -- Plumtre 69, 290, 339, 390,
444, 470, 472, 477. -- 479. Ragnall 313, 314, 322, 365, 387. -- 388, 435.
Rampton 298, 311, 313, 362, 391. -- 395, 422, 431, 467. Ratcliff 458, 462. --
Radford 121, 359, 361, 363, 399, 453. -- 458, 461. Ranby 9, 272, 400, 444, 480,
483. -- Ranskill 390, 402, 426, 460, 474, 475. -- 479. Retford East 313, 399,
406, 407. -- 409, 412, 418, 422, 426, 434, 435, 443, 460, 462, 463, 485.
Retford West 397, 402, 408, 417, 426, 460, 480, 482. -- 485. Ryton 272, 385,
458, 462. -- 466. Rosington 313, 485. -- Rufford 187, 331, 342, 368, 370, 372,
373, 377, 378, 433. -- 492, 506. Rumwood 505, 506. Saundby 231, 313, 390, 409,
417, 418, 420. -- Schidrington 373, 377. -- 380. Scofton 458, 462. -- Scrooby
390, 399, 406, 426, 479. -- Scaftworth 411, 413, 425. -- 479, 481. Serleby 408,
473, 475. -- Shireokes 342, 426, 460, 461. -- Sloswick 253, 454, 458, 461. --
Stokeham 313, 305, 394. -- Stockwith 411, 412, 424, 427, 428. -- Sturton 231,
313, 314, 406, 411, 415, 416. -- 419, 422, 426, 428, 431, 460, 480, 482, 485.
Stirap 140, 339, 408, 411, 451, 470. -- 474, 479. Sutton 313, 386, 390, 399,
406, 407, 410, 412, 425, 479, 481. -- Swansterne 387, 388. -- Sulkholme 274,
405, 447. -- Thouresby 272, 436. -- 439, 440. Tilnes North and South 408, 410.
-- 413, 479, 481. Torworth 408, 426, 464, 474, 475. -- 479. Truswell 6, 121,
172, 314, 402. -- 431, 453. Tuxford 150, 262, 283, 313, 369, 377, 378, 380. --
384, 387, 393, 405, 434 446. Upton 13, 379, 388, 394. -- Walesby 288, 290, 313,
373, 377, 378, 380, 382, 397, 413, 425, 434, 439, 440. -- 443. Wallingwelles
220, 384, 433, 463. -- 466. Walkringham 121, 126, 260, 313, 411, 423, 424, 426.
-- 429, 453. Walkre 260, 427. Warsop 272, 274, 313, 360, 361, 369, 380, 381,
405, 421, 434, 446. -- 461. Wellam 406, 407, 408, 410. -- 411, 413, 418, 421,
422, 425, 431, 432, 460, 481, 485. Wellam Morehouse 406, 408, 410, 411, 413,
418, 460, 485. Welbeck 127, 133, 141, 143, 331, 400, 405, 433, 444, 450. --
464. Welley 313, 365, 370. -- 382, 397, 407, 413, 433, 434, 441. Walley 447. --
Wheatley North and South 65, 231, 288, 290, 313, 315, 390, 406, 407, 408, 417,
418. -- 424, 425, 431, 432, 479. Wiston 297, 361, 406, 407, 416, 417, 420. --
424, 431, 432, 456, 480, 482. Willoughby 373, 377. -- 397, 439, 440. Wirksop 2,
31, 34, 121, 253, 254, 255, 313, 359, 361, 363, 399, 404, 408, 410, 411, 412,
413, 424, 426, 427, 433, 453. -- 460, 462, 463, 466, 492. Wympton 314, 322,
387, 388. -- Willay Wood 505.
Nottingham 6, 63, 71, 144, 207, 218, 228, 281, 262, 276, 311, 375, 398, 407,
434, 479, 488. --
The Castle 54, 88, 489. --
Forest of Shirewood 145, 252, 262, 314, 375, 436, 505. --
FINIS.
The Faults of the Printer may be thus corrected with a Pen, before the Book be
Read.
PAge 2. b. line 1. for Maisint make Maisnil, p* 3. a. for Rogerus de
Veteriponte make Robertus de Veteriponte, p. 3. b. for Torteston make
Torlaston, and on the same Col. before read Sandebec, and after read Aslacton,
and on the former Col. in the Marg. read St. Lo, and in the Genealogy Amira,
and Robertus de Veteriponte, p. 4. a. r. Marler, p. 10. is marked 15. which
must be corrected, p. 13. a. r. Grentmaisnil, b. for Nauton r. Hawton, p. (...)
r. Mayr^ll, p. 20. b. r. Fento^, p. 23. a. r. Kale, Ib. r. LX. Ib. b. r.
Rempston, p. 25. is marked 9. p. 26. a. r. Swannington, b. r. C^ss^oy, p. 32.
is printed 28. p. 32. in Geneal. delearur prim. Elia^ p. 34. b. l. 21. for or
r. on, p. ^5. b. r. Ruddington, p. 37. a. and b. r. Berue, p. 401 a. r.
Tibshelf, Ibid. a. l. 29. dele of, p. 44. a. for others r. Oaths, p. 43. b.
for Maria r. Christiana, p. 38. b. for difference r. distress, p. 32. a. r.
Sidswik, p. 51. a. r. Toueton, p. 66. b. l. 13. after said add Thomas, p. 65.
in the Title r. Rushel. p. 72. in the Title r. Bingh. l. 35. b. add except some
Clos^s, ib. r. Turchi, p. 73. a: r. Carcolston, 74. b. c. Fitz-Herbert, p. 73.
a. r. 8d. p. 74. l. ult. Genealog. dele ara^s, p. 95. a. r. Frane, p. 100. b.
r. Katherin, p. 102. b. r. Bov. in l. 12. and in l. 15. r. Car. p. 115. l. ult.
r. Militis, p. 116. a. r. Helmeflac, p. 117. a. l. 47. r. ten Cottages, p. 124.
b. r. hold, p. 129. a. l. 3. r. to Ri --, ib. l. 4. r. of, p. 168. b. r.
Congha^, p. 180. a. l. 31. r. Varry, p. ^55. a. r. Mallet.

There are some other faults of words, letters, and points, and also of the
numbers of some Pages which the observing Reader may easily correct.


