THE ANNALS and HISTORY OF Cornelius Tacitus: His Account of the ANCIENT
GERMANS' AND THE LIFE of AGRICOLA.

Made English by several Hands.

WITH THE POLITICAL REFLECTIONS AND HISTORICAL NOTES OF Monsieur AMELOT De La
Houssay, and the Learned Sir HENRY SAVILE.

In Three Volumes.

VOL. I.

LONDON: Printed for Matthew Gillyflower at the Spread-Eagle in
Westminster Hall, MDCXCVIII.

The WORKS of C. CORNELIUS TACITUS


To the Right Honorable WILLIAM Lord DIGBY, Baron of GEASHIL In the Kingdom of
Ireland: This Volume of CORNELIUS TACITUS, is most humbly Dedicated, by,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's Most Devoted Servant, M. GILLYFLOWER.

A CHARACTER OF C. Cornelius Tacitus AND HIS WRITINGS.
By Iustus Lipsius.
CAIUS CORNELIUS TACITUS, whom we commonly find mentioned with the Praenomen of
Publius, descended not from that Noble Cornelian Family, so Celebrated in the
Roman Senate and Story, but from another House of the same Name, though of less
Note and Quality. The time of his Birth, so far as I am able to Judge, must
have been about the latter end of Ti. Claudius his Reign. Whether his Father
and Grandfather bore public Offices, or raised themselves to any of the
Honorable Posts in the Roman State, is a Matter too dark and distant for me to
be positive in; but, if I may be allowed to interpose my private Opinion, it
seems to me more probably, that he Monsieur Bail has truly observed, that in
this, Lipsius contradicts himself; for in his Note on those Words, Dignitatem a
Vespasiano, etc. Hist. Lib. 1. he makes the Procuratorship of Gallia Belg^ca
mentioned here shortly after to have been conferred by Vespasian, not upon
Tacitus himself, but upon his Father. To which I add, That the Circumstance of
his being near Pliny's Age makes it highly improbable, that Vespasian should
employ him in such a Trust. For if Pliny were but 18 when his Uncle died, that
is, in the 2d of Titus; and if Tacitus were no great matter ^lder than he, at
what Age must we suppose him made by Vespasian Procurator of Gallia Belgica.
Now, if his Father had this Post, then it is plain, that Tacitus was not the
first Man of Quality in his Family, that Office being, as himself styles it in
the Life of Agricola, Equestris Nobilitas: But whatever Lipsius has taken away
from Tacitus his Birth, Morcry has made up, who by a mistake in the other
extreme, represents him as a Branch of the Noble Cornelian F^mily.
was the first Man of Quality in his Family. His first Rise was under
Vespasian, who (as Pliny acquaints us) advanced him to the Procuratorship of
Gallia Belgica, and made him Superintendant of that Province. Upon his return
to Rome, he had the Office of Quaestor conferred upon him, (if I mistake not)
by Titus: Thus much at least is out of Dispute, that he, in his own Books of
History, acknowledges the Dignity to which Vespasian had first promoted him, to
have received such Accessions from Titus: And what Advancement this could be
except the Office of Quaestor, or that of Aedile, is not easy to determine,
since we are well assured, he did not attain to the other of Praetor till the
Fourteenth Consulate of Domitian, which (by the way) shows us the mistake of a
certain Learned Person, who will needs make Tacitus to have been Praetor in the
Ninth Consulate of Domitian, and the Second of Verginius Rufus. For Tacitus
himself is express in the Eleventh of his Annals, that he, as one of the
Quindecimviri, (whose Business it was to see the the Rites and Religious
Ceremonies duly observed, and at the same time Praetor too, was particularly
careful in ordering the A Solemnity regularly repeated but once in a hundred
years, instituted by Valor. Publicola, celebrated by Augustus after long
intermission, then by Claudius out of time, and now by Domitian, computing from
those of Augustus, and the seventh from their first Institution. See Alex. ab
Alexand. Lib. 5. C. 24. and Lib. 6. C. 19.
Ludi Saeculares, exhibited by Domitian. Now these were celebrated in the Eight
Hundred and Forty First year after the Founding of Rome; which Computation
falls Five years later than Vertrunius has placed them. But of this Account
Antiquity has left us Evident Proof, there being still extant several Coins
with this Inscription: IMP. CAES. FLAV. DOMITIANUS. AUG. GERM. PONT. MAX. TR.
POTEST. VIII. COS. XIV. LUD. SAEC. FECIT.

After this it was a great while before his Promotion to the Consulship, which
happened under Nerva, in the year of Rome Eight Hundred and Fifty, he being
chosen into the place of F. Verginius Rufus deceased; The same Person, who with
such an inflexible firmness of Mind disdained the Offers of the Empire made him
by the German Legions, and whose Funeral Oration was spoken by Tacitus himself.
Some have pretended, that he was Banished under Domitian; but this surmise I am
apt chiefly to charge upon the Temper of the common People, which being
extremely given to amuse the World with some very remarkable Events attending
the Lives of Great Men, thought Tacitus too considerable to pass without
something of this kind. For good Authority to countenance this Opinion I meet
with none. The utmost my Reading furnishes me with, is only an Account of his
being absent from Rome for some years* and this was at the very time of his
Father-in-Law Julius Agricola's Death, when Pompeius Conlega and Cor. Priscus
were Consuls: But that absence seems to have been the effect not of Necessity
but Choice; no Exile imposed, but a Retirement of a Person sick of Trouble and
Business, and desirous to be quiet, and yet rid of a bad World. And as for that
other Fancy of the same Authors, That Domitian was at last prevailed upon to
recall him from a Ten years Exile, it is Fiction all over: Nor can I think how
this particular term of Ten years came to be fixed upon, except their Heads
were full of the Trojan War, and so applied the continuance of that to the
matter then before them: For every Man awake and in his Senses, must know, that
after those Ludi Saeculares, (at which time Tacitus was undoubtedly Praetor and
actually in Rome) Domitian lived but Seven years, for in the Eighth he was
Murdered by the Conspirators. And this is the Account of Tacitus with regard to
his Public Character.

As for his private Capacity; we find, that in the Year of Rome Eight Hundred
and Thirty, he Married the Daughter of Agricola, then Consul with Vespasian,
with whom he lived many years in great Affection and constant good Agreement.
There is little doubt to be made of his leaving Issues, for from him I am very
apt to believe, M. Claudius Tacitus sprung, who many Descents after was called
Emperor; (for so the Coins name him, and not P. Annius Tacitus, as we commonly
find him called.) And this Person, Flavius Vopiscus says, used to speak of our
Tacitus as his Ancestor.

The former part of his Life was employed in public Pleadings and the Practice
of the Law, but when he grew into ( b) years he betook himself to Writing his
History. From some Passages in Pliny's Epistles we may plainly perceive, that
Tacitus was esteemed one of the best Orators of those times, and that several
Orations of his were published. He was Contemporary with Quintilian, both the
Pliny's, Julius Florus, Secundus, Maternus, M. Aper, Eprius Marcellus, and
Vipsanius Messalla. The first Compositions of this kind were certainly his
Books of History, beginning at Nero's Death, and continued down to the Reign of
Nerva. After these, he wrote his Annals, reaching from the Death of Augustus to
the end of Nero, of both which Undertakings, how much and what Parts are lost,
I shall have occasion to observe hereafter. Fulgentius mentions some Books of
Ingenious Sayings attributed to him, of which he produces this small Fragment,
Caesi itaque morum eclogio in filiis relicto. The exact time of his Death I
pretend not to determine, though I think I am not mistaken in that of his
Birth, for the computing of which, Pliny the younger has given one hint
sufficient in the Seventh Book of his Epistles, Epist. 20.
where he says, That he was near upon the matter as old as Tacitus; and he
declares, that he was in See Pliny's Epist. XVI. and XX. Lib. VI.
his Eighteenth year when that Eruption of Vesuvius happened, in which his
Uncle was lost. Now that Burning of the Mountain happened in the Second year of
Titus, and therefore Pliny, according to this reckoning, was certainly born in
the Year of Rome Eight Hundred and Sixteen; Memmius Regulus and Verginius Rufus
then Consuls. But now Pliny has told us in the same Epistle, that Tacitus was
somewhat the Elder of the two, so that he must needs have been Born about the
latter end of Claudius, or more probably the beginning of Nero, and he lived,
as I conceive, till the time of Adrian. It is observable that he began not to
compose his History till Nerva was dead: This is abundantly manifest from the
Title he gives him in the beginning of the First Book. For Divus Nerva, Nerva
of Blessed Memory, is an Appellation of Honor never applied to any Prince in
his own Life time.

AN ACCOUNT OF C. Cornelius Tacitus, FROM F. de la Mothe de le-Vayer, IN HIS
Judgment of the HISTORIANS, Both Ancient and Modern.
THE Reason why all the Impressions of Tacitus now extant place his Annals
before his History, is, I presume, because they begin higher, and are drawn
down from the latter end of Augustus, to that of Nero, (though even of his
Reign the two So it should be deux not ouze.
last years are wanting) whereas the History sets out from the Death of that
Monster of a Prince, and was continued to the Auspicious Government of Nerva
and Trajan. But notwithstanding this Order in the Book it self, there is no
doubt, but in Time, the History had Precedence. This, as nearest to his own
Knowledge, was his first Composition, and accordingly in the Eleventh of his
Annals we find it quoted by himself, and the Reader referred to what he had
formerly Written concerning Domitian, whose Actions he no where concerns
himself to give any account of that we know, except in that part of his
Writings only, which are published under the Title of his Histories. Of these
we have now but Five Books remaining, though I believe Lipsius does not guess
much amiss In all probability there must have been many more; for the Times
treated of in the Parts that are lost seem equally fruitful of matter, and
indeed the term is much longer than what we find here mentioned: From the Death
of Nero to that of Domitian being 28 years and 3 months. Nero died the 10th of
June, An. V. C. 819. and Domitian was killed in September. 847.
, when he thinks that Ten at least have been lost. And indeed, any Man who
considers, that from Galba to Nerva and His Design in this Piece was laid no
farther than Domitian's Death, Nerva and Trajan being set aside as an Argument
for a fresh Undertaking. See Note (b).
Trajan contains the space of One and Twenty years at least, will find little
difficulty to persuade himself, that by much the greater part of this Work is
wanting, when he reflects, that the Matters contained in the Five Books we now
have were most, if not all, transacted within the compass of one single year.
The Style of this Part is something more Copious and Florid than that of his
Annals, which are written in a close dry way, as the Subject indeed required.
Though the Truth is, the particular Talent of Tacitus throughout, is a Grave
Majestic manner of Writing, a sort of Eloquence not very different from that
strength and sublimity of Expression, which the Masters of Rhetoric have
observed, as the constant Character of Demosthenes, and that wherein his
Excellency consisted.

Among the many Critics, who take upon them to find fault with Tacitus, those
are without question most to be excused, who complain of his being dark and
difficult to be understood. This proceeds very frequently from a way he has of
giving short Hints, and leaving his Narrations abrupt and imperfect. But some
part no doubt of this Fault belongs not so properly to the Author as to the
Errors of the Copies, and Corruptions of his Original Text, which make him
much more intricate. This Reflection was in Justice but his due, since in other
Passages which have escaped those Depravations, we can easily give our selves a
tolerable Account of his Meaning. But however, considering that Tacitus,
proposed to himself Thucy^^des for his Pattern, and that both Thucydides
flourished some 60 or 70 years before Demos^henes, the one about the 87th, the
other about the 105th Olympiad. This th^^efore of D^mosthenes being the common
pattern to both these Hist^^ians, is a mistake.
of them made it their Business to tread in the Steps of Demosthenes, we are
not to wonder if this Historian retain somewhat of that harshness and severe
manner so remarkable in those two Eminent Greek Writers. And what Antiquity
applauded as an Excellence in Them, it would be hard measure to charge as a
Fault upon One, who seems to have made it his great aim ^o Write after Them.
And in Truth, as (...) Wines are chiefly recommended by a gratef^^^ roughness
upon the Palate, and the darkn^^s of Temples adds to the Reverence of the P^^e,
and heightens the Devotion of some who come to Worship there; so there are a
sort of Readers, who think a rough dark Style an Advantage, because this
awakens the Attention more powerfully, raises the Mind, and keeps it fixed,
thus giving occasion for many Observations, which a Man would never take the
time or pains to make upon an Author, whose Sense is easy and obvious.

As for those who have the Confidence to Blame Tacitus for not Writing good
Latin, I look upon them as Men not well in their Senses, and therefore rather
in a Condition for Pity, than a Serious Answer. And yet two great Lawyers, it
must be confessed, have been of this Opinion. Alciat, who pretends that the
Expression of Paulus Iovius was much to be preferred before the Thorny Phrase
(so he terms it) of this ancient Historian; and Ferretus, who condemns Tacitus
likewise for a Diction, which he can by no means think good Roman. Than which
Objection, nothing was ever more ridiculous; and the just Indignation raised by
so unreasonable a Censure, provokes me to say, That in all appearance, the very
meanest Cook or Groom belonging to Tacitus, spoke better Latin than either
Alciat or F^rretus; who, allowing them the Commendations due to their great
Skill in the Law, were yet by no means competent Judges of the Matter now
before us. For Tacitus is not presently to be run down for an ill Writer,
because he has not all the Beauties of Caesar, or Cicero. Eloquence is not
confined to one particular manner; several sorts of it are commendable in their
respective Ways; and the Latin Tongue, we know, flourished in all, though not
in all equally, down to the Time of Adrian, which is since Tacitus: And he in
his own Time had acquired such Reputation, that the Principal Orators
contemporary with him, made no difficutly to give him Precedence in their own
Art. Of these I reckon Pliny the Younger one of the most considerable; and he
in several of his Epistles declares, that he bore a great Regard ^o Tacitus, as
one of the most Eloquent Persons in that Age. In the Twentieth of the First
Book, he refers himself to his Judgment, for determining a Dispute depending
between him and an Eminent Lawyer, whether copious and long Orations, or short
and concise ones, were more proper for Pleadings at the Bar. In another place,
describing the whole Solemnity of Verginius Rusus his Funeral, he observes, as
the last and chief Instance of the Good Fortune which befell him, L. 2. Ep. 1.
that the making his Funeral Oration, fell into so Masterly a Hand as
Tacitus's. In the account given his Friend Arrian, how the great Action entered
against a Proconsul of Africa for cheating the Public had succeeded, he
observes, L. 2. Ep. 10.
that Cornelius Tacitus replied upon the Defendant's Counsel with wondrous
Eloquence and Skill, and particularly with that Gravity and Weight so
remarkable in all his Way of expressi^g himself. When Pliny was desirous to
provide a Public Master for Instructing the Youth of his own Country at Como,
L. 4. Ep. 13.
Tacitus was the Person thought fittest to be applied to, as One whom all the
Wits of the Age affected to be known to, and most capable of choosing an
Undertaker of so considerable a Charge. I forbear the particular Descriptions
he gives him in two several Letters of the Death of his Uncle, and the Eruption
of Vesuvius, L. 6. Ep. 16. and 20.
in the manner related by Tacitus in his History; the earnest Request of having
his Name mentioned there, which passionate Address I think my self obliged to
insert in his own Terms, (L. 7. Ep. 33.) Auguror, nec me fallit Augurium,
Historias ^uas immortales futuras, quo magis illis, ing^nue fatebor, inseri
cupio. Na^ si esse nobis curae solet, ut facies nostra ab optimo quoque
Artific^ exprimatur, nonne debemus optare, ut operibus nostris similis tui
Scriptor Praedicatorque contingat?
I e^sily foresee, and dare depend upon the Truth of my Prediction, That your
Histories will last for ever: And this Presumption, I must freely own, makes me
very ambitious of having my Name read there: For if we are commonly very nice
what Hand our Pictures are done by, sure it is much more reasonable, when not
the Lineaments of our Faces, but the Account of our Actions must recommend us
to Posterity, that a truly-good Artist should form the Piece: In a word, that
it should be one, who writes and relates Things just as You do. But the Passage
which most fully expresses both his own and the general Esteem all Italy had
for Tacitus, is that wherein he declares him to have been the Pattern of
Eloquence* L. 7. Ep. 20.
which from his Youth he set himself to Copy after. And that in the abundance
of Eminent Orators then flourishing about Rome, not any one seemed either so
capable, or so worthy of being imitated as He. Equidem adolescentulus cum Tu
jam forma gloriaque floreres, te sequi tibi longo, sed proximus intervallo, and
esse and haberi concupiscebam. Et erant mul^a clarissima ingenia, sed Tu mihi,
(ita similitudo naturae ferebat) maxim imitabilis, maxim imitandu^ videbaris.
This the Reader will find in the Terms of Pliny himself in the Margin; and
there I have the rather inserted it, because it may be of some use to inform us
more exactly concerning the Age of these two Learned Men.

It is needless to allege more Proofs of the mighty Reputation Tacitus was in,
even in his own Time, and amidst so many Great and Celebrated Contemporaries:
And for the following Ages, every body knows what Honor and Deference have
been all along paid to his Labors; some Testimonies whereof I shall allege,
before I shall dismiss this Subject. In the mean while, is it not a prodigious
thing, that he should at this time of day meet with such contumelious Treatment
from Barbarians? (For Alciat and Ferret are no better, when compared with the
Old Romans.) Men who have the Hardiness rashly to pronounce, that an Author of
this Character was not a competent Master so much as of his own Mother Tongue?
In good Truth, such Assertions as these, require a Brow of Brass, and a heated
Brain to advance them. For my own part, though I should observe a thousand
things in Tacitus, which I could not tell how to approve; yet I would suspect
the Weakness of my own Judgment, the Corruption of the Copy, or any other
Defect, which might be no Imputation upon the Author himself, rather than
venture to give all Antiquity the Lie, by cherishing any Imagination so
singular and unworthy, as this I have now been con^uting.

Another Fault laid to Tacitus's Charge, is Want of Truth; and one of the
Principal who prefer this Accusation against him is Vopiscus. But I beg it may
be observed upon what occasion this Allegation is brought: It Is only to excuse
in this general Assertion, That the mixture of some Falsehood with Truth, is
what the best Historians that ever wrote have never been able to avoid. And now
methinks Tacitus his Reputation is not very much concerned; nor need he
apprehend any mighty Danger from such a Complainant; especially since I have
elsewhere showed, that several other Persons have pleased themselves with
maintaining the same Proposition. And Dion Chrysostomus (I well remember)
pretending in one of his Orations to prove, That we know nothing as it really
is, does not only averr, that the taking of Troy by the Graecians is a mere
Fable, and that the Persians gave a Relation of Xerxes's and Darius's
Expeditions against Greece, very different from what the Greeks themselves do;
but he carries his Point farther; and, as an Instance how little any History
can be depended upon, he tells you, That of the most Eminent Greek Writers,
some make the Sea Fight of Salamis to have been before that of Platea, and
others place it after.

Now it were, I think, a sufficient reply to all this Objection, if a Man
should urge, That some Falsehoods there, are very reconcilable with Human
Infirmity; and such as (according to the Distinction of the Schools) though not
true, are yet no Lies, because they are uttered in the Integrity of the Man's
Heart. But then, as for the Impostures charged upon Tacitus by Tertullian, and
the Reproach of one of the most Scandalous and Profligate Authors extant, cast
upon him by Bud^us; their true Meaning is, not to load him with such
Accusations of Falsehood, as simple Ignorance, or Inadvertency, might acquit or
excuse him in, or the too easy Credit given to Mistakes generally received
might be alleged in mitigation of: But their Intention was to expose his
impious Misrepresentations of the Christians, the Scoffs and insolent
Railleries against our Holy Religion; attacked by him in its very Foundations
laid in the Old Testament; his ridiculing the Miracles of Moses, and reviling
the Jews with Worshipping the Image of a Wild Ass. And these, I acknowledge,
are Calumnies full of true Pagan Venom, and such as no Man can be too severe in
condemning. But then I must take leave to urge withal, that if this Author must
be thrown aside in resentment for what he has said to traduce the True GOD and
the Christian Worship, he must be banished in a great deal of Good Company: For
the same Rule will oblige us to burn almost all the Heathen Authors, very few
of whom are clear of endeavoring to blacken us by such kind of vile Aspersions.

The same Reply may serve to take off that S^n^^nce pronounced against this
Author by Casaubon; who in his Preface to Polybius, affirms the Reading of
Tacitus to be the most dangerous Study that Princes can employ themselves in,
by reason of the many ill Characters to be met with in his Works. There is
indeed a very ill Custom to which Casaubon is too much addicted; That, I mean,
of never bestowing a Man's Pains upon any Author, without lowering the
Reputation of all besides, to gain more Credit and Authority to that One; and
however he might think fit to treat Tacitus upon this occasion; we know that at
other times he has not been sparing in Commendations of him. It Is true, his
History now extant relates the Actions of the Worst and Wickedest Princes that
perhaps ever were; and it is our great Misfortune, that those other Books of
it, which contained the Reigns of Emperors as eminently Good, such as
Vespasian, Titus, Nerva, and Trajan are lost. But at this rate, no History in
the World, no not even that of the Bible it self, can escape Censure, if the
exposing Ill Examples to public View must be thought to deserve it: For all
treat of Bad as well as Good Men, and require a Reader's Judgment and Care to
distinguish between that part of the Account which ought to be imitated, and
that which ought to be avoided. I cannot absolutely deny, but in the Times of
Tertullian, there might be reason to apprehend some Danger from the bitter
Invectives of Pagan Writers, because the World was not then cleansed from
Errors, as now (blessed be God) by his Grace it is. But I can by no means be
brought to think, that any Mischief is capable of being done by them now; when
every body sure is proof against such Calumnies, and not in a condition to
receive ill Impressions from any thing, which the Infidelity they liv^d in then
might put them upon writing against the Gospel and its Doctrines.

Indeed, without taking all this Pains, Tacitus might have been left to stand
upon his own Legs* the general Esteem of his Works being more than enough to
bear down all the Authorities we have been considering, though no Arguments
from the Reason of the thing had been brought to confute them. But if it were
necessary to balance one Authority against another, besides the universal
Consent and Approbation of Learned Men, I am able to produce Two, of weight
sufficient to cast the Scale clearly on the other side: The first is that of
Tacitus the Emperor, who, in that highest Elevation this World is capable of,
did, at Two hundred Years distance after this Historian's Death, glory in the
same Name, and valued himself upon his Descent from so Great and Worthy an
Ancestor. As Marks of the Honor he bore to his Memory, Statues of him were by
his Order set up in the Libraries, and Ten Transcripts of his Books made
constantly How little ^ff^ct this Order had, is plain from the great part of
Tacitus his Works now lost: Nor indeed was there time for any great good to
come of his intended Respects, for Tacitus^ ^eign'd but Six Months.
every Year, that so they might be preserved, and handed down from one Age to
another, as we find they are now to ours. The second is, the Great Duke Cosmo
de Medicis, whose Memory will always live in Honor, as long as Politics and
Good Government (to speak in the Language of his own Country) continue to be
cultivated and respected. This Prince singled Tacitus out from the rest of the
Historians, as the Person most capable at once of forming his Judgment, and
giving his Curiosity the most solid Satisfaction. But to the Suffrage of
Princes and Emperors, we may indeed add the general Voice of Mankind; For what
can be a greater Testimony in his Honor, than the Pains all Nations have taken
to translate Tacitus into their own Language?

Besides his Annals and History, he has left us a Treatise concerning the
different Sorts of People who inhabited Germany in his Time, and their
respective Manners and Customs; as also the Life of his Father-in-Law Agricola.
Some there are who father upon him the little Tract concerning the Causes of
the Corruption and Decay of Latin Eloquence; which others rather think to be
Quintilian's: But Lipsius seems to go upon better grounds, when he thinks it
cannot belong to either of them. As for the little Collection of Facetiae,
which Fulgentius Planciades quotes under Tacitus his Name, they are so
manifestly supposititious, that scarce any body but that wretched Grammarian
was ever imposed upon by them. The genuine Compositions of Tacitus, do very
easily distinguish themselves both by their Matter and their Form: By the
former of which, in agreement with Scaliger, I am to understand the Diction, or
Manner of the Author; and by the latter, the Substance of Things treated of. He
is particularly remarkable for inserting Speeches upon all occasions; sometimes
only obliquely, and hinting the principal Arguments; sometimes directly, and in
form? but always aptly and judiciously, suitable to the Occasion, the Place,
and the Party concerned. Though his Style be extremely concise, and Brevity the
thing he seems chiefly to affect, yet does he frequently interweave with his
main Business many entertaining Digressions, such as that concerning the God
Serapis in the Fourth Book of his History, and that other strange one
concerning the Jewish Religion, and their Lawgiver Moses, which we had occasion
to pass our Censure on before. He thought, it seems, very truly, that as no
Traveller would grudge sometimes to go a little out of his Way, for the sight
of a Place extremely well worth his Pains, or somewhat peculiar to the Country
he is passing through; so these little Excursions, which please and refresh the
Reader, are no Transgressions of the Laws of History, when seasonably indulged.

Even Thucydides and Salust are not more Sententious than he; which yet is so
artfully managed, that there is no appearance of Ostentation; but every Maxim
he lays down, ^lows naturally from the Subject he is treating of; and resembles
that Luster and Beauty of the Stars, which are said to be made out of the very
Substance of that Firmament they adorn. Here you see nothing foreign, nothing
affected, nothing forced or far-fetched, nothing superfluous; but every Thought
so pertinent, so well fitted, that no Man can dispute the Right it has to that
Place, or think any other would better become it. And which is still more, here
you do not learn barely the Events of Things, but the very Reasons and Progress
of those Events; the secret Springs of each Action, and all the Motives and
Contrivances by which it was carried on. And here a Man may say with great
Reason, with regard to History, what the Poet does in the case of Husbandry:
Faelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas.
Virg. Georg. L. 2. Happy the Man, who studying Nature's Laws,
Through known Effects, can trace the secret Cause.
Mr. Dryden. And if the Notion some Philosophers have advanced concerning the
Sea be true, That its Waters nearer the bottom are much fresher than those
about the top; it is undoubtedly a Truth of much greater evidence, that a
History which contents it self with an Account of Matter of Fact only, and
presents only with the Out^side and S^^face, as (...) were, of Things, cannot
pretend to either the Pleasure or the Profit, which arises from a Discovery of
the mysterious Causes, and the several Counsels and Debates upon which each
Action moved. This reaches the very bottom of the Matter; and every Man can
justify the vulgar Proverb here, That the deeper you go, the sweeter and more
delicious you find the Entertainment.

But one particular Character there is, which raises the Merit and Reputation
of Tacitus above other Writers; that I mean of ordering Matters so, that a Man
may oftentimes receive as much Information from what he does not say, as from
what he does. This instructive Silence is an Excellence which others have
observed before me: And a very peculiar one it is, when (to speak in Terms of
Arithmetic) his very Blanks are as considerable as his greatest Sums. So that
here you are directed to form a Notion of Men every way; because whether he
give Characters, or whether he give none, all is done with mature
Consideration, exact Justice, and accurate Judgment. It Is thus that the
Ancients ex^ol the Skill of that Eminent Painter ^imanthes, in whose Pieces
there was a great deal more for the Thought to work upon, than lay open to the
Eye of the Beholder. And this great Wisdom and Depth, is indeed very agreeable
to that ripeness of Age and Judgment, in which he applied himself to Writing:
For we ar^ assured from himself, that this Work was begun after Nerva's, and in
Trajan's Reign, at which time he must have been pretty far See Note (b).
advanced in Years.

The Reader who is desirous of a more particular Character of Tacitus his
Writings, may find it to good Advantage in the Second Volume of Muretus his
XIII. XIV. and XV. Orations. The Passages were thought too large to be inserted
here.

A Chronological TABLE OF THE Annals and History OF Cornelius Tacitus.
The First Book of the Annals contains the History of almost two Years,
Consuls. Sextus Pompeius and Sextus Apuleius, C. Julius Drusus Caesar and C.
Norbanus,

THE Emperor, Augustus, died at Nola, in Campania, the Nineteenth Day of August.

Claudius Tiberius Nero, the Son-in-law of Augustus, succeeded him, who began
his Reign with the Murder of Agrippa Posthumus.

The Consuls Sex. Pompeius, and Sex. Apuleius are the first that took the Oaths
of Fidelity to Tiberius.

Germanicus appeases a Sedition in the Army, by pretending to send away his
Wife Agrippina, and his Son Caligula.

Iulia, the Daughter of Augustus, formerly banished by her Father for her
Lewdness, died through want of the Necessaries of Life.

Germanicus defeated Arminius, or Harman, the General of the Cherusci* and took
his Wife Prisoner, the sixth Year after the Defeat of Quintilius Varus.

A Temple built to Augustus in Spain.

The Tax of the Hundredth Penny upon Commerce, imposed after the Civil Wars, is
confirmed.

The Second Book contains the History of four Years.
Consuls. Sisenna Statilius Taurus and Lucius Scribonius Libo, C. Coelius Rufus
and L. Pomponius Flaccus, Tib. Iul. Caes. Aug. 3io, and Germanicus Caesar, M.
Iunius Silanus and C. Norbanus Flaccus,

Parthian War.

Germanicus brings his Fleet into the River Amisia or Ems, and passing over the
Weser, defeats Arminius and the Germans.

Germanicus's Army sailing through the Amisia into the Ocean, is shattered by a
Storm, and the greatest part of it lost.

The Accusation and Death of Libo Drusus.

The Astrologers and Magicians are banished Italy.

A Defense of Luxury.

The Counterfeit Agrippa is taken.

Germanicus Triumphs for his Victories over the Cherusci, Chatti and other
Nations of Germany, betwixt the Rhine and the Elb.

The Tax of the Hundredth Penny is abated by Tiberius, and made the Two
Hundredth.

Twelve Cities of Asia perished by an Earthquake.

Tacfarinas the Numidian, begins a War in Africa.

Germanicus goes into Asia.

Germanicus visits Egypt as far as Syene and Elephantina.

Maroboduus the King of the Marcomanni, lives at Ravenna in Italy eighteen
Years.

Germanicus is poisoned by Piso.

Livia, the Wife of Drusus, Tiberius's Son, and Sister of Germanicus, is
delivered of Twins.

Arminius the General of the Cherusci, dies in the thirty seventh Year of his
Age.

The Third Book contains the Actions of three Years.
Consuls. M. Valerius Missala and M. Aurelius Cotta, Tiber. Iul. Caes. Augustus
4o, and C. Iul. Drusus Caesar 2o, C. Sulpicius Galba and D. Haterius Agrippa,

THe Grief and Mourning for the Death of

Nero, Germanicus's Son, is made High Priest, and Marries.

Iulia the Daughter of Drusus.

Salust the Nephew of Salust the Historian dies.

Tiberius retires into Campania.

It is debated whether the Governors should carry their Wives with them into
the Provinces.

The Cities of Gaul laboring under the Burden of excessive Debts rebelled,
being headed by Sacrovirus and Florus.

A Debate arose about restraining Luxury.

Caius Silanus accused.

A Comparison betwixt Anteius Capito, and Labeo Antistius the Lawyer.

The Fourth Book contains the Actions of near six Years.
Consuls. C. Asinius and C. Antistius, Cornelius Cethegus and Visellius Varro,
Cossus Cornelius Lentulus and M. Asinius Agrippa, Cn. Lentulus Getulicus and C.
Calvisius, M. Licinius Crassus and L. Calpurnius Piso, Ap. Iunius Silanus and
P. Silius Nerva,

IUnia the Wife of C. Cassius, dies the sixty fourth Year after the Philippick
War.

Aelius Sejanus, the Prefect of the Praetorian Bands, debauches Livia the Wife
of Drusus, Tiberius's Son, and procures Drusus to be poisoned by his Physician
Eudemus, which Wickedness was discovered eight Years after.

The Condition of the Roman State that Year is described.

A Temple built to Tiberius in Asia.

C. Silius being oppressed with false Accusations, prevents his Sentence of
Condemnation by a voluntary Death.

Cassius Severus after his Banishment, draws upon himself a severer Punishment.

Tacfarinas the Numidian is conquered.

Q. Vibius Serenus being accused of Treason by his own Son, is banished.

Cremutius Cordus the Historian is accused for Praising Brutus and Cassius, and
puts an end to his own Life.

Sejanus demands Livia in Marriage.

L. Domitius, Nero's Grandfather, dies.

L. Antonius dies.

Pontius Pilate is sent Governor into Iudaea.

The Triumph of Poppeius Sabinus for the Conquest of the Thracians.

Domitius Afer the Orator.

Agrippina the Wife of Germanicus offends Tiberius.

Tiberius leaves Rome, whence he was absent eleven Years to the Day of his
Death.

Coceius Nerva the Lawyer, accompanies Tiberius.

The Amphitheatre at Fidenae fell, where fifty thousand Persons perished.

Tiberius hides himself in the Isle of Capreae.

Titius Sabinus, Germanicus's Friend, is villanously betrayed and put to Death.

Iulia the Granddaughter of Augustus, dies in the Isle Trimerus, on the Coast
of Apuleia, whither she had been banished twenty Years before for Adultery.

The Frisii defeat the Romans.

Agrippina, the Daughter of Germanicus, is married to Cn. Domitius, the Father
of Nero.

The Fifth Book contains the Actions of three Years, most of which are lost.
Consuls. C. Rubellius Geminus and C. Rufius Geminus, M. Vinucius Quartinus and
L. Cassius Longinus, Tiber. Iul. Caes. Augustus 5o, and L. Aelius Sejanus,

LIvia the Wife of Augustus, and Mother of Tiberius, dies fifteen Years after
the Death of Augustus: Her Grandson Caligula praises her in a Funeral Oration.

Tiberius begins to exercise the greatest Cruelties toward the House of
Germanicus.

In these two Years Agrippina, Germanicus's Wife, and her Son Nero, are
banished to the Islands.

Drusus is kept a Prisoner in the most secret part of the Palace.

*********** A great Chasm in the History, the Occurrences of almost three
Years are wanting.

Sejanus falls, and his Children are punished.

The Counterfeit Drusus is taken.

The Sixth Book contains the History of about six Years.
Consuls. Cn. Domitius and M. Furius Camillus, Ser. Sulpicius Galba and L.
Cornelius Sulla, Paulus Fabius Persicus and L. Vitellius, C. Cestius Gallus and
M. Servilius Rufus, Q. Plautius and Sex. Papinius, Cn. Acerronius and C.
Pontius,

TIberius's abominable Lusts.

Sejanus, are put to Death.

M. Terentius justifies his Friendship with Sejanus.

L. Piso the High Priest, eighty Years old, dies peaceably.

Drusilla, the Daughter of Germanicus, is married to L. Cassius, Iulia to M.
Vinicius.

Vsuary is taken into Consideration, and Usurers are prosecuted. Laws relating
to Usury.

C. Caligula marries Claudia the Daughter of M. Sillanius.

Tiberius's Presage of Ser. Galba.

His Trial of the Astrologer Thrasyllus.

Drusus the Son of Germanicus, and Asinius Gallus are starved to death.

Agrippina the Wife of Germanicus, is starved to Death.

Cocceius Nerva ends his Life by a voluntary Death.

A Phoenix is seen.

The Poet Mamerius Scaurus is accused.

The Parthian Affairs.

Poppaeus Sabinus dies.

The Parthian Affairs.

The terrible Death of Agrippa.

The Death of Tiberius, in the 78th Year of April.

C. Caligula succeeds him in the Empire.

*********** Here is a Chasm of ten Years, in which the History of the whole
Reign of Caligula, and the first six Years of Claudius are lost.

The Eleventh Book contains the Occurrences of two Years.
Consuls. Ti. Claudius 4o, and L. Vitellius 3io, A. Vitellius and L. Vipstanus.

VAlerius Asiaticus is overborn with false Accusations.

Italus, the Nephew of Arminius, the Leader Cherusci, by his Brother Flavius,
is sent into Germany.

Messalina, Wife to the Emperor Claudius, is put to Death.

The Twelfth Book contains the History of six Years.
Consuls. C. Pompeius and Q. Verranius, C. Antistius and M. Suilius Rufus, Ti.
Claudius 5o, and Ser. Cornelius Orfitus, P. Cornelius Sulla and L. Salvius
Otho, D. Iunius Silanus and Q. Haterius, M. Asinius Marcellus and M. Acilius
Ariola,

Claudius Marries Agrippina, the Daughter of his Brother Germanicus, and Mother
of Nero.

Seneca is recalled from Banishment, and made Praeceptor to Nero.

C. Cassius, the Lawyer, Governor of Syria.

Lollia Paulina Banished.

Domitius Nero Adopted by Claudius.

Agrippina, to show her Power to the allied Nations, procures some Veterans,
and a Colony, to be sent to the City of the Ubii, where she was Born, which
from her took the Name of Colonia Agrippina, now Cologne.

This was done 40 Years after the Defeat of Varus.

Charactacus, King of Britain, is taken by the Romans, under their General P.
Oftorius, in the 9th Year of the British War.

Agrippina was Daughter, and Sister, and Wife, and Mother to the Emperor.

Nero is admitted to be of Age.

A Famine began under Claudius, of which there is mention made in the Acts of
the Apostles, Chap. xi.

Quadratus Governor of Syria.

The Astrologers Banished, and a Decree of the Senate against the ^ewdness of
Women.

Foelix, Governor of Judea, (Brother of Pallas, a Freed-man,) who is mentioned
in the xiv Chap. of the Acts of the Apostles.

Ventidius Cumanus Governor of Galilee.

Nero, at sixteen Years old, Marries Octavia, Claudius, and makes an Oration in
behalf of the Trojans, and the Inhabitants of Bolonia.

The Emperor Claudius is Poisoned by his Wife.

The Thirteenth Book contains the Actions of four Years.
Consuls. Nero Claudius, and L. Antistius Vetus, Q. Volusius, and P. Cornelius
Scipio, Nero Claudius Augustus 2o, and L. Calpumius Piso, Nero Claudius
Augustus 3io, and Valerius Messala,

NEro begins his Reign well.

He removes Pallas the Freed-man.

He procures his Brother, Britannicus, to be Poisoned.

Nero's Lewdness.

Pomponia Graecina accused of Christianity, or

Nero's Amphitheatre.

Provision is made for the Security of Masters against the Attempts of their
Slaves.

Artaxata, the capital City of Armenia, is taken Domitius Corbulo.

The Cincian Law, against mercenary Pleading, or against those who plead Causes
for Reward.

Sabina Poppaea, Nero's Wife, who had every thing but Virtue.

Nero has Thoughts of remitting all Taxes.

A Design of joining the Rivers Moselle and the Arar.

The Catti beaten by the Hermunduri.

The Fourteenth Book contains the Actions of four Years.
Consuls. C. Vipsanius, and L. Fonteius Capito, Nero Cladius Augustus 4o, and
Cossus Corn. Lentulus, C. Caesenius Paetus, and C. Petronius Turpilianus, P.
Marius Celsus, and L. Asinius Gallus,

NEro's Incest with his Mother Agrippina.

Agrippina's Death.

Nero a Fiddler and a Poet.

Domitius Afer, the Orator, dies.

Rome.

A Comet.

Domitius Corbulo, the Roman General, possesses himself of Armenia.

Laodicea, not far from Colossis, is ruined by an Earthquake.

Romans slain by the Britains.

London famous for its Merchants and Trade.

The Britains a while after are beaten by Suetonius Paulinus.

Burrus, Captain of Nero's Pretorian Bands, and Seneca's great Friend, dies.

Seneca is aspersed with Calumnies.

Musonius the Philosopher.

Persius the Poet dies November. 14th.

Nero puts away Octavia, and takes Poppaea again.

The Death of Pallas the Freed-man.

The Fifteenth Book contains the History of somewhat more than three Years.
Consuls. C. Memmius Regulus, and Verginius Rufus, C. Lecanius Bassus, and M.
Licinius Crassus, P. Silius Nerva, and Atticus Vestinus,

A War with Vologeses, the King of the Parthians, Domitius Corbulo is the Roman
General.

Poppaea has a Daughter.

Tiridates is constituted King of Armenia, being placed before Nero's Statue.

The Conflagration of Rome continues six Days.

The Christians are fasly charged with it.

Nero's new House.

A Conspiracy against Nero.

Lucan, the Poet, dies with courage.

The Consul Lateranus is put to Death.

Seneca receives his Death with great Constancy, April 30th.

The Sixteenth Book contains the Actions of one Year.
Consuls. C. Su^tonius Paulinus, and L. Pontius Telesmus,

POppaea big with Child, dies of a Kick which she receives from her Husband
Nero in his Rage.

A great Plague rages at Rome.

Ostorius Scapula is destroyed by Calumny.

Nero puts to Death Bareas Soranus, and Thraseas.

He sets the Diadem on the Head of Tiridates, King of Armenia.

********* The History of the remaining part of this Year, and of the two
following Years, viz. 820, 821, is wanting.

The First Book of the History contains the Actions of a few Months.
Consuls. Ser. Sulpicius Galba, and T. Vinius,

Julius Vindex Governor of the Gauls, and Galba revolt.

The Senate declare Nero a public Enemy, who at last kills himself.

Galba is sent for from Spain.

Galba Adopts Piso.

Piso is Slain the fourth Day after his Adoption.

Galba resumes five hundred and fifty Tuns of Gold of what Nero had given away.

Otho Emperor.

Otho kills Galba.

Aulus Vitellius is chosen in Germany.

Vitellius marches toward Italy.

The Second Book. The Occurrences are of the same Year, but new Consuls.
A Counterfeit Nero in Asia.

Vitellius enters Italy.

He defeats Otho in a Battle.

The Death of Otho.

Vespasian is encouraged to take upon him the Empire.

The Third Book contains the History of the same Year.
LUcilius and Caecinna desert Vitellius.

Vitellius's Forces are defeated by Vespasian's.

Cremona destroyed.

Vitellius is taken and put to Death.

The Fourth Book. Part of the Occurrences are of the same Year; part in the
Consulship of
Consuls. Vespasian Aug. 2o, and Ti. Flavius Vespasian,

THe Senate for Vespasian.

Helvidius Priscus.

Comotions in Germany.

Celer condemned.

Vespasian cures a Blind and a Lame Man.

The Fifth Book contains the History of that same Year.
TItus Besieges Jerusalem.

A very false Account of the Jews, and their Rites.

The Prodigies preceding the Destruction of Jerusalem.

A War in Germany.

BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by MATTHEW GILLYFLOWER, at the Spread-Eagle, in
Westminster Hall.
FOLIO'S.
CAbala: or, Mysteries of State and Government, in Letters of illustrious
Persons, in the Reig^s of Henry the VIII. Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King
Charles. The Third Edition, with large Additions.

The Complete Gardener: or, Directions for the right Ordering of Fruit-gardens,
and Kitchen-gardens, with the Culture of Oranges and Melons. Made English by
John Evelyn, Esquire

The Complete Horseman; discovering the surest Marks of the Beauty, Goodness,
Faults, and Imperfections of Horses, with the Signs and Causes of their
Diseases; the true Method both of their Preservation and Cure, with the regular
Use of Bleeding and Purging: Also the Art of Shooing, Breeding, and Backing of
Colts; with a Supplement of Riding. By the Sieur de Soll^ysell, Querry to the
French King. Made English from the 8th Edition, by Sir John Hope, Knight. Adorned
with Sculptures.

Aesop's Fables. Englished by Sir Roger L'Estrange, Knight.

The Works of the Famous English Poet, Mr. E. Spenser.

Brownlow's Entries of such Declarations, Informations Pleas in Bar, etc. and
all other parts of Pleading, now in use; with Additions of Authentic Modern
Presidents, inserted under every Title.

The Commentaries of Julius Caesar, with judicious Observations. By Clement
Edmunds, Esquire To which is now added, The Duke of Rohan's Remarks, a Geographical
Nomenclator; with the Life of Caesar, and an Account of his Medals.

OCTAVO'S.
The Essays of Michael Serginor, de Montaign. Englished by Charles Cotton, Esquire
In Three Vol.

Tables of Forbearance, and Discompt of Money. By Roger Clavel, Gent.

Plutarch's Morals, Englished by several Hands. In Five Vol.

Ch^^^on of Wisdom* Made English by Dr. Stanhope. In Two Vol.

Puffendorf's Introduction to the History of Europe.

The Roman History; from the Building of the City, to the Removal of the
Imperial Seat, by Constantine the Great: containing the space of three hundred
fifty five Years. For the Use of his Highness the Duke of Gloucester. In Two
Vol. The Third Edition. By Laurence Etchard, A. M.

An Abridgement of Sir Walter Raleigh's History of the World, according to his
own Method, both as to the Chapters and Paragraphs, in his larger Vol. with his
Premonition to Princes.

The Life of Cardinal Richlie^. In Two Vol.

A new Voyage into Italy. In Two Vol. By Maximilian Misson. Adorned with
Sculptures; now Reprinting with large Additions.

A new Voyage into the Levant, by the Sieur du Mont; with Sculptures.

The Life of Monsieur Colbert.

The Complete English Physician: or, The Druggist's Shop opened: Explicating
all the Particulars of which Medicines are made, with their Names, Natures,
Preparations, Virtues, Uses, and Doses, and above 600 Chemical Processes. By W.
Salmon.

The Complete Guide for Justices of the Peace. In two Parts. The First,
Containing the Common and Statute-laws, relating to that Office. The Second,
Consisting of the most Authentic and useful Presidents. By John Bond of
Gray's-Inn, Esquire The Second Edition, enlarged and continued down to this time,
with a Table referring to all the Statutes, relating to a Justice of the Peace.
By E. Bohun, Esquire

A View of all the Religions in the World, from the Creation till these times.
To which is added, The Lives, Actions and Ends of Notorious Heretics; with
their Effigies in Copper Plates. The Sixth Edition. By Alexander Ross.

Emblems, by Fr. Quarles.

The Elements of Euclid Explained, in a New, but most Easy Method; with the
Use of every Proposition, through all Parts of the Mathematics. By Fr. de
Chales. Now made English, and a Multitude of Errors Corrected.

The History of Scotland, containing the Lives of James the I, II, III, IV, V;
with Memorials of State, in the Reigns of James the VI. and Charles the I. By
W. Drummond.

The Faithful Register: or, The Debates in four several Parliaments, viz. That
at Westminster, October. 21. 1680; that at Oxford, March 21. 1680; and the two
last Sessions of King James.

THE TRANSLATORS.
Vol. I.
Book I. of the Annals. Book II. Book III.
VOL. II.
Book IV. V. VI. Book XI. Book XII. XIII. XIV. Book XV. XVI.
VOL. III.
The End of Nero and Beginning of Galba.
Book I. of the History. Book II. Book III. Book IV. Book V.
Notes on the 5th. Book and Chronological Table.
The Life of Agricola.
An Account of the Ancient Germans.
By Page Mr. Dryden. 1 Mr. William Higden, A. M. 161 William Bromley, Esquire 289
Dr. Fearn. 1 William Heart, Esquire 223 Sir F. M. 249 Mr. G. C. 377
Sir Henry Savil^. I
Sir H. S. 27 Dr.... 97 Sir Roger L'Estrange. 201 Mr. I. S. 297 Mr. Dennis. 353
Mr. William Higden, A. M. 37^
John Potenger, Esquire
Mr. R.
THE ANNALS OF Cornelius Tacitus.
Book I.
Vol. I.
By Mr. DRYDEN.
ROME was governed at the first by viz. Romulus its Founder, who, according to
Tacitus, rul'^^ with Absolute Power; Romulus ut libitum imperitaverat. Ann. 3.
Numa. who Established a Form of Divine Worship, with Highpriests,
South-Sayers, and Priests, to perform the Ceremonies of the Sacrifices, Numa
religio^ibus and divine jure populum d^vinxit, Ibid. Tullus Hostilius* who
taught the Romans the Art of making War, and for this purpose Instituted
Military Discipline. Ancus Martius, who adorned the City, and Peopled it with
the Sabines, and the Latins, whom he had Conquered, and Built the City of
(...), to be a Port for the Romans. Tarquin I. who built the Cirque, and
distinguished the Senators and the Knig^ts, by exterior marks of Honor, such
as the Ivory Chair, called in Latin, Cella Curulis; the Gold Ring; the Purple
Robe, called Trabea; the Pretexta, or the Robe edged with Scarlet. Servius
Tullius, who, according to Tacitus, was the Chief Lawgiver of the Romans,
Praecipuus Servius Tullius sanctor legum fuit, Ann. 3. took into the City the
Quirinal, the Esquiline, and the Viminal Hills, and caused his Laws to be
engraven on Tables of Stone; and Tarquin, Sirnam'd, the Proud, who having
ascended the Throne by Incest, and by the Murder of Servius Tullius, whose two
Daughters he had Married, and endeavoring to maintain himself in it by
Violence and Terror, was, with his whole Family, expelled Rome,
Kings. Tacitus always opposes Liberty to Regal Power, Res dissociabiles,
principatum and libertatem. In Agricola. Haud facile libertas and domini
miscentur, Hist. 4, a Master and Liberty are incompatible. Tarquinius Pris^us,
says he, Lib. 3. of his Hist. had laid the Foundation of the Capitol, and
afterward Servius Tullius and Tarquin the Proud, built it* one with the Gi^^s
of the Allies, and the other with the Spoils of the Enemies, but the Glory of
finishing this great Work, was reserved for Liberty: As for Iu^^us Brutus, he
was not only Author of the Consulship, but also the first who Exercised it, and
with so great Zeal for his Country, that not being content with having banished
Collatine his Colleague, only because he was of the Royal Family of the
Tarquins, he caused his own Sons to be beheaded, who endeavored to restore
them to the Throne. The two Magistrates, on whom was transferred the Authority
which the Kings had, were called Consuls, to signify that they ought to assist
the new Commonwealth with their Counsels, and not to Govern it according to
their humor, as the Kings had done.
Liberty When once the Regal Power begins to degenerate into Tyranny; the
People aspire to Liberty; and when once a Brutus appears, that is, a Head who
is capable to give it* they seldom fail to shake off the Yoke, not only of the
King, who Tyrannizes, but also of the Regal Power, for fear there come another
King, who might Tyrannize also. Occultior non Melior.
and the Consulship were introduced by Lucius Brutus: the The Dictator was a
Sovereign Magistrate, but whose Power lasted no longer than the Danger lasted,
which threatened the Commonwealth; so that he was no more than the Trustee of
the Sovereign Authority. The first whom the Romans created was in the War
against the Latins, who had given the Tarquins Protection* his Name was Titus
Lartius, or L^rgius. He was called Dictator, ab edicendo, or ab edictando, i.
e. because he had authority to make Ed^^ts; or because he was not chosen by the
Suffrages of the People, nor by the Scrutiny of the Senate, as other
Magistrates were; but only Dictus named by the Consul, and afterward
proclaimed by the People. He was therefore named by the Consul, says
Machiavel, (...). 34. Lib. ^. of his Discourses, because, as the Creation of a
Dictator was a sort of a Dishonor to the Consul, who from being chief Governor
of the City, became thereby subject, as the rest, to a Superior Power, the
^^^ans would have him chosen by the Consuls themselves, to the end that (...)
as the City should stand in need of one, they might be the more (...) to choose
him, and to have the less reluctance to obey him; the Wounds which we
voluntarily give our selves, being far less sensible, than those which others
give us. He had power to depose the Consuls, witness and Cincinnatus, who
deposed the Consul Minutius; he suspended the Functions of all the Magistrates,
except the Tribunes of the People, who sometimes had the better of him* At
first, the Dictatorship was conferred only on the Nobles, but afterward the
Commons were admitted to it, as well as to the Consulship. The Dictatorship,
says Machiavel, deserves to be reckoned amongst those things, which
contributed most to the advancement of the Roman Empire. For in Republics,
which are always slow in their motions. (because no Magistrate can dispatch any
business singly, and one having need of another agreement in their opinions,
the time insensibly slips away.) The ordinary remedies are very dangerous* when
they are to provide against some pressing Evil, which does not give time to
wait for the Consultation of many; whence I conclude, that Commonwealths,
which in pressing dangers have not recourse either to a Dictator, or some other
Magistrate of the like Nature, will certainly run a-ground upon some sudden
accident. Heretofore the Duchy of Braban^ created a R^vert, or a Protector, on
whom the Province conferred an Absolute Power for the time. The Prince of
Orange got himself chosen Ruvert, Anno. 1577. Cabrera, c. 24. l. 11. of his
Philip II. and Strada lib. 1. dec. 1.
Dictatorship was granted, but as necessity required, and for some time: And
the Authority of the Ten Men who governed the Commonwealth instead of Consuls.
It was under them that the XII Tables were composed, i. e. a Compilation of the
best Laws of Greece, but particularly of Athens, whose Polity was esteemed the
most Excellent. For all those which the Kings had made were abolished in hatred
of Monarchy. The first year each made his Table according to the several
matters, which fell to their lot, and the Year following, they made two more in
common, to supply what was wanting in the ten former. But as they were
endeavoring to perpetuate their Government, which began to degenerate into
Tyranny, the De^emvirate was abolished for Ever, and the Consulship restored.
The Decemvirs had greater Authority than the Dictator, for the Dictator could
make no alteration in the ancient Laws of the City, nor do any thing which was
prejudicial to the State, the Tribunes of the People, the Consuls and the
Senate, who still subsisted, put a Bridle upon him, which kept him from
breaking out of the right way, says Machiavel; on the contrary the Consulship
and the Tribuneship having been abolished by the Creation of the Decemvirs, to
whom the People transferred all their Rights, these Ten, who had their hands at
liberty, there remaining no appeal from them to the People, had an opportunity
of becoming insolent.
Decemvirate continued only for two Years. The surest way to preserve Liberty,
says Livy, is not to permit the Magistracy, wherein the Supreme Authority is
lodged, to be of long duration. There is no place in the World, where this
Maxim is so well observed as at Venice; and it may be this is the chief Cause
which has made it outlive so many Ages, and so many States, which were more
powerful than theirs, and not surrounded with so many dangerous Neighbors.
Machiavel says, that the short Duration of the Dictatorship, hindered the
Dictator from transgressing the Bounds of his Duty. Discourses, lib. 1. chapter 34.
. The Consular Power of the The Patricii, or the Nobles being at discord with
the People, who would have the Commons admitted to the Consulship, as well as
the Nobles, ^ound an Expedient to create Military Tribunes in the room of the
Consuls: so that, as often as the People and the Nobility could not agree in
the Election of the Consuls, they created Military Tribunes, who exercised all
the Military Functions. A Testimony, says Machiavel, Discourse l. 1. c. 34.
that it was rather the Name of Consul that they hated, than the Authority of
the Consulship. And this Custom lasted about 80 Years, not in a continued
Succession, for there was sometimes of Consuls, and sometimes of Tribunes.
Tacitus says nothing here of the Tribunes of the People, who held
notwithstanding a considerable Rank in the ancient Commonwealth, as having
been instituted to moderate the Power of the Consuls, and to protect the meaner
sort against the Insolence of the Great ones; besides, their Persons were
Sacred and Inviolable. They were instituted fifty years before the Creation of
Military Tribunes, when the People jealous of the Power of the Nobles, and
weary of their Insults, retired to the Crustumerin Hill, called afterward the
Sacred Hill, because of the happy accommodation of this quarrel. There was at
first but two Tribunes of the People, but a little while after there was four
other; and in process of time they were multiplied to ten, and the Nobility
excluded from this Office, which was not observed in following times. C.
^^^inius Stolo, and Sextius Lateranus put a stop to the Elections of Consuls,
for the space of five years, and by these means the Senate was forced to admit
Plebeans to the Consulship, which was con^err'd upon them the first time in the
Persons of Sextus and Lici^^us. Sylla, the sworn Enemy of the Common People,
had much humbled these Tribunes, but after lus Death they resumed all their
Authority.
Military Tribunes remained in force but for a little space. All Power that is
Established by Sedition, as was that of these Tribunes, can never subsist long.
. Neither was the Arbitrary Dominion of Cinna, or that of Sylla, of any long
continuance. Nothing is so weak and so obnoxious to a reverse of Fortune, as a
Power, which has neither Right nor Reason for its Foundation. Cinna was s^ain
in a Sedition by his own Soldiers* and Sylla constrained to renounce the
Dictatorship. Upon which Caesar said pleasantly, that Sylla could not Read,
seeing he knew not how to Dictate.
. The Power of Pompey and Crassus, were soon transferred to Julius Caesar; and
the Arms of Marc Anthony and Lepidus, gave place to those of his Successor,
Augustus. Then it was, that the Civil Wars having exhausted the Forces of the
Commonwealth, Augustus Caesar assumed the Government, Ambition and the
Quarrels of Great Men, are the Shelves on which the Liberty of Commonwealths
are always split; for the State is weakened in Proportion, as particular Persons
fortify themselves by Arms, under pretense of revenging their Injuries, or of
securing themselves against the Resentments of their Enemies, or the Violence
of these that are stronger. And as the People suffer themselves in the end to
be the Prey of their Dissentions, they are constrained to receive an absolute
Master, that they may have Peace; Thus Tacitus had good reason to say, that the
Factions of Citizens are much more dangerous in Commonwealths, and that Regal
Power came not into the World but since Equality and Modesty went out of it,
Periculosiores sunt inimicitiae juxta libertatem. In Germania. Postquam exui
aequalitas, and pro modestia ac pudore ambitio and vis incedebat, provenere
dominationes. Ann. 3. To conclude, Tacitus seems to observe here, that Rome was
never at rest, after the Expulsion of its Kings, until it returned to the
Government of a Single Person, as to its first principle; for in Tully's
Opinion it was not the Regal Power, but the Abuse of Regal Power which the
Roman People hated, 3 de Legib.
, under the Modest Title of Prince A new Prince ought always to wave odious
Titles, for besides that; Authority is not in Titles, those which he accepts
give Men occasion to judge of the good or bad dispositions which he brings with
him to the Government. It is natural to believe, that a Prince who voluntarily
assumed a Title which shocks his Subjects, will take no great care to be
beloved, and will make it his principal Maxim, Oderint, dum metuant. Pope Paul
II. gave People an ill opinion of his Pontificate from the Day of his
Exaltation, by being desirous to take the name of Form^sus. And indeed, his
Vanity which sprang thence, made him to do many things unbecoming a Pope, for
according to Platina's Relation, he Painted and Dressed like a Woman.
of the Senate He had yet no Superiority over the Senators, who was equal to
him in every thing, except Precedence, and for this Reason Dio calls him (...),
i. e. the first of the Senate. This Title was in use under the ancient
Commonwealth. The first who was honored with it, was Fabius Ambustus, about
the Year of Rome, 435. The Consuls were more than the Prince of the Senate, for
they were Princes of the People.
.

But all the good or adverse Fortune, which happened to the Ancient Republique
of the Romans, has already been related, by great Authors They who relate only
these things which make for the Honor of their Country, and suppress the rest,
are good Citizens, but very bad Historians, Dum patriam laudat, dum damnat
Poggius hosts,
Nec malus est civis, nec bonus historicus.
In Tacitus's Opinion, History is always better written by the Subjects of a
Republic, than by those of a Monarchy, because Flattery reigns less in
Republics.
. Neither were there wanting Famous Wits to transfer the Actions of Augustus to
future Ages, till they were hindered by the Growth of Flattery Flattery
increases in proportion as Government is Established. It began under the Reign
of Augustus, but it was at its height under that of Tiberius: To see the
Extravagant Progress which it made in a little time among Writers, we need only
compare the History of Paterculus, with that of Livy. This was written under a
Commonwealth, the other under a Monarchy. It Augustus called Livy Pompeian, he
would certainly have called Paterculus Tiberian.
. During the Reigns of Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, and Nero; their several
Actions were falsify'd through fear, while they were yet living; and after
their Decease, were traduced through the recent hate of their Historians The
History of bad Princes is never Written faithfully, not during their life,
because they are feared, nor after their Death, because they are calumniated.
And besides, those who have made their Fortunes under them, believe that it is
permitted to them to lie by way of gratitude. So that Posterity are equally
deceived by both, Ita neutris cura posteritatis inter infensos, vel obnoxios.
Hist. 1.
.

For which reason, I shall only give you here a Summary Account of those
Actions which were performed by Augustus in the latter part of his Life; and
afterward the History of Tiberius, and of the three succeeding Emperors: the
whole without Partiality or Prejudice; to neither of which I can have a Motive
They who undertake to write History ought to indulge neither to the Love nor
the Hatred which they have toward the Persons they are to speak of; Neither
their Animosities, nor their Acknowledgments ought to pass from their Heart to
their Writings; they should set themselves above Hope and Fear, that they may
be at Liberty to speak Truth. Every one says d' Aubigne protests at his
setting out to make up his wants of Abilities, by an exact Fidelity, every one
boasts of Liberty, and of laying his passions at his Feet, even such a one who
in the very beginning shows, that his Pen and his Conscience are sold to
Favor. Preface of his Universal History.
.

After the Death of Cassius and Brutus, when there were none remaining to take
up Arms for Liberty; the Younger Pompey being defeated in Sicily, Lepidus
dispossessed of his Command, and that Marc Anthony had lost his Life together
with his Power, Augustus, the only Survivor of the three Competitors, and Heir
of Caesar, laying down the Title of Triumvir When a Prince ceases to be Cruel,
and grows Merciful, all the Evil that he has done, is attributed to Necessity,
and the Unhappiness of the Times, and all the Good that he does to his own
Nature. Augustus effaced all the Footsteps of his Triumvirate, by quitting the
Title of Triumvir; and it may be said, that his Clemency did the Roman
Commonwealth, more mischief than his Triumvirate, seeing it made the People
^ame for Servitude, by making them love him for a Master, whom they before
abhorred as a Triumvir.
, took up the less invidious Name of Consul; and pretended to satisfy himself
with the Tribunitial Power, thereby to protect the People They who have
oppressed the Liberties of Commonwealths, have almost all of them begun by
defending it; for the People accustom themselves insensibly to obey him who
knows how to deceive them, under the specious Title of a Defender. It was by
this fine Name Pagano della Terra made himself Lord of Milan, and the Duke of
Aten^s, of Florence.
in their Rights and Privileges; but when he had once gained the Soldiery to
his Interest, by rewards An Army has always a greater love for the Gifts which
are bestowed on them, and the Licentiousness which is allowed them, than for
the public Liberty. Donis corrumpebatur, says Livy, malebat licentiam suam,
quam omnium libertatem.
, the People by Donatives and plenty of Provisions The Common People love their
Bellies better than their Liberty.
, and allured all in general, by the Mildness of his Government; He began by
degrees to incroach upon them, and to draw into his own hands, the Authority of
the Senate, of the Magistrates, and Laws: none daring to oppose him, the most
violent of his Enemies being either slain in Battle, or cut off by
Proscriptions, and the remaining Nobility, the more ready they were to enter
into Servitude, the more sure of Honors and Preferment. Besides, that they who
found their account in the Change of Government, were more willing to embrace
the Present Slavery, with an assured prospect of Ease and Quiet, than to run
the Hazard of new Dangers for the recovery of their Ancient Freedom It is as
dangerous to attempt to restore Liberty to a People who desire to have a
Master, as to endeavor to bring a People under Subjection, who desire to live
free: Infine, it is to preserve the shadow and appearance of Liberty, to obey
those willingly who have the power to force us to it, Libertatis servaveris
^mbram, says Lucian, si quicquid jubeare, velis.
. Neither were the Provinces any ways unwilling to admit these Alterations, as
being wearied out with the continual dissentions of the Senators among
themselves, and the Covetousness of their Magistrates, against whom it was in
vain to seek the Protection of the Laws: Which either through Force, or Cabals,
or Bribery, were become of no effect.

As for the rest, Augustus to strengthen his Authority, advanced Claudius
Marcellus, the Son of his Sister, and yet very Young, to the Dignity of the
Pontificat, and that of Edile That is to say an Aedile, for there were Aediles
taken out of the Common People, who were not permitted to ride in the City with
a Chariot, or to sit in an Ivory-Chair. But this distinction which was odious
to the People, was afterward abolished, and all the Aediles were Curules: They
had the oversight of the Government of the City of Public Games, and of the
Reparation of the Temples, and of all things relating to the Worship of the
Gods.
. And also honored with two Successive Consulships Marcus Agrippa, a Man of
mean Parentage The Prince who would be well served ought to honor Virtue
wheresoever it is ^ound, and to look upon him as the most Noble, who is the
best able to assist him to govern well. A single Person, says Co^^ines, is
sometimes the Cause of preventing great Inconveniences to his Master, although
he be not of Noble Birth, provided that he has only Sense and Virtue. Chapter 5.
Lib. 5. of his Mem. Cabrera says, that Philip the II. in conferring Offices and
Military Honors, preferred Spilled Blood to Hereditary Blood, Chapter ult. Lib. 2.
of his History.
, but an expert Soldier, and the Companion of his Victories; and not long
after, Marcellus being dead he Married him to his Daughter Iulia. He also gave
Tiberius Nero, and Claudius Drusus, the Command of Armies, though but the Sons
of his Wife Livia, and that his own Family was yet flourishing with Heirs. For
he had already adopted into the Julian Family Cajus and Lucius, his Grandsons
by Agrippa and his Daughter: And had earnestly desired, though with a seeming
repugnance It is enough to guess, that a Prince does not Refuse a thing in good
earnest, because he makes no resistance to accept it, when it is offered him
again with greater importunity. The more Popes affect to show in the beginning
of their Pontificate, little inclination to call their Relations to the
Administration of Affairs, the more the Cardinals, the Ambassadors and the
Courtiers are importunate to persuade them to that which they knew they desire,
Vid. Reflection 6. of Chapter 7.
, that they should be made Princes of the Youth, and designed Consuls, while
yet they wore the Pretext Robe Praetexta. Robe edged with Scarlet, which
Children of Quality wore from the time of the Reign of Lucius Tarquinus,
Surnamed Priscus, or the Old, they left it off at 17 years of Age.
. In a short time after Agrippa's Death, his Sons followed him, either through
the Force of an immature destiny, or through the Treachery of their
Mother-in-Law Livia The Death of Princes is frequently imputed to those, who
have the greatest Advantage by it. As Livia desired to reign, even after
Augustus's death, she was suspected to have poisoned Lucius and Caius, to make
way for her Son. Henry Duke of Orleance, and Catherine de Medicis, his Wife,
were supposed to be the true Authors of the Death of the Dauphine of France,
because his Death secured the Crown to them.
. One of them as he was going into Spain, to command the Armies there; and the
other as he was returning from Armenia, and ill of a Wound, which he had
received. And as Drusus was not long ever this deceased, Tiberius only was
remaining: Who from thence-forward, was regarded as Successor to the
Sovereignty. Augustus adopted him According to Paterculus, Tiberius was adopted
by Augustus in the Consulship of Aelius Catus, and of Cause Sentius, the 27th of
June (...). Rome, 754. Hist, 2. Chapter 103.
; and made him his Colleague in the Empire, and the Tribunitial Power: He sent
him also to make his Public Appearance in all the Armies, that he might be
known to the Soldiers, and all this at the open Solicitations of Livia; who
now no longer managed her affairs by Intrigues and secret Artifices, as
formerly she had done. For she had gained so great an Ascendant over her
Husband, now in his declining Age It is rarely seen, that a Prince growing old,
maintains his Authority to the last. Tacitus says, that the Power of an Old
Man is precarious, precarium seni imperium, and brevi transiturum. Hist. 1. For
under the color of relieving his Old Age, his Wife, or his Son, or his
Min^^ters assume the Government. Duke Philip being grown Old, Commines says,
that his Affairs were so managed by the Lords of Crouy and of Chimay, that he
restored to the King the Cities upon the River of Some, at which the Count his
Son was much troubled, for they were the Frontiers of their Lordships. The
Count called a great Council in the Bishop of Cambray's Palace, and there
declared the whole House of Crouy mortal Enemies to his Father and himself:
insomuch that they were all of them forced to fly. These proceedings were very
displeasing to Duke Philip, but his great Age made him bear it with patience,
Chapter 1. and 2. Lib. 1. of his Memoirs. That which also adds much to the
Diminution of the Authority of an old and infirm Prince, is, that there being
no more to be hoped for from him, he is abandoned by his Servants.
, that to satisfy her desires he had banished Agrippa Posthumus, his only
remaining Grandson, into the Island of Planas^a. This Youth, it is to be
confessed, had been ill Educated, was of a rude Behavior, and valued himself
too brutally on his strength of Body: but otherwise, was free from any apparent
Vice. The Emperor had also BRUTUS and CASSIUS. Paterculus says, that never any
Persons had so favorable a Fortune in the beginning, as Brutus and Cassius,
nor so short lived a one; Brutus was but 37 years old when he died; Cassius was
a better Captain, Brutus a ^etter Friend; the one had more Vigor, the other
more Honesty. And as it was more advantageous to the Commonwealth to have
Augustus for its Master than Anthony, it would likewise have been more
agreeable to obeyed Brutus than Cassius. They both killed themselves; the
latter frighted by a Company of People who came to bring him News of the
Victory, believing that they were Enemies; the Former a few days after in
despair.


placed Germanicus, the Son of Drusus, at the Head of Eight Legions, which were
quartered toward the Rhine It may be this was not so much to oppose the
Incursions of the Germans, as to put a Check upon Tiberius if he should make an
attempt upon the Authority of Augustus.
, and had commanded Tiberius to adopt him for his Son; that he might thereby
strengthen the Succession Adoption does not only serve to multiply the Heirs of
a Prince, who is too old for Procreation, but also to secure him from the
reproach of Old Age, and incapacity to govern, when it is seen, that he makes a
good Choice: And this was Galba's meaning in what he said when he adopted Piso;
as soon as the Senate and the City shall hear of thy adoption, they will no
longer think me old. Audita adoptione desinam vider^ senex. Tac. Hist. 1.
; tho* Tiberius at that time, Young POMPEY. This young Man having possessed
himself of Sicily, formed on Army of the broken remains of that of Brutus, and
of multitudes of Slaves, Fugitives, and proscribed Persons, who flocked to him.
For although he was not much like his Father, and was not Valiant but in a Heat
and in a Passion, any Leader was fit for People who had nothing to lose. When
he infested the Seas by his Pyracies, Augustus and Anthony were obliged to make
Peace with him to quiet the People of Rome, who were no longer able to bear the
Scarcity of Provisions, which was caused by the Robbery of Pompey's Fleet.
Sicily and Greece were yielded to him by this Treaty. But this turbulent Spirit
being not content to keep within those bounds, Augustus declared War against
him. In the beginning of which Pompey was successful, but Augustus in the
latter end, for he forced him to fly into Asia, where he was slain by the
Command of Anthony* Paterc. Hist. 2. Chap. 72, 73. and 79.


had a Son also of his own, The Triumvir LEPIDUS. After the defeat and flight
of Young Pompey, Lepidus, who was come into Sicily with twelve Legions,
incorporated with his Army Pompey's Troops. Being therefore at the head of
above twenty Legions, he had the boldness to send Augustus word, that Sicily
belonged to him by right of Conquest, although he had only been the Spectator
of another's Victory, and which he had also a long time retarded, by giving
advice upon every occasion, contrary to that, which all the rest approved.
Augustus, notwithstanding he was unarmed, entered Lepidus his Camp, and not
regarding the Arrows which the other caused to be shot at him, he seized the
Eagle of a Legion. Lepidus abandoned by his Soldiers, and fortune which raised
him to a degree of power which he no ways deserved, was forced to throw himself
at Augustus his feet, who gave him his Life and his Estate.


then of Age, and capable of Public Business.

He had now no other War upon his hands, but that of Germany, which he
continued rather to blot out the Ignominy which he had received, by the Defeat
of Quintilius Varus, than to extend the Bounds of the Roman Empire: or for any
other important Interest. All things at Rome being in a settled Peace; the
Magistrates still retained their former names: Arcanum novi status imago
antiqui, that is to say, the Art of a New Government is to resemble the Old.
For the People ought not to be sensible of a Change, for fear of an
Insurrection. After that Philip II. had taken possession of Portugal, he left
Cardinal Archduke Albert, Viceroy there; so that as to Habit, says Cabrera,
King Cardinal Henry seemed not to be dead, History of Philip II. sub fin. It
was possibly for the same reason, that Philip gave the Government of the
Low-Countrys to the Duchess of Parma his Sister, considering that the Flemings
having been accstomed to a Female Government for the space of 46 Years, that
Margaret of Austria, Duchess Dowager of Savoy, and Mary Queen of Hungary, his
Aunt, had governed them; it was probable that a Governess would be more
agreeable to them than a Governor. Herrera says, that Philip having recalled
the Archduke Albert from Portugal (in 1592.) the Government of this Kingdom
remained in the hands of five Administrators, because that having promised the
Portuguese to give them always one of the Royal Family for their Governor; and
being either not able, or not willing to do it at that time, he thought to make
no Innovation by placing in the room of Albert five Portuguese Lords, after the
example of the King Cardinal Henry, who by his last Will had named five others,
Third Part of his Hist. Lib. 10. C. 23. Henry IV. would make his Abjuration in
the Church of St. D^nis, to show that he would follow the Religion and the
Examples of the Kings, who were interred there* Memoirs of the Chancellor
Chiverney.
The Youth being born MARK ANTHONY. This Triumvir having resolved to make War
on his Country, the Quarrel was decided by a Fight, which put an end to the
Civil Wars. This Battle was fought near Actium, a Promontory of the Sea of
Albania. After the two Fleets were engaged, Queen Cleopatra flying, Anthony
chose rather to accompany a Woman who fled, than his Soldiers who fought. These
brave Men however obstinately maintained the Fight, and they despaired of the
Victory; they held it out a long time, being willing to die for a Deserter. But
in the end Augustus having softened them by his Remonstrances, they threw down
their Arms, and yielded the Victory to him who merited it as much by his
Clemency, as by his Valor.


after the Battle of Actium, and the Elder sort, during the Civil War, few were
now remaining of those which had seen the times of Liberty; all things had
another face. Nothing of the Form or Force of the Ancient Government was left.
Equality and Freedom were at once distinguished; the Common Interest was to
obey and serve the Prince, at least, before he grew subject to the Decays of
Age, and could attend with Vigor to the Cares of Government, and to the
Fortunes of his Family. But when he was infeebled with Years and Sickness, and
his end was visibly approaching; the Minds of Men were altered by the prospect
of a Change. Some few cried up the Advantage of Public Freedom: Many were
fearful of an impending War, which was earnestly desired by others. But the
greater Part employed their time in various Discourses of future Matters When a
Prince begins to break and grow infirm, all People turn their Eyes toward the
Rising Sun, that is to say, toward his Successor, if there is an Heir
apparent, as in Hereditary States there is: but if the Successors be uncertain,
as in Elective Kingdoms, then every one reasons upon the good or bad Qualities
of the several Pretenders, and destines to the Throne him that is most
agreeable to himself. Multi, says Tacitus, occulta spe, prout quis amicus vel
cliens, hunc vel illum ambitiosis rumoribus destinabant, Hist. 1.
.

Agrippa, they said, was fierce by Nature, and exasperated by the Disgraces
which he suffered It has been often observed, that Princes who come from Exile
to a Throne, have been cruel, -- Regnabit sanguine multo. Quisquis ab exilio
venit ad imperium. Apud Suet, in Vita Tib. and likewise those who have been
despised or ill-treated under the Reign of their Predecessor. When once L^wis
XI. was crowned and knew his Power, he thought of nothing but revenge* Hist.
Memoirs, Lib. 1. Chapter 12.
; besides, that he was wholly unacquainted with Affairs, and incapable of
sustaining so great a Weight. Tiberius was indeed mature in Years, and
experienced in Warfare; but had inherent in him, the Severity and Pride of the
Claudian Family, which he could not so perfectly dissemble, but that some signs
of Cruelty might be observed in his Nature and his Actions. What was there to
be expected from a Man, bred from his Infancy Tiberius was not three years old
when his Mother was married to Augustus. Tiberius, says Paterculus, Educated
under Augustus, seasoned with his Divine Precepts, and endowed moreover with
extraordinary Parts, discovered very early somewhat which promised all that we
behold in him at this day. Hist. 2. Chapter 94.
, in the Imperial House, and amidst Arbitrary Power, loaded with Honors and
Triumphs in his Youth It ought to be observed, says the same Author, that all
Men who have ever been great, or have done great things, began very Young. And
this lies in Education.
, and during his retreat at Rhodes, which was, in effect, but a specious Exile;
feeding his thoughts with the hopes of Vegeance, forming himself to the
Practice of Dissimulation, and consuming the rest of his time in Luxury Princes
of the Humor of Tiberius can never be in worse Company than with themselves.
The fierce and cruel Temper of Don Carlos, Prince of Spain, according to
Cabrera, was owing to the Inclination which he had for Solitude. C. 8. L. 1. of
his History. For Solitude, says he, makes young People Wild, Melancholy,
Fantastical, Choleric, and apt to form ill designs. That which none sees none
reproves; and consequently temptation meets with no obstacle. l. 4. c. 2.
. His Mother of a Violent and Imperious Nature, according to the Sex
themselves, subjected to the Slavery of a Woman; besides, two Youths, who at
present were chargeable to the Commonwealth, and would tear it piece meal
after the Emperor's Decease.

While these things were in agitation, the Health of Augustus was impairing
daily; and there wanted not some, who suspected the Impiety of his Wife by
Poison It is usual for People to impute the Death of Princes to Poison; as if
Princes could not dye of Diseases, or of Old Age; or that their Death must be
rendered as mysterious as their Life.
. For, some Months before, there had been spread a Rumor, that Augustus,
attended by some of his most trusty Servants, and accompanied only by Fabius
Maximus his Friend and Con^ident, had made a Secret Voyage to the Island of
Planasia, there to visit Young Agrippa; that many tears had been mutually shed,
with reciprocal testimonies of tenderness The Elder Pliny says, that Augustus
lamented his Grandson Agrippa, after he had banished him, and that the
Ambitious Designs of Livia and Tiberius, gave him anxious thoughts enough in
the latter part of his life. Abdicatio Posthumi Agrippae post adoptionem,
desiderium post relegationem. -- Hinc uxoris and* Tiberii cogitationes suprema
ejus cura. C. 45. L. 7. Lastly, concludes he, this Divine Augustus died,
leaving his Enemy's Son his Heir and Successor. For Tiberius was the Son of
Claudius Nero the High Priest, who was the declared Protector of all the
Malcontents after the Death of Julius Caesar, and had raised the War in
Campania, Pater, Histor. c. 75. Sueton adds, that the Father of Tiberius, was
so passionate for Liberty, that he proposed in the Senate, that rewards might
be decreed for Caesar's Murderers. In Tiberio.
; from which it might be gathered, that there were yet some hopes of his being
restored into the Family of his Grandfather Augustus being willing to repair
the Error which he had committed in disinheriting his Grandson, made a greater
by recalling him to the Succession of the Empire, after he had taken Tiberius
for his Colleague. For besides that it was not in his power to undo what he had
done, his Repentance which came too late, exposed him to the Hatred and Revenge
of Livia and Tiberius, who were no longer obliged to him for a Favor that he
was sorry he had done them. When any one will do so great a thing, says
Commines, he ought to consult and debate it well, that he may take the safest
side: For there is no Prince so wise, who does not fail sometimes, and also
very often, if he lives long; and this would be evident from his actions, if he
always spoke the Truth of them. His Memoirs, l. 5. c. 13.
. It was farther reported, that Fabius had revealed this Secret to his Wife
Marcia Cato the Censor had good reason to say, that one of the three things
whereof he repented, was, that he had told his Secret to a Woman; for, if you will
believe Plautus, none of that Sex have been Mutes. Two or three contrary
Examples, says a Modern Author, are miracles, which do not make a Precedent.
P. Bohours keeping a Secret.
, and she to Livia It is a general Custom, says Commines, more to endeavor to
please those whose future advancement we expect, than him who is already raised
to such a Degree, that he can ascend no higher. l. 6. c. ult.
, who complained of it to Augustus: these things being come at length to the
notice of the Emperor, and shortly after, Maximus being dead, ('it is doubtful
whether by a Voluntary Death, or not,) Marcia was heard at his Funeral amidst
her sorrows to accuse her self, as the Cause of her Husband's Destiny. Princes
always destroy those who have discovered their Secrets, not only for fear of
treachery, but also because they are ashamed to be deceived in those they
trusted. Augustus, who was a great discerner of Men, preferred Fabius before
all the rest of his Friends, and yet this Confident through imprudence
discovered his Secrets. Therefore Princes ought not to confide in any Person,
no more than Metellus, who said he would burn his Shirt, if it knew his secret
design. By the way, it is fit to observe, that there is nothing more dangerous
than to trust a married Woman with a Secret, because of her near relation to
her Husband; for sooner or later the Bed discovers all, especially if it is the
Woman's interest not to keep the Secret. Thus, we are not to wonder that Livia,
knowing there was a design to set aside her Son Tiberius, and to bestow the
Empire upon the Young Agrippa her Son-in-Law, sacrificed without respect and
pity, Fabius and Martia to the anger of Augustus, to prevent him recalling his
Grandson. In the last age Don Antonio de Padilla having discovered to Donna
Anna the Queen of Spain, that Philip II. had disappointed her of the Regency,
by the Will which he had made at Badajoz; this Princess, who thought her self
excluded for want of Love and Esteem, did not cease to make complaints, which
soon after cost Don Antonio his Life, Cabrara in his History Chap. 3. Lib. 12.
and c. 2. l. 13. He must never trust a Secret to a Person who is infinitely
below him; for such is the case of Great Ones, that they reckon it a dishonor
to stand in awe of their Inferiors; and a ridiculous Folly to be afraid of
disobliging him, to whom they told a thing which may be for his advantage to
reveal. Antony Pepez, says, that the Tongue is that part of Man which the
Ladies are most set against, because of the Secret which they would have kept,
and which they are afraid should be discovered. Men have more reason to be
cautious, but especially they who live at Court, or who converse with the Court
Ladies, ought to be more jealous of a Woman's Tongue, and even of their own
Wife's, than of their most dangerous Enemies.
. But however it was, Tiberius was scarcely entered into Illyria; when he was
speedily recalled by Letters from his Mother; and it is not known for certain,
whether or no he found Augustus yet living Paterculus says, that Tiberius came
to Nola before the Death of Augustus and that they had also some discourse
together, Chap. 123.
when he arrived at Nola. For Livia had ordered the Corpse du Guard to be all
under Arms at every Avenue of the Palace and the Town, and caused reports to be
hourly spread of the Emperor's amendment, till having all things in a
readiness, which the present Conjunction could require. She declared at once
the Death of Augustus, Suetonius says, that Tiberius would not publish the
Death of Augustus till he had caused the Young Agrippa to be assassinated. In
Tiberio.
, and the Accession of Tiberius to the Empire At the Age of Fifty five years.
*

The Reign of TIBERIUS: Beginning in the Year of Rome, 767.
I. THE first Action of the New Reign, was the Murder of Agrippa Posthumus A
Prince who sheds the Royal Blood, gives an Example of most dangerous
consequence. The Queen of Naples, Joan I. says Ammirato, when she caused Andrew
her Husband to be strangled, taught Charles III. when he had it in his power to
strangle her also. And after he had taken from the Queen his Mother her Crown
and Life, he also lost his own Crown and Life, by the hands of the Hungarians
who were taught by the example which he had given them. Discourse 7. of the 17
Book of his Commentary upon Tacitus. There are many Politicians, says Cabrera,
who say on the contrary, that it is difficult to keep in Prison Princes of the
Royal Blood, and that when they are dead they don't bite: which is the reason
why Charles of Anjou, (that is Charles I. King of Naples,) put to death
Conradin, the Nephew of Manfrede his Predecessor. But Aragon did not want
Heirs, who happily recovered the Kingdom, and who condemned to death the Son of
Charles. And though this Sentence was not executed, ( for Constance the Eldest
Daughter of Manfrede, and Wife of Peter III. King of Aragon, was more generous
than Charles I.) yet the innocent Conradin was revenged, by that mark of Infamy
which his blood imprinted upon the House of Anjou -- Philip II. provided for
the safety and preservation of Queen Mary of England his Wife, in opposing the
execution of the Sentence of Death given against Elizabeth, his Sister-in-Law;
for the Prince who puts those of his own blood into the hands of the
Executioner, wh^ts the Sword against himself. Chap. 10. of Book 1. and 5 of
Book 2. of his History of Philip II. Henry IV. would never consent to the Death
of Charles of Valois, Count of A^vergne, who conspired against him, saying,
that he ought to have a respect for the blood of Kings; and Mr. Villeroy, one
of his Ministers said well to the same purpose, that when the Question was put
concerning the Life of Princes of the Blood, the Prince ought for Counsel to
hear nature only. Burnet has declared, that the Death of the Queen of Scotland
was the greatest Blot of Queen Elizabeth's reign. And I wonder that Pope Sixtus
V. who knew so well how to teach others to give respect to Royal Majesty,
should envy this Queen the Happiness and Honor to have a Crowned Head fall at
her feet. And never was a Dream more full of instruction, than that Ladies, who
usually lay in the Chamber of Queen Elizabeth, and who the Night before that
Execution, awaked in a Fright, crying out, that she saw the Head of Mary Stuart
cut off, and that they would also have cut off the Head of Queen Elizabeth with
the same Axe. L^ti Book 3. of part 2. of the Life of Sixtus V.
; who unarmed as he was, and wholly Ignorant of the design, was not without
some difficulty slain, by a Centurion hardened in blood. Tiberius was silent of
this matter in the Senate, feigning a Command from his Father Augustus, wherein
he had ordered the Officer of the Guard to murder the Young Man, immediately
after his own decease. It Is undoubted that Augustus had often, and that with
bitterness, complained in the Senate, of his Manners; and had also exacted a
Decree from them to authorize his Banishment. Yet he had never proceeded to so
much cruelty, as to compass the Death of any of his Relations. Nor is it
credible that he would command his Grandson to be murdered, to secure the
safety of his Son-in-Law. The suspicion fell more naturally on Tiberius and
Livia, for hastening the Death of a Young Man, obnoxious to the hatred of the
first through fear of a Competitor Paul Piasecki says, in his Chronicle, that
Constance of Austria, the Second Wife of Sigismond III. King of Poland, used
all her Interest to get her Eldest Son John Casimir to be chosen King, and her
Son-in-Law and Nephew U^adislaus excluded, who being the Eldest Son of the
King, according to the Law and Custom of the Country, was to be preferred
before all others. Another Polonian says, Nec unquam committunt, quin hic
eligatur, cui ipso jure debetur successio. Krzistanowi^ in his description of
the Government of ^^land.
, and of the last, through the inbred malice of Stepmother. When the
Centurion, according to Military Custom, told Tiberius that he had performed
his orders; his answer was, that he had given him no such Commission It Is the
Custom of Princes in hurtful cases to throw the Odium upon their Ministers.
Anthony Perez, who found it so by sad experience in the Murder of John of
Escovedo, which Philip II. gave leave to be inquired into; says, that Princes
are advised to keep a Council of State to clear themselves of all unlucky
accidents. Queen Elizabeth imprisoned the Secretary who dispatched an Order to
hasten the Execution of Mary Stuart, Queen of Scots, saying, that she was
surprised when she signed the Warrant. Leti.
; that the Officer should be answerable to the Senate for his offense, which
coming to the knowledge of Sallustius Crispus, who was the confident of all his
Secrets, and who had issued out those orders to the Centurion, He fearing that
the Murder would be charged on him, and knowing that it was equally dangerous
in his case, either to confess the Truth, or divulge the Secret, to approve
himself, either Innocent or Guilty That Minister is unhappy, who is forced to
accuse his Prince, to prove his own Innocence; or who must be Criminal, to make
his Prince to be reputed Innocent. For if he keeps the Secret, the Judges
condemn him; if he does not keep it, his Maste^ sacrifices him as an unfaithful
Servant. Besides, the Prince is always glad to rid himself of one who may be a
Witness against him.
; advised Livia, that care should be taken not to expose the Secrets of the
Imperial House, or the Counsels of Ministers Princes would often want Counsel,
if it was dangerous to give them Counsel. D^^uturos qui suad^^nt, s^ suadere
periculum sit. Curt. Lib. 7. When a Prince keeps a Secret, says C^brera, we
freely tell him everything that may do him hurt; which often preserves his
State and Person. Philip II. was ignorant of nothing, because every one told
him what he knew; and 'twas certain he would never discover what ought to be
kept secret. Chap. 3. of the 12 Book of his Life.
, or the Names of the Soldiers, whom he privately employed to execute his
orders. For Tiberius would certainly weaken the Government, if he permitted his
actions to be scanned in the Senate It Is the Destruction of a Republic and
introduces a Monarchy to commit the Sovereign Power to one alone, and it is the
Overthrow of a Monarchy to give this Power to many. This was the mistake of
Philip II. after the death of Lewis of Req^^sen, Governor of the Low-Countrys,
in committing the Administration of the (...) of Flanders to the Council of
State of that Country. For the People, when they saw themselves delivered from
the Yoke of a Spanish Governor, were not afraid of a Power, which being divided
among many, seemed unto 'em a kind of a Republic. Besides, the Interest and
Advice of those who were of this Council never agreeing, the People had a fair
pretense not to obey, standing neuter among so many Masters, who did not know
how to command. It Is almost impossible, says Commines, that many great Lords of
the same Quality and Estate, should be able to hold long together, unless there
be one Superior to command 'em, and it is necessary that he should be Wi^e and
well Approved whom they must all obey. And a little after, he gives this reason
for it. Because, says he, they have so many things to dispatch and agree among
themselves, that half of the time is lost before they can conclude any thing.
The last Chap. of Book 1. of his Memoirs. Cabrera says, that a Prince has need
of Counsel and of Ministers to assist him in the Government; for though he be
an able Prince, yet he cannot know every thing; but they must not be his
companions in the Government, because being only his Instruments, it is ^it he
should use 'em as he pleases. Chap. 7. of the first book of his History.
. Arbitrary Dominion being of that nature, that the Performance of a Command,
from a single Person, can be accountable but to him alone Mary, Queen of
Hungary, Sister of Charles V. showed her self of the same opinion, when taking
her leave of the Low-Countrys, which she had governed 23 years, she used this
Expression: If I have failed in any thing, I may be excused, since I have done
the best I could; but if any are dissatisfied with what I have done, I regard
it not, since the Emperor my Brother is satisfied, and my care was only to
please him. Brantome dis^. 4. of brave Women.
.

II. In the mean time, at Rome the Consuls, Senators, and Knights, endeavored
to outstrip each other in the ^ace to Servitude. And they who were the most
Noble and Illustrious, made the greatest speed; using so specious a behavior,
that without showing any exterior gladness for the Death of their late Emperor,
or any discontent, for the Succession of the New Don John Antonio de Vera
speaking of the Ceremony of the Abdication of Charles V. says, that they who
assisted at it gave public testimony of their sorrow, but however in such a
manner as, without displeasing the Prince they received, showed what a Prince
they lost. Epitome of the Life of Charles V.
, their Mourning was mingled with their Joy, and their Tears with expressions
of Flattery. Sextus Pompeius and Sextus Apuleius, then Consuls, were the first
who took the Oath of Fideli^ty to Tiberius, and gave it afterward in his name,
to Seju-Strabo, Captain of the Pretorian-Guard, and to Cajus Turranius,
Commissary-General of the Public Provisions: after these, to the Senate, to
the Forces, and to the People. For Tiberius affected to begin all public
Functions from the Consuls Because Liberty began with the Consulship, he
affected to propose all things by the Consuls, to amuse the People, and even
the Senate, by an image of the ancient Republic. Arcanum enim novi status
imago antiqui.
, as in the ancient Commonwealth, and as if he were yet doubtful, whether or
no, he would assume the Government. Even the Edict it self by which he summoned
the Senate to the Court, was short and modest, declaring, that he exercised
this Right but only in virtue of the Tribunitial Power Under the ancient
Republic, the Tribunes of the People had oftentimes assembled the Senate; so
Tiberius acted popularly in convoking them. It Is true, the Tribunes had usurped
this Power, for in the beginning they could only vetare, aut intercedere, i. e.
hinder or oppose; whereas the Consuls had a right to command. Consules jubent.
, which was vested in him by Augustus The Edicts of a Prince ought always to be
short, for they are Laws and Commandments, of which it belongs not to Subjects
to examine the reasons. It Is the business of a Doctor to allege reasons, but
not of a Legislator, who ought to make himself obeyed by Authority and not by
Persuasion. If reasons were given to Subjects, they would examine them; and
this Inquiry would carry 'em to Disobedience when they did not think those
Reasons good. The force of a Law, does not formally consist in the Justice of
it, but in the Authority of the Legislator; and therefore Kings, who are the
Supreme Legislators, must be obeyed, because they have established such and
such Laws, and not because their Laws seem just to us.
; and in order to deliberate on those funeral Honors, which were to be paid to
his Father, whose Corpse, in the mean time, he would not forsake Because
Augustus dying at Nola, a^ Tacitus says, at the end of the Abridgment of his
Life, he would in honor accompany his body to Rome.
, and that all the part to which he pretended in the Public Administration,
was no more than what was reducible to that Edict John Freinshemius gives
another sense to this passage: neque abscedere a corpore, idque unum ex
publicis muneribus usurpare; making Tiberius say, that by this assembling the
Senate, he did not pretend to a Superiority over it, or over any Senator, but
only to acquit himself of his duty to his Father: and that for the future he
would not take upon him to give any more commands. And in the Examen of the
Translators of Tacitus, which is at the end of his Paraphrase, he says, most
Interpreters understand these words, abscedere a corpore, of the Body of
Augustus; but I understand 'em of the Body of the Senate. In which he had
followed Dati, who renders them thus: Ne voleva egli en cio partirsi dalla
volonta de gli altera Senatori: And Rodolphus, the Master, who interprets them
in these terms, to be inseparably united to the body of the Senate,
. Yet after the Death of Augustus, it was his Custom to give the word to the
Praetorian Cohorts, to be attended by Soldiers, and no part of the State
belonging to an Emperor, was wanting to him. Whether he walked the Streets, or
went to the Senate, his Guards followed him. He had also written to the Armies
in the style of Emperor and Successor, and all without the least Ambiguity or
Hesitation, unless it were when he spoke in Senate He acted the part of a
Republican in the Senate, because that was the only place where there yet
remained any shadow of the ancient Liberty.
. The principal Cause of his dissimulation It Is the Interest of Courtiers to
discover the Sentiments of the Prince, in the beginning of his Reign, to know
how to behave themselves toward him; but it is the Interest of the Prince not
to reveal or declare any thing in his affairs, that may exercise their
Curiosity. For if they are before hand in discovering what is in his breast, he
will never come to know what is in their hearts. Lleva la ventaja, says a
Spanish Proverb, el que vee el juego al companero.
was, that he feared Germanicus who commanded so many Legions, assured of
succor from all the Allies, and loved even to Idolatry, by the Roman People,
would rather choose to enjoy the Empire in present, than to attend it from his
Death. Neither was there wanting a mixture of Vainglory, in these proceedings,
for he affected to have it thought, that he was Elected by the Commonwealth In
an Elective Empire the Prince ought always to declare, that he holds the
Kingdom from them who have a right to Elect, though he obtained it by other
means; for otherwise he will be accounted an Usurper, and a declared Enemy to
the public Liberty, and by consequence his Life will be always in danger.
Nothing can be said more judicious, nor more agreeable to a Republic, or to an
Elective State, than that which Galba said of his Election to the Empire. Under
the reigns of Tiberius, Caligula, and Claudius, said he, the Roman
Commonwealth has been as the Patrimony and Inheritance of one Family alone;
but I who have been called to the Empire by the consent of the Gods and of Men,
can say, that I have restored Liberty to the Commonwealth, because Election
has begun again in my Person* and that if the vast body of the Empire could be
content to be governed by a single Person, I should be the Man, who would
revive the ancient Commonwealth.
, rather than introduced by the Arti^ices of a Woman In times past, the great
Men thought it a dishonor, to be obliged to Women for their Fortune, as if
they had been preferred by their Favor, rather than by their own Merit. But at
this day, we are not so nice in that respect. The Ruelle advances far more than
the Sword.
, and the adoption of an old doting Man. It was afterward discovered also,
that this Irresolution which he showed, tended to sound the Affections of the
Great toward him; for he studied their Countenance, and their Words, to make
them guilty afterward, whom he purposed to destroy.

III. The first time he came into the Senate, he would permit no other business
to come on, than only what related to the Funeral of his Father The Prince who
Honors and requires others to honor the Memory and Ashes of his Predecessors,
gives an example to his Successors, which obliges them to pay him the same
respect after his death. Suetonius relates, that 'twas said, Caesar had secured
his own Statues and Images from being broken, by restoring the Statues of Sylla
and Pompey, which the People had thrown down during the Civil Wars. In Poland
the King elect is not crowned till the dead King be buried: ( Piasecki in his
Chronicle.) which is probably done out of respect to the dead, who sur^enders
not the Crown till he has received burial. For the King Elect, does not act as
King, nor Seals the Letters he writes to Foreign Princes with the Arms of the
Kingdom, till after his Coronation. Philip II. King of Spain, built and founded
the Monastery of S. Laurence of the Escurial, to be the burying place of the
Emperor Charles V. his Father, and of the Empress Issabella his Mother, and all
their Posterity, as he expressly declares in the act of the Foundation, reported
by Cabrera, Chap. II. of book 6. of his History. Before he left Portugal he
staid three days at the Monastery of Bele^, which is a little place of Lisbon,
and caused to be interred the Bodies of the Kings Sebastian and Henry, and of
twenty other Princes, the Children and Grandchildren of King Emanuel, which
had been buried apart in diverse Convents; being willing to make at least this
acknowledgment to twenty two Heirs, who had given place to him to succeed in
this Kingdom. Spanish Relation of the Interment of Philip in Portugal. Chap.
16. and Conestagio, Book 9. of the Union of Portugal and Castile.
; whose Testament was brought thither by the Vestals. By it Tiberius and Livia
were declared his Heirs. Livia was adopted also into the Julian Family, and
honored with the Title of Augusta That is, with the Name of Empress, and with
the Title of Majesty which she had not while her Husband was living.
. In the second Degree were ranked his Grandchildren, and their Descendants;
in the third, the Greatest of the Romans, not out of Affection, for he hated
most of them, but out of Ostentation In Princes, Clemency is often an effect of
their Vanity, or of their good Nature.
, to be admired by Posterity We see here, says Pagliari, what slips sometimes
the Wisest Men make. For if on the one side we consider, that Augustus made
himself to be lamented, and esteemed, by an unparellel'd demonstration of
Humanity, yet without contributing any thing of his own; his last Will will
appear to be made with great Wisdom and Policy, but if we examine more narrowly
how he purchased the favor of the People, we shall find, that for a Prince of
such Understanding he committed a great Fault, because by the bait of an
apparent intail, he provoked the great Persons concerned in it, to plot against
his Posterity, whom he had strengthened by many Adoptions. For if these Noble
Persons were Politic Men, as it is probable, since Augustus mistrusted them;
it is not likely that they would be contented with an hope, which according to
the ordinary course of Nature, could not take effect in some hundreds of years,
Germanicus and Drusus with all their Children, being to succeed before she. I^
the thirty third of his Observations upon Tacitus.
. His Legacies exceeded not the common Rules, only he bequeathed to the People
four hundred Thousand great Sesterces; to the most Inferior sort thirty five
Thousand great Sesterces; to each of the Praetorian Soldiers (or Guards) a
Thousand small Sesterces, and three hundred to every Legionary. After this,
they spoke of the Honors which were to be rendered to the Dead; and the Chief
on which they insisted, were, that the Funeral State should pass through the
Triumphal Gate, which was first advised by Gallus Asinius. That the Titles of
the Laws which had been Instituted by him, and the names of the Nations which
he had vanquished, should be carried before the Body, which was proposed by
Lucius Arruntius. But Messala Valerius adding, that the Oath of Fidelity to
Tiberius, should be annually renewed; Tiberius (interrupting him on the sudden)
asked, if it were by his Order, that he had thus spoken? And Messala replying,
that it was of his own head, adjoin'd farther, that in all things which
concerned the Public Good, he would never take any Man's opinion but his own,
though in so doing he should make Caesar himself his Enemy. This was the only
remaining kind of Flattery. The Senators with a General Cry, demanded, that the
Imperial Corpse should be carried to the Pile on their Shoulders only. But
Tiberius dispensed with that Office rather out of Vanity, and to do himself
honor in the refusal, than out of real Modesty. After this he published an
Edict to the People, warning them not to disturb these Funerals, as they had
done those of Julius Caesar, with their excess of Zeal, and not obstinately to
persist in their desire, that the Body should be burned in the Marketplace,
and not in the Field of Mars, which was the place decreed for that Ceremony. On
the day of the Funeral Solemnity, the Soldiers were ordered to be under Arms.
Those who had either seen themselves, or had heard from their Fathers of that
day, whereon Julius Caesar the Dictator had been slain, when the sharpness of
their Slavery was yet (...) upon them, and their Liberty, with an ill Omen just
re^^or'd, much deriding the superfluous care now used by Tiberius on this
occasion; for even at that time, as there were some who judged his Death an
impious action, so there were others Who called Caesar, Tyrant, to authorize
this Murder as Lawful. It a enim appellari Caesarem facto ejus expiedebat,
says Paterculus, Book 1. Chapter 58. speaking of Brutus.
who extolled it as a glorious Justice The actions of great Men may be taken by
two handles, some commend, others blame them. They receive diverse names,
according to the different inclinations of Persons who pass a Judgment of 'em.
Cataline was blamed for what he would have done, and Caesar was commended for
what he did. When there are Parties, every one judges according to the
Affection and Interest of that side he is of. The Doctors of the League durst
compare C^ement the Iacobin, who assassinated Henry III. with Ehud who
delivered the Children of Israel out of bondage, by killing Eglon King of Moab.
The Spaniards put into their Martyrology Baltazar of Guerard, who killed the
Prince of Orange at Delf, whereas the Hollanders and Protestants have made him
a Devil incarnate. In the 14 Book of the Second Part of the History of Anthony
of Herrera, there are two Chapters (the 9. and the 10.) which make (...)
Panegyric upon this Guerard, whose death he calls a Martyrdom. I admire
amongst others these words: Considerando, como avia de executar s^ intento, y
estando firm con el ex^mplo de nuestro Salvador Iesu-Christo, y de sus Santos,
etc. i. e. Guerard, considering, how he ought to proceed to the Execution of
his design, and continuing firm in his resolution, after the Example of our
Savior Jesus Christ, and his Saints, went the 10th of July to find the Rebel,
etc. as if Jesus Christ and his Saints had given any example of murder! The
Inquisition of Spain let this pass, as if they approved it. Moreover, this
shows how much Men love their own Opinions, and how rash they are to believe
things holy or wicked in the sight of God, as their passion moves them. Upon
this occasion I shall observe, that the History of the Reformation of England,
by Dr. Burnet, is ^ull of this partiality, every where calling all those Rebels
and Superstitious who would not acknowledge H. VIII. to be head of the Church
of England, nor consent to the Laws which he made concerning Religion* nor to
those which were made in the Reign of his Son Edward VI. and on the other side,
giving the Glorious Title of Martyrs to the Protestants who suffered under the
Reign of Q. Mary, the Sister of Edward, who restored the Catholic Religion in
England.
. But in the present case, here was an old Emperor, quietly gone out of the
World, who had been settled in a long course of Sovereignty of 44 years
Counting from the Death of Antho^y the Triumvir.
, and who had established the Succession against the Commonwealth, by a large
Provision of Heirs, and those in power; he, it seems, must have a Guard of
Soldiers about his dead body, to secure it from disturbance at his Funeral.

IV. This afforded no small occasion of discourse concerning Augustus himself.
The greater part of the Assistants vainly admiring, that he should happen to
die on the same day on which he first assumed the Empire The 21. of September,
complete 20 years old, except one day, according to Paterculus, Hist. 2. Chap.
65.
: that he died at Nola, in the same House and Chamber, wherein his Father
Octavius At the Death of Cardinal de Richelieu, the Parisians observed almost
the same, that he was born and died in the same House: that he received Baptism
and Extreme Unction in the same Parish. History of Cardinal de Richelieu, Book
6. Chapter the Last. Conestagio and Cabrera have likewise observed, that Henry
Cardinal King of Portugal, died the same hour in which he was born 68 years
before.
had finished his Life. The number of his Consulships was extolled likewise,
which equaled those of Valerius Corvinus, and Caius Marius Paterculus says,
that he was Consul eleven times, and refused to be Consul any more. Book 2.
Chap. 89. Now Marius had been Consul seven times, and Corvinus six.
, both together, that had enjoyed the Tribunitial Power, without Intermission,
37 Years; had been saluted Emperor That is, Victorious General, or Great
Captain. Tacitus says, that it is an honor which Armies formerly gave to their
Captains, when they were overjoyed for having gained a Victory. So that, at
the same time, there were many Emperors, who did not take place of one another.
At the end of the 3 Book of his Annals.
one and twenty times: Besides, a multitude of other Honors which had been
heaped upon him, or invented for him. But the Politicians examined the conduct
of his Life, after another manner. Some said, that his filial Piety to Caesar,
the necessity of Affairs, and the importance of the Laws had hurried him into a
Civil War We must not always ascribe to Princes the Cause of public Evils; for
sometimes the Times contribute more to them than the Men. A Prince, who at his
accession to the Throne, finds the Kingdom in disorder, and upon the brink of
ruin, must of necessity use violent Remedies to give Life again to the Laws,
to root out dissentions, and to set the Government upon a right foot.
; which could not possibly be managed with the Forms of Justice; though the
Cause was honest. That he had consented to many violent proceedings of Anthony
and It Is true, says Paterculus, they revived again the Proscription which had
been begun by Sylla, but this was not approved of by (...), though being single
against two he could not oppose the Fury of (...) and Lepidus, joined together.
Lepidus Sometimes Princes shut their Eyes, that they may not see the
Oppressions and Crimes they would be obliged to punish, if their Eyes were
open. There are times when rigor would be p^ejudicial to their Affairs, and
particularly in the midst of a Civil War, when it is dangerous to increase the
Number of Malcontents.
, because he had need of their assistance, to revenge the Murder of his
Father. That Lepidus being grown Effeminate by the Sloth of a Private Life,
Anthony drowned in his debauches, and the Commonwealth torn in pieces by the
Discord of her Citizens, there was no other Remedy left in Nature, but the
Government of a single Person; which notwithstanding, Augustus had never taken
up the Title Paterculus says, that Caesar was become odious, from the day he
assisted at the Feast of the Lupercalia, when Mark Anthony, his Coleague in the
Consulship, put upon his Head a Royal Diadem; for Caesar refused it in such a
manner as showed, that though the Action was rash, yet it had not much
displeased him. Hist. 2. Chap. 56. Besides, he happened to say before, that
they must take care how they spoke to him for the future, and that he meant
what he said should be a Law. Suetonius in his Life.
of King A Prince ought to forbear to assume new Titles and Honors; for
instead of gaining by the new Power he pretends to, he runs the risque of
losing that which no body denied him. Augustus, a wise Prince, was cautious of
taking the Title, which a Thought of only cost his Predecessor his Life.
, or of Dictator The Dictatorship being an image of the ancient Regal Power,
Augustus would never accept it, to show that he avoided whatsoever had made his
Uncle odious. Ovid makes the reign of Augustus and Romulus to oppose each
other, as Liberty and Sovereign Power. Ti^ domini nomen, says he to Romulus,
principis ille gerit.
, but contented himself to be called Prince of the Senate; That the Empire was
owing to him, for being surrounded by the Ocean The Roman Empire was bounded on
the West, by the Ocean; on the North by the Danube and the Rhine; on the East,
by the Euphrates and the Tygris; on the South, by the Mountain Atla^.
, and remote Rivers The greatest Contests which happen among Princes, arise
upon the subject of limits, especially when their Lands lie one among the
others, as those of the Dukes of Savoy and Mantua in Montferrat; of the King of
Spain, and of the Dukedom of Venice in the Milaneze; of the same Republic and
of the Grand Signior in Dalmatia, and in the Islands of the Levant. On the
contrary, when Kingdoms are divided by the Sea, by Mountains, or by strong
Forts, which hinder a Passage, Princes have less disputes with one another.
; That the Provinces, the Legions, and the Naval Force, were well united; the
Citizens obedient to the Laws; the Allies in terms of dutiful respect, and the
Town adorned with stately Buildings; that it was to be acknowledged he
sometimes made use of Severity and Force, but very rarely, and always for
preservation of the Public Safety Paterculus says, that Augustus was resolved
to refuse the Dictatorship when the People offered it to him. Chap. 89.
. On the other side it was alleged, that the boasted Piety of a Son to a
Father, and the Necessities of a Commonwealth, were only his pretext The
actions of great Princes have always been liable to the Peoples censure, how
wise soever they may have been, the Speculative have ever been able to give
probable reasons for their conduct; nor do the Malcontents and the Envious,
ever want matter to de^ame them. When Philip II. caused his Son Don Carlos to
be arrested, all the Courtiers spoke of it as their inclinations led them, for
the Father or the Son. Some called him Prudent, and others Severe, because his
Sport and his Revenge met together. Cabrera, Chap. 22. the 7th Book of his
History. Commines paints John II. King of Portugal as a Cruel and Barbarous
Prince, because he killed his Co^in-German, the Duke of Viseu, and cut off the
Head of the Duke of Bragance, Brother to the Queen his Wife. ( Chap. 17. of the
last Book of his Memoirs.) On the contrary, Mariana says, that he was a lover
of justice, and the Great Men of the Kingdom hated him, because he seized the
Criminals who withdrew for shelter into their Territories and Castles. And as
for the Dukes of Viseu and Bragance, who had both conspired against the Person
of the King and his Kingdom, I believe Commines would have agreed with Mariana,
if he more narrowly examined this matter. Chap. 23. of the 14th Book, and the
11th of the 26 Book of the History. Where by the way we may observe, that the
Resemblance between Vice and Virtue, often causes the Common People to confound
and blend 'em together, giving to both the Name which belongs to its contrary.
; that through an insatiable desire of reigning, he being then a Youth, and of
a private Fortune, had corrupted the Veteran Troops with Bribes and Donatives,
had raised an Army, and debauched the Legions of Decimus Brutus then Consul,
under color of reconciliation with Pompey's party; that after he had extorted
from the Senate, the Ornaments and Authority of a Praetor, and seized on the
Troops which had been commanded by Hirtius and Pansa, newly slain In the War of
Modena against Anthony, Hirtius and Pansa were Consuls, and Augustus commanded
there in quality of Propraetor. Anthony was forced to fly and leave Italy.
, either by the Enemy, or by the Treason of this young Caesar, (for Pansa was
thought to have been brought to his end by an envenomed Plaster applied to his
wound, and Hirtius was slain by the hands of his own Soldiers,) he caused
himself to be created Consul in spite of the Senate, and had turned those arms
against the Commonwealth, which he had taken up against Anthony: The
Proscription of so many Citizens was charged on him; and the division of the
Lands That is, That these Lands belonging to the Community, could not be given
to private Persons, much less to the Soldiers, without wronging the Public.
disapproved even by those to whom they fell. The Death of Cassius and the two
Bruti Marcus, and Decimus Brutus, of whom the first killed himself, as I have
already said, and the other was killed by the command of Anthony. A punishment
he justly deserved for his ingratitude toward Caesar, whom he was so hardy as
to Murder, at the same time he received favors from him. He envied, says
Paterculus, the Fortune of him who had made his, and after having taken away
the Life of Caesar, he thought it no injustice to keep the Estate he had
received from him. Hist. lib. 2. Chap. 64. It Is fit to observe by the way, that
of all the Murderers of Caesar, who were sixty in number, there was not one of
them who did not die a Violent Death, nor did any of them outlive him more
than three years.
, must indeed be owned for a just Vengeance on the Murderers of his Father Hoc
opus, haec pietas, haec prima elementa fuerunt,
Caesaris, ulcisci justa per arma patrem.
Ovid. l. 3. Fast. Cato the Censor meeting a Young Man who came for a Decree to
disgrace one of his Father's greatest Enemies. See there, says he, how a
well-bred Child ought to offer sacrifice to the Memory of his Father.
; though still it had been more glorious for him, to have sacrificed his
private hatred, to the Public Interest: But the younger Pompey had been
unworthily betrayed under the shadow of a pretended Peace; and Lepidus by a
dissembled Friendship: Anthony soothed and lulled asleep, by the Treaties of
Tarentum, and Brundusium, and by his Marriage with the Sister of Augustus, had
paid with his Life the forfeit of that fraudulent Alliance. After this a Peace
was of necessity to ensue, but it was a bloody Peace; and infamous for the
punishment of the Varro's, the Egnatii Rufus Egnatius, who, according to
Paterculus, was in every thing more like a Gladiator than a Senator, having
formed a Cabal of Men like himself; he resolved to kill Augustus; but his
design succeeded no better than Lucius Murena's, and Fannius Caepio's, He was
punished with the Accomplices of his Treason, by such a Death as his detestable
Life deserved.
, and the Iulii of Rome; to which succeeded the Defeats of Lollius Marcus
Lollius, according to Paterculus, was more careful to enrich himself than to do
his duty.
and Varus Quintilius Varus, a Peaceable Man, but heavy, and more fit to
command an Army in time of Peace, than to make War. He was so imprudent, says
Florus, Book 4. Chap, 12. as to assemble the Germans in the midst of his Camp
to do them justice, as if he had been able to restrain the Violence of these
barbarous People with a Serpent's Wand. He imagined, says Paterculus, that
they were plain honest People, who had little more than the Shape and voice of
Men, and whom he could civilize by mild Laws, and tame by the Forms of Justice,
those, who could not be subdued by the force of Arms. Segestes gave him notice
of the intended revolt of Arminius, but he would not believe it, thinking the
Germans had as much good will for him, as he had for them; In the mean time his
Army is Surprised and Massacred by people whom they butchered before like
Sheep. Poor Varus, more courageous to die than fight, stabbed himself.
in Germany: Neither did they spare his private Life in their discourses. They
reproached him for having forcibly taken from her Husband a Woman then with
Child; and for having made a Scoff of Religion, by demanding of the Priests if
it were lawful for him to espouse her before she was delivered Princes often
make Religion yield to their Interests, whereas their Interests ought to give
place to Religion. Dispensations for marriages within the Degrees forbidden are
become so common, that it is not any longer a matter of scruple to marry two
Sisters, or two Brothers. Philip II. who, according to Historians, had so nice
a Conscience, was very near Marrying Elizabeth the Queen of England, and Isabel
the Queen-Dowager of France, both his Sisters-in-Law, and the latter also the
Daughter of the Empress Mary his Sister; and matching his Son, Don Carlos, with
his other Sister, Joan the Princess-Dowager of Portugal, alleging for a
President Moses and Aaron, who were the Sons of Amram by his Father's Sister.
Henry the Cardinal King of Portugal, as devout a Priest and Archbishop as he
was, at the age of 67 years, was very earnest to obtain a Dispensation to marry
the Duke of Braganza's Daughter, who was but 13 years old. Upon which Cabrera
tells an odd Story; that Don Duarte de Castelblanco advised Henry to marry, and
advised the Jesuits, who governed him absolutely, to make him take a Wife that
was already with Child, there being no hopes, by reason of his Age and
Infirmities, that he could otherwise have Children, Lib. 12. Chap. 14. Paul
Piasecki says, that the Poles abhor incestuous Marriages, and the
Dispensations that permit them; and that the Famous John Zamoyski, Great
Chancellor of Poland, who to his Death opposed the Marriage of Sigismund III.
with Constance of Austria, Sister to his former Wife Ann, remonstrating to
Clement VIII. that such a Marriage was repugnant to common honesty, and that
the Polish Nation would never suffer this Decency to be Violated by his
breeding Mares. Insomuch, that Sigismund was not able to procure the
Dispensation he demanded, till after the Death both of the Pope and the
Chancellor. In his Latin Chronicle ad An. 1604. I tremble, says Commines,
speaking of the Marriage of Ferrand, King of Naples, with the Sister of his own
Father, King Alphonso, to speak of such a Marriage, of which Nature there have
already been several in this Family within thirty years last past. Memoirs, L.
8. Chapter 14. Thus the Author of the Satyr Menippe, had reason to say, that the
House of Austria do as the Jews, and lie with one another like May- Bugs.
. They allowed him to have suffered the Luxury of Quintus Atedius, and Vedius
Pollio Princes are reproached, not only with their own Vices and
Irregularities, but also with those of their Ministers and their Favorites.
For people suppose they have the Vices which they tolerate in persons who are
in their Service or their Favor.
, his Minors, and also of having given himself up to be governed by Livia Where
is the Difference, says Aristotle, in being governed by Women, or by Men who
leave the Management of affairs to Women? Polit. Lib. 2. Chapter 7.
, a heavy Burden to the Commonwealth, and a worse Stepmother to the Family of
the Caesar's; That he had made himself a Fellow to the Gods, commanding Temples
to be dedicated to him as to a Deity, with the Pomp of Images, Priests, and
Sacrifices. That for the rest, he had appointed Tiberius to succeed him A
Prince, who voluntarily chooses a bad Successor, instead of augmenting, effaces
the Glory of his Reign; for his Memory becomes as odious as his Successor's
person: To leave a good one, says Cabrera, after the younger Pliny, is a kind
of Roman Divinity, Hist. Philip II. Lib. 1. Chapter 8. If some of the better
actions of the most moderate Princes are ill interpreted after their Deaths, as
Tacitus shows, by the Example of Augustus, whom they railed at with so much
Liberty, they have Hatred enough to bear, without loading themselves also with
that, which the choice of an unworthy Successor draws upon them.
, not out of any Affection which he bore him, nor out of any Consideration for
the Public Good, but only to add a Luster to his own Glory, by the Foyl of
that Comparison* as having a perfect Insight into his Nature, and knowing him
at the bottom to be Proud Dio and Sueton don't differ much from Tacitus.
Suspicio, says the first* quosdam tenuit, consulto Tiberium ab Augusto satis
^um qualis esset cognescen^^, successorem ordinatum, quo magis ipsius gloria
floreret, Lib. 56. Nec i^^ud ignore, says the other, aliquos tradidisse
Augustum etiam ambitione tractum ut ^ali successore desiderabilior ipse
quandoque fieret: In Tib. cap. 23. So that P. Bouhours censures all at once
these three Roman Historians, when he speaks thus: Is it probable, that
Augustus preferred Tiberius to Agrippa and Germanicus, for no other Reason, but
to acquire Glory by the comparison which would be made of a cruel and arrogant
Prince, such as Tiberius was, with himself, his Predecessor. For although
Tacitus puts this in the Mouth of the Romans, it is visible enough, that the
Reflection is his own, as well as that which he makes on the same Augustus, for
having put in his Will, amongst his Heirs, the principal Persons of Rome, of
whom the greatest part were odious to him; that he had put them in, I say,
through Vanity, to make himself esteemed by Posterity. Dialogue 3. de sa manier
de bien penser. If this Reflection is Tacitus's own, it ought to be attributed
likewise to Dio and Sueton, who are esteemed nevertheless true and
well-informed Historians. And consequently we may say of Pere Bouhours, what
Raphael dalla Torre said of Strada on occasion of the Censure of this Passage
of History, and many others, that he knew better how to accuse Tacitus, than to
justify Augustus: For although S^eton* says Raphael, declares in the place
forementioned, that so sinister an Opinion is not agreeable to the Goodness of
Augustus, yet in stead of confuting it by any Reason, he confirms it by the
Knowledge which he owns Augustus had long before of the Evil Qualities of
Tiberius. (...). (Livia) veteres quosdam ad se Augusti codicillos de acerbitate
and intolerantia morum ejus e sacrario protulit atque recitavit. And by the
Words which he says Augustus spoke after the last Discourse which he had with
Tiberius, crying out, Unhappy is the People of Rome, who (...) to fall under
such heavy (...) Sueton therefore may say as much as he will, that he cannot
believe, that so prudent a Prince could be willing to choose a Successor of so
Tyrannical a Temper to make himself the more regretted; but seeing he
consell^^, that Augustus knew the Ill Nature of him that he chose, he ought at
least to have given us some pertinent Reason to excuse so bad a Choice: c^p. 4.
of his Astrolabe of State.
and In Princes, the Vices of the Man don't unqualifie him for good Government.
Thus Augustus made no scruple to demand the Tribuneship for Tiberius, although
he knew he had many Personal Vices, because he knew he had the Virtues of a
Prince to balance them. Commines, after having observed in several places of
his Memoirs all the Vices of Lewis the Eleventh, his Inquietude, his Jealousy,
his Levity in Discourse, his Aversion to great Men, his Natural Inclination to
Men of mean Birth, his Insincerity, his Cruelty, concluded notwithstanding,
that God had made him wiser, and more virtuous in all things, than the Princes,
who were contemporary with him; because, without flattering him, he had more of
the Qualities requisite to a King, than any Prince that he had ^ver seen: lib.
6. cap. 10. And speaking of John Galeas Duke of Millain. he says, That he was
a great Tyrant, but Honorable, l. 7. c. 7. Cabrera speaking of Cardinal Henry
King of Portugal, says, That he had the Virtues of a Priest, and the Faults of
a Prince; which was as much as to say, That he wanted the Qualities that are
necessary to a King* cap. 24. lib. 12. of his Philip I^. There have been, says
the same Author, Princes and Governors, who, notwithstanding great Vices, have
been Venerable, for having had Qualities that deserve Reverence, as Eloquence,
Liberality, Civility, the discernment of good and bad Counsels, the Art of
governing Cities, and commanding Armies, and other Natural Virtues resembling
Moral ones; whence arise great Advantages, which make the Persons, who are the
Authors of them, highly Esteemed and Respected. It is for this Reason, that
some have said by way of Proverb, A bad Man makes a good King. A severe Prince,
who does not violate Natural and Divine Laws, is never called a Tyrant. The
Imperious Majesty of King Francis I. although it was excessive, was more useful
than the Sweetness and Humanity of his Son, who authorized Vice and
Licentiousness, and who, by the Gifts and Favors which he conferred on
Flatterers, converted the Public Good into Private Interest, and left the
People to the Mercy of Great Men, and never punished the Injustice of his
Officers: cap. 8. lib. 2. of the same History.
Cruel. For not many Years before, Augustus requesting the Senate once more to
confer the Tribunitial Power on Tiberius He had exercised this Sovereign Power
with Augustus, before his (...) to Rhodes. Paterculus Hist. 2. cap. 99.
, had cast out some Words concerning his Humor, and the Oddness of his
Manners, which seeming to Excuse, did in effect Reproach them This manner of
Accusing, while we Excuse, is very much in fashion with Courtiers, who,
according to the Floren^i^e Proverb, have Honey in the Mouth, and a Razor under
the Girdle.
.

V. The Funerals of Augustus being ended, there was a Temple and Divine Worship
decreed for him; and that being done, earnest Supplications were addressed to
Tiberius; who, on his side, spoke ambiguously concerning the Greatness of the
Empire, and the Diffidence he had of his own Abilities: Saying, That nothing
but the Soul and Genius of Augustus could support so great a Burden of Affairs
The Prince who immediately succeeds a Predecessor who has performed great
Things, does himself an Honor in exalting him, for besides, that it is
believed that the Esteem that he has for him will spur him on to the ^mitation
of him, he becomes himself more wonderful and more venerable to his Subjects,
when he equals him, or excels him. Tiberius was not inferior to A^gustu^ in
Understanding and Experience. The Day that Charles the Fifth had ^b^icated the
Kingdom of S^ain, his Son Philip said in his Speech, That the Emperor laid an
heavy Weight upon him; That he would not accept of a Crown which stood in need
of the Prudence and Experience of his Imperial Majesty, were it not to
contribute to the Preservation of so invaluable a Life. Concluding, that ^e
would endeavor to imitate some of his Virtue^* since to imitate them all, was
a Thing impossible for the most perfect Man in the World. Cabrera, lib 1. cap.
7. o^ his History.
; and that having sustained some part of them during the Life of the Emperor
It would be a great Advantage to the Children of Sovereig^ (...), if their
Fathers would themselves take pains to instruct them* I mean those who are to
succeed them; for, from whom shall they learn the Art of Government, if not
from him who Governs? And, how can they be able to Govern when they ascend the
Throne, if they have never been admitted to any Knowledge of the Affairs of
their State* It must pass through the Hands of interessed Ministers, who will
make their Advantage of their Prince's Ignorance, to render themselves more
necessary, and who, to maintain themselves in the Power they have gotten, will
never let him see A^^airs, but on that side which may give him a disgust of
Business. On the contrary, a Prince who has had some share in the Government
in his Father's Lifetime, enters trained up and accustomed to act the
difficult part of a King. I don't pretend to say, that a King ought to trouble
himself to teach him a thousand Things, which belong to the Office and Duty of
a Praeceptor. Majus aliquid and exce^sius a Princip^ postulatur. But setting
Iealou^ie a^ide, he cannot fairly dispense with himself from t^aching him (...)
Maxims, which are as the Principles and the Springs of Government, and which
Tacitus calls Arcana Dominationis. And as the Children of Sovereign Princes,
says Cabrera, have been accustomed to believe themselves above the Laws, they
have absolute need of the Instructions of their Fathers; for besides the
Impressions which Blood and the Majesty of Sovereign Power make upon them,
there are none but their Fathers, who have the Authority to command them, and
the Means to make themselves obeyed: cap. 8. lib. 1. of his History.
, he was sensible by his own Experience, how difficult and dangerous it was to
charge his Shoulders with the Weight of Government. That in a City, which
abounded with the Choice of great and able Persons, all Things ought not to be
entrusted to the Management of one; since Public Functions were better
exercised, when many joined their Cares and Labors It is very necessary for a
Prince, says Commines, to have several Persons of his Council; because the
wisest sometimes err, and they help to set one another right: l. 2. c. 2. The
chief Point is to know how to choose them well, and to employ every one
according to the Nature and Degree of their Abilities.
. But there was more of Ostentation, than of upright Meaning, in these
Discourses. And besides, if Tiberius, whether by Nature, or by Custom, spoke
obscurely even on those Subjects, where he had no occasion to dissemble, his
Words at this time became more intricate and doubtful, when he studied
altogether to disguise his Thoughts. Then the Senators, who were all equally
afraid of seeming to divine his Meaning, broke out into Tears, Complaints and
Vows; holding out their Hands to the Gods, and to the Image of Augustus, and
embracing the Knees of Tiberius, till he commanded a Register Sueton calls this
Registry, Rat^^narium, i. e. an Inventory, or a Iour^al.
to be brought written by the Hand of Augustus Although Princes have
Secretaries, whose Hand might save them the trouble of Writing, it is so far
from being beneath them to write themselves Memoirs of this kind, which Tacitus
calls Dominationis Arcana; that on the contrary, it would be Imprudence in them
to commit them to the Ears and Hand of another. There is no Secretary, nor
Confident, whosoever he be, that ought to be admitted to the Knowledge of these
Secrets. A Prince, who is guilty of this Oversight, will become precario^^ to
such a Subject. Edward the Sixth, King of England, wrote himself the Iournal of
his Life, whereof the three last Years are extant. So that if this Prince, who
died at Sixteen, had lived longer, and continued his Labor, he would have
proved a very great Man. In Portugal they have an Office which they call
Escrivaon d^ puridade, as much as to say, The Writer or Register of the
Confidence, or of the Secrets. And Mariana often makes use of this Word in this
sense, when he says, Communicar sus consejos y puridades. As this is the most
important place of the Kingdom, and which has never been held by any other,
but by the chief Minister, it is probable, that it was erected on purpose to
write the Secrets of the King's Cabinet, and thence to prepare Memoirs of
State. John the Second King of Portugal, and Ferdinand the Fifth King of
Arragon and Castille, wrote them themselves.
, and containing a Particular of the Public Revenues, with a Roll of the Names
of Citizens and Allies, which served in the Armies, of the Tributary Kingdoms,
of the Conquered Provinces, of the Naval Strength, of the Imposts, and all the
Pensions and Expenses which were charged on the Commonwealth. To which,
Augustus, whether out of Fear for the Empire, which had received so great a
Blow in Germany, or out of Jealousy, lest some of his Successors should have
the Glory of extending the Roman Conquests farther than himself, added the
Advice of Restraining the Empire within the present Limits Whether this Counsel
proceeded from Fear or Jealousy, it was certainly good. Power is not always
augmented in proportion as it is extended. It is often with a vast State, as it
is with prodigious Ships, whose Burden hinders their sailing. Besides, there
are Conquests, which are burdensome because they cannot be preserved. It was
for this Reason, that Edward King of England would not hearken to the Proposals
of Lewis the Eleventh, who would have engaged him in the Conquest of Flanders,
after the Death of the last Duke of Burgundy; answering, That the Cities of
Flanders were strong and great, and the Country not easy to keep after it was
conquered. Memoires of Commines, l. 6. c. 2. The King of Spain would gain more
by giving up to France the remainder of the Low Countries, than by keeping it;
for besides, that this Country not only brings him in nothing, but costs him a
great deal, it would be much more Honorable to give it up voluntarily, than to
lose it by piece-meals after a shameful manner, as it were, by the Attachments
of a Sergeant. Pensees diverses, chapter or sect. 40. This Counsel of Aug^stus, to
shut up the Empire within its Limits, crossed, says Ammirato, the inviolable
Maxim of the Romans, who were ever endeayouring by all ways possible to enlarge
their Empire; but Augustus knowing by his own Experience the Evils that might
ensue thence, thought it his Duty to leave this Counsel to his Successors, to
cut up the Root both of Foreign and Civil Wars. And if Tacitus gives the Name
of Fear to this Advice, it is because it is the part of a wise Man to ^ear that
which deserves to be feared, and to foresee how many Dangers he expo^es himself
to, who never ceases ^^om invading others. Commentary, lib. 1. disc. 6. and
lib. 12. disc. 1.
.

VI. In the mean time, the Senate still descending to the most abject
Supplications, it happened that Tiberius said unwarily, He found himself
incapable of Governing the whole Empire, but if it pleased them to commit some
part of it to his Administration, whatsoever it were, he would accept it. Then
Asinius Gallus laying hold of the Word, And what part of it, O Tiberius, said
he, would thou undertake? He not expecting such a Question, and not having
his Answer in a readiness, for a while stood silent Nothing gives greater
Offense to a dissembling Prince, such as Ti^erius was, than to endeavor to
sound his Heart, or to let him see, that you perceive that he dissembles. We
ought never to put Princes upon explaining themselves farther than they are
willing; when they speak obscurely, it is a sign that there is some Mystery in
it; and, consequently, it is dangerous to enquire into it. The Marquis of
Aitone, says M. de Montresor, went to visit Monsieur, who kept his Bed,
pretending to have the Go^t, and knew well enough that his Highness acted a
Part, but he made no discovery thereof by any outward show, or by any
particular Act to prevent his Retreat out of the Territories of the King his
Master. In his Memoirs.
: But having recovered the use of his Reason, answered, That it was unbecoming
of his Modesty to choose a Share of it, when he had rather discharge himself
altogether of the Burden This Answer of Tiberius plainly shows, that Princes do
not love to be replied upon, and that it is want of Respect toward them to put
them to the Trial. Princes desire to be thought sincere, because this conduces
much to the obtaining their Ends; but they will not be so.
. Asinius, who discovered in his Countenance, that he had stung him, replied,
That the Demand which he had made, tended not to the sharing of that Power,
which could not be divided, but to draw this Acknowledgment from his own Mouth,
that the Commonwealth, being but one Body, could only be governed by one Soul.
Then, after he had praised Augustus, he desired Tiberius to remember his own
Victories in War, and his excellent Actions in Peace, during the space of so
many Years, wherein he had the Management of Affairs. But all this was not
sufficient to make him well with the Emperor The Praises which a Subject gives
his Prince, after he has given him Offense by Words, are never a Plaster so
broad as the Sore. The Affronts offered Princes are irreparable, because they
impute the Reparations thereof to the Fear which the Offenders have of their
Resentment, and not to their Repentance.
, who bore him an ancient Grudge, suspecting him for having espoused Vipsania,
the Daughter of Marcus Agrippa, and formerly the Wife of Tiberius Dio adds a
Reason, which is of yet greater weight. That Asinius having married Vipsa^ia,
Drusus his Mother, he looked upon Drusus as his own Son. So that not being
satisfied with having Tiberius's first Wife, he also shared with him in his
Prerogatives of a Father. It looked also as if he would have had a share also
in Drusus's Heart, C^m Drusum filii instar haberet: These are Dio's Words, lib.
57. Lastly, as Tiberius had always loved Vips^n^^, whom he had not divorced but
to please Augustus, who gave him his own Daughter; he could not endure that
Asinius should' enjoy this Lady, who had as many good Qualities, as Augustus's
Daughter had bad ones.
, as if by that Marriage he designed to raise himself above the Condition of a
private Life A Prince never looks with a good Eye on him who has married a
Wife whom he has divorced, whether he divorced her out of Aversion, or by
Constraint; for if he did it out of Aversion, he looks on the Husband as a
Person who has taken her Part against him, or who knows the Secrets of the
Family, whereof he may make an ill Use: If by Constraint, which was the case of
Tiberius, he hates the Husband as a Rival, who has enriched himself with his
Spoils; or as an ambitious Person, who, by the advantage of his Marriage, hopes
to advance his Fortunes. The Honor which Asinius had of being Father-in-Law to
Drusus, one of the presumptive Heirs of the Empire, joined with his ambitious
Spirit* distinguished him too much, not to raise Jealousy in Tiberius.
Piasecki relates, that John Duke of Filandia, who was afterward King of
Poland, was imprisoned by King Eric, his Brother, with his Wife Catharine,
Sister to Sigismund Augustus King of Poland, because he seemed to have
compassed this high Alliance, to enable him to seize the Crown of Suedeland, as
their Father Gustavus had done. In the beginning of his Chronicle.
, and inherited the imperious Humor of Asinius Pollio his Father.

VII. After this Speech, Lucius Aruncius likewise offended him by another,
almost of the same Tenor: For though Tiberius had not any old Animosity
against him, yet he hated him for his Riches, for the Excellency of his Natural
Endowments, and Moral Perfections; and for the Reput^tion which they had gained
him with the People, which was not inferior to his Merit Kings, says Salust,
are more a^raid or Men of Virtue and Merit, than of ill Men. (...) boni, qu^m
(...), suspectiores sunt, s^mperque his (...) vir^us sormid^losa est. In
Calilina. Tiberius was well persuaded of what Agrippa had said to Augustus,
That a Man of great Under^^anding; and great Courage, could ^ot but be a Lover
of Liberty, and in his Heart an Enemy to an absolute Master. Di^n, lib. 52.
Commines says, that Lewis the Eleventh ^eared all Men, but especially those
who were worthy to be in Authority. Memoirs, l. 6. c. 12.
* Besides, that Augustus in one of the last Discourses which he held, speaking
of those, who would refuse the Empire, though capable of Ruling it; or who
would be Ambitious of it, though incapable of Governing; or who at once would
be capable of Governing, and desirous of the Government; said, That Lepidus
would be worthy of it, without wishing for A Prince can never give better
sustructions to his Successor, than to ^ark out what great Men he ought (...)
distrust. This Knowledge is the most necessary thing to a Prince when he (...)
ascends the Throne, and (...) much the (...), because it is in the ^^ginning
that he is most ea^^^y deceived, and the great Men most (...) to make their
At^^mpts upon an Authority that is not yet well e^tablished. In the last
Counsels, which David on his Deathbed gave to his Son Solomon, he advised him
not to let (...) go to the Grave in peace, who had (...) two just Men, Almer
and (...)* to bring to the Grave with blood the hoar Head of Shimei, who had
dared to curse him, and to caus^ the Sons of Barzillai to eat at his own Table,
who had ^urnished him with Provisions and other Necessaries for his whole Army,
when he fled before Absalom: 1 Kings, chap. 2. Francis the First, in the last
Hours of his Life, advised his Son Henry not to admit the House of Lorrain to
any share of the Government; foretelling, that the Guises would be the Ruin of
the Valois. Counsel that would have saved France from many Wars and Calamities,
had Henry the Second been wise enough to have made use of it. On the contrary,
Philip the Second employed all those Ministers which Charles the Fifth
recommended to him when he resigned the Crown of Spain, and especially the Duke
d'Alva, the Bishop of Arras, who was afterward Granvelle, Diego de Barg^^,
Francis de Eraso, and Gonzalo Peers, the Father of Anthony, who was so famous
for his Misfortunes. And this he did with so much the more success, because
Charles the Fifth, by a secret Memoir which he had sent him, had fully informed
him of the true Character of their Minds, and of the difference of their
Interests. This was a Paper of so excellent Instructions, says the Commander
of Vera, that if Tiberius had made the like, Tacitus would have given him
Immortal Praises. Epit^me of the Life of Charles the Fifth, and Cabrera, cap.
7. lib. 1. of his History. Burnet says, that Edward the Sixth, King of
England, wrote in a Book the Portraitures of the Lord-Lieutenants of his
Counties, and of the principal Magistrates of his Kingdom, with all the
Particulars that he was told of them: Part. 2. l. 1. of his History. Certainly,
he had in this ^ound the Secrets of knowing every thing, and consequently, of
being well served.
it; that Asinius would be desirous of it, without deserving it; that A^^untius
neither was unworthy of it, nor would fail to lay hold of the first Occasion
Ambition, Merit, Courage and Opportunity, are all that are necessary to make a
Usurper. A Subject who has been esteemed worthy to Govern, by a Prince who
has excelled in the Arts of Government, will always be suspected by the
Successor of that Prince, and, which is worse, will fall a Sacrifice, if the
Prince be of a sanguinary Temper. It was never doubted, but Ferdinand d'Avalos,
Marquis de Pesquera, who commanded the Army of Charles the Fifth in Italy, was
disposed to accept of the Kingdom of Naples, which Francis Sforsa, Duke of
Milain, in the Name of the Pope and the Venetians, offered him with the Title
of Captain General of the Italian League; for he was a long time in Treaty with
Ierom Moron, who was this Duke's chief Minister. And that he afterward
discovered all to the Emperor, was an effect of the difficulty of the
Enterprise, rather than of his Fidelity, which Charles the Fifth ever after
suspected.
, to seize it ^. Concerning the two first of these, it is agreed on all Hands;
but some, in stead of Arruntius, have named Cneius Piso. Certain it is, that
all of them, excepting Lepidus, perished afterward, by Tiberius, under the
supposition of several Crimes.

Quintus Haterius, and Mamercus Scaurus, incurred likewise the Displeasure of
that suspicious Soul: The first, for asking him, How long, O Caesar, will thou
suffer the Commonwealth to be without a Head Subjects cannot reproach their
Prince more, than to complain, that the State is without a Head, and
consequently fallen into an Anarchy. From the moment that a Prince ascends the
Throne, he ought to set upon Action, and not to give his Subjects space to
doubt, whether they have a Master. Anthony Perez said, That the King and
Kingdom make a Marriage; that the King is the Husband, and the Kingdom the
Wife; and that a Kingdom is a Widow, that has nor a laborious and vigilant
King.
? The other, for saying, It was to be hoped, that the Suit of the Senate would
not be unprofitable, because when the Consuls proposed him to them for
Emperor, he interposed not his Tribunitial Power to resist the Motion. He
reprehended Haterius on the spot, but he said not a Word in reply to Scaurus,
against whom he was more deeply Because he discovered, that all Tiberius's
refusals of the Empire were not in earnest; whereas Haterius seemed to be
persuaded, that his Refusal was sincere, when he conjured him not to suffer the
Commonwealth to be longer without a Head; which was also an oblique way of
flattering Tiberius, intimating thereby, that the Senate was not the Head of
the Empire.
offended Silence is the most certain sign of a deep Resentment; for whereas
the Mouth gives the Heart vent, Silence nourishes in it Hatred, and the desire
of Revenge. Tacitus says, that Agricola was a little too sharp in his
Rep^imands, but that afterward there remained no more in his Breast, so that
none had any jealousy of his Silence.
. At length being tired with hearing the general Complaints and Murmurs, and
the Remonstrances of each Man in particular, he unbent somewhat of his
Stiffness; not to the degree of declaring, that he would accept the Empire; but
only as he said, to put an end to their Requests Most Popes use this Policy; at
first they seem not willing to hear any mention made of a Cardinal Nephew, or
of the Acquisition of Principalities or Duchies for their Kindred, but after
they have acted this Part some Weeks, they call their Nephews to the
Administration of Affairs, to gratify, as they say, the Ambassadors of
Princes, for whom it would be inconvenient to treat always with the Pope
himself in Person, whereas treating with their Nephews, they discharge their
Office with less Ceremony, and consequently with greater Liberty and Confidence.
, and his Refusals. It Is undoubted, that Haterius going to the Palace to ask
his Pardon, wanted but little of being slain by the Soldiers of the Guard, as
he was embracing the Knees of Tiberius, who slipping at that instant, happened
to fall as he was going forward When a great Man is fallen under the Hatred of
his Prince, Accidents are imputed to him for Crimes, as well as voluntary
Faults. Besides, there are always at Court. Persons who are ready to dispatch
those, whose Death they know will be pleasing to the Prince.
; whether by chance, or having his Legs entangled with the Hands of Haterius:
But the Risque, which so great a Personage had run, abated nothing of his
Resentment. Haterius continued still obnoxious to his Anger, till the Empress,
whose Protection he had sought, interceding in his Favor, by force of Prayers
obtained his Pardon.

VIII. The Flatteries of the Senate were yet more excessive, in relation to
Livia. Some of them voting her the Title of Mother Which was as much as to say,
the Empress-Mother.
, by way of Excellence and Distinction: Others, that of Mother of her Country:
And many of them were likewise for passing a Decree, that to the Name of
Caesar, should be added the Son of Iulia. But Tiberius replied to all these,
That they ought not to confer Honors on Women too lavishly Kings are obliged,
as all other Men, to honor their Mothers, and to have all the Complaisance for
them, that domestic and civil Decency require; but as for Honors, which
properly belong to Majesty, or which are of dangerous consequence, they ought
not to permit them to be decreed to their Mothers. Solomon seeing his Mother
coming to him, rose up to meet her, and caused her to ^it on a separate Throne
at his Right Hand; but as soon as she had asked Abishag in Marriage for
Ado^^jah, Salomon's elder Brother, he said to her, Why do you not ask the
Kingdom for him also? And was so far from granting her Request, which was very
imprudent, that he put Adonijah to death as a Traitor, who aspired to the Crown
by marrying the Companion of his Father's Bed: 1 Kings, chapter 2. In Poland, they
crown the Queen, but take no Oath of Allegiance to her; for the State allows
her no Jurisdiction. Martin Cromer, lib. 2. of Poland.
: That for himself, he would use the same Moderation in those which were
proposed for him Princes who will retrench superfluous Titles, and moderate the
Vanity of their Subjects, ought to begin with themselves. And this is what
Philip the Second did, to give Life and Vigor to the famous Ordinance of 1586,
entitled, Pragmatica, where he commanded all those who should hereafter write
to him, to give him no other Title in the begin^ing of their Letters, than
Senor; nor any other Compliment in the end, than this Form, Dios guarde la
Catolica Persona de Vuestra Magestad; and after that, the Subscription in the
most simple manner, viz. only the Name of him that writes, without the flourish
of, Your most humble and most obedient Subject and Servant. And for the
Superscription, these Words, Al Rey nuestro Senor. Cabrera says, that Philip
made this Ordinance, that Ambition and Flattery might not come to usurp Divine
Titles; and to set his Subjects an Example in all his Grants and Letters
Patents, he styled himself only Don Filipe, etc. without assuming the Sirnames
of Magnificent, Triumphant, Invincible, which the Kings Alphonso the Sixth and
Seventh, his Predecessors, had used: cap. 21. lib. 12. of his History. See Note
1. Article 38. Lib. 4. of these Annals.
. Which he said out of Envy to his Mother, whose Elevation he regarded as a
Lessening to his own Authority. He would not, that even a Lictour i. e. An
Usher or Mace-bearer to walk before her.
should be decreed for her, and hindered the erecting of an Altar, in memory of
her Adoption into the Julian Family; and forbad them to ascribe to her any
other Honor of the like Nature. But he asked the Proconsular Power for
Germanicus, and sent him the Decree by some of the Senate; who were also
commissioned to comfort him for the Death of Augustus A Prince, who is
disappointed of the Succession of a State, whereof he is the lawful Heir, has
much greater need to be comforted upon the account of the Injustice that is
done him, than for the Death of him that has done it.
. The Reason why he required not the same Honors for his Son Drusus, was
because he was then in Rome, and besides was designed Consul. He afterward
named twelve Pretors, which was the Number established by Augustus A wise
Prince ought never to alter the Rules made by his Prededecessor, if he is one
whose Memory is had in Veneration by the People; or if he does it, Prudence
requires, that it be not in the beginning of his Reign, which is always the
time wherein he is most exposed to Censure. Lewis the Twel^th, says Commines,
took possession of the Kingdom, without making any Alterations in the Pensions
for that Year, which had yet six Months to come. He displaced few Officers, and
said, That he would keep every Man in his Post, and in his Estate. And all this
was very becoming him. Cap. ult. of his Memoirs.
; and the Senate requesting him to create more The multiplication of the
Officers of Justice, tends always to the Ruin of the People. Whereas it seems
probable, that Affairs would be dispatched with more expedition by a great
number of Officers, than by a small; on the contrary, they are spun out without
end, because there are more People who have an Interest to protract them, that
they may subsist thereby, especially when Offices are venal. For, according to
the common saying, He that buys Justice in Gross, will sell it by Retail.
, he took a Solemn Oath, never to exceed that Number.

IX. It was now, that the Assembly The Assembly, where they chose the
Magistrates called Comitia a (...) v^l comeundo, which was held in the Field of
Mars.
for electing Magistrates, was for the first time transferred from the Field of
Mars to the Senate: For though formerly the Emperor had managed all Affairs of
Consequence according to his Pleasure, yet some Things were still permitted to
be done, by the Intrigues and Suffrages Romulus divided the People into three
Tribes, as the City was then divided into three Quarters; which Number gave
occasion to the Name of of Tribe. He afterward divided these Tribes into
thirty Curiae, or Classes. The elder Tarquin doubled these Tribes, to equal
their Number to the six Quarters of the City, which was much enlarged. Servius
Tullius, the Successor of Tarquin, distributed it into nineteen Tribes, four of
which were called Tribus Urbanae, or the Citizens; and the other fifteen, which
comprehended all the Inhabitants of the Country, were called Tribus Rusticae.
And in process of Time, the Number of Tribes increased to Thirty five.
of the Tribes When a State is lately changed from a Democracy to a Monarchy,
the Prince, as being new, ought to leave the People the Enjoyment of some of
their ancient Rights, to accustom them insensibly to Obedience.
: For which loss of Privileges, the People showed no other Resentment, but by
insignificant Complaints and Murmurs. And the Senate, for their part, were well
satisfied, that thereby they were discharged from the shameful Necessity of
bribing and supplicating the Commons There is no Yoke which the great Men and
the Nobility will not bear, rather than fall into the Hands of the People, and
to make court to them to obtain Offices. It is for this Reason, that a
Democracy is always of short duration in States where there is much Nobility.
, to favor their Election. And this the more, for that Tiberius reserved to
himself but the Naming A Prince newly established, who reserves to himself the
naming but of a small number of Officers, so as his Nomination be liable to no
Contest, establishes his Power much better, than if he attempted at first to
name all. For, in process of Time, it will be easy for him to extend the
Prerogatives of a Sovereignty, which the People have once acknowledged. When
the Principality it self is in question, the Conditions ought never to be
disputed whatsoever they are; it is sufficient to get possession of it, after
which, all the rest follows as one would wish Ubi sis ingressus, adesse studia
and Ministros. Ann. 4.
of four Candidates So they call those who stood for Offices, because during
the time of their Suit they wore a White Garment.
, who were to be admitted without Caballing, or any Contradiction. At the same
time, the Tribunes of the People demanded the Permission, to celebrate at their
own Charges those Plays in Honor of Augustus A remarkable Example of Flattery*
Those, who by their Office and their Duty are obliged to preserve the public
Liberty, canonize the Person who destroyed it.
, which in their Calendars In this Calendar, called ^osti, were set down the
Festivals, the Ceremonies, and the Names of the Magistrates of the Cities.
were called by the Name of Augustales. But it was ordered, that the Public
should be at the Expense, and that the Tribunes should wear the Triumphal Robe
It was a figured Robe, edged with Purple, with a Vest wrought with Branches of
Palms.
in the Circus; where, nevertheless, it was not allowed them to be born in
Chariots. And the Annual Celebration was thenceforward committed to that
particular Praetor, to whose Lot it should fall, to judge the Differences
arising betwixt Citizens and Strangers.

X. This was the face of Affairs at Rome, when a Sedition arose, of the Legions
in Pannonia These Legions, says Paterculus, were for a new Head, a new
Government, and, in a word, for a new Republic; they threatened to give Laws to
the Senate, and even to the Prince himself; they would by main force augment
their Pay, and shorten the time of their Service, to have their Reward before
the set time. There was nothing wanting to them, but ^ Head, to have lead them
on against the Government; and whosoever this Head had been, he would have
found this Army ready to have followed him: chapter 125.
. They had no new occasion of Disturbance; only the change of an Emperor
inspired them with Boldness to make some Disturbance, in hope to better their
Condition by a Civil War The beginnings of Reigns are ever subject to some
Tempest; for it is then that all Malcontents are stirring, and are for
selling their Obedience as dear as they can, by disturbing an Authority, that
while it is in its growth has need to keep fair with all, to gain Time to
establish it self. Want of Power in a Prince, Ambition of great Men, who have
always a good Opinion of their own Abilities and Discontents in the People, are
the three ordinary Sources of Factions, as those are of Civil Wars. France saw
sad Instances thereof during the Minority of Lewis the Great. GOD grant that
these may be the last.
. Three Legions were quartered together in the same Camp, under the Command of
Iunius Blaesus, who having heard of the Death of Augustus, and the Succession
of Tiberius, had interrupted the daily Exercises of the Soldiers, either in
Token of Mourning Ob Iustitium, says Tacitus. The Iustitium then was a
Vacation or Suspension of all Civil Affairs, which was commanded by the Senate,
or the Magistrates of the City, as may be gathered from those words of the
Second Book of the Annals; Ut ante Edictum Magistratuum, ante Senatusconsultum
sumpto justitio desererentur fora, etc.
, or of Joy. This Dispute began to give a Loathing to the Army of their Labor,
and Military Discipline, and infuse into them a Propensity of Idleness and
Pleasure. It furnished them with Occasions of frequent Quarrels with one
another; and of lending an Ear to the mutinous Discourses of the most dissolute
amongst them. There was in the Camp a Fellow called Percennius, formerly Head
of a Faction among the Stage Players Great Seditions are commonly raised by
pitiful Fellows; and if a Rascal has a Talent of speaking, the Rabble is
always ready to lend an Ear to him. The common People need no other Oracles,
especially if the Haranguer inveighs against some Minister that is much hated,
as they all are. In the beginning of the Reign of Charles the Fifth, the famous
Insurrection of the City of Castille, called Las Communidades, (because it was
a Sedition of the common People against the Nobles, which afterward
degenerated into a direct Rebellion against the Prince;) This Revolt, I say,
had for its Leaders, a Barbor at Medina del Campo a Fell-monger at Salamanca; a
Carder at Valenca; a Tanner at Segovia; a Barber at Avila; and such other
Deliverers at Burgos, at Guadalaxara, at Siguenca, at Vailladolid, at Zamora,
etc. Epitome of the Commandeur de Vera. Bussy-le-Clerc was one of the principal
Supporters of the League; and Peter de Brousell, who was but an ordinary
Counselor, was the Oracle and the Idol of the Fronde.
; afterward a private Soldier: Insolent in his Speech, and who had learned to
raise Sedition, by his Practice, in the Playhouse. This Man haunting the
Conversation of the most Ignorant, and Silly, who were very inquisitive to know
what their Condition was like to be under their new Emperor, debauched them by
his Nightly Conversations with them, or at least when it grew late in the
Evening; and when the more sober Party were withdrawn to Rest, assembled the
Band of Mutineers. At length many others, who were Promoters of Sedition, being
associated with him, he questioned them, like a General who Harangues his Army,
on these following Propositions.

XI. Why they paid a Slavish Obedience to a small number of Centurions, and a
less of In elder Times the Military Tribunes had none above them, but the
General; but afterward the Lieutenant-Generals took their Place. So that these
Tribunes were much the same with our Colonels or Commanders of a thousand Men;
for there were six of them in every Legion, which ordinarily consisted of six
thousand Men. Their Office was to distribute the Generals Orders, to give the
Word to the Sentinels, to take care of Fortifications, to try Deserters and
Mutineers for their Lives, etc. Sometimes Tribunu^ Militum is taken for the
chief Commander of a Legion, and sometimes of a Cohort; and hence it came to
pass, that the Roman^ had not so many Officers as we have.
Tribunes An Army which comes to consider its own Multitude, and the small
number of its Officers, is very apt to desire to free it self from Discipline,
and makes a Jest of petitioning for those Things which they know well enough
durst not be refused them, if they have recourse to Force.
? When would they have the Courage to expose their Grievances, and require a
Remedy, if not now, in the unsettled Condition of a new Emperor The
Malcontents of a preceding Reign, find the beginning of the succeding to be
the most favorable time to have their Demands heard. This was the Policy the
People of Ghant used toward Charles Duke of Burgundy, who was forced to grant
them all they demanded, that he might not have two Wars on his Hands at once,
Duke Philip, his Father, having left him one with Liege. Memoirs of Commines,
l. 2. c. 4. Pope Innocent the Ninth said, That the beginning of a Reign was not
a time for Negotiations, but for Congratulations and Rejoycings, to free
himself by this handsome Excuse from the Importunities of those who came to beg
Favors of him.
* with whom they safely might Expostulate, or, if need were, demand Redress by
force of Arms? They had in their own Wrong been already silent for the space of
many Years, when would they be weary of so tame a Patience? Not the least
Account was made of thirty or forty Years of Service, without mentioning the
Infirmities of Age, the greatest part of them had their Bodies mangled, and
their Limbs disabl'd with their Wounds. That even they who were exempted from
their daily Duties, yet saw no end of their Sufferings; being still retained
under their Colors, they still endured the same Miseries, without other
Advantage, than that of a more honorable Name They were called Veterans, i. e.
Soldiers, who had completed their time of Service.
! If some amongst them survived so many Misadventures, they were sent into
remote Countries, where, under the specious Title of Rewards, they had Fens
allotted them to drain, or barren Hills of cultivate: That the Trade of Warfare
wa^ of it self Laborious and Unprofitable; that they earned a hard Livelihood
of Eight Pence a Day The Roman Denarius, or Penny, was worth ten Asses, but
under Augustus it was worth sixteen; about Sevenpence-Halfpenny of our Money.
, or little more, out of which they were to supply themselves with Clothing,
Tents and Arms; and pay their exacting Centurions for their Exemption from
Military Duties It is impossible, that an Army should be ever well disciplined,
in which the Officers sell Exemptions from Watches, and other Military Duties;
or that it should not abound with Malcontents, seeing that all the Soldiers
who buy these Exemptions continuing useless, the rest must necessarily be
oftener upon Duty, and withal, more exposed to Dangers. Inter paucos pericula ac
labor crebrius rediban^. Hist. 2.
. That the Blows of their Officers, their Mayms, the Severity of the Winter,
the insufferable Toyls of Summer Because they continued Day and Night.
, a bloody War, and a barren Peace, were endless Evils; for which, there was no
other Remedy, than not ^o list themselves for Soldiers under the Daily Pay of a
Roman Penny (or Denarius They demanded a Penny in Specie, in stead of ten Asses
in Money, because the Penny was then worth sixteen Asses.
); covenanting also to be discharged from Service, at the end of Sixteen Years;
to be sent to their respective Homes, to receive their Pay in Silver, and in
the Camp where they had served; shall then the Praetorian Soldiers receive each
of them a double Sallary to ours, and be dismissed after Sixteen Years of
Warfare? Are their Actions, or Sufferings to be compared with ours? I speak not
this, either out of Envy, or Contempt; but at least we may say for our
Reputation, that being in the midst of barbarous and fierce Nations, we have
our Enemies in view, even from our Tents.

XII. The whole Company received his Oration with a general applause; though
from different motives: some of them showed the Marks of the Civil Blows which
their Officers had given them; Others their hoary Hair, and many barred their
Flesh, ill covered, with old and ^atter'd Clothes. In short, they were infla^'d
to that height of rage, that they proposed the Uniting the three Legions into
one To make themselves more formidable by this Union, and to be always in a
readiness to make a common Effort, if their General should think fit to employ
Force against them.
; but their jealousy put a stop to that, every Man pretending to the chief
Honor for his own Legion. They bethought themselves of another Expedition,
which was for mixing the three Eagles confusedly, with the Ensigns of the
Cohorts; which having done, they raised a Tribunal on sods of Grass, that the
Seat might be the farther seen. Blesus arriving thereupon, took those by the
Arm whom he met in his Passage, and reproached them with great Severity
Firmness is the best of Arms against Men in Sedition, especially in unforeseen
Accidents; for in a surprise, a Man not having time to counterfeit, shows what
he is, and consequently, all his Courage, or all his Weakness. Thus when a
General immediately resists the Fury of a seditious Army, Admiration succeeds
into the place of Insolence, and Fear seizes them, when once they see that they
are not terrible enough to be feared; and that their General has Courage and
Resolution to despise them. In some occasions, says Cardinal de Richelieu, to
speak and act with Resolution, when one has the Right of his side, is so far
from making a Rupture, that, on the contrary, it is the way to prevent it, and
stifle it in its Birth. Second Part of his Politic Testament, chapter 2.
. Rather dip your Hands, said he to the Mutineers, in the live Blood of your
General; it will be a less Crime for you to murder me, than to revolt against
your Emperor: I will either restrain you within your due Obedience, if you
suffer me to live, or I will hasten your Repentance by my Death Because of the
Revenge which the Prince will take of it.
.

XIII. In the mean time they proceeded with their Work, which they had already
raised to the height of their Shoulders; when at length their Obstinacy being
conquered by his Courage, they gave it over. Blesus, who was a Master of
Well-speaking Eloquence in the Mouth of a General is a powerful means to
suppress a Sedition, especially when he speaks Ex tempore, as Blesus did. But
it must be a masculine, nervous, and vehement Eloquence; and without Art; for,
according to Tacitus, Soldiers have not the subtilty nor delicacy of Gown-men.
In Agricola.
, represented to them, That their Demands ought not to be carried to the
Emperor, by way of Sedition How just and necessary soever the Demands be,
which Subjects make to their Princes, they ought to present them with Respect
and Submission, otherwise the Circumstances totally change their Nature, i. e.
of a good Cause, they make a bad one; and they are so far from deserving to be
heard favorably, that they ought to be rigorously punished for their Insolence.
; that their Predecessors had never offered any thing of that Nature to former
Generals; nor they themselves, to the Divine Augustus; that they had ill timed
their Purpose, to give new Troubles to a Prince, oppressed with the weight of
his Affairs now in the beginning of his Reign A Prince has never more Business
than in the beginning of his Reign; for besides, that his Authority is
unsettled, he his employed in drawing up the Plan of his Government, which is
an Affair of great difficulty. A Politic Spaniard said, That no Prudence nor
Sagacity was sufficient for the beginning of a Reign; and that the case of
Princes, at their Accession to the Throne, is much the same with that of
Travelers, who meeting diverse Paths, know not which to take for fear of losing
their way. Gratian in his Ferdinand. To be short, what Tacitus makes Blesus
say, That it was ill-timing their Business, to address to a Prince, whilst he
was oppressed with the Weight of Affairs, tea^^es Ambassadors, that there are
Times which are not proper to negotiate ^^cessfully with the Princes, with whom
they are resident, and that they ought to watch Opportunitie^, when the Prince
is in a good Humor.
; that if, notwithstanding, they would make such Demands in the midst of Peace,
which the conquering Side in a Civil War had never presumed to ask from their
Commander; yet why would they transgress the Limits of Respect, and violate
Discipline by taking Arms? Why named they not their Deputies, for whom they
might draw up their Instructions in his Presence? At these Words they answered
with a general Cry, That the Son of Blesus, who was one of the Tribunes, was
the most proper Man to take upon him that Commission; and to require a
Discharge for all, when their sixteen Years There is nothing more dangerous for
a Subject, than to take upon him the Commissions of Rebels, for it is in some
sort to espouse their Interests against those of the Prince. And besides, the
Prince has always reason to take it ill, that his Subject will Capitulate with
him. Charles the Fifth seeing Don Pedro Laso at the Head of the Deputies of the
People of T^ledo, who had made an uproar, told him, That he would punish him
immediately, but that he considered whose Son he was: And he was very near
cutting off the Head of Anthony Vasqu^ d'Avila, for undertaking to deliver a
Letter of the Communeros, i. e. of the Seditious of Tordesillas. Do^ Iuan
Antonio de Vera, in the Epitome of his Life. The Prince of Salerna, of the
House of Sanseverino, lost the Favor of this Emperor, and afterward his
Principality and his Reputation, for having undertaken an Embassy from the City
of Naples, which had made an Insurrection against the Viceroy Don Pedro de
Toledo, (in 1547.) The Duke d'Alva having Notice given him, that a Trumpeter
had brought him a Letter from the Rebels of Flanders, commanded him to be
hanged immediately. And this is the Answer, ^aith Bernardin de Mendoza, which
Kings and other Sovereign Princes and their Ministers ought to give to
Ambassadors, which are sent to them by Subjects in Rebellion, to teach them not
to Treat with them as Equals, it belonging only to Princes to send Ambassadors
and Trumpeters. Besides, there ought to be no Communication between the
Officers of a Prince, and those of Rebels; for Malcontents seeing that Rebels
have the liberty to Treat and to Negotiate with safety, are encouraged thereby
to Revolt also, to endeavor to make their Condition better. His Memoirs of the
Wars of the Low Countries, l. 4. c. 3. The same Duke being General for Charles
the Fifth in Germany, answered a Page and a Trumpeter, who came to declare War
in the Name of the Princes of the League of Smalkald, That they deserved to be
hanged, but that the Emperor was pleased to pardon them, and reserve the
Punishment for their Masters. Vera's Epit^^ne of the Life of Charles V.
of Service should be expired; and that they would send him fresh Instructions,
when that first Article was accorded. When young Blesus was set forward on his
Journey, they were somewhat calm: But the Soldiers grew more haughty, on the
account of that Deputation; which showed, that they had carried that by
Violence, which by other Methods they could never have obtained.

XIV. In the mean time, those Bands of Soldiers There was the great and the
little Manipulus, or Band. The little one, called Contubernium, as much as to
say, a Company that lies in one Chamber, and had but ten Men, but the great one
consisted of a Hundred, or a Hundred and twenty. Each great Band had two
Centurions, who commanded each sixty Men, as our Captains. Each Cohort had
three Bands. These Companies were called Manipuli, i. e. Manualis herbarum
fasciculus, because they carried a Bottle of Hay, or a handful of Grass, for
their Ensign, such as the Kings of Sweden and Poland, of the House of Wasa,
bore in their Arms. The Emperors changed this Ensign into a Hand fixed on the
point of a Pike. The little Band had a tenth Man, or Decurio, which was as a
Corporal with us.
, who, before the Sedition, had been sent to Nauportum It was a City of
Pan^onia, called now Laubac in Carniola, a little Province of Hungary.
to repair the Ways and Bridges, and for other Occasions, receiving Notice of
what had passed in the Camp, laid hold on the Ensigns, plundered the
Neighborhood, and Nauportum it self, which was in the nature of a Municipal
Town That is, a City which enjoyed the Privileges and Franchises of the Roman
People.
, contemned, reviled, and even beat their Centurions, who endeavou^'d to
restrain their Madness. Their Rage was chiefly bent against Au^idie^^ Rufus,
who, from a private Soldier, had been raised to a Centurion, and from thence to
a Prefect, or Maresch^l de Camp Those Men, who from private Soldiers (...) to
the great Offices of (...) Army, are commonly the most (...), because, they
know better ^han (...) the Licentious Humor of Soldiers, and all the Tricks
which (...) use to d^ceive the Vigilance of (...)* as also, all the (...) and
Injuries which they (...) in the Towns where they (...) Garrison. Such a one in
the (...) Age was Colonel (...), who from a private Soldier, and a very poor
Gentleman, rose by his Merit to be one of the General (...) of the Spanish
Army, and (...). He was (...) to say, That he was Fransisco for the good
Soldiers, and Verdugo for the bad. A Name that in Spanish signifies a Hangman.
D. Carlos Colom^, lib. 8. of his Wars of Flanders.
. They pulled him from his Chariot, they loaded him with Baggage, and made him
march at the Head of a Battalion, asking him in scorn, If he were not pleased
to carry such a Burden, and to travel so far on Foot? For Rufus was an
indefatigable Man, who restored to use the strictness of the ancient Discipline
Rigor is the Soul of Military Discipline, and we see every Day by Experience,
that there are no worse Soldiers than those who serve under an indulgent
Captain. But we must observe by the way, that as Military Seditions, which
arise from the Severity of a General, are less frequent; so they are more
dangerous, and of longer continuance than those, whereof Indulgence is the
cause.
, and who spared their Labor so much the less, because he had undergone
himself what he had imposed on others.

XV. The arrival of these Mutineers renewed the Tumult, and roaming lawlesly
round the Country, they made Waste of all Things in their way. Blesus caused
some of them, who returned laden with their Plunder, to be beaten, and made
Prisoners, thereby to imprint a greater Terror in the rest: (For the
Centurions, and the sober part of the Soldiers, still continued in their Duty.)
The Pillagers thereupon resist those who force (...) to Prison, embrace the
Knees of their Camerades, implore their Succor; either, in particular, by
their Names; or, in general, the Company, the Cohort, or the Legion, in which
they served; crying out, Their own Turn must be next in the same Usage. They
pour out a thousand Reproaches against their General, and call the Gods to
witness his Injustice. In short, they omit nothing to move Compassion, to raise
Envy and Fear, and to foment Sedition. The Soldiers run in heaps to their
Relief, break open the Prisons, deliver their Companions, and strengthen their
Party with Deserters, and Criminals condemned to Death.

XVI. From thence, the Mutiny grew more outrageous, and the Numbers of their
Heads in^reas'd. One Vibulenus, a private Soldier Nam and hi, says Tacitus,
Hist. 1. (...) temporibus part^m se Reipub. faciunt. For, in troublesome (...),
the meanest People make a Figure in a State, and private Soldiers have more
Authority than Generals. Civilibus bellis plus militibus, quam ducibus licere.
Hist. 2.
, being hoisted on the Backs of his Companions, was carried, as it were, in
Triumph, before the Tribunal of the General, and the Soldiers big with
expectation of his Speech, and thronging to hear him, thus began. It Is true,
Companions, you have restored to Life and Liberty our innocent Fellow Soldiers;
but who shall give me back my Brother, who, being Commissioned to you from the
Army now in Germany, for our common Interests, has this Night been butchered
by, the Gladiators, who are purposely entertained by Blesus, for our General
Massacre. Tell me, Blesus, where thou have thrown this murdered Body? Even
Enemies refuse not Burial to the Slain. When I have satisfied my Grief with
Tears and Kisses, command me to be murdered; and I consent to my own Death,
provided thou will order us to be laid in one common Grave, like Brothers, who
suffered Death, not for the Guilt of any Crime, but only for defending the
Cause of the When the Duke of Mai^ heard at Lions the News of the Duke and the
Cardinal of (...) his Brothers, he caused it to be published through the whole
City, that Henry the Third had taken away their Lives, for no other Reason, but
because they protected and defended the Catholic Religion against the
Huguenots. Herrera, l. 5. of the Third Part of his History, c. 3.
Notwithstanding the Duke of Guise being at the Estates of Blois, had refused to
sign a Declaration which the King caused to be offered to him by a Secretary of
State, wherein he promised and swore to make War on the Hug^^^ots, provided
that his Subjects would assist him with their Forces, and would make no League
with Foreigners without his Approbation; and that those who should act contrary
to this Condition, should incur the Penalties of High Treason: c. 11. l. 4. of
the same Part. I cite this Historian here, because being a Spaniard, his
Testimony is of greater force against the Guises, whom all the Spanish Writers
make to be Maccabees, notwithstanding at the bottom they were acted only by
Ambition, to make themselves Kings of France with the Catolic^^^ of Spain,
against all Laws both Divine and Humane.
Ligions All Rebels and Traitors cover their wicked Designs with the Cloak of
public Good. The Count de Charolois, and other Princes of France, having taken
Arms against Lewis the Eleventh; this War was afterward called the Public
Good, because it was undertaken, as they said, for the Public Good of the
Kingdom. Memoirs of C^^mines, l. 1. c. ^. The Demands of the Lords, adds he in
cap. 12. we^ great: The Duke of Berry demanded Normandy for his Share; the
Count de Charolois the Cities seated on the River of Sum, as Ami^ns,
Abbeville, S. Quentin, and Perenne; and several other Demands for each, with
some Overtures for the Good of the Kingdom: But this was not the bottom of
their Designs, for their Public Good was turned into Private Interest; and, as
Salust says, speaking of Cataline and his Accomplices, Bonum publicum
simulantes pro sua quisque potentia ^^rtabant.
.

XVII. He animated this Discourse with Sobs and Groans, and with the Blows
which he gave himself on his Face and Breast; then getting loose from those who
had carried him on their Shoulders, he threw himself hastily at the Feet of the
Assistants, and moved them so much to Compassion and Revenge In Seditions, he
is always the most mut^nous, who is most hearkened to.
, that one part of the Soldiers seized on the Gladiators of Blesus, another
secured his Menial Servants, whilst many of them ran searching here and there
for the Body of their slain Companion. And if, by good Fortune, it had not been
immediately discovered, that Vibulenus never had a Brother, that there was no
such Body to be found, and that the Slaves of Blesus, being put to the Torture,
persisted to deny the Murder; the General was in immediate danger of
Assassination. In the mean time, they forced the Tribunes, and the Prefect of
the Camp, to ^ly for their Safety; they plundered their Baggage, and killed
Lucilius the Centurion, to whom they had given the Nickname of ^edo alteram;
because when he had broken his Baton The Roman Soldiers were chastized with a
Wand of a Vine, and the Foreigners in their Service with Blow^ of Cudgels.
on the Back of any Soldier, he was wont to call for another, to continue the
Correction. The rest of the Centurions absconded, excepting only Julius
Clemens, who was saved; as being one, who, for his ready Wit, was thought a
proper Man to execute the Commissions of the Soldiers As Soldiers commonly
exercise their Hands, more than their Minds; and consequently, understand how
to Fight, better than how to Speak; they set a great Value upon a Man who is
able to Speak well, and Negotiate, especially when they have Complaints to make
at Court against their Generals, or Favors and Rewards to solicit, which
there is some difficulty to obtain.
. There were two of the Legions, the Eighth and the Fifteenth, who were ready
to come to Blows with one another concerning one Sirpicus a Centurion; the
Eighth demanding him to be produced and put to Death, the other defending him:
If the Ninth had not interposed, and partly with Prayers, partly with
Threatenings, brought them to Reason on either side.

XVIII. These Things coming to the knowledge of Tiberius, constrained him, as
expert as he was in dissembling his Temper, and concealing all ill News Princes
take great care to conceal ill Success from their Subjects, because they have
the less Veneration for them when Fortune is against them. The Army of Lewis
the Eleventh having taken several Towns in Burgun^y, and defeated all the
Forces that opposed them, the Duke, who was then in Picardy, caused a Report to
be spread in his Camp, That his Forces had had the better, for fear lest his
Army should Revolt, if it should know the News of Burgun^y. Commines, l. 3. c.
3. of his Memoirs. But of all Evils, a Sedition, or a Revolt, is that which
Princes are most concerned to keep the Knowledge of from their Subjects,
because it is an Example which never stops at the place where it begins. It is
a Civil Contagion, which spreads from Province to Province, and whose Progress
is so much the quicker, as it finds every where many Incendiaries, and very few
Physicians.
, to send away his Son with all speed to Pannonia, without other Instructions,
than only to act according to the present Necessity, and as the juncture of
Affairs There are knotty Affairs, in which* Princes cannot take certain
Measures. Seditions are of this Nature, Severity and Mildness being equally
dangerous toward People, who must neither be altogether exasperated, nor
wholly satisfied. When the Evil is pressing, the best Expedient is to send them
a Person of eminent Quality, with Power to act according as the Occasion shall
require, without expecting farther Orders, which would retard the conclusion of
the Accommodation. But Commissions of this nature ought never to be given, but
to Persons of approved Fidelity. And it was for this Reason, that Tiberius sent
his Son and his Favorite to the mutinous Legions.
required. He gave for his Attendants two Praetorian Cohorts, reinforced with a
Recruit of select Soldiers, with a great part of his Cavalry, and the Choice of
his German Guards* sent in his Company the principal Men of Rome, and appointed
for the Governor of his Person Elius Sejanus, his Favorite When a Prince gives
a Governor to his Son, he ought to choose a Man of Authority, to the end, that
the young Prince may have an Awe and Respect for him. Education* (says
Cabrera) is the Source of all the good and bad Qualities of a Prince, and
consequently, of the good or bad Fortune of his Subjects. For want of good
Education, the Prince, in stead of being the Father and the Shepherd of his
People, becomes the public Scourge, and the universal Plague. The inward
Counsel of a Prince comes both from Education and Nature, which opens the first
Windows to the Understanding, and displays there more or less Light, according
to the disposition of the Constitution, which gives the first Lineaments to the
Manners and Actions.... A Prince's Son is born with no more Understanding, than
a common Man's; he is a Diamond that is hard to cut, but which casts a great
Luster after it is polished. l. 4. c. 2. of his History. Mariana ^aith, That
Peter King of Castile, Surnamed The Cruel, had a mixture of great Virtues, and
of great Vices; that at his Accession to the Throne, which was at the Age of
fifteen Years and a half, he showed a Mind, a Courage, and Qualities, which
gave great Hopes; that his Body was indefa^^gable, and his Courage invincible
in all Difficulties; but that, with these Virtues, there began to appear Vices,
which Age increased, and Time multiplied, and which were owing to the ill
Education which he had had under A^phonso d'Albuqu^rqu^, the Governor of his
Childhood. Insomuch, that his Reign almost in every thing resembled Nero's, for
he put to Death two of his Natural Brothers, with their Mother; his Wife,
Blanch of Bourbon, to gratify his Concubine; the Queen of Arragon, his Aunt
by the Mother's side; the Infant, John of Arragon, his Cousin-German; Joan of
Lara, his Sister-in-Law; and many more Princes and Lords: c. 16, etc. l. 16,
and 17. of his History of Spain.
, then Prefect of the Praetorium This Office was new, having been created by
the Emperors. Some are of Opinion, that the Praefectus Praetorio was much the
same with the Magister Equitum, or the General of the Horse under the ancient
Commonwealth. For as this General held the first Place after the Dictator, to
whom he was properly Lieutenant, the Praefectus Praetorio was the second Person
of the Empire, especially after Se^anus thought fit to lodge in one Camp all
the Praetorian Cohorts, or Companies of Guards, which were before dispersed in
several Quarters of the City. ( Tacit. ann. 4.) M^de (...) speaks properly, in
saying. That he was as the Constable of the Empire. His Authority grew so
great, that there was no Appeal from his Judgments, whereas there lay an Appeal
from those of the Consuls to the People, when Rome was a Commonwealth. In the
Year 1631, Urban the Eighth having created his Nephew Dom Tade Barberino
Prefect of Rome, this Lord by virtue of this new Dignity, which was but a
Phantom of the Ancient, would have the Precedence of Ambassadors to Solio.
, and Colleague to his Father Strabo, in that Office: Employed particularly, on
this Occasion, to promise Rewards to those who should submit, and threaten
Punishments to such as should persist in their Rebellion. On the approach of
Drusus to the Army, the Legions drew out, to meet him on the way, and do him
Honor; not with cheerful Countenances, as was the Custom, nor with shining
Arms and Ensigns The Roman Army was wont to adorn their Ensigns with Garlands
of Ribbands, and Bands of watered Stuff: But on sad Occa^ions they carried them
without Ornaments.
, but in a mean and ragged Equipage, and with sad and sullen Looks, which
showed more of Contumacy, than of Repentance.

XIX. When he was entered into the Camp, they placed Sentinels at the Gates,
and Corps-de-Guard in several Parts; the main Body of them gathered round the
Tribunal of Drusus, who was standing, and held out his Hand, as desiring their
Attention. As often as the Mutineers cast round their Eyes, and considered
their own Multitude, they filled the Air with Shouts and Threatenings In
Seditions, whether Popular or Military, none dares speak singly, but all
together; and all they say, is nothing but confused Complaints, and insolent
Clamours and Demands.
, but when they turned their Sight toward Drusus, they shook for fear Nothing
strikes to much Terror into Subjects that are in actual Fault, as the Prince's
Presence; for the Wrath of a King, (says Solomon) is as the Messengers of
Death: Prove. 16.
. To this confused Noise, and these insolent Clamours, succeeded a profound
Silence; and by their different Motions they gave, and took Terror in their
turns. At length, the Tumult being ceased, Drusus read to them the Letters of
his Father; which contained in effect, That he would take a particular Care of
those valiant Legions which had assisted him in sustaining several Wars It is a
good way to appease a Mutiny, or a Revolt of Soldiers, to show, that one
remembers their former Services; for this Remembrance induces them to return to
their Duty, in hopes of being rewarded for them. Besides, after Promises and
fair Means have been tried, the Prince may justly treat them with Rigor, when
once he has reduced them by Force.
; That so soon as his Grief for the Death of Augustus would give him leave, he
would propose their Demands to the Senate; That, in the interim, he had sent
his Son to them, with full Power, and without the least Delay, to grant them
all that was possible to be done for them on the sudden: And what required more
Leisure, should pass through the Hands of the Senate; it being unjust to take
from them the Glory of Rewarding, or the Power of Punishing.

XX. To this, the Assembly returned Answer, That Julius Clemens was entrusted
by them to make known their Desires. He then began, with their Pretension, to
be discharged from Service at the end of sixteen Years, with a Recompense in
Silver; that their daily Pay should be a Roman Denarius That is to say, a Penny
in Specie, which was then worth sixteen (...).
; and that the Veterans should no longer be detained under their Ensigns.
Drusus alleging, that the Cognizance of these Matters belonged to the Senate
and his Father Drusus had full Power, seeing his Father sent him with unlimited
Instructions, Nullis satis certis mandatis, ex re consulturum; and yet he would
not make use of them, although he ran no Hazard in doing it. An Example, which
ought to be imitated by Ambassadors and Plenipotentiaries, who desire to keep
the Favor of their Prince. For although the Prince is obliged to ratify all
that his Plenipotentiary has done, that he may not break his Word; yet he has
a Right to chastise his Minister, who has not made the best use of the
Authority that he has committed to him. Lewis the Thirteenth was willing, at
the Desire of Pope Urban the Eighth, to sign the Treaty of Moncon, which du
Fargis, his Ambassador, had made in Spain, anno 1626, but he might justly have
sealed it with this Ambassador's Blood. It is very necessary to be exact in the
choice of Ambassadors, and there cannot be too great Severity used in the
punishing those, which exceed their Powers, since thereby they put to hazard
the Reputations of Princes, and the Safety of States. There are Men, who have
such an itch to do something, that if they are not kept within the Bound^ which
are set them, by the fear of being ruined without Remedy, there will always
some be sound, who will choose rather to make an ill Treaty, than none at all.
His Pel. Testament, part 2. chapter 6.
; was interrupted by their Clamours. What Business has he here, they cried,
since he is not empowered, either to augment the Soldiers Pay, or to redress
their Grievances, while in the mean time they are exposed to be beaten and
slain at the Pleasure of their Officers? We remember since Tiberius has evaded
our Petitions, by remitting us to Augustus, and has he sent his Son on the same
Errand? Shall we always have to deal with Children, who come to us in their
Fathers Name? Is it not a strange manner of Proceeding, that the Emperor
refers nothing to the Senate, but what concerns the Rewarding of his Soldiers
It is usual for Princes to consult with none, when they will dispense Favors,
that they may have the whole Honor thereof themselves: But when some (...)
Action, or at least some odious Thing is to be done, they are willing to call
in Counselors, that the Hatred of the Male contents may fall upon them. And
this is what Tiberius did upon this Occasion, when finding it not convenient to
grant the Veterans what they demanded of him, he referred them to the Senate,
where he knew they would succeed worse, the Senate taking care not to grant
that, which they perceived he would refuse.
! Why does he not also consult the Senate, when he is to give a Battle, or
punish us with Death? Is it reasonable, that Recompenses should not be given,
but by the Consent of so many Masters? And that, on the contrary, every Officer
has right to punish us at his own Pleasure, and without Comptrol from any Man?

XXI. At this, they flung from the Tribunal, threatening all they met of the
Prince's Guard, or of his Friends, and seeking an occasion of Quarrel and
Revenge. Their Malice was chiefly bent at Cneius Lentulus, because that being
elder, and of greater Reputation in War than any of the other Officers: He was
thought the Man, who most despised the Danger of the Mutineers, and rendered
Drusus inflexible Counsels are always ascribed to that Minister, who is
believed to be of the greatest Power, or of the greatest Abilities. As such a
Minister has the greatest Share in the Glory of Successes, so he is also more
exposed than others to the Hatred and Revenge of Disaffected Persons. The Duke
of Alvia was insupportable to the Netherlanders, because they knew, that he had
been an Enemy to their Nation from the Time of Charles the Fifth, and the
Author of all the Evil Counsels, which had been taken to bring the Country into
absolute Subjection. Sir W. Temple, c. 1. of his Remarks on Holland. But, says
Pagliari* I doubt much, whether they who attribute to the Ministers all odious
Resolutions, are well informed whence they proceed; or rather, I believe, that
they beat the Saddle, because they dare not beat the Horse. In the 71st of his
Observations on Tacitus.
to their Demands. And shortly after, when departing from Drusus, to shun the
Danger which he foresaw, he took his way to the Winter Quarters; they enclosed
him in the midst of them, and asked him, Whither he was going, and if he was
returning to Rome, in order to oppose the Interest of the Legions? And they
were already beginning to stone him, if the Troops which Drusus had brought
along with him had not rescued him from their Hands all over bloody as he was.

XXII. The Night threatened some horrible Attempt, but an Accident unforeseen
turned all to Quiet. The Moon in a calm and serene Night, on the sudden, was
eclipsed; and the Soldiers, who were wholly ignorant of Astronomy, drew from
thence an Augury, for the present Iuncture of Affairs; and comparing the defect
of Light in the Moon to their own Labors, interpreted, that all would go well
with them, if the eclipsed Goddess recovered Light. Therefore, they beat on
brazen Instruments, sounded their Trumpets, and raised confused Clamours; and
as she appeared more bright, or became more dusky, they varied their Sadness,
and their Joy. But when the Sky grew cloudy, and took her wholly from their
Sight, so that they believed her lost in Darkness, as Minds once stricken Don
Iuan Antonio de Vera speaking of a Tempest by Sea and Land, which shook the
Fleet of Charles the Fifth at his arrival to Algiers, says, That it exercised
its Fury not only on the material part thereof, that is to say, on the Galleys,
and the rest of the Equipage, but also on the Courage of the Soldiers, who
remained all under a Consternation, for there is nothing that makes them more
Superstitious, than unexpected Accidents, which come from the Heavens, on the
Elements. Witness the Legions of Pannonia, who having mutinied in the Reign of
Tiberius, passed immediately from Fury to Repentance, upon an Eclipse of the
Mo^n. In the Epit^m^ of the Life of Charles the Fifth.
with Amazement There is nothing which makes the common People more
Superstitious than Fear, nor which makes them more fearful than Superstition.
For this Reason, Chance has oftentimes greater Share in the good or ill
Success of dangerous Enterprises, than the Conduct of those who are the Authors
of them. The Deputies of Bohemia having entered by Surprise into the
Privy-Chamber of the Emperor Frederick the Second, and threatening him with
their Arms in their Hands, That they would do themselves Right, if he did not
grant them all their Demands, changed their Threats into Submission and Fear,
upon the casual coming of Walstein with a new-raised Regiment, which he brought
to show the Emperor; and the Thunder ceased on a sudden.
, are prone to Superstition, so they imagined a Perpetuity of Labors was
portended to them, and lamented, that the Gods were averse to their impious
Attempt. Drusus thought it Wisdom To know how to make use of the Occasion, is
an infallible Mark of the Ability of a Prince, and particularly of a General of
an Army. Occasion is the Mother of great Events, Opportunos magnis con^tibus
transit^s rerum, says Tacitus, Hist. 1. The Definition, or rather Description,
which Cabrera gives of it, deserves a place here, as an Instruction necessary
for those who manage great Affairs. They, (says he) who boast of starting
Occasions, discover sufficiently, that they know not what an Occasion is; for
if Wit is the Contriver thereof, it is no longer an Occasion, but a
Contrivance: And although it is sometimes founded with Industry, it is
notwithstanding quite another Thing. It is necessary for a Prince to lay hold
on it at the very nick of Time, equally avoiding the being too soon, or too
late. Persons that are too quick, lose it by their Precicipitation, because
they scarce see the Shadow of it; but they run to catch it. They who are slow,
miss it also; for as in its Nature it is perpetually in motion, they are not
able to take notice of it at the moment it passes before them; nor to lay hold
on it at the very instant that they do take notice of it. There is
Understanding required to foresee it, and Patience to wait for it, till it
comes. If Things depended only on Fortune, or only on our Wills, there would be
no great difficulty in managing them, because Chance, or our Choice, would be
our Guide; but when there is a necessity of joining Fortune, Art and Will
together, there is need both of Patience and Judgment to make them act in
Concert, which renders them twice stronger. We may easily make use of Art and
Will when we please, but not of Fortune, with which we must absolutely comply,
in observing the Seasons of her good Humor, without ever exacting of her what
we see she obstinately refuses us, or drawing back when she gives us
Encouragement to hope for what we desire. His History, l. ^^ c. 9.
, to lay hold on the Occasion which their Fear administered, and ordered some
to go into their Tents. He made choice of Clemens, and others, who, by their
Merit, had acquired Credit with the common sort. These mixing with the
Centries, and those who went the Rounds, or watched about the Gates, redoubled
their Apprehensions, and withal, awaked their Hopes. How long, said they, shall
we continue to besiege the Son of Caesar? Shall we take the Oath of Fidelity to
Percennius, and to Vibulenu^? Will they give us the Pay and Rewards which we
pretend? In a word, Shall they Usurp the Empire of the Nero's, and the Drusi?
Why should not we be the first to repent us, as we have been the last to be
seduced In the Year 1546, the Elector Palatine, who had declared for the League
of (...) against Charles the Fifth, reduced some Cities to the Ob^dience of
this Emperor by the same Remonstrance. We are (said he) the last who have
committed this Fault, let us be the first to repair it, that we may more easily
obtain Pardon for it. Epitome of the Life of Charles the Fifth, by John Antonio
de Vera.
? The Demands which are made in common, are ever slowly granted, and late
received; on the contrary, the Reward comes speedily to their Hands, who will
each The Memoirs of (...) furnish us with many notable Examples of this. Of all
Men that I ever knew, (says he) L^wis the Eleventh was the wisest to get
himself out of the Briars, and took the greatest Pains to gain a Man, who was
able to serve him, or able to hurt him: l. 1. c. 10. The Accommodation which he
made with he Duke of Brittany by the means of the Seigneur de Lescun, this
Duke's Favorite, to whom he gave the Government of (...); and of some other
Places, was the cause that Charles of France his Brother lost the Duchy of
Normandy, to the great Displeasure of the Duke of Burgandy, who had made him
give him this great Apanage: chapter 15. of the same Book. The said Lescun obtained
afterward the Government of Gu^enne, of one of the Castles of Bourdeaux; the
Government of Blaie, of Bayonne, of Dax, and of St. Sever; the Earldom of
Comminges, the Order of the King, Eighty thousand Crowns in ready Money, and
Six thousand Livres in Pension, to have Peace with the Duke of Britany, because
so powerful a Duke managed by such a Man, was to be feared: l. 3. c. 11. Garter
Herald of England being come into France, to declare War against Lewis, if he
did not surrender the Kingdom to the King of England, immediately received a
Reward from the King's hands, for the Promise he made to endeavor an
Accommodation between the two Kings: l. 4. c. 15. The three Ambassadors from
England, who concluded this Agreement, had great Presents in ready Money and
Plate, and each of them Two thousand Crowns Pension: c. 8. of the same Book. A
Gascon Gentleman, (Lewis de Bretailles,) who was much troubled at the Peace
made between France and England, received a Thousand Crowns from King Lewis the
Eleventh, after he had had the Honor to dine with him, to prevent him from
telling the King of England his Master, that the French laughed in their
Sleeves, for having driven the English out of France, by a Treaty of Peace, and
by some Presents: chapter 10. of the same Book.
deserve it singly There are few People, who are Proof against the Charms of
Interest. During the War of Paris, all the Generals of the Sling were
meditating, on their particular Accommodation, and each had his secret
Correspondence with the Court, to make his Conditions the better. The
Counselor Brousell grew tractable, and (...), after he had a secret Promise of
the Government of the Bas^ille for his eldest Son. Memoirs of the Minority of
Lewis the Fourt^^nth. The Sieur de Villeroy, says the Chancellor de Riverny,
was engaged as far as any in the League; notwithstanding he quitted it by a
particular Treaty which he made for himself, and afterward returned to serve
the King in his former Office of Secretary of State. In his Memoirs.
. These Words having once shaken their Resolution One Man of Parts is enough to
reduce a whole Multitude to Obedience. Every Thing puts Fear into People who
are in Sedition, when their first Heat is over, and a wise Man comes to deal
with them, who excites in them the Desire of Impunity, which, according to
Tacitus, ba^^^es all the Enterprises which are formed against a Prince.
, and cast a Distrust into them of each other, the Love of their Prince
re-enter'd into them by degrees, the Legions separate, and the new Soldiers
divide from the Veterans: They forsake the Gates, and replace their Eagles by
themselves, which they had shuffl'd together in the beginning of the Mutiny.

XXIII. At break of Day, Drusus calls the General Assembly; and though he had
not the Gift of Speaking well, yet his Discourse had in it a certain Air of
Greatness, inborn to those of Noble Blood There is an Eloquence of the Looks,
of the Gesture, of the Countenance, which oftentimes prevails more, than that
of the greatest Orators. Subjects don't so much regard what their Prince says
to them, as the manner after which he speaks it; every thing that he says, is
effectual, if he knows how to speak with Majesty. He ought to speak not as one
who is about to Persuade, but as one who has a Right to Command, and is able
to make himself be Obeyed.
; highly condemns the past Proceedings, and extols the present. He tells them,
he is not capable of Fear, and that, by consequence, he is not to be moved with
Threatenings The Minister, whom a Prince sends to suppress a Sedition, or a
Revolt of Soldiers, ought to take care of nothing more, than of doing any
Thing, or suffering any Word to slip from him, that may be taken for a sign of
Fear. For if once they come to perceive that he has Fear, they shall impute it
to the Knowledge which they will believe he has of the Weakness of the Prince,
rather than to his own want of Courage or Resolution. What Commines says upon
the occasion of the Town of Nanci surrendered to the Duke of Lorraine by a Lord
of the House of Crouy, named de Bievres, who commanded in it for the Duke of
Burgundy, shows o^ what Importance it is to be firm and resolved amongst
Soldiers. The English, (says he) tired because the Duke of Burgundy delayed so
long to relieve them, began to murmur* and to despair of Succors, and told the
Lord de Bievres, that they would Capitulat^ without him, if he did not
Capitulate. Although he was a good Officer, yet, he had so little Resolution as
to use Entreaties and Remonstrances, and if he had spoken m^re boldly, I
believe, that it had been taken better from him; for the next Day, or two Days,
after the Place was surrendered, the Duke of Burgundy came, well accompanied* as
the Occasion required. Memoirs, l. 5. c. 5. In great Dangers a General ought to
put on a better Countenance; it is not always amiss to fear, but it is always
unbecoming not to know how to conceal it. A Captain's Countenance ought to be
armed with Dissimulation, as his Body with Steel, otherwise he will (...)
betrayed sooner by his Eyes, than by his Soldiers.
; that if he finds in them due Repentance, and Respect, he will write to his
Father in their behalf; and inclin^ him to receive their Petition, and
graciously to answer it. Accordingly, at their Request, the forementioned
Blesus, Lucius Apronius a Roman Knight, of the Cohort of Drusus, and Iustus
Catonius Captain of the first Century i.e. Captain of the first Century or
Company of the Band or Manipule, which, as I have already said, consisted of
two Centuries or Companies, and consequently had two Captains or Centurions.
And by centuriones primorum ordinum, Tacitus means those whom we cast Eldest
Captains.
, are sent to Tiberius. After this, a Council of War was held, where their
Judgments were divided* Some were of Opinion, that the Soldiers should be
mildly Treated, till the return of their Deputies; othe^^s thought it more
advisable to use Rigor, there being no Moderation to be expected from a
Multitude Shame is a Passion that is not to be found in the Multitude, but to
compensate this, they are mightily subject to Fear. Thus Rigor has the same
Effect upon them, that the Point of Honor has upon particular Persons.
, which makes it self formidale when it fears nothing, and which may ^afely be
despised when timorous: That Terror was to be imprinted in them, while they
were yet filled with Superstition; and that they were to be made sensible they
had a Master, by the Punishment of those who were Authors of the Mutiny
Rebellions require an unrelenting Physician, that immediately cures by cutting
and burning; for otherwise, the Cure will be long and difficult. Princes
therefore never pardon the Ringleaders of a Revolt, or a Sedition, because they
who sin without Example, are alone more ^lpable than all those who follow their
Example, and consequently deserve less* Compassion, Besides, there would be no
Seditions or Rebellions, if there were no Incendiaries, forasmuch as the
multitude sees only by Trust.
.

XXIV. Drusus, whose Nature inclined him to Severity Of all Counsels which are
given Princes, those appear to them to be the best, which are most agreeable to
their Tempers. When a Prince is cruel or severe, and also affronted by
Disrespect, it is in vain to advise him to Clemency. Cardinal Spinosa, and
Prince Rui Gomez, found it not convenient to send the Duke of Alva Governor
into the Low Countries, because, in their Opinion, his Rigor would exasperate
the Minds of that People, whereas they ought to have been softened; but as it
was in this very Particular, that the Duke resembled and pleased Philip the
Second, he was preferred before the Duke of Feria, [Gomez Figueroa,] whom the
Cardinal and the Prince proposed, and who being equal to Alva in Quality, in
Prudence, in greatness of Courage, and in Civil and Military Experience,
surpassed him in Moderation and in Liberality* and was also more beloved by the
King. Cabrera's Hist. l. 7. c. 7.
, caused Vibulenus and Percennius to be brought before him, and commanded them
to be put to Death It is the Fate of the Heads of Seditions and Rebellions, to
be the Victims of their Party; sooner or later they are Delivered up to the
Prince, or the Magistrate, to wash away with their Blood the Stain of the
common Treason. There is nothing more dangerous, says the Florentine Proverb,
than to hang the Bell about the Cat's Neck. And this is what they do, who by a
false Bravery, or rather by a fatal Rashness, put themselves at the Head of a
Party, which upon the first Check* or the first Alarm, will fell them fox a^
Amnesty.
. Many relate, that they were slain, and buried in his Tent If the Duke of Alva
had put the Earls of Egmont and of Horn to Death in Prison, the Flemmings
might perhaps have had less Compassion for them, and less Resentment against
him and the Prince. This Execution, says Sir W. Temple, put them beyond all
Patience; so that one may say* that the end o^ the Lives of these Lords was the
beginning of the Troubles, which sp^^t so much Blood in Europe, and which cost
Spain a good part of these Provinces. Remarks on the United Provinces, cap. 1.
, to keep the Execution secret; others say, that their Bodies were cast out of
the Camp, to serve for an Example, and remain a Spectacle to their Companions.
Enquiry was made afterward for the other Promoters of the Sedition, and many
flying here and there for shelter, were discovered and killed by Centurions,
and Soldiers of the Guard; some of them were delivered up by their own
Comerades, as a Pledge of their Fidelity. The Disquiets of the Mutineers were
yet more augmented by an over-early Winter, with continual Rains, and Storms so
furious, that they durst not stir out of their Tents to meet in Assemblies; and
hardly were they able to keep their Colors, which the fierceness of the Winds
threatened every moment to bear away. Add to this, That they were still in
apprehension of the Wrath of Heaven; and their guilty Minds suggested to them,
that the Planets were not eclipsed in vain, or that the Tempests roul'd without
Presage over the Heads of Rebels Nothing has a greater Force on the Multitude,
says Quintus Curtius, than Superstition; how inconstant and furious soever
they be, they will always obey the Divines better than their Governors, if
once their Minds be struck with false Images of Religion: lib. 4.
; that there was no other Remedy remaining for their present Evils, but to
abandon a profaned Camp, an unfortunate Abode, and to return to their Garrisons,
after they had expiated their Crime. The eighth Legion removed first, and was
soon followed by the fifteenth. The ninth opposed themselves to this Departure,
crying out, The Answer of Tiberius was to be attended there; but being
surpised with Fear, as being left alone, they prevented the Necessity of being
forced to Obedience. So that all Things being composed in a settled Calm,
Drusus went immediately for Rome, without longer waiting for the return of the
Deputies.

XXV. Almost at the same time, and for the same Reasons, the Legions in Germany
rebelled Noth^ng gives greater opportunity to an Army, ^^at has great (...),
to Revolt, than the Absence o^ a General. The f^rther off Punish^^^ is the less
they fear it. ( (...) was then in the (...).)
; and their Mutiny had in it the more of Insolence, because they were in
greater Numbers; and all of them concluded, that Germanicus would never submit
to the Government of another, but that to prevent Subjection, he would Head
those Legions (...) to believe, (...), who has his Sword in his (...), and
Soldiers entirely (...) to his Service, will not (...) to be deprived of a
(...) that of Right belongs to (...) if he* who (...) be odious, both (...) the
common People, and the (...) was. It is rather (...)* than Moderation, to (...)
of Power may (...) excused, but never want of Courage, especially in a Person,
who ought to inspire others with it.
; by whose means, he might put himself in a condition of reducing all others to
his Party. ^^ere were two Armies encamped on the Banks of the (...)* that on
the upper part was commanded by Caius S^lius, in Quality of Lieutenant General;
that on the ^ether, by Aulus Cecina. Their common General was ^erman^cus, who,
at that time, was busied in Gaul about gathering the Tributes. But those who
were under Silius, protracted the time of declaring themselves* till they saw
what Fortune would be^al the Army of Geci^a The Revolt of a Province, or o^ an
Army, ought to be carefully concealed from other Armies and Provinces, for fear
le^t such an Example should draw them to Revolt likewise. It was for this
Reason; that the Burgundians having been defeated, their Duke, who saw all his
Affairs grow worse and worse, and his principal Servants desert him, and go
over to Lewis the Eleventh, caused a Report to be spread in Picardy, and in
Flanders, that his Army of Burgundy had had the better. Commines's Memoirs, l.
3. c. 3.
, where the Sedition began from the Twenty first and Fifth Legions, which also
drew into their Party the Twentieth, and the First; for they were quartered
together on the Frontiers of the Ubiens The Country of Collen.
, living in Idleness There is nothing more contrary to Military Discipline than
Idleness, says Paterculus. Res disciplinae inimicissima otium: Hist. 2. c. 78.
It was for this Reason, that Augustus hardened his Soldiers by almost continual
Expeditions in Dalmatia and Illyria; that Cassius, a Governor of Syria,
exercised his Legions in times of Peace, with as much Care, as if he had been
in open War. Tacit. Ann. 12. A Lacedemonian said, That nothing was to be done
with an Army without Discipline, and that Soldiers ought to fear their General
more than their Enemies.
, or, at least, with small Employment. When the Death of Augustus was known
amongst them, the Soldiers of the new Recruits, accustomed to the Softnesses of
Life at Rome, and, consequently, Enemies to the Toyls of War, began to broach
amongst those who were Simple and Credulous, That now the Time was come for the
Veterans to demand a quick Discharge; for the new-raised Troops to have their
Pay enlarged; for both Parties to require an end of their Sufferings; and to
revenge themselves on the Cruelty of their Centurions. It was not any single
Person, (as Percennius was amongst the Pannonian Legions,) who declaimed in
this manner: Neither did the Soldiers tremble at the sight of another Army more
powerful than their own, and which were Witnesses of what they said and did;
but many Mouths which cried in Concert, That the Roman Empire was in their
Hands, to dispose of as they pleased; that they had enlarged it by their
Victories; and that the Caesar's As Tiberius, who was Surnamed Germanicus, in
Augustus's Lifetime; Drusus, and Germanicus his Son.
held it for an Honor, to bear the Surname of Germanicus.

XXVI. Cecina durst not oppose this, either by Word or Action, their Multitude
having over mastered his Resolution. The Seditious being seized, with one
common Fury fell with their drawn Swords on their Centurions, (ever the Object
of their Hate, and the first Sacrifice which they offered to their Vengeance;)
they pulled them down, and beat them afterward to Death with Cudgels; Sixty of
them at once assaulting one, to equal the Number of the Centurions, which were
Sixty to every Legion. To conclude, they cast them out of the Camp half dead,
or threw their Bodies into the Rhine. One of them called Septimius, who had
refug'd himself in the Tribunal of Cecina, and had embraced his Knees, was
demanded with so much Obstinacy, that the General was forced to deliver him up
to their Fury. Cassius Chaerea, an intrepid Youth, the same who afterward
eternized his Memory by the Death of Caligula There is no Enemy from whom
Princes have more reason to fear Attempts against their Lives, than from an
undaunted Man, who is animated with Resentment against them, and particularly,
if he be a Man who has a mighty Passion to make his Name memorable to
Posterity. Machi^vel describes, that Ierom Olgiato, who was one of the three
(...) of Gal^as Duke of Milain, very much like this Ch^re^, when he says* that
this Cavalier, who was but 23 Years old, underwent his Punishment with no less
Courage, than he had executed his Enterprise; and that seeing the Executioner
with the Sword in his Hand, he spoke these Words; Mors acerba, ^am^ perpetua,
stabit vetus memoria sacti. Lib. 7. of his History of Florence.
, opened himself a Passage with his Sword through a Crowd of Armed Soldiers,
who endeavored to have seized him. From that moment, neither the Tribunes, nor
the Mareschals de Camp, were any more obeyed. The Mutineers themselves placed
the Sentinels and the Corpse de Guard, and ordered all Things which their
present Needs required. Those who pierced into the depth of that Affair, drew
from thence a certain Augury, that the Sedition would be of a long Continuance;
because they acted not with any separate Interest, or, by the Instigation of
any particular Men among them; they raised their Clamours all at once, and at
once they ceased them; with so much Equality, and so good an Understanding
amongst themselves, that it might have been reasonably believed, they were
under the Government of one Head.

XXVII. While Germanicus, as we have said, was detained in Gaul to collect the
Tributes, he received the News of Augustus's Death, whose Granddaughter he had
married. He was the Son of Drusus, Nephew to Tiberius, and Grandson to Livia;
But the secret Hatred of his Uncle, and his Grandmother, gave him great
Inquietude, knowing that their Aversion was so much the more to be feared,
because their Motives to it were unjust For, according to Seneca, The more
Unjust our Ha^red is, the more Obstinate it is: (...) facit iniquitas ir^. And,
according to (...), it is the Nature of Man always to hate those whom he has
injured: Pr^prium (...), odisse quem laeseris. In Agric. (...), says Queen
Margaret, having quit^ed the Service of my Brother, [the Duke of (...),] bore
so mortal a Hatred to him, (as it is usual for him that does the Injury, never
to forgive,) that he plott^d his Ruin by all ways possible: ^. 2. of her
Memoirs.
. For the Memory of Drusus was in high Veneration amongst the Romans; it being
the general Opinion, That if he had come to possess the Empire The People
always imagine fine Things of those, whom they desire should Reign. Possibly it
might have ^ared with Drusus and Germanicus, had they come to the Empire, as it
did with those two Kings of the Suevi, Vangio and Sido, who, Th^itus says,
were passionately loved before they Reigned, and as much ha^ed when they
Reigned: Ann. 12. At least, we may say of Drusus and his Son, what Tacitus
says of (...) that Periculi^ (...) that both of them dying in the Flower of
their Age. (at the Age of 10 Years,) and both by Poison, their Misfortune has
preserved a grateful Fame of their Modesty* which possibly they would have
lost, had they reigned. The Mildness* the ^ivi^ity, and the Familiarity of
(...), who aspire, or who begin to Reign, are not so much the (...) of their
Nature, as of their Poli^y. Add hereto, that the best Men are not always the
best Princes. There is a Spanish Proverb, which says, De ^al ^ombre buen Rey*
i. e. An ill Man makes a good King.
, he would have restored their Liberty to the People: From thence, their Favor
was derived to Germanicus, and their Hopes of him the same: For Germanicus was
of a soft, pleasing Humor, affable in Conversation, and his Behavior wholly
different from the sullen Reservedness and Arrogance A proud and severe Prince
can never love Ministers, who will be beloved by the People; for their popular
Humor serves only to make him yet more odious, or at least more disagreeable
to his Subjects. It often happens, that the People, and also the Courtiers,
make Comparisons between the Prince and the Minister, which never fail of being
reported sooner or later to the Prince, nor of ruining the Minister, when they
are to his Advantage. And it was one of the Artifices, whereby the Grandees of
Spain compassed the Disgrace of Cardinal Espinosa, whom they could not destroy
by their Complaints. Lewis S^orsa, Duke of Milain, beheaded Cecco Simoneta, his
Secretary of State, for saying to him, Thet he could not defend Milain against
the French, but by the good will of his People; because his Counsel gave him to
understand, that his Minister was too popular. Nowadays Princes have no
jealousy in this Particular.
of Tiberius. The Quarrels betwixt the Women contributed not a little to this
Enmity; For Livia behaved herself with the Loftiness of a Mother-in-Law to
Agrippina, and Agrippina carried it somewhat too resentingly toward Livia; but
her known Chastity, and the Love she bore her Husband, to whom she had born
many Children, wrought so far upon her Soul, that, though naturally haughty and
inflexible, she contained herself within the Bounds of what was Virtuous and
Laudable.

XXVIII. But Germanicus, the nearer he approached to the height of Sovereignty,
the more eagerly he strove to maintain Tiberius in Possession The next Heir of
a Crown, or of a Principality, ought, according to all the Rules of good
Policy, to show himself the most zealous in the Service of the reigning Prince.
As he has more to lose, he has more to fear; and, consequently, he ought to
be more complaisant and submissive than all others. Strada attributes the cause
of all the Misfortunes of Francis, Duke of Alenson, to the Envy which he had
conceived against his Brother Henry the Third. For want of considering, that he
was the Heir Apparent of the Crown, and, as it were, upon the point of being
adored on the Throne, seeing his brother had no Children; he could not bear,
that the casual order of Birth had made Henry his Sovereign. Thus looking on
his Fortune only on the worse side, he lived in a continual Agitation, equally
a Burden to his Brother, and to the State; so that being desirous to Command
whatever it cost, not caring in what Country, he put himself at the Head of the
Rebels in Flanders, who invited him rather to be the Pretext of the War, than
to make him their Prince; and who hastened his Ruin, by the eager Desire which
de discovered of imposing the Yoke on that People, who had not shaken off that
of the King of Spain, but that they might live as a Free State: l. 5. of the
Second Decad of his History.
; he caused him to be recognized by the Neighboring Provinces By the Sequani,
now the French Counties; and by the Belg^, who are the ^^mings.
of the Sequani and Belgae; and when he was informed, that the Legions were
tumultuously up in Arms, he made all possible Expedition in his Journey to
them. They met him without the Camp with dejected Eyes, as in sign of their
Repentance. But as soon as he was entered, the Camp resounded with confused and
jarring Clamours. Some of them taking his Hand, as it were, to kiss it, put his
Fingers into their Mouths, to make him sensible that they had lost their Teeth.
Others showed him their decrepid Limbs, and Shoulders bending under the weight
of Age. As they were all mingled in a Crowd, and without Order, he commanded
them to draw up in their several Companies, under pretense that they might with
more convenience hear his Answer, and to separate their Colors, that he might
distinguish every Cohort by its proper Ensign. They obeyed him but as slowly as
possibly they could It is a Degree of Rebellion, for People to deliberate,
whether they shall obey; they do not seem to have been willing to obey, who
have a long time deliberated, whether they shall obey or no: Qui deliberant,
desciverunt. Tacit. Hist. 2.
Then beginning his Oration with the Praises of Augustus As the Memory of
Augustu^ was pleasing to them, he gained their Good Will by beginning with his
Praises: And as they loved not Tiberius, whose Humor was wholly different from
that of Augustus, he made them favorable to him, by putting them in mind, that
they had a great Share in the Glory of his Exploits.
he descended to those of Tiberius, but above all enlarging on those Exploits,
which he had performed with them in Germany. He set before them the Universal
Consent of Italy, the Fidelity of the Gauls, and the Concord of all the other
Provinces of the Empire. And thus far he was heard with a respectful Silence,
or, at least, with little or no Disturbance.

XXIX. But when he came to ask them, what was become of their Obedience, and of
their ancient Discipline, where were their Tribunes, and what they had done
with their Centurions? They stripped themselves naked, to show him, by way of
Reproach, the Scars of the Wounds, and the Bruises of those Blows which they
had received from their Officers; and afterward speaking all at once, they
complained of their scanty Pay, and the intolerable Price with which they were
forced to purchase their Exemption from Duties; and the Miseries they suffered
in Indeed, all this is worthy of Compassion, but Seditions and Revolts are
evermore inexcusable, and consequently, Punishment is absolutely necessary, for
fear lest Impunity open the Gate to Licentious^ess, Good and Evil are so
contrary, that they ought not to be put in the Balance against one another.
They are two Enemies, betwixt whom there ought to be no Quarter, nor Exchange
given: If one deserves Reward, the other does Punishment; and both of them
ought to be treated according to their Merit. Chap. 5. of the Second Part of
the Politic Testament. Otherwise the Hopes, which every one will have of
obtaining Pardon in consideration of past Services, will make them not care how
they offend. (...), who had defended the Capitol against the Gauls, whence he
was honored with the Name of Capitolin^s, and of Protector of the People,
notwithstanding he recounted the long Services which he had done his Country,
and showed the Scars of Three and thirty Wounds which he had received in
several Fights; the Romans condemned him to Death, as soon as his Adversaries
had proved that he aspired to Regal Power. There is an indispensable Necessity
of proceeding thus, according to the Opinion of Machiavel, in his 22 th ch^p.
of l. 1. of his Discourses; and of Scipio A^^^nirato, in the 7 th Disc. of l.
2. of his Commentary on Tacitus, And it is also the Opinion of Tacitus himself,
who says, That the City of Treves effaced by its Revolt all the Merit o^ the
great Services which it had done to the Romans. Hist. 4.
laboring Night and Day on their Retrenchments, in providing Forage for their
Horses and Beasts of Burden, and heaps of Faggots, (or Fascines;) and what
other Employments are invented to keep the Soldiers in exercise, when no Enemy
is near. A fierce Clamor of the Veterans arose, who having served the space of
30 or 40 Years, besought Germanicus to take Pity on them, and not suffer them
to die in the Hardships of Warfare, but to give them their Discharge, and
wherewithal to subsist afterward in their Age In a State which is governed by
Military Maxims, and whose Subjects are Warlike, as were the Romans, the
rewarding of Soldiers is the principal part of Government: For the expectation*
of Rewards, supports Emulation, Affection, Labor, and Discipline. And besides,
there is nothing, more Unjust, nor which does greater Dishonor to the Prince,
than to suffer People to die in Poverty, who have spent, their whole Lives in
the Danger^ and Fatigues of War.
Some amongst them also demanded the Legacies of Money, which were left them by
Augustus, not without loud Acclamations to Germanicus, and engaging to serve
him, if he would accept the Empire In the Year 1577, a Flemish Lord having
attempted the Fidelity of Don John of Austri^, Governor of the Low-Countri^^^,
by offering him the Sovereignty thereof, if he would accept it; Don John,
transported with Rage, gave him a stab with a Poniard, (...), l. 5. c. 11. of
Philia (...) This ^ehaviour; in my Opinion, was more prudent, and also more
sincere, than that of Gerinanicus, who would, or ^eign'd that he would have
killed himself. For, by immediately punishing so pernicious a (...), he stopped
their Mouth^, and struck Terror into all those, who might be capable to draw
him to this Design.
. But he, as if he feared there had been Infection in their Crime, leaped
precipitately down from his Tribunal In such a Matter, to hear it, is to be
Criminal. It is not enough to be innocent, especially, under a jealous and
mistrustful. Prince, as Tiberius, was; a Person must also act so, that the
Prince may believe, that he has neither Will nor Power to be culpable. With
Princes, it is a Crime: to be thought worthy to Reign; at least, it is a Rock,
on which the Fortunes of the bravest Men have been split. Vespasian, by the
Counsel of M^cian, his Chief Minister, put to Death Calpurnius Galerianus, who
yet had never meddled with any dangerous Affair, because his illustrious Birth,
his Youth, and his graceful Mien, made him talked of, as of a Man that was
worthy to possess the Empire. Although Verg^nius had refused to accept it, he
was yet always suspected by Galba, and kept near him to secure his Fidelity.
Tacit. Hist. 4. and 1. Although Don John of Austria had not only rejected the
Offers of the Sovereignty of the Low Countries, but also punished with his own
Hand the Person who had made him the Proposals of it. Philip the Second
repented much, that he had given him the Government: For there are Suspicions,
says Str^da, which the greatest Innocence can never cure; and how good an
Opinion soever Princes may have of the Fidelity of the great Men whom they
employ, they have always a jealous Spirit, and are inclined to believe, that
they grow weary of being Obedient and Faithful; and that it is Prudence to use
such Precautions, that a Subject, who have once had the Moderation to refuse
the Sovereignty, may never be capable to accept it: L. 10. of his First Decad.
It was well the Marquis of Pesquera died a little time after he had revealed to
Charles the Fifth, that the Pope, the Duke of Milan, and the Venetians, offered
him the Kingdom of Naples, for certainly the Emperor would not have long left
him the Command of his Armies in Italy.
, and was departing from the Camp, till they held him by the Arm, and turning
the Points of their Swords against him, threatened to kill him if he refused to
mount his Seat. He protesting, he would rather die, than be wanting to his
Duty, drew his Sword, and raising his Arm, was plunging it into his Breast, if
those who were nearest him had not stopped his Hand. They who stood farmost in
the Crowd pressed nearer, and some of them (what is almost incredible to
relate) singling themselves from the rest, came up to him, and exhorted him to
strike as he had threatened; And a certain Soldier, called Calusidius, offered
him his naked Sword, assuring him, that the Point was sharper These two
Circumstances of Calusidius, who presented Germanicus with his Sword as the
sharper, and of the others who cried out, Strike, seemed to imply that the
Soldiers believed, that Germanicus's Indignation was but acted, and that his
Fidelity toward Tiberius had less of Reality in it, than of Art and
Ostentation. For those who encouraged him to kill himself, would not have had
occasion to cry Strike, had they not seen that it was only long of Germanicus;
that it was not done; and Calusidius would never have thought fit to have
presented him with his Sword, had he not been in a condition to make use of it.
There is some Reason to believe, that the Faith of Germanicus was like that of
young Pompey, who one Day, when he entertained Octavius and Anthony in his
Gallery, being asked by the Corsair Menas, Whether he desired they should make
him absolute Master, not only of Sicily and of Sardinia, but of the whole Roman
Empire; answered, You should do it without giving me notice of it. Plutarch, in
the Life of Anthony.
than his own. But this appeared of bad Example, and even execrable to those
who were mad themselves; so that there was Time given for his Friends to draw
him off into his Tent.

XXX. There a Council was called, in order to appease the Mutiny; for Notice
had been given, that the Seditious had proposed to send Deputies to the Army of
Silius, and to engage them in their Revolt The first Remedy, which a Prince
ought to employ against the Revolt of his Subjects, is to prevent the Rebels
from gaining the Neighboring Provinces and Cities which continue in Obedience.
; that they had resolved to plunder the City of the Ubians Afterward called
Collen.
; and that if once they had tasted the Sweets of Rapine, they would soon be
tempted onwards, to make a Prey of Gaul. It was also apprehended, that the
Germans, who were not ignorant of what had passed, should make an Irruption
into the Roman Province, in case the Legions should withdraw from the Rhine.
And that, on the other side, if they should arm the Allies and the Auxiliaries
There was this difference betwixt Allies, and Auxiliaries; that the former took
an Oath of Fidelity to the Roman Commonwealth, and received no Pay; whereas the
others, who were Foreigners, and not under an Oath, took Pay. The Allies had
Corn given them.
against the Legions, to hinder their departure, that was in effect to kindle a
Civil War. That Severity exposed Germanicus to Danger, and Mildness to Cabrera
says, That the Commander Dom Lu^s de Requesens, in stead of reducing the
Rebels of Flanders to Obedience, by his Mildness, and by his Favors, increased
their Obstinacy, it appearing to them that he treated them so, because he
feared them. Chapter 15. l. 10. of his History.
Contempt To use Rigor, is to exasperate their Minds, and to drive them to
Despair; to dissemble, temporise or comply with the Will of the Mutineers, is
to show that they are feared, and, by consequence, is to increase their
Insolence, and to expose to Contempt the Authority of the Prince and the
General. (...) is to be done then in these Occasions, where Gentleness and
Rigor are equally, dangerous? He must not amuse himself about (...) the
Go^dian knot* for this will never be (...); it must therefore be (...) through.
After the Spanish Soldier^ were gone out of the Low-(...)* by^ Virtue of the
Perpetual Edict, Don John of Austria, who was Governor there* soon perceived,
that the intention of these Provinces was to govern themselves in the form of
(...) that he was constr^i^^ed to^ retire from (...), where* he wa^ at the
Mercy of the (...), to (...), and immediately to recall the^ Spanish and Italian
Troops, (which he had (...) away) to appea^e the Rebels. (1577.)
; that whether all Things should be granted, or all refused to the Mutineers,
was of equal Hazard to the common Good. In fine, all Reasons, both on the one
and the other side* being duly weighed, it was resolved to counterfeit Letters
as from Tiberi^^, by which he gave a free Discharge to all such as (...) served
for the space of Twenty Years It is Prudence in a General, not to engage the
Prince; and yet to pre^^^d to do that in Ob^d^^^ce, which he does through
Necessity. Thus Germanicus, by cou^terfeiting Letters from Tiber^^^u^ who
ordered him to g^^nt them their Demands (...) conc^^led his Inability to bring
them to Reason, and (...) was not in the mean time obliged to make good any of
the Promises contained in these forged Letters. And* probably, these Letters
were only Blank^ (...) by the Prince; for otherwise, Germanicus, who knew too
well how much he was suspected by Tibe^^^^^, (...) not have (...) use of this
Exp^dient^
; and declared those for Volunteers who had served Sixteen, retaining them
under a particular Ensign, exempted from all sorts of Duty When seditious
Persons* or Rebels, ob^^in of a Prince more than they have demanded of him,
th^^ have great Reason to believe, th^^ he is much more (...) to deceive them,
(as they deserve) than to satisfy them. This puts me in mind of what Christian
the Fourth, King of Denmark, did on the like Occasion, who was so far from
discovering any Resentment against Mutineers, who had made insolent Demands of
him, that he handsomely pretended to yield to their Reasons, and to be willing
to give them all the Satisfaction they desired. And, as a Testimony of this, he
said, That he would drink with them; which appeared to them the more sincere,
because he often did his Friends this Honor, and because in his Nature he was
very familiar: But after he had made every one of them as drunk as Beasts, he
caused them all to be hanged the same Evening. This Relation was given me by a
Danish Envoy.
, excepting only to repulse the Enemy; and ordaining them to be paid double the
Legacy which had been left them by Augustus.

XXXI. The Soldiers suspecting the Design These Soldiers* who were kep^ under
the Colors, (...)
, required that all this should be immediately performed* And the Tribunes
expedited the Discharge; but the Payment being postpon'd till they were in
Winter Quarters, the Fifth and the Twenty first Legions refused to return into
their Garrisons: And Germanicus was forced to pay them out of the Money Princes
and Generals of Armies ought to avoid nothing more carefully, than the
necessity of making Soldiers wait a long time for their Pay; for want of Pay is
always followed with want of Respect and Obedience; and, in the mean time, the
General dares not punish Men, whose Demands and Complaints are just. Besides,
the opportunity of Acting and Fighting are lost, as long as the Mutiny
continues; and there is no security in employing them, whilst they believe that
they have a Right to do themselves Justice by Treachery. In fine, the longer
their Pay is delayed, the more of their ^nsolence and cruelty must the People
fear. Insomuch, that the Princes Authority remains in suspense betwixt the
Impunity of one side, and the desperate Condition of the other. Some Spanish
Troops (says Sir William Temple, c. 1. of his Remarks) having mutinied for
want of Pay, and seized the Town of Alost in the Neighborhood of Brussels, the
People of this City were in despair, the Tradesmen left their Shops, and the
Hu^bandman his Work, and all ran to Arms: So that the Estates being assembled
at Ghent in the Year 1576, it was there resolved to drive out of the
Low Countries all Foreigners, and to re-establish the ancient form of
Government. Which gave the King of Spain to know by a ^atal Experiment, that
nothing is able to stop the Torrent of an ^^raged and obstinate People, who
overturn all that stands in their way.
which he brough^ with him to defray his Voyage, and out of what he could
borrow from his Friends. Cecina brought back to the Ubians the First and the
Twentieth Legions* and i^ was indeed a shameful March, to see carried, as it
were, in Triumph, the Silver This Money was Sacred.
, which they had extorted from their General, amongst the Eagles and the
Ensigns. In the mean time, Germanicus being gone to visit the Army on the Upper
Rhine, the Second, the Thirteenth, and the Sixteenth Legion took the Oath of
Fidelity without the least demurr; and the Fourteenth having paused a little on
the Matter, he offered them the Money, and their Discharge, without their once
demanding it It Is Wisdom for a Man to do that of his own accord, which he sees
that he shall be obliged to do by force. This Anticipation makes that received
as a Favor, which a little later would pass for Constraint.
.

XXXII. But the Sedition was again renewing in the Country of the Chauci Now
F^iseland.
, through the Malice of those Rebellious Veterans, who were there in Garrison,
if a timely Stop had not been put to the Beginnings by the Execution of two
Soldiers, whom Mennius, the Mareschal-de-Camp, caused to be suddenly put to
Death: A daring Action, and of good Example, rather than of true There are
Occasions* in which a greater Regard is to be had to the public Service, than
to the Laws; the Necessity being some time so pressing, that there is no means
to expect their Assistance, which is often retarded by Formalities. Besides, it
is not to cross the Laws to procu^e the public Good, in prospect of which all
the Laws were made. Salu^ Populi suprema L^^ esto, says Cicero. It Is on these
Occasions, said Cardinal Richelieu to the late King, in which your Authority
ought to go beyond the Forms of Law to maintain Rule and Discipline; without
which, a State is not able to subsist. Part 1. of his Pol. Testament, sect. 2.
chapter 3.
Justice Because it belonged only to the General to punish with Death.
. Notwithstanding which, the Mutiny still gathering to a greater Head, he took
flight, and hid himself; but being discovered, he called his Courage to his
Succor. This Violence, said he, is not offered to me, but to Germanicus, your
General; and to Tiberius, your lawful Emperor The Affronts offered to
Magistrates, are reputed as done to the Prince; for it is his Authority which
they resist, and not the Person of him who exercises it. It was for this, that
Charles the Fifth would never recall from Naples the Viceroy Don Pedro de
Tol^do, against whom the City had made an Insurrection, and even with some
appearance of Justice. Ulloa, in his Life. The Constable of St. Pol having
given the Lie to the Lord d'Himbercourt, Ambassador from the Duke of Burgundy,
he made him no other Answer, but, That this Affront was not done to him, but to
the King, under whose Protection he came thither as Ambassador; ( it was to the
King in Picardy;) and also to his Master, whose Person he represented, and to
whom he would report it. Memoirs of Commines, l. 3. chapter 11. The greatest Kings,
says the same Cardinal Richelieu, cannot preserve their Authority inviolable,
if they have not a great care to maintain it in the least of their Officers,
whether near or distant from their Persons. For these are Outworks which are
attacked first, the taking of which emboldens them to make an Effort against
those within, and afterward against the Person of the Prince himself. Pol.
Testament, part 1. sect. 7. chapter ult.
. Saying this, and seeing them amazed, he snatched their Ensign The Ensigns
were so highly reverenced by the Romans, that the Seditious themselves durst
not re^use to follow them.
, and turning directly toward the Rhine, he cried out, that he held him for a
Deserter who forsook his Rank A Commander, who knows how to speak with Vigor,
and to accompany his Words with some Action, wherein Resolution appears, will
scarce ever fail of striking Terror into Seditious Persons, although they be
numerous. The German Soldiers having made an Insurrection against Alexander
Farnese, Governor and Captain General of the Low Countries, he went directly
to these Mutineers, with his Sword in his Hand, and commanded the Colonel of
the Regiment to send him immediately two Soldiers of each Company, which should
be found most culpable, whom he caused to be hanged, to the number of Twenty,
in the sight of his whole Army, without any Man* daring to spea^^ a Word.
Strada's Hist. Decad. 2. lib. 5.
; insomuch, that they all returned to their Winter Quarters much discontented,
and without daring to proceed in their Attempt.

XXXIII. In the mean time, Germanicus being already on his return from the
Upper Germany, the Deputies of the Senate, found him at the Altar of the Ubians
Some are of Opinion, that this Altar stood where the City of B^^m is now, the
ordinary place of Residence of the Archbishop of ^ollen.
, where the First and the Twentieth Legions, together with the Veterans, who
were discharged, had their Winter Quarters, and were still retained under their
Ensigns. A terrible Affright suddenly seized those Soldiers, who felt the
Stings of Conscience for the Crime they had committed. They suspected, that
those Deputies had Orders to revoke the Grants, which they had extorted by
their Mutiny. And as it is the common Practice of the Multitude to accuse one
wrongfully, they make Munatius Plancus, a Consular Man, and Chief of the
Deputation, the Author of this Decree of the Senate When once a Minister has
got the Reputation of a severe or violent Man, all rigorous Resolutions are
imputed to him. The Flemings imputed all the Rigours of Philip the Second to
the Counsels of the Duke of Alva, because they knew that he had said to Charles
the Fifth, (who loved them and treated them with Respect, as having been born
and educated among them,) that he ought not to give them so much liberty, nor
so great a share in public Affairs, to the great Discontent of other Nations
of his Empire, who deserved to be preferred before them Cabrera's Hist. l. 5.
c. 2.
. Toward Midnight they came to a Resolution among themselves to demand the
Standard, which was kept in the Lodgings of Germanicus It was a Scarlet Ensign,
which was set up on the General's Pavilion when they were going to give Battle,
and it never was out of his Quarters, whence it could not be taken without
Sacrilege.
. Accordingly they ran thither in a Crowd, broke open the Doors, and dragging
the It has been a Maxim of several Princes, never to lie twice successively in
the same Chamber. Henry the Third, King of England, and the Usurper Cromwell,
changed almost every Day.
Prince out of his Bed, they threatened him with Death, and constrained him to
deliver up the Ensign Of two Evils, the least is to be chosen, and
consequently, Germanicus did better in giving up the Colors to them, than to
let them kill him.
. Then running through the Camp, they met the Legates, who hearing the Uproar,
were hastening to Germanicus; they resolve to murder them, and particularly
Plancus, whom regard of his Cicero, in one of his Letters, says, That the
exterior Marks of Dignities and great Offices, are but Obstacles to the safety
of the Persons who wear them, that is to say, in Seditions; for at all other
Times they are necessary to draw Respect from the People. One Day when Otho
entertained the greatest Men of Rome at Supper, the Praetorian Soldiers having
taken a false Alarm, came to force open the Doors of the Palace. Otho, who knew
not whether their De^ign was against him, or the Guests, dismissed the Company;
and every one, for his safety, stripped himself of the Marks of his Dignity.
Tac. Hist. 1.
Character would not permit to escape by ^^ight; and therefore, having no other
Refuge, he cast himself into the Quarter of the First Legion, and made Religion
his Buckler, by embracing the Eagle and the Ensings Which were Sacred and
Inviolable amongst the Romans, and which Tacitus calls, The particular Gods of
the Legions, Propria Legionum numina. Ann. 2.
. Which notwithstanding, the Roman Camp, and even the Altars of the Gods, were
in danger of being profaned by the Blood of a Roman Ambassador, (an unusual
Crime even among our Enemies) if Calpurnius, who was Eagle-bearer The Person
who carried the Eagle of the Legion.
, had not prevented the Blow by his Resistance. When it was Daylight, and Men
and Actions could be discerned, Germanicus entering the Camp, caused Plancus to
be brought before him, and seated him by his Side on his Tribunal; then
reproaching them with their mad Behavior, and exclaiming against their fatal
Disobedience, which he chose to attribute to the Anger of the Gods The General
of an Army, which has mutinied, does prudently to attribute part of the
Soldiers Fault to higher Causes, which have drawn them, as it were, by force;
to the end, that this handsome manner of excusing them, may make them more
readily return to their Duty, in hopes of obtaining a General Pardon.
, rather than the Fury of the Soldiers, he openly declared the Occasion of that
Embassy, and eloquently deplored the cruel Outrage done to Plancus without
cause, and the Infamy which the Legion had incurred, by violating in his Person
the sacred Character of Ambassadors The Person of an Ambassador is so Sacred,
that it is more inviolable than even that of the Prince himself, who sends him,
would be, were he in the Places where he represents him. For a Prince, who is
in the Territories of another, is but under the Security of the Laws of
Hospitality, which make but a part of the Laws of Nations: But his Ambassador
is under the Protection of the Laws of Nations themselves, taken in the utmost
Extent of their Signification, and of their Privileges, p^ovided that he be not
in a strange Country, nor for his Pleasure, nor for his own private Affairs,
but for the common Good of the two States. The Rights of Ambassadors are even
so great, that they e^^ace those which a Prince has over his Natural Subjects.
That is to say, a Frenchman, who should be Amba^^^dor from the King of Spain,
or a Spaniard, who should be Ambassador from the King of France, would e^^ace
and abolish, by his Character, the Jurisdiction, and all the Rights of
Sovereignty which his Natural Prince had before over his Person. Local Customs,
which ought to give Place to the Law of Nations, which is the Universal and
Common Law of all People, who have a Form of Civil Government, in ^like manner
as the Interest of private Men gives Place without contradiction to the public
Interest. And this is so tru^* that the Marquis du Guast, Governor of Milan,
having caused to be assassinated on the Po, Anthony Rinco, a Spaniard, invested
with the Quality of Ambassador from Francis the First, who sent him as such to
Constantinople; Charles the Fi^th loudly disowned this Action, and carefully
avoided alleging amongst the Excuses, wherewith he colored it, the Birth of
Rinco, which he would not have failed to insist on, had he believed that it was
his Right to have recalled him as his Subject, and to have punished him as a
Deserter, who had been condemned for Contumacy in Spain. Don Iuan Ant^nio de
Vera, to justify this Action of the Governor of Milan, which the force of
Truth makes him vindicate by halves, when he says, Strangers say so, and I am
willing to believe it, because it was much of his Character: Porque ^ue obra
muy ^uya. This Author, I say, complains of John Bodin, who making mention of
the Death of Rinco, cunningly dissembles, that this Ambassador was a Spaniard,
that he might give a false Color to this Action; adding, that if Bodin had
spoken the who^e Truth, it was evident and undoubted, that Charles the Fifth
might judicially condemn and punish Rinco with Death, seeing that he was his
natural Sovereign, and that no subsequent acquired Privilege could skreen him
from the Punishment of his antecedent Treason. But this Reason does not destroy
those which I have alleged to the contrary. And the Example which Don Iuan
Antonio brings of Ioab, whom Solomon caused to be slain at the Horns of the
Altar, which he laid hold on, is not parallel to our Case, seeing that Ioab was
no Ambassador, as was Rinco; nor Rinco a wilful Murderer, as Ioab was, (1 King.
2.) To conclude, the Example of Joshua, who would not ^ill the Gibeonites*
although they circumvented him in obtaining the League which they came to make
with him, ( Josh. chapter 9.) may serve as a proper Answer to all the Reasons of
this Spanish Lord. See his Epitome of the Life of Charles the Fifth, and the
first Dialogue of his En^axador.
. After this Harangue, which rather astonished the Multitude, than appeased
them, he licensed the Deputies to depart, and caused them to be convoyed by the
Auxiliary Troops.

XXXIV. During this Con^^ernation, Germanicus was generally blam'^, that he
repaired not to the Army on the Upper Rhine, where he might have found both
Obedience and Aid against the Rebels. Germanicus (said they) has discovered his
Weakness, and his Fear, in rewarding the Revolters When Mildness in a General
is not sea^^ned with Severity, it cures Mut^^^^^s of nothing but of Fear;
whereas they ought to have Terro^ struck into them, to reduce them to
Obedience. The Instructions which Philip the Second gave in Writing to Don
Iuan, his Brother, when he sent him to the War; expressly recommended to him in
all his public Actions to observe a De^^^^m suitable to his Birth, and to his
Office of General, in appe^ring grave with Sweetness, that he might be beloved;
and modest with Authority, that he might be respected. Cabrera's History, l. 7.
c. 23.
. If he regarded not his own Safety, yet why should he abandon his Infant Son
The first Thing which a General of an Army ought to do in a Sedition or a
Revolt of Soldiers, is to put his Wife and Children in some place of Safety,
for (...) le^t the Mutineers, or the Rebels, seizing on their Persons, so
precious a Pledge might serve them as a Buckler against him, and constrain him
to grant them Demands prejudicial to his own Reputation, and to the Authority
of the Prince who employs him. In a word, every Thing must be taken from
Soldiers that may augment or ^oment their Violence.
, and his Wife with Child, to the Fury of those Mutineers, to whom nothing is
inviolable? He ought, at least, to have restored those Pledges to Tiberius, and
to the Commonwealth. After long Consideration, he embraced his Wife and Son
with many Tears, and ordered their departure: And though Agrippina, to avoid
that mournful Separation, said, That the Granddaughter of Augustus had too
much Courage to fear Danger There is nothing which makes a Woman more
courageous, than the ardent Love which she has for her Husband. Dona Iuana
Coel^o, the Wife of Anthony Perez, and Mary de Regelsb^rg, the Wife of the
^amous Hugo Grotius, are two great modern Examples: And when History shall
speak of the Disgrace of Mon^^eur the Surintendant Fou^^ue^, (...) will not, it
may be, forget to parallel his Wife with those two Foreign Ladies.
, yet at length she submitted to the Journey. It was a sad Spectacle, to see
the Wife of a General, in the Equipage of a Fugitive, carrying a helpless
Infant in her Arms, encompassed with a Troop of other Women, all in Tears; and
those who stayed behind, as much afflicted, as those who went.

XXXV. These lamentable Outcries, which one would have thought had rather come
from a sacked City, than from the Camp of Germanicus, at that time in a
flourishing Condition, excited the Curiosity of the Soldiers. They came forth
from their Tents to learn the Cause. There they beheld so many Ladies of
Illustrious Birth, without any Convoy or Guard to attend them; Agrippina,
without her ordinary Train, or any one remaining Sign to distinguish the Wife
of their General from other Women: And informing themselves, that she was going
for Treves, there to seek a Sanctuary among Strangers, they were equally moved
with Shame and Pity, by the dear Remembrance of her Father Agrippa, of her
Grandfather Augustus, and of her Father-in-Law Drusus; by the Honor of her
Fruitfulness, and her inviolable Chastity; and more particularly, by their
Regret they had to see her carry away, in a manner so unworthy of her, her
Infant Son who was born within their Camp, nursed, as it were, in the Bosom of
the Legions, and called Caligula, because he wore the common Boots These Boo^s
were trimmed with Nails, and were worn only by the ^^^mon Soldiers. Wherefore,
in Latin Authors, Miles Caligatus is (...)
of Soldiers, to gain their Affections in his very Childhood. But nothing was
more grievous to them, than the Envy of that Honor, which was done to those of
Treves. Some of them ran after her, and besought her to stay among them; others
went to (...), and importuned him for her Return. But, as he was yet in the
first Ferment of his Grief and Choler, he answered them in this manner.

XXXVI. Believe not, that my Wife and Son are dearer to me than the Emperor,
and the Empire They who have the Management of public Affairs, ought to prefer
their Country to their Wives and Children. Cari sunt parents, (says Cicero)
cari liberi, propinqui, familiares, sed omnes omnium caritates Patria una
complexa est. Lib. 1. de Off. There is, in Maria^a's History, a famous Example
of what Governors and public Ministers owe to their Country, in preference to
their own Children. The Infant Don Iuan, Brother of Sancho the Fourth, King of
Castille, having besieged the Fortress of Tarifa, in which Don Alonso Perez de
Gusman commanded, this General's only Son fell into the Hands of the Infant,
the General of the Moors Army. The Besieged making a vigorous Defense, and the
Infant beginning to lose all Hopes of taking the Place, he thought fit to
expose to their Sight the young Perez, as a Victim to be slain, if they did not
surrender. At this sad Spectacle, says Mariana, the Father, without any
Discomposure, protested, That if he had a thousand Sons, he would abandon them
all, rather than stain his Honor, by surrendering the Place. And, to make good
his Words, he threw over the Battlements of the Walls a Cuttle-Ax to the M^^rs,
to make use of it against his Son, if their Design was such, and went away to
Dinner. A little while after hearing the Outcries of the Soldiers, who saw
their Master's Son executed before their Eyes, he ran at the Noise, and
understanding what was the matter, he said with a Majestic Air, I thought that
the Enemies had entered the Town; and returned to ^at with his Wife, without
discovering so much as any Alteration in his Countenance. So well did this Lord
(worthy to be compared with the greatest Men of Antiquity) know how to master
the impe^uous Motions of Paternal Tenderness. From him are descended the Dukes
of Medina Sidonia* The History of Spain, l. 14. c. 16.
. For my Father, his own Fortune will defend him; and the Empire These Words
seem to contain ^ Sense, from which we may infer, that German^cus did not
refuse the Empire, but because it would have been dangerous to accept it, the
other Armies and the other Provinces being faithful to Tiberius.
wants not other Armies, without this, for its Support. As I would freely
sacrifice my Wife and Children for your Honor, so I remove them not at present
from you, but to hinder you from becoming yet more guilty, by the Murder of
Augustus's Granddaughter, and the Grandson of Tiberius; and to expiate by my
Blood alone, the Crime which your Fury is about to perpetrate. For what is it
you have not dared to Enterprise of late? What is there so Sacred, which you
have not presumed to violate. By what Name can I call you, Soldiers? You who
have besieged the Son of your Emperor, or Roman Citizens, who have, with so
much Insolence, contemned the Authority of the Senate? You have profaned even
the sacred Laws of Nations, even the inviolable Persons of Ambassadors To
a^^ront Persons who represent Kings, says Cardinal d'Ossat, is to offend
against the first Principles of the Policy, and Maintenance of Human Society.
Letter 283.
, even the common Rights observed by Enemies. A seasonable Reproach given by a
Prince, or a General of an Army, to People who have some Sense of Honor, or
who begin to feel some Pricks of Repentance, is sufficient quickly to reduce
them to their Duty, and to make them also more affectionate than ever to his
Service. The Prisoners of the Army of the League of Smalkald imploring the
Mercy of Charles the Fifth, by calling him their Father: Such pa^ltry Fellows
as you, said he, are no Children of mine; and added, (pointing to his Camp) It
is these, of whom I am the true Father. Words which equally augmented the Shame
of the Rebels, and the Love of the Soldiers of his Army, and were the cause,
that most of the Cities, which took part with the League, returned to their
Obedience; and that a certain Count, who thought his Repentance was not
equivalent to his Fault, killed himself with his Sword, to give an undoubted
Testimony of his Fidelity. Epitome of the Life of Charles the Fifth, by Don
Iuan de Vera.
The Divine Julius sti^led a Sedition by one single Word, when he called his
Soldiers (who were deserting his Service Tradite nostra viris ignavi signa
Quirites. Whilst Caesar was preparing for the War of Africa, whither Curio and
Cat^, Surnamed Uticensis, were retired; the Soldiers, who saw he stood in need
of them, thought fit to demand their Dismission, not with a design to obtain
it, but to oblige him* for fear of being left without an Army, to grant them
whatsoever they pretended to. But he, without any Concern, discharged them from
their Oath, and disbanded them with these Words of Contempt: Etenim* O Qui^
rites, laboribus and vulneribus exhausti estis; at which, they were so
surprised, that they threw themselves at his Fe^^, to beg him to continue them
in his Service. Dio, l. 42. He did an Action of like Resolution at the Battle
of Munda, in the Kingdom of Granada, where seeing the Victory inclining to the
Enemy's side, he alighted off his Horse, and cried out to his Soldiers, who
gave Ground, That, as for himself, ^e would not give Ground an Inch; that they
should consider well what they were about to do; what a General they aban^^^'d,
and in what Necessity. Insomuch, that being spurred on by Shame, rather than by
Honor, they rallied, and gained the Battle. Paterc^l. Hist. c. 55. It was in
that Battle that he ^ought for his Life, whereas in others he ^ought but for
the Victory.
) Rabble. The Divine Augustus made his Actian-Legions After the Battle of
Actiu^, Augustus having sent back most of the Veterans into Italy, without
giving them any Rewards, these Soldiers being much discontented mutiny'd,
whilst he was employed in Asia in observing the Steps of Mark (...)* But after
he was returned into Italy, his Presence brought such an Awe with it, that none
durst stir. E^^ectum est, says Dio, ut (...) auderet. Lib. 51.
tremble only with a Look. And though I am unworthy to be named with them, yet
having the Honor to be descended from their Loins The more illustrious
Extraction a Person is of, the more the great Actions of his Ancestors give him
confusion, if he does not imitate them. As these Actions serve for Examples to
others, they lay an indispensible Obligation upon him, who has their Blood in
his Veins, to tread in their Steps. He who boasts of their great Deeds without
imitating them, is so far from doing himself Honor, that he makes the
Difference that is between them and him taken notice of. Amongst the R^mans,
the Statues and Pictures of illustrious Persons were set up in the entrances of
Houses, to put their Posterity in mind, that they had a great void Space to
fill up, and that as many Images as they saw, would be so many Censors and
Syndic^, which would brand them with In^amy, if they should degenerate.
Boles^aus the Chaste, Prince of Poland, wore a Gold Medal about his Neck, with
his Father's Effigies engraved upon it, and every time he held a Council, or
went upon an Expedition, he kissed it with Respect, saying to his Father, as if
he had been present, God forbid, that I should do any thing unworthy of your
great Name.
, I should think it strange, and even unjust, that the Armies of Spain and
Syria should despise me: But what shall I say! they are the Fifth and the
Twentieth Legion which have revolted! the one of them, enrolled by the Hand of
Tiberius himself; and the other, the constant Companion of his Victories, and
enriched by his Bounties! And, to do you Right, you have both made him in
return, a wonderful Acknowledgment of his Favors. Shall I be the Bearer of
such News to him, who receives none but happy Tidings from all the other
Provinces? Shall I tell him, that his Soldiers, as well the Veterans, as the
new Recruits, are not to be quieted, either by their Discharge, or by their
Pay? That it is here they kill Centurions; drive away Tribunes; imprison
Legates: That the Camp and Rivers are overflowed with Blood; and that his Son
is at the Mercy of as many Enemies, as he has Soldiers? Ah, my once dear
Fellow Soldiers! why did did you snatch away that Sword, which I was plunging
into my Body? He, of your Number, was my best Friend, who presented me his own.
I had now been dead; I had not been a Witness of so many Crimes, with which you
have stained your Honor since that Day! You had chosen another General, who
would have left my Death unpunished, but in return, would have revenged the
Massacre of Varus, and his three Legions. For I should be sorry, (for your
Honor) that the Belgae, who make offer of their Service, should have the Glory
of reducing the Germans to Obedience, and restoring the Reputation of the
Romans. Oh! that thy Soul, Divine Augustus, now in Heaven, and thou, Oh my
Father Drusus! whose Resemblance I behold in these Ensigns! Oh that the
Remembrance of these Actions may inspire these very Soldiers, who now begin to
feel the Stings of Shame, and Spurs of Glory, with a Resolution of blotting out
that foul Disgrace, and of turning their Swords against our Enemies! And you,
in whose altered Countenances I read another Heart, in sign, that you will pay
your Emperor the Obedience which you owe to him; and to the Senate, to their
Ambassadors, to your General, to his Wife, and to his Son; separate your selves
from the Company of these Mutineers, as a Pledge of your Fidelity, and an
authentic Testimony of your sincere Repentance.

XXXVII. At this, they threw themselves before his Feet; and confessing, that
his Reproaches were all deserved and just, they besought him to punish the
Offenders; to pardon those, who had only erred through Frailty; and to lead
them on to Battle: As also, to recall his Wife, and not to give in Hostage to
the Gauls the Nursling of the Legions. He excused himself as to what regarded
Agrippina, by her being so near her Time of Childbed, and by the approach of
Winter; as for his Son, he consented to recall him; adding, that he left them to
finish what remained. From that moment they began to seize on the most
Seditious, and brought them bound in Fetters to Caius Cetronius, who commanded
the first Legion He was as a Brigad^er in our Armies; for our Brigades of Foot
much resemble the Roman Legions, and the Battalions, which compose them, their
Cohorts, of which the Legions were composed. The Roman Cohorts consisted of
betwixt 5 or 600 Men, when the Legion was well supplied* our Battalions are 800
Men. In every Legion, there were to Cohorts; (...) ^very Brigade, there are
always 5 or 6 Battalions.
; and he caused immediate Justice to be done on them in this manner: The
Legions encompassed his Tribunal with their naked Swords; A Tribune That is to
say, a Colonel.
from above showed the Soldier who was accused, to those below; if the Assembly
pronounced him guilty, he was immediately cast down, in order to be executed;
and every one took pleasure in killing his Camerade, as if thereby he cleared
his own Innocence Every one thought to merit his Pardon, by killing his
Companion.
. Germanicus was silent while this was passing; so that nothing being done by
his Command, the whole Hatred of the Massacre fell upon the Actors. The
Veterans followed this Example, and soon after were commanded into Rhetia,
under color of defending that Province from the Incursions of the Suevae, but
in reality, ^o remove them from a Camp, the very sight of which raised Horror
in them, because it set the Image of their late Revolt before their Eyes. Then
Germanicus made a strict Enquiry into the Conduct of the Centurions: He
examined them one by one; each of them was obliged to tell his Name; his
Country; what Ordo in ^^citus.
Company he commanded; how long he had served; what Actions he had done in War;
and they, who had been honored with any Military Presents, showed them. In
short, if any Legion, or any Tribune, gave a good Account of their Probity and
Diligence, they were continued in their Stations; and, on the contrary, he
degraded those who were accused by common Fame, either of Covetousness, or of
Cruelty: And in this manner the Sedition was appeased.

XXXVIII. But what was yet remaining on his Hands, in reference to the Fifth
and Twenty-first Legion, was not of less Importance. Those Legions had their
Winter Quarters Sixty Miles from thence, in a Place called Vetera As much as to
say, Vetera Castra, the old Camp.
. The Sedition was begun by them; there was no Crime so heinous, which they had
not committed; and, to complete their Villainy, they were still for pushing on
their Fury to the utmost; nothing frighted with the Punishment of some; nothing
moved with Remorse, or with the Penitence of others. Germanicus therefore gave
his Orders to prepare Vessels on the Rhine; resolving to terrify them into
Duty, in case they persisted in their Disobedience.

XXXIX. The News of this Revolt amongst the Legions being come to Rome, before
the Event of the other in Pannonia was known, the City, struck with Fear, began
to murmur against Tiberius; accusing him, that while he by his artificial
Delays and Dissimulations was still imposing on the People and the Senate,
which were both of them unarmed, and without Power, in the mean time the
Soldiers were raising a Rebellion: They said, that the two young Princes, for
want of Knowledge and Authority, could not hold the Armies in Obedience: It was
his Duty to go in Person thither, and oppose the Majesty of the Empire to the
Mutineers; who would never dare to make Head against a Prince, of consummate
Wisdom and Experience; and who alone had their Life and Death at his Dispose;
that Augustus, in his declining Age, and languishing with Sickness, had taken
many Iourneys into Germany; and that Tiberius, now in the Vigor of his Years,
led a sedentary Life at Rome, and employed his Time in cavilling at the
Expressions of the Senators; that he very sufficiently provided for domestic
Slavery; that it was now incumbent on him, to restrain the License of the
Soldiers, and teach them how to behave themselves in Peace Soldiers cannot love
Peace, because it confounds them with the Citizens, and subjects them to the
Laws, from which they set themselves at liberty with Impunity in time of War.
Militares arts per otium ignotae, industriosque ac ignavos pax in aequo tenet.
Ann. 12. The Citizens, says Sir W. Temple, pretend to live in safety under the
Protection of the Laws, which the Soldiers would subject to their Sword, and to
their Will. Chap. of his Remarks on the United Provinces.
.

XL. Tiberius was unmoved at these Fabius Maximus, whose Method was not to
fight, slighted those envious Persons, who in a Ieer called him The Temporiser,
and Hannibal's Paedagogue, saying, That it was greater Cowardice to fear the
Judgments of the People, than to fear the Enemy. But all Captains (says Livy,
l. 4.) have not that strength of Mind which Fabius had, who would rather
unjustly suffer the diminution of his Authority, than do otherwise than what
was his Duty, to gain the Approbation of the People. Seneca says, That there
is nothing more ridiculous, than a Man who stands in fear of what others will
say of him. Nil s^ultius est homine verba metuente. Contradiction, in stead of
Sho^king, does but fortify and ^arden a resolved Mind.
Discourses An able Prince ought not to take his Measures from what the People
say, who always speak by a Passion. Non ex ru^^ore statuendum. Ann. 3. It is a
good Commendation, which Tacitus gives Tiberius, that he was always a great
Enemy to the Reports of the Town. Tiberium speruendis Rum^ribus validum. An. 3.
So that Paterculus ought not to be suspected of Flattery, in saying, That he
was an excellent Judge of what he ought to do, and that he embraced not what
the Multitude did approve, but what they ought to approve: For, says he, he
was more concerned for his Duty, than for his Reputation; and the Army never
directed the Counsels, and the Designs of the General, but the General always
gave Laws to his Army. Chapter 113, and 115. Ami^ato says, That Princes who
disqu^et themselves with the Judgments of the People, fall into the same Error
with those who scruple certain Things which are not sinful; for as the
Scrupulous sin by the Opinion which they have of sinning, although they have not
sinned; so Princes, who are concerned to hear the People blame what they have
done, or are doing with good Counsel, and thorough Information, show that they
have not acted upon certain Principles, but by false Prejudices. Disc. 7. of l.
3. A Baron of Chevreau, who served in Flanders under the Duke of Alva,
perceiving that the Duke would not hazard a Battle, which the Officers judged
convenient to fight, threw his Pistol in Anger on the Ground, saying, The Duke
will never fight. To whom the Duke (who had heard him) answered, That he was
pleased to see the Desire which the Soldiers had to fight the Enemy, because
their Profession required it; but that ^ General ought to consider nothing but
conquering. It is ordinary for Soldiers, (says the Author who furnishes me
with this Example) to desire to ^ight, to get Reputation by showing their
Courage; but the Repu^at^on of Generals depends upon knowing how to conquer
without losing a Soldier, if it be possible; and, consequently, not to fight,
unless they are invited to it by the Necessity of relie^ing a Place, or by a
most certain Advantage. Thus they ought never to comply with the Will of the
Soldiers, if Reason does not absolutely require it; for a Captain has never
suffered himself to be prevailed on by the Discourses and Importunities of his
Army, but he has been afterward beaten by his Enemies. Bernard. de Mendoza's
Memoirs, l. 4. c. 11.
; having fixed his Resolutions, not to leave the Seat of Empire The capital
City of a Kingdom, according to Tacitus, is the Center and Helm of Affairs,
Caput Rerum, and consequently, the Prince's Presence is most necessary there,
especially in the beginning of a Reign. If the Great Pompey had not left Rome,
where he was the strongest, Caesar would have had a great Difficulty to have
entered it. Philip the Second consulting in his Council, Whether he should go
into Flanders, Don John Manriqua de Lara said wisely, That the War being in a
remote Country, the King ought not to leave the Heart of his Kingdom, whence
issued out the Strength and the Preservation of all the other Parts. Gabrera's
Philip the Second, l. 7. c. 7. In the Year 1591, the City of Saragossa having
made an Insurrection against him about the Privileges of the Tribunal, which
they call El Iustitia, he would never go thither, although the People of
Madrid, and several even of the Grandees aggravated the Danger; and when they
had reported to him, what every one said of him on this Occasion, he answered,
That it was not agreeable to the Grandeur of the Monarchy, that the Prince, for
a rebellious City, should quit that, whence he gave Motion to his whole Empire.
Herrera's Second Part of his History, l. 7. c. 20. No Reason of State, nor of
War, says Cabrera, requires, that a King should hazard his Person, because
neither Vigilance nor Fortune are sufficient Guarantees for the Safety of
Princes, who ought not to ground their Deliberations on the Weakness of others,
but upon their own Strength: l. 12. c. 29. Don Iuan Antonio de Vera says on
the contrary, That Charles the Fifth had never found a more effectual Remedy
against Seditions and Insurrections* than to go thither in Person; and that
those who are of the other Opinion, upon the Maxim of Tiberius, don't consider
the Difference that there is betwixt a Monarchy and a Commonwealth; [ i. e.
What is safe for a Commonwealth, is pernicious to a Monarchy.] Epitome of the
Life of Charles the Fifth.
, or put to hazard his own Life, or the Safety of the Commonwealth. His Mind
was perplexed with many Cares, and contrary Thoughts. The German Army was the
stronger, and the Pannonian nearer Rome; one was supported by the Gauls, and
the other had an easy Passage into Italy Through the Cities of Newport and
Tergesta, now Triest, which ^order on Pannonia. Italiam (says P^terculus)
(...) sibi Nauporti ac Terge^tis confinio. Hist. 2. c. 120.
. To which of these should he go first? For the Legions, which were last
visited, would take Offense, and think themselves neglected. On the other side,
by sending his two Sons, both Armies might be at once contented, and the
Majesty of the Supreme Power preserved, which is always most respected at a
distance. Besides, that Germanicus and Drusus might be held excused, if they
sent extravagant Demands from the Legions to their Father, who would still be
in condition either to appease, or punish the Rebellious, when ever they should
transgress the Limits of Respect to the young Princes; but if they should once
despise the Person of the Emperor, what other Remedy remained? In the mean
time, he neglected not to prepare a Fleet to provide his Equipage, and set on
foot an Army of choice Soldiers, as if they were to follow him to the Wars, and
he just upon the March. But sometimes he excused his Journey by the approach of
Winter, and at other Times by the multiplicity of Business A Prince, who knows
he is hated by his People, can never commit a greater Error, than in leaving
his capital City; for if that once come to shake off the Yoke in his Absence,
he immediately loses his whole State. The Complaints, which Tacitus says, that
the whole City of Rome made against Tiberius, sufficiently show, how much his
Pre^ence there was a Burden to the Senate and to the People, and consequently,
he did very wisely not to remove thence. If Henry Duke of Guise, who has so
highly extolled his Capacity in the Memoirs which he has left us of his
Government of Naples, had read Tacitus, perhaps he would not have been guilty
of the Folly of going out of this City to give a Meeting to a Lady, who sold
him to the Spaniards.
which intervened: By which Pretenses he at first imposed on the most
Intelligent, then on the Vulgar, and for a long time kept the Provinces in
suspense Philip the Second, King of Spain, used the same Artifice, sending word
to Margaret of Parma, Governess of the Low Countries, that every thing was
ready for his Voyage, and that nothing retarded him but a Tertian Ague, and for
which also, he would not stay till he was cured, although he was ready to die
of it. Strada, dec. 1. l. 5. He communicated the same Advice to all Princes,
and demanded a Passport of the King of France, and Counsel of the Duke of Savoy
what Road was best to take. The whole Sixth Book of Strada's History is full of
these Feints, and Pretenses which Philip made use of to ^lude his own Promises,
and the Entr^aties of the Governess, and his other Ministers. But there was
this diff^re^ce betwixt him and Tiberius, that this Emperor sent his Sons to
his revolted Armies, and that Philip feared nothing more, than to hear any
Discourse of sending his Son Don Carlos into Flanders, and repented much that
he had sent thither Don John of Austria, his Natural Brother.
.

XLI. But Germanicus, though he had assembled his Forces, and was in a
condition to punish the O^fenders, yet thought it more expedient to give them
leisure to Repent, and make Trial, if, by the Example of the two other Legions,
they would prevent his Vengeance. In order to this, he wrote first to Cecina,
and gave him notice, that he was already on his march with a powerful Army,
fully determined to put all the Rebels to the Sword, without sparing the Life
of any one, if they themselves did not Justice on the Criminals before his
arrival. Cecina read these Letters privately to the Chief Commanders Tacitus
says, Aquili^eris signiferisque, i. e. the Ensign-Colonels, who carried the
Eagles of their Legions; and the Ensigns of the Cohorts* who carried Wolves,
Vultures, Lions, Dragons, Centaurs, Minotaurs, and other Figures in Relief, of
Copper, Cast Brass, or Silver.
, and to some others, who had no Hand in the Sedition, at the same time
adjuring them to preserve themselves from Death, and save their Companions from
the Infamy of that Punishment which attended them. Representing also to them,
that Reason might be heard in Times of Peace, but in War the Innocent perished
with the Guilty. Upon this, the Officers sound the Intentions of those Soldiers
whom they thought most proper for the Execution of their Design, and finding
that the greater Number still continued Loyal, they agree with Cecina, on a
Time appointed, to put to Death the most Seditious. The Signal being given,
they fall at once upon the Factious, and execute them in their Tents, none but
the Contrivers, and Assistants in the Action, knowing from whence began the
Slaughter, nor when it would conclude.

XLII. Of all the Civil Wars which ever were, none resembled this. It was not
in Battle, nor by the Hands of Enemies, that this Massacre was made; but by
Men, who the same Day conversed familiarly, and eat in Company, and at Night
were lodged together in one Bed There happened in my Time a like Adventure at
Venice betwixt the S^iri and the Guards appointed for Entries, who having been
condemned to Banishment for having shot with their Carbines at the French
Ambassador's Watermen, endeavored to kill one another, that they might obtain
their Pardon by bringing the Heads of their Companions.
. On the sudden they are divided into Parties opposite* nothing but Out^ries
and Bloodshed, the rest was governed by blind Chance, and the cause of Enmity
unknown by those who perished. Many fell who deserved not Death; for the Guilty
had taken Arms in their own Defense, when once they found on whom the Slaughter
was designed. Neither Cecina, nor the Tribunes, gave themselves the Trouble to
stop their Fury; the common Soldiers had all manner of Freedom to exercise
their Vengeance, till they were tired with killing. Germanicus soon after
entered the Camp, and beholding so many Corpse extended on the Ground, said with
many Tears, That this was not a Remedy, nor the breathing of a Vein, but a
Butchery; and commanded the Bodies to be burned. While their Minds were in this
Ferment, the Soldiers cried out to be led against the Enemy, as if the Manes of
those, whom they had slain, were to be appeased no other way, than by exposing
their impious Breasts to honest Wounds. Germanicus grati^ies their Desire, and
having laid a Bridge across the Rhine, passes over Twelve thousand Legionary
Soldiers, Twenty six Cohorts of the Allies, and Eight Regiments of Horse, all
of tried Valor, and of Proof against Sedition.

XLIII. The Germans, who were not far distant, passed their Time secure in
Pleasure, while the War seemed to sleep about them; and a Cessation of Arms
ensued of course, from the Death of Augustus, and a Civil Discord amongst our
selves. The Romans, by speedy Marches, crossed the Forest of Cesia I^ the
Territories of (...).
, and posted their Forces on a Rampart, which Tib^rius had begun to raise in
the time of Augustus; there they forti^i'd themselves, both before and behind,
with a strong Palisade: Both their Wings were covered by huge Trunks of Trees
which they had felled, and which served them for a Barricade. From thence,
traversing thick Forests, they held a Council, which way they should bend their
March: The shortest, and most frequented; or that which was farthest about, and
more difficult to pass; but where they thought the Enemy would not attend them.
The Reasons for the longer Way prevailed, but all the rest was performed with
haste; for their Scouts brought back Intelligence, that the Germans solemnized
a Feast that Night with public Rejoicing. Cecina was commanded to advance with
the Cohorts without their Baggage, and to free a Passage through the Forest, by
cutting down and removing all Encumbrances. The Legions followed at some
distance; the Night was clear and calm, and favorable to the March. They
entered the Village of the Marsi, which they encompassed with Corps-de-Guard.
They found the Germans, either asleep in Bed, or laid along by their Tables
sides, without Sentinels, or the least suspicion of an Enemy; so great was
their Confidence, or their Neglect. They thought themselves secure of War, yet
it was not properly a state of Peace, but rather a stupid Debauch, and a
Lethargick Rest.

XLIV. To make the Waste yet greater, Germanicus divided his Forces into four
Battalions, who breathed nothing but Revenge The Romans had conceived a most
deep Resentment against the Marsi, because they had contributed, more than all
the rest, to the Defeat of Var^s, who with his Legions was also buried amongst
them, in the Forest of Teu^berg.
, setting the Country on Fire for fifty Miles about, and putting all the
Inhabitants to the Sword, neither sparing Age or Sex, or Sacred Places or
Profane. The famous Temple called Tanfane This was the most magnificent Temple
of all Germany, dedicated to the Origin of Things, which could be no other
than the Supreme Being.
, was razed to the Foundations; and all this performed by ours, without
receiving any Wound, having met no opposition; no Enemies, but Men half asleep,
disarmed, or wandering about the Fields. This Massacre awakened the Bructeri
People between the Ems and the Rhine, Neighbors of Friseland.
, the Tubantes People of Westphalia,, on the River Ems.
, and the Us^petes People, who inhabited along the Lip. The Tubantes, and the
Marsi, are now the Country of Cl^ves and Guel^reland.
, who encamped themselves in certain Forests, through which the Army, in their
return, was of necessity to pass. The Auxiliary Cohorts, and one half of the
Horse, composed the Van* The First Legion marched after them, enclosing the
Baggage in the midst; the Twenty first Legion marched on the Left Wing; the
Fifth on the Right; and the Twentieth in the Rear, with the rest of the Allies.
The Enemy moved not, till they saw the main Body entered into the Wood; then
they began a light Skirmish on the Front and Wings, pouring with their Gross
upon the Rear. The Cohorts, who were all Light-Horsemen, already bent before
the closs Body of the Germans, not being able to sustain the Charge, when
Germanicus spurring his Horse at speed, came up with the Twentieth Legion, and
cried aloud, That now was the Time for ^^em to wash away the Stain of their
late Sedition; bid them haste to redeem their Honor, and turn their Offense
into Merit, their Infamy to Glory. At these Words, their Courage was kindled to
that height, that at the first Charge they broke the Enemy, drove them headlong
back into the Plain, and there made a terrible ^^^cution. At the same time, the
Vanguard got clear of the Forest, and hasted to Retrench. After this, the Way
was free, and the Soldiers went into their Winter Quarter^, highly pleased with
their Expedition, and ^^tting all that was past into Oblivion.

XLV. When Tiberius had Intelligence of this, it filled him with excess of Joy;
but the Pleasure was not so sincere, as not to be mixed with great Disturbance.
He rejoiced that the Sedition was wholly quenched, but it stung him that
Germanicus had the Glory of it Such is the nature of Envy, (...) of Actions
which deserve (...) and Reward, it contrives the (...) of the Authors; so that
great Captains, and great Men, always run the (...) of being blamed and (...)
dangerous Ambition on occasion of good Ones. Don Carlos Coloma, whose
Reflection this is, says* That the Duke of Guise having gained the Battle of
Aunea^ in Beausse against the Reitres and the Suisse, who were sent as Succors
to the Hugue^ots, Henry the Third pretended to be glad of this good Success,
but by what followed, it was evident that it was not what he desired. L. 1. of
his History of the Wars of Flanders. The Cardinal Maz^^in rejoiced, that
Monsieur the Prince had opened the Way for his return to Paris, upon which
depended his Establishment ^n France; but his Joy was allayed with jealousy of
the great Actions of this Prince, to whom he offered the Command of the Army in
Fla^ders, to remove so dangerous a Rival from Court. Memoirs of M. de la Rochef.
; and more, that he had entirely gained the Affections of the Soldiers by his
Bounty The Largesses which are given to the Soldiers, by a General who is hated
by the Prince, and who has Pretensions to the Crown, pass for so many
Corruptions, and, by consequence, for so many Crimes; and, particularly, when
the General has a great Military Reputation. The Enemies of the Duke of Guise,
(says Coloma, ibid.) said, That the manner after which he had made the War,
and the Money which he dispersed into all Hands, (which was not the Custom of
the French) sufficiently showed whence his Money came, and what were the
Designs of him who sent it him; that he could never take a better Pretext, than
that of Religion, to mount the Throne by the assistance of the King of Spain;
that Hugh Capel ascended it, although his Right was less than that of the House
of Guise, only because the Command of the Army was left to him; that Henry the
Third nourished Vipers in his Bosom; that if he any longer deferred the Remedy
of the Evils which threatened him, he would see his Fault, when it was too late.
It is worth observing by the way, that Coloma himself believed, that the Duke
of Guise had sold himself to the King of Spain, when he says, That the
Commander John Mor^o, who managed the Money which Philip the Second dist^ibuted
in France, so entirely gained this Duke, that he became wholly Spanish. L. 3.
of the same History.
; and above all, by giving them their Discharge so soon. Yet he was not wanting
to relate to the Senate his Exploits, and to give large Commendations to his
Valor; but in Terms too much affected and labored, to be thought sincere It
was his Desire, that they should believe that he exceeded in the Praises of
Germanicus, thereby to lessen all the great Things which he had said of him.
Pess^mum inimicorum genus laudantes.
. He spoke more sparingly of Drusus, and of the Success of his Voyage into
Illyria; but it was with more Frankness, and more Love; and besides, he ordered
the same Conditions to be made for the Legions in Pannonia, which Germanicus
had granted to his own.

XLVI. In the same Year died Iulia, the Daughter of Augustus Iulia (says
Paterculus) utterly forgetting that she was Augustus's Daughter, and Tiberius's
Wife, gave herself up to all manner of Debaucheries which a Woman was capable
of, how shameful and infamous soever. She measured the Greatness of her Fortune
by Licentiousness and Impunity. Her Adulterers were Julius Antonius, the Son of
Mark Anthony, and Husband of Marcella, Aug^stus's Niece; Quintius Crispinus,
Appius Claudius, Sempro^ius Gracchus, and Scipio, besides some others of less
Quality. Hist. 2. c. 100. She had four Children by Agrippa her second Husband,
three Sons, and one Daughter, who inherited her Name and her Manners. Sueton
says, That when she was the Wife of Marc^llus, she had a great Passion for
Tiberius; as it is the way of Co^ue^s, and lewd Women, always to love another
better than their own Husband. Seneca says, That Augustus perceiving too late
the Error he had committed in publishing the Infamy of his Daughter by
banishing her, said with Grief, That all this would not have (...) him, i^
Agrippa or (...) had been alive.
, whom, for her Incontinence, he had formerly confined to the Isle of
Pandataria Now Pianosa, in the Bay of Po^zzoli.
, and afterward to Rhegium, near the Coast of Sicily. During the Life of
Caius, and Lucius Agrippa, her Sons, she had been given in second Marriage to
Tiberius, whom she despised, as a Man below her Quality Unequal Marriages are
almost always unfortunate, especially those of Gentlemen with Princesses of the
Royal Blood. For commonly these Princesses will make up this Inequality at the
Expense of the Honor, or the Estate, of their Husbands: And it is of them,
that it is truly said, That Majesty and Love never dwell together. Add hereto,
that the infinite Respect which they exact upon the account of their Rank, is
insupportable to Husbands, who have reason to be highly displeased at
Irregularities, which they dare not take notice of. We ought therefore to
observe the Precept of the Wise Man of Greece, who advises not to marry a Wife
of too great Riches, or too high a Birth, for fear of having a Master in stead
of a Companion; or, as an old Poet said wittily, for fear of meeting with a
Husband in stead of a Wife.
; and this was the principal Occasion of the Retirement of Tiberius to Rhodes.
But when he succeeded to the Empire, not content to behold her banished,
dishonored, and, by the Death of Agrippa Posthumus, deprived not only of all
Hopes, but of all Support, he caused her to die in Want and Misery; imagining,
that the distance of the Place to which she was banished would hide the manner
of her Death. Sempronius Gracchus was likewise slain on her Account. Gracchus,
who was of a ready Wit and Eloquent, with Cunning and Insinuation had debauched
Iulia, during her Marriage with Agrippa; and his Gallantry with that Lady ended
not with her first Husband's Death, for he continued her perpetual Adulterer
even after her Marriage with Tiberius. He was continually provoking her against
her Husband, and encouraged her to Disobedience. It was also thought, that he
was the Author of those Letters, which she writ to her Father against Tiberius,
and which occasioned his Disgrace. For these Reasons, he was confined to an
African Island, called Cercina, where he remained in Exile 14 Years. He was
found by the Soldiers, who were sent to kill him, on a Prominence at a little
distance from the Shore; and presaging no Good from their Arrival. He desired
some little Time to write his Last Will to his Wife Alliaria, after which, he
freely offered them his Head. A Constancy, not unworthy of the Sempronian Name,
though he had degenerated from it by the Voluptuousness of his Life Men are
never thoroughly known till their Deaths* All the Stains of a Voluptuous and
Irregular Life, are effaced by a Generous Death. The Count de Chalais did
himself as great Honor by his Death, at which he called upon God to the
Twentieth Stroke, of the Thirty six that he received from the Executioner's
Hand, (an extraordinary Thing) as the Disorders of his Life, and his Conspiracy
against the King, had dishonored him. Letters of the 19th of August, 1626.
Tome I. of the Memoirs of Cardinal Richelieu. Don Rodrigo Calderon, the
Favorite of Philip the Third, King of Spain, by the Heroic Constancy of his
Death, turned the Hatred under which he lay, into Esteem and Compassion.
Savadra, Empr. 33. Un bell morir (says Petrarch) tutta la vita honora.
. Some have written, that those Soldiers were not sent from Rome, but from
Lucius Asprenas, Proconsul of Africa, on whom Tiberius thought, in vain, to
have cast the Odium of that Murder How desirous soever Princes are to throw
upon others the Hatred of the violent Resolutions, which are executed against
Great Men, they are always believed to be the Authors thereof, when they let
those Persons go unpunished, who have put them in execution. After that Peter
the Cruel had secretly put to Death John Nugnez de Prado, Grand Master of
Calatrava, this King (says Mariana) expressed Grief for it, to avoid the
Hatred and the Insamy which would be upon him by the unjust Death of a Lord,
whose greatest Crime was his Friendship with a disgraced Favorite* But when he
made no inquiry* and consequently inflicted no Punishment for so horrid a Fact,
the whole Kingdom believed, that what all P^^ple before suspected of the King,
was a Truth, which admitted of no Doubt. History of Spain, lib. 16. cap. 18.
.

XLVII. This Year was also made Remarkable by the Institution of new
Ceremonies; for there was established at this time a College of Priests in
Honor of Augustus, in imitation of the Titian Priests, formerly instituted by
Titus Tatius These Priests or Knights were instituted, in Romulus's Reign,
after the Union of the Sabines with the Romans, who received the Sabines as
Fellow-Citizens and Companions, whom the Day before they had Enemies; as
Tacitus says, Eodem die hosts, dein cives habuerit. Ann. 11. This Tatius was
King of the Sabines, and was admitted a Partner in the Sovereignty of Rome by
Romulus, who gave him the Capitol and the Quirinal-Hill for his Habitation. But
his Death, which happened a little time after, reunited the Regal Power in the
Person of Romulus, who thereby remained King of the Romans and of the Sabines.
, to preserve the Religion of the Sabines. Twenty one of the Principal Men
among the Romans were drawn by Lot, of which Number were Tiberius, Drusus,
Claudius, and Germanicus The Orders of Knighthood are not esteemed* otherwise
than they are confined to a small Number of Knights. This small Number ought
also to consist of Persons illustrious for their Birth, or for their Merit; for
otherwise the Great Men look on themselves to be disgraced in being associated
with them, and, consequently, the Prince deprives himself of an easy way of
rewarding them. Tacitus says, That the Generals of the Army perceiving that
the Senate of Rome granted the Triumphal Ornaments for the least Exploits in
War, believed, that it would be more Honorable for them to preserve the Peace,
than to renew the War, which would equal to themselves all those, to whom the
Prince's Favor should procure a Triumph to be decreed. Ann. 13. In Portugal,
it was pleasant to behold the Tailor and the Shoemaker of King Alphonso the
Sixth to wear the Habit of Christ, although in truth they were as worthy of it,
as most of those, to whom the Count of Castelmelhor sold it.
. Then it was that the Augustinian Games began to be disturbed by the
Contention of the Stage Players, and different Factions arose concerning the
Preference of this or that Actor Cabrera well observes, that the Spectacles and
the public Games were the Cause, that the People of Rome, who were before
contented to obey the Magistrates and the Laws, thought fit to desire to have a
Share in the Government. For taking upon themselves licentiously to Applaud
what gave them the greatest Pleasure, as if they had been capable of Judging
prudently, they began to perceive, that the Players set a great Value on their
Approbation, and that their Favor gave them Reputation. So that after they
knew the Power which they had in the public Feasts, they came to slight the
Nobles and the Magistrates, and afterward to create Tribunes, Aediles, and
Quaestors. At last they introduced the Plebeians into the Consulship and the
Dictatorship, and made them thereby equal to the Patricians. L. 10. c. 22. of
his History. So that we have no Reason to wonder, if Tiberius, who was so well
skilled in the Arts of Government, had an Aversion to Spectacles, and all
popular Concourses.
. Augustus himself had been much addicted to these Divertisements, out of his
Complaisance to Maecenas, who was desperately in love with the Pantomine
Bathyllus: Besides, that he was himself no Enemy to those Entertainments, and
knew it was becoming of a Gracious Prince, to enter into the As there are
certain Days in the Year, which the Fathers of Families spend in Rejoycings
with their Children, it is very reasonable, that there should be also some, on
which the Prince should live as in a Family with his People. Tacitus says,
That Nero, who was otherwise a very bad Prince, made Feasts in the public
Places, and showed himself through the whole City, as if all the City had been
his Horse. Ann. 15. Wise Princes, says Cabrera, assist at the public Plays,
to gain the Affection of their Subjects, and these Plays, or Spectacles, are
assigned to certain Days, to mitigate the ordinary Discontents of the People by
Diversions, which deceive their Trouble. Cap. 1. lib. 9. of his History.
Commines says, That Princes, who divide their Time according to their Age,
sometimes in serious Matters and in Council, at other times in Feasts and
Pleasures, are to be commended, and the Subjects are happy who have such a
Prince. His Memoirs, l. 6. c. 4.
Pleasures of his People Strada says, That Octavius Farnese, Duke of Parma,
and Son-in-Law to Charles the Fi^th, was a great Observer of this Maxim, and
thereby was as much beloved by the People, as any Prince of his Time.
Laxamentis popularibus ipse se privato non absimilem immiscebat, effecitque, ut
inter principes ea tempestate populorum studiis ac benevolentia claros merito
haberetur. Lib. 9. dec. 1. Burnet says, That Elizabeth, Queen of England, was
a perfect Mistress of the Art of insinuating herself into the Hearts of the
People; and although she was suspected of being too much a Comedian, she
succeeded notwithstanding in her Designs, and made herself more beloved by her.
People, by little Complaisances and Affectations to show herself, and to regard
the People as she passed the Streets, than many Princes have done by scattering
Favors with both Hands. History of the Reformati^n, p. 2. l. 3.
. Tiberius was of a Temper wholly different, but he durst not yet subject a
Multitude A Prince, upon his coming to the Throne, ought to make no alteration
in Things, which he finds to have been of long Establishment, the People
parting with old Customs with great diffi^ulty. If the Memory of his
Predecessor is dear to the People, he ought to conform himself to his manner of
Government, at least until his Authority be well established. He must lead the
People through long Turnings, and do it so, that they may go where he would
have them, without perceiving whither they are going. Lewis the Eleventh had
like to have lost all, by desiring to undo all that his Father had done. When
he came to the Grown, (says Commines) he disappointed the best and most
eminent Knights, who had faithfully served his Father in the recovery and
settling of the Kingdom. But he oftentimes repented afterward that he had
treated them so, by acknowledging his Error, for thence sprang the War called
The Public Good, which was like to have taken from him his Crown. C. 3. of l.
1. and c. 11. of l. 6. of his Memoirs. When he died, he therefore advised his
Son not to do as he had done. Elizabeth Queen of England, at her coming to the
Crown, acted directly contrary to Lewis the Eleventh, for she employed most of
the Ministers of her Sister Queen Mary, by whom she had been ill Treated; and
although in her Heart she was already entirely a Protestant, she was
notwithstanding Crowned by a Bishop of the Church of Rome, and ordered Karn,
who was Mary's Ambassador at Rome, to make her Compliments to the Pope.
Burnet's History, Part 2. l. 3. Mariana says, That Emanuel, King of Portugal,
made some difficulty to recall the Duke of Braganza's Brother and Children, who
were in Exile, that he might not in the beginning of his Reign show, that he
had a Design to change what John the Second, his Predecessor, had done; and
that he might not make them his Enemies, to whom John had given their
confiscated Estates. Chapter 13. of his History.
to more rigid Customs, which had so long been accustomed to a soft, voluptuous
way of Living.

The Year of Rome 768.
XLVIII. Under the Consulship of Drusus and Norbanus, a Triumph for Germanicus
was decreed, though the War was yet in being. And though he had made great
Preparations for the Summer following, yet he anticipated the Time, by a sudden
Irruption in the beginning of the Spring into the Country of the Catti: For
there were Grounds of Hope, that Factions would arise among them, some taking
part with Arminius, others with Segestes; both of them very considerable to the
Romans. one by his breach of Faith, the other by his Constancy. Arminius had
disturbed the Peace of Germanicus, and kindled the War against the Romans:
Segestes had openly declared in the last solemn Festivals, and many times
before they rose in Arms, that a Conspiracy was hatching to Revolt; at the same
time advising Varus The good Opinion which most Great Men have of their
Ability, or of their Strength, makes them often neglect to search the bottom of
the Cabals and Conspiracies which are formed against them. I never (says
Commines) knew a Prince, who was able to know the difference betwixt Men, until
he came into Necessity, and into Trouble. They who act in Fear, provide well
against Contingencies, and oftener succeed, than those who proceed with Pride.
For which Reason, it is no Shame to be Suspicious, but it is a great Shame to be
deceived, and to be ruined by Negligence. C. 12. of l. 1. the 4 th of the 2 d.
and the 5th of the 3 d. About the middle of the last Age, there happened a
Revolution at Sienna, which serves for a Lesson to Governors. A Spark of this
general Conspiracy against the Emperor, says John Ant. de Vera, flew from the
Kingdom of Naples to Sien^a, where Don Diego de Mendosa then commanded; but
this Spark entered so subtly, that although Don Diego had Notice given him of
it, he yet found somewhat in the outward Carriage of the People wherewith to
flatter his Incredulity, which in the end cost him very dear; for the People of
Sienna coming to cry out Liberty, drove the Spaniards and the Florentines out
of their City, and received a French Garrison in their stead. Epitome of the
Life of Charles the Fifth. And this was the cause that Don Diego, who had been
so great a Man in his Youth, was not employed in his old Age, so that his riper
Years paid for the Faults of his younger. Thus Le Dom Baltazar de Suninga
speaks of him in the Extract of his Life, which he has prefixed to his History
of the Wars of Grenada, in which he has very much imitated the Style of
Tacitus.
to secure Arminius and himself, and all the Leading Men of the Germans; the
People not being in any capacity of Rebelling, when they were unfurnished of
Commanders. And this once done, Varus would have sufficient Leisure, to
distinguish afterward betwixt the Guilty and the Innocent This is what all
Governors ought to do, upon Notice given them of Conspiracies which are a
forming against the Prince and the State; immediately to secure (says a
Politician) the Persons suspected, and the Places which they command, that they
may afterward at leisure inform themselves what there is in it, and finding
them guilty, punish them according to the Exigence of the Case. For, in such
Occurrences, Incredulity is perilous; all Delays are dangerous; the least
Jealousy is reputed a Crime; and the slightest suspicious; make room for
Justice to take place, which cannot be too rigorous; Rigor in such a case
passing for Clemency, and Favor for Rigor. Thus Princes and Ministers of
State, in Treasonable Practices, ought in the first place to take the Buckler
of Resolution, and afterward to unsheath the Sword of Justice, either against
the Heads only of the Conspiracy, for Example, or against all that are engaged
in it, for the Offense. In the Memoirs of Montresor. The Cardinal de Richelieu*
strongly maintains this Maxim: In the course of ordinary Affairs, (says he)
Justice requires an authentic Proof, but it is not the same, in those which
concern the State. For in such a case, that which appears by pressing
Conjectures, ought sometimes to be held to be sufficiently proved; because
Conspiracies, which are formed against the public Safety, are commonly managed
with so much Cunning and Secrecy, that there is never any evident Proof
thereof, but by their Event, which admits of no Remedy. In these cases, we must
sometimes begin with the Execution, whereas in all others, legal Evidence by
Witnesses, or undeniable Papers, is preferable to all other Ways. Pol. Test. p.
2. c. 5.
But Varus perished by his Destiny The Power of the Destinies, says
Paterculus, is not to be surmounted, when they will destroy any one, they
pervert his Counsels, and take away his Judgment. Chapter 57. and 118. Commines
says, When God is so highly offended, that he will no longer endure a Person,
but will show his Power and his Divine Justice; then he first diminishes the
Understanding [of Princes], so that they shun the Counsel of the Wise, etc.
Cap. ult. of l. 5. of his Memoirs. Ierom Moron, Chancellor of Millain, was
esteemed the greatest Politician that was in Italy, and yet he fell into the
Nets of the Marquis of Pesquera, whom all his Friends advised him to beware of,
as of a Man, who would infallibly sacrifice him to Charles the Fifth. A Thing
which appeared so much the stranger to me, says Guichardin, because I
remember, that Moron often told me in the time of Leo the Tenth, That there was
not a worse, nor a more perfidious Man in Italy, than the Marquis of Pesquera.
His History, l. 6.
, and by the Valor of It is no small Question amongst Politicians and
Soldiers, Whether it is better for a General of an Army to have great Courage
with a moderate Understanding, or a great Understanding with moderate Courage.
The Cardinal de Richelieu gives the Preference to great Courage, and afterward
adds: This Proposition will appear, it may be, surprising, it being contrary to
what many have thought of this matter; but the Reason of it is evident. Men of
great Courage are not put into a Consternation by danger: and consequently all
the Understanding and Judgment, which God has given them, is serviceable to
them on such Occasions: On the contrary, Men of little Courage being easily put
into a Consternation, find themselves so disordered at the least Danger, that
how great an Understanding soever they have, it is utterly unserviceable to
them, because their Fear deprives them of the Use of it. As a General of an
Army should not have Courage that is void of Judgment; so neither ought he to
have too much Phlegm, or too much Speculation; because it is to be feared, that
the foresight of many Inconveniences which may happen, but which do not, may
hinder him from attempting Things which would succeed in the Hands of others,
who are less Speculative* and more Daring. Politcical Test. par. 2. sect. 4. c.
9.
Arminius This young Man, says Paterculus, was of a robust Constitution, had a
quick Apprehension, and a delicate and penetrating Wit, beyond what is to be
imagined of a Barbarian. Considering, that nothing is more easy than to
destroy those who fear nothing, and that overmuch Confidence is the most
ordinary cause of great Misfortunes, he communicates his Design at first to
very few People, but afterward to many more: And this Resolution was so
immediately followed with the Execution of it, that Varus having neglected the
first Advice of Segestes, had not time to receive a second from him: chapter 118.
Charles, Duke of Burgundy, committed the same Error that Varus did, and
perished like him, by refusing to give Audience to a Country Gentleman named
Cifron, who came to discover to him the Treason of the Count de Campobasso; and
by not crediting the Intelligence which Lewis the Eleventh sent him by the Lord
de Contay, his Ambassador in France, that this Count was selling his Life.
Whereby you see, says Commines, that God infatuated him on this occasion,
Memoirs, l. 4. ^* ult. and l. 3. c. 6, and ^.
. For Segestes, though he was drawn into the War by the general Consent of his
Countrymen, yet he lived in perpetual Discord with Arminius; and the bad
Understanding betwixt them was increased by a particular Offense; for Arminius
had taken away by force his Daughter Thusnelda, betrothed already to another.
Thus the Father-in-Law, and Son, were equally hateful to each other; and those
mutual Ties, which commonly beget Friendship, were now the Provocations to the
most bitter Enmity As Princes seldom marry but by Interest, not for Love,
Alliance is so far from being a Band of Friendship betwixt them, that it opens
a Gap to new Pretensions, which grow into Quarrels, and afterward into Wars.
The last Duke of Burgundy hated Edward King of England, and the whole House of
York, against which he assisted the House of Lancaster, whence came his
Grandmother by the Mother's side; and yet at last he married Margaret, Sister
to Edward, only to strengthen himself against King Lewis the Eleventh. But as
this Alliance was not made but by State-Interest, and that both of them might
gain their Ends, the Duke notwithstanding hated Edward, on whom he made biting
Jests; and Edward offered Lewis to join with him, and to bear part of the
Charges, if he would continue the War against the Duke. Commines, l. 1. c. 5.
l. 3. c. 4. l. 4. c. 8* and 11. of his Memoirs.
.

XLIX. Germanicus, on this Account, commanded out Cecina with Four Legions,
Five thousand Auxiliary Soldiers, and some Companies of Germans raised in haste
from some Places on this side the Rhine: He himself conducted a like Number of
Legions, but double the Number of Allies; and having built a Fortress on the
old Foundations, which his Father had laid, and which were yet standing, he
marched with great speed against the Catti, leaving behind him Lucius Apronius,
with Order to take care, that if the Rivers should overflow by any sudden fall
of Rains, yet the Ways might be kept in repair, and continue passable. For in
setting forward, he found the Waters so very low, and the Ways so dry, (a Thing
uncommon in that Climate,) that he found no difficulty in his March; but he
feared in his return it might be otherwise. He came so suddenly upon the Catti,
that the old Men, the Women, and the Children, were either killed at first, or
taken Prisoners, and the young Men forced to swim the River of Adrana Now the
Eder.
; who attempting afterward to obstruct the Romans in the building of a Bridge
over it, were repulsed by their Arrows, and their Engines. These Hopes failing,
and their Propositions for Peace being also rejected, some of them came over,
and submitted to Germanicus; the rest forsaking their Cantons, retired into the
Fastnesses of their Woods. Germanicus having burned Martium Now Marpurg, the
Capital City of Hesse.
, their Capital Town, ravaged all the Low-lands, and took his March backwards
to the Rhine; the Enemy not daring to attack his Rear, as their Custom is when
they ^eign to fly, rather through Stratagem, than Fear. The Cherusci The People
of Brunswick, and of Thuring*
were desirous to have succored their Friends the Catti, but they were
apprehensive of Cecina, who ca^ry'd far and near the Terror of his Arms. On
the contrary, the Marsi, having presumed to charge him, were vigorously
repulsed, and entirely routed.

L. Some time afterward, there came Deputies from Segestes, to desire his
Assistance against his Countrymen who had besieged him, for Arminius had there
the stronger Party, because he had advised the War As there is nothing subject
to greater Jealousy, nor more difficult to preserve amongst power^ul
Neighbors than Liberty, they who advise War, appear to have a greater
Affection for their Country, than those who advise Peace, and consequently have
more Credit amongst their Fellow-Citizens. It was by this Method that Maurice*
Prince of Orange, who looked on the Treaty of 1609. as the Ruin of his
Authority in Holland, where he aimed at the Sovereignty, found means to destroy
John Barnevelt, who had been the principal Promoter of this Treaty, by
persuading the People by Pamphlets, that this great Man was corrupted by the
Spanish Gold, and held Intelligence with this King, for the reduction of the
United Provinces to his Obedience.
; it being the common Practice of Barbarians, only to love and esteem those
Persons who are Fierce and Daring, and more especially in unquiet Times.
Segestes had added to the Deputies his Son Segimond, though the Mind of the
young Man was wholly averse to that Employment When a Subject is conscious that
he is guilty of T^eason, he ought not to trust to the Prince's Clemency, if he
has not good Security of it. If my Mother was my Judge, said Alcibiades, I
would not trust her; with much greater Reason, they who have the Prince for
Judge and Party, ought to take good Security before they surrender themselves
into his Hands. The Cardinal Alphonso Petrucci was no sooner come to Rome but
Leo the Tenth caused him to be arrested, and afterward strangled in Prison,
although he came thither under the Security of the Pope's safe Conduct, whereof
the Spa^ish Ambassador was Guarantee. The Landgrave of Hesse was cheated by the
Confidence he reposed in Charles the Fifth, with whom he had two Electors, and
several other Princes of the Empire, for Intercessors.
; for the Year, in which all Germany revolted, being created Priest of the
Altar of the Ubians, he tore in pieces his Sacred Fillets These were peculiar
Ornaments of the Priests.
, and went over to the Party of the Rebels. Nevertheless, confiding in the
Clemency of the Romans, he undertook the Commission enjoined him by his Father,
and was well received Sometimes Princes, who value themselves upon Gratitude,
pardon the Children in consideration of Services done by the Fathers, or by the
Ancestors. Charles the Fifth pardoned Don Pedro Laso, (who brought him the
Message from the Rebels of Tol^do,) because he was the Son of a Gentleman,
whose Memory was dear to him. Philip II. perceiving, whilst he was consulting
about an Affair with Mat. Vasquez, his Secretary of State, that a certain
Gentleman of his Chamber observed them both with some Curiosity: Go tell that
Man, said he, That if I do not take off his Head, he is beholden for it to his
Uncle Sebastian de Santoio, who gave him to me. Cabrera's History, l. 12. c. 3.
; and sent afterward under Guard to the Confines of the Gauls. Germanicus lost
not his Labor by this Return, for after some Encounters, he disengaged
Segestes from the Hands of his Enemies, with many of his Relations and his
Vassals. There were also some Ladies of Quality, and, among the rest, the
Daughter of Segestes, who showed by her Countenance, that he shad more of her
Husband's Courage, than of her Father's Temper It was much more glorious for
Thusnelda to espouse the Interest of Arminius, who was the Deliverer of
Germany, than that of Segestes, who was a Traitor to it. Traitors have this
Misfortune, That they are oftentimes hated and contemned by their own Children.
. She walked with her Hands folded on her Bosom, and seemed to look downward on
the Fruit of her Body, with which she was now big, without shedding one Tear,
or saying one single Word, or doing one Action which had any thing of a
Suppliant. There were also carried, the Spoils which the Enemies had taken at
the Defeat of Varus, and which had been shared by many of those who were now
Prisoners. At last appeared Segestes, of a Stature higher than any of the rest,
with an assured Countenance, as having been always in the Roman Interest: And
accordingly he bespoke them in these Terms.

LI. This Day, O Romans, is not the first, wherein I have begun to give you the
Proofs of an inviolable Faith. Since the time that the Divine Augustus made me
Citizen of Rome, I have had neither Friends nor Enemies, but yours He obliquely
repro^ched the Infidelity of Arminius, his Rival, who having been formerly in
the Service of the Romans, had obtained, as well as himself, the Privileges of
a Citizen, and the Quality of a Roman Knight. Assiduus militiae nostrae prioris
comes, and civitatis Romanae jus, eque^^remque consecutus gradum* s^gnitia
ducis inoccasionem sceleris usus est. Paterc. Hist. 2. c. 118.
; neither have I steered this Course out of any Hatred to my Country, (for
Traitors are odious, even to them whose Cause they have espoused Philip of
Macedon being asked, whom he hated or loved most: I love those very much, says
he, who will be Traitors to serve me, but I as much hate those who have been
so. The Count de Campobache, says Commines, made an Offer to the King, ( Lewis
XI.) by a Physician, called Mr. Simon of Pavia, that if he would perform some
Things which he demanded, viz. the Payment of 400 Lances, 20000 Crowns in ready
Money, and a good County, he engaged to deliver the Duke of Burgundy into his
Hands, or to kill him. The King had this Man's Wickedness in great Abhorrence,
and acquainted the Duke of Burgundy with the whole Matter. Memoirs, l. 4. c.
ult. and l. 5. c. 6. Upon the Count de Campobach's Arrival to the Duke of
Lorrain, to whom he had sacrificed his Master the Duke of Burgundy, the Germans
gave him to understand, that he should retire, and that they would have no
Traitors amongst them. L. 5. c. 8. I ought not to pass over in Silence the
Praises which are due to Elizabeth of England, for the handsome Answer which she
made to to that Graves^on, who gave her an Account of a ^reacherous Act done to
the Spaniards at Berg-op-zoom. After ^aving gived him a Thousand Crowns for his
Pains, and his Voyage; Return home, said she, and if I should ever (...) in
need of a Man, who knows how to be a Traitor in perfection, I wi^^ make use of
you. Colomma, l. 1. of his History of the Wars of Flanders.
,) but only because I preferred Peace to War Traitors never want Pretexts to
color over their Treason, nor specious Reasons to defend it. All their
Remonstrances are full of those, which Tacitus puts in the Mouth of S^gestes.
There is scarc^ any Cause so bad, which a good Advocate cannot color over.
, and was convinced, that Peace was the common Interest of both Nations. On
this Account it was, that I accused Arminius to Varus, who then commanded the
Roman Army; Arminius, I say, the Ravisher of my Daughter, and Infringer of the
Alliance made with you It is common with great Men to revenge their private
Quarrel under the Name of the public Quarrel. Seg^stes accused Arminius to
Varus, as a Man who hated the Romans, and who rendered their Alliance suspected
to the Germans: The Accusation was true, and the Defeat of Varus's Legions
confirmed it; but the Motive of this Accusation, the Merit of which he so
extols to Germanicus, was not so much an Effect of his Love and his Concern for
the Romans, as an Effect of the Hatred which he bore to the Ravisher of his
Daughter, and of the Jealousy which he had to see Arminius more Powerful and
more Esteemed than himself in his Country. Thus we may apply to Segestes what
Paterculus ^aith of the Consul Opimius, That he sacrificed the Son of the
Consul Fulvius Flaccus (who besides his tender Age was innocent) to the Hatred
that he had born to his Father, rather than to the public Vengeance. Visa
ultio privato odio magis, quam publicae vindictae data. Hist. l. 2. c. 7.
. Tired with the Delays and Irresolution of your General Irresolution is the
greatest Fault that can be in a General, or in any other Man who has the
Management of public Affairs. What Advantage can be taken of Opportunities,
where Execution is more necessary than Deliberation, by a Minister, who knows
not what to resolve on, who fears every thing, and who is equally fruitful in
Doubts, and barren in Expedients? Princes have but one good Remedy against
Conspiracies, which is to prevent the Conspirators; and all Princes, who have
not done it, have been overtaken by them. In a word, Whether in War, or in
Peace, Irresolution is the Ruin of Affairs, and oftentimes even worse than a
bad Resolution; because there is sometimes a Remedy for this, whereas the other
renders the least Evils incurable, or lets slip all Occasions.
, and beside, despairing of Protection from the Laws, I desired of Varus to
make me Prisoner, together with Arminius and his Accomplices. I call that Night
to witness of this Truth, which I wish to Heaven had been my last. What since
has happened, may be Deplored better than Excused. For what remains, I have
formerly detained Arminius in Fetters, and he and his Faction in their Turn
have given me the same Treatment. Even since, I have had the Opportunity of
making my Addresses to you, O Caesar, I have constantly retained my old
Inclinations, and I preferred Repose to Trouble: And this not in prospect of
any Recompense which I pretend, but to clear my Innocence from Suspicion of
Perjury; and to put my self the better in condition to make Terms with Rome for
my Compatriots, when ever they consult their Safety by Repentance. I implore
your Clemency in my Son's behalf, desiring that his Youth may excuse his Error.
I confess, my Daughter is brought hi^her against ^er Consent; I leave it to
your Judgment, whether you will consider her as the Wife of Arminius, or as the
Daughter of Segestes.

LII. To this, Germanicus graciously answered, That his Children and Relations
had no cause of Fear; that for himself, he had provided an honorable Retreat
in an ancient Roman Province, where he might live secure from Danger. This
Affair being thus ended, he brought back his Army, and received the Title of
Imperator by the Command of Tiberius. The Wife of Arminius was delivered of a
Son, who had his Breeding at Ravenna. What contumelious Usage he received when
he was grown to Age It is fatal to great Men to be unfortunate Fathers, and to
behold Fortune a Stepmother to their Children. If Arminius espoused the
Interest of his Father and Mother, as it is to be presumed, he could not expect
better Treatment from the Romans than what they gave him, it being the Maxim of
all Princes, to revenge upon the Children the Injuries which they have received
from the Parents. It may be also observed here, that great Men are often
punished by the same Evil^ which they have inflicted on others, Arminius had
taken away from Segestes, his Daughter, who was promis^d to another; and
Germanicus, by a just ret^rn, took away from him h^^ (...), and his Son,
whereby Seg^s^^^^^ doubly revenged. Comm^^^^^ makes many Re^^^^^ions of (...),
kind, whereof this is the most Instructive. Although, said he, the Duke of
(...) had just cause to hare the Constable S. Pol, and to procure his Death,
yet all the Reasons that can be alleged in this Matter, cannot justify what
he did, in selling him to the King out of Covetousness, in order to have him
put to Death, after he had given him a good and authentic^ Safe Conduct. And as
this was at the first S^ege of Nancy, that he committed this Crime in
dispatching the Order to deliver the Co^^table to the King's Men* God
permitted, that at the second Siege of this City, he was betrayed by him in
whom he put the greatest con^idence, and justly paid for his Per^^diousness to
the Constable. His (...). l. 5. c. 6.
, shall be related in due place.

LIII. The News of the good Entertainment given to (...), was diversely
received; by some with Pleasure by ot^ers with Regret; as they either feared,
or wished the War. Arminius, besides the Violence of his Nature, being inflamed
with the Outrage done to him in the (...) of his Wife, whom his Enemies had
seized, and (...) ^is Child unborn, yet already destined for a Slave, took a
rapid Course through the Country of the Cherus^i, soliciting that People to
rise in Arms against Germanicus, and sparing no opprobrious Language against
Segestes. Behold, said he, a pious Father in Segestes! Behold a doughty
Warrior in Germanicus! A wonderful Exploit, for a whole Army to take a Woman
Prisoner! I, on the other side, have destroyed three Legions of theirs, and
three Lieutenant-Generals. The Wars I make are without Surprise, or Treachery;
I fight fairly, and in the open Field; not with Women big with Child, but with
Armed Soldiers. There are yet to be seen, in our Sacred Woods, the Roman
Eagles, and their Ensigns, which I have hung in Triumph on the Altars of our
Gods. Let Segestes please himself with his secure Abode in a conquered Country;
let let him restore to his Son the Priesthood of the Ubians; the Germans never
can forgive him, for having brought betwixt the Elb and the Rhine the Consulary
Fasces, and Axes of the Romans, with all other the Marks of their Dominion. The
rest of the Nations, who are free from their Subjection, know not yet the Names
of Punishment and Taxes. After having shaken off the Yoke, and made vain the
Attempts of that Augustus, to whom they have given the Title of a God; and of
that Tiberius, whom they have chosen in his stead, to inslave our Country;
shall we fear a Boy, a Novice in the War, and an Army made up of Mutineers? If
then you have more Affection for your Native Country, your Families, and your
ancient Laws, than for Tyrants and new Colonies, rather follow Arminius, the
Defender of your Freedom and your Honor, than the infamous Segestes, who would
betray you into Slavery.

LIVE. Not only the Cherusci, but all the Neighboring Nations, were set on fire
by this Oration. He also drew Inguiomer into his Party, who was his Uncle by
the Father's side, and of great Reputation among the Romans; which increased
the Trouble of Germanicus, who apprehended, lest with their United Forces they
should come pouring upon him. To make some Diversion Alphonso, King of Naples,
said, That there was no succeeding in War but by Diligence and Diversion.
Guiccardin's Hist. l. 1.
, he sent Cecina with Forty Roman Cohorts through the Country of the
Bructerians; Pedo led the Cavalry by the Confines of Frisia, and he himself
embarking with Four Legions, passed the Lakes; the Foot, the Horse, and his
Navy, arriving at the same time on the Banks of Amisia This River is now called
Ems, whence the City of Embd^n takes its Name.
, which was the Place appointed for the Rendevous. The Cauci, who had offered
their Assistance, were received as Companions of the War. The Bructerians, who
had set fire on all their open Towns, were defeated by Lucius Stertinius, whom
Germanicus had sent forth with some Troops of Light-Horsemen to encounter them.
Amidst the Dead, and amongst the Spoils, he found the Eagle of the Nineteenth
Legion, which was lost at the Overthrow of Varus (...) says, That in the
Defeat of Varus's Legions, there were lost two Eagles, one White, and the other
Black; that the White sell to the Auxiliar^ Sarmatians, and the other to the
Germans; whence came the Arms of the Empire, which bears an Eagle Sable, in a
Field Or; and of Poland which bears an Eagle A^gent, in a Field G^les. In his
Chronicle.
. Our Army thereupon advanced to the farmost Limits of the Bructerian Coun^ry,
wasting all Things in their way, betwixt the Rivers of Amisia and Lippa The
^ippe.
.

LV. The Army being now within a small march of the ^orest of T^u^burg, where
it was told Germanicus, that the Bones of the Legions, which were slain with
Varus, lay yet unbury'd The Field, in which Varus was slain with his Legions,
is called at this (...), i. e. in High Dutch, the Field of Victory. Bernardin
de Mendo^^^^ ^aith, That there remains also to this Day in the Bishopric of
Munster, a place called (...), that is to say, the Borough of Varus, which was
(...) by the People of the Country, to preserve the Memory of the Defeat of the
(...). His Memoirs of the Low Country Wars, l. 3. c. 3.
, he was seized with a violent Desire of rendering their last Dues to those sad
Relics. The whole Army approved their General's Design, whether moved with
Pity for their Friends and Relations, or by a Natural Re^lection on the Chance
of War, and the wretched Condition of Mankind. Cecina was sent before to
discover the Fastnesses of the Woods, prepare Bridges, and lay Ca^seways, where
the Footing was unsure, and the Ground treacherous, by reason of the Bogs
T^citus says, Fallacibus Campis. The same Mendoza says, That (...) are Lakes
and Marshes of 30 Leagues extent, and make the (...) almos^ a De^art* Ibid.
. Entering into these mournful Places, which were dreadful to their Sight, and
i^ksom to their Remembrance, the first Ob^ect presented to their view, was the
Camp of Varus, remarkable by its large Compass, and by the three Voids
Principia was a void Place, where the Eagles and the Colors were set. As each
Legion had its Eagle, it had also its Principium; so that by these three
Principia, it was known that there had been three Legions.
, which separated the three Legions. A little farther might be seen, the
Retrenchments half in Ruin, enclosed with a Ditch, now choked up, and almost
sill'd; in which it was believed, that the shattered Remnants of the Army had
been rallied for their last Re^uge. The middle of the Field was ^trew'd with
Carcasses, and white dry Bones, some scattered here and there, and others pil'd
on heaps; by which might be observed, whether they received their Death in
flight, or fell together in manly Resistance to the last. Every where were
found their broken Pikes, and Iavelins; the Limbs of Horses, and their
Iaw-bones; and the Heads of Men, which were fixed to the Trunks, or hung on the
Branches of the Trees. In the Woods about the Field were seen the Altars, where
those Barbarians had executed the Tribunes and Captains of the first Orders
That is to say, three Cohorts. For they rise from Cohort to Cohort, according
to their Merit, or the time of their Service.
. They who had escaped from this Battle, or afterward from their Captivity,
related many Particulars of that dreadful Day. On this Place, said they, were
slain the Commanders of the Legions; and there it was we lost our Eagles. Here
Varus received his first Wound, and a little farther he fell upon his Sword,
and perished by his own unhappy Hand. Behold the Eminence from whence Arminius
harangu'd his Soldiers; and yonder he raised Gibbets for the Prisoners, or sunk
Ditches These Ditches served for Burying-places for Malefactors, whom they
covered with the Earth soked with their Blood.
, to behead and bury them according to the Roman Fashion. While the Proud
Conqueror forgot not to drag along the Ground, with Scorn, our Ensigns and our
Eagles.

LVI. In this manner, the Roman Army, six Years after the Defeat, interred the
Bones of the three Legions, it being impossible for any Man to distinguish
those of his Relations from the rest: Every one performing his Duty to all in
general, as to so many Friends and Brothers, with Hearts equally divided
betwixt Sorrow, and desire of Vengeance. Germanicus partaking in their Grief,
laid the first Turf on the common Sepulcher Don Diego de Mendoza has finely
imitated this whole Funeral Description, in his History of the Wars of Grenada,
l. 4. c. 9. in his relating the Circumstances of the Defeat and the Death of
Don Alphonso d'Aquilar* Brother to him whom in Spain they call the Great
Captain. Which I have taken notice of here for the sake of those, who love to
read Works written on the Model of T^^itus, whom Don Diego had much studi^d.
: But this pious Office to the Slain was nothing pleasing to Tiberius; whether
he took in the worst sense all the Actions of Germanicus When a great Man
begins to displease the Prince, a sinister Interpretation is put upon all his
Actions. The Memoirs of Queen Margaret are full of Examples of this, and
particularly the Second Book, in which are to be seen, all the Ombrages that
Henry the Third took at the least Actions of the Duke of Alenson, his Brother.
; or that he thought, so sad a Spectacle as that was, of unbury'd Bodies, would
slacken the Courage of his Soldiers Whereas Germanicus ought to have rouzed the
Courage of his Soldiers, he ran the hazard of wholly sinking it, by letting
them see that, which he should have carefully hid from them. The frightful
Dream of Cecina, of which Tacitus speaks in one of the following Chapters,
plainly shows the Effect, which this Spectacle was capable of producing in the
Soldiers Imaginations* For, Somnia fallaci ludunt temeraria nocte,
Et pavidas mentes falsa timere jubent.
Tibul. Epigr. l. 3.

So that although Tiberius was angry to see the Care which Germanicus took to
gain the Affections of the Soldiers, he had yet most just cause to blame a
General, who let his Army see, just as they were going to fight, the Remains of
the Butchery of the Roman Legions.


, and make their Enemies appear more formidable. Besides, that the General of
any Army vested with the Augural Priesthood, and designed for the Ministry of
Religious Rites, ought not to have put his Hand to Ceremonies belonging to the
Dead.

LVII. In the mean time, Germanicus pursued Arminius, who retired into Places
unfrequented, and inaccessible; when at length he had joined the Enemy, he
commanded his Cavalry to advance, and dislodge him from the Post he had
possessed. Arminius, with his Forces drawn up in close Order, marched along the
Forest, and suddenly wheeling, faced the Romans, giving the Signal to those
Soldiers, whom he had laid in Ambush in the Wood. The Roman Horse, amazed at
the sight of these new Enemies, was put into disorder; and the Cohorts coming
up to their Assistance, being encumbered with a Crowd of those who fled from
the Germans, and pressed upon their Ranks, were forced to open as they could,
and make a Passage for them: In this Confusion, and general Affright, the
Enemy, who knew the Country, were driving our Men headlong on the Morass, from
whence it was impossible to disingage themselves, if Germanicus had not with
timely foresight drawn up the Legions in Battalia: This gave Terror to the
Germans, and restored the Courage of our Soldiers, so that both Sides retired
without Advantage. Soon after this, Germanicus marched back his Army to Amisia,
where he embarked the Legions, to return in the same manner as they came. One
part of the Cavalry were ordered to draw toward the Rhine, still coasting the
Ocean in their March. Cecina, who led back his Cohorts, was advised, That
though he was well acquainted with the Way which he had taken, yet he should
make all imaginable Haste to get over the long Bridges It is a Causeway, made
upon Piles with a great deal of Sand, above a League long. The Hollanders have
made a Fort, by which they pass as they go into Friseland.
. That way is narrow, enclosed on either hand with Marshes, over which these
Bridges, or rather Causeways, were formerly laid by Lucius Domitius. The rest
is all either miry Ground, or glewy Clay, cumbersom to the Feet, or uncertain,
with scattering Rivulets; round about are rising Woods, which, with a gentle
Descent, reach even to the Plain. In this place, Arminius had lodged a great
Number of his Soldiers, having by long Marches, and by shorter Ways, got before
our Men, who were laden with their Arms and Baggage. Cecina, not knowing how
to repair the Causway, now decayed, and at the same time to repulse the Enemy,
took a Resolution to incamp in the same place; that while one part of his Army
was employed in repairing the ruined Passage, the other might be in a readiness
to fight.

LVIII. The Barbarians made a strong Effort to push our Corps-de-Garde, and
afterward to have poured upon the Workmen; they charged our Men, sometimes on
one side, and sometimes on the other, harassing them with continual Attempts,
and endeavoring to break in upon them. The Cries of those who were employed in
working, were confusedly mixed with theirs who sought: All Things conspired
against the Romans, the depth of the Morass, the slipperiness of the Ground, on
which they could neither march, nor scarcely set a Foot, without danger of
falling; the weight of their Armor; and the height of the Waters, which
diminished their force in lanching their Iavelins. On the other side, the
Cherusci were accustomed to engage in marshy Ground, where the height of their
Stature gave them a manifest Advantage, as also their long Pikes, with which
they pushed to a great distance. The Night alone was the apparent Safety of our
Legions, which began already to give Ground before the Enemy. But the Germans,
by their good Fortune made indefatigable Coriolanus said, That Victory took
away Weariness.
, without allowing themselves the least Repose, cut a Passage through the
Mountains, round about, for the Waters to descend on the Roman Camp, thereby to
float the Works they had already made, and increase the Difficulties of their
new Labors. Cecina, who for the space of Forty Years had exercised the Trade
of War, either as a private Soldier, or a Leader, had made Trial both of
prosperous and adverse Fortune To be a great Man, it is nenessary to have had
the Trial of both Fortunes. He, that has never had any but Good, knows but one
side of Nature, and cannot be expert, because he has had no occasion to
exercise his Industry. He, that has always lived in Adversity, and in
Troubles, runs a great Hazard of being corrupted by Prosperity, which,
according to Tacitus, has sharper Goads than Misery. Secundae res acrioribus
stimulis animum explorant, quia miseriae tolerantur, feli^itate cor^umpimur.
H^st. 1. Which made one of the Ancients say, That he had rather Fortune should
a^^ault him with Adversity, than cherish him with her Delicacies. It is
necessary there^or^, that a Man employed in, or d^^igned for the Admini^tration
of public Affairs, should taste of good and bad Fortune, that he may (...)
well a^quainted with its Strength. Anthony Perez, who had had (...) Share of
Adversity, said very judicially, That Nature has two Carvers, which labor in
polishing the Matter of Man, viz. Good, and bad Fortune; that one of them is
employed in polishing the coursest Part, whilst the others cuts and chi^^ls
that which is most excellent, to make a most accomplished Work thereof. In my
Opinion, says Commines, speaking of Lewis XI. the Hardships which he met with
in his Youth, when he fled from his Father, were of great Advantage to him; for
he was forced to please those whom he stood in need of; and this Good, which
was not inconsiderable, he learned from Adversity. And in another place, I dare
give him this Commendation, That I never knew a Man so wise in Adversity, nor
who was more dextrous in winding himself out of Difficulties. Memoirs, l. 1. c.
10. l. 3. c. 12. Lastly, it has been often observed, that of all Princes and
Captains, those have proved the Bravest, and the most Able, who have had the
least Share of good Fortune. And Don Iuan Antonio de Vera says very
judiciou^^y, That when Caesar seeing himself taken with a furious Tempest, said
to his Pilot: Fear not, thou carriest Caesar, and his Fortune; He did not mean
his good Fortune, but rather his invinc^^le Courage; because, in such a Danger,
it is certain, that he relied less on his Fortune, though that had never
abandoned him, than on his undaunted Spirit, and on his Experience, which he
had acquired amidst the Labors, and the Haza^ds of War, which had never put
him into any Consternation. His Enbax. Dial. 2. The Cardinal a'Ostat speaking
of Henry IV, I have observed, says he, in the course of his Life* that of the
many cross and troublesome Events, which he has had in Peace and in War, God
has drawn out Good and Prosperity for him. Lett^r 339.
, and by Experience was become intrepid, considering all which might possibly
arrive, could find no other Expedient, than to shut up the Enemy in their
Woods, till he had passed over his Baggage, and his wounded Men. For betwixt
the Hilly Ground, and the Morass, there was a narrow Plain, only capable of
receiving a small Army. He therefore gave the Right Wing to the Fifth Legion;
the Left to the Twenty first; the Van to the First Legion; and the Rear to the
Twentieth.

LIX. The Night passed without Repose on either side; for the Barbarians, who
were in debauch, made the Valleys and the Woods re^ound, sometimes with the
Noise of their Drunken Songs, and otherwhile with Shouts and Outcries, raised
on purpose to terri^ie the Romans. On the contrary, there was a deep sad
Silence among our Troops, unless sometimes interrupted by casual Words; our
Fires were languishing; some of our Soldiers leaning on the Palisade; others
walking round the Tents, rather like People wanting Sleep, than quite awake.
The General himself had a dreadful dream: It seemed to him that he beheld
Qui^tilius Varus arising from the bottom of those Marshes, and covered over
with his Blood; who holding forth his Hand to him As we ought not to regard
Dreams too much, so neither ought we wholly to slight them, especially when
they nearly relate to the present State of Affairs, for the Contempt of them is
the cause that we neglect to apply Remedies to those Evils, whereof they are
the Forerunners. There is a prudent Mean betwixt Superstition and Incredulity,
which commonly proceeds from Self Love, which always flatters us, rather than
from a true Solidity of Spirit. The Queen Margaret makes a Reflection which is
of great weight. Some (says she) hold, That God does in an especial manner
protect the Great, and that to Minds, in which there shines some uncommon
Excellency, he gives by good Genius's some secret W^rnings of Accidents that
are like to happen to them, either of Good or Evil, as to the Queen, my Mother,
who the Night before the unfortunate Race dreamed, That she saw the late King,
my Father, wounded in the Eye, as it happened; and after she awaked, desired
him several times not to run that Day... Being dangerously sick at Metz, and
having about her Bed the King Charles my Brother, my Sister, and my Brother of
Lorraine, and many Ladies and Princesses, she cried out as if she had seen the
Battle of Iarna^; See how they (...) away, my Son has the Victory! behold in
this Lane the Prince of Conde dead! All that were there, believed that she
raved: But the Night after, Monsieur de Losses bringing her the News of it, I
knew it well enough, said she, did I not see it yesterday? Then they perceived,
that it was not the raving of a Fever, but a particular Notice, which God
gives to illustrious and extraordinary Persons. And for my self, I own, that I
was never near any signal Accident, either Unfortunate or Prosperous, of which
I had not some Advertisement, either by Dream or otherwise; and may well say
this Vers^, Of my Good, or my Evil,
My Mind is my Oracle.
L. 1. of her Memoirs.
, implored his Assistance Two or three Months before the Death of Henry the
Fourth, the Queen, his Wife, being in Bed with him, saw in a Dream a Man who
stabbed him to Death with a Knife. The News of his Death flew to Lisle in
Flanders, to Antwerp, to Bois-le-Duc, and to Mastri^h, ten Days before it
happened. For it often comes to pass, that the News precedes the Accident. On
the Eve of his Death, as he a^^isted at the Coronation of the Queen, a Maid,
named Jane Arnaud, seeing him, said to her Sisters, Behold a dead Man, who
resembles the King, who are buried here! The Day that he was stain, several
Billets were thrown into his Chamber, which all gave him warning of his Fate.
But he neglected all this as Caesar did, and perished like him* Homer says,
That as the Dreams of common People are to be slighted, because of the Weakness
of their Brain; on the contrary, there ought to be a great Regard had to those
of Persons who have the Management of State Affairs, because they arise from
their Experience, and the continual Reflection, which they make upon the great
Events of Civil Life. L. 2. of the Iliads. Cabrera says, That Joan of Austria,
Mother of Sebastian King of Portugal, being with Child of him, thought that one
Night she saw enter into her Chamber a great many Moors, clad in Habits of
diverse Colors. The first Presage of what was to besal this Prince at the
Battle of Al^asar in A^rick. His Philip II. l. 11. c. 10.
; but that he, far from answering his Request, had pushed him backward. At
break of Day, the Legions placed on the Wings, forsook their Post, whether
through Fear, or Disobedience, is uncertain, and precipitately ranged
themselves in Battle beyond the Morats. Arminius did not immediately charge
them, though nothing hindered; but when he saw their Baggage fastened in the
Mire, and sticking in the Ditches, the Soldiers out of their Ranks, and only
sollicitous how to save themselves, (as commonly it happens on such Occasions,
when the Commanders are ill obeyed;) he encouraged the Germans to the Charge,
calling to them with rep^ated Cries: Behold Varus and his Legions, who are
offering themselves to be once more vanquish^d. Having said this, he forced
through our Battalions with the flower of his Troops, and charged impetuously
on our Horse; who sliding on their own Blood, and floundring in the Mud of the
Morats, cast their Riders to the Ground; and then running furiously through the
Ranks, crushed those to Death who were already fallen, and threw down others
whom they met. That which gave us the greatest Trouble, was the defense of our
Eagles, which could not be carried into the Combat, because of the multitude of
Darts, which were continually lanc'd against the Bearers; nor yet fastened in
the Ground, by reason of the Marshes. While Cecina with great Courage sustained
this unequal Fight, his Horse was killed under him, and himself upon the point
of being taken, if the First Legion had not hastened to his Succor. On the
other side, the Enemy was so greedy of the Spoil, that they intermitted the
Slaughter, to seize the Prey. This Covetousness of theirs, was the safety of
the Legions; for it gave them the opportunity of making their Retreat The
greediness of Soldiers, who are commonly more intent upon Enriching themselves,
than upon Fighting, is the cause that there is scare ever a complete Victory.
This is an Evil that seems to be without Remedy, seeing, that after so many
Ages, the Prudence and Severity of Princes and Generals have not been able to
put a stop to it.
, at the close of Day, into a Plain, where the Footing was ^irm, and the Ground
solid. But the end of their Miseries was not yet come. They were of necessity
to make new Palisades, and new Retrenchments, though they had lost the greatest
part of their Instruments, which were to be employed in casting up the Earth,
and cutting of the Turfs. They wanted Tents to receive the weary Soldiers, and
Salves to dress the Wounded. Their Food, which they divided into Portions, was
soaked in Mire and Blood; and they deplored that fatal Night, which only hid
them till the approach of Day, which was to be the last to so many Thousands of
valiant Men Reflections of this kind do Soldiers no good, because they serve
only to abate their Courage; witness the false Alarm, spoken of in the
following Chapter.
.

LX. By chance a Horse, who was broken loose from his Standing, and terrified
with the Cries of his Pursue^s, bore down those whom he encountered in his way.
The whole Camp possessed with a panick Fear, took the Alarm; every one
believing, that the Germans When an Army has been beaten, it is very subject
to take false Alarms: And it is on these Occasions, says Xenophon, that a
General is much perplexed, for the more he encourages his Soldiers, the greater
they imagine is the Danger. Quanto magis j^beat illos bo no esse animo, tanto
existimabunt in majore se esse discrimine. Lib. 5. Cyropaed.
were breaking in upon them, they rush together to the Gates, and chiefly to
the Decumane The Camp, which was always of a square Figure, had four Gates, the
greatest of which was called the Decumane, and served for a Postern* through
which the Soldiers passed, who were carried to Punishment. It was opposite to
the Praetorian, so called from the Praetorium, or the General's Tent, which
always stood toward the Enemy. The other two Gate^, which were on the two
Sides, were called Principales.
, which was the farthest from the Enemy, and consequently the most secure.
Cecina found it was a false Alarm; but not being able to retain the Soldiers,
either by Authority, or Prayer When Foresight and Counsel have preceded the
Danger, Fear is easily overcome; but when Fear has prevented Foresight and
Counsel, Advice and Exhortations will hardly find place.
, though he took hold upon their Arms to stop them, he laid himself across the
Gate, and blocked up the Issue If it happens, says On^sander, that a vain
Terror, or even a re^sonable Fear, has seized the Spirits, it is then that a
General ought to show the Soldiers an assured Countenance, and u^shaken
Courage. Stratag. cap. 13. There is nothing that more perplexes the Prudence of
a General, than these kind of fals^ Alarms, in which the disordered Minds of an
ignorant Multitude are not easily recovered o^ their Surprise. I observe in the
Memoirs of Commines, that a Squib which fell on a Window, where Charles of
France, the Duke of Berry, and Charles Count of Charolois, were talking
together, was like to have confounded and disordered all the Princes and Lords
who were in League against Lewis the Eleventh, if Mr. John Boutefe^, who threw
it, had not come and declared that it was he, and had not thrown three or four
more in their Presence, to take away the Suspicion which they had of one
another. L. 1. c. 5.
, through the Horror which they had to pass over the Body of their General Don
Iuan Antonio de Vera relates an Action exactly like this done by Fredrique
Enriquez, Admiral of Castille, at the Battle sought betwixt the French and the
Spaniards near Pampelune. In the Epitome of the Life of Charles the Fifth.
: And at the same time, the Tribunes made it evident to them, that their Fear
was groundless.

LXI. After this* being assembled in the Place of Arms Tacitus calls this place
Prin^ipia.
, Cecina desired them to hear him with Silence and Attention, and to consider
well the present Iuncture of Affairs. He told them, there was no other Hope of
Safety remaining, but in their Courage, which also they were obliged to manage
with Prudence; that their Safety was to continue in their Camp, till the
Germans should approach near it, being allured with the hope of Victory; then
all at once to sally out upon them from every Side: This Onset, said he, will
open you a Passage to the Rhine; whereas if you should fly, you have to cross
many other Forests, and to pass over many Morasses, more deep than these; and,
after all, remain exposed to the Fury of your Enemies: When on the other side,
if you are Victorious in the Battle, you shall not only assure your Safety, but
obtain Immortal Honor. In sine, he set before their Eyes whatsoever they held
dearest in the World, their present Friends, their absent Relations, and the
Reputation they had gained in Arms; but passed over in silence the Miseries
they had already suffered, and those which they were yet to suffer. After this,
he distributed amongst the bravest Soldiers, without Partiality, the Horses of
the Tribunes and Lieutenants, and amongst the rest, his own; with Order to
those Horsemen to begin the Charge, and for the Infantry to sustain them.

LXII. Neither were the Germans less unquiet, betwixt their Hopes of Victory,
and their Desire of Booty; they were also divided in their Councils It is rare,
for two Generals to agree well together in one and the same Army, especially
when they are both Men of great Parts and Experience, as Arminius and his Uncle
were. The Protestants, who were in League against Charles the Fifth, lost the
Battle of Meissen, because John Frederick Elector of Saxony, and Philip the
Landgrave of Hesse, who commanded in conjunction the Army of this League, were
both too great Captains, and besides, of too different a Humor, to yield to
one another. This Battle was fought the 24th of April, ann. 1547. The Turks had
not failed of taking Malta, ann. 1565, if Piali, the General at Sea, would have
held good Correspondence with Mustafa, the General at Land.
: For Arminius was of Opinion, to leave the Passage open to the Romans, that
marching thence, they might oppress them afterward in other Marshes which lay
before them, and involve them yet in greater Difficulties. Inguiomer, on the
other side, advised to besiege them in their present Camp, which they should be
able to force suddenly, and with ease; that they should take more Prisoners,
and lose nothing of the Plunder: And this Advice, as the more daring, was most
to the humor of the Barbarians Amongst barbarous People, the most violent and
rashest Persons have always the greatest Credit, for Delays seem to them a sort
of Slavery. Barbaris, quanto qui^ audacia promptus, tanto magis fidus. Ann. 1.
Barbaris cunctatio servilis* statim exequi, regium vid^^ur. Ann. 6.
* At break of Day they issued out of their Forests, and being arrived at the
Roman Camp, they cast Faggots into the Ditch, and throw in Earth upon them to
facilitate their Passage to the Rampart; then attack the Palisade The Outworks
of the Camp had three Things, viz. a Ditch, ( Fossa;) a Rampart of Earth, (
Agger;) and a Palisade all round made of great Stakes, ( Vallum.)
, where there appeared but few Defendants, as if our Soldiers had been seized
with Fear. But when the Germans were just upon the Rampart, Cecina gave the
Signal, and sounded to the Charge: The Romans fally'd out with a dreadful
Clamor, and attacked the Germans; crying out, They had them now without their
Woods, and on stable Ground, unprotected by their Marshes; that the Gods would
do Justice to their Valor, by giving them an equal ^ield of Combat, for the
decision of their Quarrel. The Enemies, who expected an easy Conquest over a
handful of Men, and those too half disarmed, and quite disheartened, were
terrified with the sound of Trumpets, and the clattering of Arms, and slain
almost without Resistance It seldom happens, that an Army which is commanded by
two Generals comes off Victorious. The Roman Armies were almost always defeared
by Hannibal, when he had to do with two Consuls; whereas he was always beaten,
or, at least, hindered from being Victorious, when a Dictator was at the Head of
the Roman Army. As long as the Command of the Army was divided betwixt Monsieur
de T^renne, and the Ma^eschal de la Ferte-Senecterre, their Jealousy rendered
the fairest Enterprises abortive; but from the time that the former was got rid
of his Companion, who put every thing to hazard, Fortune always ^avoured him.
, wanting Moderation in their good Fortune, and Courage in their bad. Arminius
and Inguiomer retired out of the Battle, the first untouched, the last
desperately wounded. The Slaughter lasted all the Day, and, at the shutting of
Evening, the Legions returned into their Camp, many of them being hurt, and all
without Victuals, yet well contented, finding in their Victory, Health and
Vigor, and large Provision of whatsoever they desired.

LXIII. In the mean time, a Report was spread, that the Romans were defeated,
and that the Germans were descending upon Gaul: And they were on the point of
breaking down the Bridge upon the Rhine, if Agrippina had not opposed her
Courage, to the Cowardice of those who had advised so infamous an Action.
During the time of that Consternation, she discharged all Duties of a General
In the Siege of Tournay, ann. 1581, Mary of Lalain, Princess of Epinoy, being
not contented incessantly to exhort the Soldiers and the Burghers to a vigorous
defense against the Duke of Parma and the Spaniards, she so valiantly exposed
herself, that she had her Arm broken by the Shot of an Arquebuss, of which she
died the Year following. Thus this Lady made good the Character which Commines
gives of her Family. (...) Philip de Lalain, says he, was of a Race, of which
there have been few who have not been valiant, and have almost all died in
(...) their Princes in War. Memoirs, l. 1. c. 2. Ann. 1595, the Lady De
B^^^gny, Wi^e of the Lord of Cambray, performed the D^^y of a Captain, and o^ a
private Soldier, in the defense of this Town against the Spaniards. Night and
Day she went to visit the Sentin^^s, and to observe the Battery; ^he wrought on
the Fortifications; she di^charged the Cannon; with her Pike in her Hand, she
exposed hersel^ to all Dangers, and braved the Spaniaras, and would not hear of
a Capitulation. Which might have succeeded, if her Husband had not been so
odious to the City, over which he tyrannized without Pity. Herrera calls this
Lady, another (...), another V^rulana. Hist. part 3. l. 11. c. 16. and Don
C^r^os Coloma, l. ^. of (...) Wars of F^anders.
; she relieved the poor Soldiers, she supplied the Sick with Remedies It is not
one of the least Praises of a General, to take care of the ^ealth and Lives of
his Soldiers. As there is nothing so Valuable as Life, so there is no Benefit,
whereof Men have a more grateful Sense, than of it; especially Soldiers, who
are exposed to more Dangers, than all the rest of Mankind. The Spanish
Commentator on Commines says, That the Soldiers set upon the Tomb of a certain
Captain, who died at Milain, the Words of the Creed: Qui propter nos, and
propter, nos^ram salutem, descendit (...) inf^ros. The Spaniards, adds he, gave
not this Praise to the Prince of Parma in Flanders; for whilst his Army was in
want of every thing, he must not want Mules to ^etch Spaw-Waters for his Baths.
Chapter 9. l. 6.
, and provided Clothes for those who were perishing with Cold. Caius ^li^ius,
who has written the History of these Wars, says, That she stood on the entry of
the Bridge to prai^e and thank the Legions, as they passed along. All which
Proceedings made a deep Impression of Discontent and Melancholy on the Soul of
Tiberius. He strongly suspected, that this Over-Diligence and Care could not
possibly be innocent In the Opinion of Livy, Civility and Liberality are never
free in a great Fortune. The Prince cannot look upon a great Man, who studies to
gain the People's Affections, but as a Rival, who would steal from him the
Hearts of his Subjects, that he may afterward deprive him of their Obedience.
Henry the Third, says a Politic Spaniard, one Day asked his Confidents this
Question: What does the Duke of Guise do, thus to charm the People's Hearts?
Sir, (said a cunning Courtier,) he gives with both Hands, and when it is not in
his Power to grant what they desire, he supplies it with Words: Let them invite
him to a Wedding, he goes; to a Funeral, he assists at it; to be Godfather to a
Child, he accepts it. He is affable, caressing, and liberal; he carries it fair
to all People, and speaks ill of none; in short, he reigns in their Hearts, as
your Majesty does in your Territories. Gracian's Heroes, chapter 12. Of all that
Don P^dro Giron, Duke of Ossen, did to continue himself in he Viceroyship of
Naples, and to hinder the Cardinal Gaspar Borgia from taking Possession of it,
nothing rendered him more suspected, or rather more criminal, than what he did
after the arrival of the Cardinal to Prochira, an Isle near Naples. Having
assembled the common People, he threw among them abundance of Money, and when
he had no more left, he pulled off the Gold Buttons which he had on his
Clothes, and a Girdle of Diamonds; and after that, by an extravagant
Liberality, he also threw his Hat and his Cloak to them, imploring the
Assistance of this Multitude against a Priest, who, he said, was not fit to
govern a Kingdom, of which the Pope had a desire to possess himself. Conjuratio
Ossuniana 1612, and 1620.
at the bottom; that it was not against Foreigners, that Agrippina thus
fortified herself with the Favor of the Soldiers; that the Generals might now
securely take their Ease, when a Woman could perform their Office, take Reviews
of the Legions, march amidst the Roman Ensigns and their Eagles, and make
Donatives to the Soldiers. How could it be without Design, that her little Son
was carried round the Camp in the plain habit of a private Soldier; that she
caused him to be Sirnam'd Caligula: That she had already more Authority in the
Army than all the Generals Tiberius transgressed through Distrust and
Jealousy, but Agrippina through Imprudence; for she better remembered whence
she descended, and whose Wife she was, than whose Subject. The same Commentator
on Comminus says, That Distrust is wont to take away the Judgment of Women,
but that on the contrary it gives Judgment to Princes, and improves it; that it
is a Passion that absolutely masters Ladies; whereas it is a Quality that is
absolutely necessary to Kings. Witness Edward the Fourth, King of England, who,
according to Commines, was driven out of his Kingdom by the Earl of Warwick,
because he always lived withou Suspicion. Chap. 1. of the Commentary, let. E.
and chapter 5. of l. 1. of the Memoirs.
, since she had appeased a Mutiny, where the Name of the Emperor had been of
no Consideration Great Services draw Calamities on those who perform them,
especially when they are Men, whose Birth, Courage, or Merit, gives Jealousy
to the Prince. The younger Pliny says, That it is seldom seen, that a Prince
loves those, to whom he believes himself most obliged; and, according to the
Testimony of Commines, Lewis the Eleventh was of the same Opinion. The Reason
of this is, because Men do that more heartily which comes purely from
Free Will, than that which they are obliged to do by a Motive of Gratitude.
Anthony Perez says, That it fares with the great Obligations which a Prince
has to his Subject, as with those Fruit Trees, whose Boughs are broken by
being overladen; and that to have performed extrao^dinary Services to his King,
is a sort of Obligation, which ruins the Favorite.
. Sejanus, who was well acquainted with the suspicious Temper of Tiberius There
is nothing, which a Favorite, or a chief Minister, ought to take more Pains
about, than thoroughly to know his Prince's Humor; for without this it is
impossible, that his Favor should last long, or that he should not fall a
Victim to his Enemies. Cabrera says, That the Prince of Eboli was not so great
a Statesman as the Duke of Alva, his Rival; but withal, that he far better
understood his Master's Humor. And it is to this Knowledge, that he attributes
the good Fortune of this Prince, to keep the Favor of Philip the Second, to
the last moment of his Life. He preserved it, says he, because he kept him
company without being troublesome to him, and without importuning him when he
was inclined to Solitude. He always bore him a great Respect, and this Respect
always increased as his Favor, and the Obligations which he received. He
discharged the Duties of his Place, without Artifice, and without Constraint.
He digested and prepared with care what he had to Negotiate, and spoke his
Opinion with a natural Modesty, and hearkened with Attention to his Master's
Answer, without ever dilating in impertinent Discourses. He spoke
advantagiously of those whom the King loved, and, by a handsome and prudent
Dissimulation, he seemed to understand no more, than what the King was willing
to tell him. He kept every thing secret which the King said to him, and if
others spoke of it, he was the last that did it himself. When he went to Court,
he moderated his Train, and never clothed his Domestics in richer Liveries
than the King's; and when he reprimanded any one in the King's Name, he avoided
speaking with Heat, and keeping a wise Mean, he inveighed against the Fault,
and not against the Person. (...) History, l. 7. c. 7. and l. 10. c. 1. (...)
Perez says, That the Duke o^ Alv^ one Day speaking to him of this Favorite,
expressed his Opinion of him in these words: The Lord (...), of whose Party you
are so great a Favourer, is not one of the ablest Statesmen that we have had;
but as for the Art of understanding the Nature of Kings, I acknowledge he has
been so great a Master, that how great soever all (...) that are here are, we
meet with the (...) where we think to have the (...) a Letter to a great
Favou^^^. The Result of all which is, (...), or a Minister, who (...) only
beloved by his Prince, is bett^^ established, than he, who is highly esteemed
by him.
, was not wanting to foment these Discontents A prudent Minister, and who (...)
the Reputation of his Prince, (...) to avoid nothing more, than (...)
Disquiets, and his Iea^^^^^* This is so dangerous a (...) in Princes, and
carries them (...) troublesome Resolutions, and oftentimes so unjust, that
there (...) Care taken, to calm the Agitation of their Minds. Happy are the
Kings, who have Ministers of such a Temper, as was Don Antonio de Toledo, Grand
Prior of Leon, who having received an Order to bring a Cassette, in which were
the Letters and secret Papers of Don Carlos, tore all those, which might
prejudice this young Prince, and his Friends, before he put them into the Hands
of Philip the Second. Cabrera's History, l. 7. c. 22.
, but buried the Seeds of them deep under Ground When Princes dissemble their
Resentment, it is a sign that they are meditating a cruel Revenge. The
Constable of St. Pol, who had so much Wit, was so weak as to believe Lewis the
Eleventh reconciled to him after the Interview at Noion; for if the Hatred was
so great before, it was still greater on the King's side, who was ashamed that
he had spoken with his Servant, with a Bar betwixt them. Commines's Memoirs, l.
5. c. 11, and 12.
, and removed from sight, that they might shoot up in their appointed time, and
produce the Fruits which he desired.

LXIV. Germanicus, who was embarked already with his Leg^ons, entrusted Publius
Vitellius with the Command of the Second and the Fourteenth, that he might
bring them back by Land, thereby to lighten his Transport Vessels, lest they
should knock upon the Sands, or lie a Ground, the Water during the Ebbs, being
extremely sholy upon those Seas. At the beginning, Vitellius, who coasted the
Shores, found no Inconvenience in his March, because the Soil was dry, and the
Tide moderate. But after the Breeze began to blow, and the Sun was in the
Equinox According to Onosander, Generals of Armies ought to unde^stand
Astronomy. ^nerrantium per noctem supra terras siderum Imperatori peritiam
aliquam in^sse oportet. Strategiei, c. 39. And Polybius, as great a Politician
as an Historian, says, That a General of an Army cannot take just Measures
neither by Sea nor Land, if he does not well understand the Summer Solstice,
and the Equinoxes. Debet perspicue cognoscere solstitium aestivale and
aequinoctias, and intermedias dierum and noctium tam auctiones, quam
diminutiones; sic enim duntaxat secundum ratione^ commensurare potest, quae tam
mari, quam terra perficienda sunt. Lib. 9. Christopher Columbus saved his Army,
which was perishing by Famine, by the Prediction which he made of an Eclipse to
an Indian King, who refused to furnish him with Provisions. Pagliari
Observation 74.
, (at which time the Seas begin to swell, and grow tempestuous,) all the
Campaign was floated on the sudden, and the two Legions in apparent danger of
being lost. The Sea and Land bore the same Figure; the firm Earth was not to be
distinguished from the moving Sands, nor the fordable Passages from the Deep.
The Billows bore away the Soldiers, and devoured them; dead Bodies of Men, and
Horses, were seen floating confusedly with the Baggage on the Waves. The
Brigades were mixed with one another; some of the Soldiers were wading up to
the Waste in Water; others to their Shoulders; and always one or other their
Footing failing, were carried to the bottom. Their Cries, and mutual
Encouragements, availed them nothing against the Fury of the Waves, which
sucked them in, and swallowed them; no distinction was to be found betwixt the
Cowards and the Brave, the Prudent and the Fools, the Cautious and the Bold;
all were equally overpowered by the violence of the Seas and Winds. At length,
Vitellius having saved himself on a rising Ground, showed the way of Safety to
the remains of his wrecked Legions. They passed the following Night without
Fires, without Provisions, and without Tents, the greatest part of them all
bruised and naked, and more miserable than those who are surrounded by their
Enemies, because their Death was without Honor; whereas the others were in a
capacity of selling their Lives at a dear Rate, and dying not ingloriously.

The return of Day restored them to dry Land, and afforded them the means of
retiring to the Rhine The Latin has the Weser, but it ought there to have the
Rhine, where was the Winter Quarters of the Legions. For Vitellius carried the
two Legions into the Gauls, whereas to have gained the Weser, which was beyond
the Ems, had been to have carried them into Germany. There is more reason to
conclude, that the word Visurgim is slipped in for Vidrum, called now the Wecht,
which is one of the Mouths of the Rhine, than to attribute this Error to
Tacitus, who always places the Weser where it is at this Day.
, whither Germanicus had already brought his Forces. The two Legions reimbark'd
with him, while the Rumor yet continued, that they were lost; which was
obstinately believed, till all the World had seen the return of Germanicus with
his Army.

LXV. During this Interval, Stertinius was gone to receive Segimer, the Brother
of Segestes, and brought him, together with his Son, into the City of the
Ubians. A Pardon was granted to both of them; to the Father without any
difficulty, because he had surrendered himself of his own free motion; but more
hardly to his Son, because he was accused to have insulted the dead Body of
Varus. As for the rest, Spain, Gaul, and Italy, seemed to vye with each other,
in sending Horses, Arms, and Silver, to Germanicus, to repair the Losses which
his Army had sustained. But he, with high Praises of their Zeal, accepted only
of the Arms and Horses, which he wanted to carry on the War, being resolved to
supply the Soldiers with his own Money. And to efface wholly from their Memory,
the Thoughts of their late Suffering by his Kindness, he visited the Wounded,
desired to see their Hurts, commended every one in particular, according to the
Merits of his Service Caresses and Praises are in stead of all Rewards to brave
Men. Cardinal de Richelieu says, That Henry the Fourth being under an extreme
Necessity, paid his Servants with good Words, and made them do Things with his
Caresses, upon which his Weakness permitted him not to put them by other ways.
Pol. Test. part 1. c. 6.
; some he inflamed with desire of Honor, others with the hopes of Riches. In
short, whether by his Affability, or the Care which he took of them, he won
them all to be at his Devotion, and ready to follow him in any Danger.

LXVI. In the same Year, the Triumphal Ornaments were decreed to his
Lieutenants, Aulus Cecina, Lucius Apronius, and Caius Silius. Tiberius re^us'd
the Title of Father of his Country Sueton says, That he resolutely refused the
Title of Father of the Country, and the Senates swearing to his Acts, for fear
lest one Day they should think him unworthy of two so great Honors. Ne mox
majore dedecore impar tantis honoribus inveniretur.
, which the People were often desirous to have given him; nor even would
permit, that they should take their Oaths upon his There is no Prince so wise,
says Commines, who does not sometimes fail, and very often if he lives long;
and thus would it be found in their Actions, if Truth had been always spoken of
them. Lib. 5. cap. 13.
Acts It was an Oath which the Magistrates took, to hold for well done
whatsoever the Prince should do during his Reign. They renewed it every Year,
on the First of January. It was by this Oath, that the Romans opened the Gap to
Slavery; for to ratify and to hold for Authentic whatsoever the Prince should
please to ordain, was to put an Arbitrary Power into his Hands, and to banish
Liberty. Lewis the Eleventh seemed to exact a like Oath, when he said, That
none ought ever to withstand the Prince's Will, no not when he was out of his
Wits.
, many times repeating these words, That there was nothing stable in this Life;
and that the more he was exalted, the more in danger of a Fall This Doctrine
can never be too much inculcated on Princes, who, for the most part, presume
much on their Power. Would to God, that each Prince, in the course of his
Reign, might only meet with such a Minister, or a Confident, as he was, who
said to Philip the Second, Sir, Be moderate, acknowledge God on Earth, as well
as in Heaven, lest he grow weary of Monarchies, and provoked by the Abuse which
Kings make of their Power, in usurping his, he give another form of Government
to the World. Anthony Perez, in one of his Spanish Letters. It was very strange
Discourse in the Mouth of a Pope, ( Paul the Fourth,) who told the Cardinals,
That he would make his Memory immortal by the Dominions which he would give his
Family, according to the Grandeur of the Pontisicate, by virtue of which, he
had Emperors and Kings at his Feet. Cabrera's Hist. l. 2. c. 2.
, But this affected Modesty of his, gained him not a better Opinion with the
People; for he had lately revived the Law of High Treason for Offenses
committed against the Person or Dignity of the Prince; which it is granted had
the same Name in the Times of our Forefathers, but was not of the same Extent
Bad Princes turn all Offenses into new Articles of Treason, to render them
unpardonable, under a pretense of not going against Reason of State.
. If any one had betrayed his General in War, or raised Sedition, or
dishonored the Majesty of the Roman People in the public Exercises of his
Function, he was attainted for a Crime of State. Actions were punishable, but
Words were free. Augustus was the first, who comprehended Libels within the
Cognizance of the Law; being provoked by the Petulancy of Cassius Severus, who
had de^am'd, in his Writing, Men and Women of the highest Quality A wise Prince
ought not to suffer those Satirical Writers to go unpunished, who make a Trade
to bespatter the Reputation of great Men, of Magistrates, and of private
Persons. The Prince, who suffers them, draws upon himself the Hatred of those,
who find themselves injured by these Verses, Portraitures, and secret
Histories, wherewith they feed, or rather poison the Public: -- Iam saevus
aportam
In rabiem verti coepit jocus, and per honestas
Ire domos impune minax.
Hor. Ep. l. 2. ep. 1.

It was, perhaps, none of the least of the good Actions of Pope Sixtus the
Fifth, in punishing that Poet, whom he sent to the Galleys; for a Sonnet which
he made on an Advocate's Wife, wherein, whose Name he made, to rhyme with the
word Putana, notwithstanding she was of an unblemished Life. A Punishment, to
which this Pope condemned him for rhiming likewise with his Name, which was,
Matera. Leti's Life of this Pope, part 2. l. 3. If the Prince is the Protector
and the Preserver of the Lives and Estates of his Subjects, with much more
Reason ought he to defend their Honor, which is the most valuable Thing they
posses. Charles the Fifth did one day an Action, inwhich it is not easy to
say, whether he discovered more his good Nature, or his Merit. Desiring to give
one of those Divertisements, which they call in Spain, (...), i. e. tilting
with Canes or Reeds, he commanded the Grandees to divide themselves into
Troops. Each Lord took care to make up his own Troop of the most considerable
Gentlemen of his Acquaintance, but not one of them thought fit to take a
certain Cavalier, a Man of Merit and Importance, because he had some sort of
Blemish in his Birth. A Gentleman of the Emperor's Chamber speaking to the
Emperor of the Mortification which this Cavalier was under upon this account,
who was at that time also in the Antichamber; the Emperor, without seeming to
know any thing of it, appearing at his Chamber Door, said to the Lords who
attended at the Entrance; Sirs, Let none take Don N.... because he is to be of
my Troop. Epitome of his Life by the Commander of Vera. Cabrera says, That
Philip the Second turned his Back on those whom he heard speaking ill of
others, and particularly if it was of his Ministers. His History, l. 5. c. 17.
He answered a Canon's Letter in these Words: I am informed of what you say
concerning your Bishop, and you ought to take care to be more reserved in
speaking of such Persons. L. 11. c. 11.


. Tiberius afterward had answered the Praetor Pompeius Macer, who had
consulted, him concerning this very Law* That his Pleasure was, it should be
observed; being piqu'd himself likewise by certain Verses of concealed Authors,
which had reproached him for his Cruelty, his Pride, and his Ingratitude He
owed the Empire to her.
to his Mother Nothing offends a Prince more, than to attribute his Fortune, or
his Exaltation, to those, whom it is not his Interest to acknowledge as the
Authors of it. If the point of Honor is the most tender part of private
Persons, how sensible must Princes be of it? Ferdinand the Catholic, who owed
the whole Acquisition of the Kingdom of Naples to Gonzalo Hernandez, discovered
how uneasy he was under this Obligation, when he said; I do not see that I
have reason to rejoice for having acquired this Kingdom, seeing that there is
no return of Profit to me from it; and that he, who has conquered it in my
Name, seems not to have had a Design to have acquired it for me, but only for
himself and those, among whom he has distributed the Lands and Revenues.
Paulus Iovius, l. 5. of the Life of the Grand Captain. Maurice, Prince of
Orange, could not endure to be told, That he owed his rise to John of
Barneveld, who, by his Authority, made him leave the College, and put himself
at the Head of the Armies of Holland in his Father's stead.
.

LXVII. It Is not from the purpose, in this place, to relate the Accusations
which were carried on against Falanius and Rubrius, two Roman Knights, but both
of very moderate Estates, to show the Birth and Rise of that pernicious
Invention, and with what Cunning Tiberius fomented it: How the Growth of it was
stopped for a certain time, and how afterward it was renewed, and increased so
much in Strength, that it set the whole Empire in a Flame. He who informed
against Falanius, accused him to have admitted into the Society of those, who
were the Adorers of Augustus, and were divided into several Fraternities a
certain Buffoon An Instance, how Scandalous the Profession of Players is
accounted, as who have always been excluded from the Rites and Ceremonies of
Religion, not only among Christians, but among Heathens likewise. In the Year
1687, the Italian Actors being desirous to offer up public Prayers for the
King's Recovery, had, under the Character of Italian Gentleman, obtained Leave
to perform their Devotions in the Church of the Great Augustin's at Paris; but
the Archbishop discerning the Cheat, recalls his License, and would not permit
it. Impias preces, detestanda vota.
, called Cassius, who had prostituted his Body; and that he had sold, together
with his Gardens, a Statue of that Emperor, which was erected there. Rubrius,
in like manner, was accused for violating the Divinity of Augustus by Perjury.
Tiberius, having Information of these Procedures, writ to the Consuls thus
concerning them: That Heaven had not been decreed to his Father, with intention
that his Worship should serve for a Pretense, to the Ruin of Roman Citizens
Religion ought never to be made use of, either as a color, or instrument of
Cruelty.
; That Cassius had been accustomed to assist with those of his Profession at
the Plays, which Livia had consecrated to the Memory of Augustus; That to leave
his Images, with those of other Gods, in Houses and Gardens which were sold,
had not the least reference to Religion; That the Perjury of Rubrius ought not
to be held a more enormous Crime, than that of Forswearing himself by the Name
of Jupiter It Is for this Reason, that Crimes against Princes are punished with
a greater Severity, than Blasphemy, and many other Offenses against God,
because the Prince has no other way to make himself feared, than by present
Punishment. In Ireland, where Oaths and Perjury are too usual, they who swear
falsely by the Hand of the Governor, or Lord of the Place, are bound by the
Payment of an heavy Mulct to repair the Injury done to his Name, whereas they
who swear upon the Bible, upon the Altar, upon the Image of St. Patrick, their
Apostle, or of any other Saint, are passed by without any other Censure, than
that of being declard Forsworn.
.

LXVIII. Shortly after, Granius Marcellus, Praetor of Bithynia, was accused of
High Treason by Coepio Crispinus, his Treasurer, with the corroborating
Evidence of Romanus Hispo. This Hispo, who was of an unquiet Spirit, had taken
up a kind of Life, which the Iniquity of the Times, and the Wickedness of Men,
turned afterward into a common Practice For bad Examples, says Paterculus,
seldom or never stop at the first Author, who begins them; but when once a Gap
is opened to them, how small soever, they soon spread themselves far and near.
; for from a poor, unknown, and despicable Fellow In matters of Report and
Calumny, poor People, as living most in Obscurity, are more to be feared than
others. Inasmuch as such Men are neither by Birth nor Merit qualified for any
share in Business, nor yet honest enough to consider the public Good, they
stick not to set every place on fire, out of hopes to make their Fortunes in
the confusion. They are sure to forget nothing, that lies in their power, to
disturb, by flattering some, and libelling others, that order of Government,
which hinders their Advancement to Offices and Honors. Chapter 8. of the Second
Part of the Pol. Testament.
, as he was, he accommodated himself so well to the Cruelty of Tiberius, at
first by secret Memoirs which he gave him, and afterward by open Accusations,
which he brought against the greatest Men of Rome, that becoming as powerful
with the Prince, as hated by the People, he served for an Example to many
others; who, like him, rising from Poverty to Riches, and from Contempt to
formidable Greatness, split at length upon that Rock to which they had driven
others. He accused Marcellus to have spoken with too great License of Tiberius.
An inevitable Crime! because the Informer picking out all the infamous Actions
of the Prince, the Person accused was believed guilty of saying that, which was
notoriously true. He added, That a Statue of Marcellus had been placed higher
than any of the Caesar's; and that he had taken off the Head from and Image of
Augustus, and placed in the room of it the Effigies of Tiberius When the
Witness deposed all the Ill that was either said or believed of himself he
showed no Displeasure at it, lest he should be thought to confirm the Truth of
those Reports, if he had appeared concerned at them; but as soon as any mention
was made of an Injury done to Augustus, he immediately vents his Anger against
Marcellus, thus, under pretense of what had been done to the Statue of his
Father, revenging the A^^ront, which he took to be offered to himself. Pro
Augusto conquer^ns (...) dolorem proferebat. Further, a great many People use
the Images and Pictures of Princes to the same purpose, to which Signs or
Bushes are hung out at Taverns: and I remember, I my self have heard it said,
That Onosrio Camaiano, President of the Apostolical Chamber, treated with great
Respect the Portraiture of Pius the Fifth, his Friend and Benefactor, as long
as that Pope lived; but as soon as he was dead, he orders the Head to be
eraz'd, and that of his Successors to be put in its place. Obs. 162. I doubt
not many have ob^^erved oftener than I, what happened a ^ew years since upon the
Death of a great Minister, whose Portraitures gave place to those of his
Colleague in a great many Houses in Paris, but after this they were changed.
. At these Words, Tiberius, without breaking into Choler, cried aloud, That he
would deliver his Opinion in open Senate concerning this Affair, and that with
a solemn Obtestation For, in Matters of great Importance, the Judges were wont
to swear* That they judged according to their Conscience; using this Form, Ex
animi sententia; or else this, Si sciens fallam, ita me Diespiter bonis
ejiciat, ut ^g^ hunc lapidem; The Oath was made on the Altar o^ Iupit^r Lapis.
of Jupiter, to oblige the rest to the same Sentence A Prince, who desires to
be well advised, must take care not to give his own Opinion first, because none
will dare to contradict that. If he speaks first, it is a sign he expects
Approbation, and not Counsel; and therefore it is dangerous for him to declare
his own Judgment. Upon this account, Philip the Second seldom as^isted at his
Council of State, Because (says he to Antonio Perez) the Presence of the
Prince intimidates the Spirits, restrains the Passions, and makes the
Counselors speak by Form, like Preachers from the Pulpit; whereas being by
themselves, they Dispute, they Heat and Provoke one another, and show without
reserve their real Tempers and Interests. This serves much for the Information
of the Prince, who, on the contrary, if he be present, is in hazard to disclose
his Sentiments, and to argue with his Subjects as with Equals. A thing
incompatible with Majesty, which is supported by outward Respects, in the same
manner, as the Pontifical Ornaments procure to Prelates the Veneration of the
People. Perez, in his first Spanish Letter. A certain Italian Prince said, That
when a Prince knows not what to resolve upon, he must hearken to the Advice of
his Council, and speak his own Sense last; but that, on the contrary, if his
Resolutions be fully fixed, he should give his own Opinion first, that so none
may presume to oppose it.
. As there were yet some small Remainders of the ancient Liberty, tho now
expiring, Cneius Piso demanded of him, In what Place he would give his
Suffrage? For if you speak first, (added he) I have no more to do, than to
follow your Sentence; but if you deliver your Opinion last of all, my Vote by
misfortune may have been opposite to yours. Tiberius amazed at this unexpected
Boldness, and suddenly mollified, out of shame to have been surpised in that
Transport of his Passion, suffered the Accused to be acquitted from the Charge
of High Treason It happens but too often, that Princes suffer for over-talking
themselves. Commines, chap. 10. of the First Book, and chapter 10. of the Fourth
Book of his Memoirs. When a Sovereign falls into Passion, (says a Spanish
Cavalier,) he should call to mind that Emperor, whom his Confessor obliged to
promise, never to have any Command put in Execution so hastily, as not first to
allow himself time to say over all the Letters of the Greek Alphabet. Don
Carlos Coloma, in his Tenth Book of the Wars of Flanders. Another speaking of
Charles the Fifth, who, contrary to his Oath, granted a Pardon to the Duke of
Cleve^, says, That he never broke his Word, but when it had relation to
something of Cruelty. Don Iuan Ant. de Vera, in the Abridgment of his Life.
Moreover, Prince Ruy Gomez de Silva had reason to say, That Words uttered in
heat of Dispute, and unpremeditated, are more regarded by Princes, than all
Remonstrances whatever. Chinas y varillas arrojadas al descuy^ do ob ran mas
que lansas. Ant. Perez, in a Letter, entitled, To a Grand Privado.
, and remitted him to the common Magistrates to be tried, for his Management of
the public Treasure.

LXIX. Not satisfied to assist only at the Judiciary Proceedings of the Senate,
he frequented also the Inferior Court With what Gravity, says Paterculus, did
Tiberius assist at the Trials of Causes, not as a Prince, but as if he had been
a mee^ Senator or Judge. Chapter 129. of his Second Book.
, where he sat on one side of the Tribunal Those Princes very much deceive
themselves, says Pliny the younger, in his Panegyric, who think they cease to
be Princes, if at any time they condescend to do the Office of a Counselor or
Judge. There are some, says Pagliari, who blame Pope Clement the Eighth, for
going in Person to visit the Courts of ^udicature, the Parish-Churches,
Convents, and even the very Cells of the Monks, as if so much Diligence and
Concern were beneath the Dignity of the Supreme Bishop. As for my self, I
believ it was a matter of great trouble to this Pope, whose sole Study it was,
to perform the full Duty of his Station, that he could not inspect all the
Churche^ and Monasteries in Christendom; so thoroughly was he persuaded, that,
for the discharge of his Conscience, he ought not to leave to the Care of
others, the Administration of Things so material to the Salvation of Souls.
Observe. 474. (...) would all Bishops were effectually convinced of this
momentous Truth, which that ^aithful Monitor within is always ready to exhort
them to the Practice of.
, because he would not displace the Judge from the Seat of Justice; and
occasioned by his Presence, that many good Regulations were made concerning the
Partial Recommendations of the Great. But while he kept so strict a Hand on
Justice, he extinguished Liberty. About this time it was, that Pius Aurelius, a
Senator, petitioned the Senate to be considered for the Loss he had sustained
in the Ruin of his House, which was demolished for the Convenience of Public
Ways, and the Structure of Aqueducts. Tiberius, who was always pleased to
exercise his Liberality in those Things which might do him Honor, (a Virtue
which he retained a long time after he had divested himself of all the rest,)
ordered, That the Price of his House should be refunded to him: though the
Praetors, who were at that time Commissioners of the Treasury, were against the
Grant. Propertius Celer, who had formerly been Praetor, and who desired Leave
to lay down the Dignity of a Senator, because of his Poverty Wealth is a mighty
Ornament to Greatness, and Men in Wealth, who receive such Advantage from
outward Splendor, that of two Persons equal in Merit, it may without scruple
be affirmed, that the richer is the better, for a poor Magistrate must have a
Soul of a very resolute and virtuous Inclination, if he does not suffer himself
to act sometimes by Considerations of Interest. Besides, Experience assures us,
that the Rich are under less Temptation to Extortion, than others. Sect. 1. Chapter
4. of the First Part of the Polit. Testament of Card. Rich. The Counselor
Broussel, whose Integrity the Parliament and People of Paris did so highly
Extol, having been promised the Government of the Bastile for one of his Sons,
became from that time, of a furious Bigot for the Faction of Slingers, a great
Royalist, and wholly in the Service of Mazarine. Memoirs of L. R. However, the
Chancellor of the Hospital, a Person the most considerable for Estate and
Probity of any of his Age, affirmed, He preferred the Poverty of the President
de la Vacquerie, before the Riches of the Chancellor Raulin; (the one was first
President of Paris, and the other Chancellor to the Duke of Burgundy. It is he
who founded the Hospital of Beaune.)
, received a Thousand great Sesterces That is to say, 25000 Crowns.
, to support his Quality; Tiberius being given to understand, that his Father
had left him much in Debt. Some others endeavored to obtain the same Favor
from Tiberius, but he ordered them to address to the Senate Those who, to
obtain their Suits, address themselves directly to the Prince, desire rather a
present Denial, than to be referred to his Ministers, who commonly are little
respected for the Kindnesses they do, whether because in truth they are not the
proper Donors, or because the number of Petitioners being almost infinite, the
Discontented are a thousand times more than the others. Besides, the more Hands
the Petition passes through, the less Share has the Prince in the
acknowledgment of the Favor; whereas, indeed, it is all his Due. To give
immediate Dispatch, and without referenc^ to Officers, says a Spanish
Gentleman, i^ to Reign more, and Disoblige less. That is to say, when a Prince
can, without Inconvenience, give a decisive Answer. Don Fadriq^e Moles, in his
Audiencia de Principes. Hortalus laid open the State and Reasons of his Poverty
before a full Senate, and yet Tiberius made him a very rough and angry Reply.
See Articles the 37th and 38th, of the Second Book of Annals.
, affecting to be thought severe, and hard The Denials of a Prince, should be
tempered with Sweetness, and Courtesy of Behavior. It Is not the refusal, but
the manner, which occasions the Hatred and Ill Will* for nothing more affronts,
than Rudeness. Nihil est tam deforme, quam ad su^^mum imperium etiam
acerbitatem naturae adjungere. Cicero, Ep. 1. ad Quint. fratr.
, even in those very Things which were but Acts of Justice. Which was the
cause, that all the rest sat down content with silent Poverty, rather than
endure the Shame of owning it unprofitably According to Seneca, Favour^ that
must be extorted by the force of Cringes and In^^eaties, are as Bread made of
flinty Gravel. I had rather buy, than ask, says Cicero, speaking of those, who
are forced to ask and beseech over and over again. Pliny the younger commends
Trajan, for that he never put any to the trouble of attending, either for
Audience or Courte^ies in his Power to grant. Audiuntur statim, dimittuntur
statim. Another says, silence is the best Cloak of Poverty.
.

LXX. The same Year, the Tiber being swelled by the continual fall of Rains,
overflowed the nether Parts of the Town, and carried off both Houses and Men in
its Retreat. Asinius Gallus proposed in Senate to consult the Sibils These
Books were kept in a private Apartment of the Capitol, as an Instrument of
Policy, to awe the Populace and Soldiery during the Calamities of the City and
State. The People of Rome were always very inqui^itive, to know what was
contained in these and some other Books, which were in the custody of the
Priests; witness the Reward one Flavius received, the Son of a Freeman, who was
created Tribune, Senator, and Edile, for having given to the People a Register
of the Ceremonies, which he had purloin'd from the Censor Appius Claudius,
under whom he served as a ^lerk.
Books; which Tiberius withstood A Prince newly advanced to the Throne, ought
carefully to avoid the Introduction of Novelties among the People, especially
in Matters pertaining to Religion. If Tiberius had given leave to make public
the Sibylline Books, the People* having no ^ondness for one of his Humor,
would have been sure to expound reflectingly the ambiguous Oracles, as also the
vain and ^allacious Predictions, though, perhap^, they were never meant for a
Prophecy of his Government. The Books of Numa having been found in his Grave,
the Senate voted them to the Flames, being informed by the Praetor Rutilius,
who by their Order had inspected them, that they contained Points contrary to
the Religion then in Vogue with the People. The Areopagus condemned Socrates,
because he endeavored to make the People believe, there was but one God, when
yet at the same time many of the Senators were verily persuaded, that it was
true. Witness the Altar dedicated to the Unknown God, whom St. Paul affirmed to
be the God whom they worshipped. Acts 17.
; who was as careful to conceal the Mysteries of Religion, as those of State.
But the care of restraining those Inundations, was committed to Ateius Capito,
and Lucius Arruntius. On occasion of Complaints, which were made by Greece and
Macedonia, it was ordered, That they should be discharged, at present It is not
fitting, a Prince should bestow all that a People may desire, because there
will be no end of this; but when the Requests they sue for are reasonable, it
then becomes him in Civility and Prudence to yield something, lest otherwise
their Minds be exasperated. If a Country happen to be poor and barren, or has
been ruined by a long War, as it often befalls Frontier Towns and Provinces, it
is most equitable it should be Exempt, and Tax-free, not for ever, but for some
very short time; I say, very short, for when the Time shall expire, if the
Necessities of the Place still continue, the People will be obliged to crave a
further Forbearance, and by this means an opportunity will be afforded for a
second Favor, which will be esteemed greater than the first.
, from the Government of Proconsuls, and ruled by the Emperor For every
Proconsul had three Lieutenants, which was an Oppression to the Provinces,
whose Government was Pr^consular; whereas those in the Emperor's Division were
under the Government but of one Lieutenant, called a President, from whence
they were called Presidial Provinces. The Proconsuls were Annual, but the
Presidents continued in their Provinces, till the Emperor sent a Successor.
The Proconsuls exercised more Authority than the Presidents, but sometimes the
Emperor would advance th^se to a Power equal to that of others, by giving them
a Commission for Consular Authority. The Presidents were sometimes only of the
Order of Knights, whereas the Proconsuls were always of the Senatorial Body,
and the Consular Rank. Legatus Caesaris, and Praeses, signify the same in the
Latin Historians. There are also Provinces called Praetorian, or Publi^^^
Provinciae, according to Tacitus, Ann. 13. because the People disposed of the
Governments; but when these Assemblies of the People were put down by Tiberius,
these Provinces became annexed to the Jurisdiction of the Senate, and were held
by Lot as the Proconsular. It may be useful to observe by the way, That
Augustus, who would assume no Title, but that popular one of Prince of the
Senate, yet made no scruple to overreach them in the distribution of these
Provinces; for he took to his own Share all those, where the Legions were in
Garrison, under color they were exposed more to danger, as lying nearer to the
Enemy; but the true Reason was, That he might make himself Master of all the
Roman Militia: Ut in manu sua res omnis militaris esset, says Dion. So that
Tacitus had good Reason to say, Patres and plebem invalida and inermia. Ann. 1.
And in another place, Speciosa Senatus populique Rom^^^ nomina. Hist. 1.
. Drusus, in the Name of Germanicus, and in his own, gave the Spectacle of
Gladiators, at which himself presided, taking, as was thought, too great a
Pleasure in the sight of Bloodshed, though it was only the Blood of Inferior
Men. And his Father, as it was reported, gave him a severe Reprehension for it,
because it had given the People an Occasion to murmur, who were apprehensive of
his Cruelty, when it should be his Turn to Reign. It was diversely interpreted,
why Tiberius refrained from that Spectacle. Some conjectured, that he loved not
great Assemblies; others, that being of a sullen and melancholic Humor, he
feared that an odious Comparison would be made betwixt him and Augustus A
Prince, who knows he is hated, as Tiberius did, must industriously decline the
giving any occasion of Comparison between himself and a Predecessor, that was
popular; for the People, whose only Rule (...) Judging is wont to be their
present Humor, will never do him Right, no not even in Things wherein he
excels his Predecessor. Inviso sem^^ principe, se^ been, seu male sacta
pre^^^nt. Tac. Hist. 1. I will add on this Occa^^on to the two Reasons, which
Tacitus here assigns, Why Tiberius declined appearing at the public Shows;
another, which was, That he might not be constra^^ed either to grant or refuse
the People the Demands they were w^nt to make to the Prince in full Theater.
, who was always present at these public Entertainments, behaving himself with
great Familiarity and Complaisance A new Prince, as was Augustus, has no better
way to keep quiet the People, whose Liberties he has invaded, than by Sights
and public Plays, especially if he seems to take Delight to be at them
himself; for then the People, who mind only the outside and appearances of
Things, receive it as a piece of Complaisance and Courtship to them; when it is
in truth the main Instrument by which they are enslaved.
. I cannot think, that it was to put his Son into the ill Opinion of the People
It was Tib^rius's Interest to have his Son Drusus better beloved than
Germanicus. Therefore, it is not probable, he ever intended to render his own
Son odious, considering the terrible Jealousy he had of Germanicus, his
adoptive Son.
, by showing his Cruel and Sanguinary Temper, though there were some of that
Belief.

LXXI. The License of the Theater, which began the Year before, was now grown
excessive. Many Murders were committed, not only on Men of common Rank, but
even on some Soldiers, and one Centurion, who would have restrained the
Quarrels of the Populace, and repressed the Insults, which they made on the
Persons of the Magistrates: And the Tribune of a Praetorian Cohort was also
wounded. A Decree of Senate being made, which empowered the Praetor, to cause
the Actors of those Farces to be scourged; Haterius Agrippa, Tribune of the
People, opposed this Order; and Gallus Asinius sharply reproving him, Tiberius
did not interrupt him It is sometimes an Advantage to the Prince, to say
nothing during the Contest and Disputes his Ministers and Counselors fall into
one with another, for he may benefit himself at their Cost. In the heat of
Opposition, something always happens to be said, which both Parties would been
unwilling to have spoken in their sober Senses. Tiberius, who bore a mortal
spite toward Gallus Asinius, for the Reasons alleged by Tacitus in the
beginning of this Book, took, it may be, more Pleasure, to see him contending
with so much earnestness and fury, than Asinius did in insulting his Colleagues.
; for he was willing to sooth the Senate with that vain appearance of their
Power, and public Liberty. Nevertheless, the Opposition had the wished Effect,
because Augustus had declared the Farcers to be exempt from the servile
Punishment of the Whip; and Tiberius seemed very scrupulous, in breaking any of
his Edicts A Prince, who would establis^ his Government, must not venture to
alter the Laws of his immediate Predecessor, but to be sure not, if this
Predecessor is one much lamented; for such is the way of the People, that they
constantly admit kinder Thoughts of a good Prince who is gone, than of him they
have at present, though no less deserving. What has been settled by Princes,
whose Management has been esteemed judicious, must not reasonably be changed,
unless an inconvenience be by Experience found to follow from it, or it
evidently appear, that it may be altered for the better. Sect. 1. chapter 4. of the
First Part of the Pol. Testam. As for the Regard Tiberius paid to all the Laws
and Edicts of Augustus, it is not amiss to observe, That it proceeded as much
at least from Policy and Precaution, as Gratitude, for he could not do
otherwise, without weakening the Authority of all that Augustus had enacted in
his Favor, for preferring him before Germanicus.
. Many other Ordinances were made concerning the Stipends of Comedians Tacitus
says, De modo lucaris, which, according to Turnebius, is Merces Histrionum.
, and against the License of their Favorers For every Comedian had his certain
Followers, whose Employment it was to set the Spectators a clapping in his
Favor, and to decry all others; whence came frequent Quarrellings and Tumults,
in which every one took the Side he most fancied; and it is for this Reason,
that Tacitu^ styles them, Operae Theatrales, Histrionale Studium, Certa^^^
Histrionum, in several places of this very Book of Annals.
; and the most Remarkable are these: That the Senators should return no Visits
to the Pantomimes Comedians, who played by Imitation and Posture, and
counter^eited all sorts of Persons.
; That the Roman Knights should not accompany them in the Streets; That those
Farcers should not be permitted to Play, unless only on the Theaters; And that,
for the future, the Praetors should have Power to send into Banishment those
Spectators, who behaved themselves with Insolence.

LXXII. Spain had leave to build a Temple to Augustus Caesar, in the Colony of
Terragona; and this served for an Example to all the Provinces. The People
desiring to be discharged from the Impost laid on the Hundredth part of Reason
does not allow People to be excused from all Charges or Burdens, for if this
Badge of their Subjection be wanting, they will be apt to forget their
Condition, and by consequence, the Obedience they owe. Many Princes have lost
their Kingdoms for want of maintaining Forces sufficient for their Defense, out
of fear to burden their Subjects. And some People have become the Slaves of
their Enemies, by aspiring to too much Liberty under their Natural Prince. But
there is a stated Measure, which cannot be exceeded without Injustice, common
Sense being able to inform every one, that a a Proportion ought to be observed
between the Burden and the Strenghth of those who are to bear it. Sect. 5. chapter
4. of the First Part of the Pol. Testament.
the Gains by Commerce, Tiberius declared, the Fund for War It was somewhat
like the T^illm, or the Extraordinary in France, in time of War, This Revenue
had three Funds to maintain it; The Twentieth part of ^ll Estates by
Inheritance, and of Legacies; a Twentieth part in the Sale of Slaves; and an
Hundredth part of all Goods imported in Trade. Au^^^^^ (...) laid this Duty.
subsisted chiefly by that Income; and also, that the whole Revenue of the
Commonwealth would not satisfy for the Payment of the Forces, if the Veterans
were dismissed before they had served the term of 20 Years. By which, the
Promise made for their Discharge at the end of 16 Years was virtually revoked,
which the Seditious Legions had extorted Sooner or later Princes are sure to
revoke the Privileges and Acts of Grace, which were at first granted by
Constraint. After Charles Duke of Burgundy had brought the City of Liege to
Terms, he passed the Law to the Citizens of Gaunt, who, the very next day after
his entry, mutini'd against him, forcing him to restore all Duke Philip, his
Father, had taken from them, and to give them whatever Immunities they desired.
But being returned to Brussels, he orders the 72 Banners of the Inhabitants of
Gaunt to be fetched away, with all the Letters Patents signed in their Favor:
The Banners he sent to Boulogne, ^ulled the Privilege called that of the Law,
which was, That of the Twenty six Sheriffs, the Duke should have power to
create but Four; and condemned their City to an Amercement of 36000 Florins.
Commines, chap. 4. book, 2. of his Memoirs.
from Germanicus and Drusus not long before.

LXXIII. Aruntius and Capito consulted the Senate, concerning the Inundations
of the Tiber, whether they thought fitting to have them stopped, by diverting
the Course of the Lakes and Rivers, which discharged themselve into it. But
before the Debate passed farther, they were to hear the Reasons which were
offered by the Towns and Colonies, which were interess'd in that Affair. It was
remonstrated by those of Florence, that their Country was lost, if the Clane
should disburthen it self into the Arn: The Interamnates Now the Inhabitants of
Terni.
alleged, that the most fruitful Parts of Italy would be turned to marish
Ground, if the Nar should be sluc'd out into many Rivulets, which they were
ready to have done. The Reatines would not consent, that the Passage should be
stopped, by which the Lake Velinus runs into the Nar; declaring, That it would
overflow the Neighboring Country; That Nature had made the best Provision, for
the Convenience of Mankind, in disposing the Course of Rivers, ordaining their
Outlets, and their Bounds, as she had appointed, where their Springs should
rise; That they ought to have regard to the Religion of their Allies, who had
consecrated Woods, and Altars, and Priests, to the Rivers of their Country.
That even the Tiber Under the Popedom of Sixtus V. there was a Proposal to
enlarge the Channel of the River Tyber, thereby to render it more commodious
for Navigation; but the Pope changed his Mind, upon an Intimation that this
would be a means to facilitate the passage of this River to the Turks, and
other Enemies of the Roman Church.
would creep along, diminished of his Glory, if he were robbed of the Income,
which was paid him by his Tributary Rivers. At length, whether deterred by
Superstition, or yielding to the Request of the Colonies, or forced by the
difficulty of the Undertaking, they decreed, That no Alteration should be made,
as Piso from the beginning had advised.

LXXIV. Poppeius Sabinus was continued in the Government of Mesia, to which
were added, Achaia and Macedonia. For it was a Maxim of Tiberius, To let the
Governors grow old in the Provinces which they commanded, and many of them
died In France, where the Offices are for Life, the Maxim of Tiberius has the
Approbation of all the great Men, inasmuch as it favors their Interests; but
it is it may be against that of the Prince, who, in some sort, ties up his own
Hands, in giving what he cannot take away; and likewise against that of the
Public, where more Persons would be gratified and requited, if Places were
Triennial, as in Spain. The Fable of the Fox, which being fallen into a Pit,
where the Flies sorely stung and tormented him, refused the assistance of the
Hedghog, who proffered to drive them away; Because (says he) if you drive away
these, others will come half starved, and exhaust all the Blood I have left.
This Fable, I say; which Tiberius alleged as a Reason on which his Maxim was
founded, concludes nothing in favor of Governments for Life; because the Fear
of being no more employed, and the hope of rising from one Post to another more
considerable, will serve as a Curb and Restraint to Triennial Officers.
Besides, such a frequent Removal, inclines People to bear the more patiently
with the Governors they dislike, in hopes of better e're long. Cardinal
Richelieu contends for the Custom of France, that is to say, for Governments
during Life; but I may say, that in this matter he was influenced by the
consideration, rather of the Ministry he was invested withal, than of the
Public; for seeing the Governments were disposed of absolutely at his
Pleasure, 'twas his Interest they should be Perpetual, because his Relatives
and Dependants, on whom he bestowed the most Valuable, might then render him
more puissant and favorable in the Provinces where they commanded, than they
possibly could d^, in case their Administration had been only Triennial. And
this is so true, that if we compare the Arguments he offers for one and the
other, ( in the Second Section of the Fifth Chapter in the First Part of his
Politic Testament,) it will be easy to discern, that the practice of Spain,
in changing Governors so often, did not to himself appear altogether so
pernicious for France, as he was willing to have it thought in this place.
Insomuch, that had he remained Bishop of Luson, or Secretary of State, he had
been able as well to defend the contrary Opinion, which he in part inclines to
toward the close of the same Paragraph, where he thus speaks: I am not afraid
to say, it is better in this particular to keep to the Usage of France, than to
imitate that of Spain, which nevertheless ^s grounded on such Policy and
Reason, with respect to the largeness of its Territories, that although it
cannot be conveniently reduced to Practice in this Realm, yet, in my Judgment,
it would do well to be observed in such parts of Lorrain and Italy, as shall
continue under the Dominion of France. I conclude therefore agreeably with him,
That since Countries remote from the Residence of their Princes require change
of Governors, because continuance for Life may make them have a mind to throw
off the relation of Subjects or Subordinates, and set up for Supreme, and
Masters of themselves; the Custom of Spain will become absolutely necessary to
France, if she go on to extend her Frontiers.
in the Possession of those Places they held, whether Military or Civil. Cato
the Censor's saying was, That to continue the same Persons long in Offices, did
demonstrate, either that the Commonwealth afforded few that were fit, or that
they made small account of Magistrates.
. Various Reasons are assigned for this: Some affirm, That, to spare himself
the Care and Trouble of a second Choice, he kept constant to the first; Others
say, That it was to advance as few as possible he could A bad Policy this: For
a Prince, who prefers few of his Subjects, has not only few Dependents, but
always many Enemies, that is to say, as many as deserve to be entrusted or
considered, and are not. Thus plurality of Places is as opposite to the true
Interest of the Prince, as plurality of Benefices is to that of the Church. I
shall here remark by the way, That the principal Support of the Regal Authority
in France is the great number of its Officers. And Augustus of old had never
multiplied Offices, but the better to secure his Authority by a multitude of
Magistrates and Expectants. Commines speaking of the last Duke of Burgundy,
says, his Favors were not well placed, because he was willing every one should
share in them. Chap. 9. lib. 5. of his Memoirs.
. Some have believed, that as he had a quick and piercing Wit, so his Judgment
was always in suspense; for as he could not suffer the Extremities of Vice, so
neither did he love extraordinary and shining Virtues: Being jealous of his
Authority, he feared great Men A Person of ordinary Parts, and a moderate
Capacity, is more likely to make his Fortunes with Princes, than one of a
sublime and great Wit. For all Superiority being ungrateful to them, and they
being ambitious to be accounted Chief and Best at every Thing, will never love,
nor consequently prefer a Man, whose Understanding seems larger, and more
penetrating, than their own. The Letters of Anthony Perez contain a great deal
to this purpose. Among others, there is one directed to a Grand Privado,
wherein he thus speaks, when the Holy Spirit says, Seem not wise in the
Presence of a King; he meant not to say, Be not wise, but, Seem not to be so;
as if he had used these Words, Conceal thy Parts, and thy Prudence, show not
thy Intellectuals. Prince Rui Gomez de Silva, the greatest Master in this Art
that has appeared for these many Ages, told me, he learned this Rule from a
mighty Favorite of the Kings of Portugal; and that in all the Advices he gave,
and in all the Consultations he at any time had with his Prince, he took care
to carry himself with all the Wariness and Circumspection he possibly could...
He further added, That he so contrived the Matter, that the good Success of his
Counsels might seem to be only the effect of Chance, and not the return of any
Care he had to please him, or of an intent Application to his Business, but he
seemed ^o carry himself like those Gamesters, who in Play depend more on the
favor of Fortune, than their Skill. On this Subject, continued he, the same
Prince related to me, what passed one day between Emanuel King of Portugal, and
Count Lewis de Silveira. The King having received a Dispatch from the Pope,
composed with great exactness, sends for the Count, and commands him to draw up
an Answer, whilst he himself was making another, for he had a strong
inclination to be an Orator, and indeed was so. The Count obeys, but first
declares his Reluctance to enter Competition with his Master, and the next day
he brings his Paper to the King, who, after he had heard it, was loath to read
his own; but when the Count had prevailed with him to read it, the King
acknowledging the Count's Answer to be the better, would have that sent to the
Pope, and not his own. The Count, at his return home, orders two Horses to be
saddled for his two Sons, and went immediately with them. And when he was in
the Fields, he says to them: My Children, seek ye your Livelihood, and I mine,
there is no farther means of living here; for the King knows, that I am wiser
than himself. Don Iuan Antonio de Vera, who relates the same thing in the First
Discourse of his Ambassador, seems to say and believe, that it is a Fable; but
be it so or no, it is still very Instructive.
; and as he was jealous of his own Reputation, and of the public Honor, he
rejected those who passed for Scandalous, or Insufficient These three Reasons,
says Scipio Amirato, preceeded from his Vices* The first, from Laziness; the
second, from Malice; and the third, from a mixture of Laziness and Folly. For,
if he liked not to employ deb^uched Persons, he should have concerned himself
to find out those that were good; and if he was afraid of virtuous and great
Men, let him have but changed often, and he had been secure. In the last
Discourse of the First Book of his Commentaries. Commines says, All crafty
Princes are jealous, that all great Princes are so, and particularly, wise
ones, and such as have made many Enemies, and injured many, as Tiberius had
done. Chapter 7. l. 6. of his Memoirs. Yet Iealousies are to be admitted with
Slowness and Deliberati^^, for to be too much addicted to Jealousy, is not
well. L. 3. chapter 5.
In short, his Irresolution was so great, that he gave Governments to some such
Persons, as he had absolutely determined, should never leave the Town to take
possession of them.

LXXV. As to the Assemblies which were held for the Election of Consuls, I have
nothing to affirm for certain, either in the time of Tiberius, or after it. So
great is the Difference which is found, not only in the Relations of
Historians, but also in his own Speeches. Sometimes, without naming the
Candidates for the Consulship, he described them by their Birth; by their
Manners, and by the number of Years which they had served in War. Sometimes,
omitting even those Descriptions, he desired the Pretenders not to trouble the
Assemblies with their Intrigues, promising his own particular Care in their
Concerns. And sometimes he said, That no Competitors had presented themselves
to him, but only they, whose Names he had delivered to the Consuls; yet that
others were not debarred Tacitus says, Posse pro^iteri. Profiteri therefore
was what we call, to stand for an Office, o^ to get his Name put into the List.
Quaesturam petentes, (says Paterculus) quos indign^s judicavit, profiteri
(...). Hist. 2. cap. 92. That is to say, the Consul forbid some of those, who
pretended to the Questorship, to give in their Names, because he believed them
unworthy of it.
from pretending to that Dignity, who either con^ided in their own Merits, or
in the Favor of the Senate. Specious Words The Words of Princes seldom agree
with their Actions; and most frequently they act directly contrary to what they
say.
, but either void of Meaning, or full of Cunning; and couched under a
flattering show of Freedom, to break out afterward with greater danger of a
worse Servitude.

THE ANNALS OF Cornelius Tacitus, From the Death of AUGUSTUS.
Book II.
Vol. I.
IN the Consulship of Sisenna Statilius Taurus and of Lucius Scribonius Libo, a
War began in the Kingdoms of the East and the Roman Provinces on that side,
whereof the Parthians were the occasion As soon as a Powerful Prince has taken
Arms, the War spreads it self as it were by contagion, into all the
Neighboring States. Some arm for their own safety; others for the defense of
the weaker side; others follow the fortune of the Stronger, either that they
may have a share in the Spoils of the Conquered, or that they might not
themselves fall a Prey to the Conqueror. Thus there needs but one unquiet
Prince to trouble a whole World. For, says Comm^nes, although in the beginning
there are but two o^ three Princes or inferior persons, before the Feast has
lasted two years, all the Neighbors are invited to it. Cap. 8. Lib. 3.
, who having desired, and received Vonones from Rome for their King, afterward
despised him as a Foreigner, although he was of the Family of the The People
look upon those Princes as Strangers, who have had a Foreign Education. Indeed
Education is a second Birth. The first forms the Body, but the second forms the
Manners. It is of little Importance to Subjects, that the Body of the Prince is
Foreign, but it is of great Importance to them that his Manners be not so;
forasmuch as it is not the Body but the Mind that governs. Cicero says, That
the Romans freely tolerated Sacrifices after the Grecian fashion, provided
that the Ceremonies thereof were performed by a Roman Citizen, ut Deos
immortales scientia peregrina and externa, mente domestica and civili
precarentur. Pro. Corn. Balbo. The Dutch would never permit Philip-William of
Nassaw, Prince of Orange, the Eldest Son of their Deliverer, to reside in their
Country, till after the Truce was made with the Spaniards, for he having been
almost thirty years a Prisoner in Spain, they believed his humor to be
Spanish. For the same reason Princes ought not to absent themselves any long
time from their Dominions, because it is believed at their return, that they
bring Outlandish humors with them.
Arsacidae Which is as much as to say of the Royal Family of the Parthians,
which began with two Brothers, named Arsaces and T^ridates, who threw off the
Yoke of the Selucidae.
. He had been given as an Hostage to Augustus, by Phraates Justin says, That
when Vonones was put into the hands of Augustus, this Prince said, that the
Kingdom of the Parthians would in ^ime become a Part of the Roman Empire, if
the Romans gave Kings to the Parthians. Iuris Romanorum futuram Parthiam
aff^rmans, si ejus regnum muneris ejus ^uisse^, Lib. 42.
, who, notwithstanding he had repulsed the Roman Armies and Generals, paid all
the respect and submission imaginable to Augustus In the interview, which Caius
Caesar and Phraates had on the Euphrates, this King passed over first to the
Bank on which Caius was, and afterward Caius to the Bank on which the King
was. Paterc, Hist. 2. Cap. 101.
, and sent some of his Children Four Sons, and four Grandsons.
as a Pledge of his Friendship, not so much out of fear of us, as because he
distrusted the Fidelity of his own Subjects A Prince who is not beloved by his
Subjects, ought to avoid as much as possibly he can, engaging in War, or having
any misunderstanding with his Neighbors. Lewis XI. says Commines, would put
nothing to hazard, and he did so not only for fear of the Duke of Burgundy, but
also out of an apprehension of Seditions that might break out in France if he
should happen to lose a Battle; for he knew that he was not much beloved by his
Subjects; and particularly by the Great Men. And he has often said to me, that
he should find it, if his affairs went ill. Chapter 1. Lib. 2. of his Memoirs.
.

II. After the Death of Phraates and the [two] succeeding Kings, the Principal
Men amongst them, being weary of domestic slaughters To preserve Peace in a
Monarchical State, it is necessary that the Great Men intermeddle not with the
Administration of Affairs; for their ambition never suffers them to agree
together. The weaker desiring an Equality, and the more powerful not being
contented with that, they perpetually bandy into Factions one against another;
so that the State is torn with their quarrels, until a Prince comes, who has
the Courage and the Skill to resume all the Authority which both sides have
usurped.
, sent Ambassadors to Rome to demand Vonones, the Eldest of his Sons. Tiberius
looking on this to be much for his honor The greatest Honor that a Foreign
Nation can do to a Prince is to be willing to receive a King from his hands,
especially, when it is a Nation equal, or very near equal in power, as the
Parthians were to the Romans. Sociis virium aemulis, says Tacitus,
cedentibusque per reve, rentiam. Ann. 12. i. e. The Parthians who do not give
place to the Romans, but out of Respect and Friendship.
, sent him away with rich presents, and the Barbarous People received him with
joy, as they usually do new Kings A new Reign, says Cabrera, or a new
Minister, always pleases the People best, who in this cross the Custom that is
almost Universal, to praise the past and condemn the present. As the Successor
differs from his Predecessor, either in Age or Manners, how good qualities
soever the Predecessor had, he that succeeds is always more acceptable* People
grow weary of, and in time disrelish every thing, and particularly every thing
that is Uniform; the same kind of Dish served up two days successively, becomes
insipid; a way that is all even and alike, tires if it be long. Lib. 7. Cap.
ult. Cardinal Delfin said one day to me, that at Rome no Popes were hated more
than those who reigned long, and that la longhezza del dominare (it was the
Expression he used) made a good Pope as insupportable as a Bad one.
. But they soon began to be ashamed Tacitus says, that the Parthians regretted
their Princes, when they were absent, and disliked them when they were present.
Parthos absentiun^ aequos, praesentibus mobiles, Ann. 6. By the first, Vonones,
who had been so long absent, ought to have been very agreeable to them at his
return; but by the second, he could not fail of soon experiencing their
Inconstancy. Besides, it is common for Men to have a good Opinion of the
Absent, majora credi de absentibus, Hist. 2. and to find themselves deceived
when they see them, because it is much easier to form a great Idea of those
whom we love, before we know them, than it is to answer a great Expectation,
when we ar^ known.
, that they had so far degenerated, as to go to another World for a King that
had been trained up in the Arts of their Enemies, and that the Kingdom of the
Arsacidae was thereby esteemed, and disposed of as a Roman Province. Where,
said they, is the Glory of those that slew Crassus He was slain with the
greatest part of the Roman Army, by the Cavalry of King O^odes, the Father of
Phraates; and the Parthians were going to posses* themselves of Syria, whereof
he was Governor, if Calus Cassius, who served in the Roman Army in the Quality
of Qu^estor, had not prevented them. Paterc. Cap. 46. Lib. 2.
, and put Anthony Having entered Armenia with 16 Legions, he marched through
Media, in order to attack the Parthians. But as he advanced in the Enemy's
Country, (...) met (...) King of the Parthians, and Artavasdes King of Media,
who hindered him from passing the Euphrates, and defeated his Lieutenant Oppius
Statianus with two Legions, and all the Cavalry, which he had under his
Command. Afterward, he was forced to raise the Siege of Praaspes, the Capital
City of Media, and to send to beg Peace of Phraates, who gave it him on such
Conditions as used to be imposed on the (...) Lib. 42. Anthony, says
Paterculus, stuck not to call his (...) because he had escaped out of the hands
of his Enemies with his (...), although he had lost the fourth part of his
Army, all his Baggage and Artillery, Chap. 82.
to flight, if the Parthians are to be governed by one, that has been so many
years a Slave to the Roman Emperor? He himself heightened their Indignation and
Contempt, by differing so much from the Manners of his Ancestors, loving
neither According to Xenophon, Hunting is the truest Image of War, for there is
nothing to be seen in War, which is not seen in Hunting; and consequently
Hunting is the most profitable Diversion that a Prince can take, who de^igns to
be a great Captain. David offering himself to Saul to fight with Goliath,
alleges, as a Proof of his Courage, and of his Experience, that he had pursued
the Lion and the Bear, and that he had strangled and slew them, in stopping
their mouths with his hands; ( ^ Sam. 17.) An instance of the Re^emblance that
there is betwixt Hunting and War. Commines says, that of all Diversions Lewis
XI. took the greatest Delight in Hunting; but that he scarce returned from it,
but he was angry with somebody. For it is a thing, says he, that is not always
^anag'd to please those, who are the Principal Persons in the Field. An
Observation for Princes, who love this Diversion, and for those who accompany
them at it. Chap. 13. Book. 6. of his Memoirs.
Hunting (...) in the Preface to his Cataline, reckons Hunting amongst ^ervile
(...) and (...)* Non fuit consilium socordia atque defidia bonum otiu^
conterere; neque vero agrum colendo, aut venando, servilibus officiis intentum,
aetatem aegere. Reasoning in this like a Roman, for in his time the Romans did
not hunt; and it is taken notice of by Su^tonius, that Tiberius branded a
Commander of a Legion with infamy, for sending some Soldiers a Hunting* Here we
ought to observe, that Republicans have never been great Hunters, because they
are always taken up with affairs of Government. So we are not to wonder, if the
Noble^Venetians, are neither Hunters nor Soldiers. They don't so much as
understand how to sit a Horse; for besides that they have no Horses in their
City, they don't care to be Horsemen, because they don't make War but by Sea,
all their Military Land-Offices being given to Strangers. Cabrera calls Hunting
a Royal Exercise, Real exercicio de la casa; and says, that Philip II. took
great delight in it. Chap. of his History.
, nor Horses In a Nation, such as the Parthians, whose whole strength ^ay in
Cavalry, a King cannot have a greater Fault, than not to be a good Horseman.
The Polanders, who much resemble the Parthians, could never endure a King that
was not a good Horseman. It is well known, how much they contemned their King
Michael Wisniovecki.
; passing through the Cities in a Litter, and contemning the Parthian Feasts.
They made a Jest of the Graecians which he had in his Train, and at the ^ealing
of the Meanest Utensils of his House. But his easy access, and his affable
way, being Virtues, that the Parthians were unacquainted with, passed for new
Vices, and they equally hated what was good, as what was bad in him, because it
was contrary to their Customs A Prince who comes to govern a Foreign Country,
will never be agreeable to his New Subjects, if he does not conform himself to
their Manners, at least in the beginning of his Reign. Those Virtues, with
which they are unacquainted, will appear Vices to them, if he has not the
address to accommodate himself, for a while to their Vices, as if they were
Virtues. Italas King of the Cheraschi, gained the Affection of his people, in
making a Debauch sometimes, although he was born at Rome, and had been trained
up in Maxims directly opposite to those of the Barbarians. Charles V. according
to the report of Strada, had such a Command of his temper, that he changed his
Manners, as easily as his Residence, living after the German fashion in
Germany; after the Italian in Italy; after the Spanish in Spain; and every
where as much beloved as he was in ^landers, the Country where he was born. On
the contrary Philip II* by so much affecting to be and appear Spanish to the
whole World, rendered himself intolerable to the English and odious to the
Netherlands, who had been a long time accustomed to the Affable and Popular
humor of Charles V. Commines says* that a Prince who goes into a strange
Country, had need be wise, to guard every side. chapter 3. lib. 6.
.

III. Wherefore they call in Artabanus, one of the Blood of the Arsacidae,
educated amongst the Dahae, who having been defeated in the first Battle,
raises new Forces, and Dispossesseth Vonones, who fled into Armenia, where he
found an empty Throne, and a Nation fluctuating betwixt the Parthian and the
Roman Power A Prince whose Dominions are situated betwixt two Neighbors
stronger than himself, is always forced to side with the most Powerful, or the
most Successful of them. Now as the Romans and the Parthians were almost equal
in strength, as I have before observed; and because Fortune favored sometimes
one and sometimes the other; multa Romany secunda, quaedam Parthis evenisse --
damnis mutuis. Armenia, which equally depended on each of them, (for the Romans
had the Sovereignty of it in Right, but the Parthians in possession) espoused
the Interests of That of these two Empires which it feared most, being
perpetually divided betwixt Obedience and Revolt.
, ever since the Perfidious Act of Anthony, who after he had under color of
Friendship, invited Artavasdes, King of Armenia, to come to him, put him in
Chains But in chains of Gold, says Patercuius, to do the greater Honor to the
Royal Character. Rege^ Armeniae Ar^avasden, fraud deceptum, catenis, sed ne
quid honori deesset, aureis vinxit, Hist. 2. Argenteis catenis vinxit, says
Di^, quia nimirum turpe erat Regem ferreis in catenis haberi, Lib. 49. This
King had contributed much to the ill success of Anthony's Expedition against
the Parthians.
, and at last to Death It is, says Commines, a great Folly in a Prince to put
himself in the Power of another; especially when they are in War, or there is
any quarrel betwixt them: and it is a great Advantage to Princes to have read
Histories, where there are instances of such Interviews, and of the great
Treachery that some of the Ancients have used toward one another, having
seized and Assassinated those, who have trusted to such a security. -- The
Example of one is sufficient to make many Wise by it, and to take care of
themselves. Chap. 6. Lib. 2. of his Memoirs.
, whose Son Artaxias, resenting our base Usage of his Father, entered into an
Alliance with the Arsacidae against us, with whose assistance he defended
himself and his Kingdom, until he was assassinated by the Treachery of his own
Kindred. After which, Augustus gave this Kingdom to Tigranes Brother to
Artaxias.
, who was put in possession of it by Tiberius Nero. But he had no long reign,
nor his Children after him, although they, according to their Custom In the
East the Brother and Sister married together, and reigned in common. There are
several Examples in the Families of the P^ol^my'^ of Egypt. Dio says, that
Cleopatra was married to her Eldest Brother Ptol^my, and Arsinoe to another
Ptolomy her Younger Brother.
, were united by Enter-marriages, and Partnership in Government. Artavasdes
succeeded next, by the appointment of Augustus, and was afterward
dispossessed, but it cost us dear.

IV. Hereupon, the settling of the Affairs of Armenia, was committed to Caius
Caesar The Son of Agrippa.
, who placed on the Throne Ariobarzanes of Medish extraction, the Armenians
consenting to it, he being a Person of a Majestic Presence A good Mien and
fine Shape, are not always indications of the Merits of the Persons, but they
serve at least to impose on the People, all whose Judgment lies in their Eyes.
So that it is not without reason, that Princes take so much care to have a good
outside; for every one sees their Bodies, and very few their Minds. Cabrera
says, that the first time that the Queens Mary and Eleanor, Sisters to Charles
V. saw Philip Prince of Spain, he appeared of small stature in their Eyes,
which had been accustomed to the sight of Germans. As if Man's Body, says he,
were a Cage, which by being too little or too strait, could not lodge the Soul
for which the whole Earth is not a Quarry large enough. Chapter 3. Lib. 1. of his
History. Don John Antonio de Vera, mentions a Law of King Don Alonso el Sabio
(the same who compiled the Customary which they call las Partidas) by which he
recommended to the Kings of Castile to marry none but handsome well-shap'd
Women, that their Children might be handsome and well-shap'd* which is of great
importance to the Sons of Kings. The same Author adds, that the Ambassadors of
Poland, who brought to the Duke of An^ou the Decree of his Election, told him,
that he was obliged for it in part to his Good Presence, and his Charming Mien,
In the second Discourse of his Ambassador. His Sister, Queen Margaret said,
that Beauty which gives a Grace to every action, did shine in him to that
Degree, that it seemed to vie with his good Fortune, which of the two should
make him most glorious. Lib. 1. of his Memoirs.
, and of great Endowments of Mind; but he dying suddenly, they would not admit
his Children to succeed him, but were for trying the Government of a Woman,
named Erato, whom they soon laid aside Gynecocracy is the Worst of all
Governments. For this Sex, says Tacitus, is not only weak and voluptuous, and
consequently unfit for the Management of Affairs of State; but besides, is
Cruel, Untractable, and desirous infinitely to extend its Power, if its
Ambition be not rest^^in'd. The Prophet Isaiah, (Chapter 3.) threatens the Jews
with the Government of Children, and with that of Women, as with two equal
Curses. So that we are not to wonder, if (...) is so odious in those very
(...), where Women have right of Succession, nor why diverse Nations have for
ever excluded them from the Throne.
and thus being in an unsettled and confused Condition Anarchy is the most
miserable Condition that a Kingdom o^ a Commonwealth can fall into; and it is
the only plague that can make the loss of a Female Government regreted: For it
is impossible for Civil (...) to sub^ist without a Master, and without Laws.
And this is the r^ason that Anarchy has been always of short duration.
, and rather without a Master than in Liberty, they offer the Crown to exiled
Vonones A State, however it changes the Form of its Government, sooner or
later, will return to that which it had in its Original. The first Government
to a Body-Politick, is what the Natural Air is to a Humane body.
. But as soon as Artabanus threatened him, and it appeared that there was little
reliance on the Armenians, and as little expectation of assistance from the
Romans, who could not defend him, unless they would engage in a War against the
Parthians, he retires to Creticus Silanus, the Governor of Syria, who, although
he had invited him, set a Guard upon him as soon as he came, leaving him,
however, the Title and the State of a King It is not the Royal Title or (...),
that make a King, but the Authority; The Majesty is in the Functions, not in
the Ornaments; and it is (...) this reason that the Title of (...) d^d not
belong to the Senate o^ Rome, although it had all the exterior Marks of it, as
the Rods, the Purple Robe, the Ivory-Chair, etc. but to the People, in whom the
Supreme Power resided. Witness the Form of Words which was pronounced with a
loud voice at the opening of all the Assemblies, Velitis, Iubeatis, Quirites,
which is the Appellation they gave the People in their Assemblies. Cabrera
says, that Philip II. having married Mary Queen of England, and received from
his Father the Renunciation of the Kingdom of Naples on the score of this
Marriage, took it very ill, that his Father kept the Administration and the
Revenues of it, and the more because, he was hereby King of Naples and of
England, only in Title and Name. There were also some Englishmen, who gave him
no other Title but that of the Queens Husband, Chap. 5, and 7. Lib. 1. of his
History. The Earls of Egmond and Horn having been arrested by the Duke of Alva,
without the privity of the Duchess of (...), Governess the Low Countries, this
Princess who saw that the Duke, besides his large power, had secret Orders,
which le^t her (...) more than the Name of Governess, desired leave of Philip
II. to retire out of these Provinces, saying, that it was neither for his
Service, nor her Honor, whom he was pleased to call his Sister, to continue
there with a Title without Authority. Strada Lib. 6. of Hist. 1. Decad.
. How he endeavored to escape from this Pageant-Royalty, we will relate in its
proper place A Prince who is dispossessed of his Dominions, does not willingly
continue in the hands of him who has go^ possession of them, how well soever
he is treated by him. For this is to adorn with his presence the Conqueror's or
the Usurper's Triumph. Ferdinand the Catholic assigned Lands and Revenues to
Boabdiles, whose Kingdom of Granada he had Conquered, or Usurped; but this
Prince soon passed into Africa. For, says Mariana, those who have seen
themselves Kings, have not constancy or pa^ience enough to lead a Private Life,
Chapter 18. Book 25. of his History of Spain.
.

V. But these troubles in the East were no unwelcome News to Tiberius, since
they gave him a fair Pretense to draw off Germanicus from the Legions that had
been accustomed to his How great soever the Fidelity of a Subject appears to
be, to whom an Army or a Province has offered the Sovereignty, it is prudence
in a Prince, under some specious pretense, to remove him from this Army or
Province, for fea^ lest the Infidelity of others, and opportunity may at last
inspire him with a desire to accept what may be again offered him. The
Mutineers of Germanicus's Legions, had offered Germanicus their service being
resolved to follow his Fortune, if he would seize the Empire, ( Ann. ^.) and
consequently Tiberius had reason to be jealous of the Fidelity of Germanicus,
and of the Affection which these Legions had for him, and Ag^ippinae, who was
continually giving them largess* The Satisfaction which the Neapoli^ans had in
the Government of Gonsalo Hernandez, whom they styled by way of Eminence the
Great Captain, was the principal Cause of the Resolution that Ferdinand the
Catholic took to make him return into Spain, with hopes of being rewarded with
the Office of Grand Master of the Order of St. Iam^s, which was the highest
Honor in the Kingdom.
command Philip II. dealt with his Nephew Alexander Farnese almost after the
same manner. He sent him into France to the assistance of the League, whilst
his presence was absolutely necessary in the Low Countries, where he had begun
to re-establish the Royal Authority, having obliged the Archduke Matthias to
return into Germany; the Duke of Alonson into (...)* the Earl of Liecester into
England, and the Prince of Orange into Holland. For his absence gave the Rebels
new strength, and was the Cause, that they recovered a great part of what they
had lo^t. So that Don Carlos Coloma, had good reason to say, that Philip II.
acted herein against all the Rules of Policy, Lib. 2, and 3. of his Wars of
Flanders.
, and to expose him at once to Hazards and Treachery in Provinces where he was
a Stranger. But the more he was hated by his Uncle and loved by the Soldiers,
the more he endeavored to put an end to this War by a Decisive Battle, in
order to which, he considered well with himself the Methods of Fighting, and
what had succeeded well or ill with him, after three years War in this Country.
He found that the Germans were always beaten in pitched Battles, and on even
Ground; that their advantages lay in Woods and Marshes, in short Summers and
early Winters; That his Soldiers were more troubled at their long marches and
the loss of their Arms, than for the Wounds they had received; That the Gauls
were weary of furnishing Horses; That his long train of Carriages, was much
exposed to the Enemy, and not easily defended. Whereas if they went by Sea,
where they were Masters, and the Enemy Strangers, they would be Earlier in the
Field; the Legions together with their Provisions, the Horsemen and their
Horses, would be all safely carried through the Mouths and the Channels of the
Rivers, into the very Heart of Germany.

VI. He resolves therefore on this Method, and whilst he dispatcheth P.
Vitellius, and C. Antius, to receive the Tribute from the Gauls, he appoints
Silius Anteius, and Cecinna, to provide a Fleet. A thousand Ships were judged
sufficient, and they were soon Equipped; some of them were short with a narrow
Poop and Stern, and a wide Belly, that they might better endure the Waves;
others with flat Bottoms, for the convenience of landing in shallow places;
several with Sterns at both ends, that with only changing the stroke of the
Oars, without turning the Vessel, they might advance or retire; many were
covered with Bridges for the carrying of their Artillery, with conveniences
also for Horses and Provisions, and all of them were made both for Sailing and
Rowing, and the eagerness and shoutings of the Soldiers, added much to both to
the show and the terror of the Fleet. The Isle of Batavia Holland.
was appointed for the place of their rendezvous, because it had good Landings,
and lay convenient for receiving the Forces, and for their passage thence to
the Seat of the War. For the Rhine keeps one Channel, or at most makes but
little Islands till it enters the Country of Batavia, where it divides it self
as it were into two Rivers; whereof, that which runs through Germany retains
its Name and rapid Course, till it discharges its self into the Ocean; the
other which washes Gaul, runs with a broader and a gentler Stream, and is by
the People of the Country called, the Wahal Now Wahal.
, which name it afterward changes into that of the Meuse, through whose wide
mouth it falls into the same Ocean.

VII. Whilst they were launching the Ships, Germanicus ordered his Lieutenant,
Silius, with a Flying Army to invade the Country of the Chatti; and hearing
that a Fort which stood on the River Lip was besieged by the Enemy, he
marched himself with six Legions to its relief. Silius, by reason of a sudden
fall of Rains, did nothing more than bring away the Wife and Daughter of of
Arpus, Prince of the Chattti, with a little Plunder. Nor did the Besiegers give
Germanicus opportunity to ^ight, but stole away from the Siege at the News of
his approach; however, they first demolished the Monument erected to the
Legions of Varus, and the old Altar consecrated to Drusus. Germanicus repaired
the Altar, and himself with the Legions, performed funeral rites in honor of
his Father, by a Mock-fight before it This was a Ceremony used amongst the
Romans at the Funerals of Princes and Illustrious Persons. Exercitus, says
Sueton speaking of Drusus, honorarium ei tumulum excitavit, circa quem deinceps
stato die quotannis miles decurreret. These Altars were like our Epitaphs:
Hectoreum ad tumulum, etc.
Et geminas, caussam lacrymis, sacraverat aras.
Virg. Aeneid. 5. Aggeritur tumulo tellus, stant manibus arae.
Aen. 3.
. It was not thought fit to rebuild the Monument, but he fortified all that lay
between the Fort of Alison and the Rhine, with the addition of a new Line and
Works.

VIII. After the Fleet was arrived, and he had sent the Provisions on board,
and assigned the Legions and the Auxiliary Troops their Ships, he entered the
Drus^an Canal It was a Canal which Drusus cut betwixt the Rhine and the Isell,
from Arnheim to Doesburg, which is as much as to say, the City of Drusus, for
the Passage of his Army from the Rhine to the Bay of the Zuyder-Sea, and thence
into the Ocean.
, which took its name from his Father Drusus, to whom he made a Prayer, that he
would favor his Son who after his Example was making this attempt. He had a
good passage thence through the Lakes and the Sea, into the Mouth of the River
Amisia, and anchored his Fleet at a Port of the same Name There was a Place
named Amista, as there was the Fort and the River of Alison, and as the Place
and the River, says Mr. ^ick in his No^es, had one Name, they have so also at
this day. For the Ems gives its name to the C^y of Embden.
, which was an oversight, it being on the left hand of the River, and not high
enough; so that several days were spent in making bridges for the Army to pass
over to the other side. The Cavalry and the Legions safely forded it at low
Water; but the Auxiliaries who were in the Rear, especially the Ba^avians,
whilst they sported in the Waters, and were ambitious of showing their skill in
swimming, were overtaken by the Tide and some of them drowned. As Germanicus
was Encamping, news was brought him, that the Angrivarii A People who dwell
betwixt the Ems and the Weser.
, whom he had left behind him, had revolted, whereupon he dispatched Stertinius
with a body of Horse, and light-armed Foot, who revenged their treachery with
Fire and Sword.

IX. The Armies of the Romans and the Cherusci, being separated only by the
River Weser, and Arminius, who* with his Principal Officers stood on the Bank,
understanding that Germanicus was come, desired that he might speak with his
Brother Flavius, who was in the Roman Army, and who had signalized himself by
his Fidelity, and by the loss of an Eye some years before in a Battle, when he
served under Tiberius. His request was granted, and as Flavius came near him
Arm^nius saluted him, and ordering those that came with him to withdraw
themselves, he desires that our Archers who lined the Bank of the River might
likewise retire; after which Arminius asked his Brother how his Face came to be
so disfigured; who freely telling him the Place, and the Battle where he
received the Wound, the other asked him farther, What reward he had received
for it; Flavius answers him, That his Pay was augmented, and that he was
adorned with a Chain, a Crown These Crowns were of several sorts, but all of
very common matter. The Triumphal Crown, which was the Noblest of all, was of
Laurel; (...) Luxury, which is always at War with Moderation, brought
afterward in use Crowns of Gold for Victorious Generals, and this Present was
called Aurum C^ronarium. The Obsidional Crown which the Soldiers presented to
their General, for raising the Enemy's Siege, was made of Grass; because
heretofore the Conquered gave a handful of Grass to the Conqueror, to show,
that he took possession of their Lands* Plin. Lib. 22. and Chapter 3, and 4. This
Crown was esteemed above all the rest, because it was the only one, which was
given to the Generals by the Soldiers; whereas the Soldiers received the others
from their General. Sicinius (...), who had obtained eight Crowns of Gold,
three Mu^al, and fourteen Civick, had never but one Ob^idional Crown. The
Civick was of Oak or Holm, and was given for saving the Life of a Citizen, and
killing him who was going to take it away. The Mural and the Camp or Trench
Cr^^m, was given to those who first mounted the Breach, or Forced the Enemy's
Camp: Which was represented by Battlements or Pallisadoes engraved on these
Crowns. They who obtained an Ovation, i. e. The lesser Triumph, wore a Myrtle
Crown on their Heads. Paterculus says, that Agrippa, Son-in-Law to Augustus,
was the first Roman who was honored with a Naval Crown, Hist. 2. Chapter 87. This
sort of Crown had for distinction the Beaks of Ships engraved round it, whence
it was called Corona (...)* The Romans, says Cobrera, used Crowns of Grass and
Wood, and rings of Iron, to exclude mercenary rewards, by separating Profit
from Glory, and to engrave the Love of Virtue on their Hearts, with the graving
Instrument of Honor, Chapter 12. of the 8th Book of his History. Rewards of this
kind, says a Modern Author, have no bounds, because the Royal Power is a
Fountain, whence new Honors and new Dignities incessantly spring, as Rays of
Light every moment emane from the Sun, which are so far from exhausting that
they increase its light, Chap. 9. of the Politics of France.
, and other Military H^nours It is not the matter of the Gift which is regarded
in these rewards, but the Opinion which Men have of them. Their Esteem is not
paid to the Metal of the Collar, of the Crown, or of the Cross, but to the
Reason for which they are given. Thus it signifies little. whether these
Exterior Marks be of Gold, Silver, Brass, Wood, or Stuff. These are Arms of
Inquest, which by exciting the Curiosity of those that see them, draw Respect
and Admiration on him that wears them. T. Labienus having given Golden
Bracelets, (a Military Gift which Soldiers wore on the left Arm) to a Trooper,
who had performed some great actions, Scipio said to this Trooper, for whom he
had a great Esteem; You have the share of a rich Man: as much as to say, You
have not the share of a Soldier. The Trooper blushing at this Raillery, went
and threw this Present at the Feet of Labienus, after which Scipio, his
General, having sent him Bracelets of Silver, he esteemed himself highly
honored therewith. An instance, that it is easy for Princes to reward their
Soldiers and Servants ^t a Cheap Rate, and that brave Men set a Greater Value
upon that which honors them, than upon that which enriches them. Sebastian
King of Portugal, presenting a Sword set with precious Stones to the young Duke
of Pastrana the Son of Ruy Gomez de Silva, Prince of Eboli; this Duke, who was
but fifteen years old, immediately unsheathed it, and touching the Blade,
without regarding the precious Stones, said, It is very good. Cabrera, Chap.
10. Lib. 11. of his Philip II. To conclude, Princes give what value they please
to things, and Iron and Lead are more precions in their hands, when they know
how seasonably to make use of them, than Gold is in the hands of Subjects. If
the shameful Hair of a Lady of Bruges, has served for the Occasion and
Institution of an Order, of which the Kings of Spain, and the Emperors of
Germany, think it a Glory to wear the Collar; what is there so Base and Vile,
which may not furnish Princes with an inexhaustible Fund wherewith to
recompense Great Men.
, which Armenius ridiculed as base prizes of Slavery.

X. Whereupon they begin to be hot; Flavius, extols the Roman Grandeur, and the
Power of the Emperor; His Severity toward those that are Conquered, and his
Clemency toward those that submit; and that his Wife and his Son were well
treated. Arminius, on the other hand, insists on the Rights of his Country,
their ancient Liberty, the Tutelar Gods of Germany; and adds, that it was their
common Mother's request as well as his own, that he would at last choose rather
to be the General of his own Nation, than the Deserter and the Traitor of it.
They proceeded by degrees to bitter reproaches The Interviews of Great Men do
rather exasperate than sweeten their Spirits; for there is always something
said, either by themselves, or by those that accompany them, whence they take
an occasion to part Enemies.
, and had certainly come to blows, notwithstanding the River was betwixt them,
had not Stertinius ran and held Flavius, who in a Rage Even those who have
renounced their Honor, and who glory in their Wickedness, are offended when
they are called Traitors. Flavius had patiently endured the cutting Raillery of
Arminius, who had reproached him with being a Slave of the Romans; [ irridente
Arminio vilia servitii pretia] but so soon as his Brother called him Traitor,
he could no longer dissemble; and had it not been for Stertinius, who stopped him
by main force, he was going to revenge the Affron. I cannot omit here the
Answer of one John Bravo, when he was on the Scaffold to be beheaded, at these
Words of the Sentence, a est^s Cavalleros por traidores, which the Executioner
pronounced with a loud Voice; he cried out, You Lie in that, and all those who
make you say it. A Heat which did not indeed discover a Contrite Heart; but it
showed at least one that was but little stained with the Guilt of Treason:
Which are the words of Don Iuan Antonio de Vera, in the Epitome of the life of
Charles the Fifth.
called for his Horse and Arms. Arminius, on the other side, with a Menacing
Countenance, was heard to Challenge us to a Battle, for he spoke several words
in Latin, having formerly served in the Roman Army, as a Commander of some
Auxiliaries of his own Nation.

XI. The next Day the German Army was drawn up in Battle, on the other side of
the Weser. Germanicus thinking it not prudence in a General to hazard the
Legions A good General ought never to hazard a Battle till he has put all
things in good order. To begin to be in a Condition not to be Conquered, is to
begin to Conquer. Lewis XI. says Commines, understood this Point very well; He
was slow in Undertaking, but when once he undertook, he took such care for
every thing, that it was a very great chance if he did not succeed in his
Enterprise, Lib. 2. Cap. 13. Prosper Colonna, and the Duke of Alva, who took
him for his Pattern, would never give their Enemies Battle, till they were sure
of gaining it. Ste the first Note of the 40th Article of the first Book. Henry
the IV. having sent to demand Battle of the Dukes of Parma and Maine; the first
answered the Herald, (they are the Words of Chancellor de Chiverny) that the
King of Spain had sent him to prevent the Alteration of the Catholic Religion
in France; and to raise the Siege of Paris: As for the Former he had already
done it; and for the Latter, if he should find that the shortest way to succeed
in it, was to give Battle, he would do it, and force the King of Navarre to
accept it* or that, in fine, he would take what other resolution he should
think fit. In his Memoirs.
, before he had laid Bridges and Guarded them, orders the Cavalry to pass the
River where it was Fordaable under the Command of Stertinius and of Aemilius a
Primipile The Primipiles were the Lieutenant-Colonels of Legions. Every
Primipile commanded all the Centurions or Captains of his Legion. Qui primus
Triari^rum Centurio, sive Triariorum manipulo in prima cohorte praeerat, atque
reliqu^s omnes Centuriones dignitate anteibat, Primopilus, sive Primipilus,
sive Primipili Centurio vocabatur. Rosin. Antiquit. Romans Lib. 10. Cap. 7*
, who passed over at distant places from each other, that they might divide the
Enemy. Cariovalda, General of the Batavi, passed the River in the most rapid
part of it, but was by the Cherusci, who seigned flight, drawn into a Plain
environed with Woods, where they had planted an Ambuscade, whence they sallying
out on a Sudden, and surrounding them on all sides, they knocked down those
that made resistance, pursued those that gave ground, and broke the rest that
had drawn themselves into a Ring, either by fighting with them hand to hand, or
by galling them at a Distance, with their Darts and Arrows. Cariovalda having
sustained the Enemy's Fury a good while, exhorted his Men to draw into a Close
Body, and to break through the Enemy's Troops, and he himself led the way into
the thickest of the Fight, where his Horse being killed under him, and himself
overpowered with Darts, bravely fell with many of the Nobility by his side:
The rest escaped either by their own Valor, or by the Assistance of Stertinius
and Aemilius, who came in with the Horse to their relief.

XII. When Germanicus had passed the Weser, he was informed by a Deserter, that
Arminius had chosen the Place of Battle; that other Nations had joined him in a
Forest consecrated to Hercules, and that they designed to Storm our Camp by
Night. He gave credit to this Intelligence, and the rather because their fires
were discerned, and the Scouts who had been sent out brought back word, that
they heard the Neighings of Horses, and a confused Noise like that of a
Numerous and Undisciplined Army on their march. It being like to be a Decisive
Battle, and this the critical time of Danger, Germanicus thought it fit to try
how the Minds of the Soldiers stood affected, but how to be assured of this was
not so easy; He considered, that the Tribunes and Captains used to give rather
acceptable than true Accounts; that the Freemen were of slavish Tempers, and
that Friends were too prone to flatter. That if he should call a Council of
War, nothing was more common than for all the rest to applaud that Advice,
which happened to be approved by a Few at first In such a Council, says
Commines, there are a great many People, who are only Echoes to others,
without scarce understanding the Matter, and desire to show their complaisance
to some Person, who has spoke and who is esteemed to be in authority, Lib. 2.
Cap. 2. There are others who will not contradict, because they make it a Point
of Honor not to be overborn by their Adversary; insomuch, that they had
rather suffer an opinion, which they believe must be prejudicial to pass, than
not to have the Glory of carrying what they appear for. Which Vanity is yet
more blameable than Complaisance. It is much better, says Cabrera, to pass for
Wise and Prudent, than for a Man of Authority; for if your Advice is rejected,
and there follows thence any Evil to the Prince or the Public, this turns to
your Honor, and to the Disgrace of him who carried it by his Credit or his
Favor, Lib. 2. Cap. 7.
, and therefore he concluded, that the only certain way of knowing the Soldiers
Minds, was when they were at their Meals in their respective Tents and
unobserved, at which time, if ever, they discoverd their Hopes or Fears.

XIII. Wherefore, the Evening being closed he goes out of his Pavillion by the
Augural Gate This was the Praetorian Gate, where the Augural always stood, i.
e. the Place where the General took the Augury and the Auspices, before he
Enterprized any thing. The Augural was on the Right hand, and the General's
Pavilion on the Le^t.
, covered Princes cannot make themselves familiar with Truth, unless it be
disguised; nor Truth with them, unless they are disguised. When Truth knows
them, it flys from them, whereas it seeks them, when it does not know them.
There is scarce any Prince, who at the End of his Reign is not yet to know, as
well as Pilate, what is Truth.
with the skin of a Wild Beast This was the common Habit of the German
Auxiliaries, and Germanicus wore it at that time, to pass for one of the
Germans of his Guard. Tergis ferarum horrentes. Hist. 2. Gerunt and ferarum
pelles. In Germania.
, having no more than one Person to accompany him, and as he passes the Lanes
of the Camp through By-ways that were unknown to the Sentinels, he listens at
the Tents, enjoys his own Fame; hearing some extol his high Birth and his good
Mein, others his Patience, his Affability, and his even Temper both in Business
and Pleasures, and all of them acknowledging, that they were obliged in
gratitude to serve him to the utmost in the Battle; and that these perfidious
violaters of the Peace, ought to be sacrificed to his Glory and Revenge In the
mean time, one of the Enemy that understood the Latin Tongue, came on Horseback
up to the Line of our Camp, and with a loud Voice declares in Arminius's Name,
that as many as would come over to him, should have each 100 Sesterces About 12
Shillings of our Money.
a day, during the War, and Wives and Lands assigned them for the rest of their
Lives. This Affront exasperated the Legions, who said, the Day was coming in
which a Battle would decide that; in the mean time, they accepted it as a good
Omen, that the Germans Lands and Wives were to be the Fruits of their Victory.
About the third Watch of the Night The Night was divided into Watches or
Guards, each of which consisted of three hours.
, they approached our Camp, with a Design to Storm it; but finding it strongly
guarded and ^o advantage to be taken, they did not attempt it.

XIV. The same Night Germanicus had a pleasing Dream, wherein he seemed to
himself to Sacrifice, and that his Robe being stained with the Blood of the
Victim, he received a more splendid one from the hands of his Grandmother
Augusta. Encouraged by this Presage, which was confirmed by the Auspices The
Auspices were taken from the Flight of Birds.
, he calls an Assembly, wherein he proposes the Measures which he had resolved
on for the ensuing Battle. The Romans, said he, with good Conduct, can fight as
well in Woods and Forests, as on the Plains, for the Unweildy Targats, and the
long Pikes of the Enemies are not so easy to be managed amongst the Trunks of
Trees and the Shrubs, as your Darts and Swords, and your Armor which sits
tight to the Body; so that you may redouble your blows, and make directly at
the Faces of your Enemies. The Germans have neither Breast Plate nor Helmet,
and their Bucklers are not strengthened with Iron or Cords, and are made only
of Osier Twigs, or of thin Painted Boards. Their foremost Ranks indeed are
armed with a sort of Pikes, but the rest have only Stakes hardened in the fire,
or short Darts* And although they are terrible in their Looks, and vigorous in
their first Charge, yet they will not stand after they are once wounded, but
run away without any concern for their own Honor or their General's Safety.
They are utterly dispirited under ill-fortune, as they are a most insolent
People upon Success, having regard neither to Divine nor Humane Laws. To
conclude, if being fatigued with long Voyages and Marches, you desire to see an
End of this War, the Elb The Reason of this was, because the Romans would have
the Elb the Boundary of their Empire on that side, according to the Counsel of
Augustus. Co^rcendi intra terminos Imperii. Ann. 1.
is now nearer to us than the Rhine, and as I follow the Steps of my Father and
my Uncle, so I do not desire to carry my Conquests farther than they did
theirs. The General's Speech was followed with the Acclamations of the
Soldiers, and the Signal of Battle was given.

XV. Neither was Arminius and the rest of the German Nobility wanting to
encourage their Men, telling them, that these were the fugitive remains of
Varus's Army, who rebelled to avoid the fatigues of War, of whom some having
shameful Wounds on their Backs, others their Limbs disabled by storms at Sea,
were now again exposed to their incensed Enemies, without any hopes of success,
the Gods being against them. Although they had gotten a Fleet, and taken the
most unknown ways of the Sea, that none might meet them as they came, nor
pursue them after they should be defeated; yet when they joined Battle, they
should find that Oars and Winds would prove but little succor to a routed
Army. Let the Germans only remember the Avarice, Cruelty, and Pride of the
Romans, and resolve either to defend their Liberty, or die with it.

XVI. The Germans thus encouraged, and eager to fight, Arminius draws them down
into a Plain called Idistaviso, which winds with an uneven space betwixt the
Weser and the Hills, as the Course of the River gives way to it, or the Hills
jet upon it; behind it grew a Wood of high Trees with spreading tops, but with
void spaces betwixt their Trunks. The Barbarians Those, which Tacitus said,
joined Arminius*
possessed themselves of this Plain and of the Entrances of the Wood, only the
Cherusci kept the Hills that they might fall down upon the Romans when they
were engaged. Our Army marched in this order: The Gaulish and German
Auxiliaries were in the Front, followed by Archers on Foot, next to whom was
Germanicus himself with four Legions, two Praetorian Cohorts and the Flower of
the Cavalry: After them as many Legions more, with Lightarm'd Soldiers and
Archers on Horseback, and the rest of the Confederate Troops, all of them
being very careful to march in order of Battle.

XVII. Germanicus perceiving the Cherusci to advance boldly toward us,
commands some of the best of the Cavalry to charge them in the Flank, and
Stertinius with another Party of Horse to surround them, and to fall upon their
Rear, promising that he himself would be ready to support them if there should
be occasion. In the mean time appeared an auspicious Omen Don Iuan Antonio de
Vera and Ulloa, relates in the Life of Charles V. that as he was upon the point
of giving Battle to John Frederick Elector of Saxony, there appeared an Eagle,
which after it had flown for a long time round the Imperial Army, at last took
his flight toward the North, as it were to carry the News of the Emperor's
Victory. Herrera says, that another Eagle came from the Turk's Camp, pitched
on the Pavillion of Sigismund Battori, Prince of Transylvania, and suffered
himself to be taken and managed like a tame Bird, Lib. 21. Cap. 21. of the
third part of his History. It is reported in the Chronicle of Paul Piasecki,
that the Scholars of the College of Zamoyski playing one day in a Neighboring
Field, caught an Eagle, about which a Serpent had turned it self, which was
taken for a Presage, that the Crown-General, John Zaymoyski, who departed that
day, to join his Army at Cracow, would soon rescue the Polish Eagle out of the
S^ares of Maximilian, Archduke of Austria, Elected King by the Faction of
Zborowvi and Gorka, who were for annulling the Election of Sigismund, Prince of
Suedeland, 1587. If these Prodigies pass for Truths, I know not for what reason
that which Tacitus mentions here, appeared fabulous to Lipsius. He ought to
have remembered that Tacitus says, that as it would be beneath the Dignity of
History to entertain the Reader with fabulous Stories, so it would be rashness
not to give credit to what all People have published. Hist. 2.
, eight Eagles were seen to fly into the Wood, which as soon as Germanicus
observed, he cried out, That they should march and follow the Roman Birds,
which were the Tutelar Gods The Romans had so great a Veneration for their
Eagles, that they (...) Gods, and even preferred them before the other (...),
says Tertullian in his Apology, sig^^ veneratar, (...).
of the Legions It is Prudence in a General of an Army always to interpret
Prodigies to his advantage; for nothing should be said to Soldiers, how Brave
and Warlike soever they are, which may discourage them. Besides, a General who
lets his Army know, that he presages ill from any appearance or casual Event,
is suspected to be himself under fear; which always produces bad Effects.
. The Infantry charged them, and the Detachments of Horse that were sent
before, at the same time attacked them both in the Flank and Rear, and which
was most surprising two Bodies of the Enemy ^led counter to one another; they
who were posted in the Wood ^led into the Plain, and they who were drawn up in
the Plain betook themselves to the Woods. The Cherusci who were posted betwixt
these two Bodies were beaten from the Hills, amongst whom Arminius, who might
be distinguished by the motion of his Hand, by his Voice, and by his Wounds,
bravely maintained the Battle. He charges furiously on our Archers, and had
broken them if the ^aeti The (...).
, Vindelici The Bavarians.
, and the Gaulish Cohorts had not supported them; however, through his own
strength and the fleetness of his Horse, he made his way through them, having
besmeared his Face with his own blood that he might not be known. Some say,
that the Chauci who were amongst our Auxiliaries, knew him, but let him pass.
Inguimerus escaped by the like Stratagem or Valor. Almost all the rest were
slain, many as they endeavored to swim over the Weser, of whom some were
either killed by our Darts, or carried away by the Force of the Stream, or were
sunk by the Weight of People that threw themselves into the River after them,
or of the Banks that fell upon them. Some cowardly climbing to the top of Trees
to hide themselves in their Boughs, were shot by our Archers, as Birds, by way
of Diversion, and others fell to the Ground with the Trees which were cut down.
This was a great Victory, and cost us but little blood. A Victory which costs
little (...) is a (...) Victory, and consequently this Name is not very
properly given to Battles, wherein they lose fifty or sixty thousand Men, as
the Spani^rds did at O^^end. And this was Pyrrhus's meaning, when he said,
after he had gained two Battles against the Romans, that he was ruined if he
should gain a Third. The Romans refused the Honor of a Triumph to Generals who
had paid dear for a Victory, they refused it amongst others, to the Consul
Attilius, who had made above seven thousand Samnites pass under the Yoke,
because he had lost almost as many of his own Men; and to his Colleague
Posthum^us for the same reason.
.

XVIII. The slaughter lasted from Eleven a Clock Forenoon*
in the Morning* until Night; so that for the space of ten miles all the
Country was strewed with Arms and Dead Bodies, and amongst their spoils were
found Chains which, as being sure of the Victory Quintus Curtius says, that
there are no little Enemies. You strengthen those whom you despise. They who do
things with fear, says Commines, make good Provision, and succeed oftener than
those who act with Pride and Security, Lib. 2. Cap. 4. The Emperor, Frederick
III. said wisely, that we ought not to ^ell the Skin before we have killed the
Bear. Lib. 4. Cap. 3. The Duke of Alva who promised Philip II. to smother the
Hollanders in their Butter, had the dissatis^action to see before he died, The
Union of Utretcht, that is to say, The first Establishment of their
Commonwealth on the Ruins of the Spanish Government. Sebastian King of
Portugal, thought himself so well assured of the Conquest of the Kingdom of
Morr^co* that before his departure, he caused a Crown and Regal Ornaments to be
made on purpose, to be used at the Ceremony of his Coronation in Africa;
whereas he ought to have carried thither Funeral Ornaments. Lib. 1. of the
History of the Union of Portugal. The Spanish relation of the Entrance of
Philip II. into Portugal, says, that this Crown, which Sebastian carried with
him, was made after the Fashion of that of the Empire, because he intended to
take upon himself the Title of Emperor, after the Victory, which he thought
himself as good as possessed of. Cr^yend^ intitulars^ E^perador (...) las
esp^rancas de (...) victoria. Cap. 103. It had been more for the Honor of the
Governor of Luxemburg, not to have made a show of Violins on the Rampart of the
Town* in derision of our Army that was approaching it, and to have considered
that he had to do with Enemies who knew how to dance to the Sound of Cannon.
, they had prepared for the Romans. The Soldiers proclaimed Tiberius Emperor in
the Field of Battle and raised a Monument, whereon they fixed, in the Form of
Trophies, the Arms which they had taken, and inscribed underneath the Names of
the Conquered Nations.

XIX. The Germans were more incensed and troubled at the sight of this, than
for their Wounds and their Defeat The Conqueror ought never to reproach the
Conquered with his Victory. Such Monuments exasperate their Minds, and provoke
them to revenge it, if they are Equals; and to revolt if they are Subjects. The
Brass Statue of the Duke of Alva trampling under his Feet two Statues more,
which represented the Nobility and Commons of the Low-Countrys, cost the King
of Spain the Revolt of Antwerp, and of several other Cities. Wherefore Don Luis
de Requesens, who succeeded him in the Government of these Provinces, entered
on his Administration with the Demolishing of this Statue, not, said he, that
so great a Man did not deserve this Honor, but to remove ou^ of the Peoples
sight, a Monument which shocked them, and to give them hopes of a milder
Treatment. Herrera, Chapter 11. Lib. 3. of the second Part of his History, (1575.)
Diodorus Siculus says, that heretofore the Greeks did not suffer Trophies to
be made of any other Materials but of Wood, to the end that these Monuments of
Discord, (for so he calls them) might be soon destroyed and consumed, Lib. 13.
of his History.
. They that before thought of nothing but leaving their Country, and retiring
beyond the Elb, now take Arms again, and will have another Battle. The Commons
and Nobles, Old and Young, surprise the Roman Army, and put them in some
Disorder. At length they Encamp on a Wet-piece of Ground, having a River on one
side of it, and a Wood on the other, surrounded with a deep Marsh, except in
one place, where the Angrivarii had cast up a large Work to separate themselves
from the Cherusci. The Infantry were posted in this Place; the Cavalry covered
themselves in an adjoining thicket, that they might fall upon the Rear of our
Legions, as soon as they were entered the Wood.

XX. Germanicus was ignorant of none of these things, he knew the Enemy's
Posture, and their secret Designs There is nothing more necessary, nor more
useful to Generals of Armies than Spies, whom Strada had reason to call the
Ears and Eyes of Princes. God himself, as it may be seen in the Holy
Scriptures, commanded Moses to send Spies into the Land of Promise. The Lord
spoke unto Moses saying, send Men who may search the Land of Canaan, which I
give unto the Children of Israel. All the Instructions which a General can give
to the Spies that he employs are expressed in this Chapter.
, as well as what they gave out, and turned their own Stratagems on themselves
to their ruin. Having given his Lieutenant Sejus Tubero the Command of the
Cavalry, with orders to draw them up in the Plain, he divided the Infantry,
that one part of them might enter the Wood where the Ground was even, whilst
the other part forced the Works which the Enemy had thrown up, and which, as
being the most difficult to attack, he commanded himself When a General
undertakes the most dangerous part himself, the Officers and Soldiers very
cheerfully do all the rest.
, and left the other to his Lieutenants. They who were to gain the Even Ground,
easily brake in; but those who were to force the Works, found almost as much
resistance, as if they had been to scale a Wall. Germanicus perceived that they
fought with great disadvantage so near, and therefore causing the Legions to
retreat a little, he ordered the Slingers and the Engineers These Engines threw
pieces of Stone, of Lead, of Wood, and Dart^, whose Iron Points were two or
three foot long.
with their Stones and Darts to beat off the Enemy from their Works: And they
no sooner began to play upon them, but they galled them extremely, and
dis^odg'd them; especially those that were in sight. This Post being taken,
Germanicus at the Head of the Praetorian Cohorts broke into the Wood, where the
Germans made a stout Resistance. They were shut in by a Morass behind them, and
the Romans by the River and the Hills, so that both were under a Necessity to
stand their Ground, and no hopes but in their Valor, nor safety but in Victory
Nothing makes an Army more invincible, than a Necessity either to Conquer or to
Die. Count Maurice of Nassaw, being just going to fight the Battle of Newport,
sent back all the Ships which had brought his Army to Flanders, telling his
Soldiers, that they must either cut their way through the Enemy, or drink up
all the Water of the Sea. Which was followed with a Victory so much the more
Glorious, as the Army of Archduke Albert was much stronger than his* [ July 2.
1600.]
.

XXI. The Germans were not inferior to the Romans in Courage, but their
disadvantage lay in their Arms and in the Manner of the Fight; for they being
very numerous, and couped up in strait Places, had not room to wield their long
Pikes, nor was their Agility of Body of any use to them, when they were forced
to a standing Fight, without moving scarce a Foot: Whereas our Soldiers, who
were armed with Breast-plates, and who had their Hands guarded with the Hilts
of their Swords, made terrible thrusts at the large Bodies and the Naked Faces
of the Enemy, and opened themselves a way by the Slaughters that they made.
Arminius now began to flag, being either fatigued with continual labor, or
disabled by a fresh Wound, but Inguimerus did his utmost to rally the Forces,
and wanted rather Fortune than Valor Fortune may rob great Captains of
Victory, but not of the Glory which is due to them, when they have acquitted
themselves well of their Duty. We ought not to judge of them by the Success,
which is o^tentimes the Effect of mere Chance; but by their Conduct which shows
their Ability, or their Insufficiency. Notwithstanding the Admiral Gas^ar de
Coligny had lost four Battles, he was so far from losing his Reputation
thereby, that Charles IX. was even obliged to ^ue to him for Peace, so well was
the Court satisfied that his Courage was much greater than the Malignity of his
Fortune.
. Germanicus, that he might be the better known, took off his Helmet, and
desired them to give no Quarter, telling them, That they had no need of
Captives, and that there was no way of ending the War, but by the entire
Excision of the Nation When two Nations have been Engaged in many Quarrels,
there is always either open War betwixt them, or Preparations for War; and
whatsoever Peace they patch up, good Faith or Confidence is never found amongst
them., Aut bellum inter ^os populos, aut belli preparatio, aut inf^da pax.
Paterculus Hist. 1. For the hatred, says the same Author, lasts longer than
the Fear, and the Victorious Nation never ceases to hate that which is
conquered, (although it has no more to fear from them) until it is entirely
extinguished, Odium ultra metum durat, and ne in victis quidem deponitur, neque
ante invisum esse de^^n^^, quam esse desiit. Ibidem.
. Toward the Evening he retired with one Legion out of the Fight, to prepare a
Camp, and the rest pursued the Enemy with a great Slaughter till Night. As for
the Cavalry, they drew off without any advantage on either side.

XXII. Germanicus having made a Speech in praise of his Victorious Army,
erected a Trophy of Arms, with this lo^ty Inscription; The Army of the Emperor
Tiberius having conquered the Nations which are betwixt the Rhine and the Elb,
have consecrated this Monument to Mars to Jupiter and to Augustus. He made no
mention of his own Name A wise Minister ought to dissemble his own Glory, and
refer all to the Honor of his Prince. The Duke of Alva having caused his
Elogium to be put on the Pedestal of a Statute which he had erected for himself
at Antwerp, with these Words in the Close, Regis optimi Ministro fidelissimo
positum. Ruy ^omez de Sylva, a Favorite of King Philip II. said very smartly,
That the Character of the most Faithful Minister, agreed very ill to him who
robbed his Prince of his Glory, Strada Lib. ^. of his first Decad. Cabrera
adds, That Cardinal Spinoza and Ruy Gomez said, that to make this a Monument of
the Duke's Fidelity, he ought to place King Philip's Statue there instead of
his own, Chapter 12. Lib. 8. Aubery du Maurier observes farther, That Alva having
built the City of Antwerp with five Bas^ions, he called four of them* after his
own Name and Titles, viz. The Duke, Ferdinand, Toled^, and Alva, and the fifth
Paciotti, which was the Name of the Ingineer; without making any mention of his
Prince, whose most faithful Minister he called himself, In his Memoirs of
Holl^nd. There is an Example in the second Book of Sam^el, which ought never to
be forgotten by Ministers, to whom the Prince commits the Command of his
Armies, or the Direction of his Affairs; Ioab, David's General, having reduced
the City of Rabbah to a Necessity of Surrendering it self, wrote to David in
these Words; I have ^ought against Rabbah, and the City is reduced to
extremity; Now therefore gather the rest of the people together and Encamp
against the City and take it, lest I take the City and it be called after my
Name, Chapter 12. Cardinal d'Ossat speaking of Hilary of Grenoble a Capuchin-Fryar,
who boasted thar he had an absolute Power over the Mind of Henry IV. Although,
said he, he had given such Counsel to the King, it was more decent for a good
Servant, such a one as he would pass for, to have concealed himself in it, and
to have left the praise of it to the Goodness and Prudence of his Majesty,
Letter 251.
, either to avoid Envy, or because he thought his own Conscience was Theater
enough Virtue has its reward in it self, and the Wages of a good Action is to
have done it, Seneca Epist. 81.
. He ordered Stertinius to march against the Angrivarii, unless they would
immediately submit, which they did, and by accepting what Conditions were
imposed on them, obtained their Pardon.

XXIII. The Summer declining, some of the Legions were sent back by Land into
Winter Quarters; Germanicus with the rest Embarked on the River of Amisia to
return by Sea; which was so calm at first, that there was no noise heard but of
the Oars or Sails of a thousand Ships, but the sky being all on a sudden
darkened with black Clouds, which pouring a Hail-storm upon them, and
tempestuous Winds blowing at the same time from all quarters, the Waves ran so
high, that they were neither able to steer their Ships, nor see their Way. The
Soldiers unacquainted with such disasters, were under a great Consternation;
and whilst they endeavored aukwardly to help, they hindered the Seamen. At
last the Heavens and the Sea yielding to the Force of the Southwind, which
gathering strength from a vast tract of Clouds, the rapid Rivers and High
Mountains Tacitus says, That Mountains are the Cause and the Matter of
Tempests, Mo^tes causa and materia tempestatu^^. In Agricola.
of Germany, as well as from the Cold Neighborhood of the North, is generally
very violent in those parts, and dispersed these Ships through the Ocean, or
split them on Rocky Islands, or threw them on Quicksands It has been often
observed, that Captains who have been Successful in Expeditions at Land, have
always been Unfortunate in those at Sea. Every thing succeeded to Germanicus,
when he fought at Land, and all things conspired against him when he was on the
Seas. On the contrary, the Prince of Orange, who was the Founder of the
Commonwealth of Holland, was always beaten at Land, where he lost four or five
Battles, whereas in a continued War of ten years he gained every Battle that he
fought against the Spaniards at Sea, Memoirs de M. Aubery du Maurier. Thus it
was not without reason, that that brave Spaniard, Julian Romero, who had
signalized himself by so many Exploits in Land-fights, having been worsted in a
Sea Fight, out of which he swam for his Life, said to the Governor Don Lewis de
Requesens; Your Excellency knows well, that I was no Seaman, but a Good Foot
Soldier: I desire you therefore to trust me no more with a Fleet, for if you
should commit a Hundred to me, it is much to be feared, that I should lose them
all, Bernardin de Mend^za, Cap. 2. Lib. 11. of his Memoirs of the Low Countries.
, whence those that were upon the return of the Tide, got off with great
difficulty, were afterward driven at the Mercy of the Winds, the Mariners not
being able to cast Anchor, or to pump out the Water which broke into them.
Their Horses, Arms, and Baggage were thrown over board to lighten the Vessels,
which were often driven on their sides, the Waves beating over them.

XXIV. As Germany has the most boisterous Sea, and the sharpest Climate, so
this Wreck exceeded all others for the Greatness and Uncommoness of it. They
had no prospect but of an Enemies Country, or of a Boundless and Bottomless
Ocean, wherein some of our Ships were sunk, others cast on remote and desert
Isles, where the Soldiers were starved for want of Food, except some that kept
themselves alive with the Flesh of the Horses which the Waves had thrown up on
the same Shores Don Iuan Antonio de Vera, relates a Disaster altogether like
this, which ^e^el the Fleet of Charles V. at Algiers. Most of the Galleys,
says he, were broken to pieces, and most of the Ships perished in the
Emperor's sight, who had neither Biscuit nor Powder left; insomuch, that for the
Subsistence of his Army that Night and the Day following, they were forced to
kill Horses, and to distribute them through the Quarters. At last, after he had
marched twenty Leagues, he Embarked his Troops at the Cape of Metafuz; and when
there remained not a sufficient Number of Ships to receive them, he caused all
the Horses to be thrown into the Sea, which increased the general Grief, every
one being troubled to see these poor Creatures swim, and as it were, beg help
from the Men who abandoned them; for, according to the Proverb, a Man ought to
have Humanity even for the Beasts that serve him. In the Epitome of the Life of
C. V. Cabrera recites a Consolatory Letter, which his Son Philip wrote him upon
this Disaster, wherein he said to his Father, That to return from difficult
Enterprises, without Victory, never took from Kings nor Great Captains that
Glory, which is always due to Martial Valor; the most Prudent and most
Prosperous having lost as well as won; that he ought so much the more to
comfort himself, because he had yielded to nothing but the Force of Fortune,
which had conspired with the Elements against his Prudence and Greatness; that
he ought never to be angry with accidents, which depended purely on Chance;
that one has acquitted himself well, when he has projected and ordered things
well; that the good Fortune of Augustus, and that of King Ferdinand,
Grandfather to his Imperial Majesty, by the Mother's side, appeared prodigious;
and that nevertheless, if we compare their Successes with their Misfortunes, it
is hard to say, whether Fortune was a Mother or a Stepmother to them, Cap. 2.
Lib. 1. of his History.
. The Galley in which Germanicus was, came alone to the Coast of the Chauci,
where as he continued several days about the Rocks and Promontories, hoping to
get sight of some of his Ships, he was always condemning himself as the Cause
of this Calamity, and so sensibly was he touched with it There are Men, says
the same Antonio de Vera, who to show that they are above Events, affect a
Stoical Constancy in their Afflictions; and Glory, as of a Greatness of Soul,
in not shedding a Tear, or changing their Countenance under the most sensible
Calamities: But, for my part, I believe, this is altogether contrary to what
they ought to do, because such People by their insensibility or their hardness,
offend the Providence of God, who sends them these Afflictions. A certain
Person has said with great judgment, that Job that he might not be charged
with Pride, lamented his Calamity, and expressed his Grief, even to the rending
of his Clothes, not that he had lost his Patience, but to show his Doc^lity and
Submission. And this Doctrine concludes yet more strongly, when a People fall
under some very great Misfortune by obeying the Will of their Prince; for in
this case indeed, the Prince may glory of Constancy in not appearing (...), but
not of his Gratitude: St. Paul saying, that he who has not care of his own,
has (...) the Faith and is worse than an Infidel. And if a Passage of the Holy
Scriptures is not su^ficient to convince the Author, [who blames the Tenderness
and Grief, which Charles V. expressed under this Adversity] he will have, it
may be, a greater Difference to the Authority of Tacitus, who says, that
Germanicus being afflicted for the loss of part of his Army, ran up and down,
accusing himself as the Cause of this Disaster, and was about to have killed
himself. Augustus was troubled to that degree for the loss of the Legions of
Varus, that for several day^ he would eat nothing; and he was heard to sigh
often in the Night, and to cry out, Varus, Varus, give (...) my Legions. It is
therefore commendable for a Prince to be sensible of the Calamities of his
People, and to give outward Expressions of it; but withal he ought not so far
to indulge to Grief, as to neglect his Health, or the Public Affairs. Commines
with reason blames the Duke of Burgundy, for shutting himself up above six
weeks, after he had lost the Battles of Granson and Morat. Which made an
alteration not only in his Health, but also in his Sense and his Spirit. Such,
says he, are the Passions of those, who seek not the true Remedies; and
especially of Proud Princes. -- No man ought to be ashamed to show his Grief to
his private Friends; for this lightens the Heart, and makes the Spirits return;
and if not, he ought to seek for some other Remedy, as Exercise and Business,
and not to take the way this Duke took, to hide himself, and be Solitary, but
on the contrary, to drive away all Austerity, Cap. 5. Lib. 5. of his Memoirs.
Lastly, the same Commines relates with commendation, what Charles Duke of
Berry, Brother to Lewis XI. said on the occasion of 7 or 800 Men of Count de
Charolois being wounded at the Battle of Montlh^ri, That he had much rather
that things had never been begu^, than to see so many Evils come to pass upon
his account, Cap. 5. Lib. 1.
, that his Friends had much ado to restrain him from throwing himself into the
Sea. At length the Sea settling, and the Wind favoring them, several Ships
returned very much shattered, some almost without any Oars, others with Clothes
spread instead of Sails, and many so disabled, that they were towed by those
that were in a better Condition. Having ordered these to be refitted with all
haste, he sent them to the Isles in search of their Companions, by which means
many of them were recovered. The Angrivarii, who had lately submitted, brought
several whom they had ransomed from some of their Neighboring Nations. Some
who had been driven on the British Coast, were sent back by the Petty-Kings of
that Island. Those that came from remote Countries made strange relations of
uncommon Whirlwinds, Monstrous Birds and Fishes, and Creatures half Man and
half Beast, which they had seen, or which their fears made them fancy so.

XXV. As the News of this great Disaster that befell our Fleet, revived the
Hopes of the Germans, so it awakned the Care of Germanicus to prevent them
Misfortunes are so far from sinking the Courage of Great Captains, that on the
contrary, they re^ine their Prudence, rouse their Activity, augment their
Constancy, and accustom them to Brave dangers. The loss of Ostend, which after
a Siege of above three years, was no better than one great Churchyard or
Burying-place, inspired Prince Maurice of Nass^w with a Resolution to take
Esclusen, which was a Place of much greater importance, and which he took in a
few Days. The Archduke Albert, having cut off two Regiments of his Foot, and
four Troops of his Horse, which he had sent to take a Pass, he nevertheless the
next day fought the Battle of Newport, in which the Archduke was wounded;
above six hundred men slain; the Admiral of Arragon, and several other
Principal Spanish Officers made Prisoners; and all their Cannon taken, with a
hundred and five Colors.
. He orders C. Stertinius to go against the Chatti with thirty thousand Foot
and three thousand Horse, whilst he himself with a greater Army invades the
Marsi, whose General, Malovendus, lately come over to us, discovered that the
Eagle of one of Varus's Legions was hid under ground in an adjacent Wood, and
but slightly guarded I have already observed, that the Romans reverenced their
Eagles, as their Tutelar Gods. So that we need not wonder that Germanicus was
so much concerned to recover that Eagle which Malovendus gave intelligence of.
For as it was ignominious to lose the Eagles, it was Sacrilege and Impiety, not
to rescue them out of the Enemy's hands, when an occasion offered it self. It
was for this Reason, that Augustus reckoned it amongst his most glorious
Actions, that he had obliged that Parthians to restore the Eagles, which
Crassus and Marc-Anthony had lost amongst them, Sueton in his Life, and
Paterculus, Cap. 91. Lib. 2. Charles V. set such a Value on his Standard, that
when he was about to give Battle to Francis I. before Landrecy, he commanded
those who Environed it, to save the Standard, rather than his Person, i^ it
should come to that pass, that they must choose one or the other. Don Iuan de
Vera in the Epitomy of his Life.
. A Party was immediately sent out to attack the Enemy in the Front, and by
light Skirmishes to draw them from their Posts, whilst another detachment was
to wheel about behind them, and open the Earth where the Standard lay, and both
succeeded. Wherefore Germanicus advances farther into the Country, which he
lays waste, and presses upon the Enemy, that durst not give him Battle, or
whenever they did make resistance were immediately beaten, and as the Prisoners
reported, were never under greater Consternation. For they now said, that the
Romans were invincible, and to be broken by no Misfortunes, who after such a
loss of their Fleet and of their Arms, after the Shores had been covered with
the Carcasses of their Men, and of their Horses, fought with their wonted
Courage and Vigor, and as if their Numbers had been increased.

XXVI. Hence the Army returned into Winter Quarters, rejoicing that they had
repaired their Losses at Sea, by this prosperous Expedition, and Germanicus
with his Bounty increased their Joy, by making up to every one of them what
loss they had received; And there is no doubt but that the Enemy was brought so
low, that they designed to sue for Peace, and that the next Summer would have
put an End to the War. But Tiberius by repeated Letters importuned him to
return home to the Triumph that was decreed him; telling him, That he had seen
variety of Events, had run hazards enough, and had fought great and successful
Battles. That he would also remember the great Losses he had received There was
never a Captain so Fortunate, whose Undertakings have not been sometimes
checkered with Misfortunes; and the greatest Generals of Armies, have had the
greatest Disasters. Besides, that Fortune is fickle in War, there are a
thousand Accidents, which the greatest humane Prudence is not able to foresee,
nor able to prevent, if it could foresee them.
, not through any Error of his own, but from the Winds and Waves. As for
himself who had been by Augustus sent nine times into Germany, he did more
there by Conduct than Force Men more easily wind themselves out of difficulties
by address, than break through them by force^ Lewis XI. the Tiberius of our
Kings, obtained his ends of the King of England, and the Dukes of Normandy, of
Britany, of Burgundy, and of the Duchess of Savoy, who were all in a
Confederacy against him, by as many Particular Treaties, which ba^^led all
their ill designs. After the Death of the Duke of Burgunay he Reunited to his
Crown Peronne, Mondidier, Roie, Arras, Hesdin and Bo^logne, by gaining the Lord
of Cords, who was Governor thereof. And Co^^^ines says, that he could not in
a long time have done tha^ by Force, which he did by secret ln telligence, by
the means of this Lord* Lib. 5. Cap. 15. and 16. And of all the Persons that I
ever knew Lewis XI. was the most dextrous in getting himself out of the Briars
in times o^ Adversity, and in gaining to his interest a Man that could serve or
hurt him, Lib. 1. Cap. 10.
. It was by this way that he obliged the Sigambri The People of Guelderland and
Fries^and.
to submit, the Su^vi, and King Marobod^^s to accept a Peace. That now the
Romans were revenged and their Honor repaired; the Cherusci and the other
rebellious Nations might be securely left to worry one another by Domestic
Quarrels. Germanicus desiring one Year more to complete his Undertaking Jealous
and Suspicious Princes, as Tiberius was, had rather lose a certain Good, than
to be obliged for it to a Captain, whose Glory gives them jealousy. They love
Conquests very well, but commonly they cannot endu^e the Conquerors. Cardinal
Richelieu said, that there is no Prince in a worse Condition than ^e, who
instead of governing himself with respect to the Public Interests, has
Passion for his Guide; and who being not able always to do himself the things
which he is obliged to, is uneasy to let them be done by another; and that to
be capable to suffer himself to be served, is not one of the least Qualities
which a great King can have. Chap. 6. de la 1 party de son Testament Pol.
Observe by the way, the Malignity of Tiberius. He calls Germani^us to the
Enjoyment of the Consulship, and to the Honor of a Triumph, before he had
completed the Conquest of Germany to turn that into Grace and Favor to him,
which he was upon the Point of meriting under the Title of a Reward. By this
advance, he changed the Obligation, and would have that appear to be the Effect
of Paternal Kindness, which was Tyrannical injustice.
, Tiberius more briskly attacks his Modesty with the Offer of a New Consulship,
which he was to execute at Rome in Person; adding, That if the War should
continue, he ought to leave it as a Scene of Glory for his Brother Drusus, who,
now the Empire had no other Enemies, could not acquire the Title of Imperator,
nor merit a Triumph, unless in the German War Thus Princes endeavor to
justify their Resolutions, by spec^ous Reasons, notwithstanding they have
power to command absolutely. Modesty serves for a Cover of the Injustice.
. Germanicus pressed it no farther, though he knew well enough The more insight
we have into the Thoughts of Princes, the less we ought to discover it; for
nothing offends them more, than to show them that we are more cunning than
themselves. Part of our respect, says Tacitus, consists in feigning that we
understand nothing of their Artifices. Intelligebantur arts, sed pars obsequii
in ^o, ne depre^enderentur Hist.
, that these were no other than specious Pretenses, and that he was recalled
through Envy, when he was at the very Point of accomplishing his glorious
Enterprises Philip II. of Spain, a Prince who had much of Tiberius in him,
dealt, almost in the same manner with his Brother Don John of Austria, in
giving the Command of the Army in the War of Grenada, to Don Lewis Fejar^o
Marquis of V^lez, under color of ^asing Don John who had the whole weight of
the Government of this Kingdom upon him; but in truth to take out of his hands
the Glory of reducing the Rebels, which were already much weakened. D^^go de
Mendoza, Cap. ^. Lib. 3. of the War of Grenada.
.

XXVII. About the same time Lib^ Drusus of the Family of the Scribonii, was
accused of a Conspiracy against the Government. I shall give an exact Account
of the Rise, Progress, and Issue of this Affair, because this was the first
time those pernicious Practices were set on foot, which for a long time after
afflicted the State, and preyed on the very Vitals of it. Firmius Catus, a
Senator, and an intimate Friend of Libo, puts this imprudent Youngman, who was
apt enough to be amused with vain Hopes Monsieur de Cinqmars, Grand-Ecuier of
France, much resembled Lib^* but with this Difference, that Libo was ruined by
the Treachery of his Confident, whereas Monsieur de Cinqmars ruined his
Confident, Monsieur (...), a Man of as great Virtue, as Ca^us was of Vill^^y.
, upon trinketting with Astrologers, Magicians, and Interpreters of Dreams The
Predictions of Astrologers and Fortune Tellers, have in all times been fatal to
Great Men, who have given credit to them; for either they have rendered them
suspected to their Prince, as Persons who build their hopes on Revolutions and
Opportunities which they wait for, or they have engaged them in Unfortunate
Enterprises, of which they would have never dreamt, if their Credulity had not
blinded them. Mariana relates a remarkable Instance of this in Don Diego, Duke
of Viseu, who being at the Head of a Conspiracy against John II. King of
Portugal, had the Confidence or rather Rashness to go to the King, who sent for
him; being persuaded that he should escape so great a Danger, because it had
been predicted to him that he should reign; and that if the King seized him, he
should be succored in the very nick of time, by all the Great Men that were
engaged in the Conspiracy. But he was mistaken in his reasoning, for the King
stabbed him with his own hand; saying to him. Go and tell the Duke of Braganza
the issue of the Plot which he laid. Whereupon Mariana concludes with the Words
of Tacitus, That Astrologers are a Generation of Men ^it only to abuse Great
Persons, by Vain and Flattering Promises, who have and always will find Belief
and Applause in all Countries, notwithstanding their Lies are so common and so
well known to all the World* Lib. 24. Cap. ult. of his History. It Is true,
says Father Paul, these Predictions sometimes come to pass by Chance, or by
some other secret Cause; but most commonly they are the Cause that a great many
Credulous People run themselves upon ruin, Hist. of the Council of Trent, Lib.
5. To conclude, it looks as if God permitted Great Men to be beset by
Astrologers to humble them; for he has always sent them so many Disgraces and
Afflictions, as these Ra^cally Cheats have promised them Grandeurs and
Successes. These study only to make them Prognostics, which set them above the
Condition of Mortals; and God, on the contrary, sooner or later lets them see,
that their Hopes are Vain and Wicked.
; and to kindle his Ambition reminds him at the same time of his Illustrious
Ancestors, that Pompey was his Great Grandfather; Scribonia, Augustus's first
Wife, his Aunt; and the Caesar's his Kinsmen B^hold here what is incident to
most great Men's Children, their Governors foment their Ambition, instead of
giving a Check to it: they ent^^tain them with nothing but their Noble
Extraction, with their great Alliances, with the Pretensions of their Family,
which are very often imaginary; and with the great Estate they have in
reversion, the Prospect of which plunges them in Luxury, and sometimes reduces
them to a shameful Poverty. They puff them up with the Titles of your H^ghness
and your Se^enity; which in a little time will grow as common, as those of
Count and Marquis, which are now taken by the Sons of Fa^mers of the King's
Revenues, and such upstar^ Men: Insomuch, that i^ this Abu^e continues, one may
say in ^rance and Italy what was said to the Emperor by an Italian Ambassador,
who went from his Court in very ^ll Weather. That there was no need to fear
either Rain or Thunder, since his Imperial Majesty had filled the World with so
much Serenity.
; persuades him to a more Splendid way of Living, to borrow Money to support
it; and that he might have the greater Evidence against him, becomes himself a
Companion in his Debaucheries, and a Surety for his Debts.

XXVIII. As soon as Catus got witnesses enough, and some of them Libo's Slaves*
who were ready to corroborate his Evidence, he gave Tiberius, by the means of
Flaccus Vescularius a Roman Knight who had his Ear, some account of the Person,
and of the Matter which he had to discover, and desired that he might himself
have access to him. Tiberius did not slight the Discovery, but refused to admit
him into his presence It is a Niceness becoming the Prudence of Princes, to
have no communication with Traitors. Guicardin commends it as a Noble
Resolution of a Spanish Lord, who would not lend his Palace to lodge the Duke
of Bourbon, Constable of France, who was come to Madrid. I can re^use your
Majes^y nothing, (said he ^o Charles V.) but I do acclare, that if the Duke of
Bou^bon lodges in my house, I will burn it as soon as he has left it, as a
Place infected with the Contagion of his p^rfidiousness, and consequently not
fit to be ever inhabited by Men of Honor. Lib. 16. of his History of Italy.
And it is for this Reason, that they raze to the Ground, the Houses of
Traitors, and sow the Place with Salt, that nothing may grow there.
, seeing whatsoever was to be said on either side, might as well be
communicated by the intercourse of Flac^us. In the mean time, he honors Libo
with the Praetorship; takes him to his Table; discovers not the least anger or
strangeness in his Countenance, or in his Words, so dextrous was he in
concealing his Resentments; and when he might have stopped him in his courses,
he chose rather to let him go on that he might know all There is nothing more
dangerous than the Silence of Princes, with respect to those whom they hate.
For this Silence, as Commines observes well, emboldning those who are in fault,
to attempt imprudent things, gives the Prince an opportunity to take a full
Revenge on them. Cap. 1. ult. Lib. 3. And speaking of Lewis XI. and of the Duke
of Burgundy: The King, says he, more effectually made War against him, by
letti^g him alone, and by secretly raising Enemies against him, than if he had
declared against him; for had the Duke seen a Declaration against him, he would
have quitted his Undertaking, and so have prevented all that which afterward
came upon him, Lib. 5. Cap. 4. By a contrary Reason, a Prince can never do a
greater Favor to his Subject, than to admonish him of his Faults, or to
prevent him from committing them. Nothing can be more kind, than what Cardinal
de Richelieu did to a Page of his, who was a Relation of the Messieurs de
Marilla^. Having asked this Page, W^ether these Gentlemen knew that he was in
his service, the Page answered, No, but that he intended to go and see them
with the first Opportunity; not knowing that they were the declared Enemies of
his Master: The Cardinal, who had a Kindness for this Youngman, said to him,
Don't do it, if you would have me continue my kindness to you; but never speak
a Syllable of this that I have now said to you; for if you do, you must never
expect any thing from me. Memoirs (...) C. de R. concerning the Ministry of the
Cardinals de Richelieu and Mazarine. But to return to the Honor which Tiberius
did Libo, to admit him to his Table, and to give him a Praetorship; I may say,
that there are Princes who dissemble their resentments, as Horace's Eutrapelus,
who gave rich Cloths so those whom he would destroy, knowing that these Cloths
would pu^^^ them up, and make them forget their Duty. Epist* 18. Book 1.
; Until one Iunius who had been solicited to raise Infernal Spirits by Spells,
discovered the Matter to Fulcinius Trio, an Eminent Promoter, and one that was
ambitious of making himself famous by Villainies There are People of such
corrupt Minds, that they had rather perpetuate their Names by detestable
actions, than lead an obscure Li^e, which will never be spoken of after their
^eaths. Tacitus says Ann. 11. that the Greater the In^amy is, the more Charms
it has for great Villains. Such a one was Cabrino ^onduli, Lord of Cremona,
who as he went to Execution, told his Confessor and those also that were
present, that he repented of nothing more, than of having let slip one brave
opportunity, which was of throwing headlong from the top of the (...) of a
Castle, Pope John XXIII, and the Emperor Sigismund, who went up alone with him,
saying, that this Action would have made him been talked of for ever. Pa^^^us
Iovius in the Elogy of Philip Maria, Duke of Milan.
. He immediately draws up an Accusation against the Criminal, goes to the
Consuls, requires the Senators to be assembled. The Senators are summoned with
this Notice, that they were to consult about a Criminal Matter of great
Importance.

XXIX. In the mean time, Libo puts on a Mourning Habit, and accompanied with
some Ladies of the Greatest Quality in Rome, goes from House to House to
entreat their Relations that they would appear in his behalf, but they excused
themselves upon different pretenses, but all from the same Fears There is a
Proverb which says, That the Unfortunate have no Kindred. Insaelicium nulli
sunt affines.
. On the Day of his Trial, being much enfeebled with Grief and Fear, or
because, as some say, he would be thought sick, he was brought in a Litter to
the Door of the Senate House, where leaning on his Brother, in the most
submissive manner, he begs Pardon of Tiberius, who appeared not in the least
moved thereby: By and by the Emperor reads the Accusations, and the Names of
their Authors, with such temper, that he seemed neither to extenuate nor
aggravate the Crimes.

XXX. Besides Trio and Catus, there came also two Accusers more, Fonteius
Agrippa, and C. Livius, amongst whom there was some dispute which of them had
the Right to accuse him; but when they could not agree amongst themselves, and
Libo came without an Advocate, Livius declared, that he would exhibit the
several Crimes wherewith he was charged. Of which one was, That he had
consulted with the Astrologers, whether he should ever be rich enough to cover
the Appian way from Rome to Brundusium with Money, and the rest were much of
the same nature, Ridiculous and Pitiful. Only there was a Writing in Libo's
hand, upon which the Accuser insisted very much, wherein were the Names of the
Caesar's, and of some Senators, with Dangerous and Mysterious Notes added to
them. Libo disowning it, 'twas thought ^it to put some of his Slaves who knew
his hand to the Question. But because it was forbidden by an ancient Decree of
the Senate, to examine a Slave by torture against the Life of his Master;
Tiberius, who was ingenious at inventing new Laws There are occasions wherein
the Prince for the Safety of his Person, or for the Repose of his People, is
constrained to accommodate the Laws to the Necessity of his Affairs.
Politicians pretend, that the Laws consist not in words, but in the Sense which
the Public Authority gives them; and that they have no force but as far as the
Prince lends it them, who is the sole legal Interpreter of them. Howsoever that
be, a good Prince ought as much as is possible to avoid coming to new Examples
of severity therein; for whatsoever the Cause or the Color may be, the Novelty
of the procedure makes him pass for Cruel. The action of Pope Sixtus-Quintus
who ordered a Youth to be put to Death, who was under Seventeen years old,
telling the Governor of Rome, that he would give him ten of his own years, that
he might be of the Age required by the Laws Leti lib. 1. part 2 of his Life.
, this Action I say ought rather to be forgotten, than imitated.
, ordered Libo's Slaves to be sold to the Public Register, that they might be
examined against him by torture, without infringing the Law It ill becomes
Princes to use certain tricks and shams of Art, to put a color upon Frauds,
and real Injustice. The manner of the same Sixtus-Quintu^'s dealing with the
Author of a Pasquinade upon his Sister Donna Camilla, is another action that
did no honor to his Pontificate. We have promised you your Life and 1000
Pistols, said he to this Unhappy Man, and we freely give you both, [for coming
and making the Discovery your self] but we reserved in our mind a Power to have
your ^ongue and both your Hands cut off, to hinder you from speaking or writing
any more. L^ti lib. 2. part 2. of his Life. It is of him that the Pagliari
speaks in his 210 Observation, where he says. We have seen in our days a
Prince, who did not invent new Laws, but who extended the old ones to all cases
which he had a Mind to comprehend under them; saying, that this was the
Intention of the Prince, who made them, although^ these Cases were not
expressed in them. Not only all Germany, but also all Europe, detested the
Fraud which Charles V. put upon the Landtgrave of Hesse, by the help of one
word of the Treaty, wherein his Ministers slipped in a W instead of an N, so that
in the Copy which the Landtgrave signed, it was written Euvige, whereas the
Minutes or the rough Draught had Einige; which entirely altered one of the
Essential Conditions of the Treaty, which was, that the Landtgrave stipulated
to be sent back without any Imprisonment, ohne einige ge fangus; whereas the
Emperor on the contrary, having caused him to be arrested by the Duke of Alva,
said, that by the Treaty he was obliged only not to hold him in perpetual
Imprisonment, as the Word Euvige signifies. Heiss. li* 3. part. 1. of his
History of the Empire. Don Iuan Antonio de Vera endeavors to (...) Charles V,
by saying, that the (...) had no reason ^o (...) that a Promise to exempt him
(...) perpetual Imprisonment, (...) that he was (...) But this does (...) the
(...) to the Let^^ ((...) written in it) yet he cannot he excused from breaking
his Word, seeing he knew, that the Landtgrave and his Mediators, Maurice Duke
of Saxony, and the Elector of Brandenburgh, had agreed, and capitulated for the
Contrary.
. Upon which Libo having desired that he might have time given him till the
next Day for his answer, went home, and sent, by the Hands of his Kinsman P.
Q^irinius, his last Petition to the Emperor; whose Answer was, that he must
address himself to the Senate.

XXXI. In the mean time, his House was beset with Soldiers, who made such a
Noise in the Porch, as if they desired to be taken notice of; so that
perceiving what he was to expect, he was Melancholy at this last Feast, which
he had made to take his farewell of Pleasure, and called for some body to kill
him; laid hold on his Servants, and put a Sword into their Hands; but they
trembling and drawing back threw down the Light that stood on the Table, and
the Horror of the Darkness suiting with his design, he immediately gave himself
two stabs in the Belly. His Freed man hearing him groan as he fell, ran to him,
and the Soldiers retired at the sad Spectacle. The Accusation was still
prosecuted in the Senate with the same Heat: However, Tiberius swore, that he
would have interceeded with the Senate for his Life, notwithstanding his Guilt,
had he not prevented him by a Voluntary Death.

XXXII. His Estate was divided amongst the Accu^ers, and his Prae^orship was
given to some of the Senate before the Assembly was held for the Election of
Officers. At the same time Cotta Messalinus moved, that Libo's Image might not
be carried in the Procession of the Funerals of his Kindred. Cneius Lentulus,
that none of the Family of the Scribonii might take the Surname of Drusus. The
Names of Traitors ought to be buried in Eternal (...). To bear their Name, is
to partake of their Infamy with them, and in some sort to approve of what they
have done. John II. King of Portugal, giving to Emanuel, who afterward
succeeded him in the Throne, the Con^i^cation of the Duke of Viseu, his
Brother's Estate, made him take the Title of Duke of Beja, instead of that of
Viseu, that this young Prince might not bear the Name of a Tray^or who would
have killed his King, Mariana, Cap. ult. Lib. 24, of his History. And since
that time, there have never been any Dukes of Vise^, notwithstanding Emanuel
and his Son John III had a great many Children. The Family of Valieri at
Venice, is, as they say, a Branch of the ancient Family Faliers, which changed
the first Letter of their Name, to show, that they detested and execrated the
Memory of the Doge, Marin Falier, who was beheaded for attempting to make
himself Sovereign of the State*
Pomponius Flaccus, that a Public Day of Thanksgiving might be appointed for
this Deliverance. Lucius Publius, Gallus Asinius, Papius Mutilus, and Lucius
Apronius, that an Oblation might be made to Jupiter, to Mars, and to Concord;
and that the 13th of September, being the Day on which Libo killed himself
might be observed as an Anniversary Festival. I have given the Names and the
Flattering Opinions of these Men, to show that this is no new Evil in the
Commonwealth. The Senate also made a Decree to banish Astrologers, and
Magicians out of Italy, of which number Lucius Pituanius was thrown headlong
from the Tarpeian Stone. Publius Martius, according to the ancient Custom Which
was to whip the Criminal before his Head was cut off.
was executed without the Esqu^line Gate, the Consuls having first pronounced
Sentence on him with sound of Trumpet.

XXXIII. In the next Assembly of the Senate. Q. Haterius, who was a Consular
Person, and Octavi^s Fronto who had been Praetor, spoke much against the Luxury
of the City; and a Decree passed, that for the time to come, none should be
served at their Tables in Vessels of Massy Gold, nor should Men wear A very
Rich and Costly Silk, much different from ours, in which the Great Men of Rome,
so magnificent in their Habits, would have thought themselves poorly clad.
Indian Silk. Fronto went farther, and moved that Silver Plate, Furniture, and
the Number of Servants should be regulated by sumptuary Laws; for it was yet
customary for the Senators to propose any thing else which they thought for the
Good of the State, as well as to give their Opinion on the Matter already
proposed. Gallus Asinius opposed this, saying, That the Empire being enlarged,
the Wealth of Private Persons was also proportionably Increased, and that this
was no new thing, but agreeable to the Manners of our Ancestors. There was
quite another manner of living in the Age of the Scipio 's, than what had been
in that of the Fabricii, and yet both suitable to the Condition of the
Commonwealth at those several times. When That was little, the Romans lived in
little Houses; but after that was raised to such a pitch of Glory, it was but
fit that its Citizens should make a greater Figure. That there is no way to
determine what is Excess or Moderation in Plate, Equipage, and in those things
which are for the convenience of Life, but from the Riches of the Possessor.
That the Laws had made a Distinction betwixt the Revenues of Senators and
Knights, not for any natural difference that was betwixt them, but that those
who were in the greatest Places and highest Stations, might be best
accommodated with every thing that might contribute to the Satisfaction of the
Mind, or the Health of the Body It is but just, that Princes who have so great
Cares, and such laborious Employs, should have Diversions in proportion to
their Toyls, that there may be such a Consort betwixt the Mind and the Body,
that one might not be a Burden to the other. The nature of Affairs of State,
says M. the Cardinal de Richelieu, so much the more requires an unbending of
the Mind, as the weight thereof is heavier than that of all other Affairs; and
the strength of the Mind and the Body being limited, continual labor would in
a little time exhaust them. It allows all sorts of honest Diversions, which do
not take off the Persons, who make use of them, from those things whereunto
they ought principally to apply themselves The first Part of his Politic
Testament, Sect. 5, Chapter 8. But it is not with the Pleasures of Princes as with
those of the Common People; it is their Mind that measures them, and not their
Body. They keep a certain Mean, by the help of which the Mind grows stronger
and more vigorous, in not applying themselves either to any business or
pleasures, but such as are necessary to maintain a good Habit of Body, and
consequently, to continue still Princes. For in effect, they are not so, when
Health fails them, seeing that Affairs are not dispatched, Audiences not given,
their Designs broken or suspended, and every thing is at a stand upon the
failure of the first Movement: Whereupon follow Complaints, Murmurings, Change
of Minds, Tyranny in the Ministers, and Despair in the Subjects. In short,
nothing is wanting to a Prince who has Health, since without it there is no
true Pleasure, and with it any labor is supportable, Cap. 1. Lib. 9. of his
History. And in another place, he says, that it is Health that makes great
Kings, whereas Sickness makes Subjects of them. And from this Principle he
concludes, that Princes ought not to have much commerce with Women; the
Frequency of which enervates the Vigor both of the Mind and Body, and is the
Cause, that most of them die in the Flower of their Age, Lib. 4. Cap. 2. And
speaking of the Dukes of Ioyeuse and Ep^rnon, who drew Henry III. to a Soft and
Voluptuous Life, under a Pretense of taking care of his Health, he says, That
on the contrary, there have never been any Princes who have lived longer, than
those who have employed their Minds most about the Affairs of Government, lib.
12. cap. 11. Witness Charles-Emanuel l. Duke of Savoy, and ^hristian IV. King
of Denmark, both of them the most laborious Princes of Europe, and both
threescore and ten years old. Happy was that King of Portugal, (Alphonso) who
having spent some days successively in hunting, met with Counselors at his
return, who took the Liberty to tell him, that at the Hour of his Death, God
would not require an account of him of the Beasts and Birds which he had not
killed, but of the Men whose Prayers and Complaints he should have neglected to
hear. In a Spanish Treatise, Entitled, Audiencia de Principes.
Words that deserve to be Engraved on the Hearts of Princes.
; unless they would have the Greatest Men be oppressed with a greater Weight of
Cares, and be exposed to more Dangers, and not be allowed the means to sweeten
their Lives, and secure their Persons. Gallus with these specious Colors,
gained and easy assent from Persons whose Inclinations lay the same way;
which, however, was no better than a Confession of their Vices Men are always
of that opinion which is most agreeable to their Manners; and by this Maxim we
may make a good Judgment of their Manners by their Opinions, La^dibus arguitur
vini vin^sus Homerus, says Horace, Ep. lib. 1. Ep. 19.
Tiberius added, That this was not a time for Reformation, and that if any
dissolution of Manners appeared, the State should not want one to Reform it
Princes are never pleased to hear Discourses of Reformation; for under the
Color of reforming Luxury, and other Abuses, which creep into Civil Societies,
the Censors often go up to the very Springs of Government, the Secrets of which
ought not to be laid open to Subjects. Besides, the Reformation of Abuses is
not proper to be made at all times. If Physicians need wait for a Proper time
to purge a sick Person, ^ Prince has much greater reason to use this
Precaution, seasonably to apply the Remedies which are necessary to the
Body-Politick, which is always charged with many humors, which it is dangerous
to stir too much. A great Person said to some who spoke to him of the Disorders
of his age; Let it run, it will die soon, for it is very sick. In the Aphorisms
of Anthony Perez.


XXXIV. Upon which L. Piso complained of the Illegal ways of obtaining Offices:
of the Corruptions of the Courts of Judicature; of the Insolence of Advocates;
who menaced People with Accusations; protesting that, he would retire from the
City, and live in some remote and obscure Country, and at the same time went
out of the Senate House. Tiberius was incensed, however he caressed Piso with
fair words It is the Quintessence of Knowledge, to pass sometimes for Ignorant;
and the greatest Victory of Reason, to suffer ones self to be overcome by the
present Necessity. David himself put this Reason of State in practice. He was
willing enough to punish Ioab, for killing Abner; but it being dangerous to
raise troubles in the beginning of his Reign, he deferred the Punishment of this
Crime, saying, I am this day weak though anointed King, 2 Samuel 3.
, and put his Relations upon using their endeavors to prevail with him to
stay. A while after, Piso gave another instance of as great freedom, when he
commenced a Law Suit against Urgulania, who was so much in favor with Augusta,
that she thought her self above the reach of the Laws. As Urgulania instead of
appearing to the Summons, went to the Emperor's Palace It is of pernicious
example for a Prince to permit his Palace to be a Sanctuary to those who
contemn the Authority of the Magistrates. A famous Carver, who fled into
Arragon, for having resisted the Justice of Madrid, could never obtain his
Pardon of Philip II. notwithstanding that he was the best Workman of his
Profession, and that this King had great need of him to work on the Escurial.
, setting Piso at defiance; so he desisted not from his Prosecution,
notwithstanding Augusta complained that she her self was Affronted, and exposed
thereby. Tiberius thinking it was but decent for him to show so much
complaisance to his Mother It is very becoming a Prince to be complaisant to
his Mother, so long as it is not to the prejudice of the Laws and his
Reputation. A certain Prince being importuned by his Mother, to grant her an
unjust thing, excused himself, saying, that she would sell him too dear the
Nine Months that she had carried him. The Pagliari says, after the Goselin,
That that which ruined Ferrante Gonzaga, Governor of Milan, with C. V. was his
suffering his Daughter and his Son-in-Law Fabricius Colonna to intermeddle in
recommending the Causes of private Persons to the Public Magistrates.
Observation 40. Queen Margaret blamed her Brother Henry III. for suffering
himself to be influenced by the Persuasions of his Minions Maugiron and
Saint-Luke, to that degree, that he went himself to solicit a Lawsuit for
Madame de Seneterre, against M. de la Chastre, because the Latter was in the
Service of the Duke of Alenson his Brother, Lib. 2. of his Memoirs, The Majesty
of Kings, says Cardinal de Richelieu, obliges them to reserve themselves for
the Party of Reason, which is the only one that they ought to espouse on all
occasions. They cannot do otherwise, without divesting themselves of the
Quality of Judges and Sovereigns, to take upon them that of Parties, which in
some sort sinks them into the Condition of Private Men. Those who are to defend
themselves against the Power of a King, know too well that they cannot do it by
force, and therefore have recourse to Intrigues, to Artifices, and secret
Practices to secure themselves, which often raises great disturbances in
Kingdoms. Pol. Test. part 1. c. 6.
. as to promise to go himself to the Praetor's Court, and appear on Urgulania's
behalf; and in order to it went out of his Palace, ordering his Guards to
follow him at a Distance. As the People flocked about him, he appeared very
composed, talking freely of several things as he went to prolong the time; in
the mean time, Piso's Friends importuned him to let fall his suit, but to no
purpose; however, before the Emperor had reached the Court, he was acquainted,
that Augusta had ordered Piso the Sum of Money that he demanded: So that the
Issue of this Affair was not inglorious to Piso There is nothing more dangerous
for a Great Man, than to come off with advantage from an Affair wherein the
Prince's Authority seems to have been (...)
, and very much for the Honor of Tiberius. But Urgulania grew so assuming,
that she refused to come and give her testimony in a Cause that was heard
before the Senate, so that the Praetor was sent to examine her at her own
house; whereas it was always the Custom, even for the Vestal Virgins
themselves, to come into the Courts whenever they were summoned to give their
Testimony.

XXXV. I would not mention the stop that was put to Public Affairs this Year,
but that it is worth the while to know the different Opinions of Cn. Piso and
Asin^us Gallus It is the Duty of an Historian, as Tacitus says in the Preface
to his History, to relate not only the Events of things, but also the Causes
and Motives which produced them, nothing can make a History more instructive,
than faithfully to report the Opinions of those who have had a share in the
Consultations of the Great Affairs which it speaks of. For it is in these
Opinions, that we discern the Ability, the Interests, the Passions, and all the
Good or Evil qualities of those who have delivered them. Amongst the Modern
Writers, those who have excelled in this Kind, are the Famous Friar Paul in the
Histories of the Council of Trent, and of the Interdict of Venice; the C.
Bentivoglio and Strada in the History of the Wars of the Low-Countrys; Lewis
Cabr^^^ in his Philip II. The Author of the History of the Union of Portugal
with Castile, attributed by the Italians to Ierom Conestaggi^ a Genouese
Gentleman; and restored by Father Bel^azar Gracian, and by some other Spanish
Writers, to Do^ John de Silva, Count of Portelegre in Portugal.
, on this Occasion. Tiberius having said, that he should be absent for a few
days, Piso was of Opinion, that they ought the rather to proceed in public
Business, it being for the Honor of the Commonwealth, that the Senators and
the Knights could exercise their Offices in the absence of the Princes A
Republican Opinion, as Pis^'s was, was not in season under an absolute Prince.
And although Opinions ought to be free, they ought however to be suited to the
Form of the present Government. And it i^ thus that Tacitus makes a Roman
Senator speak, who remembered the Times he was born in, and the Form of
Government in the City and the State, under his Fathers; that h^ admired the
Past, and conformed himself to the Present, Hist. 4.
. Gallus seeing that Piso had prevented him in taking the Popular side, opposed
him; saying, That nothing could be done with Majesty, nor suitable to the
Gaandeur of the Roman Empire, but in the Emperor's presence, and therefore the
Affairs of Italy and of the Provinces, ought to be adjourned until his Return.
This Debate was managed with great heats on both sides, in the Presence of
Tiberius, who held his peace; however Gallus's Opinion prevailed.

XXXVI. Gallus had also a Contest with the Emperor, for he moved, that the
Assemblies for Election of Magistrates should be held but once in five years;
that the Commanders of Legions who had not been already Praetors, should be
then chosen Praetors Elect; and that the Prince should then nominate 12
Praetors for every year.

There is no doubt but that there was a farther Design in this Motion, which
struck at the very Soul of the Monarchy Princes cannot be too careful in
examining the Opinions and Counsels of their Ministers; for it happens
oftentimes, that they lose their Authority by the Methods which appear to them
proper to enlarge it, for want of reflecting sufficiently on the Motives which
they who advise them may have, Ips^ qui suadet, considerandus est, said Mucian
to Vespasian, Tacit. Hist. 2. Ferdinand the Catholic, told his Son-in-Law,
Philip ^. the Father of Charles V. That the Ministers and Counselors of
Princes, were like Spectacles, which although they are convenient for those who
have not good Eyes, are of such a use that it is unfortunate to stand in need
of them. The Treatise Entitled, The Audience of Princes.
. However, Tiberius, who would seem to take it, as if it had been designed to
enlarge his Power, answered, That he could scarce with modesty choose so many
Persons, and exclude as many more at the same time; Men, says Anthony Perez,
in the Epistle Dedicatory of his Relations, present themselves before Kings as
a Picture, and with the best Colors, that Arti^ice can lay on. Thus, it is
almost impossible, but Princes must be often deceived in the Choice of their
Ministers and their Couns^llor^. Cardinal d^ (...) comments thus, upon this
Aphorism of Perez. Oftentimes, says he, Men have no sooner changed their
Condition, but they change their Humour^ or to speak more properly, they
discover that, which they had dissembled until that time, to compass their
Ends, Section 1. Cap. 2. of the first Part of his Polit. Testam. If, says he
in another place, the Mask with which most Men cover their Faces; and if the
Artifices which they commonly make use of to disguise themselves, and conceal
their Faults, keep them from being known, until that being possessed of great
Places, they appear as much Unworthy, as they were esteemed Virtuous when they
were chosen, the mistake ought immediately to be redressed; and if indulgence
may bear with some ^^ight incapacity, it ought never to go so far in favor of
particular Interests, as to suffer Vices which are prejudicial to the State,
Cap. 7. of the second Part of the same Testament.
That if it is so hard a matter to prevent Discontents now the Elections are
every year, and the Disappointment more tolerable, by reason of so near hopes,
what hatred should he incurr from those, who should be put out of a Capacity of
being chosen in 5 years. Besides, what assurance could there be had so long
beforehand, of the Continuance of any Man's Behavior or Fortunes? Persons are
so apt to be assuming upon annual Designations to Offices, how much more
exalted would they be, when they have the Honor of them for five years, either
in Possession or Designation All these Reasons conclude against the Perpetuity
of Governments, which is spoken of in the first Note on the 7th Chap. of the
first Book of the Annals.
. That this would in effect, make the Magistrates five times as many as they
are, and subvert those Laws, which to improve the Industry by Competitors, have
limited the time both for acquiring and enjoying Offices. And with this
plausible Speech he prevented the Diminution of his Power Princes, says
Anthony Perez, get rid of a troublesome Affair, by answering upon some other
subject, quite different from what is proposed to them, when they see that
there is a design to surprise them. This Policy was much practiced by Cardinal
Mazarine, who affected to answer as if he had been at Cross-purposes, when any
thing was desired of him which he was not willing to grant; or when he was
spoken to upon a Business, on which he did not think it sit to explain himself.
He told one of his Confidents, that nothing had been more useful (...) him in
Audiences, than to ^eign some difficulty to express himself well in French.
.

XXXVII. The addition which he made to the scanty Reven^es of some of the
Senators, makes the ill Reception which he gave to the Petition of M. Hortalus,
who was notoriously Poor, the more surprising. This young Nobleman was Grandson
to the Orator Hortensius, and Augustus, by the Gift of a Thousand great
Sesterces, had prevailed with him to Marry, that so Noble a Family might not be
extinguished Ammirato in the 8th Discourse of the second Book of his Commentary
on Tacitus, ^aith, That it is the Glory of Princes to preserve the ancient
Nobility, perch a quanto piu nobili person commandano (...) piu la lor gloria
ne divien maggiore; That is, the more Noble Subjects they have, the more Honor
and Esteem redounds thence to their Government. And half a Page after, he adds,
I am not ignorant that some may be ready to tell me, that I reason more like a
plain Simple Man, than like a Statesman, because the meaner Birth and the
meaner Fortunes the Subjects are of, the more the Prin^^ lives in Peace and
Safet^. -- I answer, That my Intention is not to give lessons to Tyrants, but
to show what good Princes ought to be. [An answer which would give offense to
many at this day, who make their greatness consist in the depressing of great
Families.] As for Ammirato's reason for the Preservation of Illustrious
Families, it puts me in mind of that, which a Duke of Ostrook gave me at
Venice, to prove to me, that the King of Poland is the greatest of all Kings,
est enim, these are his own Words, dominus dominantium, and tot Regum Rex, quot
Pal^tinorum. To whom I answered, That this reason proved, that his King was the
least of all Kings, seeing that all the Palatines of Poland were Kings. And it
was in this Sense that the last Duke of Burgundy said unpleasantly, that for
one King that there was in France, he wished there were six. Commines, Chap. 8.
Book 3. of his Memoirs. Whence it follows, that the fewer great Men that there
are in a State, the Greater is the Prince of it.
. Hortalus having placed his our Children before the Door of the Senate, who
met that day in the Palace, instead of delivering his Opinion on the Matter
which was under debate, he delivered himself to the Senate in these words,
(casting his Eyes sometimes on the Statue of Augustus, and sometimes on that of
Hortensius, placed amongst the Orators.) I should never, my Lords, have
troubled you with these Children, whose number and tender Age you see, had not
my Princes commands prevailed with me against my own Inclinations. My Ancestors
have indeed deserved to live in a late Posterity, but when by reason of the
Changes and Calamities of the times, I was not able to raise an Estate Tacitus
confirms here what he has said in the Preface to the first Book of his Annals,
that Flattery which insinuates it self into Courts, corrupts brave Minds; and
he takes notice farther, that it is much more difficult to arrive at honors in
a Monarchy than in a Republic. Indeed Hortalus made he^e an odious Comparison,
betwixt the ancient Republic in which Eloquence sto^ris^ed, and the Government
of Tiberius, whereby he seemed to say, that Eloquence expired with Liberty. By
these words varietate temporum, he offended Tiberius, who desired to pass for a
Popular and a Republican Person, especially in the Senate, where he made as
great a show of modesty as he was able.
, or to gain the Affections of the People^ or to acquire Eloquence, which has
been the Hereditary Riches of our Family, I was contented if my narrow Fortune
A single Life is the most commodious Seat, and the most honorable cover of
Poverty. Gaston Duke of Orleance had reason to ^ay of the Marriage of two
Persons of Quality who had very little Estate, that Hunger and Thirst had
married one another.
would preserve me from Contempt, and from being a Burden to others. It was in
obedience to Augustus that I married, and behold here the Posterity of so many
Consuls and Dictators, which I do not mention to reproach any man, but to move
compassion. These Children, Caesar, may hereafter, under your auspicious reign
and the influences of your favor, arrive at Honors; but in the mean time I
beseech you, rescue them from Poverty, as they are the Grandchildren of
Hortensius, and the Foster-children of Augustus. It is seldom seen, that a
Prince shows favor to his Predecessor's favorites, for he looks upon them as
the Creatures of another. And besides, he can no more suffer others to share
with him in Acknowledgments than in Authority. And it is for the same Reason
that most Princes make little account of the Recommendations which their
Fathers make to them at their Death, in favor of their Ministers or other
Servants, whom they have loved.
.

XXXVIII. The Favor which the Senate seemed to have for him, was a Motive to
Tiberius to oppose him He that would obtain Favors from a Prince, ought to
beware of asking him before those whose presence may seem to impose a Necessity
on him to grant them. It was the Error which Hortalus committed, who trusted
more to the Protection of the Senate, than to the Compassion of Tiberius.
, as he did in the following words: If all that are needy should begin to come
hither and beg Money for their Children, the State would be soon exhausted The
Prince who knows not how to deny, knows not how to reign. If he gives to all
who ask of him, he must give a thousand People, who deserve to have nothing
given them. If I gave to all who ask of me, said Philip II. I should soon ask
my self. Cabrer^ Cap. 26. Lib. 1^. of his Life. By being too liberal, Men are
reduced to an incapacity of being so at all. Therefore a Prince, who would be
respected and well served, ought never to suffer the Sources of his Bounty to
be drein'd; for Men are more forward to do service for the Good they expect,
than for that which they have received.
and they never satisfied. When our Ancestors gave the Senators a Liberty
sometimes to make a Digression from the Matter in Hand; and instead of giving
their Opinions upon that, to propose somewhat else which they thought would be
more for the Public Good; they did it not with an intention that the Public
Debates should be interrupted by Private Affairs, or that such things should be
proposed which must draw on the Prince and Senate certain hatred from the
Petitioners, if the Request be denied, or from the People if it be granted The
People like a Frugal Prince better than a Liberal one, for they always believe
that he is Liberal a^ their Expense, and that he would be more sparing if he
did not reckon on recruiting himself out of their Purses^
. Nor can these be called Petitions, but unseasonable and importunate Demands.
A Prince who gives to deliver himself from the Importunity of those who ask,
draws upon himself that of a thousand People who never durst have asked any
thing of them, had they not known his Weakness. Besides, they are not obliged
by what he gives, being persuaded that he would not give it, if ^e had
resolution enough to re^use it. Commines speaking of Henry IV. of Castile,
says, That this King was very weak of pusillanimous, for he gave away his
whole Estate, or suffered it to be taken from him, by any one that would or
could take it. I have seen him abandoned by his Servants, and the Poorest King
I ever saw, Memoirs, Lib. 2. Cap. 8. Indeed there is not a more Noble Error in
a Prince than Bounty, but withal there is not a more Dangerous one, if it be
not regulated by reason. The Spanish Commentaries on Commines speaking of that
instruction which Lewis XI. gave his Son, Qui nescit simulare, nescit regn^re,
adds, that Charles VIII. stood in great need to have been taught another Rule
which his Successor Lewis XI. made his Principal Maxim of State, Nescit
regnare, qui nescit negare, i. e. He that understands not how to Deny,
understands not how to Govern. There is no doubt, but that if this King, and
Don Henry IV. of Castile, had governed themselves, they would have been better
governed, than they were by their Favorites, Cap. 34.
. When the Senate is met about other business, for a Man to rise up and press
their Modesty with a Story of the Number and Age of his Children; and then to
turn upon me with the same importunity, and as it were to break open the
Treasury, which if we exhaust by Vainglorious Bounties, must be supplied by
ill practices The Liberality of Princes i^ oftener an Effect of their Vanity and
of their Ambition, than of their Goodness and of their Justice. This
Counter^eit Liberality is the Fault of all Kings who love Flatterers; and our
Historians have very well observed it in our Kings Henry II. and Henry III. who
abandoned the Government to their Minions.
. August^s gave you Money, Hortalus, but without importunity, and not with a
Condition that he should be always giving you. If Men have no reliance on
themselves, Industry will flag, and Laziness will grow upon them, and as long
as they can securely depend on relief from others, they will do nothing for
themselves, and be a constant Burden to us An able Prince ought to keep his
Favors for those who do, or are capable of doing service to his State.
Machiavel says, that he ought by Privileges and Rewards to encourage People
who excel in any art, and especially those who are well skilled in Commerce,
to invent whatsoever may enrich his subjects, Cap, 21. of his Prince. It has
been a saying, That Princes, ought not to keep Fowls, which lay no Eggs. An
Apothegm against Useless and Voluptuous Persons.
. This Speech, though it met with Approbation from those, whose custom it was
to applaud right or wrong, whatsoever the Emperor said or did; yet many
muttered softly, and others by their silence showed their dislike As it is
dangerous to blame Princes, and shameful to flatter them, when they do ill,
honest Men keep a Mean betwixt Complaisance and Liberty, which is Silence.
, which Tiberius perceived well enough When Courtiers keep Silence, it is easy
for the Prince to perceive, that they approve not that which they durst not
condemn. Witness the Young Italian, who going into the Chamber of Cardinal
Salviati, when he was in dispute with a Person who was playing at Chess with
him, at first ^ight gave it against him, without hearing the Reasons on either
side. And the Cardinal asking him, why he judged so, before he knew the Fact:
Because, said he, if you were in the Right, all these Gentlemen (pointing to
the Company) ^ culd have immediately given it for you; whereas no body ^urst
speak his Opinion, ^^^ause you are in the Wrong.
, and therefore after a little pause he added, That he had given Hortalus such
an Answer, as he thought his Speech required; however after all, if the Senate
thought sit, he would give his Sons two hundred great Sesterces a-piece. When ^
Prince gives ^ little, and those to whom he gives are Persons of Merit or of
Noble Birth; it is a sign that he gives unwillingly, and consequently that no
more is to be expected from him. There are Princes who have not resolution
enough to give a Denial: but who in revenge give such small Gifts, that
notwithstanding they give to all that beg of them, pass for as Covetous and
fordid Persons, as if they gave nothing. Such was Cardinal Henry King of
Portugal. The History of the Union of Portugal and Castil^e, Lib. ^.
. The whole Senate thanked him, only Hortalus said nothing, either out of Fear,
or out of a Sense of his Noble Birth, which he retained in his lowest Fortune.
Nor did Tiberius ever after show him any Compassion, although his Family was
reduced to scandalous Poverty.

XXXIX. The same year, the bold attempt of one Slave, if it had not been timely
prevented, had embroiled the Empire in a Civil War A whole Council has work
enough to settle a State that is troubled with Civil Dissentions, but there
needs but one dangerous Man to disturb a State that is in Peace; especially if
he be one who has nothing to lose. Anthony Perez says, That the Fear which
the Lion has of the Crowing of a Cock, and the Elephant to see a Mouse, is an
Example which reaches Princes, that the least Instruments are capable to put
their Kingdoms in flames. In his Aphorism^.
. He was a Slave of Post^umus Agrippa In the last Age one Cornelius Hock, who
lived at Rotterdam and married there, had the Boldness to affirm that he was
the Son of Charles V. and the People began to respect him as such, and to
hearken to the Proposals which ^e made for the new Modelling the Commonwealth,
when the Council of Holland caused him to be beheaded and quartered at the
Hague. 1583. Her^era's Hist. l. 12. c. 14.
, named Clemens, who as soon as he heard that Augustus was dead, laid a Design
that had nothing of the Slave in it; which was to rescue his Master Agrippa by
Force or Stratagem from the Isle of Planasia, whither he was Banished, and to
convey him to the German Army. But the slowness of the Merchant Ship on which
he embarked, made him too late for this Design, Posthumus being killed before
he came; which, however, put him on a greater and more hazardous Enterprise;
for having stolen away the Ashes of his Master and gained Cosa In Toscany near
Porto-Hercole.
, a Promontory of Etruria, he concealed himself in desert Places, till his Hair
and Beard were grown long, intending to Personate Agrippa, being much about his
Age, and not unlike him In the Year 1585. Portugal saw two Counterfeit
Sebastiants one of them a Native of the Town of Alcasova, and the Son of a
Tile-maker; the other named Matthew Alvarez, a Native of the Isle of Tercera,
and the Son of a Stone-cutter; both Hermites, and drawn out of their Hermitage,
to be imaginary Kings of Portugal. When a Report was spread through the whole
Kingdom, that Don Sebastian had escaped with his Life from the Battle of
Alcasar; and that to do Penance for having been the Cause of the Death of so
many Men, which fell in that Battle, he had retired into a Desert for seven
years, the Term which the Portuguese by a Ridiculous Superstition, believe to
be necessary for the Expiation of the Sins of a King, who has lost a Battle.
The Country People, who saw the Austere Life which these Hermits led,
suspected, that this might be King Sebastian. The first was taken with the
Imaginary Bishop of La Guard, who received the Alms that were given him, and
had set down the Names of all those who gave; to the end, said he, that
Sebastian might recompense them, when he should return to Lisbon. This Bishop
was hanged, and the King his Disciple sent to the Galleys, that the Incredulous
and the Over-credulous might have the Opportunity to see him; and to undeceive
themselves by seeing him, for he was not at all like King Sebastian, Herrera,
Cap. 18. Lib. 1^. of the second Part of his History. As for Matthew Alvarez, in
the beginning he was sincere; telling all those who took him for Don Sebastian,
because he had the Air of his Face, and brown hair as he had, that he was the
Son of a Poor Stone-cutter; but when he saw that his words were interpreted to
proceed from Humility, and from a Desire not to be known, and that the more he
denied himself to be Don Sebastian, the more obstinate they were in believing
it; he cunningly confirmed in their Error, those who would not be cured. He
rose at Midnight to give himself discipline, and begged leave of God to discover
himself to his Subjects, and to return to the ^hrone of his Ancestors. An
Artifice, which succeeded as he desired with those who were within hearing. For
they being persuaded after this, that he was the True Sebastian, stuck not to
publish it every where. In fine, all the People ^^ocking about him, to kiss his
hand, he acknowledged that he was Don Sebastian, and eat in public with all
the Royal Ceremonies in the little City of Rezeira, or Elzera. And some days
after he had the Confidence to write a Letter to the Archduke Cardinal Albert,
Viceroy of Portugal, in which he commanded him in rough terms immediately to
quit his Palaces, because he was coming to take possession of his Throne. The
Archduke sent Di^go de Fonseca with some Forces to the Place. Alvarez had
about a thousand Men, which after some resistance were defeated, and as he fled
the third Day through Rocks, he was taken and carried with his two Companions
to Lisbon, where his hand being first cut off, he was Hanged and Quartered.
Herrera, c. 18. and 19. of the same Book. It is not amiss to observe here by
the way, that the Incredulity of the Portugues^ about the Death of King
Sebastian, was grounded upon that of King Cardinal Henry, who would never dwell
in the Palace Royal at Lisbon, out of respect to Sebastian, whom he believed to
be yet alive. For before his Coronation he dwelt in the House of the Duke of
Bragansa, and after it he took for his Palace, the House of Martin Alphonso de
Sousa near the Cordeliers. Cap. 4. and 6. of a Relati^^, Entitled, La Entrada
de Don Filippe (...) Reine de Portugal.
. After which, by means of his Accomplices he gives out that Agrippa was alive,
which they whispered first in cautious and ambiguous Words, as they usually do
obnoxious Reports; but it soon spread among the Credulous Multitude, and was
readily entertained by turbulent Spirits, who are always disposed for
Revolutions They who hate the Present Government, have not a fairer occasion to
Embroil the State, than that of a Counterfeit Prince, who sets up against the
True one. When Don Ant^onio Prior of Crato, was not able to succeed his Uncle
King Cardinal Henry, he always countenanced the Belief, which the People had,
that King Sebastian was alive, to raise a general Insurrection against Philip
I^.
. About the Eveningtwilight he went to some little Towns, but would never
appear publicly, nor stay long in a Place, because Truth is confirmed by Sight
and Continuance, and Imposture gains credit by Precipitation and uncertain
Abode; he commonly came to a Place before he was expected, and left it as soon
as he was known to be there; that he might prevent too curious Observation, or
at least leave them in suspense.

XL. In the mean time, it was generally reported through Italy, that Agrippa
was by the special Providence of the Gods preserved alive. It was believed at
Rome, that he was already come to Ostia People easily belive that to be true,
which they desire should be so; for Desire, when it is not guided by Reason,
finds probability in the most impossible things.
, and he was all the subject of Discourse in their private Cabals. Tiberius
unresolved whether he should chastize the Slave by force of Arms, or leave the
Peoples Credulity to be undeceived by time, ^luctuated betwixt Hope and Fear On
such Occasions, where the People side with the Malcontents, it is prudent and
safe to Fear. It is an honor, says Commines, to ^ear what one ought, and to
provide well against it. Those who win have always the Honor, cap. 5. lib. 3.
and 9. of lib. 5. If Diego d^ Fonseca had punished the Portuguese Gentleman, (
Herrera calls him Don Diego de Melo) who entered Arzille by the Name of King
Sebastian, and who had been that day at the Battle of Al^asar, they would
possibly never have thought ^it to have revived him again, to impose upon the
World, Cabrera, cap. 9. lib. 12, and Herrera, cap. 14. lib. 8. of their
Histories.
, sometimes considering that nothing was to be slighted Great Con^^agrations
arise from little Sparks: whosoever extinguishes one of them, knows not what a
Fire he has prevented; but to know that, if he leaves one of them
unextinguish'd, he will find himself it may be in such extremity, as he is not
capable to remedy. C. 8. Part 2. of the Politic Testament.
, and again that not every thing was to be feared. At last he commits the
Conduct of the Business to Salustius Crispus, who ordered two of his Creatures
(some say they were Soldiers) to go to Clemens, and pretending to know his
whole Affair, to engage their Lives and Fortunes in his Service, and as a
Pledge of their Fidelity, to present him with a Sum of Money. They punctually
execute their Orders; after which, having found a Night when he was unguarded,
they seized him with a strong Party of Soldiers, which they had ready, and
hurried him away to Rome gagged and bound. It is said, that when he was brought
before Tiberius, and asked by him, How came you to be Agrippa? He answered, As
you came to be Tibetius. He could not be brought to discover his Accomplices;
nor durst Tiberius suffer him to be executed publicly There are Occasions
wherein it is dangerous to proceed according to the ordinary Forms of Justice.
A public Punishment had been more Honor than Shame to this Counter^^it
Agrippa, whom the People did not look upon as an Impostor, but (...) a Man who
designed to revenge his Master's Death. And besides, possibly the People might
not have been idle Spectators of his Execution. If John II. King of Portugal
had re^er^'d the Duke of (...) to the ordinary Course of Justice, he would it
may be have given success to this Duke's Conspiracy, who had almost all the
Great Men his Accomplices; or at least he would have run the (...) General
Insurrection.
, but commanded him to be put to Death in a secret Part of the Palace A Prince
who causes Criminals ^o be e^ecut^d in (...), exposes himself to the Suspicion
and Reproach of having put them to Death unjustly. Wherefore, all Executions
ought to be Public, either for Example, or for the Honor of the Prince;
unless it be some matter, which the People ought not to know, or some Person on
whose behalf they may desire to make an Insurrection. Don Iuan de Vega,
answered a Lady of Palermo, who offered a hundred thousand Ducats, that her
Husband might not be Executed at the public Place, La justicia no tiene lugar,
si no se haze en su lugar; that is, Justice takes not place, if it be not done
in its Place. Gracian Discourse, 30 of his Agudeza. When there is a great
Number of People involved in a Conspiracy, or any attempt against a Prince or
State; and consequently, that it requires a long Inquiry to discover them all,
it is more expedient for him to dissemble, that he may not irritate Wasps. All
Punishment, which is extended far, how just foever it be, passes not for an Act
or Justice, nor for Example; but for a Butchery, and makes the Prince hated as
Sanguinary.
, and his Body to be privately carried out. And although he was informed, that
several Courtiers and Senators, had assisted him with their Counsel and Money;
yet no farther enquiry was made A Courier who was carrying Letters from several
Protestant Princes and Lords of Germ^ny, to the Land^grave of H^sse, being
taken by some (...) of Charles V. they found among his Dispatches, a Memorandum
of Succors which they offered him, in order to continue the War against the
Emperor; but this Prince, without reading any more than the Title, threw it
into the Fire, judging, as Julius Caesar, who would not read the Letters sent
to Pompey from the Nobility of Rome, that the most agreeable way to Pardon was
voluntarily to be ignorant of the Offense. Epit^^e of his Life, by Don Iuan
Ant. de Vera.
.

XLI. Toward the End of this Year, a Triumphal Arch was erected near Saturn's
Temple, for the recovery of the Eagles, by the Conduct of Germanicus, and under
the Auspices of Tiberius, a Temple was dedicated to Fors Fortunae Tacitus
says, Aedes Fortis Fortun^. There was at Rome a Fortune, named F^rs Fortunae,
as if one should say, Casual Fortune, or Fortune which decides the Lot of War.
With which may agree Prosperous For (...), which Rodolph the Master gave her.
This Goddess had a Temple first at Rome, under the Reign of Servius T^lli^^,
and received then Gifts of those, who lived on their Rents, without being of
any Trade.
, in the Gardens near the Tiber, which Julius Caesar bequeathed to the People
of Rome. A Chapel to the Family of the Iulii, and Statues to Divine Augustus,
in a Place called the Bovillae.

770 Years after the Building of Rome.
XLII. IN the Consulship of C. Caelius, and L. Pomponius, on the 26th of May,
Germanicus triumphed for his Victories over the Cherusci, Chatti, Angrivarii,
and the rest of the Nations lying betwixt the Rhine and the Elb. Spoils,
Captives and Pictures of the Mountains, Rivers, and Battles, were carried
before him; (as if the War had been ended, because he would have made an end of
it had he not been Countermanded) but the Comeliness of Germanicus's Person,
sitting in his Triumphal Chariot with his Five Children, added much to the
Splendour of the Show, and the satisfaction of the Spectators. But secret Fears
allayed the Joy of those, who considered, that the Favor of the People had not
been fortunate to his Father Drusus; that his Uncle Marcellus was snatched from
their Affections in the Bloom of his Youth, and that the Love of the People of
Rome was commonly fatal, and an Omen of short Life to those they loved. A Great
Man who has the Favor of the People, and cultivates it by popular actions, as
Germanicus did, and his Father had done, is always hated by his Prince; either
because such a Subject seems not to stand in need of his Favor; or because a
Man who has the People at his Devotion, exposes himself to a thousand
Suspicions, which his Rivals have opportunity to raise and foment in the
Prince's Mind. Insomuch, that this Great Man must fall soon or late, if he
continues at Court, or amongst the People whose Idol he is. Every body knows
what the Battle of Barieades, May 12. 1588. cost the Duke of Guise, when the
Parisians declared so openly for him, that Henry III. was forced to leave the
City. To conclude, as the Hatred of the People, is the reward of the Prince's
Favorites, the Hatred of the Prince is reciprocally the reward of the Peoples
Favorites.
.

XLIII. Tiberius gave the People three hundred Sesterces About thiry five
Shillings in our Money.
a Man in Germanicus's Name, and nominated him for his Colleague in the
Consulship It is to be observed, That all the Colleagues of Tiberius's
Consulships came to Unfortunate Ends: Quintilius Varus by Despair; Germanicus
and Drusus by Poison; Piso, Governor of Syria, and Sejanus, by the Sentence of
the Senate.
; but after all this he was not believed to be sincere in his Affection to him
When the Prince is hated, his sincerest actions are mis-interpreted; but above
all, the Caresses and Honors which he does to a Great Man, whom the People
knows or imagines that he does not love.
, and the less when it was known that he resolved to send him from Court,
pretending it was for his Honor; and in order to it contrived Occasions, or
laid hold on the first that offered. Archelaus had reigned fifty years in
Cappadocia, and was hated by Tiberius Dio says, that when Archelaus was
accused by his Subjects before Augustus, Tiberius pleaded his Cause in the
Senate. So that Tiberius might (...) him for his Ingratitude, Lib. 14.
, because he had never paid him any respect during his retreat at Rhodes
Commines says, that most People have naturally an Eye to aggrandize or to save
themselves, and this is the Reason, that they easily range themselves on the
strongest side, Memo^rs l. 1. c. 9.
, which Archelaus did not omit out of any neglect of Tiberius, but by the
Directions of the Principle Favorites of Augustus, who were of Opinion, that
it was not safe for him to hold any correspondence with Tiberius, whilst C.
Caesar was living, and had the Government of the East The Counsel which
Augustus's Ministers gave Archelaus, was according to all the Rules of Policy,
and so much the more because that Caius Caesar had also two Brothers, and that
they were all three younger than Tiberius. Notwithstanding, this Counsel was
the principle Cause of this King's ruin. An instance that Humane Prudence
serves for the sport of Fortune; which, to speak with Polibius, often takes
delight to give the greatest Actions of Men, an issue directly contrary to what
they designed, Hist. 2. All that Archelaus could have done, was to have carried
himself after such a manner toward these two Princes, as to have honored
Calus as the Principal, and Tiberius as Subordinate, which would not have given
^ealousie to Caius, nor have affronted Tiberius, who had not himself retired to
Rhodes, but that he might not by his presence obscure the Glory of the
Grandsons of Augustus, who were entered on Employments. In fine, Evils that are
very remote and not certain, ought not to hinder a Prudent Man, from making his
advantage of the present Conveniences; for if one must take into consideration
all accidents that may happen one, what can one ever resolve with safety? When
Ferdinand the Catholic came to take possession of his Kingdom of Spain, he
said to Do^ Antonio de la Cueva, who notwithstanding he had received many
favors from him, preferred Philip I. King of Castile before him: Wh^ could
have thought, Don Antonio, that you would have abandoned me on this Occasion?
But, Sir, replied La C^eva, who could have thought, that a very old King had
longer to live than a Young one; and that Philip fresh and blooming like a Rose
was t^ wither and die in three days? ^Such is the Method of all Courtiers, they
adore the Rising, and turn their backs on the Declining Prince, Epitome of the
Life of Charles V. and Lib. 3. of the Life of the Great Captain.
. But when Tiberius came to the Empire upon the Extinction of the Family of the
Caesar's; he wheedles Archelaus by his Mother's Letters to come to Rome, who not
dissembling her Son's displeasure assured him withal, that he would pardon him
upon his Submission Princes who have been neglected, despised, or persecuted by
the Favorites or Ministers of their Predecessors, rarely forgive them when
they come to reign. As soon as the Cardinal Henry of Portugal came to the
Throne, he abandoned all the Ministers of King Sebastian, and all the Principal
Officers of the Crown, who (little thinking that he, who was so old, would
survive Sebastian. who was Young, and who had no great Esteen or Affection for
him) had not paid him that respect which was due to his Rank. Hist. of the
Union of Protugal with Castile, Lib. 3.
. He not suspecting Treachery, or not daring to show his suspicions if he did,
for fear of the Emperor's Power, hastens to Rome, when meeting with a rough
Reception from Tiberius, and an Accusation against him in the Senate, he soon
ended his Days, whether by a Natural or a Voluntary Death is not certain; not
that he was believed to be conscious of those Crimes charged upon him, which
were mere ^ictions; but because he was broken with Age and Grief, and a
Treatment that is unusual to Kings; to whom a Moderate Fortune is
unsupportable, so little able are they to bear Contempt and Misery Things that
are tolerable appear insupportable to Kings, and those which are really rough
and hard to bear, are almost always mortal to them. Commines comparing the
Evils which Lewis XI. had made many persons suffer, with those which he
suffered himself before his Death, says, that his were neither so great nor of
so long continuance; but besides that he was in a higher Station in the World
than those he had treated ill; the little that he suffered against his Nature,
and against what he was accustomed to, was harder for him to bear. And four
Pages after, speaking of his Physician who handled him in the rudest manner:
This was, says he, a great Purgatory to him in this World, considering the
Ob^dience which he had had from so many good and great Men. His Memoirs, lib.
6. cap. 12.
. His Kingdom was reduced into the Form of a Province, and Tiberius declared,
that by the Addition of the Revenues of it, Rome should be eased of one half of
the Tax of the hundredth Penny Established by Augustus, about the Year 760.
(...) is ^poken of at the and of the first Book of the Annals.
imposed on all Commodities that were sold; and that for the future no more
than the two Hundredth should be paid. The Death of Antiochus King of Comagena,
and of philopator King of Cilicia, which happened both about the same time,
produced great disorders in those Nations; some desiring to be governed by
Kings of their own, others to be Subject to the Roman Empire. The Provinces of
Syria and Iudaea groaning under the Burden of Ta^es, petitioned to be
discharged of part of them.

XLIV. He acquainted the Senate with those Affairs, and with the State of
Armenia, of which I have given an account before; telling them withal, that the
Troubles of the East could not be composed without the Presence and Conduct of
Germanicus When a Great Man i^ so beloved of the People, that the Prince is
Jealous of him, but dares not show his resentment of it, the most common
expedient is to give him some remote Government, or some splendid Embassy, to
withdraw him from the Eyes and the Applause of the People; under a pretense
that none but he is capable of that Employment. For if the Prince has ^ Design
to destory him, he easily finds ways for it by the advantage of his distance,
which prevents the People from knowing the Orders that he sends.
who was the fittest Person for this Expedition, Drusus being too young, and
himself in his declining years There are some Employments, for which a good
Understanding with a long Experience is sufficient; but there are others, for
which vigor of body is also necessary. Philibert-Emanuel, Duke of Savoy, said,
that a General of an Army ought to be of a middle Age, betwixt Manhood and Old
Age, that he might be capable of being sometimes Marcellus and sometimes
Fabius; That is to say, to know how to wait for Opportunities as the Latter,
and to fight as the Former. Charles V. said of a Count of Feria, that by his
Prudence (...) command^d as a Captain, and that his Vigor made him sight as a
Common Soldier, Epitome of his Life.
. Upon which the Senate decreed Germanicus all the Provinces beyond the Seas,
with a more absolute Power, than those Governors who obtained them by Lot, or
by the Prince's Nomination. But Tiberius had first recalled Creticus Silanus
from Syria, because he was allied to Germanicus There is nothing more dangerous
than to give two Neighboring Governments to two Men, betwixt whom there is a
Close tie of Kindred, Friendship, or Interests; for it is to give them an
opportunity to act by concert, and to rebel against the Prince. Lewis XI.
having agreed by the Treaty of (...) to give for Appanage to his Brother
Charles, Champagne, Brie, and some neighboring Places, was careful enough not
to accomplish this Tre^ty, which left him to the Discretion of Charles and of
the Duke of B^rgundy. For the situation of Champague and Brie was convenient
for them both; and Charles might upon a Days notice have succors from (...).
the two Countries joining together. So that Lewis chose rather to give him
Guien^e, with (...) although this Partition was of much greater value, than
that of Brie and Champagne; being resolved that his Brother and the Duke should
not be so near Neighbors. Commin^s, lib. 2. cap. ult. of his Memoirs.
, by the Contract of the Daughter of the Former, to Nero the Eldest Son of the
Latter, and had put Cneius Piso in his Place; a Man of a Violent and
Untractable temper, that inherited all the Haughtiness of his Father Piso, who
had been so zealous and vigorous a Supporter of the Civil War against Caesar,
when it was revived in Africa, who followed the Party of Brutus and Cassius,
and who after he had Liberty to come to Rome, never vouchsa^ed to put in for
any Office It is not always a sign of Modesty not to sue for Offices and
Honors; on the contrary, it is often a sign of Pride and Presumption: for
there are people who have so great an Opinion of themselves, that they hold it
for a Dishonor to have Competitors; and there are others who believe themselves
to be so necessary to the State, that the Prince will be constrained to offer
them what they would not ask. As Albert Walstein obstinately refused the
Generalship of the Emperor's Armies, that he might be forced to accept that
which the Extremity of the Affairs obliged the Emperor to offer him.
, until he was courted by Augustus to accept the Consulship. But he had not
only his Father's Spirit, but the Nobility and Riches of his Wife Plancina to
exalt him She was the Daughter of Munatius Plancus, a Consular Person, who is
mentioned in the 33 Chapter of the First Book of these Annals.
; insomuch, that he would scarce yield to Tiberius, and thought himself much
above his Sons. Nor did he believe that the Government of Syria was given him
for any other Reason, but that he might be a Check on Germanicus, A Governor of
a Province, who ^nows that another Governor his Neighbor is hated or suspected
by the Prince, never fails to make his Court, at the Expense of his Colleague,
either by heightning the Suspicions of the Prince, or by raising Complaints,
which may hasten the ruin of him, whom they design to sacrifice. But besides,
of what use to Germanicus was that absolute Power, which the Senate decreed
him, since he had an imperious Supervisor, that was inflexible and charged with
orders altogether contrary to his Commission. Germanicus, had the Name and Show
of Governor, and Piso the Power. Don Diego de Mendoca speaking of the sending
of Don John of Austria into Granada, says, that his Commission was so large
that it extended to every thing; but that his Liberty was so strictly
restrained, that he could dispose of nothing Great or Small, without the
Consent of those of his Council; nor even without an Order from Philip II. The
War of Grenada, Lib. 2. Cap. 26. Thus most Princes use Great Men, who for the
most part, says Commines, go only to prepare the Feast, and commonly at their
own Expense.
, and many believed, that Tiberius gave him secret Instructions to this
Purpose. It is certain, that Augusta out of an Emulation too incident to some
of her Sex, encouraged Plancina to teaze and contend with Agrippina A Proud and
Imperious Woman, as Plancina was, never obeys more willingly, than when the
Prince commands her to mortify her Rival. All Ladies, to whom Princes have
given the like Commissions, have always well acquitted themselves therein.
. The Court was divided by the secret Favor which they had for Germanicus, or
for Drusus. Tiberius loved Drusus as his own Son, but others had the greater
Affection for Germanicus, as well because of Tiberius's Aversion to him There
is almost always a certain Antipathy betwixt the Prince and his Subjects,
whence the Subjects love the Persons whom the Prince hates, and he reciprocally
loves those who are hated by his Subjects. I^ the Quarrel which happened
betwixt Lewis of Bourbon, Count of Soissons; and Charles of Vaudemont,
afterward Duke of L^rain, who gave him a Box of the Ear in the Presence of
Lewis XIII, every one having declared: in favor of the Count, the King
declar^d for Vaudement. Memoirs of the Reign of Charles IV. Duke of Lorrain, by
the Marquis of Beauvau.
, as because he was of more illustrious Extraction by the Mother's side, by
whom Anthony was his Grandfather, and Augustus his Great Uncle, whereas
Pomponius Atticus Vipsania the Mother of Drusus, was the Daughter of Agrippa,
and Granddaughter of Pomponius Atticus^
the Great Grandfather of Drusus, who was no more than a Roman Knight, seemed
to Disgrace the Images of the Family of the Claudii. Besides, Agrippina the
Wife of Germanicus, had the Advantage of Livia, Drusus's Wife, in fruitfulness
and reputation; but this Emulation betwixt their Relations and their
Dependants, made no manner of Impression on the two Brothers, who continued
Constant and Unshaken in their love If the Children of Sovereign Princes knew
what prejudice they do themselves by their Misunderstandings and their
Quarrels, they would beware of Engaging therein^ M. de Guise, says Queen
Margaret was not sorry for the Divisions which he saw break out in our Family;
hoping that he should gather up the Pieces of the broken Vessel, Lib. 1. of his
Memoirs. Anthony Perez says in one of his Letters, that Prince Ruy Go^ez said,
That he knew by his own Experience, how much it concerns Courtiers to stop
their Ears against Reports and Calumnies; if they will keep their Friends, and
avoid making themselves Enemies. The Count de Brion, says M. de M^ntresor,
suffered himself to be prepossed, although we were very near Relations, and had
always lived friendly together. When I was advertised of it. I took him aside,
and acquainted him, that I was very well informed of what had been told him of
me: That if Monsieur committed his Secrets to him. I should be extremely glad
of it; but that I thought, he ought not to take it ill, that his Royal Higness,
did me the some honor; that in fine, it would be shameful for him to suffer
himself to be surpised by the Artifices of Persons who had always deceived
their Master, and to break with his Kinsman and his Friend, who had never given
him any occasion of complaint. He owned to me that the thing was true, and we
afterward lived in an entire Friendship.
.

XLV. Not long after, Drusus was sent into Illyria to gain the Affections of
the Army and Experience in Arms It is Machi^vel's advice, That a Prince apply
his Mind wholly to the Art of War, as being the only one that is of importance
for him to understand, Chapter 4. of his Prince. For States are not preserved by
Cowardice, but by Arms. Non enim ignavia magna Imperia contineri, Ann. 15.
Phil^bert-Emanuel Duke of Sav^y, Nephew to Charles V. wrote on a time to Philip
II. who was not of a Warlike temper, that indeed War was not one of those
things that was to be desired; but that it nearly concerned great Princes to
understand the Management of it; and that therefore he ought to be pleased to
find in the beginning of his Reign an occasion to make War; that he might gain
betimes the Reputation of a Powerful and a Formidable Prince; and might learn,
although at great Expenses, what is an Army, Squadron, Battle, Siege,
Artillery, Ammunition, Baggage, Spies, Guides, and a thousand Nec^^sities,
which must be provided for. Cabrera cap. 1. lib. 4. of his History.
, Tiberius thinking that he would wear off in the Camp There is no greater Spur
than that of Military glory; Especially to Princes, who are naturally inclined
to be dazzled with the splendid Titl^ of Conquerors. Commines says, that after
the Battle of Montl^ery, the Count of Charolois, who before that day had never
been useful in War, nor ever loved any thing that belonged to it, entirely
changed his Humor, and became so Warlike, that he pursued it as long as he
lived, desiring above all things to tread in the Steps of those ancient
Princes, who are so famous for it, Cap. 4. Lib. ^. and Cap. 9, Lib. 5. of his
Memoirs.
the Debaucheries he had been used to in the City; and himself would be safer,
when the Legions were under the Command of his two Sons. He was furnished with
a Pretense by the Suevi, who came to desire assistance from him against the
Cherusci; for when these Nations were delivered from the Fear of a Foreign
Power by the retreat of the Romans, they according to their Custom turned their
Arms against one another When in a Civil War amongst the Athenians, many were
for Banishing or Extirpating all the Contrary Faction. We ought not to do it,
said another, for we shall have nothing to exercise our selves upon.
, out of an Emulation of Glory. The two Nations were equally matched in Power,
and their Generals in Valor; but the Title of King drew upon Maroboduus the
hatred of his Countrymen, whereas Arminius was adored as the Patron of Liberty,
and one that fought for it The Defense of Liberty is the most specious Pretext
which Boutefeus and Malcontents have always had to kindle a War in their
Countries. The People have been gulled with it a hundred thousand Times, and
they will be gulled with it a hundred thousand times more, before they will be
disabus'd: For they give more credit to Words than Actions, and they judge not
of Good and Evil, but by those false Idaeas thereof which they give them, who
take to them of Liberty, for no other end, but to make them more pliable to be
led into Slavery. Quia apud (eum) verba plurimum valent, bonaque ac mala non
sua natura, sed ^o^ibus seditiosorum aestimantur, libertas and speciosa nomina
praetexuntur. Tac. Hist. 4.
.

XLVI. Wherefore, not only the Cherusci and their Allies, who had before served
under him, took Arms for him now; but the Suevi Semnones and Lombards, who were
the Subjects of Maroboduus revolted to Arminius* The People never love their
Prince so much, how Good and Valiant soever he be, but they love Liberty more;
Nullam tantam potestatem cuiquam dari posse, ut non sit gratior potestate
libertas. Plin. in Paneg.
* with which additional forces he would certainly have been Victorious, had not
Inguiomer with all that were under his Command, gone over to Maroboduus, which
he did for no other reason but because he looked upon it as a Dishonor There
is no tie so strong which Jealousy does not break. The Duke of Main would
never hearken to the Proposal, which was made to him, for choosing the Young
Duke of Guise his Nephew, King of France. As he desired to be so himself, says
Colonna, he was, it may be more afraid of the Crown, on the Head of his Nephew,
than to see it on the Head of a Prince of Be^rn; so true is it, that Envy is
stronger and more obstinate than Hatred. After, said he, that I have sustained
the whole Weight of the League, is it ^ust, that another should gather the
Fruits of my Labors? Must I be reduced to beg the Government of a Province? I
who have governed and defended the whole Kingdom at the price of my Blood: Is
it because my Nephew is^ Young and un-married, that they would give him the
Crown of France, and the Infanta of Spain? My Eldest Son is 17 years old, and
for his Person, not unworthy so high a Dignity. Let them make him King, if they
will not have me; for in this Case I will content my self with the Honor of
being his Governor, and of commanding the Armies of the most Serene Infanta,
Lib. 6. of his History of the Wars of Flanders. He says, that these were the
very Expressions which the Duke of Maine used in his private Conferences with
the Count Charles of Mansfield, and the Duke of Feria. It was thus that the
Uncle and the Nephew weakened, and by degrees ruined the Union and good
Understanding that was necessary for them to maintain their Party. Memoirs de
Chiverny.
for an Uncle that was in years to be commanded by a young Nephew During the
War of Paris, there was the like Jealousy betwixt the Duke of B^auf^rt and
Nemours; who, although Brothers-in-Law, could never agree with one another.
Diego de Mendoza ^^ith, that Gonsalo Fernand^^ de ^ordoua, styled by way of
Excellence the Great Captain, would never serve under his Brother Don Alphonso
d' Aguil^r, one of the most renowned Captains of Spain. Guerra de Grenada, Cap.
2, Lib. 1.
. The two Armies with equal hopes on both sides ranged themselves in Battle;
not as the Germans used to do, in little separate Parties which roved up and
down, and skirmished without Order or Discipline; for by their long Wars with
us they had learned to follow their Colors A Warlike People ought never to
make frequent or long Wars with the same Neighbors, for fear of training them
up to War. This was heretofore the Maxim of the Lacedaemonians, and is at this
Day of the Turks. Philip II. King of Spain had time to repent that he had not
followed the Counsel of Don Gomez Figure^, Duke of F^ria, who would not have
had him carry the War into the Low-Countrys, saying, that he oug^t to reduce
these Provinces by gentle methods for fear of teaching them to handle Arms and
make War on their Prince, Strada, Lib. 6. of the first Decad. From the very
beginning of the Troubles of the Low Countries, Cardinal Granvelle had advised
Philip to extinguish this War as soon as he could, either by a Battle, or by a
Treaty of Peace, for fear this People should come to know their Strength;
^ore-telling, that if once they knew it, he would never be able to keep them in
Obedience. Pio M^tio consideration, 259. Lib. 1. of his Commentary on Tacitus.
to obey the Orders of their Generals, and to keep a Reserved Body to succor
the rest as there was occasion. Arminius took a Review of his Army, and as he
rode through it, he put them in mind of their Recovered Liberty; of the Enemies
Legions which they had cut in pieces, and part of whose Arms and Spoils some of
them had now in their hands. He called Maroboduus a [Coward] It is a Reproach
often cast upon Great Captains, That they know not how to fight; but it never
lessens their Reputation, when they are known to be Persons, who will hazard
nothing unseasonably. This Reproach was sometimes cast on the Famous Duke of
Alva, either by the Duke of Guise, or by the Prince of Orang^; and by several
others, but they could never make him change the Method; and his Constancy in
despising the Censures and the Railleries of his Enemies, was the Principal
Cause of his Good Fortune and his Glory. For he that has the Profit of the
War, says Commines, has all the Honor of it; and he ought never to run the
Hazard of a Battle, who can avoid it, Cap. 2. Lib. 2. and c. 4. l. 4. of his
Memoirs. Where^ore the Answer very well became the D. of Alva, which he made to
the Duke of Guise, That he would not play a Kingdom against a Coat of Cloth of
Gold, l. 9, of the History of the Union of Portugal with Castille. And
Alexander Duke of P^rm^, answered a Trumpeter, who offered him Battle from
Henry IV. That it was not his Custom to fight when it pleased his Enemies, only
when he thought it fit. D. Carlos Co^oma, Lib. 3. of ^is Wars of the
Low Countries. Count Peter Ernest of Mans^ield saying to a Trumpeter, That he
wondered, that his Master, who was Young and full of Vigor, kept himself
always close, and covered within his Intrenchments; the Trumpeter answered him
ingeniously, That Maurice did so, that he might one Day become as Experienced a
Captain as his Excellency of Mansfield. Memoirs of Aubery du Maurier.
who understood not how to fight a Battle, and who skulk'd in the lurking Holes
of the Wood Hercinia, until he had basely bought the Alliance of the Romans,
whereby he was become a Traitor to his Country, and a Slave to the Roman
Emperor It does not become Princes and Generals of Armies to utter reproaches
against one another. Those who have force in their hands, ought never to use
this kind of Revenge, which is sit only for Women, and which also more
dishonours him that attacks, than him that is attacked. Besides, words which
wound a Man's Honor are never forgiven. A Lie given the S^ig^eur a
Himbercourt, Am^as^ado^ from the Duke of Burgundy, c^st the Constable of St.
Pol afterw^rds his Life. For this Reason, says Commines, Princes, and those
wh^ are in great Places: ought to (...) to whom they offer such (...); for the
Greater they a^e, the more sensible are the Affronts which they (...) inasmuch
as those who are affronted, think, ( and with reason) that the Authority of the
Person who affronts them, casts a greater Blemish on their Honor. Cap. 11.
Lib. 3. of his Memoirs.
, and therefore ought to have no more quarter given him than Varus had. In the
Conclusion, he desired, them to remember the many Battles they had fought; by
the Event of which, and by the Expulsion of the Romans in the End, it was
sufficiently evident on whose side the Victory rested.

XLVII. Nor was Marobodu^s wanting to extol himself, or lessen the Enemy, and
taking Inguiomer by the Hand; In this Person you see, said he, all the Glory of
the Cherusci, and to whose conduct are owing all the Successes they ever had.
Arminius himself has neither Prudence nor Experience, and takes that Glory to
himself which is not his due, because he perfidiously surpised three Legions,
and their unwary General, which action cost Germany dear, and turned to his own
Dishonor, seeing his Wife and Children are yet in Slavery. But when Tiberius
invaded us with twelve Legio^s, I defended the Honor of Germany, and made
Peace on equal Terms; and we have no reason to repent of what we have done,
seeing it is now at our choice, whether we will have a Lasting Peace with the
Romans, or begin the War again with them on even ground. Besides the
Encouragement of these Speeches, each Army had their peculiar Reasons to
animate them; for the Ch^rusci and Lombards fought either for their Ancient
Glory, or for their New-gotten Liberty In Guiccardin's Opinion, there is more
Courage and Fury in those who recover their Liberty, than in those who defend
it. Lib. 18 of his History of Italy. And I think it is because they who recover
their Liberty have ^elt Oppression, and have therefore a greater Resentment,
than those who having not yet lost their Liberty, have not tried the Severities
of Tyranny and of Slavery. Thus, the Lombards had a double Motive to animate
them to fight; that of the Common Defense, and that of their Private Revenge;
for according to Paterculus, Marobodu^^ was not contented with a Regal Power,
regulated by the Laws and Customs of the Country; but would have one that was
entirely Absolute and Despotick. Hist. 2. Cap. 108.
; and the other side to enlarge their Dominions. They never fought with greater
Fury, nor with more equal Success; the right Wings of both Armies were broken:
and it was expected that the Fight would have been renewed had not Maroboduus
retreated to the Hills, which was a sign of Consternation; after which his Army
being weakened by Desertion The loss of a Battle, says Commines, has always a
long and sad Train, for him that loses it; for it often happens that the
Vanquished People entertain a contemptible Opinion of their Master; fall into
Mutinies and Contrivances against him; make insolent Demands, and desert him,
if they don't obtain them. Cap. 2. Lib. 2. of his Memoirs. And speaking of the
Battle of Granson lost by the Duke of Burgundy. What damage, says he, received
he that day for acting on his own Head, and despising counsel? What damage
received his Family thereby; and in what a Condition is it to this Day? How
many People became his Enemies and declared themselves, who the Day before
temporis'd with him, and pretended to be his Friends. Gelasius Duke of Milan,
who three Weeks before had sent him a solemn Embassy, to make an Alliance with
him against Lewis XI. renounced this Alliance to make one with Lewis. Renatus,
King of Sicily, who designed to make the Duke of Burg^ndy his Heir, and who was
going to put him in possession of the County of Provence, disposed of it in
favor of his Nephew, Lewis XI. His Sister, the Duchess of Savoy, who was
entirely in the Interests of the Duke, and whom Lewis therefore called Madame
de Bourgogne, reconciled her self to him, and utterly abandoned the Duke.
Nuremberg, Francfort, and several Imperial Cities more, declared against him;
and they thought that to do him all the Mischief they could, was to procure
their Pardons: So much did the World change after this Battle.
, he retired into the Country of the Marcomanni, whence he sent Ambassadors to
desire succors of Tiberius How Haughty and Courageous soever Princes are, a
reverse of Fortune humbles them as well as other Men. When they are concerned
for their own Preservation or Defense, their Point of Honor always gives place
to their Interest. Paterculus says, that Maroboduus had exalted his power to
such a Degree, that he was grown formidable to the Romans, and that without
openly attacking them, he gave them sufficiently to understand, that he wanted
neither Strength nor Courage to defend himself, if they should attack him; that
the Ambassadors which he sent to them, spoke to them sometimes as from an Equal
to an Equal; and that in short, his Dominions were a Retreat to as many as
revolted from their Obedience to the Romans. After all this, he stuck not to
address himself to Tiberius, to support his Fortune, shocked by an Unfortunate
Battle, who before this Battle, boast^d that he was the Arbitrator of Peace and
War. After the Battle of Granson, the Duke of Burgundy sent the Lord of Contay
to Lewis XI. with a Submissive and Obliging Message, which was not his custom,
so much was his Temper or his Courage changed in an hours time. Commines, cap.
2. lib. 5. of his Memoirs. We ought therefore to conclude with him; that if
Great Men, were always wise they would be so modest in their words, in time of
Prosperity, that they need not be constrained to change their Language in the
time of Adversity, Chapter 21. of the same Book. And this is what Charles V.
intimated to John Frederick Elector of Saxony his Prisoner of War, hearing him
called him, Most Powerful and most Gracious Emperor, he answered, You were wont
to call me otherwise; reproaching him thereby with the Nickname of Charles of
Ghant, which the Protestant Princes of Germany, of whom the Elector was the
Head, gave him heretofore in their Manifesto's. Don Iuan Antonio de Vera, in
the Epitomy of his Life.
, who answered at first, That it was unreasonable for him to expect assistance
from the Roman Arms, when he had never sent any to them, when they were engaged
in a War with the same Enemy Henry III. King of France returned much the same
Answer to Deputies from Flanders in 1579. How dare you, says he, to demand
succors of me against your Prince, when ye would give me none against my
Subjects? Cavriana.
. However, Drusus was sent as I said before to make a Peace Tiberius had quite
another design, as will be seen in the 63 Paragraph.
.

XLVIII. The same Year twelve famous Cities of Asia were overturned by an
Earthquake in the Night, which was the more Fatal, the less it was foreseen;
nor could the People save themselves, as many use to do, in this Calamity, by
running into the Open Fields, for they were swallowed up in the Cle^ts of the
Earth. It is said, that Mountains were levelled, Plains raised into Mountains,
and that Fire flashed out amidst the Ruins. As the Sardians were the greatest
Sufferers, so they drew the greatest Compassion toward them; for Tiberius
promised them 100 thousand great Sesterces 250000 Crowns*
, and remitted all their Taxes for five Years Inundations, Fires, Earthquakes,
Famine, and other Public Calamities, are so many Occasions, for a Prince to
signalize his Magnificence, and to perpe^uate his Name. Private Men may do good
to Private Men; but there is none but a Prince, who can do it to a whole
People. A Prince ought not to desire these Occasions, but he ought to take the
Advantage of them when they offer. Debet esse major and propensior in
calamito^os liberalitas, says Cicero, 2. of his Offices.
. Magnesia which lies at the Foot of the Mountain Sipylus, was relieved in
proportion to its loss, which was next to that of Sardis. Temnis, Philadelphis,
Aegea, Appollonia, Mosthena, the Macedonian Hircania, Hierocaesarea, Myrina,
Cimes and Timolus, were discharged from all Taxes for the same space of time;
and it was resolved to send a Senator to view, and to repair the Ruins. They
Deputed M. Aletus of the Praetorian rank; because the Governor of Asia was a
Consular Person, to prevent any Emulation or Contest which might arise betwixt
Equals It is not easy to determine, whether is more fit to be sent as a
Commissioner into a Province, an Inferior, or an Equal to him that is Governor
of it. For, according to Tacitus himself, Jealousy is stronger in an Inferior
than in an Equal, quia minoribus major aemuland^ cura, Hist, 4. I know not,
says Pio Mutio, whether Tiberius did prudently to send into Asia a Minister
that was of an Inferi^r Rank, to the Consular Person who governed it; for this
Inequality drew after it, not only that Emulation, which he would have
prevented, but also Envy which is the fruitful Source of Dis^entions and
Quarrels. And some lines after: If the Emulation be good, it makes each of the
Rivals more Diligent and Punctual, whereby the Prince is the better served.
Witnes^ what Titus Livy makes Papirius Cursor the Dictator say; A laevone cornu
victoria incipiet, and dextrum cornu, Dictatoris acies, alienam pugnam
sequetur? i. e. Shall the Victory begin in the Left Wing? And shall the Right
Wing, where the Dictator is, only assist the other in the Fight? (Because the
General of the Horse, who commanded the Le^t Wi^g, had broken that of the
Enemy). Consider. 121. on the 2. lib. Cabrera says, That the Triumviral
Government of the Cardinal of Trent, the Marquis of Pesquera, and of
Iohn-Baptist Castaldo, whom Philip II. had sent to Naples, to oppose the
Designs of Pope Paul IV. was prejudicial to his affairs, because these three
Ministers were near Equal in Authority. Cap. 3. Lib. 3. of his History. The
Cardinal de Richelieu has clearly decided this Question. Diverse Experiments,
says he, have made me so knowing in this Matter, that I should think my self
accountable in the sight of God, if this Testament did not in express terms
declare, that there is nothing more dangerous in a State, than diverse
Authorities equal in the Administration of Affairs. What one un^^rtakes is
crossed by the other; and if the Honestest Man is not the A^lest, although his
Opinion be the (...), it will be always Eluded, by him that has the greatest
Parts. As the Diseases and Death of Men proc^ed from the Discord of the
Elements whe^eof they are composed; so it is ce^tain, that the Opposition and
Disunion, which is always found amongst Equal Powers, will disturb the Quiet of
the States, which they shall Govern, and will produce diverse Accidents which
will in the End r^ine them. As several Pilots do never set their h^nds all
together to the Helm, so no more than one ought to hold that of the State. He
may very well receive advice from others. (...) also sometimes to ask it; bu^
it belongs to him to examine the Expediency thereof, and to turn the Hand on
one side or the other, according as he thinks it most convenient to escape the
Storm, and to make his course successful. Section 6. Cap. 8. of the first part.
and retard the Business.

XLIX. After he had been thus Magnificent in Public Bounty, he was Liberal to
Private Persons, in a Way that was no less grateful. The rich Possessions of
Aemilia Musa, who dying intestat and without Heirs, were escheated to his
Treasury By the Law. Iulia.
, he gave to Aemilius Lepidus, because it was probable that she was of his
Family. And the Estate of Patuleius, a rich Roman Knight, (although he had
bequeathed part of it to himself) he gave to M. Servilius, because he
understood that he had made him his Heir by a former Will that was liable to no
suspicions: adding, that both these Persons deserved a Revenue to support their
Honor Ph^lip II. caused an Historical Abridgment of all the Noble Families to
be Composed, that he might know their Rise, Increase, or Declension, and at
what Time, and in what Services they had acquired the Titles and Privileges
which they Enjoyed. A Knowledge which Enabled him to recompense the
Descendants, according to the Merits of their Ancestors. Cabrera, Cap. 16. Lib.
12. of his History. Having understood by this Nobiliary, that the Kings of
Castile, made the Marquis^es de Moya dine at their Table on St. Lucy's Day,
which is the 13th of December; and the Counts de Salines, on Epiphany, for the
great Service these two Families had done the State; in 1593, he restored this
Pre-eminence to them, which time had abolished, and sent solemnly to the
Marquis de Moya the Golden Cup, in which he had drank that Day; that he might
punctually observe what the Kings his Predecessors had done. Herrera, cap. ult.
lib. 3. part 3. of his History.
. Although it is not always for the Interest of the Prince to preserve the
Ancient Nobility; it is yet for his Honor, and but Policy sometimes to raise
up again some Illustrious Families, that the Nobility may have no occasion to
believe that he takes pleasure to sink and to destroy it. Salust says, That
Great Men who fall into Poverty, and consequently into Contempt, hate the
Present Government; and leave no Stone unturned to introduce a New one, wherein
their Condition may be better; as he shows by the Example of Cataline. Egnatius
Rusus conspired against Augustus, for no other Reason, but because he was poor,
and out of hopes of being relieved by this Prince. For, says Paterculus, Such
is the Wickedness of Men, (and particularly of Great Men) that every one of
them had rather be involved in the Public Ruin, than perish alone. Hist. 2.
91. Cecina rebelled against Galba, who required him to give an account of the
Public Treasury which he managed in Spain, that he might hide the Disorder of
his A^^airs in the general Confusions. Caecina aegre passus miscere cuncta, and
privata v^^lnera Reip. malis operire statuit. Tacit. Hist. 1. Of all which the
Result is, that the Prince ought sometimes to scatter his bounty on great
Families that are decayed, but especially on those, in which there are Persons
capable of making a Party, or putting themselves at the Head of Malcontents.
It was herein that Philip II. King of Spain, failed, who lost the Obedience of
the Prince of Orange, and the Counts of Egmont and Horn; for saving 150000
Crowns which Granvelle Bishop of Arras advised him to distribute amongst them,
before he left the Low-Countrys. Which, says Cabrera, cost him afterward
above 150 Millions; besides the Blood of so many thousand Men which was spilt.
Cap. 3. Lib. 5. of his History. The same Historian says, That this King
empowered the Great Men of Spain to Mortgage or to Sell their Estates; and that
by this Method he weakened and lessened them before they were aware of it. The
Effects whereof their Posterity feel at this Day. Cap. 16. Lib. 12.
Nor would he ever be Heir to any Man's Estate, unless he had been so much a
Friend to him in his Life, as might give him some pretensions to it. But he
utterly rejected the Inheritance of Unknown Persons, and of those especially,
who had made him their Heir, only to disappoint their own Relations whom they
hated The Moderation of Tiberius, who, though a Heathen, scrupled to accept the
Estates of those who bequeathed them to him, to deprive their Relations of
them, ought to shame those Monks who procure themselves to be made Heirs to the
prejudice of the Children of the Family, and of a thousand and a thousand poor
Relations, who perish through want. They who by their Vows and their Ministry,
are more strictly obliged than all other Ecclesiastics, to lead a Retired and
Mortified Life, can they in Conscience spend their Time in soliciting the
Judges, and besetting the Tribunals, and in commencing every day fresh Suits
against the Lawful Heirs, whose Patrimonies they would possess.
. As he relieved the Poverty of Men of Virtue How many times, says Paterculus,
has he furnished those Senators who were unprovided, with what was Necessary;
Honorably to support their Dignity? But as he suffered not an innocent Poverty
to be deprived of Offices and Honors; so he took car^ of giving to debauched
Persons, for fear of encouraging or fomenting Luxury and Voluptuousness. Hist.
2. c. 129.
, so he was severe against those who had ruined themselves by Vice and
Extravagance Public Affairs can never be in worse hands, than in those of
Persons, who understand not how to manage their Domestic Affairs. For it is
almost impossible, that such Magistrates should be dis-interess'd, or
consequently incorrupt.
; and it was for this Reason that Vibidius Varro, Marius Nepos, Appius
Appianus, Cornelius Sulla, and Q. Vitellius, were expelled the Senate by him,
or at least suffered voluntarily to quit it.

L. About the same time he consecrated the Temples of the Gods, which had been
consumed by Fire or Age, and which Augustus had began to rebuild. One near the
Great Cirque, which A. Posthumus the Dictator had vowed to Bacchus, Proserpina,
and their Mother Ceres. Another in the same Place to Flora, built by the
Aediles, Lucius, and Marcus Publicus; and that to Ianus in the Herb-Market,
which was built by Caius Duillius, who obtained the First Victory which the
Romans ever had at Sea As the Romans were at that time as much Strangers on the
Sea, as the Carthaginians were Experienced and Powerful on it; Duillius
provided Iron Hooks and other Instruments, with which he grappled the Enemy's
Ships, who were thereby forced to fight without ^^irring, as if they had been
on Land.
, for which he was honored with a Naval Triumph over the Carthaginians. But
the Temple of Hope which Attilius had vowed in the same War, was Consecrated by
Germanicus.

LI. In the mean time, the Law against Treason exerted its force. Apuleia
Varilia, who was Granddaughter to Octavia, the Sister of Augustus, was accused
of Treason for speaking Scurrilous and Invective Words against Divine Augustus,
Tiberius, and his Mother Livia; and for staining her self with Adultery,
notwithstanding her relation to the Emperor. As for the Adultery, they thought
they needed go no farther than the Julian Law, which had sufficiently provided
in that Case. And as for the Treasons wherewith she was charged, Tiberius
desired that they might be distinguished; saying, That she deserved
Condemnation, if she had spoken Blasphemy against Augustus A wife and prudent
Prince ought severely to punish the Injuries which are done to the Memory of
his Predecessors; for besides that, the Honor which he does herein to them,
returns directly on himself, it is an Example which he leaves his Successors to
do the like for him after his Death.
; but he would not have her questioned for what she had spoken against himself
The Lashes of Women's Tongues deserved to be despised, rather than resented. If
fools have Liberty to say any thing, because what they say signifies nothing,
it is for the Honor of Princes to let some Women eternally enjoy this
Privilege.
: And being asked by the Consul what should be done in case she should be
convicted to have defamed Livia; he returned no answer at that time, but at the
next Assembly of the Senate, he said, That it was his Mother's desire that none
should be molested for any words spoken against her; and thereby acquitted
Apuleia from the Indictment of Treason. He also desired that her Adultery might
not be punished with the utmost rigor; and obtained that she might, according
to the ancient Custom, be only banished by her Relations 200 Miles from Rome.
But Manlius her Gallant, was banished from Italy and Africa.

LII. A Contest arose about the Election of a Praetor, to succeed Vipsanius
Gallus, deceased. Germanicus and Drusus (for they were yet at Rome) employed
their Interest in favor of Haterius Agrippa, who was a Kinsman of
Germanicus's; but they were opposed by a great Party who contended, that the
Competitor who had most Children, ought to be preferred as the Law required In
the Disposal of great Offices, it is for the Interest of the Prince, to prefer
those Competitors, who, ^aeteris paribus, have the more numerous Families;
because more persons remain thereby obliged to him.
. Tiberius was well enough pleased to see the Senate divided betwixt his
Children and the Laws A new Prince, I mean a Prince whose form of Government is
new, cannot have a greater Pleasure than to see the Laws weakened, which had been
made in those times, when the State was governed in the Form of a
Commonwealth. Thus, when the Senate was divided betwixt the ancient Laws and
the Parties of Germanicus and Drusus, it was insensibly sinking to that
Slavery, to which Tiberius designed to bring it. Observe by the way, that
Germanicus, who was the Darling of the People and the Senate, for his popular
temper, did not himself stick to destroy the Liberties; and that if ever he had
come to the Empire, he might possibly have had quite different sentiments, from
those which he showed under another's Reign.
; and it was no wonder that the Laws truckled; however it was carried In the
pursuit of Offices and Honors, the support of Princes, is of much greater
advantage, than that of the Laws. And it is upon this Maxim, that the Cardinal
de Richelieu concludes for the selling of Offices; because, if that be
suppressed the Disorders that will proceed from Competitions, and
Underhand-practices, by which Offices will be obtained, will be greater than
those which arise from the Liberty of buying and Selling them; because, in that
case, all would depend on the Favor and Artifice of those, who are in the
greatest Credit with Kings. Sect. 1. Chap. 4. of the first part of his Politic
Testament.
but by few Voices, and not without some struggle against the Laws, as it used
to be sometimes when they were in force.

LIII. The same Year a War brake out in Africa, in which one Tacfarinas, a
Numidian, was the Leader, who had formerly served as an Auxiliary in the Roman
Army; which having Deserted, and drawn together a Company of Vagabonds and
Robbers for Plunder and Rapine; he afterward formed them into a regular Body
after a Military manner, dividing them into Companies under their respective
Colors; after which, he became General War is the best of all Trades for those
to whom Nature has given great Courage. It is the School wherein Fortune has
raised most of her greatest Favorites; and whence Men born in Poverty,
Contempt, and the most abject state of Mankind, have ascended to the supreme
Command of Armies; and oftentimes to the Regal Power it self. Francis Sforsa,
from the Son of a poor Shoemaker, became General of an Army, and his Son Duke
of Milan. The Constable de Lediguieres, and the Mareschals de Toiras, de
Gassion, and de Fabret, who all three had no other Estate, nor other
maintenance, but their Sword, are Examples of a late Date, which, like the
Trophies of Miltiades, ought to rouse the Courage and Industry of so many poor
Gentlemen, who live in shameful idleness.
of the Musulans, a Potent Nation bordering on the Deserts of Africa, living
without Cities or Houses; who having taken arms against the Romans, drew their
Neighbors the Moors into the Quarrel, whose General was named Mazippas;
betwixt whom and Tackfarinas the Army was divided. The latter had the choice
Troops which he armed after the Roman Fashion, and confined them in a Camp to
inure them to Discipline and Obedience; whilst the Former with a Light-armed
Body ravaged the Country with Fire and Sword, carrying Terror wherever he
came; so that they had compelled the Cinithii, which was no contemptible
Nation, to enter into their League, when Furius Camillus, Proconsul of Africa,
marched against them with a single Legion, and what Forces of the Roman Allies
which were with him, which was a very small Force, in comparison of the numbers
of the Numidians and Moors, who were therefore so confident of the Victory,
that they feared nothing but that the Romans would not give them Battle; but
this Confidence proved their Ruin; for Camillus having placed his Legion in
the Middle, and Light-armed Cohorts and two Squadrons of Horse in the Wings, he
received Tackfarinas so warmly, that he defeated the Numidians An
over-confidence of Generals in their strength, is oftentimes the Cause of the
Defeat of their Armies. As there is no little Errors in War, we need not wonder
that the strongest are sometimes vanquished. Add hereto, on the Occasion of
this Diversion, which was made betwixt Tuckfarinas and Mazipp^^ that a single
Head, with ordinary Prudence, makes better Officers, than two brave Generals,
who are jealous of each other.
, and hereby revived after a long tract of time the Military Glory of the
Family of the Camilli It is with Families as with Cities; sometimes they
flourish, sometimes they decline; sometimes they are utterly Extinguished;
sometimes they rise again out of their Ashes, after they have been whole ages
buried in Obscurity and Oblivion. This Vicissitude is more rare in
Commonwealths, in which they more easily preserve themselves by means of
Equality, which covers them from Oppression; whereas in Monarchy^, a thousand
of them perish under one reign, when the Prince, or his principal Ministers,
are Sanguinary or Covetous.
, which since the famous Deliverer of Rome It was in the Consulship of Furius
Philo, or Furius Camillus, as others call him, that the Gauls were beaten from
Rome; but it was his Colleague Caius Flaminius, who gained this Victory, without
Furius's having any share in it. Therefore Livy makes no mention but of the
Triumph of Flaminius. M. Iunius Dictator, says he, sex millia hominum gallicis
spoliis, quae triumpho C. Flaminii translata fuere, armavit. And in another
place, speaking of this Consul's Death, who was slain by Ha^^ibal in the Battle
of the Lake of Perousa, he puts these words in Hannibal's Mouth, Consul hic
est, qui legiones nostras, etc. So that this Passage of Tacitus which seems to
ascribe the Expulsion of the Gauls to Furius, is to be understood of the Year
of his Confulship, and not of his Person.
, and his Son Camillus, had left to other Families, the glory of furnishing
Generals. And he of whom we now speak was never before esteemed a Soldier Place
shows the Man, says the Proverb; To know the Capacity of a Man he must be
employed. Nothing does more honor to the Prince, than the Choice, which he
has made of a Minister, who succeeds in his Employment much otherwise than the
World expected of him. Commines relates, that Lewis XI. having told him, that
he had sent Master Oliver his Barber to Ghant, to reduce that City under his
Obedience, and others to other great Cities: He said to the King, That he
doubted that Master Oliver and the rest would not succeed in their Designs on
those Cities. Cap. 13. Lib. 5. of his Memoirs. But in the 14th Chapter he
says, That although this Commission was too great for Oliver, yet he showed in
what he did, that he had some understanding. For being forced to ^ly from
Gha^t, he made to Tournay, and found a way to put this fine City into the
King's Hands. And this Honor, as Commines concludes, was procured to the King,
by the said Oliver. A Wiser and a Greater Man, had probably failed in the
Management of this Enterprise.
, for which reason Tiberius was the more forward to extol this Action to the
Senate, who decreed him Triumphal Ornaments, which Honor drew no Envy upon him
because he always behaved himself with wonderful Modesty A Minister, or a
Favorite cannot long keep the Favor of his Prince, but by Submission and
Dependence. When he will rise of himself, the Prince never fails of depressing
him, as one that will be no longer his Creature. Lisander saying to Agesilaus,
whose chief Confident he had been before: Truly you know very well how to
slight your Friends. Yes, answered Agesilaus, When they would be greater than
my self. Plutarch in his Life. It is just so with all Princes. And this ought
to be well considered by Great Men, who have a great Military Reputation; for
it is that which gives Princes the greatest Jealousy, there being nothing
which the People speaks of with so much applause, as of Battles and Victories.
Don Bernardin de Mendoza says, That that Victory which the Count d'Egmont
gained at Gravelin, was possibly one of the Principal Causes of his Misfortune,
because it exalted him so much. Cap. 4. Lib. 3. of his Memoirs of Flanders.
. Princes more freely praise an ordinary Man, than they do a great Person;
because the praising of one is an Act of Grace, but the praising of the other
is no more than an Act of Justice: And Princes would have Men obliged to them
for every thing.


LIVE. The Year following, Tiberius and Germanicus were chosen Consuls, which
was the third Consulship of the Former, and the second of the Latter, who
received this Dignity when he was at Nicopolis A City built by Augustus, in
memory of the Victory that he obtained over Anthony.
, a City of Achaia, whither he came by the Coast of Illyria; after he had
visited his Brother Drusus in Dalmatia; and having in his passage met with two
Storms, one in the Adriatic, the other in the Ionian Sea, he stayed a few Days
there, to refit his Ships, in which time he went to see the Bay of Actium,
famous for the Fight there; He viewed also the Spoils consecrated by Augustus,
and the Place of Anthony's Camp; and was mightily affected It is an advantage
to Princes to see the very Places, where their Ancestors have done some
Memorable thing; for this Sight makes a strong Impression on their Minds, and
inspires them, as the Trophies of Miltiades did Themis^ocles; with a generous
Desire to imitate or to excel them. Philip II. King of Spain, was curious to
see wherever he traveled, the Edi^ices and the Tombs of his Predecessors. He
caused their very Co^^ins to be opened, and stood uncovered before their
Bodies, with as much respect, as if they had been living. Being at Segovia, he
repaired the Townhouse, for the sake of a great Hall, called, sala de los
Reges, where are the Statues of the Kings, under which he caused to be set
their Names, and a short account of their Reign, with an equal Number of Lines
and Letters in every Elogy, thus to revive their Memories. Cabrera, c. 12. l.
9. of his History.
with these lively Images of the Success of one of his Ancestors, and the
Misfortunes of the other; for Augustus, as has been said before, was his great
Uncle, and Anthony his Grandfather.

Thence he came to Athens; and in regard to the ancient Renown of this City and
its Alliance with the Romans, he entered it with no more than one Lictor. The
Graecians entertained him with the most studied Honors The more Modest and
Popular a Prince is, the greater Honors are paid him. The People are never
more prodigal thereof, than to those who exact none. Spreta in tempore gloria,
says Livy, cumulatior redi^, i. e. The Honors Great Men don't seek for, are
paid them with Usury. Charles V. won the Heart of the Catalans, (a Nation not
to be conquered when their Privileges are at stake) by answering those who were
deputed to know his pleasure, how he would make his Entry into Barcelona; That
he was contented to be received as their Counts; i. e. The Counselors of the
City not to alight from their Horses to salute him; because, he said, that he
held it a greater Honor to be Count of Barcelona, than to be King of the
Romans. Don Iuan Antonio de Vera, in the Epitomy of his Life.
, and, after a more refined sort of Flattery, carried before him Pictures
representing the Great Actions, and Memorable Sayings of his Ancestors Nothing
makes a greater Impression on the Minds and Hearts of Princes, than the
Examples of their Ancestors; it is almost the only instruction which they
receive with delight, or at least with respect. After that Nero had got rid of
his Governor Burrh^s, whose Wisdom was not agreeable to him, and had begun to
be disgusted at his Praeceptor Seneca; he was told, That he wanted no other
Masters nor Counselors, than the Examples of the Princes from whom he
descended. Charles V. and Philip II. conferring together about Don Carlos
Prince of Spain, who had very Evil Inclinations, which his Governor Don Antonio
de Rojas was never able to correct, nor moderate, concluded, that there should
be set before the Eyes of this Young Prince Pictures, which might excite Noble
Idaeas in his Imagination, and which might incline his Mind to the love of
Glory, by a Desire to imitate the Great and Generous Actions which he shall see
represented; That he should be suf^er'd to hear no Discourses but such as might
imprint in him good Maxims and Good Manners; That the Conversation of Persons
of Wit and Probity, who should be about him, would insensibly give him a Relish
and a Delight in good things, which would be of greater advantage to him, than
Precepts and Lessons which are always disagreeable to Princes, by reason of
that Superiority which those who instruct them in the Quality of Masters, seem
to usurp over them. Cabrera, l. 4. ^. 2. of his History.
.

LV. Hence, taking Eubaea Now Negropont.
in his way, he passed to Lesbos, where Agrippina was delivered of Iulia Or
Livia, who was married to Marcus Vini^ius, to whom Paterculus Dedicates his
History.
, which was her last Child. After which, sailing by the Coasts of Asia, he
visited Perintheis and Byzantium, two Cities of Thrace; and entered the
Streights of Propontis, and the Mouth of the Euxine Sea, being carried on with
a desire to see ancient and famous Places; and at the same time he relieved
those Provinces which were oppressed by Magistrates, or harassed by intestine
Divisions It is absolutely necessary for a Prince from time to time to visit
his Provinces; for he learns upon the spot all those things which it was the
Interest of his Officers to hide from him. It is there that he hears with his
own Ears, the Complaint which a Da^matian Lord made heretofore to Tiberius:
Instead of sending us Shepherds and Dogs to keep your Flocks, you send us
Wolves, which devour them. Dion, lib. 55. The Prince is not touched with the
Miseries and Oppressions of his People, if he does not see them; for there are
always ^latterers, who make him believe, that the Evils which are only reported
to him, are aggravated. And consequently, there is need of the Remedy which the
Sisters of Lazarus desired, Com^, Lord, and see. He must come and see,
otherwise the Remedy will not be equal to the Grievance.
. In his return he intended to have seen the Religious Rites of the
Samothracians; but the North-winds beating him back from that shore, he
directed his course to Troy, venerable for the Variety of its Fortune and its
last Fate, and for being the Mother-City to Rome. Whence coasting back by Asia,
he puts to shore at Colophon, to consult the Oracle of Clarius Apollo. It is
not a Priestess as at Delphos, but a Priest officiates there, who is chosen out
of certain Families* and commonly from Miletus. As soon as he is informed only
of the Number and Names of those who are come to consult the Oracle, he
descends into a Cave, where he drinks water of a Secret Fountain; and then,
though he is generally a Person of no Learning, nor of any skill in Poetry, he
gives his answers in Verse, to what things each Inquirer has in his thoughts;
and it was said, that he predicted to Germanicus his approaching Fate, but in
such Dark and ambiguous Phrases Princes would never hea^ Death spoken of, but
in obscure hints. Lewis XI. deserved compassion, who could not hear that cruel
wordd, Death, pronounced; and who commanded all his Servants, that when his own
approached, they should not give him (...) of it, but by saying to him, Sp^^k
l^tt^s* Com^^^es Memoirs, l. 0. ^. 12.
, as Oracles always use.

LVI. But Cn. Piso, that he might lose no time for his Designs, entered Athens
with great Precipitation, and made a Speech that surpised them as much as his
coming. In which he not only severely rebuked them, but made some oblique
Re^lections on Germanicus; as if he had pro^tituted the Majesty of the Empire,
by treating them with two much respect It is good to be Civil and Popular; but
(...) as not to lessen the Majesty of the Prince. The Ministers who represent
him, ought to avoid nothing more, than to derogate from the Rights of their
Character, to which too great a Reverence cannot be paid.
; who, said he, are not Athenians, (those having been long since extinguished,
by the many terrible Misfortunes that City had under-gone) but the Off^scouring
of several Nations, who had been Confederates with Mithridates against Sylla,
and with Anthony against Augustus. He reproached them also with their ill
success against the Macedonians, and their ill treatment of the Bravest of
their own Citizens When Men speak with Passion, they are very apt to contradict
themselves. Piso reproached the Athenians for being the Dregs and the
Offscouri^g of diverse Nations of Greece, and notwithstanding he imputed to them
all the Faults of this ancient Republic, for which they could not be
responsible, without being genuine Athenians.
; Things that had been done some ages past, for he had a Particular quarrel
against them, because they had refused to pardon at his Intercession, one
Theophilus It is common for great Men to revenge their Private Quarrels, under
the Name of those of the State. Velut pro Repub* conquerentes suum dolorem
pro^erebant. Tacitus, Hist. 3. There are many Ministers, says Anthony Perez,
who invest their Prince with their private Passions and Wrongs In the Aphorisms
of his Relations. Who under specious pretenses, convert the Public Interests
into their own; and instead of regulating private Affairs by the Public, do
the direct contrary, with Equal Injustice and Boldness. Part 1. Sect. 3. Cap.
8. of the Politic Testament.
, condemned for Forgery by the Areopagus. Departing from Athens, he passed in
great haste by the shortest cut of the Sea through the Cyclades, and at the
Isle of Rhodes overtakes Germanicus, who though he had been informed of the
Invective Speech which he had made against him, had nevertheless the Humanity
to send out Galleys to save him, when a Tempest had cast him amongst the
Shelves, where he might have been rid of his Enemy, and his Death imputed to
Chance For, says Tacitus, Ann. 14. Nothing is so subject to accidents as the
Sea; and besides, no Man is so Unjust as to make another responsible for the
Misfortunes which are caused by the Sea and Winds.
. But this Kindness could not so^ten Piso Violent Spirits are capable of very
little Gratitude, because they impute the Complaisance which People have for
them, to the Fear which they believe they have of offending them. Piso did not
doubt but that Germanicus feared him, seeing that this Prince was not ignorant
wherefore Tiberius had taken the Government of Syria from Silanus, and had
given it to Piso. Thus Germanicus, was so far from gaining the Friendship of
Piso, (who knew Germanicus was suspected by the Emperor) that he made him more
Haughty and less Tractable, by the care that he took to oblige him. And
be^ides, Piso judging of Germanicus's Nature by his own, which was revengeful,
could not imagine him mild enough, heartily to pardon the Injury which he had
done him at Athens. And this is what makes great Men irreconcilable; there
being one of them which cannot nor will not trust the other. According to M. de
la Rochefoucaut, one of the Principal Causes of the resolution which Monsieur
the late Prince took to retire into Spain, was the Opinion which he had, that
after all that had passed, he could not longer be secure with the Queen-Regent.
, who would scarce stay one day with Germanicus, but hastened again on board,
that he might get to Syria before him; whither as soon as he came, he gained
the Common Soldiers by Gifts and Caresses, and in the mean time cashiered the
old Centurions and the ^evere Tribunes, and filled their Places with his own
Creatures, or any profligate ^ellows. And whilst he permitted Laziness in the
Camp, Licentiousness in the City, and the Soldiers to commit any Disorders in
the Country, they gave him the Title (so great was the Dissolution of Manners)
of the Father of the Legions. Nor did Plancina keep within the Bounds of the
Modesty of her Sex, but was present at the Exercises of the Cavalry, and the
Musters of the Cohorts, and made bitter Reflections on Agrippina and
Germanicus: And when it was whispered that these things were not done without
secret Encouragement from Tiberius, some of the best of the Soldiers were ready
enough to carry on the Humor, and to obey ill Orders.

LVII. Germanicus had Intelligence of all this; but his more pressing care was
to go to Armenia. This had been always an Unsteady Nation; not only from their
Natural Temper, but also by reason of the situation of their Country; which
bordering on the Roman Provinces on one side, extends it self as far as Media
on the other; so that lying betwixt the two greatest Empires of the World We
may say of Armen^a, what the famous Marquis Spinola said of the (...) of
Rhimberg, That it was the St^umpet of War, because it fell by turns from one
hand to the other.
, they are engaged in frequent Quarrels, either with the Romans, or with the
Parthians; Hating the Former, and Envying the Latter. They had been without a
King ever since the removal of Vonones, but they were well inclined to Zeno the
Son of Polemon, King of Pontus; because from his Infancy he had imitated the
Manners and the Habits of the Armenians, and was much addicted to Hunting,
Feasting, and other things which this Barbarous People esteemed; and which
gained him the Favor both of the Nobility and the Common People. Germanicus
therefore, with the consent of the Nobility in the City of Artaxata set the
Royal Diadem on his Head, in a numerous Assembly; who did him Homage, saluting
him by the Name of Artaxias from the Name of their City. The Government of
Cappadocia, which had been lately reduced into the form of a Province, was
given to Q. Veranius, and the People were discharged of part of the Taxes There
is no better way for a Prince to endear his Government to new Subjects, than to
^ischarge them of part of the Taxes which they paid to the ^ormer Prince.
People are easily inured to Slavery, but never to the Avarice of Governors and
Magistrates; for they know no greater Evil than Poverty. After that, Charles
VIII. King of France, had taken Naples, and caused himself to be crowned there;
He did many acts of Grace to his Subjects, and lessened their Burdens, says
Commines, Lib. 7. Cap. 14. Clement VIII. did the same after he had reunited
the Duchy of Ferrara to the Ecclesiastical State: So that the House of Este,
which had a long time governed at Ferrara, and was also much beloved there, was
very little regretted by the People. The Cardinal d'Ossat adds, That he made
Seigneur Bevilaqua Cardinal, to honor and give good hopes to the City of
Ferrara, lately returned to the Holy See; this Cardinal being of one of the
most Noble Families of this City, Letter 167.
which they formerly paid their Kings, to give them hopes of being easier under
the Roman Government, than they had been under them. Q. Serveus was constituted
Governor of Comagena Which also before had a King.
, which was then first reduced under the Government of a Praetor.

LVIII. Notwithstanding, Germanicus had thus happily composed the Affairs of
our Allies, he could not yet be at ease in his Mind, by reason of the
Haughtiness of Piso Oftentimes Princes are more Disquieted and Troubled with
on^ Domestic Enemy, than by a Foreign War, The Conduct of Monsieur, the late
Duke of Orleans, made the late King more uneasy than the whole House of
Austria, and all the Enemies of France.
, who having been commanded by him, either to come himself, or to send his Son
with part of the Legions into Armenia, did neither. At last they both met at
Cyrrum, where the Tenth Legion was in Winter Quarters, Piso putting on a
Countenance that might betray no Fear; and Germanicus, one that might discover
no Resentment; and he was, as I have said before, of a forgiving Nature; but
there are a sort of Friends well-skill'd in enflaming Quarrels Men, but
especially Great Men, easily believe whatsoever is told them by Persons whom
they love, against People whom they hate. And hence it is, that Quarrels
betwixt Great Men are almost always immortal; those who have Power with them,
having an Interest to hinder their Reconci^^ation. It was thus Maugiro^,
Quelus, Saint-Luke, Saint-Mesgrin, Gr^mmont, Ma^^eon and Livarret, made use of
it with Henry III. on whom they made what impressions they pleased against his
Brother the Duke of Alenson. Lib. 2. of the Memoirs of Queen Margaret, who very
properly calls them the Council of ^eroboam.
, who brought diverse Accusations against Piso, his Wife, and Children,
aggravating somethings that were True, and suggesting others that were False.
At last, Germanicus had a Conference with him in the Presence only of a few
intimate Friends, wherein he began to discourse in such Language, as commonly
proceeds from a mixture of Anger and Reserve, and which Piso answered with such
haughty and provoking Excuses, that they parted open Amongst Great Men,
Explanations rather Exasperate than Pacify; because it is very difficult to
speak with so much reserve, as not let fall one angry word. It is almost
impossible, says Commi^es, that two great Lords should agree together, by
reason of Reports and Suspicions which they hourly have; and two Princes who
would live in Amity, ought never to see one another, but to send prudent
Persons to each other, who would rectify what is a^iss: Memoirs, l. 1. chapter 14.
and l. 2. chap. 8.
Enemies Apertis O^^is seems to be the truest Reading; for Piso having answered
with so little respect to Germanicus, whose dissembled anger he could not be
ignorant of, Germanicus had no reason any longer to dissemble his Anger toward
a Man who did not dissemble his toward him.
. After which, Piso came seldom to Germanicus's Tribunal; and when ever he did
assist, he appeared with a ^our Countenance, and always dissented from him in
his Opinion It is a strange thing, that Princes must suffer for the
Misunderstanding that is between their Ministers; and that the Public Affairs
must be sacrificed to their Private Quarrels. Are there not frequently seen in
a Council, Persons who give their Opinion not to counsel the Prince, but to
contradict their Rival; not to follow a good Opinion, but to make an ill one
pass if they can? Princes are very much concerned to remedy this Disorder.
. And when they were invited by the King of the Nabathaeans to a Feast, at
which Golden Crowns of great weight were presented to Germanicus and Agrippi^a,
and light ones to Piso and the rest of the Guests; He said aloud, That this
Feast was made for the Son of a Roman Prince Tacitus has said in one of the
foregoing Paragraphs, that Piso hardly gave place to Tiberius, and that he
looked on his Sons as his In^eriors. So that nothing could affront him more
than to make so great a Difference betwixt Germanicus and him. And by saying,
that Germanicus was the Son of a Roman Prince, and not of a Parthian King; He
intimated that Tiberius was no more than a Prince of a Commonwealth, and not a
Sovereign as the King of the Parthians; and that consequently, Germanicus
transgressed the bounds of an Aristocratical Equality, by accepting a Crown of
greater value than was given to the rest of the Guests.
and not of a Parthian King: And throwing aside his Crown, inveighed against
Luxury If they had presented Piso with a Crown like Germanicus's, we may
believe, he would not have rejected it, nor made an Invective against Luxury.
But because he was no^ made Equal to Germanicus, he thought fit to take upon
him a Mask of Modesty to put a better Color on his Resentment. And observe
here the Nature of most of our Censors and Reformers. They declaim against
Great Men, because they cannot be as great as they; They despise the Honors
that are given them, because they would have greater than are due to them. So
that we may say of them what Alexander said of Antipater, his Father's
Minister, That if they are modest in their Clo^ths, they are all Purple within.
; which G^rmanicus bore with patience, though he was sensible of the Affront.

LIX. It was about this time, that Ambassadors came from Artabanus King of the
Parthians; representing, that their Master desired to renew the Friendship and
League with the Romans, and that in honor to Germanicus he would come as far
as the Banks of Euphrates: But in the mean time, he entreated that Vonones
might not be suffered to continue in Syria, lest so near a Residence might give
him opportunity to solicit the Great Men of his Kingdom to an Insurrection.
As to the League betwixt the Romans and the Parthians, Germanicus returned an
answer suitable to the Dignity of the Subject; but as to the King's coming, and
the Honor he had done him, he expressed himself with great Modesty and Respect
The Audience of Ambassadors is one of the most Difficult things which a Prince
has to do; for it is not enough, that he hear with Modesty and Attention, but
it behooves him also to answer with Prudence and Constancy; as well to remember
what he is himself, as what the Prince is who treats with him; and to manage
the Ambassador so well, that of a Public Witness and a Spy, he may make a
Friend and a true Mediator of him. Commines says, That Lewis XI. dismissed
Ambassadors with such good Words, and such handsome Presents, that they always
went away pleased from him, and dis^embled to their Masters what they knew, for
the sake of the Pro^it which they gained thereby. Memoirs Lib. 5. Cap. 14. I
have read in a History of Venice, that the principal Cause which moved that
Senate immediately to acknowledge Henry IV. for King of France, was the
Relation which was sent them by the Senator John Mo^enique, who was their
Ambassador at the Court of Henry III. when he was murdered. Commines says,
That to give audience to Ambassadors, the Prince ought to be well Dressed, and
well-inform'd of what he is to say. l. 3. c. 8.
. He removed Vonones to Pompeiopolis a Maritime Town of Cilicia, which he did
not so much to comply with the request of Artabanus, as to mortify Piso There
are many Faults and Maladministrations, which would remain unpunished, if the
Officers who commit them, were not hated by those who punish them. If
Germanicus had not hated Piso and his Wife, he possibly would never have
removed Vonones from Syria; who in all appearance endeavored by the Presents
he made to Plancina, to corrupt the Fidelity of Piso, to set him at Liberty.
Witness the attempt which he made for it in Cilicia, under favor of a Hunting
Match, as Tacitus relates in the 69 Paragraph of this Book. Which shows, that
Artabanus had good reason to demand the removal of Vonones.
, to whom Vonones was very acceptable, upon the account of the many Favors and
Presents, wherewith he had obliged Plancina.

The Year 772. after the Building of the City.
LX. In the Consulship of M. Silanus, and L. Norbanus, Germanicus takes a
Journey into Egypt, under color of taking care of the Province, but in truth
to see the Antiquities of the Country Princes who have large Dominions, ought
not to travel into other Countries, because they have more work at home than
they can ever do; and in my Opinion, the use of Embas^ys, was introduced to
save them this trouble, or rather to teach them the Obligation they lie under
to provide for the Necessities of their People, whose repose absolutely depends
on their Presence. A Prince who travells into a Foreign Country, soon loses
the Affectious of his Subjects; for besides that, he neglects the
Administration of Affairs, they are displeased at the great Expenses which he
is obliged to be at, to appear Liberal and Magnificent to Strangers. A Point of
Honor that draws upon him more curses from his own People, than he gets
applause from those whom he Enriches. An able Ambassador of Savoy told me more
than once, that Duke Charles-Emanuel had been at such excessive Expenses in his
Journey which he took into France, about the End of the last Age, that he was
straightened thereby above fifteen years; and that if in 1612, he had been Master
of the Money which he had left there, he would have had thrice as much as he
needed to have obtained the Empire, in opposition to the whole House of Austr.
a. These were his own Words. Commines utterly blames the Journey which Alphonso
V. King of Portugal made into France, to procure assistance against Isabella
Queen of Castille, and Ferdinand of Aragon her Husband, who had usurped this
Crown from his Niece. For during his long stay in France which was above a
Year, his affairs in Castille were changed, where the Lords of the Kingdom, who
were almost all of his Party before his absence, made their terms with
Ferdinand and Isabella, being weary of expecting succors from France, and his
return. But that which he adds, shows to what Princes expose themselves who go
into another's Dominions. The King of Portugal 's End, says he, was that he
suspected, that the King (Lewis XI.) had a design to seize him, and deliver him
up to his Enemy the King of Castile. For this reason he disguised himself a
third time, being resolved to go away to Rome, and to retire into a Monastery.
For he was ashamed to return into Castille or Portugal, without having done any
thing in France, whither he went against the Opinion of many of his Council. In
this Habit he was taken by one Robinet le Beuf. And half a Page after; This
King endeavored to marry his Niece to the Dauphine, now Charles VIII. in which
he could not succeed. Insomuch, that his coming into France was to his great
Prejudice and Trouble, and was the Cause that he died soon after his return
into Portugal. His Memoris, Lib. 5. Cap. 7. Paul Piasecki speaking of the Death
of Cardinal John Albert, Brother to Uladis^aus King of Poland, who travel^'d
into Italy, says, That the wisest Lords of the Kingdom, condemned this Passion
for travel, as a thing unbecoming, and always fatal to great Princes; and
especially to the Sons of Kings* Proceres prudentiores talem peregrinationem
Princibus majoris nominis, praecipue Regum filiis, indignam improbabant. And in
the Margent; Peregrinatio filiis Regum indecora and periculosa, In Chronico ad
annum, 1634. Add hereto, That for the most part Princes return dissatisfied
with those whose Countries they have visited, because almost always part of the
Honors, which they pretend to, are contested with them. For which reason most
have had recourse to the Expedient of being Incognito, during their stay in
Foreign Countries, or their passage through them.
. By opening the Public Granaries he brought down the Price of Corn, did many
Popular things, went abroad without Guards Persons placed in high stations
ought never to appear in public, without the Exterior Marks of their Power;
for although Authority is not in the Ensigns, yet they are the Ensigns which
attract the Veneration of the People to the Magistrates. And it was partly for
this Reason, that they called the Duties which they rendered to the Emperors at
Rome, purpuram adorare. And Mamertinus says, That the Guards which environ
good Princes, are not for the Defense of their Bodies, but only to give some
luster to Majesty, Non custodiae corporis sunt, sed quidam imperatoriae
majestatis solemnis ornatus, Paneg. Iulia^^. It is therefore becoming Princes
and Great Magistrates to support Majesty by Exterior Splendour, which makes
Admiration and Respect enter by the Eyes. Commines speaking of the Interview of
our Lewis XI. and Henry IV. King of Castile, says, That the Castilians made a
Jest of Lewis, because he was in a mean Habit, and wore a Pitiful Hat, with a
Leaden Image on the top of it; saying, That it was for Covetousness. And some
lines after, he says, That the Burgundians contemned the little train of the
Emperor Frederick III. and the sorry Clothes of the Germans, His Me^oirs, l. 2.
c. 8. An instance that Princes, and consequently Magistrates also, have need to
go with an Equipage suitable to their Grandeur, if they will be respected.
Pagliari says, That that which obliged Pope Gregory XIV. to give the red Cap
to Cardinal Monks, was, that during his Cardinalship, he had often observed the
little respect that was given, and even the Indignities which were sometimes
offered to these venerable Prelates in the throng of great Ceremonies, because
having black Caps, they were not sufficiently distinguished. Observation, 213.
And it was for the same Reason, that the late King gave the Pectoral Cross to
the Bishops of France, who, it is said, are beholding to the rudeness of the
Swiss for it.
, in Sandals The Romans wore Buskins which reached up to the Calf of the Leg,
but the Graecians wore Shoes made almost like Slippers, which left the upper
part of the Foot uncovered.
, and in a Grecian Habit, in imitation of Scipio, who is said to have done the
same in Sicily, in the heat of the Carthaginian War. Tiberius made some gentle
Reflections on his Habit, but severely reprimanded him, for entering Alexandria
without the Prince's Permission, which was contrary to the Order of Augustus.
For Augustus amongst other Secrets of State, had prohibited any Senators or
Roman Knights that were of the Illustrious Rank to go into Egypt, without a
Pass from the Emperor Germanicus's intentions were good, but his Imprudence
brought them under suspicion. His going into Egypt without leave from
Tiberius, taught the Great Men of Rome to contemn the Prohibition of Augustus.
The opening of the Public Granaries, the affecting to go abroad without the
Rods, might very well appear criminal to Tiberius, there being no virtues more
dangerous than those which may create a Desire in an Unsteady and Changeable
People, to receive for their Master him who has them.
, for fear lest any one by making himself Master of that Province, (which
having the Keys both of the Sea and Land Egypt is environed on the South with
steep Mountains, which serve for Walls and Bulwarks to it; On the West and the
East with Mountains and Deserts; and on the North with a Sea that has no Road
nor Harbors: Which makes it Inaccessible on all sides, and consequently easy
to defend. Augustus who knew all the Conveniences of this Province, which was
a Granary to Rome, and all Italy, would debar all the Great Men from
acquaintance with it, for fear lest any of them should take a Resolution to
make himself Master thereof. And this Vespasian did when he rebelled against
Vitellius. Sciens Aegyptum plurimam esse partem imperii, says Josephus, eaque
si potitus soret, Vitellium dejiciendum sperabat. -- Cogitabat etiam
propugnacula sibi fore illam regionem adversus incerta fortunae, nam and terra
difficilis accessu; marique importuosa est. Belli Iudaici, l. 5.
, might be easily defended by a small Force, against Numerous Armies) should
starve Italy The Knowledge of the Situation, and the Commodities of his
Provinces, and of the Manners of their Inhabitants, is very necessary for a
Prince; for without this, he will often be deceived in the Choice of his
Governors, and send into a Province a Person who will raise nothing but
Troubles there; whereas, if he had been sent into another, he might have
governed with applause. For instance, If the King of Spain should send into
Catalonia and S^ci^y, (which are two fierce Nations, and whose Obedience is as
it were Arbitrary) Viceroys who would take the same Courses that the Viceroys
of Naples, and the Governors of Milan do, he would immediately lose these
Provinces, where there is nothing but Bones for the Spanish Ministers to gnaw
upon.
.

LXI. But Germanicus, who did not yet know that his Journey had given Offense,
went up the River Nile, having Embarked at Canopus, a Town built by the
Sparta^^, in Memory of a Captain of a Ship of that Name who was buried there,
when M^nelaus, in his return to Greece, was driven back by contrary Winds to
the Coasts of Lybia. The Mouth of the River that is next to Canopus, is
consecrated to Hercules, who, as the Inhabitants affirm, was a Native of their
Country; and the first of all who bore that Name, with which the rest were
honored after him, because they followed him in the same Paths of Valor. He
afterward viewed the great Ruins of Thebes, where there were yet remaining
some Inscriptions engraven on Obelisks in Egyptian Letters, which described
its ancient Grandeur. One of the Eldest Priests who was ordered to interpret
it, reported, That it formerly contained seven hundred thousand Men of an age
able to bear Arms; and that with an Army of that Number King Rhameses conquered
Libya, Aethiopia, the Medes and Persians, Bactriania, and Scythia, and all the
Country which is inhabited by the Syrians, Armenians, and their Neighbors the
Cappadocians, extending from the Bithynian Sea on one side, to the Lycian on
the other. There was also read an account of the Tributes imposed on the
Nations; what weight of Gold and Silver; what Numbers of Horses and Arms for
War? How much Ivory and Perfumes for Oblations to the Temples; and what
quantities of Corn and other Necessaries of Life, each Nation paid; which
equaled in Magnificence and Value, the Tributes that are now imposed either by
the Parthian or the Roman Empire.

LXII. But Germanicus was led on with a Desire of seeing other Miracles,
whereof the Principal were, the Statue of Memnon cut in Stone, which gave a
Sound like that of a Humane Voice, when the Rays of the Sun st^uck upon it.
Pyramids as high as Mountains raised in moving and almost unpassable Sands It
is common for great Princes to raise Magnificent Edifices in Desert and dry
Places, and which by their situation seem to be Uninhabitable, to make their
Power appear the greater, and to show that every thing yields to their Fortune.
Philip II. had this Prospect, when he chose the pitiful Village of the
Escurial, to build there the Famous Monastery which bears this Name, and which
the Spaniards call the Eighth Wonder of the World, although an old Alcada aged
^ourscore years, answered an Officer, who asked him in the King's Name his
Opinion of it; That the King was going to make a Nest of Caterpillars who would
devour the whole Country. Cabrera, c. 11. l* 6. of his History.
, by the Emulation and Wealth of their Kings. Lakes cut in the Ground for the
reception of the Waters of the Nile when it overflows, and in other places
Caverns so deep, that their bottoms cannot be sounded. From hence he went to
Elephantine and Syene, heretofore the Boundaries of the Roman Empire, which now
extends to the Red Sea.

LXIII. Whilst Germanicus passed the Summer in Progresses, Drusus acquired no
small Glory amongst the Germans by fomenting their Division It is true sign of
the Destruction of a Country, when those divide and abandon one another, who
ought to be united. Memoirs, l. 2. c. 1. Dum singuli pugnant universi
vincuntur, says Tacitus, in Agricola. The Landtgrave of Hesse, who commanded
the Army of the League of Smalcald against Charles V. had reason to say to the
Con^ederate Cities through which he passed, My Friends let every Fox keep his
Tail; to let them understand, that the League could not subsist but by their
common agreement. Epitomy of the Life of C. V. There cannot be better Counsel
than what the Lord Contay gave the C. de Charolois, who took it very ill, that
the Lords of the League of the Public Good held a Council amongst themselves
without calling him to it. Bear it patiently, said Contay; for if you displease
them, they will make their Peace with King Lewis more advantageously than you;
as you are the Strongest, so you ought to be the Wisest: Beware therefore of
dividing them, and use your ulmost industry to maintain a good Correspondence
betwixt them and your self. Memoirs of Commines, l. 1. c. 12.
, and persuaded them, that now Maroboduus With what Prudence and Conduct, says
Paterculus, Tiberius, by the Ministry of his son Drusus, forced Marc^od^us to
quit the Kingdom which he had Invaded; and wherein he hid himself as Serpents
do in the Bowels of the Earth? Hist. 2. Cap. 129. Lewis XI. took almost the
same Method against the Duke of Burgundy, not only by Separating from him all
his Allies, Edward, King of England; Gelasius, Duke of Milan; who had before
left the Alliance of the King for that of the Duke of Burgundy; Renatus, King
of Sicily, who designed to have made him his Heir, and to put Provence into his
hands; the Duchess of Savoy, the King's Sister, who, says Commines, was so
much in the Duke's Interest, that the Duke disposed of the House of Savoy as of
his own; but also by raising him up new Enemies, as the Swiss, who beat him in
two Battles; and the Cittes of Basil, Strasbourg, Nuremburg, and Francsort, who
entered into an Alliance with the Swi^s; and to injure him was thought enough
to get their own Pardon. His Memoirs, Lib. 5. Cap. 1. and 2.
was already weakened, they ought to follow their blow till he was entirely
ruined This Example shows, that there is scarce any such thing as good Faith
among Princes; and that the Leagues and Confederacies which they enter into,
are rather s^ares which they lay for one another, than Ties of Friendship.
Commonly the Weakest joins himself with the Strongest, only to make himself
more considerable to his Neighbors and his Enemies; and this was the Motive of
Maroboduus, who by his Alliance with the Romans* hoped to become more
formidable to the Cheru^ci, and to his Rival Arminius. The Strongest, on the
contrary, allies himself with the Weaker, under color to protect and defend
him; but in truth, to lay the Yoke of Slavery upon him, as soon as he can find
an Opportunity to do it. And this is what Tiberius did with respect to
Maroboduus, in sending Drusus into Germany to sign a League with him. Thus, it
may be truly said, That L^^gues make more noise, than they do service; That
they have more of Appearance and Ostentation, than of Reality and Strength; and
that, in fine, they rather hasten the Ruin of the Weaker or the less Politic,
than they do retard or hinder it.
. There was amongst the Gotones, a Young Nobleman named Catualda, who having
been banished by Maroboduus, attempted now to take his Revenge on him in his
declining Fortune Observe Tiberius's Policy. After he had made use of
Maroboduus to give a Check to Arminius the sworn Enemy of the Romans, he made
use of Catualda, to ruin Maroboduus; and afterward of Maroboduus's Faction to
expel Catualda, whereby he completed the ruin of Germany. King Lewis XI.
says Commines, better understood this Art of dividing Nations, than any other
Prince whom I ever knew. He spared neither his Money nor his Pains, not only
toward the Masters, but also toward the Servants, Lib. 2. Cap. 1. With a
Hundred and twenty thousand Crowns of Gold, he divided the D. of Burgundy from
the Dukes of Normandy and Brittany, and forced his Brother to renounce his
Right to the Duchy of Normandy, for a Pension of twenty thousand Crowns. Cap.
5.
. And in order to it enters the Borders of the Marcomanni with a good Force,
and having corrupted the Principal Men of the Country to join him, he forces
the Palace, and the Castle that stood near it, where were found the ancient
Spoils of the Suevi, and Cooks, and Traders of our Provinces, whom first
Freedom of Commerce, afterward, desire of Lucre, and at last, Forgetfulness of
their own Country, had transplanted from their Habitations into the Enemy's
Soil.

LXIV. Maroboduus being deserted on all sides, had no other refuge but to the
Mercy of the Roman Emperor. Wherefore passing the Danube where it waters the
Province of Norica Now Bavaria.
, he wrote to Tiberius, not as a Fugitive or a Peti^ioner, but like one that
had not forgot his former greatness How Unfortunate soever a Prince be, it
always becomes him to remember his past fortune; neither to do nor say any
thing, which may give People reason to believe that he was unworthy of the Rank
that he held, or worthy of the Evils that he endures. John Frederick, Duke of
Saxony, falling into the hands of Charles. V. spoke to him to give order that
he should be treated as a Prince of the Empire; and so far was he from humbling
himself to the Emperor, who spoke to him in menacing terms, that he put on his
Hat and answered, That it was in vain that his Majesty went to fright him, and
that by becoming his Prisoner, he did not cease to be a Prince.
. That although several Nations had courted him, as one who had been lately so
renowned a King to make their Countries his retreat, yet he preferred the
Friendship of the Romans to all their Offers. Tiberius answered him, That he
should have a Safe and Honorable retreat in Italy if he thought fit to stay;
but if it should be more for the advantage of his Affairs to go elsewhere, he
should go with the same Liberty that he came. There is no Prince who does not
rejoice to receive another into his Dominions; for besides the Honor of the
Hospitality, he may draw thence very great advantages in due Time and Place.
And consequently, it is no wonder, if ordinarily their Departure is not so free
as their Entrance. If the late Duke of Orleans had not deceived the Marquis
d'Aytone, President of the Council of State of the Low-Countrys, he had run a
great risque of continuing a long time in the hands of the Spaniards, to serve
as a Pretense for War against France.
. But he afterward told the Senate, that he had been a more Formidable Enemy,
than ever Philip was to the Athenians, or Pyrrhus or Antiochus to the Romans
The more Illustrious the Conquered is, the more Glorious is the Conqueror. If I
had made no resistance, said Caractacus to the Emperor Claudius, my Defeat and
your Victory would never have been talked of. Ann. 12.
. His Speech is yet extant, wherein he extolled the Greatness of his Person,
the Fierceness of the Nations that were subject to him, and what measures he
had taken to destroy so Dangerous and so near an Enemy to Italy Paterculus
says, that Maroboduus had so far enlarged his Power, that he was become
formidable to the Roman Empire; that all the Malcontents, who withdrew
themselves from obedience to the Romans, fled for Sanctuary to this Prince, who
maintained an Army of 70000 Foot, and 4000 Horse; That he had reduced under his
Obedience all his Neighbors, either by Force by making continual War on them;
or by Treaties which obliged them to declare for him; that he was in particular
formidable by the situation of his States, which had Germany on the Front and
on the Left Hand; Pannonia on the Right; and Norica on the Back; so that they
feared him on all sides, as a Prince who was ready to fall upon them. Add
hereto, that his Frontiers were not but 200 miles, or a little more, distant
from the Alps, which served as Boundaries to Italy, Cap. 108. and 109. The last
Duke of Lorrain, seems to have followed the Steps of Maroboduus, as they may
easily observe, who will compare them together.
. Maroboduus was kept at Ravenna to awe the Suevi with the fear of his return
There is nothing that Rebels are more afraid of, than to fall again under the
Power of a Prince, whom they have dethroned. The People of Liege, who upon the
Instigation of Lewis XI. had revolted from the Duke of Burgundy, seeing their
City besieged by these two Princes in person, purposed, says Commines to
hazard all; for as they knew that they were undone, and that if they must die
in the Execution of such an Enterprise (which was to make a Sally out of the
Town, with the Bravest of their Men, and to kill the King and the Duke in their
houses) they should at the worst have a Glorious End; and they wanted but
little of having succeeded in their Design. His Memoirs, l. 2. c. 12. Thus
nothing is more advantageous to a Prince, who has dangerous and unsteady
Neighbors who have revolted, than to give their Prince a Retreat to awe them
by the Fears of his Restoration.
, if they should at any time grow Insolent. But he stirred not out of Italy for
the space of Eighteen Years, and he was conscious that he had lessened his
Glory by setting too great a Value on Life. A Prince who has long survived the
loss of his Kingdom, gives occasion to People to believe, that he is little
affected therewith, and that consequently, he had not the Qualities which were
requisite to make him worthy to possess it, nor the Courage which was
necessary, to keep the Possession of it. Don Pio Mutio becomes an Advocate for
Maroboduus against Tacitus, who ascribes to a Poorness of Spirit, the Care
which this King took to prolong his Life. Let us leave, says he, this Itch of
Dying to the Stoics, and use the Means to preserve that Life, which God has
given us to assist our Relations and our Friends, and to serve our Country. And
some lines after he concludes with these words: Therefore our Author unjustly
blames Maroboduus, since in my Opinion there is no less glory, for a Man to be
a Good Husband of his Life to serve God, his Country, and his Friends, and to
reserve himself for a better Fortune, than to run into Battles, and throw it
away, to acquire Glory, which like smoke is carried away by a Blast of Wind.
But this Consideration, which is the 145. of the Second Part, is fitter for
Monks and Tradesmen, than for Princes and Noblemen, to whom War is the most
Natural Employment.
Catualda had the same Fate, and no other refuge; for being expelled not long
after by the Hermunduri under their General Vibilius, he was received by the
Romans, who sent him to Forum Iulii, a Colony of Gallia Narbonensis. And lest
the Barbarous People who came with these two Princes, might raise any
Disturbances in these Provinces, which were in perfect quiet, they were
transplanted beyond the Danube, betwixt the River Marus and Cusus, and Vannius
of the Nation of the Quadi, was set over them as King.

LXV. The Senate having at the same time received the News that Germanicus had
made Artaxias King of Armenia, they decreed, that he and Drusus should enter
the City in Ovation, and that Arches with their Statues should be built on both
sides of the Temple of Mars the Avenger. And Tiberius being better pleased that
he had made Peace by his Prudence A Prince who understands Negotiations, as
Tiberius did, ought always to prefer the way of Treaties to that of A^ms. It is
certainly more honor for him to overcome his Enemies by Skill, than by Force.
A Gascon Gentleman who was in the Service of Edward King of England, on
occasion of the Peace of P^quigny, said, That his Master had gained Nine
Battles in Person, but that what we made him lose by this Peace which drove the
English out of France, brought him greater Shame and Loss, than the other Nine
which h^ had gained, had acquired him Honor and Advantage. Commines, l. 4. c.
10. of his Memoirs. Queen Margaret speaking of the Peace which the Duke of
Alenso^ made at Nera^ with the King of Navarre and the Huguenots on his Party:
My Brother, said she, having made a Peace to the Satisfaction of the King and
all the Catholics, and not less to the Contentment of the Huguenots, returned
thence into France, with as much Honor and Glory for having composed so great
Troubles, as from all the Victories which he had obtained by Arms. Memoirs, l.
3.
, than if he had ended the War with the Sword, employs the same Artifices
against Rhescuporis, King of Thrace. After the Death of Rhoemetalces, who was
in possession of the whole Country, Augustus had divided it betwixt his
Brother Rhescuporis, and his Son Cotys. In which division, the Arrable-Land,
the Cities, and the Parts adjoining to Greece, fell to Cotys's share; the Wild
uncultivated Parts, and which bordered on Enemies, to Rhescuporis. The tempers
of these two Kings were as different; the Former being Mild and Complaisant;
the Latter Covetous, Ambitious, and Cruel. However, they lived at first in an
appearance of Friendship. But in a while, Rhescuporis passed his Bounds,
usurped upon Cotys, and stuck not sometimes to use Force where he found
Resistance; but this he did by wary and slow Methods in the Reign of Augustus,
who he feared would revenge the Injustice as he was the Founder of these two
Kingdoms; But when he heard of his Death, he sent Troops of Robbers, and
demolished some of his Castles, to give an occasion for War.

LXVI. Tiberius who feared nothing more than new Troubles, dispatches away a
Centurion, with a Message to the two Kings, enjoining them not to decide their
Quarrel by the Sword Divisions never began in a Country, says Commines, but
they have proved destructive in the end, and very difficult to extinguish, Lib.
4. Cap. 9. For a King to nourish Divisions betwixt Princes, and Persons of
Virtue and Courage, is to kindle a Fire in his House; for sometimes one or the
other will say, The King is against us; and under this Pretense will think of
fortifying themselves, and making Alliances with his Enemies, l. 6. c. ult. And
whilst one of the Parties takes Arms against the Prince, he is always ill
obeyed by the other; who thinking that he stands in great need of them, sets
their Services at the higher price. Thus a Power^ul King ought never to suffer
the Princes who are his Vassals or Neighbors to go to War, for the Fire comes
to spread it self thence into his Dominions. On the contrary, he ought to
assume the Office or an Arbitrator, or a Mediator betwixt the Parties, and
threaten to declare against him, who will not hearken to Peace.
. Cotys immediately disbands the Army he had raised; and Rhescuporis with a
feigned Submission, desired, that they might have an Enterview, and terminate
their Differences by Treaty; and what with the Easy Compliance of the one, and
the Fraudulent Compliance of the other, they soon adjusted not only the Time
and Place of their Treaty; but also the Conditions of their Agreement.
Rhescuporis, under color of ratifying the Agreement with greater Ceremony,
makes a Feast, which he protracts till Midnight, and then puts Cotys in Chains
A wise Prince ought never to put himself into the hands of another, with whom
he has great Interests depending. He that goes to meet another, cannot be
reasonably secured by any Promises, Oaths, or Passports. Safe Conducts are as
feeble Arms against Force, as Paper is against Iron: And Julius II. before he
was Pope, said often, That they were great Fools, who exchanged Liberty and
Life for a Dead Beast's Skin Apology for the Council of Pisa. The Duke of
B^rgundy, wrote to Lewis XI. a large Letter with his own hand, giving him
security to come and to return; and the King took no gua^d with him, but would
rely entirely upon the security given by the Duke. Commines, l. 2. c. 5.
Notwithstanding, the Duke ordered the Gates of the City and of the Castle of
Peronne to be shut, saying, That the King was come thither to betray him: and
these Gates were shut three days; during which time the Duke did not see the
King, nor did any of the King's Servants enter into the Castle, but through the
Wicket of the Gate, Chap. 7. and 9. of the same Book. This Duke, when he was
only Count de Charolois committed the ^ame Error, by suffering himself to be
insensibly led on by the King, with whom he walked to a Place called the
Boulevart or Bulwark, through which People enter into Paris; for which he was
much blamed by the Count de S. Pol, and by the Marshall de Burgundy, who put
him in mind of the Misfortune that happened to his Grandfather King Charles the
Seventh, at Montereau-faut-Yonne. To which Reprimand, the Duke returned this
Answer; Don't rebuke me, for I know very well my great Folly, but I did not
perceive it, till I was near the Bulwark. Memoirs, l. 1. c. 13.
. (Meaning Parc^ment)
, who amidst all his Iollity suspected nothing; but as soon as he perceived the
Treachery, he in vain conjured him, by the Sacredness of his Character, as a
King Consanguinity, Honor, and all the Essential Duties of Civil Society, are
feeble Ties for Princes, for they have commonly no other Rule of their Conduct
but their Interest* and the present Possession of all that is agreeable to
them. They pretend that there are Privileges, which belong only to them; and
that what is called Breach of Faith in Private Men and Subjects; ought to be
called Policy and Reason of State in Transactions between Princes* Princes,
says Mariana, have a Custom to love their Profit, better than their Word and
their Duty; they steer their Course that way where they see the greatest Hopes,
without being concerned what Judgment posterity will pass upon them. His Hist*
l. 15. c. 18. In short, we may say of all Princes, what was said in Portugal of
King Cardinal Henry, That as scrupulous as he was, he had two Consciences; one
for what he would have, and another for what (...) would not. Cabrera's Hist.
l. 12. c. 12. The same Historian observes, as an extraordinary Thing, and which
many Princes would have stuck at* That Philip going into Flanders* entrusted*
the Person of Don Carlos, the Sole Heir of the Spanish Monarchy, with the
Infanta Maria his Sister, and with Maximilian, King of Bohemia, whom she had
married. Lib. 1. Cap. 2.
, by the Common Gods of their Family, and by the Rights of Hospitality, to
desist. Having thus made himself Master of all Thrace, he wrote to Tiberius,
that he had only prevented the Treachery of Cotys, who was plotting his ruin;
and at the same time strengthened himself with New Levies, both Horse and Foot,
under pretense of making War on the Scythians and Bastarnians.

LXVII. Tiberius answered him with a great deal of Temper; That if he had used
no Fraud, he might safely rely on his own Innocence; but that neither himself,
nor the Senate could distinguish Justice from Wrong, before they had heard the
Cause; and that therefore he should deliver up Cotys, and by proving the
Injustice with which he charged him, vindicate himself. Latinius Pandus,
Propraetor of Maesia, sent these Letters into Thrace by the Soldiers who were
to receive Cotys. But Rhescuporis fluctuating betwixt Fear and Anger; and
choosing rather to be guilty of an accomplished Villainy, than of an Imperfect
one Great Crimes, says Tacitus, are begun with Danger, but when they are once
begun, there is no other remedy, but to complete them, Ann. 11. and 12. For,
says Machiavel, a Man never escapes out of one Danger but by another Danger.
History of Florence, Lib. 3.
, orders Cotys to be murdered Alphonso XI. King of Castile, dealt with John
Lord of Biscay, after the same manner, as Rhescuporis did with Cotys. He
invited John to an Enterview in the City of Toro, with a Promise to give him in
marriage his Sister the Infanta Elconor; and to take all suspicion from him, he
removed from his Court Garci Lasso de la Vega, his Chief Minister, who, as John
said, was his Mortal Enemy. When John was at Toro, he invited him to come and
Dine with him on All Saints Day. John went thither without Arms, and without
Fear, by reason of the Festival, and was slain in the midst of the Rejoycings
of the ^east.
, and gave out, that he had killed himself. Notwithstanding this, Tiberius
altered not his measures, but acted the same Part toward him; insomuch, that
after the Decease of Pandus, of whom Rhescuporis complained that he was his
Enemy It is the common Pretense of Great Men who will not come to Court, when
they are called thither by the Prince, to impute their Disobedience to the Fear
they have of being oppressed by his Ministers, or by his Favorites. Thus the
Constable St. Pol, excused himself to Lewis XI. for appearing before him in
Arms, and with the Precaution of a Rail betwixt them, saying, That he had not
done it, but to de^end himself against the Count de Damartin his Mortal Enemy.
Commines.
, he made Pomponius Flaccus With what Prudence, says Paterculus, did Tiberius
draw Rh^scuporis to Rome, who had murdered Cotis his Nephew and Copartner in
the Throne. In this Affair he made use of the conduct of Pomponius Flaccus, a
Con^ular Person, who was sitted to execute with success, whatsoever was desired
of him, that might be done with Honor; and who by an unaffected Virtue merited
Glory, rather than sought for it. Lib. 2. Par. 129.
Governor of Maesia, who was a well-experienc'd Soldier, and an intimate Friend
of the Kings, and therefore the fittest Person to circumvent him There is no
Friendship which is proof against the Fear of losing the Prince's Favor, or
the Hopes of gaining it. The Order to apprehend the Marshall de Marillac was
carried by one of his near Relations; who besides, was God-son to his Brother
the Keeper of the Seals. The Case of Lobkovits, Chief Minister to the Emperor,
was singular, who having no tie of Kindred or Friendship with Prince William of
Furstemberg, now Cardinal, gave notice to the Pope's Nuntio, of the secret
Sentence of Death given against him, (and which was to have been Executed inter
privatos parietes) to the end that he might demand him in the Name of the Pope,
as being under his Jurisdiction as a Bishop. Which indeed saved this Prelate's
Life, but was the occasion that Lobkovits was accused of holding Intelligence
with France, and that he was taken off by Poison. Memoirs de Chev. de R.
.

LXVIII. Flaccus arriving in Thrace, prevailed with him by great Promises to
enter our Frontiers, notwithstanding his Guilt made him suspicious Suspicion
and Distrust are learned in the School of Wickedness. And according to Tacitus,
it is very difficult to surprise People who have been a long time wicked.
Ministris tentare arduum videbatur mulieris usu scelerum adversus insidias
intentae. Ann. 14.
, and sometimes to hesitate. A strong Guard pretended for his Honor A Prince
who has taken refuge in the Dominion of another, ought to look upon all those
who are appointed to wait upon him when he goes abroad, as so many Spies. The
more Honor this Train does him in appearance, the less Liberty he has: and
this is what Henry Prince of Conde, one day complained of to the Count de
Fuentes, Governor of Milan, who had him guarded with wonderful care, under
pretense, that Kings having long hands, it would be easy for Henry IV. whose
Indignation he had incurred, to have him carried away from Milan it self, i^
the Count did not watch for the safety of his Person. It is well known how much
the Spaniards were troubled at the Manner of M. the Duke of Orleans's retiring
from Brussels, although the Marquis d'Aytone said, That the only
dis^atisfaction he had about it, was, that his Higness had deprived him of the
Means of rendering him the Honor that was due to a Prince of his Rank, which
would have been more for the Dignity of his Person, and the Satisfaction of his
Catholic Majesty. Memoirs of Montresor.
was sent to attend him; and the Tribunes and Captains by entreaty drilled him
on, and the farther he went, the Closer they guarded him; so that he perceived
at last there was no remedy but that he must go to Rome, where he was accused
by Cotys's Wife before the Senate, and condemned never to return to his
Kingdom. Thrace is ^new divided betwixt his Son Rhoemetalces, who was known to
have been an Enemy to the Violences of his Father, and the Children of Cotys:
But these being Minors, the Administration of their State, until they should
come of Age, was committed to Trebellianus Rufus, who had been Praetor, after
the Example of our Ancestors, who sent M. Lepidus into Egypt to be Guardian to
the Children of Ptolomy Ptolomy Philopator, Father to Ptolomy Epiphanes, who
succeeded him at the Age of five years. The Romans sent Lepidus into Egypt, to
oppose the Ambitious Designs of Antiochus, Sirnam'd the Great, King of Syria,
and of Philip (This was Philip, Father to Perseus the last King of Macedonia.)
King of Macedonia, who designed to have shared betwixt them this Young
Prince's Kingdom.
. Rhescuporis was carried to Alexandria, where he was put to death for
attempting to make his Escape, though possibly this Crime was forged against
him.

LXIX. At the same time Vonones, who being, as I have said, confined in
Cilicia, having corrupted his Guards, under color of going a Hunting, Besides
that Hunting is good for Princes, for the Health of their Bodies; and being an
Image of War, it teaches them that Art by way of Diversion; it is also of
advantage to them to be Hunters, because of the favorable Opportunities that
this Exercise gives them, when they are in the hands of their Enemies.
, endeavored to make his Escape into Armenia, and thence to the Albanians and
the Heniochians, and from thence to the King of the Scythians, who was his
Kinsman. Leaving therefore the Seacoasts, he takes the By-ways of the Forests,
and with all the speed that his Horse could make, posts toward the River
Pyramus. But the Country People having had notice of the King's Escape, broke
down the Bridges, and the River being not Fordable, he was taken and bound on
the Banks of the River by Vibius Fronto, General of the Horse, and an Evocate
Evocati were Veteranes who were listed anew, but without being obliged to the
Military Offices; so called, quia militia de^uncti rursus a^ ipsam revoc^bantur.
, named Remius, who before had the Guard of him, run him through the Body with
his Sword; as if it had been in revenge of his ^light, which made it more
credible that he was privy to his Escape, and that he killed him to prevent his
Discovery of it.

LXX. Germanicus at his return from Egypt found all the Orders which he had
Established amongst the Legions, or in the Cities, laid aside, or reversed, N^w
Ministers, says Anthony Perez, are wont to do as New Engineers, who to change
the Design of those who went before them, demolish the Works which they had
begun, and consume the Prince's Money in unnecessary Expenses. In the Aphorisms
of his Relations.
, which drew from him some hard words against Piso, who was designing ill
things against him. At last, Piso was preparing to quit Syria, but the Sickness
of Germanicus staid him; and when he heard of his recovery, and that Public
Thanks were returned to the Gods for it, he sent his Guards to disperse the
People of Antioch who were solemnizing the Thanksgiving, to force away the very
Victims from before the Altars, and to put an End to the Ceremonies. After
which, he went to Seleucia The Capital City of Mes^potamia, seated on the
Tygris.
, to expect the Issue of the Relapse which Germanicus fell into, whose
suspicion that he was poisoned by Piso, much increased his Distemper Commines
had good reason to ^ay, That Suspicions are the greatest Diseases of Princes,
and which much shortens their Lives. Cardinal de Richeli^u paints Princes to
the Life, when he says, that they believe their Suspicions as Oracles, and do
as Magicia^s, who make themselves dr^nk in their false Science, for an Event
the knowledge whereof they owe to Chance. In an Apology for his Conduct toward
Queen Mary de Medicis.
. There were found in the Floor and the Walls the Remains of Humane Carcasses
dug-up, Charms and Sorceries, and Germanicus's Name engraved on Plates of Lead,
Bones half burnt, and be^mear'd with Gore, and other Witchcra^ts There are many
People, who that they may pass for Men of great Sense, believe nothing of all
that which Historians and other Authors, speak of Magicians and Sorcerers; ^ut
the Holy Scriptures, and the Authority of the Church, which Excommunicates and
Anathematises them every Sunday in Parish-Churches, will not suffer us to doubt
of the Truth thereof. And consequently Princes and Magistrates can never
proceed with too much rigor against these public Pests. It is observed in the
Iournal of the Reign of Henry III. that in the Reign of Charles IX. impunity
had multiplied this Vermin to the Number of thirty thousand Persons. However,
we must not believe that Sorcerers have all that Power to Hurt and Kill which
some ascribe to them. Henry. III. lived still, notwithstanding all the
Wax-Images, which they pricked in the Place of the Heart, during the Masses of
40 hours, which those of the League caused to be said in the Parish Churches of
Paris. The some Iournal, 1589.
, by which Souls, as it is believed, are devoted to the Infernal Gods. Some
were also accused to have been sent by Piso, to observe the Progress of his
Distemper The Curiosity of knowing the Progress of the Diseases of Princes, is
almost always fatal to those who inquire after it. As nothing afflicts Princes
more than the approaches of Death, so nothing gives them greater Indignation
against Great Men, than a certain Imprudent Hastiness, that discovers that they
expect a New Reign. M. the Duke de la Rochefocault makes a Reflection, which
agrees well with this Subject. If, says he, the Parties which the principal
Persons of the Realm made, some for the Queen, and others for Monsieur, did not
discover themselves more; it was because the King's recovery, which seemed to
be in a fair Way, made them fear, lest he should be informed of their
Practices, and should look upon it as a Crime in them to be so careful
beforehand, to Establish their fortunes after his Death.
.

LXXI. As these things came to the Ears of Germanicus, they added both to his
Fears and his Anger. If my Chamber, said he, is beset? If I must expire before
my Enemy's Eyes, what will afterward become of my Miserable Wife, and my Poor
Children It is common enough for Princes and Great Men, to fore-s^e and
foretell at their Death, the Misfortunes that will be^all their Children.
Germanicus prophesied.
? Piso thinks the Poison works too slowly, and is impatient till he becomes the
sole Master of the Province and the Legions, But Germanicus is not yet sunk so
low, but that he is able to hinder the Murderer from enjoying the Prize of his
Villainy He that has not power enough to defend himself against Oppression, has
oftentimes Friends eenough courageously to revenge him after his Death. Which
ought to be considered by those, who find themselves supported by favor, make
trial of their Power on Great Men. For sooner or later the Oppression is
returned upon themselves.
. Hereupon, he writes a Letter to Piso, wherein he renounced his Friendship
There is not nowadays so good faith amongst Men; Dissimulation and
Double-dealing are become so much the Mode, that People are generally so far
from openly renouncing the Friendship of those who have disobliged them, that
on the contrary, they make greater expressions of it than ever, that they may
more securely ruin them. The Friends of this Age, says Anthony Perez, have
the Figure of Men, but the Heart of Wild Beasts. Kostro^ humanos, coraso^es de
fieras.
; and some add, that he commanded him to leave the Province. Nor did Piso make
any longer stay, but took Ship: However, he made the Ship sail but slowly, that
he might the sooner come back, if Germanicus 's Death should make way for his
return to Syria.

LXXII. Germanicus after some little hopes of recovery ^lagg'd again Let
Princes be never so sick, Flatterers make them almost always hope, that they
will recover. They deceive them to the very moment that they depart to give an
account to God, without any one being concerned for their Salvation; in this
one thing more unhappy than the most mis^rable Subject they have. Don Carlos
Colona speaking of the sudden Death of Alexander Duke of Parma, says, That he
knew not that he was dying, but by the Countenance of his Servants and
Physicians Lib. 5. of his History of the Wars of Flanders.
; intimating that this Prince understood that by their Eyes, which he ought to
have known from their Mouths.
; and perceiving that his end was drawing on, he spoke to this Effect to his
Friends that stood about him. If I had died a Natural Death, I might justly
have complained of the Gods for ravishing me in the Bloom of my Youth, by an
untimely Death from my Parents, my Children A good Father, as Germanicus was,
could not have a greater Trouble at his Death, than to leave a Wi^e and
Children whom he loved tenderly, to the mercy of his Enemies.
, and my Country; but now being taken off by the Treachery of Piso and Plancina
It is very hard for private Persons, who are accused by a Prince that is the
People's Favorite, to shelter themselves from the Storm* which so heavy an
Accusation draws upon them.
, I leave my last desires with you: Acquaint my Father and my Brother, what
Cruelties I have suffered, and with what Perfidiousness I have been treated,
and how that at last I end a most miserable Life, by the worst kind of Deaths
Poison is the Plague of Princes, for it is almost the only kind of Death,
against which it is impossible for them to guard themselves, what cautions
soever they make use of against the Treachery of their Domestic Officers. And
thence it is, that People ordinarily attribute their Death to Poison; and that
they themselves are so often troubled with suspicions of being poisoned. To
this purpose I remember, I have read in the Relations of a Venetian Ambassador
at Rome, that in the Pontificate of Urban VIII. an Italian Gentleman told a
Jesuit in Con^ession, that he had poisoned five Popes, which is the more
wonderful, because the Nephews, whose whole Fortune depends on the Continuance
of the Pontificates of their Uncles, watch with Argus's Eyes for the
Preservation of him, whose Death reduces them to a private Condition.
. They whose good Fortune depended on mine, or who were allied to me by blood,
way even they who before envied my Glory, will lament Those who have Envied us
in Prosperity, or during our Lives, freely pity us in Adversity, or at least
after our Death; because they have the Glory of appearing generous, when they
have nothing more to fear.
my hard Fat^, that after all the Successes I have had, and the Battles I have
escaped, I should at last fall by the Treachery of a Woman Nothing seems
stranger, than that a General of an Army should dye by the Hands of a Woman,
after he has passed his whole Life in Battles and Dangers. Notwithstanding
this Mis^ortune has befallen many great Captains, God having permitted it so
to be, to punish their Pride by an humbling Death.
. You will have opportunity to complain to the Senate, and to demand Justice.
The great Duty of Friends is not to show their Affections to the Dead in
Fruitless Lamentations It is decent for Women to weep, says Tacitus, but Men
have a greater Duty to perform, which is to remember. Faeminis lugere honestum
est, viris meminisse. In Germania. It is not (said a great Orator to the Regent
Anna of Austria) by useless Complaints, and superfluous Grief, that a great
Soul like your Majesty's, ought to express her P^ety and her Love to the Ashes
of her Husband; it is by Executing his Orders; it is by proposing to your
Imitation the Image of his Virtues; it is by courageously conducting the
Fortune of the State. Ogier in the Preliminary Epistle to the Funeral Oration
of Lewis XIII.
, but to remember what he desired, and execute what he left in charge.
Strangers will weep for Germanicus. But it is your part to revenge my Death, if
you loved me rather than my Fortune In the Lifetime of Princes it is very
difficult to distinguish their Faithful and Disinterested Servants from those
that are not so; because the Favors they are capable of doing, are apt to make
it be believed, that all who adhere to them, adore the Fortune, and not the
Person; but after their Death, it is known by the Duties that are paid them,
and by the Execution of their last Desires, who were worthy, or who were
unworthy of their Affection and Favors.
. Set before the Eyes of the People of Rome, my Wife, the Granddaughter of
Augustus, with our six Children. Compassion will be on your side that accuse
When the Judges are touched with Compassion for the Accusers, there are no
hopes of Mercy for the Accused; especially, if they are Persons who have been
long hated, as Piso and Plancina were for their Arrogance.
; and though they should pretend secret Orders for their Villainies Many
Violences and Excesses are committed in remote Provinces, of which the
Governors and Principal Ministers would be hard put to it to show their Orders.
These Of^^cers deserve double Punishment: First, for the abuse of their Power;
and Secondly, for the Danger to which they expose the Prince, by authorizing
with his Name and pretended Will, such Acts of Injustice as make him pass for a
Tyrant; which is an Injury to him, that cannot be repaired, but by an Example
that is capable to undeceive the People.
, they will either not be believed, or not acquitted. His Friends taking him by
the right Hand, as he was ready to expire, swore, they would lose their own
Lives, but they would revenge his Death The Christian Religion commands us to
pardon the Injuries that are done to our selves; but it does not forbid us to
avenge those that are done to our Friends, when Justice and the Laws are on
their side. The Gospel obliges us to the First, and Civil Society to the Latter.
.

LXXIII. Then Germanicus turning himself toward his Wife, he beseech'd her,
That if she had any regard to his Memory, and to the Interest of their common
Children, she would lay aside her haughty temper, and submit her Mind to the
severity of her Fortune, lest at her return to Rome, she should by a Vain
Emulation exasperate those who were too powerful for her We ought never to have
any Competition with the Prince's Favorites or Ministers. It is better to
retire from Court, than to enter the Lists with them. If the Prince, says
Cabrera, has chosen any one of those whom he loves to be his Chief Minister,
we ought to honor him according to the Rank which he holds, and according to
the Influence which he has on his Prince. It is advantageous to make him a
Friend; and on the contrary, it is dangerous to judge whether he deserves the
Place and Authority which is given him. Remember the Brazen Image, which Amasis
King of Egypt caused to be worshipped, that was made of a Basin wherein he was
wont to wash his Fee^, and those words of Tacitus, We adored the Colleague of
your Consulship, and him who represented your Person in the Administration of
the Empire. For otherwise, there is no security for high Birth, nor for great
Merit, which have always been suspected and hated by Favorites. And it is not
enough to say; I will live at Court without Ambition, without any Pretensions,
without Employment, and without having any thing to do with any one: for none
that hear this believe any thing of it. His History, Lib. 7. Cap. 7. He adds,
that the Duke of Alva put in for the Government of the Low Countries for no
other reason, but to get off from the Level with Cardinal Espinosa, and Prince
R^y Gomez, whom ^avour made equal to him in Esteem and Credit; although they
were inferior to him in abilities. Notwithstanding, Cardinal Briconcet, the
Chief Minister of King Charles VIII. had very small abilities, and understood
nothing at all of Military Affairs; however, says Commines, (who knew much
more of it than he) when I was ill-treated in the beginning of this King's
Reign, I durst not intermeddle, that I might not make any of those my Enemies,
to whom he gave Authority, Memoirs, Lib. 8. Cap. 5. It is with Men as with
pieces of Money, on which Princes set what value they please; end consequently,
we must receive them according to their currency, and not according to their
intrinsic value.
. Thus much he spoke publicly, and something more in secret When we speak of
Princes, we must speak of them with the utmost Caution. It is not enough to
distrust the Ears of those who are present, we ought also to distrust their
Eyes, who read in the Countenance and the Looks, all that of which they make a
Mystery to them.
; soon after which he expired, to the great regret of the Province, and the
adjacent Countries. Foreign Kings and Nations, Enemies as well as Allies,
lamented him The most glorious Apotheosis of a Prince, is to be lamented by his
Subjects, and honored with the Praises of Foreign Nations.
; the Former for his Clemency and the Latter for his Courtesy. His Presence
and his manner of Speaking were graceful and drew respect; and although he
retained an air of Majesty A General of an Army should have an aspect mingled
with Sweetness and Severity; for Soldiers contract a sort of Fierceness, which
often carries them to Sedition, if they are not restrained by an air of
Authority, which strikes an awe upon them. The Roman Historians have observed,
That this Mixture in Hannibal was the Foundation of his Greatness and
Reputation.
suitable to his high Birth and Character; yet he never incurred Envy, nor the
Suspicion of Arrogance.

LXXIV. His Funerals were not solemnized with Images and Pomp, but with public
Praises, and the Commemoration of his Virtues The Name of Princes is always
immortal, by reason of the Greatness of their Office, which is the Cause that
all their Actions, good or bad, are written on the Records of Posterity: But
there is this Difference betwixt those who have abused their Power, and those
who have discharged the Duties of their Station, that the Memory of the Former
is In^amous for ever, whereas that of the Latter is always Glorious and
Triumphant. So they need not raise Pyramids and Mausolaeums if they have been
Virtuous; for the Memory of their Virtues in Eternal; and their Monuments are
as many in number, as there are People who read their History, and as there are
Princes who follow their Example.
. And there were some who compared him with Alexander In all times Warlike
Princes and Great Captains have been compared with Alexander, as if there was
not a more perfect Model to propose for Arms than this Conqueror. He must,
says a Learned Prelate, be found in all our Panegyricks; and it seems, by a
sort of Fatality, glorious to his Name, that no Prince can receive Praises, but
he must have a share in them. M. de Meaux in the Funeral Oration of Lewis
Prince of Co^de.
for his Beauty and his Age, the Manner of his Death, and the Nearness of the
Places where they died. For they were both very Handsome, and of Illustrious
Birth: Neither of them lived much above thirty Years, and they both died in a
Foreign Country by the Treachery of some of their own People Strada reports,
That the Flemmings compared Don John of Austria, the Son of Charles V. with
Germanicus for Beauty and Gracefulness; for Years which were 33; for Exploits
in War performed by each in diverse places, bordering on Holland; for having
been both suspected by their Princes; and for having ended their days by an
untimely Death. History of Low-Countrys. De^ad. 1. Lib. 10.
. But Germanicus was courteous to his Friends, moderate in his Pleasures,
contented with one Wife Chastity is a Virtue so much the more praiseworthy in
Princes, ^s their Condition sets them at a greater Distance from it. Commines
speaking of the Vow which Lewis XI. made, never to touch any Woman but his
Wife, says that, Although the King ought to have done it according to the
Ordinance of the Church, it was nevertheless a great Thing for him, who had so
many Women at his command, to persevere in this Promise; considering also, that
the Queen was not a Woman in whom he could take much Pleasure. Memiors, lib. 6.
cap. 9. It is a great Miracle, says a Famous Panegyrist, that he for whom the
Church has so often prayed that he might not fall into extraordinary Crimes,
did not so much as fall into the Common Faults, which we call Humane Frailties.
But let us call them as we will, they are no other than Mortal Sins, which
cannot be excused, neither by the Vigor of our Age, and heat of our Blood,
seeing Lewis was Chaste in his blooming Youth; nor by the Opportunities of Sin,
seeing he was Chaste in the midst of the Court; nor by the Violence of
Temptations, seeing the finest Eyes of the World lay in wait in vain for him;
nor by the Difficulty of the Precept, seeing neither Age, nor Blood, nor
Opportunity, nor the Charms of Beauty, hindered him from preserving an
inviolable Chastity. The Funeral Oration of Lewis XIII. by Franc. Ogier.
, and a sure Issue. As great a Captain as Alexander, if you will not reckon the
Successes of the other's Rashness; and who, after he had broken the Germans by
so many Victories, would have entirely reduced Germany under the Obedience of
the Romans, had he not been recalled when he was upon the Point of finishing
his Conquests. But had he been invested with the Title and Power of King
Independance is a mighty advantage in a General of an A^my for the Execution of
Enterprises. Germanicus would have completed the Conquest of all Germany, if
Tiberius had not been Jealous of his Glory. The Duke of Alva would have taken
Rome and Pope Paul IV. if Philip II. his Master had been of the humor of
Charles V. The Count de Rantzau, who was afterward Marshall of France, would
in^allibly have surpised the Citadel of Ghant, wherein there were at that time
many French, Portug^ese, and Catalans Prisoners, if Monsi^ur d^ Noyers, who
governed all under Cardinal Richelieu, had been willing to have seconded this
Enterprise, whereas he disappointed it to hinder the Count, whose Person he
hated, from growing more considerable at Court, by so great a Service. The
Marshall de la Mothe Houdancourt, would have carried the King of Spain
Prisoner to Paris, if the Regency had not been in the Hands of his Sister, who
on this Occasion preferred her Brother's Interests to her Sons.
, he would as easily have Equaled Alexander in Military Glory, as he Excelled
him in Clemency, Temperance, and other Virtues. His Body before it was burnt,
was exposed naked to be viewed in the Marketplace of Antioch, where his
Funeral Pile was Erected. It is very uncertain, whether or no, there appeared
on it any signs of Poison; for People, as they were influenced with Compassion
for Germanicus, and with the common Prejudice against Piso on the one hand, or
as they were inclined to ^avour him on the other, spoke differently of it.

LXXV. The Lieutenant-Generals, and some Senators who were in those Parts,
immediately held a Consultation about the Choice of a Person to Administer the
Government of Syria. All the Competitors that appeared for it soon quitted
their Pretensions, except Vibius Marsus and Cneius Sentius, betwixt whom there
was a warm Competition, until Marsus at last gave it up to Sentius, as being
the Elder Person, and the more eager Competitor. A good Minister ought to
sacrifice his Private Interests to the Public Service, without being
obstinately bent to carry it from his Rivals. There is nothing more pernicious
than the Dissentions which happen betwixt the Great Officers of a Province,
whilst there is a Powerful Rebel who endeavors to make himself Master of it.
On such occasions, it is a Victory to yield to an Ambitious Competitor, who is
of a Humor obstinately to support his Pretensions. Don John de Cerda, Duke de
Medina Caeli, being come to Brussels to succeed the Duke d'Alva in his
Government of the Low Countries, chose rather to return into Spain, than to
enter into a Contest with Alva, who refused to put these Provinces into his
hands; under color, that they had yet need of his Presence, and that Medina
was too gentle, to govern so rough a People, Cabrera's History, Lib. 10. Cap. 2.
. As soon as he was in the Government, at the request of Vit^llius, Veranius,
and some others who proceeded against Piso and Plancina, as if they had been
already convicted, he sent to Rome one Martina, a Woman who had been infamous
in that Province for poisoning, and Plancina's great Favorite Persons who have
a Friendship with Poysoners that are known to be such, are easily believed to
be Guilty, if they are once accused of Poisoning. The Acquaintance of la Voisin
and the Lady de Brinvilliers, was unfortunate to several People, and many more
would have felt the Rigor of Justice, if the King's Clemency had not removed
the Balance.
.

LXXVI. But Agrippina, notwithstanding she was almost sinking under Grief and
Indisposition of Body, yet impatient of any thing that might retard her revenge
A Wife cannot do any thing more worthy of conjugal Love, than to prosecute the
Murthere^s of her Husband.
, took Ship with her Children, and her Husband's Ashes, which was a Spectacle
that drew Compassion from all, to see so great a Princess, who in regard of her
happy Marriage was lately Applauded and Adored by all People Past Prosperity,
draws greater compassion on the present Adversity; Especially, when they are
Persons who have behaved themselves well in their good Fortune.
, now carry in her arms her Husband's mournful Urn, full of anxious Thoughts,
whether she should find at Rome any Justice for him, or Safety for her self,
and who, by her unhappy Fruitfulness, was obnoxious to so many more strokes of
Fortune According to the Proverb, which says, That He is a Fool that lets the
Children live whose Father he has killed. Agrippina who looked on Tiberius as
the Principal Author of her Husband's Death, had just cause to fear lest he
should also destroy her Children. And as she had six, Tacitus, who never says
any thing in vain, expresses by these three Words, toties fortunae obnoxia;
that she foresaw, that they would be so many Victims, which Tiberius would
sacrifice to his Jealousy. And this Presage was in part accomplished by the
Death of Nero and Drusus her two Eldest Sons.
. In the mean time, (...) Messenger overtakes Piso at the Isle of Coos, with
the News of Germanicus's Death, which he received with such extravagant Joy,
that he ran to the Temples and offered Sacrifices He is very rash* who expose^
himself to the Universal Hatred, by openly rejoicing at the Death of a Great
Man, whom all the People lament. What did Piso and P^ancina mean, who did not
conceal their Joy for a Death, which they were believed to be the Authors of,
and which their Enemies already began to revenge? This shows, that Hatred is
the most indiscreet of all Passions.
, and Plancina, who was yet more insolent, left off the Mourning upon it she
was in for her Sister, and put on a Gay Habit Ann of Boulen, Second Wife to
Henry VIII. King of England, did the same thing, when she received the News of
the Death of Queen Catherine, whose place she had taken. Burnet's History of
the Reformation, Part 1. Book 3* The Duke of Maienne had the Insolence to take
the Green Sca^^^ in token of Joy, the Day that he heard of the Death of Henry
III.
.

LXXVII. The Centurions coming to him, assured him, That the Legions were at
his Devotion; and that therefore his best course was to return to the Province
of Syria, which was now without a Governor; and whereof he was unjustly
dispossessed. Whereupon consulting what was best to be done, his Son Marcus
Piso was of Opinion, That he ought to hasten to Rome We shall see in the
following Book, that Piso deeply resented that he had not followed this Wise
Counsel; U^in^m ego potius filio j^^^eni, quam ille pa^r^ s^ni cessiss^t.
; That there was nothing done yet which might not be answered; That slight
Suspicions, and uncertain Reports, were not to be feared; That his Differences
with Germanicus It is easy to justify ones self to the Prince, for being at
Variance with a Great Man, whom he has always hated. When the Noblemen at
Court failed in their respect to the Duke of Alenzon (which happened every day)
Henry III. more willingly heard their Excuses than the Complaints of his
Brother, to whom he had a Natural Aversion.
deserved perhaps a Reprimand, but not Punishment; especially since he had
given his Enemies the Satisfaction they desired, by quitting Syria. But to
return thither in opposition to Sentius, would be to begin a Civil War How good
a Right soever a Man has, he ought to beware of maintaining it, when Damage
may ensue thence to the Prince, and Trouble to the State.
, wherein he could not rely much on the Fidelity of the Captains and the
Soldiers, who had the Memory of their Beloved General Germanicus, fresh in
their Minds A Governor or a General of an Army, ought not to expect much
Fidelity from an Army which has been wholly devoted to his Predecessor, and
which knows that he is accused of the Death of him whom they lament.
, and an indeliable Affection for the Caesar's.

LXXVIII. His great Confident, Domitius Celer, was of a contrary Opinion, and
represented to Piso, That he ought to make use of the Occasion; That Piso, and
not Sentius, was the Rightful Governor of Syria; That to him only, the Legions,
and the Fasces, with the Authority of Praetor had been committed. If any acts
of Hostility should ensue, who could with greater Justice take Arms, than he
who had received his Commission of Lieutenant General, and his Orders,
immediately from the Emperor? That time dissipates false Reports There is not a
more Sovereign Remedy against Calumnies than Time, which sooner or later
discovers the Truth. When any one is Calumniated to the Prince by Persons in
Authority, it is safer for him to keep at a Distance, than to come to justify
himself before passionate and prepos^ess'd Judges.
, and that Innocence it self is oftentimes over born by Envy in its first heat
Innocence is not a sufficient Guard against the People, when they have hated a
Man a long time. The Voice of the People has oft^n oppressed Innocent Persons,
without any other ground, but that of a Superstitious Opinion, which is rooted
in the Minds of many, that the Voice of the People is the Voice of God. For one
time that the People have spoken Truth, it will be found that they have a
Hundred times maintained Injustice and Falsehood.
, but if he were at the head of an Army, and augmented his Forces It is a
common saying, That whosoever has Strength, i^ commonly in the Right.
, Chance might bring many things to pass which could not be foreseen There are
occasions, where the Nature of Affairs allow not time for Deliberation, it is
necessary to take a sudden Resolution, and to leave the rest to Fortune.
. But why are we in such haste to get to Rome? Is it that we may arrive there
together with the Ashes of Germanicus, and the Lamentations of Agrippina, that
you may be torn to pieces unheard and undefended, by the first fury of the
giddy Multitude? It Is true, Livia is your Accomplice, and you are in favor
with Tiberius Princes take no great care to skreen the Ministers of their
Cruelties from Justice, and the rather because, by abandoning them, they give
occasion to have it believed, or at least doubted, that these are the true
Authors thereof. Besides, they do not desire to see them again, whose presence
cannot but reproach their Injustice. It was for these Reasons, that Philip II.
abandoned his Secretary Anthony Perez, and suffered him to be tried for the
Murder of John de Escovedo.
, but they will not dare to protect you openly, and none will mourn for Germanicus
with greater Ostentation, than those who rejoice most at his Death Princes and
Courtiers are more dextrous in dissembling their Joy, then even their Hat^ed.
When any one is suspected by them, or gives them Jealousy, their Countenance
often betrays their Thoughts; because the Emotion of the Heart dif^uses it self
to the Eyes, which, according to Polybius, are the Interpreters of our
Passions; but when they are delivered from their Enemies, it is not difficult
for them outwardly to act that Part which Policy dictates. Eli^abeth, Queen of
England, after she had caused the Queen of scots to be beheaded, lamented her
Death, as it she had had no hand in it, and ordered magnificent Obsequies for
her at London, and at Peterborough, where she was buried beside Queen
Katherine, the first Wife of Henry VIII. Pos^cki's (...), ann. 1588. Madam de
Nevers, says Queen Margaret, being come with us to the Lodgings of the Queen
of Navarre, who in her life time had hated her above all people; and betwixt
whom no reconciliation could be made, approached the Bed where the Body of the
Deceased lay; and after many humble and great Reverences, taking her hand
kissed it. Her Memoirs. Lib. 1.
.

LXXIX. Piso, who was naturally inclined to violent Counsels, was, without any
great Difficulty, gained to this Opinion To sound Men's Hearts, and to know
their Nature to the Bottom, we need only observe what Couns^ls they are
governed by.
. Upon which he wrote Letters to Tiberius, wherein having accused Germanicus of
Luxury and Pride, and of removing him from the Province, only that he might
more securely carry on his ill Designs; He declared, that he had resumed the
Command of the Army with the same Fidelity he before held it. At the same time
he ordered Domitius to take Ship, and avoiding the Shores and Islands, to sail
into Syria through the Main Sea. He arms the Servants that followed the Camp,
and forms into Companies the Deserters that came in to him; and as he sailed
with them to the Continent, he intercepted a Regiment of New raised Men that
were going to Syria. He writes to the Petty-Princes of Cilicia to send him
Succors, and his Son Piso was wanting in nothing that was necessary for the
War, although he had dissuaded him from Undertaking it There is nothing which a
brave Man will not do, when his Father's Life and Honor are at stake: But his
case is pitiable to the last Degree, who is under a Necessity to declar^
against his Prince, or against his Father; to be a Rebel, or Barbarous; to
renounce Country of Nature, and to choose of two Du^ies, which are both
indispensable.
.

LXXX. Piso's Squadron meeting near the Coasts of Lycia and Pamphylia, with
that which was carrying Agrippina to Rome, the Enmity was so great, that both
sides at first prepared for a Fight; but being restrained by mutual Fears, they
proceeded no farther than hard Words. Marsus Vibius summoned Piso to come to
Rome to defend his Cause; who answered him scoffingly, That he would appear
there when the Praetor who took Cognizance of Poysonings, should appoint a Day
both for the Defendant and the Plaintiffs No Man ought to rally with Justice,
till he is strong enough not to ^all under its hands.
. In the mean time, Domitius, who was come to Laodicea, a City of Syria,
intending to go to the Winter Quarters of the Sixth Legion, which he supposed
to be most inclined to innovations, is prevented by Pacuvius, who had the
Command of it. Sentius acquainted Piso with this by Letter; and advises him to
make no farther attempt to debauch the Army by his Emissaries, nor to raise a
War in the Province; and drawing together all those whom he knew to have an
Affection for the Memory of Germanicus, or to be of an opposite Interest to his
Enemies, he speaks great things in praise of him; and by the way, often reminds
them, that it was against the Commonwealth it self that Piso made War; and
afterward marches with a good Body that was ready for Battle.

LXXXI. Notwithstanding, things had not succeeded according to Piso's
expectation, he was not yet wanting to take the best Measures for his safety in
his present Circumstances, but possessed himself of a strong Fortress in
Cilicia, named Celendris, and of the Auxiliaries which the Petty-Princes of
Cilicia had sent him, and the New raised Soldiers which he had lately
intercepted, with his own and Plancina's Servants, and what Deserters had come
to him, formed into a Legion, all of them completing the Number of one. To
whom he made a Speech, declaring, That as he was the Emperor's Lieutenant in
Syrid, it was not the Legions which opposed his Entrance into the Province,
(for it was upon their Invitation that he returned) but Sentius, who under
pretended Crimes covered his own Malice against him. That they might safely
range themselves in Battle against Soldiers who would not ^ight when they saw
Piso, whom they heretofore styled their Father, and who, they knew, had the
best Right, if it were to be decided by Law, and wanted not Courage, if by
Arms. After which, he draws up his Troops in order of Battle before the Fort,
on a Steep and Craggy Hill; the rest being environed by the Sea. Opposite to
them were ranged our Veteran Soldiers in good Order, with a Reserved Body. One
side had the advantage in Soldiers, and the other side in Ground; But Piso's
Soldiers wanted Courage and Hope; nor had they any but Countrymen's Arms, which
were made in haste for the Present Occasion. After once they were Engaged, the
Victory was no longer doubtful than whilst the Romans were climbing up the
Hill, which they no sooner gained but the Cilicians ^led, and shut themselves
up in the Fort.

LXXXII. In the mean while, Piso attempted to surprise the Fleet which lay at
Anchor not ^ar off, but not succeeding, he returned; and as he stood on the
Walls sometimes lamenting his Fate, sometimes calling to the Soldiers by Name,
and promising them great Rewards, he endeavored to raise a Mutiny amongst
them, and did so far prevail, that the Standard Bearer of the Sixth Legion went
over to him with his Eagle. Whereupon, Sentius immediately ordered the Signal
to be given by Sound of the Trumpets and Cornets; the Works to be raised, the
Ladders to be set, and the Stoutest, Men to make the Assault; whilst others
plied the Enemy with Darts, Stones, and Fireworks thrown from Engines. At
length, Piso's obstinacy being broken, he desired, Superior Ministers, who
command in very remote Provinces, ought not to stand still, expecting fresh
Orders, when they have pressing Necessities to provide for; for besides that
these Orders would come too late, because of the Distance of Places, they ought
on these Occasions to take a final Resolution, and the rather because they to
whom the Prince has been pleased to commit his Authority, ought to presume
that he has likewise left to them the Conduct of all unfore-seen Affairs,
which are not in their Instructions. If Cardinal Jasper Borgia. had not hasted
to take possession of the Viceroyship of Naples, and even by dextrous
Management, the Duke d'Osso^e, who would not leave it, on pretense that his
presence was necessary there, and that he expected another new Order from the
Court of Madrid. Philip III. had run a great Risque of losing that Kingdom, or
at least of having an Insurrection in it. Conjuratio Oss^ni^^^.
that upon laying down his Arms, he might be permitted to remain in the Castle,
until the Emperor was consulted, Whom he would have to be Governor of S^ria:
But this was not granted, nor could he obtain any thing more than a Passport,
and Ships to carry him to Rome.

LXXXIII. After the News of Germanicus's sickness was noised at Rome, and
reported, as is usual when bad News comes from far, worse than it was, Grief,
Anger, and Complaints, filled the City. It was for this, said they, that he was
sent to the remotest Parts of the Emprie, and Piso made Governor of the
Province of Syria. This is the Effect of Livia's secret Conferences with
Plancina. The Liberty of the Tongue, says Mariana, punishes the Excesses and
the Injustices of Princes, who cannot be Masters of Tongues, as they are of
Bodies. History of Spain, lib. 16. cap. 16.
It is true enough what was said by Old men on Drusus's account, that Emperors
don't like a Modest and Courteous Disposition in their Sons, for both Father
and Son have been destroyed for no other Reason but because they designed to
restore to the People of Rome their Liberty. But the News of his Death incensed
them to that degree, that without waiting for the Edict of the Magistrates, or
the Decree of the Senate, they deserted the Courts of Justice, shut up their
Houses, and made a Vacation. In all Places there was either sighing or silence,
and nothing was affected or done for Ostentation. And although they neglected
not to mourn in their Habits, yet they mourned much more in their Hearts. It
happened that some Merchants who came from Syria before Germanicus died,
brought with them news of his Recovery, which was easily believed, and quickly
spread abroad: Every one through joy telling it with some addition to the next
he met. They run up and down the City, force open the Doors of the Temples. The
Night time made some ready to believe it, and others more positive to affirm
it. Tiberi^s thought not sit to put a stop to this False Report, but left the
People to be undeceived by time; and then, as if he had been a second time
taken from them, they lamented him more passionately than before As the People
are Excessive in their ^oy, so they a^e always in their Grief; and especially,
when they have been Tantaliz'd with a False ^oy. For, according to Cicero,
False ^oy, commonly ends in Des^lation and Despair. Us^ra falsi gaudii (...),
deinde frangi repent, a^que (...), ut nulla ^es ad ^^uitatem animi postea
possit extollere. Epist. Lib. 6.
.

LXXXIV. Diverse honors were invented and decreed to his Memory Nothing
demonstrates more how much a Prince has been beloved, than the Extraordinary
Honors which are done him after his Death.
, agreeable to the Genius of the Senators or their Affection to Germanicus.
That his Name should be inserted into the Saliar Hymn, which was sung by the
Priests of Mars. That the Curule Chair should be placed for him amongst the
Seats of the Priests of Augustus, with a Garland of Oak over it. That his
Statue made in Ivory should be carried the foremost in the Circensian Games.
That none should be elected Priest or Augur in his Place, who was not of the
Julian Family. At Rome, on the Banks of the Rhine, and on Mount Amanus in
Syria, Triumphal Arches were erected to him with Inscriptions, which made
mention of his great actions, and that he died for the sake of the
Commonwealth. A Monument was Erected to him at Antioch The Romans erected
Tombs to Great Men and Illustrious Persons in all Places where they had done
some memorable Action, although their Ashes were not there, nor ever had been
there. These honorary Tomb^ were called Cenotaphia, that is to say, Empty
Sepulchers. At Venice, those of their Doges and their Generals, that are slain
in the Service of the Republic, are most of them without Bodies. For the Doges
order their Interment in those Places, where their Ancestors rest; and
afterward their Children cause Mausolaeums and Statues to be erected in the
most frequented Churches of the City, as those of the Iacobins and Cordeliers
are, to perpetuate the Memory of their Dogedom.
, where his Body was burnt; and a Tribunal at Epidaphne The Suburbs of Antioch*
, where he died. But the Places where Statues were set up, or Altars dedicated
to him, are almost innumerable. When it was decreed, that a Buckler of Massy
Gold of an extraordinary size In these Bucklers there was the Effigies of the
Person in Relievo. And it was one of these Bucklers that Hortalus looked on.
Hortens^i inter Oratores sitam imaginem intuens, when he presented his Children
to the Senate. These Bucklers were ordinarily of Brass, and the Head of Silver.
There is to be seen in the Townhouse of Lions, a Silver Buckler of 22 Pounds
weight, which seems to represent the Generous Action of Scipio* who sent back a
Beautiful Captive which he had taken; and it is the most cu^ious piece of
Silver that is to be seen. Burnet's Voyage into Switzerland (...)*
should be placed for him among the great Masters of Eloquence, Tiberius said,
that he would dedicate one to him of the Ordinary size and make, for Eloquence
was not to be distinguished by Fortune; and that it was a sufficient Honor for
his Son to be ranked amongst the ancient Authors. That which before was called
the Regiment of Iuniors, was by the Knights now named the Regiment of
Germanicus, who also ordered, that on the 15th of July his Statue should be
carried in the Head of their Regiment. Many of these Orders are yet observed,
but some of them were soon neglected, and others are worn out by time.

LXXXV. But whilst this Grief was green, Livia, the Sister of Germanicus who
was married to Drusus, had two Sons at a Birth, which being a Thing rare, and
welcome to mean Families, was received with such joy by Tiberius, that
according to his way of turning all things, even the most Casual to his Glory,
he could not refrain from boasting to the Senate, that never a Roman of his
quality, before him, had the good Fortune to have two Sons at a Birth This good
Fortune happened to Margaret of Austria, natural Daughter of Charles V. Wife to
Octavius Farnese Duke of Parma, Grandson of Pope Paul III* and there is a
Monument at Rome, which preserves the Memory of it, as a Fortunate Thing that
seldom happens to a Sovereign Family. Relicto lapideo ad poste^os monumento
rarae utique fortunae in regnatrice domo. Strada, Lib. 9. dec. 1.
. But at this time it had a quite different Effect upon the People, who were
concerned at the Increase of Drusus's Family; for fear it should depress
Germanicus's.

LXXXVI. The same Year the Senate made severe Decrees to repress the Lewdness
of Women. It was decreed, that no Woman should prostitute her self for Money
The Debauchery of Women of Quality, is of so much more dangerous contagion, as
it serves for Example to all others. Tanto conspectius in se crimen habet,
quanto major qui peccat habetur, says Iuvenal. Had Tiberius suffered Vistilia,
to have led the Infamous Life, which she had resolved on; all Wives who had
been discontented with their Husbands, would have taken off the Mask, to
revenge themselves by dishonouring them. How many Women in Paris do glory in
living in Debauchery; some with Great Men, others with Magistrates, and most
with Abbots; (a Condition nowadays consecrated to Gallantry) They are ashamed
to have a Husband that has no Coach; and Pride themselves in having a Gallant
with a fine Equipage, at the Expense of their Honor.
, whose Grandfather, Father, or Husband, was a Roman Knight, because Vistilia a
Lady of a Praetorian Family, had declared to the Aediles, that she would
prostitute her self according to a Custom established amongst our Ancestors,
who thought it a sufficient Punishment for Unchaste Women This Custom is
observed at Venice.
, to make this public Profession of their Infamy. Titidius Labeo, being
questioned why he had omitted to punish his Wife according to Law The Law,
Iulia.,
seeing she was notoriously criminal; and he pretending, that the Sixty days
allowed by the Law to consult, were not yet expired, they thought it sufficient
to proceed against Vistilia, and banished her into the Island Seriphos. One of
the Ciclades.
. The Senate took into consideration, the Extirpation of the Egyptian and
Jewish Religion out of Rome, and a Decree passed, that 4000 Persons infected
with that Superstition, who were of the Race of Freedmen, and of an Age fit for
Service should be sent into the Island of Sardinia, to suppress the Robberies
there, as being People whose loss would be inconsiderable, if they should
perish by the Unwholsomeness of the Air, and that the rest should leave Italy,
if they did not by such a Day renounce their Profane Rites New or Foreign
Sects and Ceremonies, do by degrees ruin the Religion of the Country; and
consequently it nearly concerns Princes not to Tolerate them in their
Dominions. They who introduce a New Worship, said Mecaenas to Augustus, open a
Gap to New Laws, whence at last arise Cabals, Factions, and Conspiracies. Dio.
Lib. 52.
.

LXXXVII. After which Tiberius proposed the Election of a Virgin to succeed
Occia, who for the space of fifty seven Years had presided over the Vestals,
with great Integrity. He thanked Fonteius Agrippa and Domitius Pollio, because
that by offering their Daughters, they ^ied with one another in their Zeal for
the Commonwealth. Pollio's Daughter was preferred, for no other reason, but
because her Mother had always lived with her first Husband, whereas Agrippa had
lessened the Reputation of his Family by a Divorce If a Heathen Prince so
strictly examined, not only the Personal Qualifications of those who possessed,
Offices of Religion, but also the Conduct and Morals of their Parents; with
much more reason ought Christian Princes carefully to inform themselves of the
Birth of those who sue to them for Bishoprics and Abbeys. I say of the Birth,
for it is a shame to see Bastards and adulterous Slips installed in
Ecclesiastical Dignities. Cardinal Charles Borr^meo, says Ammirato, had great
reason to be astonished, that Christians left Pagans the glory of Excelling
them in Moral Virtues. Lib. 11. Disc. 2.
; However, Tiberius to comfort her that lost it, gave her five thousand Pounds
for her Dowry.

LXXXVIII. The People complaining of the Dearth of Corn, he set a Price for the
Buyer to pay; and promised that he would add two Nummi A Roman Nummus is about
Seven Pence halfpenny of our Money*
a Bushel In a Famine a Prince may buy the People's Liberty at a Cheap rate;
for in such a time the People are best disposed to sell it. People accustom
themselves to Slavery, but never to Hunger. The Israelites being in the
Wilderness, murmured against Moses, for having brought them out of Egypt,
where they had Bread and Meat in abundance, to make them die of Hunger in the
Wilderness. It had been better for us, said they, to have served the
Egyptians, than to die in the Wilderness, Exodus 14. Would to God we had died
by the hand of the Lord in the Land of Egypt, when we sat by the fleshpots,
and when we did eat bread to the full, Exodus 16.
to the Seller. And yet for all this, he would not assume the Title of the
Father of the Country, which was now again offered him The Name of Father of
the Country, is a Title, which a Prince, who either is so, or desires to be so,
ought never to refuse. To accep^ the Title, is to impose an Obligation upon
himself to deserve it. Therefore, Tiberius would not promise that, which he
knew he never intended to be. So that his refusa^ was rather the Effect of his
Evil Disposition, than of his Modesty. The younger Pliny says, that Trajan,
(who was a very Modest Prince) wept for Joy, every time that he heard himself
called Optimus.
; and he gave a sharp Reprimand to those who styled him Lord, and his
Employments Divine Princes are Mortal; and although they are God's Vicegerent^
here on Earth, yet the Functions they Execute are Humane.
. So that there was but little left to be said, and that scarce with safety,
under a Prince who hated Flattery, and feared Liberty.

LXXXIX. I find in the ancient Writers of those times, That Letters from
Adgandestrius a Prince of the Chatti, were read in the Senate, wherein he
engaged to put Arminius to death, if they would send him Poison for that
purpose Princes who make use of Poison against other Princes, teach them to
Employ it against themselves. The safety of Princes consists in a mutual Good
Faith betwixt one another. Charles V. answered Barbarossa's Baker, who offered
to Poison his Master, and thereby to make him enter T^nis without any
difficulty, That he would not honor a Moor so far, as to use so much ceremony
with him. After which, he sent notice to Barbarossa to fortify himself against
Poison, but without naming the Baker to him. Epitome of Don Antonio de Vera.
; who was answered, That the Romans did revenge themselves on their Enemies,
not Clandestinely and by Treachery, but Openly and in Arms; whereby Tiberius
equaled himself to the Glory of the old Roman Generals, who prevented the
Design of Poisoning King Pyrrus, and discovered it to him. At last, after the
Romans were retired, and Maroboduus was expelled, Arminius aspiring to
Monarchy, made his own Countrymen his Enemies, who taking up Arms against him
in defense of their Liberties There was never any one, says Tacitus, designed
to Rule, who did not make use of the pretense of Liberty. Hist. 4.
, after variety of Fortune, he fell at last by the Treachery of his own
Kindred. He was the undoubted Deliverer of Germany; and which adds to his
glory, he did not attack the Romans in their Infancy, as other Kings and
Captains had done, but in the most flourishing State of their Empire. His
Fortune was various in the Battles which he fought; but he was not conquered in
the War. He lived 37 years, and commanded 12; and his Memory is still famous
amongst those barbarous Nations, who celebrate his great actions in their Songs
Tacitus says, That the ancient Germans had no other Annals but their* Verses
and their Songs. In hi^ Germany.
, although he is not known in the Annals of the Greeks, who admire nothing but
what is done amongst themselves; nor so renowned as he deserves amongst us, who
whilst we extol things done long since, are apt to neglect late Examples The
Mind of Man is so humoursome, that by much admiring past times, it comes to
have a Disgust and Jealousy of the Present. The Past instructs us, but the
Present shocks us, because it seems to Eclipse our Glory. Pater^.
.

THE ANNALS OF Cornelius Tacitus, From the Death of AUGUSTUS.
Book III.
Vol. I.
By WILLIAM BROMLEY Esquire
I. AGRIPPINA continuing her Voyage, notwithstanding the Severities of the
Winter, and Storms at Sea, arrived at last at Corfu, an Island opposite to the
Ports of Calabria* She staid there a few days to quiet her Mind, divided
betwixt Grief and Impatience. Upon the News of her coming, Germanicus's
Friends, and the Soldiers that had served under him, and many Strangers also,
some out of Duty, and others following either for Company or Curiosity, flocked
from the Neighboring Places to Brind^si Or, Brundusium, an Archiepiscopal City
in the Kingdom of Naples, w^^ch has a strong Castle and safe Harbor, and lies
upon the Adriatic Sea.
, where she was expected as the nearest and safest Port. As soon as the Ships
were discerned at Sea, not only the Haven and Shores, but the Walls, Houses,
and other Places, as far as could be seen, were filled with Mourners, enquiring
often, whether they should receive her with Silence, or Acclamation. Neither
were they determined which was properest, when the Fleet came in, not rowing
briskly as they used to do, but slowly, and with Sorrow in their Countenances.
When she came with her two Children on Shore, carrying her Husbands Urn, and
her Eyes fixed on the Ground, there was an universal Lamentation, so that you
could not distinguish the Grief of Relations from Strangers, nor the Men's from
the Women's, only theirs who met Agrippina being fresh, exceeded those came with
her, which a long Affliction had spent.

II. Tiberius sent two Companies of his Guards to meet them, ordering the
Magistrates of Apulia, Calabria, and Campania, to pay their last Respects to
the Memory of his Son. The Tribunes and Centurions therefore carried the Ashes,
the Banners were rolled up, and with the reversed Fasces went before. In all
the Colonies as they passed, the People in Mourning, and the Nobles in their
Purple Habits, according to the Wealth of the Place, burnt Perfumes, and other
things that add to Funeral Solemnities. Those that lived out of the Road, met
them in great numbers, and showed their Grief However magnificent and
extraordinary the Funerals of a Prince are, nothing does more Honor to his
Memory, than the Grief of the People that lament the loss of him. The History
of Portugal, says, That upon the Death of John II. all the Kingdom went into
Mourning, and at Lisbon the Barbers were ^orbid Shaving any Person for 6
Months, which was never done for any King before. Dialogo quarto Varia
Historia, c. 11.
, not only by their Lamentations and Confused Cries, but by their Sacrifices to
the Infernal Gods. Drusus went to Terracina, with Germanicus his Children that
were at Rome; and Claudius his Brother.

The Year of the City 773.
The Consuls, M. Valerius and M. Aurelius, (who then entered on their Office)
with a great number of the People, filled the way without observing any order
At the Funerals of Princes it is an infallible sign of great Affliction, when
the great Men and Magistrates decline those Honors that are due to their Rank.
Now the Masters of Ceremonies have more to do to regulate the Claims of
Officers, and to adjust the Disputes among Great Men, than in all the other
Parts of their Office: So that Princes Funerals are oftener memorable for the
Disorders that happen at them, than for the Universal Affliction.
, every one bewailing the loss of Germanicus as he saw good; for there was no
Flattery in this Mourning, and all knew Tiberius rejoiced at Germanicus's
Death, though he pretended to be troubled for it.

III. Tiberius and his Mother forbore appearing in public, believing it a
lessening to Majesty to grieve publicly The Laws of Nature are the same to
Princes as the rest of Mankind. Grief for their Children and Princes of their
Blood is not unbecoming them, provided it does not degenerate into Weakness,
nor Excess. Henry III. of France, in my Opinion* little regarded his Dignity
when he assisted at the Interrment of Cardinal Biragne, in the Habit of a
Penitent* and it looks as if he had forgot he was a King, when he kissed the
Bodies of Quelus and Maugiron his Favorites* Iournal de son Regne* 1578.
, or perhaps fearing lest the People by their Looks should discover their
Dissimulation Cabrera, speaking of the Funerals of Don Carlos, says, That
Cardinal Espinosa attended the Body only to the Church Door, because he would
not be at the Ceremony of the Service, pretending himself indisposed; though he
might with more Truth have said it was because his being there would have
displeased the King, who was not sorry for his Death. The 5th Chapter in the
8th Book of his History.
. I find not in any Registers of the City, or our Histories, that Antonia had
any particular share in this Solemnity, though Agrippina, Drusus and Claudius are
named with other Relations. It may be she was prevented by Sickness, or so
overcome with Affliction, she had not the Courage to see the Funerals of her
Son Of all the Duties of Nature, there is not any a good Mother is less obliged
to observe, than that of assisting at her Son's Funerals. Upon such an Occasion
she is too much afflicted to behold what will only increase her Sorrow, or to
endeavor appearing unconcerned, when it will bring her natural affection in
question.
; though I should rather believe she was kept at home by Tiberius and Livia, that
they might seem all equally^afflicted, and to have it believed the Grandmother
and Uncle kept in upon the Mothers Example A Prince that is not afflicted, but
rather rejoices at the Death of one whom the People regret, acts more wisely in
not appearing at his Funerals, for fear it be discovered that his Sorrow is
only ^eigned, or that he is displeased at the Honor paid to the Memory of one
he always Hated.
.

IV. The day the Ashes were laid in Augustus's Tomb, there was sometimes a
profound Silence, and at others, great Lamentation, the Streets full of People,
and the Campus Martius of lighted Torches. The Soldiers in Arms, the
Magistrates without their Habits, the People ranked by their Tribes, cried out,
All was lost beyond Recovery, and in this they were so bold you would have
thought they had forgot their Governors In the 18th chapter of 1 Kings, it is
said, Saul began to hate David mortally after the Women of Israel sang and
played before him for his overcoming Goliath, and their using these Words, Saul
has killed his Thousands, but David his Ten Thousands: Why have they, said he,
ascribed unto David Ten Thousand, and to me that am their King only a Thousand;
and what can he have more save the Kingdom? This Song was rather a Satyr
against Saul than any thing else. What Mortification was it to Henry III. to
understand, that the Preachers at Paris Preached as if they had no King, but
that it was through the Courage and Constancy of the Duke of Guise, the Ark
fell not into the Hands of the Philistines, and that Heresy Triumphed not over
Religion. Iournal du Regne d' Henry III. 1587.
. But nothing went nearer Tiberius, than the great Affection of the People for
Agrippina, whom they called, The Glory of their Country Those Commendations the
People give to one of Royal Birth, whose Merit or Power create a Jealousy in
the Prince, always cost him dear, for they not only lose him his Prince's
Favor, but make the Prince* desire to get rid of one to whom the People give
the Preference. Witness Saul, who would kill David because the Women of Israel
were so indiscreet as to compare them. The Acclamations of the Parisians, in
Favor of the Duke of Guise, that Day he received the Blessed Sword Sixtus
Quintus had sent him by a Bishop, raised the Jealousy and Suspicion of Henry
III. against him: And not without Cause, for the Ceremony was performed with as
much Preparation and Pomp as a King's Coronation, (1587.) Besides, Tiberius,
whose Maxim it was, To moderate the Honors done to Women, and even those to
his Mother, who had given him the Empire, could not forbear being much
displeased with Agrippina, whom the People so much adored.
, the only Blood of Augustus, and the last Remains of ancient Probity; and
prayed the Gods her Children might survive their Enemies.

V. Some thought these Funerals not pompous enough, and compared them with
those Augustus made for Drusus, Germanicus's Father: For he went in the middle
of Winter to Pavia, and attended the Body to Rome, upon the Hearse were the
Images of the Claudii and Livii The Latin, says Iuliorum, but that is a
transposing the Letters of Liviorum, For at public Funerals they carried only
the Images of their Ancestors. The Iulii were not related to Drusius, but the
Livii were by his Mother. And it appears not that the Images of the Livii were
omitted in that Ceremony.
. His Funeral-Oration was spoke in the Place of Public Assemblies; he was
praised in the Rostra Rostra, a goodly fair Edifice, in which was an Orator's
Pulpit, decked and beautified with the Beaks of many Ships which the Romans
took from the People of Antium, in a memorable Sea-^ight, and from thence in
Latin Rostra, has this Place taken its Name.
, and all Honors done him that either our Ancestors or latter times have
invented: But Germanicus wanted those that are due to every noble Roman. It
signified little, said they, that his Body was burnt without Ceremony in a
Foreign Country, considering the Difficulty of bringing it so far home, but he
should have had the greater Honors afterward in lieu of those this Accident
deprived him. His Brother went but one Day's Iourny to meet the Body, and his
Uncle only to the Gates. What is become of the Ancient Customs? Why was not his
Effigies The word Effigies ought not to be used here, (says Fremont de
Ablancourt) because it is not spoken here of any thing set up, and that word
cannot properly be used but on such an occasion. Nevertheless his Uncle uses
this very word in his Translation. The late Monsieur Ogier has the same word in
his Funeral-Oration upon Lewis XIII. when he speaks of the Monuments of the
Kings at St. Dennis.
carried, and Verses sung in Honor of his Memory? Why was he not praised and
lamented with the usual Ceremonies of Mourning If Princes are not really
concerned for the Death of those that have done important Service to the
Public, they ought at least to seem so. And that Tacitus means by these Words,
Doloris imit^menta. When the Duke d' Alva died at Lisbon, the Portuguese
thought it strange, that their new King* Phillip II. should appear the next day
in public, contrary to the Custom of their Kings, who upon the Death of their
Ministers, and others of inferior Rank that had faithfully served the Crown,
kept up some days. And to make an odious Comparison, some remembered, that
Emanuel, his Mother's Brother, locked up himself for three days, upon the Death
of a famous Pilor. Livre 9. de Histoire de l'Union du Portugal a la Castille.
?

VI. These Discourses were carried to Tiberius, and to put a stop to them, he
declares, by an Edict, That many Illustrious Persons had died in the Service of
the Commonwealth, but none had been so passionately regretted. This was
commendable both in him and them, if a Mean was observed: That the same things
were not becoming Princes and private Men It is no wonder the Judgments of the
People are for the most part contrary to those of their Princes: For the People
not being able to discern right, would have the Prince espouse their Passions,
and accommodate himself to their Humor; and he, on the contrary, would have
them leave the Government to him without judging what they understand not. The
People are not capable of knowing what is fitting or not fitting for the
Prince, when a weak Prince generally knows what is agreeable to, or unbecoming
his Dignity.
, for a People that Command the World, and those that Govern Petty
Commonwealths: That the Season for Sorrow, is, when Grief is fresh, but after
three Months 'twas reasonable to lay it aside, as Caesar did upon the Death of
his only Daughter, and Augustus after he had lost his Children When the Prince
would justify an Action, which he knows the People do, or may interpret amiss,
he cannot do it better than by the Example of his immediate Predecessors; for
the later the Example is, it makes the greater Impression on those to whom it
is brought.
: That it was not necessary to give ancienter Instances, how the People had
bore with Constancy the Defeat of their Armies The loss of the Battles of
Cremera and Allia, both fought on the 17th of July, in different Years, and
four others, that of Ticinum, Techia, Lago di Perugia, and Cannae, where so
many Roman Knights were killed, that Hannibal sent to Carthage two Bushels full
of Rings, an Account of the number of the Slain by that of their Rings.
; the Death of their Generals Of the Scipio's in Spain, and so many others.
, and the entire Extinction of many noble Families All the Fabii, who were 306
near Relations, perished in one Ambuscade the Tuscans had said for them near
the River Cremera; but by good Fortune, there was one staid at home because of
his being very young, who restored the Family.
: That Princes are Mortal, but the Commonwealth Eternal Kingdoms, says Ant.
Perez, are in respect of Kings; the same as Species are to their Individuals:
The Philosophers say, the Species are Eternal, because naturally they never
end, though Individuals perish, like Accidents, Kings make not Kingdoms, but
Kingdoms make Kings. Dans ses secondes Lettres.
; that they should therefore return to their ordinary Employments, and enjoy
themselves at the Megalensian Games Games instituted in Honor of the great
Goddess, called by the Romans, Magna Matter. Her Statue was brought in great
Pomp from Pessinum in Greece to Rome: These Games consisted only in Scenical
Sports, and were a solemn time of Invitation to Entertainments among Friends.
They were always celebrated in April.
, that were at hand Whatever Discontents the People are under, propose to them
Plays and Shows, and they soon forge^ the Causes of them. It Is a more easi^
Transition from Sorrow to Joy, than from Joy to Sorrow. A Carousal or Mascarade
sometimes will reduce them to their Duty. They are amused by such sort of
Diversions, as Children are quieted, when they cry, by Babies.
.

VII. The Vacation being ended, every Man returned to his Business, and Drusus
went to the Army in Illyricum, leaving all under great Expectation to see
Germanicus's Death revenged upon Piso. They often complained he marched over
the pleasant Countries of Asia and Greece, to avoid by his Contumacy and
Delays, the Conviction of his Crimes. For it was commonly reported, That the
infamous Poisoner, Martina, sent by Cneius Sentius to Rome, died suddenly at
Brindisi, that Poison was found in her Hair, yet no sign thereof appeared upon
her Body The most dangerous of all Poisons, is that operates without leaving
any visible sign thereof. It was impossible to prove Germanicus was poisoned.
All the Proof was only from the Correspondence of Plancina with Martina. The
Iournal of the Reign of Henry III. of France, mentions a Servant of the Duke of
Alenson, called Blondel, accused of Poisoning his Master, and was several times
put upon the Rack, though there was no other Evidence against him, than
Suspicion, because he had been a Servant to Cardinal Biragne, who, according to
the Testimonly of Admiral Coligni, told Charles IX. and H^nry III. They would
never have an end of their Enemies, but by the help of their Cooks.
.

VIII. But Piso, after he had sent his Son to Rome, with Instructions how to
apply to Tiberius for his Favor, went to seek Drusus, from whom he expected
more Countenance for removing his Rival, than Displeasure for taking off his
Brother Princes are very well pleased to find Persons that will clear the Way
for them to the Throne: but when such Services are done by Poisoning or Murder,
if they be wise, they will be cautious how they show any Acknowledgement for
them, when they have no share in the Crime. In these matters, to be Grateful is
to be an Accomplice, and to be Ungrateful is a sign of Prudence and Equity.
. Tiberius, to show he was not prejudiced against Piso, received his Son
honorably, and made him such Presents as were usual to young Gentlemen of his
Quality. Drusus told Piso, If those things were true that were reported, he
should be much troubled It much concerns Princes to revenge the Death of their
Predecesso^s that are Murdered or Poisoned, for there is no other way to
assure their own Lives, than by taking care there be no Example of Impunity for
a Prince's Death. If the Successor punish it not, that tells the People, a
Conspi^acy may be sometimes just and reasonable. An Opinion Princes ought to be
careful to prevent. Under Claudius, Chereas and Lupus, who killed Caligula,
suffered, though this Murder mounted him into the Throne. Domitian likewise
punished Epaphroditus for having only assisted Nero to kill himself, though he
was proscribed by a Decree of the Senate. Nerva, on the contrary, exposed
himself to the Fury of the Soldiers, because he would not deliver up the
Murderers of Domitian: From which Danger, nothing saved him, but his adopting
Trajan. Yet it has been at all times an inviolable Maxim among Princes, Never
to pardon those that have killed their Predecessors, nor those that have
Murdered any Foreign Prince. Though Albert Duke of Austria, was chosen King of
the Romans, in the Life of the Emperor Adolph of Nassau^* and after the Death
of Adolph, whom he killed in a Duel, when he would have had his Election
confirmed, or rather a new Election made; some of the Electors, and many of the
Princes of the Empire, made a Complaint against him to the Elector Palatin,
whereby they would set aside this second Election, as a Man that having killed
his Predecessor, was incapable and unworthy to succeed him. Oxenstiern de
Ratione Status, c. 5. part. 1.
, but that he wished they might appear false, and the Death of Germanicus fatal
to none It always becomes a Prince to speak graciously to those that are
accused, and justify themselves, though he knows they are guilty; for fear, if
he behave himself otherwise, his Passion or particular Hatred be looked upon as
the Cause of their Condemnation.
. He spoke this publicly, declining private Conversation with him, which none
doubted to be by Tiberius's Order, because Drusus was of himself too easy and
unwary to have practiced so much Art and Cunning above his Years. A Prince that
gives himself the Trouble to Instruct his Son, soon makes him an able Man: For
the Scholar is the more Docile, because of the Respect he bears to the
Authority of his Master; and the Master more Careful because of the Interest he
has in the Eduation of his Scholar. Paterculus ascribes all the Abilities of
Tiberius to the Divine Precepts of Augustus. Innutritus Coelestium praeceptorum
disciplinis, Hist. 2. Cabrera says, That Charles V. when he returned to Spain
after his Abdication, had thoughts himself of Educating of Don Carlos, the
Prince of Spain, who neither regarded his Governors nor Tutors, but his want of
Health prevented. It may be too, he changed his Mind because he would not teach
him Maxims of Policy, which are dangerous for an ill Temper, such as Don
Carlos, to learn. Diego de Mendosa, says, That it is the Custom for the Princes
of L^on, to take their Children with them to the Wars, and to be their Masters
in all parts of their Education. [The Ponces, formerly Dukes of Cadiz, now
Dukes of Arcos, are Hereditary Grandees, and that Honor is always in their
Family, as the Guzmans, Dukes of Medina-Sidonia, their Rivals: These two Houses
are distinguished from other Grandees originally, because of the twelve
Families that enjoy this Honor, there is yet only the Guzmans and Ponces that
the King of Spain has named and acknowledged such.] Chapter 9. and 14. du live. 4.
de la Guerre de Grenade.
.

IX. Piso having sailed over the Adriatic Sea, and left the Ships at Acona,
came by Pisenum Now la Marca d' Ancona.
, and so by the Via Flamina That is one of the great Ways to Rome, made by
Flaminius the Consul.
, to join the Legion that returned from Panonia to Rome, to go into Garrison in
Africa. But because it was reported, he intended to Corrupt the Soldiers, by
conversing much among them When a great Man is suspected by his Prince, or
actually accused of any Crime against the State, he cannot be guilty of a
greater Imprudence than to Converse with the Soldiers, especially if he had any
Credit before among them. So Piso, that was called, The Father of the Legions,
after he was accused by the Senator Sentius, for endeavoring to raise a
Civil-war in the Province, increased the Suspicion of that Crime, by conversing
familiarly with the Legion that returned to Rome.
; as soon as he arrived at Narni A C^ty of Umbria.
, he embarked upon the River Nare to avoid Suspicion, or because those that are
timorous are always uncertain. But he incensed the People by his landing in
their sight, at the Burying-place of the Caesar's, with Plancina; both were
pleasant and cheerful, he attended with a Multitude of Followers, and she with
a great Train of Women. Their House, which stood very publicly, was adorned
with Laurels, and Garlands, there was a Festival, and great Rejoycings, and all
so public, as to raise them more Envy Pomp, Ceremony, Festivals and
Rejoycings, are accounted so many new Crimes in one accused of Designs against
the State; for it is indeed to brave a Prince and the Laws, in showing he fears
them not. Tiberius rejoiced at Germanicus's Death, but that troubled him. Piso
should have forbore entering with so much Splendor, and making those Shows at
his House, which served only to raise a public Displeasure, by the Comparison
was made betwixt his Rejoycings, and the Silence, Sorrow and Mourning at
Agrippina's. Cabrera says, The Magnificence Anthony Perez lived in, while the
Wife and Children of the Secretary Iuan Escovedo, whom he had caused to be
Assassinated, prosecuted his Death, so provoked the People, that Phillip II.
was at last forced to give him over to Justice, which treated him with great
Rigor.
and Ill Will.

X. The next day Fulcinus Trio accused Piso before the Consuls but; Veranius
Vitellus, and others, that had been with Germanicus, insisted, That it belonged
to them, and not to Trio, and that instead of being Accusers, they would only
report, as Witnesses, the last Declaration of the Deceased. Trio waved that
part, and contented himself with the Liberty to enquire into the Life of
Germanicus. The Emperor desired Cognizance of this himself, and Piso freely
consented for fear of falling into the hands of the People or Senate, both too
much inclined to Germanicus's Family; and knowing also Tiberius valued not
Reports, and that his Mother had agreed with him the Orders she sent Plancina.
Besides, Truth is more easily discerned by a single Judge, than an Assembly The
diversity of Humors and Interests among those, compose an Assembly, opens the
way to all Passion, and then it is impossible to discern Truth from Falsehood,
which has always Prejudice for its Advocate.
where Hatred and Envy are too prevalent. Tiberius was not ignorant of the
Consequence of this Affair, nor the Reflections he lay under. After hearing
therefore before some of his Confidents, the Complaints of the Accusers, and
Piso's Answer, he sent all back to the Senate.

XI. In the mean time, Drusus returning from Sclavonia, came privately to Rome,
deferring till another time the Triumph the City decreed him for the taking
Maroboduus, and his great Actions the Summer before. Afterward Piso desiring
T. Aruntius, Fulcinius, Asinius Gallus, Eserninus Marcellus, and Sextus
Pompeius for his Advocates, and they excusing themselves A Criminal, when the
People seek for his Death with Threats that they will cut him in pieces, though
he should be acquitted by his Judges, would find ^t difficult getting Advocates
to make his Defense. Means are often found to escape the Wrath of a Prince, but
very seldom that of the People.
on diverse Pretenses, M. Lepidus, Lucius Piso, and Liveneius Regulus were
appointed him. All the City expected with great Impatience to see the Fidelity
of Germanicus's Friends They had promised Germanicus, before he died, to lose
their Lives rather than his Death should be unpunished; as Tacitus says toward
the end of his Second Book of Annals.
, the Courage of the Criminal, and whether Tiberius would discover or conceal
his Sentiments. For the People never showed greater Suspicion, nor took more
Liberty to Censure their Prince.

XII. The Day the Senate met, Tiberius made a set Speech, and said, That Piso
had been Augustus's Friend and Lieutenant, and that by Authority of the Senate
When a Prince has chose a Governor, or other Officer, whose Administration is
blamed, he commonly divides it with his Council. So Tib^rius here would have it
believed, that the reason why he sent Piso Governor into Syria, was in
Conformity to Augustus, who had honored him with his Friendship, and diverse
Employs, in which he had well acquitted himself.
he was sent with Germanicus to govern the East. They were impartially to
judge, whether he had provoked the young Prince by his Disobedience and
Disputes, if he rejoiced at his Death, or was the Cause of it. For, says he, if
he exceeded what was committed to him, when Lieutenant, disobeyed his General,
rejoiced at his Death, and my Affliction, I will banish him my House, and be
revenged of him as a Father, not a Prince There is great difference betwixt
Offenses against the Person, and the Authority of a Prince. He may pardon the
first, but ought never to let the others go unpunished, because their
Consequences are always dangerous to the State. For that would be, as Cardinal
Richlieu has very well observed, A mistaken Clemency, more dangerous than
Cruelty, Chapter 5. de l^ second party de son Testament Politic.
. Nay, if he has been guilty of any Crime, that deserves Punishment, even the
Death of any private Man, give your selves, the Children of Germanicus, and us
their Parent just Satisfaction. And especially forget not to enquire if he has
corrupted the Military Discipline, if he has ambitiously endeavored to gain
the Soldiers Affections, and if he returned into the Province by force of Arms,
or if these things be false and aggravated by the Accusers When a Prince puts a
great Man into the Hands of Justice, and there is enough against him, it is
wise and honorable in him to Command the Judges not to trouble themselves with
the Examination of uncertain and doubtful Crimes, whereof he is accused, to
show he acts without Passion, and will proceed only according to Law.
, whose great zeal I have cause to be offended with. For, Why was Germanicus's
Body stripped and exposed naked to the People, and why has it been reported he
was Poisoned, if these things are yet uncertain, and to be proved? I lament the
loss of my Son, and shall always do it, but will not hinder the Accused making
his Defense A Prince has a double Obligation upon him, that of Nature to his
Children, and of Government to his People. As he is a common Father, he ought
to hold the Balance even, especially when he is to Revenge the Death or
Complaints of the former.
, without sparing Germanicus, if he has been to blame. I beseech you, let not
my Trouble make you take Accusations for Crimes. If any among you are Relations
or Friends to Piso, let him not fear to help him with his Eloquence and Care. I
exhort his Accusers to the like Application and Constancy. We will only indulge
this to Germanicus, that his Death shall be enquired into in the Curia The
Curia is the Place where the Senate used to assemble, to Consult about the
public Concerns of the Commonwealth.
, not the Forum The Forum is the place where the public Courts of Justice sat.
, before the Senate, rather than the ordinary Judges, all the rest shall be
according to the common Form. Lastly, I desire you will neither regard Drusus's
Tears, my Affliction, nor any Calumnies.

XIII. It was ordered, the Accusers should have two days to bring in their
Accusations, the Defendant three to answer, and six to prepare for it. Then
Fulcinius began with old and frivolous matters, as his governing Spain
ambitiously and covetuously; a conviction whereof would not have Condemned him,
had he justified himself of the rest, nor the clearing himself of that would
have acquitted him, if found guilty of the new Crimes he was charged with.
Serveus Veranius and Vitellius continued the Accusation with the like warmth,
but the latter with more Eloquence, objected, That Piso, out of Hatred to
Germanicus, and desire of Innovation, so corrupted the Soldiers, by too much
Indulgence and Licentiousness, at the Expense of their Allies, that the worst
of them called him, Father of the Legions. On the other hand he had ill used
the best Officers, and especially the Friends of Germanicus, whom he killed by
his Charms and Poison, as the detestable Sacrifices made by him and Plancina,
for Joy at his Death, do testify See chap. 76. l. 2.
: That he was in Arms against the Commonwealth, and had never been brought to
Justice, but that he was overcome in Battle.

XIV. His Defense was weak, for he could neither deny his gaining the Soldiers
by Ambition, nor exposing the Province to them, nor his Reproaches to the
Emperor, he only seemed to clear himself from the charge of Poison, which in
truth was not well proved For Poison, says Patin, that is always said upon the
Death of Princes, of which they often make a Mystery, Lettre 69. As if, says
Strada, it was a Dishonor to them to Die a Natural Death, because that would
make Princes and others too equal. Livre 2. de la second Decade de sa Guerre
de Flandres.
. For to say he poisoned the Meat by touching it, as he sat one day above
Germanicus at Table, that was so absurd, there was no probability in it, that
Piso should dare to do so before the Servants and Waiters, and Germanicus
himself too. And he desired his Servants and Family might be put to the
Question. But the Judges were inexorable Upon State Accusations, says Cardinal
Richlieu, You are to shut the Door against Pity, and Despise the Complaints of
those that are concerned. To be rigorous against those that Contemn the Laws
and Government, is to be good for the public, against which, a Prince cannot
offend more, than in being indulgent to those that violate them. C. 5. de la
second Party de son Testament Politic.
, and all on different Motives; the Emperor because of the War in the Province,
the Senate out of Prejudice, upon suspicion that Germanicus died not a natural
Death. Some were for obliging him to show the Letters his Friends writ him from
Rome, while he was in Syria, but Tiberius opposed that as well as he. At the
same time the People cried aloud, before the Senate House, that if Piso was
acquitted, he should not escape them The Prince ought never to suffer the
People to take Cognizance of those accused of State-Crimes, nor let them
examine, whether the Iudge^ should acquit or condemn. I^ thi^ Door be once
open, the People will be Masters of all Judgments, by the Seditions they will
raise in favor of those they would save, or to take of those Ministers and
Public Officers they hate.
; and his Statues were dragged to the Gemonies This was a Place where Condemned
Persons were dragged and cast into the Tyber. It was up stairs, and from thence
Scala Gemonia, and Gradu^ Gemonii, because, as some are of Opinion, the first
that suffered in this manner his Name was Gemonius, or as others, because it
was Locus Gemitus and Calamitatum. And from hence they used to throw down the
Statues of Criminals. This was upon the Aventine Mount*
, and had been broke there, but that Tiberius protected them. Piso was carried
back by a Captain of the Pretorian Band, which was differently interpreted,
some saying he was to guard him from the fury of the People, others to be his
Executioner.

XV. Plancina was as much Hated, but more in Favor It is a fatality in all
Monarchies to have a Minister the more loved by his Prince, as he is hated by
the People; and to have popular Hatred preserve those, a Prince would willingly
give up, when he is informed of their Behavior, if it were not to gratify the
People. You therefore often see Ministers and Favorites prosper and flourish,
when the People clamor against them; and fall from the top of their Grandeur
when the People seem weary of hating and affronting them.
, and therefore it was doubted whether Tiberius would bring her to Trial
Nothing is more dishonorable to a Prince, than to suffer a great Man to grow
to that Credit or Power, as shall oblige him to cover his Faults, so that he
dares not let him be questioned for Crimes against the State.
: As long as Piso had any Hopes, she Vowed she would accompany him in his
Fortune, and Death too, if that happened; but she was no sooner Pardoned by
Augusta's means, than she began to leave her Husband Every thing is sacrificed
to Life, and as A. Perez says, There is not a Truer Friendship than betwixt the
Soul and the Body, for they would never part. A great many Women make their
Husbands all the Promises Plancina made Piso, but you see none keep them; they
are the inseparable Companions of their good Fortune, but instead of com^orting
them in bad, are oftentimes their Scourges. He is exceeding happy who meers
with a good One.
, and make her Defense apart, which Piso took for a certain sign of his Death.
Doubting whether he should any more try the Compassion of his Judges, at the
persuasion of his Sons, he takes Courage, and goes again to the Senate. He
found the Accusations renewed, the Judges set against him, and all conspiring
his Destruction. Nothing troubled him more, than the Carriages of Tiberius,
which appeared without Pity, without Passion, ^ixt, insensible and unmovable.
When he was brought back, as if he was providing for his Defense, next day, he
writes, Seals it up, and delivers it to one who had been his Servant, and then
took that Care of himself he used to do. Lastly, his Wife leaving his Chamber
at midnight, he orders the Doors to be shut, and was found in the morning with
his Throat Cut, his Sword lying by him.

XVI. I remember I have heard some old men say, ^iso had often a Book in his
Hand, which he never made public, but his Friends said it contained Tiberius's
Letters and his Commands against Germanicus, which he intended to have produced
to the Senate, and accused Tiberius, but was deluded by Sejanus's vain
Promises. They said he did not Kill himself, but that Tiberius sent one who did
it. I affirm nothing An Historian can never be too scrupulous, when he is to
relate the secret Actions of Princes. That Itch, which many Scriblers have to
search into the Secrets of Princes, and to refine upon the Memoirs communicated
to them, gives them not always Reputation in the world, for if with some they
pass for Wise and Discerning, others very much doubt their Fidelity and Truth.
They are Writers, says Strada, value themselves upon publishing Secret and
Villainous things, and neglect those that are common. Like those Felons that
pass by Houses that are open, and only beset those are fast. Livre... de la
second Decade.
, but ought not to conceal what I have heard from Persons There are some
curious things an Historian ought not to omit, though they are difficult to be
believed, and none have taken notice of them before, when he knows them from
Persons of Credit, who have had some share in them, or that have seen secret
Memoi^s. Historians, says Commines, leave us many things that they do not know
to be true, but for my part I will speak of nothing but what I know to be true,
or have had from great Persons that are fit to be believed. And in another
Place, says, Though I was not in the Places where these things were done, yet I
know that they were reported to the King, and by the Letters were writ him,
which I often saw, because he commanded me to answer them. Chap. 13. du Live. 5.
and 4. du Live. 6. When Strada speaks of the Apparition of Colonel Pedro de Paz
to his Regiment, at a Battle near Antwerp, he appeals to Delrio, and says, That
after the Testimony of a Man of so great weight, he thought he should do injury
to Posterity, if he kept from them so extraordinary an Event, which was
acknowledged too by many Officers upon Oath, who were present at the Battle.
Live. 6. de la second Decade. The Preface to M. Aubery du Maurier's Memoi^s is
one of the best pieces he has given us a long time, and I prefer a little
History, like that of the Queen of Scots's Death, which he says he learnt from
his Father, who had it from Chancellor de Bellievre himself, to all his
Histories he has writ upon Manuscripts, and invisible Memoirs.
that lived till I came of Man's Estate. Tiberius, with some Compassion, told
the Senate, Piso had found a way to deliver himself from them. He asked his
Servant many Questions as to the particulars of his Death. And he answering
some of them well, others confusedly Nothing is more difficult than to answer
well to the frequent Questions of Princes; the most able are very much
confounded, and with greater reason may others be so the first time they appear
in a Prince's Presence, that has a severe Air of Majesty, as Tiberius, whose
Countenance was as doubtful as his Words. Tiberii Serm^ne, vultu, adregantibus
and obs^uris. Ann. 1.
, he read what Piso had left in Writing, which was almost in these words. Since
neither Truth, nor my Innocence will be received against the Calumnies of my
Enemies, I call the Gods to witness, I never have been wanting in my Faith to
you, Sir, nor in my Duty to your Mother. I therefore beseech you both, protect
my Children, one of them has had no share in my Affairs, having always been at
Rome, the other was against my going to Syria. And I wish to God I had rather
yielded to him than he to me. I most earnestly beg of you not to confound the
Innocent with the Guilty. I conjure you therefore, by my Forty five years
Services, by our Fellowship in the Consulship In the Year of Rome 746, or 747.
, by the Memory of Augustus, whose Favor I had, and out of Compassion to a
Friend's last Request, have Pity on my Son. He said nothing of Plancina.

XVII. Tiberius excused the Son from any Crime in the Civil War, because of the
Influence of his Father As it is certain, the Authority of a Father can never
give him a Right to command his Children any thing against the State; so the
Children that are of Age to know what they do, are as guilty as their Fathers
when they obey in a plain Rebellion, whether they do it voluntarily, or by
force: Otherwise the Duty of Filial Obedience would be a pretense for
Rebellion. Now when young Piso dissuaded his Father from returning to Syria,
showing him he would raise a Civil War in the East; it is evident he knew the
consequence thereof, and saw it as clearly as his Father: And besides, it
appeared too by Piso's Letter to the Emperor, that his Son was not altogether
innocent, as in Truth he was not, since according to the Testimony of Tacitus,
he was as zealous in the War when it was begun, as he had been first in
advising against it. Haud ig^avo administeria belli ^uv^ne Pisone, quanquam
suscipiendum bellum abnuisset. Ann. 2.
. He spoke at the same time of the Nobleness of their Family Which was of the
Calpurnian H^use.
, lamented the Misfortune of Piso, however he had deserved Though Princes are
obliged to punish Crimes, yet it becomes them very well to pity the Misfortune
of those suffer for them. After the part of a Prince is over, which is to do
Justice, without regard to the condition to those that are guilty, it is but
Humanity to show some Compassion, especially when they are Persons that have
done Service to the Public. I do not see, that those who read Sixtus Quintus's
Life, approve, or in any sort excuse his extravagant Zeal, which made him say,
after he had beheld the Execution of a Spanish Gentleman, who was hanged before
his Windows. That it was a Sauce would make him Dine with the better Appetite.
Leti Live. 2. de la second party de sa Vie.
. For Plancina, he spoke with some shame and concern, pretending it, at his
Mother's Entreaty, against whom all good men secretly complained. Is it, said
they, fitting for the Grandmother to behold the Murderer of her Grandson,
speak to her, and take her from the Senate? Is that denied only to Germanicus,
the Laws allow to all Citizens? Vitellus and Veranius demand Justice, and
Plancina is protected by the Emperor, and Augusta. What remains for this Woman,
after having so fortunately bestowed her Poison and Enchantments, but to use
them also against Agrippina, and (...) Children, and satiate the good
Grandmother As Historians ought not to approve the Reflections the People make
of a Prince and great Men, yet they ought less to pass them in silence; for the
end of their Writing, is, to give Examples whereby we may know Good and Bad,
and shun those things which Envy and Evil-speaking may interpret ill.
and Uncle with the Blood of this unhappy House? Two days were spent under
color of examining the Cause, Tiberius encouraging Piso's Children to defend
their Mother. And when no Answer was given to the Accusers, and the Witnesses
against her, their Hatred gave way to Compassion. The Consul Aurelius Cotta,
being asked his Judgment, (for when the Emperor propounds, the Consuls speak
first) he gave it, That Piso's Name should be rased out of the Annals, part of
his Goods Confiscated, the rest given to Cneius Piso, on condition he changed
the name of Cneius, that M Piso be degraded Judges should always give Judgment
according to the severity of the Laws; it is not for them, but the Prince to
show Mercy. This of the Consul Cotta was rigorous, but conformable to the Laws,
the chie^ end of which is to strike terror in Offenders. Besides, Princes love
to have Judges severe, so that if they please to show any Mercy, the Criminals
may be the more obliged to them. However, the Judges should never exceed those
Bounds their Con^ciences prescribe, and their Complaisance to the Prince ought
not to go beyond that rigor the Law requires. For it is a rashness and
injustice to condemn a Criminal to more than his Crime deserves, on supposition
that the Prince will mo^^rate the Sentence.
, 25000 Crowns allowed him, and he banished for Ten years, and Plancina
pardoned at the intercession of Augusta.

XVIII. Tiberius moderated the Sentence, and thought it not reasonable that
Piso's Name should be rased out of the Annals It is Wisdom in ^ Prince to stop
those Sentences against great Men, that carry along with them marks of Infamy.
and reflect on the Honor of their Family. Philip II. of Spain understanding
the Circumstances of Gon^alo Pizarro's Crime, who was Beheaded in the Reign of
Charles V. for endeavoring to fix himself in the Government of Peru, which his
Brother had Conquered, without ever consenting to the Title of King* which
those of the Country offered him; declares by an Act, signed with his own Hand,
That Gon^alo was never a Traitor, though condemned as such, commanding that Name
should be blotted out of all the Histories where he was called so. Don Iuan
Antonio de Vera dons l'Epitome de la Vie de la Charles V. Those who have mind
to see a Case parallel to Piso, need only read there.
, when Mark Anthony, that actually engaged in a Civil War, and Julius Antonius
that violated Augustus's House remained there. And as for Marcus Piso, he would
not suffer him to be attainted, and granted him all his Father's Estate, for he
was never covetous, (as I have often said) and shame for acquitting Plancina
made him more merciful. When Valerius Messalinus proposed the erecting a Golden
Statue in the Temple of Mars the Avenger, and Coecina Severus an Altar to
Revenge, he forbid them, saying, Such Offerings ought to be for Foreign
Victories, but Domestic Evils should be buried in Sorrow. Messalinus was also
for giving Thanks to Tiberius and Augusta, to Antonio and Agrippina, and to
Drusus, for revenging Germanicus's Death, but never mentioned Claudius. L.
Asprenas asked him before the Senate, whether that was a willful Omission, and
then Claudius was entered with the others. The more I consider modern or ancient
Histories, I discover the greater Vanity and Uncertainty in Human Affairs; for
in Fame, Hope, and Estimation, all were rather destined to the Sovereignty,
than he whom Fortune had reserved for the future Prince There are often
Instances in Elective Governments, that the People, who love much to Discourse
of Affairs of State, speak of diverse Princes, every one according to his Fancy
or Desire, till at last they Name him that is chosen, Tac. Hist. 2. And as
there is no Court, where so many Changes happen, nor so ma^y unexpected
Elections, as at Rome, Scipio Ammirato had Reason from hence to Discourse of
the Election of the Popes, out of which I shall give you an Extract. It seems,
says he, those Wise Men that take upon them to point out who will be Elected,
make Age the principal Condition of Election, concluding, the young Cardinals
are never to hope for the Pontificate; which is very wrong, for Leo X. came to
it at the Age of 37. Boniface VIII. at 34. Clement VII. at 45. Others take it
for granted, they will never Elect a Foreigner for a Pope, because the Italian
Cardinals, that are always more numerous than the Tramontans, will never suffer
the Popedom to be out of their Nation. Without going farther for an Example, we
see the contrary in Adrian VI. who was not only a Fleming, but had never seen
Rome nor Ita^y. And Cardinal P^ol had been Pope, but that his Pious Modesty
refused the Adoration at midnight. Calixtus III. and Alexander VI. who are not
very ancient, were not they Spaniards? Others say. That the Cardinals of an
Illustrious House, or that have many Relations can never hope for the
Pontificate, and yet Paul III. and Paul IV. were both very nobly Born, and the
last had so many Relations, that there is no Family in Italy has more Men,
Lands, and Charges than the House of ^araffa. And besides, Clement VII. was not
only very Noble, but an absolute Lord (though under the modest Title of Governor)
of a great part of Tuscany. How o^t was it said, that after the Pontificate was
out of the Benedictines, they resolved it should never return into any
Religious Order: Yet besides Sixtus IV. and Pius V. one a Cordelier, and the
other a Dominican, in the year 1585. when of 64 Cardinals, there were only two
Religious, Felix Peretti, a Franciscan, was made Pope. Testimonials sufficient,
that neither young Men, nor Strangers, neither Nobles nor Monks are excluded,
as their Politics would predict. There are those also lay it down for a Rule,
that they will never make a severe Man, nor one that is very liberal, or that
loves War, Pope. Can they have a Pope more severe than Pius V. more Liberal
than Julius III. more stout and martial than Julius II. From whence Ammirato
concludes, That whatever the world may say, and the Cardinals Cabal together,
yet the Election of Popes is without doubt directed by the Hand of God. Disc.
1, du Live. 3. de son Comm. sur Tac. There cannot be a greater Instance of this,
than what is mentioned in a Letter of Cardinal Ioyeuse, where he gives an
Account to Henry IV. of France, of the Election of Cardinal Borghese, who was
Paul V. instead of Cardinal Tosco, whom the Cardinals Aldrobrandi and Montalto,
the Heads of the two Ch^ef Factions in the Conclave agreed to Elect. Upon that,
says he, the great Cardinal Baronius, who had always declared to Aldobrandin,
he would never go to the Adoration of such a Man, spoke publicly, That he they
were going to Elect was unworthy of that Charge, that it would bring a great
Plague upon the Church, that he would make no Schism, but would be the last to
Adore him. This was an ardent Zeal for the Honor of God, and an Example very
rare, that one Cardinal alone, when they were going to Adoration, and when the
rest were agreed, should dare to speak with so much Freedom. The Cardinal
Aldr^brandin proposed to me Cardinal Borghese, conjuring me, by all the
Services he he had done your Majesty, and by the Memory of Clement VIII. to
agree. I consulted Cardinal Montalto, if he approved him. He told me he not
only liked him very well, but that we should oblige him very much to accept
him. Aldrobrandin supplicating us to do him that Favor: I answered, I thanked
God that in serving two Persons, whom we honored very much, we might have him
Pope, whom your Majesty desired most, so good a Man and of so exemplary a life:
And as soon as I said so, B^rghese was made Pope. Thus, Sir, succeeded this
Negotiation, from which I believe your Majesty will have great satisfaction, to
see Affairs here in such a Condition, that the Cardinals, your Subjects, are as
it were, the Arbitrators of the Conclave, and have prevented the Church having
a Head, whose Life and Reputation were a little blemished, and instead thereof
to have one that without contradiction is esteemed very good and very wise. I
will also believe it will be acceptable to your Majesty, and advantageous to
France, that he owes his Election to the Cardinals your Subjects, for it cannot
be denied, that they under God, have prevented the Holy See's being filled with
another Person, to reserve it for him, to whom God had destined it for the Good
and Service of the Church. Dans l'Histoire du Cardinul Ioyeuse.
.

XIX. A few days after, Tiberius persuades the Senate to advance Vitellius
Veranius and Serveus, to the Priesthood; and having promised Fulcinius his Vote
for any Dignity, advised him not to lessen his Eloquence by too much Eagerness
Logo Diarrhaea, which Quintilian calls, Os Praeceps, is a great fault in an
Orator. We see Preachers, whose Mouths go like the Alarm of a Clock, and whose
Sermons are ^ continual labor to them. The vulgar calls that Apostolical
Preaching, as if the Apostles could not otherwise deliver God's Word. This
fault the Italian and Spanish Preachers abound with, whose Gesture was violent
as their Pronunciation. I will add to this a Reflection on the Advice Tiberius
would give Fulcinius, It is that the Precipitation and Vehemence of this
Advocate displeased him, because very contrary to his easy and composed way of
speaking. They that are to speak before Princes ought to accommodate their
Discourse to their liking, if they would be well heard. In Augustus's Reign the
Harangues were long, his being so, because of the care he took to deliver his
Thoughts clearly. Under Tiberius they were short and pertinent, because his
Style was concise and close. Which shows, Eloquence has its Modes, and that the
Fashion and Rules of Graminar and Rhetoric are used according to the
conformity they have with the present Genius of the Court.
. This was the end of Revenging Germanicus's Death, which was differently
reported then It is very difficult to discover the Truth of those matters that
have been differently reported when they happened. The older they are, the more
obscure they become, and are intermixed with ingenious Circumstances that make
them pass for Romances. Therefore the Chancellor Chivergny said in his Memoirs,
he thought good to deliver the Truth of the most remarkable Things wherein most
Historians deceive Posterity.
, and in subsequent times. So dark are all great Affairs, some believe all they
hear, others disguise Truth with Falsehood, and Posterity adds to both.

XX. Drusus left the City to enquire his Fortune Without which he could not
fall again to his public Employments, which had been interrupted ever since
his return to Rome, nor enjoy the Honor of the Triumph was decreed him. This
Ceremony consisted in Prayers that those made who took upon them any Civil or
Military Employments, to the God's to be propitious to them.
, and entered with a small Triumph The Ovation some fancy to have derived its
Name from shouting Evion to Bacchus, but the true Original is Ovis, usually
offered in this Procession, as an Ox in the Triumph. The Procession generally
began at the Albanian Mountain, whence the General, with his Retinue, made his
Entry into the City. He went on Foot, with many Flutes or Pipes sounding in
Consort as he passed along, wearing a Garland of Myrtle, as a Token of Peace,
with an Aspect rather raising Love and Respect, than Fear.
; and within a few days, Vipsania his Mother died, the only one of Agrippa's
Children that died a natural Death. For it is certain, or at least believed,
the rest died by the Sword, Poison, or Famine Caius and Lucius by Poison,
Agrippa Posthumus by the Sword, Agrippina by Famine.
.

XXI. This year Tacfarinas, who I told you was beat the last Summer by
Camillus, begun the War again in Africa, first by plundering, in which his
quick marches secured him, then he burnt Towns, and carried off great Booties,
and lastly, Besieged a Roman Fort not far from the River Pagys; Decrius was
Governor, a Man of Courage and an Experienced Soldier, and looking on such a
Siege a Dishonor to him, he encouraged his Men to Fight in the open Field, and
drew them up before the Fort Though Sallies, says Commines, are sometimes
necessary, yet they are dangerous, for the loss of Ten Men to them is more than
an Hundred to the Besiegers, because their number is not equal, and cannot
Recruit at pleasure, and if they lose their Commander, (which often happens) it
causes the loss of the place. Chap. 11. du Live. 2. de ses Mem. He that is
afraid of losing a Fort, ought not to make Sallies often, for Ten of the
Besiegers will not recompense the loss of one of his Men, because they can
Recruit, and he has no hopes of doing it. Dis. 3. du Live. 20. de son
Commentaire sur Tacit.
. They were beaten back at the first Engagement, he run among them that fled,
rebuking the Ensigns for turning their Backs to Traitors and Deserters. And
though he received several Wounds, and lost an Eye, yet he faced the Enemy, and
continued Fighting till he was forsaken by his Men and Slain.

XXII. Which when L. Apronius (who succeeded Camillus) understood, being more
concerned for the shame of his own Men, than Glory of the Enemy, he decimated
(...) majores nostri, says Cicero, speaking of Decimation, ut, (...) m^ltis
esset (...) rei militaris admissum, sor^ione in quosdam animadver^e^etur, ut
metus videlicet adonmes, poena ad paucos perveniret. Pro Cluentio. That is, Our
Ancestors have decreed, that if many offend against Martial Law, some only
shall be punished by Lot, so that their Punishment may strike Terror to all
the rest. Appius Claudius seems to have been the first Author of Decimation
among the Romans. His Army having forsook him in his Expedition against the
Volsci, he Decimated them at his return, and cut off the Centurions Heads after
they had run the Gantle^. T. Live. livrez. The same Historian says, he killed
the Roman Soldiers, (vitibus,) and the Foreigners (fustibus.) Paterculus says,
That the Proconsul Calvinius Domitius caused Vibillius, a Lieutenant Colon^l,
to be slain with his Generals Staff, because he shamefully run away. Hist. 2.
Chap. 78. Sometimes the Roman Consuls viges^^a^ant and centesima^ant, i. e.
punished only One of Twenty or an Hundred.
those dishonorable Troops Decimation is the most effectual remedy for the
Cowardice, Disobedience and Infidelity of Soldiers. It is rarely executed in
France, but supplied with an equivalent, the breaking of Companies. What Lewis
the Just did in 1639. is remarkable, Viz. The King being well informed how
cowardly the Troops of Light Horse of Fontette, Castelet and Cuvilliers, left
the Foot at the Battle of Thionville, and resolving such Infamy should be taken
notice of, and exemplarily punished, ordered they should be broke and never
raised again. His Majesty declares the Captains and Officers of the said Troops
infamous, and incapable of ever having any Command, reserving himself to
appoint them such Punishment as they deserved. And in a Letter to the Viscount
de Lignon, My desire is* says he, That you break with Disgrace, and expel your
Regiment, all the Officers and Soldiers that were known to fly on that
occasion, and that you let them not serve in other ^roops, where the Contagion
of their ill Conduct may make the like disorder, as at the Battle of
Thionville. Dans le Tom. 4. des Memoires du Ministere du Cardinal d^ Richelieu.
, and drubb'd them to Death. A Punishment rare in those times, though practiced
formerly. Which Severity did so much good, that an Ensign, with no more than
500 old Soldiers, defeated Tacfarinas's Army Sometimes those that are Beat,
bring more Resolution, Courage and Conduct to a second Battle, than their
Victors; for these are apt to relax, through Haughtiness and Pride, which
Victory inspires, when the others have Shame, Anger, and a desire of Vengeance
to spur them to recover the Esteem and Favor of their General, Which Tacitus
says, Acri^r^ disciplin^ victi* quam victores agunt: hos ira, odium, ul^ionis
cupiditas, ad virtutem accendit; illi; per fastidium and contuma^iam hebescunt.
Hist. 2. Profuisse disciplinae ipsum pudorem. Hist. 3.
, as they were going to assault a Fort, called Thala. In which Battle, Rufus
Helvius, a common Soldier, had the Honor to save a Citizen's Life, on whom
Apronius bestowed a Chain and Spear, Tiberius added the Civic Crown, finding
Fault rather than offended, that Apronius did not give it Princes are always
pleased to have their Ministers leave to them the disposing of Rewards,
especially Military Rewards, the distribution whereof draws great Consequences
after it, when done by other Hands. After the Battle of Rocroy, the Baton of
Marshal was not refused M. de Gassion, because the D. d'Anguien asked it, but
because the Queen Regent and Cardinal Mazarine would not let him owe that
Dignity to a Victorious General. However, there is nothing gives a Sovereign
greater satisfaction, than the Moderation of a Subject, who after he has done
great Services will receive no Recompense from any other hand than his.
Cardinal d'Ossat, speaking of the Presents Cardinal Ioyeuse had sent him, after
his Promotion, said, He accepted only the Silver Basin, which might be worth an
Hundred Crowns; f^r though he had not then what became him to support his
Dignity, yet he would not renounce his Abstinence, that he had always
preserved, to be obliged to any other Lord or Prince, than the King, Lettre
171. The King, says a Modern Author, should be the only Master and Judge of
all Rewards, and ought to dispose them himself, so that they who receive any of
them, may be persuaded they owe them to his Bounty. Besides, nothing can give
juster satisfaction to Subjects, who have a true Sense of Honor, than to
receive a Favor from the King's own Hand, because the Dignity of the Royal
Hand adds a Quality to the Present that augments its excellence and value.
Chap. 9. du Traite de la Politic d^ France.
, which he might have done as Proconsul. But Tacfarinas, seeing the Numidians
daunted, and resolved against more Sieges, scattered the War, giving ground
when pursued, and following upon the Retreat, and thus kept the Romans in play
to no purpose. But greedy of Booty, he got near the Seacoasts, and encamped;
Apronius Caesianus being sent by his Father, with the Horse and Auxiliaries,
and the greater part of the Legions, found a way to Fight him, and drove him to
the Deserts.

XXIII. Lepida, who, besides the Honor of the Aemilian Family, from whence she
was descended, had L. Sylla and Cneius Pompeius for her Grandfathers, was
accused by her Husband, Publius Quirinus, a Rich Man and Childless, for a
Supposititious Child, and also for Adulteries and Poisonings It is easy to
persuade Judges, a Woman that commits Adultery would Poison her Husband:
, and that she had consulted the Baldeans against Caesar's House. Her Brother
Marius Lepidus desended her. And though she was faulty and infamous, yet
Quirinus's Prosecution, Ita enim apud Roman^s, says Appian, futuri anni Consul
primus censet.
after he was Divorced from her, made others have Compassion on her. It was
hard to guess Tiberius's Inclination, he so artfully mixed the signs of his
Anger and Clemency. He requested the Senate to let alone the Charge of Treason
at that time, then he drew from M. Servilius, that had been Consul, and the
other Witnesses, what he pretended he would have concealed, and sent Lepida's
Servants to the Consuls, under a guard of Soldiers, and would not suffer them
to be examined on the Rack against her. Lastly, Dispensed with Drusus, Consul
Elect, giving his Opinion first, which was differently interpreted, that the
Judges might not be led by his Son and others, that they might have the greater
liberty to Condemn her It Is very certain, if Tiberius had desired to have saved
Lepida, he would have let his Son have spoke first, to have had the Reputation
of it, to which the (...) would willingly have consented, because the Contempt
they had for Quirinus, her Accuser, would have inclined the Judges to show her
Favor. He would not let his Son declare himself first, under pretense of
leaving others to their liberty, but in effect, that they might do what he
would not be thought the Author of; and to show, that instead of imposing a
necessity on the Judges to follow Drusus's Opinion, he might pretend Drusus
conformed to theirs, which threw the Odium on them. See how Prince's Actions
are covered with shows of Modesty, Clemency and Justice. When Philip II. King
of Spain, preserved the Lady Elizabeth, and gained her Liberty, after she was
committed to the Tower upon Wiat's accusing her, this Action was magnified by
the Spaniards, as a singular Example of Clemency and Generosity. When he would
not consent she should be sent into Spain to be shut up in a Convent, the
English believed it to be for the Reason he gave the Queen, because the Kingdom
would have reason to complain, if the Lawful Heir was taken from them when the
Queen and he had no Children. When to prevent the ^eheading of her, he told the
Queen, That the Prince, who has his Hands in the Blood of his Relations,
prepares a Sword for himself, she believed him concerned for her Safety. But
all these were only Pretenses* as his own Historian Cabrera allows. The French,
says he, would have it, That Philip saved Elizabeth only out of State Policy to
prevent England's being joined after the Queen's Death in Mary Queen of Scots,
who had Married the Dauphin of France, by which Union France had been
formidable to the Low Countri^s, which was very tr^e. And God suffered
Elizabeth to disturb and divide these Provinces, and to give Philip great
Trouble for preferring his own Interest to that of Religion, in saving one was
afterward the greatest Enemy the Roman Church ever had. Thus God punishes
Princes who prefer the Welfare of their Temporal Affairs before their
Conscience. Chap. 7. and 10. du Live. 1. de son Histoire, and Aubery du Maurier
dans la Preface de ses Memoires.
.

XXIV. During this Process, the public Plays being shown, Lepida goes to the
Theater, with diverse Noble Ladies, and directs her Prayers and Tears to her
Ancestors, calling on Pompey, whose Images were placed round the Theater he
built, which wrought so great Compassion in the Spectators, that with Tears
they imprecated Quirinus, who considering his Age, and the meanness of his
Birth, was not a fit Husband for such a Lady, once designed to be L. Caesar's
Wife, and Daughter-in-Law to Augustus: But her Crimes being discovered by
Torturing her Servants, Rubellius Blandus's Sentence was received, That she
should be banished. Drusus yielded to it, though others would have been more
merciful. Then Scaurus, who had a Daughter by her, obtained that her Goods
should not be Confiscate. At last, Tiberius declared he was assured by
Quirinus's Slaves, she sought to Poison him.

XXV. The Afflictions the great Families were under almost at the same time The
Calph^^nii and Aemilii were very considerable Fam^lies in Rome.
, the Calphurnii having lost Piso, and the Aemilii Lepida, were alleviated
through Joy, That D. Decius.
Silanus was restored to the Iunii. His Case I relate in a few words. As
Augustus was fortunate in public Affairs Tacitus, says, Valida in R^mp.
fortuna, which rendering Literally, is, He had good Fortune against the
Commonwealth. And I believe, that is the Author's true Sense, who in my Opinion
would take notice of the extraordinary good Fortune he had to make himself by
force of Arms absolute Master of the Empire. For if Tacitus would only have
spoke of his Government, he should have said in Rep. and not in Remp. Which
none of the Spanish, Italian or French Translators have observed, but Rodolfus,
who says, (as Fortune was very favorable to the Emperor Augustus, against the
Commonwealth.) But I think it more proper to content my self wi^^ the common
Interpretation, making only a Grammatical Note upon it, (which I do seldom) Non
ut arguerem, sed ne arguerer.
, so he was unhappy at home It is fatal to Princes that are happy in their
Government, to be unfortunate in their Families, either by the Disobedience of
their Children, as Charles VII. of France, Philip II. of Spain, or in the
Lewdness of their Wives or Daughters, as Augustus, Tiberius, and many others.
Besides, Augustus deserved this very well, because he forgot all the Sacred
Ties of Friendship when he consulted his Pleasure, and abused Mecenas's Wife,
who was his first Minister and Favorite, which has given occasion to Arioste
the Italian Poet, to say, Non fu si santo ne benigno Augusto,
Come la tromba di Virgilio suona.
i. e. Augustus was not so Virtuous, nor so Good, as Virgil tells us.
, in the lewdness of his Daughter and Neice, whom he banished, punishing the
Adulterers with Death or Exile. For finding their Offenses the subject of
common Discourse, he gave them the Name of Sacrilege or Treason to have a
pretense to show no Pity, and to exceed the Laws The Prince that observes not
his own Laws, gives room to think, either that they are unjust, or not
necessary, and brings public Hatred on himself, if he makes others rigorously
observe them. The more severe Laws are, the more it concerns a Prince to
Authorize them by his Example, which wins those would otherwise oppose them.
Macchiave^ gives us a very considerable Relation, which shows how dangerous it
is for the Maker of a Law to Break it. He says, That Friar (...), having among
other things, for the security of the Government of Florence, obtained a Law
for Appeals to the People in Matters of State* both from the Senate and the
Council of Eight, (which he had a long time solicited, and got with much
difficulty at last.) It happened, that not long after, there were five Persons
Condemned to Death by the Senate, who endeavoring earnestly to Appeal to the
People, were denied it, and could not have the Benefit of that Law, which was
greater Diminution to the Reputation of the Friar, than any thing had ever
happened before. For if that Law was of such Importance as he pretended, it
ought to have been observed; if not, Why was it solicited so earnestly? And it
was the more remarkable in the Friar, because in his Sermons and Discourses
afterward to the People, he neither blamed the breaking of that Law, nor went
about to excuse it: For being to his purpose, he would condemn it, and excuse
it he could not, having nothing to say; which Action having discovered the
Ambitious Partiality of his Mind, lessened his Repute, and loaded him with
Scandal. Chap. 45. Live. 1. de ses Disc. Sixtus V. lost a little the Reputation
he had of a constant Man, by one or two Promotions he made extra tempora in
1587. after his Bull, whereby he decreed, That no Promotions should be made but
in Ember-Week in December. Leti livri dernier de sa Vi^.
. But I reserve for another work, the ends of others, and other Matters, if I
live to write another Book, when I have finished these Annals. D. Silanus, who
was accused for Debauching Augustus's Neice, was only forbid his House So I
render, Amicitia Caesaris prohiberi; for Tacitus says by that the Romans
declared they renounced Friendship with those had offended them. ^orem fuisse
majoribus, quotis dirimerent amicitias, interdicere domo, ^umque finem gratiae
ponere. Ann. 6. To which Tacitus's Words to Tiberius in his Harangue against
Piso; Si obsequium erga Imperatorem exuit, ejusdemque and luctu meo laetatus
est, odero, seponamque a domo mea. Ann. 3.
, which he interpreted Banishment, and till Tib^rius's Reign durst never ask
leave of the Emperor and Senate to return home. And then depended on his
Brother, M. Silanus's Credit and Reputation for his illustrious Birth and great
Eloquence. But Silanus thanking Tiberius on his Brother's behalf, he replied
before the Senate, it was matter of Joy to him as well as others, to see his
Brother return home after so long Travels; that he lawfully might, because he
was not banished either by Decree of the Senate, or other Law There were three
sorts of Exile; the first was called Deportatio. Transportation, this was
perpetual, and extended to loss of Estates and Privivileges. Ann. 1. Deportati
autem jus civitatis and bona amittebant. The second was Relegatio, by which a
Criminal was sent to such a Place or such a time, or perhaps for ever, but not
deprived of the Privilege of a Roman Citizen. The third, Depended on the Will
and Pleasure of the Prince, by a certain Writing under his Hand to those he
suspected, or had offended him, and he recalled them at Pleasure.
. That his Offense against his Father remained, and his return reversed not
Augustus's Decrees Princes ought to forbear as much as may be, reversing what
their Predecessors have done. For besides that, this Respect is of good Example
for their Subjects, who have therefore the greater Reverence for Majesty, it is
a lesson to their Successors, how to behave themselves toward them. Never any
Prince had greater Cause to be discontented with his Predecessor, and despise
his Memory, than David, and yet he not only slew him that brought the News of
Readiness Death and his Crown, and lamented him that would often have killed him,
he makes his Elegy, magnifies his Valor, his Liberality, his Riches, the
Loveliness of his Person, saying to the People of Israel, He was swifter than
Eagles, he was stronger than Lions, 2. Sam. c. 1. Lewis XII. of France was very
ill used under Charles VIII. yet he turned out few of his Officers, but said he
would maintain every Man in his Estate, whereby he gained great Honor.
Commines dans le dernier Chapitre de ses Memoires.
. From that time Silanus lived in Rome, but as a private Person.

XXVI. They afterward debated moderating the Law Papia Poppaea This Law was
made by Papius and Poppeus, when Consuls, and contained Rewards and
Punishments. That the Magistrates should have Precedence according to the
number of their Children, or a Married Man before a Batchellor. That in
Elections, those who had most Children should be preferred; That any Person
might stand sooner than ordinary for an Office if he had so many Children as to
be capable of it. That whosoever in the City had three Children, in other Parts
of Italy four, and in the Provinces five, (some say seven) should be excused
all troublesome Offices. Hence came the famous Iustrium Liberorum, which the
Emperor's often indulged to several to whom Nature had denied it. On the other
side, Unmarried Persons were incapable of receiving any Legacy or Inheritance
by Will, unless from near Relations.
, which Augustus, when he was old, added to the Julian Laws, to make Celibacy
more Penal, and enrich the public. Yet Marriages were not more frequent, most
finding it better having no Children When Men had rather want the Comforts and
Pleasures of Marriage than to bring upon themselves the Necessity of Children,
and consequently of multiplying the Misfortunes of their Families, it is a
certain sign of a Tyrannical Government. It was in this Sense, Pliny the
younger wrote to Trajan, that he desired Children in his Reign, because he was
assured of being an happy Father. And Tacitus says, After the English had lost
a Battle, whereby they were at the Mercy of the R^mans, they fell into so great
a Despair, that many of them killed their Wives and Children, tanquam
misererentur, in compassion to them, to deliver them from a cruel Slavery that
was coming upon their Country. In Agricola.
. However, the Informers daily ruined many Families, so that their Laws were
grown as fatal to them as formerly their Crimes. This leads me to give some
Account of the Original of Laws, and to show from whence it is they are come to
such an infinite number as at present.

XXVII. As the first Men were without Malice and Ambition Pagliari pleasantly
asks, Who were these Men had this Simplicity and Innocence Tacitus speaks of?
The first Man that was Born in the World killed the second, we ought then to
conclude, since Adam's Fall by Disobedience, there have always been good and
bad. Obser^ation 341. But probably Tacitus never read Genesis.
, they wanted not Correction and Punishment, and as they were naturally
en^lined to good, they needed no Rewards. Nothing was forbid, where nothing was
desired that was not allowed. But after Equality was gone, Ambition and
Violence succeeded Modesty and Justice, and by degrees introduced Sovereignty
and Tyranny, which have always subsisted in some Countries. Some at first
desired to be governed by Laws, others not till they were weary of Kings Diverse
Monarchies have been turned into Commonwealths, some through the Inconstancy or
Untractableness of the People, but most through the unbounded liberty of their
Kings, who would not content themselves with a Legal Authority. Therefore, says
Antonio Perez, if Princes love and would preserve themselves, they ought not so
much to beware of those Physicians, that either through Ignorance or Flattery,
or particular Hatred, suffer them to Eat what is contrary to their Health, as
Counselors that give them an Arbitrary Power without Bounds. For such
Counselors will soon tire out the Patience of the People, and consequently
make them Dethron^ their Masters. Dans ses Relations.
. The first Laws were simple, as Men's Minds Laws ought to bear a ^roportion to
the condition of Men, for they are made like Remedies in Physic, to Suit the
Nature of Distempets. A Lawgiver that shall make Laws against Vices and
Corruptions, unknown to the People he governs, will debauch their Innocence, by
teaching what they should rather be ignorant of. Like imprudent Confessors,
that by unnecessary Questions instruct Girls in the Knowledge of Ill, before
they know the difference of their Sex. Or like some Preachers, that to Confute
Errors and Infidelity, raise such Scruples and Objections as their Answers do
not sufficiently clear, and instead of confirming the People in the Faith, make
many of them curious and inquisitive, and Scepticks, if not downright Atheists.
, and the most cebrated, were those Minos gave the Cretians They are now the
Inhabitants of the Isle of Candia.
, Lycurgus the Lacedaemonians, and Solon the Athenians, but his were more
numerous and more refined The more cunning and discerning People are, the more
numerous the Laws should be, for as a Lawmakers can never foresee all Cases
that may happen, nor all the Subtilties and Cavils will be thought on for
evading his Law, or at least, the Exceptions will be found, that is the Reasons
against obeying it hic and nunc; he is obliged to explain his Law, or rather to
make as many Laws as new Cases shall arise. There is no Country where there are
better Laws, nor more than in Normandy, for the Normans have always been very
cunning, and are in France like the Athenians in Greece.
. Romulus ruled as he pleased. Numa established a Form for Divine Worship and
Religious Ceremonies. Tullus and Ancus made some Laws, but our chiefest
Lawmakers was Servius Tullius, whose Laws Kings themselves were bound to Obey
According to Plato, Monarchy is the worst and best sort of Government. The
worst if absolute, the best if limited. Those that teach Kings and Sovereign
Princes the contrary, learn them to Tyrannize, not Reign, not to keep the
People in Duty and Obedience, but to make them Rebel. No Princes have ever been
better Obeyed, nor consequently more Princes, than those that have not set
themselves above the Laws. Commines gives a very good instance in Charles VIII.
of France, that at his Accession to the Crown; obtained of the States at Tours,
a Gift of Two Millions and Five Hundred Thousand Livres, (which was* says he,
rather too much than too little) though the Kingdom had been under gri^vous Taxes
for Twenty Years. On the contrary, when a Prince will do every thing according
to his Will and inordinate Desire, his People will not Obey him, nor Succor
him in his Necessities; but instead of aiding him when he has great Affairs
upon his Hands, they despise and run into Rebellion against him. Chap. dernier
du live. 5. de ses Memoires.
.

XXVIII. After Tarquinius Superbus was expelled See the end of Independent,
Arbitrary and Unlimited Authority* which Flatterers make Princes assume. See
what happened to Henry III. of France, of whom it is said, he forbid the French
make any Applications to him, and taught them there was no other measure of
Justice than his Will. Mezeray de sa Vie. One thing that most hur^ this poor
Prince, says the Chancellor de Chiverny, was the Opinion he had entertained of
his own Sufficiency, despising others Judgments, which is the greatest
Misfortune that can befall a Prince, or any other Person. Dans s^s M^moirs.
, the People made many against the Factions of the Senators The Nobility always
love a Prince, whatever he is, better than a popular Government, where the
People never fail bringing them to an Equality, which they cannot bear, being
used to Distinction. For it is the same with Great Men, as it was with Agrippa,
Augustus's Son-in-Law, who, according to Paterculus, willingly obeyed one, but
in revenge would command all others. Parendi, sed uni, scientissimus, aliis
sane imperandi cupidus.
, to defend their Liberties, and establish Union. The Decemviri See Decemviri
in the Historical Notes of the Preface to Tacitus.
were chosen to collect the best Nothing is more useful to a Prince that has
great Dominions, and consequently great Affairs to Transact with other Princes,
than an exact Knowledge of the Laws and Customs of other Countries: Besides
that, it teaches him to distinguish good and bad in every Government, shows him
proper Expedients for Reforming Abuses that daily happen in Government, whether
in his Revenue, in his Military Discipline, in his Courts of Justice, and in
all other Parts thereof. Mariana says, That Henry III. of Castile, sent
Ambassadors to Christian Princes, and to Mahometans, only to inform him their
manner of Governing, so to collect the Wisdom of all Courts in his own, and to
know the better how to show the Majesty of a King in all his Actions. What
might have been expected from this Prince, who died at 27 years old, and was
the ablest that had Reigned in Spain? Chap. 14. de live. 19. de son Histoire.
Laws of other Countries, out of which they composed the Twelve Tables, the sum
of Law and Justice. As for the Laws that followed, though some were made
against Malefactors, yet they were most commonly brought in, through the
Dissensions of the People and Senate, for obtaining unlawful Dignities, driving
out Noblemen, or other Disorders. Witness the Gracchii and Saturnini, the
Incendiaries of the People; and Drusus, who was no less prodigal in the Name of
the Senate, and corrupted his Companions by Hopes, or deluded them. Neither the
War of Italy, nor the Civil War That this Recital of the History of the ancient
Commonwealth may be the better understood, in which Tacitus is so short, it is
in my Opinion proper to give an Extract here of some Chapters of Paterculus,
which relate very well those Dissentions. Scip^o Nasica, says he, was the first
advised Force against the Tribune Tiberius Gracchus, his Cousin, to prevent the
Execution of the Lege^ Agrariae, made in favor of the People. Ten years after,
Nasica was followed by the Consul Opimius, taking up Arms against Caius
Gracchus, who, either to revenge his Brother Tiberius's Death, or to open a way
to Sovereignty, which he affected, exercised the Tribunate with greater
Violence than his elder Brother, and subverted the Government of the City and
State. The Gracchi being Dead, Opimius caused all their Friends or Servants to
be put to Death, which was not liked, as proc^^ding rather from his particular
Hatred to the Gracchi, than a desire to make public Examples of them. The
Gracchi were succeeded by Servilius Glaucia, and Saturninus Apuleius, who to
keep the Tribunate longer than the Laws allowed, and to prevent others being
chose in their Places, (which Tacitus expresses by apisci inlicitos Honores)
dissolved by Fire and Sword the meetings of the People, which obliged Marius,
then Consul the sixth time, to Sacrifice them to the public Hatred. The
Tribunate of Livius Drusus, who would have restored to the Senate the right of
judging Causes, which Caius Gracchus had transferred to the Knights, was
neither more quiet nor happier, all the Senators opposing him in those things
he designed in their Favor, choosing rather to bear the Insults of his
Colleagues, than be beholding to him for the Honor he would procure them. So
much envi^d they his Glory, which appeared to them too great. The Death of
Dr^sus, who was killed as the Gracchi, for extending the Privileges of the
City of Rome to all Italy, (which explains Tacitus, Corrup^i sp^, aut (...) per
intercessionem socii) kindles a War in Italy, or of the Contederates, (...) who
presently demanded this Honor, complaining with good Reason, that they were
treated like Strangers by a City, maintained by their Arms, though of the same
Nation, the same Blood, and Rome obliged to them for her great Power. This War
was the first occasion of raising, Cn. Pomp^ius, Marius and Sylla, who turned
those Arms against the City they were entrusted with against the Allies. For
Sylla, that was of a noble Family, out much lessened in their Greatness,
valuing himself upon the Credit of ending the War in Italy, demanded the
Consulate, and obtained (...) by the Su^^rag^s of almost all the Citizens. At
the same time the Government of Asia ^alling to Sylla, Pub. Sulpicius the
Tribune, declared for Marius, who at 70 years of Age would Command all the
Provinces, and by a Law turned Sylla out of the Government to give it to
Marius, whence presently began Sylla's Civil War, who drove Marius and
Sulpicius with their Accomplices out of Rome. This War was succeeded by that of
Cinn^, who was no more moderate than Marius or Sulpicius. He to Revenge himself
of the Senate, that deposed him from the Consulate, and put another in his
place, recalled Marius and his Son from Exile, and all of their Party that were
Banished, to strengthen his own, to which by great Promises he drew all the
Officers of the Roman Army at Nola. While he made War with his Country; Cn.
Pompeius, seeing himself disappointed in his hopes of being continued Consul,
stands (...) 'twixt the Commonwealth and Sylla, to watch an opportunity to m^nd
his Condition, by going with his Army to that side had the Advan^age* (For it
often happens in Civil Wars, that great Men Sacrifice their Al^egiance to their
Interest.) Pompey dying after he had given Cinna Battle, he and Marius became
Masters of Rome, whose Entry was followed with the Death of the Consuls,
Octavius killed by their Order, and Cornelius Merula, who cut his Veins to
prevent Cinna's Revenge, for being in his Place. Marius dying next year at the
beginning of his Seventh Consulate, Cinna that entered upon his Second had all
the Power of the Government, but being very violent, the great Men retired to
Sylla in Greece, which made him return into Italy to revenge the Nobles, who
made him their Chief, as Marius was of the People, and Cinna was slain by the
Soldiers who Mutined against him, when he would have had them Embarkt to Fight
the Nobles. Sylla endeavors to end all Differences by a good Accommodation,
and upon ^easonable Terms, but Peace would not please those that hoped to
advantage themselves by Fishing in Troubled Waters. The Ambition of young
Marius, elected Consul at 26 years of Age, continued the War, but after he lost
a Battle, he was slain by some that Sylla hired to do it. He was surnamed, The
Happy, so much was his Courage valued. This Victory made Sylla Dictator, who so
much abused his Authority, that Marius and Cinna were regretted. For he was the
first invented Proscription, i. e. by public Authority, gave a Reward to any
one should kill a Citizen of Rome, so that more was no^ given for the Head of
an Enemy slain in Battle, than for a Citizen's killed in his own House. After
Cinna, Marius and Sylla, came Pompey the Great, who according to Tacitus, was
not better than they, but knew more how to Dissemble. Post quos Cn. Pompeius
occultior, non melior. Hist. 2. As soon as Pompey was in the Management of
Public Affairs, not content to be the first, he would be alone, from thence
came Caesar's Jealousy, which in Conclusion produced another Civil War, where
Fortune leaving Pompey, Caesar became Master of the Empire. Pater^. Hist. 2.
Chap. 6. ^ 12. 13. 15. 17. 19. 20. 21. 22. 25. 28. 33. 47. and 48.
, hindered them making many Laws, and very different, till Sylla the Dictator
changed or abolished them to make all new. Then there was some Intermission,
which continued not long, by reason of Lepidus's turbulent Demands, and the
Licentiousness of the Tribunes, who managed the People as they pleased; and
made as many Laws as they had Persons to accuse, so that the Commonwealth being
corrupt, the Laws were infinite The multitude of Laws, says Plato, de
Republica, is as sure a sign of the Corruption of a State, as a multitude of
Physicians is of a Complication of Distempers. It may truly be said, adds a
great Minister, That new Laws are not so much Remedies for the Disorders of
States, as Testimonies thereof, and sure to^ens of the weakness of a
Government; if old Laws have been well executed, there will be no need of
renewing them, nor making others to stop new Disorders, which then had never
been settled. Chap. 5. de la second party du Testament Politic. However it
be, Mezeray had reason to say, That the multiplying Regulations in France
served only to multiply the Abuses. Dans la Vie d' Henry III.
.

XXIX. Then Cneius Pompeius was a third time Consul Paterculus says, That in
this Consulate he had no Colleague, and that this extraordinary Honor gave
Caesar so much Jealousy, that from that time they were irreconcilable
Enemies. He adds, Pompey used all his Authority against Canvasing for Offices.
Chap. 47.
, and chose for Reformation of Manners, but being more severe In making Laws,
the Disposition of the People is to be observed. No Laws are worse than those
that require Perfection, for the difficulty of observing them brings them into
a Disuse. Practice never reaches Speculation, and consequently things are not
to be adjusted in such a manner as will be best, but in such a manner as will
last longest. Cardinal Pallavicini very properly calls too severe Laws, the
Bane of public Tranquillity.
than the Offenses deserved, was the Subverter of the Laws he made, and lost by
Arms what he had gained by them All good Men, says the same Author, would have
Pompey and Caesar both quit their Commands, Pompey agreed with those would have
Caesar do it, but was against doing it himself too. And thence began the Civil
War. Chap. 48.
. From that time there were continual Troubles for Twenty Years, no Custom, no
Law observed, the greatest Crimes went unpunished, and many good Actions were
fatal. At length, Augustus Caesar being the Sixth time Consul, and settled in
his Authority, he abolished those things he commanded in his Triumvirate, and
gave new Laws to be observed in time of Peace, and under a Monarch. And that
they might be the better kept, he appointed some to look after them. The Law
Papia Poppaea provided, the People, as common Parent, should inherit their
Goods, that left no Children By the Lex Papia, those who had never been
Married, nihil capiebant ^x testamentis, they were incapable of taking any
thing by Will. But the Orb^, i. e. those who had been Married, but had no
Children, lost only a Moiety. And it is in this Sense Iuve^al makes the
Adulterer say to the Husband; Quod tibi filiolus, vel filia nascitur ex me,
Iura parentis habes; propter me scriberis haeres.
Legatum omne capis, nec non and dulce caducum.
Sat. 9. The Emperor Antonine took from the People the Right of vacantia
tenere, and ordered such Goods to fall to the Prince's Treasure. Hodie, says
Ulpian, (...) Imperatoris Antonini, omnia caduca fisco vindicantur. In Fragm.
Tit. 18.
. But the Informers went farther, not only in the City, but through all Italy,
where any Citizens were, ruined many Families, and frightened all. To remedy
Since the end of Laws is the preserving Order, and the Welfare of Societies, a
Prince should moderate or repeal them, when they are no longer profitable to
the public.
which, Tiberius appointed by Lot, five that had been Consuls, sive that had
been Praetors, and as many Senators, to explain the Doubts in that Law, and by
a favorable Interpretation to give the People some Relief for the present.

XXX. About the same time he recommended Nero, one of Germanicus's Children,
then 17 years of Age, to the Senate; and requested he might be dispensed with
for the Vigintivirate The (...) distributed Corn to the People, they had the
Care of the Highways, and to see the Money was not altered.
, and be Quaestor five years sooner than the Laws permitted According to the
Laws, no Man could be Quaestor till he was 25 years of Age.
, pretending the same was granted him and his Brother at Augustus's Request
Augu^tus to do a popular thing, and to give the People an empty show of (...)
and (...) pretended he wanted their Consent to grant his (...) Children a (...)
he had in his own Power.
. I doubt not but some then secretly laughed at this. These were the beginnings
of Caesar's rising, the ancient Custom was in every Man's Eye, and a less
Relation looked upon The Education Prince's Children have, and the Privilege of
their Birth, ar^ such Advantages that they ought not to be subject to the Laws
of Age, because they are ripe for Business sooner than others. Whence it is
said, Caesaribus virtus contigit ante diem. It is impossible, says Cardinal
Perron, but Princes should know every thing; for they have the Fruits of their
Labors that Study, and Learn in a quarter of an hour, what a good Wit has
labored for a month. Perroniana.
to be betwixt a Father-in-Law and his Wife's Children, than an Uncle and his
Nephew And therefore Tiberius should be more concerned for the Advancement of
his Grandson, than Augustus for his Wives Children.
. The Pontifical Dignity was also bestowed upon him, and the first time he
appeared in public, he gave the People a Donative, who were joyful to see a
Son of Germanicus at full Age. Their Joy was increased by his Marrying Iulia,
Drusus's Daughter Equal Marriages are always liked.
. But if this Marriage was universally approved, there were great Discontents
upon Claudius's Sons being to Marry Sejanus Daughter Princes of the Blood, when
they have any thing to obtain, commit not so great an Error as some imagine, by
Marrying the Daughters or Neices of Ministers. For besides, it is a means to
keep in a Prince's Favor, it will also make them great; but Ministers that
have the Ambition to be Allied to Princes, expose themselves very much to Envy;
and when the Reverse of Fortune comes, as it often happens, they have little
Protection from them but for their Interest, and when that ceases, consider
them only as Relations that are D^s^redit to them. There is also another Reason
should keep Ministers from aspiring to this Honor, because those Princes are
very liable to be suspected by him that Reigns, which often falls upon the
Minister that is concerned to protect them because of the Relation. And the
Prince that will be Ma^ter of all, and be chiefly regarded by his Creatures,
can never love much, nor long, a Minister that divides his Affection and
Complaisance betwixt him and the Princes of the Blood.
, as a Disparagement to him, but Sejanns, whose Ambition was susp^cted, was
much exalted upon it.

XXXI. The end of this year died two great Men, L. Volusius and Sal. Crispus.
The first of an ancient Family, but never in higher Employment than that of
Praetor; he was made Consul and Censor for chasing Bands of Horsemen; he got
vast Riches, which made that House so great. The other was Grandchild to Caius
Salustius's Sister, the famous Historian, whose Name he took by Adoption.
Though he might easily have got Honors, yet after the Example of Mecenas
Paterculus says, Mecenas contented himself all his Life with being a Roman
Knight, without regarding those Dignities he might easily have obtained from
Augustus, who loved him as well as Agrippa, if he had been of a Temper to have
desired them. Hist. 2. Chap. 88.
, was never Senator, but had greater Power and Authority than many had
triumphed and been Consuls. His manner of living was very different from his
Ancestors, either for his Apparel or Table, where the Plenty was such as to be
near Luxury. He had a Capacity for great Affairs For the most part, those that
have managed, or are capable of managing great Affairs, have been Voluptuous.
Never any Man was more vigilant than Mecenas, when the State Affairs required
it, and never any Man loved Quiet, Laziness, and the Pleasures of Life more
than he. So Salust imitated him in all his Virtues and his Vices.
, and very vivacious, though he affected to appear heavy and slothful. While
Mecenas lived, he had the second place in the Ministry, and the first
afterward. He was privy to the Murder of Posthumus Agrippa Sooner or later
Princes forbear seeing, or at least having a Kindness for those have been
Witnesses, Accomplices, or have assisted them in their Crimes, either through
Shame or Repentance. Voi la Note 3. du Chap. 1. du Live. 1.
, and as he grew in years, had rather the Name than Power of a Favorite. The
like happened to Mecenas The ^isgrace of the Chief Ministers is not always an
Effect of their ill Conduct. The wisest and most moderate lose Favor as well
as those who abuse it. Mecenas was without ^^spute one of the best and most
understanding Ministers Augustus could have, and yet he found his Master loved
Change. Gon^alo Hermandez conquered the Kingdom of Naples, and the first
Recompense he had, was, Ferdinand the Catholic gave Ear to all the Complaints
and Calumnies of his Enemies, and was glad to have an Occasion to reform and
preserve his Authority. After which, calling him into Spain, he confined him
for 7 or 8 years to his own Estate, while he was unblemished he refused him the
Commanderic of Leon, and then that of Horna^hos, vacant at the same time.
Mariana, chapter 9. du live. 28. and 14. du live. 30. de son Histoire. At the end
whereof he gives a Commendation of this great Captain, in these words. He had,
says he, a very beautiful Personage, and was altogether the braves^ and
happiest Warrior Spain has bred a long time. The Ingratitude he met with,
added to him Glory, and preserved him from those Errors he might have fallen
into in his old Age. For it rarely happens that a Man puts often to Sea without
meeting with a Tempest.
, so rare is it for a Prince's Favor to continue always The Chancellor
Chiverin says, It has been fatal to the Race of the Valois to hate those at
last, they loved most at first. Philip de Valois, the first of that Line, was
obliged to the Count d' Artois for his Crown, and afterward did all he could
to spoil him of his Possessions. Lewis XI, ruined the Duke of Burgundy, with
whom he lived six years. Lewis XII. persecuted the Marshall Gie; and Francis
I. the Duke of Bourbon, whom he had entirely loved, and the Messieurs de
Montmorency and de Biron, that had been his Favorites. Henry II. did the same
to Monsieur de Dampierre, and the Marshall de Gie, by whose Hand he would be
made a Knight; Charles IX. to Messieurs Montmorency and de Cosse. Henry III. to
the Messieurs de Lignerolles, de Bellegarde, le Guast, St, Luc. de Villequier,
Beauvais-Nangis, and above all the Messieurs de Guise, whom he loved so much in
his Youth, and all of his Council that had served him best. Dans ses Memoirs.
The same may be said almost of all Princes.
, or because both have their Satiety, those when they have given all they can,
these when they have got all they desire The Favor of Princes, (says Anthony
Perez, who knew it by Experience) rises or falls. When it can go no higher, it
necessarily falls. When Princes have no more to give, they are ashamed to see
their own want of Ability; and when Favorites have no more to ask, they
forbear their Compliances. For, according to Co^^ines, more serve in hopes of
the good Things to come, than those already received. Cap. 11. Lib. 3.
.

The Year of the City, 774.
XXXII. This Year is Memorable for having Father and Son Consuls together.
Which was the Fourth time with Tiberius, the Second with Drusus. Two years
before, Germanicus was Tiberius's Colleague, who was not very agreeable to him.
The beginning of this Year Tiberius goes for his Health to Campania Now called
Terra di Lavoro.
, where he thought to withdraw himself wholly, and by his absence leave the
Affairs of the Consulate to his Son A Prince that instructs his Son in the
Offices of Government, does as becomes a Father and a Prince; as a Father,
because he gives his Son such Education as he should have; and as a Prince,
because he does his Duty to his Subjects, in endeavoring to leave them a good
Successor. Commines blames the Emperor Frederick the Third, that his Son knew
nothing, had been ill Educated, and was utterly unacquainted with Matters of
State. Cap. 3. Lib. 6.
. And it happened a small thing causing warm Disputes gave Drusus an Occasion
of gaining great Credit From very small Things we often see great Events. The
Quarrels that happen among great Men, should never be neglected; because they
often carry them into Factions, Cabals, and Parties.
. Domitius Corbulo, who had been Praetor, complained to the Senate of L. Sylla,
a Young Nobleman, that he gave him not Place at a Play of the Gladiators. His
Age, Custom, and all the Old Men were for Corbulo; Mamercus Scaurus, L.
Arruntius, with some others, were for Sylla their Kinsman. Speeches were made
on both sides, and old Presidents cited; severely rebuking the Irreverence of
Youth It is not only good Breeding and Decency, but the Interest of a Prince
and State to have old Men respected by the Young; and particularly in the
Public Assemblies and upon Ceremonies, where the Irreverence of Youth, to
those whom Age makes Venerable, is of very dangerous consequence.
, till Drusus qualified the Matter with a proper Discourse, and Corbulo was
satisfied It concerns a Prince not to let those Offenses go unpunished, that
the young Lords at his Court commit against his Judges and Magigistrates. For
he will not be obeyed himself, but as he makes them respected that are the
Guardian of the Laws. There are every where, but more in France than any other
Country, a great Antipathy betwixt those of the Sword and the Gown; what would
become of things, if these restrained not the other?
by Scaurus, Uncle and Father-in-Law to Sylla, and the Best Orator in his time.

XXXIII. The same Corbulo complained, that through the Fraud of the Surveyors,
and Negligence of the Magistrates, the Highways were much out of Order, and
scarce Passable, and willingly accepted finishing them. Which turned not so
much to a Public Benefit, as the ruin of Particular Persons There are always
People, that have the Confidence to believe, they are capable of managing
Affairs, they understand not at all. Those that find themselves in Credit with
Princes, think themselves fit for any Employs; and upon this false Foundation
do what they can to obtain them. Yet, it is very certain, that he is able to
serve the Public in some Offices, who will ruin it in others. M. de la
Chastre said, the Bishop of Beauvais did what he could to ruin M. Chasteauneuf
with the Queen Ann of Austria, that so he might have none joined with him in
the Management of Affairs, of which he thought himself very capable. The Queen,
he goes on, could not have chose better for Fidelity, not scarce worse for
Capacity, this good Prelate having not a Head for such a Charge. Dans ses
Memoirs.
, whom he oppressed in their Estate and Credit, by condemning them, and setting
their Goods to Sale Reformation is more dangerous than the Evil to be reformed,
when it is committed to Persons have neither Abilities nor Moderation that is
requisite. Upon Complaints made against certain Reformers that ruin more than
they established, Cardinal Perron said to the Council, These have reason to
call themselves Reformers, but it is Master William 's Sense. This was a
Buffoon, who called Ruining, Reforming, Perroniana.
.

XXXIV. Not long after, Tiberius writ to the Senate, to give them notice, that
by Tacfarinas's Incursion Africa was again in Arms; and that it was necessary
for them to choose a Pro-consul, skilful in Military Affairs, and of able Body
and fit for this War. Sextus Pompeius takes this Occasion to vent his Malice
against M. Lepidus; he accused him as a Coward, Beggarly, and a Dishonor to
his Ancestors The greatest Men have at all times found Enemies, who would not
only deprive them of their Employments and Dignities, but ruin their Credit,
and endeavor to destroy the Opinion has been e^tertain'd of their eminent
Worth. M. de Montresor says, That Cardinal Richelieu in all he undertook, was
more obliged to Fortune, than the State to his Counsels and Advices. And in
another place, he adds, He never ^ound any thing in him of foresight no^ a
Great Man, but only that he was very happy, that Fortune carried him through
Difficulties more than the Prudence many would value him for. Dans ses Memoirs.
The Bishop of Beauvais said, Cardinal Mazarine was not an able Man, because he
understood not the Revenues* Memoirs de M. de la Chastre.
; and therefore not to be admitted a Candidate for the Government of Asia. The
Senators on the other side looked on Lepidus as a Moderate Man, more worthy
Praise than Blame; and his Father leaving him a small Estate, his Living
without reproach they ^udg'd a Credit, rather than Disgrace. He was therefore
sent into Asia, and for Africa, they referred the Nomination to Tiberius.

XXXV. Upon this, Severus Caecina proposed, their prohibiting Women going with
their Husbands to their Governments; Often declaring how happily he lived with
his Wife, by whom he had six Children; and that he had advised nothing for the
Public, but what he observed himself, not suffering his to go out of Italy,
though he had commanded abroad forty Years. He added, It was with very good
Reason our Ancestors forbid it, That the Company of Women was burdensome and
injurious by their Luxury in Peace, and Fear in War There is nothing more
contrary to that Application is necessary for Public Affairs, than the
Engagement of those to Women that have the Administration. As a Woman lost the
World, nothing is more capable of hurting States, than that Sex, when they have
those in their Power that govern, they make them do what seems good to them,
and consequently, what is ill. The best Thoughts of Women being always bad in
them that are guided by their Passions, which is commonly their Reason, when
Reason it self should be the only Motive to animate and actuate those that
manage public Affairs. Sect. 5. du c. 8. de la premier Party du Testament
Politic du Cardinal de Richelieu.
; and made a Roman Army like the Barbarians going to War The Latin is, ad
similitudinem barbari incessus, because it was the Custom of Barbarous Nations
to carry their Wives with them to the Wars, as Tacitus remarks, Ann. 4.
Adsistentes plerisque matres and conjuges. Ann. 14. Britta^^orum copiae animo
adeo fero, ^ut conjuges quoque testes victoriae secum traherent. And in his
account of Germany. Feminarum ululatus audiri, vagitus infantium. Hi ^uique
sanctissimi testes, etc.
. That Sex was not only weak and unable to Labor, but they got the Ascendant,
Cruel, Ambitious, and Arbitrary. That Women have lately been seen to march
among the Soldiers, and commanding the Centurio^s, were present at their
Musters and Exercises. That they should consider when any have been charged
with Corruption, much was objected to their Wives. That the greatest Villains
in the Provinces have applied to them, who have undertaken and transacted their
Affairs. From hence it is, two are courted and two Judgment Seats. That
formerly they were restrained by the Oppian Laws, but have broke through those
Ties, they govern not only their Families, but the Courts of Justice and the
Armies Since Interest is that commonly makes Men behave themselves ill in
Office, Ecclesiastics are generally preferable to others, says Cardinal
Richelieu; not as being less subject to Interest, but as having neither Wives
nor Children, are free from those Ties engage others. Chap. 7. de la second
party du Testament Politic.
.

XXXVI. Few agreed with him, many interrupted It Is always dangerous speaking of
Reformation, for there are ever more that fear, than desire it. Cardinal
Richelieu declared he durst never begin a Reformation of the King's House,
because he could never do it, without encountering the Interest of many that
were constantly near the King, and in that Familiarity with him, they would
dissuade him from what was most necessary in the State, to prevent the
Regulations of his Family, that would be very profitable to him. Chap. 7. de la
premier party du meme Testament.
; saying, That was not the Matter before them Because not proposed by the
Consuls, nor the Prince, to whom it belonged to propose Matters that were to be
considered, and therefore what C^cina offered was not to the purpose; and he
was not considerable enough himself to undertake a Reform of Pro-consuls, and
other great Magistrates that went to govern the Provinces. yet Tacitus says in
two places of his second Book, that it was allowed them to quit their Subject
they were upon, when they had any thing to offer more important to the Public;
and that was commonly practiced by the Senators. Erat quippe adhuc frequens
senatoribus, si quid e rep. crederent, loco sententiae promere. And three Pages
after. A majoribus concessum est egredi aliquando relationem, and quod in
commune conducat loco sententiae proferre.
, and Caecina not a Censor of weight enough for such an Affair. And Valerius
Messalinus, Mess^la 's Son Messala Corvinus, of whom Quintilian says, Cicerone
mi^ior and dulcior, and in verbis magis elaboratu^* Di^logo de Oratoribus*
, who had much of his Eloquence, replied, Many hard Customs of their Ancestors
There are things Convenient and Necessary at one time, that may be Pernicious
at another. Those that have the Government of States, whether Princes or
Ministers, should accommodate themselves to the Present, which commonly has no
agreement with the Past. All Politicians agree in this. Machiavel says, That
the Occasion of every Man's good or bad Fortune, consists in his correspondence
and accommodation with the Times. Which is the Reason why a Prince's Fortune
varies so strangely, because she varies the Times, and he does not alter the
way of his Administration. Chap. 9. l. 3. of his Discourse. The Duke of Rohan
says almost the same thing in his Epistle before his Interest des Princes,
Dedicated to Cardinal Richelieu. That there is no immutable Rule in the
Government of States. Upon Revolutions in States, a Change even in Fundamental
Maxims is necessary to govern well. Therefore those that in these Matters
observe more Examples of what is past, than present Reasons, necessarily commit
great Errors.
* had been changed for others better and more agreeable. That the City was not
besieged as formerly, nor the Provinces in Arms, and some Regard should be had
to the Satisfaction of the Women, who are so far from being troublesome to the
Allies, they are not so to their Husbands. They share with them in all
Conditions, and are no inconvenience in time of Peace. It Is true, we should go
to the Wars without Encumbrances, but when we return, what Comfort more
Commendable than that a Man enjoys with his Wife? It Is said, some Women have
been Ambitio^s and Covetous. What shall we say of the Magistrates themselves,
most of them have their Failings; will you therefore send none to the
Provinces? But the Wives have corrupted their Husbands; are therefore single
Men incorrupt If Pilate had taken his Wife Claudia Procula's Counsel, who sent
a Message to him to the Iudgment-Hall to have a Care how he condemned the
Innocent. His Wife sent unto him saying, Have thou nothing to do with that Just
Man. Matt. 27. He had never given up Jesus Christ to the Jews. If there were
many such Wives, as this Procula, it were to be wished all the Governors of
Provinces would carry their Wives along with them.
? The Oppian Laws were once in force, the State of the Commonwealth requiring
them; but after, their Rigor was moderated, because that was judged Expedient
When a Government is first framed, it is reasonable to make the most perfect
Laws Humane Society is capable of; but Prudence admits not the same is an
ancient Monarchy, where Imperfections are grown Customary, and where some
Disorders are made a Part of the State. In which Case we must submit to such
Infirmities, and be content rather with a moderate Rule, than to establish one
more severe and less agreeable, because the Severity of it may give
Disturbance. Sect. 1. Chap. 4. de la premiere Party du Testa. Polit.
. It Is in vain to cover our own Miscarriages with other Names; for if the Wife
does amiss, it is the H^sband's It Is in vain, says Abla^court, we cover our own
Faults with other Names, and that Women's Failings are often owing to their
Husbands.
Fault The foolish Vanity of Husbands that encourage their Wives in
extravagance of Clothes, is the first Occasion of their Faults. Those who
maintain the same, when they find their Allowances not sufficient, are glad to
make use of a Lover's Purse. This is the Fact, and you may see who is to blame.
. Besides, for the Failings of one or two, it is not reasonable to deprive all
Husbands these shares in their Prosperity and Adversity; and to leave a Sex
naturally weak, exposed to their own Wanton Desires, and the Lusts of others If
Extravagance was laid aside, it would not be difficult to remedy the Vices of
Women. For as they are more given to Vanity than Love, and the greatest part
love Men only as they supply their Vanity and Ambition, if Extravagance, which
is the Incentive, was once gone, it is certain their Disorders would cease too,
and Chastity and Modesty succeed them. But the general Depravation of Manners
gives us no room to hope for so great a good.
. For if their Husbands presence is scarce sufficient to keep them Virtuous,
what shall become of them when an Absence of many Years separates like a
Divorce? We should take care of the Disorders abroad, and not forget those may
happen at home. Drusus added something of his own Marriage; and that Princes
often visit the remotest Provinces. That Augustus had several times carried
Livia with him to the East and West A Prince can offer nothing better to
justify himself, than the Example of a Predecessor, universally approved.
; That he had been in S^lavonia, and was ready to go into other Countries, if
necessary, but should do it with reluctance, if he was to be separated from his
dear Wife When Princes are young, and undertake long Voyages, they can have no
better Company than their Wives, who may prevent their falling into Debauches,
if they have Beauty and Complaisance. For without those advantages, it is
impossible they should have Power enough over their Husbands to restrain the
Natural Inclination to Voluptuousness.
and Children. So Caecina 's Advice took no Effect A Prince need only give his
Opinion, for that is generally followed by those that sit in Council with him.
.

XXXVII. At the next Meeting of the Senate, Tiberius's Letters were read, which
gently reproved their casting all the Cares of the Government Princes Hearts
and Tongues seldom agree, when you hear them speak you would think they were
very Modest; but when you see what they do it is always the contrary. Tiberius
complained the Senate should leave it to him to name the Pro-consul of Africa,
and yet accepted what he seemed to refuse. He offered two to them, to leave a
Liberty of Choice, but in effect they had no Choice, since he proposed
Sejanus's Uncle for one, whose Fortune they worshipped.
upon him, nominated M. Lepidus and Iunius Blaesus, one of them to be chosen
Pro-consul of Africa. Both were heard, Lepidus earnestly excused himself A good
Courtier will avoid a Competition with the Relations of a Favorite or Chief
Minister. On such Occasions there is more Safety and more Honor to give way
than to be a Competitor.
for want of Health, his Childrens Age, and a Daughter he had to marry;
considering too, that Blaesus was Sejanus's Uncle, and therefore sure to carry
it Whatever Merit a Pretender may have, he ought never to flatter himself that
he shall prevail against a Comperitor that has the Prince's Favor, or the
first Minister's. There is almost the same Difference betwixt Merit and Favor,
as the Divines make betwixt Sufficient and Effectual Grace. The Duke d'Alva had
Merit, and the Prince d'Eboli Favor, in the year 1558. both asked for the
Duchy of Bais in the Kingdom of Naples, from whence the Duke drove out the
French Army. This Service was fresh, and many former Services spoke for the
Duke; but the Competition of the Prince d'Eboli hindered Philip II. giving this
Recompense to one to whom he and his Father had so much Obligation. So true is
the Maxim of Lewis XI. That a Prince naturally loves those more that are
obliged to him, than those to whom he is obliged. Commines, Chap. dernier du
Livre 3. de ses Memoires. Yet it is an ill Omen for a Prince when he that is
most considerable for his Merit, is not also most considerable in Favor. Merit
ought to balance, and when Justice is on one side, Favor cannot prevail
without Injustice. Chap. 7. de la second Party du Testament Politic
. Blaesus seemed to refuse too, but less earnestly; and was heard favorably by
the Flatterers.

XXXVIII. Then many secret Complaints were made, for every Villain that could
lay hold on Caes^r's Image, might freely reproach honest men A Prince should
never let any Man make use of his Name or Authority to do Injustice. Lewis XI.
says Commines, opp^ess'd his Subjects, but would never suffer any Favorite or
other Person to do it. Sixtus Quintus sent Bellochio, his Gentleman and old
Servant, to the Galleys, for setting the Annulus Piscatoris to a Brief he would
not grant. (It was a Brief that commanded one to sell Bellochio's House, who
had a Mind to build a stately Palace there.) Leti libro 3. della Seconda Part
della vita di Sisto.
, and raise Envy against them. Even Freed-Men and Slaves were feared* insulting
their Masters Pliny the younger speaks of this Misfortu^e of Masters, when he
say^ to Trajan; You have delivered us from Domestic (...), and have (...) last
extinguished, (as I may call it) B^llum S^^vile. Philostratus mentions a Master
that was Condemned as Impious and Sacrilegious for (...) his Slave, who had a
piece of Silver with (...) Image upon it. (...) Vie d'Apollonius.
and Patrons with Words and Blows. Therefore C. Sestius, a Senator, spoke to
this Effect, That indeed Princes were like Gods, but the Gods heard only just
Prayers, That neither the Capitol nor Temples of the City were a Refuge to any
for their Crimes Sanctuaries were instituted for those who desire the help of
the Law, but not for such as make it their Business to injure others.
. There was an end of the Laws, if Anna Rufilla, whom he Condemned for Fraud,
might threaten and reproach him before the Senate and in public and not be
questioned for it, because she had Caesar's Image before her Suetonius says*
The Senate forbid their laying hold on the Stat^es and Images* Condemning those
to the Mines that should do so to injure other^* Da^s la Vie de Tibere, Chap.
37.
. Others delivered themselves to the same purpose, but some with warmth,
beseeching Drusus to inflict some exemplary punishment on her, so she was
called for, Convicted and Condemned to Prison.

XXXIX. At Drusus's Request, Considuus Aequus, and Celius Cursor, two Roman
Knights, were condemned by the Senate for falsely accusing Magius Cecilianus,
the Praetor, of High Treason. These Matters were to Drusus's Honor A Prince
cannot gain himself more Love and Respect than by speedy Justice. There cannot
be a better Action than that of John III. of Portugal, who being before the
Altar to Communicate, a Gentleman coming in, cried out aloud to the Priest that
held the Host, to d^fer the Communion till the King had heard him, and done him
Justice, and this good Prince did not Communicate till he had done it. See the
Treatise, Entitled, Audiencia de Principes.
, for by his means Conversation was made free and safe, and his Father's secret
Designs qualified. They found no Fault with his Riots, thinking it better for
one of his Age to spend the Day in the public Shows It is in Latin,
Aedi^^cationibus, but the Commentators think it ought ra^^er to be, Editionibus.
, and the Night in Revels, than to live Solitary Solitudo does Princes no good,
especially when they are young. It only makes them cruel, ^antastical,
untractable, and averse to those Duties that belong to Sovereig^ty. I cannot
give here a better instance of the mischief of Solitude in the Education of
Princes, than that of John II. King of Castile, according to the Description of
the judicious Mariana. All the Virtues of this king, says he, were obscured by
the little care he took of his Affairs and the Government. He gave no Audience
willingly, nor never any but in haste. He had no great Capacity, nor a Head fit
for Affairs of State. That brought his Courtiers into Favor, and particularly
Alvaro de Luna, who began to be more familiar with him than all the rest. Queen
Catherine his Mother had good Reason to drive this Favorite from Court, and
send him back into his own Country; but s^ewed little Wisdom in keeping her son
shut up in a House for six years together, without suffering him to go out, or
any Person to visit him, besides some Domestics of the Court. Whereby she
pretended to prevent the Grandees making themselves Masters of him, and
Innovations in the Kingdom. A mis^rable Education for a King! an unworthy
thing, not to allow a Prince liberty to speak, to see, or be seen; but to keep
him in a Cage to make him cruel and violent, and to mew him up that was born
for Labor, and the Fatigues of War. Why would she soften and emasculate his
Courage, who ought to be day and night on his guard, and watch over all the
Parts of his State? Certainly such an Education will bring great Mischiefs upon
the Subjects of any Kingdom. For the Prince's manly Age will be like his
Infancy; he will pass the best of his Days in dishonorable Pleasures and
Idleness, as John II. did. For after the Death of Queen Catherine, his Carriage
was always like a Child, and as if he had never seen Light. The multitude of
Affairs troubled him and perplexed his Head. Therefore he was always governed
by his Courtier^ to the great prejudice of his States, which were in perpetual
Commotions. Mariana, says too, he was subject to Startings, which would take
him all of a sudden, and his Caresses were all out of Season, so that he was
more despised than feared, Chap. 11. du 20. live. de son Hist. d'Esp. The Life
Henry III. of France led after his Minions had persuaded him, not to appear any
more to his Subjects, but to be shut up from them, like the Kings of the East,
had the same Effects. His Desires, says the Chancellor Chivergny, showed his
Judgment was not as it used to be, that he was too much locked up and involved
in other Pleasure, his Minions had engaged him. And I shall take the liberty to
say, that foreseeing long before his Death, 4 years at least, how impossible it
was for him not to fall into some great Misfortune. I often laid before him the
great Injury he did himself, and the Evil he and his State would undoubtedly
receive. Da^s ses Memoires.
without Pleasures A Prince should have some Relaxation from his serious
Affairs, and after he has been at the Head of his Army. It is not possible the
Soul should be always bent to grave and painful Administrations, without any
Refreshment, or the Diversion of other more agreeable Thoughts. Titus, who is
recommended for one of the wisest Princes ever governed, was desperately in
love with Berenice, but his Love never hindered his Business. Harangue de M.
d'Aubray dans la Satyr Menipp^e.
, and to let Melancholy prevail upon him and draw him into ill Practices and
Devices. For Tiberius, and the Informers gave disquiet enough. Ancarius Priscus
accused Cesius Cordus, Proconsul of Crete, of Extortion, and of Treason too, a
Supplement in all Accusations When all Crimes are turned to Treason, it is a
certain sign of a Tyrannical Government, and that a Prince sacrifices Justice
to his Interest.
.

XL. Tiberius displeased with the Judges for acquitting Antistius Verus, one of
the chief Lords of Macedonia of Adultery, sent for him to Rome to answer for
Treason When a Prince sets up new Accusations against a great Man, that the
Judges acquit of what he is charged with, it is plain he resolves to destroy him.
, as an Accomplice with Rescuporis in his Designs of making War upon us, when
he had slain his Brother Cotis. He was Banished Aqu^ and ignis interdictio, was
the Phrase used in Banishment, which was not a Punishment immediately, but by
consequence. For the forbidding the use of Water and Fire, which were necessary
for Life, the Condemned Person was obliged to leave his Country.
into an Island The less Evidence there is against a man, the more severely is
be treated, if it be for Treason: Mathematical Demonstrations of Conspiracies
and Cabals, says Cardinal Ric^lieu, are not to be expected; those are not to be
met with till the Event, that is, not till they are past Remedy. Tome 5. des
Memoires de son Ministre. And consequently what appears by strong Conjectures,
should sometimes be thought sufficiently proved. Chap. 5. de la second party
du Testament Politic.
that had no Commerce either with Macedonia or Thrace If a great Man is potent
in a Frontier Country, and behaves himself so, as to give cause to suspect his
corresponding with the Neighboring Princes, the Prince is in the Right to
secure his Person, either by calling him to Court, or arresting him there if he
comes not out. And though there be not sufficient Evidence against him, yet there
is no Injustice done him in preventing his return, for it is not reasonable
Princes should live in Fear and Uneasiness for any Subject, nor that the
Interest of a particular Person should be considered more than the public
Safety.
. For since Thrace was divided betwixt Rhemetalces and Cotis's Children, to
whom Trebellienus Rufus was Tutor, by reason of their Infancy, being not
accustomed It is absolutely necessary a Governor should know the Customs, Laws,
and Manners of the Count^y where he is sent; otherwise he will commit a
thousand Errors that will make him be hated or despised, which will be in
prejudice of his Prince's Authority. Cardinal Richlieu says, in the first
Chapter of his Testament Politic, that he was forced to put the Marshal de
Vitry out of the Government of Provence, though his Courage and Fidelity made him
very ^it for it, because being of an insolent haughty Temper, he was not proper
to govern a People jealous of their Liberties and Privileges, as the
Provensals are. And in Arragon, they pretend the King of Spain cannot give them
a Stranger for their Viceroy, that is, one that is no Native, without breaking
the Laws. So they call their Liberties and Immunities, in Defense whereof all
the Kingdom rose for Antonio Perez against Philip II. (1591.)
to our Government* the People were full of Discontents, and complained of
Rhematalces and Trebellienus, that they never punished the Oppressions of the
Country A Governor that suffers the People to be insulted by Strangers, whether
he can remedy it, or not, may however be assured, that upon the first occasion
they will Rebel against him.
. The Celaletes, Odrusians, and other Potent People of Thrace, took Arms under
diverse Captains, but for want of Experience The Event of Rebellions is almost
always unfortunate, because of the Incapaci^y of those that Command. For on
such occasions, the People, who know not what is ^itting for that time,
commonly take him for their Captain who first offers.
, came not to any formidable War. Some wasted the Country, others passed the
Mountain Haemus a Mountain of Thrace, continually cold, at the foot whereof are
the pleasant Fields of Thessaly.
, to raise those lived remote, others Besieged Rhemetalces, and the City of
Philippopoli, built by Philip of Macedonia.

XLI. Velleius He writ an Epitome of the Roman History, in very elegant Latin,
but ^ull of gross Flattery.
, that Commanded an Army near The Army in Missia.
, having advice of these Disorders, sent some Horse and light Footmen against
those pillaged the Country, or got Recruits, while he went himself to raise the
Siege. All ended prosperously, the Foragers were slain, and a Dissension
arising among the Besiegers, Rhemetalces made a seasonable Sally upon the
arrival of the Legions. This deserved not the name of an Army A good and
faithful Historian should relate things plainly, and without Aggravation. If
Truth be the life of History, those that write ought carefully to avoid
Aggravation, which has always a mixture of Lying. C^mmines, speaking of the
Battle of Morat, where the Duke of Burgundy was beat by the Swissers, says,
Many talked of Millions, and reported they know not what, making Armies five
times greater than they are. This is a Fault very common with the greatest part
of modern Historians.
, or Battle, in which a few unarmed Men were defeated, without any Bloodshed
on our side.

XLII. The same year the Cities of Gallia began to Rebel, by reason of the
excessive Debts they had contracted. The Incendiaries were Julius Florus and
Julius Sacrovir, both nobly descended, whose Ancestors, for their great
Services, were made Citizens of Rome, an Honor at that time rare, and only a
reward for Virtue Those Honors that are rarely conferred, and only upon
Persons of extraordinary Merit, are great Rewards to those that have them. M.
de Marquemont, Archbishop of Lions, speaking of the Prince of Poland's arrival
at Rome, and the Difficulties they were under how to treat him, says, he
received no public Honors, but though^ himself well recompensed in being made
a Canon of St. Peter, and to be allowed in the Habit of a Canon to show the
Holy Relics of that Church, which was never done by any but Charles V. and
another Emperor. Dans une lettre du 5 Ianvier 1625. Tome 1. des Mem. du
M^nistere du Card. de Rich.
. By Conferences they gained those whose Poverty or Crimes had made desperate.
Florus was to raise the Low-Countrymen, and Sacrovir the French. In their
Meetings they talked Seditiously of their Taxes, the Excess of Usury They were
(...) to borrow Money of the Roman Bankers to pay their heavy Taxes, which
ruined them with Us^ry.
, the Pride and Cruelty of their Governors, and that since Germanicus's Death,
there were great Discontents in the Army. And that if they considered the
Strength of the French, the Poverty of Italy; the weakness of the People of
Rome, who understood nothing of War, and that the Strength of our Armies
consisted of Foreign Troops, they would see this was a proper time to recover
their Liberty.

XLIII. There was scarce a City free from this Contagion, but Tours and Angiers
revolted first. The latter was reduced to its Duty by Lieutenant Acilius
Aviola, who marched speedily thither with some of the Garrison of Lions. And
those of Tours by those Forces Visellius Varro, Lieutenant of Lower Germany
sent Aviola, with the Succors he had from some of the great Men of France, who
waited a more favorable opportunity to Rebel themselves. Sacrovir fought
bareheaded, as he said, to show his Courage, but the Prisoners said, he did it
to be better known, and that the Romans might not draw upon him.

XLIV. When Tiberius was consulted upon this Rebellion, he slighted the
Discovery, but ^omented the War by Irresolution The want of Resolution in
Princes, says Antonio Perez, begets many Inconveniences. Dans ses R^lations. In
great Affairs, says Cardinal d'Ossat, for avoiding a great Evil and obtaining
great Good, something must be attempted, and a Resolution taken to get out of
ill Circumstances the soonest and best that may be. Lettre 127. Charles
Colonna, an able Man both in Government and War, has given a good reason for
it. Wavering in Counsels, says he, has never been found good, and whatever
probability there may be that time will ^urnish better Expedients, yet it is
safer to resolve to master the present Difficulties, than to expect they will
cease, for we know not nor can certainly, but greater may happen. Livre 8. d^
son Histoire (...) Guerres d^ Flandres.
. For Florus pursuing his Designs, labored to corrupt a Regiment of Horse,
raised at Treves, and used to our Discipline, inciting them to begin the War
with destroying the Roman Merchants there: A few only were gained, most
continued in their Duty. Other Bankrupt Men, and some of his Dependants took
Arms, and would have thrown themselves into the Forest of Arden, but the
Legions from both Armies They were encamped upon the Rhine, Duo apud ripam
Rheni exercitus erant; cui nomen superi^ri, sub C. Silio leg^to; in^eriorem A.
^^cina cura^^t. Ann. 1.
, which Ursellius and C. Silius sent, prevented them. And Julius Indus being
sent before with a Detachment, glad of an occasion to show himself against
Florus, his Countryman and particular Enemy Great Men often revenge the
Injuries done to a Prince or State, out of Malice to the Offenders. Cardinal
Richlieu had reason to say, Such Men did good upon an ill Principle. When a
great Man Rebels in a Province, a Prince cannot do better, than to give another
great Man of the same Province, who has been his Rival and Enemy, a Commission
against him.
, defeated the disordered multitude. Florus escaped by sculking in diverse
places, but finding all Passages stopped, and that he was like to be taken,
killed himself. And thus ended the Rebellion at Treves.

XLV. That at Angiers was greater, because that City was more populous, and the
Army distant. Sacrovir made himself Master of this City, where all the Youth of
France studied to oblige their Relations and Friends to him by such Pledges,
and distributed Arms among them. His Troops consisted of near Forty thousand
Men, a Fifth Part were armed as the Legions, the rest with Hunting-staves,
Hangers, and such other Arms as Huntsmen carry. These were joined by some
Fencers, covered over with Armor of Iron, they were called Crupellarii,
(Cuirassiers) unfit to assault, and impenetrable. The Forces daily augmented by
a Confluence from the Neighboring Cities, not that they declared for them, but
all longed for Liberty. To which contributed the Dissentions of the Roman
Generals There is not a better Opportunity to revolt, than when there are
Dissen^ions, and consequently Disorder in the Armies of a Prince, whose
Authority you would shake off. So a Prince that has discontented Subjects
ought at any rate to prevent a Mis^nderstanding among his Generals* For when he
is (...) served by them (as ever happens, when they differ) he is exposed to
the Practices of his Enemi^s.
; both coveting to command the Army. But Visellius being Old, yielded to Silius
who was in his Prime Health of Body is almost as necessary to a Gen^^al, as a
Capacity of Mind; for it is an Employ will exercise both. According to Ca^dinal
Richelieu, a General to be Excellent, should be young in Years, but not in
Service and Experience. And though those that are Old are commonly the Wisest,
yet they are not the Best to undertake, because they often want the heat of
Youth, that is requisite on such Occasions Besides, that it is certain, Fortune
smiles upon Youth, and turns her back upon Old Age. Section 4. du Chap. 9, de
la second party du Testament Politic.
.

XLVI. In the mean time, it was reported at Rome, that besides Tours and
Argiers, 64 Cities had rebelled, that the Germans had joined them, that Spain
was wavering, all (as the Manner of Report is) made much greater than they
were. Every good Man was concerned for the Commonwealth; many out of Hatred to
the Present Government, desired a Change The Great Men in a Kingdom, governed
by such a Prince as Tiberius, that is, by a Prince, that will endure no
Companion, are apt to desire he may have Troubles and Wars, either to make them
the more necessary, or to have the Pleasure of seeing him perplexed and his
Affairs in an ill Condition. The Count S. Paul, Constable of France, says
Commines, and certain of the Duke of Gui^n's Servants, with several others,
desired rather War than Peace, betwixt the King and the Duke of Burgundy, for
two Reasons, the one because they feared their great Offices and Pensions would
be lessened, if Peace con^inu'd, for the Constable paid four hundred Men every
Muster without control; and besides the Profits of his Office, abo^e thirty
thousand Livres a year in Pension, and the Revenues of many good Places he
held; the other was because they were persuaded the King was of such a
Disposition he could never be idle, so that unless he was busied with Princes
abroad, he would be with his Servants and Officers at home. The Constable
offered to take Saint-Quintin when he pleased, and boasted of Intelligence in
Flanders and Brabant, and that he could make many Towns revolt from the Duke.
The Duke of Guien and his principal Servants* offered to serve the King in this
Quarrel; but their Design was other than the King expected, Chap. 1. du Livre
1. de ses Memoires. Claudian explains in three Words, Why great Men hate Peace.
-- Mandataque fortius urget
Imperiosa quies.

, and rejoiced in their Dangers. Blaming Tiberius for employing himself in
reading Informers Accusations when there was so great Commotions. What, said
they, have the Senate found Julius Sacrovir guilty of Treason? Some have had
the Courage to suppress by Arms the Bloody Libels That is the Secret Orders a
Prince gives to his Centurions and Soldiers, to Murder Men in their Houses,
that they suspect. They are called in other Places, his Letters, his Codicils,
and the Execution of his Orders. Ministeria militum. Ann. 1.
of a Tyrant; War is a good Change for a Miserable Peace. But he neither
changed Place nor Countenance Able Princes little regard the Censures of the
People, it satisfies them to arrive at their End, which is the good of the
State. Pope Urban VIII. used to say he would willingly sacrifice his Reputation
to the Good of the Public, and to Peace, provided he could any way obtain it,
repeating St. Paul's words, per gloriam and ignobilitatem, per (...) and bonam
famam. Lettres de M. de Marquemont, Ambassadeur a Rome dans le 1. Tome des
Memoires du Cardinal de Richelieu.
; affecting to show he was not afraid, either through Courage, or that he knew
things to be less than they were reported.

XLVII. Silius marched with two Legions, having sent some Auxiliary Troops
before; he laid waste the Towns in the Franche Comte, which joined to the
Anjovins, and were their Confederates. Then marched speedily to Autun Autun, an
ancient City in the Duchy of Burgundy; in Latin August^d^num, and Hed^^.
, the Standard-Bearers striving who should make most haste; the Common Soldiers
said they would march Night and Day, and if they could but see the Enemy, would
answer for Victory When Soldiers have a great desire to fight, a General should
not let it cool, for it is almost always a Presage of Victory.
. Twelve miles from the City, Sacrovir appeared with his Troops in the open
Field, drawn up in a Line of Battle. The Cuirassiers in the Front, his own
Troops in the Wings, and those that were ill-arm'd in the Rear. Among the
Principal Officers Sacrovir was on Horseback, riding through their Ranks;
Magnifying the Exploits of the Gauls, and how often they had beat the Romans;
laying before them how honorable their Liberty would be if they were
Conque^ors, and how insupportable their Slavery, if Conquered Those that fall
into the hands of their Prince against whom they have rebelled, should expect
to be treated with extreme Rigor. Which makes Princes for ever lose those
States, they might recover, if the Rebels despaired not of a sincere Pardon.
Which made the Hollanders persevere in their Resolution rather to drown
themselves and their Country in the Sea, than be Subject again to Philip II.
concluding what his Resentment would be from the Cruelty of the Duke d'Alva his
Minister.
.

XLVIII. His Harangue was not long Short Harang^es are best for Soldiers, who
can give no long attention, nor weigh the Reasons are urged. Nothing makes
greater Impression upon them, than this Imperatoria Brevitas, whereby they
retain all that is said to them. Such was the Speech of Hen. IV. of France, one
day when he was going to give Battle; I am King, says he, and yo^ are
Frenchmen, and you cannot th^^ but Conquer.
, nor pleasing; for the Legions drew near in Battle Array, and the Citizens and
the Peasants unskilled in War, could neither see nor understand what they were
to do. On the contrary, though Silius might have spared his pains, through the
Assurance he had of his Men, yet told them: That it was a shame for them who
had conquered the G^rmans, to be brought against the French, as if they were
their Equals. One band lately reduced the Rebels of Tours; a few Troops of
Horse, those of Treves; a small Number of theirs, those of the Franche Comt^.
These of Autun are richer, but weaker, and more enervate with Pleasures.
Conquer them then, and look after those that fly. The Army answered with
Acclamations, and at the same time the Horse compassed the Enemy, and the Foot
engaged their Front. The Wings made little Resistance, except the Cuirassiers,
whose Armor was Proof against the Swords and Arrows, which obliged our
Soldiers to fall on with their Axes and Hatchets, as if they were to make a
Breach in a Wall. Some knocked them down with Poles and Forks, and these Poor
Men, unable to help themselves There ar^ no worse Arms than those a Man cannot
stir in. Saul having armed David with his Armor, he put an Helmet of Brass on
his Head, put on his Coat of Mail, and girded his Sword upon his Armor; but
when David had tried these Arms, that they were too heavy for him, he said unto
Saul, He could not go with them, and took only his staff in his hand, and five
smooth stones h^ had chose out of the Bro^k and put in his Scrip, to conquer
Goliath, 1. Sam. 17.
, were left for Dead on the Ground. Sacrovir retires first to Autun, then for
fear he should be delivered to the Romans, goes with a few of his trustiest
Friends to the next Village; where he killed himself, and the rest one another,
having first set fire to the Place, that they might be burnt.

XLIX. Then Tiberius writ the Senate an Account of the Beginning and Ending of
the War; neither adding nor lessening the Truth; ascribing the good Success to
the Courage and Fidelity of his Lieutenants, and his Counsels. And gave Reasons
why neither He nor Drusus went to the War, magnifying the Greatness of the
Empire; and that it was not fitting for Princes to leave Rome which governs the
rest, for the Rebellion of one or two Cities. But now, that the State had no
longer cause to fear any thing, he would go and settle that Province. The
Senate decreed Vows and Supplications for his Return, with other Honors.
Cornelius Dolabella, when he endeavored to exceed others, fell into an absurd
Flattery, proposing Tiberius should return in Triumph from Campania. Upon which
he writ to them, that after he had conquered warlike Nations, and received or
refused so many Triumphs in his Youth, he wanted not Glory so much as to accept
vain Honors When Princes have acquired a solid Reputation, they despise false
Honors, because their Glory needs it not; and what their Flatterers give them,
serves only to blemish the Good Opinion of their true Merit. Therefore
Alexander threw into the River Hydaspes the History of the Victory he gained of
Porus, telling the Author, when he read it to him, it was very rash in him to
insert false Exploits; as if Alexander had not true ones sufficient to
recommend him without Lying. Prusias King of Bithynia, was despised by the
Senate of Rome, for desiring an Harangue full of Flattery, upon a Victory the
Romans gained in Macedonia.
in his old Age, for taking the Air near Rome.

L. About the same time he desired the Senate, Sulpicius Quirinus There is no
Kindness more sincere than that Princes show after the Death of those Ministers
who have served them well. The Portuguese accuse Philip II. of Ingratitude,
because he did not forbear, (according to the Custom of their Kings on the like
Occasions) appearing in Public, that Day the Duke d'Alva died that conquered
the Kingdom of Portugal for him. And Henry IV. was commended by all the Court
of Rome, and all the Princes of Italy, for celebrating the Obsequies of
Cardinal Toledo in the Church of Nostre D^me in Paris, and of Nostre Dame in
Rouen, he having chiefly promoted his Absolution. And it is a wonderful thing,
says the Wise Cardinal d'Ossat, that out of Spain, from whence came all the
Opposition to so good a Work, God should raise a Person of so great Authority
to Procure, Solicit, Direct, Advance and Perfect, what the Spaniards most
deprecated. Letters 24, and 80.
might have public Funerals. He was not of the Noble and ancient Family of the
Sulpicii, but born at a Free City In Latin it is rendered Municipium.
called Indovina; and having served Augustus well in the Wars The Latin has it,
impiger militia, and acribus ministeriis.
, was honored with the Consulate, and after, with a Triumph for taking the
Castles of the Homonadenses in Cilicia. Then being Governor to C. Caesar in
Armenia, he made his Court to Tiberius at Rhodes, To be heartily loved by
Princes we should court their Friendship in their private Condition, or when
persecuted by their Predecessors. The Friendship of particular Persons is never
acquired but by time, with greater reason then, that of Princes should be
acquired with long Services. They have little value for those that come to
them, when they are in their Thrones, because they are commonly such as make
Court rather to their For^une than Person, and look upon their Reward as near;
when those that adhere to them in the time of their Rivals and Enemies, as
Quirinus did to Tiberius while C. Caesar was alive, and next Heir to the
Empire, have full Right to a Prince's Favor, who con^ide^s them as
disinherited Friends. So the Duke of Beaufort, at his return from England, was
the Favorite of Queen Ann of Spain, who not only spoke of him with all marks
of Esteem; and commanded her Creatures to have a Friendship for him; but when
the Physicians one day thought Lewis XIII. dying, chose him to be Governor of
the Dauphine and Monsieur. A Trust that showed sufficiently to what Honors and
Dignities he was destined, if he had known how to manage his Fortune. Memoires
de la Chastre. Henry IV. of France never le^t asking the Promotion of the Sieur
Sera^in to be a Cardinal, till he obtained it, because this Prelate (he was
Auditor of the Ro^a above 30 Years) was always for him and his Crown, in the
most difficult and dangerous Times. So says Cardinal d'Ossat. Dans sa Letre 61.
, which Tiberius opened to the Senate, commending his Dutifulness, and accused
Lollius Patercul^s says so of Lollius, That he was a Man that more desired to
grow rich, than to live well, and with all the Care he took to conceal his
Vice. Yet he was, and also appeared to be very vicious. Cap. 97, du Livre 2. de
son ^pitome. And in the 102 Chap. ^^e adds, Augus^us chose Lollius to be C.
Ceas^r's Governor. Quem moderator^m juv^n^ae filii sui Augustus esse voluerat*
as the Author of C. Caesar's An ill Governor or Tutor is very dangerous for a
Young Prince. Testa recen^ imbuta diu servabit odor^m. Plato says, That Kings
should have four Masters or Governors for their Children, to teach them the
four Virtues necessary for those that Reign. The first teaches them Prudence,
the Second Justice, the Third Temperance, and to despise Pleasures, the Last,
the Art of War, and sets Examples before them of the Courage and Constancy of
their Glorious Ancestors. Dans son premier Al^ibiade. Paul Emilius says, that
Giles Romain, Archbishop of Bourges, exhorted King Philip the Fair* in that to
imitate the Kings of Persia* Livre 8. de son Histoire de France.
Sedition and Lewdness. But his Memory was not very agreeable to the Senate,
because he accused Lepida, and was sordid and insolent in his Old Age.

LI. The end of this Year C. Lutorius Priscus, a Roman Knight, who had composed
an Excellent Elegy on Germanicus, and received a Reward from the Emperor for
it, was accused for making it for Drusus when he was sick, in hopes of a
greater Gratuity if he had died There is nothing more disagreeable to Princes,
than what puts them in mind of their Death. In whatever Condition they are they
would not be told they shall die. When Lewis XI. answered those that told him,
he was a Dead Man, It may be I am not so bad as you think me. He showed That
those who took upon them this Commission, did him a piece of Service he should
not thank them for, if he recovered. It seems, the late King, who was much a
better Prince than Lewis XI. was displeased with the Credulity of the Queen,
and would have her hold a Council, as she had done the day before by his Order,
and made her go out of his Chamber, as he was Departing. So easily do Princes
^latter themselves with hopes o^ long Life. So M. de Chiverny acted very
wisely, when he refused to assist at a Consultation of Physicians upon Charles
IX. because belonging to the King of Poland* his Brother and Law^ul Successor,
he would have been looked upon at that Meeting, as one that de^ir'd the King's
Death, and the Accession of his Master to the Crown. Dans ses Memoires. If
Lutonius did ill in making an Elegy upon Drusus's Death, which he thought
certain, these are no l^ss Criminal, that make Funeral Orations upon Princes in
their perfect Health, to be early enough with them when they die, and to get
the Reputation of great Orators; persuading the World they have made a
Discourse in five or six days, which sometimes has cost them more years.
However, these People show their Vanity more than their Eloquence.
. C. Lutorius was so vain as to read it in P. Petronius's House to several
Noble Ladies. And when the Informer cited them to give Testimony, only Vitellia
denied she heard it read; but greater Credit was given to others that testified
against him. Haterius Agrippa, Consul Elect, delivers his Opinion, that he
should die. M. Lepidus spoke to this Effect.

LII. If we consider only how Lutorius Priscus has debauched his Mind and his
Auditors ^ars, neither Prison, nor Halter, nor any servile Punishments were
enough for him. But though his Crimes are without measure, yet the Moderation
of a Prince, their own, and your Ancestors Examples, will qualify the
Punishments. Vanity differs from Wickedness, and Words from ill Deeds. There
may such a Way be found to punish him, that we may neither repent our Clemency,
nor Severity. I have heard our Princes complain, when any through Despair have
prevented their Mercy How cruel soever a Prince is, he takes Pleasure in being
praised for his Clemency. It some times happens, that the Commendations given
him for Virtue he has not, create a desire in him to merit that by his future
Practices.
. Lutorius's Life is yet safe, and the preserving it* will neither endanger the
Commonwealth, nor can the taking it away be any Example. As his Studies were
full of Folly, so were they senceless and soon over. Neither have we reason to
fear any thing great or serious in one that betrays himself to the Women. Yet
let him leave the City, his Goods be seized and he banished, which I take to be
as bad as if he was convict of Treason.

LIII. Among all the Consuls only Rubellius Blandus A Subject that has his
Prince against him, never finds many Judges to protect his Innocence; and if
little guilty all ways are thought on to condemn him. Dangerous, (says Anthony
Perez) is that I^stice where there is an Inclination to condemn. What will it
be then, if accompanied with absolute Power, Displeasure, and Flattery?
A^orismes de ses Relations. That puts me in mind of the Spanish Proverb, alla
van Leyos, do qui^ren Reyos. The Laws go a^ the Kings please.
agreed with Lepidus, the rest were of Agrippa's Opinion; so Lutonius was
carried back to Prison, and soon suffered. Tiberius writ to the Senate with his
usual Ambiguities, extolling their Zeal for severely punishing the least
Offense against their Prince, desiring them not rashly to punish Words for the
future Bloody Princes are wont to put on Clemency after Blood is spilled, to
cast the Odium on those have served them in it. After Queen Elizabeth had cut
off the Queen of Scot^ Head, she committed Secretary Davi^son to Prison, who
carried the Warrant for her Execution, pretending he had surpised her in
signing it. And Philip II. of Spain let Process* issue against Antonio P^r^z
his Secretary for the Murder of Secretary Escov^do, though he had his Order
under his hand ^or it. And Cabrera that pretends to write in Favor of Philip,
cannot forbear declaring the violent Death of this Man, wrought no Compassion
in him. Chap. 3. du Livr^ 12. de s^n Histoire.
. He commended Lepidus, and blamed not Agrippa When a Prince blames not cruel
or severe Actions, it is a sure sign he is easy, or at least not troubled at
them.
. And a Decree passed the Senate, that their Sentences should not be carried to
the Treasury before the Tenth Day That is, that those who are sentenced shall
not be executed till ten days after Sentence given.
, to give the Condemned so long time to live. But the Senate could not alter
the Sentence The Roman Laws allowed not the Magistrates to change any thing in
their Sentences, not so much as a Letter. Pro^onsulis tabella sententi^ est*
quae semel lecta neque a^g^ri littera, neque minus potest, sed ut cunque
recitata* ita Provinciae instrumento ref^rtur. Apul. Lib. 11. Hor. Therefor
Pilate answered the Jews, that would have had him alter the Inscription upon
Christ's Cross, Quod Scripsi, S^ripsi.
, and time never mollify'd Tiberius.

The Year of Rome 775.
LIVE. C. Sulpici^s and Decimus Haterius were the next Consuls. This year there
were no Troubles abroad, but great severity was apprehended against Luxury at
home, which grew to excess in all things that were expensive* Yet some of their
Expenses, however pro^use, were covered by concealing their Cost The price of
Jewels, Vessels of Silver and Gold, and rich Stu^fs* being not commonly known*
those that Bought them took care not to tell what ^hey cost.
. But all their Discourse was of their Gluttony, which they feared Tiberius, a
Prince of Frugality equal to the Ancients, would restrain. For ^. Bibulus
beginning, the other Ediles showed that the Sumptuary Laws were neglected, and
that notwithstanding any Prohibitions, the price of Necessaries daily
increased, and that such Disorders were not to be redressed by ordinary Ways.
And the Senate, after Deliberation, referred the whole matter to the Prince.
But he, after he had considered, whether such Extravagances could be redressed,
whether a Reformation would not be more to the prejudice than benefit of the
Commonwealth The first thing a Reformer should well consider, is, That his
Reformation bring not greater Mischiefs than those he would Refo^m. Pius V.
after he had shut up all the Courtisans in a separate place, was acquainted by
the Confessors, that Adulteries, Incests and Sodomi^s plainly increased.
Pagliari da^^ son Commentaire sur Tacit, Observe. 389. Sixtus V. who understood
the best of any Man how to make himself Obeyed, succ^^ded no better than Pius.
He drove many of them out of Rome, where they were in very great numbers, and
shut up the rest, but the Confessors ^aying the same things before him as
before Pi^s, he commanded the Governors of Rome to revoke the Order, and gave
leave to those were gone away, to return. Leti Livre 1. de la sec^nde party de
sa Vie.
, how dishonorable it would be to him to undertake what he could not effect,
or if he did, that it would require the punishing some noble Persons. H^ writ
thus to the Senate.

LV. It were perhaps more proper, My Lords* in other Matters, to ask my my
Opinion in your Presence, and to have me there tell you what I thought
expedient for the Commonwealth, but in this it is better I am absent, lest by
the Fears and Countenances of some among you, I should discover those who lead
this shameful life, and as it were, take them in the Fault. If the Ediles had
first consulted me, I cannot tell but I might have advised them rather to
connive at those Vices that have taken deep root and are inveterate A Prince
that would establish an absolute and despotick. Government, if he be wise, will
have a care how he refor^s Luxury, the best and most agreeable Instrument of
Slav^ry. Ciriacus de Lentz says, spea^ing of Tiberiu^* Therefore a Prince will
not re^orm Luxury, because the great and rich Men that live in Pleasure and
Magnificence, are so many Pledges and Hostages of Slavery. I^ Vespasiam could
by his Example recover the ancient manner of living, and restore Frugality: If
Lewis XIII* could by an Edict remedy the Fashions and excessive Expenses in
Cloths, Why might not Tib^rius have done the like* (...) he had the like
Incl^nations? Dans (...) A^gustus. He adds, in his (...) Tiberiana* That the
Ca^o's D^^asea's, and (...) are never ^cc^ptable to Tyrants; and that Socrates,
though very poor* was suspected to the Thirty Tyrants. ^ecau^e he contemned the
Pleasu^es of Life: So that ill Princes, look as ill upon those as they do upon
Am^^tious Persons, that prefer their Re^putation before the Engagements of
Pleasures. Aphorism ^. du Live. 3.
, than hazard showing there are some we are not able to remedy Though the
Complaints made against inveterate Vices are reasonable, yet Princes will
tolerate them, because we are not capable of that Perfection those Censors
expect that understand not the Government of States. The most reasonable Orders
are not always best, because some being not suitable to those who are to
observe them.
: But these worthy Magistrates have done their Duty, as I could wish all others
would. For me, I think it neither honest to hold my Tongue, nor expedient to
speak, for I am neither an Edile, Praetor, nor Consul Great Princes are not to
trouble themselves with all Affairs, nor to descend to li^^le matters. While
they are employed on the greater, their Ministers and Magist^ates dispatch the
lesser. Their Application to these would make them forget, or at least Postpone
others, which were very prejudicial to the good of the State. Iuan Antonio de
Vera, says the Emperor Charles V. though a pious Prince, never had much
Communication with Monks, out of Con^ession, while he Governed. And one day
that Father Francis of Madrid consulted him upon some Abuses of their Order,
which he thought wor^hy Reformation, he answered in some displeasure: Father
Francis, of all you have said to me, I find nothing concerns the Emperor, but
would have you apply to the Pope, or the General, rather than to me* who lose
not my time in discoursing the Affairs of a Cloister. Dans l'Epitome de sa Vie.
I beseech your Majesty, says Cardinal Richlieu, to apply your self to those
great matters, concern your State, and despise the lesser, as unworthy your
Care and Thoughts. -- You will not only be ^ar from receiving any Advantage
from employing your self in things not considerable, but on the contrary much
Damage, by diverting you from others that are better, and also because little
Thorns being more apt to prick than bigger, which are more easily perceived, it
were impossible to prevent Discontents, u^eless to your Affairs, and very
contrary to your Health. Chap. 5. de la premiere party de son Testament
Politic.
: Something more is expected from a Prince, and when every man assumes to
himself the Praise of what is well done, the blame of what succeeds not falls
upon him alone. Where shall I begin to Reform? Shall it be your large and
spacio^s Country Seats? The multitude of your Servants of several Nations? The
Quantities of your Silver and Gold The way H^nry III. of Castile took to put
down Excess in Entertainments, des^rv^s to be mentioned here, as a great
instance of what a Prince may do that has Wit and Courage: One day, when his
Table was ill served, he was told, The Grandees of his Kingdom lived much
better, and that there was nothing so Magnificent as the Ent^rtainments they
gave one another. The same day he had notice, the Archbishop of Toledo gave a
Supper to several Lords; he went in Disguise, and saw the Magnificence of the
Entertainment, where nothing was wanting, and what was worse, he heard them
relate their great Estates, and the Pensions they held out of the King'^
Demeas^s. The next morning, he caused a Report to be spread, That he was Sick,
and would make his Will, upon which they all went to Court. About Noon he came
into the Room where he usually gave Audience, and they waited ^or him, and as
soon as he sat down, he directed his Discourse to the Archbishop, and asked
him how many Kings of Castille he had known, and asked all the same Question:
Some said, they had known three, others four, others five, etc. How can that
be* says the King, when I have known twenty at my Age. And seeing them
surprised at what he said, he proceeded, It Is you my Lords are the Kings* to
the great Damage of this Kingdom* and Disho^our of your King, but I will
prevent your Reign continuing long, and carrying the Merriment any farther you
make of me. The Archbishop threw himself at his Feet, and asked Pardon, as did
also the rest. The King gave them their Lives, but made them Prisoners till
they restored the Castles they held of the Crown, and all they had got from the
last Kings. An Action that gained him so much Glory and Authority, that the
great Men were never so humble and obedient. Besides, it brought him in such a
Treasure* that he left a great Sum behind him, without over-charging his
People. Mariana, Chap. 14. du Live. 9. de son Histoire d'Espagne. It Is
observable t^o, the King did this at 15 or 16 years of Age. He was called,
Henry the In^irm, because of his Sickly Countenance, but deserved the Title of
Henry the Brave and Valiant, for his Courage. Which Example plainly shows as
Richlieu says, Kings can do any thing, when constant and resolute, and that
those things which seem the most difficult, and almost impossible, are so, only
because of the negligence and indifference of their Execu^ion.
? Your painted Tables, and brazen Stat^es of exquisite Work? The promis^uous
Habits of Men and Women? Or the Extravagances of the Women only in their
Jewels, for which our Money is carried away to Foreigners and Strangers? I am
not ignorant you blame these things at your Entertainments, and a mean is
wished for. But if a Law should be made against them, and punishments
appointed, those that complain now, will cry out, that the City is subverted,
the Destruction of the Nobility sought for, and none free from those Crimes.
But we see, old Maladies are not to be Cured without sharp and harsh Remedies
Desperate Diseases must have desperate Cures.
. A corrupt Mind is not to be regulated with gentle Methods, when inflamed by
inordinate Appetites. So many Laws framed by our Ancestors, so many by
Augustus, have only given greater Establishment to our Luxury, the former have
been forgot, the latter (which is worse) have been contemned There is no Remedy
when Vice is turned into Virtue. Then we are to accommodate our selves to
Hippocrate^'s Aphorism, to administer no Remedies where Diseases are desperate.
. For when we love what is not yet forbid, we fear it may be, but when we
transgress the Laws, and are not punished, there is neither Fear nor Shame left
While Abuses are tolerated, Men observe some Rules of Decency, because they
fear, if they take too much liberty, the Prince or Magistrate will Reform them.
But i^ a Reformer wants Power to make himself Obeyed, as it sometimes happens,
or wants Courage to punish the Great Men, who are commonly the first that break
new Regulations, the Examples of such Impunity opens the Door to Contempt, and
from Contempt they go insensibly to Licentiousness. Therefore a Prince should
no^ meddle with Reformation* if he finds himself wanting in Power, or of a
Temper to be wrought upon by Intercessions: or if he will Reform, should take a
Resolution to be inexorable, as Six^us V. was, when any dared to break his Laws.
. Why was Frugality formerly used? because every Man moderated his Desires; we
had only one City, and our Dominions not reaching out of Italy, we had not the
same Provocations; by Foreign Conquests we learn the use of Foreign
Commodities, by Civil Wars our own Patercu^us imputes the Luxury of Rome to the
two Scipio's, surnamed A^ricans. The (...), says he, open^d the way to the
Roman G^eatness, ^ut the other to their Luxury. For when Rome no longer s^ared
Carthage, which was burnt, they le^t not their Virtue by degrees as before, but
run impe^^ously into all Pleasures and Vices. The ancient Discipline was
despited, and gave way to new Customs, and all the City turned presently from
their Vigilance to Laziness, from Warlike Exercises to Looseness, and from
Labo^^ to Idleness. At last, the public Magnificence was succeeded with the
wastful Expenses of particular Men. Au Commencement du Live. 2. de son Epitome.
* That which the Ediles complain of, is a small matter in comparison of others
Some People think all is lost* if what offends them is not immediately
Remedied, but a Prince should not be drawn away by another Passion. He is to
for^see the Inconveniences may arise from the Ref^rmation is desired, and to
consider well if he can undertake it with success, so that he may satisfy more
than he shall displease. For so you see the Wisdom of a Re^ormer.
* But no man puts us in mind that Italy wants the support of other Countries,
that the Li^e of the People of Rome is tossed with the uncertainty of Sea and
Tempest For all their Corn came out of Egypt, and consequently by Sea.
, and were it not for the Plenty of the Provinces, it is not our Farms and
Possessions would maintain us and our Slaves. These, My Lords, are the Cares
employ your Prince, without which the Commonwealth could not subsist. For the
rest, every Man should apply the Remedy himself, let Shame amend us, Necessity
the Poor, and Sa^iety the Rich Pleasures leave us when they entertain no
longer. Many Voluptuou^ Persons become Abstemious because they want new
Plea^ures.
. But if any of the Magistrates finds he has Courage and Ability enough to put
a stop to this Evil, I shall be glad of his Help, and shall own he eases me of
a great part of my Labor. But if they only complain of these Faults, and think
to gain themselves Credit, and raise me Hatred, and then leave me. I assure
you, My Lords, I will not make my self Enemies to no purpose There is this
Difference betwixt a Prince and his. Ministers: The Prince should avoid all he
can what may draw upon him the Hatred of the People, or of the Great M^n,
because the keeping his Authority depends upon the Affection of his Subjects.
On the other side, his Ministers being obliged by the Duty of their Places, to
sacrifice their particular Interests to the Public Good, and their Master's
Service, are never to suppress any good Advice, for fear it should make them
odious to the People or to the Great Men: For, according to Richelieu, the
Probity of a Minister of State should be Proof against all Interests, and so
constant, that neither Calumnies nor Opposition, should discourage him doing
well, nor turn him from those Ends he has proposed to himself for the good of
the State, Chap. dernier de la premiere Party du Testament Politic. Cardinal
d'Ossat speaking of a Knight of Malta, ^^om whose Importunity he could not quit
himself without promising, though coldly, to recommend him to Henry IV. of
France, for a Favor he unseasonably asked. I repent my self says he, and will
another time conquer this P^sillanimity, without exposing again the
Impertinences of such Impor^uners, nor my own cowardly shame to re^use them.
Letter 197.
, and though I may have many, and for the most part unjustly It is common for
Princes to do well, and their Subjects to approach them. There are scarce any
Princes have Justice done them, w^ile they live, because Men naturally hate
those whose Authority they fear.
for the Commonwealth, I desire I may not make my self more, when it is neither
of Advantage to you, nor me.

LVI. After these Letters were read, the Aediles were discharged that Care. And
the Luxury in their Tables which had been very profuse from the End of the
Battle at Actium, till the Accession of Servius Galba to the Empire, that is,
for about 100 Years The Battle at Actium was in the Year of the City, 724. and
G^lb^ came to the Empire in the Year 822*
, was by Degrees left of In France, Excess in Entertainments begins to
moderate, but it is to give place to another Extravagance in their Clothes and
Furniture, which is more dangerous. It Is this has so multiplied Ladies that
Persons of Quality and Birth are not to be discovered from Citizens Wives and
Daughters, but by their Civility and Modesty. In the last Age, the first
Presidents de Thou and de Harlay were content to ^at upon Pewter; now the
mean^st Officers of the Revenue are served in Plate. The Chancellor de
Bellievre gave his Daughters only 20000 Livres, now one of the King's Farmers
gives his 100000. Adeo praecipiti cursu a virtute descitum, ad viti^
transcursum.
. The Causes of this Change, were these: Formerly the most considerable
Families for their Birth or Riches were ruined by their Magnificence. For then
they were permitted to court the People, their Allies and Princes, and be
courted by them. And the more splendid any man was in his Houses, Furniture,
and Attendants, it gained him the greater Reputation and more Clients People
that made Court to Great Men for their Protection.
. But after they began to murder one another, and their Greatness was a Crime
Great Reputation is as dangerous as ill Reputation. If it revives the Dead, it
often makes the Living die. Princes cannot bear Merit that is too much taken
notice of. It is therefore a great piece of Knowledge to know how to conceal it
well, not only from the Prince but from the People, whose Applauses are fatal.
, others grew wisers. And new Men that were often taken into the Senate from the
free Towns, the Colonies, and Provinces, brought with them the Frugality they
had been used to; and though several through Fortune or Industry had great
Riches in their Old Age, yet they never changed their manner of living. But
Vespasian was chiefly the Occasion of this Frugal way of living, who conforming
himself to the ancient Economy, raised in every Man a desire of Imitation
Nothing establishes Virtue more than the good Life of a Prince; which is a
speaking Law, and prevails more than all they make. If it be true, that
whatsoever Fault a Prince commits, he o^^ends more by his ill Example, than the
Nature of it; ^is not less certain, that let him make what Laws he will, if he
practices what he prescribes* his Example will go as far to make them executed
as the Penalty he lays. A Prince that never Swears, shall sooner suppress
Swearing and Blasphemies among his People, than the Security of his Magistrates
against those are subject to such Impieties, Chap. 1. de la second party du
Testament Politic.
, which prevailed more than all the Laws, or Fear of Punishment. Unless there
be a Circulation in all things, that Manners change as well as Times and
Seasons, all things were not better formerly All our Veneration is for what is
past, and we despise the Present; for the Present Troubles and Disquiets us
with Objects that displease, when what is past instructs us, without showing us
any thing we can repine at, or that can put us into ill Humor. It is certain,
as the Word is framed, we should judge the same of those, we admire because
they were some Ages before us, as we do of our Contemporaries, for Vices are as
old as Men.
than now, and our Age has set Examples worthy Praise and Imitation. But let
such Disputes continue between us and our Ancestors.

LVII. Tiberius having got a Reputation for his Moderation, for suppressing
Informers That would have Informed against their Luxu^y.
, writ to the Senate to make Drusus Tribune When Princ^s have done any thing
that gives them Reputation, they are wont to ma^e use of it, as a Right to
obtain what they desire, and they generally succeed in the first Heat of
popular Applause.
. Augustus found out this Title, instead of that of King or Dictator, and yet
by that Name New Titles great Men take, give them often a sor^ of Title to
u^urp States that belong not to them. Paul Emili^s observes very well, that the
Title of Prince of France, which Charles Martel took instead of Stewa^d of the
King's House, was the ^^rst ^^ep to raise his Family to the Throne. The
Constable of Mo^tmor^n^y showed good Policy when he opposed the Guise^ that
would have taken the Name and Arms of the House of Anjo^, from which they were
descended by Yoland of Anjo^, their Great Grandfather of their Mother's side;
because this new Name would have strengthened their old sta^e Pre^ension, (so
Cardinal d'Ossat calls it, Letter 123.) to Provence. And for the same Reason,
when H^nry 4. gave the young Duke of Guise that Government, the Chancellor
Chivergny protested in full Council against it, and would have his Protestation
registered in the Parliam^nts of Paris and A^x, before he would seal the
Letters Patent. Memoirs de Chivergny, 1594. The The Duke d'Oliverez, first
Minister of Spain, soon repented making the Duke of Braganza General of the
Portuguese, which new Power, together with the Right he had to the Crown, was a
Step to get it him.
had a Sovereignty We may observe here, the Dexterity of A^gustus, when he
quitted the odious Name of Trium^^^, he tool that of Consul, Consulem se
fere^s. A^^. 1. But when the Tri^^nes of the People opposed the Consuls, and
dis^^^^d their Authority, by the Right they had to protest against the
Proc^^d^ng of the Senate, and by the Prerogative of their Dignity, which made
(...) Sacred and Inviolable, August^s who saw the Consulate distinguished (...)
from other Consuls, resolves to make himself Tribune, by virtue (...) oppose
the Resolutions of other Magistrates, and none of (...) So (...) out of two
Offices that sprung from Liberty, which he (...) to de^end ( ad tu^^dam plebem
Tr^bunitio jure con^entum) he made (...) and perp^tual Dictator, as absolute as
I^lius Caesar, but less (...) he pl^ased the people with the Title of Tribune,
A (...) Years, as Tacitus observes, A^n. 1.
above the other Magistrates. He chose M. Agrippa for his Associate, and after
his Death, Tiberius Nero, that his Successor might be known, thinking thereby
to restrain the Unlawful Hopes of some others, trusting to Nero's Modesty and
his own Greatness. After his Example, Tiberius advanced Drusus; while
Germanicus lived he carried himself indifferently between them. His Letters
began with a Prayer to the Gods to prosper his Counsels for the Good of the
Commonwealth; then added a few Words, and those truly of his Son's Behavior,
That he had a Wife and three Children, and of his own Age when Augustus called
him to that Honor; neither could it be said, this was precipitately done; but
after he was tried eight years, had suppressed Seditions, ended the Wars,
triumphed, and had been twice Consul.

LVIII. As the Senate expected this Demand, so their Flattery was the more
Artificial; but they could think of nothing more to decree, than that their
Princes Images, Altars to the Gods, Temples, Arches, and such customary
Honors, should be erected for him, Only M. Silanus by dishonouring the
Consulate thought to do Honor to the Princes, and proposed, that Public and
Private Acts should be dated for the Future, not from the Consuls, but
Tribunes. And Q. Haterius moving the Decrees of that Day should be writ in Gold
Letters, was laughed at The higher a Man is in Dignity, the more shameful is
Flattery in him; but especially if he be in such a station as makes it his Du^y
to preserve and maintain the Au^hority of the Laws. It was p^easant to see
James (...), who called Henry III. of France, the Saint of Saints, harangued
the Parliament* and say he deserved Canonization, better than any the Kings of
France his Predecessors* though he abandoned the Government of his Kingdom to
his Favorites. Iournal de son Regne.
, that an old Man to his shame should fall into such filthy Flattery

LIX. At this time, the Government of Africa was continued to Iunius Blaes^s,
Servius Maluginensis, a Priest of Jupiter, desired that of Asia, saying, It was
a Mistake to think the Priest of Jupiter might not go out of Italy, there was
no other Law for them, than the Priests of Mars and Quirinus; and if these had
governed Provinces, why not they? That neither the Laws nor Ceremonials The
Clergy have always been ingenious in finding Reasons, or rather Pretenses to
exempt themselves from their most indispensable Duties. Residence was so
strictly observed by the Roman Priests, that Seneca says their Priests were
like Exiles that could never quit the Place of their Punishment. Quosdam
exilia, quosdam sacerdotia uno loco tenent. De tranquillitate vit^^. Visus est
sibi quis, says Artemidorus, ad firmament^m templ^ Neptuni catena alligatus
esse: factus est sacerdos Neptuni: oport^bat enim ipsum inseparabilem esse
sacerdotem. Lib. 5. de somniorum eventibus, sommio 1. A Pagan looks upon his
Priesthood as an indissolvable tie upon him, that con^ines him for his Life to
Neptune's Temple; yet the Christian Priests and Prela^es make no scruple of
spending all their Lives in a manner from their Churches, without doing the
State any Service. Filii hominum, usquequo gravi cord?
were against it. That the High Priest had often o^ficiated for the Priest of
Jupiter, when sick, or employed in public Affairs. That after Cornelius Merula
died, there was no Man in his Place for 62 Years A Fault is a Fault though it
has lasted a long time, and consequently a Prince should not lose an occasion
to remedy it, when he finds one.
, and yet the Rites wasted not. And if his Creation could be omitted so many
years, without interruption to the Sacrifices, how much more easily may he be
absent a Year with the Proconsulary Dignity? Formerly they were forbid by the
High Priests out of Ill Will, now (Thanks to the Gods) the High Priest was the
best of Men The Priesthood and Sovereignty are so far from being incompatible
in the same Person, that on the contrary, one is a strengthening of the other;
so Tacitus observes of the Kings of the Jews, amongst whom Honor sacerdotii
firmamentum potentiae assumeba^ur, Hist. 5.
, not subject to Emulation, Malice, or private Affection There is no Quality
more essentially necessary in a Pope, than to be a Common Father: All Popes
have equally this Title, but do not equally perform their Duty. The Partiality
they all have, one for this Crown, another for that, never fails to produce ill
Effects. As it is impossible a Partial Pope should be Just, it is likewise
impossible those Princes should have any Reverence for him who suffer by his
Partiality. Besides those he favors, often reap no other Fruit from it than
War with their Neighbors. What made the League betwixt Henry II. of France,
and Paul IV. but the loss of the Battles of S. Quintin and Gravelines, which
was a just Punishment for the Breach of the Truce of Vaucelles, and altogether
a convincing Evidence, that the Absolutions a Violent and Passionate Pope
gives, are not always sure signs of a Divine Absolution. So the wise Cardinal
d'Ossat had good reason to say, that a Pope should be a Man of Virtue and
Understanding, that he may not be deceived by the Artifices of ill Men, and to
make him a common Father, in holding the Balance equal, not doing ill to any
at the Desire and Suggestion of others. Letter 330. Gregory XIV. at the
beginning of his Papacy declared he pretended not to govern according to the
Maxims of State, but according to the Laws of the Gospel. That was speaking
like a Pope, but as a good Milanese he could not keep his word; for he soon
declared for the League in favor of the King of Spain, and the Guises; As if
Partiality had been an Evangelical Precept for a Common Father, Herrerac. 10.
du Livre 6. de la 3 Party de son Hist. If the Piety of the Faith^ul, says
Saavedra, has given the Popes Temporal Power, it were more for the Security of
their Grandeur never to use it against Princes, but when the Universal Good of
the Church made it necessary. When the Triple Crown is turned into an Helmet,
there is no Respect paid it, but as a temporal Thing; when it makes use of
Politic Considerations, it is looked upon only as the Crown of a Politic
Prince, and not a Pope's, whose Authority should be supported by Spiritual
Power. His Pastoral Duty is not for War but Peace. His Staff is crooked, not
pointed, for it is to lead, not hurt. Empresa 94. I will conclude this with a
very judicious Reflection of Don Iuan Antonia de Vera, in the Second Discourse
of his Ambassador. What ancient or modern Example, says he, can be brought in
comparison of that which Cardinal Bembo and Thomas Porcachi relate of Pope
Julius II. who being more an Enemy to the French King ( Lewis XII.) tha^ was
fit for an universal Pastor of the Church, orders the King of Spain's
Ambassador, and the Venetians, his Allies, to acquaint their Masters, he had
made Peace with France, but that they should not be alarmed at it, for he
continued still his ill Will to that Crown, that his Heart was Spanish, and
that this Peace was only to lay the French asleep, to take them afterward,
unprovided. If there be then so little Security and Faith in a Pope, what may
we expect from Secular Princes? How can we trust those that are not Catholics,
or are born Infidels? Words worthy this Spaniard, who took for his Motto,
Verita^ Vincit.
. Against this Lentulus the Augur, and others differently spoke; at last it was
resolved to refer the Matter to the Emperor's Decision.

LX. Tiberius defers giving his Opinion in it, and moderates the Honors
decreed Drusus with the Office of Tribune, reproving by Name the Insolence of
that Proposition that the Decree should be writ in Letters of Gold, contrary to
Custom. Drusus's Letters were read, which were taken to be very arrogant,
though they had a turn of Modesty too. They said, Things were come to that
pass, that Drusus upon receiving so great Honor, would not vouchsafe a Visit
to the Gods of the City, nor show himself in the Senate, or begin at least, his
Authority in his own Country, if the War, or his Distance hinde^^ him? However,
he is entertaining himself on the Shores and Lakes of Campania A Province near
Rome, called now Terra di Lavoro. Florus says Campania was the ^inest Country
in the World. Terrarum pulcherrima.
; Thus is he bred that is to govern the World. This he learned from his
Father's Counsels. Tiberius might excuse himself from appearing in Public, by
reason of his Years and Labors; but what hinders Drusus, besides his Pride?

LXI. Tiberius daily strengthened his Sovereignty; but to leave some show of
their ancient State to the Senate, he sent them the Petitions of the Provinces
to examine. The Licentiousness and Impunity of Sanctuaries grew to that in
Greece, the Cities set them up as they pleased. The Temples were filled with
Slaves, Debtors that defied their Creditors, and Persons subject of Capital
Crimes As Greece was a Province almost all Maritime, and where, according to
Thucidides, Piracy prevailed much, and those that exercised it were in good
Esteem; the Inhabitants built Temples to protect themselves from the Insults of
the Pirates; So these Temples were not like our Churches, but like Castles and
Forts, with Vaults under ground, and were not for the Retreat of Criminals, but
for honest Persons, that fled from Oppression. And if they were abused, they
lost the Privilege of the Sanctuaries, which at first was allowed to very few
Places. But the Wickedness of Men, ingenious enough in finding out ways to
abuse the most sacred things, wrought ^o great a Change, that what was
instituted in Greece for a Protection against Oppression, became one against
Justice and the Laws; so that the Sanctuaries that were at first only a Refuge
for honest Men, and such as were afflicted, served afterward only for
Criminals. This made the Senate of Rome to regulate them, and take from the
Temples in Greece the Privilege of Sanctuaries, except Nine that gave better
Testimony than the rest of their Original. Too small a Number for so great a
Province, that was more than a thousand Miles extent. There was at this time
another kind of Immunity, not Instituted in Honor of any God, nor in Favor of
any Temple, but only in consideration of Justice. It was for those had any
Potent Enemy they could not oppose, they run to some Statue of the Prince,
embraced it, calling for Public Authority, and then no one durst offer them
the least Violence. Yet this was not an Immunity, but rather an Appeal to
Justice; For as soon as the Judges took Cognizance of the Matter, if their
Cause was good, they awarded them Satisfaction; but if Unjust, a double Penalty
was inflicted, one for the Crime, the other for their boldnes^ in running to
the Princes Statue, when guilty. Would to God Churches were only Sanctuaries
for the Innocent, and that C^iminals resorting to them, were not only punished
for their Crimes, but also for their Rashness in believing God and the Churches
will protect (...), Thieves, Rebels, incestuous Persons and Villains. (...)
Pa^lo Sarpi, chap. 7. de son Traite ^es Asiles. Philo Iudae^s explaining the
Law in the 21. of Exodus, If a Man come presumptuously upon his N^ighbour to
s^ay him with Guile, that thou shall take him from mine Altar that he may die,
says, That Wicked M^n should find no Sanctuary in Places consecrated to Piety
and Worship. Pro^ani in fano nullum esse receptum, lib. de spec. legib. In
Petrarchs Letters there is one to the Pope, in which he congratulates his
repressing the Liberty of the Cardinals, who protected any Offenders pursu^d by
Justice. Epist. 1. lib. 7.
Neither was any Authority able to suppress the Seditions of the People,
protecting Villainies, as much as the Rites of the Gods As Princes are obliged
to establish the true Worship of God; they ought to be careful to banish false
Appearances, which are to the pre^udice of States. For we may truly say, That
Supperstition and Hypocrisy are often coverings to wicked Designs. Chap. 1. de
la second Party du Testament Politic. The Conspiracy of the Marchioness de
Verneuil against Henry IV. of France, was contrived by a Capuchin, called
Father Arcange, under pretense of Confession, which covered the frequent
private Conversations he had with her, and the Count a (...) her Brother, who
pretended he had taken a Resolution to become a Capachin.
. It was therefore ordained the Cities should send their Deputies with their
Privileges. Some voluntarily quitted them, as Usurped; others justified theirs
on old Superstitions, or an account of Services to the People of Rome. The Pomp
of that Day was great in show, when the Senate considered the Grants of their
Ancestors, the Agreements of Confederates, the Decrees of the Kings before the
Roman Power prevailed there, and the Religion of the Gods, being at the Will of
the Senate to confirm or alter them, as formerly they had done.

LXII. The Eph^sians appeared first, setting forth, That Diana and Apollo were
not Born in the Island of Delos, as was commonly believed, that in their
Country was the River Cenchiris, and a Wood called Ortygia, where Latona
leaning on an Olive Tree, which yet remains there, was delivered of these two
Deities, and that the Wood was Sacred by the Command of the Gods. And that
Apollo, after he had killed the Cyclopes, fled thither from Jupiter's Anger.
That Bacchils, when he conquered the Amazons, pardoned those that humbling
themselves took hold on the Altar. That Hercules added to the Rites of that
Temple after he was Master of Lydia, and their Privileges were not lessened
when under the Dominion of the Persians, and afterward the Macedonians
preserved them.

LXIII. Next, the Magnesians insisted on the Constitutions of L. Scipio and L.
Silla, who conquered Antiochus and Mithridates, and in acknowledgement of the
Felicity and Valor of the Magnesians, commanded Diana Lucofryne's Temple
should be inviolable. Then the People of Aphrodisium and Stratonica, produced a
Decree of Caesar the Dictator During the Civil War betwixt him and Pompey.
, and another since of Augustus, for the Services done them, and opposing an
Invasion of the Parthians, never departing from their Fidelity to the Romans.
Those worshipped Venus, these Jupiter and Diana surnamed Trivia. From
Hierocesarea was brought greater Antiquity, they having a Temple dedicated by
K. Cyrus to Diana Persica, and that Perpe^^a, Isauricus, and many other
Emperors, had not only acknowledged this Temple for Sacred and Inviolable, but
the Country two miles about it. The Cyprians pretended Franchises for three
Temples, whereof the ancientest was built by Aerias, and con^ecrated to Venus
Paphia So name^, because this Temple was within the City of P^phos, now called
Ba^^o.
, the second dedicated by his Son Amathus to Venus Amathusia There was in this
Island, a Place called Amatonte, now Limisso, but it is little more than a
Village.
, and the other to Jupiter Salaminius, built by Teucer He called this Temple of
Jupiter, Salamine, in Honor of his Country.
, when he fled from his Father Telamon.

LXIV. The other Ambassadors had their Audiences too, but the Senate growing
weary with hearing so many, and their Canvasings, a Commission was given to the
Consuls to examine their Titles, and make a Report* They made it very
favorable for a Temple at Pergamu^^, dedicated to Esculapius The Church of
Orle^n^ is the most ^amous and authentic Sanct^ary now in France, and it may
be in Europe. The Privilege the Bishops have upon their Entry to f^ee all the
Criminals that (...) thither from all Parts of the Kingdom, except Traito^s,
has been preserved by a Possession and uninterr^pted Enjoyment ever since S.
Aignan, and confirmed by the Consent of all the Kings of France, and allowance
of all the Cou^ts and Magistr^^es of the Kingdom* that have never disputed this
Right* So the Learned Historian, Adrian Valois, has reason to wonder at the
neglect of the People o^ Orleans, who ^east and celebrate by a general
Procession the 8th of May, because on that day they were delive^ed from a Siege
of the English, 1429. and seast not on the 14th of June, the day their
Ancestors drove out (...) and the Huns that closely Be^ieged them. Quem diem si
qu^ndo forte celebrare voluerint, scian^ anno 451. 18 Kal. Iulii, qui est Iunii
dies quar^^^^ decimus, Hunnos urbe expulsos, ac majores suos captivita^e misera
(...) vinculis esse liber^tos. Notitia Galli^rum, ^it* Genabum.
but that the Claims of the rest were grounded on obscure beginnings There are
a great many Privileges and Exemptions of which we may say, as a Doctor did of
Constantine's Donation, That it was read by the Blind, heard by the Deaf, and
related by the Dumb. If, according to Cardinal Perr^n, all the Letters of the
Pope's were forged by the Monks in ^^^^lemaine's time* there is great Reason to
believe they are the Authors of the greatest part of their Registers.
, by reason of their Antiquity. Smyrna and Tenedos pretended both an Oracle of
Apollo, that commanded one of them to Dedicate a Temple to Venus Stratonicis,
the others a Statue and Temple to Neptune. Those of Sardis and Miletum insisted
on later Grants, one of Alexander in Honor of Diana, the other of Darius in
Honor of Apollo. The Cretensians desired the Image of Augustus might have some
Privilege. Upon the whole, the Senate made several Decrees, whereby great
Honors were allowed, but Moderation Princes should religiously forbear
violating the Rights of the Church, but when they degenerate, and are abused,
they are obliged to apply necessary Remedies. Theodorick, King of Italy,
commanded the Magistrates to protect the Church, and maintain it in its Rights,
without prejudice to his Authority, Salva Civilitate, says Cassiodore. And it
was in this Sense, that Charles V. coming to be Crowned Emperor in Italy,
answered the Pope's Legates that received him at Genoua, That he would never
Violate the Rights and Privileges of the Church; but so as to support those of
the Empire, without suffering the Church to change them. Saave^ra empresa 94.
and Don Iuan Antonio de Vera da^^ I'Epitome de sa Vie. The Immunity the
Ecclesiastics have is good to Privilege, but not exempt them from their Duty;
it is to straiten the Circumference in which they are to live, and not to give
them head, nor to suffer them to exceed those bounds of Modesty are requisite
for their State.
prescribed to all, commanding them to have the same in Tables of Brass, and
set them up in some public Place in the Temples, to preserve a Memorial, and
prevent their falling into vain and ridiculous Superstitions if the Genoueses
remember the miserable Condition their City was reduced to by the French Fleet
1684. they will trust no longer to St. Bernard's Letter, the Original whereof,
they say, is kept yet in their Archives, in which the Saint promised never to
forget them. In aeter^^m non obliviscar tui, plebs devota, honorabilis Gens,
Civitas illust^is. Epist. 129. ad Ianuenses. They may make Solemn Vows, and
Dedicate Churches ^o him to protect them against the Arms of France, but he
will let their City be Bombarded, and their Republic destroyed if they keep
not themselves within the Bounds of Respect and Modesty. In 1625. this
Republic being in a War with the Duke of Savoy, they made a Vow to St.
Bernard, to reckon him among their Patrons, to Celebrate his Festival for ever
with a general Procession, to Build him a Chapel, and to give yearly Port^ons
to Twelve poor Girls. Don Ie^n Mabil^on in Notis ad Epistolas D. Bernardi. This
good Saint, and all the rest in Paradise, says a Pre^ate, Conform themselves to
God's Will, who gives ^eace and War as pleases his Providence, and Laug^s at
the pretended Wisdom of Mortals. Lettre Mons. M^rqu^mont Archev. de Lion, du 5
May 1625. dans le ^ Tome des Memoires pour l'Histoire du Cardinal d^ Richelieu.
under pretense of Religion.

LXV. About the same time, Livia falling dangero^sly ill, Tiberius hastened to
Rome; there was yet a good Agreement betwixt the Mother and Son, or only Secret
Hatred. A little before she had dedicated a Statue to Augustus near Marcellus's
Theater, and set Tiberius his Name after her own, which it was believed he
resented as an Indignity to him Majesty knows no Superior. Kings, as Kings have
no Mothers, and consequently their Natural Mothers should pay them the same
Regard as their Subjects do, whereof she is one. What Margaret of Austria,
Queen of Spain, did at ^errara, in her first Visit to Clement VIII. with her
Mother the Arch-Dutchess of Gretz, in giving the Arch-Dutchess the Chair
provided for her, and taking another Place her self, may be an Example of
filial Piety, but was not an Action becoming Majesty. It may be also said, that
on this Occasion she violated the Rules of good Breeding and Justice, when to
honor her Mother, she was wanting in that Respect was due to her Husband's
Dignity. To recover which* Clement caused another Seat to be presently brought
for the Queen, who could not ^it in that of the Arch-Du^chess, without in^uring
the Majesty of the King of Spain. Gracian dans le 59. Discourse de son Agudeza.
The Person of a Prince, says Antonio Perez, may have a Companion, but his
Office cannot. And it is that the Ancients mean, when they say* Jupiter
distributed to the other God^, the White Wand, the Trident, and other marks* of
Sovereignty, but always reserved the Scepter and Thunder to himself. Dans les
Asorismes des secondes Lettres.
, though he showed it not. But when the Senate decreed Public Prayers to the
Gods, and the Plays, called Magni, to be exhibited, by the Chief Priests, the
Augurs, the Fifteen together with the Seven, and those of the Fraternity of
Augustus, called Augustales. L. Apronius proposed the Heralds Numa first
institu^ed this Order at Rome, consisting of Twenty Persons those out of the
ancien^est Families in the City, and settled in a College* Their Office was
properly to be the chief Arbitrators of all Controversies relating to War and
Peace, nor was it Lawful to take up Arms till they had declared all Expedien^s
^or an Accommodation rejected.
to be Overseers; but Tiberius was against it, making a Difference in the
Rights of the Priests, and producing Examples for it. And that therefore the
Augustales Who had no more Right* than the F^^ciales to preside at the Public
Play^.
were joined with them, because a peculiar Priesthood of that House, for which
the Prayers were made.

LXVI. It is not my Intention to relate here all Propositions, but only such as
are memorable for their Honesty, or shameful for their Infamy. For I look upon
the chief Part of an Historian to be, not to conceal Virtues, nor Vices. That
therefore every one may be afraid of doing or speaking ill, lest they become
In^amous with Posterity Who can stop the Mouth of Posterity, and hinder their
speaking of those, that make no other use of their Power than to commit Crimes
with Impunity? Whatever Laws are made, ill Persons can never escape this
Punishment; and if they gratify themselves while they live, they have yet this
Displeasure, to know, that the People will scan their Actions and curse them
secretly; and that Writers will not spare them when they are Dead. See the End
of the late Discourse of the Satyr M^nippee. A Satyr, says the Chancellor
Chivergni, which is a Masterpiece and Monument to the Eternal Reproach of those
who were the Authors of the League, and serves for an Example to such others to
turn them from the like Enterprises. Dans ses M^moires. As fear of Infamy
c^eates an Aver^ion to Vice, so the Example of Virtue recounted in History,
should excite us to imitate those have le^t them.
. But those tim^s were so corrupted with base Flattery, that not only the best
of the City were forced ^o keep their Reputation in that manner, but also the
Consuls, most of the Praetors, and many pedary Besides the proper Senators, any
Magistrate might come into the House, while he was in Office, and those who had
born any Curule Office. They were not allowed the Privilege of giving their
Votes; yet they tacitly expressed their Mind by going over to those Senators
whose Op^nion they embraced, and on this account had the Name of (...) P^^^rii.
Senators, strove which should propound things most base and mean. It Is
reported, Tiberius never went out of the Senate, but he said in Greek, O how
ready these Men are for Slavery! so much did he abhor base and servile
Submission, who could not bear Public Liberty.

LXVII. From Dishonorable things they fell by degrees to wicked When
Magistrates give themselves up to servile Fla^^^ry, they soon fall into
Cruelty. Those Iu^ges that seek to make their Fortune, are always ill judges.
It is for that Reason the Preacher says, Ask not of the King the Seat of (...)
and seek not to be made a Judge, lest thou be not able to take away In^qui^y,
and lest thou, fearing the Person of the ^^ghty, should commit an Offense
against thine own Uprightness, Eccle. chap. 7.
Practices. Mamercus Scaurus that had been Consul, Iuni^s Otho, Praetor, and
Brutidius Niger, the Edile, ^prosecuted C. Silanus, Pro-consul of As^a, accused
for his Corruptions in the Provinces, Charging him with profaning the Divinity
of Augustus, and contemning the Majesty of Tiberius. Mam^rcus justified himself
from ancient Presidents, alleging that L. ^otta had been accused by Scipio
Africanus, S. Galba, by Cato the Censor, and P. Rutilius, by M. Scaurus. a very
unlikely thing, Scipio and Cato should ever take such Revenges, or Scaurus,
Great Grandfather to this Mamercus, who dishonored his Ancestors by so
infamous an Action. Iunius Otho, who formerly taught School, and afterward was
made a Senator by Sejanus's Interest, brought his obscure beginning into
Reproach by these Villainies Great Men have no worse Enemies than those that
have raised themselves from a mean Birth to a share in Public Affairs. It were
odious and unnecessary to give Domestic Examples of this Kind, every Man has a
hundred before his Eyes. The Cause of this Hatred, according to T^^itus, is,
Qui^ minor^^us (...) a^m dandi cura, Hist. 4, Because these little People are
naturally ill-disposed to them. But there is another Reason has a better
Foundation, because few of them but have received some ill Usage from Great
Men; or have been oppressed by them. So that scarce any of them ^ise without
Res^ntments. A Man is an Enemy to the Law, because he lost a Trial* and the
like Instances hold in other Cases.
. Brusidius was a Man well qualified, and if he had taken a right Course, might
have come to Preferment* he was too impatient, which made him first endeavor
to outgo his Equals, then his Superiors; and at last, even his own Hopes. Which
has been the ruin of many good Men, who have hastened to gain that before
their time, which they might have had with a little Patience, and possessed
with Security A wise Spaniard says, He that will not obey another, takes the
way not to command himself. The Means should be suitable to the Ends we
propose. We would have Passive Obedience be taken for a Principle in us, when
it is often only an impudent Pride. When a Man has once gained Honors, his
manner of rising to them is forgot. Suffering much, to arrive afterward to
great Employs, is neither Meanness, nor want of Spirit, but Discretion. There
are those can wait for nothing, which proceeds from their Excessive Ambition,
for they will almost at the same time out-go their Equals, then their
Superiors, and outstrip even their own Expectations. Pushed on by their
natural Impetuousness, they neglect the surest means, as too fl^w, and embrace
the shortest, though most hazardous. The same thing commonly happens to them as
to Buildings erected in haste, without giving time to the Materials to settle,
they fall down presently. Those Trees that upon the first warm Weather put out
their Buds soon lose them, not staying till the Severities of the Winter are
past. He never reaps any Benefit from his Affairs that precipitates them, his
Impatience makes them abortive, and serves only to hasten Danger. Saavedra
empresa polit. 34. In less than an Year N... M^^got was Master of Requests,
First President of Bourdeux, Secretary of War, and Keeper of the Seals; but as
he understood little of this last Place, they were forced to restore the Seals
to Monsieur du Vair, his Predecessor. The Duke of Beausort lost his Credi^ with
the Queen-Regent, for pretending too much to her Favor and Con^^dence in him.
For not being satis^ied to rest upon the Pretensions the Duke of Vendos^e his
Father had to the Government of Br^t^gne, he supported those also of all the
Great Men that suffered under Richelieu's Minist^y, to make himself Creatures,
and to give such clear Testimonies of his Power, that every one might ascribe
to that whatsoever could satisfy his Ambition and Vanity. Memoires de M. le
Du^ de L. R.
.

LXVIII. G^llius Poplicola and M. Paconius, one Silanus's Treasurer, the other
his Lieutenant, increased the number of Informers. There was no doubt he was
guilty of Cruelty and Avarice, but many other things were accumulated,
dangerous to the Innocent. For besides so many Senators that were his Enemies,
he was to answer himself the most Eloquent of Asia, that were picked out to be
his Accusers; he was ignorant in Pleading, and in dread of his Life, (which was
enough to have confounded the ablest Person.) Tiberius refrained not pressing
him with hard Expressions, and a severe Countenance, he asked many Questions,
but gave him not Liberty to answer, or reply; he often confessed, what he might
have denied, that Tiberius might not seem to ask in vain. And his Slaves were
sold, that so they might be examined upon the Rack. And he was also accused of
Treason to make it necessary for his Friends to be silent, and leave him. He
desired a few days, then let fall his Defense, and had the Courage to send
Letters to Tiberius mixed with Prayers and Complaints.

LXIX. Tiberius to justify the Proceeding against Silanus, caused the Records
of Augustus against Volesus Messala, Pro-consul also of Asi^, to be read, and a
Decree of the Senate against him When Princes would do an hard thing they are
used to seek for Examples to authorize, or at least excuse their Injustice.
After P. II. of Spain had arrested Don Carlos, he sent his Officers to
Barcelona, to take out of the Archieves the Process against Don Carlos, Prince
of Viana, Eldest Son of John III. King of Arragon, which he caused to be
translated into Spanish, to be a President to him in proceeding against his
Son. Cabrera, chap. 22. du Livre 7. de son Histoire.
. Then asked L. Piso's Judgment, who after a long Discourse of the Prince's
Clemency No Princes are so much commended for Clemency, as those have least of
it. Piso, according to Tacitus's Character of him in his Sixth Annals, was a
very wise Man, and hated base Flattery, yet commended Tiberius for a Virtue he
wanted, not to ^latter him, but to make him in love with the Reputation of it,
and thereby to make him more merciful. For this Prince knew very well, Quae
^ama clementiam sequeretur. Ann. 4.
, concluded he should be banished to the Island Gyarus. The rest agreed with
him, only Cn. Lentulus thought it fit that the Goods of his Mother Corn^lia
(for he was by another Woman) should be separated from the rest, and given her
Son, to which Tiberius consented. But Cornelius Dolabella to flatter more This
was the same Man was ^or Tiberius's entering Rome in Triumph, which Tiberius
exposed in his Letter to the Senate, that it was not fit for him to accept a
Triumph for taking the Air.
, after he had blamed Silanus's Morals, added, That for the future, no Person
of a Scandalous and Infamous Life, should draw Lots for the Government of the
Provinces, and that the Prince should be Judge thereof. This is one of those
Counsels appear well, but under color of increasing the Prince's Power, in
effect destroy it. Dolabella would have furnished Tiberius with a way to
exclude from Government all that displeased him; but on the other side it
exposed him to the Hatred of most of the Great Men, if he expected it, Cardinal
Richelieu speaking of the Selling of Offices, concludes it better to continue
than suppress it, and give them freely, Though the Suppression of selling
Offices, says he, is most agreeable to Reason and the Laws, yet there are such
inevitable Abuses in the Distinction of them, when they are at a Prince's
Pleasure, as make the Selling tolerable, For then the Artifices at Court go
farther than Reason in the Disposing of them, and Favor beyond Merit. And a
little after he says, A Suppression would be so far from (...) Vi^tue, it would
promote Cabal^ and Factions, and fill the Places with Men of mean Birth. The
Weakness of the Age is such, that we sooner yield to Importunity, than are led
by Reason, and instead of being guided by Justice, are commonly carried away
with Favor. From what is past we ought to (...) the ^uture, because we have
alway^ seen, that those in greatest Favor, have always carried it against
Vir^^^. And (...) Princes and those they (...) cannot know the Merit of
Persons, but by the Judgment of others, they often mistake the Shadow for the
B^d^. Sect. 1. du c. 4. de (...). ^ormerly the Popes pre-co^^^ed those they
de^^gn'd to make Cardinals, to have time to learn Peoples Opinion of them,
before they proc^eded to (...); but the Malice of Ill (...) a thousand
Ar^^^^ces and Lies (...) exclude those they hated, wa^ the Reason this was
(...).
The Laws punish Crimes, but how much better were it for us to provide none
shall be committed?

LXX. Against which Tiberius spoke. That he was not ignorant of the Reports of
Silanus, but common Fame was not always to be believed. Many had behaved
themselves otherwise in the Provinces, than we hoped or feared. For some being
employed in weighty Affairs, have been excited I have often thought, says
Ammirato, from whence it comes that some Men behave themselves better in
Business, others worse than was looked for. For Example, Vespasian was better
and more Moderate, after he was Emperor; when on the contrary, it is said, Galba
would have always been thought worthy of it, if he had not Reigned. Pius IV.
who may be compared to the first, exceeded all was expected from him; when
Clement VII. whom every one thought fit to be Pope, s^cceeded no better than
Galba. To seek this Difficulty, we will use a Comparison. There are two
Vessels, one small and full, the other large and almost empty; The full Vessel
is like a Man in an Employment suitable to his Abilities; Those who see him
carry himself so well in it, conclude he would do the like in a Greater, not
taking notice, that his Vessel is as full as it can hold, and if more be put
in, it will run over. So Galba, while a Private Man, seemed much greater than
he was. The large Vessels, almost Empty, or at least not Full, are the Men of
great Capacity, who having neither Estates nor Employments suitable to their
Merit, are not much esteemed, whether it is that they use not all their
Diligence or Exactness in what they do, or not being proportionate, we cannot
judge what may be expected from them. But when their Condition is such as to
all their Vessel, they show, contrary to common Expectation, that greatness of
Soul and sublimeness of Genius, that their lower Fortune buried. Vespasian
taking not all the Care he should to have cleansed the Streets, Caligula
ordered the Skirt of his Gown to be filled with Dirt and Filth, and in Nero's
Reign, he had like to have lost his Life for sleeping while Nero played. Which
is not to be wondered at, considering he was not born for these Trifles, and
that to fill his Vessel he wanted the Government of the World, which he
afterward held. Discourse onzieme du livre 3. de son Commentaire sur Tacit.
The Father of William Duke of Mantua, would have had him a Priest, because h^
was little and Crooked, judging of his Soul by his Body; but he would not, and
when he was Duke he showed by his Acquisition of Montserrat, and some other
Places, that a Great Soul may be lodged in a Little Body. To conclude, how many
excellent Men die without being known, who would have been admired, i^
femploy'd? How could Arnaud d'Ossat have showed his Abilities, if Henry IV. of
France had not made him his Procurator, to solicit his Absolution at Rome?
to better Behavior, others became more sloathful. That a Prince could not
foresee all things; Neither was it Expedient he should be led away by the
Ambition of others. That Laws were made against Facts, because future things
are uncertain. So was it ordained by our Ancestors, That Punishments should
follow Offenses. Therefore they were not to alter what was so wisely Decreed
What judicious Princes have done, cannot reasonably be changed, unless
Experience shows some Inconvenience; and it is plainly seen the same may be
mended. Section 1. die chap. 4. la premiere Party du Testament Politic.
. That Princes had Charge sufficient There is no greater Charge than doing
Justice, i^ a Prince would be a perfect Sovereign. Sovereignty, says A^tonio
Perez, is a Charge, and consequently the Actions of him who exercises it,
depend not on his own Will; but on the Rules and Conditions the People have
required and he accepted. And if a Prince observes them not, because they are
only Humane Contracts; yet he cannot depart from those the Laws of God and
Nature have pre^cri^'d, which are Superior to Kings, as we^l as Peasants. Dans
les Aforis^^s de Relations. And in another place he says, That Kings ^^owns are
made Circular, as an Emblem of the ^ounds of Humane Power. (...) the Catholic
said, The surest way to keep a Throne, was to balance the Interests of the
Kingdom and People.
, and Power enough; That as their Power increased, the Laws grew weak, and
Absolute Power was not to be used, where the Laws would do. This Answer was the
better received, because Tiberius was seldom Popular* And as he was Wife in
moderating things (unless transported with Passion) he said, The Island Gyarus
was Barbarous and Uninhabited, and was for their showing so much Favor to one
of the Iunian Family, and that had been of their own Body, as to send him
rather to Cythera: Which Torquata, Silanus's Sister, a Lady of eminent Virtue,
desired, and all condescended to.

LXXI. Afterward the Cyrenians were heard, and Caesius Cordus, upon the
Accusation of Ancarius Priscus, was condemned for Corruption. L. Ennius, a
Roman Gentleman, was accused of Treason for converting the Prince's Statue into
common uses in Plate, Tiberius acquitted him, yet Ateius Capito openly
complain^d, and with great Liberty said, That the Determining such a Matter
ought not to be taken from the Senate, nor so heinous a Crime go unpunished;
That the Emperor might be as merciful as he pleased, in punishing Offenses
committed against himself* yet ought not to pardon those against the
Commonwealth There is no Flattery more agreeable, nor more refined, than what
pretends to Correction or Liberty, for that catches Men, and especially
Princes, by their weak side, Self-love. Plut^rch says, this pretended Liberty
is like Blows from Ladies, which instead of hurting, irritate and provoke to
Pleasure. Princes have common Flatteries so continually in their Ears, that
they would be wear^ed with them, if this Court-Food was not dressed different
ways, which recovers the Appetite their Favou^ites are concerned should not be
cloyed.
. Tiberius understood these things rather in the sense they were intended, than
as they were spoken, and persisted in acquitting Ennius. This was the more
Dishonorable in Capito, that he who was so learned in Humane and Divine Laws,
should so blemish himself the Public The Latin is, egregium publicum, Emanuel
Suegro renders it la reputation de la Republic^; Don Carlos Colonna, la
reputacion publica; Adri^no Potiti, la reputacione publica; M. de Cha^v^alon,
I'Etat; Rodolphus with this Paraphrase. That Capito had tarnished the Luster of
his public Actions and Domestic Virtues. A Sense which appears very
reasonable, considering this Senator had been Consul, and consequently a
Public Magistrate. Tacitus had perhaps a mind to speak of his different States
of Life.
and the good Qualities that were so Eminent in him Ill Men, says Commines, are
the worse for their Knowledge, but it mends those that are well disposed.
Gentlemen of the Long Robe, are very requisite for Princes when honest; but if
otherwise, they are very dangerous. Livre 2. Chap. 6. and Livre 5. Chap.
derniere. Pope Nicholas III. was used to say, Knowledge without Honesty, was
Poison without Remedy. Pagli. Observe. 431.
.

LXXII. Then a Question arose, in what Temple the Offering should be placed,
which the Roman Knights had Vowed to Fortuna Equestris, for Augusta's Recovery:
For though that Goddess had many Temples in the City, none bore that Name Livy in
his 42th Book says the contrary, mentioning, That Q. Fulvius Flaccus, when
Praetor in Spain, vowed a Temple to Fortuna Equestris, which he built after at
Rome, when Livius Posthumus Albinus and Marcus Popilius Lenas were Consuls, and
he Censor: But this Temple being never dedicated, whether by reason of Fulvius
his Death, who died the year after he was Censor, or because this Building was
not then finished, it is probable Tacitus therefore said, there was no Temple of
that Name in Rom^, for the Name was not given but at the Ceremony of Dedication.
There was one found so called at Antium, and all the Rites in the Cities of
Italy, the Temples and Images of the God's being subject to the Roman Empire,
they appointed it should be placed at Antium. And this matter being in Debate,
Tiberius takes occasion to give his Opinion, which he had deferred, about
Servius Maluginensis, Priest of Jupiter. He produced, and read a Decree of the
Pontiffs. That when the Flamen, Dial, or Priest of Jupiter fell into any
sickness, he might with the High Priest's Permission, be absent from Rome two
days, provided it was not on the Days of Sacrifice It is melancholy thing to
consider, that Pagans should make their false Priests so strictly keep
Residence, and that the frequent Injunctions and Laws are not su^ficient to do
the like among Christians. A Priest of Jupiter could not be absent from Rome
above two days, and those when he had no Religious Duty to perform. Now it is
too common to see Bishops and Clergymen whole years absent from their Diocesses
and Cures, and are little known but by their receiving Rents and Tithes. What
would S. Bernard say, who so pas^ionately desired to see the Church of God in
the same Condition as in the Apostle's time, when laxabant retia in cap^uram,
says he to Pope Eugenius, non in capturam auri vel argenti sed in capturam
animarum. Epist. 237. However, says Lewis XIII. of France, in a Circular Letter
that he writ to the Clergy about Residence, there is not one can be ignorant
that the Canons of the Church, (which King's are to see observed) and the Laws
do oblige to an actual Residence, (upon which chiefly dep^nds good Order and
Discipline in their Diocesses. Tome 5. des Memoires du Cardinal Richlieu.
Bishoprics, says Cardinal d'Ossat, are the greatest and most important Charges
of the Church, which cannot be well administered without the Presence and
Residence of Prelates, especially in so disorderly a time as this is, for a
Bishop has enough to do to discharge it well when he is present; however
careful, diligent and zealous he is. Lettre 328. What Denis de Marquemont,
Archbishop of Ly^ns, writ to Cardinal Richlieu to be recalled into France, is
stronger and more affecting. Rome, says he, which was formerly my Eden and
Delight, is become so insuppo^table in this my last Voyage, that I have no
Heart, nor Health, nor Desire to stay there longer. It Is not fit for an
Archbishop of Lions, and an old Man, to pass his time in Anti-Chambers. I
forbear mentioning what is most considerable, the Reproaches of my Conscience,
and those Comforts I am deprived of, and continually thirst after, which I have
had the Experience of in the Exercise of the Duties of my Function. Dans les
Memories du Ministre du Cardinal de Richlie^. Don Francisco Sarmiento, Bishop
of Iaen, re^used the Office of President of Castille, which Philip II. pressed
him to take, telling him he could not in Conscience do it, since he believed
Residence of Divine Right.
, nor more than twice in a year. Which being ordained in Augustus's time,
sufficiently showed they could not be absent a whole year, nor consequently
govern Provinces. He remembered likewise the Example of L. Metellus the
High Priest, who kept Aulus Posthumous, Jupiter's Priest in the City. And
therefore Asia came to his share, who was next among the Consuls to
Maluginensis.

LXXIII. Then Lepidus desired leave of the Senate to Repair and Beautify at
his own Charge, Paulus Emilius's Basilica, The Basilicae were very spacious and
beautiful Edifices, designed not only for the Senate to sit in, but for the
Judges to, in Decision of all sorts of Causes, and for the Lawyers to receive
their Clients.
, the Monument of that Family. For at that time, particular Men endeavored to
show their Magnificence by public Buildings, and Augustus forbid Statilus
Taurus built an Amphitheatre, Philippus the Temple of Hercules, surnamed of the
Muses, and Balbus, a Theater. Taurus and Balbus, who had both made their
Fortune in the Wars, laid out only the Spo^ls they took from the Enemies, but
Philippus built out of his own Estate.
not Taurus, Philippus, and Balbus, bestowing the Spoils they had taken from
the Enemy, or their great Riches, for the Ornament of the City and Glory of
Posterity. In imitation of which Examples, though Lepidus was not very rich, yet
would he revive the Honor of his Ancestors. Pompey's Theater, that was
accidentally burnt, the Emperor promised to rebuild at his own Charges, there
being none of that Family left able to do it, and that it should still retain
Pompey's Name An extraordinary Example of Modesty, that is followed by few or
no Princes, o^ great Men, who often take the Honor of that to themselves that
has cost them nothing. In Innocent X's time* S. Peter's Church in Rome was
called S. Peter's Dove-Coat, to expose the ridiculous vanity of this Pope, that
set up his Arms there in a thousand Places. Eutropius, said Constantine, called
the Emperor Hadrian, The Pellitory of the Wall. because his Name was writ every
where. This Vanity is now very common: It Is seen upon the Walls, upon the
Glass, upon the Hangings, and even upon the Altars. I speak not of Kings,
Princes, or other great Men, but Upstarts and Citizens, whose Arms we meet with
every where.
. On this Occasion he much commended Sejanus, to whose Vigilance he imputed it,
that the Fire did no more mischief, and the Senate Decred, Sejanus's Statue
should be erected in the Theater.

LXXIV. A little after, when Tiberius honored Iunius Bloesus, Proconsul of
Africa, with a Triumph, he said, he did it in regard to Sejanus, whose Uncle he
was; yet Blaesus had deserved those Honors. For Tacfarinas, tho^ routed
several times, rallied his Troops together in the middle of Africa, and had the
Insolence to send Ambassadors to Tiberius, to require a Country for himself and
his Army, or else threatened perpetual War. It Is said, Tiberius was never in
greater Passion for any Affront to him or People of Rome, than to have a
Traitor and Robber deal with him like a just Enemy A Prince should never admit
his Rebel Subject to treat with him; for besides, that it is an Example of
dangerous consequence, it is i^ some measure making a Subject his equal, or
independent. Robert de la Marck, says Don Iuan Antonio de Vera, came a third
time into Germany, from whence he was driven by the Emperor's Captains, for
Charles V. would never march in Person against this Rebel, who deserved only
Contempt, remembering what Herodotus writ of the Slaves of Scythia, that had
taken Arms against their Masters, and made Head against them in the Field,
being proud of the regard had to them in going against them as just Enemies;
but when their Masters laid down their Arms, and took Scourges and Rods to meet
them, these Wretches submitted, when they saw the Contempt their Masters had
for them. Dans l'Epitome de la Vie de Charles Quint.
. Spartacus, after he had with Impunity harrassed Italy, defeated so many
Consular Armies, and burnt so many Towns, was never Capitulated with, though the
Commonwealth was then weakened with the Wars of Sertorius and Mithidrates, and
when the City is in a flourishing Condition shall she make Peace with
Tacfarinas, a Robber, and give him Lands? He committed this matter to Blaesus,
with order to promise Pardon to those would lay down their Arms, and to take
their Captain what Rate soever he cost him.

LXXV. Most of his Men accepted Pardon, and made War upon him in the like
manner as he had done upon others. For as he wanted strength, and understood
pillaging better than they, he commonly divided his Army into several Parts,
would fly when attacked, and draw the Romans into Ambuscades, if they pursued.
Their Army was divided into three Parts, one of which was commanded by
Cornelius Scipio, Blaesus's Lieutenant, who was to march where Tacfarinas
wasted the Leptins, and the Retreats of the Garamantes. Blaesus's Son led
another Body to keep the Cirtensians from joining him. The General marched in
the middle, erecting Castles and Fortresses in ^itting Places, which brought
the Enemy into great Streights. For which way soever he went, he found the
Roman Forces in his Front, on his Flanks, or his Rear, and so had many killed,
or taken. Afterward Blaesus divided these three Bodies into several Parties,
the Command of which he gave to Captains of Experienced Courage. And when
Summer was over, he drew not his Men out of the Field, and sent them into
Winter Quarters in Old Africa So they called at Rome, that part of the Province
the Romans gained from the Carthaginians.
, as was usual, but as if it had been the beginning of War, having built new
Forts, he followed Tacfarinas with light Horsemen, that were well acquainted
with those Deserts, who daily changed his Quarters The Latin calls them
Map^lia, poor little Hutts.
, till his Brother was taken, then retired with more speed than was for the
quiet of the Country, leaving those behind him might revive the War. But
Tiberius concluding it ended, allowed Blaesus the Honor to be saluted Emperor
by the Legions. An ancient Honor victorious Armies formerly gave their
Generals, upon the first transports of their Joy. And had sometimes several
Emperors together, all of equal Dignity. Augustus granted some of his Captains
this Honor, and Tiberius at last to Blaesus.

LXXVI. This year two great Men died, Asinius Saloninus, Nephew to M. Agrippa
and Pollio Asinius, and Brother to Drusus He was the Son of Vipsania, Agrippa's
Daughter, Tib^rius's first Wife. and Drusi^'s's Mother.
, designed to have been Married to one of Germanicus's Daughters; and Capito
Ateius, who was mentioned before, and had raised himself by his Studies to the
highest Dignity in the City, but his Grandfather Sullanus was only a Centurion,
and his Father Praetor Augustus hastened him the Consulship, that by the Dignity
of that Office, he might be preferred before Labeo Antistius It Is very usual
for Princes to advance one Man thereby to lessen another of greater Merit, they
hate. For this Reason, Philip II. of Spain preferred almost in every thing, the
Prince d'Eboli before the Duke d'Alva. At the beginning of the Regency of the
late Queen Mother of France, Cardinal Mazarine, continued the Seals to the
Chancellor Segnier, who was hated both by him and the Regent, that he might
have a Man of Wit and Quickness to oppose to M. de Chasteauneuf that pretended
to them, and to the Duchess of Chevr^use, who labored all she could to have
brought her Adorer and Martyr into the Ministry. So the Regent called M. de
Chasteauneuf. Memoires de M. de Chas^re.
, who was not inferior to him. For that Age had these two great Ornaments of
Peace together, but Labeo was most esteemed by reason of his Freedom How good
soever Princes are, they never love those who want Complaisance. Majesty is so
used to Respect, that whatever savours of Freedom is insupportable. There are
few Princes like Stephen de Battor, King of Poland, who gave the rich
Palatinate of Sandomir to Stani^^as Pekoslawski, who when he was Deputy from
that Province to the Diet, always opposed him. Pekoslawski, said Stephen, when
he named him to the Palatinate, Is a very bad Deputy, but very good Soldier. A
memorable Example (says the Bishop of Pre^^ilz) of Generosity and Moderation,
and the more Commendable, because this Prince valued his Merit, when he had
cause to hate his Person. Piajecki dans sa Cronique. What Pope Julius III. did
in savor of Brac^io Martelli, whom he removed from the poor Bishopric of
Fiesole to the rich Church of Leccia, though he had always stiffly opposed the
Authority of the Legates in the Council of Trent, where Julius had presided in
that Capacity, is one of the noblest Examples of the last Age. Le Cardinal
Pallavicin chapter 1. du. 13. Livre^ de son Histoire du Concile de Trent. Scipio
A^^nirato says, That this Prelate's good Life made the Clergy of Leccia, who
lived very dissolutely when he came to the Diocese, so regular and virtuous,
that the strictest Observers were satisfied with them. Disc. 9 du livre 3. de
son Comm^ntaire sur Tacit.
of Speech This was he, that giving his Vote for L^pidus to be Senator,
answered Augustus, who asked him, I^ he knew no Man sitter, that every one had
his Opinion. Upon which, Augustus being so ince^^'d, as to threaten his Life*
Labeo, without changing his Countenance, or Courage, replied, That he thought
he made a good Choice, when he was for one whom Augustus continued in the
Dignity of High Priest.
; and Capito's Complaisance was more acceptable to the Princes. One was much
valued, because of the Injury done him in that he was not advanced higher than
a Praetor When a great Man's Merit is generally known, the refusing him those
Employments and Honors he deserves, recommends him to Posterity. And while he
lives, the public Compassion recompenses the wrong done him. And it is a Glory
to him to have it asked, Why he is not a Marshal, or a Governor of a Province,
because it is an Argument he is worthy of them. Ciaconius, asked with
Admiration, Why St. Thomas Aqu^nas was not Created Cardinal as well as St.
Bonadventure, whom he equalled both in Learning and Sanctity. And I may
likewise ask, says a Modern Writer, Why St. Bernard was not a Cardinal as well
as so many other Religious, his Disciples: But it is believed his Book De
Consideratione ad Eugenium Papam, boldly writ, and his Remonstrances to many
Cardinals, whose Behavior he could not bear, were the Reasons Pope Eugenius
his Disciple made him not a Cardinal. Traite de l'Origine des Cardinaux, chap.
6. Nothing exposes a Courtier to more Envy, than to be called too soon to
Employments, to the excluding others of higher Birth and Merit from them. The
Promotion of Bartelemi de Caransa, a Dominican, to the Archbishopric of
Toledo, created him as many Enemies and Persecuters as there were Prelates in
Spain. Don Hernando de Valdez, Archbishop of Sevile, and Inquisitor General,
who expected this Primacy of Toledo, accused him for not being Orthodox, and
many Religious of the same Order, Counselors of the Holy Office, joined with
this Grand Inquisitor; so that this poor Prelate, the first Archbishop of
Spain, was to be a Sacrifice to Calumny; when if Phillip II. had led him by
degrees to this eminent Dignity, no one had taken notice of his Elevation and
his Prince's Favor. Cabrera chapter 10. du live. 4. de son Histoire. Don Bartelemi
was 17 years in the Prisons of the Inqui^^tion, 7 at Madrid, and 10 at Rome,
where he died in 1576.
, and the other envied because he was made Consul1.

LXXVII. And Iunia died in the 64th year after the Philippensian War. She was
Cato's Neice, C. Cassius's Wife, and M. Brutus's Sister. Her Will was much
discoursed of There is always much discourse of great Person's last Wills,
which are the most faithful Mirrours of their Sense and Manners. Testamenta
hominum speculum morum, says Pliny Junior. While they live, you commonly know
not their Hearts, they so disguise themselves, but when they die, their
Testaments clear all Doubts, and undeceive many that thought they had the best
share in their Esteem and Affection. What Philip II. of Spain did in 1580. at
Badajoz, when he thought he should Die, discovered to Queen Anne, who expected
the Regence, that she had a Husband of Tiberius's Opinion, not to trust Women
with Power. The sincerity of a Man when he makes his Will, appears fully,
Cardinal Richlieu's Testament Politic to Lewis 13. There you see the King's
Picture drawn to the Life, there you have all the good Counsel an able Minister
can give his Prince, exquisit^ Policy, great Thoughts, bold Truths, a Masculine
Eloquence, and admi^able Wit: But Self Love, which, according to the old
saying, is the last Shirt a Wise Man puts off, has made him commit an Error, in
spea^ing too much of his Services, particularly in the first Chapter of the
first Part, which is more to his own Commendation than his Master's. For the
rest, as to his manner of Drawing Lewis XIII. as a Prince and Magistrate, there
is cause to say, A Testament discovers many Thoughts the Testator durst not
divulge in his Lif^ time. Chapter 7. de la premier Party.
, because when she had honorably named all the great Persons, and left them
Legacies, she omitted Tiberius Those that are Born Rebublicans find it very
difficult to quit the Love of Liberty, witness Iunia, who after 64 years living
under Augustus and T^b^rius, preserved always the same Sentiments, in which her
Uncle, Brother an^ Husband dies. So her Will could not fail being Republic^n as
well as her Family, which had been for many Ages the Bullwark and Palladium o^
Liberty.
, which he took not ill There are some things that are not only more seemly,
but more expedient for a Prince to dissemble, than resent. Tiberius could not
show himself displeased with Iunia's Will, without disobliging all the great
Persons she had named in it, so that they would have Cause to think he would
take away the Freedom of Testaments. Besides, Iunia seemed to have a good
Opinion of his Moderation and Justice, when she made the greatest Persons in
Rome her Heirs, without fearing the excluding him would overthrow her Will.
, neither hindered the Solemnizing her Funerals in an Oration to the People, and
other Ceremonies It is Generous to Honor Virtue in our greatest Enemies.
Rodolph Duke of Suabia, whom Pope Gregory VII. made Emperor in the room of
Henry IV. that was Excommunicated and Deposed, being Buried at Mersbourg, like
an Emperor, the Saxons would have taken a Plate of Brass from his Monument, on
which was his Arms, with the Imperial Crown, and other Marks of Sovereignty, to
avoid Henry IV's Resentment, who had gained two Battles against the Rebels; but
he forbid them, saying, He wished all his Enemies as honorably Buried. Heiss.
dans son Histoire de l'Empire, Vie d'Henry IV. The Duke de Sesse, Viceroy of
Naples, under Phil^p II. of Spain, caused a stately Mausolaeum to be erected to
the famous Captain, Pedro Navarro, though he took part with Francis I. of France
against his Sovereign Charles V. and Died at Naples by the Hand of Justice.
Quamvis Gallorum parts secutum, says the Epitaph, pro sepulcri ^^^ere
honestavit, c^m hoc habeat in se praeclara virtus, ut etiam in host sit
admirabilis. This Duke, says De Maurier, paid Respect to Virtue in an Enemy,
and a Rebel, and not content to Esteem him in his Heart, he raised him a
Mausoleum. Dans la Preface de ses Memoires de Hollande. Philip II. of Spain,
after he cut off Don Iuan de la Nuca's Head, who took up Arms in the Defense of
the Privileges of Arragon, ordered his Body to be carried to the Burial Place
of his Ancestors by ten Noble Persons to pay Respect to his Worth, whose Person
he had punished. Chapter 10. des dits and des faits de Philippe II.
. The Images of Twenty Noble Houses were carried before her Body, among which
were those of the Mantii, Quincti, and others of their Rank. But Cassius and
Brutus were the more remembered, because their Images The Glory of Great Persons
depends not on the Humor nor Ill Will of Princes. They are gro^^y mistaken,
that think that the Suppression of their Images, or Praises can bury their
Memory in Eternal Oblivion. Princes can make Men hold their Tongues, but cannot
make them forget the good Actions of those have deserved Universal Applause.
The Complaisance, every Man has for his Prince, suspends for a time
Commendation and Honors that are due to them, but when he is Dead, Liberty
succeeds Restraint, and revenges upon the Memory of the Oppressor, the
Injustice done to those that are oppressed.
were not seen there.

The End of the First Volume*
THE Life of AGRICOLA.
By JOHN POTENGER, Esquire
I. IT has been usual heretofore to transmit the Deeds, and Manners of famous
Men to Posterity, neither is it omitted in our Times, though the Age is very
careless of its own Transactions, as often as any great, and noble Virtue
proves so transcendent as to ba^fle Envy, and prevent Ignorance, Vices equally
common to great, and little Cities. But as our Predecessors were apparently
more prone to Actions, worthy to be recorded, so every celebrated Wit was
induced, by the mere Reward of doing well, to an impartial Publication of their
Virtues: Nay, many have thought ^it to be their own Historians, not through
Arroganc^, but a just Assurance of their good Behavior. Neither is it any
Discredit, or Objection to the Memoirs of Rutilius, or Scaurus, that they were
written by their own Hands; so highly is Virtue esteemed, when frequently
practiced: But I, who am about to write the Life of a dead Man, have need of
Pardon, which I should not crave, were I not to write in Times so malignant
toward the Virtuous.

II. We have read of Arulenus Rusticus, and Herenius Senicen made Capital
Offenders; the one for praising Priscus Heluidius, the other, for commending
Petus Thrasea; nay, the Books as well as the Authors were executed: A
Triumvirate being appointed to burn those Monuments of famous Men, in the
Public Assembly, and in the open Market, believing by their Flames, the
Peoples Freedom of Speech the Liberty of the Senate, and the good Conscience of
Mankind would be destroyed. And by the Expulsion of Wise Men, and the
Banishment of honest Arts, Goodness it self would be extirpated. We have given
ample Proofs of our Patience; for, as the former Age saw the End of Liberty, so
we have the Extremity of Servitude, being deprived, by frequent Inquisitions,
of the Commerce of the Ear, and Tongue; so that we had lost our Memory with our
Voice, could we as easily forget, as be silent.

III. Now at last our Spirits are revived: But if in the beginning of this
blessed Age, Nerva Caesar has reconciled two former Opposites, Liberty and
Sovereignty; and Caesar Trajan daily increases our Happiness under Kingly
Government; so that we have not only fair Hopes, and a longing Desire, but a
strong Assurance of the Public Safety: Yet, such is the Infirmity of Human
Nature, Remedies work slower than the Disease. And as our Bodies, that grow by
degrees, quickly perish; so it is easier to suppress, than restore Wit, and
Learning, there being a kind of Charm in Idleness that makes Sloth, which was
at first troublesome, turn to Delight. What, if for fifteen Years, a large
Space of Human Life, many have fallen by Accident, but the more Eminent by the
Cruelty of the Prince? Yet some of us have not only survived our
Contemporaries, but, if I may so speak, our selves, so many Years being
subtracted from the middle part of our Age; in which, if young, we grow old,
if old, we are passing in silence to the last Period of our Lives. But I shall,
without Regret endeavor, though in a rude Style, to relate our past Misery, and
our present Happiness. And I hope this Account, being dedicated to the Memory
of my Father-in-Law, Agricola, will, for its Piety, merit Pardon, if not Praise.

IV. Cnaeus Julius Agricola was born in the Ancient and Famous Colenny of
Forium Iulium: Both his Grandfathers were Procurators to their Prince: the
noble Employ of a Roman Knight. His Father Julius Graecinus was a Senator
eminent for Wisdom, and Eloquence; good Qualities that provoked the Rage of
Caius Caesar, who put him to death, for refusing to implead Marcus Silanus. He,
being bred up under the Wing of a tender Mother, Iulia Procilla, a Woman of a
singular Chastity, passed his Minority in acquiring Virtues suitable to his Age.
He was not only guarded from the Allurements of the Vicious by a natural
Probity, but by having, in his tender Years, Massilia the Seat, and Mistress of
his Studies; a Place that had exactly tempered a Provincial Parsimony, with a
Grecian A^^ability. I well remember, he frequently would relate how eagerly he
was bent in his Youth, on the Study of Philosophy, and the Law; more then was
allowed a Roman Senator. But his Mother's Prudence corrected this irregular
Heat. His high Spirit made him more vehement, than cautious in the Pursuit of
Glory, and Renown: But Age and Experience made him more temperate; but, what
was most difficult, he continued to bound his Desires with Discretion.

V. He made his first Campaign with great Approbation under Suetonius Paullinus
in Britain, a diligent, and good-natured General, who did him the Honor to
choose him for his Comrade. Agricola did not, like other Gallants, make War the
Business of Love, and Courtship: He was not addicted to Rambling, and Pleasure,
so as to have the Title, without the Skill of a Tribune; but spent his time in
discovering the Country, in making himself known to the Army, and being
informed by the Skilful; still following the Brave; never attempting any thing
out of Ostentation, or declining any Attempt for Fear. Never were Affairs in
Brit^in more desperate: Our old Soldiers slain, our Colonies burnt, our Army
intercepted; and we forced first to fight for Safety, and then for Victory.
These Exploits, by which the Province was recovered, though acted by the Advice,
or Conduct of another, were the General's Glory; and made our young Soldier
more emulous, as well as more experienced, his Soul being fired with an
Ambition of Military Fame, which was very disagreeable to those Times; in
which, to be Eminent was to be suspected; a great Name, and an ill one being
equally dangerous.

VI. He went hence to Rome to commence a Magistrate; and married Domitia
Decidiana, a Lady of a Noble Family, which Match was not only a Credit, but an
Advantage to his Rise: They mightily agreed, and loved; mutually preferring
each other; a Point of no great Consequence, only a good Wife is as great an
Ornament, as a bad one is a blemish to her Husband. 'Twas his Lot, as Questor,
to have Asia his Province, and Salvius Titianus, Pro-Consul, but he was
corrupted by neither; though a greedy Pro-Consul, and a wealthy Province, a fit
Prey for the Avaricious, might easily have made way for a mutual Connivance.
Here his Family, to his great Support and Comfort, was recruited with a
Daughter, having lost his Son a little before. The time between his being
Questor, and Tribune of the People, nay, the Year of his Tribuneship, he past
in Ease, and Quietness; well understanding the Temper of Nero's Court, where,
to do nothing was Policy; the same was the Course, and Silence of his
Pretorship: He executed no Judicial Office; he managed Plays, and other pompous
Vanities, by a Temper of Reason, and Liberality; the farther from Excess, the
nearer to Credit. He was appointed by Galba to Revise the Gifts, and Riches of
the Temples; who by a diligent Scrutiny preserved the Commonwealth from being
sacrilegiously pillaged by any but Nero.

VII. The next Year severely wounded him, and his Family: Otho's Fleet, loosly
roving along the Coasts, wasted Intemelium, a part of Liguria, and killed his
Mother at her Farm, which they spoiled, and plundered of its Wealth; the
occasion of her Murder: Going to perform his last Act of Piety, Agricola was
acquainted, by an Express, that Vespatian pretended to the Empire, with whom he
immediately sided. At first Mutianus was at the Head of Affairs, and governed
the City, Domitian being very young, and making no use of his being the Son of
an Emperor, but to live licentiously; Mutianus sent Agricola to take Musters,
which he did with Integrity, and Courage. And, understanding that their present
Lieutenant behaved himself seditiously, ^e gave him the Command of the
Twentieth Legion, which was hardly brought to take an Oath to Vespatian. A
Legion formidable, and too much for the Lieutenant-Generals, but wholly
ungovernable by their own: Though 'twas a Question, whether he was too weak, or
they too stubborn. Agricola was elected for his Successor and Revenger; but he,
with rare Moderation, would rather seem to find than make them good.

VIII. At this time Vectius Bolanus was Lieutenant of Britain, who was of too
mild a Disposition for so fierce a People. Agricola checked the Ardor of his
aspiring Spirit, fearing it should increase, for he had learned perfect
Obedience, and to act honestly to his Advantage. In a little time Petilius
Cerialis was Lieutenant General here: Now he had Space and Opportunity, to give
frequent Proofs of his Courage and Conduct. Cerialis first made him Share of
his Toil, and Danger, then of his Glory. Oftentimes, for an Experiment, letting
him Command a small Party, and, as he came off, a greater. Agricola never
boasted of his Performance, but ascribed all the Honor of the Action to his
Superior Officer. Thus by a virtuous Submission, and a Modesty in speaking of
himself, he lived without Envy, but not without Praise.

IX. Returning from being Lieutenant of the Legion, Vespatian made him a
Patrician; and with the Hopes of being Consul, which was designed him, gave him
the Government of Acquitane, a Command of the first Rank and Dignity. It has
been the Opinion of many, that Military Wits are not so refined, and polished,
Martial Proceedings being more coarse, and blunt; rather the Work of the Hand,
than Head; not using the Acuteness, and Subtility of Civil Courts. Yet
Agricola, bred a Soldier, by a natural Prudence, lived easily and fairly with
those Sharpers of the Law. Now he had set times for Business, and Diversion;
when he was on the Bench, and to give Judgment, he was grave, intent, severe,
but o^tenest merciful, if consistent with his Duty: Afterward there was no
Sign of his Authority, for he put off his Austerity, State, and Rigor; and,
what was seldom to be met with, his Kindness did not abate his Power, nor his
Severity, the Love of his Subjects. I should injure the Character of this Great
Man, should I tell how free he was from Corruption, or Bribery. He never would
purchase Fame, which good Men are fond of, by ^lie Arts, or confident Boasting:
He neither emulated his Colleagues, nor contended with the Procurators, knowing
to be overcome was a Shame, and to conquer no Honor. He continued three Years
in his Government, but was recalled with a Prospect of being Consul, returning
with the Opinion of all, that he was designed for Britain, because he was most
^it; not that any thing that dropped from him could occasion the Report. Fame
does not always mistake, but sometimes makes a good Choice; during his
Consulship he was so kind, as to promise me his hopeful Daughter, and when it
was ended, our Marriage was consummated: He was immediately made Governor of
Britain, to which was annexed a Pontificial Dignity.

X. Many Writers have described the Situation, and Inhabitants of Britain,
which I shall do; not to vie with them in Wit and Care, but because it was now
first totally subdued: That, which our Predecessors adorned with their
Eloquence, I shall faithfully relate. Of all the Islands that are known to the
Romans, Britain is the largest: Its Eastern Parts lie toward Germany, its
Western toward Spain, its Southern against France; there is no Land to be
described on the North, but an open and wide Sea, that continually beats upon
the Shore. Livy, the most Eloquent of the Ancient, and Fabius Rusticus of
Modern Authors, have compared its Figure to an Oblong Dish, or an Ax. That is
its Shape indeed, of this side Caledonia, and therefore Fame has applied it to
the whole: But there is a vast enormous Tract of Land, that, by Degrees, grows
narrower and narrower, like a Wedge; the Roman Fleet first doubling this Point,
affirmed Britain to be an Island, and at once discovered and conquered the
Isles of Orkney, 'till that time unknown. Thyle too, at a distance, it
descried, hid hitherto in Snow and Winter. The Sea here is said to be sluggish
and stiff to the Oar, not subject to be agitated by Winds: I suppose, because
the Continent is far off, and the Mountains upon it but few, which are thought
to be the Source and Nurseries of Winds and Tempests: Whereupon so continued a
Mass of deep Water, is difficult to be put into Motion. To enquire into the
Nature of the Sea, and Tides, is not my Business, it being done by others; but
this I shall say, The Empire of the Sea is no where more absolute, proudly
carrying Rivers of Water hither and thither; and does not only ebb and ^low,
but forces its passage into the Land, and climbs up to the Tops of Mountains,
as if they were its proper Road and Channel.

XI. Whether the first Inhabitants of this Island were Natives, or imported
Strangers, is hardly to be found in this, or any barbarous Nation. We may
conjecture at their Original, by the various Fashions of their Bodies: They
that live in Caledonia, are red Headed, big Limbed, which speaks them of a
German Extraction. The Swarthiness of the Silures, and their curled Hair, would
induce one to believe, by their Situation over against Spain, that the Iberi
had heretofore failed over, and planted themselves in these parts. They that
are Neighbors to the French, are like them, either because the Qualities, and
Strength of their Progenitors, continue in them; or, because, in Countries
bordering upon one another, the same Climate creates the same Complexion: But
it is generally believed, the French first Peopled those Parts. You may guess at
their Religion, by their superstitious Opinions. Their Speech differs but
little; with equal Boldness they challenge Dangers, and with equal Fear decline
them when they come: The British Fierceness has the Preference, being not at
present softened by a long and a sluggish Peace. The French were formerly brave,
but being invaded by Sloth and Idleness, they lost their Courage and their
Liberty. The same Fate attended the Britains heretofore. The rest remain such
as the French were.

XII. Their greatest Strength lies in their Infantry. Some Nations use Chariots
in War; the greatest Men drive them, and their Dependants defend them. They
were formerly governed by Kings; but now they are divided into Faction, and
Parties, by some Ringleaders. That which contributed most to our conquering
these Warlike Nations, was, their having no Common Council; seldom above two or
three Cities, at a time, concerted Methods of repelling the Common Foe: So that
whilst they fought singly, they were universally overcome. They have a
dropping, and a cloudy Sky; the Cold here is not sharp; the Days are of a
greater Length than ours; the Night is clear, and in the Extreme Parts short;
so that you scarce distinguish the Beginning from the Ending of the Day. They
affirm, if the Clouds did not interpose, the Rays of the Sun would be always
visible; and, that he does not rise and set, but glide by; because the Extreme
and Plain Parts of the Earth, project a low and humble Shadow, which makes
Night hang hovering under the Stars and Sky. The Soil will bear all sorts of
Grain, besides the Olive, and the Vine, and such as love a hotter Climate. It
is very fruitful, and every thing springs quickly, but ripens slowly; which is
the effect of moist Grounds, and showry Heavens. This Country produces Gold and
Silver, and other Metals, which defray the Charge of their Conquest. The Sea
breeds Pearl, not very Orient, but pale and wan: Some suppose it want of Skill
in those that pick them up; for in the Red Sea they are plucked from the Rock
alive, and breathing; but in Britain, they are gathered as they lie about in
the Sea: But, I believe, there is more want of Worth in the Pearl than Skill,
viz. Greediness in them who gather 'em.

XIII. The Britains suffer patiently the Levying of Men and Money, and
faithfully discharge all Public Employments imposed on them, if so be they are
not abused thereby, which to them is intolerable, being at present subdued to
Obedience, but not to Vassalage. Julius Caesar, although he first made a Descent
with his Army, and ^righted the People with a successful Battle, yet he
possessed himself of nothing but the Shore, and seemed rather to show, than
deliver them to Posterity. Now the Civil Wars of Rome turned the Great Men's
Swords upon the Commonwealth, and Britain was forgot, during a long Peace.
Augustus, but especially Tiberius, termed that Oblivion, State Policy: But it is
certainly known, Caius had a Design to attack Britain, had he not been of a
Temper to resolve suddenly, and as suddenly to alter his Resolution; or, had he
not been disappointed by the bad Success his Arms had in Germany; 'twas
Claudius who first effectually prosecuted its Conquest, transporting Legions,
and Auxiliaries, and taking Vespatian in to the Enterprise, which was a Prelude
to his future Greatness: Now it was, that Countries were reduced, Kings
captivated, and Vespatian made known to the World.

XIV. The first Lieutenant General,^ was Aulus Plautius; the next, Ostorius
Scapula, both great Commanders: By degrees, the nearest Parts were brought into
the Form of a Province, where a Colony of old Soldiers was planted. Some Cities
were bestowed on King Cogidunus (who continued faithful, even within our
Memory), according to an Ancient Practice of the Romans, who made Kings the
Instruments of the Peoples Slavery. What others acquired, Didius Gallus
preserved; and by erecting a few Castles farther up in the Country, sought to
gain the Reputation of having extended his Trust. Verantius followed Didius,
and died in a Year's time. After that, Suetonius Paullinus was very successful
for two Years, subduing Nations, and fortifying Garrisons; upon Confidence of
which, he was resolved to make an Attempt on the Island Mona, that still
furnished the Rebels with fresh Supplies.

XV. But this turning of his Back, gave the Britains a fair Opportunity, whose
Fear left them with the Lieutenant General; they had now leisure to consider
the Mischiefs of Bondage, and to compare their Miseries, and be inflamed by
their reflecting upon them: -- What was the Effect of their Patien^e, but to
have heavier Burdens laid upon their Shoulders, as if they were ready to bear
any thing? They had heretofore, but one King at a time, but now they had two; a
Lieutenant to be lavish of their Lives, and a Procurator to make havoc of
their Fortunes. Their Governor's Discord, or Concord* was equally pernicious
to the Subject; vexed by the Soldiers, and Centurions of the one, and the
Force, and Contumely of the other; nothing was exempted from their Luxury and
Lust: The Brave in Fight should plunder, but now their Houses were become a
Prey to base ignoble Cowards, their Children forced away, and Soldiers required
of them, as if they knew nothing but to die for their Country. If the Britains
would but Number themselves, they would find, how few of their Soldiers,
compared to them, had been brought over: The Germans shook off their Yoke, who
had not the Ocean, but a River only for their Defense: And, that they had the
juster Cause of War, their Country, Parents, and their Wives; whereas, their
Enemies had no pretense, but Avarice, and Luxury: Would they but emulate their
Ancestors, and not be daunted at the Event of one or two Battles, and consider,
that Men in Misery are apt to make the braver Attempts, and to go on with the
greater Perseverance, they might make these their Enemies as hastily return, as
their Ancestors did their first Invader, Julius, by calling away the Roman
General, and by detaining him, and his banished Army, in another Island, they
had vanquished the greatest Difficulty, which was to Consult; to which it may
be added, that it is more dangerous to be taken Plotting, than Fighting.

XVI. Having provoked each other, by such Discourses, and made Voadica, a
Woman, their Chief, no Sex being excluded the Government, they, by Consent,
made War together, pursuing those dispersed in Garrisons, taking their Forts,
invading their Colonies, as the Seat of Slavery and Oppression: Neither did
these conquering and incensed Barbarians, omit any sort of Cruelty. If Paulinus
had not been acquainted with the Revolt of the Province, and speedily sent
help, Britain had been utterly lost; but the Success of one Engagement, reduced
it to its former Obedience and Patience. A great many kept their Arms in their
Hands, being conscious of their own Guilt, and fearful of the
Lieutenant General; who, otherways a Great Man, to revenge this particular
Affront, behaved himself cruelly toward the poor People that surrendered.
Petronius Turpilianus was sent, a Person more exorable, and less acquainted
with their Crimes, which made him receive the Penitent with greater Mildness.
When he had composed these Differences, he delivered up the Province to
Trebellius Maximus; who being a less active Man than his Predecessors, and
wanting Knowledge in Military Affairs, maintained his Province by a gentle way
of looking after it. The Britains were so civil, as to pardon an Error so
grateful, and so easy to themselves. A Civil War breaking out, gave just
Excuse to his Remisness: But the Army began to mutiny; which, having been used
to Enterprise, now grew Loose for want of Action. Trebellius avoided their Fury
by Flight and Concealment, but lost his Authority; being forced to Govern
precariously, as if it had been agreed between him and the Army, that he should
live safely, provided they might live licentiously. This Sedition cost no
Blood. Vectius Bolanus came in his room, but the Civil Wars continuing, he
could not maintain Military Discipline in Britain, the Army being alike
careless of the Enemy, and troublesome to the Superior Officer in the Camp;
but being a harmless Man, and not having incurred any Ill Will by reason of any
Offense, he obtained Respect, instead of Authority.

XVII. But now Vespatian having won the Empire of the World, and Britain, his
Captains became Great, his Armies Famous, and the Enemies Hopes little:
Petilius Cerialis struck them with a present Terror, by assaulting the City of
the Brigantines, which was esteemed the most populous of the whole Province.
And after many sharp, and bloody Conflicts, he reduced and wasted the greatest
part of the Country. The bright Reputation of Cerialis was enough to eclipse
the Diligence, and Glory of a Successor; but Julius Frontinus, a Man as great
as Circumstances would permit, sustained the Charge with Honor, and Renown,
overcoming the Difficulties of Defiles, and Passes, and the Courage of the
Enemy; he subdued the stout and fighting Nation of the Silures.

XVIII. Agricola passing over, in the middle of Summer, ^ound Affairs in this
Posture, and these to be the various Turns of War: The Soldiers living
securely, as if the Business of the Expedition were over; and the Enemy as
intently watching all Advantages. The Ordovices just before his coming cut to
pieces almost a Squadron of Horse that lay in their Borders, with which
Proceeding the rest were so elevated, that some, desirous of War, approved of
the Example; others staid to see the new Lieutenant's Resolution. Agricola,
though the Summer was almost spent, and his Men dispersed up and down in the
Country, the Soldiers dreaming of nothing less than Action, which things
mightily crossed, and retarded his Warlike Designs: Nay, many thought it more
advisable, for the present, to guard the Places suspected, resolved to meet the
Danger, gathering together the Ensigns of the Legions, and some few Auxiliars;
the Ordovices not daring to come on even Ground, he placed himself at their
Head, to inspire them with the same Courage, exposing himself to the same
Hazard, and made the Army march and destroy almost the whole Nation; knowing
very well, that now was the time for gaining a Reputation; for as things happen
at the first, so they continue, most commonly, afterward: He therefore was
very intent upon the Reduction of the Isle of Mona; which, as I have related,
Paulinus was forced to quit upon the general Defection of Britain. But as in
dangerous Adventures, something is always wanting; so now they had no Ships to
transport their Men: But Agricola, by his Contrivance, and Constancy, carried
them over. After they had laid aside their Baggage; he chose the best, and most
expert of the Auxiliars, who understood all the Fords, and were admirable
Swimmers, and could manage their Arms, themselves, and their Horses at once;
and in this manner poured them on their amazed Enemies, who thought to have
seen a Navy, and Ships crossing the Sea, and not a War brought in to their
Country so miraculously: So that they concluded nothing was difficult, or
impregnable to such bold Adventurers. Whereupon they immediately supplicating
for a Peace, and delivering up the Island, Agricola began to be esteemed a
great, and valiant Commander. At his first entering upon the Government, he
applied that Time, to Labor and Hazard, which others spent in Show and
Complement: He did not let his Success prove fruitless; neither would he call,
the keeping the Vanquished in order, an Expedition, or a Victory; he did not
crown his Letters of Advertisement with Laurels, but increased the Glory of his
Arms, by taking no notice of it, while Men weighed with themselves, how great a
Prospect he must have of Things to come, who was so regardless of great Things
already done.

XIX. Being well acquainted with the Genius of his Province, and having learnt,
at other Men's Cost, that Arms avail little toward the settling of a Peace, if
Injuries are permitted, he was resolved to root out all Occasions of War: And
what was to some as difficult, as the Government of a Province, beginning with
himself and Family, he reformed his own House; he allowed no Bond or Free Man
to share in the Management of Affairs; he let no Soldiers immediately attend
his Person, that were privately recommended by Friends, or by the Praises, or
Entreaties of the Centurions; but he esteemed the best Soldier always the most
Faithful: He would be informed of all things, though he did not punctually exact
their Execution; he applied Pardon to small Faults, and Punishment to great
Ones; he prudently chose those Officers, that were likely to prove inoffensive,
rather than be put to the ungrateful Trouble of condemning them, when
Offenders: The Augmentation of Tribute and Corn, he mitigated by an equal
proportioning the Burden; and cut off all Extortion, which was more grievous
than the Imposition; for they made a Jest of the poor People, who were forced
to wait at the Granaries, when locked up, and to buy Corn, which they must sell
at a Price: Several ways* and far distant Places* were enjoined by the proud
Purveyors, that the Cities should carry their Provisions, not to the nearest,
but farthest Camp, which was out of the way, till that which was ready, and at
hand for all, was made the Advantage of a few.

XX. The rectifing these Matters, in the first Year of his Government, mightily
recommended Peace, which before, by the Connivance, or Negligence of his
Predecessors, was as dreadful as War. As soon as it was Summer, he drew his
Army together, commended those that marched orderly, but checked the Straglers;
he chose the Places for encamping, and in Person, tried the Bogs and Woods; he
gave the Enemy no rest, being never free from Incursions, and Ravage; when he
thought he had scared them enough, then he would hold his hand, forbearing Acts
of Hostility to sweeten them to a Peace. These Methods of proceeding, wrought
so upon many Cities, which, till that time had stood upon equal Terms with him;
that they, laying aside their Animosity, voluntarily submitted, giving
Hostages, and permitting Garrisons and Forts, to inviron them; which was done
with so much Care and Judgment, that no part before of the Roman new Conquest
in Britain, was free from the frequent Insults of the Enemy.

XXI. The ensuing Year was spent in wholesome Councels, to bring this Rough and
Warlike People, living dispersed, and ready to take Arms upon all Occasions, to
Peace and Quietness, by showing them the Pleasures thereof: In order to which,
he privately exhorted, and publicly joined with them to build Temples, Houses,
and Seats of free Justice, praising the Forward, repremanding the Backward;
which bred in them such an Emulation of Honor, that did as much as Compulsion.
Then he took care to have the Sons of the Princes instructed in the Liberal
Arts and Sciences; preferring their Wit, and Capacity, before the Industry of
the French: So that they, who just before, scorned the Roman Language, now
studied their Eloquence, and had their Garb in Esteem, the Gown being
frequently worn; by degrees, they past to the Softness of their Vices, erecting
Portico's, costly Baths, and making sumptuous Entertainments; which sad and
certain Badges of Slavery, the Ignorant termed good Breeding.

XXII. The third Year of the Expedition discovered new Nations, wasting the
Country as far as an Arm of the Sea, called Taus, which so intimidated the
Enemy, that they did not dare to attack an Army, harassed with Tempests; which
gave the Romans time to build Forts and Castles, as they pleased. The best
Judges of War, made it their Observation, that no General chose his Ground with
more Prudence, or built Castles better secured, than Agricola; never any being
forced, or delivered up upon Capitulation, or deserted for Fear; they made
frequent Incursions, and were furnished with yearly Provisions, to sustain a
Siege; the Winter Quarters were secure, every Garrison being its own Protection:
The Enemies endeavors were so frustrated, that they despaired, as formerly, by
Reprizals in Winter, to repair their Losses in Summer; for they were equally
repulsed in both Seasons. Agricola never poorly intercepted the Glory of an
Action, due to an inferior Officer, but faithfully attested his Merit. Some
thought him too bitter in rebuking; but as he was severe to the Bad, so he was
mild to the Good: He never was malicious, though angry; there was no fear of his
Reservedness, or Silence; he thought it was more honest to offend, than hate.

XXIII. The fourth Summer was passed in securing what he had acquired: And if
the Courage of the Army, and the Roman Glory would have permitted, this had
been the Bounds of their Conquest in Britain. Glota and Bodotria, two opposite
Arms of the Sea, being carried up into the Continent, are only separated by a
Neck of Land, which was then guarded by a Garrison; so that the Romans were
absolute Lords of all on this side, driving the Enemy, as it were, into another
Island.

XXIV. Agricola passed over in the first Ship, and after several prosperous
Encounters, subdued Countries never before known. In that Part of Britain, that
looks toward Ireland, he quartered his Forces, not out of any apprehension of
Danger, but hope of Advantage; Ireland lying between Britain and Spain, and
very commodiously for France, would have united the strongest Parts of the
Empire, to their mutual Convenience. If you compare Ireland with Britain, it is
much less, but far bigger than any of the Islands of our Sea: The Climate, the
Nature, the Fashion of the People, are not much differing from the British:
Their Ports are commodious, and their Entrance secure; very well understood by
Trading Merchants. Agricola entertained a petty Prince of that Country, driven
out of his Dominions by his rebellious Subjects: He kept him fast with him,
under Pretense of Friendship, but it was indeed, to serve his own Turn upon
occasion. I have often heard him say, That with one Legion, and a moderate
Force of Auxiliars, all Ireland might easily be reduced; and that it would be
an Advantage against Britain, to have it sur^ounded by the Roman Arms, and its
Liberty out of sight.

XXV. In the Summer of the sixth Year of his Employment, being apprehensive of
a general Insurrection of all the Kingdoms beyond Bodotria, and suspecting all
the ways to be infested by the Enemy, he examined all the Ports with his Fleet,
which was now made part of his Military Strength; and following, made a gallant
Show, at once a War coming upon the Enemy by Land, and Sea: The Horse, and
Foot, and Mariners frequently encamped together, and mixing Company, and Mirth,
would alternately boast their Exploits, and Adventures; the Land-men telling
what tall Woods they had passed, and high Mountains they had climbed; the
Seamen, how they had been tossed and shattered by Waves and Tempests; one
vaunting their Victory over the Earth, and Man, the other over the proud Ocean.
As I have been informed, the Britains were quite dejected at the Sight of our
Fleet; we having deprived them of the last Refuge of the Vanquished, by
discovering their Sea, hitherto unknown. The Inhabitants of Caledonia resolving
upon Arms and War, with great Preparations, and greater Noise, Things unknown
being more in report than reallity, and assaulting our Castles, began to make
us afraid of them, as Men used to be of Aggressors; the Fearful to cover their
want of Courage, gave prudent Advice, persuading him to retreat to the other
side of Bodotria, rather than be forced: But being informed, the Enemy would
fall on him, in several Parties, he marched with his Army, divided into three
Bodies, that he might not be enclosed by their Superior Numbers, or
disadvantaged, by their better Knowledge of their Country.

XXVI. Which, when the Enemy perceived, they suddenly changed their Designs;
and altogether in the Night, broke in upon the Ninth, the most feeble Legion,
killing the Sentinels, and surprising the Camp; the Men being all asleep, or
amazed with fear; and now the Fight was brought within the Trenches: But
Agricola having learned by his Spies, which way the Enemy marched, followed
them at the Heels, and commanded the foremost of the Horse and Foot, to fall on
their Rear: The whole Army was to make a general Shout; and at Daybreak, the
glittering Ensigns appeared. In this Con^lict, the Britains Courage abated, and
the Romans returned, not fighting for Safety, but Glory and Honor. Now the
Romans were Aggressors; there was a cruel Fight in the narrow Gates of the
Camp, 'till the Enemy was routed, one part of the Army contending to bring
Succor, the other fighting, to show they did not want it: If the Fens and the
Woods had not hid them in their flight, we had ended the War, by gaining this
Victory.

XXVII. Upon the fighting this Battle so resolutely, and the winning of it so
bravely, the Army grew fierce and bold, presuming nothing could resist their
Courage: They cried out, to be led into Caledonia, that by a continued Series
of Victories, they might be brought to the utmost Limits of Britain: And our
late cautious, and wise Counselors began to speak big, and to be very daring,
now the Danger was over. This is the unjust Condition of War, that all claim
their Share in good Success, but bad is imputed but to one: The Britains
supposing themselves defeated, not by the Courage of their Adversaries, but
Conduct of their General, who had watched his Opportunity, abated nothing of
their Arrogance, but listed the stoutest Men they had, and carried their Wives
and Children to Places of the greatest Security. The Cities con^ederated
together, meeting frequently, and by Religious Rites, and offering up
Sacrifices, confirmed their Association: And thus both Armies parted with equal
Animosity.

XXVIII. This Summer there was a horrid, but memorable Fact, committed by a
Troop of Vsipians, raised in Germany, for our Service in Britain; who having
slain the Centurion, and some Soldiers, put over their Parties, and mixed with
them for their Example and Government, they seized three small Vessels,
compelling the Masters to execute their Office; but only one discharging his
Duty, they killed the rest, as suspected Persons: It not being yet discovered,
they miraculously set out; but by and by, they were tossed hither and thither,
and had several Encounters with the Britains, who defended their own, in which
they sometimes were worsted, and sometimes had the better; but at la^t, they
were reduced to that Extremity, that they had no Food to sustain them, but the
Infirm; when they were spent, they cast Lots who should be killed, for the
Provision of the Rest. Thus roving about Britain, they lost their Ships, for
want of Skill to sail them, and being taken for Pirates, they were first
intercepted by the Suevians, and the Frisans, and were bought and sold, till at
last in Tra^fick, they came on our side of the River, which fully discovered
the whole Adventure. In the beginning of the Summer, Agricola had a severe
Affliction in his Family, the Loss of his Son, born the Year before; he did
not, like some Great Men, vent his Sorrow vain-gloriously, or express his
Concern in an effeminate Lamentation, but made War the Diversion of his Grief.

XXIX. Therefore sending his Fleet before, which plundered many Places, the
Enemy was struck with a great and perplexed Fear; and making the Army ready, to
which he had joined the bravest, and by a long Peace, well assured Britains, he
marched to the Hill Grampius, which the Britains had possessed; who were not in
the least daunted with their former Defeat, knowing now they had nothing to
expect but Revenge, or Slavery; and having learned, that Common Danger was to
be repulsed by Concord: The Cities, by sending Ambassadors, had united their
Force, and entered into a strict League of Defense: Now they had an Army of
about Thirty thousand fighting Men, and the Youth of the Country daily came in
to them, with such Old Men as continued lusty and strong, every one telling his
old and past Exploits: But Galgacus was preferred for his high Birth, and great
Virtue, who made a Speech to this vast Multitude, earnestly desiring Battle:

XXX. As often as I revolve in my Mind, the Cause and Necessity of this War, I
am persuaded, that this Day, and your unanimous Agreement, will be the
beginning of the British Liberty. We are all sensible of Slavery, we have no
Land, or Sea, left secure, the Roman Fleet riding on our Coasts. To take Arms,
and Fight, as it is honorable for the Brave, so it is safest for the Coward.
Our former Combats with the Romans were various in their Success; yet we had
Hopes, and a Reserve still in our own Power: For we, the Flower of the British
Nation, and therefore seated in the innermost Recess, never beheld the slavish
Shoars, nor had our Eyes violated with the Prospect of a Foreign Government:
For this little Corner has preserved us the small Remains of our Country and
Liberty: But now the Bounds of Britain are discovered, and to attempt what is
unknown, is reputed great. We have no Nation behind us, but a raging Sea, and
senseless Rocks: The Romans are in the Bowels of our Country, whose Pride you
vainly seek to evade, by Modesty and Submission. They are the Rapparees of the
Universe; when Lands are wanting, they ri^le the Ocean. If their Enemy is rich,
they are covetous; if poor, ambitious: So that neither East nor West, can
satisfy their unruly Passions: They are the only greedy Men, that with equal
Avarice, make Wealth and Poverty their Prey: To kill, plunder, bear-away, they
call by the false* Name of Empire, and Desolation they term a settled Peace.

XXXI. Nature commands us all to hold our Children and Relations dear; these
are pressed, carried somewhere to be Slaves. Our Wives and Sisters are not
ravished in a hostile Manner, but they are deluded and debauched, under the
specious Pretense of Frienpship and Hospitality. Our Estates are wasted in
paying Tribute, our Corn in supplying the Army with Provisions* Our Bodies and
Hands are worn out, partly by Stripes, and partly by Contempt, while we are set
to work on Bogs and Woods. They that are born Slaves, are sold but once, and
then maintained at the Charge of the Purchasers; but Britain daily buys and
maintains its own Servitude. As in a private Family, new Servants are always a
Laughing Stock to the old; so in this old Family of the Universe, we being
newly discovered, and vile, are sought out for Scorn and Destruction. There are
no Fields, no Mines, no Ports, for which we may be reserved to Till, to Dig, to
Trade in. The Gallantry of Subjects is very distasteful to their Lords; and yet
Distance, and Privacy, as it is most safe, is more suspected. Having lost all
Hopes of Pardon, let us act as Men that hold their Liberty, as well as their
Glory, dear. The Brigantes, led by a Woman, burnt their Colony, and took their
Forts; and, if Success had not made them careless, had broke their Yoke. We
are, as yet, entire, unsubdued, born to be free, and not the Vassals of proud
Rome. We'll let them see at our first Meeting, what Men Calidonia has reserved
'till last.

XXXII. Do You think, the Romans Prowess in War, equals their Licentiousness in
Peace? No, they are made great by our intestine Discord and Dissentions; they
make their Enemies Faults, the Glory of their Army, composed of several
Nations, which Prosperity keeps together, and Adversity will disband; unless
the French and Germans, and, what I blush to say, some Britains too, are
foolishly lavish of their Blood, to establish Usurpation. It cannot be
conceived, that Enemies will continue longer Faithful and Affectionate than
Servants, the feeble Bonds of their Love, are Fear and Terror; if they are once
removed, they will straight begin to hate those they cease to dread. All the
Encouragements to Victory are on our side; the Romans have no Wives to raise
their Courage, or Parents to upbraid their Flight; they have either no Country
to defend; or, if they have, it is another. These few, but fearful Men,
distracted by their Ignorance, casting their Eyes on our strange Heavens,
Earth, and Woods, the Gods, at last propitious, have, in a manner, delivered
into our Hands, pent up, and bound. Never fear the gaudy Terror of their
glittering Gold, and Silver, that neither can defend or hurt. We shall have
Troops marching, even, in their very Army. The Britains will remember, sure,
their Country's Cause; nor can the French forget their former Liberty. Like the
Vsipian Cohort, the Germans will desert. We have nothing more to fear; their
Garrisons are drained; their Colonies are made up of Old Men, some refusing to
Obey, and others Commanding tyrannically, while their Towns are at Difference
and Discord among themselves. Here is the General, and the Army, their Tribute,
and Mines, with other sorts of Miseries, the Punishment of Slaves, which you
must suffer for ever, or revenge on this Spot; therefore going to fight,
remember your Ancestors, and pity your Posterity.

XXXIII. They received this Speech with Joy, Singing, and Shouting, and making
different Noises, according to the rude Custom of their Country. And as the
Troops came together, and the glittering Armor appeared, some of the Hottest
advanced forward, and both Armies were putting in Order. Agricola, although his
Soldiers were very joyful, and scarce to be restrained by Advice, supposed it
best to say something before they engaged:

In eight Years time, Fellow Soldiers, by your Pains, Fidelity, and Valor, and
the auspicious Fortune of the Roman Empire, you have conquered Britain. In so
many Expeditions and bloody Battles, there was need of your Labor and Patience
to encounter opposing Nature, as well as Resolution to resist the Enemy. As I
do not repent my having you for my Soldiers, so, I hope, you do not your having
me for your Leader. I have surpassed the Limits of our ancient Generals, and
you the Bounds of preceding Armies. We do not possess the End of Britain by
Fame and Report, but have actually seized it with our Arms and Pavilions:
Britain is found and subdued. I have often heard the Brave cry out, when you
were fatigued with Bogs and Hills, and Rivers, in your March, When shall we
have an Enemy? When shall we fight? They now appear forced from their lurking
Holes, and you enjoy your Wish, and a fit Opportunity for your Valor. All
Things will be prone, and yield to us, if Victors; but cross, and adverse, if
vanquished: For, as to have finished such tedious Iourneys, to have evaded such
great Woods, and crossed so many Arms of the Sea, is honorable, and becoming, if
we go on; so if we turn our Backs, that which was our Advantage, will prove our
Danger. We have not their Knowledge of the Country, or the same Provisions for
the Army: But we have Swords and Hands, and in them we have All* I am very well
satisfied, Flight is neither safe for the General, nor the Army; an honorable
Death far excels a mean ignoble Life; Safety and Honor dwell together. But it
cannot be inglorious to fall on the utmost Confines of Earth and Nature.

XXXIV. If you had new Nations, and an untried Foe, I would make the Deeds of
other Armies an Argument for your Courage: But now reflect on your own
Exploits, interrogate your own Eyes; they are the same, who by Stealth, and
under the Covert of the Night, assaulted the Ninth Legion, and were routed by a
blast of your Breath; they are the most apt to run of all the Britains, for
which Reason, they are now alive. When we Travel the Wild Forest, we chase away
the sturdy Monsters of the Wood, with Force and Violence, but the Rascal Herd
flies at the Noise of every Passenger; so the most daring Britains are long
since dead, these are but base, ignoble Numbers, whom you have found, not
because they have resolved to fight, but because they are the last you have
overtook; their Bodies are fixed with excessive Fear to the Ground, over which
you will gain a fair and signal Victory. Put an end to your Expeditions, and let
this Day finish the Work of fifty Years, convince the Commonwealth, that
neither the Length of the War, nor any Excuses for not making an end of it, can
be charged upon the Army.

XXXV. Whilst he was speaking, their Ardor was visible; when he had ended, they
freely vented their Joy, running to their Weapons. As they were thus fired, and
rushing forwards, he put them in order; Eight Thousand Foot he placed in the
Middle, and Three Thousand Horse in the two Wings; the Legions he placed before
the Trenches, thinking it would mightily add to his Glory, if he could gain a
Victory, without the Effusion of Roman Blood; or at least keep them as a
Reserve, in case of a Repulse: The Britains drew up their Army on the higher
Ground, most for show and Terror, but so as the foremost Battalions stood on
the Level, the rest rising one above another with the Hill; the Chariots and
Horsemen filled the middle part of the Field with their din and clatter,
whirling up and down. Agricola, perceiving their Numbers to be Superior, that
he might not be charged at once in Flank and Front, widened his Ranks, so that
his Army became more thin, as well as more extended: Some advised him to make
the Legions advance; but he, being always ready to hope, and resolute in
Danger, alighted from his Horse, and placed himself a Foot before the Ensigns.

XXXVI. The Fight began at a distance, which the Britains managed with great
Constancy, and Cunning, avoiding, or putting by whatever was cast at 'em, with
their short Bucklers, and great Swords; but poured upon us a Shower of Darts,
till Agricola encouraged three Batavian Cohorts, and two Tungrians, to bring
them to Sword's Point, and Handy-blows, which they were well verss'd in, being
old Soldiers: But that was no way of fighting for the Britains, who wore little
Shields, and great Swords, without Points, so that they were not fitted for a
close, or open Fight. Whilst the Batavians dealt Blows, striking them with the
Bosses of their Bucklers, battering and bruising their Faces, and thrusting
others aside, who upon even Ground opposed their Passage, advanced up the Hill;
the other Cohorts, with a joint Emulation and Force, slew all near them; but
many times, to hasten the Victory, they left Men half dead, others untouched,
behind them: In the mean time, the Horse fled, and the Chariots mingling with
the Foot, gave a new Terror, but their Carier was stopped by the unequal
Ground, and close Ranks. It did not in the least look like a Horse-Fight, for
keeping their Ground, they bear down all before them, by the Weight of their
Horses; wandering Chariots with frighted Horses, but no Drivers, overrun Friend
and Foe, as they through fear crossed, or met them.

XXXVII. The Britains, who were on the Tops of the Hills, and had not yet any
Share in the Engagement, being free, and at leisure, disdained our small Force,
and began to descend by degrees, and had enclosed our prevailing Troops, if
Agricola, suspecting the Design, had not detached four Squadrons of Horse,
which were kept for a Reserve, to oppose them; who made them fly as fast as
they came to assault; so they were caught in their own Trap: Some Squadrons,
who fought in the Front, were commanded to leave the Fight, and to pursue those
that were put to flight. There was a dismal Spectacle in the open Plains, where
you might see our Men following, wounding, and taking some, killing others,
when fresh offered themselves: Now, whole Regiments fled as they thought most
convenient, and turned their Backs to a far less Number of their Pursuers: Some
naked and disarmed, rushed on the Sword's Point, and offered themselves
voluntarily to Death: All the Field was strewed with Weapons, and Limbs, and
dead Bodies, and the Earth was dyed with Blood; many, though expiring, retained
their Fierceness and Courage. As soon as they approached the Woods, they turned
and encompassed their forward Pursuers, wholly ignorant of the Ways: And if
Agricola, who was always present, had not commanded the stoutest, but lightest
Cohorts, to encompass them like a Tyle, making some of the Horse dismount, to
search the thickest, whilst the rest scoured the thinnest parts of the Wood,
they had suffered extremely by their Confidence: But as soon as they perceived
they were followed by our Men, marching regularly, and in good order, they all
^led, not in Troops as before, having an Eye to each other, but separate and
dispersed, every one taking such Path or By-way for his Security, as his Fear
directed; 'twas Night and Weariness ended our Pursuit: The Enemies Loss was
computed to be Ten thousand, ours but Three hundred and forty Men, amongst whom
was Aulus Atticus, a Captain of a Cohort, who by his youthful Heat, and unruly
Horse, was carried into the midst of the Enemy.

XXXVIII. The Night was joyful to the Victors, full of Booty and Gladness; the
scattered Britains, Men and Women, dragged along the Wounded, called upon the
Unhurt, and Strong, left their Houses, and burnt them in a Rage, then they
sought Hiding-places, and as soon quitted them: Sometimes they consulted
together, and began to have fresh Hopes; now and then they were dejected at the
Sight of their dear Pledges, but more frequently enraged; so that many, to
express their brutal Kindness, to their Wives and Children, slew them out of
pure Compassion. The next Day made a fuller Discovery of our Victory; all
Things were silent, the Mountains desolate, the Houses burning, and smoking,
afar off, and our Scouts met Nobody when they were sent out, or descried any
thing, but the uncertain Track of their Flight; the Enemy appeared nowhere in
Companies; and the Summer being spent, we could not extend the War: Therefore
Agricola, led our Men into the Borders of the Horrestians, where receiving
Hostages, he commanded the Admiral of the Fleet to ^ail round Britain; some of
his Men going aboard, and the Terror of the Roman Name preceding. Agricola^
marched the Horse and Foot gently through the new Conquest, that the slowness
of his Motion might strike them with a Fear; and so he put his Army into
Winter Quarters; and his Fleet having a good and a happy Voyage, arrived at the
Port Trutilensis; from whence, ^ailing along the nearest side of Britain,
returned thither again.

XXXIX. Agricola, by Letter, certified the true State of Affairs, without any
vaunting Expression, or pompous Words; which Domitian, according to his Custom,
received with a sad Heart, and a joyful Countenance: He was conscious of his
own ridiculous sham Triumph over Germany, his Captives being the Purchase of
Money, not of Blood, and were trimmed and and clothed artificially for the
Mock-Solemnity: But here was a Victory celebrated by the whole World, and
obtained by the Slaughter of many thousands. It was a terrible Mortification to
see his Glory eclipsed by a Subject: He had in vain laid aside the Study of
Eloquence and Political Arts, if a private Hand snatched from him the Military
Laurel, other Disgraces might easily be dissembled, but this was an Ornament
^it for no body but a Prince to wear; being continually vexed with such
Thoughts, he was often alone in his Closet, a shrewd Sign of some intended
Mischief; but he judged it best to sti^le his Hatred, till Agricola's Fame, and
the Armies Love was abated. Agricola was still Governor of Britain.

XL. Therefore, he ordered some Triumphal Ornaments, and the Honor of an
Illustrious Statue, and commanded in the Senate, that whatever was usual to
complete, and set forth a Triumph, should be appointed. And all this he did in
the highest Strain of Complement: He made all People believe, that Syria should
be Agricola's Province, then void by the Death of Rufus the Lieutenant, and
always reserved for the best Men. Many believed, that his freed Man, who used
to execute his most secret Commands, was sent to him with a Commission for
Syria, with this Instruction, That he should deliver it, if he found him in
Britain, and that meeting him, as he was crossing the Sea, he neither delivered
that, or his Message, but returned to Domitian: But it is doubtful, whether
this be a Truth, or a Report cast abroad by the Artifice of the Prince.
Agricola, in the mean while, gave up the Province quietly to his Successor: And
that his Entrance might not be remarkable for the Resort, or Multitude of
People that came out to meet him, he avoided the Civility of his Friends, by
coming, according to Order, to the City and Court by Night, where he was
received with a short Salutation, and no Discourse, and immediately retired
into the Herd of Attendants. Now, to the end that he might lessen his Military
Glory, a thing uneasy to the Slothful, with other good Qualities, he allowed
himself more Ease and Quiet, being sober in his Garb, familiar in his Speech,
and never going, but with one or two of his Friends; so that many, who were
wont to judge of Great Men, by their Pomp and Grandeur, were at a loss, being
mightily disappointed when they saw Agricola, few understanding the Secret of
his Management.

XLI. In those Days he was often accused and absolved when absent: His Crimes
were not the Cause of his Danger, nor the Complaints of the Injured; but a
Prince displeased with his good Qualities, the Honor of the Man, and the worst
of all Enemies, his Commenders. Now there ensued such unhappy Times, that would
not permit Agricola to pass his Life in Silence: For so many Armies had been
lost in Mesia, Datia, Germany, and Pannonia, by the Temerity, or Ignorance of
the Generals; so many Cohorts, and gallant Men, defeated and taken, that 'twas
not the Bank of a River, or the Limits of the Empire, but even our
Winter Quarters, and what we were in possession of, that was in a dangerous
Condition: Thus having a continued Series of Misfortunes, and every Year being
signalized by some Calamity, or Destruction, Agricola was called for to be
General, by the common Voice of all, comparing his Constancy, Vigor, and
Military Experience, with the Ignorance, Pusillanimity of others. It Is certain
these Discourses frequently reached Domitian's Ears, 'till his best Friends,
out of Fidelity, and the bad out of Envy and Malice, stirred up their Prince,
of himself prone to make the worst of Things: So that Agricola, by his own
Virtues, and the Vices of others, was hurried to Glory.

XLII. This Year, a new Pro-Consul of Asia, and Africa, was to be chosen,
Civica being lately slain. Agricola did not want Advice, nor Domitian an
Example: Some who were acquainted with the Prince's Mind, came to him, and
asked him, If he would accept of that Province? And at first ^aintly commended
a private Life, then proffered him their Service to get him excused; but at
last no longer palliating the Matter, sometimes persuading, sometimes
threatening him, they pulled him to Domitian; who, with a Set Hypocrisy, and
Majestic Arrogance, hears his Request, and Excuse; to which, when he had
yielded, he graciously suffered himself to be Thanked, never blushing at so
abusive a Favor. But the Salary usually offered to Persons of that Quality,
and granted to many Others, he never gave to Agricola; either being angry 'twas
not requested, or being sensible, that he should look as if he had paid for
what he was against. It is the Property of Human Nature, to hate those they
injure; but Domitian's Nature, prone to Anger, which the more concealed, was
the harder to be appeased. Agricola, made Mild and Gentle by his Prudence and
Moderation, for he never by Contumacy, or a vain Ostentation of Liberty, ^ought
Fame, or tried his Fortune; therefore let those know, who are fond of Things
unlawful, that Good Men may live under Bad Princes, and that Modesty and
Submission, joined with Vigor and Industry, will acquire that Glory, which
Others seeking by indirect Ways, not in the least serviceable to the
Commonwealth, grow only famous by that Death, which their Ambition brings them
to.

XLIII. Agricola's Death was lamentable to his Relations, sad to his Friends,
and a great Concern to Strangers, and Persons unknown. The Common People, and
such as were here upon their Diversion, would visit his House, and speak of him
in all Public Meetings: Neither did any body that heard of his Death, either
rejoice at it, or soon forget it; but that which increased their Commiseration,
was a Report of his being poisoned, which I cannot affirm: But it is certain,
all the time of his Sickness, Domitian's chief Servant, and most trusty
Physician, came to him oftener than is usual for a Prince to send him, as from
himself, on a Visit, which was great Care, or Inquisitiveness. On the last Day
of his Life, every Moment he was expiring, was signified by Posts, laid ready
for the purpose; and Nobody thought they were in haste to hear that News, for
which they would be sorry. But Domitian put on a sad Countenance, and being
free from what he hated, he found it an easier Matter to dissemble his Joy now,
than formerly his Fear: But it is certain, when Agricola's Will was read, in
which he made him a Coheir with his Wife and Daughter, he rejoiced
exceedingly, as if it had been an Act of Judgment and Respect, being so blinded
by continual Flattery, as not to know, a Good Father never made any Prince, but
a Bad one, his Heir.

XLIV. Agricola was born on the Thirteenth Day of June, Caius Caesar being the
third time Consul, and died on the Twenty-fourth Day of September, in the
Fifty-sixth Year of his Age, Collega, and Priscus, Consuls. If Posterity would
have a Description of his Person, he was well proportioned, but not tall; in
his Countenance was nothing of Fear, but a great deal of Sweetness, so that you
would easily guess him a Good Man, and as readily a Great Man. Though he was
snatched away in the midst of the strongest part of Man's Life, yet by reason
of the Honor he had gained, he lived to a great Age; for he had arrived to the
true Worth, which consists of Virtuous Actions; and having been Dignified with
Triumphal and Consular Ornament, What could Fortune give him more? He did not
desire immoderate Riches; but he had a plentiful Estate. In this he was happy,
that he had a Wife, a Daughter, and in that he escaped future Calamities by his
Death, at a time when his Honor was untainted, his Name flourished, and his
Relations and Friends were all prosperous: For, as he did foretell, and desire
to live in this Happy Age, and to see Trajan Prince, so he had this great
Solace, of his sudden Death, that he avoided the Last Times, in which Domitian,
not by Intervals, or short Pauses, but, as it were, at one continued Blow,
destroyed the Commonwealth.

XLV. For Agricola did not see the Senate House beset, the Senate encompassed
with Arms, a great many of Consular Dignity massacred, and Multitudes of
honorable Women, forced to Flight and Banishment, by the same Outrage. Carus
Metius, yet, had obtained but one Victory; Messalinus's Sentence only made a
Noise in the Manor of Albana; and Messa Bebius was but then accused: But by
and by, we carried Helvidius to Prison; the Sight of Mauricius, and Rusticus,
wounded our Hearts; and Senecio sprinkled us with his Blood: Nero withdrew, and
would not behold those Cruelties he commanded. But the chiefest part of our
Misery, was to see, and to be seen, under Domitian, while our very Sighs and
Groans were Registered, and while he was able to behold the Paleness and Fear of
so many Persons, with a stern Countenance, and Face Red against all Shame and
Blushing. O, Agricola! thou art happy, not only in a famous Life, but a
well-timed Death! As they tell us, who heard your last and dying Words, You
with great Constancy, and Willingness, submitted to your Fate, and did all that
you could, to bequeath Innocence to your Prince: But that which increases mine,
and your Daughter's Grief, besides the sharp Affliction of the Loss of you, her
Parent, is, that we did not attend you when sick, cherish you when fainting,
and satisfy our longing Eyes and Arms, in beholding and embracing you. Had we
received your Commands, they had been for ever imprinted in our Minds; this is
the greatest Wound, the most pungent Grief, that by a long and unhappy Absence,
we lost you four Years before you died. I do not doubt, but the tenderest
Mother, the most loving Wife, who constantly attended your sick Bed, supplied
you with all Things proper for your Quality; but you was laid out with fewer
Tears, and your closing Eyes seemed to want some desired Object, they would
willingly have taken in with their last Glance.

XLVI. If there is a proper Seat for the Good, and as Wise Men tell us, Great
Souls do not perish with their Bodies, may you enjoy an undisturbed Rest, and
recall us of your Family from weak Desires, and effeminate Lamentations, to
contemplate your Virtues, not to be celebrated by Weeping and Wailing: This is
the truest Honor, your nearest Relations can show you; this I would enjoin
your Wife and Daughter, the one to honor the Memory of her Husband, the other
of her Father, by a frequent Revolving in their Minds his Noble Acts; not that
I would prohibit the use of Brass or Marble Statues, which are as frail and
mortal as Men; but because the Form of the Mind, cannot be enjoyed, or
represented, by gross Matter, or human Art, but by copying it out in one's
Life; whatever we loved, or admired in Agricola remains, and will continue in
the Minds of Men, as long as Time, or Fame, shall last. When many of the
Ancients, below the Dignity of a Memorial, are buried in Oblivion, Agricola
shall survive in Story.

FOrum Iulium; a Town seated in Littore Narbonensi. Ordovices; North Wales.
Brigantes; Yorkshire, Lancashire, Westmorland, and Cumberland, with the
Bishopric of Durham. The Isle of Mona; Anglesey. Taus; Tweed. Glota; the Frith
of Dunbritton. Bodotria; Edinburgh- Frith. Silures; South Wales, and Cornwall.
Grampius; now called, Gratabanie. Horrestians; now called, Angus. Trutulensis;
now Richborow, near Sandwich.
A DISCOURSE OF THE Situation, Customs and People OF GERMANY.
By CAIUS CORNELIUS TACITUS.
ALL Germany is separated from the Gauls, the Rhaetians, and Panno^^ans, by the
Rivers Rhine and the Danube; from the Sarmatians and Dacians by a mutual Dread
of Invading each other, or impassable high Mountains: The rest of it the Sea
surrounds, containing spacious Bays and vast Islands; and it is but of late that
some Nations and Kings have come to our Knowledge, which the War discovered.

The Rhine rises from an inaccessible and steep Pick of the Rhoetian Alps, with
a small bowing inclining to the West, intermixes with the Northern Ocean. The
Danube, gushing out from the easy and gently-rising top of the Mountain
Abnoba, passes through many Countries, till it discharges itself in six
Branches into the Pontic Sea; the seventh is swallowed up in the Marshes.

I should fancy the Germans to be Natives, and not all intermixed by the
Arrival and Entertainments of other Nations; because those who formerly
transplanted themselves were not conveyed by Land, but by Shipping; and
moreover, the immense and opposite Ocean, as I may call it, is touched upon
with few Ships from our World; for, who, besides the Danger of a rough and
unknown Sea, abandoning Asia, Africa, or Italy, would inhabit Germany, a
shapeless Land, the Climate unpleasant, melancholy to the View, and
uncultivated, unless his own Country?

They celebrate in ancient Poesy, (which is the only Method of the Records and
Annals amongst them) That the God Tuisto, sprung from the Earth, and his Son
Mannus, were the Original and Founders of that Nation. To Mannus they ascribe
three Sons, from whose names those bordering upon the Ocean are styled,
Ingaevones; those of the Midland, Herminones; the rest, Istaevones. But some
taking License from Antiquity, affirm, That more are descended from that God,
and, that there are more Denominations of that Kingdom, the Marsi, Gambrivi,
Suevi, Vandali; and, that these are the true and ancient Names; but, that the
word Germany is new, and lately given, because those who first passed the Rhine
and expelled the G^^ls, were but now termed Tungri, and then Germans: So that
the Name of a Party, not of a whole Country, by degrees prevailed, that all at
first, for fear of the Conqueror, presently after having invented a Name, were
from themselves called Germans.

They report, That Hercules had been amongst them, and that he was the most
valiant of all Men. They advance singing into the Battle. The Verses they call
Barditus, which in rehearsing ^^^^ame their Courage, and by that very Tune they
foretell the Event of the approaching Engagement.

They terrify and are terrified, according to the noise the Army makes: Nor
does it appear so much a Consort of the Voice, as of their Valor: The
roughness of the Sound is the most affected, and a confused Murmur, by putting
their Shields to their Mouths, by which the Voice swells deeper and fuller from
the Repercussion.

Some conjecture, that Ulysses, in his long and fabulous Wanderings was carried
into this Sea; that he landed in Germany, and that As^iburgium, which is
situated on on the Banks of the Rhine, and at this day inhabited, was founded
by him, and named (...); and moreover, That an Altar, consecrated to Ulysses,
with the Name of his Father Laertes, was formerly found in that place, and that
there are some Monuments and Tumulists yet extant, inscribed with Greek
Characters, in the Con^ines of Germany and Rhoetia: Which I Am inclined neither
by Arguments to confirm or confute; let every Man, as he pleases, either credit
or discredit.

I assent to their Opinions, who observe, that the People of Germany are
tinctured with no foreign Marriages, but continue a peculiar and unmixed
Nation, only like themselves, from whence the shape of their Bodies, although in
so great a number, has the same resemblance; their Eyes blue and fierce, their
Hair yellow, and only powerful upon an Assault. They Are impatient of Work and
Labor, can in no wise undergo Thirst and Heat; Cold, and want of Provisions,
they are accustomed to, from the Climate and Soil.

The Land, although it sometimes varies in Form, for the generality, in rough
with Woods, or stinks with Marshes; as far as it looks to France more humid,
toward Noricum and Pannonia more windy. It is indifferently fertile, but
improper for Fruit Trees; abounds in Cattle, but, for the most part, stocked
and runtish; nor are their Herds beautifully headed: They are delighted with
their Numbers, and those are the only and most acceptable Riches. I very much
doubt whether the propitious or angry Gods have denied them Silver and Gold;
nor would I a^^irm, that no Vein of Germany produces Silver and Gold; for, who
has made the Trial? They are not so much as affected by the Propriety and Use
of them; yet there is to be seen amongst them Silver Vessels, presented to
their Ambassadors and Princes, but no more esteemed than those which are made
of Clay, although their Neighbors, for the Advantage of Commerce, set a Value
upon Gold and Silver, and own and make choice of some Coins of our Money; the
Inland People, without tricking, and as formerly, exchange their Commodities.
They approve most of Old Money, and what has been long known, especially the
Serrati and Bigati. They prefer Silver before Gold; not out of any Love to it,
but because the Pieces of Silver are more useful to those who buy cheap Wares.

They have no great Plenty of Iron, as may be in^er'd from the make of their
Darts. Few use Swords or large Lances; they carry Spears, or, according to
their own expression, Fram^as; the Iron narrow and short, but so pointed and
adapted for use, that with the same Weapon, as they see occasion, they fight at
hand, or at a distance; and the Horseman is very well satisfied with a Shield
and a Framea. The Foot cast Darts, and every one of them a considerable number,
and throw them a prodigious way, and are either naked, or only covered with a
short Iacket. They don't value themselves upon their Furniture: Their Shields
are only distinguished by select Colors: Few have Coats of Male; scarce any of
them have either Headpiece or Helmet. Their Horses are neither remarkable for
their Shape or Speed, nor are they taught the Manage according to our manner;
they are made dexterous at their Career, or in single Wheeling, so closed in
the Ring, that all stand even. Weighing all things, their chiefest Strength is
in their Foot, and therefore they fight intermix^d, the Swiftness of the Foot
suiting and agreeing in the Engagement of the Horse, who, picked out of all
their Youth, they place in the Front of the Army; and the Number is limited, a
Hundred out of every Town, for so they are called amongst themselves; and that
which was at first but a Number has now gained a Name and a Reputation. The
Army's drawn up in form of a Wedge; they look upon it to give ground when
pressed, so they rally again, to be more of Conduct than Fear. Their Bodies
they carry off in doubtful Battles: It Is the greatest Scandal to relinquish
their Shield; neither is it lawful for those who have forfeited their Honor,
either to be present in their Religious Duties, or to go to Council; and many,
who survive the Wars, put an end to the Disgrace by the Halter.

They make choice of their Kings for their Noble Extraction, their Commanders
for their Courage: nor have their Kings a boundless and unlimited Power. Their
Captains they prefer more for Example than Command, if active, if of Presence
of Mind, and behave themselves well at the head of the Army; but it is not
permitted to reprimand, nor put in Chains, nor indeed chastise, to any but to
the Priests; not as if it were for a Punishment, or by Orders of the Captain,
but as if their God commanded it, who they believe assisting in their
Engagements.

They carry the E^^ig^es, and certain Banners taken down from the Groves, into
the Battle: And what is the chief Incitement to their Courage, is, not Chance,
nor a fortuitous Embodying, which composes the Squadron or pointed Battle, but
their own Family and nearest Relations; and hard by ar^ their Children, from
whence the Lamentations of their Women, and Cries of their Infants, may be
heard; these are the most sacred Witnesses, and the highest Applauders of every
Man's Bravery. To their Mothers and Wives they declare their Hurts; nor are
they afraid to suck or number their Wounds: They carry Provisions to, and
animate them when they are fighting. It Is recorded, That certain Troops
beginning to stagger, and giving Ground, were made to rally again by the Women,
by their Importunities, the exposing of their own Breasts, and demonstrating
their approaching Captivity, which, upon the account of their Women, they bear
with much more reluctance; so the Affections of those Cities are the most
effectually secured, to whom, amongst their Hostages, the Noblest Virgins are
committed. Moreover, they suppose there is something sacred in them, and that
they can foretell Events; neither do they reject their Counsel, or neglect to
follow their Advice.

We have seen Velleda, under the divine Vespasian, long adored among many as a
Deity: Yet also, in time past, they reverenced Aurinia and diverse others, not
with Flattery, nor as if they would make them Godesses. They adore Mercury most
of all their Gods, to whom, upon solemn Days, they judge it justi^iable to
offer up Human Sacrifices. Hercules and Mars they pacify with lawful
Creatures. Part of the Suevians also sacrifice to Isis; but I Am in the dark
what was the Cause and Original of this strange Sacrifice, unless her Image,
fashioned in the shape of a Galley, instructs us, that their Religion was
adventitious. They Are of an Opinion, from the Magnitude of the Celestial
Bodies, that the Gods cannot be confined within Walls, or be represented in any
Human Shape. They consecrate Woods and Groves, and call that Privacy, from the
Names of their Gods, which only in their Worship they behold. Divinations by
Birds, and Chances, they most of all others superstitiously observe.

The Custom in managing their Lots is plain and inartificial. A Branch pulled
from a Fruit-bearing Tree they cut into Slips, and at a venture, and casually,
scatter them, being distinguished by some Marks upon a white Vestment; if it be
a public Concern, the Priest of the City; but if private, the Father of the
Family praying to the Gods; and looking up to Heaven thrice, takes up every one
apart, and being held up, gives an Interpretation, according to the former
Mark; if they discourage, there is no more consulting about the Affair that day;
but if favorable; yet the Credit of the Success is further required: And this
also is more notable, they argue upon the Notes and Flying of Birds. Its
peculiar to that Nation, to experiment the Presages, and Admonitions of their
Horses: They are publicly fed in those Woods and Groves, white and polluted by
no Human Labor, who being put in the Sacred Chariot, the Priest, or King, or
the Governor of the City attends upon 'em, observing their Neighings and
Whynnyings: Nor is there greater Credit given to any Divination; not only
amongst the Plebeians, but the amongst the Nobility and Priesthood; for they
believe themselves to be the Attendants, and these the Con^idents of the Gods.

There is also another Observation of their Sooth-saying, whereby they explore
the Events of their greatest Battles: They engage a Captive, that some how or
other has been surpised, of that Nation, with whom they are at War, with a
picked Man of their own, both armed after their Country Fashion; and who gains
the Victory, its looked upon as ominous to the other side. Of little Affairs,
the Princes; of greater, all in general advise: So, notwithstanding, that those
things, whose Arbitration is in the Power of the Populace, are fully canvass'd
amongst the Princes.

They assemble on certain Days, either upon a New or Full Moon, unless any
thing accidental, or unexpected, falls out; for in transacting Business, they
believe this juncture of time the most auspicious: Neither do they reckon by
Days, as we do, but by Nights; so they make their Agreements; so by a common
Consent their Appointments: The Night here seems to guide the Day. This Error
proceeds from the Liberty they take, because they do not meet all at once, or
upon Command; both the second and third Day is wasted by the Delay of their
convening: They sit down armed, if the Company approves on it. Silence is
commanded by the Priests, in whom there is lodged then the Coercive Power: By
and by the King or Prince, according to every one's Age, their Quality,
Reputation gained in the Wars, or Talent in Rhetoric, are heard, more by the
Authority of Persuading, than the Power of Commanding; if the Opinion
displeases, its rejected by a Murmuring; if it pleases, they clash their
Weapons: Its the most honorable Manner of Assent, to applaud it with their
Arms. It Is also lawful to accuse, and arraign before the Council. The
Difference of the Punishment, is from the Nature of the Crimes; Traitors and
Revolters they hang on Trees; the Sloathful, Timorous, and Sodomitical they
drown in Mire and Marshes, throwing Hurdles upon them. The Diversity of the
Punishment respects this, that Villainies, when punished, ought to be exposed,
Scandals concealed: But for lesser Faults, being convicted, for the Manner of
their Penalty, they are fined such a number of Horses and Cattle; part of the
Mulct goes to the King or City, part to him, who is injured, or distributed
amongst his Relations: Persons of the best Quality are also elected with those
Councils, who do Justice to the Towns and Villages: A hundred Associates are
assistant to every one of them, out of the Commonalty; together with their
Advice and Authority. They act nothing of private or public Business unarmed;
but its not the Custom for any one to go armed, till the City has adjudg'd him
qualified: Then in the Council Chamger, some one of the greatest Dignity, or
his Father, or his Relation, equips him with a Buckl^r and Sword. This amongst
them is their Gown, this is the first Honor of their Youth; but before this
they seem only part of the Family, but now of the Commonwealth. A noble
Extraction, or the great Deserts of the Fathers, recommend these young Men to
the Favor of their Prince. They associate with others that are more robust,
and long since approved: Neither do they blush to be seen amongst their
Companions; although he has his Post in the Retinue at his Discretion, whom
they follow. There Is a great Emulation amongst them, who shall be chief
Favorite to their Prince; and amongst the Princes, who shall have the most,
and the bravest Followers. This is their Grandeur, these their Forces, to be
encompassed with a great Guard of select Youth, their Honor in Peace, and
their Defense in War. It gives a Name, and a Reputation to every one, not only
in his own Country, but also amongst their Neighboring Princes, if the
Associates excel in Number and Courage. They Are also applied to in Embassies,
and courted by Presents; and for the most part, by their very Fame, dispatch
their Wars. When they come into the Field of Battle, its dishonorable to the
Prince to be overcome in Bravery; and for his Retinue too not to equalize the
Courage of their Prince: But above all things, its infamous, and during Life
reproachful, to fly, and survive their General slain. Their principal Oath is
to defend and protect him, and attribute all their valiant Actions, to his
Conduct and Glory* The Princes fight for Victory, their Adherents for their
Princes.

If the City, in which they were born, grows stiff and unactive, by a long
Peace and Repose, most of the young Noblemen go Volunteers into those Nations,
which are then engaged in War; because, also Quiet is ungrateful to that
Nation, and with the more Facility they grow Famous amongst dubious
Enterprises; nor can they maintain their great Attendance, unless by Violence
and War. They obtain from the Liberality of their Prince such a War-Horse, and
such a bloody conquering Sword.

As to Banquets, although homely, yet a plentiful Table they allow instead of a
Salary. The Supply of their Munificence proceeds from War and Rapine.

Nor can you so easily persuade them to Till the Ground, and wait for a good
Year, as to challenge the Enemy, and receive Wounds; for it looks lazy and
dispirited, to acquire that by hard Labor, which may be compassed by Blood.
When they have no War, they pass not their time so much in Hunting, as
Idleness, being much addicted to Sleep and Gluttony: The most Valiant and
Warlike doing nothing at all, committing the Care of their House, Gods, and
Fields, to their Women and Children, and to the most in^irm of the Family. They
have a wonderful Contrariety in their Nature; for those Persons, who take such
delight in Idleness, have an aversion to Quiet.

Its the Custom in those Cities, for every Man freely to bestow on their
Princes, either of their Herds or Fruits, which is taken for a Favor, and
besides supplies their Necessities. They take great Delight in the Presents of
Neighboring Nations, which are not only sent from particular Persons, but from
the Public; as choice Horses, large Armours, Trappings and Chains: And we have
been informed, they now receive Money. Its very well known, that Cities ar^ not
inhabited by the Germans; nor do they indeed, suffer Houses to be joined
together. They plant themselves separately and divided, as the Spring, Field,
or Wood, pleases them best. They found their Villages not according to our
Manner, with connex'd and contiguous Buildings: Every one leaves a Space about
his House, either as a Remedy against any Accident of Fire, or from their
Unskilfulness in Building. They use no Tyles or Mortar amongst them; but make
use of in all things a shapeless Stuff, without either Form or Delight: Some
Places they curiously parget with an Earth, so pure and shining, that it
imitates a Picture, or the first Draught of Colors. They are wont to open
Subterranean Caves, and those they cover with a great Quantity of Dung, which
serves as a Refuge in Winter, and a Granary; and when the Enemy advances, he
ravages the open Country* But those things which are concealed, or lie hid
under Ground, they are either ignorant of, or for that Reason are deceived,
because they are to be searched for.

Their Clothing is a loose Coat, joined together with a Button; but for want
of that, with a Thorn: Being uncovered as to any thing else, they lie basking
whole Days upon the Hearth by the Fire. The most wealthy are distinguished by a
Garment, not flowing like the Sarmathians and Parthians, but close, and
representing every Joint: They wear also the Skins of wild Beasts; those next
the Seaside with less Curiosity; but those that are higher in the Country are
more nice, as having no other Attire by Commerce. They make choice of the
Beasts, and having taken off their Hides, spot them with the Skins of those
Monsters, which the outermost Ocean, and the unknown Sea produces. Nor have the
Women any other Habit than the Men, unless that the Women are more frequently
clothed in Linen Garments, and those they checquer with Purple, and part of
the upper Dress is not made into Sleeves; their Arms are naked, and their Bosom
lies bare.

However, their Marriages there are very strict; neither is there any part of
their Customs that is more commendable; for they are almost the only People of
the Barbarians, that are contented with one Wife apiece, except a very few, who
not for Lasciviousness, but out of State are surrounded with many Wives. The
Wife does not profer a Dowry to the Husband, but the Husband to the Wife: The
Parents and Relations are by, and approve of the Presents; Presents not
contrived for Womanish Toys, nor by which the New-married Bride may be adorned,
but Oxen, a Horse bridled, a Shield with a Partisan, and Sword: Upon these
Terms the Wife is received; and she in her Turn brings some Arms to her
Husband. This is the greatest Tie, these the Sacred Arcana's, these they deem
the Conjugal Deities; and lest the Woman should think herself exempted from the
Thoughts of Bravery, and the Hazards of War, she is reminded from the beginning
of the solemnized Marriage, that she is now become a Partner of his Toyls and
Dangers, and that she will run the same Risque in Peace and War, as he himself
does: This the yoked Oxen, this the equipped Horse, this the presented Arms
declare; so they must live, so they must die. Those Things which she receives,
she restores uninjur'd to her Children; what is put into the Daughter-in-Laws
Custody, they return to their Nephews. They therefore behave themselves with
the strictest Modesty, being debauched with no alluring Objects, with no
Provocatives in Banqueting.

The Men, as well as the Women, are equally ignorant of the Mysteries of
Learning.

In so populous a Nation, Adultery is rarely committed; for which there is a
present Punishment, that is left to the Discretion of the Husbands. The Husband
having cut off her Hair, turns her out of his House naked, before her
Relations, and whips her through the whole Village. There Is no Pardon for
violated Chastity, neither can her Beauty, Age, nor Wealth, recommend her to
another Husband. No one there makes sport with Vices, nor is the Age said to
corrupt, or be corrupted. Those Cities do still much more reputably, in which
Virgins only marry, and where it is transacted with the Hopes and Desire of
being but once a Wife; so they receive one Husband, as they do one Body, and
one Life; nor is there a Thought beyond that, nor a larger Desire; not as if it
were the Husband, but as the Marriage-State that they affect.

It Is looked upon as the highest Enormity, to stint the Number of Children, or
to kill any of their Kindred. Their good Morals avail more there, than in other
places good Laws. In every House going naked and dirty, they shoot out into
those vast Limbs, and those great Bodies we so much wonder at. Every Mother
gives suck to her own Child; neither are they committed to the Care of Maids,
and Nurses.

The Masters, and Servants, are not to be distinguished by the Niceties of
Education; they live amongst the same Cattle, on the same Ground, 'till Age
distinguishes the Freeborn, and their Courage signalizes them.

The Amors of the young Men begin late; for which Reason their Youth is not
impaired: Nor are the Maids too soon put upon Marriage; their Age is the same,
their Stature alike. Those that are equally matched, and strenuous,
Inter-marry, and the Children resemble the Vigor of their Parents.

There is the same Respect paid to the Sisters Sons, by the Uncle, by the
Mother's-side, as by the Father: Some think this Tie of Blood is more sacred
and strict; and in receiving of Hostages, they rather require it; as if they
kept the Mind the more confirmed, and the Family the less reserved.

The Heirs and Successors to every Man, are his own Children, and therefore
they make no Will: If he has none, the next Relations, as the Brothers, Uncles,
by the Father's, or Mother's-side, take possession; and his Age is esteemed
proportionate to the Number of his Kindred and Affinity. Nor are they respected
who are without Issue. They are obliged to espouse, as well the Enmities,
either of a Father, or Relation, as their Friendships; neither do they continue
implacable: For Homicide is atton'd for at a certain Number of Beasts and
Cattle, and the whole Family receives Satisfaction advantageous to the Public,
because Feuds are pernicious to Liberty.

Not any Nation is so profuse in Entertainments and Hospitality: It Is held the
highest Crime, to turn any one out of Doors; every one treats answerable to his
Fortune. When the Provisions are all spent, he which last entertained, is a
Guide and Companion of his Guest, and though uninvited, they go to the next
House; nor is it ill taken. They are received with the same Civility, no one
distinguishes the known and unknown, as far as relates to the Right of
Hospitality. It Is the Custom for him that is going away, to give, if any thing's
required: And on the other hand, there is the same Freedom in demanding. They
take delight in being presented; nor do they charge to Account what is given, or
think themselves obliged by what is received. The Entertainment of their Guests
is affable.

As soon as they rise from Sleep, which, for the most part, spins out the Day,
they are washed oftentimes in warm Water, the Winter there lasting long; having
done washing, they go to Dinner: Their Seats are at a distance, and every one
has a Table to himself; they go armed alike to their Business and Feasts. It Is
reckoned no Disgrace, to hold out a Day and Night in Drinking. Those frequent
Broils amongst those who are addicted to Wine, are seldom past over with ill
Language, but oftener by Death and Wounds: But they consult of reconciling
Enemies, and contracting Marriages, choosing their Princes, and of Peace and
War, for the most part, in their Banquets: As if at no time, the Mind was more
open to unbiased Thoughts, or warmed to greater Enterprises. This Nation being
neither crafty, nor cunning, by reason of the Privilege of the place,
discovers the hitherto unreveal'd Secrets of the Heart; therefore, the Mind of
all being naked and detected, the next Day it is spoken to anew, the Reason of
both times being weighed. They debate when they know not how to dissemble,
resolve when they know not how to err.

Ale is their Drink: Those who are next the Seacoast, traffic for Wine. Their
Diet is simple, wild Apples, fresh Meat, or Curds; without making Preparations,
without Dainties, they expect Hunger. Against Thirst there is not the same
Temperance; if thou will indulge their Drunkenness, by furnishing them with as
much as they covet, they will as easily be conquered by Wine, as by Arms.

The Manner of their Shows is one and the same, in all their Meetings; naked
young Men, to whom it is a Diversion, throw themselves amongst Swords, and
deadly Weapons: Frequent Exercise begets Experience, Experience Gracefulness;
but this notwithstanding is not done for Profit, or Reward; though the Prize of
this daring Wantonness, is the Pleasure of those which behold it. Dice (which
you would wonder at) the soberest Persons play at, amongst their weighty Affairs,
and with that rashness of winning or losing, that when all is gone, they set
Body and Liberty upon the last Throw; he that loses, enters into a voluntary
Vassalage, although younger and more robust, suffers himself to be bound and
sold. Obstinacy in this ill Cause, they style Faith. Slaves of this Condition,
they deliver up, by the way of Commerce, that they may absolve themselves from
the Reproach of the Victory. They use the rest of their Servants not after our
manner, by assigning them their Offices in the Family; every Man governs his
own House, and domestic Affairs. The Master enjoins the Payment of a
Proportion of Corn, or Cattle, or Clothing, as to his Farmer, and so far the
Slave complies. The other Offices of the House, the Wife and Children manage.
It Is very uncommon to beat a Slave, or to punish him with Fetters, and hard
Labor. They are wont to kill them, not by Discipline, and Severity, but out of
Passion and Anger, as they would an Enemy, and that without Impunity. The
Freed-men are not much above their Slaves, seldom doing any (...) of Importance
in the House, never in the Cities, ^^^epting in those Nations which are under
Subjection; (...) there they have the Ascendent, both over the Free-(...), and
the Nobles too. Amongst other Nations, (...) inequality of Freed-men, is an
Argument of Liber^^

They are Strangers to Usury, and the making Advantages by Interest, and
therefore it is more observed, than if it had been prohibited.

The Fields, according to the Number of the Tillers, are cultivated by Turns;
which they divide amongst themselves, according to the Credit of the Persons:
The largeness of the Plains, makes the Division less difficult. The plough'd
Lands they change annually, and let the Ground lie fallow; neither do they
endeavor, by their Labor, for an Improvement, or Enlargement of their Soil;
so that they may plant Orchards, enclose Meadows, and water their Gardens; Corn
only they expect from the Ground. Whereupon, they don't divide the Year into so
many Parts: Winter, and Spring, and Summer, have their Names and
Significations: The Name and Benefit of Autumn they are alike ignorant of.

They are not ambitious of pompous Funerals; this only is observed, that the
Bodies of Illustrious Persons are burnt with particular sorts of Wood. They
heap not up the Pile with Garments, nor Odors; his own peculiar Arms, and the
Horse of some of them is also superadded, to the Fire. Their Tombs are raised
with Turf. They despise the lofty and costly Magnificence of Monuments, as only
burdensome to the Dead. Lamentations, and Tears, they refrain quickly; Grief,
and Sorrow, slowly. It Is commendable in Women to lament, in Men not to forget.

These Things we have been informed, have been allowed of by all, of the Origin
and Customs of the Germans: Now I Will relate the Institutions of particular
Nations, and their Ceremonies how (...) they differ, and what People have
removed out of ^^rmany into Gaul.

The Divine Julius, the best (...) Authors, affirms, That formerly the
Condition of (...) Gauls has been much more powerful: And ther^^re its
credible, that the Gauls also passed into Germany: For how little could a River
hinder it, but that as every Nation grew more potent, they should possess and
exchange their, as yet, promiscuous Habitations, and undivided Dominions?
Therefore the Helvetians kept their Ground, between the Hercynian Forest, and
the Rivers Rhine, and Maenus; the Boii the furthermost parts; and both Nations
were Gallican.

The Name of the Boiemi is yet extant, and signifies the ancient Remembrance of
the Place, although the Inhabitants are changed: But whether the Aravisci removed
from the German Nation into Pannonia, from the Orsi, or the Orsi from the
Aravisci into Germany, whereas hitherto they use the same Language, Customs,
and Manners, is uncertain; because in Times past, from the like Scarcity and
Liberty, the same Convenience, and Inconvenience accru'd to those who inhabited
the Banks on both sides.

The Treveri, and Nervii, are over and above ambitious of affecting a German
Genealogy; as if by this Honor of Blood, they were distinguished from the
Resemblance, and Sluggishness of the Gauls. Undoubtedly the People of Germany
were the Vangiones, Treboci, Nem^tes, who inhabited the Bank of the Rhine. The
Vbi also, although they deserved to be a Roman Colony, are ashamed of their
Original; and who more willingly would be called Agrippinenses, from the Name
of their Founder, having formerly passed over, and out of Experience of their
Fidelity, were planted upon the Bank of the Rhine, that they should expel their
Enemies, not that they themselves should be guarded.

The Batavians, of all these Nations, are the most courageous: They inhabit not
much of the Bank, but an Island of the River Rhine, formerly the Nation of the
Catti, who passed over into those Habitations, from a domestic Sedition, in
which they were to be made a part of the Roman Empire. The Honor remains, and
a Mark of the ancient Alliance; for neither are they disgraced by Tribute, nor
does the Receiver of the public Revenues oppress them. They are exempted from
Taxes and Contributions, and only set apart for the Service of the War, as
Darts and Arms are reserved for Battle.

The Nation of the Mattiaci are also under the same Obedience; for the
Greatness of the People of Rome was extended beyond the Rhine, and their
Majesty beyond the ancient Consines of the Empire. As to the Frontiers of their
Country, and Habitations, they live upon the Bank: In Humor and Inclination
they are joined with us: As to other things, they are like the Batavians; but
that, as yet, by reason of the Soil of their Country, and Air, they are much
braver. I shall not reckon them amongst the People of Germany, although they have
taken up their Abode beyond the Rhine, and the Da^^be, who cultivate those
Fields, which pay Tenths.

The most profligate of the Gauls, and who are grown bold by Want, possess the
Land of a doubtful Title. Now their Territories being enlarged and Forts
advanced, they are esteemed the Border of the Empire, and part of a Province.
Beyond these the Ca^ti are seated whose Bounds begin from the Hercynian Forest;
but not in such spacious and fenny Places, as the rest of the Cities, into
which Germany expatiates itself. Here the Hills seem to continue, but grow thin
by degrees; and the Hercynian Forest follows, and together, leaves the Catti.

The Bodies of that Nation are hardened, their Limbs compact, their Countenances
threatening, and their Courage greater. They have as much Reason and Policy as
is to be found amongst the Germans. They prefer choice Men, hearken to their
Officers, know their Ranks, and make the best of Opportunities, delay their
Resentments, order the Day according to their several Occasions, entrench by
Night, reckon Fortune dubious, but Virtue unerring; and what is more uncommon,
unless it is to be allowed from the Reason of their Discipline, To repose more
Confidence in their General, than their Army. All their Strength lies in the
Foot, whom, besides their Arms, they load with Iron Tools, and Provisions: You
may see others go to Battle, but the Catti to War. They seldom make Incursions,
or engage accidentally. It Is peculiar to the Horse, suddenly to gain the
Victory, or suddenly Retreat: Expedition borders upon Fear, but Delay comes
nearer to Constancy; and the particular Courage of every one, seldom tried by
the rest of the Germans, is grown to an unanimous Consent amongst the Catti,
that as soon as they attain to the Years of Maturity, to let their Hair and
Beard grow long; nor do they lay aside this Fashion of the Face, devoted and
obliged to Gallantry, 'till they have slain an Enemy.

Upon Blood, and Sports, they discover the Forehead, and declare, That they
have made a Recompense for their being born, and that they are worthy of their
Country and Parents; that Deformity sticks to the cowardly and timorous.
Moreover, every one of the most valiant, wears an Iron Ring, as it were a Bond
(most ignominious to that Nation) 'till he can acquit himself of it by the
Death of an Enemy.

This Mode pleases many of the Catti; and now these remarkable People, grown
gray, are both showed together, to their Enemies, and their own Soldiers: These
always give the first Onset: This is always the Forefront, distinguished by
the Figure they make; neither in Peace have they milder Aspects: They have no
House, or Land, or take Care of any thing; according as they come to any one,
they are provided for; are profuse of another's, Contemners of their own, 'till
Bloodless Old Age makes them incapable of such hard Service.

The Vsipii, and Tenecteri, Neighbors to the Catti, inhabit upon the Rhine,
now known by the Channel, which is su^^icient to be a Boundary.

The Tenecteri, above their accustomed Reputation in War, excel in the Art of
Horse-Discipline; nor have the Catti a greater Repute for Foot, than the
Tenecteri have of Horse: So have their Ancestors instituted, and their
Posterity imitate them. These are the Plays of Children, this the Emulation of
Young Men, and the Aged persevere in them.

Amongst the Family, and Goods, as the Rights of Successions, Horses are
delivered: The Son receives them; not as he does the rest, by Priority of
Birth, but as he is more Courageous, and a better Man in War.

Near the Tenecteri, in Times past, the Bructeri lived: Now its reported, that
the Chamavi, and Angrivarii, are come to dwell there; having chased away, and
totally extirpated the Bructeri, either by the Consent of the bordering
Nations, or out of Hatred to their Ambition, or for the Sweetness of the Booty,
or by a peculiar Favor of the Gods to us: For they did not envy us the Sight
of a Battle, wherein were slain above Threescore thousand; not by the Roman
Arms, and Darts, but what is more Magnificent, to give Diversion, and to
delight the Eye.

I pray, that if the Affection for us from these Countries cannot remain and
continue, that their Aversion for one another may; that when the Fates of the
Empire are declining, Fortune cannot perform a Greater Thing than the Discord of
our Enemies.

The Dulgibini, and Chasuari, shut up on the back; the Angrivarii, and Chamavi,
and other Nations, not so much as mentioned. On the Front the Frisii are ready
to receive them: They are called the Greater, or Lesser Frisii, from the
Proportion of their Forces; both Nations spread themselves from the Rhine to
the Ocean; where Fame has published, that Hercules's Pillars are there, as
yet, remaining.

Whether Hercules was there, or whether what is everywhere Magni^icent, we
agree to impute to his Honor.

Nor was Resolution wanting to Drusus Germanicus; but the Ocean opposed both
him and Hercules, from making further Discovery. Since no one has attempted
it, it looks more holy and reverend to believe, rather than be too inquisitive,
in prying into the Secrets of the Gods.

Hitherto we have known Germany toward the West. Toward the North it returns
with a very great Winding.

And first of the Country of the Chauci. Although it begins from the Frisii,
and possesses part of the Shore, yet it is covered by the Confines of all those
Nations, which I have described, until it winds even to the Catti.

Such an immense Tract of Ground, the Chauci don't only inhabit, but also
replenish: The most Noble of all the Germans, and who choose rather to defend
their Greatness by their Justice. Without Covetousness, without Weakness, quiet
and sequestered, make no War, are wasted by no Theft or Robbery: And this is a
principal Demonstration of their Courage and Force, because that they did not
obtain by Injuries a Superiority over others. Notwithstanding they are all in a
readiness for War. And if their State requires an Army, they are well provided
of Men and Horses, and they are in the same Repute when they lie still.

On the side of the Chauci, and Catti, the Cherusci being unprovoked, have too
long indulged a lasting, but consuming Peace, which was more pleasant than
safe; because between the impotent and powerful there is no living in Security:
When it is done by Force, Modesty, and Integrity, are Names in the Power of the
Superior: So that they which were, in former Times, the good and just
Cherusci, are now called cowardly and foolish: Fortune, in the conquering
Catti, was reputed in them Wisdom; and the Fosi, a bordering Nation of the
Cherusci, were affected with the Ruin of the Cherusci, by Right, their
Companious of Adversity; whereas they were much their Inferiors in Prosperity.

The same Coast of Germany, next to the Ocean, the Cimbrians inhabit; now a
little City, but great in Glory: Their Camps on both Shoars, are largely the
Monuments of their ancient Fame, and those Intervals, by whose Compass thou
may compute the Bulk and Strength of the Nation, and the Confidence they had
of so great an Army.

Our City had been founded 640 Years, when first the Arms of the Cimbrians were
heard on, Caecilius Metellus, and Papirius Carbo, being Consuls. From whence,
if we reckon to the Second Consulship of the Emperor Trajan, it almost amounts
to Two hundred and ten Years; so long Germany was conquering: During which long
Space of Time, there were many reciprocal Losses on both sides; neither has the
Samnite, nor the Carthaginians, nor the Spaniards, nor the Gauls, or indeed the
Parthians, so often checked us in our Carier; because the Liberty of the
Germans is more vehemently affected, than in the Kingdom of the Parthians: For
what has the East to object against us, besides the Death of Crassus, who had
lost himself, vanquished Pacorus, cast down by Ventidius? But the Germans
having slain, or taken Prisoners, Carbo, and Cassius, and Scaurus Aurelius, and
Servilius Cepio, and also Marcus Manlius, have, moreover, destroyed Five
Consulary Armies from Rome; and Varus, with his three Legions, sent by Caesar:
Neither has Caius Marius, in Italy; the Divine Julius, in Gaul; Drusus, Nero,
and Germanicus, assaulted them in their own Habitations without Danger.

Not long after, the great Threatenings of Caesar were turned into Ridicule.

From this time there was a settled Peace, 'till by the Opportunity of our
Discord, and Civil Wars, they had won, by Assault, the Winter-Camps of the
Legions, and also attempted Gaul: And being again from thence repulsed, were
afterward rather triumphed over, than conquered.

Now we must treat of the Su^vians, of whom there is not only one Nation, as of
the Catti and Tenecteri; for they take up the major part of Germany, divided as
yet by Countries, and distinct Names; although, in general they may be called
Suevians. Its the Mark of the Nation, to curl their Hair, and tie it in a Knot:
So are the Suevians distinguished from the rest of the Germans; so are the
Freeborn of the Suevians from the Vassals. So in other Countries, whether from
the Alliance of the Suevians, or (which often happens) in imitation, and that
seldom, and whilst they are young too: Amongst the Suevians, even till they are
Gray, they tie their brisly Hair behind, and oftentimes upon the Crown of the
Head only: Their Princes wear it more exact: Such innocent Care they take of
their Beauty. Nor do they do it out of a Design, that they may make Love, or be
beloved: They go into Battle with their Hair combed high, and for a Terror, and
are so trimmed up in view of their Enemies.

The Semnones report, That they are the most Ancient, and Noble of the
Suevians. The Truth of their Antiquity, is confirmed by their Religion. At a
set time, all the People of one Blood, assemble by their Embassies in a Wood,
Sacred by the Oracles of their Ancestors, and by an ancient Veneration, and
celebrate the horrid Beginnings of their barbarous Rites, by publicly killing
a Man.

There is also another Reverence paid to that Grove; no one enters into it,
unless bound like an inferior Person, and professing openly the Power of their
God: If by chance he falls down, it is not lawful to be taken away, or rise up,
but he is rolled off the Ground: And thither all their Superstition tends; and
from thence were derived the Origin of their Nation, that there was a God,
Ruler of all, that all beside were subject, and obeying.

The Success of the Semnones gives this Authority: They inhabit a Hundred
Villages; and compose so great a Body, that they believe themselves the Head of
the Suevians: On the other hand, the small Number they have makes famous the
Longobards; because, being encompassed with many, and very powerful Nations,
they are safe themselves, not by a Compliance, but by Battles and Hazards.
Moreover, the Reudigui, and Aviones, and Angli, and Varini, and Eudoses, and
Suardones, and Nuithones, are fortified by Rivers and Woods: Neither is there
any thing remarkable in particular, but that they in common Worship Herthum,
that is, their Mother-Earth, and believe she ininterposes in the Affairs of
Mankind. There is a Sacred Wood in an Island of the Ocean, and a Chariot
dedicated in it, covered with a Garment, allowed to be touched but by one
Priest: He understands, when the Goddess is come to her Retiring Room, and
follows her, drawn by Cows, with much Veneration. Then are their Days of
Rejoicing, and Festival Places, which she vouchsafes to honor with her
Presence, whatsoever she reputes worthy of her Arrival and Friendship. They
make no Wars, put on no Armor, all their Arms are locked up: Peace and
Tranquillity is only then known, then only beloved, 'till the same Priest
returns the Goddess to her Temple, satiated with the Conversation of Mortals;
presently after the Chariot, and Vestments, (and if you will Credit it) the Deity
her self is washed in a secret Lake: Bondmen attend, whom the same Lake
immediately swallows up; from hence there is a mystical Terror, and a holy
Ignorance, that should be, which they only see, who are just perishing. And
this part of the S^evi is extended into the very Heart of Germany; the nearer
(that I may after the same Method, as I did a little before, follow the Rhine,
so I may now the Danube) is the City of the Hermunduri, faithful to the Romans;
and therefore to these of all the Germans, is Traffic allowed, not only upon
the Bank, but in the Bowels of the Country, and in the most flourishing Colony
of the Province of Rhaetia: They go where they please, without a Guard; and
whereas to other Nations, we show only our Arms and Incampments, to these, we
throw open our Houses, and Villa's, they not so much as coveting them. Amongst
the Hermunduri, the River Albis rises, formerly very famous and much known; now
its scarcely heard of. Hard by the Hermunduri, the Narissi, and further on the
Marcomani, and Quadi live. The highest Reputation and Power the Marcomani have
acquired by their Valor, and also their Habitation, having in times passed
driven out the Boii. Neither do the Narisci, or Quadi degenerate; and this is
as it were the Entrance of Germany, so far as its covered by the Danube. The
Marcomani and Quadi, even within Memory, had Kings of their own Nation: The
Noble Race of the Marobodui, and Turdi; and even now they submit to be governed
by Foreigners; but the Force and Power of their Kings is derived from the Roman
Authority. They are seldom assisted with our Arms, though often with our Money:
Neither are the M^rsigni, (...), Osi, Burii, which lie at the Back of the
M^^^omani and Quadi, of less Power, of whom the ^arsigni, and Burii, in Speech
and Habit resemble the Suevii. The Gallican Language convinces, that (...)
Gothini; the Pannonian, that the Osi, are not (...) Germans, because they
submit to Tax^^^: Part of their Tribute the Sarmates, other part the Quadi
impose on them, as upon Foreigners. The Gothini, to their Disgrace, also dig up
Iron: And all these have seized little of the Champaigne, but Forests, and the
Tops and Heights of Mountains; for a continued Ledge of Hills separates and
divides Suevia; beyond which many Nations dwell; out of which, the Names of the
Lygii is the most (...) ^o many Cities.

It may suffice to instance the Arii, Helveconi, Manimi, Elusiii, Naharvali, as
the most Potent. Amongst the Naharvali, a Grove of the Ancient Religion is
shown; a Priest presides in Womanish Attire; but they report, That the Gods
were Castor and Pollux; by a Roman Construction, the Name of that Deity is
Alcis: There are no Images, no Monuments of a Foreign Superstition;
notwithstanding, as Brothers, as young Men, they are worshipped. But the Arii
over and above their Forces, in which they surpass those People, that are
little before reckoned up, are Cruel, and with Art and Time set off their
innate Fierceness: Their Shields are black, their Bodies painted, they make
Choice of dark Nights for their Engagements; and by a Dread and Shadow this
dismal Army strikes a Terror, no Enemy being able to support this new, and as
it were, infernal Sight; for the Eyes are first conquered in all Battles.
Beyond, the Lygi, the Gothons are governed a little more slavishly, than the
rest of the Countries of Germany; and yet not beyond Liberty. Next them, from
the Ocean lie the Rugii, and Lemovii; and the Distinction of all these Nations,
are round Shields, short Swords, and Loy^^^ to their Kings. From hence, the
Cities of the (...) besides Men and Arms, are powerful in Shipping in the very
Ocean: The Make of their Ships differs in this, because, on both sides, the
Prow of the Ship ^lways guides the Forepart ready for Landing; (...) they
managed by Sails; nor do they make fit (...) Oars in order on the sides: The
rowing is mov'^ ^ither and thither as ill, and in some Rivers changeable, as
occasion requires. They set a Value upon Riches; and therefore, one governs,
^i^^out exception, and not with the (...) Right of being accountable. (...)
their Arms in common, as amongst the (...) o^ the Germans, but they are shut up
under a Keeper, and that also a Slave; because the Sea keeps off the sudden
Incursions of an Enemy: Besides, Soldiers that have nothing to do, easily grow
effeminate: For, it is not the Interest of a King, to set the Noble, nor
Freeborn, nor ind^ed the Freedman, over his Armory.

Beyond the Suionians is another Sea, slow, and almost motionless, by which
there is a Belief, that the whole World is bounded, and encompassed; because
the last Brightness of the Setting Sun continues till it rises again, and so
very clear, that it eclipses the very Stars. Some are of a Persuasion, that a
Sound is to be heard of his rising out of the Sea, and that the Forms of Gods,
and the Rays of his Head are to be seen. Even there (and Fame is true) is the
end of the World. Therefore, now on the right Coast of the Suevian Sea, the
Countries of the Aestyii are beat upon, who follow the Customs and Habits of
the Suevians; but their Language comes nearer to the British: They worship the
Mother of the Gods; they carry about the Pictures of Boars, as the Cognizance
of Superstition; that is for Arms, and a full Protection, and Warrants the
Worshipper of the Goddess secure, even among his Enemies. They make use of
Clubs, more than Steel: The^ labor harder for Corn, and other Fruits, than is
customary for the Sloth of the Germans; and ^^^gently pry into the Sea; and
they only of all (...) gather Amber, which they call Glesum, amon^^t the
Shallows, and on the very Shore: Neither is the Nature or Reason which produces
it, enqui^^d after, or found out, by these Barbarians. Moreover, it lay long
amongst the rest of the Purgings of the Sea, ^ill our Luxury gave it a Name:
They make no use of it, for its unskilfully gathered, and brought misshapen to
us; and they with wonder, receive the Price: Notwithstanding, yo^ (...) take it
to be the Juice of a Tree; because some (...) also flying Animals, for the most
part appear in the midst of it, which being intangl'd by its Viscosity, and
suddenly, that Matter growing hard, are enclosed. As in the more remote Places
of the East, the Woods and Groves are more fruitful, where Frankincense and
Balms distill; so I should believe, that there are in the Islands, and Countries
of the West, which drawn out and melted by the Rays of the Neighboring Sun,
glide into the adjacent Sea, and by the Force of the Tempests, float to the
opposite Shore: If you experiment the Nature of Amber in the Fire, it burns
like a Torch, and nourishes the pinguous, and odoriferous Flame, and
immediately grows as soft as Pitch or Rosin.

The Countries of the Sitoni are bounded by the Suevians; in other things they
are alike, and differ only in this, that they are governed by a Woman;
insomuch, as they don't only degenerate from Liberty, but even from Servitude.
This is the End of Suevia.

I am in suspense, whether I should ascribe the Nations of the Peucinians,
Venedians, and Fennians, to the Germans, or Sarmates; although the Peucinians,
whom some call Bastarnas, in Speech, Habit, Situation, and their little Huts,
live as the Germans: They are all nasty and sluggish: The Marriages of their
Nobles are intermixed; they are somewhat disfigured by the Dress of their
Garments. The Venedi have very much followed their Customs; for they ravage,
whatsoever is built on the Hills, between the Peucinians and Fennians: Yet,
these ought rather to be reckoned amongst the Germans, because they both pitch
their Tents, carry up and down their Shields, and take a Pride in Footmanship,
and being Fleet: All which things differ from the Sarmates, who live in
Wagons, and on Horseback.

The F^nnians are extremely Cruel, and very Necessitous, having (...), nor
Horses, nor Houses; their Food (...), their Clothing Skins, and their Lodging
is the Ground; their Confidence is in their Arrows, which for want of Iron,
they point with Bones: The same Hunting maintains the Men, and the Women also;
for they accompany one another every where, and demand part of the Booty. Nor
is there any other place of Refuge for the very Infants, from wild Beasts and
the Weather, than that they are covered over with interwoven Boughs. Hither the
Youth return, this is the Receptacle of the Aged; this they deem more happy,
than groaning under the Toil of tillinged Ground; than to take Pains in
building Houses, and turning over their own, and other Peoples Fortune, betwixt
Hope and Fear; here they are secure against Men, secure against the Gods,
having attained the most difficult Affair; that they have no Vows to make to
the Gods; that they have nothing to wish. For other things, they are merely
fabulous; That the Hellusii and Oxionae have the Faces and Countenances of Men,
their Bodies and Limbs of wild Beasts; which I will leave in common as a thing
uncertain.

The End of the Second Volume.
A TABLE OF THE Annals of the First Tome.
A.
ADgandestrius, Prince of the Chatti, offers the Romans to Poison Armini^s.
Page 285 Aedile Curul. 8, 9 Adrana, or the Eder, a River in Germany. 112
Agrippa, Honored by Augustus with two successive Consulships, and made his
Son-in-Law. 8 Agrippa Posthumus, Grandson of Augustus, banished. 10 -- Visited
by Augustus. 15 -- Killed by Order of Tiberius. 17 Agrippa the Counterfeit, his
History. 212, 213 Agrippa, (Haterius) Tribune of the People, defends the
Privileges of the Pantomimes. 151 -- Elected Praetor by Tiber^us's Sons. 235,
236 -- Gives his Opinion, that C. Lutorius Priscus should die. 350 --
Contradicted by Lepidus, and followed by the rest. 351 -- His Consulship
remarkable for Reforming Luxury. 352 Agrippa, (Fonteius) accuses Libo of
Co^spiring against the State. 198 -- Proposes his Daughter for Superior of the
Ves^als. 284 -- She is brought back. Ibid. -- The Cause of it. Ibid. -- Has
5000 l. given her by Tiberius to Comfort her for the loss of it. Ibid.
Agri^^ina, Wife of Germanicus, much hated by Tiberius and Livia. 74 -- Retires
to Treves to avoid the Violence of the Mutinous Soldiers. 88 -- Hinders the
breaking of the Bridge upon the Rhine by her Courage. 133 -- Her Courage and
Liberality to the Soldiers. Ib. -- Tiberius accuses her of Ambition. 134 --
She Is brought to Bed of Iulia, or Livia, her last Child. 240 -- Pursues the
Vengeance of the Death of her Husband. 272 Aletus ^ent by Tiberius into Asia.
231 Angi^rs Revolted. 342 -- Reduced to its Duty. Ibid. Angrivarians punished
for their Revolt from the Romans. 172 -- Obtain Pardon for their second Fault.
187, 188 Anna Rufilla, punished for Insulting a Senator. 337 Anteius ^its out a
Fleet against the Germans. 170 Anti^chus, King of Comagena dies. 220 Antonia
not at the Funeral of her Son Germanicus. 291 -- Why. 292 Anthony, (Mark)
Triumvir. 4, 7 -- His Defeat at the Gulf of Actium. 239 -- His Name not Razed
out of the Annals. 309 Ant. (Julius) Corrupts the Daughter of Augustus. 306
Apollonia, overturned by an Earthquake. 230 Appius Appianus, expelled the
Senate. 234 Apronius ((...).) Germanicus, his Lieutenant, receives the
Ornaments of the Triumph. 139 Decimates the dishonorable Troops. 312
Archelaus, King of Cappadocia, hated by Tiberius and why. 218 -- His Death. 220
Ariobarzanes, made King of Armenia. 167 -- His Death. Ibi^. Armenia, balances
between the Romans and Parthians. 166, 244 -- Germanicus gives them a King. 244
Arminius, a German Lord, raises Germany. 109 -- Takes away the Daughter of
Segestes. 111 -- Sollicits the Ch^r^sci to take up Arms against the Empire. 11^
-- Confers with his Brother Flavius, who was in the Roman Se^vice. 173 --
Exhorts his Soldiers to fight. 180 -- Is defeated by G^rmanicus. 182 -- He
fights Ma^^bodu^s King of the Su^des. 228 -- Hi^ Death and Praise. 286
Aruntius, (L.) discovers an Advice which vexes Tiberius. 39 -- Judged capable
of Reigning by A^gustus. 40 Artoba^us, Prince of the Blood of the Arsacides,
called by the Parthia^s to be their King. 165 -- Beaten by Vono^^s. 166 --
Beats him again, and drives him out of his Country. Ib. -- De^res to renew the
Alliances with the Romans. 247 Artavosdes, King of Armenia, cheated and put to
Death by Anthony. 166 Artaxias, Son of Artavasdes, sides with the Parthians
against the Romans to Revenge the Death of his Father. 166 -- Defends himself
even to his Death in Armenia. Ib. Aspr^nas, (L.) Proconsul of Africa* puts
Sempronius Gracchus to Death by Tiberius's Order. 105 -- Asks why Claudius was
not mentioned. 309 Asinius Gallus offends Tiberius by a Treacherous Demand. 38
-- And would after soften him by Praises. Ib. -- Hated by Tiberius for Marrying
Vispania. 39 -- Desirous to Reign. 40 -- Contests with Haterius Agrippa upon
the subject of the Farcers. 151 -- Opposes the Reformation of Luxury. 202 --
Says, the Senate ought not to Treat of public Affairs in the Princes absence.
206 -- Would surprise Tiberius, but in vain. 206, 207 -- Piso demands him for
one of his Advocates. 299 Aufidienus Rufus, Marshall of the Camp, evil treated
(...) Soldiers. 54 Augustus takes the Government under the Name of Prince of
the Senate. 5 -- Q^its the Name of Triumvir, and makes himself called Consul. 7
-- Goes to see his Grandson Aggrippa in his Exile. 15 -- His last W^ll. 23 --
His Gifts to the People of Rome, to the Officers and Soldiers. 24 -- His
Obsequies, and the Honour^ given to him. 25 -- Diverse Judgments of his Life and
Reign. 26, 27 -- A College of Priests instituted to his Honor. 106 -- His
Temple at Terragona. 152 -- Livi^ dedicated a Statue to him. 369 Augustinia^
Games disturbed by the pa^^^^ity of Spectators. 107 -- Lucius Apronius proposed
the Heralds to be Overseers of them, but Tiberius was against it. 369 Aviola,
(Acilius) reduces Tours and Angiers to their Duty. 242 Angiers, an Academy,
revolts by the persuasion of Sacrovir. 343
B.
Bathyllus, the Buffoon, Favorite of Maecenas. 107 Blesus, (Iunius) Commands
the Legions. 47 -- By Accident causes their Revolt. Ib. -- Endeavors to reduce
them to their Duty. 54 -- Seems to re^use the Government of Africa. 330 -- Is
continued in it. 361 -- Honored with a Triumph. 379 -- Saluted Emperor by the
Legions. 381 Blesus, Son of Iunius, deputed to the Emperor by the Mutinous
Legions. 52 Bructerians, People of Germany, cut in pieces by Germanicus. 102 --
And Defeated by L. Stertinius. 119
C.
Caius Caesar declared Prince for his Youth, and designed to be Consul. 9 --
Pacifies Armenia, and those Places, and makes a King. 167 -- Dies in his return
to Rome. 9 Calpurnius, Eagle-Bearer of the German Legions, saves the Life of
Manutius Plancus, Ambassador of the Roman People. 85 Camillus, (Furius)
Proconsul of Africa, defeats the Numidians, and Moors, and for that is Honored
with a Triumph. 237, 238 Canopus, a City of Egypt, built by the Spartans. 251
Capito, (Atteius) a Flatterer, Learned Man. 376 Cappadocia, reduced into a
Province by Tiberius. 220 Cariovald^ dies honorably fighting against the
Cherusci. 176 C^tonius sent to Tiberiu^ at the desire of the Legions. 67 Catti,
defeated by Germanicus. 112 Catualda, driven out of his Country by Maroboduus,
revenges himself. 254 -- Driven out by the Hermund^ri, retires to the Romans,
and is sent to Forum Iulii, 257 Cecina, Lieutenant to Germanicus in Germany. 70
-- His Army Revolts. 70, 71 -- He beats the M^rsii. 112 -- Makes War against
the Cherusci with different Success. 128 -- His Address to retain the Soldiers,
being affrighted. 130, 131 -- A Triumph Decreed for him. 139 -- He sets out a
Fleet for Germanicus. 170 Caecina, (Severus) is for prohibiting Women to
accompany their Husbands to the Army. 332 -- His Advice rejected. 332
Cecilianus, Praetor, falsely accused of High Treason. 337 -- His Accusers
punished. Ibid. Celer, (Propertius) a poor Senator, receives a Gift from
Tiberius. 146 Celer, (Domitius) persuades Piso to enter by force into the
Government of Syria. 274 Celibacy preferred. 319 Centurions odious of a long
time to the Roman Soldiers. 72 -- Germanicus degrades those who were Convicted
of Rapine and Cruelty. 94 Cercina, an Island in Africa. 105 C^stius, (^.)
declaims against the Insolence of Slaves, and Abuse of Sanctuarie^. 337 C.
Cestronius, Chief of the first Legion, chastises the Mutineers, and how. 95
Cherea, (Cassius) Centur^on, his Courage. 72 Cherusci's, they dare not succor
the Catti's against Germanicus. 113 -- Side with Arminius against the Romans.
119 -- And after against Maroboduus. 225 Cilicia, at Discord after the Death of
King Philopator. 220 Cini^h^i, a People of Africa join against the Romans. 237
Clau^ius. 309 Claua^i, a ^amily naturally Proud. 13 -- The Family disparaged by
one of the Sons Marrying S^^anus's Daughter. 327 Clement, (Julius) charged by
the Legions of Pann^ni^ to declare their Intentions to Drusus. 61 Clemens,
Slave of Agrippa, lays the Design to carry his Master to the German Legions, to
make him be Proclaimed Emperor. 212 -- And finding him Dead makes himself pass
for Agrippa. 213 -- His Address to persuade it. 214, 215 -- His Answer to
Tiberius. 216 -- His Death. Ibid. Co^^ag^na in Trouble after the Death of K.
Antiochus. 220 -- Annexed to the Roman Empire. 245 Considuus, Condemned by the
Senate for falsely accusing Cecilianus. 337 Comedians, declared exempt from the
punishment of the Whip by Augustus, and maintained in that Privilege by
Tiberius. 151 -- Regulatio^s about their Stipends. Ibid. The Comitia, or
Assembly for Electing Magistrates, transferred from the Field of Mars to the
Senate. 44, 45 Concord, rare amongst the Great. 225, 226 Consuls, their
Institutor. 2 -- Why so called. Ibid. -- Suppressed and after Established. 3 --
The manner of their Election. 157, 158 -- All Acts dated from the Consuls. 361
Consul Elect gives his Opinion first. 315, 350 (...) gets a part of Thrace, and
is there troubled by his Uncle Rh^s^uporis. 257, 258 -- Betrayed and put into
Irons. 259 -- After killed. 260 Corbul^ complained of Sylla, and of Surveyors
and Magistrates. 330 -- Takes the Employ, which made him odious. Ib. Cordus,
(Caes^us) Accused of Extortion and Treason. 3^9 -- Condemned. 376 Crowns
Military. 2^3 Crowns of Gold at a Feast presented to Germanicus, and other
Guests. 246 Crispinus accuses Granius Marcellus of High Treason. 142
Crupellarii, or Cuirassiers, impenetrable, but unfit to assault. 344
D.
Debauching Senators ruined by their Debauches; degraded. 234 -- The Sentence
of the Senate against Women's Debauches. 282 Decrius dies honorably fighting
against Tacfa^inas. 3^2 Deceraviri, their Authority continued but a little
time. See Note d. 2 -- Composed the Twelve Tables. 322 Dictator, an absolute
Magistrate which was Created in the time of public Calamities. See Note c. 2
-- Chosen by Consuls, and why. See Note c. Ib. Dolabella, a Flatterer. 348, 373
Drusus, Son of Tiberius, sent into Pannonia to appease a Sedition. 57 --
Returns to Rome after having pacified it. 70 -- Gives the Spectacle of
Gladiators at which he presided. 149 -- Is blamed for it by his Father. 150 --
His Extraction by the Mothers side was not Illustrious. 223 -- He goes into
Illyrium to learn the Exercises of War, 224 -- And from thence into Germany.
230 -- Where he cunningly sows Discord. 253 -- Is Honored with a small
Triumph. 257 Drusus, Son of Tiberius, pays his last Respects to the Memory of
Germanicus. 291 -- Goes to the Army in Illyrium. 296 -- Defers the Triumph the
City Decreed him. 299 -- Entered Rome with a small Triumph. 311 -- Marries his
Daughter Iulia to Nero. ^27 -- Manages the Affairs of the Consulate alone in
the absence of his Father. 329, 330 -- Gains Reputation by Deciding a
Controversy between Corbulo and Sylla. 330 -- Opposes the Proposition to
prohibit Husbands to take their Wives with them to their Governments. 335 --
Gains Honor. 337 -- The Roman People glad that he loves Company and Pleasure.
338 -- Is called to the Office of Tribune by his Father. 360 -- Has great
Applause given him* 361 -- Two Senators render themselves ridiculous in
Honoring him too much. 361 -- His Letters Read, and taken to be very Arrogant,
though they had a turn of Modesty; the Senate complains. 363 Drusus, (Livius)
Tribune, Prodigal in the Name of the Senate. 322 -- Sen^tors oppose him, See
Note m. 323 -- His Death. Ib. Drusus, Son of the Empress Livia, has the T^tle
of General. 9 -- Cherished by the Roman People, wherefore. 73 -- The Favor of
the People fatal to him and to his Son Germanicus. 217 -- His Canal. ^72 -- His
Funeral. 293 Duillius, First Admiral of the Romans, honored with a Naval
Triumph. 234
E.
Eagle of the 19th Legion lost. 120 -- Found. Ib. Eagles retaken by the Romans.
192 Eagles by their flying predict Victory to Germanicus. 181 Eclipse of the
Moon stops the Sedition of the Roman Soldiers. 63 Eg^a ruined by an Earthquake.
231 Egypt, Augustus forbids the Roman Senators and Knights to enter into it,
and why. See Note c. 250 -- The Pyramids of Egypt. 252 Egyptia^s transported
into Sardinia 283 -- Their Religion abolisht at Rome. Ib. E^ilia Lepida accused
by her Husband for a Supposititious Child. 314 -- Punished. 316 Eloquence is
not to be judged by Fortune. 282 -- Hindered by Fear. 372 Emilius, (P^ulus) his
Basilica, repaired and beautified by Lepidus. 378 E^^ius accused of Treason and
Acquitted. 376 Epidaph^e. where Germanicus died. 281 Erat^* Queen of Armenia,
was soon driven out of it. 167 Esculapius, his Temple acknowledged an
Authentic Sanctuary. 367 E^iles, 3 sorts of it. See Note h. 318
F.
F^l^nius, a Roman Knight accused of High Treason. 141 Favor of Princes. 328
Flavius, Brother of A^minius, solicited to abandon the Romans, continues firm
to them. 174 Florus, (Julius) Incendiary. 341 -- Kills himself. 343 Fortune;
its Temple dedicated to Fo^^ Fort^nae. 217 Fifteen. 369
G.
Gallia, the Cities of it Rebelled. 341 Germanicus adopted by Tiberius. 11 --
Is made Proconsul. 44 -- Commands the Armies in Germany. 70 -- As much hated by
Tiberius and Livia as loved by the People. 73, 223 -- His Humor very different
from that of Tiberius. 73, 74 -- Appe^ses the Legions in Germany which
Mutinied. 79 -- Pays some of them with his own Money. 81 -- The Mutineers take
away the General's Standard. 84 -- They accuse him of Weakness. 86, 87 -- He
sends his Wife and Son Caligula to T^^ves, to secure them from the Fury of the
Seditious. 88 -- His excellent Remonstrance to the Revolters. 89 -- He orders
Cecina to punish the Guilty, which is done. 98, 99 -- He surprises the Marsi,
ravages their Country, and razes their Temple, the most beautiful in Germany.
101 -- His Exploits make Tiberius jealous. 102 -- Who sticks not to declare
them to the Senate with much Affectation. 103 -- A Triumph is ordered for him.
108 -- He delivers S^gest^s out of the hands of his Enemies, who kept him
Prisoner. 114 -- He is Honored with the Title of Emperor by order of Tiberius.
117 -- Pays his last Respects to the Legions of V^rus, in giving them Burial.
120, 122 -- An Action disapproved by Tiberius. 122 -- He sees Varus in a Dream
all bloody, asking him succor. 126 -- A Pre^age of the Disgrace which happened
to him the day following. 127 -- Another Disgrace happens to two of his
Legions. 136, 137 -- He gains the Hearts of the Soldiers by good Usage. 138,
139 -- Tiberius resolves to separate him from the Legions which were too
Affectioned to him. 169 -- How he sounds the Heart of the Soldiers, when he was
about to give Battle to the G^rmans. 177 -- Dreams of good Presage, which makes
him hope for Victory. 179 -- His Harangue to the Soldiers. 179 -- He cuts
Arminius's Army into pieces, who flies away. 182 -- Gains another Battle over
the Germans. 186 -- His Modesty. 187 -- His Fleet dispersed by a violent Storm.
188, 189 -- His Despair because of that loss. 190 -- He Ravages all the Country
of the Marsi. 192 -- Tiber^us invites him to return to Rome. 192, 193 -- He
returns with Regret, why. 194 -- His Triumph. 217 -- His Children. Ibid. -- His
Consulate with Tiberius. 218 -- He is made Governor of the Provinces beyond the
Seas. 221 -- His second Consulship. 239 -- His Curiosity to see the Monuments
of his Ancestors. Ib. -- His Justice. 241 -- His approaching Death predicted.
Ibid. -- His Civility to Piso his greatest Enemy, 242, 243 -- Their Enterview
makes them both more bitter. 246 -- Patience of Germanicus. 247 -- His Answer
to the Ambassadors of the Parthians. ib. -- He goes into Egypt. 248 -- Clothes
himself in the Grecian Mode, and is blamed for it by Tiberius. 250 -- But more
for Violating the Orders of Augustus. Ib. -- Visits the Antiquities of Thebes.
251 -- Is Honored with a small Triumph. 257 -- Falls Sick. 264 -- His Recovery
and Relapse. Ibid. -- His last Letter. 265 -- His last Discourse. 266 -- His
last Advice to his Wife. 268 -- His Death. 269 -- His Praise. Ib. -- His
Parallel with Alexander. 269 -- His Death reproached to Tiberius and the
Empress. 279 -- Universally lamented. 280, 299 -- His Name Sung by the Salian
Priests. 281 -- His Statues and Altars. Ibid. -- His Regiment. 282 -- His
Sister brought to Bed of two Boys, to the great Displeasure of the People, and
why. 282 -- His Wife comes to Rome with his Urn. 290 -- His Funeral. Ibid. --
Compared with the Funeral of his Father. 293 -- His Death differently reported
310 Gracchus, (Sempronius) Adulterer, with Iulia* a Wi^e of Tiberius, his
Death, 105
H.
Haterius offends Tiberius by an imprudent Question. 41 -- Obtains his Favor
by the Protection of the Empre^^. 42, 43 -- His Invective against Luxury. 201
-- A Flatterer. 361 -- Reproved by Tiberius. 363 Helvius, (Rufus) a common
Soldier, had the Civic Crown given him by Tiberius. 313 Haemus, a Mountain. 340
Heniochians, a People of Asia. 263 Hercules; The Egyptians say, the true
Hercules was of their Country. 251 Hircania, of Macedonia, overturned by an
Earthquake. 231 Hortalus, Grandson of Hortensius the Orator, addresses himself
to the Senate to be relieved in his Poverty. 208, 209 -- The Inclination of the
Senate causes Tiberius to re^use him. 210 -- The Senate thereupon Murmurs. 212
-- Tiberius to Content them, gives a certain Sum of Money to the Children of
Hortalus. Ibid.
I.
I^dus (Julius) de^eats ^lorus. 343 Iunia, Sister of Brutus; her Testament,
Death and Funeral. 383, 384 Inguiomer Ar^i^ius, his Nephew, draws her into the
Revolt against the Romans. 119 -- The Advice of the Uncle preferred before that
of the Nephew. 131 -- Both of them beaten by Cecina in one Battle. 132 -- And
by Germanicus in another. 180 Inguiomer, abandons Arminius, whom he would not
obey. 225 -- And joins with Maroboduus, his Nephew^ greatest Enemy. ib. Jews;
Are commanded to renounce their Superstitious Ceremonies, or to go out of
Italy. 283, 284 Iulia, Daughter of Augustus, her Misery and Death. 104 Iulia,
Daughter of Germanicus and Agrippina, her Birth. 240 Iunius, the Regiment
called by his Name, takes the Name of Germanicus in honor of that Prince. 282
K.
Kings first governed R^m^.
L.
Labio esteemed for his freedom of Speech. 382 Lentulus, a Man of Authority;
the Soldiers will kill him, why. 62 Lepidus, a Triumvir. 7 -- Degenerates
through idleness. 28 -- Is deceived by Augustus. 31 Lepidus (Marius) desends
his Sister, 314 -- Accused as a Coward, and beggarly. 331 -- The Senate of a
contrary Opinion, sends him into Asia. 331, 332 Lepidus (Marcus) judged worthy
of the Empire by Augustus. 40 -- Excuses himself from being Proconsul. 330 --
Pleads for Priscus. 350 Libo (Drusus) accused of plotting against the State.
194 -- No body found that will undertake his Defense. 198 -- Implores the Mercy
of Tiberius, but in vain. ib. -- Kills himself. 200 -- Several Opinions
concerning him, ib. Livia, Wife of Augustus, causes Agrippa to be banished. 10
-- Suspected to have poisoned her Husband. 14 -- The Julian Family 23 --
Flattered by the Senate, and lessened by her Son. 43 -- An Enemy to Agrippina.
74 -- Gives too much Authority to Urgulania, her Favorite. 204 -- Complains of
L. Piso. ib. -- Vexes Agrippina by the Wife of Cn. Piso. 223 -- Privately
protects Plancina. 304 -- I^ dangerously ill. 369 -- Affronts Tiberius. 369 Law
(Julian) against Adulterers. 235 Law of High Treason revived by Tiberius. ^39
-- Its Progress. 141 -- A Supplement in all Accusations, 339 Laws (Oppian)
broke by the Women. 333 -- Their Rigor moderated. 334 Law Papia Popp^^ against
Celibacy. 319 -- Moderated. 326 Laws (Sumptuary) neglected. 352, 355 Laws
Agrariae blamed by those who made them. 30 Laws, their Original. 320 -- Their
Number infinite when the Commonwealth is corrupt. 324 Lollius (M.) de^eated in
Germany. 3^ -- Accused as the Author of Cai. Caesar's Sedition and Lewdness.
349 Lucilius a Centurion, slain by reason of his Violences. 57 Lueius, Son of
Agripp^, declared Prince of the Youth, and designed Consul. 9 -- His Death. ib.
Luxury. 2 -- Senators demand Reformation of it. 201 -- Another opposes it, and
his Advice preferred. 202 -- The Ediles desire the Senate to prevent it. 352 --
The Senate refer it to the Prince, ibid. -- His excellent Answer. 353 -- By
degrees le^t off in the Reign of Galba. 358 -- The ancient Frugality returned
in the time of V^spasi^^. 359
M.
Macedonia discharged of the Proconsular Government. 148 -- Romans ill Success
against it. 242 -- Alexander valiant, but exceeded by Germanicus in Clemency,
Temperance, etc. 271 -- Formidable to the Atheni^^^. 255 Magi and Astrologers
banished out o^ Italy. 201 Magnesia, a City of Asia, overturned by an
Earthquake. 221 -- Receives Succor from Tiberius. ib. M^lovendus, General of
the Mars^, surrenders himself to the Romans* and declares the place where one
of the Eagles of the Legions of Varus was kept. 191 Malaginensis, a Priest of
Jupiter, d^sited the Government of Asia. 361 -- Tiberius his Answer. 3^^ --
Example for Bishops, (Reflect. 2) ib. Marcellus, Nephew of Augustus, r^is'd
being young to the Dignity* of Pontificate and Edile. ^ Marcellus (Gran^us)
Praetor of Bithinia, accused of High Treason. 142 -- And of Mismanagement of
the public Treasure. 145 Marcomanni. People of Germany* plundered by Catuald^.
254 Maroboduus King of the Su^vi, the Semnons and Lombards ^evolt from him. 225
-- He demands Succor from Tiberius against Arminius. 229 -- His Retreat into
Italy, where setting too great Value on his Life* made him contemptible. 256
Marsi, People of Germany, conquered by the Romans under the command of
Germanicus. 101 -- Beaten by Cecina. 113 -- Pillaged again by Germanicus. 19^
Marsus (Vib.) disputes with another Senator the Government of Syria. 271 --
Summons Piso to give an account of his Actions to the Senate. 277 Martia; a
Secret which she reveals to the Empress, costs her Husband his Life. 16
Martina, a famous Poisone^, Favorite of Plan^ina, sent to Rome. 272 -- Her
sudden Death. 296 Martius (P.) Astrologer, put to Death. 201 Martium, Capital
City of the ^atti, burnt by Germanicus. 113 Mazippas, Head of the Moors, joins
with Tacfarinas to War against the Romans. 237 Me^^^on; his Statue gives an
articulate sound, when struck, with the Rays of the Sun. 252 Menm^us, Marshall
de Camp, by a courageous Resolution reduces the Soldiers to their Obedience. 82
Merulas (Cornelius.) 362 Messalinus (Co^ta) his Advice against the Memory of
Libo. 200 Messalinus (Valor.) defends the Women. 333 -- His Discourse seconded
by Drusus, 335 Myrin^, a City of Asia, overturned by an Earthquake. 231 Musa
(Aemil^a) her Possessions confiscated, given by Tiberius to Emillus L^pidus.
Musulans, a powerful and warlike Nation in A^rica, war against the Romans under
the command of Tac^arinas. 236
N.
Nero dispensed with for the Vigintivirate. 326 -- Pontifical Dignity bestowed
upon him. 327 -- His marrying Iulia. increased the Joy of the Roman people. ib.
Naup^rtum, a Municipal City, plundered. 53 Nile, its Mouth consecrated to
Hercules. 251 -- Lakes cut in the Ground to receive its Waters. 252 (...), the
City where Augustus died, 16 Numa established Divine Worship, 321
O.
Occ^a, the Superior of the Vestals, 284 Octavius, Father of Augustus, both
die in the same City, and in the same Chamber. 27 Odrusians revolt. 340
Oracles, their Answers always doubtful. 241 Otho (Iun.) from a Schoolmaster
made Senator by Seia^^s. 371 Ovation, the Nature of it. Vide Note 2. 311
P.
Pacuvius (P.) Commander of a Legion. 277 Peace; amongst stubborn Nations,
those who advise Peace, have never much Credit given to them, 113 -- Under a
Tyrant, War to be preferred before it. 345 P^ndus, Vice-Praetor of Maesia. 260
Parsa, Consul, his Death. 30 Pedo commands Germanicus his Cavalry against
Arminius. 119 Perce^^ius, a private Soldier, causes the Legions of Pa^^onia to
revolt, 47 -- Killed by order of Drusus. 68 Philadelphis overturned by an
Earthquake. 231 Philopator, King of Cilicia. 220 Phraat^s sends most of his
Children to Augustus for a Pledge of his Faith. 162 Piso (Cn.) offends Tiberius
by his Liberty. 145 -- Advises to leave Tiber in the condition it is in. 154 --
Would have the Senate dispatch Business in the Prince's absence, 20^ -- Is made
Governor of Syria. 222 -- So proud, that he looked upon the two Sons of
Tiberius as his Inferiors. ib. -- Is put into the Government to break the
Designs of Germanicus. ib. -- Blames Germanicus. 242 -- Inveighs against the
Athenians, why. ib. -- Is assisted by Germanicus in a great Danger, but makes
no acknowledgment of it. 243 -- Corrupts the Military Discipline, ib. --
Disobeys Germanicus. 245 -- Insults him at a Feast. 246 -- And changes all his
Orders in Syria. 263 -- Stops the Rejoycings which the People of Anti^ch made
for the recovery of Germanicus. 264 -- Who suspect that he poisoned him, ib. --
Retires from Syria. 265 -- Rejoices insolently for the Death of Germanicus. 273
-- Strives to regain the Government of Syria. 276 -- Gives up his Arms to
Sentius. 279 -- Goes to seek Drusus. 296 -- Comes to Rome. 298 -- Accused
before the Consuls. 299 -- Consented that the Emperor should take cognizance
of it himself, and why. 299 -- Judged by the Senate. ib. -- Abandoned by his
Wife. 304 -- His Death. ib. -- Contents of his last Letter. 306 -- Which clears
his Son of Treason, ib. -- Who has all his Fathers Estate, 308 Piso (L.)
inveighs against the Advocates. 204 -- Commences a Law Suit against the
Empress's Favorite. ib. -- Appointed Advocate for Cn. Piso, 299 -- Is for
banishing Sil^nus. 373 Plancina; her Riches puff up Piso, 222 -- The Empress
orders her to teaze Agrippina, the Wife of Germanicus. 223 -- Her Exercises not
suitable to her Sex. 243 -- Her insolent Discourses. ib. -- Her Joy at
Germanicus's Death, 273 -- Pardoned by August^'s means, 304 -- Tiberius speaks
for her. 307 -- The People complain of it. ib. Plan^us (M^nalus) Consular,
departed from the Senate to Germanicus in danger of being killed. 84 -- Pliny
the Historian, what he says of Agrippina. 133. Pomponius (Flaccus) Vice-Praetor
of Maesia, deceives Rhescuporis King of Thrace. 261 Poverty, when it proceeds
neither from Luxury nor Debauch, it ought to be relieved by the Prince, 146,
232 -- Without Reproach, a Credit, rather than Disgrace. 371 Praetors; Tiberius
will not augment the Number settled by Augustus. 43 -- A Senator proposes to
nominate 60 at a time for 5 years, instead of 12 yearly. 206 -- Tiberius
perceives the cunning. 207 Pretexta, what it is. Vide Note h. 9 Priest of
Jupiter, when sick, officiated for by the High Priest. 362 -- His Place vacant
62 years. ib. -- Must be absent from Rome but two days, etc. 377 Priests: The
Priests of Augustus, 106, 281, 369 -- The Solian Priests, or Priests of Mars.
281 -- The Titian Priests. 106 Priscus (Luterius) accused for composing an
Elegy for Drusus. 350 -- Lepidus spoke for him. ib. -- Only one of the Consuls
agreed with Lepidus. 351 Priscus carried back to Prison, and suffered. ib.
Publicus; a Temple of Flora built by the Aediles, Publicus, and Lucius. 234
Pyrrhus King of Epirus, formidable to the Romans. 255 -- Is advertised by them,
that his Physician would poison him. 286
Q.
Quirinus (Publ.) accuses his Wife of a supposititious child, etc. 314 -- His
Age, and means of Birth, made him not a fit Husband for her. 316 -- His
Employs, Death, and Funeral, 348, 349 -- His Memory not agreeable to the
Senate. ib.
R.
Religion: The Mysteries of Religion ought not to be divulged. 148 -- All the
Rites of it in the Cities of Italy subject to the Roman Empire, 377 Remius lets
Vonones go, and after kills him. 263 Revolt of the Cities of Gallia, 341 Revolt
of Arminius. 109 Revolt of the Legions of Pannonia, 46 -- Its Beginning. ib. --
Its Progress. 48, etc. -- And End. 69, 70 Rhoemetalces succceeds to part of his
Father's Estate. 262 Rhescuporis: Augustus divides Thrace between Rhescuporis
and Cotys his Nephew. 258 -- After the Death of Augustus, Rhescuporis ravages
the Land of Cotys, ib. -- Invites him to an Interview, makes him Prisoner. 258,
259 -- After kills him. 260 -- Flaccus seizes him, sends him to Rome, where he
is degraded, 261, 262 -- Is carried to Alexandria, where he is slain. 262 Rhine
separates in Batavia as into two Rivers. 171 Rome; its Kings. Vid. Notes. 1 --
Its Dictators. Vid. Note c. 2 -- Its Decemvirates. Vid. Note d. 3 -- Its
Military Tribunes. 3, 4 -- Its Tyrants, Cinna, Sylla, and Caesar. 4 --
Beautified by Augustus. 29 -- Its multitude of Laws. 324 -- As fatal to them as
their Crimes, 320 Rubrius accused of Perjury. 142 -- Tiberius causes him to be
absolved from it. ib. Ru^illa (Anna) imprisoned for reproaching a Senator. 337
Rufus (Aufidienus) Marshall de Camp, a rigorous observer of Military
Discipline. 54 Ru^us (Trebellianus,) Tutor of K. Cotys his Children. 262, 340
-- The Thracians complained of him. ib.
S.
Sabinus ^ontinues in the Government of Mesia. 154 Sallustius, Minister of
State to Tiberius, sends the order to kill young Agrippa. 19 -- Says, that a
Prince ought never to reveal the Counsels of his Ministers. ib. -- Stops the
counterfeit Agrippa, 215, 216 -- His Death, and Commendation, 327 Sardis, a
City of Asia, overturned by an Earthquake, and assisted by Tiberius, who
remitted all their Taxes. 230, 231 Sanctuaries, their Abuse. 364 -- Reasons for
them. 365, 366 -- The Senates Order. 367 Sacrovir (Iul.) incensed Gallia to
rebel. 341 -- Fights for the Romans to betray them. 342 -- Made himself Master
of Angiers, 343 -- His short Harangue. 345 -- Is beaten, and kills himself. 347
Scaurus (Mamercus) offends Tiberius by the hopes he gave, that Tiberius would
accept the Empire, 41, etc. 316, 330, 371 Salonius (Asinius) his Death. 381
Scribonia, Augustus his first Wife. 196 Scribonius (L.) Consul. 161 Segestes, a
German Lord, discovers the Plot against the Romans to Farus. 109 -- Demands
Succor from Germanicus against Arminius. 113 -- His Harangue to Germanicus.
115 -- His Daughter, Wife of Arminius, Prisoner of War. 114 -- Brought to Bed
of a Son. 117 Segimer, Brother to Segestes, surrenders himself voluntarily to
the Romans. 138 -- His Son with difficulty obtains his Favor, and why. ib.
Segimond, Son of Segestes, scruples to go find Germanicus, and why. 113 -- His
Father asks pardon for him. 117 S^janus goes into Pannonia with Drusus, Son of
Tiberius. 58 -- Foments the Hatred of Tiberius and the Empress against
Agrippina. 135 -- Cheats Cneius Piso by false promises. 305 -- A Statue erected
for him. 379 Sentences of Death stopped 10 days. 352 Sentius (C^eius,) Governor
of Syria after the Death of Germanicus. 271 S^ptimius a Centurion, his General
constrained to abandon him to the Fury of his Soldiers. 72 Servius, Governor
of Comagena. 245 Sibyls; Tibrius binders the consulting the Books of the
Sibyls. 148 Silanus (Cret.) Governor of Syria, treats Vanones as King, and
Prisoner. 168 -- Recalled from Syria, because of his Alliance with Germanicus.
221 Silanus (C.) accused. 371 -- Pressed by Tiberius. 372 -- Banished. 373 --
That Sentence mitigated by Tiberius. 375 Silanus (D.) accused for debauching
Augustus his Niece, banishes himself. 318 -- Returns to Rome; but as a private
person. 319 Silanus (M.) gives Tiberius Thanks for his Brother's return. 318 --
Tiberius his Answer. ib. -- Dishonours the Consulate, by his proposing, that
all Acts should be dated from the Tribunes. 361 Silius (C.) Lieutenant General
in Germany. 70 -- Receives the Ornaments of a Triumph. 130 -- Enters into the
Country of the Catti, where he carries away the Wi^e and Daughter of the
Prince, 171, 191 -- Commands the Army against the Rebels. 344 -- Lays waste the
Towns in the Franche Comte. 345 -- His Harangue. 347 -- Defeats Sacrovir. ib.
Soldiers; their Pay amongst the Romans. 49 Son excused from Rebellion for
obeying his Father. Vid. Rest. 1. 306 Stertinius, Lieutenant to Germanicus,
defeats the Bructerians. 119 -- Chastizes the Angrivarians. 172 Strabo, Father
of Sejanus the Favorite of Tiberius. 21, 58 Sylla expelled the Senate. 234
Sylla, the Dictator; his Government not long. Vid. Note m. 322 Sylla (Lucius)
his Dispute with Corbulo. 330
T.
Tac^arinas, Head of the Robbers, becomes General of the M^sulans, 236 --
Overcome by the Romans. 237 -- Renews the War in Africa. 312 -- Is defeated.
313 -- Driven to the De^arts. 314 Tacitus, a faithful unbyassed Historian. 6 --
Ridicules every where the Flatterers. 25, 201, 373, 361, 370, 376 -- Recites
the Death of Cn. Piso from old Men. 305 -- Teaches the part of an Historian,
370 Te^^tis, a City of Asia, overturned by an Earthquake. 231 Terror; Panick
Fear in the Camp of Cecina. 129 Teutberg; a Forest, where Varus and his Legions
were defeated. 120 Thala, a Fort besieged by Tacfarinas, 313 T^^bes; her
ancient Puissance. 251 Theophilus, condemned by the Ar^opagus. 242 Thrace,
divided by Augustus between Res^uporis and C^tys. 257 -- Divided again by
Tiberius between their Children. 262 Tiberius takes the Command of the Armies.
8, 9 -- Is adopted by Augustus, who associates him to the Tribunitial Power. 9
-- His accession to the Empire. 13 -- He caused young Agrippa to be
assassinated. 17 -- Receives the Oath of Fidelity of the Consuls. 20, 21 --
Affects great Modesty in the beginning of his Reign, and why. 21 -- Consults
the Senate concerning the Funeral of Augustus. 23 -- Speaks ambiguously. 35 --
Says, he is not capable to Govern the Empire. ib. -- Retrenches the Honors
designed for his Mother. 43 -- Transfers the Peoples Election of Magistrates to
the Senate. 44, 45 -- Unmoved at the Murmurs of the People. 95 -- Amuses the
Senate and Provinces by the Preparations he makes for a Voyage to the
Frontiers. 97 -- Lets his Wife Iulia die in Want, and Misery. 104 -- Loves not
the public Games and Shows. 108 -- Wherefore. 151 -- Refuses the Title of
Father of the Country. 139, 285 -- Renews and enlarges the Law of High Treason.
139 -- Assists at the Audiences of Inferior Courts, without turning Judges out
of their Places. 146 -- Gives a Senator wherewithal to support his Dignity. ib.
-- Sends back others to the Senate, 147 -- Opposes the Suppression of the
Hundredth part of the Gain by Commerce. 152 -- Seldom changes the Governors and
Officers of Provinces. 154 -- Wherefore. 155 -- Gives the Par^hians a King. 163
-- And the Praetorship to Libo, whose Death he studies. 196 -- Defers the
Reformation of Luxury. 203 -- Severely treats Hortalus the Senator fallen into
Poverty. 210 -- Answered well by counter^eit Agrippa. 216 -- Discharges Rome of
one half of the Payment of the Hand^e^ Penny. 220 -- And some Cities of Asia of
all Taxes for 5 years. 230, 231 -- Will not be Heir of those who made him their
Heir to be avenged of their Relations. 233 -- His third Consulship. 239 -- His
Day of Rejoicing for the two Sons at a Birth, Heirs of Drusus. 282 -- His
generous Answer to him, who offered to poison Arminius. 286 -- His Trouble to
see Agrippina adored by the People of (...), 292 -- And the Mourning for the
Death of Germanicus to hold so long, 294 -- His Prudence at the Process of
(...). Piso. 300 -- His fourth Consulship, of which he leaves all the Business
to his Son. 329 -- His refusal of Honors. 348 -- His Gratitude toward one of
his Friends. ib. -- His Order to stop the execution of Judgments. 351 -- His
Answer to the Senate's demand of a Reformation. 353 -- His Popularity the more
agreeable to the Senate, because very ^are, 375 Tiber, its Inundations. 148 --
Methods proposed to prevent them, ^53 Tigranes made King of Armenia, reigns no
long time. 166 Tours, its Revolt against the (...), 342 Tribunate; a Magistracy
exercised 37 years by Augustus. 27 -- Invented by Augustus. 360 -- He takes
Agrippa, and after ^^^rius, for Associates. 361 Trio (Fulcinius) a celebrated
Promoter. ^97 -- Accuser of Piso. 299 -- His great Heat (...) his E^oquence.
310 Trophy of Arms taken by Germanicus his Soldiers, irritates the Germans. 184
-- Another by Germanicus, to the Honor of Tiberius. 187 Troy, a City famous
for giving Birth to the Romans. 241 Tubantes, a People of Germany destroyed by
Germanicus. 101
V.
Varilia accused for Lampooning Augustus and Livia. 234 -- Acquitted from the
Indictment of High Treason, but punished for Adultery. 235 Varus surprised by
Arminius for neglecting the Advice of Segestes. 110 -- His Body ignominiously
treated by the Nephew of Segestes. 138 -- His Legions had a Tomb made for their
Bones. 121 -- Demolished by the Bructerians. 171 Varro (Visellius) Lieutenant
of Lower Germany. 342 -- He yields the Command to Silius, 344 -- Raises the
Siege of Philippopoli. Vid. Note. 341 Ubians. 71 -- Their City pillaged. 79 --
Their Altar. 83 -- Son of Segestes, Priest of that Altar. 114 Veranius, first
Governor of Cappadocia, discharged it of part of the Tributes which it paid to
its Kings. 214 -- Friend of Germanicus. 272 -- Revenges his Death in pursuing
that of Piso. 299, 302, 307 -- Is honored with the Dignity of Priesthood. 310
Verus (Antistius) a Macedonlan Lord, accused to keep Intelligence with
Rescupori, banished. 339 Ves^als carry the Last Will of Augustus to the Senate.
23 -- Appeared before the Judge when called to witness. 205 V^tera, or the old
Camp-place upon the Rhine. 94 Veterans, Soldiers, offer the Empire to
Germanicus. 77 -- Demand the Legacies of Augustus, ib. -- They are promised it
double to appease them. 80 -- They would be paid upon the spot, and are so. 80,
81 -- Tiberius revokes the Promise he made, to free them at the end of 16
years. 153 Vibidius Varro expected the Senate; wherefore. 234 Vibilius, General
of the Hermunduri, 257 Vibuleus, a common Soldier, devises how to ^eign that
they have killed his Brother, and to demand his Body. 55 -- Counterfeits so
well, that General Bl^sus had been killed, if the Imposture had not been
discovered. 56 -- Drusus puts him to Death. 68 Vipsania, first Wife of
Tiberius. 39 -- Mother of Drusus. 311 -- The most fortunate of all the Children
of Agrippa. ib. Vistilia, a Roman Lady, declares that she will prostitute her
self, 283 -- The prudent Answer of her Husband to the Judges. ib. Vitellia will
not depose against Luc. Priscus. 350 Vitellius (Publ.) is in danger of drowning
with the two Legions, 136, 137 -- Goes to receive the Tribute of the Gauls. 170
-- Accuses Piso and Plancina as Authors of the Death of Germanicus, 299 -- Is
honored with Priesthood. 310 Vitellius (Qu.) expelled the Senate, 234 Vonones
given in Hostage to Augustus by his Father. 162 -- Demanded by the Parthians
for King. 163 -- Despised, and why. ib. -- Expelled. 167 -- Called to Royalty
by the Armenians. 168 -- Whose Inconstancy obliges him to retire into Syria,
where he is treated as Prisoner. ib. -- Taken from thence by Germanicus, and
why. 248 -- He corrupts his Guards, and flies, but is taken. 263 -- An Evocate,
supposed to be privy to his Escape, kills him. ib. Urgulania, Favorite of
Augusta, cited to Court, but refuses to appear. 204 Usipoles cut to pieces by
Germanicus* 101 Volusius (Luc.) his Death, and Commendation. 327
Z.
Zeno, Son of the King of Pontus, is made King of Armenia by Germanicus. 244
FINIS.
The Family of AUGUSTUS*


The former is AUGUSTUS's Family and Blood, this that follows, is his Family by
Affnity, or his Wife LIVIA's Family, which was taken into his own by Adoption.



