A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church OF BRISTOL, JUNE xxi. MDCLXXXV.
Before His GRACE HENRY DUKE of BEAVFORT, His Majesty's Lord Lieutenant for
that City and County.

By RIC. THOMPSON D. D. Dean of Bristol, and Chaplain in Ordinary to his late
Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for Luke Meredith, at the King's Head at the West End of St
Paul's Churchyard, 1685.

To His Grace HENRY Duke of BEAVFORT, Marquess and Earl of Worcester, Baron
Herbert of Chepstow, Ragland, and Gower; Lord President and Lord Lieutenant of
Wales, and the Marches; Lord Lieutenant of the Counties of Gloucester,
Hereford, and Monmouth, and of the City and County of Bristol; Lord Warden of
His Majesty's Forest of Dean, and Constable of the Castle of St Briavells,
Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Gentleman of His Majesty's
Bedchamber, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please Your GRACE,
I Was far from making the same Estimate of this Discourse which was put upon
it by the Generality of Your Grace's Soldiers, who heard it preached. But
since Your Grace has had the Charity to think it worthy Theirs and other
Peoples Reading, I am resolved not to dispute Your Grace's Great Judgment: and
so, do most readily submit it to the Press; regardless of other men's Censures,
whilst Your Grace is pleased to look on it as a Dutiful and well-meant
Performance.

Henceforward if any ask, What is in this Discourse that should move Your Grace
to Order its being thus public? I answer, It was designed to promote Loyalty;
the same Loyalty which now stands the Top and Comble of Your Grace's most
Illustrious Titles and Characters, which rendered You all along a Great
Favorite of our late deceased Sovereign, and makes You most Dear unto his
present Majesty; which prevailed with Your Grace in the very worst of Times to
assert his Majesty's Interests in Contempt of all Your Own, in defiance of the
Excluding Bill, and all the Traiterous Votes and Designs of the Associated
Commoners who promoted it. In short, which brought Your Grace now down to
Bristol, by Your Vigilance and Resolution to secure this City for his
Majesty's Service, at a Time, when the Mock-King of Lyme had assured his
Adherents, That this City was most certainly his own.

But Your Grace has so effectually suceeded in Your Undertaking, that the
Daring Rebels had only so much Courage as to look upon the City at four Miles
distance, and wish it theirs. The only Assault which they made upon Your Grace
was a Volly of Lies; (For having scarce laid it, they raised their Siege, with
many bitter Cursings and Execrations of Your Wise Conduct, at Midnight cowardly
running away.)

No wonder then that All honest and Loyal hearts within this City are now
blessing God for Your Grace, and celebrating Your deserved Praises, as the only
visible Means under Him, that has secured to them their Estates, their
Liberties, and their very Lives.

As for my self, the remembrance of my own Escape shall always live fresh in my
mind, and I shall not fail to own it to Your Grace upon all Occasions, as
becomes,

May it please Your Grace, Your Grace's most Humble, and most obliged Servant,
Richard Thompson.

TITUS iii. v. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers,
to obey Magistrates, and to be ready to every Good Work.
THESE Words are part of those Instructions which St. Paul gave to Titus,
touching those Matters of Doctrine, which he would have him vigorously to
insist on, in his Course of Preaching among the people of Crete: They enjoin a
peaceable and submissive behavior in all Christians toward the Government,
under which they live. Government being so great a Blessing to Mankind, that
without it the World would be no better than a savage Wilderness, and an
Habitation of Wolves and Tigers in humane shape, rending and devouring one
another.

Wherefore Christ, when he came into the World, though he resolved to set up a
New Religion in it, and knew that the present Powers would Oppose and Persecute
the Professors of it to Death; yet did he take care withal, to counsel his
Disciples and Followers patiently to suffer their utmost rage and cruelty,
rather than there should be any violent Alterations made in the Kingdoms of the
Earth, upon the very score of his Religion.

He would not have Princes turned out of their Temporal Jurisdictions, nor the
Sword wrested out of their Hands, in order to the Establishment of his Own
Throne; neither would he, that his Kingdom should go up with the Noises of Axes
and Hammers.

If the Rulers of the World would keep up their old Religion, and oppose his,
he would not have Fire to come down from Heaven to consume them, nor Fire from
Hell to blow them up; but that all that were his Servants indeed, should
overcome with Patience and Meekness, and shine in the whiteness of Innocence,
and not look dreadful with Garments rolled in Blood: And therefore he has
given it in charge to all the Ministers of his Gospel, To put all the
Professors of his Religion in mind To be subject to Principalities and Powers,
to obey Magistrates, and to be ready to every Good Work.

In which words Two things are observable.

I. What the Duty of all Christians is, who live under Government, viz. To be
subject, etc.

II. What the Duty of all the Ministers of Christ's Gospel is, viz. To put the
people in mind to be so.

I shall only be able to speak to the First of these at this time, viz. The
Duty that God has bound upon all Christians that live under Government, viz.
To be subject to those Principalities and Powers under which they live. Where
my work will be to show Two things:

I. Wherein the Practice of this Duty does consist. 2. The Extent of it.

I. I shall show wherein the Practice of this Duty of Subjection does consist.

Now the Practice of this Duty of Subjection consists in Three things.

First, In paying an Active Obedience to all our Prince's Just Commands.

Secondly, In suffering patiently, in case they should oppress and punish us
for not observing even their Unlawful Commands.

Thirdly, In honoring the Persons of the Princes under whom we live.

First, This Duty of Subjection, it requires we should give an Active Obedience
unto all our Prince's just Commands; i. e. We are to own their Authority in all
things that are not sinful for us to do. For in such cases, we may not satisfy
our selves that we are ready to undergo the penalties of Laws. For, the Design
of the Law, is to have Men Obey, not to have them Punished. And Men ought in
those cases to be subject, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake: i.
e. for the Lord Christ's sake, by whom our Consciences are obliged.

It is said of Aristippus, That being asked what he had benefited by
Philosophy, he Answered, To live uprightly and justly, although there were no
Laws to compel, or Gods to punish him. And if an Heathen Man, acted by the mere
Light of Nature, could do so much, much more should Christian Men do,
considering that they live under a much higher, and a more Noble, and
Advantageous Institution. Christian Men should hold themselves obliged to
observe in their Actions, all the ends and designs of the Christian Laws, and
comply with them; and not think themselves blameless, by coming up only to the
Letter of them. For he whose Obedience reaches no higher, observes the Law only
for Wrath's sake, and to save himself in an whole Skin. For, he would break the
Letter as well as the Intention, if he could save himself harmless. Such a Man
does not Obey for Conscience sake. And it is against all the Laws of Christ for
Christian Men to study only how to find out flawes in their Prince's Laws, and
to satisfy them only so far as those words in rigor do require. But they
should hold themselves obliged to do all that in them lies to answer the full
design and intention of them. Nor,

Secondly, Does our Duty require, That Christian Men do the Commands of their
Princes where they are Just, but also, That they should suffer patiently under
them, in case they should oppress them; and they should not resist them, even
although they punish them for not observing their sinful Commands. Indeed, in
case their Commands are sinful, they may suspend their Active Obedience, but it
must be certain that they are so, before they refuse doing them. And they are
then only so, when they require what God has forbidden; as Nebuchadnezzor,
when he required the Three Children to fall down and Worship the molten Image,
that he had set up: or when they forbid what God has required; as when Darius
made a Law, That no Petition should be made for Thirty Days together, unto any
God, but to himself only.

In which cases we are to Obey God rather than Man. And then, indeed, it is
thank-worthy, if a Man for Conscience sake toward God, endure Grief, suffering
wrongfully. For even hereunto were we called; because Christ also suffered for
us, leaving us an Example that we should follow his steps; who when he was
reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered he threatened not, but committed
himself to him that Judges Righteously. And yet,

Thirdly, Whether the Obedience which Christian Men pay to their Princes be
Active, or Passive only, the Doctrine thereof does most expressly require, That
Christians should at all times and places, pay all due Honor to the persons of
those Sovereign Princes they live under: And that they should treat them as
having a Character of the Divinity set upon them; because both their Persons
are Sacred, and the Scripture it self calls them Mortal Gods.

Now the Practice of this Duty will be indifferently well secured by observing
these Negatives. Not to deprave the King's Government by loud Murmurings, by
Libels, or other Seditious Discourses to alienate their Subjects hearts. For,
as Subjects may not touch their Princes with a Violent Hand, so neither may
they smite them with a Virulent Tongue. No, nor take delight in those that
Discourse licenciously of Them, or their Affairs. To Honor the Person of the
King obliges us in no sort to entrench upon his Royal Prerogative, nor to
meddle in any thing that speaks and constitutes him King; for these things are
against his Honor and to the Diminution of his Crown. We must not so much as
blazon his personal Infirmities, if we knew any that he had; and least of all
think that God has put it in our power to say to his King, What do thou? But
every one ought with profound Modesty and Humility, to behave himself toward
him, and to speak Unpleasing Truths with greatest Distance and Fear, when they
are called to it: For Kings are not to be put to Shame. A Man must have a
special and particular Commission from God, by an extraordinary Revelation,
before he can reprove a King. And such Commission no Man now can pretend unto.

Indeed, in the Great Emergencies of the State, his Subjects, when he calls
them together for that purpose, may with all Humility and Submission, Address
to him, and in the meekest manner, represent what they take to be the evil
Consequences of things: But Remonstrance, and Vproar, and Tumult, are contrary
to the Majesty of a King, before whom all things ought to be calm and serene.

And then as to the Affirmative part of this Duty of Christian Obedience, to
Honor the King, requires, That his Subjects should not only speak him fair, but
do him good; blessing him, and praying for him, and rendering him Tribute. And
even when they so do, if they would approve themselves followers of Christ, and
speak in the language of the Holy Spirit, they may not say, they give the King
this, or they give the King that: For, all that Subjects possess, is not their
own; God has one part due to him, and Caesar has another; and when they pay
them, they do but render them their due. Nor, has the King only a share in
their Estates, but their very Lives also are his. And so it is become their
Duty to Fight for their Prince's Safety. And whoever does not, upon Occasion,
Honor his Prince on this manner, he cannot be said truly to fear God: For these
are all alike branches of that Duty, which the Gospel does require, when it
would have us Submit for Conscience sake, and for the Lord's sake. I come now
to consider in the

2d. Place, the Extent of this Obligation, both in respect of the Obedience it
self, as to the Matter of it, and of the Persons, to whom, and the Time, how
long this Precept is of force.

First, In respect of the Obedience it self, it is so Universal, that it is not
limited by the usual limits of Men's Actions considered in their single
capacity; not by Scandal; not by a Scrupulous Conscience; no, nor by any
Antecedent or Subsequent Vow.

First, Obedience and Subjection to the King, is not limited by Cases of
Scandal. Indeed, such is the Strictness of the Christian Religion, That it will
not allow a Man in a single capacity, to exercise his just Liberty in some
Actions, whereby a weak Brother may be offended. And there may be an Obligation
of Charity that may bind this Duty upon a Man in his private Capacity. But if
the Prince require such a Man's Obedience, in such or such matters of Practice,
as are lawful to be done, and other private persons shall pretend themselves
offended thereby, and so incline to fall into Sin; Why, here, notwithstanding
this, we are bound to obey our Prince: Because the avoiding Scandal, is but an
Act of Charity; but to Obey the Prince, is a matter of Justice; and we are
always bound to pay Debts of Justice, before Debts of Charity. When we forbear
an Act, only to avoid Scandal, we recede from our own Right, which we may do;
but when the Prince enjoins, even the Act, which we did before avoid, though we
may give away our own Right, yet we have no power to give away our Prince's
Right. Our Obedience is our Prince's Right, and if he will not remit it, we are
bound to give it him. For, if in a Christian Commonwealth, men should be free
from Laws, by pleading, That they give offense; then every man that had no mind
to Obey, would defend himself with this Plea; and so it would be left in the
Vp-shot to the Peoples pleasure, whether they would obey or no. And
consequently, none or very few Laws would be observed. And

Secondly, As our Obedience unto our Prince is not limited by a Case of
Scandal; so neither is it limited by a Scrupulous Conscience. I mean, when a
man, considering the Action that is commanded, doubts that it is Unlawful, but
he is not certain; he has some fear and distrust upon him, but he is not fully
persuaded; he cannot show where in Scripture it is forbidden, but he only
doubts. Now, though a man in his Private, single Capacity, is in such case
bound to suspend Acting, until his Conscience be duly informed, (because,
whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin:) i. e. whatsoever is not done in such case
with a full persuasion, that it is lawful, is sin: Yet, when the Prince
requires Obedience, and we only doubt whether the Command be lawful, we are
then bound to obey the Prince, because he commands; and not to suspend acting,
because we are scrupulous. For, it is certain, that we owe our Prince our
Obedience; but it is not certain, that the Command is unlawful, and it is our
Wisdom and our Duty to adhere to the safer side. For, otherwise, to refuse the
Prince, would be to run into a certain sin, to avoid that which is uncertain.
To obey the Prince in such case is not for a man to act against his Conscience.
For, a doubting Conscience, is not properly a Conscience, because it prescribes
no Rules, nor does it, like a Judge, pass a Sentence; neither can it excuse or
condemn. Nay,

Thirdly, Subjection to the Prince is due, neither can it be withheld from
him; no, not by virtue of any Antecedent or Subsequent Vow.

Indeed, it is written in the Law of Moses, Numbers 30. v. 2.
That if a man in a private Capacity vowed a Vow unto the Lord, or swore an
Oath, he should not break his Word, he should do according to all that
proceeded out of his Mouth. But if a Woman vowed, and her Father heard it, and
disallowed it in the day that he heard it, it is there also written, That not
any of her Vow was to stand. The Reason is, because she was under subjection.
And by as good Logic as any is, the same may be concluded concerning the
Obligation which lies upon the people in respect of the Prince. The Sovereign
Prince is the Father of his people; and therefore, if the people should make a
Vow, and enter into a Solemn League and Covenant, and the Prince should by a
public Declaration disallow it when he heard it, such Vow of the people could
have no binding power in it, and there lay no Obligation upon any such
Subjects, from any such Vow, that they should say, they cannot obey in this or
in that thing, by reason of it: For, they are under Subjection.

This would hold, if the Vow or Oath were a thing lawful in it self. But much
more will it hold then, if the Oath is an unlawful Oath; as it needs must be,
if people shall take an Oath, and enter into a Covenant to alter the
Government, and depose their Governor, and especially when they have before
taken an Oath of Allegiance to their Governor, and an Oath to maintain his
Government. Such an after-Oath of the Peoples, is unlawful in it self; and
therefore not binding; but they ought to obey the King for all that, in what
lawful Instances soever he requires their Obedience.

This is the Extent of the Subject's Obedience, as to the matter of it. It now
remains, That

Secondly, We consider the Extent of it, as to the Persons to whom it must be
paid; and that is General, to all Principalities and Powers, without any
Limitation or Distinction. Subjects are not only to obey them that are
Religious, and whom they acknowledge to be Christian; but even those who are of
a contrary Religion, and when they persecute and oppose theirs. Subjects must
submit to those Princes, if they be theirs. For, they are still the Ordinances
of God, whatever else they be. Thus, though the Principalities and Powers in
St. Paul's time were Heathen, and Enemies to the Faith of Christ; and the
Supreme Power was then vested in Nero, a very Cruel, and a very Debauched
Prince; yet, for all this the Christians were not to withdraw from him their
Obedience. It was not permitted to any of his Subjects to say of him, that was
their Prince, neither is it permitted to any Subjects whatever, to say of their
Prince, That he is an Ill man, and a Tyrant, and an Enemy to Godliness, and a
Hater of Christ and Religion; and that therefore it being the Cause of Christ,
they are bound to stand up, and shake off the Yoke, and come forth for the help
of the Lord against the Mighty, i. e. to pull down Kings and Kingdoms: For,
Christ has commanded all Subjects to submit themselves, and render unto Caesar
the things that are Caesar's; yea, although Caesar should take no care to
render unto God the things that are God's. Nay, Christ himself, when upon an
Occasion the People would have taken him by Force, and made him a King, refused
it, and chose to pay Tribute to Caesar; yea, though Caesar held his power from
and under him: And at another time he declared, That his Kingdom was not of
this World, least his Soldiers should fight for him. From whence also it may
be concluded, That since Christ's is a Kingdom of another Nature, his Soldiers
are not to fight against their Temporal Governor, even in Defense of Christ
himself.

Since the Expulsion of the Canaanites by Joshua, there is no such thing in
Nature as an Holy War, though it be against Infidels, to advantage Christ's
Religion, and destroy theirs; and therefore, when the Popes of old excited
Christian Princes to the Expedition against the Turks for propagating the
Gospel; and when, in the late great Rebellion amongst us, the Presbyterians
conspired against their Sovereign, King Charles the First, under pretense of
setting Jesus Christ up upon his Throne, they both of them prosper'd
accordingly. God, as he has not allowed any such Wars in his Word, so he
blasted those by his Providence, and that, he will still blast all such Designs
unto the end of the World, I make not the least Question, when I consider in
the next place

Thirdly, How long this Law of Christian Obedience is extended, in respect of
Time. There are some Laws in Scripture that bind only for a Time, such as are
the Divine positive Laws, the Ceremonial of the Jews, and such as the Apostles
laid on the Gentiles that were expedient for the present Juncture and
Necessity; as, Not to eat things strangled, and, To abstain from blood, because
a charitable respect was expedient to be born to the Jews, until the Temple and
Mosaic Institutions should be abolished. Some there also that have boldly
affirmed in print of late days, That the Law of submitting to Governors,
especially Heathen Ones, obliged no longer than the present Necessity, and the
Churches Infancy. Vid. Jonson's Julian the Apostate.
That it was to expire when Christians had gained a stronger power to defend
themselves. That men are to follow Providence, as God puts them into a greater
Capacity; and to use their power, and to understand all their former
Obligations accordingly. That to submit was only a provisional Precept for the
present time. That St. Paul laid this charge on the first Christians, because
they durst not by their Censures threaten and provoke the Heathen Emperors for
fear of plunging the Church into a Sea of Persecution; and that for this Cause
alone, they did not exercise this Power.

This is the Account also, which all Rebels give of themselves, and their
resisting of Kings, when they are charged with walking contrary to the Doctrine
of St. Peter and St. Paul. But now,

Contrarily hereto, I shall show that St. Paul etc. intended this precept to
hold in force for ever; not only from what has already been observed out of
the Life of our Savior; but first of all, and chiefly, from the Reasons given
by St. Paul for Subjection; for those Reasons are permanent, and of Eternal
Verity, ex. gr. That the Magistrate is the Minister of God; That all Powers are
of God; That the Magistrate bears the Sword to execute Justice on those that
oppose him; That to resist him, is to resist the Ordinance of God; That we must
be subject not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience sake; These Reasons are
still permanent, and of Eternal Verity: and therefore it may be inferred, That
because these which are the Foundation of the Command, continue always,
therefore the Command will be always in force too, and so the Precept of
Submission was never intended for a mere provisional Precept.

Moreover, if this and other like Commands of God were to be thus interpreted
as mere provisional Precepts, why then, by parity of Reason, the whole
Scripture, as well as the Ceremonial Law, might be devoided of its Authority.
And as the Case may be put, there may be more Reason, and it would be more
agreeable to the sense of the Scripture, to read the Text backward, viz. to put
the people in mind not to be subject, or to be subject only for wrath, but not
for Conscience sake, i. e. for fear of provoking the Powers to destroy us, but
not out of any lasting obligation that Christ has laid on us to Submit.

2. To say that these Precepts of Submission were only provisional, for the
Infant-State of the Church, and not lasting Laws, would be to charge all the
Ancient Professors of Christianity with the deepest Dissimulation and
Hypocrisy. It is to say, their Obedience to the Principalities of their Times,
was but counterfeit, extorted, and wrung out of them by force: That all the
Submissive Apologies and Supplications of the Fathers, (the assured Testimonies
of their Allegiance, Humility, and Patience) were only certain Forms of
disguised Speech, proceeding not freely from the Suggestions of Fidelity, but
faintly and feignedly, and as proceeding from some violent Convulsion of Fear.
Whereupon it must inevitably follow, That all their Torments and Punishments,
even unto Death, are wrongfully honored with the Title, and unjustly crowned
with the Crown of Martyrdom; because their Patience, according to this
Supposition, proceeded not from Choice and Election, but was violently produced
by force and Necessity: and so, whereas they did not mutinously and
rebelliously rise in Arms, to assuage the Flames of Tyrannical Persecution, it
was not for want of Will, but for lack of Power; of which false and forged
Imputation the Fathers, both Greek and Latin, have cleared themselves in their
Writings.

In them you will find that the Primitive Christians did not give place to the
violence of Heathen Rulers by virtue of this Precept as a Provisional
Direction, accommodate to the Temper of those Times; but as to a necessary and
certain Command of God; and which was to be in force when the Church was grown
up into a power and Multitude.

3. To say, That the Precepts of Obedience and Submission were only
Provisional, etc. is to teach a Doctrine that is most highly prejudicial or
dangerous to Christians living under Heretical and Pagan Powers; ex. gr. make
it but once known to the Emperor of the Turks, that the Christians living
within his Empire do take God's Commands of Obedience to the Prince whom they
count an Infidel, to be only provisional Precepts for a time, and that they are
only to wait for an Occasion to shake off the Yoke of Turkish bondage; and
doubtless, he will not spare with all speed to root out the whole Stock of
Christians out of his Dominions: He would hold himself concerned to do this for
his own Safety. And then, this would be a just Recompense of their Error, that
would thus make void the Commandments of God through their vain Traditions.

By what is said, it is evident enough, that there is nothing so Unchristian,
nothing so Unreasonable, as for Subjects to seek Occasions to dispute the Wills
and Pleasures of their Princes; and how much more, to raise Tumults and levy
Arms against them? Yea, though they were Heathens, and Tyrants, and the most
professed Enemies that can be imagined to God and Goodness.

There is nothing so great a Contradiction to right Reason, and the Spirit of
the Gospel, as is the Spirit of a Rebel and a Traitor to his King and Country.

For the Spirit of the Gospel more especially, it is a Spirit of Love, and Joy,
and Peace, and Patience, and Long-suffering and Gentleness toward them, even
toward the froward and unkind; how much more toward those that are Gentle and
Good. And therefore, there needs no other Light to set off the Foulness of
that Spirit that rules in the hearts of the Now Rebels in Arms against our
present most Gracious and Liege Lord and Sovereign, King JAMES the Second; than
to describe to you the true Spirit of the Gospel, as it was recommended by our
Savior unto his Disciples and Followers.

But because the Now Rebels, to color their most horrid Treason against their
Lawful Sovereign, have endeavored to poison the minds of their Followers,
where they come, with I know not what dark and damnable Insinuations against A
Prince so every way Great and Just and Good; I shall humbly crave leave, upon
this Occasion, and before the Common Soldiery here assembled, to expose the
Monstrosity of the now Traitors treasonable pretensions and practisings: and I
shall expose it by the Sunbeam Light of his Majesty's Undoubted Right of Blood
to the Crown, and of his Unparalleled Merits, and his Interests to defend that
Right, against all Treasons and Traitorous Conspiracies whatever: And,

First, I shall crave leave to speak a few words with Reverence, concerning his
most Gracious Majesty's most undoubted Right of Blood, etc. It may seem
needless to have his Majesty's Titles after Proclamation to be declared,
especially in the Pulpit: Yet, give me leave, in Remembrance of the BLACK BOX,
and the Excluding Bill more Black than That, and that still more Black and
Bloody Association that followed it, and which still works in the Hearts of
the Children of Disobedience; to put you, especially of the Common Soldiery,
in Remembrance;

That our now Sovereign Lord King JAMES the Second, is the now only surviving
Son of King CHARLES the Martyr, Grandson of King James that was of Scotland the
Sixth of that Name, and of Great Britain the First: who was lawfully descended,
both by Father and Mothers side from King HENRY the Seventh, and the Great
ELIZABETH, Daughter and Heir of Lionel Duke of Clarence, third Son to Edward
the Third: Which King Henry the Seventh entailed the Crown of England by Act of
Parliament upon the Issue of His, and his Queens Body Lawfully begotten.

No Prince ever mounted the Throne of England with a Title more undoubtedly
apparent and clear! Clear as the Sun in its brightest Meridian! Clear as the
Late King could make it, in a Declaration written with his own hand, to prevent
the now Rebels pretensions, and to prevent and avoid any Disputes for time to
come, concerning his Now Majesty's Succession to the Crown!

His late Majesty's own Words to this purpose are published by the truly Loyal
and Judicious Author of the Address to the Freemen and Freeholders of the
Nation. Vid. part ^. p. 14, 15, 16, 17,
But

Secondly, Had not his Majesty been born to be a King, I think there are but
few that have the Honor to know him, who do not think him the Worthiest Person
to have been chosen our King.

For, if ever we had a Prince that came to the Crown in the full Ripeness and
Maturity as well of Royal Uertues as Years; one who brought to the Government
of his people all that Experience, which others are a long time at much charge,
and more hazard to learn; it is our present most Gracious Sovereign King JAMES:
A Prince! whose Wisdom, Justice and Mercy (if men will be but so merciful to
themselves as to do any thing that may deserve it) A Prince! whose Munificence
and Magnanimity, whose Sobriety and Temperance, whose Courage to dare bravely
in the greatest dangers, equal to his Christian Fortitude in bearing the worst
of Evils from the hands of a sort of Men-Devils among us: A Prince! whose firm
Fidelity to his Friends, and whose Zeal for the Honor of the English Name and
Nation are so notoriously known both at home and abroad, that even base Envy
and Detraction have but rendered them the more acknowledged, and Jllustriously
Conspicuous.

All these shine by their Own Light, and need not my dim Taper to show them by.

But there is one Qualification which will gild and adorn his Crown, and add a
Luster to his Great Name in Chronicle, and that is, his Ueracity; And King
JAMES the Second shall be known in the Ages to come by this Appellative, of
King JAMES the Just, Prince of his Word.

Go to then, all they that whine and fear for their Religion, their Religion!
blush they, and let them all be ashamed and confounded, because of the Evils
which they fear, only because they are not. Have we not for our Security, as a
Pawn, the Word of a Prince, who never yet broke his Word?

But if neither his Royal Title, nor his Royal Merits may prevail with rash and
unadvised Men to work them up to Obedience, let it be considered, in the

Third place, of what value his Interests are, to secure and defend the Rights
both of his Title and his Merits. For though his Majesty hold all by Love (all
his Kingdoms and Countries having long since received him into their Hearts)
yet I shall here subjoin, to the Honor of his Majesty, the Comfort of his
Friends, and the Terror of his Enemies, these two Considerations:

First, That his Majesty has the undoubted Forces of England, Scotland and
Ireland, and all other his Dominions and Countries in his own power, and at his
sole Command. And the Numerous and very Loyal Addresses that have been sent
from all the Quarters of these his Kingdoms, are so highly expressive of a
Godly Emulation in all his Loyal Subjects to serve him, that it has hitherto
seemed the only Contest within the three Kingdoms, who should be the forwardest
in Duty to vow their Lives and Estates a Sacrifice in defense of his Imperial
Highness and the Prerogative.

What should I speak of his Militia? of his Magazines, and his Naval Forces at
Sea, and of his most Wise Council? What of the Thrice happy Agreement which
has been all along, and still is, and which we beseech Almighty God to
continue between him and his most Loyal Parliament? Consider we,

Secondly, His Friends and Alliances abroad, and their mighty Puissance to
assert his Right: They are all of them of such Invincible strength and might
both by Sea and Land, as by God's continuing to bless the Union will give no
Cause to fear either the growing Factions at home, or the growing Greatness
(shall I call it?) of our Neighbour-Nation.

Nunc Causa valens causamque tuentibus Armis. And therefore as the King does,
no doubt, out of a most Religious and Godly heart, so let us lift up our Hands
and our Eyes to God on High, and let us from the bottom of our Hearts beseech
him to keep and defend His own King, whom (maugre all the Evil Designs of Evil
Men among us) he has set on the Throne of the English Nation, for the Glory of
his Name, and for the comfort of us his Subjects. Let us pray for him, and
against his Enemies, That God would abate their Pride, and assuage their
Malice, and discover daily more and more, and confound their Devices. And to
our Prayers, let us each man in his Station, manfully endeavor his Peace, and
our own in His. And to this End, let all Murmurings and Repinings and
Discontents toward the Government for ever cease from amongst us. Let us
follow Peace, and the things that make for Peace, and the things in which we
may Edify one another; quietly submitting our selves to the Government that
God has set over us, and blessing God that he has accounted us worthy of so
Good a Prince to Rule and to Reign over us, and beseeching him to continue his
Reign long and prosperous; even for Many and for Many Years! And to this Good
Prayer, let every one here present be concerned to say, Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for, and Sold by Luke Meredith, at the
King's Head, at the West End of St. Paul's Churchyard.
AN Introduction to the Old English History; comprehended in Three several
Tracts: The First, An Answer to Mr. Petyt's Rights of the Commons Asserted; and
to a Book, Entitled; Jani Anglorum Facies Nova: The Second Edition very much
enlarged. The Second, An Answer to a Book, Entitled, Argumentum
Antinormanicum; much upon the same Subject: Never before Published. The Third,
The Exact History of the Succession of the Crown of England: The Second
Edition, also very much enlarged. Together, with an Appendix, containing
several Records, and a Series of Great Councils and Parliaments, Before and
After the Conquest, unto the End of the Reign of Henry the Third. And a
Glossary, expounding many Words, used frequently in our Ancient Records, Laws,
and Historians. Published for the Vindication of Truth, and the Assistance of
such as desire with Satisfaction to read, and truly understand the Ancient
English Historians, and other Pieces of Antiquity. By Robert Brady, Doctor in
Physic.

Two Treatises: The First, Concerning Reproaching and Censure; The Second, An
Answer to Mr. Serjeant's Sure-Footing. To which are annexed, Three Sermons
Preached upon several Occasions; and very useful for these Times. By the late
Learned and Reverend William Falkner, D. D.

A Dialogue between a Pastor, and his Parishioner, touching the Lord's Supper:
Wherein the most material Doubts and Scruples about Receiving that Holy
Sacrament, are removed, and the Way thereto discovered to be both plain and
pleasant. Very useful for Private Christians in these Scrupulous Times. By
Michael Altham. The Second Edition. To which are added, Some short Prayers,
fitted for that Occasion; and a Morning and Evening Prayer, for the Use of
Private Families.

Sober and Serious Considerations: Occasioned by the Death of His Most Sacred
MAJESTY, King Charles II. (of ever Blessed Memory,) And the Serious Time of
LENT, following it. Together with a Brief Historical Account of the First Rise,
Progress, and Increase of Phanaticism, in England; and the Fatal Consequents
thereof. Now made Public, in tendency to the Peace of the Kingdom. By a
Gentleman in Communion with the Church of England, as now by Law Established.

The Songs of Moses and Deborah Paraphrased; with Poems on several Occasions.
Never before Published. To which is added, A Pindarick on Sir Roger L' Estrange.

The End of the Catalogue.

