THREE LETTERS.
I. A Letter from a Jesuit at Liege, to a Jesuit at Fribourg, giving an Account
of the Happy Progress of Religion in ENGLAND.
IT cannot be said what great affection and kindness the K. has for the
Society, wishing much health to this whole College by R. P. the Provincial,
and earnestly recommending himself to our Prayers. The Provincial Alexander
Regnes being come back for England, the K. was graciously pleased to send for
him; (several Earls and Dukes waiting his coming at the hour appointed) the Q.
being present, the King discoursing familiarly with him, asked him How many
young Students he had, and how many Scholasticks? to which (when the Provincial
had answered, That of the latter he had Twenty, of the former more than Fifty)
he added, That he had need of double or treable that number to perform what he
in his mind had designed for the Society; and commanded that they should be
very well exercised in the gift of Preaching; for such only (says he) do we
want in England.

You have heard I make no doubt, that the K. has sent Letters to Father Le
Chese, the French King's Confessor about Wadden-house, therein declaring, that
he would take in good part from him, whatsoever he did or was done for the
English Fathers of that Society. Father Clare Rector of the said House going
about those Affairs at London, found an easy access to the K. and as easily
obtained his desires. He was forbid to kneel and kiss the Kings hand (as the
manner or custom is) by the K. himself, saying, Once indeed your Reverence
kissed my hand, but had I then known you were a Priest, I should rather have
kneeled and kissed your Reverences hand.

After the business was ended, in a familiar Discourse, the K. declared to this
Father, That he would either Convert England, or dye a Martyr; and that he had
rather die tomorrow, that Conversion wrought, than Reign Fifty years without
that, in happiness and prosperity. Lastly, he called himself a Son of the
Society, the Welfare of which, he said, He as much rejoiced at as his own: And
it can scarce be said how joyful he showed himself when it was told him That he
was made partaker, by the most Reverend Father N. of all the Merits of the
Society; of which number he would declare one of his Confessors: Some report R.
P. the Provincial will be the person, but whom he designs it not yet known.
Many do think an Archbishopric will be bestowed on Father Edmond Petre,
(chiefly beloved) very many a Cardinals Cap, to whom, (within this Month or
two) that whole part of the K. Palace is granted, in which the K. when he was
Duke of York used to reside; where you may see I know not how many Courtiers
daily attending to speak with his Eminency, (for so they are said to call him)
upon whose council, and also that of several Catholic Peers, highly preferred
in the Kingdom, the K. greatly relyes, which way he may promote the Faith
without violence. Not long since some Catholic Peers did object to the K. that
he made too much have to establish the Faith, to whom he answered, I growing
old, must make great steps, otherwise, if I should dye, I shall leave you worse
than I found you. Then they asking him why therefore was he not more solicitous
for the Conversion of his Daughters Heirs of the Kingdom, he answered, God will
take care for an Heir; leave my Daughters for me to Convert; do you by your
example reduce those that are under you, and others to the Faith. In most
Provinces he has preferred Catholics; and in a short time we shall have the
same Justices of the Peace (as they are called) in them all. At Oxford we hope
Matters go very well: one of our Divines is always Resident therein; a Public
Catholic Chapel of the Vice-Chancellor's, who has drawn some Students to the
Faith. The Bishop of Oxford seems very much to favor the Catholic Cause: he
proposed in Council, Whether it was not expedient, that at least one College
in Oxford should be allowed Catholics, that they might not be forced to be at
so much Charges, by going beyond Seas to Study? what Answer was given, is not
yet known. The same Bishop inviting two of our Noblemen, with others of the
Nobility to a Banquet, drank the King's Health to an Heretical Baron there,
wishing a happy Success to all His Affairs; and he added, That the Faith of
Protestant in England, seemed to him to be little better than that of Buda was
before it was taken; and that they were for the most part, mere Athiests who
defended it Many do embrace the Faith, and four of the chiefest Earls have
lately professed it publicly.

The Reverend Father Alexander Reg^es Nephoy to our Provincial, to whom
committed the Care of the Chapel, of the (...) of the Most Serene Elector
Palatinate, is whole days busied in resolving, and showing the Doubts or
Questions of Heretics, concerning their Faith, of which number you may see two
or three continually walking before the Doors of the Chapel, disputing about
Matters of Faith amongst themselves. Prince George, we can have nothing certain
what Faith he intends to make Profession of. We have a good while begun to get
footing in England. We teach Humanity at Lincoln, Norwich, and York. At Warwick
we have a Public Chapel, secured from al Injuries by the King's Soldiers. We
have also bought some Houses of the City of Wiggorn, in the Province of
Lancaster. The Catholic Cause very much increases. In some Catholic
Churches, upon Holydays above 1500 are always numbered present at the Sermon. At
London, likewise, things succeed no worse. Every Holyday, at Preaching, People
so frequent, that many of the Chapels cannot contain them. Two of ours,
Darmes, and Berfall, do constantly say Mass before the King and Queen Father
Edmund Newil before, the Queen Dowager, Father Alexander Regnes in the Chapel
of the Ambassador aforesaid, others in other places. Many Houses are bought for
the College in the Savoy (as they call it) nigh Somerset House, London, the
Palace of the Queen Dowager, to the value of about eighteen thousand Florins,
in making of which after the Form of a College, they labor very hard that the
Schools may be opened before Easter.

In Ireland shortly, there will be a Catholic Parliament, seeing no other can
satisfy the King's Will to Establish the Catholic Cause there, In the month
of February, for certain, the King has desiged to call a Parliament at London:
1. That by a Universal Decree, the Catholic Peers may be admited into the
Upper House: 2. That the Oath or Test may be annulled. 3. Which is the best or
top of all, That all Penal Laws made against Catholics, may be Abrogated;
which that he may more surely obtain, he desires every one to take notice, that
he has certainly determined to, dismiss any from all profitable Employments
under him, who do not strenuously, endeavor the obtaining those things; also
that he will Dissolve the Parliament: with which Decree some Heretics being
affrighted, came to a certain Peer to consult him what was Best to be done. to
whom he said, the Kings pleasure is sufficiently made known to us; what he has
once said, he will most certainly do: if you love your selves, you must submit
your selves to the Kings Will. There are great preparations for War at London,
and a Squadron of many Ships of War are to be fitted out against a time
appointed; what they are designed for is not certain. The Hollanders greatly
fear they are against them, and the therefore begin to prepare themselves, Time
will discover more,

Liege, 2. Feb. 1688.
II. A Letter from the Reverend Father Petre, Jesuit, Almoner to the King of
England, written to the Reverend Father la Chief, Confessor to the Most
Christian King, touching the present Affairs of ENGLAND.
Translated from the French.
Most Reverend Father,
IF I have failed, for the last few days, to observe your Order, it was not
from want of Affection, but Health, that occasioned the neglect; and for which
I shall endeavor to make amends by the length of this.

I shall begin where my former left off, and shall tell you, That since the
appearing of a Letter in this Town, written by the Prince's Minister of
Holland, which declares the Intentions of the Prince and Princess of Orange,
relating to the Repealing of the Test, or to speak more properly, their
Aversion to it: This Letter has produced very ill effects among the Heretics;
whom, at the return of some of our Fathers from those parts, we had persuaded,
that the Prince would comply with every thing relating to the Test, that the
King should propose to the next Parliament, in case he should call one; to
which I do not find his Majesty much inclined. But the coming of this Letter
(of which I have enclosed a Copy) has served for nothing but to encourage the
Obstinate in their aversion to that matter. The Queen, as well as myself, were
of opinion, against the sending of any such Letter to the Hague, upon that
subject, but rather that some person able to discourse and persuade, should
have been sent thither: for all such Letters, when they are not grateful,
produce bad effects. That which is spoken face to face, is not so easily
divulged, nor any thing discovered to the People, but what we have a mind the
Vulgar should know: And, I believe, your Reverence will concur with me in this
opinion. This Letter has extremely provoked the King, who is of a temper not to
bear a refusal, and who has not been used to have his will contradicted: and, I
verily believe, this very affront has hastened his resolution of re-calling the
English Regiments in Holland. I showed his Majesty that part of your Letter,
that relates to the opinion of his Most Christian Mejesty, upon this subject,
which his Majesty well approves of. We are interested to know the success of
this affair, and what answer the States will give. The King changes as many
Heretic Officers as he can, to put Catholics in their places; but the
misfortune is, that here we want Catholic Officers to supply them: and
therefore, if you know any such of our Nation in France, you would do the King
a pleasure to persuade them to come over, and they shall be certain of
employments, either in the old Troops, or the new that are speedily to be
raised; for which, by this my Letter, I pass my word.

Our Fathers are continually employed to convert the Officers; but their
obstinacy is so great, that for one that turns, there are five that had rather
quit their Commands. And there being so many Malcontents, whose party is
already but too great, the King has need of all his prudence and temper, to
manage this great affair, and bring it to that perfection we hope to see it in
ere long. All that I can assure you is, That here shall be no neglect in the
Queen, who labors night and day, with unexpressible diligence, for the
propagation of the Faith, and with the zeal of a holy Princess The Queen
Dowager is not so earnest; and fear makes her resolve to retire into Portugal,
to pass the remainder of her days in Devotion: she has already asked the King
leave, who has not only granted it, but also promised, that she shall have her
Pension punctually paid; and that during her life, her Servants that she leaves
behind her, shall have the same Wages, as if they were in waiting. She stays
but for a proper season to imbark for Lisbon, and to live there free from all
stories.

As to the Queen's being with Child, that great concern gaes as well as we
could wish, notwithstanding all the satirical Discourses of the Heretics, who
content themselves to vent their poison in Libels, which by night they disperse
in the Street, or fix upon the Walls. There was one lately found upon a Pillar
of a Church, that imported, That such a day, Thanks should be given to GOD, for
the Queen's being great with a Cushion. If one of these Pasquil-makers could be
discovered, he would but have in Ill time on it, and should be made to take his
last farewell at Tyburn.

You will agree with me (most Reverend Father) that we have done a great thing,
by introducing Mrs. Celier to the Queen: this woman is totally devoted to our
Society, and zealous for the Catholic Religion. I will send you an account of
the progress of this Affair, and will use the Cipher you sent me, which I think
admirable. I can send you nothing certain of the Prince and Princess of
Denmark; he is a Prince with whom I cannot discourse about Religion; Luther was
never more earnest, than this Prince. It is for this reason that the King (who
does not love to be denied) never yet pressed him in that matter, his Majesty
thinking it necessary that the Fathers should first prepare things, before he
undertake to speak to him. But this Prince, as all of his Nation, has naturally
an aversion to our Society; and this antipathy does much obstruct the progress
of our Affairs; and it would be unreasonable to complain hereof to the King, at
present to trouble him, though he has an entire confidence in us, and looks
upon our Fathers, as the Apostles of this Land. As for Ireland. that Country is
already all Catholic; yea, all the Militia are so. The Viceroy merits great
praise; we may give him this honor, That he is a Son worthy our Society; and I
hope will participate of the Merits of it. He informs me, he has just writ to
your Reverence of those matters, how things go there. Some Catholic Regiments
from those parts will speedily be sent for over, for the King's Guards; his
Majestly being resolved to trust them, rather than others; and may do it
better, in case of any popular Commotion, against which we ought to secure
ourselves the best we can. His Majestly does us the honor to visit our
College often, and is most pleased when we present him some new
Convert-scholars; whom he incourages with his gracious promises. I have not
expression sufficient to let you know, with what Devotion his Majesty
communicated the last Holydays; and a Heretic cannot better make his court to
him, than by turning to the Catholic Faith. He desires that all the Religions,
of what Order soever they be, make open profession, as he does, not only of the
Catholic Religion, but also of their Order; not at all approving that Priests,
or Religious should conceal themselves, out of fear; and he has told them, That
he would have them wear the Habit of a Religious; and that he will take care to
defend them from affronts. And the People are already accustomed to it; and we
begin to celebrate Funerals with the same Ceremony as in France; but it is
almost a Miracle to see that no body speaks one, word against it, no not so
much as the Ministers in their Pulpits; in so good order has the King managed
these matters. Many English Heretics resort often to our Sermons; and I have
often recommended to our Fathers, to preach, now in the beginning, as little as
they can of the Controversy, because that provokes; but to represent to them
the Beauty and Antiquity of the Catholic Religion, that they may be convinced
that all that has been said and preached to them, and their own Reflections
concerning it, have been all scandal: For I find (as the Apostle says) they
must be nourished with Milk, not being able to bear strong Meat. Many have
desired me to give them some of our Prayers, and even the holy Mass, in
English: which I mean to do, to satisfy the meanest sort, of which the
greatest part do not understand Latin, but not to take away from the new
Converts their Testaments, which is a matter of moment; and, that we may not
disgust them at the beginning, we must permit them to have them for a time,
till they part with them of themselves. I have need of C. H.'s counsel upon
this point, and not in this only, but also in a great many other matters that
daily press me: for you may easily believe, that I have often more business
than I can well dispatch; and we must work with so much circumspection and
precaution, that I have often need of your Paternity's wise counsel. But the
Lord, and the good Virgin do strengthen me as there is occasion.

The Bishop of Oxon has not yet declared himself openly; the great obstacle is
his Wife, whom he cannot rid himself of: His design being to continue Bishop,
and only change Communion; as it not doubted but the King will permit, and our
holy Father confirm: though I do not see how he can be farther useful to us, in
the Religion in which he is, because he is suspected, and of no esteem among
the Heretics of the English Church: nor do I see that the example of his
Conversion is like to draw many others after him, because he declared himself
so suddenly. If he had believed my counsel, which was to temporize for some
longer time, he would have done better; but it is his temper, or rather zeal
that hurried him on. There are two other Prelates that will do no less than he;
but they hold off alike, to see how they may be serviceable to the propagation,
and produce more fruits, while they continue undiscovered.

That which does us most harm with the Lords and great men, is the apprehension
of a Heretic Successor: For, (as a Lord told me lately) assure me of a
Catholic Successor, and I will assure you, I and my Family will be so too. To
this happy purpose, the Queen's happy delivery will be of very great moment.
Our zealous Catholics do already lay two to one, that it will be a Prince: GOD
does nothing by halves; and every day Masses are said upon this very occasion.

I have gained a very great point, in persuading the King to place our Fathers
in Magdalen-Celledge in Oxon; who will be able to tutor the young Scholars in
the Roman Catholic Religion. I rely much on Father Thomas Fairfax, to whom I
have given necessary Instructions how to govern himself with the Heretic
People; and to take care, in the beginning, that he speak not to them any thing
that may terrify. And, as I tell you, a Religious has need here of great
prudence, at this time, that the King may hear of no Complaints that may
displease him; and therefore we dare not at present, do all we shall be able,
and bound to do hereafter, for fear of too much haring the Mobile.

I like well that Father Hales goes to stay sometime at the Hague Incognito, on
pretense of soliciting for a Place, which is not soon to be got there; and I
have given him a Letter to some of that Court: Father Smith that is there now,
by reason of his great Age, nor being able to do all he ought and wishes to do,
and is also too well known there. And I shall often impart to you what I shall
learn from those Quarters: from whence I shall weekly receive something of
moment, so long as the two Courts are in so bad Intelligence together, as at
present they are. For my part, to speak freely on this Topic to your Reverend
Fatherhood, I am of opinion, we should rather endeavor to Moderate, than
Aggravate the Difference between them; though I know I do not, in this matter,
altogether concur with the Sense of the French Ambassador, who considers only
his Master's Interest: But we are necessitated to take other Measures, and such
as perhaps may not always agree with the Interest of France in this matter.

And I think aggravating of this Breach at present, to be also prejudicial to
the Catholic Religion itself. The great design we have so long aimed at, is
applying to the King of France to take from the Heretics all hopes of a Head,
or any other Protection, than what they must expect from their own King;
whereby they, finding themselves expes'd to his Pleasure, will the more readily
subscribe to his Will. But this misunderstanding between us, will occasion an
opportunity to the Heretics to set up the Prince of Orange for their Chief. And
let me assure you, not to deceive yourselves, The Religious of England, as well
as the Presbyterians themselves, regard the Prince of Orange as their Moses;
and his Party is already so powerful in both these Kingdoms, that it will
appear terrible to any thinking person, should things come to extremity; as may
never happen, if matters are not pushed on too far, but managed with
Moderation. And I desire therefore, with great deference to your better
Judgment, that this matter might be hinted to his Most Christian Majesty, as
opportunity shall serve, and am sensible it must be done with very great
caution.

I can tell you nothing at present concerning the certainty of calling a
Parliament; it requires so many things to be considered of, and measures to be
taken, that his Majesty ought to be well assured of the success, before he
Convenes them together. I am not of opinion with many other Catholics, who say,
That by calling them, the King hazards nothing; for, if they will not answer
his ends, he need only Prorogue them, as is usually done: But it is my opinion,
and the sense of many others, That his Majesty hazards- much; for if it should
unfortunately happen, that they should, in their Assembly, refuse to comply
with his Majesty's desires, it may be long enough ere he compass his ends by
way of a Parliament, and perhaps never: and then there rests no expedient, or
other means, but by Violence, to execute the Orders of his secret Council,
which must be supposed by his Army; who, upon a pretense of Incamping, may be
called together with the less jealousy or suspicion. So, you may see (most
Reverend Father) that we do not want work in these Quarters; and I must be
supported by your Prayers, which I beg of you, and from all those of our
Society.

His Majesty is so desirous that things may be done in order, and upon a sure
fund, so as to be the more lasting, that he makes great application to the
Shires and Corporations, to get such persons chosen for the Parliament, as may
be favorable to his ends, of which he may be sure, before they come to debate:
And the King will make them promise so firmly, and exact such Instruments from
them in writing, that they shall not be able to go back, unless they will
thereby draw upon themselves his Majesty's utmost displeasure, and make them
feel the weight of his resentment. And I have here enclosed some effects of his
Majesty's endeavors in this matter, which is an Address which the Mayor,
Sheriffs and Burgesses of Newcastle, in the County of Stafford, have presented
to the King, [see the Gazette, where this Corporation, as well as Glocaster and
Teuxbury, and others, in their Addresses, promise to choose such Members as
shall comply with his Majesty's desires] If all Towns were in as perfect
Obedience as these, we should certainly have a Parliament called, which the
Catholics and Non-conformists expect with great impatience. But, since this
cannot be said of many of them, the King's Secret Council think good to wait
for the Queen's delivery, that they may see a Successor, who may have need of
the whole Protection of the Most Christian King to support him, and maintain
his Rights. And, by the Grace of GOD, we hope, that that Prince, treading in
his Father's steps, may prove a worthy Son of our Society, like his Father, who
thinks it no dishonor to be so called.

As to other things, (most Reverend Father) our Fathers, with me, as well as
generally all the Catholics, with what grief do we hear of the Disunion that
arises between his Holiness and the Most Christian King! How does my head, in
imitation of the Prophet's, become a Spring of Tears to lament night and day
the Schism that I foresee coming into the Church! Is it possible that our holy
Society should not stand in the Breach, and prevent the mischiefs that this
Difference may occasion in the Church? And that no body can reconcile Levi and
Judah, the Priesthood and the Scepter, the Father and the Son, the eldest Son
of the Church with the Vicar of Christ upon Earth? And what a Desolation, and
what Advantage to the Hereties, must this occasion? They begin already to bid
us Convert the Children of the Family, before we begin to Convert Strangers.
And I must with grief confess, they have but too much reason for what they say;
and if there does not come some present assistance from Above, I foresee this
Affair will occasion great prejudices in the North: Nor have we any hope, that
his British Majesty will interpose herein openly, he receiving so little
satisfaction from his Holiness, in some demands made by his Ambassador at
Rome, which (morally speaking) ought not to have been denied so great a King,
who first made this step, (which his Predecessors for a long time were not
willing to undertake) in sending his Ambassador of Obedience to Rome: And yet,
for all this, our holy Father had nor any particular consideration of this
Submission and Filial Obedience: so that I dare not mention this matter, but by
way of discourse, daily expecting that of himself he will be pleased to make
some Proposal therein. I doubt not (Reverend Father) of your constant endeavor
to accommodate this matter, thereby to take away from the Heretics, especially
the Hugonots of France, this occasion to laugh and deride us: and we should
think the change much for the worse, if, instead of the French King's going to
Geneva, he should march to Rome: What may not all this come to? especially
since the Marquess de Lavardin has been so passionate in his discourse to the
Cardinal Chancellor, as to call him Impertinent; and so far to forget his Duty
and Reverence toward our holy Father, the Pope himself, as to say he Doted: as
the Heretics do confidently discourse in these parts. I have caused some Masses
of Holy Ghost to be said, That GOD would please to Inspire the discontented
Parties with a Spirit of Peace and Concord. You did acquaint me, some time
since, That Madam Mainteron did take upon her the Title of Daughter of the
Society; by virtue whereof, you may command her, by virtue of Obedience, to use
her Credit and Eloquence with the King, to incline him to an Accommodation in
this matter. In the mean time, I hear that at Rome, many eminent persons
endeavor the same with his Holiness, who says, He cannot, nor ought not to
recede from what he has done; otherwise, it were in effect to submit to the
Articles made in France by the Clergy in 1682, and consequently of too great
moment to recant: and therefore, Submission ought to come from the Son, and not
from the Father. I recommend myself (Reverend Father) to your Prayers and
Blessing, desiring you would continue to assist me with your Salutal Counsels,
and rest for ever

St. James's, Feb. 9th. Yours, etc.

III. The Answer of the Reverend Father la Chese, Confessor to the Most
Christian King, to a Letter of the Reverend Father Petre, Jesuit, and Great
Almoner to the King of England, upon the Method or Rule he must observe with
His Majesty, for the Conversion of His Protestant Subjects.
Most Reverend Father,
WHen I compare the Method of the French Court (which declares against all
Heresies) with the Policy of other Princes, who had the same Design in former
Ages; I find so great a difference that all that passes now a days in the
King's Council is an impenetrable Mystery: and the eyes of all Europe are
opened, to see what happens; but cannot discover the Cause.

When Francis the First, and Henry the Second his Son; undertook to Ruin the
Reformation, they had to struggle with a Party which was but beginning and weak,
and destitute of Help; and consequently easier to be overcome.

In the time of Francis the Second, and Charles the Ninth, a Family was seen
advanced to the Throne by the Ruin of the Protestants, who were for the House
of Bourbon.

In this last Reign many Massacres happened, and several Millions of Heretics
have been Sacrificed, but it answered otherways: and his Majesty has showed (by
the peace and mild ways he uses) that he abhors shedding of Blood; from which
you must persuade his Britannic Majesty, who naturally is inclined to
Roughness, and a kind of Boldness, which will make him hazard all, if he does
not Politickly manage it; as I hinted in my last, when I mentioned my Lord
Chancellor.

Most Reverend Father, to satisfy the desire I have to show you by my Letters
the Choice you ought to make of such Persons fit to stir up, I will in few
words (since you desire it) inform you of the Genius of the People of our
Court, of their Inclinations, and which of them we make use of; that by a
Parallel which you will make, between them and your English Lords, you may
learn to know them.

Therefore I shall begin with the Chief: I mean, our Great Monarch. It is
certain that he is naturally good, and loves not to do Evil, unless desired to
do it. This being so, I may say, he never would have undertaken the Conversion
of his Subjects, without the Clergy of France, and without our Societies
Correspondence abroad. He is a Prince enlightened; who very well observes, that
what we put him upon, is contrary to his Interest, and that nothing is more
opposite to his Great Designs, and his Glory; he aiming to be the Terror of all
Europe. The vast number of Malcontents he has caused in his Kingdom, forces
him in time of Peace to keep three times more Forces, than his Ancestors did in
the greatest Domestic and Foreign Wars: which cannot be done, without a
prodigious Expense.

The Peoples Feats also begin to lessen, as to his Aspiring to an Universal
Monarchy: and they may assure themselves he has left those thoughts; nothing
being more opposite to his Designs, than the Method we enjoin him. His Candor,
Bounty, and Toleration, to the Heretics, would undoubtedly have opened the
doors of the Low Countries, Palatinate, and all other States on the Rhine, and
even of Switzerland: whereas things are at present so altered, that we see the
Hollanders free from any fear of danger; the Switzers and City of Geneva,
resolved to lose the last drop of their Blood in their defense; besides some
diversion we may expect from the Empire, in case we cannot hinder a Peace with
the Turks; which ought to hasten his Britannick Majesty, while he can be
assured of Succors from the most Christian King.

Sir, his Majesty's Brother is always the same, I mean, takes no notice of what
passes at Court. It has sometimes happened, that Kings Brothers have acted so,
as to be noted in the State; but this we may be assured will never do any thing
to stain the glory of his Submission and Obedience: and is willing to lend a
helping hand for the Destruction of the Heretics; which appears by the
instances he makes to his Majesty, who now has promised him to cause his Troops
to enter into the Palatinate the next Month.

The Dauphin is passionately given up to Hunting, and little regards the
Conversion of Souls; and it does not seem easy to make him penetrate into
business of Moment; and therefore we do not care to consult him which way, and
how, the Heretics ought to be Treated. He openly laughs at us, and sights all
the Designs, of which the King his Father makes great account. The Dauphiness
is extremely witty; and is without doubt uneasy to show it in other matters
besides Complements of Conversation. She has given me a Letter for the Queen of
England; wherein after her expression of the part she bears on the news of her
Majesty's being with Child, she gives her several advices about the Conversion
of her Subjects.

Most Reverend Father, She is undoubtedly born a great enemy to the
Protestants; and has promoted all she could with his Majesty, in all that has
been done, to hasten their Ruin; especially having been bred in a Court of our
Society, and of a House whose hatred against the Protestant Religion is
Hereditary; because she has been raised up by the Ruin of the German
Protestant Princes, especially that of the Palatinate. But the King having
caused her to come to make Heirs to the Crown, she answers expectation to the
utmost.

Monsieur Louvois is a man who very much observes his duty, which he performs
to admiration; and to whom we must acknowledge France owes part of the glory it
has hitherto gained, both in regard of its Conquests, as also the Conversion of
Heretics; to which latter I may say, he has contributed as much as the King:
he has already showed himself Fierce, Wrathful, and Hardhearted, in his Actions
toward them; though he is not naturally inclined to Cruelty, nor to harrass
the people. His Brother the Archbishop of Rheims, has ways which do not much
differ from those of his Soul; and all the difference I find between them is,
That the Archbishop loves his own glory, as much as Monsieur de Louvois loves
that of his Majesty. He is his own Idol; and give him but Incense, and you may
obtain any thing. Honor is welcome to him, let it come which way it will. The
least thing provokes this Prelate; and he will not yield any thing deregotary
to his Paternity. He will seem Learned; he will seem a great Theologian, and
will seem to be a good Bishop, and to have a great care of his Diocese; and
would heretofore seem a great Preacher. I have hinted in my last, the Reasons
why I cannot altogether like him; which are needless to repeat.

The Archbishop of Paris is always the same; I mean, a gallant man; whose
present Conversation is charming, and loves his pleasures; but cannot bear any
thing that grieves or gives trouble; though he is always a great enemy of the
Jansenists, which he lately intimated to Cardinal Camus. He is always with me
in the Council of Conscience, and agrees very well with our Society; laying
mostly to heart the Conversion of the Protestants of the three Kingdoms. He
also makes very good Observations, and designs to give some Advice to your
Reverence, which I shall convey to you. I do sometimes impart to him, what you
write to me.

My Lord Kingston has embraced our good Party: I was present when he Abjured in
the Church of St. Denis; I will give you the Circumstances some other time.

You promised to send me the Names of all Heretic Officers who are in his
Majesty's Troops; that much imports me; and you shall not want good Catholic
Officers to fill up their Places I have drawn a List of them who are to pass
into England; and his most Christian Majesty approves, thereof: Pray observe
what I hinted to you in my last, on the Subject of the Visits, which our
Fathers must give to the Chief Lords, Members of the next Parliament; those
Reverend Fathers, who are to perform that duty, must be middle aged, with a
lively Countenance, and fit to persuade. I also advised you in some of my other
Letters how the Bishop of Oxford ought to behave himself, by Writing
incessantly, and to insinuate into the people the putting down the Test; and at
the same time calm the storm, which the Letter of Pensionary Fag^^ has raised.
And his Majesty must continue to make vigorous Prohibitions to all Booksellers
in London, not to print any Answers: as well to put a stop to the Insolency of
Heretic Authors; as also to hinder the people from Reading them.

In short, you intimate to me, That his Majesty will-follow our Advice: It Is
the quickest way, and I cannot find a better, or fitter, to dispossess his
Subjects from such Impressions as they have received. His Majesty must also, by
the same Declaration, profess in Conscience, that (if complied with) he will
not only keep his Word, to maintain and protect the Church of England; but will
also confirm his Promises by such Laws, as the Protestants shall be contented
with. This is the true Politic way; for by his granting all, they cannot but
Consent to something.

His most Christian Majesty has with great success experienced this Maxim: and
though he had not to struggle with Penal Laws and Tests, yet he found it
convenient to make large Promises, by many Declarations; for, since we must
dissemble, you must endeavor all you can to persuade the King, it is the only
method to effect his Designs.

I did also in my last, give you a hint of its importance, as well as the ways
you must take to insinuate your selves dexterously with the King, to gain his
good will I know not whether you have observed what passed in England some
years since, I will recite it, because Examples instruct much.

One of our Assisting Fathers of that Kingdom, (which was Father Parsons)
having written a Book against the Succession of the King of Scots, to the Realm
of England: Father Creighton, who was also of our Society, and upheld by many
of our Party, defended the Cause of that King, in a Book Entitled, The Reasons
of the King of Scots, against the Book of Father Parsons: and though they
seemed divided, yet they understood one another very well; this being practiced
by order of our General, to the end, that if the House of Scotland were
Excluded, they might show him who had the Government, the Book of Father
Parsons; and on the other hand, if the King happened to be restored to the
Throne, they might obtain his good will, by showing him the Works of Father
Creighton: So that which way soever the Medal turned, it still proved to the
advantage of our Society. Not to digress from our subject, I must desire you to
read the English Book of Father Parsons, Entitled, The Reform of England;
where, after his blaming of Cardinal Pole, and made some observations of Faults
in the Council of Trent, he finally concludes, That suppose England should
return (as we hope) to the Catholic Faith in this Reign, he would reduce it to
the State of the Primitive Church: and to that end all the Ecclesiastical
Revenue ought to be used in common, and the Management thereof committed to the
care of Seven Wise Men, drawn out of our Society, to be disposed of by them as
they should think fit. Moreover, he would have all the Religious Orders
forbidden on Religious Penalties, not to return into the Three Kingdoms,
without leave of those Seven Wise Men: to the end, it might be granted only to
such as live on Alms. These Reflections seem to me very Judicious, and very
suitable to the present State of England.

The same Father Parsons adds, That when England is reduced to the True Faith,
the Pope must not expect, at least for Five years, to reap any benefit of the
Ecclesiastical Revenue; but must leave the whole in the hands of those Seven
Wise Men; who will manage the same to the Benefit and Advancement of the Church.

The Court goes this day for Ma^li, to take the Divertisements which are there
prepared: I hope to accompany the King, and will entertain him about all
business; and accordingly as he likes what you hint to me in your Letter, I
shall give you notice. I have acquainted him with his Britannic Majesty's
Design, of Building a Citadel near Whitehall; Monsieur Vauban, our Engineer was
present: after some Discourse on the Importance of the Subject, his Majesty
told Monsieur Vauban, that he thought it convenient he should make a Model of
the Design, and that he should on purpose go over into England, to see the
Ground. I have done all I could to suspend the Designs of our Great Monarch,
who is always angry against the Holy Father: both Parties are stubborn: the
Kings natural Inclination is, to have all yield to him; and the Popes
Resolution is unalterable.

All our Fathers most humbly salute your Reverence. Father Roine Ville acts
wonderfully about Nismes amongst the New Converts; who still meet,
notwithstanding the Danger they expose themselves to. I daily expect News from
the Frontiers of the Empire, which I shall impart to your Reverence, and am
with the greatest Respect,

Paris March 7. 1688. Yours, etc.


