angler

The True Art of Angling: OR, The Best and Speediest way of Taking all sorts of
FreshWater Fish with the Worm, Fly, Paste, and other Baits, in their proper
seasons; how to know the Haunts of Fish, and Angle for them in all Waters and
Weathers, at the Top, Middle, and Bottom, Baiting of the Ground, and Night
Baits, Oils, and Ointments, Baits Natural and Artificial: The several ways of
Angling; To make Oil of Asper, and many rare Secrets never before made public;
containing the whole Body of Angling, and Mystery of a Complete Angler.

By J. S. Gent. A Brother of the Angle.

London, Printed for George Conyers at the Golden Ring, and John Sprint at the
Bell in Little Britain. 1696. Prince bound 6 d.

TO THE LOVERS OF Angling.
THough you see this Book but small, yet think not the matter is so it
contains, for upon my Word, Brother Angler, you will find in it more than you
are aware of, or could reasonably expect.

It is stored with such variety of choice Instructions, that I am bold to say,
there are none of what Volumn soever, that in a direct and easy method, can
show you any thing like it. It comprehends whatever they pretend to, and many
secrets that never before appeared in Print; nor is any thing omitted, that I
could upon mature deliberation, reasonably conceive might tend to pleasure and
profit, by well observing the Rules I have laid down, you need not be endowed
with so large a stock of Patience, as some tell you an Angler ought to be
possessed withal, but soon furnished with a Dish of Fish to your Mind, you may
change yonr Recreation, and not make this Irk some to you, by a tedious poring
on the Banks as many do, and for all that, return fretting at their slender
success.

But by the way let me tell you, Angling of all other Recreations, is the most
Innocent, Contemplative, and least Chargeable, it affords Advantage without
cost, and Pleasure without toil or sweating, it much contributes to a healthful
constitution of Body, by the pleasant Airs that breathe from wholesome Waters,
to refresh and enliven Nature, and indeed has been held in high esteem, by Wise
Men of all Ages; and therefore I recommend it to you, as the best winder-off of
your leisure hours, wishing you Moderation in it, and Good Success. Vale.

Instructions for rightly preparing Angling Tackle, as Rods, Lines, Hooks,
Floats, Plummets, and other matters required to accomplish the Angler, etc.
IF we consider Recreations aright, they are intended to refresh the Mind, and
unbend our Cares after Toil, Labor or Study, and therefore ought not to ^e
pursued with too much fatigue, least they appear more like a business, than
pleasure, and so in the end become palled and tiresome; but when leisure hours
will admit, they are very convenient to sweeten the Cares of Life. Among these,
Angling is held by all the Ingenious, the most diverting for those that are
contemplative, and though it require much Ingenuity, yet is it performed with
little Labor, yet as in all other curious matters, Rules are necessary to be
observed in it, and to that end I shall, as Experience, the best Master
teaches, proceed Gradually, to lay down such, as perhaps the greatest part of
Mankind are Ignorant of, and therefore according to the method I have chosen,
it will be necessary first to speak of Tackle, without the Knowledge of which,
the Angler must be like one that undertakes business, and wants Tools to
accomplish it.

As for your Tops, Hasle or Yew Switches, gathered about the middle of
December, when most free from Sap, are accounted very good, though the two
following, or preceding Months, may reasonably serve, run them over a gentle
heat, to make them tough; let the Stocks and Tops be taper, smooth and strait,
the pieces of each Rod suitable in an exact symetry, free from knots, or else
they will be deficient in Casting, and never Strike well, nor be truly pliable,
but at a knot be apt to break and spoil your sport: To keep them in good order,
bind them close to a strait Pole, and so let them continue long, that they may
not warp, fasten a Loop of Silk or Horse hair, at the end of it, with
Shoemakers Thread, that the Line may have play on it, and though many use Silk
Lines, yet I prefer the Horse Hair as the best, and in twisting or breading,
observe an Exact Evenness, for one Hair being shorter than the rest in a Link,
the whole stress will lie on that, and it breaking, renders the rest much the
weaker, and often a good Fish is lost for want of this observance; make your
knots sure, that they slip not; as for the color of your Hair, it being free
from Nits or Goutiness, which some call Botches, the pale, waterish color is
the best to deceive in a Clear Stream; but in Wheyish or Muddy Water, you may
choose indifferently a Line, for the Ground Angle need not be so strong as that
you intend for your Rod at the Artificial Fly, abating in the latter a Hair
from top to bottom, in every Link from one or two, to six or eight, or more.

As for the Hook, it must be long in the Shank, and of a compass somewhat
inclining to roundness, for if the Shank be strait, the point will stand
outward, fasten the Hair on the inside of the Shank, to preserve it from
fretting, whether you Angle at top or bottom, proportion your Hook for strength
and compass, to the number of hairs you Angle with next it, neither use great
Hooks to small Baits, nor great Baits to little ones, Barbel and Chub must have
large Hooks, Carps, Eels, Tench, Perch, Breams, those of a much lesser size,
and Experience teaches, Trouts in clear Water, Grayling, Smel^s, Roaches Salmon
Smel^s, Dace, Ruff and Gudgeons are soonest taken with small Hooks, though many
use great ones for the Trout, especially in Muddy Water, yet the Salmon must be
Angled for with a Hook, according to his strength; Hooks for Dubflies should be
generally small, and so for Cod-baits, but larger for Worms, yet such as some
use for the latter, do not generally take in Clear Water: When you whip your
Hook, which is styled Arming, do it with Silk lightly rubbed with Shoerhakers
Wax, twisting it round on the lower part of the Line, almost to the bent of the
Hook on the inside, having first smoothed the Shank of the Hook with a
Whetstone, and for Worms let it be red colored Silk, but for Cod-bait, Pasts,
etc. white.

Floats should be of Cork for River Fishing, but for Ponds' Meers, and other
standing Waters, Quill and Pens will do very well, and in very slow Rivers,
especially when you are to Angle near the Top with tender Baits or Paste; as
for your Cork, let it be the finest, free from holes or flaws, bore it through
with a small hot Iron, thrust in a quill sizeable, shapt with a Knife to the
likeness of a Pyramid, Egg, or Pear, a proportionable bigness, and with a
Pumice-stone finely smooth it, run your Line through the Quill, and wedge it in
with the uppermost hard part of the Quill, the smaller end of the Cork being
toward the Hook, and the bigger toward the Rod, let the Cork be so poised
with Lead on the Line, that the Quill standing directly upright, the least Bite
or Nibble may sink the Cork.

To Lead your Line, do it with a Shot cloven, and then closed exactly on it,
put not above two of these on any Line, and that an Inch and a half, or two
Inches distance from each other, and the lowermost plumb, seven or eight Inches
from the Hook, but for a running Line, either in Clear or Muddy Water, nine or
ten Inches, and if you in a River find a Sandy bottom, it being full of Wood
with few Stones, shape your Lead a Diamond fashion, or to that of a Barley Corn
or Oval, bring the ends very close and smooth to the Line, yet make it black,
for the brightness will scare the Fish.

It is very necessary to have a landing Net and Hook, or you may lose many a
large ^ish, by breaking line or hold, before you can land him. The Net you may
fasten to the end of a long manageable Pole: As for the Hook it must be a large
one with a Screw, to screw into a Socket at the end of a Pole, and when your
Fish is entangled, clap it into the Mouth of it, and draw it to Land, but this
latter is chiefly for Barbel, Salmon, and other strong Fish.

As for your Pannier, let it be of light Osier twigs, neatly Woven and Worked
up, and to be the more completely prepared on all occasions, have in a
readiness diverse sorts of Hooks, Lines, Links ready twisted Hair and Silk of
several colors, small strong Thread, Lead Plummets, Shoemakers Wax, and Floats
of diverse sizes; Line Cases, Whet-stone, Pen knife, Worm bags, Boxes, Baits,
Scisars. And thus having pretty well accoutred my Angler with Tackle, it will
next be necessary to know what Baits he must use, for on it mainly depends
success or frustration.

Baits bred on Trees, Herbs, Plants, Worms, their season, and what Fish take
them, when and how, etc.
BAits for the sundry kinds of Fish are numerous, and many of them must be
considered in their proper Season, or they are of no value; as for Earthworms,
they are accounted a general Bait, they and Gentles are always in Season,
Earth-Bobs only from Martlemas, till the latter end of April, Cowturd Bobs from
thence till Michaelmas, Oak worms, Worms bred of Trees, Plants and Herbs,
Palmers, or Wool-beds, Flies Caterpillars, Cod baits, etc. all the Summer, and
here it is requisite to note, that when one sort of Bait comes in Season, the
other are not useless. If you are to Angle in Clear Water at the ground, it
will be necessary to have with you Codbaits, Worms, Gentles and Bobs, to try
which will best take, but in Muddy Water for Trouts, with the running Line, you
are required for better sport, to have Tag tails, Gilt-tails, Brandlings,
Meadow-worms, some scowered in Moss and Water, others directed with a Riddle,
and some again with heavy Earth, for almost at the same time they will take
them, some one way done, and some another, as Experience has often demonstrated.

But to come nearer, and show you what your Baits are, how shaped, and to be
chosen.

1. The Garden-worm, Lobworm, or Treachet and Dewworm, are one and the same,
though in diverse places their names thus alter, and this Worm one of the
greatest size, is an Excellent Bait for Chevin, Salmon, Barbel or Eel, though
the smaller of the same kind, are not much affected with them: That with a
broad Tail, a red Head, and streak down the Back is the best, they are found in
the latter end of the Summer in the Evening, in Gardens, Churchyards, and may
be driven out of the Earth, with the Juice of Walnut-tree Leaves, and Water
poured on their holes.

2. Marsh or Meadow-worms are found in Marshy ground, or on banks of Rivers in
Fertile Mould, being somewhat bluish, and being well scoured it will be tough
and lively, and is a very good Bait, especially in March, April and September,
for Perch, Flounder, Bream, Smelts, Gudgeon, Salmon, Trout, Grayling, though
many and not without success, use from Candlemas to Michaelmas, and in Moss and
Water it may be kept fifteen days before use.

3. Brandlings, Red-worms, and Gilt-tails, are found in old Dunghills, rotten
Earth, Cow Dung, Hogs-dung, or Tanners Bark when it is used and cast by. The
Brandling and Gilt-tail, are especially good for taking Perch, Tench, Bream,
Salmon, Gudgeons, Smelts, they are taken by Trout and Grayling in Muddy or
Clear Water, and the Red-worms well scoured, are taken by Tench, Perch and
Bream, and best in Muddy Water.

4. The Worm called Tagtail, is of a flesh color, having at his Tail a yellow
Tag near half an Inch long, found in Meadows after a shower of Rain, or in
Chalky ground in March and April, if the Weather be temperate; this is held an
extraordinary good Bait for a Trout in cloudy Water, and a little scouring will
serve it.

5. The Palmer-fly, Palmerworm, Wool bed and Cankers, are accounted one and the
same, being bred on Herbs, Trees, and Plants, not being properly a Caterpiller,
yet the shape of one, being in the outward parts Rough and Wooley, being
excellent Baits for the Chub, Grayling, Trout, Dace, or Roach. The Palmer-fly
and May-fly are held the foundation of Fly-Angling, and have usually good
success.

6. The Oak-worm, Caterpillars, Cabbage-worm, Crabtreeworm, or Jack,
Colewortworm, or Grub, may be long kept with the Leaves of those Trees or
Plants, that breed them in Boxes with holes for Air, or in Withey Bark. They
take Chub, Roach, Da^e and Trout, the Oak-worm being preferrable to any bred on
Trees or Plants, being the best taken on the top of the Water, though you may
go as deep as you will with them; to get these, learch the Colewort or Cabbage
Leaves, beat the Oak, Crabtree, or Haw-thorn, some of them are hard and tough,
others smooth and soft, some horned-tailed, others have them on their heads,
some smooth, other hairy.

7. Bobs of these, there are two sorts, they are found i^ Sandy or Mellow
ground, especially after Plowing: The one is one is called the Earth Bob^ White
Grub, or White Bait being much bigger than a Gentle, having a Red head, the
Body soft, and full of white Guts, the other is lesser, and somewhat bluish,
found many times in digging on Heaths, they are excellent Baits till after
Mid-April to the first of November, to take Tench, Bream, Trout, Chub, Routh,
Smelts, Salmon, Dace and Carp, they must be kept in an Earthen Vessel, with the
Earth you find them in, covered very close to keep out the Cold and Wind, some
boil them about two minutes in Milk before they use them, which makes them
tougher and whiter, others dip them in Honey or Gum-Ivy for Carp, Bream, and
^oth ways prove successful.

8. Gentles or Maggots, may be kept with Flesh, and scoured well with
Wheat-Bran, they are easis to be had, or bred, by Putrefaction. These are
sometimes added to a Worm on ^he Hook, sometimes to a Dub^ly, and so take
Salmon Smelts, but oftener used by them selves two or three on a hook; the ^ay
before you Angle, put them into a Box with Gum-Ivy and it will prove successful
to your sport, they are good Baits or Tench, Barbel, Bream, Bleak, ^udge^n,
Trout, Dace, Chub, ^arp.

9. Flag-worms, or Dock^orms are the same, found a^ong Flags, in old Pits o^
Ponds, viz The small Fib^^ of the Flag roots, by open^ little husks, it is
Pale, Yello^ or White, longer and slender than a Gentle, and these (...) be
kept in Bran, and are go^ Baits for Br^an, Ten^h Ro^^ Carp, D^^^, Bleak and
P^a^ when you fish with it for (...) Grayling, use the smallest L^^ and the
Float, and Fish nine ten Inches from the ground.

10. The Bark-worm, or A^ Grub, are all one, being ve^ full and white, bent
round fi^ the Tail to the Head, the He^ being red, and the parts v^tender,
resembling a you^ Dorr or Humble-Bee, and (...) be used all the year, but part
cularly from Michaelmas to (...) middle of May or June, and (...) cept the Fly
and Cod-bait, the best for Grayling, D^ Roach and ^h^b, it is found b^ under
the Bark of an Oak, Ash, Alder, or Beech; especially when felled, and they have
lain about a year, or in the hollow ^f these Trees when standing, where doated
or rotted; it is a very tender bait; and best on ^bristled Hook, by running the
^ook in at the Head, and up the ^elly, till it stays on the bristle, and no
part of the hooks point ^opears out of it; they are kept ^ell in Wheat-Bran,
and take ^e Grayling with the smallest ^ne: Angle with the F^oar, ^eeping the
B^it seven or eight ^ches from the bottom; but if ^ou fish with it for Reach,
Chub, (...) Dace, use Indifferent Tackle. ^ 11. There is a Bob found under a
Cow-turd, called the ^ow-turd Bob, from the begin^ng of May to Michaelmas, some
^ll it a Clap Bait, this is like a ^eutle, but bigger; you may keep it sometime
in Moss, but the best is to keep it in Earth^ dug up under the place where you
find it; it is a very good bait for Trout, if you Angle with it on a bristled
hook, on the top of the Water, and in the Water it is taken by Chub Carp,
Bream, Tench, Dace and Roach.

12. The Cod-bait, Cad-baid Cadisworm, or Caseworm, are one and the same Bait,
though of three sorts. The one i^ found under Stones that lie loose^ and hollow
in small Brook^ shallow Rivers, or very fin^ Gravel, in a Case or Husk, an^
when fit for purpose, they an^ yellow; they are bigger than^ Gentle, having a
Black o^ Bluish head; another sort i^ found in Pits, Ponds, slow running
Rivers, Ditches, in Case or Husks of Rushes, Water weeds, Straw, etc. and are
by some called Ruff-coats, or Strawworms; these are accounted Principal Baits
for Bleak, Salmon-smelts, Tench, Bream, Chub, T^out, Grayling, Dace. The next
is a green sort, found in Pits, Ponds or Ditches, in Mar^h, coming before the
yellow ones, for they are not in season till the end of April, and in July are
out of season; the third sort is proper in August, being smal^er than the
other, These must be kept tender in Woollen bags, when you carry them for use,
but to keep them long alive, put in a green Withey Bark, taken off and hollowed
like a Trunk, lay it in the Dew a night to moisten it.

Natural Flies for Baits their Seasons, and where to be found, for wha^ Fish
they are proper, etc
1. THE Ant-flies are foun^ in their Hills, about the end of June, July,
August, an^ most part of September, with the Earth you take with them, the^ may
be kept in Glass Bottles^ two or three of these fixed o^ the small hook, are
certain Bait^ for Chub, Reach and Dace if you Angle under Water not above six
Inches from the bottom.

2. The brood of Humble^ Bees, Hornets and Wasps, ar^ good Baits, dry them over
(...) Fire, or in an Oven, so not being over done, they will la^^ long, and sit
handsomely on the ^^ook, to take Chub, Eel^, B^eam, Flounders, Roach or Dace,
some ^oil them, but then they will ^ot keep long, Hornets, Wasps, and
Humble-Bees may be used ^live, when their Wings are a ^t^le grown, and their
Legs ^hort, especially for the Chub, ^s also the Black-Bee breeding ^n Clay
Walls.

3. The Fern-Fly or Fern-^ud, is found among Fern from May Day to the end of
August, it ^s thick and short of Body, has two pair of Wings, the uppermost
reddish and hard, which may be taken off, the last ten ^ays of May the T^out
will take ^t every day, and the Chub re^uses it no part of the Summer.

4. The Stone-fly and Green. ^^r^ke. The first of these is found under hollow
stones at River sides: The Body of it is pretty thick, and almost as broad at
the Tail as in the middle, it is of a curious brown color, streaked a little
with yellow on the back, but much more on the Belly; he uses much the Water,
and seldom flies though he has large Wings that double on his back, he comes in
about April, and continues till about the end of June, and is a very killing
fly of R^ach, Dace and Bleak, and the Green-Drake has his Wings standing high
like a Butter-fly, and his motion in flying the same, the body is in some of a
Paler, in others of a darker Yellow, Ribbed with Rows of Green, long and
slender, his Tail turns up to his back, having three long whisks at the end of
it, he comes in about the middle o^ May, and continues till Midsummer, and is
found by stoney Rivers, with this Bait for Flounders, Dace, Bleak, Roach and
Perch.

5. The great Moth that has a considerable big head with whitish Wings, is to
be found in Summer Evenings in Gardens, on Trees, and Plants, it speedily takes
Chub if you dibble with it.

6. The Hawthorn-fly is black, found frequently on Hawthorntrees, when the
Leaves are put out, the best use this can be put to, is to Dibb in a River for
Trout.

7. The Ash-fly, Wood-cock-fly or Oak-fly is the same, under different names,
and holds good from the beginning of May to the end of August, its of brownish
color, and usually found in the body of an Oak, or Ash, standing with his head
downwards toward the Root of the Tree, and is a very good Bait for a Trout.
And to make speedy work, put it long ways on the hook, and at the point a Cod
bait, and let them sink six Inches or a foot into the Water, raise it gently,
and having a short dibbing Line, you need not fear Trouts in clear Water, and
instead of a Cod-bait, if you have it not, you may use an Oak-worm, or
Green-Grub, you may dub this, or make it Artificially with Isabella, colored
Mohair, and bright brown Bears-hair, wrapped on yellow Silk. These being the
Principal Flies, used in Angling, I now come to mixed Baits of another Nature.

Miscellaena of Baits Very Taking, and much in use.
1. SAlmon Spawn b^iled, and fastened on the Hook, is a very good Bait for Chub,
and in some Rivers for Tro^t, it being advantageous to the Angler, especially
in Winter and Spring, if he keeps it salted; especially in places where Salmon
used to Spawn, for thither the Fish gather to expect it.

2. Grasshoppers the latter end of June, all July, and August if their Legs and
outward Wing be taken off, especially fo Roach, Trout and Grayling, an here you
may put a slende plate of Lead on the shank (...) your hook, slenderest at the
bent, then draw your Grashop over it, after put a lesser Grasshopper, or
Cod-bait at the point, and keep it moving, lifting up and sinking again, a Chub
will also take the Bait freely, and so will a Tro^t if you dib with it.

3. The Water-Cricket, Water ^^use or Creeper is but one, these take Trout in
March and April, and sometimes in May, if you Angle at the River: it is to be
Angled with in Clear Water, within a foot of the bottom, some let it drag on
the ground. This Creeper is bred in Stoney Rivers, and held to turn into a
Stone-fly about the middle of May, that Fly not being any where seen before.

Lamery Pride, or Seven, is a very good Bait for Chub and Eels, Night or Day,
this is no other than little live things like small Eels, no thicker than a
Straw, and are to be found in Sandy Muddy heaps, near to the Shore in Rivers.

Snails, the Black and White are good Baits for Chub, very early in the
Morning, Trout and Eels take them on Night hooks, but the Bellies of the black
may be slit, so that the white may appear, some dib for Chub with
House-Crickets.

For Chub, Barb^l, Roach and Dace you may Angle with Cheese, or Oat Cake,
especially at the Ledger Bait, the Cheese you may wrap up two or three days in
a wet Linen Cloth, or moisten it over with Honey and Water.

Black-berries, Mul-berries, Cherries, or Ra^berries take the Chub in Ponds or
Rivers, Lip-berries, or Aron-berries, being when ripe, of a transparent red,
found in dry Ditches, or dry Banks, fit for use in July and August, two of
these on a hook will take a Roach, and four a Chub.

As for the P^ke he is a greedy Devourer, and therefore mostly delights in
Fish, Frogs, etc. therefore your Baits for him must be small Dace, Minows,
Roach, Salmon Smelt, Gudgeon, Bleak, Millers-thumb, small Perch with the back
fins out off, also Tro^t and Eels well scowred in Wheat-Bran, to take away the
Sli^^e; and indeed most sort of small Fish he takes, and how you are to manage
them on your hook, I shall tell you when I come to treat of the taking him in
the River of Tham's. Periwinckle, a kind of Water-Snall, is much used for
Roach, being taken whole out of its Shell; Shrimps taken out of their Husk or
Shell, may be used as a Bait for Pike or Chub. The White-bl^te with much Seed,
by some called All-seed, is a proper Bait for Fish.

Pastes proper for the Angler.
PAstes are of several kinds, though tending to one and the same end, for a
Ch^b or Chevin, make a Paste of the fattest Old Cheese, the Suet of a Mutton
Kidney, a little strong Runnet, mix them equally and finely together, then put
as much Powder of Turmerick, as will give them a fine Yellow Color.

For Roach and Dace, Grate fine Bread into a little fair Water, wherein Gum-Ivy
has been soaked. For the Barbel in August, make a Paste of New Cheese and
Mutton Suet. For Roach or Dace, you may put a little Butter to your Crumbbait,
and Color it with Saffron. For Carp or Tench, mix crumbs of Bread with Honey,
though for a Carp I reckon this the surest.

Take Bean Flower, or for want of it Wheat Flour, the inside of the Leg of a
young Rabbit, Catlin, or Whelp, white Beeswax, and Sheeps Suet,
proportionable, beat them in a Mortar till well Incorporated, then moisten the
Mass with clarified Honey, and work it up into little Balls, before a gentle
fire.

The Chub in Winter takes a paste made of strong Cheshire Cheese, beaten with
Butter and Saffron till it become a Lemon color.

Stoned Cherries, fine grated Manchet, Sheeps Blood and Saffron make a good
Paste for Roach, Dace, Bleak, Chub, Trout, Perch, and for the Chub only put a
little Rusty Bacon in it.

Another excellent Paste is made of the fattest Old Cheese, Mutton Kidney-Suet,
strong Rennet, Anniseed Water, Wheat Flower, and the dripping of Rusty Bacon
held against the Fire.

What is to be observed in Angling with Pasts.
1. YOU must proportion the quantity of your Paste you put on your hook, to the
smallness or largeness of the Fish you Angle for, as in other Baits.

2. You may try Oils upon any of these Pasts, and as you see your success, so
continue the one, or the other, and the best for this purpose are Oil of
Polipody of the Oak, Oil of Petre, Oil of Ivy, and as properly Gum of Ivy, and
Assafoetida.

3. To strengthen any Past, and so prevent its washing off the Hook, it will
not be amiss to beat a small quantity of fine Flax cut short, Cotton Wool, or
fine Lint among them, which will prove very binding, those that you would have
keep long, put a little White Bees wax into them, and anoint them with
clarified Honey, the latter you may wipe off, when you use occasion.

4. Paste, or tender Baits must not be Angled with, in Rapid Streams, but on a
small hook in Pits, Ponds, Meers, or slow Running Rivers; your Eye in this sort
of Angling must be quick, your Rod somewhat stiff, and a nimble hand to pull up
or else the Bait and Fish will quickly bid you farewell. This is better done
with a Quill float than a Cork, which sooner shows the Nibble or Bite, and if
you then be not very quick, your labor is lost, and with these Pasts, success
is usually had for Bream, Bleak, Chub, Roach, Dace, Carp, Tench, Barbel.

Oils and Ointments useful in Angling.
TAke Oil of Ivy-berries, anoint the inside of an Oaken Box with it, and put
three or four Worms, or other live Baits into the Box, shutting i^ close, but
keep them not there too long, least the strength of the Oil kill them, but take
these out and put in more, and so they being scented with the Oil, it will
allure the Fish the more readily to take them. This may be done in the same
manner for want of Oil, with Gum-Ivy, which is a Tear that flows out of the Ivy
Stalks, when slit, or wounded by peircing.

Oil of Spike and dissolved Gum Ivy, are held to be much attracting, the Bait
being anointed with them.

Oil of Polypodi, of the Oak, Venice Turpentine, and new Honey is very good, if
eight Inches of the Line next the Hook, be anointed with it; but then there
must be two or three Hairs, for it will not well stick to a single one, however
do not clog your Line with it.

Chimical Oil of Lavender, or for want of It, Oil of Spike six drops, three
Drams of Assafoetida, Venice Turpentine, one Dram, Camphite one Dram, make
these into an Ointment, and anoint your Line, as the former, this in Clear
Water wonderful takes Gudgeons.

Man's Fat, and the Fat of the Thigh Bone of a Heron, makes an Ointment that
rarely fails, and is esteemed by those that have tried it, the best of any,
being a new Experiment.

But let me commend to you above others this, take the Oils of Chammomile,
Lavender, Anniseed, each a quarter of an Ounce, Man's Fat, Heron's Grease, and
Cats Grease, and the best Assafoetida, each two Drams, two Scruples of Cummin
seed, finely beaten to Powder, Venice Turpentine, Camphir and Galbanum, of each
a Dram, add two Grains of Civet, and make them into an Unguent; this must be
kept close in a glazed Earthen Pot, or i^ loses much of its virtue, anoin^ your
Line with it as before, and your expectation will be strangely answered.

Oil of Asper so much noised about, and said to be Extracted from a Fowl called
the Osprey, is now found to be a mixture of the Oils of Spike, Lavender, and
refined Oil of Turpentine, which however has a considerable effect in Still, or
slow moving Waters, and observe in this case, your Line must be anointed every
second drawing up, or the strength of the scent being washed off, you may
expect your sport to cease.

I might now speak something of Artificial Flies, and other Artificial Baits,
but not to keep the Angler too long from the Water, I shall have occasion
elsewhere to treat of them.

Fishes Haunts proper to be known.
IF you are not certain of any Waters to Fish in, your business is to try the
most likely and promising, viz.

Where Trees fallen, Wood, Rushes, Weeds, or Rubbish are in Rivers, or likely
large Ponds, there are store of Fish promised, for thither they resort for
warmth and shelter, but it is very troublesome Angling there.

The next are Weirs, Weir-Pools, Mill Streams, Flood gates, Piles, Posts,
Pillars of Bridges, Cataracts and Water-falls, Eddies, Whirling Pits, the side
of a Stream in the Summer especially, for then they love to bask and lie
shallow, unless the Weather be excessive hot; though I may herein except Carp,
Eels and Tench, in the Winter, find for the generallity the deep as the
warmest, in a gentle Ebb and Flow, by the beating of the Waters, at any turning
or opposing Bank, there is good biting, so that strait Rivers are not so
advantageous to Angle in, as those that are Winding or Crooked, having Eddies,
Pits, and Pools in them, occasioned by the Waters beating on the Points and
Doublings, and thence being forced back, and into those Pits and Creeks, the
Fish will get in some considerable numbers many times, where the Water is
narrow, try both si^es; but to come somewhat nearer.

The Salmon is found in large swift Rivers, that Ebb and Flow, Gravelly and
Craggy. The Trout mostly in purling Brooks and Rivers that are somewhat ^wift,
and have Sandy bottoms. The Carp and Tench love Still Waters, or such as gently
move, where Weeds or Roots of Trees ^re near to shelter them on occa^ion. Eels
generally covet Mud^y Rivers, Ponds, or Slimy ^and, especially those of the
^arger size. The Pike, Bream and Chub, are mostly found in ^andy or Clay
Rivers, Brooks or ^onds, wherein Bushes, Bul^ushes, or Flags grow. The ^arbel,
Roach, Dace and Ruff, for ^^e most are found in Sandy or Gravelly deep Rivers,
coveting to be under the shade of Trees. The vmber is likeliest to be found in
Marley or Clayey Streams, running very swift. The Gudgeon likes best'a Sandy or
Gravelly bottom; yet for all this, a trial of diverse Waters will not be amiss,
where you may suspect any Fish are likely to breed; for Experience in this Art
is the surest Instructor.

Times proper above others to Angle in, according to the Water, Weather, etc.
IN the hottest Months, take your opportunity when it ^ Cloudy, and the Water
is mo^d by gentle gales.

2. When the Floods have car^ed away the filth, sudden ^owers incumber the
Waters ^ith, and the Rivers, etc. re^in their usual bounds, looking (...) a
palish color.

3. When a violent shower ^s Muddied or Troubled the ^ater, and after that the
stream ^ns swift, for then they usual^ seek for Creeks, and Shelter, ^^d in the
little Rivulets run^ing into the great one.

4. If you Fish for Carp or ^nch, do it early in the Morning, viz. a little
before Sun-ri^^ till eight, and from four in t^^ Afternoon, till Sun set, wh^
the days are of a convenie^ length, June, July, and August but in March, the
beginning (...) April, and end of September they refuse not to bite in t^^
warm^h of the day, the Wi^^ being still.

5. If you Angle for the S^mon, the best time is from thre^ in the Afternoon
till Sun s^^ and in the Morning as before his proper Months are May, June, July
and August. The Bar^ bites best in May, June, July and the beginning of August,
from five to eleven in the Morning The Perch and Ruff all day (...) very Cool
and Cloudy Weather The Bream bites from Sun-ri^ till nine or ten in the Morning
in Muddy Water, especial^ when the Wind blows hard, f^^ the most part keeping
in the middle of the River or Pond in May, June, July or August.

6. The Pike Bites in July, August, September and October, about Three in the
Afternoon in gentle Water, and a clear Gale. ^n Winter he Bites all the Day
^ong, and in April, May, and the beginning of June, early in the Morning, and
late in the Evening. As for Roach and Dace, they Bite all the Day long, if the
Weather be not in the extremities of Heat or Cold, on the top of the Water. The
Gudgeon Bites best in April, and till he has spawned in May, and if the Weather
be Cool, till Wasp time, and at the end of the year all day long in a gentle
stream, observe when you Angle for him, to stir and rake the ground, and he
will Bite the better. As for the Flounder though he is found only in Ebbing a^^
Flowing Rivers, that have Communication with the Sea, (...) Bites freely all
day in April, May, June and July, in a swift strea^^ he will Bite in the Still,
but (...) near so freely.

Ground Baits to gather an^ feed the Fish, that you (...) better, and readily
kno^^ where to find them, etc.
THE Ground Baits, or (...) baiting the Ground, a^^ Barley or Wheat soft boile^^
which for prevention of scatte^ing, you may mix with so^^ pleasant fresh Earth,
Ale-gral^^ Wheat Bran steeped in sheep^ blood, blood clotted, dried an^ cut in
small pieces, Periwinkle bruised in their Shells, black and white Snails, Worms
cut in sunder, and made up in little Balls of Earth. The Guts of Fowl, the
small Guts or Livers cut small, Old Cheese and O^t-Cakes, bruised together,
Malt grossly ground, these especially gather Tench, Dace, Carp, Chub, Ro^ch,
Bream and Barbel, and the more you feed them, they will be the surer to keep to
that place, and be the fatter to reward your pains when taken, and these throw
in a little above the place you Angle at, if it be a moving water, for before
they ground, the stream will carry them some distance from the place you throw
at.

These are especially good when you Angle with the Codbait, Gentle, Wasp, or
Paste, for it will make them take your Bait more eagerly, and with less
suspicion. And this directs you to the Pike or Perch, for if those Fish you
Angle for be not there, and neither others have circumvented you, nor the
season improper, then are these two devourers of Fish, lurking thereabout, and
the rest dare not approach for fear of being made a Prey, therefore use
suitable Tackle and Baits to take them, and then other Fish will boldly
approach.

When you Angle in Clear Water, keep out of sight as much as may be, sheltered
behind some Bush or Tree, or by standing as far off as possible, keeping your
Eye only on the surface of the Water where your Float is, and to effect this
the better, your Rod must be proportionable in length, to answer the place you
Fish at, and especially at the ground, and a long Rod and Line at Artificial
Flies are very necessary, an Angler must add Silence to his Patience, and move
his Body as little as possible may be, for the Fish are very quicksighted, and
naturally fearful, particularly the Chub, Carp and Trout.

When in a Clear Water you Angle at the Ground, or with a Natural Fly Dibble,
always do it going up the River, but in Muddy Water, or when you do it with a
Dub-fly use the contrary; if you have hooked a Fish, and suspect the strength
of your Line or Rod, let him Play and Tire within the Water, before you offer
to bring him near the top, be sure to keep the Rod bent, least running to the
end of the Line, he break his hold, or the hook, and if he be tired, and have
in a manner done flustering, bring him toward the top, and if there be
occasion, use your Landing Net or Hook; and take this for a genera^ rule in
hooking all strong^ Fish.

How to take the Salmon and Salmon Smelt, by Angling, etc.
THE Salmon though not found in many Rivers in England, is of Principal note
for River Fish, though it as well belongs to the Sea. The chief Rivers noted
for them are the Thanes, Severn, Trent, Lon at Lancaster, and about
Cockersand-Abby at Workinton in Cumberland, Bywell in Northumberland, Durham,
Newcastle on Tine, Dee in Cheshire, and some Rivers in Wales, as Vsk, Wye and
Tivy; he commonly is found in the Water deep, and about the middle.

His best Biting is Nine in the Forenoon, and Three in the Afternoon in Clear
Water, especially when the Wind blows against the stream, but not very roughly:
Then take the Baits directed, and the strongest Tackle, for when he is struck,
he plunges and leaps, though not usually does he endeavor to go to the end of
the Line. The younger sort of these are so tender mouthed, that unless you
fasten two Hooks almost in a quarter of a Circle asunder ^ they usually break
hold; for the great Salmon, the principal Bai^ is well scowered Dew-worms (...)
for the Salmon-Smelts the Brandling, Gilt-tail, Meadow-worm^ etc. and for Flies
he takes them Natural or Artificial and if you use these, a Cod Bait or Gentle
at the top of the Hook is effectual, this with the Dub-fly takes Salmon-Smelts
beyond Expectation, but for a greater Salmon, if your Fly be Artificial, make
it very large with six Wings one behind another, that by that and the different
colors, he may suppose it, as indeed it will appear in the Water, a Cluster of
Flies. He is taken at the Ground with a running Line or Float, and sometimes he
Bites lower than Mid-water at Ground-Baits, he is taken with Oak-Worms,
Dub-flies, Cod-baits, Clap-baits, and the larger sort sometimes take the Minow
and Loach, and for these you may Angle with a Wire Ring on the top of the Rod,
^etting the Line run through it ^o a great length, and when he is hooked, and is
spent with plunging, fix your Land hook in his Mouth, that is screwed to the
end of a Pole, as directed, to land him.

Several ways to take the Pike, and where to find his haunts, etc.
Pike


TO find this Greedy Fish, you must Cast in Sandy, Chalkey, or Clayey places,
somewhat near the Banks, for he coveting solitude, often lurks in holes to
surprise other Fish, as they fearlessly swim by, sometimes he shelters among
Bulrushes, Water-Docks, Weed^ or Bushes, and then he Bite^ about the middle of
the River, or Pond, at Mid-water, and for him you must keep your Bait in a
gentle motion, and at all times to be above a foot from the Ground; he rarely
Bites in the Night, for then he is for the most part gone to rest in his
retirement. In April, May, June, and the beginning of July, he does it most
freely Morning and Evening in Clear Water, and a gentle gale in Still Water, or
a moderately moving one, and in the rest of July, August, September and
October, his best Biting time is about Three in the Afternoon, in Water as
before in Winter Months, if the Weather be pleasing, and the Water Clear, he
will not refuse to Bite at any time, though the most certain time is about
Three of the Clock in the Afternoon, if particularly in a gloomy, cloudy day,
but the Water Muddied with Rains, there is no certainty of him, his beloved
Baits are Gudgeon, Roach, Dace, Minows, Salmon-Smelts no bigger than Gudgeons,
very small Pikes; in the Winter Mouths a piece of an Eel, Fat Bacon, a young
Trout or Perch, if the Pricks be cut off the back, etc. but all his Baits must
be very fresh, and a live one tempts him much the sooner, which may be put on
by drawing the Line between the Skin and the Ribs of the Fish, and so on the
Hook, fastening it in the Gills, and this you may use in Trowling, but here
have your Tackle very strong, with Wyre about a foot from your Hook, that next
to it Silk, and the rest of the Line strong spun Flax, come as little as you
can near the Weeds, least they spoil your Bait before the Pike comes at it,
fasten the Tail of the Bait to the Joint of the Wire, and having fixed your
Tackle, that the Line may Run and Play, let so much lead be at the Hook, as may
carry the Fish's Head downward, as if after Playing on the top, she was going
to the bottom, and when you have sunk it so, that it is at a convenient depth
for the Pike, slack your Line, and give it scope, that he may run to his hold,
and there pouch or swallow it, which you may know by the moving of the Line in
the Water, then with a smart Jerk, hook him, some use no Rod with this, but
Lead and Float, holding the Line in their hands on Links, and indeed there are
several methods taken, though all to the same purpose, wherefore for brevities
sake I omit them.

Angling for him at the Snap, is to give him leave to run a little, and then
strike, which must be done the contrary way to that which he moves, therefore
a double spring-hook is useful in this way of Angling especially, for great
Pike usually will hold the Bait so fast in his Teeth, that you may fail to pull
it out of his Mouth, and likewise strike him, when if he holds the spring hook
never so fast, the Wire will draw through the Bait, and so the spring opening
you will frequently hook him on the outside of his mouth, though Trowling is
surer than this, and more practicable, yet this is best used in March, when the
Pike Bites ill, then upon Spawning they are Sick and lose their Stomachs, bait
this as the former, and he may be taken this way, when he is so.

Other Brief Rules for Pike Angling.
1. WHen the Pike has taken your Bait, observe how he moves, if slowly, give
him time and you will rarely miss him; let not your Bait fall in one and the
same place above once or twice, for if he take it not, then he is farther off.

2. If you find after he has taken the Bait, he lies still, as sometimes he
will, move your hand gently, to get notice which way his Head lies, least in
striking you happen to pull the Bait out of his Mouth, if that cannot be
discerned, strike directly upward: At the Snap have strong Tackle, and give two
lustly Jerks quickly one after another, fastening a Swivel at the end of your
Line, which must be used at Trowl and Snap. and your Armed Wire must be hooked
on it.

3. For the Snap, have a hollow piece of Lead, that it may pass over the Wire,
and End of the Hook, which you draw within the Fishes Gills or Mouth, that as
directed it may keep the Head downwards, and at either of these baitings, if
you out away one of the Fins of the Bait close at the Gills, also behind the
vent, and one on the contrary side, it will play the better, and seem more
lively.

4. Be sure to raise your hand in Casting, when the Bait is about to fall into
the Water, so that by dashing it may not fright him away, and when it is sunk a
little, draw it near the top toward you a little, and so let it sall again;
and if your Wire Hook is joined with a Steel Ring, the Bait will play better,
and sink more direct; for Snap, March is the chief Month, February, April, May,
September and October for the Trowl, and though a large Bait invites him most,
yet a lesser takes him more surely, yet let your Bait be suitable to your Hook;
and this way with a Minow, Loach or small Gudgeon, you may take Perch, and if
possible always Trowl in Clear Water in a Windy Day, and then a Gudgeon will do
well for the Pike, but if a Dark, Cloudy Day, Roach, Dace or Bleak, are to be
preferred.

To snare a Pike, when you perceive him rise, and staying near the Surface of
the Water, fasten about a yard and a half of strong Pack-thread to a Pole, and
at the end of it, a running Noose of small Wire, softly putting it over his
Head, with a quick Jerk throw him to Land; this is often done to Young Pikes,
but the older are more wary, though sometimes carched by this means, especially
in Pends, as also when they come out of Rivers, and go a frogging in Ditches,
in May, June and July.

To Find and Angle for Perch.
Perch


THis Fish delights in a good Stream, of a moderate depth, abiding usually
close by a hollow Bank, Pebbly, Gravelly bottomed, with Green Weeds growing in
it, being commonly a River Fish, he bites little in Winter, but in the middle
of the Day, yet in Summer all Day if the Weather be Cool and Cloudy, and the
Water shaken with the Wind, but more Freely from Seven till Ten in the Morning,
and from Two in the Afternoon till Six, and sometimes till Sun set, if in the
middle of Summer, you must look to him when he is struck, for he is a very
strong Fish, and will struggle hard, and long; they generally go many together,
and if there be a great many in a hole, if you light right on them, you may at
one standing, catch the greater part, if you give them time to Bite; for if you
are too hasty in striking, you may chance to miss your Aim, he takes almost all
manner of Worms, as Dew-Worms, Red-Worms, Meadow-Worms, Cod-baits, also the
Minow, Loach, small Frog, Wasps, Hornets, and Humble-Bees.

He is best taken with a Float, resting the Bait about six Inche^ from the
ground, and sometimes he is taken about mid-water, some use a Ledger Bait on
the ground, but the first depth has usually the best success.

To Angle for the Carp, etc.
Carp


THis Fish has always been in great esteem, and made many Industrious to find
ways ^o take him. They delight in ^andy, or Muddy bottoms in ^till, Deep Water,
and in Green ^r Grass growing under the water, by the sides of the Pond ^r
River, though in a good ^ond they thrive best; they ^re very wary, and hard to
be ^atched; their first Spawning time is about May day, breeding three times a
year, and wonderfully increase if they like the Water they are in, they li^^
long, though most disagree about their particular number ^ Years, and indeed I
see no reason how he should be exact^^ known.

They bite very early in April, May, June, July and August and sometimes all
Night if the Weather be hot, and Star ligh^ in the Still deep Water, if yo^
Angle in the day time keep o^ of sight as much as may be^ therefore provide a
long Ro^ he is very strong and must Pl^ when struck, or he will carry o^ your
Hook by breaking the Li^ or Rod.

Use always the Float a^ Quill, Angle for him sometim^ above, and sometimes
below ^id-water, as the Weather is, enough in Mid-water he is the ^ertainliest
taken, especially in ^ Pond, but in Rivers they are ^ery shy, lay a ground Bait
for ^^e Carp. with ground Malt.

The Baits you use on your ^ook must be Gentles, two or three on the Hook, then
put a ^ttle square bit of Scarlet on ^etop of the Hook, above the ^ait of
Gentles, dipped in Oil ^f the Rock, or Petre, this is ^eld an excellent Bait;
they ^ake likewise Bobs, Wasps, ^weet Paists, Marsh-worms, ^lag-worms,
Gilt-tails, Dew^orms, the Cod-bait and Bread^rain boiled soft; and in June and
July, in the heat of the ^ay, they show themselves on ^^e top of the Water, and
often^^ among Weeds, then you may take them with a we^^ scowred Lobworm,
Angling (...) with a Natural Fly, but in thi^ case keep from their seeing you^
as much as possible you can; (...) Carp is a numerous breeder, (...) Spawning
three or four times (...) year, therefore as a caution t^ those that stock
Ponds with them, let them be warm and secure from Cold Winds, fence^ by Trees,
and the place allowing good feed, for otherwise the Pond being over stored they
will starve themselves, an^ the other Fish that are pnt (...) with them.

Observations on the Tench and the best way to Angle for him.
Tench


THE Tench is accounted a very good Fish, and much coveted, yet he takes
delight in Muddy or Foul Water, and among Weeds, the Ponds that are suitable
for Carp, please him better than the Rivers, and in Pits he thrives better than
in either, if they be agreeable to time, though in some Pits they will not,
though they breed, com^ to any bigness, and in some it i^ held they will not
breed at all, but if any be put in they wi^ thrive wonderfully; but this ^
believe may happen where the Storer is not skilful to distinguish Males from
Females, b^^ by an unlucky guess put in a^ of one ^ort, and though he covets
Mud, yet his Fins are very large, and to know him from others, there are two
little Barbs at the Angles or Corner, of his Mouth, his Scales are small and
smooth, and about his Eyes are Circles of a golden color, he is accounted the
Physician to the rest, so that the Devouring Pike, who being sick is cured by
him, will not, unless great hunger provoke, hurt or destroy him, though he
spares not hisown kind. This Gift of healing is said to be by a Medicinal Balm,
sweating from his Skin, which the Sick Fishes take in as Physic, and indeed
his Flesh is good in Consumptions, (or any Languishing of the parts) for Men.
They Bite best from as soon as it is Light, to Eight in the Morning, and from
Four in the Afternoon, till a quarter after Sunset, but in the hot Months, if
the Weather be not Tempestuous, they many times Bite all Night, their ^est
season is, from the beginning of September, to the end of May, and about the
beginning of July the Tench Spawns.

He takes the Cod-bait, Marshworm, Gentle, Flag-worm, or Red-worm well scowred,
and to make it take the better, you may dip your Bait in a little Tar Water
just before you use it, though the plain Bait many times pleases him well: For
want of the former Baits, you may use Pastes sweetened with Honey, or Wasps.

Angle for him with a Float of Quill, letting the Bait into the Water two foot,
sometimes more or less, but no great matter.

The Bream his Haunts, and how to Angle for him.
Bream


THE Bream is a Large but Bony Fish, he is found in Rivers and Ponds, but in
the latter if convenien, he delights best, he is long growing, and will be very
fat, and is almost as great a Breeder as the Carp. The Breams swim diverse
together, especially in a gentle stream, they Love a Sandy or Clayey bottom and
the deepest and broadest part of the Water, your best time in Season, is to
Angle for him from Sunrise to Eight a Clock in a moderate stream, the Water a
little Slimy or Muddy, especially when a good breeze troubles the Water, and in
Windy Weather, if in a Pond, he generally keeps the middle, and there you are
most likely to find him. In the Afternoon, your time is from Three or Four till
Sunset. But in a Darkish, Windy Day, he bites at any time.

He is Angled for with much success, from the beginning of April till
Michaelmas, and may be taken at other times except the very cold months.

He takes as Baits, Flag-worms, Wasps, Gentles, Grasshoppers their Legs being
off, Red-worms, Gilt-tails, and Meadow-worms well scowered, Bobs, and under
Water, Flies, especially the Green ones; when he Bites, he runs off with the
Bait to the further shore, or as far that way as he can, and therefore you must
give him Play, for though he seems a Fish made strong enough, he will not much
struggle, but after two or three turns he falls on one side, and may be easily
landed.

Here you must Angle with a Float, so that the Bait may touch the Ground, you
may make ground Bait for Bream, with Malt, and it will draw them together.

The Barbel how to Find, and Take him by Angling.
Barbel


THis Fish is very strong, and takes him name from the Barbs that hang at his
Mouth, is curiously shaped with small Scales. In the hot months you will find
him in the swift strong streams, though he shuns the current, and delights
somewhat more out of the Rapidity, under shades of Trees, lurks under Trees
that are fallen into the Water and Weeds, where they root in the Sands like a
Hog, and so Nest, some suppose him to Eat much Gravel and Sand, but I rather
fancy he seeks for Insects or other food, that Heat and Moisture produces in
the bottom of Shallows, yet sometimes he is found in the deep and swift Waters,
especially at Wears, Bridges or Floodgates, where he shelters among Piles, or
in hollow places, holding by the Moss or Weeds, to prevent his being carried
away by the Stream, when Winter is coming on he retires to the still Deep.

His best biting time is early in the Morning, That is, from the Sun Rising,
till Ten, and from Four till the Sun-sets, and often later, and this
principally happens from the 20th of May, to the latter end of August, you must
be wary in taking him, for he is very subtle, and struggles long, unless well
managed, many are found together frequently, but in April they are little
worth, for then is the spawning time.

As for the Baits you intend to take him with, care must be had that they are
very sweet, and such as give him not distaste; Angle for him with a Float, and
so let down the Bait that it may touch the Gravel; He takes Bobs, Humble-Bees,
Gentles not over-scowred, Dew-worms, New-Cheese, Red-worms, Pasts, the young
brood of Wasps, Hornets, and so cunning he is, that you will be cheated of many
a Bait in Angling for him, if you do not have a watchful Eye, and a quick hand,
for he will Nibble and Such it off, and ten to one when your Float sinks, and
you attempt to strike, whither he has the Hook in his Mouth, yet often if you
strike the contrary way his Head lies, you may take him by the Nose, and give
him Play till tired, or else if he be any thing large, unless your Tackle be
very strong, part of it goes with him; he is not an over-pleasant Fish to Eat,
by reason he is somewhat dry, and very full of Bones.

The Trout his Haunts, best way to Angle for him, and his Baits.
Trout.


TO be most sure of finding the Trout, address your Angle to small Purling
Brooks, or swift gliding Rivers, not too great, observe whether their bottoms
are Pebble, Gravel or smooth Stones, for on the sider of these he usually has
his Residence, though he is often found in the deep, especially a large one,
also behind Banks, Blocks, Stones, at Turnings or Points, where the Stream much
beats, or makes a kind of whirling, he loves coverture and shade, from whence
he may most easily seize his Prey, but his hold or hole is usually in deep
places, he is seldom found among Weeds, rather among the boughs of Trees that
hang in the Water or Shady Bushes, he plies in Spring at the Tail of the
Stream, but as many other Fish do, about the middle of May at the upper end,
staying long in a place, if his hold be near it, in the hot Weather, he leaves
the deep, and goes into the sharper streams among Gravels, unless by the
Excessive Heat of the Weather, droughts ensue, and then the still deep delights
him.

This Trout may be taken by dibbing, or if the Weather be Dark, Cloudy and
Windy, you may taken him with the Cast-fly, he is in season from March till
Michaelmas, but chiefly about the end of May, when he is in the best season;
his Body is adorned with red spots, the Female is accounted better than the
Male, they much affect to be near the Source or Spring of Rivers, and where
they run on Lime Stones, there the best Trouts are found.

Angle for him at the ground with a running Line, with two or three small
Pellets of Lead, omitting the Float, or you may take him by Float Angling at
the ground, if you are dexterous at Angling with a single Hair, two Links from
you^ Hook, he is much sooner take than with two or three Hairs though you must
be cautious he break not the Line, and this is better done at the bottom, than
top, because there he has not so much force to shoot and spring, as on the top,
and a single Hai^ next the Hook, if well chosen and strong, will take one of 13
Inches, if there be Water-room, free from Wood and Weeds.

He Bites best in a Water that after a Flood is clearing, or rising, somewhat
Troubled; Cloudy and Windy Weather, early in the Morning is the best time from
the middle of April, to the end of August, from Sunrising till near Eleven,
and from two till Sunset, but Nine in the Morning, and Three in the Afternoon
are the best times^ at the Ground or Fly as the Water is most agreeable, in
March, the beginning of April, September, and till the fifteenth of October,
and then you must cease Angling for the Trout, to the end of February, after a
shower has fallen in the Evening, you will find him rise at a Gnat^ In warm
weather you may dib for him with the Minow or Loach.

As for other Baits than what I have mentioned, the principal are at the
Ground, Brandlings, Gilt-tails, Tag-tails, Meadow-worms, and for the greater,
Dew-worms, well scowred, the two first hold him all the Seasons, either in
Muddy or Clear Waters, the rest do well when the Water is discolored with
Rain, you may use a God-bait, either for Top or Bottom, but then it must be in
Clear Water, he takes the Palmer-^^y or Wool-bed, and all sorts of Artificial
and Natural Flies at the top of the Water. When you Bait with small Fish, as
the Menow, Bull-head and Loach, cut off their Fins, and the Gills of the
latter, and so with these Instructions and a little practice to ripen
Experience, depend on success.

The Eel their Haunt, Bait, and Taking them, etc.
Eel.


THere is many disputes about the Generation of Eels, whether they generate and
breed as other Fish do, or proceed from Mud and Putrefaction, enlivened by Heat
and Moisture, but my business being to Instruct you how to come by them, I
shall lay no stress on that nicety, since Eels there are, and for their
delicacy, are called by some the Queen of Fish.

Their Haunts in the day time, are usually under the covert of Tree Roots,
Brush-wood, Planks, or Piles, about Floodgates, Wears, or Mill-dams, in hollow
holes in Banks, they mostly delight in foul. still Water, or at least such as
runs very slow, with Ousey Sand, or Muddy Bottoms, in Pits, Ponds and Meers.

Bait for him with a young Lamprey, Dew-worms, scowred Earthworms, any very
small Fish their Fins cut off, Guts of Chickens or other Fowl^cut in small
lengths, Lean Beaf, the Brood of Wasps, the four first take him Day or Night,
but most of the rest are properest for Night hooks.

Take him in the day by a Ledger Bait, by Snigling, Bobbing, Brogling; as for
Brogling and Snigling, the best method I have known is this, get a long and
strong Line, your hook of a small compass, Baited with scoured Red-worms, or
Dew-worms, having one end of your Line in your hand, place very easily the
upper end of your Hook in the Cleft of a Hazle-Rod of convenient length, so
that it may slip out as you please, and where you fancy the Eel to be, let the
Bait leasurely sink, and supposing it swallowed by giving time leasurely, draw
him up by little and little, else lying double with the strength of his Tail,
your Line is endangered.

This you must practice in hot weather, the Waters being low. As for

Bobbing, take large Earthworms out of good Mould, scour them well in Moss,
and run a strong thread with a needle through them end-ways, as many as will
lightly wrap a dozen times round your hand, make them into Links, and fasten
them to a strong Pack-thread or Whip-cord two yards or more long; make a knot
about six or eight Inches from the Worms, put about three quarters of a pound
of Plummet, made Pyramiditally on the Cord, by the means of a hollowness, or
hole bored through it, and let it sink to the ^not, six the Cord to a
manageable Pole; Angle with this in ^^uddy or Cloudy Water in the ^ides of the
Streams, or Deeps, when the Eel or Eels Tug, let them be well fastened by the
Teeth, before you draw up, then do it gently, till on the top, and hoist them
quickly then to Land; many by this way have been taken at a time.

Some near Eels haunts sink a Bottle of Hay hoosly bound, stuffed with Fowls
Guts and Liver cut in long shreads overnight, and coming Early the next
Morning, drawing it up hastily by the Rope fastened to the Bank, find large
Eels bedded in it for the sake of the Prey. This may be done with a bundle of
Brush-wood, out of which upon pulling up they cannot so easily get.

To Angle, etc. for the Grayling or Umber.
THough this Fish has two Names given it, the former for the lesser sort, and
the latter for the greater, yet both are the same Species.

Their Haunts are in Marly Clay, Clear Water, and swift ^^^eams, the largest is
accounted eighteen Inches, being in ^eason all the year, but their ^rime is
December, when his Gills and Head are Blackish, and his Belly a dark Gray,
studied with Black spots, he will ^ite freely, but is very tender-^outhed,
therefore be careful (...) break not hold, though he will not struggle much, as
being very faint when he is hooked, Angle for him, in or near the middle of the
Water, for he is always more apt to rise than descend, wherefore he is rarely
taken by a Ground Bait, rather than a running Line, use for him a Float of
Cork, if you particularly Angle for him, but for Grayling and Trout the running
Line is the best.

As for Baits, he takes Brandlings, Gilt-tails, Meadow-worms Tag-tails, the
Bark-worm, Flag-worm, Meadow-worm, Co^^ bait, Natural or Artificial Flie^
particularly the Camlet Fly and Fly made of Purple Woo^ and one made of Tawny
Cham^^ let Hair, also the Earth-b^^ and Clap-bait.

The Pope or Ruff, his Haunts, how to Angle for him, with proper Baits, etc.
THE Pope or Ruff, is one being in Shape, Nature and Disposition, like the
Perch, though in bigness not exceeding a large Gudgeon, but of a more pleasing
taste, he bites Eagerly, and many of them are usually together, where the Water
runs slowly and is deep in Sandy places, fifty of them have been taken at a
standing. You may Bait him with the small Red-worm, Gilt-tal, Meadow-worm, and
other Baits proper for the Perch, he biting at the same time the Perch does;
yo^ may ground Bait with new turned up Earth of a Fallow, as also with a Clear
Sand, you may take him with a single Hair, the Link next the Hook, the Body of
i^ is rough, and has prickly, and sharp Fins; it has its Season^ and Nature
like the Perch, and is a very wholesome Fish, eating short and tender.

The Bleak or Bley, to Angle for him, etc.
THis Fish makes sport, though not much valued, as not being very wholesome, it
is many times destroyed by a Worm that breeds in its Stomach in hot Weather, he
bites eagerly, and you may Fish for him with several Hooks on one Line, and if
you catch three or four together on the several Hooks, not fear the breaking of
your Line, tying them about half a foot one above the other, he is easily taken
with Gentles, small Red-worms, and the Dub^fly which must be of a sad brown;
Angle at middle Water, or at the Top, for he is usually in motion; There is
another sort of these, called the Sea-Bleak, better and wholesomer than this,
called by some the Sea-Camelion, because in the Water he seems often to change
his color.

The Chub or Chevin his Haunts, and to Angle for him.
THE Chub though large, is a very timorous Fish, he is found in large Rivers,
having Sandy or Clayey bottoms, delights much in Streams shaded with Trees, as
also in holes, where many of them consort together, he is in season from the
middle of May till after Candlemas, you may take him with dibbing on the top of
the Water, but in the hot Months he keeps Mid-water, in the colder Weather
Angle at the bottom with the Ledger Bait.

He bites from Sun Rising till Eight, and from Three till Sunset, the large one
when struck is soonest tired, the less will struggle longer, and in Sunshiny
Weather they bite, in Winter the middle of the Day.

He scarcely refuses any bait, if not too large, as Lamprys-Pride, the
Eels-Brood, Dew-worms, lange Red-worms scowred in Moss and Gravel, Clap-Baits,
small Snails, White and Black Chief Paste, the Marrow of an Ox or Cows back, a
Beetle with the Legs off, all sorts of Baits bred on Trees, Plants and Herbs,
Cod-baits, Brood of Wasps, Hornets and Humble-Bees, the Fat of Rusty Bacon,
Dors, Grasshoppers, also Rasberries, Black-Berries, Mulberries, a Fly, and a
Cod-bait, and an Oak-worm on the Hook together, infallibly takes him in the hot
months.

When he is taken he must be eaten the same Day, or is little worth, most
esteem his Head the best part.

Dace or Dare, and Roach, their Haunts, Baits, and how to Angle for them.
THese delight in Ponds or Rivers with Gravelly bottoms or Sand, they love deep
Clear Waters, shaded with Trees, either in Rivers, or elsewhere; the Dace Spawn
about the middle of March, and are in season three Weeks after; the Flesh is
soft and sweet in taste, and in Italy they are pickled as Anchovies.

You must Angle for the Dace, within two Inches of the bottom, and sometimes
the Bait may touch it if it be with Worms, but with Flies, at the Top of the
Water, or within an Inch.

The Roach Spawns about the middle of May, and is so healthful, that his
Soundness has created an usual saying, though often causes some to tell Lies:
the best Roach by reason of the abundance of Soil are found in the Thames near
London; Angle for him abo^t two foot in the Water, and in Temperate Weather
they bite all day long, the Float Angle takes them best.

Their Baits are numerous as their Fry, as Worms bred on Trees, Plants, Herbs,
Gentles, Cod-baits, Grasshoppers with the Legs off, Flies Artificial or Natural;
particularly the Antfly, Meadow-worms scowred, Bread-Corn boiled; the Roach in
Ponds is chiefly found under the Water-docks, if there be any, and indeed few
small come amiss to them.

The Flounder or Flook, his Haunts, Baits, and Angling.
THis is properly a Salt Water Fish, no where but in Rivers that have
Communication with the Sea, and is first brought up by the Tide loosing, and
himself in fresh Streams, he after some time minds not his way back again; they
love Gentle streams, Gravelly and Sandy bottoms, are very shy, and not easily
taken, they bite all the Day, May, June, July, and the beginning of August,
though he will Nibble much about the Hook, and suck off the Bait, if you be not
wary to keep it in motion, which hinders him from seeing the Hook, if he do,
away he flies from it, sometimes he is in the Deep, and sometimes in the
Shallow, he takes scowred Meadow or Marsh-worms, Earthworms, Gentles, the
Brook of Wasps, Gilt-tails and Brandlings, he is to be Angled for with the
Float, and your Bait must touch the ground.

The Minow, or Pench, Loach, and Bull-head or Millers Thumb, Lampreys.
THese are rather Baits for other Fish than of any value in themselves. The
first is taken with small Worms, Brandlings, and Gilt-tails; the two latter
with Gilt-tails, Meadow-worms at the Ground; Lampreys are taken as the Eel,
being much of that nature, therefore I omit for brevities sake to be tedious on
these.

Observations on, and Rules for Natural Fly-Angling.
THis is a choice point in Angling, requiring a quick Eye, and wary Hand; it is
termed by Artists Dibling, Dibing, or Dapeing, and is performed on the Surface
of the Water, or at most sometimes, not letting the Bait sink above two or
three Inches under, not that, unless the Oak-fly, for the Chub or Trout, has
joined to it, a Clap-bait or Cod-bait.

This must ever be done i^ Clear Water, without Lead or Float, in the Evening
of a Hot Day, or in a Hot Calm day is best, and the Still D^ep is to be
preferred before the Stream, though on the side of a Stream, when the Water is
Clearing after great Rains, or a Flood, is very proper, and all hours you may
Dib with the Green Drake-fly, and if you needs must do it in the Stream, use the
Stone-fly, which is proper Early and Late, but if in the Evening it is Windy,
^ake the Artificial Stone-fly, which I shall teach you to make; for then in the
Stream the Fish, rise the best, and are soonest taken, and if you pull off the
Wings, you may Angle in the Water with it, and it will take very much in a
Stream near the bottom, you must in this case observe to keep out of sight, as
much as may be, and keep your Fly moving, that it may appear to the Fish to be
alive.

In Dibbing for Dace, Roach or Chub, let not your motion be swift, if you can
perceive any of them coming toward it, but make two or three short removes, as
if there were a Rest, or the-Fly were Swimming or Playing, then let it gently
glide with the stream if poffible toward the Fish, but if it be slo^ or
standing Water, you must keep it moving with your hand, not just upon him, but
side-ways and sloaping by him, this least it should escape him, will make him
mind it the more, for only the Trout, if it be moved swiftly, will of any
certainty follow it.

In a Calm Dibbing it is not so sure, as when a pretty good Gale stirs the
Water, for then neither you, nor the deceit put o^ the Fish by an Artificial
Fly, (...) so easily discovered, and then few Natural Flies at liberty can lie
on the Water, and for want of choice, they will Snap at the first that comes in
their way, and bite more eager for hunger; and if they will not rise at the
Top, try them a little lower, for some will be sooner taken, as the Roach,
particularly by Dibbing under the Water than at top; Roach, Dace and Chub will
sometimes be pleased with an Artificial Fly, especially if an Earth-bob,
Cod-bait, Earth-worm, or Gentle, be put on the point of the Hook, or an
Oak-worm, is very pleasing on the Top or under the Water.

At Dibbing and Trayling, Trout and Salmon-Smelts will take an Artificial Fly
well, particularly the Stone-fly and Green-drake, Early, or Late in the
Evening; and if you for Salmon-Smelt, Roach, Chub or Dace, with the Dub-fly,
put on a Gentle, Wasp, Cod-bait or Clap-bait, let it stand well on the point of
your Hook, when the Wind Furls the Waters, and few Flies appear on it, or over
it, is the best time to Angle with the Fly Natural or Artificial; for then
having no variety of choice, they will quickly take your Bait; if it be a
Sunshiny day, get under the shade of Trees if you can, that neither the shadow
of your Body, nor Rod may appear in the Water to fright them away; if you find
the Fish rise not at top, sink your Fly by degrees, and try even to
middle-water, and before the sorts of Flies are naturally in season, the Fish
very rarely rise at them, therefore to know this, that you mistake not in your
Baiting, observe what Flies are on the Water, or flying near over it, or are on
the Bushes or Trees, of Ponds and Rivers, and that Fly that Swarms there most,
is chief in Season, and is to be used either Natural, or to be imitated by
Artifice; some open the first Fish they take, and look in its Stomach to see
what indigested Food there remains, and from that take their measures, though
uncertain; for either it must be partly consumed, or so discolored that it
cannot well be known, and also Fish for Extreme hunger, take in such Food at
one time, as at another they altogether dislike.

You may for other Baits found in Rivers, grope in the Sand, Bank-sides within
the Water, under the Stones, or observe what Insects are Playing, or Swimming
in, or on the Surface of the Water, and so accordingly provide your self with
seasonable Baits. In May you may Dibb with Oak-flies, Fern-flies, or Oak-worms
for Trout, and all Summer with the Fern-fly for Chub, keeping the Bait moving
on the Top of the Water, as if it were alive, and your self out of sight, as
much as possible it may be.

Artificial Fly Angling.
ARtificial Dub-fly or Cast-fly Angling, is somewhat more difficult, and
requires more cunning than the former, and is more perfectly Learned by seeing
it done, than by Printed directions, however I doubt not but to give a
satisfactory account of it to the Angler.

The first thing to be maternally considered is, to know and choose the proper
colors of Flies in Season when you Angle, and these must be proportioned to
the places you Fish in; for there are different Haunts of Flies, and are found
much ear^er in some places than in others, as the Season proves Hot or Cold; a
warm Spring brings them early, but the contrary later, sometimes by a Month,
and always sooner in high grounds, than in those that are Low and Marshy, or
Boggy.

And though sometimes upon disgust, Fish suddenly change their Fly, yet it is
not usual, until they have been glutted with one sort, and that must be some
days first, and when that sort of Fly is near going out. Nor will they freely
take them till they are at their best an^ most plentiful, and it alway^
follows, when one sort goes out, another comes in, which you must have a
special regar^ well to note, and make the change with them.

The Fly required being found, your next business is, to make one in Color,
Shape, Proportion of Body and Wings, as like it as possible, always having the
Natural one as a Pattern; and to do this, you must have in readiness Bears-hair
of diverse Colors, Camels hair, Sad, Light, and of middle indifferent Color,
Badgers hair, Spaniels hair, Sheeps wool, Dogs ^air, Hog Down, such as is
Combed from the Roots or Bristies of a Hog, Camblets and Mohairs of diverse
Colors, Cows hair, Abortive Calves, and Colts hair.

Furs of Squirrels Tails, the ^ails of Black Cats, Yellow and Dun Cats, of
Hares Necks, the Fern Color Ferrets Fur, Martins, Yellow Fur, Filmers ^ur, the
Tails of White Weasles, Moles, Black Rabbets, Down of a Fox Cub, Ash Color at
the. Roots of Fox, Fur that comes off the Otter, and Otter Cub, Blackish and
Brown Badgers hair, that has been in a Skinners Lime-Pit.

Hackles or Feathers about a Cock or Capons Neck, and such as hang loosely down
on each side the Tail, of various colors; particularly to make the Palmer-fly,
or Insect called the Woolbed, you must have Feathers of all sorts of Fowl, and
those colored Feathers required that you cannot get natural, you may dye.

You must also have Caddows or Blankets, out of which are got good Dubbings, so
of C^shions made of Abortive Skin^ of Calves and Colts, like Silver Wire, Gold
Twist, Silver Twist, White and Yellow Beeswax, for Ground Work, or to frame the
Bodies and Heads on, as the Nature of the Fly more or less requires it, and a
sharp pointed neat pair of Scissars, to trim and shape your Work.

How to make the Dub-Fly.
WET your Materials to know how they will hold Color, for though dry they may
appear of the right Color, yet Wet they may alter, and be too Light or too
Dark this done, take the Hook in your Left Hand, between your Fore-singer and
Thumb, the Shanks back upwards, take strong Silk of that Color the Fly
requires and Wax it with Wax of the same Color, and so draw it to the Head of
the Shank, betwixt your Finger and Thumb, and whip it about the bare hook two
or three times; draw your Line between your Thumb and Finger, holding the Hook
so fast, that it may only have space to pass by, so joining the Hook and Line,
put on the Wings, fashion the Body and Head, by twisting the Dubbing on your
Waxed Silk, and Lapping it on, so Work it by degrees up toward the Head, and
part the wings of an even length, or the Fly will not Swim upright; then turn
it into a proper shape, by nipping off the superfluous Dubbing from the Silk,
so fasten and accouter your Fly: It would be well to see one done by an
Experienced Angler, and then these Directions will be easy to you.

Directions relating to Dubflies, and Angling with them.
1. WHen you proportion your Dub-fly, confider the largeness or littleness of
the Fish you intend it for, and be sure the Belly of it is of the exact color,
because it is most obvious.

2. Let not the Tail of the Fly be only to the bend of the Hook, and not come
unto the bent of it.

3. If the Trout at the top of the Water refuse it, the day is not proper for
it, or the Fly either out of season or ill made.

When you Angle with the Dub-fly, it must be in such a River or Water which is
clear, after Rain, or in a River a little discolored with Moss or Bogs, in
Moorish places, or else in a Cloudy, Gloomy Day, when the Water is stirred by
gentle Gales; or if the Winds be pretty high, they will rise in the plain Deep,
but in little Wind, the best is to Angle in the Stream.

Keep your Fly in continual Motion in all Weathers, to prevent the Fish from
diseerning the fraud; in clear and low Water let the Body of the Fly be the
smaller, and the Wings very slender. In dark Weather and thick Water, let the
Fly be of a darkish color, but it must be pretty large Body and Wings, the
better to be discovered; in a clear day, a light colored Fly is preferrible.

A Rod for the Dub-fly should be five yards at least, and the Line about seven,
or somewhat more, if the Water be free from Encumbrance of Weeds, etc. and to
adapt your Fly to the color of the Water more properly, have three of the
sort, the one Light, the next a degree Darker, and the third the true color of
the Natural Fly, by trying all which, you may gain the more Experience, for one
of them cannot well miss. In slow Rivers, Muddy and Slimy bottomed in great
Draughts expect little success, but rather choose Pebbly, Sandy or Stony
bottoms, in a running Stream, which much Cools and Refreshes the Fish in the
hot months.

Let your Eye be steady on what you are about, and your hand ready to strike
when it is convenient, which is with the rising of the Fish; or the finding his
mistake will throw out the Hook again: But for a great Fish, most hold it
proper to let him turn his Head with the Bait, which will less strain your
Tacke, for so he will strike himself, and then do it moderately.

Upon Casting, do it with a little circling about your Head, by waving the Rod:
or else the Fly may with too smart a yerk be apt to snap off, Cast the Fly
behind a Trout at his rising, and so with a gentle hand draw it over his Head,
so that not scaring him, he will quickly take it if it be the right color.

In Casting, observe to do it always before you, that it may fall on the Water,
and no part of the Line dash to scare away the Fish; and do it if you can
without making any circling in the Water: But if the Winds be high, some part
must be in the Water to keep the Fly from being blown out. Take your standing
so, if possible, that the Sun may be in your Face, and the Wind to your Back.

In Still or Slow Water, cast your Fly almost a cross the River or Pond, and
draw it toward you gently a little way, that you break not the Water, or put
it into trouble, and let it bear with the Current if there be any, Fishing
downwards and not upwards of the River. Thus having as I hope given plain
Instructions in these matters, to be understood by easy Capacities, I proceed
to describe Artificial Flies, for the proper Month of Angling with them.

Artificial Flies proper in the Month of the Fishing Season, how to make them.
Febr. THE Palmer-fly or Plain Hackle must have a rough black body, which may
be done with black Spaniels hair, or the Whirl of an Estridge Feather, and the
red Hackle of a Capon, all over.

The Prince Dun, this may be Dubbed of the Down of a Fox Cub, with Ash-colored
Silk, the Wings of a Stares Feather, this must be made little.

The little Red, Brown Dub, with the softest hair on the black spot of a Hogs
Ear, the Wings of Mallards Feathers near white, wrap it on with red Silk.

March. The Green-tail may be made of the brown-hair of a Spaniel, taken from
the outside of the Ear, and a little from the extreme of the Tail.

Morish brown, may be Dubbed with Black Sheeps Wool, Red Silk, and the Wings
made of a Partridges Wing Feather.

Thorn-tree-fly Dub of a very good black, and mix a little Isabella colored
Mohair; with it make a little body, and the Wings of a Mallards brightest
Feathers.

The early bright brown, make of the Hair of a brown Spaniel, that of the flank
of a Red Cow, and Wing it with the Gray Feather of a Wild Duck.

April. The Violet-fly which takes excellently from the sixth to the tenth,
make of Bears hair a light Dun, mixed with Violet Stuff, Wing it with the
greasy Feathers of a Mallard: The Horseflesh fly, which lasts all this Month,
Dub with Pink colors, Blew Mohair, and Red Tammy, let the Head be dark brown,
and the Wings of a light color.

The small bright Brown, is very well taken in a clear Day and Water, make it
of Spaniels Fur with a light Gray Wing.

May. The Green Drake an excellent killer, Dub on a large Hook with Camels
hair, bright Bears hair, soft Down combed from the Bristles of a Hog, mix
yellow Camlet; let the B^dy be long, and Rib it with green Silk mixed with
yellow; let the Whisks of his Tail be the long hair of Sables, his Wings, the
light gray Feather of a Mallard died yellow.

The Stone-fly Dub, with Dun Bears hair, mix it with a little brown and yellow
Camlet, that she may be yellower on the Belly and Tail, than in any other part,
to be the better liked by the Fish, who mostly Eyes the Belly of Baits; and to
adorn it the more, place two or three hairs of the Beard of a Black Cat, on the
top of the Hook, in the Whipping or Arming, and in warping on your Dubbing,
sta^ ring one from another something upright, Rib her with yellow Silk, make
the Wings long and large, of the dark gray Feather of a Mallard, or other such
like Feather.

The Gray Drake comes in when the Green one goes out, much of shape with it,
but in color differs, and must be made of a paler and more bluish yellow and
green, his Ribs quite down his body must be of black, with black shining wings
very thin, and may be made of the gray feathers of a Mallard, the Down under
Hogs Bristles, the black Hair of a Spaniel, and the Whisks of his Tail, of the
Beard of a Black Cat.

June. The Ant-fly is dubbed with brown and red Camlet, the Wing of the
Feathers of a light-grey Pidgeon.

The Purple-fly, with Purple Wool, mixed with light brown Bears Hair, the Wings
of a Stares Feather, Dub it with Purple Silk.

The brown Hackle make of the lightest brown Hair, of a somewhat grown Colt,
with a red Hackle or Cocks Neck-feather over it, warped with hair color or Ash
colored Silk.

July. Orange-fly, Dub this with Orange colored Cruel or Wool, and the
Feathers of a Black-Birds Wing.

The Wasp-fly. Do this with brown Dubbing, or else of the Hair of a black Cats
tail; rib it with yellow Silk, and make the Wings of the gray Feather of a
Mallard's Wing.

The blew Dun must be made with the Down of a Water Mouse, and the bluish Dun
found on an old Fox, mix them well together, and Dub with sad Ash colored
Silk, the Feathers of a Stares Quill, will furnish you with Wings.

August. The late Ant-fly may be Dubbed of the Hair of a Cow, that is of a
blackish brown, and for the tagging of the Tails wrap in some red, and make the
Wing of a dark Feather, this Fly takes admirably.

The Fern-fly must properly be Dubbed with the Wool taken from a Hares Neck, of
the color of Fern, when dry, make the Wings of the darkish gray Feather of a
Mallard.

The Hearth-fly, Dub of the Wool of an aged Black Ewe, with some Gray Hair to
accommodate the Body and Head, Dub with black Silk, and take the light Feather
of a State for the Wings.

September. The little blew Dun, make of the Fur a Water-Mouse, Dub it with sad
Ash-colored Silk, and Wing it with the Feather of a blew Pidgeon.

The late Badger, do this with Badgers Hair that is Black, whip with red Silk,
and use a darkish gray Mallards Feather for the Wings.

The Camel brown-fly, pull out for Dubbing, the Hair in the Lime of an old
Wall, whip it with red Silk, make the Wings of a Stares lightest Feather.

October. This Month is supplied by the Flies of the former, for all being now
upon their going away, any almost will do. And thus Reader keeping to my
intended Brevity, I have singled you out the best killing Flies from a great
many more, and by knowing how well to make these, you may soon imitate all
others, by having a Natural Fly before you, and choosing your materials suitable
to her color, and shape her as you see the other, and then promise your self
success in Angling with her as directed.

Various, but very Curious Observations on Angling diverse ways of Angling not
commonly known.
NOte that sometimes all sorts of Fish take Baits at the ground? when but some
sorts will take the Fly at the Top of the Water; and therefore to Angle for a
Trout with a Worm, choose the running Line without any Float, only small
Plummets in their proper places. This is successful at the ground either in
Clear or Muddy Water.

As for the latter, use a Line a little more than half the length of the Rod,
and sometimes less than that length, and the lower most Links must be at least
three Hairs, and one at top of four, where of have a Water Noose or Loop, to
put it to another Link of four hairs, having also a Loop or Water Noose at its
bottom; so proteed with Links of five or six hairs a piece, till you come to
the top-most, make the lowest of Chestnut color, or Sorrel brown. Then to your
Reed or Cane, have a Top neither too stiff nor too feeble, but between both,
the Cane about three yards and a half long, and the Top about a yard and a
half, or near two yards, in one or two pieces, and five or six Inches of
Whale-bone, smooth, round, and pliant.

Observe to Lead your Line, as is consistent with the Water; in rough streams
more than in small gentle streams, and least of all in Still Water; then carry
the top or point of your Rod in a level with your hand, and so you will be the
point of your Rod, perceive the Bite at the Ground, then strike strait and
gently upwards, and by a little slacking your hand before, you will give the
Fish time the better to take the Bait.

Some are of opinion, if you know that a Trout bites, to strike at the first
biting, but this is only allowed in Clear Water for Salmon-Smel^s, Trout, and
Grayling, and the Bait is the best Red-worms scowred, or a Brandling, and
Gilt-tail turned Head to Tail, and run cross wise through the middle, under the
Wings, and so you may do in Muddy Water with other Worms, as two Brandlings,
two Meadow-worms, etc. a Trout will seize on the Bait when it drags on the
ground, either in Clear or Muddy Water, but a large Grayling will rather rise a
Foot or more at your Bait from the bottom, than descend.

If a large Trout you Angle for in Muddy Water, then it requires some art in
baiting your Hook, as suppose the Bait a Dew-worm, here you must thrust the
Hook in toward the Tail, a little above the middle, and out again below the
Head, then draw him above the Arming of the Hook, or Whipping, so put the point
into the Head of the Worm, till it is very near the place where the point of
the Hook first came out, and so draw back the Worm or that part that was above
the Shank. This Hook should be indifferent large.

To Bait two Worms in Muddy Water for a Trout, etc. from eight to ten Inches:
Take Meadow-Worms, or Brandlings, or a Brandling and Gilt-tail, and run the
point of the Hook in at the Head down the Body, till it pass the knot, or come
to the middle of the Worm; then strip it above the Arming or Whipping, not
bruising it in any manner with your Fingers, so put on the other, by running
the Hook in the same manner, and let the Head of it just cover the point of the
Hook, then slip the first down, till the knots or middle of both Worms meet
together; and thus you may do by any other Worms, for other Fish, as by
foregoing directions you find they take them.

Directions for Angling with the running Line in Clear Water.
PUT a Gilt-tail and small Brandling on your Hook, as before directed, well
scowred, and here your Hook must be much smaller than in Muddy Water, two or
three of the lowermost Links of your Line^ of a single Hair, so rise from two,
to three o^ four, of (...) gray or duskish White, the Line about two yards
shorte^ than the Rod, leaded with a small black Plummet.

Angle with this in the stream always up it, in a River with a light hand,
still casting out the Worm before you; let the Rod be as the former: And thus
you may Angle for Salmon-Smelts, Trout or Grayling, to whose proper Baits I
refer you in my Treatise of Baits in this Book.

Directions for the Top-Water Angling with a Worm.
YOur Line in this case must be longer than your Rod, without any Plummet or
Float, drawing your Bait down and up the stream, in a clear day with a gentle
hand, that it may glide as if it were swimming, and your Bait here must be a
Gilt-tail, or Brandling, keep it from the shore, and free from Intanglements of
Weeds, Wood, Rushes, or other Encumbrances that hinder sport.

Farther Directions for Float Angling.
HEre your Line must be two or three foot longer than your Rod in Rivers, but
in Ponds and Pits something shorter, Angling in Clear Water for Salmon Smelts,
Trout or Grayling, you must put but one Hair next the Hook, but in Muddy Water,
and for other Fish two or three, observing the running Line and Rod for the
Trout, and proportion this to it. Lead it moderately, but so that it may keep
the Line strait and even, but for Tench, Carp, Barbel or Chub, your Rod and
Line must have an addit onal strength in the thickness of the one, and the
number of Hairs in the other, and your Float manageable in the Water,
proportioned according to the swiftness or slowness of the Water, but with one
Worm, the Water being very clear; and observe for some sort of Fish as
Flounders, Salmon-Smelts, Bream and Gudgeon, your Bait must drag on the ground,
but for other sorts, as Tench, Roach, Bleak, Pike, Ruff, and Carp, at
mid-water; for Grayling and Perch, at six or nine Inches from the bottom. The
Chub is often taken at Bottom, Mid-water and Top.

You may use the various sorts of Baits, Angling with a Vloat, but Ground Baits
are most frequently used, and with success.

Directions for Drabling.
BY this, Barbe's of large size are taken; to do it completely, observe these
Rules.

Have a strong Line of six yards, which before you fasten it to your Rod, must
be put through a piece of Lead, that if the Fish bite, it may slip too and fro,
and that the Water may something move it on the ground, Bait it with a pretty
large Lob-worm well s^owred, and so by its motion, the Barbel will be enticed
into the danger without suspicion. The best places are in running Water near
Piles, or under Wooden Bridges, supported with Oaks doated and slimy.

This Drabling way I have placed here, by the particular directions of my
worthy friend Mr. Samuel Wright of Derbyshire, an Experienced Angler, of the
Crown Society of Jolly Anglers in Fleetstreet.

Angling with the Ledger-Bait.
THis is used for variety of Exercise, to give rest to the Anglers, and so
differs from others, that are called walking Baits, and this is, when the Bait
continues to rest in one fixed and certain place.

Here you must take off your Float, but let the Lead remain, and within half a
yard of the top of the Line, wrap a thin plate of Lead, an Inch and half long,
and pretty broad, viz. about an Inch, so fasten your Line to your Rod, cast in
your Bait either into a still slow draught, or gentle stream, and when it is at
the bottom you may stick your Rod in the Bank of the River, or hold it in your
hand at discretion, and by the bending of the Rod, or motion of the Lead at
top, you will perceive when the Fish Bites, give her some time, and strike
contrary to where her head lies. The Chub and Eel are successfully taken this
way.

To lay Night Hooks.
TO do this effectually, procure a small Cord, which may be about sixteen yards
long, and to this at equal distances, ^ye five or six fine twisted. Flax or
Silk Lines, about eighteen Inches each, of the thickness of your Trowling Line,
fasten them so that they may be easily removed, and put on again, whip to the
ends of each of them a pretty strong hook, Bait with a Loach, Minow or
Bull-head, the Fins and Gills cut off; or these being wanting, the Seven Eyes,
Eel-brood, small Roach, Gudgeon, the Pith of an Ox or Cows Back Bone, etc. will
serve for the Fish, put the point of the Hook in at the Tail, and out at the
mouth, so that the Fishes Head may have a resting in the Hooks bent, and that
the point may not be discovered, cover it with a Worm, and casting the Cord by
a weight, over the River, Stream or Pond, fasten both ends to stakes on either
side, and be there Early in the Morning, and expect Chub, large Eels, Trout or
Pike, but for a Pike keep the Bait with a Float, about a foot or something more
from the bottom.

For this to gather the Fish, you may Bait the ground with Blood and Grains, or
Sweet, made up in Sweet Earth, taken from under the green Soard, or Pasts, etc.

Choice Receipts, or Rare or Secrets, never before made Public.
TAke Oil of Amber, Rosemary and Myrrh, an equal quantity, infuse in them any
Worms, or mingle Paste with them, and the Fish if near, will hasten to the Bait
so dipped, and then not have power to go away, till she either Nibbles off the
Bait, or is Taken.

Oil of Water Lillies, and the Juice of Mulberries, is excellent to make up
Paste with, especially with a few drops of Oil of Peny-royal in it, and the Fat
of a Hedg-hog or Urchin.

Ground-bait for Carp, with unpickled Samphire bruised, and made into Balls,
with Walnut Oil. This likewise allures Tench and Bream.

Overnight, mix Bean Flower with a little Honey, wet it with Rectified Spirits
of Wine, and a little Oil of Turpentine, make it up into little Pellets, and
such Fish as Nibble it, when thrown in, will be stupefied, so that in the
Morning, coming to themselves a little, they will bite very eagerly, as being
after their drunken fit exceeding hungry. This likewise is a sure detainer of
them all night in Summer, so that they will not wander from the place. Nux
Vomica scraped into Paste, makes them Drunk, so that if the Water be shallow,
you may go in and take them, when they rise and turn up their Bellies as if
expiring, though in a little time they will come to themselves again, if the
Water be deep you may use a Landing Net.

The Fat of Barnacles or Sea-Gulls is extremely coveted by Fish, if mixed with
the Juice of Eringoes, or Sea Holly. The Craw of a Turtle Dove well scowred, is
taken very eagerly by the Pike.

The Fat of a Water Rat, takes Perch if the Bait be rubbed with it, as that of
a Mole does the Pike.

Some particular observations on Gudgeon Angling.
THE Gudgeon though not over large, is approved among other Fish as a Dainty,
being very wholesome Food. This Fish Spawns twice or thrice in the year, he
delights in sharp Streams, with Gravelly or Sandy bottoms, and shows the young
Angler extraordinary good sport, who not being well skilled in choosing, or not
well knowing how to come by other Baits, may take him with a small Red-worm on
the ground, or very near it, and rarely by reason of the toughness of his
Mouth, is he lost when struck. In the heat of Summer they make to the Shallows
in Rivers, but when the Weeds in Autumn, grow of a bad taste, or rot, and Cold
Weather comes on, then they get together in Deep places; and here it is
properest to Fish for them at the ground, or a little above it; if you fish
with a Cork or Float, but it may be done with a running Line on the ground,
without a Float: As for particular Baits, I have already discoursed of them,
and among others those relating to the Gudgeon.

A special Winter Bait to get, and preserve.
WHen Plowing begins in Autumn, before any ^rosts come that are forcible, to
make entrance into the Earth; observe where the Ploughs are going, if there be
store of Crows lighted on the Ground, especially in that which is Heathy,
Sandy, or Greensoard, follow, and you will find a white Worm, bigger than a
Gentle, having a red Head, which is held to be bred of the Spawn or Egg of a
Beetle, left in those holes she digs in the ground under Horse or Cow dung;
which is March or April, turns to a Beetle again: You may put about two quarts
of these, into half a Bushel of the same Mould, when you gather them, put them
in a Tub or other Vessel, where the Frost or Wind may not come to kill them;
and by this means, when most other Baits are out, you may be provided all the
seasonable times in Winter, and early in Spring. They take in those seasons,
Bream, Carp, Roach, Dace and Chub.

Gentles may be kept in Winter, in Bran, Moss and Scowering Earth, lightly over
some putrefaction, in which at the first laying them in the ground, where the
Frost cannot come at them, you perceive they begin to live.

Unseasonable times to Angle in.
HAving spoke much of proper times to accommodate the Angler, I shall now speak
somewhat more of unseasonable ones, that those who are ignorant in this Art, as
to the Niceties of it, may not lose their labor.

The two extremes of Weather are not proper, viz. (1.) When great droughts have
parched the Earth, so that the Rivers carry but low Currents, when the Weather
is Excessive hot, in the Heat of the day, unless Clouds cover all, and Winds
gently breath. (2.) In Frosty or Snowy Weather, or unhealthy Weather, for two
reasons, viz. because you will little damage the Fish, but greatly injure your
self.

In the Morning, either in the Spring or advancing of the season, if a Hoar
Frost happen, the Fish will be backward in their biting that day, and little
sport can be expected, for they will not freely rise, except in the Evening,
and soon after they have spawned they will not bite to the purpose, till with
Grass and Weeds they have well purged and scowered themselves, so that they may
by that means recover their Strength and Appetite.

It is not proper to Fish when the North or East Winds be very sharp.

In Brooks that are small and clear, where the Water is kept up by Mills or
Dams, it is not good Angling, for there especially the Trout keeps her hole,
and others bite faintly.

Some other useful observations and directions.
1. IF you are doubtful what Bait will be taken, look in the first Fishes
Stomach, and such Flies, Worms, etc. as you find there, that kind at that time
delights in.

Be sure always to keep your shadow off the Water, and therefore let the Sun be
in your Face, or on one side of you when you Angle, keeping out of sight, and
making no noise; and when you are bent for Trout, you need make but three or
four Essays with the ground Bait or Fly, for if it comes not then to Bite or
offer, either there is not any there, or they keep close in their holes.

If you Fish for Carp, cut no Weeds in the River, nor on the sides, to make you
a convenient standing, for then they will perceive they are laid wait for, and
forsake that haunt, not returning in a considerable time.

A curious Paste with Oils to take Fish.
TAke the flower of Lupins, three ounces, the Fat of a Rabbits Kidney an ounce,
the Juice of Horse Radish a quarter of an ounce, Oil of Turpentine three drams,
mix these together with a stiff hand, and make them up into a Paste, with a
little Rabbits Wool felted in with it to strengthen it on the Hook, and it will
take to admiration Trout, Tench, Chub and Roach, and is an excellent ground
bait for most sort of River or Pond Fish, and proportionable to direction, mix
a greater quantity, adding a little Honey.

And thus have I given you in a small Book, the whole Art of Angling, for by
way of direction, there needs no more; all that remains now, is to put it in
practice, without which, whatever can be said on the Subject, signifies little.

FINIS.

