THE Complete Courtier: OR, THE MORALS Of the Famous Historian CORNELIUS
TACITUS Concerning Flattery, etc.

In above One Hundred ESSAYS.

Paraphrased and Illustrated with useful Observations by the Sieur Amelo de la
Houssaie and M. D'Ablancourt.

Done out of French.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by E. Rumball, at the Post House in
Russel Street in Covent Garden, 1700.

TO THE READER.
IT was the Judgment of the Learned Philip Carriana, That among all the Latin
Historians, there was not any one, who was to be preferred before Tacitus, if
equaled to him, either for the Solidity of his Instructions conducing to Civil
Life, or for his manner of Concise and Judicious Writing; which is the reason,
that all his words are as so many Sentences. There is nothing unprofitable,
says he, in his Writings, nothing of Hyperbole, nothing of Circumlocution in
his words.

The Marquess Virgilio Malvezzi speaks this farther of him, That his History
consists in recounting the Actions of Sovereign Princes; and the Benefit that
accrews to Us from thence is this, that we may learn thereby those things which
may be of great use to us in an Age, wherein almost all the Estates of the
World are under Monarchical Government.

This Treatise then contains several Observations upon the Choicest Morals of
that Famous Historian, written in French by the Sieur Amelot de la Houssaie,
Dedicated to Monsieur Boucherat, Chancellor of France, and Printed with the
Allowance of that Potent Monarch now Reigning in that Flourishing Kingdom.

This is enough to recommend these few Sheets to your Reading; For though the
Design may seem to require a larger Epistle, yet I am apt to believe it would
be superfluous at such a time as this, when the World is grown weary of long
Prefaces; as also for that all Persons who delight in good Authors, have too
much Sense, to be informed of the Benefit of Tacitus's Morals, and the Use
which ought to be made of them.

The Modern Courtier: OR THE MORALS OF TACITUS, CONCERNING FLATTERY Lately
Revived.
ESSAY I.
EGregious and Sparkling Wits are soon discouraged and depressed, where
Flattery once gets Footing and Prospers, Tacitus Annal. l. 1.

The meaning of the Text is, That there was no want of Egregious and Sparkling
Wits, till they were Stupifi'd by Adulation. D'Ablancourt renders it, While
there was no speaking of Truth without a Candid Complacency, Which does not
does not sufficiently express the Sense of Tacitus, whose meaning is, that
where Flattery Reigns, there follows a decay of Towering Ingenuities, for that
all Recompenses and Rewards go to the Flatterers. Therefore Monsieur Harlay
Chanvalon, has rendered the words much better, thus, till Noble Ingenuities had
debased themselves by Flattery.

There needs no other Comment upon these words, then that of Tacitus himself.
Many Authors, says he, have Compiled us the History of the Seven First Ages of
the Roman Commonweal, at what time they Wrote with no less Freedom then
Eloquence: but after it was the Interest of Peace that the Supreme Power should
be devolved upon one single Person, those lofty Genius's were soon Eclipsed.
And the Reason was, for that Dominion having deprived Equality of all Command,
every one strove to please and comply with the Prince, that he might render
himself capable of Honors and Preferment, to which he could not ascend, but by
the steps of Servitude. For so it is, that Servitude and Flattery are two
inseparable Companions: And it was upon the occasion of the shameful Flatteries
of the Senate, that Tiberius himself was wont so often to Exclaim: Poor Souls
prepared for Slavery. The younger Pliny, whom we shall frequently cite, by
reason of the Conformity of his Maxims with those of Tacitus, whom he caused to
examine his Writings, speaking of his Uncles Books, makes an excuse for eight,
which were not wrote in the same Style, and wanted those Sinews of Eloquence,
that gave manly force to all the Rest; because they were Written under the
Reign of Nero, when the Servile Fears of Men would not permit 'em to write with
Freedom. And in one of his Epistles, he adds, That he lived in the Reign of
another Emperor, when the Senate was become altogether Mute, and merely
Stupifi'd, by reason of long Silence.

ESSAY II.
Caius and Lucius, the Sons of Agrippa, he introduced into the Family of the
Cesars, and them, though he made a Semblance of an utter avers^^^ to any such
Design, he most earnestly desired to have Proclaimed, Princes of the Youth, and
to be Nominated for Consuls.

Princes of the Youth; that is to say, Presumptive Heirs of the Empire.
D'Ablancourt renders it thus. He had Adopted the Sons of Agrippa, Caius and
Lucius, and caused 'em to be Proclaimed Princes of the Youth, and earnestly
desired they might be in Nomination for Consuls, though to outward appearance, he
testified an extreme unwillingness to have it so.

Flattery is always the Companion of Advanced Fortune. For Caius and Lucius
were no sooner admitted into the Imperial Family, but the Senate and Roman
People design 'em for the Empire. And that which is yet more remarkable is
this, That these two Princes, who had not as yet assumed the Robe of Manhood,
and consequently were not capable of Public Employments, were already Consuls
Elected by the Senate and People, although Augustus, out of an Affected Modesty,
seemed so unwilling to give his Consent. But Flattery is ingenious and studious
to Insinuate; she devines with ease what it is that Princes desire; so that let
them cover their Longings with never so much Art, she will find out the Secret.
And this was that of which Galba gave warning to Piso, when he used this
Expression (...) much ado, how Wise, how Resolute, how Constant soever thou
may be (Irrumpet Adulatio) Flattery will force thy Modesty; and make her
self Mistress of oll thy Affections.

ESSAY III.
Nero was only left of all the Sons in Law: Him all the Popular Adoration
Courted.

D'Ablancourt renders it; There remained no more alive then Tiberius, so that
Fortune began to cast an Eye upon him alone.

While Marcellus and Agrippa, both Augustus's Sons in Law, were alive, as also
Caius and Lucius, the Sons of Agrippa, Tiberius had much ado to brush off
several slights and Scorns, that were put upon him in the Family of Augustus,
his Father in Law. But when the Palace was empty by the Death of all his
Rivals, then he ruled Lord and Master: All People made their Addresses to him;
they took no notice of any Body else; Courted no Body else but only him alone.
Illuc (...), as if Tacitus would seem to intimate, that they began even to
neglect Augustus himself; as it is the Custom of Subjects, more especially
Courtiers to adore the Rising Beams, and forsake the Setting Sun. Flattery has
been always swayed by Interest, and Mercenary. When Princes grow in Years, and
begin to stoop toward the Grave, Flattery removes her Altars, and offers her
Incense to those who are to Succeed, to the end she may be sure betimes to make
sure of their earliest Favor and good Opinion. Therefore it was a Sentence of
Galba, grounded upon good Reason, that Flattery was vaid of Love; and that
there was not any Poison more dangerous then hers. And I wish it were the Will
of Heaven, that all Princes were as well Convinced of this Truth, as Galba.
Surely it would be much better for the General Prosperity of their Affairs; and
their Reputation, of which they can never be too jealous, would advance it self
to a higher Pinnacle of Grandeur. For then they would have Subjects that would
adore their Persons, whereas those Many Flatterers that crowd about their
Thrones, Idolize nothing but their Exalted Fortune. And therefore it was, that
Tiberius and Galba always contemned and scorned 'em.

ESSAY. IV.
COnsuls, Fathers, Knights, all ran headlong into Slavery; and by how much the
more Illustrious they were, by so much the more Deceitful, and speedy in their
Motion: And with a Composed Gravity, that they might not seem to be too much
overjoyed at the Death of the deceased Emperor, nor sad at such a Conjecture
as the Advancement of the Succeeding Prince, they intermixed their Tears with
Joy, and their Lamentations with Adulation.

At Rome, says D'Ablancourt, all Degrees of Men, Knights, Senators, and
Consuls, ran headlong into Slavery, and the most Illustrious and Eminent first
of all; composing so their Looks and Countenances, that they might not seem
joyful for the Death of Augustus, nor sad that Tiberius was come to the Throne.
Nevertheless their Tears, their Condolements and Congratulations, were all but
cunning Dissimulation.

Flattery is always Excessive at the beginning of a new Reign: For every one
strives to be Complaisant and to advance his Fortune, by Ingratiating himself.
Even they themselves, who are not addicted to Flattery, become Flatterers then,
spurred on by Envy and Jealousy, not enduring that their Competitors should
gain a greater ascendant over the Affections of their Prince then themselves,
and fearing least Favors should advance their Equals to be their Superiors.
The Grandees are obliged to Flatter, in regard there is an absolute Necessity
for them to please, that so they may be able to preserve their Grandeur. Every
Prince at the beginning of his Reign is subject to mistrust, not knowing
whither the Great Ones are well pleased or disgusted at his Advancement.
Therefore it is, that he makes it his business to sound the Affections of his
Nobility; and that he studies to observe their Countenances and their
Discourses. Which is the Reason that we we find all Men in all Companies,
striving to outvie one another in Adulation and Servitude.

ESSAY V.
Valerius Messala added, That the Senators should every Year renew their Oaths
of Fidelity to Tiberius: And being asked by Tiberius, whither it was by his
Order that he had given those hints to the Senate, he answered of his own
accord, That in those thing which Concerned the Commonweal, he was not wont to
follow any other Counsels then his own, not caring whither others were offended
or no. That only sort of Flattery then remained.

Says D'Ablancourt, When Tiberius had asked him, whither he had given him
Orders to speak what he had said, he answered, That what concerned the
Republic, he never took advice of any Person. Where he leaves out, Vel cum
periculo Offensionis, Wherein chiefly consists undiscernable spurn of absolute
Control, and the disguised assertion of Liberty. And besides, he omits the
following Sentence, Ea sola species adulandi supererat, Which makes a most
graceful and pleasing Epiphonema to what went before.

The Question which Tiberius put to Messala, plainly shows, that there are
certain Flatteties, which are so far from being grateful to Princes, that they
rather blush and are ashamed to hear 'em pronounced. But from one piece of
servile Flattery, which had wounded Tiberius's Modesty, Messala drives on to
another, which under the false appearance of a Bravado, and an undaunted
Courage, concludes in the Absolute Annihilation of Liberty. For while he feigns
as if he thought Tiberius offended with his Advice, as one that really was
resolved never to take upon him the Burden of the Empire, he maintains by his
Reply, That it was not the Power of the Empire to excuse Him, and by
Consequence, that there was a compulsive necessity for Him to accept of the
Sovereign Power maugre his aversion to the Contrary protesting that he would
rather incur the Princes Indignation, then be debarred from speaking freely
whatever he thought might be for the Service of his Country.

ESSAY VI.
THE Fathers unanimously cried out, that the Body should be carried to the
Funeral Pile, upon the Shoulders of the Senators.

D'Ablancourt renders it, Then the Senate cried out, that it was but decent for
the Body to be carried to the Funeral Pile upon the Shoulders of Senators.

There needs but one Flatterer to infect a whole Society. Messala had no sooner
delivered his fawning Opinion, but the whole Senate are for improving and
striving to outvye his glozing dissimulation. Messala had spoken like a
Colloguing Courtier, and the Senate speaks like so many abject Slaves: For it
was a Duty incumbent only to the Slaves to carry the Bodies of their Masters to
the Funeral Pile.

ESSAY. VII.
NOR were the Fathers less Prodigal of their Adulation toward Augusta. But
Tiberius told 'em, there was a Moderation to be used in bestowing Female
Honors.

Says D'Ablancourt, Their Flattery was not only excessive toward the Emperor,
but also toward his Lady.

Princes are willing enough that Honors should be bestowed upon their Mothers,
or their Kindred; but they cannot endure that any Person whatever, should be
made their Equal. But this was that which the Senate were about to do, when
they decreed that glorious Title of MOTHER OF HER COUNTRY to Livia. For indeed
Flatterers are strongly subject to one piece of Imprudence, for that as they
are a sort of People, that make their Interest the only Idol of their
Adulation, looking one way but rowing another, they never measure their studied
Encomium's according to the Merit, or Quality, or Dignity of the Person, but
give the same Panegyricks to a Judge, a Chancellor, a President, or an Earl,
etc. as to a Sovereign Prince. And thus we find at this day several Illustrious
Epithites, whither before large Folio's, or Plays, or Discourses upon mean and
frivolous Subjects, which are allowable to none but Kings and absolute Princes.
Which is the Reason that France now mainly stands in need of a PRAGMATIC
Sanction, like to that which Philip the II. set forth in the Year 1586. to
prevent Abuses of the same Nature. As for Women, Tiberius like a Politic
Prince, well understood how dangerous a thing it was to raise their Pride,
their Vanity, their Luxury, their Avarice, their Ambition, their Insolence, and
their Cruelty, which according to Tacitus, are the usual Passions incident to
their Sex. And this Maxim of Tiberius, is well observed in Hungary, where the
Queens, at the Ceremony of their Coronation, are never Crowned but upon the
Shoulders, to let 'em know that the Kingdom has no need of their Heads, the
King's being altogether sufficient for the weight of Government.

ESSAY VIII.
THE Name of Father of his Country, frequently by the People crowded in among
his Titles, Tiberius refused; Nor would he permit any Oaths to be Sworn for the
Observation of his Acts, alleging that all the Acts of Mortal Men were frail
and uncertain, and the more he was advanced in Power, the more slippery was the
Pinnacle upon which he stood.

He excused himself, says D'Ablancourt, by urging the Inconstancy of Human
Events, affirming that the higher he was Exalted, the more dangerous would be
his Fall, and the more likely to happen.

Nothing better becomes a Great and Glorious Prince, then to withstand the
assaults of Flattery. The Senate had decreed, that all the Acts of Tiberius
should be Sworn to; that is to say, that they should be bound to Confirm and
Justify, whatever he did to be Legally and Warrantably done. But Tiberius was
of a contrary Opinion; that he was so far from being Infallible, that he was
more then others in danger of Failing in his Judgment, for that his High
Employment, and the Burden of the Ponderous Charge upon his Shoulders, was not
only more difficult then any other to undergo, but more Obnoxious also to Human
Accidents.

Princes have always been accustomed to have Flatterers at their Elbows, who
Swear continually to all their Acts; Insinuating that God has given 'em a
Universal Knowledge, and a Judgment that cannot err. So that we must not wonder
if so many Princes miscarry in their Government, for want of Faithful Servants
that will open their Lips to tell 'em Truth. Therefore a Politic Spaniard,
giving the Reason why it was the Custom for many Princes to carry their Jester
along with 'em where ever they went: Gracian in his 3d. Dialogue of his 3d.
Part of his Critioon.
Because, says he, they were Wise and Prudent Men; for they did not make use of
those Jesters for Sport or Divertisement, but for Information. And in anothir
Place, In his Ferdinand.
These Jesters, says he, are the Oracles of Truth, who fearlessly discover what
others have unwarily uttered in their Hearing.

Which is a great Assistance to Princes, who never can Correct the Fault before
they know it.

ESSAY IX.
THE Tribunes and Centurions reported oft'ner what was grateful to the Ear then
what was true: The Freedmen still retained a twang of their former Slavery:
Friends were all addicted to Flatter: But 'twas his business to know the inside
of the Soldiers Hearts, when alone and thinking themselves secure, they freely
imparted their Hopes and Fears at their Military Meals.

D'Ablancourt renders the whole thus: For that the Tribunes and Centurions made
their reports rather as things were wished to be, then according to Truth. That
the Freedmen still retained a smatch of their former Slavery, and treacherous
Friendship only Flattered. He resolved himself therefore to discover what he
was uncertain to know by any other Information, and to penetrate the Minds of
the Soldiers, when retired in their Tents, and familiarly discoursing over
their Military Commons, they displayed the naked verity of their Hopes and
Fears.

Germanicus it seems one night took his Opportunity to walk in Disguise and
unattended through every Street of his Camp, and stopping at every Tent,
heedfully Listened to the familiar Discourses of the Soldiers. Several great
Princes have observed the same Method, to make those Discoveries themselves,
which they were certain others concealed from their Knowledge. The Spanish
Author last Quoted (in his Ferdinand.) says very pertinently, That Charles the
V. was become the Spy of his own Reputation. And that Francis the I. having
spent a whole Night in the Dwelling of Simplicity, that is to say, in the
Country among the Vulgar Hinds, discovered so many Things of high Imporoance to
his Government, that he was often wont to repeat this saying, He had been lost,
unless he had been lost; as he rode a Hunting. In like manner might he as well
have said what the Great Antiochus uttered, upon his having been in a little
Cottage, where he Discoursed with several poor People that knew him not, That
he had never heard Truth spoken till then. And the same Author adds, If it be
so difficult for a private Man to know himself, what a Task must it be for a
King? While Self-Love will not permit to know himself; nor, Flattery to know
others. Princes have no Mirrours, and therefore muct make use of their own
Industry. So then, there cannot be a more Beneficial piece of Industry to be
their own Perdu's, when Men are discoursing over their Trenchers and Cups, with
free and open Hearts; for then it is that they give their Tongues and Jocund
Humors the liberty to Range; while Precaution and Reserv'dness are laid aside.

ESSAY X.
Tiberius rejoiced to hear the Senate argue for the Laws against his Sons.

D'Ablancourt renders it, Tiberius was glad to see his Sons, in that same
famous Dispute, made equal with the Laws.

What a strange thing Flattery is! The Dispute was about the Election of a
Praetor; for which Office there were several that stood. Drusus and Germanicus,
the Sons of Tiberius, favored a Kinsman of their own, whereas the Roman Law
preferred those who had the most numerous Issue. However, notwithstanding the
Election was hotly bandy'd and opposed by the Senate, yet Favor at length
carried it above the Law. Which is no more then what happens every day in other
Courts, However let Princes be never so Virtuous and Moderate, yet they always
take delight to prefer their Authority above the Laws, while it gives them the
Opportunity of reaping to themselves the sole Glory of submitting afterward.
Thus it was that Tiberius one day Depressed himself, to advance the high
Opinion of his Moderation, returning in answer to the Flattery of a Senator,
That the Customs of a Country prudently Established, and with which the People
had always all along been satisfied, were not to be Changed, but upon mature
and deep Premeditation: That Princes had too much Business already, and too
much Power: That while they labored to advance and extend their own, they did
but weaken the Authority of the Law. Lastly, That there was no need of
Application to a Prince, when the Laws were sufficient to reform the Grievance.
Here by the way we must observe, that in Republic's they say, The Laws are
above Princes: But in Monarchies, Reason of State requires that the Prince
should be above the Laws: I speak of Hereditary Monarchies; for in Elective
Monarchies, the Laws are Superior to the Prince, as in Germany and Poland,
where the Government is Aristocratico-Monarchical.

ESSAY XI.
HE sharply reprehended those who gave the Epithet of Divine to his daily
Employments, and gave him the Title of LORD.

Says D'Ablancourt, He severely reproved those who called hiw Lord, and gave
his daily Exercises the Epithet of Divine Occupations.

There are some Flatterys, that render Princes Odious. Tiberius, who was hated
enough already, had been much more Contemned, had he accepted of a Title, which
Augustus, whose Example had always with him the force of a Law, had refused by
a Decree. And for that reason it was that he thundered out his Indignation
against Those, who called him LORD. He was a Lord in Reality, but he would not
that People should call him so, as being desirous they should believe he did
not look upon himself so to be. Politic Princes are contented with the
Substance of their Power, and willingly part with all the rest as merely
Superfluous. For Subjects are almost all of the humor of that same Parthian
King, who was nothing troubled that his Brother bore the Yoke of Roman
Servitude, so long as he did not wear the Scars and Marks of it. The greater
Progress Tiberius made in taming the Senate with the vain show of Liberty, the
more he enlarged and established his Power. The more Popular his Words and
Actions were, the more pliable he found the Great Men, and the more easily led
to Servitude. He was offended with those who called his Occupations, Divine;
for because he knew himself not undeservedly to be taxed with the Common Stain
of his Family, which was Haughtiness, he was desirous that the People should
believe he went hand in hand with the Senate in the Government. I know, said
he, that I am but a Mortal Man, and subject to all the Frailties of Humanity,
and therefore it is enough for me to be Honored with the first Seat in the
Senate, and more then enough if I supply it well. -- Princes are Mortal, but
the Commonwealth is Eternal. By this acknowledgment he was no more then a
Member, and he permitted those Honors that were paid him no otherwise, then
as they were ascribed to the rest of the Senators. Who though they gave little
Credit to what he said, yet were they pleased to hear him deliver himself with
so much Modesty, so much the rather because it was not always his luck to be
Popular for all that. Observe moreover, that by the Difference which he made
between Princes as Mortals, and Commonwealths as being Eternal, he seemed to
intimate, that he was so far from being LORD of the Empire, that he had little
Concern in the Government of it; only his Eternity resided in the Body of the
Senate, which was Immortal, and was able alone to shake the Affairs of the
Universe.

ESSAY XII.
WHO feared Liberty, yet hated Adulation.

Says D'Ablancourt, Under a Prince who hated Flattery, yet was no friend to
Liberty.

To hate Flattery is to love Liberty; to hate Liberty, is to love Flattery.
Nevertheless Tiberius hated both the one and the other. A strange thing, says
Tacitus, that a Prince who left remaining not the least Footstep of Liberty,
should be tired and discontented to behold in the Senate, such an Effeminate
and Servile Complacency. Certainly it is a very difficult thing to find the way
how to please the Palate of a Politic Prince. If you Flatter him continually,
you incur his Contempt; if you deal too frankly and freely with him, you meet
his Indignation. How Virtuous soever he be, too much Liberty offends him;
because it appears not so respectful as Flattery. And if they are wickedly
inclined, Flattery then becomes suspected; because her Eucomiums are oftentimes
the Reproaches of Vices, which are opposite to Virtue. Therefore had Tacitus
reason to say, that a Man has enough to do, who has to deal with a Prince that
understands what Flattery is. For which reason it was an Ingenious and Witty
saying of the Countess D'Aranda, that there was no Register in the Heart of a
King, and by consequence it was not to be read. Moreover Princes find greater
Benefit by Liberty, then Flattery, as being deluded by one, but instructed by
the other. But Courtiers take the surer Course to attain their ends by
Flattery, then by Liberty of Speech; while the one is grateful, the other
odious to the Generality of Great Personages.

ESSAY XIII.
THE same undestinguish'd Lamentations among all: an intermixed and confused
Throng of Mourners, and every one Weeping at their own rate. There could be no
Adulation there, while all Men knew that the Death of Germanicus was welcome to
Tiberius.

D'Ablancourt says, That it was no formal Funeral Pomp, or studied Mourning, to
gratify Tiberius, who they knew was well pleased with the Death of Germanicus.

The Common People are not capable of Dissimulation, nor by consequence of
Flattery. For when Tiberius outwardly bewailed the Death of Germanicus, they
were so far with Complying with his inward Joy, that they sought to spite him
by all the Demonstrations of a Public and Real Lamentation imaginable; and
celebrating the praise of the Deceased. And indeed there has been in all Times,
a certain kind of Antipathy between the Prince and the People. They who are
hated by the Prince, are generally beloved by the Multitude. On the other side,
they who are the Darlings of the People, are never favored by the Prince.
Germanicus was mortally hated by Tiberius, because he was the Peoples
Favorite; and the People had an Antipathy against Drusus, because Tiberius had
a greater kindness for him, then for his Brother. The People adored Agrippina;
Tiberius persecuted her to Death. When the Wife of Drusus lay Inn of two Male
Infants, Tiberius could not contain his Joy, nor the People their sorrow.
Because the Reinforcement of Drusus's Family weakened and depressed the Family
of Germanicus. But when Drusus died, the People were overjoyed to hear the
Emperors Lamentations, in hopes the Family of Germanicus, against whom his
Father had all along displayed his Enmity, would now revive and flourish in its
former Glory.

ESSAY. XIV.
HE named Manias Lepiodus, and Junius Blesus, to choose which of the two they
pleased to be sent Proconsul into Africa. Lepidus excused himself by reason of
the Crazie Constitution of his Body, and for that he had a Daughter ready to be
Married: But there was another Reason which was Conjectured at by all, though by
him not so much as mentioned, which was, that Blesus was Uncle to Sejanus, and
therefore assured of the Preferment: Blesus also refused the Proffer, but not
with that Fervency and Sincerity as the other did, nor was he so much Applauded
by his Flatterers, who were also the same that flattered Sejanus.

D'Ablancourt says, That Lepidus grounded his refusal upon his Indisposition of
Body, alleging besides, that he had a Daughter to Marry; but that there was
another Reason which he durst not discover; because his Rival was Uncle to
Sejanus, and therefore would be sure to be preferred before him. Blesus also
made a refusal; but not with half that Earnestness, nor so loudly Applauded by
those that flattered him.

When Tiberius proposed Lepidus and Blesus to the Senate, he propounded a
Choice between Merit and Favor. Lepidus was a Person of Merit, as being a
Person whom Augustus had adjudg'd worthy and fit to Govern the Empire. But
Blesus was the Favorite, as being Uncle to Sejanus. Tiberius named Lepidus in
the first place, seemingly designing to give the Precedence to Merit; but he
knew well, that Flattery would bequeath it to Favor. The excuses which Lepidus
alleged were received with Applause and Acclamation, as being no less grateful
to Tiberius, then to Sejanus and Blesus. But the excuses which Blesus produced
could not be heard; while every one knew there was a willing force designed to
engage him to acceptance. For Favor and Flattery go hand in hand together;
they never part Company, attended by Injustice that follows close at their
Heels.

ESSAY XV.
CEstius the Senator discoursed, That Princes indeed were like the Gods, but
that neither Gods bowed down their Ears to the unjust Supplications of their
Adorers.

Says D'Ablancourt, Cestius declared, That Princes were like the Gods, but that
the Gods never listened to Prayers that were unjust.

Princes are oftentimes compared to God; and indeed they may be said to be
Corporeal Gods; according to that of Vegetius, There is a faithful Devotion to
be paid to the Emperor, as to our present and Terrestrial God. God himself
also gives them the same Title, I have said ye are Gods. But the Illustrious
and Caelestial Title should put 'em in remembrance of their Principal and
God-like Office, which is to distribute Justice to their Subjects, and prevent
the Oppression of the Poor. It Is a usual thing for them that Kneel at their
Feet for Favors and Preferments, to tell 'em they are absolute in Power, and
that they are the Images of the Almighty: But for the same reason, they are
obliged to take care that all their Grants be just, for fear of defacing that
same glorious Similitude. It Is a great Weakness in a Prince to be so timorous,
as not to dare justly to deny what others dare demand without regard to
Justice. Certainly, that King spoke like a Virtuous Prince, who being pressed
to keep an Illegal Promise, replied, That 'twas impossible he should ever have
made an Unjust Promise. Thus Charles the V. being informed that he had signed a
Grant that was contrary to Equity, sent for it again, and after he had tore it,
I love my Soul, said he, much better then my Writing.

ESSAY XVI.
DOlabella Cornelius, while he strove to outvie the rest, stumbled into a most
absurd piece of Flattery, and Decreed, that he should make an Ovant entry into
the City, returning from Campania.

Says D'Ablancourt, Dolabella desirous to surpass all others, fell into a
Ridiculous piece of Flattery, proposing to decree Tiberius the Honor of a
Petty Triumph.

Could there be a more Impertinent piece of Flattery then this, to decree a
Triumphant Entry to a Prince, merely upon his Return from a bare Progress? But
Tiberius had too much Wit to be in the humor to accept of such an Honor,
which had rendered him more ridiculous then the Curry-Favour that decreed it
him. I am not so indigent of Honor, said he to the Senate, after having Tamed
so many Warlike Nations, and received and refused so many Honors in my Youth,
as in my Declining Age to beg a Counterfeit Triumph for a Journey of Pleasure
almost within view of Rome it self. Princes that have acquired a substantial
Reputation, as Tiberius had done, in the East, in Germany and Pannonia, or
Hungary, scorn all false Honors: And to flatter 'em, is to incur their
Displeasure; because their Renown has no need of borrowed Augmentation. When
their Praises flow from the Lips of Flatterers, they become suspected; for it
is with Flatterers as with Liars, whom no body believes, even when they speak
Truth. So that Princes have the greatest reason to abhor their vain Idolizers,
who rob their Virtue of more true Glory, then the Sophisticate Honor comes to,
so sedulously prepared for a false and unseasonable Glitter.

ESSAY XVII.
ONly Rubellius Blandus held with Lepidus; the rest all sided with Agrippa.

Says D'Ablancourt, Of all the Consular Senators, only Rubellius Blandus was of
Lepidus's Opinion? the rest condemned Priscus to Death.

Agrippa had adjudg'd to Death a certain Roman Knight accused to have cheated
Tiberius, in presenting him an Elegy upon the Death of Germanicus, which he
had made for Drusus, who was recovered from a Disease, of which 'twas thought
he would have died. Lepidus, according to his Custom, which was to moderate the
rigor of severe Sentences, insisted, that the mild Temper of the Prince, and
the Example of their Ancestors, would not admit that they should run to that
Height, as not to make a distinction between Words and Actions; and that
Ostentation was not to be punished as a Criminal Offense: That they might find
out such a Medium, so that the Offender might be punished, and yet they have no
occasion ever to repent of too much Clemency, or too unwary Severity. That a
Man who made it his study to write Verses and read 'em to Women, to acquire the
reputation of being a Poet, was neither in a Capacity to do the Public any
harm, if they suffered him to live; nor considerable enough, to be made an
example of Terror, if they put him to Death, and therefore that it was
sufficient to Banish him, and Confiscate his Estate. But this Prudent and Grave
Advice had but one only Person to applaud it; while Agrippa, though his Opinion
and Intentions were unjust, had all the rest of the Voices of his side, because
he flattered the Inclinations of the Prince, who was both cruel and greedy of
Revenge. One Flatterer makes many, while they are afraid to be less forward
then He, to support the Prince's Interests, if they do not side with that
Opinion which flatters most.

ESSAY XVIII.
HE spoke Modest Things concerning the Manners of the Young Man, nor did he add
any thing of untruth to set a higher value upon his Parts.

Says D'Ablancourt, He added something, as to Drusus, but without Flattery.

When Tiberius mentioned Germanicus, to whom he bare a particular Spleen and
Envy, he spared for no Words, nor no Applauses, because he Flattered him, and
was willing the Senate should believe he said more then he meant. But when he
spoke of Drusus, who was his own Son, he was always thrifty of his Expressions,
as being desirous they should believe all that he said; as indeed he never did
speak any thing of him but what every one knew to be Truth. Behold here the
difference between Praising and Flattering. To Praise, is truly to declare the
real Worth and Merits of any Person and no more: Whereas he who Flatters,
either Aggravates, or Lies. He that Aggravates, attributes more to the Person
then he deserves: And he may be said to Lie, who gives to Vices the appellation
of Virtues, that are their Opposites, as it is the custom of all that Flatter.

ESSAY XIX.
THE Fathers had studied his Oration before hand; so that the Flattery was the
more finely Spun.

Says D'Ablancourt, The Senators waited for this Request, which rendered the
Flattery more delicate.

If Flattery be generally so subtle and Ingenious as it is, what is there which
it is not able to invent to show her Complacency, after a serious Meditation?
If she be so pliant and submissive, when her Acts are unconstrained and
voluntary, to what a low degree of Pusilanimous Baseness will she not
condescend and poorly stoop, when once necessity and awful force compel her?

ESSAY XX.
M. Silanus, in contempt of the Consulship, labored for the Honor of the
Princes, and delivered it, as his own Opinion that the Names of the Consuls
should be no longer affixed to Public or Private Acts, as the Rule of Kalenders
and Chronologies, but the Names of those that had the Tribunitial Power. But as
for Quintus Haterius, when he proposed that the Decrees of the Senate for that
day, should be set up in the Court in Letters of Gold, the Old Man became the
Laughter of the whole Court, who having so small a time to Live, could think of
carrying the Infamy of such a notorious piece of Flattery to his Grave.

Says D'Ablancourt, Haterius exposed himself to public Laughter, for having
proposed to Engrave their Decrees in Letters of Gold, as one that could not
hope to reap the fruit of his Flattery, but the Ignominy that attended it. But
this does not come up to the sense of Tacitus, who the better to set out the
poor Spirit of Haterius, tells us, that he was an Old Man, who by Consequence
not having long to live, could expect no other, then to go to his Grave laden
with Infamy.

The same thing happened to Tiberius, which had befallen Augustus. When
Augustus made Tiberius his Associate in the Tribuneship, then thither Cuncta
Vergere. The Flatterers began to pay their Adorations all to Tiberius: And so
soon as Tiberius summons Drusus to Partnership in the Dignity and Authority,
every one strives to adore the Rising Sun, all the Flatterers; all the Senators
like Emulous Champions, dispute for Pre-eminence in Flattery, and to gain the
Favor of the New Prince, generally the Prize of early Sedulicie. Silanus
therefore, a person Illustrious for his Extraction and Eloquence, steps up, and
proposes that the Public Accounts of the Years should be no longer taken from
the Names of the Consuls, but from the Sovereign Tribuneship, little heeding
that while he Honored Drusus, he Dishonored Tiberius, who having been four
times Consul, received the same Affront as the rest of the Consuls, if he
suffered a Dignity to grow into Contempt, which he himself had taken upon him,
after he was Emperor. Besides, that if the Alteration of Chronological
Computation should Commence from no longer a Date then the Tribuneship of
Drusus, he must be Inferior to his Son; or at least be beholding to him for
being Named with Him in all Public Acts and Registers: Which is a Thing highly
injurious to Majesty, that endures neither Equality nor Dependency. And thus
see how Flattery oft-times splits it self upon the Rocks of Imprudence, and
becomes Affrontive where she studies most Obsequiousness. As for Quintus
Haterius, his Flattery was so ill resented by Tiberius, that his Proposal was
looked upon as Extravagant. And that which rendered him most ridiculous, was
his Old Age, that put him out of hopes of ever living to reap the Fruit of
Drusus's acknowledgement; so that there nothing more remained for him, but the
ignominy of having been the Author of a Proposal so much beneath a Person of
his Years and Quality: for he was of an Illustrious Family, and moreover highly
esteemed for his Eloquence. Whence you may observe by the by, that Eloquence
and Flattery wonderfully sympathize one with the other; and that it is a
difficult thing to be a cunning and dextrous Flatterer without Eloquence; or to
be Eloquent without Adulation. And this is that perhaps, which the younger
Pliny means, That Eloquence is not to be learnt, without good Manners; to let
us understand, that Eloquence is a dangerous Talent in them, who are not endu'd
with a Sincerity capable to make a right use of it.

ESSAY XXI.
I Think it to be the chiefest Duty of a Historian, to take care that Virtue be
not smothered, and to deter Men from evil Actions and Sayings, for fear of
being branded with Ignomy to Posterity.

In my Opinion, says D'Ablancourt, it is the Duty of a Historian, to give to
Virtue the recompense which she deserves, and to beget an abhorrency of Vice,
by awing Men with the shame of Eternal Infamy.

It is the custom of Flatterers to extol Vice, while by a wrong impression of
Interpretation, they make it pass for current Virtue; and to cry down as
Crimes, the Virtues of such as are hated by those Princes whom they Flatter. Of
all People therefore in the World are Flatterers the most unfit, and improper
to undertake a History, which ought to have Truth for its Guide, and for its
Object the Instruction of Posterity. And here we must not omit to give that
worthily deserved Character of Monsieur Mezeray, to be the only Modern Author,
that has honored France with a Sincere Story, and left in his Writings the
lively Image of its ancient Liberty.

ESSAY. XXII.
ENnius a Roman Knight, accused of High Treason, because he had melted down the
Princes Statue, and turned it into Silver Plate, Caesar forbad to be Registered
among the Guilty; Aseius Capito openly opposing him under the Pretense of
Liberty, alleging that such a Heinous Crime ought never to go Unpunished; that
he might be remiss in pard'ning Offenses against himself; not be so lavish to
forgive notorious Injuries done the Public.

Says D'Ablancourt, Ennius a Roman Knight was accused of High Treason, for
having melted a Statue of the Prince, to change it into Silver Plate for his
own use. But Tiberius discharged him; though Capito opposed him, crying out as if
he had stood up in defense of the Public Liberty, that it became him not to let
so great an Offender go Vnpunish'd; that he might Pardon his own, but not the
Injuries of the Commonwealth.

Flattery is never more wicked, then when she disguises her self in the habit
of Liberty. Capito was not to learn that Tiberius hated Flattery, and that on
the other side he was no Friend to Liberty; and therefore he intermixes both
together. What? says he, will you let go a Criminal, that has thus daringly
displayed his contempt of your Person, by melting down one of your Statues; and
had this Offense been committed against You alone, you might have pardoned it,
and the Senate could not have opposed it; but since it is a Crime that Ennius
has committed against the whole Republic, the Punishment belongs to Us; since
it is not just that you should be so merciful at the Expense of our Authority.

Certainly no piece of Flattery could ever have outdone this Reprimand.
Capito, who was not ignorant of the cruel Temper of Tiberius, would insinuate
that all the Injuries done to the Prince, should be looked upon as done to the
Commonweal; to the end that under that specious pretense, while the Senate
satisfied the Emperors Revenge, Tiberius might be discharged of the Odium
which was like to fall upon him, had he been Carver for himself. Thus
Sycophants cherish and foment the Vices of Princes, and teach 'em how to be
Tyrants. Observe by the way, that this Capito was a Person highly learned in
the Laws, both Human and Divine, and moreover accounted one of the Chief Men in
the Senate, yet all his Learning served but to stain his Reputation with
Eternal Reproach; considering the ill use which he had made of it, as well
under Augustus as under Tiberius. There are always at the Elbows of Princes,
says Commines in his Memoires, l. 1. c. 6. some or other of the Long Robe; a
lovely sight, when Virtuous; but dangerous, when Wicked. And in his Fifth Book,
toward the end of the Chapter, Too much Knowledge corrupts the Wicked; but the
Virtuous are much the better for it.

ESSAY XXIII.
LAbeo, an untainted Asserter of Liberty, and for that Reason, of a more
celebrated Reputation; but Capito's Obsequiousness was more approved by those
that had the Sovereign Power.

Says D'Ablancourt, Labeo more Frank and Generous, and therefore more Famous
among Men, the other more Complaisant, and better beloved by his Prince.

I have already said, that how Virtuous soever Princes may be, they are
unwilling however to suffer absolute Liberty: Whatever their aversion may be to
Flattery, yet too much Freedom is that which more offends their Ears. Majesty
is so accustomed to Respect and Adoration, that whatsoever is not Complaisance
or Submission, proves insupportable to it. Augustus was a mild and virtuous
Prince, but yet he never loved Labeo, because he did not seem to demean himself
as became him, like a Subject; therefore he preferred Capito, his Competitor,
though his inferior in Birth, in Merit, and in Honesty, only surpassing him in
Complaisance. Labeo was more esteemed by all the World, and Capito more valued
by his Prince. Labeo deserved the Consulship but never had it; Capito's
Advancement was early to the same Dignity; though no otherway deserved it then by
his Cringing Obsequiousness. Labeo's Humor gains a Reputation among the
People, but he who strives to be a Favorite at Court, must observe the Method
that Capito followed; according to the Court Maxim, That Favor acquired is
more durably preserved by Complaisance, then by Courage.

ESSAY XXIV.
A Dulation and Pride kept equal pace together.

Says D'Ablancourt, Servile and Proud both together.

Flatterers (I mean the Flatterers in Courts of Princes) are for the most part
Tainted with two sorts of Vices, which seem however to be contrary to each
other; that is to say, Servility and Pride. They are flexible pliant, and
obsequious to their Prince, but arrogant and haughty toward their Inferiors.
And this was the meaning of Tacitus, where he says, that Mucianus was an
Intermixture of Affability, and Arrogance: And of what the Orator Passienus
said of Caligula, who had been a most Servile Flatterer of Tiberius, that there
was never known a better Slave nor a worse Master. Plutarch also records in
Sylla's Life, That he always humbled himself to those with whom he had to do;
but expected Adoration from those that had to do with him; so that it was hard
to say of him, which of the two were his chiefest Excellency, his Flattery, or
his Pride.

ESSAY XXV.
THose that were too lavish of their Flatteries, He himself restrained and
reproved.

Says D'Ablancourt, And if any suffered themselves to run into high-strain'd
Flattery, those the Prince was the first that reprehended.

This was the True means to preserve himself from being mislead. For it is with
many Princes, as with Women that are given to tell Stories, that their Ears are
too open to the Charms of pleasing Impertinents. If Flatterers never opened
their Lips, Princes would never be misguided, for Verity would take place of
Untruth. For this Reason it was, that the prudent Senator Helvidius, delivering
his Opinion concerning the Deputies which the Senate had resolved to send to
Vespasian, to Congratulate his Advancement to the Empire, alleging, That it
was for the Interest of the Public Weal, and the Honor of the Prince, to
depute the first time, such of their Number, whose Lives and conversations were
free from stain or reproach, that they might accustom his Ears to wholesome
Counsel; that Thraseas, Soranus, and Sentius, (who were three of the Sincerest
Persons in the Senate) having been Honored already with Vespasians Friendship,
it behooved 'em to be careful to let him see their Accusers. That a Deputation
so judicious would be as it were a tart Intimation which the Senate gave him of
those Persons, who were most worthy his Esteem and Favor; and likewise of
those other whom he had reason to mistrust. That is to say, Flatterers, and
other wicked People, that build their Fortunes upon the Ruin of others.

ESSAY XXVI.
THE same Honors were Decreed to the Memory of Drusus, as to that of
Germanicus, though with several Additions, as the latter Adulation will be always
contriving to do.

Says D'Ablancourt, They Decreed the same Honors to Drusus, as were decreed to
the Memory of his Brother: But some new Ceremonies were added, as the latter
Flattery is always the moct Ingenious.

By the means of this same Novelty it is, that Flatterers always support
themselves in the Favor of their Princes. They would be weary of her
Flatteries, had Adulation but one string to the tuneful Harp of their
Encomiums. They only value those Honors that are peculiarly invented for
themselves. For every Prince new Incense and Perfumes. Hence it comes to pass,
that he who sits at present in the Throne, is more applauded, then all those
that Reigned before him. As Ridiculous and Stupid as the Emperor Claudius was,
the slave to his own enfranchiz'd Bondmen, yet he failed not to find one
Consul, who was not ashamed to propose the giving him the Title of Father of
the Senate, alleging that Father of his Country was too Common; and that a
Prince who blessed the Empire every day with new Accumulations of his Favor,
deserved at least to be Honored with a Surname that never had been given to
any of his Predecessors.

ESSAY XXVII.
THE chief Priests also when they made their Vows for the Welfare of the
Prince, recommended likewise Nero and Drusus to the Gods, not so much for love
of the young Men, as out of Flattery, the Omission of which as equally begets
Suspicion, as the Excess.

The High Priest, says D'Ablancourt, when they made their Vows for the
Emperor, recommended to the Protection of the same Gods, Nero and Drusus, not
so much through any Affection as out of Flattery, the Excess or Omission of
which are equally dangerous.

We have already asserted, that Flattery is void of Love, and that by
straining at Flattery, Men often loose themselves in the Mazes of Folly and
Imprudence. And certainly it was a great piece of Imprudence to equal to the
Person of the Emperor, two young Striplings that were but just coming into the
World. Majesty endures no Companion or Partnership in Honors. When others
mount, she must descend. Flattery's mercinary; and is always for him that bids
most. Tiberius was now in his declining years, and Nero and Drusus in the prime
of their Youth. The High Priests looked upon the Reign of Tiberius, as a Reign
that would be soon at an end; and the Fortune of Nero, as a Sovereignty that
was shortly to Commence. Therefore it was not through Affection but Interest,
that they made so little a distinction between the two Brothers and Tiberius,
who having lost his Son, seemed to have no more then a precarious and
languishing Authority. And this was the meaning of Tiberius, when he told the
Pontiffs, That he was glad to see Children equaled to his Hoary Age; which was
a wipe by the by, to let 'em understand they had been too hasty to appoint him
a Successor. And thus you see what an ill reception Flattery finds, when once
it knows no bounds. But the Omission of Flattery is no less displeasing to
Princes, as ascribing the cause of that neglect to Haughtiness, to Contumacy,
or Contempt. And therefore it was that Tiberius so often complained of the
Arrogance, and Indocibility of Agrippina, Germanicus's Wife; and that under
Nero, it was objected against Thrasea, for no less then High Treason, that he
had never either applauded, or countenanced the Flatteries of others, and that
he always absented himself on purpose, when the Magistrates were to take their
Oaths of Allegiance, or made any Vows for the Prosperity of the Prince: That he
had never Sacrificed in return of Thanks for his Charming and Celestial Voice,
that he would never acknowledge Poppea for a Goodess; that he had forboru coming
to the Senate for three Years together, because he would not consent to his
Decrees; to show that none of his Majesty's Actions pleased him, though he
would not declare his mind by any open Contradiction or Opposition. That he
left the Senate one day, when they were making Speeches against the Memory of
Agrippina, the Mother of Nero. And thus you see in one Man, almost all the sins
of Omission, which a Courtier could commit in the concerns of Flattery.
Moreover, there are some Occasions where the Subject cannot dispense with
Flattery as others do. Such are those which we call Congratulation, or
Condolement. Though had Thrasea been present when the Magistrates took their
Oaths, had he made his Vows for the Prince, or appeared at the Funeral of
Poppea, it could have been no stain to his Reputation. And therefore it does
not become a Subject to be too stiff neither; but on the other side to comply
with the Times and Humors of the Prince, as much as it is possible, more
especially so far as the Rules of good Breeding and Civility extend.

Thus the younger Pliny being designed Consul, refused to decree new honors to
Trajan, as the Consuls Elect had wont to do to other Princes. But, said he, I
did not abstain from this same outward Appearance of Flattery, through any
motive of Liberty infringed, or of Constancy, but because I was assured of the
Moderation of my Prince, therefore believing it would be much more to his
Honor, for me to refuse the making any such Decree; although so just a Duty
could not be taxed of Flattery. Those Grandees and other Persons who are
obliged to live at Court, can never learn a better (...) then this, to preserve
themselves in their several Stations. 'Twere well, there were no Flatterers at
all; but there is no need of such remarkable Demonstrations to prove Men are
not so; in regard it shows like a piece of Contumacy and Mutinous Insurrection
against the Majesty of a Prince. So that Seneca spoke rather like a Philosopher
that contemned death, then a Courtier when he answered the Tribune whom Nero
sent, to bring back his Justification, that he was not of a humor to Flatter,
as no body better knew then Nero himself, who had had more frequent Experience
of Seneca's freedom then his Complaisance.

ESSAY XXVIII.
IN the Senate he gave a severe charge in a set Speech, that no Man for the
future should attempt to Elevate the fluctuating and unsteady Minds of the
Young Men with over hasty Honors.

In the Discourse which he made to the Senate, says D'Ablancourt, he gave a
strist Caution, that no Man should swell the Volatile Minds of the Young Men
with Honors above their Age.

This Admonition concerns the Governors and Tutors of young Princes, for whom
there is nothing so necessary as these Lessons of Moderation and Modesty. The
Children of Princes know too soon that they are Princes, and by consequence
that they are born to Command over Men, though sometimes they learn too late that
they are but Men themselves. They are told upon every occasion, that all
belongs to them; but the same Instructors at the same time forget to tell 'em
likewise, that their Persons belong to the Commonweal; that all their Time
belongs to the Public; that the Burden which they are one day to undergo, is
very troublesome and painful; and besides that, extremely subject to the
accidents of Fortune; that the Higher they are Advanced, the greater is the
danger of their Fall; that they will never be beloved, unless they love
Reciprocally; for Love it self is Masterless, that to be beloved of God, it
behooves 'em to be beloved of Men; that Flatterers mislead 'em, if they listen
to their Charms; that when they are Flattered, it is not their Persons, but
their Fortune that is fawned upon; since no Flatterer can be capable of sincere
and real Love. That Princes can never know all things, nor bear the whole
burden of their Sovereign Employment, and therefore for the good of the
Kingdom, and their own Honor, they ought to make choice of able and faithful
Ministers, to assist 'em with their Counsels and their Industry; Dominion and
Absolute Power, which commands all other Things, not having any more to desire,
then their dextrous and truly Loyal Assistance. And lastly, That the safest and
shortest Expedient to Reign well, is for a Prince to propose to himself, as the
Rule and Balance of all his Actions to be no other then he would wish a Prince
to be, were he a Subject.

ESSAY. XXIX.
VArro the Consul gratified the hatred of Sejanus, by the loss of his own
Reputation.

The Consul Varro (...) D'Ablancourt, became his own (...) and was not ashamed
to sacrifice (...) and to the Interests of Sejanus.

Flatterers are always no less Servile then Cruel: And seeing they Sacrifice so
willingly their Honor to Favor, it is no wonder we are so easily induced to
sacrifice to the Interrest of Topping Favorites, the Objects of their Hatred.
If the Favorite, says Commines, would lay an Imposition of a Penny, they cry
two. If the Prince do but threaten a Man, they cry, let him be Hanged. And be
sure Sir, to render your self formidable; and for themselves, their Deportment
and their Frowns discover nothing but Pride and Severity, as if Authority and
Power were their Inheritance. Observe by the way, that Tacitus when he mentions
Flattery, frequently associates with it Calumny, which is indeed one of the
most usual means, that Flatterers make use of to the Ruin of others.

ESSAY XXX.
LEpidus for the most part, deviated for the better, from the severe Adulations
of others; and yet he carried himself so exactly poys'd that he flourished
under Tiberius with an equal share of Authority and his Princes Favor. So that
I am constrained to doubt whither the Inclination of Princes to some, and their
Aversion to others, be not guided as many other things are by fate and the
ruling Constellations at our Birth: And whither it be in our power to walk in a
Path free from Ambition and Dan- between untractable Contumacy, and deformed
Servility.

Says D'Ablancourt, Many times he allayed the over-rigorous advice of others,
not failing nevertheless in his Respect to his Prince, and by that means
preserved two things most difficult to be preserved; the Honor of his
Employment, and his Majesty's Favor. Which makes me frequently doubt whither
the Favor of Great Men, and their Hatred, be not rather the effects of
Destiny, and the Stars that governor Nativities, as are all other Accidents
that happen in the World, then of Human Prudence, that so much pretends to have
a share therein.

The Moderation of Lepidus, is a remarkable Testimony, that rhere may be some
great Personages, impenetrable to Flattery and Injustice under the Dominion
even of the most wicked Princes, and that there never was any Age so barren of
Virtuous Courage, but has offered us Examples of such a noble Generosity.
Prudence understands to choose out such a way that leads neither to the
Precipice of Liberty, nor the Abyss of Servitude. She is neither Libertine nor
Slave, but observes an equal Temper, so as neither to be offensive to Majesty
nor Justice. She gives to Caesar, that which belongs to Caesar; that is to say,
Obedience and Duty: To God, that which is Gods, or whatever is required by a
sincere Conscience. If at any time she Flatters, (for she cannot always avoid
it) she makes use of such a sort of Flattery, that rather informs then misleads
the Prince, and serves as an Incitement to provoke him to some Generous Act,
which otherwise perhaps he might not think of. For example, Lepidus to save the
Life of Lutorius Priscus, whom Haterius Agrippa had sentenced to Death, for a
certain Elegy made upon Drusus, makes it his business to applaud the
Moderation of Tiberius; telling him, That after he had several times heard him
complain of those that had prevented his Clemency, he could not believe so just
a Prince would ever confirm so rigorous a Sentence. In short, when Tiberius,
(who was then in the Country) understood that Drusus was Executed, he blamed
the Senate, though the Reprimand were very gentle, and commended the Prudence of
Lepidus, though on the other side, he did not rebuke Agrippa for his severity.
Now it is certain, that if Priscus had been repreiv'd, Tiberius would never
have taken away his Life, Lepidus so well understood to make him sensible of
Honor.

In Nero's time, the President was quite the contrary. For the Praetor,
Antistius, who had made a bloody Lampoon against him, was saved by Thrasea, who
after he had spoken of Nero, as it is Customary to speak of a good Prince, and
had bitterly enveigh'd against the Insolence of the Praetor, further added that
the cruelty of preceding Reigns was out of date; that without putting the
Criminal to those Torments which he deserved, he might be Punished in such a
manner, that he should have no reason to object against his Judges; and lastly,
That his Life would be a solemn Testimonial of Public Clemency. This Advice was
no less prudent nor less respectful, then that of Lepidus; but it was as ill
received by Nero, as the other was well received by Tiberius. Thrasea incurred
the Hatred of Nero, and in a few years after lost his Life, for having saved
Antistius, whom the Prince would fain have put to death. Tiberius and Nero,
resembl'd each other in Cruelty; Lepidus and Thrasea were Competitors in
Virtue, Priscus and Antistius equaled each other in Arrogance and Sawciness;
for the one had the vanity to repeat his Elegy to a company of Ladies, and the
other to read his Lampoon at a Public Feast. Thrasea pleaded for Antistius, as
Lepidus had done for Priscus; and yet that which made for Lepidus's Honor,
turned to the perdition of Thrasea. And thus you see the different effects of
that Fatality, which Tacitus attributes to that same natural Inclination which
Princes have for some, and that natural Antipathy which they have for others.
But if we more narrowly pry into the real Character of Lepidus, and Thrasea's
Genius, we shall easily perceive, that though they were both highly Prudent, and
equally averse to Flattery, yet there was a Remarkable difference between 'em;
for assur'dly, Lepidus was the more prudent of the two. Lepidus was Feasible
and Complaisant, yet without any thing of low-spirited Meanness, or abject
Condescension: Thrasea prided himself altogether in his Stedfastness and
Constancy. Lepidus shaped himself according to the Times he was born in, and
the Humor of the Reigning Prince, as it is the duty of every good Subject so
to do. Thrasea was a little too obstinate and hardy in what he thought Just and
Reasonable, which occasioned that saying of Nero, That he wished Thrasea loved
but him, as well as he did Justice. The latter was the better Man, the other
the better Subject. By which Parallel it is apparent, that Prudence has a great
share in the Conduct of Human Affairs, and that the Favor and Aversion of
Princes, are not always the Effects of their Fancies.

ESSAY XXXI.
SOme things he had added more Contumaciously, then safe to be gathered in by
haughty Ears, and prone to be Captious.

Says D'Ablancourt, Serenus had reproached his Ingratitude, in terms more
Insolent then the nice and tender Ears of a Prince could endure.

The Ears of Princes are not accustomed to the rude touches of Insolence and
Expostulation. When we speak to Princes, (said one of the Ancients) we must
make choice of words either all Silken, or all Honey; that is to say, our
Language must be tempered with Modesty, Prudence, and Submission. The Contumacy
of Inferiors, causes the Superiors to lay aside his Clemency. Let a Subject
have never so just reason to complain, he is not however allowed to do it
Arrogantly; for Submission and Respect are claims and rights never to be
alienated from Majesty: There remains to the Subject nothing but the honor of
Obedience. He that upbraids him with his Services, destroys the Fortune and
Grandeur of a Prince; and generally such Reproaches are the forerunners of
Rebellion. And therefore upon this Foundation it was, that the Accusation was
grounded, designed against Serenus by his Son, that he had Conspired against
Tiberius, and sent Incendiaries into Gallia, to kindle a War in that Province.
Lastly, It better becomes a Subject to be a Flatterer, then to be too lavish of
his Tongue, when he speaks to his Prince: But if he can avoid it, it is better
for him to be neither the one, nor the other.

ESSAY XXXII.
NEither is it such a Mystery to understand, when the Actions of Princes are
truly and really Congratulated, and when with a Fictitious Joy.

It Is no great Difficulty, says D'Ablancourt, for great Personages to discover,
when the Praises which are given 'em proceed from Flattery, and when from a
real sentiment of Affection.

Politic Princes are not easily to be deluded by Flattery, for they consult not
their Ears, but their Hearts, which are sufficiently Conscious, whether or no
they merit those Praises that are bestowed upon 'em. They understand by what
their Flatterers say, the undisclos'd conceptions of their Hearts; well
knowing, that when such People make their Addresses to their Persons, it is
their Fortunes that they Court; a Truth that never deceives 'em, when ever they
put it to the Trial. Real Encomiums are most delightful to their Ears, because
they are apt to believe they Merit what is given 'em; but false Applauses are
distastful, because they look upon 'em as By-reproaches of their Defaults. The
younger Pliny reports, that Trajan wept for joy, and blushed to hear himself
called, The Truly Virtuous, because he knew it was to Trajan that they spoke,
and not the Emperor. And afterward he adds, That he was not afraid least
Trajan should think, that while he discoursed of the Mildness, the Frugality,
the Munificence, the Clemency, and Vigilance of a Prince, he had any design to
upbraid those Vices, which were their Opposites.

ESSAY XXXIII.
THE Fathers decreed the Books to be Burnt, but they were not all found; some
being hid up, and Published afterward. Which gives us an occasion to deride
the Simplicity of those People, who think that the Memorials of Posterity can
be stifled by present Dominion. For on the other side, the Authority of
Punished Ingenuities increases, and Princes who have made use of that Severity,
have only purchased Dishonor to themselves, and enhaunc'd the Glory of the
Authors suppressed.

Says D'Ablancourt, The purport of the Decree was this, That the Books should
be Burnt, but they were privately preserved, (he leaves out and afterward
published, which is that which both Tacitus and Suetonius seem to have inserted
for particular Observation) which makes me laugh at their Impertinency, who
think by virtue of a soon Expiring Power, to extinguish the Memorials of Future
Ages. For on the other side, Punishment enlivens their works with new
Authority, and all those Princes who have made trial of that same Artifice,
have only augmented their own Disgrace, and the Glory of their Enemy.

Flattery and History could never well agree together, for the one is wholly
devoted to Falsehood, the other to Truth. The one deludes, the other informs and
disabuses Princes. Sejanus ordered Cordus to be abused for having applauded
Brutus in his Annals, and called Cassius, the Last of the Romans. And this was
looked upon as but newly imputed for a Crime, the rather for that all the
preceding Historians, and among the rest, Livie and Pollio, had mentioned them
with Honor; and for that Augustus himself, by whom they were Vanquished, had
always had such a Veneration for their Memory, that he never removed their
Images. Besides that, but three Years before, Tiberius himself, had permitted
the Funeral Rites of Junia, Sister to Brutus, the Wife of Cass^us, and Cato's
Niece, to be Solemnized with all the Ceremonies that appertained to her
Illustrious Birth. Nevertheless, the Senate, to please Sejanus, condemned both
Cordus and his History, the purport of which was, that the last of the Romans
was dead, and that at Rome there remained alive no other then such as
sacrificed all to Favor. For here the Senate gave the Appellation of
Parricides and Robbers to two Men, whom History had celebrated for Illustrious
and Famous Personages. So that Cordus's only Crime was this, That he had spoken
like a faithful Historian, and that he was adjudg'd capable, to Write with the
same Liberty, the Reign of Tiberius, who after the death of Drusus, began to
grow worse and worse; and to display the Actions of Sejanus, who so insolently
abused his Favor. Great Favorites infinitely delude themselves, when they
think their Reputation sheltered by the suppression of Books, that discover
their Miscarriages. For to burn Books, is but to kindle in others a Curiosity
to read 'em, whereas the taking little or no notice at all of 'em, renders 'em
less prized by those that have already read 'em, and cures that Itch in others,
to be prying into a subject little regarded. It Is an easy thing for Men in
Power to be revenged upon Historians, whose Lives are in their Hands, but their
Authority will not prevail against the History, which is Immortal, and will
devolve it self to the Judgment of Permanent Posterity. 'Twas very cunningly
done, says Tacitus, to burn the Writings of Rusticus Arulenus, and Seneca, as
if that Fire could stifle the Voice of the Roman People, the Liberty of the
Senate, and the Memory of Mankind. Posterity, says Cordus, renders to every one
their due, and they who will remember Brutus and Cassius, will not fail to
remember me as well. Meaning, that Posterity would honor his Memory, as it had
honored the Memory of those great Men.

ESSAY XXXIV.
AND the Honor of Augustus will vanish, when profaned with promiscuous
Adorations.

Says D'Ablancourt, For this would be to lessen the Honor of Augustus, to
Communicate it to every Body without Distinction.

Princes despise those Honors that are common to others, esteeming only those
that are new and only invented for themselves. They are likewise for the most
part jealous of their Honor, that they hardly will admit an equality of
Comparison with their Predecessors, how Illustrious soever they were. Flattery,
said Pliny to Trajan, has so drained the Fountain of Encomiums, that we have
not any remaining more, that are new, to give Thee. The only Honor which we
can pretend to pay Thee is, not to decree Thee any; so well assured we are of
thy Modesty and Bashfulness. A Commendation worthy the Prince who received it,
and the Subject that Addressed it. And therefore Cardinal Richlieu, though he
loved Applause, yet would not accept of Balzac's Praises, alleging, 'Twas no
Honor to be extolled by a Person that equally praised all Men alike; so prone
that Author was to Hyperboles.

ESSAY. XXXV.
THrough the Benevolence of Augustus ratified by Tiberius himself, it has been
the custom, that the Supplicant, ever he put up his Prayers and Wishes to the
Gods, should first address them to his Prince's Ears.

Says D'Ablancourt, The purport of his Letter was, That his Obligation was such
to the Memory of Augustus, and to the Testimonies of Tiberius's Affections,
that he addressed his Prayers rather to the Emperor then the Gods.

This Language well befits the Flatterers at Court, who adore no other Deity
but Fortune. This is a Theme so plain, it needs no Commentary: Besides that, my
design is only to Inform, and not to Offend.

ESSAY XXXVI.
Tiberius heard the Opprobrious Language with which his Reputation was wounded,
and was so deeply concerned, that he cried out, he would immediately clear
himself, and stand a Trial. Nor could the Persuasions of nearest Relations, or
the Flatteries of all his Followers compose his Mind, but with Elaborate
Importunity.

Says D'Ablancourt, Tiberius heard the Defamations that were thrown upon him,
and cried out in a great Fury, that he would at the same instant clear himself
of those Calumnies; so that it was a difficult task of the Senate, and all his
Friends together, to apappease him with all their Flatteries and Prayers.

Flattery is never so seasonable, nor runs to that excess, as when the Prince
is wound^d in his Honor. Tiberius had received a Bloody Affront. For a certain
Officer in the Army, coming in as an Evidence against one Montanus, who had
uttered heinous Language against the Emperor, in a full Senate repeated the
Words as they were spoken, to add the more weight to his Testimony; and the
more the Senators showed their unwillingness to understand him, as detesting
his Impudence, the more obstinate the Officer was to make good his Accusation.
So that considering Tiberius's humor, a Prince so politic and dextrous in
concealing his Vices, and designing 'em into Virtues, it was no wonder he
should be more enraged against the Testimony, then against the Person accused.
And this was that which obliged him to protest with so much Violence, and be so
earnest to clear himself of what was laid to his Charge.

Now when a Prince goes about to insist upon his Justification, especially when
the Imputation from which he thinks to clear himself is true, and known to all
the World, then it is, that Flattery becomes most pleasing to him; and that he
is overjoyed when they tell them, that he has no need to purge himself from
Scandals and Reproaches which no Body believes; that it redounds to his Honor
to be hated by Wicked and Vicious People; that it is peculiar to Princes to do
well; and for Subjects to talk Maliciously and Scandalously of Princes.
Moreover, as Flattery is always excessive toward bad Princes, as being feared
and dreaded most of all; so are Scandal and Oblcquie most outrageous, when they
believe themselves most secure; that is to say, when Men are venting their
disgusts among their Intimate and most Familiar Acquaintance, where every one
discovers the very bottom of his Heart. So that it is the most certain Mark of
a good Prince, when his Subjects discourse of him in their Private Houses and
Retirements, as he is cried up at Court. And this it was which the younger
Pliny intended, when speaking to Trajan. This day, said he, it is, that we have
just reason to complain, that our secret discourses are not spied and observed
but by Princes which hate us: For if good Princes were so Inquisitive as the
bad, what a pleasure would it be to Thee, to hear what we discourse of Thee in
our private Dwellings, to our Wives, our Children, and our Servants? Then thou
would know the full extent of our Love and Admiration of thy Virtues, and
how we power forth our Prayers continually for thy long and prosperous Reign.
Then, though Love and Hatred are perfect Contraries, thou would understand,
that in our Houses there is so far a kind of Reconciliation between those
opposite Passions, that we adore and reverence Virtuous Princes with the same
excess of Cordial Affection, as with detestation we abominate unruly Tyranny.

ESSAY XXXVII.
WHen the Conflagration had consumed all things round about it, the Effigies of
Tiberius only remained untouched: So that the Claudii were looked upon as
peculiarly favored by the Gods, and there was a farther addition of Reverence
and Adoration to the Place, wherein the Gods had shown so high an Honor to
the Prince.

Says D'Ablancourt, It was a Remarkable Testimony that the Cla^dian Family was
Sacred and Favored by the Gods, and that the Place deserved a particular
Reverence where they had showed a Miracle so particular in favor of the Prince.

Flatterers conster all things to the Princes Honor, and cry up for
Testimonials of their Virtue, those Accidents which are the effect of Chance
and Hazard only. They never mind, that Flattery becomes Ridiculous, unless it
be such as is pleasing to the Prince. And such was this same Adulation of the
Senate, upon this occasion; for that Tiberius had a custom to appropriate
Honors to himself from all Accidents, that would bear a favorable
Construction. On the other side, he could not choose but be highly satisfied, to
see the Senate make a Construction so different from that of the People, who
laid the Fire to his Charge, and all the other Calamities that had befallen the
City, as having left it a little before, in spite of the unlucky Signs and
Omens that appeared upon the Augur's Consultations. The good Fortune of
Princes, many times supplys the place of Merit; for Men have always a high
Opinion of their Worth, so long as they are happy. Let the Accidents that
happen, be never so merely Casual, they are taken for assured Omens of their
Grandeur, and are of great importance to improve that Veneration which Men
pretend to be their due.

ESSAY XXXVIII.
NEither was it the Care of the Senate, to prevent loss of Honor upon the
Frontiers of the Empire. An inward Consternation had possessed their Spirits,
for which the only remedy they could provide was Flattery. So that although they
had several Affairs of higher Importance that required their Debates, they
decreed an Altar to Clemency, another to Friendship, and Statues to Caesar and
Sejanus round about.

Says D'Ablancourt, The Senate troubled and amused with inward fears, neglected
the Frontiers of the Empire; and to shelter themselves under some signal piece
of Flattery, never minding those more Important Affairs which they had under
their Consideration, decreed Altars to Clemency and Friendship, and Statues to
the Emperor and Sejanus.

Under evil Princes the Grandees take little Care of the Public Misfortunes, as
being solely employed to secure themselves. The more in fear Men are, the more
they abandon themselves to Flattery. Especially those Persons that live at
Court, or else have high Employments to lose; in regard their Advancement,
exposes them to greater Dangers then others. And then again, when a Prince
dissembles the bad Condition of his Affairs, then it is that he is Flattered
most of all; every one affecting to show his absolute reliance upon the Fortune
and the Prudence of his Prince.

ESSAY. XXXIX.
BUT as for Junius Gallio, who had decreed that the Pretorian Soldiers having
served out their full time, might have the Privilege to place themselves in
the Amphitheatre upon the first Fourteen Benches among the Knights, he chid him
severely. Such was the Reward that Gallio had for his premeditated piece of
Adulation, to be Expelled the Senate.

Junius Gallio, says D'Ablancourt, was severely handled, for having proposed,
that the Soldiers of the Guard, might sit upon the Fourteen first Rows of
Benches in the Theater, after they had served their time in the Wars. -- And
Gallio, for the Reward of his premeditated Flattery, was Ejected out of the
Senate.

He that Flatters, ought to understand the nice Temper of the Person to whom he
makes his Addresses; for otherwise he loses his Aim, while contrary to his
Expectation, his Flattery becomes offensive. Gallio thought he had highly
obliged Tiberius, in decreeing a new Honor to the Soldiers of the Pretorian
Guards. But Tiberius was offended, that he should take upon him to meddle with
rewarding the Soldiers. What has Gallio to do, said he, in his Answer to the
Senate, with the Privileges of the Pretorian Soldiers? who being under the
Command of none, but only the Emperor, ought not to have their dependence but
upon him alone? Does he believe he has found out an Expedient which Augustus
never dreamed of? Rather may it not be thought that this same Creature of
Sejanus, sought to bring an Innovation into Military Discipline, on purpose to
prepare the Soldiers for Rebellion? These Expressions of Tiberius demonstrate,
that he had reason to be offended with a Proposal, which perhaps a Prince less
Politic then he, would have taken for an Honor. For had the Soldiers of the
Guards obtained this Privilege to sit equal with the Roman Knights, they had
been beholding for their Honor only to the Senate. To which we may add, that
such an Honor would have rather served to swell their Pride, then increase
their Affections to their Prince.

ESSAY XL.
LVcius Piso, chief Pontiff, di'd in his Bed about this time; (which was rare
for a Man so eminent in Dignity) a Person who willingly never uttered an
expression that savored of Servility; or if necessity constrained him,
tempered his words with Prudence and Sobriety.

Says D'Ablancourt, The Pontiff, Lucius Piso, di'd a Natural Death, which was a
rare thing at that time, considering his high Reputation. A Person that never
propounded any Advice that misbecame the Dignity of his Employment; and when he
was constrained to approve the Flatteries of others, would be always sure to
moderate their high flown Excesses.

A Man may both preserve his Life, and his Dignity, yet neither be a Slave nor
a Flatterer, as is apparent from the Example of Piso, who lived Fourscore
Years, and yet neither lost his Employment, nor suffered in his Reputation
either under Augustus, or Tiberius, by whom he was always highly esteemed. But
who expects the same good Fortune, must take the same Course. Tacitus says,
that he never miscarried in any servile piece of Flattery: But he adds, that
sometimes he surrendr'd to the Flatteries of others upon some occasions. To
teach Great Men to comply with the Experiencies of Seasons and Business.
Generosity is a Virtue that becomes 'em, however they must be careful, least it
degenerate into Obstinacy and Rashness: For as Pliny says, Necessity is a part
of Reason. Had Piso always opposed his Colleagues, he had never been in a
condition by the preservation of his Authority, to have allayed their Heats;
because they would have concerted together, to thwart his Counsels: Whereas
they many times gave way to him, as he sometimes submitted to them.

ESSAY XLI.
FRom whence Vitellius returning to Rome, partly for fear of Caius Caesar, and
partly through his intimate Familiarity with Claudius, he abandoned himself to
such a degree of Abject Slavery, that he became an Exemplar to Posterity of
Obsequious Infamy.

Says D'Ablancourt, At his Return debauched by his dread of Caius, and the
Favors of Claudius, he only served to Posterity an example of Ignominious
Servitude.

Fear and Favor are commonly the Original Sources of Flattery. He that stands
in fear of his Life, Flatters to preserve it; and he that is warm in the Favor
of his Prince, betakes himself to Adulation, that he may not lose it. And thus,
were it not for Self-interest, there would be no Flattery.

ESSAY XLII.
THey that dwelt by the River, brought news that Euphrates, in a season free
from Rain, or any immoderate Showers, was swelled to an unusual and prodigious
height; and carried a Foam that curled upon the Water in white Circles like so
many Diadems; from whence they gathered a prosperous Omen, to encourage his
crossing the Stream with his Army.

They brought News, says D'Ablancourt, that the River Euphrates was swelled,
and yet no Showers had fallen, and seemed to curle its Waters in the shape of a
Diadem. Some took this for a happy Omen, etc.

Flattery interprets all things to the Advantage of Princes, and particularly
at the beginning of their Reigns. For then it is, that she feeds their Humors
with vain hopes; and that all People who make their approaches to the New
Sovereign, are equally contending to excel each other in quaintness of
Addresses. Nor is it enough for Princes to be deluded by their Flatterers,
Astrology, the ancient Companion of Falsehood, intrudes for a share, and then
chiefly succeeds in her Designs, when she meets with an easiness in the Prince,
to believe the greatest Uucertainties in the World. There is not any Prince, to
whom, at his first coming to the Crown, she does not pretend, but that he shall
be more happy then Augustus, and that he shall Live till he is grown weary of
his Grandeur. But the most numerous part of Princes are deceived by these vain
Calculations, and reap no other Fruit of their Credulity, then the Misfortunes
of their unwary Confidence.

ESSAY XLIII.
AND labors by Obloquie to be informed of the Truth, to which Adulation is an
Enemy.

D'Ablancourt has omitted this Expression.

This is a Maxim, of which if Princes and great Men were fully convinced, they
would never be so ready to hearken to their Flatterers, or at least to credit
their Flatteries, who make it their only business to disguise and conceal from
their Knowledge, the real certainty of Things that most concern 'em.

ESSAY XLIV.
BUT the Seleusences were they, who out did the rest in Flattery. -- They
loaded Tiridates not only with the Honors of their Ancient Kings, but with all
the profuse and quaint Additions of later Ages.

Says D'Ablancourt, Seleucia surpassed all the other Cities in Magnificence. --
Tiridates was received with Honors of all sorts. He leaves out, That Seleucia
added modern Adulation to their Ancient Honors; wherein consists the stress of
the Sentence.

The latest Flattery is always the most Ingenious: And this same charming
Novelty it is, by which she gains and encroaches upon the Favor and Affection
of Princes, that nauseate vulgar Honors worn threadbare by Custom. Seleucia,
though she were then a free Republic, would needs be so Obsequious, as to surpass
in Servitude all the other Cities through which Tiridates had Marched. Such is
the eager desire that Subjects have to Gratify a new Prince, not so much out
of any love to his Person, as the Novelty of the Government.

ESSAY XLV.
BUT upon Artabanus they powered forth all their Scorn and Contempt, of the Race
of the Arsacidae by the Mothers side, and otherwise Degenerate and Mean.

Says D'Ablancourt, They publicly debased the glory of his Enemy. For they
upbraided Artabanus, that he had nothing in him of the Blood of the Arsacidae,
though he were descended from 'em by his Mothers side. It is a Cotnradiction to
say, That he had nothing in him of the Royal Blood of the Arsacidae, and yet
allow his Mother to be a Branch of the same Family; and therefore, what Tacitus
affirms, should D'Ablancourt have also said, that he was of the Ancient Family
of the Arsacidae by his Mothers side, however he came to Degenerate in other
things.

They dispis'd Artabanus, to heap the greater Honor upon Tiridates, who was
bred up from his Infancy in all the Effeminacy and Softness of Roman Education.
Whereas Artabanus setting aside his Cruelty, was a Heroic Prince, who had put a
happy and successful end to several Wars with his Neighbors. A proof
sufficient of the Impertinency of Flattery, that lessens and ecclipses the
Glory of so great and famous a Name, to advance the honor of weak and
sloathful Effeminacy.

ESSAY. XLVI.
THen Vitellius, with Tears in his Eyes, alleging the antiquity of the
Friendship contracted between 'em, repeating in the next place the good
Services which Asiaticus had done the Commonweal, and his late Expedition
against Britain, or whatever else seemed proper to raise Compassion, besought
his Judges that he might have leave to choose his Death; and he was seconded by
Claudius, who moved for the same Clemency.

Says D'Ablancourt, Vitellius in few words related the first beginning of their
Friendship, and running over cursorily all the past Services which Asiaticus
had done the Public, and particularly mentioning his last Enterprise against
Britain, he proposed to permit him to make choice of his own Death; to which
the Emperor consented, as a particular favor done him. Which latter words
pass by the Ironie of Tacitus, who tells ye, that Claudius interceded for the
same Clemency.

I have already observed, that all Flatterers are naturally Cruel; nor need we
a clearer Example, then this of Vitellius, to prove this Assertion. Messalina,
the Emperor Claudius's Wife, caused Asiaticus to be accused of several Crimes
against the State, thirsting after his Life, and his delicious Gardens.
Claudius consulted Vitellius, Messalina's confident, and it may be, one of her
Adulterers also: Vitellius therefore, that he might not lose her Favor,
betrays his old Friend, and throws away his Life, under a pretended Mitigation
of his Punishment. And thus you see the Trust of Courtiers Friendship. Their
Love and Friendship without Hesitation plie to Interest. They readily bestow
their Praises, and undermine your Life at the same time: They utter Clemency
with their Lips, but Cruelty is in their Hearts.

ESSAY XLVII.
VItellius voted a Remuneration of Five and twenty thousand Crowns to be given
Sosibius, for instructing Britanicus with his Precepts, and the Emperor with
his Counsel.

Sosibius, says D'Ablancourt, had a reward of Five and twenty thousand Crowns,
by the Advice of Vitellius, under pretense of the good Services which he did
the Emperor and his Son, by assisting the one with his Precepts, and the other
with his Counsels.

Sosibius, Tutor to Britanicus the Son of Claudius, was made use of as an
Evidence against Asiaticus; and for this piece of of Service it was, that
Vitellius would needs vote him a Reward so considerable, under the fair and
specious pretense of Merit and Desert. And thus it is, that Flattery adorns and
beautifies deformed Villainy, with honorable and graceful Titles. Vitellius
calls that Counsel, to which Men of Virtue and Integrity, would have given the
Appellation of Tyranny. Sosibius had told the Emperor, that the excessive
Riches of private Persons many times proved fatal to Princes, on purpose to
provoke him to a suspicion of Asiaticus's Wealth, and a seizure of his Estate;
which being once designed by Messalina, the officious Pedagogue was no less
diligent to appear as a Witness against the Innocent Gentleman, whose Crimes
were ready multiplied to take away his Life. Certainly, if the Instruction
which he gave Britanicus, were answerable to the Maxims which he instilled into
the Father, he was a dangerous Tutor for a young Prince.

ESSAY. XLVIII.
BUT Claudius reproved the Consul, as urging his Flatteries a little too high.

Says D'Ablancourt, A little too concise, The Emperor reproved the Consul for
his Flattery.

Princes have as great an Antipathy against those that Flatter too openly and
excessively, as against those that are too sparing of their Respect: For the
former seem to have a mean opinion of their Parts, and the latter of their
Actions. Of their Parts, as if they thought their Prince not able to discern
the Vanity of such Hyperboles. Of their Actions, because a Prince may well
believe, that they who vouchsafe 'em a kind Commendation, either can find out
nothing worth their Applause, or else discover much that deserves Reproof and
Censure. Witness that Senator Thrasea, whose silence was laid to his Charge by
his Accusers, as a sufficient mark of his dislike of the Princes Government.

ESSAY XLIX.
THerefore Vitellius covering his Servile Fallacies with the name of Censor,
and foreseeing a new Torrent of Usurpation ready to supplant the true
Successor, that he might purchase the good opinion of Agrippina, began betimes
to intregue himself in her Designs.

Says D'Ablancourt, Vitellius to gain the good will of Agrippina, who, as he
saw was mounting into Favor. But he leaves out the words (Ingruentium
Dominationum provisor) by which Tacitus intended to show that Vitellius foresaw
that Agrippina would labor to set up Nero to the Exclusion of Britannicus.

This same Conduct of Vitellius, is a perfect demonstration of that which
Flatterers put in practice every day. Before he had devoted all his Grandeur
and Reputation at Court to serve Massaline; when she was dead, he employed all
his Interest to second Agrippina, who was forming a Design, to supplant
Britannicus the young Prince, and lawful Heir to the Empire, merely for the
Advancement of her own Son. And thus are Flatterers no less Ungrateful then
Cruel, as having no other aim then their own Interest. For Acknowledgment can
only proceed from Love, and consequently is never to be expected from the
Breasts of Flatterers, who are incapable of real Affection.

ESSAY. L.
NOR would they venture yet to Solemnise the Nuptials; there being no President
to be found of an Uncle, that ever espoused his Niece. -- Nor did this
Hesitation cease, till Vitellius by his wonted Artifices undertook to remove
the Obstacle:

Says D'Ablancourt, They durst not openly Celebrate the Marriage; for that
there never had been any such thing seen before in Rome. But at length
Vitellius to remove those Difficulties, etc. where he again suppresses those
Emphatical words, (Nec ante Omissa cunctatio.)

Claudius was afraid least his Marriage with Agrippina should be looked opon as
Incestuous; and consequently draw from Heaven some dire Calamity upon the
Empire. Vitellius therefore to gratify this Princess, who resolved to Reign,
at the expense of Honor, Virtue, Modesty, and Prostitution it self, declared
in a full Senate, That the welfare of the Empire depended upon this Marriage;
that it was a visible effect of the Providence of the Gods, that Agrippina, who
was of the Imperial Blood, and had given sufficient Testimonies of Foecundity,
and of all the noble Qualities required in an Empress, should happen to be a
Widow, at the same time, that the Emperor was in a condition to Espouse her:
That in truth, it was a Novelty at Rome, for a Man to Marry his Brothers
Daughter; yet that there was no Law which forbid it, and that all other Nations
authorz'd the Act by public Presidents: That as Marriages between Cousin
Germans, heretofore but rarely known, were now by allowance of Time, become the
frequent Mode, succeeding ages would permit the same liberty also in this Case;
and therefore that was their duty to accommodate their Debates, to the present
necessity of Affairs. Thus that which Claudius thought to be a Crime, (and was
so indeed among the Romans) was by Vitellius burnished over with the specious
Titles, not only of the Welfare of the Empire, but the Will of the Gods. And
thus we see how Flatterers mislead unsteady Princes, and embolden 'em to do
those things, which of themselves they dread. For Tacitus makes this Marriage
so great a Crime, that he affirms it to be the Source and Original of all
Agrippina's Impieties.

ESSAY LI.
NOR were there any wanting who crowded out of the Senate, crying out, they
would make use of Force, if Caesar delayed. And a promiscuous Multitude being
got together, clamoured aloud, that it was the Voice of the Roman People. Then
Claudius without farther Hesitation entered the Senate, and demanded a Decree,
declaring all Marriages for the future Legitimate, between Uncles and Neeces.

Says D'Ablancourt, There were some so Insolent, as to rise from their Seats,
and rush out of the Senate, as it were to constrain the Emperor if he made any
Difficulties; and the Multitude cried out in the Streets, that it was the Will
of the Roman People. Then Claudius without any farther delay entering the
Senate, demanded a Decree to Legitimate this Marriage, and that it might be
lawful for the future, for the Uncle to Marry the Niece.

Princes are misguided by their Flatterers, and the People are led astray by
the Examples of their Princes. How pleasing and how acceptable is that sort of
Adulation, which Imposes upon Princes a necessity to do the Thing, which they
desire themselves with far more earnestness, then they with all their Zeal make
show of, who put the Force upon 'em. They reap all the Pleasure, and their
Subjects all the Infamy.

ESSAY LII.
AND yet there was not found but one, who attempted such a Marriage, Talledius
Severus, a Roman Knight; to which, as it was reputed, he was merely instigated,
to serve his Mistress Agrippina.

However, says D'Ablancourt, there was but one single Person who followed the
Example; which by report he always did, to pleasure Agrippina.

A certain Proof, that Subjects think quite otherwise then they speak. When
they find that the Prince's desires are eagerly bent for speedy Satisfaction,
they show themselves more eager still to gratify his Impatience: Yet afterward
they show their Dislike, in forbearing to follow the Example; which is the most
certain Symptom which the People can give of their ill Resentment of the Act.
Claudius had caused his Marriage to be decreed Legitimate by the Senate,
believing the Romans would follow his Example, and authorize those Marriages by
Custom. However notwithstanding the Decree, which was a sufficient shelter from
Punishment or Infamy; yet there was but one single Person who followed his
President. Nor did he neither marry his Wife out of any true persuasion that
his Marriage was Just and Lawful, but out of a desire to please the Empress,
and to raise his Fortune by an Act, of which there was no Body cared to share
the Reward.

ESSAY LIII.
HOwever thanks was returned the Prince, intermixed with more exquisite
Adulations of Tiberius; and a Law enacted, that the Name of Nero should be
Transferred into the Claudian Family.

Says D'Ablancourt, The Senate returned thanks to the Emperor, wherein they
cunningly interwove the Praises of Nero, who was obliged to quit the name of
Domitius for that of Nero, in favor of his Adoption.

Here Claudius had the Thanks of the Senate for a great piece of Injustice
which he had done Britannicus, his own Son, as if he had performed some noble
Exploit, And Nero, according to the custom of Flattery, which always addresses
her Adorations to the Rising Sun, was applauded, as if he had been worthy of
the Empire, whereas all his Pretensions had no other Foundation then an
Incestuous Marriage, and a pernicious Adoption made by a weak and misguided
Prince. But whether Princes do well or ill, they are always applauded, and have
always Thanks returned 'em for what they do, and never more then when they
least deserve either the one or the other. And this is an easy and certain
Rule, by which to know a Sycophant.

ESSAY LIVE.
TO which it was added by Scipio Cornelius, that Thanks should be publicly
given to Pallas, for that he being Sprung from the Kings of Arcadia, prefer the
Public Benefit before his Ancient Nobility, and condescended to be still a
Servant to the Emperor.

Scipio added, Says D'Ablancourt, that Thanks should be given to Pallas, for
that being descended from the Arcadian Kings, he preferred the Interest of the
Empire when his Grandeur was so Sublime, and chose rather to be counted one of
the Emperors Ministers.

Thus we find what comes to pass, when the Ministers are more Powerful then the
Prince; or at least, when the Prince suffers himself to be Governed by his
Ministers, as Claudius did. Flatterers who adore the Favor only, will not
allow the Prince to honor the Minister, but will have the Minister to be an
honor to the Prince. Pallas was no more then one of Claudius's Bondmen, by him
made Free, and for this a Noble Senator has the confidence to applaud him in a
full Senate, for contenting himself with the Quality of a Chief Minister. As if
he would have said, that he deserved to supply his Masters Throne, who indeed
according to the younger Pliny's Expression, was no more then a Slave to his
Bondmen.

ESSAY LV.
AND a Decree of the Senate was Engraved in Marble, and publicly Erected,
wherein an Enfranchised Slave, in possession of above seven Millions in Gold,
was extolled for his Frugality, equal to the Parcimony of Ancient Times.

Says D'Ablancourt, They made a Decree by which an Enfranchised Slave, that was
worth above seven Millions in Gold, had the praises of Ancient Frugality.

The Consul, Barea Soranus, having decreed to Pallas, the Pretors Ornaments,
and a Present of a Million of Money, in recompense of his Services, Claudius
declared, That Pallas was satisfied with the Honor, and was unwilling to
renounce his primitive Poverty. An Expression befitting the poorness of
Claudius's Spirit, who it is very probable could not be Ignorant, that his
Bondsman was at that time Richer, then all the Kings of Arcady, his pretended
Ancestors.

The younger Pliny makes mention of this Decree in two of his Letters, in such
Terms as will serve in this place, for a most excellent Commentary. There is,
says he, upon the Highway to Tivoly, a Monument of Pallas, with this
Inscription: The Senate has decreed to Pallas the Ornaments of the Pretorship,
and the Gift of a Million, for his Fidelity and Zeal toward his Masters, but he
is contented with the Honor.

But certainly I was never an Admirer of those things that proceed rather from
Fortune then Judgment. More especially this Inscription taught me a new Lesson,
what a strange Impertinency those Men were guilty of, who decreed Honor to d
Scoundrel; and what an unusual Impudence possessed that Rascally Fellow to
accept the one, and refuse the other; and to transfer these refusals to
Posterity, for an Example of Modesty. But to what purpose do I seem to be
offended at it? Were it not more proper for me to make it the subject of my
Derision, to the end they may not think to have gained any great Matter, who by
their good Fortune, do but serve to be the Sport and Contempt of other Men?

In another Letter, after he has told ye, that as Lofty as this Inscription
seems to be, yet it appeared both Modest and Humble, in respect of the Decree
which he found among the Registers of the Senate, he adds the following words.
I omit to tell ye, that the Pretorian Ornaments were offered to a Slave,
because they were Slaves themselves that offered 'em: And that it was Decreed,
not only to beseech him, but also to force him to wear the Rings of Gold. For
it was a Dishonor to the Majesty of the Senate, for a Pretorian to wear Rings
of Steel. But this is nothing; that which is most worthy Observation, is this,
That the Senate returned Thanks to the Emperor, in the name of Pallas, for
having spoken so advantageously in his behalf, and given leave to the Senate,
to give him those Testimonials of their Respects and good Will toward him. For
what could be more Honorable to the Senate, then to show their Gratitude to
Pallas? The Senate knowing how averse Pallas was from such Ambitious desires,
ordain that an Address should be made to the Emperor, to beseech him that he
would oblige Pallas to accept the Senates Kindness. There could not be a more
Servile Condescension then this, that the Public Authority was made use of, and
the Intercession of the Emperor implored, to mollify the haughty Moderation
of Pallas so far, as to bring him to vouchsafe the acceptance of the Senates
Present. -- Now do but imagine you saw Pallas opposing the Decree of the
Senate, and moving in Mitigation of the Honors which they offered him;
refusing a Million, which was given him as a Present, though an excessive Gift,
after he had accepted the Ornaments of the Pretorship, as a thing of mean
Value; suppose you saw the Emperor, who submits to the Entreaties, or rather
Commands of a Bond* man Enfranchised, in the presence of the Senate. Then take
a view of the Senate, who recite in their Decree, that among other Honors
decreed to Pallas, they thought it material to add this Donative, in recompense
of the Services he had done the Empire, and that they did not desist from their
Importunities to Pallas, that he would be pleased to accept their Donative, but
only in Obedience to the Emperor, whose Will and Pleasure it was not lawful
for them to gainsay in any respect. The conclusion will be, that it required no
less then all the Modesty of Pallas, and all the Complaisance of the Senate, to
excuse Pallas from accepting a whole Million of the Public Treasure. To which
the Senate would never have consented, but that they thought it contrary to
their Duty to disobey the Emperor. Now do you believe that this is all? No,
there is something worse behind. It was Ordained that this Decree should be
Engraved in Brass, and set up next the Armed Statue of Julius Caesar. 'Twas not
enough for the Senate to be the Testimony of so great a piece of Infamy, they
made choice of a most remarkable Place, where it was to be read by the Living*
and transmitted to Posterity. It was their care, that all the Honors offered
to an Insolent Slave, should be Engraved in Brass; what he had refused, and
what he had accepted. His Pretorian Ornaments were Inscribed upon Public and
Eternal Monuments, like the Ancient Leagues, and Alliances, nay like the Sacred
Laws of the Empire. Such of the Prince, such of the Senate, such of Pallas
himself, was that I know not what to call it. While all Three exposed to the
view of all the World; Pallas his Insolence, the Emperor his Patience, and the
Senate their Obsequious Servility.

Certainly the Roman Flattery far out-did the Adulation of the Greeks.

ESSAY LVI.
WHile he discoursed the Antiquity of his Extraction, and numbered up the
Consulships and Triumphs of his Ancestors; while he Commemorated his
Inclinations to Learning, and the Liberal Arts, and insisted upon the
Prosperity of his Reign, in all which time the Commonweal had suffered no
Disaster, he was attentively and willingly heard by all: But when he came to
applaud his Providence and his Wisdom, there was hardly any Person could
refrain from Laughter.

Says D'Ablancourt, Nero spoke his Funeral Oration, wherein he highly extolled
the Antiquity of his Descent, and the Grandeur of his Ancestors, Enumerating at
length their Consulships and their Triumphs. Thence he proceeded to applaud his
Learning; and told the People how that the Empire had suffered no Damage
during all his Reign. All which was heard attentively without the least Murmur;
but when he began to talk of his Prudence and his Wisdom, they could not
forbear Laughing.

Flatterers often fall into the same Imprudent Errors; while they strive to be
excessive in their Praises, they render both themselves, and those they applaud
Ridiculous. Many People Flatter, but few are Masters of the Art. Witness
Seneca, who as great and piercing a Wit as he was, was not sensible of the
Impertinency of the Harangue which he had made for his Pupil, till he found it
to be derided by all that heard it. For to extol the Wisdom and Understanding
of Claudius, who was so generally known to be a Person of weak and sottish
Intellectuals, was to accuse all Mankind of Stupidity.

ESSAY. LVII.
HE forbids any Statues of Massy Gold or Silver to be Erected, in Honor of
his Person. -- And when the Magistrates took their Oaths, in Confirmation of
the Acts of his Predecessors, he would not suffer Antisthius, one of his
Consuls, to hear the Confirmation of His; for which the Senate loaded him with
Encomiums, in hopes that since his youthful Thoughts were thus inclined to
Virtues of a lower Rank, he would continue greater.

Nero, Says D'Ablancourt, would not suffer his Colleague to pay him that Honor;
which was received with Acclamations more then ordinary, on purpose to excite
the youthful Prince to the love of Virtue. Which last words come far short of
the sense of Tacitus.

Modesty is a powerful means to procure both Love and Esteem to a young Prince,
at the beginning of his Reign. For as it is then the time that Flattery sets
all her Springs at work, to make her self the Darling of his Favor, so is it
likewise then that he acquires a solid Reputation, if he ward off the first
Assault of Adulation. And therefore it was, that the Senate were so profuse of
their Praises to Nero, to pre-ingage him by their own, against the Flatteries
of others. For there is a sort of Adulation allowable and wholesome, which
infuses into Princes and great Personages a love of Virtue, wherein consists
their chiefest Glory.

ESSAY LVIII.
AS lately too severe in Restraining his Son, now as immoderately Submissive.

Says D'Ablancourt, Agrippina was constrained to change her Severity into
Caresses, and to repent her past Severity; and that with as much Submission
now, as Rigor and Arrogance before.

Of all the sorts of Flatterers, there are none so bad as those that are forced
to stoop, in hopes to regain the favor of a Prince, whom they have disobliged
either by their Severity, or over saucy Freedom. For being then to repair the
Faults of their Ingratitude, they spare for no submission to recover what they
have lost, either by their Moroseness, or their unwary Zeal. For there is a far
greater mixture of Vanity then Integrity in that same Hardiness, which many Men
assume in reprimanding Princes. Who are never to be contradicted, but when we
are assured, that our Arguments are such as will not offend their Ears; and
that it may prove the more Successful, the Admonition must be such as may seem
to relish of Commendation. Ita reprehendat ut laudet, says Pliny, Ep. 12. l. 3.
Thus Gundamore, the Spanish Ambassador in England, perceiving that James I.
particularly valued himself for his Scholastic Learning, very facetiously told
him one day, that his Majesty spoke Latin, as it became Gundamore to speak it:
Whereas Count Gundamore spoke it, as it rather became his Majesty to do;
insinuating that Pedantic Learning was beneath a Prince, from whose Lips there
is always expected something more Weighty and Sublime.

ESSAY LIX.
THereupon the Senate enacted Public Processions, and Days of Thanksgiving;
Statues also, Triumphal Arches, and continual Consulships were decreed the
Prince: And that the Days upon which the Victory was won, when the Tidings were
brought, and the Relation of it made, should be numbered among the Solemn
Festivals; with several other Additions altogether so Exorbitaut, that Caius
Cassius readily consenting to the former Honors, farther declared, That if the
Solemn Thanks to be repaid the Gods were to be measured according to the merit
of their Benignity, the whole Year would be too small a time for Public
Supplications; and therefore that the Holy Days and Worky-days, ought only so
to be divided, as that the Worship of the Gods might not be a hinderance to
secular Business.

Says D'Ablancourt, The Senate ordained Public Processions, Triumphal Arches
and Statues, together with a new Consulship in Honor of the Prince; and
farther that the Day wherein the City was taken, when the News was brought, as
likewise when the Decrees were made, should be solemnly observed as Public
Anniversaries, with several other Flatteries so excessive, that Caius Cassius
who consented to all the rest, was constrained to add, That if they were to
render Thanks to the Gods proportionable to their Favors, the whole Year would
not suffice; only some days were to be set a part and excepted, that the
Worship of the Gods might not hinder Human Commerce.

This Article has no need of any Commentary. Only I will observe this by the
way, That what Cassius spoke of Nero's Reign, might be well said of Lewis the
Great, which has been a complete Calendar of nothing else but Combats,
Victories, and Triumphs. So that if Paterculus observed of Caesar, That his
Achievements were so great, that he who durst attempt and bring to pass such
wondrous Enterprises, could hardly be other then some Deity: What would he have
said of a Prince, that in a few days won those Cities, which Caesar could not
take in many Months?

ESSAY LX.
IN this same Consternation, the Flattery of the Centurions and Tribunes first
erected his drooping hopes, crowding to kiss his Hands, and congratulate his
Escape from the unsuspected and horrid Contrivances of his Mother. Then the
Courtiers resorted thick and threefold to the Temples; and thus the Example
being set, the Neighboring Municipal Towns of Campania testified their joy by
Sacrifices, and public Addresses.

Says D'Ablancourt, Burrhus was the first who raised his Hopes, persuading the
Officers of the Guard to Complement him upon the Danger he had escaped, and
testify their Joy to see him delivered from the Ambushes of his Mother. After
that, the Courtiers frequented the Temples, and Addresses came from all the
Neighboring Cities, etc.

Flattery is a Contagion that spreads it self from Man to Man. When ever any
one has led the way, all the rest are presently at strife who shall out do him.
Nero had but just embru'd his Hands in a most inhuman Parricide, and the People
stood gazing one upon another with Fear and Astonishment. Nero himself was
almost at his Wits end. But no sooner had the Pretorian Officers kissed his
Hands, and assured him of their Fidelity, but the Courtiers, a sort of People
always ready to unmask, were not ashamed to kneel before the Gods; nor the
Neighboring Cities to offer Sacrifices for joy of such a perpetrated Crime,
which cried aloud for Vengeance on the Detestable Murderer. Horrid
Thanksgivings, more Impious then the Parricide it self. But the Senate acted
higher yet, and worse: They decreed Public Intercessions for the Welfare of the
Prince, and put the day of his Mothers Nativity among the Unfortunate Days; and
that upon which her pretended Conspiracy was discovered, among the most Solemn
Festivals of the Year. So true it is, that never greater Honors are decreed to
Princes, then when they are extremely hated. For Dissimulation is more
ingenious then Truth, says the younger Pliny; Servitude then Freedom; and Fear
then Love.

ESSAY LXI.
WHile he was hesitating in the Cities of Campania, how he might return to the
City, and no less anxious whether to expect either the Addresses of the
Obsequious Senate, or the Favor of the People, all the most infamous of his
Adherents argued against his vain fears, that Agrippina's name was become
odious, and that by her Death he had inflamed the affection of the People
toward him; and therefore that he should go with an undaunted Courage, and try
the effects of their veneration upon the Place.

Says D'Ablancourt, While the Emperor staid in the Cities of Campania,
uncertain whether he should return to Rome, or seek the Applauses of the Senate
and the People first: (Tacitus does not say whether he should seek, but wait
for, considering the Enormity of his Crime.) His Courtiers advised him to go
on, and fear nothing; for that they should find the Affections of the People
redoubled by the death of Agrippina, whose very memory they Execrated; and
therefore that he should go Courageously to reap the fruit of his Renown and
Glory.

Though Princes are made believe that they have an absolute Liberty to do what
er'e they please, yet are they touched with an inward Remorce, when they either
do or have committed any Act which is in it self unlawful. After Nero had
caused his Mother to be murdered, he durst not show his Face, he wandered from
City to City, thinking to dissipate those Fears and Jealousies with which the
apparition of his Crime that haunted him where er'e he went, continually
tormented his mind. But his Flatterers, accustomed to extol the most heinous
miscarriages of great Personages, soon Cured him of his Shame and his Fear;
persuading him that all the People of Rome rejoiced at Agrippina's death, and
thought themselves beholding to him for having rid her out of the way, though
every Body in secret detested the Action, and had a bad opinion of Seneca, for
the Letters which he wrote to the Senate, in Justification of Nero. Ill done in
Seneca, though seasonably perhaps, who after he had been beholding to Agrippina
for all his Fortune, had the grace to lay to her charge all the Mischiefs, and
all the acts of Injustice, that had been committed in Claudius's Reign. He whom
she had recalled from Exile, and advanced to be Tutor to her Son, where he had
rammass'd together above seven Millions of Gold in four Years. A fair Proof,
that he knew how better to discourse of Benefits and Kindnesses then to
acknowledge 'em; and that it is but too true, that how deeply soever Men are
obliged to those who fall into Misfortue, they then believe the Engagement
fully satisfied.

ESSAY LXII.
HEnce resuming his wonted Pride, and victor over Public Servitude, he enters
the Capital, pays his Thanks, and abandons himself to all manner of Luxury and
Lasciviousness.

Says D'Ablancourt, He ascended into the Capital, triumphing over Public
Servitude, and having paid his Thanks to the Gods, gave himself over to all
manner of Voluptuousness.

Behold the Effects of Flattery. Nero, who feared to return to Rome, observing
that the Senate and the People paid him greater Honors, then his Flatterers
had promised; and that the City had set up Scaffolds to behold him make his
Entry, as if he had led all the Barbarian Kings in Triumph, began to believe,
that his Parricide was looked upon as a noble Exploit; and that by consequence,
there was not any thing which he might not boldly undertake for the future.
Thus when Princes once have laid aside all Fear and Bashfulness, small are the
hopes of any farther good from Them. And here it was, that Burrhus and Seneca,
both Men of great Prudence and Policy, were much deceived, while they thought,
that their condescension to any single Ridiculous Pleasure of their Pupil,
would in a short time make him weary of that Vice. For after he had spent his
time one while in playing the Charioteer in an enclosed piece of Ground, where
no body had liberty to enter; he would needs have Spectators afterward, whose
Applauses did but serve to encourage him in the continuance of that Exercise,
which his Governors were in hopes would soon have tired him. In short, after
he had been a Charioteer, and had engaged the Principal of the Nobility to
ascend the Theater, he took his place himself there also, to sing to the Harp
before his Courtiers, and the Soldiers of his Guard: Well pleased with the
Applauses of a company of young Roman Knights, who immediately admired his
Beauty and his Voice, for Divine Perfections. Whence Tacitus concludes, that if
Modesty and Bashfulness, be so difficultly preserved by Virtuous Education, how
are they possibly to be preserved in a Court, where Vices contend and only
emulate each other; and where men are only esteemed for being double Hearted,
and they accounted Best, who are the Worst.

ESSAY XLIII.
NO Man carried away the Prize for Eloquence, but Caesar was pronounced the
Victor.

Says D'Ablancourt, No Man carried away the Prize of Eloquence, but they gave
the Victory unanimously to the Emperor.

Tacitus relates, That the Funeral Oration which Nero pronounced at the
Obsequies of the Emperor Claudius, seemed to savor of Seneca's Style; which
gave an Occasion for some to observe, that Nero was the first Emperor that
ever stood in need of another man's Eloquence, for that he employed his Parts
quite another way; as in Painting, Sculpture, Music, and sometimes in Poetry,
to which he had a great Inclination. Therefore it could be no other then pure
Flattery, which adjudg'd him the Prize of Eloquence; as it is the custom to
ascribe to Princes all those Qualities, which add to the Luster of Majesty.

ESSAY. LXIV.
THE Temple also erected to Deifie Claudius, was looked upon as the Tower, as
Others will have it, the Pledge of Perpetual Domination.

Says D'Ablancourt; The People also looked upon the Temple dedicated to
Claudius, as a Gage of Perpetual Servitude.

These People, meaning the Britains, who were not yet accustomed to Servitude,
finding themselves tyrannized over by the Romans, without any hopes of being
better dealt with for the future, revolted from their forced Obedience, cut
their Soldiers in pieces, and in two days made themselves Masters of this
Temple, which seemed to have been built for no other purpose but to let 'em
understand, that their Liberty was exterminated for ever. When Princes subdue
great Cities, their Flatterers are the most diligent Persons in the World to
erect Magnificent Trophies in their Honor, which rather serve to exasperate
the Vanquished, then to instruct the Victor what is absolutely necessary for
the preservation of his Conquest. Thus the Brazen Statue of the Duke of Alva
trampling under feet two other lesser Figures, representing the People and
Nobility of the Low Countries, cost the King of Spain the Revolt of Antwerp,
and several other fortified Cities.

ESSAY LXV.
NERO then not well in health, when his Flatterers told him, The Empire would
be at an end, should it be his Fate to die, made answer, etc.

Says D'Ablancourt; One day that he was ill, his Courtiers, in Flattery, told
him that the Empire would expire with him.

This piece of Flattery is a certain proof of the Impertinency of Flatterers.
For, for a Man to tell such a Prince as Nero, who made it his chiefest Glory,
to be an excellent Charioteer, a good Musician, and an elegant Poet, as much as
to say, Eminent in every thing that was beneath a Prince, that the Welfare of
the Empire depended wholly upon him, and that expiring with his Life, it was
never to rise again, was either to laugh at the Emperor, or make himself
ridiculous. Nevertheless we meet with Compliments every day altogether as vain
and impertinent, which however are kindly accepted. So true is that Remark of
Tacitus, That Assiduous Adulation corrupts and blinds the understanding of
Great Personages.

ESSAY LXVI.
NERO inclined to the more Vicious. They assail Seneca with various
Accusations. They objected his assuming to himself alone the Pre-eminence in
Eloquence, and his making Verses more frequently, since Nero had addicted
himself to the study of Poetry: That he openly exclaimed against the Prince's
Pleasures: That he contemned his Agility in the management of Horses; and
derided his Voice when he sang.

The Prince (says D'Ablancourt) was naturally inclined to follow the worst
Counsels. Thereupon it was laid to Seneca's Charge, That he ascribed to himself
the Glory of being the only Eloquent Person in the City; and had made Verses
more frequently, since Nero began to esteem Poetry. That he forbore not in
public to find fault with his Divertisements, and to laugh at his Activities in
driving Chariots; and derided his Excellency in Music.

When once a Prince begins to lend his Ears to Flatterers, Calumny forthwith
makes open War with Men of Virtue. They that accused Seneca, were certain of
overruling Nero, to his Destruction: For that Burrhus and He were always
averse to his Pleasures. For the Court is always full of certain People, who
make it all their business to sound the Disgusts and Discontentments of
Princes, and incense 'em against them who are both the Object and the Cause of
them. And thus it was, that Sejanus exasperated Tiberius against Asinius
Gallus, and that Cossurianus Capito and Eprius Marcellus persuaded Nero to rid
himself of Thrasea. As to what the Courtiers laid to Seneca's Charge, that he
ascribed to himself the sole Glory of surpassing all others in Eloquence, that
was only an Artifice, by which they rendered him so much the more odious to
Nero, in regard that he, continually making use of him for the composing those
Orations and Speeches which he had to make to the Senate, should thereby take
notice, that Seneca made Merchandise of this Eloquence; while 'twas the general
saying, that whatever he spoke or did, either Handsome and Noble, still Seneca
reaped all the Honor of it, as being the first Composer. However, that Nero
was past a Child, and by consequence needed no more Tutors, the Examples of his
Ancestors being sufficient to instruct and advise him in the management of his
Government. By the way observe, that Tacitus seems obliquely to reprove the
Vanity, or rather Vainglory of Senca, in saying, That he caused Nero to
pronounce several Popular Harangues, to show the good Education which he had
given his Pupil, or else in Ostentation of his own Wit. So true it is, that the
wisest of Men are subject to an ardent love and desire of Glory: And according
to the Greek Proverb, It Is the last Shirt they put off.

ESSAY LXVII.
TIgellinus growing daily more powerful, and believing his wicked Artifices,
wherein his chiefest Excellencies lay, would prove more acceptable, could he
but engage the Prince to be an Accomplice with him in his Crimes, he dives into
his Fears, and found that Plantius and Sylla were the objects of his Terror.

Says D'Ablancourt; Tigellinus grew more and more in Credit every day; and to
render himself yet more considerable, he resolved to plunge Nero deeper and
deeper in Vice, as being the only Craft of which he was the absolute Master.
Seeing therefore that the Persons whom the Prince most feared, were Sylla and
Rubellius, he endeavored to render their Exile suspected.

Rubellius Plautus and Cornelius Sylla, were Persons suspected and dreaded by
Nero- The first, because he was descended from Augustus by the Mothers side,
and in the same degree next of Kin to Nero; besides that, he was vastly Rich.
The second, for that having espoused Antonia the Daughter of Claudius, and
Sister to Octavia, Nero's Wife, he seemed to have some Right, or at least some
Pretension to the Empire. For which reason he had procured their Exilement, the
one being Banished into Asia, and the other into Gallia. But Nero (as it is the
custom of bad Princes to be prone to Fears and Jealousies) had still the same
suspicions of these two Men, notwithstanding the distance of their Consinement:
Wherefore Tigellinus, who was not ignorant of the innate Cruelty of his Master,
and understanding from whence his Jealousies arose, infuses into his mind, That
two Persons of such Illustrious Extraction, had the ready opportunity to
revenge themselves in their Exile, where they were at hand to debauch both the
Eastern and German Armies. That Nero might secure himself from the Contrivances
of his Enemies at Rome, where his presence was sufficient to curb the growing
Insolences of Mutiny and Disorder, but that it would be a difficult thing for
him to put a stop to Designs well laid in distant Provinces. That the Gauls
already cast their Eyes upon Sylla, as a Noble Branch of the Dictators Family;
and that the hopes of Asia were no less in the Grandchild of Drusus. That
Sylla's Poverty was a sufficient incitement to push him forward in the
prosecution of bold and daring Attempts, and that he only affected a
counterfeit Supidity, till he met with an opportunity to show his Courage. On
the other side, that Plautus was a Person of prodigious Wealth, and so far from
seemiog to love Repose and Quiet, that he took a pride in imitating the Ancient
Romans, and in practicing the Maxims of the Stoics, a Sect that teaches Men to
be arrogant, turbulent, and daring. These are the dangers that attend Great
Personages: The Flatterers tell the Prince, that the excessive Wealth of a
Subject, is fatal to Domination; that they are too High for the Condition of a
Private Person, and over-shadow the Grandeur of a Prince. And therefore it was,
that the Prince of Conde made Answer to a Proposal that was made him, only to
beg and have such a Government as he should himself desire, That he had Wealth
and Estate sufficient, to preserve himself by his good Services and Loyalty;
that if he had more, it would but render him justly suspected to the King, who
could have no other reason to Ruin him, but only because he was too Great.

If they are Poor, then they are represented to the Prince as Malcontents, who
study all opportunities to meliorate their Fortunes at the Expense of the
Public Tranquillity; that if they are not prevented, their Misery will hurry
'em to Despair; and their Despair to Revolt; and that therefore there is a
necessity to hast'n their Destruction. If they are Persons of mean Parts or
little Courage, those Feeblenesses are interpreted to be refined Policy and
Dissimulation. But if they are Persons of Courage and Merit, then they are
branded for Dangerous Persons, that will soon be their Sovereign's Masters, if
once admitted to the Helm of State. Or if excluded, that they will meditate
Revenge, unless cropped in the budd of their Resentment. Tacitus tells us, That
Plautus led a retired Life, went mean and plain, and kept his Family in good
order: But the more he concealed himself in privacy from the stratagems of
Envy, the more his Reputation exposed him. Therefore that Philosopher was in
the right, who said, That Great Men were born to afford Subjects for Tragedies.

ESSAY. LXVIII.
AFter he found that all his Crimes were applauded as Egregious Acts, he turns
Octavia out of doors, pretending Sterility, and Marries Poppaea.

Says D'Ablancourt; The Emperor finding that all his Crimes were consecrated
by the Senate, Divorced Octavia, as being Barren, and Espouses Poppaea.

Tacitus tells us, That when the Head of Plautus was brought to Nero, he thus
discoursed to himself! What fear thou Nero, now that Plautus and Sylla are
dead? Why do thou not forthwith Espouse Poppaea, and send Octavia home again,
though she be truly Complaisant and Modest, but yet a burden to thee, for the
sake of her Father's Memory, and the affection of the People?

Nero dur'st not repudiate her while Sylla her Father-in-Law was alive, and
Plautus her near Kinsman, who might have revenged her Quarrel. But so soon as
these Obstacles were removed, he never scrupled to dissolve a Marriage that had
advanced him to the Empire. So true it is, that bad Princes cannot endure the
sight of those to whom they are too deeply obliged. Now Nero could not see
Octavia, without recalling to mind those Obligations which he had received from
her Father, who had preferred him before Britannicus his only Son; and
therefore it was that the Memory of Claudius was offensive to his Mind.
Moreover the Marriage of Nero with Poppaea, is a clear demonstration, that when
once a bad Prince is rid of his Fears, he lays aside his Shame as soon.

ESSAY LXIX.
OCTAVIA is commanded to die -- And to this, a Scorn more heinous then the
Cruelty was added, that Poppaea saw her Head cut off, and brought into the
City. For this, Gifts were decreed to be offered to the Temples of the Gods:
Which I have on purpose delivered to Posterity, that whoever shall read the
Story of those Times, whether written by our selves, or any other Author, may
understand, that so often as any Murder was commanded by the Prince, Thanks
were returned to the Gods; and those things which were formerly the Signals of
prosperous Success and Triumph, were now the Concomitants of Public Desolation.

Says D'Ablancourt; He commanded Octavia to die -- And for an addition of
Cruelty, they cut off her Head, to glut the greedy eyes of her Rival. The
Senate for this ordained, that Offerings should be made in the Temples: Which I
mentioned to this end, that They who shall hereafter read this History, may
understand, that as often as the Prince had perpetrated any Crime, so often
Thanks were returned to the Gods; and that that which was formerly a Mark of
our Triumphs, was become the Witness of our Miseries.

ESSAY LXX.
BUT the Child dying within fourth Months, new Flatteries repaid that Loss,
while the Senate decreed the Infant the Honor of a Goddess, a Cushion of
State, a Temple, and a Preistess.

Says D'Ablancourt; The Child died four Months after, which made 'em have
recourse to new Flatteries; so that they decreed her a Temple, with Divine
Honors, and all things thereto belonging.

Nero having honored the Infant with the Title of Augusta, upon the day of her
Birth, which was a thing for which there was no President before, the Senate,
according to the custom of Flattery, which always strives to exceed, would
also needs decree her Divine Honor, that had never yet been given to any
Infant. For when the Prince himself opens the way to Flattery, the Contention
then runs high among the Crowd of Flatterers, who shall bear away the Prize,
especially when he is under the pangs of Affliction: For that being the time,
when Tenderness and Compassion softens the haughty humors of Men, it affords
the most proper opportunities to conquer their Affections.

ESSAY LXXI.
CErealis Anicius, the Consul Elect, pronounced as his peculiar Sentence, that
a Temple should be erected with all the speed imaginable, at the Public Charge,
to Divine NERO. Which he decreed him, as having surmounted Human Grandeur, and
deserving now the Adoration of Men. Which was afterward numbered among
inauspicious Omens of his Death; for the Honors due to the Gods, were never
attributed to the Prince, till he ceased to live among Men.

Says D'Ablancourt; Anicius Cerealis propounded the building him a Temple at
the Public Charge, and in his Proposal gave him the Title of a God, meaning
thereby, that he was exalted above Human Frailty, and deserved to be adored by
Men. But that was afterward taken as an ill Omen of his Death, for that the
Emperors were never honored with that Title, till they were departed out of
this World.

Nero having escaped a Conspiracy, wherein were engaged almost all the chief
Nobility of Rome, and with them, Persons of all sorts and conditions, and many
Women among the rest, the Senate decreed Thanksgivings and Offerings to the
Gods, and particular Honors to the Sun, who had discovered the Enterprise,
just as it was ready to have been put in execution; and to Salus or Safety, out
of whose Temple the Senator Sevinus had taken the Dagger, with which he was to
have given the first stroke: All this was done in Honor to the Gods, and had
been highly commendable, had not Nero been so wicked a Prince. But that there
might be nothing wanting of addition to the Public Misfortune, (for to use the
words of Tacitus, the Gods, in preserving Nero, plainly showed, that they
designed their Vengeance, not their Saving Favor to the Roman People) one of
the Consuls proposed the Consecrating of a Temple to NERO THE GOD, as if he
meant the World should understand, that the Emperor was beholden for his
Deliverance to his Deify'd condition, which exalted him above all Accidents of
Fortune, and rendered him Immortal. Certainly this was the utmost extent of
human Adulation, above which it was impossible for human Wit to soar a Higher
strain. And if 'twere Fear which made the Gods, a Pagan might have been excused
to Deifie a Prince, who after he had murdered his Brother Britannicus, his
Mother, his Wife, his Tutor, seemed only born to exterminate the Race of Human
kind. But how shall we excuse those Christians, who make profession of Virtue
in its purity, and particularly of Evangelic Simplicity, who abandon themselves
to that degree of Flattery, as to compare a Temporal Prince to the True God,
ascribing to him those Attributes which the Sacred Scripture only gives to the
Majesty of Heaven. As if among so many Famous and Renowned Actions with which
the Universe rings, they could not have found Matter for the most Noble
Panegyric in the World, without robbing God of that which incommunicably
belongs to Him, to give it to Caesar.

ESSAY LXXII.
HEnce the Orators took occasion to spend all their Studies upon Panegyrics and
Encomiums in honor of the Prince. The Earth (cried they) produces not only her
usual Fruits, and Gold confused with other Metals, but as if infertiliz'd by
Thy Rays with a new access of Plenty, teems with unaccustomed Productions,
while the Gods throw down their obvious Riches to increase her Store. With
several other servile Raptures, composed with no less Eloquence then Adulation,
as being secure of the Credulity of their Hearers.

Says D'Ablancourt; The Orators made choice of no other Themes for their
Panegyrics, crying out, that the Earth produced not only Fruits and Flowers, or
Metals within its bowels, but from her bosom discovered new Treasures, to
augment the felicity of so flourishing a Reign. With many other things of the
same nature, which their own servile Inclinations, and the Prince's Credulity,
produced with as much Eloquence as Flattery.

Princes are the more easily induced to flatter themselves with the enjoyment
of those successes with which Adulation sooths their Fancies, as being made
believe that all things must be obedient to their Fortune; and that there is no
contending with their Fate. Nero therefore, who naturally coveted things the
most incredible, with ease gave credit to his own Wishes; and his Courtiers
were no less careful how they undeceived him, seeing how lavish and profuse he
was in his Expenses, in hopes of Dido's pretended Treasures.

Thus it is, that unwary Princes are frequently abused and gulled by their
Flatterers, impoverishing their Treasures by immense Profusions, while they
feed 'em with vain Expectations. For his expectancy of promised Wealth, was one
of the causes of public Poverty. It Is the course of Flatterers still to be
buzzing in the Sovereign's Ears, that Princes should never mind good Husbandry;
whereas they should have told 'em, they could not be well too thrifty,
considering there is no end of their Expenses.

The Favorites of Hen. 3. (says Mezeray in his Life) had instilled into his
mind, that all the Estates of his Subjects were absolutely at his disposal; and
that France was such an inexhaustible Fountain of Wealth, that no Prodigality
whatever could draw it dry. But this ill Advice, and worse bad Husbandry (says
he) caused such scarcity of Money, that many times there was not sufficient to
defray the Expenses of the King's Kitchen.

ESSAY LXXIII.
SOme there were who admonished him to make Caesar his Heir of the greatest
part of his Estate, which would be the way to preserve the rest for his
Grandchildren. Which he refused to do, that he might not tarnish with servile
condiscension a Life that he had lead, the nearest that might be to Liberty --
And (speaking of Petronius) neither would he Flatter in his Will either Caesar,
or Tigellinus, or any of the Great Men then in Favor.

Says D'Ablancorut; Some advised him to leave the best part of his Estate to
the Emperor, and to save the rest; but he replied, That after he had lived so
long in Honor, he would not fully the end of his Life with a servile Act --
Nor would Petronius Flatter in his Will, either Nero, or Tigellinus, or any
other of the Favorites, as most of those there that suffered had done.

They who never committed any degenerate Act in their lifetime, are careful to
preserve their Reputation to the last gasp. Nor can there be a smarter
incentive to die like a Man of Honor, then to have always been so. Therefore
Cocceius Nerva, the best Friend Tiberius had, seeing that the Emperor grew more
vicious every day then other, while his Health and Estate were yet in a good
condition, and his Reputation unblemished, chose to die. And Thrasea, whom
Tacitus calls the Pattern of true Honor, made answer to those who advised him
to delay his Death, That he had nothing more to do but to die as he had lived;
that is to say, untainted, unpolluted, and imitating the glorious Exit of those
whom he had emulated in his lifetime. For it is not enough for Great
Personages to be distinguished from Others by the Magnificence of their
Funerals, unless at their Deaths they likewise leave a distinct remembrance to
Posterity.

ESSAY LXXIV.
TRuth was several ways eclipsed and interrupted; first through ignorance of
Public Affairs, now managed by a few; then by the contagious lust of
Adulation, or else by the general hatred of those that were in Power. So that
what between those that were Disgusted, and those that were Obnoxious, there
was no care taken of Posterity. But it is easy for thee to discry and ward off
the Flatteries of a Historian; though Detraction and Envy are heard with willing
Ears. For there is a kind of resemblance between the foul Crime of Servility
and Adulation, but in Malignity, there seems to be some similitude of Liberty.
We cannot deny our Preferment begun by Vespasian, augmented by Tiberius, and
farther advanced by Domitian; but they that pretend to an inviolate Fidelity,
must never be swayed by the Affections either of Love or Hatred.

Truth, Says D'Ablancourt, was clouded and obscured through ignorance of Public
Affairs, wherein few were concerned; and sophisticated either by Flattery or
Hatred. The Historians took no care of Posterity, minding only their Revenge or
their Preferment. But though Flattery and Obloquie both equally disguise the
Truth, it is more easy for a Man to secure himself from the one which is
odious to all the World, then from the other, which deceives us under the false
show of Liberty. It Is true, I owe the first rise of my Fortune to Vespasian,
and the progress of my Advancement to his Children. But when a Man once goes
about to write a History, he must forget Favors as well as Injuries. Wherein
D'Ablancourt mistakes the words of Tacitus, who says no such thing, but only
that no Historian should suffer himself to be biased, either by his Love or by
his Hatred.

Were it absolutely necessary for a Historian to understand not only the Events
of things, but also the Reason and Causes which produced those Events; it would
be impossible for any Man to be a good Historian, that never had any share in
the mannagement of Public Affairs. For the Success and Events of things are
known to all the World, but the Motives, the Interests, the Accidents, the
Springs, that enlivened, moved, and ma^nag'd those Affairs, and were the Causes
of their prosperous accomplishments or miscarriage, are only known to the
Contrivers and Artificers themselves. And for that Reason it is, that
Historians of Republics have more advantage to write the Truth of things, then
the Subjects of Sovereign Monarchs: Where the Secret lies locked up in the
Breast or Cabinet of the Prince, so that they may be well called strangers to
the Government.

The second thing which disguises and disfigures History is Flattery, which in
Republics is but little practiced, where Servility is incompatible with
Equality: But is of absolute use in Monarchies, where it is hard to attain to
Honors and Employments, or long to enjoy 'em, but by gaining the favor of the
Ruling Sovereign, by the customary and usual ways of Assentation and
Obsequiousness.

The third Rock that Shipwracs Truth, is Hatred; which takes place of Flattery,
after the Decease of the Prince. So long as Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, and
Nero Reigned, says Tacitus, Fear disguised and eclipsed the Truth, but so soon
as they were Dead, Hatred published with aggravations, what Fears suppressed
before. Whence we may infer, that the Histories of bad Princes, are never
faithfully Written, neither when they are Alive, as being dreaded then; nor
after their Decease, when Calumny takes her full swinge to disgrace their
Memories. When Princes are hated, men are willing to believe whatever is
reported of 'em, though never so heinous and horrid; nay, many things too, which
are altogether impossible. And for this Reason it is, that Tacitus desires of
those that shall read his Works, never to prefer vulgar Reports and Tales
Incredible, though greedily swallowed, before plain and downright Truths, not yet
corrupted into miracle. There are some Historians that seem to have no other
design, then to abuse Posterity, transmitting to future Ages, Things not to be
believed. And some Persons there are, so unjust and empty in their Judgments,
that no Histories will please their Appetite, but such as are stuffed with
Scandals and Absurdities. And this proneness of the one to Credulity, and of
the other to Falsehood it is, which is the occasion that all Affairs of
Importance are communicated to our understandings, quite otherwise then as they
were really transacted. Add to this, that many times they who have been the
mannagers of these Affairs, and encourage the Author of the Story, having
sometimes acted by the sway of bad Principles, furnish the Writer with
Memorials, so far from discovering the real Truth, that they rather stifle it
in those politic Ambiguities, from whence it is impossible to Disinvelop it.
Whence it comes to pass, that the Historians themselves being first deceived,
the Reputation of their Fidelity serves only to delude others. Moreover the
severity of History is such, as not to suffer that her Authors should discover
the least resentment of Injuries or Favors; She would be shown to the World
without Hatred or Flattery; without Fear or Hope; without refined Subtlety or
Affectation; not to Criticize, but to Instruct; nor to kindle any hatred
against the men themselves, but a detestation of their Vices.

ESSAY. LXXV.
AFelicity of the Times but rarely known, when it was lawful to think what ever
thou would; and what thy Thoughts were, those to utter freely.

Says D'Ablancourt, A Subject more Ample and less Thornie, upon which a Man
might fearless utter whatsoever he thought, which was no small Happiness.

Court Flatterers observe this for a certain Maxim, Never to speak what they
think, but always to speak what they never think, or at least never intend. And
thence it is, that Princes being accustomed to understand 'em, those Persons
that are Sincere and Real-hearted, are at a Nonplus how to please their
Humors, and by consequence to make their Fortunes. Besides, it is no such
Error in Princes, as generally the Common sort believe, not always to favor
and esteem those Persons, who freely and frankly speak their own Thoughts. For
besides, that freedom of Speech approaches too near forbidden License, it is
also no less subject to heighten into Imprudent Zeal, which frequently leaves
behind most mortal stings in the nice Breasts of Princes. The simplicity of the
Dove at Court signifies nothing, if it be not managed by the wisdom of the
Serpent.

ESSAY LXXVI
PRosperity and Success, with sharper Probes, explore the Minds of Men; for
Miseries are endured, but we are corrupted by Felicity. Thou perhaps wilt
retain thy Fidelity, thy Liberty, thy Friendship, the chiefest blessings and
perfections of the Mind; but others will endeavor to vitiate thy good Nature
by their Flatteries. Adulation, and glozing Sycophantries, the most pernicious
poison of a virtuous Inclination, while every one seeks his own Profit and
Interest, will break in upon thee. Thou and I discourse this day together with
Sincerity and Cordial Integrity, others more willingly address themselves to
our Fortune then to us. For to persuade a Prince to what it behooves him to do,
is a task of great difficulty. But to Flatter any Prince, there is no Affection
required. To be Begotten or Descend from Princes is merely Fictitious, nor is
valued any farther. Nero will be also always wished for by the worst of Men;
however it must be both Our Cares, that he be not wished for by the Good and
Virtuous. But this is not a time to insist longer upon Admonitions. The most
profitable and the shortest Method in the regulation of thy Actions, is to
consider what thou would require, and what not, from another Prince. For thou
art now to Govern a People that will not brook an Absolute Servitude, add will
be as impatient of Absolute Liberty.

Says D'Ablancourt, Prosperity has more powerful Incentives then Adversity, for
we give way to the one and resist the other. (Which words are more obscure then
the Text it self.) Though thy Inclinations prompt thee to preserve thy Virtue,
they that have access to thee, will have lost their own. (Which is quite
contrary to the sense of Tacitus.) There is nothing so easy as Complaisance,
and therefore all Men are ready to make use of it. But there are few Persons
that advise Princes what they ought to do, because it is a Task of too great
difficulty. (Here also is the sense of Tacitus again mistaken.) It Is by Fortune
that Men are born Sovereign Princes. (Here again Tacitus expresses himself more
at large.) Only, Do thou learn that the shortest way to Govern well, is to
consider what is to be Approved, and what Condemned in other Princes; to avoid
the one, and follow the example of the other. (Which latter words are
superfluous.) Never were more Noble, nor more Universal Admonitions given to
Princes, to guard themthemselves from the contagion of Flattery. Here they are
warned, that Prosperity runs 'em headlong into more Impieties then Adver- for
that it usually plunges 'em into all manner of Luxury, and all that Tacitus
calls the License of Regality. Which was the Reason of that Saying of Tiberius
himself, That the more Puissant he was, the more in danger he was of Falling;
and that he could not have his Authority, without Diminishing the Law.

Thus what Galba says to Piso, that the obsequious Respect which all men would
pay to his Person would corrupt his Virtue, is a wholesome Admonition which he
gives to all Princes, not to confide in the constancy of their own Resolutions,
nor in their natural inclination to Justice, in regard that if they bow their
Ears to their Flatterers, Adulation by virtue of her alluring Blandishments,
will glide at length through the Ears into the Heart, and tear from thence all
Shame, all Moderation, Docility, Gratitude, Clemency, and all other Virtues
whatever that harbors there. Mezeray gives us a remarkable Example of this, in
the Person of Henry III. His Reign, says he in his Life, might be called the
Reign of Favorites (and consequently of Flatterers) they brought to perfection
their Design, and absolutely Enervated whatever he had of constant Resolution,
and at length dissolved him into all Voluptuousness. And that they might
possess him wholly to themselves, they persuaded him not to show himself so
frequently and so publicly to his Subjects as his Predecessors had done, but to
keep himself reserved and close like the Eastern Monarchs; or if he did at any
time appear among 'em, that it should be with all the dazzling Pomp and
Magnificence imaginable, or else to let 'em know him by the Absoluteness of his
Commands; but above all, to break the Neck of that Custom among the French of
making Remonstrances, and to make 'em understand that there was no other
Justice but his Will. (For according to the Dictates of Flattery, it is but a
precarious Reign, and an Acquiescence in single Authority, which extends it
self no farther, then only Things permitted.) With these Flatteries they raised
him to a high Opinion of himself, and filled him with a Conceit, that he was
the Greatest Prince in the World: That all the Politics of his very Youth, were
Master pieces; and that all the Prudence of the most Cunning Artists in that
Profession, was but mere Ignorance in comparison of his.

Nor is there any Prince whatever, to whom at least some of their Flatterers do
not say as much: A sufficient demonstration that they speak not to the Person,
but the Fortune of the Prince, which is the sole object of their Adorations. As
for the advantage of being born a Prince, Galba tells Piso 'twas only an
accident of Fortune, to let him understand, that it was not an Honor to be so
highly gloried in by Princes, as being that which they received from another,
and was no Honor to 'em farther, then they gave it luster by the brightness of
their own Virtue. They that told Nero he needed no other Rule whereby to govern
himself then the Examples of his Ancestors, while they Flattered him with the
greatness of his Birth, did but give him an oblique hint, that having Augustus
for his Great Grandfather, and Germanicus for his Grandfather, it best became
him to derive his Glory from the Imitation of those two Persons: For it is not
Nobility of Extraction that makes a Prince. Caligula, Claudius, and Nero, were
all Illustrious by Descent, but Scandals to the Empire and the Family of the
Caesar's. Neither is it the vast extent of Dominion that makes an Emperor; but
on the contrary it is rather a Burden, which only serves to display the
Weakness of the Prince, and by consequence to render him Contemptible, when he
is found to be incapable of Government. Witness Galba, who when he came to the
Empire, through his want of Parts, lost all the Reputation which he had
acquired, while he was only Governor of a Province; whom all Men would have
judged most fit for the Imperial Dignity, unless he had Reigned.

A Prince therefore is never to be accounted a Great Prince, unless the glory
of his Merit be equal to those of his Fortune. Historians, says Matchiavel,
gave greater Applauses to Hiero of Syracuse, while he was but as yet a private
Person, then to Perseus, when he was King of Macedon; for that Hiero wanted
nothing but a Kingdom to be a Prince, whereas the other had nothing in him of a
King, but his Kingdom. An Argument, that Posterity considers neither Royal
Birth, nor Royalty it self, as not deserving its Esteem, but how the Prince
managed his Affairs, and carried himself in so high and difficult an
Employment* And in this sense it was, that Tiberius prayed the Gods to grant
him a quiet Mind to the end of his Life, and all necessary Understanding of the
Law of God and Man, that after his Decease, his Name and his Actions might be
Honored with the remembrance and approbation of all his Subjects. Observe by
the way, that in the same place he tells the Senate, how highly Honored should
he deem himself, if Posterity do him but that Justice to acknowledge him for a
Prince worthy his Ancestors, Vigilant, Resolute in Dangers, and Zealous for the
Public Welfare, fearless of Envy or Hatred. To inform those who are Born
Princes, that it ought to be their chiefest Ambition to show themselves worthy
of their Illustrious Extraction, in performing glorious Actions, deserving the
Remembrance of all succeeding Ages. And this was that which Octavius himself
confirmed, when his Mother and his Father in Law dissuading him, to acknowledge
himself Heir to Julius Caesar, he rejected their Counsel, affirming, 'twould be
a shame for him to think himself above a Fortune that Caesar thought him worthy
of: To whose Opinion he would rather stand then theirs, who understood not his
Worth. But to return to Galba.

Nero, said he, will be always lamented and wished for by the Wicked; but it
must be our Duty so to behave our selves that good Men too, may have no reason
to lament his loss; which certainly they will do, if we prove no better then
He. This is an Admonition so much the more necessary for Princes, in regard
that Flatterers, by applauding their Actions whether good or bad, and by
infusing a Conceit into their minds, that they surpass all their Predecessors,
make 'em sometimes worse then they, whose memories are become most odious. It Is
a burdensome thing to succeed a Virtuous Prince, says Pliny in his Panegyric, in
regard it is a difficult labor to gain that Affection which he had done. Which
was the Reason that the younger Pliny told Trajan, that no Body would covet to
Succeed him, because no Body could presume to equal him. But it is no less
dangerous to succeed a bad Prince; for instead of this happy Effect, that the
virtue of a Predecessor should serve to inflame the Emulation of him that
succeeds, it happens that while he fears to be despised or hated upon the
neglect of his Duty, the Vices of the Predecessor seem to authorize, or at
least excuse the the miscarriages of the succeeding Prince. Whence it happens
that the latter, not having any recent Example of moderation to upbraid his
Liberties, and check his Irregularities, he throws of his Mask, and abandons
himself to all manner of Luxury and Impiety, insomuch that his Predecessor,
though he had been very inordinate, is many times recalled again in wishes for
a good Prince. Thus the loss of Tiberius was bewailed in the Reign of Caligula,
Caligula in the Reign of Nero, and Nero in the Reign of Domitius: So true it
is, that wickedness finds out new Rivals every day, especially among bad
Princes, that suffer themselves to be guided by their Flatterers; that bad
Examples can never stop their career, when once they have begun; but that when
once they are strayed out of the high Road, they never stop till they
precipitate themselves into an Abyss of all Disorders.

Lastly, says Galba, if thou would know in short, what method is most proper
to gain the Esteem and Love of the People over which thou art to Rule, call to
thy remembrance whatever has been applauded or condemned in the Princes that
have Reigned in thy time, and then do thou of thy own accord, as formerly
Mecaenas advised Augustus, so manage the conduct of thy Rule, as thou would
expect another Prince should do, were thou a Subject to the same Person. The
Younger Pliny commends Trajan for his observance of this Precept. Long have
thou lived among us (said he) and ventured with us through the same danger, and
thereby thou giv'st us an apparent demonstration, that thou art not forgetful
of the Wishes and Complaints which thou weret wont to make among us, for in thy
Sovereignty do thou fulfill, whatever thou did once desire so ardently, when
a private Subject; only with this difference, that thou art more benign and
clement toward us, then thou did then desire the Prince should be moderate
toward thy Self. And thence, whereas before we wished for no other happiness,
then to have a Prince but somewhat better then the worst of all that ever we
had (speaking of Domitian) we are now, by thy means, become so nice and
difficult, that we cannot endure any other then the Best of Emperors.

And in several other parts of the same Panegyric, Thou make the choice of
thy Friends, among the most Virtuous; and truly it is but just, that they
should be beloved hy a good, who have been hated by a wicked Prince. Thou
know the difference between Domination and Supreme Rule, which is the reason
that they who are now most acceptable to the Prince, have the greatest
Antipathy to a Tyrannical Master. Thou know, that there can be no Power so
great conferred on any single Person, but that Liberty still is more desirable
then Masterless Superiority. And yet so far art thou from triumphing over our
Patience, that thy Triumphs are only over the pride of wicked Princes. Thou
liv'st among us like a Father with his Children. It Is lawful to approach thy
presence, to accompany, and speak to thee. Nor is it thy Pride that puts a
conclusion to the Discourse, but a modest shame and fear of being too
importunate. Thou Govern'st us, and we Obey, but yet no othewise then we Obey
the Laws. Thou have barred up the passage to thy Ears against greedy
Sycophants, who excited thy Predecessors to nothing but Rapine and Violence.
And now there being no such Prince that will afford a ready Ear to pernicious
Counsels, there are none that now will undertake to give it. Insomuch that
being highly obliged to Thee, for the Integrity of thy Manners, we are yet more
engaged to thy Virtues, for the amendment of our own, which the Servility of
former Times had so horribly perverted. So powerful is the Example of a
Virtuous Prince, whether out of that veneration which all Men pay him, or the
desire which we have to please him in our Imitation.

ESSAY LXXVII.
PIso's Oration was modest and civil; nor did he want the Favor of the
Father's; many out of pure good will and affection; more vehemently they that
least desired it; the Middle sort, and the Moderate party were the most, all
meditating private Interest, while obviously obsequious without Care of the
Public.

Says D'Ablancourt; Piso's Oration was very modest, and received with applause
by the Flattery of some, and the Affection of others. They who had the least
desire, testified the most, and every one suffered himself to be busied by his
particular Interest, without any Care of the Republic.

A new Prince always occasions the growth of new Interests, new Expectations,
and new Sycophants. And Flattery was the more excessive toward Piso, while
every one believed that Sycophantry could not choose but be acceptable to a
Person who had always been the Mark of Adverse Fortune. For there is nothing so
lulling to the Senses, as to be Flattered, Caressed and Honored, after a Man
has been a long time Unfortunate. And for that reason it was that Galba,
putting him in mind of his former condition, Hitherto (said he) thou have only
experimented the Cruelties of Fortune; now she begins to look upon thee with a
favorable Eye: However be sure to stand upon thy Guard, for it is more easy
constantly to undergo Adversity, as thou have done, then to resist Allurements
of Prosperity, so ingenious in depraving our Inclinations. It Is not to be
questioned but that thou art a Person of great Virtue, but if once thou giv'st
admision to Flattery, she will soon impair thy Virtue. These and such like were
Galba's Expressions (says Tacitus) to Piso, as to a Private Person, whom he was
about to make an Absolute Prince, but all the rest he spoke as to a Prince
already Enthroned. To let us understand that Galba spoke to the Person of the
Prince, whereas Sycophants make their Addresses only to his Fortune: That the
first Admonished him, as a Father and a Prince; but that others Flattered him,
as the Person that already was their Lord and Master: That Subjects are only
capable of Flattery, because they only seek to please; whereas the Prince who
makes his Choice of a Successor, bespeaks him cordially and sincerely, and
gives him no other then only the best of Counsel.

ESSAY LVXXIII.
THE most Favored of his enfranchiz'd Slaves, and other Servants, laid before
him the Pomp of Nero's Court, his Luxury, his Adulteries, his Divorces, and
incestuous Wedlocks, and all those other Pleasures of Imperial Reign, all which
he thirst'd after, and which if he had the Courage, were his own; but if he
trifled away his Opportunity, would be another's.

His principal Domestics, (says D'Ablancourt) ceased not to lay before him the
Luxury and License of Princes, and to upbraid him secretly, for abandoning to
another, that which was in his power to seize as his own.

Thus we see the gay Allurements that Sycophants make use of to provoke the
Appetites of Princes, and incense 'em to Luxury. This is that which they call,
Releasing Kings from the Subjection of Wardship; but indeed (says Mezeray) Is
the putting them beside their Senses and their Reason. Otho had spent his Youth
in Debauchery, and had insinuated himself into Nero's Favor and Confidence, by
the imitation of his Voluptuousness and Vices. Piso, on the other side, had
always lived a sober Life, and without Scandal, but the severity of his
Manners, which pleased Galba, displeased the old Court, which Nero had
accustomed to honor a Voluptuous Prince, no less then formerly they were wont
to reverence a Prudent and Moderate Sovereign. Therefore it was that Otho, who
was of the same temper with Nero, and as such a one, desired by all the
Courtiers, was so highly encouraged by his Domestics, and his Friends, to take
Possession of the Empire. For the looser and more extravagant sort of Courtiers
are afraid of nothing more then a Virtuous and Vigilant Prince, because their
Interest is incompatible with his Duty. The young King (says Mezeray, speaking
of Charles VIII.) was naturally inclined to the study of Virtue, addicting
himself, as much as his leisure would permit him, to the reading of good
Authors, and to converse with learned Men. But the Sycophant, to whose humor,
a serious and prudent Prince is a burthensom Master, before the Year was out,
plunged him again into the love of Toys and Women.

I find moreover two or three things more to be observed upon the Choice which
Galba made of Piso to succeed him, rather then Otho, who being the first who
had declared himself for Galba, was in hopes to have been adopted for his Son.
The first is, that Galba rather chose to expose himself to Otho's Resentment,
to whom he was so highly obliged, then to advance to the Empire a Person, who
was guilty of all Nero's Vices; considering, that would be of little benefit to
the Publick-weal to have escaped Nero's Violencies, should it relapse under the
power of his Companion in Debauchery. The second thing is, that Virtuous
Princes make it their chiefest Glory to choose a good Successor; whereas a bad
Prince en deavours to find a worse then himself, to the end he may be missed,
when gone. Augustus (said Galba to Piso) made Choice of a Successor out of his
own Family, but I choose mine out of the Commonwealth: Not that I am destitute
either of Kindred or Friends, but because of all my own and thine, thou seem
to me most worthy to be the Heir of my Fortune. My Age permits me not to do the
Roman People any other kindness, but only to leave them a Virtuous Successor.
But thou who art in the flower of thy Youth, have it within thy power to bless
'em with a Virtuous Prince and long Tranquillity. The Younger Pliny tells us,
that Nerva was beloved and lamented by all good Men, for that he had made such
Provision, that no body should have cause to miss him, and being a most worthy
Prince himself, he was not afraid to make Choice of one that might exceed him.
And in another Place he says, That a good Successor is a most evident Mark of
the Divinity of the Prince that makes the Election.

The last thing is, the difference between the Advice which Princes give to
their Successors, and that which Sycophants give to Princes. When a Prince
admonishes another, it is his usual custom to tell him, that Sovereignty is a
weighty Burden, and a Condition above all others most subject to the
Capriccio's of Fortune: That the Higher a man is exalted, the more in danger he
stands of the Precipice: That Power is never truly secure, when excessive, and
rarely longer permanent then the Life of him that exercises it: That there is
nothing in the World so unstable, or so difficult to preserve, as the Fame of
Power that rests not on its proper foundation, of Justice and Reason: That it
is impossible for a Prince to know or act all things himself, and therefore had
need of good Counsel and Assistance: That his Ministers and He, transacting
unanimously together, the Public Affairs will be better managed: That he ought
not to study Dominion over Slaves, but equal Government over Children and
Subjects accustomed to rational and not to blind Obedience: That Loyal Subjects
never grudge to pay Taxes or Impositions, but ill brook the Violence, the
Cruelty and Avarice of the Officers: That a Government cannot long subsist
between unjust Command and forced Obedience. I do not Interest my self, said
Tiberius, in in the Choice of Edils, Pretors or Consuls; something greater and
more sublime is expected from a Prince; nor do I make use of Power, where I can
act by Law. Then he goes on, that Liberality, when excessive, proves
pernicious, as forcing to repair by Injustice, what Extravagancy has
dissipated; That Clemency advances the Reputation of Princes; and that having
all things at their Command, there remains nothing for them to desire more,
then only to Eternize their Happy Memories. These are the Temples, those the
Noble Statues, said Tiberius, that I desire to be erected in your minds; for as
for those that are built of Stone, should I deserve the hatred of succeeding
Ages, they would be scorned, and soon defaced.

On the other side, Sycophants infuse into the ears of Princes, that they have
not only an Absolute Power, but a Universal Understanding, and that their
Subjects can pretend to nothing but only the Honor of a blind Obedience: That
the Will and Pleasure of a Prince, is the Rule of Justice, and by consequence,
that all the Actions of Kings are Infallibly Just: That a Prince who Governs
according to Laws, is only a Precarious Prince; and that he who listens to the
Advice of his Counsel, is a Pupil: That all ways and means whatever which
conduce to the preservation of Authority, are honest and lawful, provided they
be successful: That the Impov'rishing of the People, and keeping the Nobility
Low, are the main Pillars of Imperial Power. That Privileges, Exemptions and
Moderate Taxes serve only to render the People untractable and mutinous;
whereas they are supple, submiss and yielding, when they have nothing to lose:
That Luxury, Adulteries, Revelling and choice of Women, are the Rewards of
Principality: That it is of little importance to be beloved, but of great
moment to be feared; for that Fear is supported by the dread of Punishment,
which never ceases; but that Love is preserved only by a certain tie of
Complaisance, which Men as often break, as fancy and humor inspire 'em: That
Clemency is a dangerous Virtue, and Modesty fitting only for a Citizens Wife.
And lastly, That Princes never need take any care what Posterity says of 'em,
as being no competent Judge of the Truth or Falsehood of those that applaud or
discommend, since it is the Fate of Historians, to be always suspected either of
Flattery or Malice.

ESSAY LXXIX.
THen from all Parts of the City, as Othonians met Othonians, some augmented
the general Fears, others minced the Truth, not then refraining from their
wonted Adulation.

Says D'Ablancourt; People crowded together from all Parts of the City, some
augmenting the danger, others lessening it as much, not forgetting their usual
Flattery even in that extremity.

Otho was Proclaimed Emperor, and Galba now no longer in Possession of the
Sovereignty; nevertheless there were some People that Flattered the Unfortunate
Prince, as if after he had lost the Empire, he had something of higher
Advantage to lose. An evident proof, that Sycophants never can find in their
hearts to speak sincerely to Princes; and that Princes are Flattered, because
it is the Mode, without the least anxiety for their good or ill success.
Sycophants never tell 'em any thing but what is grateful, though it be never so
prejudicial. They who soothed up Galba at such a Conjuncture, when the
preservation of the Imperial Dignity, and his Life lay at stake, were so much
the more to blame, in regard they knew that Galba was always desirous that the
Truth should be told him, as one that detested Flattery; and that his Safety
then depended upon true Intelligence of the imminent danger. But in short, it
is the Fate of Princes to be deluded, even to the last minute of their Lives.
Mezeray tells us, That after the French had lost the Castle of St. Angelo,
between Padua and Milaine the most prudent Captains (and particularly Lewis de
la Tremouille) were of opinion, that Francis the First should raise his Siege,
laying before him, That his Army was wasted a third part more then he was made
believe it was; that five thousand Grisons had deserted him, under pretense of
going to defend their own Country against the Milaneses, who perhaps with their
connivance, had taken Clavenna from them; and that the Enemies Army, for want
of Pay, would certainly Disband within fifteen days at farthest. But those
Reasons were not of force sufficient to alter his Resolutions. The
Sycophantries of his Favorites, overruled the Counsels of his Experienced
Captains. And that was the reason that his Enemies, not able any longer to keep
their Forces in a Body resolved to give the King Battle; who was there taken
Prisoner, together with the Chief Nobility of the Kingdom. So that it was held
for Prophetical, what a Jester told the King, when he had concluded upon the
War of Italy: Sir (said he) your Counselors seem to me, to be a company of
Fools. They say very true, that your Majesty shall enter Italy; but they do not
tell you how you shall get out again.

ESSAY LXXX.
I Shall not boast of my Nobility or Moderation (said Piso to the Pretorians,)
nor is there any necesity for me to dispute my Virtues in competition with
Otho. His Vices, in which he only glories, ruined the Empire, even then, when
he acted Nero's Friend.

Says D'Ablancourt; There was no need for him to urge his Virtues there, nor
those of his Ancestors, in comparison with Otho's vices, which had ruined the
Empire, when he was no more then a private Person. But this does not express
the sense of Tacitus (Cum amicum Imperatinis Agecet) by which he plainly gives
us to understand, that Otho was Nero's Confident, and the Pandar to his
Pleasures, and consequently the cause of the Disorders of his Reign.

To be a good Prince, it is not sufficient for him to be only better then one
that has been very vicious. Otho had lived a life so licentious, while he was
one of Nero's Courtiers, that Piso, whose Manners were without reproach, would
have thought himself dishonored to have made a Parallel between his Deserts,
and Otho's Vices. On the other side, Sycophants observe this method, that when
a Prince is guilty of those Miscarriages which are abhorred by all the World,
they still amuse 'em with stories of the Vices of his Predecessors, or of such
and such Princes living at the same time; which they aggravate to that degree,
that his own seem Peccadillo's and Trifles in respect of their Enormities.
Whence it comes to pass, that instead of Amendment, he grows Worse. And
therefore if it were true that Comines spoke those words to Lewis XI. whose
Favorite he was, which he repeats in his Memoire, we may suspect him to have
been as much a Sycophant as any of the Rest.

Comines, says Mezeray, represents him extremely prudent in Adversity, on that
penetrated to a Miracle into the Interests and Thoughts of Men, and then made a
dextrous use of 'em to his own ends, ragingly suspicious and jealous of his
Power; absolute in his Will; Inexorable; a terrible Oppressor of his Subjects,
and yet one of the best Princes of his Time.

Certainly the rest were then most heinous Criminals, or else Comines was a
great Sycophant. As for what Piso said, that Otho had a mind to the Empire in
the Reign of Nero, whose chiefest Confident he had been, for three or four
Years together, thereby we are instructed that Sycophants (for Otho, while a
private Person, was his Crafts-master in that goodly Calling) are the common
Pests of Kingdoms, by reason of the pernicious Counsels which they infuse into
the Ears of Princes, which is the reason that Tacitus calls 'em the Corrupters
of Government, and Pedagogues of Tyranny.

ESSAY LXXXI.
NOR was it Judgment or Truth that swayed their Affections, but according to
Custom, license of Acclamation, and a habit of Flattering any Person whatsoever.

Says D'Ablancourt, It Is neither Affection nor Judgment, but Custom and
Flattery. Far short of the Author's sense.

There are very few Princes that are beloved, or indeed that can escape
Irrational and Brutish Hate: But they are all Flattered without exception. For
that Flattery never makes its Addresses to the Person, generally the Objects of
it will, but to their Fortune which is always adored; Galba was despised
because of his Old Age, and hated for his Severity, and his Covetousness:
Nevertheless, both People and Grandees could not forbear to Flatter him, while
they demanded Otho's Life, and the Banishment of all his Accomplices, so long
as they thought the Conspiracy would be crushed before it got to a head. And
when the Report was spread abroad that Otho was killed, they not only expressed
their Joy by public Acclamations and Congratulations, but a great number of the
Knights and Senators who thought Otho dead, crowded to the Palace to
Congratulate him, bemoaning their hard Fortune, that had rescued Otho from
their Revenge. An evident Example to teach us how little trust or heed there is
to be given to the fair words or services of Sycophants, and how unwary those
Princes are that put their Confidence on such weak and failing Support: They
were therefore in the Right, who to encourage Flavius Salinus to take up Arms
for his Brother Vespatian against Vitellius, told him, that the People, who
seemed to love Vitellius, would change both their Opinions and their Notes, so
soon as he should declare himself; and that all the Flatteries, and
Acclamations, which the Multitude hollowed forth to Vitellius, would as loudly
fill the Fire and Honor of Vespatian, so soon as they found the strength of
his Party.

ESSAY LXXXII.
OF Menaces an undaunted Contemner; impenetrable to Flattery.

Says D'Ablancourt, Invincible both to Flattery and Fear.

The greatest part of Princes make a much stouter Resistance against Fear then
Flattery. For Menaces provoke their Courage; but Adulation poisons the very
Mind, and depraves their Inclinations* Menaces waken 'em, soft and soothing
Sycophantry lulls 'em asleep. And they lend an ear the more willingly to their
Sycophants, in regard that Complaisance being one of the Properties of Love,
they believe themselves to be beloved by those that please their Humor.
Cabrera tells us, that Philip the Second, King of Spain, had a custom to
interrupt his Sycophants* with this Expression, Dex ad esso, y de zid lo que
importa: Let this alone, and talk something to the purpose. Words that become
the Lips of all Princes, to whom their Sycophants never prattle other then what
is either Prejudicial or Unprofitable. Besides, that if Princes would not
listen to their Stories, but only to matters of Importance, Flatterers would
have little or nothing then to say.

ESSAY LXXXIII.
ALL thronged in heaps to the Camp, got before the next, strove to outrun the
foremost, upbraided Galba, extolled the Soldiers Judgment, kissed Otho's Hand;
and the greater their Dissimulation was, the more was the Bustle and the
Ceremony.

Says D'Ablancourt, Every one made haste before his Companion to get to the
Camp, where the Cursed Galba, applauded the Soldiers, and kissed Otho's Hand,
redoubling their Caresses, the more feigned they were.

What I have already observed in the IV. and LXXXI. Articles may serve for an
Explanation of this, and therefore I shall add no more then one single
Reflection of Particulars, which is, That Flattery is for the most part
attended by Treachery. For in regard that Sycophants adore the Fortune only,
not the Person of the Prince, they soon exchange their Person, when the Person
exchanges once his Fortune. Witness their Invectives against Galba, merely to
reconcile themselves to Otho, whose Life they had demanded but some few Hours
before, for a Sacrifice to their fury. So that Tacitus might well say, that
whoever had beheld those Hurries, would never have believed but that they had
been another Gang of People, and quite another Senate. Which brings to my
remembrance what a Roman Senator said to Plancus, who was Secretary to
Antonius, who accused his Master and his Benefactor of several Crimes, after he
had been one of his most obsequious Flatterers. Certainly, said he, Antonius
must have committed a world of wicked Actions, the day before thou left'st him.
Thus it is with Sycophants, while the Prince's Liberality and Favors last,
they Deifie him; but when he either grows weary of their Company, or by any
Misfortune to be deprived of his Grandeur, they are the first to render and
leave his Reputation. So true it is, that all sorts of Friends never believe
themselves to be any way concerned in Gratitude to those who are in Adversity;
or that the Fidelity of those that have received the greatest Favors, is of
any longer permanency then the good Fortune of their Benefactor.

ESSAY LXXXIV.
THE Magistrates contend to outvie each other in Adulation: The Fathers flock
in haste to the Senate: The Tribunitial Power: The Title of Augustus, and all
the rest of the Imperial Dignities, are decreed Otho; every one striving to
bury in Oblivion the scurrilous Invectives and opprobrious Language that had
been promiscuosly bestowed upon his Reputation before.

Says D'Ablancourt; The Praetor assembled the Senate, where the principal Men
strive to outvie each other in Submission and Flattery. They bequeath Otho the
Tribunitial Authority, the Title of Augustus, and all the rest of the Imperial
Honors, in hopes he might forget the Affront and Injuries he had received.

Injuries done to Princes, are always repaired by excess of Flatteries; and
that so much the rather, because that sort of Reparation costs the Sycophants
nothing, who have neither Honor nor Shame to expend. And then again, the Dread
which terrify the Roman Grandees, lest Otho should revenge their former
Obloquies, and abusive Scurrility, serves as a Document to Great Personages to
keep within the bounds of Decency in season of Turbulency and Disorder, when
the Common People let loose the reigns of Vulgar Malice and Contempt. The
People are always exempted, by reason of their number. On the other side, the
Nobility are always exposed, by reason of their Wealth, which causes all their
Words and Actions to be narrowly scanned and pried into. The People however are
overjoyed when such Ringleaders once abet, encourage and accompany their
Insolence: Though indeed, it should be the consideration of Great Personages,
that the Favor of the Mobile, are no shelter against a Prince's Resentment.
For to lay a Foundation upon the Multitudes (says Machiavil) is to build upon
the Mud.

ESSAY LXXXV.
VItellius, among the more prudent and ridgid sort, was thought to be a Man of
a poor and pitiful Spirit; which his Favorers called his Affability and
Mildness, as being a Person that squandered away his own, and was no less
profuse of other Men's, without either Moderation or Judgment: And thus they
interpreted for Virtues, most Egregious Vices, in greedy hopes to Command their
Master.

Says D'Ablancourt; His readiness to give away both his own and the Estates of
other Men, without rule or measure, was looked upon as Liberality and
Genorosity, though they that censured more severely, called it his Weakness and
Prodigality. But the eager desire of Dominion, made 'em disguise his Vices
under Virtuous Appellations.

Sycophants extol the Vices of Great Men, because it is their Interest to
foment and cherish 'em. So that if Princes had not their Vices, at what a loss
would Flatterers be, who have only that Sally-Port open to creep into their
Favor, and only that same ignominious means to preserve what they have once
attained? The Younger Pliny says, that Princes have no need of Masters to
instruct 'em to be wicked; yet let 'em be never so bad, yet they learn many
things which else they never would have thought of, had not Sycophants been
their Tutors. Nor is there any Vice to which a Prince may be prone, which they
more seduliously labor to foster and cherish, then his Luxury and his
Prodigality, in regard they are Persons that get the largest share of his
Profusions. Henry III. of France, was one of the best Princes in the World, but
Francis D'O, one of his principal Sycophants, and as an addition to the King's
Misfortune, Super-intendent of his Exchequer, made swift haste to corrupt and
vitiate his good Nature. He was a Person (says Dlozeray) entirely devoted to
Luxury, who every day persuaded the King to make new Edicts, which were called
Bursal, and to go to the Parliament, by his Presence to force their
Confirmation. And this was one of the chief Causes of the ruin of that Prince,
by his losing insensibly that Respect and Affection which the People had for
him: Nor did the Heads of the LEAGVE fail to make their advantage of it, by
augmenting their Contempt and Aversion to his Person. To which the Insolency of
his Favorites did not a little contribute, who acted the parts of more then
Sovereign Princes, and disposed of all things with an absolute Will and
Pleasure.

ESSAY LXXXVI.
A Loud shout ensued and the Acclamations of the People no less immoderate then
dissembled: As if they had been pouring forth their Wishes for the Prosperity
of Caesar the Dictator, or the Emperor Augustus; with equal strife did they
implore the Gods for the Prosperity of his Expedition; not out of Fear or Love,
but an inflamed desire of Servitude.

Says D'Ablancourt; The Oration was received with great applause, and attended
by the feigned and excessive Praises, as if they had been to honor the
Departure of Caesar Augustus; and this not for Fear or Affection, but by the
instinct of Custom and Flattery.

I have observed in several places, that Flattery and Love are incompatible,
and never makes its Addresses but only to the Fortune of Princes. So that
although Otho fell short of Caesar's Worth, or the Merits of Augustus,
nevertheless the People paid him the same Honors which they would have
rendered to either of Them, because he was exalted to the same Dignity. For the
People measure their Reputation by the present Grandeur of the Prince, and not
by his Credit and Reputation, of which they are not capable to judge. They
despised Galba, for that being Old, his Reign could be of no long endurance. On
the other side, Otho, far inferior to Galba for his Parts and Integrity, was
reverenced because his Youth promised a long Reign.

ESSAY. LXXXVII.
OTHO was desirous of Battle: And his Brother Titianus, and Proculus the
Captain of his Guards, as being Persons of little Experience in War urged him
on; assuring him that as Fortune, the Gods and Otho's Genius were present at
his Councils, so would they also assist his Enterprises: A piece of Flattery
which they made use of, lest any one should oppose their Advice.

Otho (says D'Ablancourt) was willing to give Battle, seconded by his Brother,
and the chief of the Pretoriun Countiers, who spunr'd him on for want of
Experience, and cried out, That the Gods who had assisted Otho in managing the
Design, would never abandon him in the execution of it; adding Flattery to
Impatience, lest any one should presume to oppose 'em.

There is no sort of Flattery so bad, as that which precipitates a Prince to
the rash and overhasty execution of a Design, where there can be no
miscarriage twice committed. In the most Important Affairs of Private Persons,
there is always some hope, or something of last remedy, to which he may have
recourse; so that a Man with the absolute ruin of himself, may try a second
Fortune. But the Affairs of Princes, especially such as are advanced of a
sudden from a Private Condition to Absolute Dominion, and whose unstable
Fortune is still upon the Totter, are subject to so many Accidents, and depend
upon so many Circumstances, that the smallest Error is enough to unhinge the
whole Frame of their Designs for ever. History furnishes us with a remarkable
Example of the Fatality of Sycophant Advice in the Person of Francis Duke of
Anjou, Brother to Henry III. of France, who lost Flanders and Brabant by
miscarrying in his Design upon Antwerp. They, by whom he was more particularly
governed (says Mezeray*) were Persons without Honor or Fidelity, among the
rest Quinsay his Secretary, Fervaques, and Aurilly his Son* in-Law, the Son of
a Sergeant of La Terte near Blois, with his Playing upon the Lute, his Voice,
his Dancing, and such other Effeminate Qualities, more proper for the Affection
of a Young Lady, then a Great Prince, had raised to the highest degree of his
Master's Favor. These People keeping him still at defiance with the Duke of
Montpensier, and other Men of Honor, spurred him on continually to make
himself Master of those Towns and Places of which he promised them the
Government. For the Counsels of Sycophants are always biased. And for that
reason it is that all Princes, who lay the Foundations of great Designs, ought
seriously to deliberate, whether their intended Enterprises will turn to their
Honor, and the Benefit of the Public; whether the Execution will be easy; or
at least, whether it be not beyond their Strength and their Industry; and,
whether they that advize 'em, have Courage and Fidelity enough to venture equal
Dangers with 'em and for 'em: For many times they happen to Engage themselves
in a War, of which they know not how to make an Honorable end when they have
begun it: In regard that if they repent, their coming fairly off is in the
power of another. Besides that, their own Authority lessens, as the Reputation
of their Generals increases. Therefore Tiberius rather chose to terminate his
Differences by Treaty, then by Arms; and always concealed his Losses upon the
Frontiers of the Empire, because he would not be obliged to give the Command of
his Armies to Persons that might find him work at home. There is not the same
equality of Prosperity and Adversity (said Mucienus to Vespatian) between Thee
and Me: For if we Vanquish, I shall enjoy no more Honor, then what thou will
be willing to confer upon me. But if we fail in our Enterprise, we shall share
alike in our Misfortune. All Generals speak the same words; but when once they
become Victors, they change their Language, and many times their pretensions
are too excessive, that their Victory would prove a Burden to the Prince and
State, should they be gratified to the utmost of their demands. For, according
to the saying of M. de la Rochefoucauld, It Is a difficult thing for a Man to
contain himself within the limits of Moderation, after the performance of great
Services, which inspire sublimer Thoughts of Rule and Dominion into those that
never think their Merits rewarded to the full. Then as to the point of giving
Battle (says Comines) whoever he be, it is expedient for him to consider,
before he hazards his Kingdom upon a Battle; for the loss of a small number of
Men, dismays the Courages of all the rest beyond belief; and instead of
terrifying the Enemy, begets a Contempt of the Loser. And some few lines after,
Let it be how it will, a Battle lost, draws a large Train behind it, to the
prejudice of whoever is vanquished. And in another place (speaking of Lewis
XI.) The King, said he, whatever could be said or argued to the contrary, was
resolved he would not Fight, as being resolved not to venture the Fortune of a
Battle. And in my Opinion, he took the most prudent course. To conclude, I
shall only add one single Reflection more, and more remarkable then the former,
out of the same Comines, upon another usual piece of Adulation which Flatterers
daily insinuate into the ears of Princes, that they should rely upon their own
good Fortune, and despise their Enemies. A notable Example, says he, (speaking
of Edward IV. King of England, who was driven out of his Kingdom in fifteen
days,) for Princes to take notice of, who pretend to be always fearless of
their Enemies, and to disdain and scorn an Armed Foe. It Is true, the chiefest
part of their Courtiers, uphold 'em in their vain Conceits, to please their
Humors: And they think they are to be esteemed and valued for it; and that
People will applaud 'em for their courageous advice. But the wiser sort look
upon those Rodomontadoes as mere Folly; since it is a virtue to fear with
Prudence, and provide against it. It Is a great Treasure for a Prince to have a
Wise Man at his Elbow, provided he believe him, and that he have permission to
tell him the Truth. For no Person is more likely to Ruin himself, then he that
lays aside all Fear, his Security and Confidence being generally the beginning
of his Destruction.

ESSAY LXXXVIII.
TItianus and Proculus being overrul'd in their Counsels, betook themselves to
the Prerogative of their Generalship.

Says D'Ablancourt, They seeing that they were vanquished by Reason, fled to
the Authority and Commands of the Emperor.

Otho had in his Army three, the most Prudent and most Experienced Captains of
that Age, Suetonius Paulinus, Annius Gallus, and Marius Celsus, who were all
three of a contrary opinion to Titian and Proculus, That it was not the safest
course to give Vitellius Battle; alleging that Vitellius had all the reason in
the world to be desirous of Combat, and Otho to spin out the time in delay; for
that the Enemy had all the Force he could make, as not being out of hopes of
any Succor from Gallia, that began already to totter; nor could they expect
any Recruits from the Rhine, which would be then exposed to the Incursions of
the Barbarians; that his supplies out of England had the Seas to cross, and an
Enemy to oppose 'em already; that Spain had but few Soldiers. That Gallia
Narbonensis was sufficiently Infested by Otho's Navy, and had not yet forgot
the misfortune of their last Engagement: That the Army of Vitellius lay
enclosed between the Po, and the Alps, without any hopes of Relief by Sea, and
could not subsist long in a Country harrass'd as that had been, by the
continual March of so many Legions; that if they could but spin out the War
till Summer, the very change of the Climate would bring Diseases among the
Germans, who were the most hardy Soldiers among all the Vitellians; and that
many Armies who have driven all before 'em at first, had been forced to
dissipate for want of meeting an Enemy to fight with. On the other side, that
Otho had plenty of all things; that Pannonia, Moesia, Dalmatia, and all the
East were at his Devotion, with numerous Succors; and more then all this, that
he had Rome at his back, the Seat and Rudder of the whole Empire; together with
the favor of the Senate, whose Majesty had been always held in Veneration,
though it might be for a time Eclipsed; that the Immense Treasures which he had
in his Possession, would soon render him Master of the whole; in regard that
Money was far more prevalent in a Civil War, then the edge of the Sword; that
the Soldiers were accustomed to the heats of Italy: That the River Po was a
sufficient stop to impead the farther march of the Enemy, upon which he had
several Cities well Fortified and Garrisons, which as he found already by the
Resistance that Placentia had made, would with no less Vigor and Fidelity
oppose the Enemy: That therefore his business was to spin out the War, or at
least to stay for the fourteenth Legion, so highly esteemed for their Valor,
together with the Forces out of Moesia, which were all expected within a few
days: That then Otho might again deliberate what he had to do, and if he
thought it his wisest course then to give Battle, he might do it much more to
his Advantage, with the Assistance of that new Reinforcement.

These Reasons were so Convincing, that neither Titianus nor Proculus had any
thing to reply. But in regard that Otho was so extremely desirous of Battle, as
one that was impatient of Languishing so long between Hope and Fear, both
Titianus and Proculus Flattered him to his Destruction, by telling him, that
all things would give way to his Fortune. A piece of Sycophantism, that was one
of the principal Causes of his Ruin; whereas if they had listened to the
wholesome Advice of Paulinus and his Colleagues, Otho might have been persuaded
to have changed his Resolution. But that which is here most observable is this,
that Proculus (as it is the custom of Favorites, and Sycophants) had not only
a particular Antipathy against those three Generals, to whom he was inferior
both in Probity and Understanding, but made it his business to Calumniate, the
high Reputation of Paulinus, Celsus's vigor, and the accomplished Experience
of Gallus; so that being now mistrusted and suspected by their Sovereign, they
were only Nominal Generals, whose unhappiness and chief perplexity it was, to
see their Prudence made a Cloak to cover the Miscarriages and Ignorance of
others. A misfortune that happens too often in the Courts of Princes, that
suffer themselves to be made a Prey to the passions of their Favorites.

ESSAY LXXXIX.
THE Death of Otho being known, the Senate presently decreed him all those
Honors that had been studied in the longest Reigns of Preceding Princes. A
return of Thanks was also ordered to the German Armies, and Commissioners were
sent likewise to Officiate their Obsequious Congratulations.

Says D'Ablancourt, The Senate heaped upon the new Emperor all the Honors,
which others had obtained during a long Reign, and ordered Thanks to the German
Legions, with a Deputation to the Prince, to Congratulate his coming to the
Imperial Crown.

Here are three Things to be observed. First, That upon the first intelligence
of Otho's death, and that the Soldiers had sworn Allegiance to Vitellius, at
the Instigation of the Governor of the City, the People Crowned with Flowers
and Laurel Garlands, carried the Images of Galba round the Temples as it were
in Procession; and passing by the place where he had spilt his Blood, they
covered it with a Pyramid of Garlands, as it were to Erect him a Monument.
Which was done to blacken Otho's Memory, who had wrested from him both the
Empire and his Life; and in Honor to Vitellius, who seemed to be the Avenger
of his Death.

The second Thing is, That when Tidings were brought to Rome of the Revolt of
the German Legions, and the Election of Vitellius to the Empire, the Senate and
People of Rome openly declared the Calamity of the Commonwealth, which was
fallen into the hands of two, the Vilest and most Infamous Persons in the
World. Shall we repair to the Temples cried they, to offer up our Prayers for
Otho or Vitellius? Certainly, most Impious and Detestable will be our
Devotions, either for the one or the other of those two Rivals, of which two
whoever proves the Victor, will be still the worser Nevertheless the same
Senate and People that Cursed Otho and Vitellius, as two Subjects fatally
elected the Ruin of the Empire, now decreed to Vitellius those Honors which
were never given to Augustus himself. So strangely do Sycophants and Flatterers
differ from themselves, and so subject are they like Bulrushes, to bend with
every wind of the Court.

A third Remark is this, That when the two Armies that had Proclaimed these two
Emperors, came to understand how unfit they were to manage so high an
Employment, and consequently began to repent of the bad Choice they had made so
much to their Dishonor, presently some time before Otho's death, they fell to
deliberate Considerations about a Reconciliation one among another, for the
Election of an Emperor to the general Satisfaction, and to restore Peace and
Concord to the Empire. For the Senate therefore to give the German Legions
thanks for the Choice which they had made of Vitellius, the Scorn and Contempt
of Mankind, was one of the poorest and meanest Condescensions imaginable. And
thus you see there is nothing so vile and abject, which Flattery will not stoop
to.

ESSAY XC.
BUT when the Army importuned him to honor with the Dignity of Knighthood his
Enfranchiz'd Vassal Asiaticus, he reproved their Immodest Flattery.

Says D'Ablancourt; But upon the request of the Army, to make his Enfranchiz'd
Slave a Knight of Rome, he put a stop to their Flattery.

It Is one of the meanest and the lowest condescensions of Flatterers, to seek
to ingratiate themselves with the Prince, by soliciting the Interests and
Aggrandizement of such as they know to be their Favorites, though Persons of
never so base an Extraction, without Merit or Honor. In the Fifty fourth and
Fifty fifth Principal Heads, we have discoursed at large of all the servile
Flatteries, to which the Senate stooped, while they labored to heap up Honors
upon the Enfranchiz'd Vassal of Claudius. We Courted Satrius and Pomponius
(said a Roman Knight to Tiberius) and we held it for an inestimable Honor to
be accounted then Enfranchiz'd Slaves and Porters to Sejanus. Mezeray reports,
That the Cardinal Chancellor de Birague, had a greater esteem for one of his
Lacquies that was his Favorite, then for all the Laws of the Kingdom: For it
was his saying, That he was not the Kingdoms, but the King's Chancellor. An
Expression becoming an Italian Sycophant. As for Vitellius, we are to observe,
that after he he had refused to grant this favor at the request of his whole
Army, which was to bestow Gold Rings upon Asiaticus, and thereby to dignifie
him with the Order of Roman Knighthood, yet he conferred the Honor upon him
afterward at a great Banquet. So difficult a thing it is for Luxurious Princes
to withstand the force of Flattery, and to guard themselves from the
insinuating Artifices of certain small Officers that creep into their favor by
unwarrantable means, as Asiaticus did. Therefore it was the saying of the
Younger Pliny, That a Prince who preferrs mean and abject People, can be no
great Prince himself. And in another place he thus addresses himsel to Trajan.
Though thou bestow'st the marks of thy favor upon thy Enfranchiz'd Vassals, yet
they are no other then such as are only convenient for their Quality. Thou
form'st 'em so, and have such an eye over 'em, that they dare not presume to
measure themselves by thine, but by their own Fortune.

ESSAY XCI.
BEing heard, they made use of Justifications rather useful then seemly: For
they acknowledged themselves guilty of Treachery to Otho, of their own accords;
as if they had designed the long march of the Army before the Battle, the
Tiring of the Othonians, and the Pestering the Battalions with Carriages on
purpose, and attributed to their own perfidiousness several fortuitous Events,
which only Chance produced. Thereupon Vitellius seemed to believe their
Perfidie, and absolved 'em from the Crime of forfeited Fidelity to Otho.

Paulinus and Proculus (says D'Ablancourt) had Audience, and defended
themselves by Excuses not so honest as necessary: For they ascribed to their
own Cunning the long march of the Army before the Battle, and the encumbrances
of the Baggage, with several other accidents of Fortune, to make out their
Fidelity to Vitellius by a supposed Betraying of Otho.

Behold an Example of what I have in other places alleged, that Flattery is
always biased by Interest. Paulinus and Proculus rather chose to be accounted
Traitors, then Persons of Honor. Because their Treason was a meritorious act,
and advautagious to Vitellius, and by consequence secured 'em from his
Indignation. Another Prince then Vitellius, who had no sentiments of
Generosity, would have despised their Submissions. For if Traitors are odious
to themselves, whose Party they embrace, the supposed Traitors, that is to say,
they who to ingratiate themselves with the new Prince, falsely accuse themselves
to have betrayed his Rival, are no less Treacherous and Criminal then others.
And for that reason Tacitus tells us, That the Justifications of Paulinus and
Proculus, were rather such as necessity required, then honesty. For, for a Man
to boast himself a Traitor, to the Person to whom he had been Faithful in his
Lifetime, was an open acknowledgment, that he never was faithful, but for his
own Interest; and that he only studied to enrich himself by opportunities of
Treachery. For that reason it was, that the Consul Marius Celsus, who never
stirred from Galba's Interest, frankly confessd before Otho, that he had always
adheard to Galba's Fortune; and that if he lived longer, he would have served
him with an inviolable Fidelity. And that with the same integrity he stuck to
Otho against Vitellius, who nevertheless continued him in his Consulship, for
which another had offerr'd Money. So highly is fidelity esteemed by them, that
have used all their endeavors themselves to vitiate it in another. And
therefore Tiberius not only acquitted a person that had the courage to
acknowledge himself one of Sejanus's Friends, and caused his Accusers to be
punish'dd with either Death or Exilement. Augustus had always a high esteem for
Asinius Pollio, though he never would attend him to the War of Actium; in excuse
of which he gave him such a reason, as ever after afterward excused him to his
favor. The good Services (said he) which I have done for Anthony, are greater
then the Benefits which I have received from Him; but what he has done for me,
is better known to the World, then what I did for him: And therefore I leave
him to determine your Differences, without declaring for the one or the other,
resolving to be a prey to the Victor.

Thus Men of Courage always abominate whatever has the least Tincture of
Treason; whereas Flatterers, who are only the Friends of Fortune, believe
themselves disengaged from all Obligations of Loyalty or Fidelity, to those
whom She abandons.

ESSAY XCII.
Vitellius upon the coming of his Brother, and Preceptors of Tyranny creeping
into favor, became more lofty and more cruel.

Says D'Ablancourt; Vitellius became more lofty and more cruel upon the coming
of his Brother, and the Courtiers from Rome, who taught him to act the the
Tyrant. Not to act the Prince, as the Translator erroneously renders it; for
Tacitus and the Younger Pliny always oppose Domination to Principality.

I have already told you in several of the preceding principal Heads, that
Sycophants are always of a cruel humor. Which is the reason that Princes who
listen to their Charms, cannot choose but be very sanguinary. Nor need we
crowds of Examples in this place, to clear what has been sufficiently made out
already.

ESSAY XCIII.
AS Vespasian came out of the Bedchamber, some few Soldiers that waited in the
next Room, instead of saluting him, as the Emperor's Lieutenant, bid him All
hail, by the Title of Emperor. Then crowds of others pressed in, and heaped
upon him the Titles of Caesar and Augustus, with all those Appellations
belonging to Imperial Sovereinty.

Says D'Ablancourt; As he came out of his Chamber, the Soldiers that were upon
the Guard, saluted him Emperor; whose Examples others followed, that came
running in shoals, and gave him the Names of Caesar and Augustus, with all
those other Titles that are usually given to Emperors themselves.

What has been said already in the 4. 26. 44. 77. 14. and 89. Articles, may
serve as a Commentary sufficient for Explanation of this. I shall here add but
only one Reflection of Tacitus himself, That the first Attempts of Men aspiring
to Sovereign Dominion, are full of dubious Thoughts, and tottering Resolutions;
but when they have once laid violent Hands upon the Throne, they shall not want
for Encouragement, Counsel and Assistance.

ESSAY XCIV.
VEspasian in the Infancy of his Empire, not being so obstinate in Licencing
Injustice, till his Indulgent Fortune, and the Flatteries of his Tutors taught
him to dare more boldly.

Says D'Ablancourt; There were nothing but Accusations of the Rich, and
Confiscations of Estates; Violences insupportable to the People, but excused
through the necessity of the War. Nevertheless Vespasian corupted by his good
Fortune, and instructed by his evil Tutors, practiced the same Oppression in
Peace toward the end of his Reign, notwithstanding his Reserv'dness at the
beginning.

Avarice was a Vice predominant in Vespasian, Equal but only for that (says
Tacitus) to the Ancient Roman Captains. His Flatterers fomented and cherished
this same failing of his, which he had some thoughts of reforming at the
beginning of his Reign, at which time he carried himself with so much
Moderation, that it was said of him, That he was the only Private Person
advanced to Sovereignty, who ever changed for the Better. But they that are
always at the Elbows of Princes, make it their study to corrupt and enervate
their virtuous Intentions by the force of Pleasure, which they strive no less
to make habitual to 'em, that so they may have neither leisure, nor any desire
to look after the Public Affairs. If Private Men (says the Younger Pliny)
change their Manners and their Conduct in so short a time, Princes are more
easily allured to the same Effects of Human Frailty, how excellent soever their
Natural Inclinations may be; because there are so few that study to cultivate
and improve those blooming Excellencies, while all Men rather labor on the
other side, out of servile Complaisance, to encourage and augment whatever they
discover amiss or irregular in his Disposition. Francis I. (says Mazeray) had
been a most Renowned Prince in all particulars, had he not suffered himself
sometimes to be led astray by the evil Counsels of his Ministers* who to
advance their own Authority, screwed up his Prerogative beyond the Anncient
Laws of the Kingdom, to irregular Domination. And that Henry II. who was
greatly inclined to acts of Justice, Was the cause of all the Mischief which
they who Governed him committed, in regard he never was the absolute Master of
himself.

ESSAY XCV.
THE Multitude grew burthensom through the vast number of Senators and Knights
that thronged out of the City to meet him, some through Fear, many out of
Adulation, the rest, and all by degrees, lest others going, they should remain
behind.

Add to this (says D'Ablancourt) the numerous Train of the Court, always Proud
and Insolent even under the best of Princes, all the Senators and Knights, went
out to meet him, some in Honor to his Person, others out of Flattery, or for
Fear, and all at length, that they might not be seen to remain alone behind.

The Fourth Article may serve as a sufficient Commentary for this, to which I
refer the Reader, to avoid Repetition.

ESSAY XCVI.
THE next day he made a long Harangue in Commendation of Himself, wherein he
extolled his Industry and his Temperance with high Encomiums, though all that
were present had been Eyewitnesses of his Debaucheries, and all Italy, through
which he had marched, had seen himnotorious for his drousie Luxury and
Gluttony. Nevertheless the Vulgar, unable to distinguish between Truth and
Falsehood, made a hideous noise with their Acclamations and Applauses, and
clamoured to him to accept the Title of Augustus, which he refused.

The next day, says D'Ablancourt, he made a Harange to the People and Senate,
wherein he commended his Industry and his Temperance, as if he had spoken to
Strangers, and that all Italy had not been able to testify the contrary. The
People however, who are accustomed to Flattery, void of all Sentiments of
Honor, applauded his Impertinences, and forced him to assume the Title of
Augustus, which he had refused.

When Princes applaud themselves, it is a sign they expect to be Extolled and
Admired by those that hear 'em. And Sycophants when they Flatter out of
Custom, they never fail to magnify a bad Prince, who is so vain as to commend
himself. Some there are therefore who have styled Sycophants the Echo of
Princes, and indeed it is a Definition that properly befits 'em; for they
always speak whatever the Princes say, and always repeat the Princes own words.
Tacitus reports that Caligula affected as much as in him lay, all the
Expressions of Tiberius; and then when Nero sang upon the Theater, all the
Company, but more especially, the Senators and Roman Ladies extolled his Voice,
observing the same Time and Measure in their Acclamations that he kept in
Singing.

ESSAY XCVII.
BUT neither had Aponius written to him the whole Truth, and his Flattering
Sycophants made a more slight Interpretation of his Intelligence, as being only
the Mutiny of one Legion, while all the rest of the Armies continued in their
Obedience.

Says D'Ablancourt, The first Intelligence that Vitellius received of
Vespasians Revolt, was from Aponius Saturninus, who sent him word that the
first Legion had dedeclar'd for his Enemy. But as one that was himself
astonished at the Action, he had not given him an account of all the
particulars; so that the Emperor's Favorites made slight of the News, assuring
him that it was only thy Revolt of a single Legion, but that all the rest
continued their Fidelity to Himself.

This Article is explained by the 79. Article, where it is said, That Princes
are Flattered, even in the most Perilous Conjunctures of their Affairs. So far
Vitellius was well informed, that one Legion was already Revolted, but that
other piece of Intelligence, so absolutely necessary for him to have known, was
suppressed, that the Legions of Egypt, Syria, and Judea, had already Elected
and Proclaimed another Emperor. They made him believe, and he himself had
divulged It among his Soldiers, that there was no fear of a Civil War, and yet
at the same time there was one already begun, while the Empire was shared
between two Emperors. Then he demanded Succors from the Germans, the English
and the Spaniards, and yet not one of those Provinces made haste to send him
any, in regard that through the pernicious Councels of his Flatterers, he
dissembled the present necessity of his Affairs. A piece of Dissimulation which
Tacitus calls Impertinent, while it delays the Remedy instead of putting a stop
to the Distemper: It Is very probable, that Portugal had still been subject to
the Crown of Spain* if the Conde D'Olivares, Chief Minister to Philip the
Fourth, had had a better Opinion of the Courage of the Portugueses; and had put
a higher Value upon the Prudence of the Vice-Queen Margaret of Savoy, Duchess
Dowager of Montoua, who adviss'd him several times to dispel the Tempest, which
she else foresaw would fall upon the Spanish Monarchy. But the Duke was born to
be an Example, that the too great Confidence which the Grand Ministers of State
have of their Abilities and their Fortunes, is most commonly the foundation of
their Destruction; and that God infatuates the Counsels of Princes, whom He
designs to punish.

ESSAY XCVIII.
VItellius having made an Oration to the Senate full of Pomp and Ostentation,
was applauded with all the most exquisite Flatteries which the Fathers could
devise.

Says D'Ablancourt, He made a most Maguificent Oration to the Senate, which was
received with no less Pompous Adulation.

There needs no other Explanation of this Text, then what has been already said
in the 96. Article.

ESSAY XCIX.
VItellius enquiring the cause of so much Light in a certain Tower, word was
brought him that several Persons Supped with Laecina Tuscus, among whom the
most considerable for Honor, was Junius Blesus; at what time they that brought
the News aggravated much more then it was, the Splendour of the Feast, and the
dissolute Riot of the Guests: Nor were there wanting some that accused Tuscus
himself and others, but Blesus more hainously, for Debauching so publicly when
the Prince was Sick.

Says D'Ablancourt, Vitellius lay very ill in Servilius's Garden; at what time
he observed a great Company of Lights in a House adjoining, and demanding the
reason, he was told that Tuscus Cecina made a great Entertainment for Junius
Blesus, and several others of meaner Condition. Nor did they fail to give him
an Account of the Magnificence of the Banquet, and the Excess of their
Debauchery, and to blame the Master of the Feast, but more especially Junius
Blesus, for Debauching so scandalously when the Emperor lay Sick.

There can be nothing said more perhaps to this Subject, then what Tacitus
himself repeats concerning the Death of Blesus.

So soon, says he, as certain of the Courtiers who make it their Business to
dive into the secret Jealousies and Disgusts of Princes, perceived that
Vitellius was Exasperated, and that Blesus might be made the victime to his
Indignation and their Envy, they made their Addresses to Vitellius's Brother,
who out of a depraved Emulation hated Blesus, whose high Reputation was an
Eyesoar to a person sullied with all manner of Infamy, and engaged him to
undertake the Accusation of his Rival. L. Vitellius thereupon entering the
Emperor's Chamber, took his little Son in his Arms, and throwing himself at
his brothers Feet, told him that the Trouble he was in, and the Supplications
he made him with Tears in his Eyes, proceeded from no other cause, but his real
good Wishes for the Welfare of the Emperor and his Children. That his most
dange^ous Enemy was not Vespasian, whom so many faithful and courageous
Legions, and so many Loyal Provinces prevented from approaching Italy; but a
Person that Rome fomented in her Bosom, who boasted his Descent from the Family
of the Caesar's, and a Branch of the Junius's and Antonius's, and who daily
corrupted the Alegiance of the Soldery, by his Traiterous Liberality and
Caresses. That all the World looked upon him as already Emperor, to the
contempt of Vitellius, who slighting equally both his Friends and his Enemies,
suffered the Fortune of a Rival to grow great, who rejoiced to behold in the
midst of a Luxurious Feast, his Sovereign languishing upon the Bed of Sickness.
And therefore it behooved him to let him taste the sorrows of a sad and dismal
Night for his unseasonable Jollity, that he might both understand and feel
Vitellius was alive and Emperor, and had a Son too to succeed him.

And thus we see how Sycophants envenome the most Innocent Actions of Men, of
whom the Prince has once a Jealousy, and spur their Sovereigns on to Cruelty
and Tyranny. And this Example of Blesus may serve to serve to admonish great
Personages, how much it behooves 'em to be careful of themselves, and to 'em
understand the Dangers to which their Birth and Fortune expose 'em.

ESSAY C.
COntrary to the Opinions of the most experienced of the Centurions who would
have frankly given him their Advice, might they have been Consulted. But the
Favorites of Vitellius would not permit 'em to come near him, besides that the
Ears of the Prince were so possessed, that all things profitable sounded harsh,
and nothing would be admitted but what was Grateful and Destructive.

Says D'Ablancourt, Against the Opinion of his most Experienced Captains who
would have given him their Advice, if he would have required it: But he had
been accustomed for a long time to hear nothing but what was pleasing and
prejudicial.

Sycophants understand so well to possess the Ears of the most part of unwary
Princes, that in time they render 'em not much unlike Vitellius; there being
very few that will endure to hear Truth spoken without Offense. Therefore it
was that one of the Ancients resembl'd Sycophants to Thieves, who when they go
about to break open a House in the Night time, put out their Candles for fear
of being discovered. For the first thing that Flatterers do in the Courts of
Princes, is to remove from about their Persons all Men of sharp and penetrating
Apprehensions, though bold and able to give wholesome Advice to their
Sovereigns, and discover the Artifices which they make use of, to the prejudice
of the deluded Prince. Thus Nero became a Prey to his Flatterers, when once
they removed Burrhus and Seneca out of their way, who labored by consent, and
made it their Business to infuse into him Sentiments becoming a Virtuous and
Magnanimous Governor.

ESSAY. CI.
BUT Envy lay concealed, and Adulation practiced openly.

Says D'Ablancourt, The Senate concealed their Sentiments, as well of Hatred as
Envy, only their Flattery shew'p it self openly.

Observe here in two words, the Portraiture of the Court, where Hatred lurks in
the Heart, while the Lips of Men are full of Adulation. The Chief Ministers who
ever they be, are still Flattered by reason of their high Advancement, but
Envied always by reason of their Power. It being the Custom of Men to behold
with murmuring and repining, Superior Authority in the hands of those that
have been their Equals. Mucianus having written to the Senate, the Senate
murmured in their Private Cabals. If Mucianus be a private Person, cried they,
why does he Write like a public Minister? Had he had any thing to say to us, he
might as well have stayed till his Return to Rome, at what time he might have
proposed it himself in the Senate. But when they were met in a Body, then they
strove who should most applaud what they had condemned in private, even to the
decreeing Triumphal Ornaments to Mucianus for a Civil War, which he had kindled
by inciting Vespasian to Revolt against Vitellius. And this that the Senate
acted at Rome in respect of Mucianus, is no more then what is daily Practiced
in all the Courts of the World, where the Chief Ministers and Favorites hear
nothing but Encomiums of themselves, because all People fawn upon their present
Fortune. But they are much deceived who judge by their own Ears, of the inward
Sentiments of their outward Adorers.

ESSAY CII.
A Certain Person known to have been long Blind, imploring with Tears the Cure
of his Blindness, besought the Prince to rub his Cheeks and the Balls of his
Eyes with the Excrement of his Mouth. Another lame of his Hand, begged the
favor that Caesar would vouchsafe to Tread upon him with his Feet. Vespasian
at first refused and laughed at the Petitions of both, as fearing the vain
Issue of such an attempt; till tired with the Supplications of the Afflicted
People, and the Encouragements of his Adulators, he was induced to have a
better Conceit of himself.

Says D'Ablancourt, One that was Blind and well known by the People, besought
him to rub his Eyes with his Spittle, as being the only means to recover his
Sight; and another that was lame of one Hand, implored him likewise but only to
touch the part Affected with the sole of his Foot. The Emperor rejected both
their Solicitations at first with Scorn and Laughter, till pressed by their
continual Importunities, he inquired of the Physicians whither such a thing
were possible to be done, waving between the Flatteries of his Courtiers, and
the fear of rendering himself Ridiculous.

Tacitus makes the Commentary upon this place himself. Vespasian, says he,
Commanded the Physicians to consult among themselves, whether Humane Remedies
could surmount the Nature of those two Infirmities. The Physicians after they
had argued the Point, concluded, that the Blind Man not having as yet quite
lost his visual Faculty, the sight of his Eye not being utterly Corroded away,
his sight might be restored, provided the Impediments were removed: And that
the other's Hand might be recovered, so that the Nerves that were shrunk, could
be mollifi'd and stretched out to there natural use: That the Gods perhaps made
choice of him to effect this great Miracle: Moreover, that the Glory of the
Cure would redound to his Immortal Honor, whereas if it did not succeed, all
the Laughter and Derision of the Cure in vain attempted, would fall upon the
Credulity of those unfortunate Persons. Vespasian therefore believing all
things would submit to his Fortune, with a cheerful Air went on, and
condescended to their Supplications.

Thus Princes at first withstand the Corruptions of Flattery, but sooner or
later suffer themselves to be Vanquished by its Temptations. They may be
Modest, Prudent, Constant, Resolute, Politic, and Judicious, yet Flattery
always finds a way to steal into their Affections, and supplant those Virtues
which she meets with in their Inclinations.

ESSAY CIII.
WHen Domitian read Agricola'r Will, wherein he left him Coheir with the best
of Wives, and a most Pious Daughter, he rejoiced at it were to find so great an
Honor done his Brother by so judicious a Person. So blinded and corrupted was
his Judgment by continual Adulations, as not to discern that a Virtuous Father
never left a Prince his Heir, unless he were a bad one.

Says D'Ablancourt, When Domitian read Agricola's last Will and Testament, and
saw that he had left him his Heir together with his Wife and Daughter, he took
it for an Honor; being so Infatuated by Flattery, as not to apprehend that a
bad Prince was never the Heir to one that was Virtuous.

Princes that have a Kindness for Sycophants, are soon mistaken in their
Judgments, while the the other make use of all their Art and Cunning, to disguise
the Truth of things. Self-love it is indeed that blinds the greatest part of
Men. But they have a Remedy which Princes want, in regard that either their
Superiors or their Equals, are not afraid to tell 'em Truth, which is an easy
step to Reformation; whereas Princes having neither Superiors nor Companions,
unless they please themselves; all the World studies to please or rather to
misguide 'em. Whence it comes to pass that they delight in many things, which
they would shun as the Rocks of their Reputation, and as eternal Stains upon
their Memories, had they but Faithful and Uninterrested Friends, who had the
Courage to discover what their Sycophants conceal from their Knowledge. I wish
to Heaven this little Treatise may prove acceptable to others as perhaps it may
be unpleasing to them, who raise their Fortunes by Adulation.

FINIS.

