PLANOPNIGOS, OR, A GAG FOR JOHNSON That Published ANIMADVERSIONS UPON
Galeno-pale. AND A SCOURGE For that pitiful Fellow Mr. GALEN, That Dictated to
him a Scurrillous Greek Title. By GEO. THOMSON, Doctor of Physic.

London, Printed by R. Wood, for Edward Thomas, at the Adam and Eve in Little
Britain, 1665.

PLANOPNIGOS OR, A GAG for Johnson that published Animadversions upon
Galeno-pale, etc.
O Brave Galenists! are ye upon that lock^ and I doubt not but I shall meet
with you there. Is this your coming to a fair Trial by matter of Fact, to let
loose your Ban-dog at me, clapping him on the back, and spitting in his mouth,
while ye in the mean time lie lurking in a den, peeping through a cranny, in
hope to see him worry me. Have I touched you so to the quick, that being
conscious to your selves what facinorous Actions ye have committed, none of you
dare appear in person to plead directly, whether Guilty or no, for the
satisfaction of the world; but are forced to suborn a sneaking reproachful
Fellow to rail at us, one of those that are Spons^ Penelopes Nebulones
Alctnoique, who (if he had his desert) ought to be branded on the Front for
abusing honest men: A most illiterate bruit as I found him in Discourse, when
he came on purpose to affront me, instigated no doubt by some of you, who
forsooth Own him for your Chemist; and indeed fitting for such Galeno-Chymists,
that the common Proverb may be verified, Patella dignum Operculum; like Priest,
like Clark, good enough for Amen. Well Mr. Galen, you and the rest of your Gang
(for all this) are mistaken in your subtle plot; it will not hold I assure you:
for I would have you know, that if ye had fetched the tricipital Dog Cerberus
out of Hell to have flown at me, it had been all one, I should not have
startled at it, or gone back an inch; for by power of that unconquerable Truth
in my Art, I am able to stop the mouth of that old Grandfather of Lies, and all
his Imps.

Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit. It is no wonder therefore if ye take me
for your Enemy, and conspire against me by underhand dealing; since I have told
you downright Truth, sine Fuco, Palpo, vel Offaciis, without mincing and
tenderly touching your pernicious Practice in Physic, and your intolerable
obstinacy, in still persisting in the same. Could I have run with the Hare and
held with the Hound, and undertaken to have been an Instrument to have betrayed
a Just, Profitable, and Noble Design, set upon by some learned Chemists, I
might have been reputed an Able Doctor, one of the Honorarii if I pleased.
Could I have blown Ho^ and Cold (odious to a candid Satyrist) out of the same
mouth, then had I been qualified fit for your Temperaments and Humors. Had I
like a half-codled Chemist declaimed against the extravagant Theories of
Paracelsus and Helmont; had I called you alone the Rational Chemists (as one
does in his Letter) and all the rest Pretenders, esteeming Mountebanks and
Chemists Synonima's, making the world believe that ye are as much conversant in
Chemical Authors as any besides, and best able to judge of them; had I say
against Conscience and real Proofs thus flattered you, I had got into your
Favor, but damnified my own Soul. Now forasmuch I charge you home, and offer
to make it appear by Optical Practice, to any man that is not partial or
biased by sinister respects, or wilfully blind through Ignorance and
Covetousness, that Galen never had the Gift of Healing, nor none of his
Disciples at this day; that they take a quite contrary way and indirect method
to cure Infirmities, by Bleeding, Issues, Vesicatories, Cupping-glasses;
uncorrected Purgatives; by their languid and ineffectual Cordials, Juleps,
Apozems, Electuaries of the Shops, and Diet-drinks; that tyrannical usurpation
over the Patients course of life, by sending them to the Wells to be cured,
because they know not what to do more. Because I extol Helmont as he deserves,
in that he hated to palliate your Deformities, and would not go behind the
door to call Fatuum, Fatuum, Nebulonem, Nebulonem, as they are really so,
without any grudge or rancour to their persons. Because I heartily congratulate
him for pulling down the old ruinous structure of the Galenical Doctrine, built
upon a rotten foundation, and for giving us a Model of a new. Because I reprove
you sharply for your insolent aspiring Ambition of Domineering over the most
Ingenious, Industrious, Honest, and Pious Chemical Laborers in the Nation,
under a specious Pretense of Reforming that noble Art, which ye principally (as
is obvious to any man that has the least inspection into things of this
nature) have defaced and deformed by your Lazy Recipes?

Forasmuch I check you for keeping your Patients to a tedious course of
Physic, without any sensible Amendment, merely for your private Gain, not
resolving them what will be the Event of the Disease; or whether or no ye are
able to cure them in any reasonable space of time. Because I take notice of
your (...), vain Curiosity and Ostentation in Anatomy, without any notable
Improvement of the Sanative part, and your remarkable Ignorance in Chyrurgery:
The plausible shows of being Chemists, and yet practice a quite contrary way,
as is daily evident by your actions; so that your Damnation must needs be the
greater, if ye know what ye ought and do it not.

That I dare appear upon the Stage of the World with other worthy Philosophers,
and challenge to make good by Ocular Demonstration of five several Experimental
Essays, that those Theorems in Physic to which ye constantly adhere in the
Therapeutick Intention (though ye can sometimes Dispute for recreation and
exercise of your Dialectick faculty otherwise) are false; that your Phlebotomy
is plainly destructive to mankind; and your Officinal Solutives extremely
injurious to the Body; and that Chemical Remedies without equivocation (unless
abused by Galeno-Chymists and Pseudo-Chymists) are no more dangerous then the
best Canary wine as I offer to indicate by frequent sumption into my own
stomach.

Having thus thrown you flat on your back in Galeno-pale, ye rage, fret, storm,
and in your mad mood run to the Kennel, and take up filthy dirt and cast it in
the face of most deserving men; animating and putting reviling Terms into the
black mouth of a sordid Fellow, an Operator fit for those Physicians that may
very well be his Masters, or rather a Master for such Disciples, (some having
hired him to reach them Chemistry, himself being ignorant enough) who does
alike ludere cum Chymicis, as the Galenists do cum Corio Humano; one, that if
he were served aright, ought to be Catamidiatus in Amphitheatro, publicly
disgraced according to the Roman Law, for squandring away his Time, and neglect
of the discharge of his Function. Such a Coprologos, a Dung-hill-like Fellow,
fitting for a Barretor, Informer, and Promoter; one that we may suspect will in
his necessity hazard his soul to get money, who has so little of Conscience
(like some of the Galenists) that (if he could do it impune, and undiscovered)
would for some small gain sell Mercurius sublimatus Corrosivus for Dulcis. One
of Demetrius brats, who more properly may be called Demophonos, that is, a
destroyer of poor Mortals; who cares not though millions perish, if he and his
Accomplices can carry on a gainful trade; crying down whatsoever is Salutary and
Preservative, if it bring not in notable lucre.

This lewd person whom I scorn to touch with my Chemical Tongs, unless to take
him by the Nose as St. Danstan did the Devil, or rather by that his slanderous
Tongue to pull it out, has our crafty Sophisters the Galenists chosen to
patronize, and divulge what they have prompted to him. I think it very much
below my self to expostulate with such a Triobolar Sycophant, and I am certain
all that know me aright would blame me to foul my fingers about him: I shall
only reflect a little upon Mr. Galen, who I am confident abetted, instructed,
and disciplined him in most of his scurrillous and false Expressions.

In Limine these contumelious Galenists call those that are of known Candor,
Integrity, and Learning, through the hollow trunk of this Halophant, or Liar
for a Whetstone; (...), that is, Circulatores, Juglers that go about from place
to place, gathering people together to deceive them, or Nebulones, Knaves,
Villains, Praestigiatores, Couzeners.

How far I for my own part am guilty of this opprobrious language, all that
know me can sufficiently testify; and I shall defy the proudest Galenist in
England that dares speak any such thing to my face; yea, I doubt not but other
learned Chemists will take my part, and vindicate themselves, who are as much
concerned to assert their own Innocence against these Maligners as my self.
Some of the persons thus abused I presume to nominate; to wit, Doctor Jos. Dey,
Will. Currer, Geo. Starkey, John Friar, Ever. Maynwaring, Tho. Norton, Tho.
Troutbeck, P. Massonet, Thornley, Tho. Williams, Febure, and several others.

Are these such men as your Amanuensis, or Scribe, deciphers them by the Title
and the whole tenor of his Pamphlet? What unhandsom things can you lay to
their charge in the Practice of Physic? Did any of them ever Bleed their
Patients that had the Small Pox ready to appear, and thereby sent them packing
into the Grave, to the great grief of the Nation? Did any of them ever keep a
Lady sick of an Acute Fever one and twenty days before they gave a
Prognostic whether she would live or dye? Have any of us got Riches unjustly
by the ruin of others? If any of the forenamed have done these, or the like
ugly actions, then speak aloud, and proclaim us at the Cross for Knaves and
Villains. For we do not desire, nor can we expect any favor from you, but
without any more ado, Indict, Arraign, and Hang us if ye can lawfully.

Yea, I will go farther with you to clear my self and these worthy Gentlemen, I
shall (and I doubt not but they will all join with me in order to this useful
Discovery) if his Majesty be pleased to appoint any perspicacious judicious
persons, men that are moderate and no way preoccupated or seduced to this or
that Opinion, through favor, affection, or any secular Interest, such as look
upon Truth with a sincere single eye) be obliged to demonstrate by practical
Instances, that Phlebotomy is no proper Remedy for any Fever whatsoever; and
that Bleeding in the Small Pox, Spotted Fever, and all other malignant
Diseases, is a ready way to destroy the Patient, unless Nature be extraordinary
vigorous: wherein if I fail, and give not good sound Philosophical Reasons
thereof, for the satisfaction and conviction of those intelligent Enquirers;
let his Majesty (according to their Report) forthwith punish me for an Impostor
and a Villain; and I hope I shall be so ingenuous to say I deserve it.

Moreover, after that I have made it appear what great mischief this Galenical
Bleeding causes in the World, I shall proceed in the same manner to manifest
and certify to the Eye, what detriment and inconvenience happens to Man's body
through uncorrected Purgatives; and likewise maintain certain other Positions
and Verities set down in Galeno-pale, to the confutation of those capital
Errors in Physic that have these many Centuries of years been allowed, to the
slaughter of Mankind.

So much for the freeing us from your scurrillous abusive Title; as to the
Contents of the Animadversions upon Galeno-pale, of this base pretended Author
(on whom I hope the Magistrate will make an Animadversion for an example to
others, for their own and the Nations welfare) I shall take no notice as to
make him any Reply, they being as he that sets them down not Tant^: for the
greatest part of them is made up of notorious Lies, Scurrility, Obloquies,
Slanders, Detraction, Sophistry, perversion of the proper sense,
Misinterpretation, and Misapplication; so that any ingenious well-meaning
Reader may easily understand the fallacious Design of this Hyperbolical
Impostor, and them that set him on work, without any Comment or Exposition: Yet
I could not but set an Asterisk, or small mark, where the Galenists by him call
me and other Euchymists, in their right wits (if all the world be not in a
dream) Fanatics; taxing us that we intend to bring in Confusion and Disorder
into the Nation. The words are these: It Is no wonder at all to hear you inveigh
bitterly against Rule and Method in Physic, when out of your Anarchical
Principle you are as ready to renounce all Order and Government in the State.

Were I not ascertained that some of his Masters (who upon all occasions can
seldom afford us any better term then Fanatics) read him this lesson, and that
their principal drift is to bring an Odium upon Truth, and the Defenders of it,
by fastening this filthy deformed mark of Fanatic upon the Kings loyal
Subjects, that they may thereby disappoint us of our just ends: Had not these
words I say, or at least the sense of them, proceeded from the mouth of those
Galenical Fellows, who (whatsoever they pretend to the contrary) are the most
notable Misochymici, haters of Medicinal Truths, next the common illiterate
Rabble, I should lightly have passed them over without reflection, being
content to hear a Fool rail without retorting. Now since my own Loyalty,
Fidelity to the Crown of England, and a hearty desire to promote the Peace,
Unity, Order, and Conformity of Church and State are engaged, I cannot be
satisfied till I wipe off these muddy Galenical Reproaches, and taking two or
three bright Chemical Stones out of my Scrip, fasten them in the impudent
Forehead of these railing Goliahs.

Where have I in Galeno-pale, or any Discourse whatsoever, directly and
absolutely inveighed against Rule and Method, unless your contrary Rules of
Healing, and your tedious irregular Methodus medendi, or rather Periodus, and
Satan's (...), which I hope you will not openly stand up for. This is one of
your old Fallacies to argue, a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter. All
that I reprove is your indirect and exorbitant way of attaining that principal
and most desired scope Man's sanity. It were equally as absurd in me to cry down
all Rule and Method, as for a Traveller to find fault with, and condemn the
Ground he treads upon, because he deviating through his incogitance or
obstinacy, made choice of a long and dangerous way full of Thieves and Robbers;
whereas had he steered a right course, and been governed by sound advice, he
might have taken a short and safe Way to his intended journeys end. Sub judice
lis sit. If our Method, Rules, Canons, or Directions do not enable us to
perform the Business in order to the Preservation of Man's Life better every way
then yours, we will straight yield and take yours up for the best. But we
assure you it must not be (...) or (...), a curious fine texture of empty words
that will confute us, but (...) something done, and by this we will stand or fall.
And we hope the World will not be so rash to to judge us Irregular, Fanatic,
and Immethodical in Physic, because you barely affirm it by the mouth of this
any thing that is vile. Well, all this will not serve our turns to be
discharged of Fanaticism in Physic, unless we be likewise acquitted from the
same in the State; for these subtle Argumentators make use of men's personal
Crimes and Vices to maintain their exitious false Hypotheses, which plainly
shows what they are. For had it not been more for fear then any civil respect
(as appeared by making void a great part of the first Impress.) M. N. (that
wrote Medela Med. an ingenious Treatise full of verity, which Mr. Sprackling
and all the learned Coadjutors of that Society, if all their Brains were
comprehended in one Skull, were never able to Answer to any purpose by way of
refutation) had been soundly lashed by them for what he did amiss in Olivers
days, and all this to justify their Ignorantia Medelae, of which they are
resolved never to be cured, and that is a sad thing.

Aegrotare malum est sed pejus nolle sanari. This Obiter. Let Us now plead to
that Bill of Treason they bring in against us by this Prevaricator, who says,
that we have in us an Anarchical Principle, and that we are ready to renounce
all Order and Government in the State. How now, is it possible? then assuredly I
have been in a Dream all this while, and beside my self indeed, and am verily
and truly a Fanatic: if this be so, that I have an Anarchical Principle within
me, yet would not comply with Oliver, and other Anarchists, and accept of that
Lucriferous and commodious way which many Galenists in their right wits (as
they suppose) never refused, getting thereby that which they esteem the Summum
Bonum of Physic. Have you Doctor Dey, with other Chemical Gentlemen, been so
infatuated too, then without controversy ye are no such wise men as I took you
for; and they may very well call us all Fools and Fanatics, to see us a
company of beggarly Cin^flo's, Puffcoals, standing upon a punctilio of Honesty
and Loyalty, to have taken pains to be poor; and they without wetting or
burning their fingers (for these learned Clarks, like the Ape, know how to take
Nuts out of the fire with the paw of the Cat) have per fas aut nef as made
themselves (counting all other Fanatics and witless that are not so) Rich and
Honorable. Gentlemen who would be thus troubled with a Medical Mendical
Conscience. Had I foreseen this it had been enough to have made me a very
Knave, to have played my Game as well as any Galenist; to have made Hay while
the Sun shined; to have laid up against a rainy day, and never to have suffered
what I did for King Charles the First, being persecuted and imprisoned for his
sake almost to death upon a Monarchical Principle, though now very unseasonably
it is become (as my Enemies will have it) Anarchical: I could but at worst have
been called Fanatic.

O tempora, o mores! hosne mihi fructus? Am I thus rewarded for my Loyalty? O
misera virtus ego te rem existimabam, sed tu nil nisi verba eras. I thought
Virtue would have given a man a better reward. Well, who can help it? Contra
Sycophantae morsum non est remedium. I am forced to put it up, what cannot be
cured must be endured. Adeone res rediit? I am brought to a fine pass. What? A
Bad Physician, and a Worse Subject. Parit indignatio versum: methinks I could
now condescend insanire, and be willingly a Fanatic for some short time that I
might be revenged upon these Calumniating Galenists, that thus accuse Loyal
Subjects of Rebellion, when they have been and still are in their hearts.

Were it not for the Act of Oblivion how would I claw them away: but I must be
silent because my Sovereign commands me. Only thus much I shall insert into my
Letany, From Scribes, Pharisees, Sadduces, and Galenists the worst of all, Good
Lord deliver me and all Honest men.

Thus have I sufficiently made it appear what notorious Pseudologists the
Galenical fellows are; and how they stick not to disgrace any, be he never so
upright, by falsely aspersing and representing him to the world the worst of
men: so that they may thereby bring into disrepute the noble Profession of
Chemistry, of which they are either grossly ignorant, and deserve to be termed
no better then fools in the Science of Physic; else if knowing and expert
therein, cannot be imagined any other then -- forasmuch as their Actions, and
Chemical Knowledge to which they make pretense, stand as it were Diametrically
opposite, being very inconsistent and different one from the other. Now since it
is so that we know not how to judge of any man, but by his operations (God
being the only (...), Heart-searcher) we have all the reason in the world to
censure and conclude according to these men's fruits, that they are far from
being such Persons that this hired Halophant proclaims them to be; that is,
such lovers of Chemistry these twenty years last past. That its improvement
has been their great care and constant study; and that pitch that this noble
Art is advanced, is owed to them; and if it ascend higher, the same Hands must
lend their assistance.

All which is most false as I can make evident. Would these fellows if they
were Improvers and Advancers of this noble Art thus malign and revile approved
Artists? calling Honest men Knaves; those that have been Loyal Subjects and
Sufferers for his Majesty, Fanatics; those that are Philomatheis and
Polymatheis, imbued with Learning as well as themselves, Amatheis, illiterate
Idiots. Had they any cordial kindeness for Helmont, would they still
obstinately maintain those Essential Capital Errors in Physic, which the
noble Author in express positive terms condemns, and by undeniable Arguments
demonstrates to tend to the ruin of mankind. Surely if they did not commend
him only teeth outward, hating him in their hearts, they would not still
retain that Periodical long old beaten Method, which he does directly cry down
as destructive; they would quite lay aside Bleeding and colloquating
Purgatives, which he is utterly against: Is it possible that these should have
real friendship for Helmont, or any Sons of Art, that are absolutely opposite
to his Theorems.

Away with these juggling and hypocritical Delusions, and let them not think
thus to impose upon our Senses; for they may endeavor as easily to persuade
men out of their Proper Names, as ever to convince them that have aright
conformed eyes without defect, whose Judgments are not perverted or distorted,
that they are Philo-Chymists, advancers of Chemistry, and will ever lend their
assisting hand to lay one Chemical Stone in order to the erecting of such an
Elaboratory, that may edify the tottering fabric of their frail diseased
Brother, unless they may cement it with the (...), the babble or confused noise
of their Galenical garrulity and multiloquacity, which puffs them up with pride
and self-conceit of their own empty worth, so that like so many (...) and
(...), they wage war against all those that sincerely stand up for the Defense
of Verity and Charity in the Profession of Physic; in so much, that what these
men cannot now compass by real worth and lawful means, they think to attain by
their policy, subtle wiles, and deceit: Flectere si nequeant superos Acheronta
movebunt. Rather then fail in their unrighteous Projects, they will seek to
Pluto; and rather then they will be accounted ignorant in Pyrotechnie, they
will procure him to be their Tutor, who is well versed in Igne Gehennae, being
well acquainted with all degrees of that Fire, and knows how to distribute to
every one a just proportion. He can accommodate them with false Fire, and an
Ignis fatuus sufficient to seduce and deceive the world that is best pleased
with Shadows rather then Substances.

'Twas that old Salamander that moved some of them to send their Spy to
supplant and trappan me, and to return gross Lies in reference to those
Chemical Utensils I possess, the twentieth part of which the Forger never saw:
with the third part of which I dare challenge any Galenist in England to do
more for the Use and Benefit of man, then they (destitute of the dextrous
mysterious Encheresis) with numerous and pompous Furnaces.

O how it pleased his Masters to hear this their lately repaired and new vamped
Servant to jear at a cracked Furnace, tied together with a Rope, which I confess
would have done better about his neck, to have prevented such a leaking fellow
for the future, ab hac atque illac diffluendo, from being employed any more by
the Galenists to tell such abominable Falsities for their advantage, to make
their Imposture the more plausible. Certainly now Mr. Galen I see you are put
to hard shifts to uphold the Credit of your Polyarchy, and being ready to sink,
are forced to catch at any twig to buoy you up. These are Naeniae, lamentable
Stories to upbraid me with such a ridiculous thing as a cracked Furnace, when ye
are nonplust, and are not able to answer me to the main. Do ye think this kind
of Drollery will satisfy any diligent Indagators of truth. Desist ye
Pharisaical Hypocrites from thus trifling and deluding our eyes with glittering
Apparitions, and be more serious and substantial in such weighty matters
concerning man's life: show your Art if ye have any, and prove that ye are in
the right way or method of Curing. I have offered you reasonable and equal
Propositions, and am resolved (if I live) to keep close to them, desiring only
indifferent Arbiters to determine our Controversies according to the facts of
each of us. Doubtless, as one said of the dead Body that would not stand being
set upon its legs, Aliquid deest intus; so may a man conclude that ye are
deficient, and all is not sound within, since ye dare not stand upon the
Justification of your Principles by your works.

Heu quam difficile crimen non prodere! Ye may set a good face upon it, but I
assure you ye have lost much of your reputation among the wiser sort, for this
very reason that ye would not endure a Test. None hereafter but mad men (whom
some that are little better affirm ye have an excellent faculty to cure above
others) will ever trust such counterfeit ignorant Galeno-Chymists, that dare
not give a taste or trial of their skill. Wherefore our faithful advice is,
that ye would utterly abdicate your former vanities and fooleries in Physic,
and openly make a recantation thereof, declaring a hearty sense of your gross
Errors, and a full resolution to exercise the duties of your Profession more
sincerely, heartily, and conscientiously, laboring with your own hands as
other laudable Chemists have done, to acquire those Arcana's that complete a
Philosopher, and enable him to minister relief to a languid wretch. Upon these
conditions ye shall find us ready to instruct you, and teach you how to handle
a Retort and Cucurbite, informing you of the grand mistakes in preparation and
appropriation of Spagyrick Remedies; to the right knowledge of which your dull
Servant Johnson and Books are never able to direct you Yea, we shall honor you
so far, as to make you Members of our Society, so that we be thoroughly
persuaded that ye are become hearty Converts, and will never prove false to us,
betray, and blab abroad the Secrets of our Art to Apothecaries Boys, Good
wives, Nurses, and such like profane persons, as ye have formerly done, to the
great damage and dishonor of Physic. This favor we shall out of
commiseration to your low condition vouchsafe to afford you, upon this pinch
and strait, to which we plainly perceive (by those mean beggarly evasions and
subterfuges ye seek) ye are now reduced, being stormed on every side by several
powerful Veridici and Eupractici in Physic. Its confessed we have little
reason to be so courteous and kind to you, considering how ye have disobliged
us every way, and how wilfully accessory ye have been to your own overthow:
However, we shall give a testimony to the Nation, that a true Chemist is of a
most Heroic Sublime Spirit, ready to forgive injuries, and pass by abuses
without retaliation.

A Mantissa, or Advantage, cast into the Scale, to make the Galenical
Animadverter and Remarker appear downright a N. in Grano, for the Credit of
his Worshipful Masters.
THese Pharisaical Galenists out of a supercilious Haughtiness and Philauty
presumptuously censure all belonging to the Iatrical Faculty, that are not of
their Sect, Publicans or Fools, not fitting to hold correspondence with, or to
be touched with their sanctified Lady-like hands, lest they should be polluted
by such Carbonarii, Colliers in their Art, as the Chemists: wherefore these
proud selfconceited Critics have passed a rigid (but unjust) Sentence of
Condemnation upon me; and have sent out their wicked Commentariensis to
suffocate and smother my reputation, because I met with and associated my self
with an impudent Crew (as they style them) of such, that are uttter enemies to
Learning in general, alleging that I am one of the most considerable Champions
and Ringleaders of this Faction, having been an intimate friend and associate
of Odowd's, best knowing him; so bold and dull an Ignoramus that he shames the
Gallows, a wretch that is a disgrace to his most Disgraceful Party, and withal
an Atheist. It Is well the Galenists have found out a Mercenary Fellow, that
will take upon him to personate what they invent, and for some small reward
excuse them, and suffer the Lash himself; being we believe so fit for their
Humors and Complexions, that if they say aestuat, it is hot weather, (though
quite contrary) he will forthwith protest, sudat, he is all in a sweat:
Otherwise I would have remitted their venomous Arrows, and directly have aimed
at the Authors that first drew the Bow at me, and have neglected this durty
Fellow whom they make use of for a slight Bulwark to shelter themselves and
their untruths; however I make no question to penetrate them through his side.
Mendacium servile vitium. To hire and to be hired to derogate from any by
Slanders, Calumny, and Pseudologies, argues a base slavish Spirit unworthy any
man, but especially a Physician. Are these Dogmatical Candidates? if so, nigro
carbone cos posthaec annotabo, I Will mark them hereafter for black sheep.

Have ye no other way to evade the trial of Essential Physical Truths (which if
I maintain not demonstratively let me perish) but by countenancing your Servant
wrongfully, and publicly to disgrace and represent me to be companion and
copes-mate of those, who (if they were as they are set down by you) ought not
to have a being in this Nation; accusing me as Ringleader and Champion of them
in those wicked Designs you tax them with. Whether those you call ignorant
persons, especially Mr. Odowd, (whom it is confessed I did sometime meet with
upon a very reasonable and justifiable account) be guilty of those Crimes that
are laid to their charge, (maliciously as I conceive in great part, and upon
false grounds) I shall not undertake to ventilate or discuss, let them plead
and vindicate themselves. However, grant them and my self never so bad as you
say. Yet Truth is Truth, and will stand firm in despite of all your
undermining, cryptick, and subterranean workings, to blow up the Propugnators
and Defenders of it. I desire to appeal to all sober, discreet, honest, and
impartial men that know me intus and in cute, whether I ever proposed or joined
with any to carry on any base unworthy thing in this Chemical Enterprise, above
the Glory of God, the increase of Virtuous Actions, the Honor of his Majesty,
the benefit of the Nation, the promotion of Learning) as I have sufficiently
explained my self in the 20. Chapter of Galeno-pale) the melioration and
reformation of the state of Physic. If this ought to be reputed Factious, I
desire to be the Ringleader and Champion of such a Faction.

As for that intimate friendship between me and Mr. Odowd (which your Halophant
divulges) it is as arrant a Truth as that you are real friends to Chemistry,
unless it be per Antiphrasin. Indeed I always looked upon the Gentleman as a
queint Courtier endued with good natural parts, and might deserve well of his
King and Country, according to his station, without justifying his
Illiterature, supposing withal that were true (which I formerly much suspected)
that he had acquired so potent and active an Arcanum as he relates, and some do
now testify, above any Weak and sluggish Preparation in your Dispensatory: To
your grand shame be it spoken, that such an Illiterate person, (for which
Defect I have heard him sometimes ingenuously condole himself in the presence
of several knowing men) should outvie your learned Ignorance in that which is
principally desired by every Sick man; but I never had that favor for him that
we could set our Horses so together, as to be intimate and thoroughly to know
each other, but always kept a loof to avoid scandal.

But now methinks I begin to have a little more then ordinary respect, and to
draw a little nigher him, since this remarkable Diabolos (belonging improperly
to those of Amen, who ought to make good the Etymon of the word, with which
some I think are resolved never to associate themselves intimately) traduced,
slandered, maliciously and falsely accused him for an unparalled Knave,
Villain, and Atheist. From that time there came to me a Testimonial Note of Mr.
Rawlinsons Cure, signed with his own hand, I began to think better of him then
before, and conceited the Devil was not so black as some that painted him. The
satisfaction I received in that particular was this.

Whereas Mr. Will. Johnson has in Print reported ill of Doctor Odowde's
Relation, touching a CURE performed upon me: I do by these presents attest,
That the Relation published by Doctor Odowde is in every Circumstance, and in
the whole most true. Witness my Hand the 7th. of June, 1665.

Richard Rawlinson. Signed in the presence of us, Will. Goddard. Mar. Nedham.
Edw. Coke.



If this Fellow (notwithstanding his Masters Protection) deserve not to be
Whipped about the Pig-Market, and every Chemist in England to have a Lash at
him, let any judge that is truly sensible of the loss of a good Name. I hope no
man will be so mad to credit him for the future; for, qui semel est semper
praesumitur esse malus.

FINIS.
An Epistolar DISCOURSE TO THE Learned and Deserving AUTHOR OF Galeno-pale. By
George Starkey, M. D. and Philosopher by Fire.

London, Printed by R. Wood, for Edward Thomas, at the Adam and Eve in Little
Britain, 1665.

An Epistolar Discourse to the Learned and Deserving Author of Galeno-pale.
AFter my most real and hearty thanks, for that great favor you were pleased
to oblige me with, in bestowing upon me that Learned, Useful, and Seasonable
Piece of yours, Galeno-pale, (in acknowledgement of which obligation, be
pleased to accept the tender of my utmost service, and most cordial love) I
make bold in answer of your request so me, to return you my sense of that
Tractate of yours, (which is so highly deserving, as not to need my
Commendation, and so accurately learned, as not to fear any man's Censure or
Animadversion) as also of that trivial and contemptible piece of Garrulity,
pretended as an Animadversory Reply to your Book, and Lash for your person;
though in my judgment he has had the ill luck, to be so far out in the
performance, that his ill cookt mess of opprobrious Obloquy, will serve only
to polish, and make more amiable the luster of that your excellent Tractate;
and like a black foil, to set out to the greater advantage, that so every way
desirable Jewel.

Of my concurrence with you in opinion, my two Tractates, viz. Helmonts
Vindication, and Pyrotechny Asserted, are such undeniable arguments, that I
need add nothing in this place for confirmation of a truth so beyond doubt,
apparently evident. To them I refer such as either know not, or will not
believe, that I am altogether concurring with you in Judgment; being able to
prove beyond rational contradiction, that our Opinions herein agree with the
truth of Nature; and can practically demonstrate, that our Antagonists, in what
they differ from us, have only idle Speculations, and unprofitable airy
Notions, which they embrace instead of real practical truths; so hugging (as
the Poet has it) a Cloud instead of Juno.

It is not because we are strangers to the Doctrine of Humors, that we do not,
with the Galenists, make up Temperaments, and vary Complexions and
Constitutions, according to the diverse mixtures of them, and measure all the
defects in Nature, by their contest, prevalency and victory. What the received
opinion herein is, we know, and learned many years since; but afterward, being
convincingly reclaimed by the unresistable force of light and truth, we learned
that hard lesson, of making loss of all these imaginary seize, and were
willing to confess that we had drunk largely of muddy and unwholesom waters;
and being thus overswayed with the Dictates of a more sound Reason, we
accounted it no dishonor both to sing a Palinode our selves, and sound a
Retreat unto others; desiring if it were the good will of God, that as many as
are friends to Learning and pretend to ingenuity, may taste of the pure streams
of truth, and solid learning; not doubting but if once tasted, they would drink
largely, and always desire the same Waters, loathing those muddy and infected
lakes to which they had been long accustomed.

While we resolved on this course, and addressed our selves in earnest to this
work of Charity, of recovering as many as we could (all if possible) from the
paths of Error, in which they (following either blind or unfaithful guids)
had long wandered: As we really did a work of pious Charity toward all, so our
pains and labor was heartily interpreted, and acknowledged by some, who by the
help of that small Candle which we (according to our mean capacity) had lighted
up, and brought with us, did discover such monstrous Deformities and Defects in
that Fabric in which they were, and for want of a clear distinct Light,
esteemed a sumptuous and glorious Building; they discovered, I say, such rotten
Foundations, ruinous Arches and Pillars, mouldering and tottering Walls, a
leaky and almost falling Roof, that they were quickly prevailed with to quit
that dangerous, and most unpleasant abode, fit only to make a habitation for
Birds of darkness.

But alas! as there is no action (of what concernment soever) that will
universally please, so this work of ours, which by many was, and by all
deserves to be attributed to pious Charity, was misinterpreted, reproached, and
reviled by many, and those men of no mean rank or fame. For this old, decayed,
rotten Structure, of which I speak, is challenged by some of the Ancients of
the Fraternity, as a Propriety belonging to the Professors of Philosophy and
Physic; of which they as Seniors are to have the mannagement and disposing.
These to the younger deal out Lodgings, and Tenements, as also Honors and
titular Preferments, with this caution, that they shall admit them and no
other, to be their Governors, Guids, Directors, and Counselors: and because
the Building was once famous and stately, though now decayed and ruinous, they
dawb over these Defects with Plaistering and Painting, and adorn the Walls and
Arches with curious Hangings, but will not endure any clear Light to be brought
in to discover their crazie and tottering Habitation, lest their Guests and
Candidates being affrighted at the discovery, should leave them; and so the
repute they have, of being the Fathers and Dispensers of Art and Knowledge,
should vanish like a shadow before the Sun.

These are they that are ever learning, but never come to the Knowledge of
truth; and the reason is, because they think they have already attained it, and
therefore conceive there is no need of further learning, and disdain to be
taught, or reproved, but will abuse him that shall attempt it, and load him
with opprobrious contumelies.

On which score it was, Sir, that the late invective against your person (and
in your name all that are assertors of Pyrotechny its excellency, beyond the
Art or Mystery of Medicine, professed by those who style themselves Methodists,
as by a Characteristical note of Distinction) was vomited up under color of
Animadversions upon your deservedly esteemed Tractate, with a Title befiting
the Author (appearingly at least) of that infamous Libel; which were I in your
case I would scorn to Answer, but in such a way as might manifest deserved
contempt and neglect, not of he Author (pretended) had he been (which he can
hardly) more inconsiderable then he is, but of the sheets which he has
blotted, not with any design, (if he have but the wit to survey the Lines he
has fathered with any discretion) but to let the world know, what a pitiful
Reply the Rational Chemists of Amen-Corner can make to the just Exceptions of
the true Sons of Art, against their pretended (...), which to English in their
sense, is only a bare subscription to Galen; on which score they are severely
culpable, but deserve pity (to speak the most softly) for that unlawful
Marriage, which without consent of both parties, they have endeavored to make
between solid Realities and practical Verities, on the one part, and aerial
Speculations, mistaken Principles of Nature, and ignorant Conclusions, and
Prescriptions taken on trust from their predecessors, without examination, on
the other part; which Marriage if they can consummate, so as to produce from it
a Galeno-Chemical offspring, I hope they will reconcile lazy Ignorance, with
sedulous Diligence and Industry, in searching out truth, for Bride-men; and
Light and Darkness, Truth and Error, adept Knowledge, and putaticious
Uncertainty, for Bride-maids; and let all about Town that have skill in the
learned Languages, Logic, and School Philosophy, and have read Galen and
Paracelsus, Avicen and Helmont, Riverius and Quercetan, the London
Dispensatory, and Scroderus Pharmacopoea, etc. be Candidates of this new
Society; and let the Author of those sorry Animadversions on your Book, be
Doorkeeper to this new-model'd College, with order that he admit of none,
that is a verier Wiseman then himself, as a Member among them; and then no
doubt but the Art of Medicine will be improved, so as to silence the wonder of
a Minotaure, or the Poets Pegasus, or a Siren.

But, Sir, I hope as you in your Galeno-pale have begun to forbid the Banes,
and to put a stop to the Enterprise of so unequal a Match, and have shown most
just Causes why two Parties so disagreeing should not be joined in Matrimony;
so you will continue a vigilant Eye that the Galenical Satyr, whose Lust of
propagating (whether in, or out of Kind) is insatiable, may not commit a Rape
upon so delicate a Nymph as Pyrotechny; such an unlawful mixture is by some
reputed and reported the original of Apes, Monkeys, and Baboons; if or no,
truly, I shall not dispute, but surely the unequal commixture before mentioned,
will in likelihood, yea for certain, produce as great, or greater Monsters in
Art, then the others are in Nature, allowing the supposition of their original
for true.

It Is granted, of late many rash pretenders have assumed the Title of Chemists,
whom Nature not knowing, nor they her, the true Sons of Art disdain to own, and
protest against; among whose number I know none more fit to be first begun
withal, then this Fugitive Renegado, who never attaining higher honor in the
Chemical Army, then of a Pioneer, or Dragoon at best, has proved an Apostate
from that Profession he never was worthy of, and betrayed to the Enemy as much
as he ever knew, which all that understand any thing in Art, are assured, is
little enough; by discovery of which no real Artist need fear damage, nor was
there ground of Reply to any thing that either has dropped, or hereafter may
fall from his Pen, were it not that all who know him are induced to believe,
that he does by that Scribble (how impertinent soever it be) as many of his
mind (in another case) are reported to do, father Brats which they are sure
are none of their own, because they either have received, or hope to receive
some beneficial Courtesies from the Fathers: Therefore for sake of the real and
not pretended Father of that piece, I shall say a little to some Passages I
observed therein, though very briefly.

First, I observe with what a magisterial supercilliousness he censures as
illiterate, all that are Professors of true Pyrotechny, and maintain its
Principles, both as to the Preparation and Application of Remedies, the
judging, distinguishing, and curing Diseases, in opposition to those who
subscribing to Galen, Avicen, and others of that gang, own the distinction of
Dogmatists, and Methodists; and have done for many ages, till of late they have
wrought upon the facile Nature, or Cranium of an easy impression, of a
nameless person (of honor for ought I know) to become their Godfather; and now
at the years of rotten ripe discretion, to give them a new Name of Rational
Chemists, as a distinction (I conceive) between such, whom his wisdom is
pleased to style Melancholy Operators, and them; that is, between such who
will admit no practical Theorems, whose Confirmation they have not practically
received from the Fire; and those more neat, Genteel Chemists, who without
knowing the Names and Forms of Furnaces, the degrees, and manner of ordering
Fires, the shapes and diversities of Chemical Vessels, can by depth of reading,
and profound Reason, tell what are the best Chemical Remedies, and when, how,
and by whom they are best made; and the time, manner, dose, and rule, requisite
for the most beneficial administration of them. This Gentleman I suppose for
the honor of the Nation, and future benefit of the Cadets of the Gentry, will
shortly distinguish between the Rational, and Gross mechanical Merchant,
Mariner, Soldier, etc. And for the honor and profit of Generations to come,
introduce and recommend Rational Pilots, Masters and Captains of Ships,
Captains and Commanders of Land Forces; Rational mannagers of Trafique by Sea
and Land; as also Dealers by Exchange of Moneys, and the like; and if he can
persuade those in Authority to listen to, and approve such a Rational Motion,
we may hope (in time) to be provided as well in all these mentioned Cases, as
we are now with Iatrochemical Galenists.

It Is as possible, and probable, to be an expert Chemist, without seriously,
sedulously, indefatigably, and constantly attending the Mechanical part of
Pyrotechny, making new daily, pondering also, and amending future Operations by
past experience, as to be an expert Anatomist without knowing the use of the
Knife, by bare Rational speculation. It Is the Mechanist informs, instructs, and
confirms the Theorical speculator, and not on the contrary: But here the
Operator acknowledges the highest of his seize, to his profound Masters
of Amen-Corner; and they owe all which they pretend to of Chemical Skill, to
this Servant, (thus one hand washes another) while an impartial by-stander may
say, It is pity such Masters and such a Servant should be separated.

But why must all that dissent from the Nil ultra, praeter idiotas, of Pater
Noster Row, be branded for Illiterate? It Is well the visible father of this
peremptory and petulant Charge is known not to be guilty of, or overgrown with
either wit or learning himself, and therefore is as fit a Judge in the Case, as
Midas was of the excellency of Music made by Apollo on his Harp, or Pan on his
Pipe; and if he were repaid as well for his Judgment as Midas was, his
Masters, in case they should lose him, might find him, though hid under the
Covert of a Philosopher, by the same marks that the Farmer in Aesop found a
lost Servant of his, concealed under the disguise of a Lions Skin.

As to the Challenge made by you of deciding the grand Controversy by proof,
and experimental Demonstration, the World will take notice, although you and we
should be silent, how he seeks to evade it by scandalous and reproachful
Quibbles, in which his scurrility will try the utmost of your patience, and
will excuse you if you reply with Vinegar to his cankered Lines, writ with a
pen dipped in gall; I wish that either side had forborne to discharge your selves
like Cannons, roaring, and rending each other, yielding much smoke, but little
light, yet must Apologize for you in the words of the Comic Poet; that it is
(on your part) responsum, non dictum, quia laesit prius; He first transgrest
the bounds of a fair Gamester, and played such Butchers play, as both the Pate
and Shins, that if himself get a cracked Crown, he may thank his own
indiscretion, and his blustering huffing. I have known an uncivil braving
Hector so abusive to a sober Gentleman, that he has provoked him at length to
cudgel him soundly for his unmannerliness; and I could not account it otherwise
then just, that he who would not be guided by discretion, should be basted into
better manners. But of this a word to the wise.

But concerning the thing proposed, and that on such fair terms as cannot be
refused with honor, nor accepted, without a silencing demonstration on one
side or other; if it be enough to laugh at the Proposal as impossible, upon
presumption that so many will not be found, that will trust their Lives, either
in your, or any other hands of your Persuasion and Principles; or if they
would, that you might easily give a certain Prognostic of them all, with a
Reserve, for this ill-nurtur'd Quibble; that you will cure them all alike, and
the Earth cover your failing in so rash an attempt; if, I say, this Answer by
themselves be judged sufficient, they must account all, to whom that Scribble
shall come, gross Idiots, and stupid Dunces; for will any (a degree beyond a
Natural in capacity) imagine, that if they did really judge that such would, or
probably might prove the effect, they would not have made it their prime
business, either to have rendered you, by the first ridiculous, in finding none
that durst adventure to trust your skill; or odious, by performing such
Catachrestical Hangman-like Cures. This charge might with probability and
justice be retorted, but I hate recrimination; it being unlikely, that if the
Contest were once begun to be thus decided, after a score of instances
concerning the vast difference of the safety of true Chemical Remedies, and
agreeableness of them to Nature beyond the Galenical Prescriptions, and
Carbonado's of Humane Bodies, according to their Rules of Art, scarce any more
would be found, that would undergo their Methodical course of Physic, (were
there no hazarding of Life, and impairing the Strength, by exhausting the
fountain of Life, the Blood) if either Prayers or Tears might move so much
compassion in the Judges, as to escape their too Fatal clutches: but for peace
sake I shall drive the bolt no farther, only this I shall say, and I hope not
transgress the bounds of modesty and sobriety, that my self about eight years
or more since, publicly challedged them to the like Contest, at infinite more
odds, and disadvantage on my part, and will yet make good the same, upon
penalty of being infamous, and so publicly proclaimed, and my self will
proclaim it with as much ignominy, as to place, time, and expressions, as they
shall please to prescribe unto me, and will undertake to procure the Patients
without trouble to them; and let them be divided with all equality possible,
half to me, the other half to them: let me be certified of their will to accept
the Contest, and if I decline what I offered, I shall willingly beforehand
condemn my self to a future prohibition of all Practice, till I openly do what
disgraceful Penance they shall think fit to put upon me, and the like, if I am
baffled or worsted in the Combat; only let able, impartial Arbiters judge
between us, the relation of Fact being first published both in our Native, and
in a traveling Language, the Judges then let them give public Sentence,
according as the Demerits of each side shall appear to them.

This may, and I doubt not but will be put off with a Sardonian laughter, while
in the mean time Haeret lateri lethalis arundo, the arrow galls them too much
for a hearty smile; nor will very sober persons fail to laugh at, and deride
them, if they can find no other Answer then grinning merriment, for so home,
and so close followed an Argument; which if once resolved on, as the final
issue of the Controversy, would quickly for ever silence one or the other
party; and if we practically get the better of them, (as I doubt not) if
afterward we do not maintain our own Theseis, and oppose theirs, undisputably
on our part, and convincingly on theirs, let us be afterward accounted only
fortunate illiterate Empyricks. But if besides this we publicly give a full
account of their Theorems, Axioms, Maxims, Method, and Practice, as well in
the Therapeutick, as Theorical part thereof, and then with undeniable Arguments
overthrow their whole Building fundamentally, yet challenge them of Ignorance
(even to pity) in the Principles of true Pyrotechny, which we will undertake to
make as plain as the Noonday Sun, to the convincing both of themselves and
friends that it is really so: What pretense soever they make to Rational
Chemistry (this Charge I would have understood of the generality of them, and
as they are a Society) and we will permit their man Johnson to lay his Head
together with them; whose Chemical Dictionary dedicated to them, will speak his
ability in Pyrotechny, should we be silent. If, I say, after our practical
Combat, and experimental Contest, we perform this, then let the titles of
Illiterature and Empyricisme be given to them that best deserve them; and if we
do it not, we will own our selves empty vainglorious Boasters, nec fama nec
fortuna dignos.

But it is time to recall my self, these Rationally Chemical Gentlemen may for
ought any man in the world (or they themselves) knows, be the sans peer
Chemists of Europe, if not of the Universe; for I call to mind, and very
seasonably, that in their Book of Precautions and Remedies against the
Pestilence, they crown their work with (multum in parvo) a Collection of the
choicest Chemical Medicines attainable; which they set down for their sakes who
are only affected with Chemical Preparations, with caution, that they be
honestly and faithfully made, according to the Prescription of the best
Authors; among which, I was not a little pleased, to find both the
Philosophical Elixirs, for the White and the Red, prescribed, leaving the dose,
and time of taking them, and in what Vehicle, to the discretion of the
Patients; upon which I would query, First, That seeing there is a Plague of the
purse, as well as the person, to which these two Remedies should most properly
be applied? Secondly, where they are to be had faithfully and honestly
prepared? Certainly by their white fixed Sulphur, and by their red fixed
incombustible Oil of Sulphur, they meant the two tinging Elixirs of the
Philosophers, or else they prescribed it at all adventures, any thing unknown
to themselves, with a hard name to amuse the vulgar; like him of their
Fraternity, whom you instance in your Book, who for a long time prescribed
Mercurius dulcis, upon presumption that it was a Vegetable.

The other Preparations by them advised, if they did but know experimentally,
how secret, hidden, and truly difficult their true Preparation is; and how few
among Artists that search after them, attain them, (scarce one of ten thousand)
they would not so lightly prescribe them, unless withal, they could advise
where, and of whom, and at what rates they might be procured; and either added
Directions for their use, or left them, who desired to have them, to be
directed by the Preparers and Disposers of them; but to give only a bare
Catalogue of a few hard what do you call 'ums, to be procured God knows where,
and when; and to be used God knows how, or to what end, however at all
adventures, with assured success against the Pestilence, is for grave old men
to turn again to boys play, and dance a Chemical Antique, and magno conatu,
specioseque sub praetextu nugas agere.

The other part of that Book I shall not meddle with, being unwilling to thrust
my Sickle into another man's Harvest, only wish it might effectually answer its
Title, and the Expectation of his Majesty and Council, especially the poor sick
parties, whose Skins must pay for its defect, the more the pity!

For my part, I shall allow every Bird to sing its own note, and every Man to
praise or dispraise a Bridge, according as it has carried him over, or failed
him. But this I may, and shall not doubt to affirm, that this hand of God, in
case it continue upon us, and increase among us, will prove a signal note of
distinction, between Physicians elected, and sent forth by God, and those
mercenary Hirelings, who either run unsent, or were created by the Schools. The
latter having compiled a wonder-doing Book, for the prevention and eradication
of the Pestilence, to show the Confidence they have in their own Prescriptions;
in the next place, get as soon, and as far off as they can out of reach of it,
except a few of the most confident of them, a very inconsiderable number,
considering the large Herd of them, who (shameful to mention, more shameful to
practice) in consideration of an unreasonable sum of Money in hand demanded,
and a more unconscionable Salary by the year expected, with other Conditions,
arguing a mercenary distrustful mind, will take such care of the Sick, and
afford them such attendance as they shall think fit; when as eight times their
number would be too few by half, to attend the Sick, in case of the increase of
this calamity: for if in the most healthful times so great a number of
Physicians be not supernumerary, there being ordinarily Employment sufficient
for most, if not all of them; can it be imagined, that in case the numbers of
the Sick should be increased ten for one, or upwards, as in some Contagions
London has sadly found and felt, a fifth or sixth part of the Doctors in and
about this City, will be sufficient to attend those whom God shall visit in so
unusual a manner, as to the terror and truculency of the Disease, where
multitudes are swept away with such rigorous speed, as might command pity in
any breast that has left in it the least room for charitable piety?

If the Care and Cure of the Sick be the work, office, and duty of all who
conscionably pretend to the Art of Medicine, this sure is a time in which it is
an incumbent duty on all its Professors, to double their vigilance and
industry; yea, unworthy is he the name and title of a Physician, who shall then
quit his work and station, when his assistance and help is most needful and
required: Dulcia non meruit qui non gustavit amara. Here is a time and occasion
of exercising all their care and charity with the most religious observance: If
it be the work of Doctors, as beyond doubt and denial it is, how can they
answer the neglect of it to God or their own Conscience?

Not but that I judge the pious care of the Magistrate highly commendable, in
encouraging as many as are conscienciously diligent, at such a time when their
work and care is increased, with addition of both danger and hazard to their
persons; but for any Doctors to refuse or decline this duty, without
prestipulating for a large Reward, before either their Ability or Care has
been made appear to the world, will brand as many as shall be found guilty in
this kind with a black note of infamy, not to be born with Honor, nor excused
by any Apology.

The pretense of having other Patients, and their unwillingness to affright or
endanger them, is too narrow a Fig-leaf to cover this their nakedness, and hide
their shame: For, first, many (if not most) of considerable Fortunes leaving
the City upon the first alarm of this Visitation, as it much diminishes the
ordinary employment Doctors had usually at other times when the City was free
from this Contagion; so especially the terror of this severe Disease silenceth
many others, and swallows up in its larger stream other more inconsiderable
Rivelets; so that what they propound in case of the Pestilence, might be an
adequate Expedient for providing at this season against other Diseases and
Maladies; namely, that a sufficient number of Doctors might either by lot, or
mutual consent, be set apart to attend such only as were free from, and were
fearful of the Plague, but others (without admitting any excuse) to attend
their Calling on this so weighty an occasion; and in case any through cowardly
fear should neglect or decline this their undoubted duty, might they be (for
ever after) laid aside as unfaithful Physicians of no value, fit to be marked
publicly with some note of disgrace, in case they should after the removal of
this hand of God, presume to reassume their former Practice and Profession.

For my part I should give my vote that none such might be admitted publicly
to Practice for the future, that should now desert their station, and
unworthily decline this so great duty, till first he had stood publicly in
some eminent place of great Concourse, with a Collar of broken Urinals about
his Neck, with a Note of his Fault, Name, and place of abode, that men might
know where to find, and how to beware of such an unfaithful, unworthy
Quacksalver. Afterward when every man's demerits shall be understood, (and in
so common a Calamity, as in all eminent actions of public Concernment,
remarkable Deserts cannot go undiscovered) the Magistrate, as his prudence
shall direct him, may encourage the Diligent, that others may be stirred up to
follow their example: But a cowardly Physician (like a cowardly Captain) is
unworthy of fame, fortune, or life.

As for their Families, undeserving are they the name of Christians, who doing
their duty, shall be afraid to trust God in such a matter: But in case any of
them be afraid, let them remove where they judge themselves more secure, yet I
dare say, seldom will such an obstacle lie in the way of a conscientious
Physician? That God who can (and if it stand with his pleasure, and be for his
glory will) secure the persons, rules and governs the hearts and spirits of all
related to such, whom he shall employ in so pious and charitable a work; let me
do my duty, and I will trust God with the rest: this is my judgment, this is,
and God willing shall be my practice, and will be of as many as God has
elected and made Physicians. The rest that are otherwise minded, I beseech God
to convince them of their fault and folly. And, Sir, give me leave to tell you,
that I was heartily glad for your sake, to find in you the same spirit; nor
can I think of any in this respect culpable, without regret of mind.

If a man be conscientious in this particular, self-preservation as well as a
desire to be serviceable in his calling, will make him very studious in his
search, and earnest at the throne of Grace, that he may be master of real and
true, not imaginary, false, and unfaithful Remedies, against so truculent and
terrible an enemy. And those that ask, seek, and knock out of a pure design of
pious serving God, in doing their duty faithfully and effectually, and
charitable serving their Neighbor, to the comfort of the Patients, and credit
of themselves, the merciful God will hear.

Blessed be the Almighty who has fortified us with such resolution, and has
furnished us with such Remedies, as may be the clear Diplomata and evident
tokens of our Mission; and being sent out by the Lord himself among such great
numbers of languishing and distressed objects of Charity, beseeching him, that
he would take away, or lighten his hand, as may stand with his infinite good
pleasure, and most blessed will.

Sir, you see how these thoughts and discourses with you have drawn me beyond
my first propounded limits, yea, rather beyond the bounds of an Epistle; for
which I crave and hope easily to find your pardon, since matters of no light
importance have thus insensibly enticed me, and drawn me out to so unexpected
Enlargement; I return now to that Pitiful Thing, that has endeavored to throw
dirt upon your umblemisht Reputation, and to eclipse your bright luster; which
he has as unsuccessfully prosecuted, as he did foolishly attempt it.

The last thing that I shall take notice of in his Scribble, is the Contempt he
would throw on your Ability by the despicable relation he makes of your
Laboratory, as to which you give me a most satisfactory account: First, that
where you at present reside, you are only a sojourner, and unsettled:
Secondly, that he neither saw (nor desired to see) a third part of those
Conveniences which you there have, being admitted but into your first, and
most obvious room. But let me add this as an information to him, and as many
as it concerns, That a true Son of Art makes his Furnaces, not they him. I will
do that in a small contemptible Earthen Furnace, which he shall not in any, or
all of those which he has set up in his pompous Laboratory, an Engine more for
show and ostentation, then real use; and a true Philosopher needs not the half,
nay, nor third part of those specious Fooleries which he has erected, of
which, some there are, which if he were then (and not till then) to be happy,
when he could give any, but a most ridiculous account of the use of them, and
his intent in erecting them, he would certainly be for ever (in this world)
miserable.

For my own part, although I have (as you know) Furnaces, for convenience,
usefulness, and neatness, so many, and fit, that I dare compare with any
Laboratory in, or about the City; yet for a need I could furnish my self and
many others in City and Country, as I do and have done, for a very ample
practice, with half as many, and nothing so sightly, Furnaces: Therefore in my
judgment, that part of his Animadversions betrays in him as arrant wisdom, as
can be expected from such a heap of idle garrulity, and dunghill of
opprobrious contumely. Perhaps he accounts none furnished with a Laboratory as
he ought to be, unless like himself, he lay out upon this outside of Chemistry,
so much of other men's Moneys as he can possibly get credit for; and having
erected it, do nothing of remark in it, unless to draw the Quintessence of a
few Spiders, which (as those who know the constitution of Citizens affirm) that
one of thos^ Animalcula, is for them a dangerous and hazzardous bit to swallow,
as they are in their simplicity; how much more being so subtillized, may they
give an Essence, after the tasting of which it is an extreme hazard if ever he
recover and do well.

Truly I pity this man's folly and simplicity, and wonder at his unadvised
audacity, that knowing in what relation he stands to a Gentleman, a great
honourer of true Pyrotechny, and as great a defier of the Galenists (as they
stand in opposition thereto) a very judicious, sober person, and stout defender
of true natural Helmontian Principles, against any, or all their contemners and
opposers; that I say he (of all men) should suffer his Name to be put to so
unworthy a Piece, full of Reproaches against that Art, and such Artists, for
whom this Gentleman (to whom he stands so related) has a very great, and more
then ordinary kindeness; certainly this verifies the Proverb, Perdere quos vult
Jupiter, hos prius dementat. And if I might without consulting the Stars,
foresee from what Corner a Storm may arise, that may shake the four Corners of
his Laboratory, and bring it down tumbling about his ears. For my part, I know
not what to make of him, except a Gudgeon, and as such, I shall at present take
leave of him; and for his further and future instruction and edification,
deliver him over into the hands of a worthy friend of mine, a noble heroic
spirited Cook, to make of him, if not what he pleases, yet what he can;
whether Fish, or Flesh, or red Herring.

Thus, Sir, having done with your Scribbling Animadverter, I take leave of you,
wishing you all possible Happiness, present and future, here and hereaftet; and
subscribe my self,

Broadstreet, second Dwelling House from Winchester-street June 21. 1665. Your
most faithful Servant, and Fellow Laborer for the Advancement of true
Pyrotechny, and Fellow-contender for the Truth of Nature, against all Opposers
whatsoever, George Starkey.

FINIS.

