THE Three Countrey-mens English ANSWERS TO THE Clergy-mens Latin CHARGES.

OR, The Laymens plain ENGLISH, in answer to the unknown Language of the
pretended Spiritual Court at Winton.

Unto which is added a short Relation of the dealings of John Hayes Priest with
two of them after they were excommunicated.

Also twenty four Queries propounded to be answered by those that call
themselves Spiritual men.

They are waxen fat and shining, they do overpass the deeds of the wicked, they
execute no judgment, no not the judgment of the fatherless Jer. 5. 28. Woe
unto them that are mighty to drink wine, and to them that are strong to pour in
strong drink, which justify the wicked for a reward, etc. Isa. 5. 22, 23.
Printed in the Year, 1664.

IN the name of God Amen. We Mo^deford Bramstone Knight, etc. do on the
complaint of Henry Burrat and Alexander Faithful, Guardians of the Parish
Church of lower Wallop within the Diocese of Winton, as follows.

Answer,

IT is written, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; and
these things following are not written in the name of God, nor givenforth from
his spirit, though his name be mentioned but are rather found to proceed from
that which oppresses and resists the spirit of God, and persecuteth his
servants, there being untruth written therein; and wherefore is it that you
force them to complaint, and then herein as it were complain of them for
complaining, but can you say that Henry Burret and Alex. Faithful are made
Guardians or Overseers by the Holy Ghost to guard your Temple made with hands.

First, That thou Edmond Gearle art and have been of the Parish of nether
Wallop in the Diocese of Winton, and of right subject to the Court, etc.

Answ. Of right I now belong to God, whose name I see is profaned by such as
are called spiritual men, and of right my soul belongs to Christ the Bishop
thereof, who is the power of God, which is the highest power, to which every
soul is to be subject, he being exalted at the Fathers right hand far above all
principalities and powers, Ephesians. 1. 20. 21. and in conscience to the Lord I am
ready to submit unto the ordinance of men, yea though they be wicked men, that
profane the name of God.

2. Also, That the foresaid Henry Burret and Alex. Faithful in the Months of
March, April, May, June, July, August, September, October, November, December,
January, February, and March, in the years of our Lord 1659. 1660. 1661. and
March, April, May, June, July, August, September, in the years of our Lord,
1662. now going on, and at present are Guardians of the Parish Church of lower
Wallop, and are lawfully elected, admitted and sworn, etc.

Answ. Whereas it is said they are lawfully elected and admitted, by what Law
was it they were elected, so long since as three years and a half? and if by
lawful is meant humane or temporal, then how comes it to pass, that men now by
temporal matter are admitted into spiritual office; or by that which is humane
or temporal made Guardians over, or fitted to guard that which is spiritual, or
must the temporal oversee the fpiritual, or else is the Church they guard
temporal also. If it be, why then do spiritual men uphold a temporal Church.
But if by, lawful elected, is meant divine or spiritual, then let themselves
declare what divine power they received from God or men, when they were
elected; and let it be proved by what divine or spiritual Law of God or Christ
they were admitted and sworn, and when had any of the Apostles or true
Ministers any men sworn or swearers to guard their Churches.

3. Also that all and singulaer lands, messuages, tenements, within any parish
within the Diocese of Winton aforesaid, are liable and subject to pay toward
the repairing of the parish Church, when there shall be occasion to repair the
same according to the value of the same lands and tenements, etc.

Answ. These are words, ways, and things of this world, which passes away,
and of the earth that waxes old, as if it proceeded from earthly minded men,
who themselves are liable to covetousness, and by ambition and vigor force
parishioners to be liable to such payments, taxes, and cruelties, that they
already begin to be weary thereof, and these lines have not the least show of
any Scripture authority, nor Apostolical example, neither does this prove that
such as are not of the world, as Christ is not of the world, but are followers
of him, that they ought to pay toward the repairing of a house made with
hands, and yet be called a Church, which is another thing then that for which
Christ shed his blood, Acts 20. 28.

4. Also that in the years or months aforesaid, or in some of those years or
months in the time of the rate or tax made, thou Edmond Gearle did have,
hold, and occupy a certain message or tenement, with certain lands to the same,
belonging and appertaining within the parish of lower Wallop foresaid, and thou
were said, and commonly reported to be the possessour and occupier of the said
message or tenement and lands aforesaid,

Answ. This is written more like the critical subtle Lawyers, such as Christ
cried woe against, who took away the key of Knowledge, Luke 11. 52. As you keep
knowledge from our eyes, and not like men endued with the Spirit of God, though
at first you take his name in your mouths, and then go on like them tha^ did
so, and hated to be reformed. But by your words, it was sometime, or never that
I did possess something or nothing, and it was so, or else said or reported to
be so, which words opene^h like a wide mouth, but brings forth little or
nothing: but if it be so, that once or never I did possess a tenement or piece
of land, and that your tax was assessed upon the same, then not upon my person;
therefore you should have sought it from the land according to your own way,
whilst it was in my possession, and not upon my person, now it is not in my
possession.

5. Also that in the year of our Lord 1659. and in the months in the same
year, or in some or one of them, the parish Church of lower Wallop aforesaid,
was much ruinated, and out of repair in the walls, and tower, seats, and
ornaments* and other things to the same parish Church belonging and
appertaining, and this was and is true and manifest.

Answ. Then it seems your buildings have been once going down, and so out of
repair already, so that I perceive it is possible your buildings may decay, and
if so, then at last fall, and come to an end: but now you appear like them that
said, The bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stone. But take
you heed least you weave the Spiders web, and hasten Gods wrath against your
selves, and then he brings down your high Towers, and makes your walls like a
tottering hedge, and remove your seats though you have set your nests on high,
and exalted your selves above the stars of God, like those that act spiritual
wickedness in high places, from the which when the Lord God brings you down,
and rewards you according to your works, which he will surely do, then shall
you know that this is true and manifest.

6. Also that in the year and months, and in the year of our Lord 1659.
aforesaid, and in the months of the same year in the time of the rate and tax,
making the aforesaid Henry Burret and Alexander Faithful guardians, etc. had
not within their hands or possessions, neither were to receive or have any
rents, or lands, or tenements to the same Church belonging or appertaining, or
any other means to repair or amend the same parish Church, otherwise then by
m^king and imposing a rate and tax on themselves, and other Parishioners and
inhabitants of the same Parish limits and precincts of the same Parish, and
that this is true and manifest, etc.

Answ. There you have as it was told a large story, how a rate or tax was made,
but here is not one word of the Law of God, nor of the Gospel of his Son, nor
so much as three words of Scripture language, but nonsense put in the stead
thereof, as though there were both years and months in the year 1659. and if
you have neither Rents, Lands, Tenements, nor any other means to uphold your
Church walls from going down, nor to repair the ruinations thereof, but what
you get by force and violence like Hophni and Phinias, then that is the ready
way to make all people weary both of you and your Church too, and this is true,
and may come at last to be manifefl.

7. Also that in the aforesaid year 1659. in the months in the same year or in
one of them, etc. the Guardians, Parishoners, and Inhabitants of the Parish of
lower Wallop aforesaid, according to forewarning at certain days, or a certain
day and place, etc. or the greatest part of them came together, and with
unanimous assent and consent did tax and impose Rates and Taxes in and upon all
Parishoners and Inhabitants, and other Messages, Lands or Tenements within the
Parish aforesaid, and within the limits and precincts of the same Parish, the
holders and occupiers of the same, according to the value of the Messages,
Lands and Tenements of every person for and toward the repairation and
amendment of the defects of the faid Church, and ornaments, and other things
belonging to the same Church, and amongst other Parishoners and Inhabitants of
the said Parish, thee the aforesaid Edmond Gearle for a Message, or Tenement
and Lands by thee within the Parish aforesaid, limits and precincts, etc. in
the year and months, etc. held possessed, and occupied, and according to the
quantity, quality, and value of the same did rightfully and lawfully tax the
sum of two shillings and two pence to be paid to the Guardians aforesaid, for
and toward the repairation and amendment of the defects of the said Church,
and ornaments, and other appurtenances to the said Church belonging; and this
is true and manifested, etc.

Answ. Herein you show again in what year (but very doubtfully) what month the
Tax was made, and how it came to be, but not the least example thereof from any
of the Ministers of Christ, though you do mention it is for and toward the
repairations and amendments of the defects of your Church, and the ornaments
belonging to the same, whereby it seems your called spiritual men are seeking
to repair the defects of a temporal Church, for your Church and the ornaments
thereof are things that are seen, and the Apostle says the things that are
seen are temporal, and such things will wax old and decay and at last may
vanish away, as better things then them did; and it seems your Church ornaments
are defective, and the Church it self defective, and it may be the upholders
thereof defective, and the worship defective, and the faith vain, and then what
shall we do there, or why should we pay money to have such defective stuff
renewed, and it may be your upholding such defective stuff is not only
defective, but also to us destructive or hurtful both in body, soul, and state,
which nothing can be so to us, that is truly spiritual of God; but that this
Tax of two shillings two pence to be paid by me toward the repairing of the
defective Church is rightfully according to any Gospel order imposed upon me,
or lawfully according to any Levitical Law assessed upon the Lands I then held,
according to any Scripture direction I do deny, neither do I believe that most
of the Parishioners were together at the seasing of this Tax, neither can you
prove the same, and therefore this is false, and not manifest.

8. Also that after the rate made Tax or Imposition as abovesaid, etc. all the
Parishioners and Inhabitants of the Parish aforesaid and other Proprietours,
Possessours and Occupiers of Messages, Lands, and Tenements within the said
Parish, limits, and precincts, or the major part of them have paid or are ready
to pay the foresaid Guardians the Rates and Taxes upon them Imposed
notwithstanding they have been dissuaded from paying the same by thee and
others, etc.

Answ. As for the major part paying the said rates or tax, the major part go
the broad way which leads to destruction, who being in the worlds nature follow
their blind leaders, like weary horses under their heavy burdens,
notwithstanding they see their Teachers reel to and fro in the matter of their
worship like the waves of the Sea, and stagger about the manner thereof like
drunken men, and cast off their professions like serpents, and change
themselves in other habits like Tailors, and into other colors, shows, and
fashions, like Camelions, and turn with the times, like the wind, and change
every season, like the Moon, and conform to any thing, like time-servers, yet
not so much as transform themselves into the likeness of the true Apostles of
Christ, neither do they bear the image or shadow thereof; but if most of the
Parishioners aforesaid have paid your Tax, I question not but they had rather
kept their money, some of them to relieve their Families, and some out of
saving, or covetousness, and it may be some of them, had as willingly have
gone to the Alehouse with it, so little zeal may foam of this major part have
toward your defective Church, and some that did pay it, might pay because you
rule with such force and cruelty over them, that they dare not do otherwise,
and so those are not cheerful givers, nor willing payers, and so you have not
much to boast therein; and their souls having so little benefit by that decayed
and defective Church that they have several sufficient reasons in themselves to
dissuade them not to pay without being persuaded thereunto by me and others.

9. Also that thou the aforesaid Edmond Gearle, though thou have been asked and
called upon for the abovesaid sum of two shillings two pence often times or
once by the aforesaid Henry Burret and Alexander Faithful guardians, or by one
of them, for and toward the reparation of the Church aforesaid, yet thou have
denied, or refused, or yet do delay or defer at present to pay the same, etc.

Answ. Yea, I had good reason so to do, and if I had met but with such
reasonable dealing as usually is among heathens, they had not need to have
asked more of me, nor have had that unreasonable covetousness to seek any more
from me toward their defective Church, for the which there being taken from me
by John Cox, and Nicholas Thomas in the year 1658. one brewing kettle, one
washing kettle, one peuter dish, worth about twelve shillings, though their own
demand was but five shillings five pence, which was also for repairing the
defective Church, so that above three years since the guardians of the said
Church have had from me about six shillings seven pence aforehand, which is
about three times two shillings now demanded, so that of right and by good
reason, if not according to your own way there remains due to me near four
shillings five pence, and therefore as I said I had good reason not to pay any
more toward your defective Church.

10. Also that thou know that the aforesaid Henry Burret and Alexander
Faithful guardians abovesaid for all and singular the matters and things
abovesaid, and on their parts have rightfully and lawfully complained unto us
and our office in this behalf, etc.

Answ. This is utterly false that I do know, that you called guardians to your
foresaid defective Church, did rightfully and lawfully complain unto your
office for all and singular matters and things aforesaid, nor yet any part
thereof, being utterly false, is turned back unto you as a filthy thing, which
is not in the name of God, though at first you did take his name into your
mouths, and now appear something worse then those that began in the Spirit, and
end in the flesh, if you have only begun with his name in your mouths, and at
the end lies proceed out of the same mouth, like blessing and cursing.

11. Also that thou know, believe, or have heard to be said, that all and
singular of the premises have been and are true, and concerning which, and all
the said premises, the aforesaid Guardians do require Justice to be
administered, with the effects, etc,

Answ. What I know and believe is one thing, and what I have heard to be said
may be another, for I may know and believe the truth, but if I should harken
much to such lying men as the Priests of England, who have now sufficiently
showed themselves, I may not only hear what is said, to be lies, but the lies
themselves, for they said and pretended they led us the right way before, and
now they would lead us another way, and say this is right, and they said they
were Ministers of Christ before, and now they deny their own profession and
practice, and yet pretend they are Ministers of Christ now, and though they for
filthy lucre turn every way like the wind, and creep for dust or earthly things
like Serpents, yet still they pretend to be right; and as for your said
Guardians justice from you upon me, it is more like they are forced by you, and
your wicked oaths imposed upon them to do what they do, when they had rather be
quiet with their neighbors, who by these unchristian like proceedings are
sometimes now set at variance, and so you show your selves like fools that
stir up strife, and as for the justice of your Court which shows little
mercy, I have neither known, nor do I believe, nor certainly hear that you have
full power according to your own Law by special Pattent or Broad Seal for what
you do, but remember you must receive from God according to your works.

by me who am a lover of the Truth, called EDMOND GEARLE.

JAcob was a plain man and the Lord loved him, and we are plain men and are
persuaded that Gods love is toward us; however men may hate us and seek
occasion against us, and use us hardly as our Fathers were in Egypt, but we
having the love of God shed abroad in our hearts we dare not offend him, in
doing or upholding that which the Lord has showed us to be evil, and though we
have not much knowledge in the Law, yet we know what is just and reasonable;
and though we have not much heretofore known the proceedings in this which you
call a Spiritual Court, yet we see and plainly understand that you who are the
upholders thereof are not guided by the spirit of God who is Love, nor by the
spirit of his son, who said, love your enemies, but by another spirit, the
fruits whereof both toward us and before our faces has appeared to be quite
contrary to the spirit of God which is shown by the Apostles, Gal 5. yea, and
you have showed forth works of darkness toward us, throwing away our hats,
and even abusing them and us, as once by profane cursing of us, and then give
us writing wherein (it may be) is declared what is demanded, but by reason it
is written in such a dark way, not only in Latin, but in such an unsound and
uncertain or unknown way, that if we were willing to pay it, we can scarce come
to know how much it is, whereby also it appears you are men of such a spirit
that seeks to keep us in darkness and blindness, and from the knowledge of
those things which concerns our bodies and estates as well as our souls, that
by no means we might understand it, though we much desire the same; and we know
no reason that we or any else should give any unto you for so doing, neither
can we be free or clear in the sight of God to pay toward the maintenance of
such a Priesthood, which is to be upheld by men of such a spirit, nor to uphold
or repair such Temples in which they (not we) do worship, but we confess
Christ come, and him to be our Priest for ever, and the Bishop of our souls,
and our bodies are a spiritual house built up of living stones, of which Christ
is the Head we own, which is not a Temple made with hands, for ye are the
Temple of the living God, and I will dwell in them, and walk in them, says the
Lord; but as for that place built with men's hands called a Church, we own it
not for the Church, and therefore we cannot pay to the upholding of the same.

Josiah Wickham, Nicholas Wonson.


The Reader may know that the Declarations which these three men received at
the Court were one and the same, only their names and the sums of Money
demanded were several, as one two shillings two pence, another two shillings
six pence, and the other three shillings.

Here follows a short Relation of the actions and dealings of the Priest of
the Parish (unto which we belong) with us, after we were excommunicated by them.
AFter that we had delivered into the Court these our Answers, having been
abused in words, and our hats taken from our heads, and thrown from us; and
also one of the Parators cursing of us (which is of the spirit of the wicked
one whom they obey) and having thrust us forth of their Court, could not be
satisfied, but proceeded to excommunication (or cursing) of us from out of
fellowship with them (whom we dare not to have union with) we say the Priest of
the defective Church he proceeded to sentence of excommunication, and cursed us
from amongst them, with the which we rested well satisfied, and had peace with
the Lord whom we obey (though detected and rejected by those whose actions show
by what spirit they are guided, as may be seen in open view*) Now after they
had thus dealt with us in summoning us from time to time to our great
hinderance (who are husbandmen, and got our bread by our labor) telling us
diverse times that we should have our articles) or in writing that which they
alleged against us, wherein also they proved liars, and so to be of their
father the Devil; for when we came according to appointment they shuffled us
off, and would bid us come another time, and so we did several times before we
had it. But to come to the thing, this Priest after he had proc^eded to
excommunication in public before his hearers, then he came to us, and demanded
tithe, and coming to Josiah Wickhams house, he asked him how many sheep he had
shorn (he being but Vicar, having the tithe of wool, lambs, calves, apples,
plumbs, etc.) unto which he gave him answer, that it mattered not how many
sheep he had shorn, for they were none but his own, at the which he raged; also
his wife said unto him, that she thought he would not have offered to come to
them for wages, seeing he had before cursed them forth of his Church, unto
which the Priest like a (dumb dog) was silent, and afterward like a fox he went
far about to bite, and sub poena'd us to appear at the Exchequer on such a day
(it being nominated) and then we went to the Priest to speak with him about it,
but he put us by and told us, that he would speak with us another time, and
likewise he having before dep^ived us of the benefit of Law, he then sued us at
the Law (which is double wickedness in the sight of God, and will appear
odious in the sight of any reasonable man, and seems ridiculous; according to
that Proverb, First cut off their legs, and then bid them go. And then for
Nonappearance we were served with a process by a Bayliffe, and at that time
also we went to speak with the Priest to know what he intended to do with us,
and he said, we must go to prison, if we would not pay him, whom before he had
renounced as Heretics. Mark people, this man who professes himself a Minister
of Christ, would be maintained by us whom he has cursed; some of his Church
has also told us, that they must not buy or sell with us, and yet this Priest
would have maintenance from us. Surely he and his brethren are not to be
paralleled, nay the false Prophets of old, of whom we read, were not found in
such actions. Would not Hophni and Phineas, wicked men, (who took the offerings
by force) have been ashamed to have acted as this man has done, who though
they did take the offerings by force, it was of them who were of Israel (and
not of the heathen) But these Priests manifest themselves, yea they are already
manifest to us, that can see, hear, or understand, to be absolute wolves, whose
sheeps clothing (though now its but narrow) by these and such like actions
will be wholly stripped off, and appear they shall even as they are, before the
eyes of all. But to proceed, this Priest perceiving that we were resolved to go
to Prison, rather then to uphold or maintain his belly (which is his God) he
then began to fawn and to wipe his eyes (Crockadile like) pretending he was
sorry, and bid us we should not go, with other words which he used; yet our
minds he could not alter, who had faith in our God, and did trust in his name,
who has been a tower of refuge unto us; and so we were brought to this prison,
where we have been kept about twenty five weeks from our honest labors, yea,
this serpent was so subtle, that he chose (as he thought) the best time
throughout the year for his purpose, and so by that thought to get over us, it
being then the beginning of harvest, and we had not any manservant to take
care for our corn, and so to outward appearance it was in danger (or some of
it) of being spoiled. But the God whom we serve, and for whose cause and
testimony we this day suffer provided for us beyond our expectation, and even
raised some that were our enemies, that they profred to assist our wives and
chilbren. So our harvest was brought in (though it was something more charge to
us) in seasonable time, praises to him that rules over all, and since we were
brought ^ither, some of his flock has spoken with him about us, and as we
hear, he gave one of them this answer, That if he should let us alone, others
would serve him so likewise, and none would pay him, and so he might starve.
Mark how far this man is from that Spirit which ruled in the Apostle Paul, who
said, They labored day and night, because they would not be chargeable, 1
These. 11. 9. But this Priest John Hayes he is so far from purposing to work
with his own hands, that he intends to make others maintain him, whether they
are willing or not, and so little love has his hearers toward him, that if
there were not a law he might starve, as appears by his own words. Oh what a
flock has this man gathered, and what a vineyard has this man planted, and
what fruitless trees (that cumbers the ground) has this man set, who would
yield him no fruit to satisfy his belly, and what unruly flocks (but more like
herds) has these Priests of England gathered who would give no milk. Surely
they are careless shepherds, they gather not, they heal not, they bind not up
the wounds of the sheep, they seek not the lost, nor regard those that die in
pollution. They eat of the fat, and cloth themselves with the wool, sitting
at ease in their houses, and fill themselves with wine at their pleasures: they
waste the creation on their lusts, and rule over people with rigor: their
wives sit as Ladies at their feasts, and they have the uppermost room in the
Synagogues; the people labor in the earth, and God gives the increase, and
these Caterpillars eat the fruits of their labors. But the whirlwind of Gods
fury arises which shall scatter them as the chafe, and drive them into the
lake of woe and misery, unless they repent with speed.

Wherefore all ye people that reads the foregoing with a single eye, and
considers the thing with an upright heart; hearken, was there ever such
oppression as this? read the Scriptures, and trace the false Prophets of old,
and parallel them wi^h this man, and you may easily perceive and understand
that there was not the like found among them, for though they were wicked, and
their sins great, and though their abominations reached unto heaven, wherefore
their solemn Assemblies God could not away with, but their sacrifices were
abomination unto him, and their incense which should have been a good savor in
his nostrils became as a stink before him, yet we do not read that any of those
Priests dealt so cruelly with the people, as to thrust them from among them,
and afterward to cast them into prison, if they would not maintain them,
though by the Law of God there was authority given for them to have tithe; but
these Priests are so far from acting by the Law of God, that many times they do
contrary to the Law of man, in taking away their goods, and keep them in prison
also. Surely greedy dogs they are, and have manifested themselves to be. Isaiah
in his days complained of such, chapter 56. 10, 11. The watchmen are all blind,
they have no knowledge, they are all dumb dogs, greedy dogs, that never have
enough, looking every one for his gain from his quarter. So read people, mark
your shepherds, behold and see, can they understand, are they not dumb unless
they have their gain, yea do they not all seek it every one from his quarter,
for they never have enough, but sue at Law, and cast honest men into prison,
hunt for greater benefices, as witness John Hayes of Wallop who is not
satisfied with the tithe of one parish, nor is not content with sixty pounds a
year, but hungers for more of these earthly things (which is the Serpents meat)
yea in stead of being servant, as Paul was, 1 Cor. 9. 19. He rules as Lord over
them, suing and contending at Law with his Parishioners; but the day makes him
manifest, though the beasts go to their dens, yet the light is broken forth
that discovers them all, and they can no longer hide themselves from it;
wherefore they foam, roar, and rage (and why) but because their time is short,
for the night is over with thousands, and they are and shall be more manifest;
a day of trembling is coming upon them, wherein rocks nor mountains shall not
hide them from the powerful stroke of the Lamb who is coming to reign;
wherefore fear all people, and dread the Lord God ye inhabitants of the earth,
for a day of howling is coming upon all the workers of iniquity, all ye
Priests, Proctors, Deans and Parators, with the rest of the uncircumcised,
dismal is the day which hastens, and black unto you (who have resisted the
light) a day of trouble and anguish, a day of torment, and perplexity, and of
great sorrow shall compass you, from the which there is no way to escape but
by speedy repentance and amendment of life; wherefore consider it before it be
too late.

J. W. N. W.


Now here follows a few Queries for any of those called Spiritual Men to answer.
1. Query. Who set up the first Spiritual Court, and where was it set up, or
whether there were any one set up by the Apostles, or by the Bishops in their
days, as Timothy and Titus, etc.

2. If there were any one set up by them, then to what end was it set up, and
what did they deelare was their intent who did set up such a Court?

3. Whether it was not after the Apostles decease before any of these Courts
were set up (in whose days) there were many Antichrists entered into the world?

4. Whether the night of Apostasy did not soon come after the Apostles decease,
wherein no man could work for God?

5. Whether it was possible for any (who were in this night) to do any thing
for the glory and honor of God.

6. Whether is the Judge of your Spiritual Court (so called) a spiritual man,
and whether he does act for God.

7. Whether a spiritual man of God who sits in the Judgment Seat can see sober
men wronged in his Court, and he not rescue them?

8. Whether a man who Judges for God can hear some or one of his own Court
curse, and not punish him according to the Law provided?

9. Whether a man that Judges for God can see such a man wrong others more
innocent then himself, and he take part rather with him that curses then with
him that is abused and innocent?

10. To what end are your Proctors in your Courts, or for what service are
they, or are they there appointed to cheat the people of their money, if people
have offended why should not all both poor and rich suffer alike?

11. Whether its not a cheat and an absolute sin against God to take money for
the offense of one when another that has not money, or cannot for conscience
sake give it you, must suffer the utmost penalty of the Law provided?

12. Whether you do not respect persons in so doing?

13. Whether is your Church made up of wood and stone, etc.

14. Or whether men and women gathered together are your Church? If you say its
the Church of wood and stone which you own,

15. Then whether Christ purchased such Churches to himself, or whether he shed
his blood for them, or whether such Churches are to be presented without spot
to God?

If you say men and women gathered are your Church.

16. Then whether your Church be without spot, or whether your Church members
be holy, or whether their sins be washed away by the blood of Christ?

If you say yes,

17. Then of what Church are those who are Drunkards, Swearers, Liars, Cursers,
Persecutors, Gamesters, Riotors, Whoremongers, Dancers, Racers, Hunters, they
saying that they own you, and have fellowship with you?

18. Whether you own such persons before mentioned, yea or nay?

19. Whether your Parators are spiritual men?

If so,

20. Then whether spiritual men of God will be drunk, lie, swear, call honest
mon rogues, and cause people to be idle on some of the six days, on which the
Law of God commands them to work?

21. Whether you allow your Parators in these things?

If you do,

22. Then whether it be not absolute deceit and lies in you to read, and in
pretense own and command people to do that, viz. work six days, when you
intend to punish them if they do, and send men abroad through the Country for
that purpose?

23. Whether you own that Parators may take money of some (when they have
feared them) for their pretended offense, and so let it be sufficient for them,
when others that cannot for conscience sake give into their mouths they bring
to you for a farther snare.

24. By what authority do you do these things?

Answer these Queries if you can, and send it abroad in Print to satisfy the
people; for many are, and more will be weary of you.

The End.

