The Manner of Dissecting the PESTILENTIALL BODY.

Printed for Nath: Crouch at the Rose and Crown in Exchang Ally



LOIOTOIA: OR THE PEST Anatomized In these following particulars, Viz. 1. The
Material Cause of the PEST. 2. The Efficient Cause of the PEST. 3. The Subject
Part of the PEST. 4. The Signs of the PEST. 5. An Historical Account of the
Dissection of a Pestilential Body by the Author; and the Consequents thereof.
6. Reflections and Observations on the foresaid Dissection. 7. Directions
Preservative and Curative against the Pest.


Together with the Authors Apology against the Calumnies of the Galenists: and
a Word to Mr. Nath: Hodges, concerning his late Vindiciae Medicinae.

By George Thomson, M. D.

(...).

Dii talem terris avertite Pestem.

London, Printed for Nath: Crouch, at the Rose and Crown in Exchange-Alley near
Lombard Street, 1666.

IMPRIMATUR, 1666.

To the Truly Honorable, WILLIAM Earl of CRAVEN, Vicount of Ovington, and
Baron of Hampsted Marshall.
MY LORD,
YOU have so obliged this whole NATION to Love and Honor you, for those many
eminent Graces and Virtues conspicuous in you, especially that transcendent
Charity toward your Neighbor in time of Extremity; that should I, conscious
of your Noble Actions, having so fit an opportunity, neglect to render you
Thanks, and to celebrate your Praises, for your bounty and liberality to this
miserable City, when the Contagion was grassant to the depopulating and
depauperating of it, I might deservedly be reckoned among ungrateful men;
Augustam Animam Augusto in pectore gestas; you have a Soul like the Image of
the Great Creator, of a vast extent, diffusive, communicative, beneficial to
good and bad. Sir, you have given such example of Charity upon this late
Exigent, as more powerful to convert this hard-hearted Age, than the Tongue of
Men and Angels. Certainly, the presence of your Person, has been a means to
counterpoise the evil effects of fugitive Physicians; so that many probably
have evaded the fury of the late Pest, through a strong Imagination that it was
not so Contagious and Mortal (as was conceived) because a Person of your
Dignity did dare to tarry here when it was most outrageous. Blessed be the Wise
Disposer of all things, who has preserved you to be an Instrument for his
further Glory, the Benefit of your Country, and the maintenance of FUNDAMENTAL
TRUTHS against all Opposers. And now I draw a little nigher your Lordship,
offering to you the First Fruits of my Difficult Labors, collected in the time
of the Raging Pest. The Substance of this Discourse is Practical, no idle
Dogmatical Fancy of a Non Ens, no Necessary Directions from Hearsaid; But I
have here laid open what I visibly and experimentally have found to be true,
what I have handled with these hands, and seen with these eyes. Really, Noble
Sir, all that I beg of your Honor is, That you would be pleased to favor me
so far, as I Speak, Write, and Act according to Truth: which I know is so
prevalent, that maugre all Adversaries, it will at length be Triumphant, and
bestow upon all Honest Endeavors an Immortal Crown of Glory.

Your Lordships most Humble, and Affectionate Servant, GEO: THOMSON.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Know thou art Cloyed with multitude of Books that this Scribbling Age is
fertile in: Thou must needs nauseate Cramben Millies coctam, the same homely
Service a Thousand times set before thee, the same things still repeated,
perhaps false, or little for thy satisfactory Instruction: So that it is enough
to make thee look askew, and scorn what I have here offered to thy Perusal,
expecting no other from me than Cuculi Cantum; sed siste Gradum: If you please
to make a Halt awhile, I may deliver something thou may not repent to spend
time to hear, and take pains to read, tending to thy Health; that Goddess
Salus, without which no Temporal Felicity can be enjoyed, by means of which so
long as it favors us, nothing but may be purchased.

I have ventured my own Life to save thine, passing through a way little
trodden, full of Briars and Thorns; and finding a shorter Cut, I have given
thee such Directions, which if thou strictly follow, may make thy passage
through this valley of miseries more happy. I have declared in this following
Treatise, how we are begirt on every side with infinite occasional Causes that
seek to ruin us; and what a Domestic Enemy we carry about us, ready to betray
us to the violent power of preternatural things infesting us.

I have been above this Twenty Years sollicitous and sedulous to find out the
genuine proper Causes and Cures of all Diseases malignant, but especially the
Pest; for which end I visited all sorts of People, the Poor as well as the
Rich, administering to them Medicines of my own preparation; observing from one,
what might be useful to another; yea, I was so eager in the pursuit of
Therapeutical Truth, that I was restless till I had the full view of the inward
parts of a Pestilential Body, whereby my Judgment was confirmed in some things,
and my Intellectuals instructed in others. I have acted many Years formerly,
but especially now of late, when there was most need, the part of a Physician,
Chyrurgion, and Apothecary, as becomes every honest able Man lawfully called to
this Noble Faculty. Take it for an infallible Verity (and I assert it without
the least Rancour and Malice to any Person) that it is impossible, without
miraculous Inspiration, for a Physician to discharge his Duty in this
honorable Profession, unless he bring to Unity that which of late has been
made a Trinity, through the Laziness, Pride and Covetousness of a Company of
Dogmatists. I speak not this to disparage or discourage any able professed
Apothecary or Chyrurgion, that is laborious, ingenious, honest, and furnished
with competent Learning (as for those that are otherwise qualified, I look upon
them as so many Iack-alls or Lurchers, that hunt up and down for a Prey for
their Masters, that they may have a share and snip with them) with some of whom
I am acquainted, who are an Honor to their Society, for whom I have no small
respect and kindness; and so much, that I prefer them, without Partiality,
before many Titular Prescribers, Grandia gradientes, that carry a fair outside,
make a great noise in the World (admired of a company of Idiots, that gaze and
dote upon them, ut pueri Junonis Avem) and yet are grossly ignorant in Materia
Medica, and the right preparation of the same

My Judgment is, That it is no such preposterous thing (as some Philo-Galenists
account it who are as it were riveted into a fond opinion and applause of that
Sect) for a Physician that intends to acquire excellency in his Science, to
begin with Pharmacopoea and Chyrurgia supposed, that he have some considerable
knowledge in the Tongues.

Neither should I have thought it any Disparagement to me, if I had been (as
they falsely allege) at first professedly instructed and initiated in these
Manual Operations, as Doctor Bugs, and some others have been Had I (when the
distressed Patient cried out for speedy help in the most acute Disease) been to
seek to an Apothecary or Chyrurgion for the preparation and dispensation of my
Medicines; or either of them to have made their address to a Doctor, many a
sick man had in the mean time perished, or at least had suffered much damage. A
true Physician always carries an Apothecaries shop about him, having in
Procinctu at hand, what is fitting to pessundate any potent Disease suddenly
sallying out upon Nature. He is unworthy the Title of a Doctor, the Name of a
Physician, that labors not with his own hands to attain such Remedies
sufficient to save his Patients Life.

I question not but the time is at hand, that whosoever is wilfully ignorant in
this kind, will be exploded by all understanding men; for what madness can
there be greater, than for an infirm person that truly values Health, to pin
his Life upon the Sleeve of such a Doctor, that prescribes a Composition, the
Ingredients whereof he knows not, whether they be taken in right, the
proportion just; when, nor perhaps how it was made; nay, I go farther (upon
good grounds) that shall not tell you the name of those Concretes, and judge of
them, laid before his eyes jointly ordained for a Medicine!

Be wise at length ye Mortals, and suffer not a Dogmatist to Cheat you any
longer with a formal Recipe, sent I know not whether, to be made up I know not
how, nor by whom; but be ascertained, before you meddle with a Physician, that
he have an intuitive knowledge of Animals, Vegetals and Minerals; that he is
well versed in the separation of their pure Crasis with his own hands, and then
thou need not doubt of a happy event. Wishing thou may accept of my
Advice for thy own welfare, I remain thine, whilst I am,

June 15. 1666 From my House in Dukes Place nigh Aldgate. G. T.

The Contents of the Chapters contained in this Treatise.
CHap. 1. Concerning the Name, Essence, and Material Cause of the Pest. page 7.
Chap. 2. Of the Formal and Efficient Cause of the Pest. 26 Chap. 3. Of the
Subject Part, where the Pest does principally reside, and act these Tragical
Scenes in Man's Body. 39 Chap. 4. Signs of the Pest. 52 Chap. 5. An Historical
Account of the Dissection of a Pestilential Body; And the Consequents thereof.
69 Chap. 6. Some Medicinal Reflections, and useful Observations made upon this
Pestilential Dissection. 107 Chap. 7. Directions Preservative and Curative
against the Pest. 144 The Author's Apology against the Calumnies of the
Galenists. 172
Courteous Reader, Here are a few Material Faults escaped by the Printer, which
I would have thee to mend with a Pen as thou Read; it is possible thou may
meet with some Literal ones too, which I have here omitted, that may be past by.

IN the Prologue, page 5. line 17. for Orial read Trial. p. 23. l. ult. for
(...), read (...). p. 54. l. ult. for Amphilogical, read Amphibological. p. 63.
l. ult. for perspication, read perspiration, p. 64. l. 7. for Diapuoick, read
Diapnoick. p. 84. l. 20. for Dee, read Dey. p. 88. l. 7. for senserint, read
senserit. p. 105. l. 16. for Pseudiatori, read Pseudiatri. p. 107. l. 4. for
labor, read labor.

LOIOTOIA: OR, THE PEST ANATOMIZED.
(...).
WHat that virtuous Lady, once afflicted with the Leprosy, wrote upon the
Frontispiece of an Hospital, which she erected for the Relief of Leprous
Persons: Haud ignara mali miseris succurrere disco. That she had learnt
experimentally to pity and assist others in the like condition, I do heartily
endeavor to put in Practice. And certainly none can truly condole another
unhappy Fate, that has not savourly and feelingly been made sensible of the
vexation of the same himself. Methinks it should be no small encouragement to a
sick man to take down freely that bitter Potion for his recovery, which has
often been swallowed by that Physician who has been himself a Patient
laboring under the like Grief.

When I look back, and seriously ponder with my self what an Army of Diseases
have laid Siege to this my frail Mudwall, assailing, undermining and battering
it with great and small Shot, sent flying from hereditary and outward
occasional Causes; I stand in Admiration, that I have not ere this been laid
flat on the ground, insulted over by Worms! I may confidently affirm, That I
have felt more or less in my Minority, the smart of most Diseases that have an
existence either traduced from my Parents, or contracted by some exorbitancy
and irregularity in my course of life. Three several times have I been wounded
by the venomous Arrow of the direful Pest, from which I have recovered, being
despaired of by my Friends. The first Arrow stuck deep and long in my Groin,
even four Months, for want of application of appropriate Medicaments (which the
Galenists always want) for indeed at that time I conceived nothing could act
beyond the usual Dispensatory to which I did then too pertinaciously adhere, to
my Sorrow: But the two last Arrows were quickly extracted, and the wounds
healed without extraordinary Labor and Dolor by Chemical means: And though I
am certain the second Scene of this Contagious Sickness did much transcend the
former, in respect of the ingress and egress thereof; the magnitude of the
Cause, the Atrocity of the Symptoms, with the sad Signs prognosticating Ruin:
Yet such Favor received I from the Donor of every good and perfect Gift, that
those purified Remedies which he was pleased to bestow upon me, did in the
space of Ten days, from the time I was taken, enable me to visit some of my
Patients abroad. Certainly had I been so well acquainted about Ten years pa^.
with those Arcana's in my Art as now, it is impossible that I should (being at
that time surprised with a malignant Fever) have been Cloystered up Seven
weeks in my Chamber; extenuated to a Sceleton, by no less than Six large
Cruciating Vesicatories prescribed by no inferior Galenist, who, as it were,
extorted me out of the hands of an able Chemist, for the intended Repute of his
own Method; which (as soon as I was restored to my right understanding) I
declined, absolutely declaring against bleeding in the Arm, which he gave order
should be put in execution the next day; and had I not prevented it by an
unmovable resolution to the contrary, the thread of my life had undoubtedly
been cut off; for I have positively set down, and can make it good by practice,
That Phlebotomy in the Arm in any malignant Disease, is absolutely destructive.

Give ye ear then all that desire to preserve Sanity, to be healed of Languors
and Infirmities, to live a long and comfortable Life, to one' that
experimentally knows it for a Truth, and can verify it by Fact, with
sufficient Reasons to back it, That the very foundation of the Galenical
Doctrine for the radical Cure of any Disease, (...) in general, and in
particular this that is called malignant, etc. (...) the Pest, is sandy and
tottering, not able to stand before a spirituous and fierce Orial of that
subtle all-searching Spagyrick power, which like Lightning, penetrates to the
Center of things, dissolving them into their first Principles, destroying what
is superfluous in them, and extraneous, keeping entire and untouched that which
is pure and defaecate. Had I not been Passive as well as Active to find out the
truth of Curing, I might have remained to this day in the Cimmerian darkness of
Dogmatical Vanities, to which I confess I was too much wedded at first. At
length, wholly resigning my self to be led freely by the thread of Nature
through the manifold Tortuosities and Meanders of its wonderful operations, I
am thoroughly informed, and shall endeavor to instruct others concerning the
Being, Cause, Cure, and Event of this late Pest, as real Experience in my self
and others has taught me, without deviating one tittle wilfully from the truth
of things as they are in themselves.

CHAP. I.
Concerning the Name, Essence, and Material Cause of the Pest.
I Very well know the curious Linguist will expect the Nomenclature of the Pest
in various terms; wherefore to satisfy his desire, I shall deliver them thus.
The Hebrews call it (...) a radice, (...) locutus est vel (ut sumitur in sensu
malo) perdidit, quod sit res a Deo edicta vel decreta, vel quasi sit perditio.
The Greeks, (...), a (...), corrumpo, to corrupt or spoil; (...), a (...),
percutio, vulnero, to smite, or wound. The Latins, Pestis, quasi perestis, a
peredo, to eat up, or devour, vel Plaga. The English, the Plague, the Pest, the
Sickness, or Disease, per excellentiam, vulgarly the Infection, Contagion, or
Distemper.

From the Name, I pass to the Essence and Quiddity of the Pest; which is a
Contagious Disease, for the most part very acute, arising from a certain
peculiar venomous Gas, or subtle Poison, generated within, or entering into us
from without: At the access, or bare apprehension of which, the Archeus is put
into a Terror, and forthwith submitting to the aforesaid Poison, invests it
with part of its own substance, delineating therein the perfect Idea or Image
of this special kind of Sickness distinct from any other.

Touching the Material Cause, it is a venomous Gas, or wild Spirit, produced
either inwardly from some degenerate Matter conceived within the Body, or
outwardly received from some fracedinous noisome Exhalations contained in the
pores of the Air, taking their Original from several putrid bodies excited to
fermentation, rarefied and opened by the Ambient, altered and moved by
Celestial Influences, and so disposed to this or that condition, whereby an
expiration is made of virulent Atoms, which sometimes close pent up, and drawn
in by the Lungs, do by their deletery power put to flight, confound, suffocate
and mortify the Archeus, or vital spirits, in as short a times as the strong
fume of burning Brimstone does destroy any small living Insect held over it.

I suppose I may well compare this mortiferous odor to the Gas or fume of
Brimstone, called by the Greeks, (...), forasmuch as Hippocrates calls that
abstruse Malignity of which a manifest prompt Reason is not to be given, (...),
that is something above the Elements, difficult for humane Capacity to render a
Cause thereof. To say truth, it is not for a Galenist that is clogged with (...)
of Temperaments and Humors, to understand the sublime Mystery of (...); for
none can apprehend this, but he that is Divinitus doctus, able to soar aloft by
virtue of the nimble wings of Mercury, which will by degrees carry him up to a
high pitch of the true Philosophical knowledge of natural things. This material
virulent substance endued with exceeding Leptomery, or subtilty of parts, has
free passage through the pores of man's Body, which are patent both for
admission and emission of minute particles, either friendly and agreeable to
Nature, or hostile and pernicious, which the vigilant Custos, the innate spirit
of every part can easily distinguish and judge of, detesting and abhorring the
one with a perfect Hatred, Terror, Consternation and Confusion; but embracing
and hugging the other with confidence, complacency, and sweet delight. Now the
Concordance and Sympathy, the Discord and Antipathy of all things in the
Creation is plainly visible; for Natura natura gaudet: whatsoever is Symbolical
and Congruous with another, does easily unite and shake hands with the same;
what is Antibolical and disproportionable to it, is rejected, loathed, and
nauseated. Thus there is a continual Syndrom and Concourse with like matter to
like; and Naturae Bellum infer, is odious both to the Macrocosm and
Microcosm. Water in an instant is conjoined with water, not so easily with that
which is Heterogeneous: How quickly do the many Globes of Mercury coincide and
couple into one, making a larger Spherical body? How extraordinary fertile do
some Lands show themselves by an injection or superaspersion of some matter
agreeable and consentaneous to their Condition, Nature, and inherent Property?
Behold how greedily the Air imbibes and swallows up any body attenuated to a
high degree, seeming as it were to be converted into an Identity with it! This
doubtless deceived the Ancients, supposing from this Affinity and Parity
between each, an absolute essential Transmutation of one into the other, which
cannot be, since the primogenial, simple and virgin Elements are stable, never
capable to undergo an Alternate vicissitude of one into another; so that
according to Mechanic demonstration, it may be made good, That there is not
one grain more or less either of Air or Water, since the very first moment of
the Creation of both. It Is certain the Air is not only Separator Aquarum, but
likewise a Disparter and Segregator of all Tangible bodies whatsoever, insomuch
that the more it appropinquates any thing, the more it breaks it into Atomical
parts according to its own constitution, and the disposition of that matter it
does surround. Now the Air being ready, according as it is qualified to admit
Dilatation and Contraction; and as it is thus modified, so it penetrates,
insinuating it self so far as there is the least passage for it, suffurating,
and insensibly carrying off whatsoever is capable to be volatilized; hence all
Concretes that have the least Humidity do continually expire, sending out
various emanations suitable to their grosser matter whence they arise, which
acquiring an inward Ferment, or torn into invisible parts by violent torture of
the fire, are all greedily sucked up into the spongy Spaces, or Magnale of the
Air, which obnoxious to many Changes, from the Blas Alterativum and Motivum of
the heavenly bodies, does accordingly produce different Meteors, thick or thin,
hot or cold, serene or cloudy constitutions, and consequently healthy or sickly
Times, Diseases malignant or well conditioned, acute or long, gentle or fierce.
Now when the ambient Air shall be crowded full of infinite small particles
disagreeing to our Nature, in their Figure, Crasis, Power, Texture and
Proportion, making uncessantly a strong impulse upon the vital Aura how is it
possible but it must needs be affected, altered, and at length subjugated to
the Dominion of an Exotic Tyrant, with which it conspires to the subversion of
a goodly frame, the obscuration and extinction of this bright and shining light
of life, which makes us beautiful, effulgent and radiant, so long as it
continues clear and vigorous, but once obscured, or put out, the Body becomes
dark, deformed, lucid and ghastly to behold? Now the venomous antecedent matter
which occasions the Pest, takes its Original immediately either from within the
Body, or without; within the circumference of the Skin, an absolute pestiferous
Poison is sometimes engendered, which being incubated by the Archeus, and
fomented by several outward Accidents, undergoing manifold Alterations, is at
last maturated and specified to this Hoc aliquid Pestilentiale, this kind of
virulent matter that occasions the Pest; for without Controversy, were a man
separated from all Society, and lived in never so wholesome Air, yet such a
pestiferous seed may spring up in the Body that may produce the same effect,
which an extraneous matter occurring does frequently introduce. Neither ought
this to seem strange, since whatsoever within us degenerates from its native
goodness, becoming stagnant and excommunicated from the Commonwealth of life,
is either in some short time extruded and banished, or rectified, reformed and
reduced, if possible, to its pristine goodness; and if Nature cannot perform
this, then is it by little and little insensibly graduated to what it is
capable of, and disposed unto; hence by the power of different Ferments arises
such a distinct Poison congruous to that seminal power it was first endued
withal. Thus the Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Vertigo, Lethargy, Madness, etc. take
their Original cause from such a matter that never fails (where there is a
suitable Agent to mould it) to explicate it self in this or that manner, and at
last to come to this or that determinate, individual thing it was at first
destinated, so certain as a Hen-egg, Turkey, or Goose-egg, if not interrupted by
some accident, do constantly afford what is appropriated inherently to each
kind. For Diseases in man's body have as certain a Seed, as any Mineral, Vegetal
or Animal, and make their Beginning, Progress, State, Declination, Period,
regularly and uniformly, whatsoever the Galenists say to the contrary,
asserting, That a Disease is only aliquid privativum; non positivum; excluding
it all the Predicaments, when in truth it is contained in all.

The outward antecedent occasional matter arises from some minute venomous
Particles, Aporrhaeas, or Effluviums of several Bodies either taken into our
Stomach, or immediately entering in through the small pores of the Skin; else
darted into the ambient Air, and there skipping up and down, are ready to be
admitted through the large patulous passages of the Body, where they play more
or less a sad Tragedy, according to the capacity of the receiver; for it
falls out that sometimes a Pestilential matter is taken in, and by virtue of
a robust innate Archeus, is forthwith excluded or tamed, and brought under the
Laws of Nature; so that what would prove great damage and detriment to one man's
health, does little impair another.

Now the usual common broad way through which this Poison is conveyed, is for
the most part the Mouth and Nostrils, places obvious for the reception of these
virulent Atoms; and needs must it be so, forasmuch as Respiration, which
consists of Inspiration and Expiration, being uncessantly performed for the
preservation of life, must needs draw in together with the Air whatever is
therein intermixed. Now there is in some Topical Air a fermenting venom,
equivalent, and every way as active as the Poison of a Scorpion, Phalangium, or
Viper, which though small in quantity, yet operates stupendiously. This
invisible Gas, this fracedinous Aura Lethifera, that fluctuates here and there,
once taken into these living houses of Clay, bears such a discord and hostility
to them, that if it be not in a short time extruded, a certain ruin of the
whole Fabric must needs follow; for there is such an absolute disproportion
and disagreement between these Opacons, dark and spiss Atoms, and the bright
luminous beams of life, that this must necessarily be extinguished, if those
once take firm possession in us, in the very same manner as Subterranean Damps,
and Mephitical Exhalations, cause the clear flame of a burning Lamp to become
dim and dusky, and at length to be annihilated.

Considering that we are thus beset on every side with such an allogeneous,
pernicions matter, that does frequently infest us, it is almost miraculous,
that the thread of our lives is drawn out to any length considerable, since
every thing has Spinas and Tribulos in it, somewhat disagreeable to our
Nature; yea, certain things are so deletery, that they dispatch us like the
Basilisk, smiting us down we know not when, or how. What strangely offensive
Particles are in some places, is well known to any that have often changed
their Region, and gone out of one Climate into another. It is remarkable what
Josephus Acosta relates of the grievous effects that the Air causes in those
that ascend the hill Pariacaca in America, what violent vomitings even to
blood, defection of the spirits, and faintings almost to death do continually
disturb them, till such time they have passed over the Perolede, or Valve of
the Air about that hill, which without doubt conteins in it those Corpuscles,
which are altogether incongruous with our spirits. It is reported that such a
noxious breathing arises from a certain Lake in Hungary, that Birds that fly
over are suddenly surprised with death.

Notable are the Stories of the Petrification of tender bodies, by certain
Corpuscles in the Air, endued with such a saxifying power. Some Tracts of Air
offend the Eyes, some the Teeth. Some places are Scorbutical, others
Dysenterical, these Febriculous, those Arthritical, and here and there some are
Pestilential, which are observed to produce the Pest Periodically (as in Gran
Cairo in Egypt) where the beginning and end of raging Plagues may punctually
be foretold, the reason of the cause whereof seems very abstruse, only in the
general we may probably conclude, That there arises some eminent alteration in
the Air, and those infinite Emanations it has received into the Pores thereof,
from a Blas or Influence of the heavenly bodies: Which, although as I have
formerly delivered, are of themselves innocent, free from any malignity, venom,
or pestiferous property: yet they cause various alterations and motions in the
Air, whereby it is disposed to be wholesome or unwholsom to us; for we find
experimentally, That the Pest is most outrageous, when the pores of tangible
bodies are most ready to expire by the ambient Air, which the nearer the Sun
approaches, the hotter it is, and thereby a Rarefaction and Subtiliation made
of those parts which otherwise lie constringed, dormant, benumbed as it were,
and mortified by extreme cold; for it is the nature of Cold to destroy the
seminal power of all Concretes as moderate heat on the contrary excites the
seed of all things, and provokes them to act.

We commonly see, that a most putrid and putid substance congeled by violent
Frost, desists to send forth that horrid ill odor, which the warmth would
quickly extract from it; questionless had not Divine Providence ordered, That
the middle Region of the Air should be extraordinary cold, on purpose to spoil
various Exhalations of their Ferments and Seeds, it were impossible but that
all things should have been long ago reduced to their first Chaos: So
efficacious do we find cold Seasons, through the distance of the Sun from us,
in powerfully restraining this feral Disease, the Pest, that in this part of
the World there has seldom any great Mortality reigned amongst us in a very
sharp Winter. And I have observed that the late Contagion, although it had
taken deep root in man's body, and endeavored to pullulate, and shoot out
fresh; yet was it so curbed and tamed by the Autumnal Frost, that it could
never rise up to any height, or get head, its fermenting power being still kept
under by the surrounding cold Air; which is changed according to the remotion,
appropinquation, interception, and obscuration of the solar Beams; which though
innocuous; lovely and glorious of themselves, yet shining upon a stinking
Dunghill or Kennel, and opening the body of any putrilaginous substance, do
accidentally cause a Fermentation in its parts, and thereby an Expiration of
unsavory and noysom Atoms prejudicial to man's life. Hereby not only inanimate
things induce a detriment to our health, through a multiplicity of their
copious Exhalations continually altering, and making impression upon our
spirits, weakening their Tone, debilitating their Vigor, dissipating,
confounding, and destroying them by their deletery property; but likewise the
Respiration, Emanations or Effluviums of diverse sorts of Animals do often prove
hurtful to our Natures; especially one man's body does easily affect and infect
another, by reason of a symbolical Affinity that is between one mumial ferment
and another; for there is an easy transmigration of virulent Particles from
body to body, where there is a magnetism, and a capable reception thereof; and
under the guise of a friendly Guest, a mortal Enemy is sometimes entertained:
And doubtless there are some Men and Women seemingly healthful, whose (...),
Breathings, Aporrhaea's, or Effluviums, are very pernicious to others, causing
great inconvenience and disturbance in the Archeus, yet perhaps not sensibly to
be discovered: Since then we are thus beset on every side with an invisible
fracedinous Gas, how is it possible that materials should be wanting for the
framing the Pest, and other innumerable Diseases!

Thus much concerning the antecedent occasional matter: That which is next to
be enquired, is Materia conjuncta, or Conttnens of the Pest, which is part of
the Archeus contaminated by the Pestilential Miasm, which primarily seats it
self in the privy Chamber of the vital spirit, which becomes one, and joins
with the Occasional, Antecedent matter, to dissolve the goodly structure of
this Microcosm; for the antecedent matter could do us no harm, were not the
Continent united to it, so as to become capable to receive the true figure,
character or impression of this determinate disease, the Pest; where it
remains, till such time the foresaid matter be profligated or proscribed by the
strength of the residue of the Archeus, as yet untouched and free from
Contagion, or the Image of the Pest expunged, and thereby a Manumission and
Redemption of the captivated spirit, from that slavery it was before kept under
by a domineering Idea. Neither ought it to seem strange, that I reckon part of
the Archeus for the conjunct matter of the Pest, contrary to the Doctrine of
the Schools, who never dreamed of any such thing, till that great Deliverer of
Philosophical verity, Helmont brought it to light; forasmuch as nothing exotic
or venomous could do us any hurt, did not the Archeus, the vital spirit
cowardly first yield it self Prisoner to the assailing Poison; and then
afterward become confederate to act with it, to the demolition and devastation
of that Fabric which otherwise might stand unmoved.

CHAP II.
Of the Formal and Efficient Cause of the Pest.
MAtter of it self is effete, languid and dead, if it be not quickened and
actuated by some spirit, which contrives, moulds and fashions it into such a
form, that does specify and make it distinct from another by its essential
Properties, and inseparable Accidents. This spirit, Archeus, (...), of all
Things is chiefly seated in the Seed; for without a seminal power nothing can
have production. Every thing that acts is furnished with some portion of the
universal Spirit; and even those things that seem to be vapid, dull and torpid
to our senses have in them latitant a spirit dormant, which gave them, and
maintains their being. Now there are many different kind of Seeds, Ferments and
Spirits (all derived from the Universal) as there are things in the World which
act according to the disposition of the Matter, and capacity of the Subject:
For unumquodque recipitur secundum captum recipientis; and Ex quovis non fit
quodlibet: Which is to be understood of a secondary, concrete matter, not
primary simple Elementary; since according to Helmont, and the best
Philosophers, all things take their Original from Water, which transmuted to
this or that, according as topical Ferments, and innate Seeds lead it. However
all compound bodies, perfect and imperfect, are confined, and stinted only to
bring forth their like, and to act within the sphere of their activity, without
interfering, grating, incroaching and intrenching upon another Commonwealth;
and within these bounds of their Monarchy do they still continue, till they
have acted the last Scene, and taken their Exit, and are so resolved again into
their first aqueous Element, from which daily arise new Actors in several
Dresses. To this do many Philosophers subscribe as Truth, as it relates to
Minerals, Vegetals and Animals, that have a manifest principle of generation;
but they will not allow Diseases to be taken into this Catalogue, since they
arise from a depravation and distortion of Nature, through the fall of the
first Prevaricator, who by his lapse put the creature in Arms against himself
and all Mankind: So that a disease with them, is only a privation or mutilation
of our health, a defection from Sanity, proceeding from diverse Accidents that
daily affect us preternaturally. For they think they have spoken enough, in
telling us, that some good is exclusively taken from us, but are silent
concerning that positive, real evil that infests us, having an absolute Entity
in it, consisting of a seminal power, a fermental transmutation, an operative
Spirit, and a lively Idea. All which Endowments make a Disease to be Ens reale
verum, something in Reality.

That Maladies have in them a Spermatick power, is evidently known by some
hereditary Diseases that are propagated and traduced from the Father to the
Son, and from the Grandfather to the Grandchild, which lie a long time unseen,
unfelt, closely couched in the blood, and at length break forth into Act upon
some irritating occasion. How is it possible that the Small Pox should lie
above Twenty years in our bodies, before it shoot out, if it were not contained
in a Seed, which according to the disposition of each Individual, when the
fullness of time comes, breaks forth sooner or later, into Buds and Branches?

The Gowt and Stone are sometimes so concorporated with our seminal principles,
that it may be thought as difficult to separate light from fire, as to part two
such Companions fundamentally conjoined in our Conception. Moreover, as it is
the Nature of every Seed, whether Vegetal or Animal, in the very moment of
breaking forth into Act to ferment, that thereby its virtues may be diffused
readily into all parts, and likewise an equal distribution of Spirits made: In
like manner morbos seeds have their fermentation, which though invisible at
first, yet at length are plainly apparent by effects. So requisite is
fermentation for the production of all things, that without it the Spirit
remains drowned and overwhelmed in untractable and indisposed matter. Did not
the poison of the Pest, most contemptible for quantity, ferment and season the
whole mass of blood, by altering the position and texture thereof, by
coagulating and changing it into a tartarous substance, it could never cause
such a tragical Catastrophe in man's body, quite subverting its well composed
frame. For it is grand Ignorance to think that bare Qualities, which are
transient and momentany, depending upon the influence of substantial Forms,
which cause a Flux and Reflux of the heat, cold, moisture, and siccity,
according to the Motion, Collision, Exaltation, Degradation, Indigence and
Abundance of Spirits in the body, should on a sudden cause such a stupendous
Metamorphosis in this little admirable World; wherefore nothing but that which
causes a Zumosis, an Effervescence, and leavens the whole lump of blood by its
deletery, diffusive property, can turn all topsie turvy in this manner, and
bring a speedy ruin to this magnificent Structure.

Neither is there wanting in Diseases an Architectonical Spirit, which is the
Faber and Vulcan that hammers out and forges every kind of malady, observing an
exact Copy, Rule and Canon which was at first imprinted in it by a vigorous
Imagination: As this Stamp, Figure, Idea or Character does direct the Archeus,
so it begins, proceeds, and at last concludes, according as the impression
lasts. This pure, restless Spirit, that at first moved upon the waters, is
ordained by the great Creator of all things to be an exact Fabricator of
whatsoever has a being, which always at first pourtrayes and delineates the
scheam and fashion of whatsoever is afterward to be done by it. And although
it was never intended by that Fountain of this universal Spirit, that any thing
hurtful or destructive to man should be produced, yet ever since there was
brought an Ataxy, irregularity and inconformity upon the spirit of man through
the disobedience and rebellion of the Protoplastes it has minted and coined
exorbitant, monstrous, exotic Images, by direction of which it acts to its own
calamity and ruin, consuming, spoiling, making havoc of that (through
foolish, vain Terrors, Inquietudes, Anxieties and Fury) which ought to be
preserved and cherished by regular and peaceable operations. Now no sooner is
it touched by any thing that is disagreeing and disproportionable to its
natural constitution, but it is affrighted, perplexed, fretted, raged and
disturbed, and put quite besides it self, if it cannot presently be rid of it;
yea, the very thoughts of an approaching mischief, does sometimes cause the
Archeus from a groundless fright to bring that really to an existence, which
otherwise would never have been; as is apparent, when a timorous person hearing
a relation of the Pest, and the terrible symptoms accompanying it, does through
the power of strong imagination, making somewhat of nothing, sow a
pestilential Seed in the blood, which fermenting and swelling up, does
forthwith entertain the vital spirit that makes in it self a perfect Idea of
that Disease which never ceases, as long as it continues, to diminish, and at
length to extinguish the bright shining Lamp of life. Did not the vital Spirit
at first running away, afterward entertain treacherously, as it were, into its
privy Chamber, shaking hands, and hugging in its bosom that which is virulent,
poisonous and deletery, and thereby appropriate the same to it self, entering
into a firm league with that which is Tristissima mortis Imago, the lurid and
dismal Picture of lethiferous dissolution, conspiring and cooperating with an
irreconcilable Enemy to man's health; neither the venom of any Mineral,
Vegetable or Animal, nor the Heteroclite poison of the Pest could injure us, or
any way damnifie us. But as the Case stands, Perditio nostra a nobis; and that
which was in the beginning ordained for a sole preservative to us, does often
become our bane and destruction. And Spiritus ille vitalis qui Actiones sanas
etiam morbosas edit: That Archeus which is the instrument of Sanity, is
likewise the Author of Maladies; and that saying is too true to our sad
experience, Nemo laeditur nisi a se ipsa. We are indeed (...). Self destroyers,
and do exactly patrize, daily putting in practice what the First of Men taught
us. It Is not the outside that simply defiles us, but all our Misery flows from
within; it is this domestic Enemy that does infest us, our familiar Friend,
with whom we continually converse, that lies in our own bosom, that betrays
us, and delivers us up for a spoil, to the ambient Air, Diet, and other
necessary things we are forced to make use of for a subsistence to support this
brittle and friable clod of earth.

These poisonous Atoms that lurk in the pores of the Air, and are wasted up and
down with every blast, slighly entering into our bodies unfelt, unseen, cannot
of themselves make the Pest, unless our Archeus become an efficient and formal
cause of its Quiddity; so that it has its immediate being from our vital
Spirit, which comes to pass in this manner. So soon as these loathsome Particles
enter in, either through the larger or smaller passages of the skin, the Custos
or Sentinel of that part where it first makes an impulse, perceiving that its
Territories is invaded by a cruel potent Adversary, a destroyer of Nature,
being surprised with horror and confusion, forthwith flies, giving advantage to
its Foe to take possession of that part, and giving all over for lost: It
suffers the fermenting poison to alter the natural well disposed mumial ferment
in our bodies, and to change it into the same condition with it self; upon this
the Archeus, the forenamed Custos, that keeps guard, and always watches and
wards Night and Day for the preservation of the whole, being full of
Consternation and Terror, throws away the Reins of orderly Government, and
yields it self up captive to the imperious Placits of a Truculent Tyrant,
uniting it self intimately with full consent to demolish this beautiful
Edifice; and to that end does immediately frame a seminal Idea, and an absolute
draught of what it intends to accomplish. Then is the first beginning of the
Pest, and is as it were in Ovo, acquiring maturity by degrees, sometimes
quickly, sometimes slowly, according to the strength or weakness of
imagination, vigorous power, or feebleness of mumial ferments, the subtlety, or
dullness of the Poison, the activity or drowsiness of the Archeus. So long as
the pestiferous occasional Cause, whither it arise from within or without,
continues not actuated, and as it were not animated by our Archeus, it can do
us no harm; but remains like an unpolished misshapen piece of Timber, which was
never yet brought into a form by a dextrous Mechanic. So soon as the
Architectonical spirit enters into this deletery matter, it informs the same,
and brings that into an actual being, of which otherwise it would have been
deprived; once quickened, it never leaves to play a sad Tragedy (unless the
venomous matter be suddenly excluded, the Idea obliterated, and the Archeus
highly fortified) upon the Theater of this Microcosm, with variety of dismal
Scenes, as several individual Constitutions admit from the Prologue of its
Birth to the Epilogue of its Death.

CHAP. III.
Of the Subject Part, where the Pest does principally reside, and act these
Tragical Scenes in Man's body.
I Have not been a little anxious (but not presumptuous, as the Galenists have
falsely aspersed me) to find out the chief Palace, or Chair of State, where
this mortiferous Tyrant the Pest does principally sit enthroned; where by its
beck and insolent frowns, it makes this little World, and all that inhabit in
it, to crowch, creep, and tremble!

That this Poison does enter in, and ride in the Triumphant Chariot of the
vital Spirit, both innate and influent, is an undoubted Truth: For, as I said,
by means of it, the Pest moves, and has a being; and without the same, it is
as nothing; for the pestilential matter whether generated within, or has an
ingress from without, through the Hand, the Foot, the Eye, the Nostril, Mouth,
or any other place; still the Custos, the vital Spirit of that part gives it
entertainment, by cowardly running from the poison, and so betraying that trust
that was reposed in it, by yielding up treacherously it self, and a strong hold
to the fury of a potent Enemy, to which the Archeus becomes a Vassal to
perpetrate those things that tend to Ruin and Desolation.

Notwithstanding this particular damage and nocument (that arises from a
dedition and timorous submission of the Archeus to this pestiferous Gas, making
an incursion and invasion upon the Borders and Confines of this flourishing
Kingdom, Man's living Body) were far more tolerable, were not this venom
conducted to the very Center and Metropolis thereof, the Stomach, where the
Soul it self keeps Court, which incircled with all necessary Officers, sends
forth wholesome Edicts for the preservation of the body Natural. In the
Bedchamber of this Noble Membrane, the Stomach, does this usurping Disease
take its lodging, darting Basilisk-like, his virulent beams into all parts
circumjacent in a Heteroclite, and Anomolous manner, sometimes causing a
stupor, and lethargical drowsiness, like Opium, sometimes a phtenzy or fury
like Hemlock, or Nuces insanae; at one time a Numness, or Paralytical
disposition, like the Fish Torpedo. At another time an inquietude or incessant
motion, like the poison of a Tarantula. Now an insatiable thirst, and a
scorching flaming heat, like one bit by the Serpent Dypsas; then again a
Coldness, Rigor and Shivering, like the venom of a Scorpion! provoking in one
man a hungry appetite a little before death, in another an aversation and
loathing of all Food; producing a manifest Fever in this man, and in that none
at all, or hardly any sensible; striking down one, as if he were Syderated, or
Apoplectical, and tenderly handling another, as it were, in a dallying,
flattering and sporting way, curiously spinning out the thread of his life for
some days, yea, weeks, and then at length cutting it off! Thus this raging
venom being once ushered by the desponding Archeus, into the innermost Recesses
and Closet of life, is by this means become Master of the whole, vacua
dominatur in Aula; and having quite confounded the Eutaxy and good Government
that was before in the vital ingenite spirit of the stomach, quietly and
sedulously working, (...), causes the same to be irregular, exorbitant,
hair-brained, foolish and furious, careless what becomes of itself, and what
belongs to its tuition. For the Confirmation of what I have delivered, That the
Region of the Hypocondries, especially the Stomach, is the principal place
where the Pest takes up its abode. We are to take special notice what strange
alteration is made in the Region Epigastrick by violent passions, and how the
Economy of the whole body thereby is put into a disorder (perhaps upon an
imagination sometimes of that which is not at all real) as it happens when a
panick fear, extraordinary anger, an excessive joy, some sad and dreadful News
brought to us does in a trice distract us, making the first impulse upon the
stomach; and us Helmont excellently observes, spoiling an eager appetite to our
food in an instant, quite taking off the edge of the stomach, which before was
sharp set: And although the Galenists are plensed erroneously to separate the
irascible and concupiscible Appetite, so that they divide them into two
distinct stalls, placing the one, i. e. the irascible in the heart, and the
other, the concupiscible, in the stomach, the lower adjacent parts; yet if they
weigh the truth of things seriously, they may be better informed, that the
Orgiastick, as well as the Epithymetick are chiefly lodged in the mouth of the
Ventricle, which the Ancients for that excellency they conceived of it, adorned
with the name of (...), being of that power and sovereignty, that according to
its benign or malign Aspect, it causes a serenity or obscurity in this little
Horizon. Here is the Bench, where the sensitive Soul sits as Judge, which if
rightly tuned, and well composed, censures, and strait puts to an end the
manifold Conflicts, Tumults, Broils, and Uproars in the Body Natural; but if
out of order, and have an Atony, it embroils all in Wars, being the
Ringleader, Promoter, and efficient cause of all Disorder and Confusion. Now
as from this Fountain the Stomach, and its Co-partner, the Spleen (which make
according to Helmont, a Duumvirate) springs our Health, the greatest felicity
in this world; so from the same root arises sickness and infirmity, the bitter
ingredient, that marrs all that delicious mess which either Nature has
provided, or man's ingenious Cookery can invent. In hac Olla continentur mors
and vita: This is that Pandora's Box, which Adam, to please his brutish
appetite, ventured to open for the reception of the forbidden fruit, which was
no sooner ingested, but out flew infinite calamitous Maladies that vexed him,
and torture us his Posterity to this day. In this little membranous Field was
first sown the rebellious seed of all Diseases, which ever since never ceased
to propagate and multiply it self over the universal face of the globe of
Mankind in a direful manner. Here is the Plantation and Nursery of all sort of
Fevers; for never did I know any afflicted in this kind, but still the
digestive ferment of the stomach became impaired, and degenerate from its
Native goodness; hence come those multiplicity of sad Symptoms which appear, as
Nauseousness, Anorexy, extreme Thirst, bad Sapour, Sopour, tedious Watchings,
Dotage, Melancholy, Madness and the like. Here is the Mine where the Stone and
Gowt have their Ens primum; are first embrionated, and lie in their rude
Principles. In this Duumvirate is the Nest where the Asthma, Sqinsie,
Pleurisy, Vertigo, Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Lethargy, Frenzy, Diarrhaea,
Lienteria, Dysuria, Stranguria, Ischuria, Scorbute, and this terrible blow,
Plaga excellens, the Pest are first brooded, hatched, fed, and at length
perfected, and able to subsist of themselves. In this admirable Cavity is
erected the Mint royal, where the lively Image of Sanity and Infirmity are
stamped, and the lineaments of every Languor drawn out as it were with a
Pencil, that it may act uniformly in one continued series and tenor, according
to its kind and various constitution it meets with. For even a vulgar Head
knows how to distinguish a Quartan Ague from a Quotidian, and both from a
Tertian; a continual, from an intermitting Fever; the Spasm or Cramp, from a
Palsy; the Dropsy, from an Atrophie, or a macilent Consumption; and several
other Diseases one from another: And this is deduced from the Parts affected,
the certain Symptoms, Accidents and Products that inseparably accompany each of
them. The silly old Women called Searchers, can report upon the bare Aspect of
a pestilential Corpse, when thy see Tumors of the Emunctories, Cauterizing
Carbuncles, Blains, Pustles, and those stigmata nigra, they call the Tokens, in
the superficies of the Skin, that this or that Person dyed of the Sickness,
Wherein although they are sometimes mistaken by reason of some intervening
outward Accidents, which may hinder the eruption of these pestilential
Blossoms; yet an expert Physician, that has a more intuitive knowledge into
these things than the common People, will hardly ever be mistaken in the
Diagnosis of the Disease: And certainly this could never be discovered aright,
were not the Idea and Platform of every grief, as it were shadowed out, limmed
and sigillated in the ingenite Archeus of the tender, tractable Stomach and
Spleen. Neither ought it to seem strange, that the Ventricle being a Membrane,
should have such admirable properties, and rare effects bestowed upon it by
power of the sensitive Soul, there taking its principal habitation; since the
womb of the same Texture does sometimes act stupendiously, even to the seeming
imitation of a new Creation out of nothing, as when the Idea of a Cherry,
Mulberry, or the like, is impressed by the uterine Imagination upon that part
of the Infant, according as the hand of the Mother shall be directed at that
time of her earnest longing; which fictitious fruit shall afterward flourish
sooner or later, as the Native Soil and Climate of that place does bring real
fruit to a speedy or late maturity. Now forasmuch as the Stomach and its
Compeer the Spleen, the Duumvirate of this Commonwealth, have such power
committed to them, that they are as the Key to open the Door to Health and
Sickness; and as it were, the Helm that turns and winds this Vessel at
pleasure: In what ought a true Physician to be more sollicitous, than in
preserving them in Eutonie, Eucrasie, Eumetrie, and to have special care of
this excellent Organ, lest any thing assumed may injure the ferment of these
parts, disturb, disquiet and annoy the Archeus thereof? Away then with the
seculent and dirty Medicaments of the Galenists, which I can demonstrate to
their faces, if they dare to stand a Trial, are not fitting to be received into
such a Noble part for the Cure of any deep rooted Disease whatsoever. And were
not their Patients grossly ignorant in that which concerns their own life, did
they but understand the notable damage both present and future that attends
those that enter into this Wire-drawing Galenical course of Physic, they would
utterly abominate such dreggy stuff, if more pure and defecate Chemical
Remedies could be obtained. Never let any Lover of Learning harbor a thought,
that such an Elephant like, Gigantical Disease the Pest, is like to be
detruncated and overcome by a Galenist, who (I Will make it appear, ipso facto)
knows not how to remove a trivial ordinary Fever radically and fundamentally!
And all this proceeds for want of a clear understanding of the right use of the
Stomach; the powerful influence it has upon all parts; the Nature of its
Ferment, and the tender respect that is to be given to the Archeus, the
diligent Custos, and watchful Janitor of the Orifice and Pylorus. Suffer not
then any that pretends to Cure thee, to exhaust the innocent blood profusely,
by opening a vein in the Arm for the Cure of that Malady, whose cause does only
Centrally depend upon an Exorbitancy, Discord, Dearticulation, and Apostasy of
the vital Spirit in the Duumvirate, from the genuine well-disposed Constitution
that ought to be in it.

CHAP. IV.
Signs of the Pest.
JUdiciously to dicsern the Pest from other Diseases, is sometimes a Task of no
small difficulty, in that it has no certain, peculiar, proper, Pathognomonical
inseparable Sign emergent with it, not common to others: So that an able
Physician may sometimes be puzzled at first Access positively and absolutely to
determine, whether the Patient be smitten by this superlative stroke, or
afflicted with some other inferior sickness. He alone that is Omniscious, can
infallibly tell in what instant time this pestilential poison is conceived, or
enters into man's body; so closely does it lie for the most part, that none but
he that knows things a priori, can punctually discover that such an one carries
about him a mortal Arrow shot into his Praecordia.

To see a man eat and drink liberally, to be jocund, frolic, seemingly
enjoying a Jubilee, to exercise Venery, and several Disports, as at other
times, and yet to carry about him the very Picture of Death within, is a Plague
of the Plague. To be undermined by a Clandestine Enemy little dreamed of,
digging like a company of Pioners into the very bowels of this Microcosm, and
on a sudden tearing in pieces unawares this strong fortress of life, is that
which heightens the malice of this truculent Calamity. For had an able
Physician opportunity granted him to encounter with this horrid Monster upon
its first approach, I make no doubt but that by means of the Artillery of
powerful Remedies, it might quickly be overcome, dispossessed and mortified.
Wherefore the Case standing thus with us, it is prudent Providence to stand
upon our guard, and discreetly suspecting the worst, to fortify our selves as
well as possibly may be, vim vi repellere, and to get such a Panoplie of
Arcanas, that we may not easily be vulnerable, or at least may speedily heal
those wounds that are made by its intoxicated arrows: Since we are ignorant a
priori, when we are first assaulted with this fermenting poison, let us
strictly observe what may be useful to us a posteriori.

Yet ought we not to despair; for some antecedent Signs may coniecturally lead
us to a fore knowledge and prevision of this venomous Arrow that is let flown
at us, that thereby we may make the better provision, defending our selves, pro
re nara, and thereby take off by Art the virulency that attends it; for
praevisa spicuia levius feriunt. How significant the Stars are to forewarn us
of this grievous wound to be inflicted upon Mankind, is best known to
Astrologers, whose Predictions I have always found very uncertain and
amphilogical, for want of that Syderal knowledge which Adam once enjoyed.
Indeed I am bound to believe that the heavenly bodies were ordained in Signa,
Tempora, Dies and Annos; and the reason why we do not foretell what they often
preindicate, is to be attributed to the dimness and imbecility of our
understanding, which since our lapse is become incapable of such Celestial
mysteries. It is confessed, some general obscure Notions we may collect from
above, yet we for the most part square them, as that crooked Line of our own
Interest guides us; not according to the strait Rule of Verity, for every one
is willing to put from himself the evil day, and shift it upon another. That
Comets, or Blazing Stars do portend some evil to come upon Mortals, is
confirmed by long observation and sad experience, as likewise Phenomenon of a
Parelios, Parasolene, apparitions of Draconos volantes and Trabes, Scintillae,
now Stars, Battles fought, and Coffins carried through the Air, Howlings,
Screechings, and Groans heard about Churchyards; also raining of blood,
unwonted matter, etc. All of which having something extra naturam, are
portentous and prodigious, ordained by that good Philanthropos to advertise us
to a timely resipiscence, and prevention of those evils that hang over our
heads.

Moreover, when unseasonable weather, as extreme drought, or superfluity of
moisture infest us, when waters contract a fracedinous Odor and Corruption;
when multitude of Insects, as Toads, Froggs, Flies, Cimires, and diverse
poisonous Creatures appear; when Cattle perish in great Numbers by some
Contagious lues; when malignant Diseases, as Small Pox, Spotted Fevers;
Scurvy, or the like, are frequent among us, which gave me occasion (perceiving
how grassant the Scorbute was in this Nation) to deliver a Prediction, that in
some short time it would break forth into some terrible Symptoms, degenerating
into this late acute Sickness.

Let this suffice in General, to give a Premonition and Caveat of a future ^est
for our premunition. Touching the Signs that attend the Pest, that it is
present, they are manifold all or most of which are maturely to be considered,
that we may attain a perfect Diagnosis of this Heteroclite Calamity, and
withal make a Prognosis for a discovery what is like to be the event thereof.
And here I must take notice what a promiscuous complication, contexture and
mutual intercourse there is of the Signs belonging to the Pest, and other
Maladies, especially the Scorbute; so that he ought to be very quick-sighted,
that can sometimes rightly distinguish between one and the other: Wherefore in
delivering Judgment concerning a doubtful matter, all Circumstances are
strictly to be observed, and a Syndrom of Symptoms to be mustered together,
that what a single cannot, a collective Enumeration of Signs may instruct us in
the Nature and Essence of that kind of Languor which has seized upon the
Patient. When therefore an Oppression about the Praecordia, a Loathing,
Vomiting, a Vertigo, great pain of the Head, a notable redness in the veins of
the conjunctive Tunicle, difficult or irregular Respiration, a great asperity
of the Tongue, extreme Thirst, or no Thirst considerable; a Soporous, or
Lethargical Disposition, Agrypnie, Restlessness and Inquietude, a
Misapprehension, false Conception of things; a delirium or raving, a Faintness,
Palpitation of the Heart, and Lipothymie; a Stupor and Numness in several
parts, Spontaneous Trembling, Lassitude, alternate changes of heat and cold,
shooting pains especially in the Emunctories, Eruption of Blanes, Vesicles,
Spots, Botches, Carbuncles, an obscure or manifest Fever, sometimes violent,
sometimes gentle, the pulse weak, unequal, intermitting, formicant, or
vermiculant; a laudable well-colored Urine, not at all discovering any evil
affect, when many, or most of these Signs appear, especially when the Disease
is dominant, an able Physician may confidently assert, That the sick man has a
Pestilential poison within him. Happy is he that meets with such a Physician,
that can detect in a seasonable time this subtle Serpent that lies hid in the
bosom, that he may bruise his head, before it infect by his noysom breath the
greatest part of the vital Spirits, hindering a free circulation of the blood,
by causing a restagnation, and coagulation of the same; for while the Pest is
in fieri, potent Remedies being duly administered, do seldom miss or their right
scope of Curing; but when it comes to be in facto esse, the Recovery becomes
very hazardous. For this reason I have urged some persons that would listen to
me, whom I have suspected to have received the Infection, for (...) to take
what might give a check to its full Career, stopping it in limine, before it
entered into the Bedchamber of life; and so successful have I been this way,
that in a few hours there has been by virtue of some active Remedies, an
Epiphany and Efflorescence of some Spot, Tubercule, Vesicle, Bubo, or the like
on the skin, which has both satisfied the Patient, by a timely prevention of
future mischief, and confirmed my Judgment with credit. In some I have at first
so taken off the force of the Venom, by the frequent use of purified Sulphurs,
that it could never so seize upon the blood, as to put any considerable stop to
its motion; so that hereby, not the least cutaneous Emersion could be
discovered, as it happened to my Brother, who had the Pest twice, with a
Fever, Vertigo, Oppression at the Stomach, and other evident Symptoms
belonging thereto; and yet had neither Botch, Carbuncle, Blane, Vesicle,
Pimple, or Spot apparent in his whole Body: And though, as he told me, he felt
about a Hundred times for a Bubo in his Groin, the virulent, tartarous blood
tending that way, notwithstanding it could never gather to make any Tumor;
forasmuch as it was still ferretted, subtiliated, and dissipated by Medicines
that were volatile, and capable to be circulated with the blood, and to be
carried as far as the sixth digestion; and there to execute the office of
discussing any gross leutous matter, without leaving a Caput mort behind.
Certainly the advice of the Poet, Principiis obsta, is to be embraced in any
Disease, but especially this, which being morbus per peracutus, quickly
finishes its course, (when it once sets forth) and hastens to a period
oftentimes in a few hours. Seeing therefore it treads so softly within us, that
it cannot be heard to walk; remains sometimes so silent, that it speaks little
or nothing that we can understand for our instruction, it is wisdom to send out
some Exploratores perspicaces, subtle Scouts, I mean, exquisite Medicines, that
by their leptomery and specific Dowry implanted in them, may search out and
discover whatsoever is hostile in our Territories, heating up the Quarters of
that close Enemy which lies in perdu to destroy us ex improviso. Wherefore if
any notable Error be committed by any in Diet or any outward thing that is
ordained no support our life, let there be a timely prevention of the ill
effects thereof. And although it is true, that there is no sign in the Pest
which may not appear in another sickness, yet when such a Contagion is
grassant, and many of the forenamed Symptoms show themselves, though very
obscurely, we have just cause to censure it to be of this kind, and to
withstand the same with Curatives suitable to the magnitude and activity
thereof. Much likewise is to be gathered from some Adjuncts and Circumstances
annexed to virulent Symptoms and Products that may specify their Nature from
what root they spring, and show that they are not of the Classis of those that
are mild and gentle; for pestilential Bubo's, Parotites, Carbuncles and Blanes
often break forth before any considerable Fever on a sudden, and are far more
painful than others that are well-conditioned. Any small cutaneous Phenomenon
as a Vesicle, or some vexatious Pimple, somewhat unusual to us in time of
mortal Contamination, though no Fever, nor any other bad Symptoms show
themselves, ought to dictate to us what may be the worse, that nothing may be
neglected conducing to the breaking this Cockatrice Egg in the beginning.

In short, any sudden Alteration arising in us in time of Contagion, and no
solid Reason to be given for it, may very well inform us, that we are
intoxicated, and our Spirits infected by this Atrocious Arrow. A defect of a
customary Diaphoresis, and a kindly perspication of the whole body, especially
toward Morning, ought to make us suspicious, and to move us to use all means
to open the Pores by Diaphoretical and Diapuoick Alexiteries. Whether this
poison entered into us from without by Contact or Respiration? and whether it
took its original from an inward principle of Malignity, is often hard to deem?
yet sometimes there arises a manifest change, punction and dolor in that part
where it had the first ingress, and some remarkable impression made Topically,
as it happened in an obscure manner to my hand, which was for some time
demerged and souzed in the poisonous liquamen of a pestilent Carcass, that had
at that time retained a heat in the bowels. Expedite and vehement is that Pest
which is framed by a strong imagination of a fright in the Individual, for it
often absolves a fatal History in a very short time, but what proceeds from a
Terror of the Archeus, ingenite in every particular part, although it have
more danger in it, yet it begins and makes it progress a little more leisurely
for the most part, giving fairer warning, which I ought to have taken more
notice of, when those destructive Atoms entered into my hand at the time of the
Dissection of such an infecting Cadaver.

Touching the event of the Pest that has seized upon any person as to make a
Prognosis thereof forthwith infallible, is scarce granted to any Physician, it
being a mere Proteus, turning Chamaeleon like, into all shapes of life and
death; for where there seems most security, there is most danger; and when the
Symptoms are most direful to behold, a happy conclusion of Sanity sometimes
follows.

Thus much I have frequently observed, that a very laudable Urine, like to one
healthy, is oftentimes the worse; and the more mild the Accidents appear to us,
in the greater hazard is that man's life! That which I always principally
depend upon, to give a solid Judgment what may be the conclusion of this Scene,
for better or worse, is the strength or weakness of the Patient, the Maturity
or Tardity of my access to him; for (...), is highly to be prized above all, if
he be able and honest. From hence I take my Indication to perform my Duty,
being ascertained, that Nature sunt Morborum medicatrices, nothing where the
vital Spirits do altogether fail can be done; wherefore in this case of making
a Prediction, a good Physician ought to be guided chiefly by the Effects of
some potent Arcana's, which if they be rightly ordered, and seasonably given,
will inform him how long, and with what success this universal Archeus,
Governor of this Fortress, is able to hold out, and by what ways sallying
forth upon the Enemy it can rout, profligate, and cut it off. Whosoever is not
furnished with extraordinary Remedies, shall find that Aphorism of Hippocrates
true, (...) (...) That is, in acute Diseases there is no infallible Prediction
whether the sick man will live or dye; which I confess trusting to a Galenical
Crisis I have experimentally found to be true: but he that by premature
Medicines does anticipate the same, shall seldom Err in his prenotion for the
Honor and credit of this Divine Art, and Confirmation of the faith of the
stander by in him that undertakes the Cure.

I know my Countrymen will expect my Judgment, what I think concerning the
state and condition of this approaching Summer, Whether the Pest be like to
break forth in this City in a raging manner again? To which I answer
Negatively: So far as I can Conjecture by Natural Reasons, taken from the
ordinary course of all things, which I observe have their first Rise, an
Ascent, an utmost Height, a Descent, and then a Setting. I have perceived the
late Pest to be Ambulatory, to make a progress from place to place; and having
made havoc in one Topical Quarter, after some abatement it removed to another;
which signifies plainly, that there are local seminal Dispositions prone to
produce this peculiar poison at such a time above others, which as it ripens
sooner or later, and finds our Bodies inclined to receive an Impression, so
according to our Capacity it breaks forth into Act, speedily or slowly, mildly
or fiercely. Now the pestilent matter being in great part exhausted and spent,
the Scorbutical malignity somewhat tamed, and the Archeus fortified, daring,
becomes as it were an old Soldier, not ready as formerly to give back upon
every terrifying Occasion; I may confidently conclude, That London is like to
enjoy this Summer the Company of the Galenists, when there is least need of
them; which will I fear be an ill Omen to some, so long as they continue
Bleeding, and Deletery Purgation, more destructive to poor Mortals, than all
the Pests that ever reigned since the Creation!

AN HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE DISSECTION OF A Pestilential Body; And the
Consequents thereof. CHAP. V.
IN the Year 1665. a most ruefull lamentable time as ever London suffered in
this kind, when the Sickness swept away many Thousands in a week in the Month
of August, I visited a lusty proper man, by name Mr. Will: Pick, living in
Peticoat-lane, grievously wounded with one of those poisonous Arrows that flew
thick about poor Mortals: so that his condition seemed to be almost desperate,
and finding no relief at all from those frivolous and vain preparations a
Galenist had exhibited to him usque ad nauseam: was in some short space
preserved by Chimical Remedies: the poison being therewith excluded, and the
Archeus of the Stomach redeemed from captivity. At the same time there lay a
Servant of Mr. Picks, a youth about 15 years of age, laboring under most
horrid symptoms, raving as it were extimulated by some Fury; which Tragical
Interlude was quickly terminated by a mortal Catastrophe. Upon this, I took
occasion to request my then recovering Patient his Master, to grant me liberty
to open this defunct body; for my own instruction, and the satisfaction of all
inquisitive Persons, to which, having given him some persuasive reasons to that
purpose, he strait condescended, yet not without some jealousy and kind fear
least I should do my self injury; upon his concession I being much exhilarated
in my spirits, having obtained that desire which was often denied me by those
who pretended several slight excuses, I girt up my self with all expedition,
getting in readiness what Instruments were fitting, with a porringer containing
Sulphur to burn under the Corpse, which was at that time placed in the open air
in a yard there adjacent, which for several respects was very convenient; and
for my better accommodation, a Servant by the permission of the foresaid Master
was ready to afford me his service, in opening the Coffin nailed up, and
administering some other things necessary for my design. The head of the Coffin
being taken off, and the linen cleared away, I could not but admire, to behold
a skin so beset with spots black and blew, more remarkable for multitude and
magnitude than any that I have yet seen; some of which being opened, contained
a congealed matter, in one more shallow, and in another more deep. Here I
conceived something more than of ordinary Rarity might be discovered; wherefore
perforating the Membrane that involved all the rest, I made entrance into the
lowest venture or Region, where appeared a virulent Ichor, or thin liquor
variously colored, as yellow, greenish, etc. the small guts being much
distended with a venomous flatus, did contain a great quantity of a foul scoria
or dross in them; but they were not, as some apprehended, outwardly spotted as
the skin; only some obscure large marks were made in their inward parts, as
likewise in the stomach, arising from the poisonous liquamen therein lodged.
The Vena Porta and Arteria Caeliaca being divided, afforded only a serous
liquor, no rubified juice at all; that which was enclosed in these vessels, was
a firmly congealed substance of a very dark color; the Parenchyma of the Liver
being separated was very pallid, and did straight weep and send out a thin
yellowish excrement. The Spleen dissected, appeared more then ordinary obscure,
a livid Ichorous matter following the Incision: the Kidneys laid open abounded
with a Citrine water, but altogether exanguine, as likewise the other viscera;
at length I came to that most excellent useful part, the Stomach, whose tender
membranes when I had divided, a black matter like Ink did show it self, to the
quantity (as nigh as I could guess) of a wine pint, somewhat tenacious and
slimy: the inward membrane of the Ventricle was much discolored, but the
bottom thereof not perforated, as Helmont found in the like case: in such a
manner (says he) as if a potential cautery had been applied thereto. Having
sufficiently lustrated and viewed the lower venture, I ascended to the middle,
and making a divulsion of the stern from the Mediastinum, I intentively beheld
the superficies of the Lungs, stigmatized with several large ill favored marks
much tumified and distended: the inward part of which being pertunded with my
knife, a sanious dreggy corruption issued forth, and a pale Ichor destitute of
any blood, for which I searched by cutting this Organ of respiraion into
various particles, but could find none but a dirty coagulation, which
Hipocrates calls (...), in the branches of Vena and Arteria Pulmonica. After
this I disparted the descending Trunck of the Cava, and the Artery called
Aorta, expecting some considerable emanation of blood there, if any where, that
might make a little inundation, but no such thing succeeded, for only some very
few spoonfulls of a thin liquor of a pale hew came forth, which might easily be
licked up by a small handkerchief. Diffecting these pipes secundum
rectitudinem, I found them stuffed with a thick curdled blackish substance,
which once laid hold on might be drawn out to some length. Next I separated the
Pericardium, that robust coat that circumvolves the Heart, replenished with a
deeply tinged yellow liquor: Then having opened the right cavity of the Heart,
I therein found a white congealed matter, extracting which with my fingers, and
narrowly viewing it, I could not compare it to any thing more like, than a
Lamb-stone cut in twain, which the Servant beholding, standing nigh, easily
assented to in his Judgment. To render a sound reason of this albified
coagulation in this right Ventricle of the Heart, may perhaps puzzle a good
Physiologist. For in all those cadavers I ever saw dissected, this hollow
receptacle did still contain a blackish blood condensed, arising from a
stopping of the Circulation of it first in that place. Now the most probable
cause (as I conceive, with submission) of this unwonted white substance, may
come from a sumption of mere crude milk, which an indiscreet Nurse had given
this youth not long before he died, part of which passing out of the stomach
little altered, might be conveyed, upon a pinch and stress to preserve life,
through the Venae lacteae in the Mesenterie, or some shorter passages, into the
subclavian vessels, and there entering the right cavity of the Heart, be (for
want of (...), that sanguifying power, and that material transmuting ferment
attending it) changed according to the capacity of the Matter by a virulent
preternatural ferment, into this seeming glandulous flesh. 'Twas strange to
behold instead of candid, a black fuiiginous matter; fitting only for the
infernal stomach of the Dog Cerberus enclosed in one ventricle, that public
shop and treasury of life, that ought to be furnished with all manner of
utensils requisite for the sustentation of this little world: and in another a
white innocent lamb-like juice lodged, instead of a duskie concreted clot of
gore, and all this proceeding from the deletery ferment of this Heteroclite
poison; which, that I may give you a further account, had so altered the
substance, texture, consistence, and color of that Solar Nectar contained in
those curiously contrived Pipes, veins, and arteries, that I may truly say not
one spoonful of that ruddy liquor properly called blood could be obtained in
this Pestilential body, being partly congealed, and partly colliquated into a
Tabum or filthy matter: Which I have experimentally found to be the usual
effects of those poisons I have given to some Creatures, whose carcasses I have
afterward dissected.

Having finished the Dissection of this loathsome Body, I presently found some
little sensible alteration tending to a stiffness and numness in my hand, which
had been soaking and dabling in the Bowels and Entrals then warm, though it was
Ten or Twelve hours after the Youth expired; whereupon having cleansed away
that foulness it was besmeared with, I held it for some time over a dish of
burning Brimstone, and so received the Gas thereof, but in vain. Serius
ejicitur, quam non admittitur; I might better (had I foreseen what I do now)
kept it out, than thrust it out; for those sly, insinuating, venomous Atoms,
excited by the heat of the body, opening the pores of my skin, had quickly free
ingress; the Archeus, the Porter of my hand, that should have better guarded
it, forthwith tergiversating, and taking its flight, being extremely terrified
at the Alarm of so fierce and potent an Enemy, and afterward in an abject
manner conducted it to the principal place of the Souls residence, the Stomach;
where after this lately entered poison had dressed and habited it self with
that spirit that had the perfect Idea and Image of this sickness, it was to act
a Tragical part (the Archeus being obliged to be Executioner to bring to pass
its own Ruin) and now do I carry about me the very Pest, closely spreading
like a Gangrene, diffusing its malignity into all my members, covered over for
some short space as it were in the ashes of silence, while I in the mean time
visited, visit others visited, administering that help to them, which I (then
more perplexed at my Neighbors Calamity, than sollicitous for my own) suffer
my self to want, relating with joy what an Inquest I had made into that Subject
which had made a Conquest of me.

Thus I walked up and down from Patient to Patient, Dum hoc virus membra mea
depascitur. I ate, I drank, and slept well till about Two of the Clock the next
Morning being Saturday, at which hour I waked to sleep for ever, had not Divine
goodness given me an Antidote to rouse and raise me up, (...), no sooner had I
recollected myself, but I perceived such a kind of stupor in my Thighs and Legs
that was at first in my hand, then I began to ponder what I had done the day
before; and still those large and manifold Spots were too lively represented to
my eye against my will: Without further delay, I forthwith called up my
Servant, a Stripling, nigh Fourteen years old, whom I commanded (having lighted
a Candle) strictly to observe those Directions I gave him, appointing such
Remedies to be produced with all speed that I knew were very sufficient and
valid by multiplicity of Experiments to resist this feral Disease. And when I
had delivered to him such Rules I thought necessary for life; having taken a
large quantity of my best Medicaments, I charged him to follow me close,
doubling and trebling the ordinary Dose I usually gave; which he so faithfully
and sedulously performed with advantage, that I dare assert that Five of my
Patients joined altogether, never did through my whole practice high these
Twenty years, take so great a portion of such like Remedies, as it appeared by
his own, and others reports, compared with that great expense of those
preparations I had in store; for I knew (...), where Nature was so prostrate,
and the Disease so strong, it was to be supported by extraordinary help; which
course, had it not been vigorously taken, I question (had there been delay of
what was needful for my recovery but two hours) whether any Medicine in Nature
could have been of any efficacy and validity for my Restoration, such was the
Magnitude, Activity and Celerity (pardon my expression, good Mr. Captious
Logomachus, and let not one single term without any true saving knowledge breed
a quarrel between us) I say properly, the Celerity (in despite of any
self-conceited cavilling Galenist) of the Disease that then invaded me, that
would admit of no Truce or Respite: For so soon as I was thoroughly awakened, I
felt a grievous oppression about the Midriff, especially in the pit of the
Stomach; and such a sudden defection of the Spirits, that I had much ado to
hold out to advertise my Servant how he should menage his business. My head
also began to be much out of order, exceedingly dozed; and whereas Three or
four Ounces of a Cordial liquor I took formerly, did commonly put me into a
breathing Sweat, now ten times so much of the same did hardly cause a heat in
the lower parts. Perspicuous also was the Coagulation of part of my blood, as
many small Stigmata, Spots scattered about my Breast and Arms, did plainly
testify; but one above the rest was most remarkable in the bending of my right
Arm, where there appeared a very large Spot of an obscure color, of the
bigness of a single Halfpenny, which I often took a view of. Well, after some
hours tedious Inquietude, and despondency of Spirit, with much Reluctance, and
many an Agony, a gentle Mador at length bedewed my skin, with which I was
somewhat relieved; and persevering in the frequent repetition of Polyacaea and
some other noble Remedies, I began to be much refreshed, sweating liberally cum
emphoria and dysphoria by turns; for I frequently sustained (...), ah
Alternate Vicissrtude of desperate and hopeful Symptoms: there being
sometimes an Eclampfis, a seeming serenity and clarity in the Archeus: then
again nothing but Cloudiness, Storms and Tempests.

Thus I passed over that doleful morning, inter spemque metumque, earnestly
longing for the presence of that Excellent expert Chemist and legitimate
Physician, Dr. Starkey, whom I sent to, being verily persuaded, that he, if
any, under God, would be a Comforter to me, (for I knew certainly that the best
Galenist was a miserable one, and that Spiritus Antiloimoides was a mere cheat)
sed heu lachrymabile! ambo morbo laboramus eodem, he was stricken, and had as
much need of mine, as I of his succor, and so we might condole, but not
conserve each other. However this worthy Gentleman came to me, whose very
Aspect exhilarated and solaced my drooping spirits; of whom when I had taken
something, I was wonderfully composed for some time. This brave man, (that did,
I dare maintain it, more good than all the Galenists in England put together)
was that night after he had been with me, forced to yield himself prisoner to
that insolent Conqueror, which did then make spoil of many Thousands; and so I
was left destitute of two of my dearest friends in my saddest Condition; For
Honest and learned Dr. Dee, of whom I shall speak further hereafter, could not
afford me his Assistance, being much afflicted and oppressed (after a former
deliverance) with the same venomous Sickness. Wherefore, I resolved to make use
of that reason I was then master of, and that outward aid I had then at hand,
uniting and mustering up all supplies that I conceived were proper for me,
laying aside all peevishness and foolish averseness to take what was fitting;
which fault I often found incident to most of my Patients, to their own
prejudice. The Remedies that I took in a Quintuple quantity for what others
took, was Tinctura Polyacaea, and no small portion of Pulvis Pestifugus.
Touching the Diet I observed, it was good spirituous liquors, as the best Wine,
and Strong Beer sweetened with a little sugar, also now and then I drank a
draught of White Wind Posset: as for Galenical Juleps, Small beer, Barley water,
muccaginous Decoctions, Broths, satiated with the crude juice of Ingredients, I
detested; for I knew they would annoy my stomach, and so hinder the Archeus
from conquering the poison, which upon every irritating occasion was ready to
ferment. My whole scope was to keep up the strength of the vital spirits,
without which I am sure no Malady can be cured. Neither was I wanting to make
use of Helmonts Xenexton, a Toad, the powder of which my dear friend Dr.
Starkey gave me, made up in the form of a Trochisk of his own ordering: I
likewise hung about my neck a large Toad dried, prepared not long before in as
exquisite a manner as possibly I could, with my own fingers: This Toad sowed up
in a linen cloth was placed about the Region of my Stomach, where after it had
remained some hours, became so tumefied, distended, (as it were blown up) to
that bigness, that it was an object of wonder to those that beheld it. Had I
not felt and seen this swollen dead body of the Toad, I should very much have
doubted by relation the Truth thereof; forasmuch as that Great Scholar in
reality, Van Helmont, (who shines with such a bright luster in his Orb, that
the Galenical Bats and Owls are not able to look him in the face) delivers
these words; Nam Buso exsiccatus utut sex horis maceretur, semper tamen
tumefactionis incapax, i. e. A dried Toad, though it be steeped in water for
six hours together, will not for all that be swollen or puffed up. This he
speaks for the confutation of Paracelsus, who tells us, That a dried Toad
macerated and softened in Rose Water for six hours together, does draw the
Pestilential poison so into its body, that five or six Bufo's laid on one after
another upon a Botch, will all be wonderfully tumefied: This, says Van
Helmont, can never be, quod intumescere sit proprietas Archei vitalis, quod non
nisi occasionaliter tumor a venenis procedat. Where the Vital Archeus is
wanting, there can be no swelling from any poison, quatenus a poison: for every
tumor from poison happens occasionaliter, or excitative, in as much as it
excites, exasperates, and causes an indignation in the Archesus, which being
thus irritated and quite disordered, frets, rages, storms, and in this
distracted mad fit produces such or such accidents and symptoms, as the
natural Idea of the specific venom shall direct and inform it. Again, Non
tumet (says the Acute Author) Cadaver ictum a serpente: Cadaver namque si non
senserint nec tumefaciendi energiam retinuit; A Carckasse for as much as it is
deprived of all sense, is incapable of tumefaction from poison: which
doubtless is sound Philosophy, never read or heard of from a Galenist, for
medicinal Instruction, till this Privy Counselor of Nature discovered it. This
rightly understood, might serve as a good Argument to convince these
Dogmatists, that poisonous Vesicatories do but disturb Nature, and take it off
from performing a Sanative Office, (if rightly assisted by Art) and divert it
from that intended scope of profligating the pestilential poison, to spend it
self in opposing another, contrived by a company of Impostors, to delude
Ignorant persons, under a notion of drawing out the disease by these Blisters,
which are raised in all living bodies, healthful as well as sick, from a
colliquating venom that Cantharides have inherent in them, vexing and galling
the Archeus of the membranous parts, that it even changes the harmless and
mild blood into such a sharp mischievous Ichor, that a Dysuria or Ischuria, a
great pain or stopping of the Urine frequently follows; but this obiter. I
shall hereafter make a larger discovery of this daubing with untempered mortar,
and those palliating deceitful courses that are daily imposed upon Credulous
weak persons. To proceed: when I contemplate the foresaid words of this great
Philosopher, a man of that transcendent Reason, and that clear bright
Understanding; I am not a little puzzled to find out the Efficient and Material
Cause of the vast tumefaction of this Bufo incumbent on my breast. That simple
water of it self will not puff up a dried Bufo to that bulk ready to burst, is
plain, by the Experiment of the Noble Author, and my own knowledge: Also a dead
Bufo for want of a vital Archeus, cannot suffer such an expansion of parts from
a venom never so active and pernicious to it, (as a Spider is reported to be)
considering mere poisons are little considerable in quanto, but in quali:
neither is Man's pest poisonous to a Bufo, no more than it is to a Dog or Catt,
to whom it is innocuous; Wherefore I suppose; till I be better informed, that
some virulent emanations (either expelled by Nature, strengthened with the
presence of the Bufo, or attracted by Magnetism) carrying with them a
transmutative putrefactive ferment imbibed by the Cadaver, might attenuate,
rarifie, and hove up the easily dilatable particles of the Bufo, and might (the
ambient heat of the Bed being coadjuvant) cause this kind of flatuous
extension: which Aporrhaa's being afterward spent, the succeeding application
of another Bufo of the same magnitude, prepared after the same manner, menaged
with the like Circumstances, suffered no such tumefied alteration, which
doubtless could never be, had there been the same adaequate cause present
which was before. Well, be the Cause never so abstruse, I am sufficiently
persuaded, That the adjunction of this Bufo nigh my Stomach, was of wonderful
force to master and tame this Venom then domineering in me, and thereby
subjugate it to the dictates of the vital Spirit, somewhat more pacified and
freed by degrees from that hotrid, deformed, pestilential Idea imprinted in it;
so that it was enabled to proscribe part of that tartarous Excrement through a
place most opportune (but not often frequented by such an evacuation) the
Fundament, where appeared in some few days a very great Bubo of the bigness of
a Tennis-ball, quite stopping up the passage of the Anus. My Head being now
pretty well settled, I was better able than before to reflect upon my self, and
to consult more rationally for my own safety; wherefore after some serious
considerations of my present condition, I thought it fitting to give vent to
this Tumor, and to let out immediately the foul gore contained therein.

For this end I sent to an honest industrious young man (a great lover of
Chimistry, one who was lately convinced by Fact of the Truth therein) desiring
him to apply Leeches to this swelling, which he performed with much dexterity,
Three Sanguisugae having filled themselves usque ad nauseam, a filthy, corrupt,
blackish, ichorous, staining Recrement issued forth, much like that I found in
the Cadaverous Dissection. By this Excretion I was exceedingly Recreated;
Nature discharging every day a great quantity of virulent moisture for the
space of nigh three Weeks.

Thus continuing the frequent use of Tinctura Polyacaea, and good spirituous
Liquors, I lay in a perpetual large Sweat Six days complete, sometimes
dejected, almost Lipothymical, and as it were dead in the Nest upon a reflux of
the Venom to the Central parts; and then again upon its Efflux to the
Peripheria, the Circumference of the Skin forthwith elevated, cheerful and
lively. Upon the Sixth day I arose, and walked about the Chamber with so firm a
foot, that my Brother and others wondered at the strength of my progressive
motion; that (...), impetum faciens, the vital Spirit being kept up with good
Liquors, and pure Chemical circulated Spirits, agreeable to our Nature: And I
am persuaded, upon the first setting my Foot upon the Floor after this sickness
(had not that painful Swelling in the Fundament hindered) I could firmly have
walked a Mile outright; which thing (considering the Atrocity and
Outragiousness of the Disease, and other Circumstances) if ever it was, or will
be performed by mere Galenical Physic, I will be bound to undergo Martyrdom
for the approbation and testimony of their way as best.

Upon the Eighth day I went down Stairs to visit my Landlady Mrs. Ladyman, most
dangerously ill; who, notwithstanding her abortion, miscarrying, was saved from
the Grave, by an Almighty hand, working by Chemical Remedies. No sooner was I
got up, but my Maidservant, and my Apprentice, about Thirteen years old, fell
down, being wounded with the same Arrow, both of which escaped through a
blessing upon the means. That Four in one House should have the Pest about the
same time, and all escape when it raged most Mortally, is a Mercy never to be
forgotten by us!

Having recovered the Ferment of my Stomach in great part, enjoying a sharp
Appetite, and (...), having lost my flesh suddenly, I thought I might according
to Hippocrates advice, (...), get it again as speedily. Sed difficile est modum
tenere; I went beyond the bounds of Sobriety, eating and drinking too
liberally, presuming I could correct a small Error at my pleasure, forgetting
Hippocrates Aphorism, (...). And going abroad too soon, out of a Zeal to visit
my Patients, being not thoroughly rid of a relic of Malignity that lay lurking
within me, and something more perhaps added by those loathsome Expirations of
the Sick I was conversant with (a Scald head being soon broken) I fell into a
most desperate Relapse with great oppression at my Stomach, a Looseness,
difficulty of Respiration, exceeding weakness, Restlessness, fruitless
Sweating, etc. So that I thought it not possible to hold out that Night; but
this wanzing, and ready to go out spark of life was once more blown up to a
flame by that comfortable refreshing blast of former Chemical Remedies,
repeated in great quantity, and so in four days I made another evasion from my
tedious Bed, resolving to be more cautious for the future; I was fully
confirmed in my health, for which benefit I hope I shall be grateful to the
most High, Dum Spiritus hos regit artus.

At that very time, whilst I did undergo many a sad Brunt, many a trepidation
of the heart, and conflict of Spirit, two of my most esteemed Consorts, Dr.
Joseph Dey, and Dr. George Starkey, two Pillars of Chemical Physic, were both
reposed in their Graves, before I knew of their Deaths, concealed on purpose
from me, lest upon the apprehension of so great a loss, my Calamity should be
aggravated, and I swallowed up in the gulf of Despair. They are gone, and at
rest free from Persecution, Slanders and Obloquies of their Enemies, and have
left me behind to deal with those that are always supplanting and
contradicting the Truth. Well, I must be content, considering, Quicquid patimur
venit ab Alto: This came not out of the Dust, but from the hand of him Above,
who for our abominable Crimes, and our Ingratitude, the grand Sin of this
Nation, was pleased to deprive us of Two such eminent Lights, of which this
wicked World is not worthy, unless they could have prized them better. It Is not
for my own so much, though great, as for the public interest, that I heartily
lament the Translation of these two brave Souls into a better place, whose
Praises all Candid and Ingenuous men will, I dare say, Celebrate; and none but
Sordid, Envious, Ignorant Spirits, will ever detract from them. It was, I
confess, a most unhappy malevolent juncture of things at that instant, that we
should all Three fall sick at the same time, neither of us being able to
relieve each other; for, I am persuaded, had Divine Providence been pleased to
have spared any one of us from the severe stroke of his Indignation, we might
have been at this day all three alive; for it is the nature of this fly Venom
to strike so unawares at the brain, and to cause such an adiathesis, a
discomposure, and disturbance in that Organ, that a man has not free libetty
of his Reason, to act what may be convenient for the securing his own life; as
it was too apparent in these Physicians of singular Parts. One of whom, i. e.
Dr. Dey I visited in the Evening, a little after I had Anatomized the Body,
relating to him what I had done, which he was much delighted to hear.

At my departure from him (that night I was surprised with the Pest) he seemed
cheerful, having felt about a fortnight before the smart of this piercing
stroke, of which he was healed, and so had likewise upon this second encounter,
had he not been too ventrous to save others, rather than his own life: such was
the true Charity of this Worthy Honest Gentleman toward his neighbor; for he
eviscerated and spent himself in toylsom Manual Operations, leaving the way of
Riches, Honor, Pleasure and Ease his Colleagues trod in, (having been admitted
one of the College of London about twenty years) whom he deserted, to his
prejudice in this World, for Consciencesake, abominating their indirect and
destructive manner of Practice, knowing the Professors thereof (as he often
told me) to be quite out of the way of Curing Diseases. He was a Learned
Scholar in deed as well as word; a Pious, Modest, Charitable, Humble Man, so
far free from Ostentation and Vainglory, that he hid his Excellent parts,
when other of his Brethren, far inferior to him, made ten times the
glittering show. He took such laborious pains night and day in his Faculty,
that I am certain he exhausted his Spirits, and thereby disenabled the Archeaus
to resist the Contagion. Carendo non fruendo agnoscimus; He has his Exit with
applause, and is wanted by many, that better value him now, than when they
enjoyed him.

Dr. Starkey one of the Triumvirate, that was then infected when he came to me,
having his Imagination dislocated, yielded himself Prisoner to this Cruel Enemy
that very night, being wounded in his Groin, a Bubo appearing there, which I
conceive, if rightly ordered, might have been a means to have saved him, had
he not poured in an unreasonable quantity of Small beer. After which
understanding what he had done, he told those then present, That all the
Medicines that he had in possession were of no force to do him any good; for
the natural ferment of the Stomach was by this immoderate ingurgitation of dull
flat Small beer totally subverted, the poison exalted, the Archeus debilitated,
the blood made restagnant and congealed, and the pores thereby obstructed, that
no considerable Diaphaeresis could be made. I have reason to believe, that had
Dr. Starkey made use of his own Noble Chemical preparations in the beginning,
and followed them close, as I did, it had been no difficult thing for himself
to have escaped, that had an extraordinary Gift bestowed on him of Curing
others in a far worse condition then he was reported to be. But for my part I
am persuaded, that being very sensible of the impiety, hypocrisy, dishonesty,
the imposture, subtle Frauds, disrespect of Real worth, odious Ingratitude,
and other notorious Crimes of the Times, he was willing to resign himself to
Death, so that he was not much sollicitous to live. It Is a thousand pitties,
that a man of those excellent parts had no better entertainment, and more kind
usage here, that he might have composed and settled himself to a further
investigation of those Chemical mysteries, into which hardly any in this Nation
had a greater inspection. The Spagyrical Republike and the Professors thereof
are not a little obliged to him, and have reason (if they be not ungracious and
ungrateful) to speak of his memorable Name, with Respect and Honor; and he
that shall do the contrary, will savor of a Galenical spirit; and ought to be
reckoned among those his unworthy seeming Friends, whom out of a sweet flexible
nature, and a hearty desire to do good for Mankind, he taught many
Philosophical Arcana's: for which they rewarded him with persecution,
calumnies, and base detracting language. It was his fate, as likewise Dr. Deys,
to be evil entreated, and slighted, because they could not cogg, lie, and
flatter; and haec est ars qua quivis possit ditescere: and he that cannot do so
in this leprous age of the world, wherein men's minds have the greatest Plague
and Miasm, is like to fare no better than they.

They scorned that reward which the World could give them, and now enjoy
perpetual bliss, while their innocent Ashes lie digesting in their Urnes, till
they attain that maturity of perfection of coming forth Diaphanous, Splendid,
and Glorious Bodies.

There is one thing, the truth whereof I cannot omit to give the World
satisfaction in, in reference to these Heroes of Chemistry. Whereas there was a
confident Report (the broachers of which it is no difficulty to conjecture)
that Dr. Dey, and Dr. Starkey, were both present at the Dissection of this
Pestilent Body: It is an absolute untruth, contrived on purpose to represent
them presumptuous rash Persons, in undertaking such a desperate business,
which cost them both their lives, as they would have it, that thereby the good
estimation and fame of Chemical preparations may be eclipsed: and the
miscarriage of one of their own Sect (who upon the like Occasion lost his life,
as I have told them in Galeno-pale, for want of a Remedy which an Helmontist
could have given him) the better excused. I question not, as I have it from
their own mouths, but either of those Gentlemen would willingly have joined
with me in this Anatomy, had not the Opportunity offered to me occured so
unexpectedly, that I could not conveniently gain any leisure to send to them.
Moreover they were both seized upon by this Truculent Disease, before I entered
upon this Dissection: so that Dr. Dey was not capable to assist me therein,
being infirm; and Dr. Starkey went to and fro with this mortal Arrow sticking
in his side unfelt: and withal, so great was his employment, and medicinal
negotiation at that time, that it was both hard to find him out, and likewise
to divert him from those engagements of visiting his Patients he had taken upon
him. Wherefore I thought good to lay hold alone, of that seasonable sudden
Occasion then presented of prying into this dead Body, which I often sought
for, but was still frustrated in obtaining so useful a Discovery, through the
peevishness and crossenesse of some, and fond foolish fears of others: And now
Mr. Pick my Patient then recovering, a rational person, easily condescending to
my desires, gave order that his Servant should attend me, who was the only man
that stood by and looked on (while I handled this horrid object) and can at
this day testify the verity of several remarques therein obvious to his eye.

Thus have I delivered to you the very plain Truth of the Anatomical (...),
Transaction of this Pestilent Cadaver, that the Reader may be prevented from
those Mistakes which Malevolent Forgers will impose upon him if he be not very
Cautious.

These Pseudiatori are prone to corrupt the Text, and to de^^^ve the genuine
Sense of any Physical Experiment, which through fear, and want of appropriate
Remedies, they dare not venture upon for the benefit of their distressed
Country. For they enter in at the Backdoor, and run away at the Fore-door, on
whom the gift of Healing was never bestowed, because they never sought aright;
for that reason they could never obtain such a favor from Heaven, to be
protected by Divine Preservatives from the stinking noysom Breath of this
mortiferous Basilisk: wherefore they maliciously backbite those that perform
any thing above themselves, calling that a Presumption, that tends to the
preventing a Consumption and Devastation of a whole Nation.

CHAP. VI.
Some Medicinal Reflections and useful Observations made upon this Pestilential
Dissection.
STultus est ineptiarum labor; to take pains, and not to improve it for the
benefit of our selves, or our Neighbors, may, I confess, be justly termed
Presumption, Folly, Vainglory, and an affection of Singularity: But to
undertake any dangerous and difficult design, that a particular Country,
Nation, yea, the whole World may be meliorated in its condition, and enjoy some
comfort therefrom, deserves to be encouraged, promoted, rewarded, and to have
better appellations given than some spiteful persons commonly fasten upon it I
acknowledge that I cannot acquit my self wholly of Philautie, Kenodoxie,
Ostentation, etc. and I cannot help it, for it is inherent and ingenite in me;
Homo sum, nihil humanum a me alienum puto. I am as prone as any other, sine
Gratia Dei anticipante, to run into many enormous Crimes; yet if I can judge
any thing of my self, and my Conscience does not very much delude me, I have
always set before my Eyes in my Function (next Gods Glory) chiefly, and in the
first place, the preservation and sanity of my dear distressed Neighbor,
endeavoring to make my own By respects to follow in the Rear. Wherefore I have
often abhorred to take those indirect and oblique Courses that would advance my
own private Interest, but debellate and overthrow the public prosperity of a
people.

How sollicitous I have been to keep poor afflicted man from falling into the
Pit of destruction, is only known to the (...), the Searcher of all Hearts.
Duram suscepi provinciam, I underwent a very difficult Task these late
Contagious Times, performing it not perfunctorily, by Fits and Girds, by
halves, in a trifling manner, expressing (as some that I know) such a fear in
looks and gestures that was enough to bring the Plague into a House free from
it: but I followed what I took in hand vigorously, to a purpose not ready to
take my flight as soon as I was entered the doors, like the Statue of Mercury
on Tiptoe, leaving behind a pitiful Recipe of Ellec: Diascor: Methrid: Theria:
aq: Theriar: Sir aceto: Citri, and such like Trash and Trumpery; but I
continued oftentimes half an hour, and sometimes an hour, conversing with my
Patients, and giving them effectual Remedies, prepared with my own fingers,
opening their Bubo's, and cutting out Eschars of Carbuncles, by the operation
of my own hand. All this while, the (...), beholding my upright intentions,
preserved me in health, even in the height when the Pest was most grassant,
till such time being desirous to learn what might instruct me farther in the
Nature and Cure of this abstruse Sickness, after that I had conversed with the
Living about it, I entered into more than ordinary familiarity with a dead
body; Itum est in viscera, I searched many dark Corners thereof to be taught
something, but I bought my Learning at a dear Rate; and what the Cadaver could
not teach me of it self, was infused into me to my sad Experience: Experto
credit.

I shall now deliver to you the Physical Observations I made, resulting from
both dead, and my own living Body.

Observation I.
In the first place, I observe that the Punctilio's, Pulicar-like Spots, those
Stigmatick marks on the Skin with a Fever, do always signify a stop more or
less put to the Circulation of the blood, some Coagulation or Grumosity therein
caused, through a malignity, and Gorgonian Venom that depredates, sacks, and
confunds the Vital Spirits that are the chief instrument of Motion; so that
when they become Torpid and stupefied, part of the blood remains like standing
pool, prone in some short time to contract an evil odor.

Now if this Tartarous concretion be dissolved, discussed, or thrown out, and
lodged in an Emunctory, or some byplace ignoble, through the strength of Nature
assisted by Art, then all things succeed well; but if this spissitude of the
blood increase, that the channels are exceedingly clogged, and nothing is
difflated, ventilated, and carried off by universal breathing sweats, nor any
morbifique matter discharged into any glandulous or external carnous
diverticle; conclamatum est, that person may be judged in all likelihood to be
lost.

Observation II.
Whenever these Cutaneous spots appear, they always signify an endeavor in
the Archeus to extrude that which is noxious: but failing in the very act by
reason of its own impotence, and the force of the virulent untameable matter
carried out of the Capillary vessels, as far as the skin, it is there condensed
by a preternatural coagulative ferment, promoted by the ambient air into this
round figure, according as the sperical small drop is capable. The annitence of
Nature to make an expulsion from the Center to the Circumference may instruct
the Physician to use all means to imitate her, to assist her, to keep the blood
in continual Motion, to weaken the strength of the poison to kill an Exotic
ferment, to rarifie and attenuate whatsoever is gross and lentous: and to keep
the Pores open, that there may be free perspiration of the whole body.

Observation III.
When the Natural ferment of the Stomach in the Pest is so far lost, that
instead of white, a black juice is engendered, it is a certain sign of the
abolition of the vital Spirit, and consequently of approaching Death. For I
never knew any afflicted in this kind, whose strength failed, that vomited an
Excrement tinged black, did escape: where this blackness is, there must needs
be a privation of light, with which our spirits symbolize, they being luminous,
if so darkness, the shadow of death must needs follow; and doubtless great is
that darkness that seats it self in the spirit of light and life.

Observation IV.
That which did first occurr most remarkable to my eye in this Dissection, was
the great alteration I found made principally in the Stomach, in respect of the
part continent and that which was contained therein: In the continent, certain
Vibices, Stigms, strokes, of an obscure color imprinted; (the inward coat
being stained with colors different from the natural) and a fluid matter
contained fuliginous, pitch-like, did sufficiently indicate to me, that there
the pestilential poison did take up its chief residence.

Observation V.
When I contemplate what a pure white substance was taken into this Youths
stomach not long before he died, and how strangely it was transmuted into
another hue, as black almost as Ink, I cannot but smile to think on the vain
Conceits of the Galenists, that tell us of atra Bilis, adusta, and retorrida,
black Choler made by a mere torrefaction or violent burning heat and adustion,
according to their definition of a Fever, as if there were a fire no whit
different from a Culinary in our Bodies, converting that which is white into
black, and black into white, by a strong reverberating heat. Suck like fond and
foolish opinions have they harbored these Sixteen hundred years and upward,
for want of the knowledge of the Doctrine of Ferments; which can never be so
well illustrated, as by Chemical Experiments; which those Pseudo-Chymists boast
they are acquainted with (only (I am certain) in a formal manner sufficient to
delude the world, otherwise they would not deny the power thereof in their
Actions.) If they did really understand how a little Leaven does infect the
whole Lump, they would forthwith leave their bare beggarly Qualities in curing
Diseases, as Hot, Cold, etc. (Relollea, as Paracelsus calls them) things
transient and momentany, ebbing and flowing every minute, according to the
disposition of the Subject, and insist more upon substances, whose intrinsecal
transmutation depends upon powerful ferments.

Observation VI.
What a Sovereignty and Influence the Stomach has over the whole body may be
proved by multitude of Instances and Examples that I could produce; but this
was eminently conspicuous, that when any thing was taken in that disturbed the
innate Archeus, and required some difficulty to digest, many horrid Symptoms
did strait break forth, as Vertigo, Cephalalgie, Delicium, Frenzy,
Inquietude, Dyspuoea, Sopor, defection of the Spirits, a cohibition of Sweat,
and other cutaneous Fxcretions, etc. This was plainly apparent in this
Stripling, who having an indiscreet Nurse attending him, suffered much damage,
when she offered him that which was by no means to be admitted as tolerable,
the natural ferment of the stomach being perverted by the pestilent Poison: And
I doubt not but the period of his life was accelerated by the unwitting Dose of
Milk, which though it be the best Nutriment where it is well altered, yet it
often proves the worse corrupted.

Hereby we may learn not to ingest any thing into this noble Vessel, but what
may agree with the innate Archeus, may increase the vital Spirit, rectify the
enormous Ferment, cherishing that which is genuine; may be quickly altered, and
leave very little Dross and Recrement behind, and such are those things that
abound with noble Spirits, as good Wine, and strong Beer or Ale well brewed; as
for Flesh, Broths, Gellies, Watergruel, Ptisans, Barley water, and such like
dull vapid things, etc. they are all to be abandoned and excluded from entering
(into this Palace, where the sensitive Soul sits) so long as such a grand Enemy
stands in defiance of it, and seeks to destroy it.

Observation VII.
In all parts I took notice of (...) and (...), a great coagulation, and some
small colliquation of juyces, except in the Stomach, where this Negro liquor
did flote without any Concretion or Coaction; whereby I gather, That the kindly
and familiar Ferment of the Stomach, made to dissolve and open any hard tough
food, and to change it into a fluxible white Chile, that the nutritive and
excrementitious parts may be the better separated, being now degenerate and
hostile, did still retain a property like the former, though tending to Ruin,
tabefying and colliquating what it touched, and changing it into a black,
instead of a white juice. On the other side, the Ferments of the Fourth and
fifth Digestions, ordained lightly to incrassate, thicken, and to bring one
portion of the blood to a moderate fibrous consistence, and to subtiliate,
another becoming exorbitant, and losing that primitive gift with which they
were endued, and acquiring a virulent Nature, transcending their former bounds
of Mediocrity and Modification of this red Balsom to be afterward assimilated,
does now compinge and closely streighten the part thereof, depriving it of that
continual Circulation which is necessary for the generation of vital Spirits,
the immediate instrument of the sense and motion of every Animal, and turns
another small part into a venomous, variegated Ichor or Serosity.

Observation VIII.
That whereas there is a power inherent in the Veins and Arteries to preserve
the blood from Congelation even when the body is dead, so great is the
concretive force of the pestilential poison, that the blood is suddenly put to
a stop, and becomes grumified, turning into Glotts in a living body, with nigh
as much expedition as the Spirit of Urine changes Spirit of Wine into a white
thick lump.

Observation IX.
That a kind of glandulous substance like a Lambs stone should be found in the
right Ventricle of the heart, instead of an obscure clot of blood, does show
how sollicitous Nature (though violently hurried away by a contrary Idea) is to
save it self from destruction; since that when the Haimopoietick power was lost,
she carries out of the stomach a small quantity of a rude Chyle, passing a
short way through some of the Sanguineous Vessels, without receiving a rubicund
Tincture, into this noble Cavity, and not able to give it the stamp and
signature belonging to this vital Nectar, was forced to yield it up to that
impression which the exotic Ferment did make upon it.

Observation X.
It being granted, that blood does make blood, as I can demonstrate, that it is
in being before the conformation of the Liver; and that when the Sanguis, this
pure defaecate sublimely graduated crimson juice stands still, and loses its
virtue, then the milky Chyle cannot receive a vital Character, and be tinged as
it ought. How cautious should we be to exhaust and spend prodigally this
treasure of Life, as the Galenists, who to satisfy their erroneous Documents,
without any solid Reason, or approved Experiments, rashly let it out in many
trivial Diseases, which might easily be Cured by proper Medicaments.

Observation XI.
Any Artificial evacuation of Blood (except that which is performed by
immediate Derivation, being degenerate) in the Pest, Spotted Fever, Small Pox,
Meazils, or any Malignant Disease whatsoever, that has always in it, (...),
aliquid sanguinis congelativum, something in it that does condense and fix the
blood, is absolutely pernicious, and brings certain perdition, or at least
great Calamity, if thee be not present extraordinary vigor of Nature
whatsoever the perverse Galenists pretend to the contrary, that they empty an
Athletick, full Habit of Body, and thereby cause Motion in the blood, and so
hinder the coagulation of it: which opinion (if rightly cavassed) is
notoriously false; for they take a mere contrary course that diminish the good
blood in this case, which cannot be avoided when vent is given to a large
vessel, for out flies the best as well as the worst together, indistinctly,
and hereby the Archeus must needs be disenabled to resist the poison, to
attenuate, profligate, and tame any pertinacious, viscous, and noxious matter;
for I am sure, if Hippocrates (...) or Helmonts Archeus, i.e. the Vital spirit,
the principal Author and efficient Cause of Sanity be wanting, nothing
benevalent can be expected. That Phlebotomy in the foresaid sense does cause
this inconvenience, I can make appear both Logically and Optically; for the
more good blood, the more good Spirits, and consequently in Reason all Vital
Actions must needs be performed the more successively, and a stronger expulsion
made of what is offensive: as on the contrary, defect of blood and spirits
causes all manner of mischief. Experimentally also and visibly it is true: For I
never saw any deprived of any great quantity of blood, (...) with that
Alacrity, stability, celerity, and safety, as he that was cured dexterously a
phlebotomos, without emission of blood and spirits. And through this indirect
Course I frequently observe, that those that are ordered after the Galenical
Method, fall from Acute Diseases into Chronick, and Tedious Languors, merely
because their Physicians either exhaust their Blood, consume their Spirits by
deletery uncorrected Catharticks, torture, crucify and gaul them with
Blisterings, Cuppings, and Scarifyings; Or keep them at a low ebb with their
sluggish, flat and spiritlesse Julips and Potions; so that hereby the Archeus
becomes weak and feeble, the blood must necessarily move slowly, and for want
of Active Spirits be retarded in its Current, and in many places subsist like a
standing Pool, clottering and causing great obstructions. Whosoever therefore
that intends to keep the blood, sine Remora, fluent in its Channels, free from
Curdling, let him study to the utmost to exhibit those Specificks that may
mortify and annihilate the inspissative Torpedinous poison, and advance the
impulsive Spirits by those things that symbolize with, and directly match them.

Observation XII.
Those variety of several colored juices coagulated and colliquated apparent
in this body, were not (as the Dogmatists affirm) so many distinct Humors, as
Choler, Phlegm, etc. Analagous to the Elements, fallen off from their native
Temperament, (as they would have it) but they all arose from the Chile and
Blood disguised and masked in diverse forms, according as the Protean Ferments
altered the Texture and position of their parts, and so marked them with this
or that color. Believe it, there is no Real existence of those Humors, as
Choler, Phlegm, Melancholy, that the Galenists frequently mention in most of
their Writings; but there is one only primigenious rivulet, i. e. Blood, that
irrigates all parts of this Microcosm, which as it meets with different
Ferments, so it is subject to diverse alterations, and manifold colors.

Observation XIII.
The usual effect of most poisons commonly known to us, is to coagulate the
blood, as I have found evident, dissecting diverse Bodies destroyed by things
deletery, which I observed made a stigmatick impression in the Stomach, and so
condensed the Vital red Balsom in the Vessels, that Clodders of four or five
Inches in length might be extracted.

Observation XIV.
Whenever there is any great concretion of the blood in the Pest, no kindly
beneficial sweat is to be expected, till such time the constringent venom be
overcome, the gross matter attenuated, rarefied, and an apersion made of the
pores of the skin. And this was manifest in this Youth, who could by no means
be brought into a breathing sweat, durable, with allevation, the juices of his
body being as it were frozen, made torpid, and indisposed to stir from a
Narcotick poison.

Observation XV.
I find such an indissoluble league, connection, and coherence between the
Vital Spirit and Sanguis pure blood in all perfect Animals, insomuch that if
they be separated from each other, they both lose their essence and proper
denomination; for this most highly defaecated liquor does maintain the spirit,
and the spirit does move, agitate, and purify this liquor, that it may be fit
to be changed* into it self. I look upon the Chyme or Cruor, as upon the sweet
juice of Grapes, which has little sensible spirit in it at first, till it
comes to be fermented, depurated, and segregated from its lees and foul faeces,
and then it explicates its activity in an admirable manner; Likewise this crude
juice rubefied, is by long circulation and fermentation of the fourth and fifth
digestions so cleansed and rid of all dross and filth, that it attains an
Homogeneous nature, easily convertible into a Gas Vitale capable to receive the
bright shining beams of the Soul, as highly rectified spirit of wine does the
lucid flame. If the blood harbor any thing extraneous, acrimonious, austere,
acide, malignant, venomous matter, etc. it forthwith titubates and deviates
from its integrity and accomplishment: Then the Spirit, its individual
Companion, falls into discontent, peevishness, frowardness, fury, and rage,
and an Ilias of Diseases follow, and all is brought into confusion: as likewise
if the spirits be consumed, disturbed, suffocated, extinguished, by reason of
perturbations of the mind, pernicious fumes and odours, great dolours, or the
occurse of any thing very violent, altogether disagreeing with them, the blood
missing that Archeus that should hold the reins of right Government, and carry
it about in a direct road, where it may receive a just alteration by natural
ferments, does become degenerate, relapsed, colliquated or coagulated, as was
visible in this Cadaver.

Observation XVI.
Since it is so, (as it is intuitively conspicuous) that the Pestilential poison
does principally strike at and deprave the Stomach and fistulary Vessels, by
colliquating the lacteous juice contained in that, and by coagulating the blood
in these, what intolerable, non-sensical practice is it, to prescribe any
thing either Dieterical, or Pharmaceutick, that is so far from hindering, that
it furthers these sad effects.

Observation XVII.
The extraordinary warmth that was in this body at twelve hours end, from the
time it expired, does sufficiently testify what a Phlogosis, (...), and
combustion was about the viscera, arising from a fermentation and impetuous
collision of exardent Atoms, which the fretting and furious Archeus had
agitated, being exstimulated, and at length enraged, that it had entertained
into its very penetralls, such a mortal Enemy; and now the Fuel being
consumed, the spirits exanclated, and fire extinct, there remains an Empyreuma,
a relic of heat in the parts defunct, as a sufficient testimony of that
notable ebullition and fermentation which was precedent in the living.

Observation XVIII.
I am commonly Censured by the Galenists presumptuous, in venturing to open
this Contagious Body, for no other Reason (as I can conceive) but that I
escaped so great a danger contrary to their expectation; I confess I was a
little careless, in that I did not before fortify my self as I might have
done, being extreme eager in the pursuit of knowledge for the public good. I
am persuaded, had I strengthened the Archeus of my hand with some appropriate
Balsamic Spirit, and filled up the Pores with an oleaginous odorous matter,
the Pestilential poison could never have had so free an ingress, and so easily
have put to flight the vital Spirit, making an inroad into all parts. That the
intoxicating Atoms did first invade my hand imbrued with that foul Gore, I may
without doubt conclude from long malaxing and steeping it in the body, and from
the perceptible Alteration succeeding. For it is very unlikely that I who had
sustained so long time before such abominable, loathsome, noysom Smells, from
Sores, Carbuncles, the tainting Respiration, and faetide Expiration of numerous
living bodies, and all this while suffered no great detriment in my health,
should now receive an Infection by a Ten times less occasion in that respect,
the Emanations being little comparatively, and those much weakened by a Pan of
Brimstone burning under the Corpse.

Observation XIX.
The Pest that arises from a contrectation of Entrals warm, is more active, and
breaks out more violently than that which proceeds from the light touch of the
same cold; and either of these are more Contagious, than a bare Contact of the
skin of a Carcass. If the skin of a living body suffer discontinity, the
Contagion of the dead enters more forcibly, as I found once experimentally to
my prejudice, in Anatomizing one that dyed of a Spotted Fever; for having
accidentally cut my Finger, and often washed it in that malignant juice, I was
more troubled to Cure it than any wound ever inflicted upon me all my
lifetime. The space that this venom lay cryptick within me, closely and
silently working in this subterranean Microcosm before it acted publicly was
Eight hours, and then after a very sound sleep from Eleven till Two in the
Morning, a grievous oppression at the stomach, with deep and difficult sighs,
seized upon me, which does still confirm me in this judgment, That the Pest
never falls to acting a Tragical Scene openly, till such time it has taken up
its lodging place in the Stomach.

Observation XX.
I have very good Reason and Experiment on my side to believe, that had I
forthwith, after the Dissection, be taken my self to Bed, and liberally made
use of those Remedies the good Creator bestowed upon me, much of the Atrocity
of this Sickness might have been allayed, and perhaps the Poison made effete
and feeble; for I look upon this pestilential virulence, though (otherwise
declined than commonly) yet to hold such a proportion with ordinary Poisons,
that they both agree in many Circumstances. We find that if an Alexiterium, a
proper Antidote be ready at hand in the very nick of time, and strait be
offered to one that has suffered hurt from any Animal, Vegetal or Mineral that
is deletery, there forthwith follows a frustration and annihilation of that
pernicious property in it, and the mortiferous effect thereof: but if there be
a dilation or procrastination, and no check given to its furious and violent
power (opportunity once slipped) all the Art of Man is at a loss to discover
any thing medicable as a counterpoyson in such a case. He that expects help
from a Physician, when the fermenting poison has had its full Career without
any stop, and has played a Game almost to the last period without any bar,
having put out the light of the vital Spirits, that no foundation is left for
their Reparation or Relumination; and has choked up all the passages of the
blood to be circulated as long as there is life, may with as much reason
require one without a Miracle to raise a dead body from the Grave.

Observation XXI.
Vis unita fortior; had I not kept up my Spirits with high Cordials, and strong
Liquors; had I not used Specificks, Diaphoreticks, those things that lenified
and pacified the Archeus, the topical application of the Bufo, etc. Had I not
lain in a large Sweat continually Seven days together, sometimes dropping down
my Skin, had not an extraordinary great Botch been thrust out in the Fundament,
and upon an Apertion made by Leeches, many Ounces of a virulent quitture issued
forth. Had any of these forementioned been wanting, I could not at this day
have sucked in the Air, and conversing among the Living, have set forth to the
World the History of this narrow evasion from the Jaws of all devouring Fate.

Observation XXII.
For any one to assert that the Pest is not Contagious or Catching, argues
either Sottish, Stupid Ignorance, or a perverse obstinate contradiction of
Truth, out of peevishness, and singularity of Opinion. The best Reason that
these men have to maintain their gross Paradox repugnant to Sense, is, That
some conversant among the sick, have lain in the same Bed with them, have held
there Noses over their running Bubo's and Carbuncles, yet have escaped the
Infection. All this while these Captious Disputants forget the true Axiom in
Philosophy, Unumquodque recipitur secundum captum recipientis: There is no man
affected like another in every respect, but still every Patient has some
disparity, though not discrepable and sensible to us in the reception of the
Agent. In one the imagination of the whole man is strongly fortified against
the Infection, and can vigorously resist it, expressing an undaunted
resolution; but the imagination of the Archeus may be weak in the same person,
and not able to make any resistance or renitence, when it is assaulted by
another Contagious munial ferment, but easily yields to it. On the other side,
the fantasy of the Archeus, or vital Spirit of every part may be courageous
and bold, not ready to give way to the Occurse of any outward evil: yet the
imagination of fear and horror in the man may be so great, that upon every
slight occasion a pestilential impression may be made upon him. If the
fantasy of man and the Archeus be magnanimous, stout, free from any Idea,
vain conceit of fear and terror, having a strong and valiant persuasion that
neither can suffer injury in this kind: then the contagious effluviums cannot
take place in such a body to offend it, because they are altogether disowned;
and so being not appropriated, are in a short time expulsed and dissipated,
before they can settle themselves to produce any act of hostility against
Nature. Now because few have this ingenite Gift bestowed upon them so as to be
exempted from some pusillaminity and distrustful thoughts either of the mind or
the Archeus, it is very rare when the Pest is very grassant and outrageous,
that one coming within the sphere of the activity of this poison, depart
without some stain and spot, which sometimes is wiped off by strength of
Nature, helped by Art, without any blemish to the health; and I am confident
many Thousands in this City have had a light Infection, which passed away per
Diap^aeam, a transpiration of the whole body, without the least cognizance of
it. For my own part, I can avouch by several Signs, being very curious and
exact in the consideration of my own state, that I often received the Scent or
Tincture of the Pest, but quickly washed it off by some Balsamical odor,
causing a profluence of a kindly Sweat. And had I not out of a little too
forward Zeal thrust my hand without due preparation into the mouth of this
cruel Tiger, I might have continued invulnerable to this day; yet none but an
unwitting, mad, self-conceited person will deny, that the Pest according to its
Etimon does peredere, mordere, and devorare, does bite, tear in pieces, pierce
even to the very marrow with its sharp fangs; though some clad like Curassers,
with Armor of proof from Top to Toe, have escaped those wounds that were
inflicted upon others. One may as well conclude, that the Itch or Leprosy is
not Contagious (contrary to Divine Writ, and firm experience) because some
coming within the same reach of contaminating Emanations with others that were
infected, have evaded the pollution.

Observation XXIII.
I have sometimes found the fermenting venom of the Pest, especially furthered
by large draughts of Small Beer after aestuation and effervescence of the
Spirits, so speedily congeal the blood, that the best Remedies made use of at
the first appearance of the Fever, were bauked, and of no effect; and being
followed close, could only indicate by driving out some Stigmata, Vibices,
Spots, and a suffusion of red or blew marks in the Skin, what great malignity
was within; and that there was almost a total coagulation of the blood in facto
esse, as I observed in diverse, who having surfeited themselves, were dispatched
in the space of a few hours. I have also seen some Remedies made use of for
seasonable prevention to keep down and strangle this still pullulating poison,
not suffering it to make any condensation of the vital juice, insomuch as
though a violent Fever did break out, continuing for the space of Five or six
days, yet the blood being kept in its due motion, no Efflorescence or
cuticular Eruption did appear, no not the least Pimple or Spot; but such a
Rarefaction and Subtiliation was made by penetrative, active and specific
Medicines, that if any coagulation was in fieri, it was immediately prevented
from further progress; or if the blood began to be restagnant, it was forthwith
agitated; if any grumous matter present, it was sent packing, per Diapnaeam and
Diaphaeresin, through the pores of the Skin, fine capite mortuo, without any
faeces, or sediment left behind.

Observation XXIV.
When I meditate seriously upon the extraordinary occasion that brought this
Truculent Disease upon me, when I contemplate its Magnitude, Malignity, (...),
the swiftness of its motion, those direful Symptoms and Products that appeared;
when I consider that Three besides my self were sick at the same time, of the
same Malady, in the same House, the Landlady one of the Three, being with
Child, miscarrying, and that all of us recovered by the same means blessed from
Heaven, I cannot but heartily magnify the good Creator of all things, that
has provided such potent Medicines for the Restoration of man fallen from his
Sanity, and withal be firmly resolved concerning the admirable efficacy of
Chemical preparations, abhorring the laziness, perverseness, and Ingratitude of
those that still resist the Truth, obstinately maintaining their own
destructive Principles, Method and Medicines.

CHAP. VII.
Directions Preservative and Curative against the Pest.
O (...), says the candid, learned Hippocrates; Time is pourtrayed, not
without good reason, with a Sith in his hand as keen as any Razour; to
signify to us, that it cuts off those opportunities, which once offered, and
neglected, can never afterward be regained. Therefore (...), an able Physician
that is present in the nick of time, is highly to be prized by the Patient:
Likewise, he that asks counsel for prevention, or sends for an able Chemist,
(as for the Galenist, or Pseudo-Chymist, it matters not much when they are sent
for: since in Truth (I am sure I can make it appear) some of them are to be
avoided as the Pest it self) at the very first onset of a Disease, is to be
attended with all diligence, and to be supplied with the best Remedies
possible. For my part I had rather be altogether absent, than be called upon,
when all that I can do, is to discover to the standers by, that the Disease is
Mortal. What good can be expected, when Nature is extreme feeble and prostrate,
not able to rise up to make the least conflict with a forcible Disease, when
the fundamental strength is altogether wanting, it is impossible to make a
reparation and redintegration of that which is abolished, without a miracle. Of
all Diseases, there is none that finishes its course with more expedition than
the Pest, nor any insinuates more slily, treads more softly, flatters more
subtly, and kills more treacherously; the more cautelous therefore ought we
to be how we give any harbor to it, and through a careless supinity neglect
means fitting to expel it. (...), is an undoubted truth delivered by
Hippocrates. He that desires to live comfortably, prolong his days, and defend
himself from the Pest, and other grievous infirmities incident to mankind,
next to powerful Medicines, let him embrace Temperance in his Diet, yet let
him rather drink more, so it be spirituos, than eat; let him rather exceed in
sleeping than watching, in motion rather than a sedentary course of life, still
discharging any excrementitious superfluity, chiefly through the universal
Emunctory, the skin, without any notable debilitation of the vital spirits: but
above all, let him endeavor after (...), magnanimity, brave resolution, and an
undaunted firmness of mind to resist any vain conceits of infection. Let the
Air, the principal vehiculum, (...), a nimble conveyer and translater of the
fermental poison from one to another, be defaecated, purified, and ventilated
from thsoe diversity of effluviums, and noxious exhalations that conspurcate
its Magnale, and fill up the pores thereof with soul corrupt hoary Atoms that
annoy the Archeus. For this purpose nothing is more efficacious (not only to
segregate (...), whatsoever is unclean, but also to consume and mortify (...),
any thing malignant and repugnant to our nature) then (...), Sulphur,
Brimstone, which may fitly be so called, both from the giver of it, and
likewise from its Divine effects. The use hereof I have in short set down in
Loimologia de Elogio Sulphuris. For Sulphurs highly mundified, made terse and
polite, are as it were Archei Speculum, the looking-glass wherein the Archeus
beholds it self with delectation and complacency, being both reflected and
illuminated by them; for whatsoever is luminous and splendid, does by an
emission of socillating beams exhilarate and dilate the vital spirits, and
dispose them to audacity, but that which is dark, misty, and opacous, does
cloud them, causing fear and terror, the harbingers of this unwelcome guest.
For this reason Anima Auri, the clear Sulphur of Gold, extracted by a friendly
Menstruum, being of a Solar property, does wonderfully cheer up the vital (...)
from an implanted congruity, and a symbolical affinity between each other. The
same is likewise performed by the defaecated Sulphur of Mars, Antimony,
Vitriol, Boodstone, native Cinnabar, without castration of their virtue,
which taken into this Microcosm, do by their Rutilation and Glistering Rays,
strongly fortify the Spirits against any imminent danger of the Pest, and
enable them to profligate and protrude by sweat the intoxicating particles
generated within, or taken into us from without. Whosoever then desires to
possess these Arcana's, must labor with his own hands, not thinking it
inferior for him to take pains and toil for a public good. It is a most
infallible Truth, That he can never be an absolute Philosopher, and an able
Physician, that seeks not after this Spagyrical Sophy by his own (...), this
Chirurgia, Manual Operation must make him complete, otherwise he is lame,
maimed and detruncated in the knowledge of his profession. For I expressly
assert (as I have declared in Galeno-pale) and can prove it, That it is an
egregious shame, and an unsufferable abuse in a Nation, That a company of
Drones that can do little but make a humming Noise to please the Ear, should
neglect to gather with their own fingers that Aetherial, Essential part of
every Concrete, which has a sovereign virtue to preserve from, and cure
infirmities. He that desires to attain an insight into these Mysteries, let him
compose himself without wavering, to try what the fire can discover that true
Philosophical light, which Prometheus, i.e. every prudent circumspect Physician
endeavors to purchase from Heaven, that he may be able to correct and mitigate
those many calamities that Epimetheus, i. e. an improvident indiscreet man
brings upon himself, ever since that once divinely gifted Pandora offered to
him that Box, which he out of a curiosity (...), opening, brought innumerable
griess of Body and Mind into the world: Let him make use of his own eyes and
hands, which are bestowed upon him for Speculation and Practice. Let him
intuitively examine the Sulphurs, Salts, and Spirits of Animals, Vegetables,
and Minerals, in which he shall find abscondite most powerful Remedies
against the Pest, and other stubborn Diseases. The saline spirit of Blood,
Bones, and Urine well rectified, are of admirable use against the Pest;
Likewise the spirit of Hartshorn, (the stinking phlegm being well separated)
does powerfully hinder coagulations of the blood, and sweeten the Acidity
thereof. The Sulphures or oils of any of these forenamed, well mundefied and
digested with a very clean fixed Alkali, are so united thereto, that they lose
their nauseous unctuousity and become saline, volatilizing the fixed Alkali. I
have often found the spirit of Tartar of singular virtue in the Pest; but above
all the pure salt of Tartar made volatile by a combination of its oil and
spirit, and tinged with the golden Sulphur of some Minerals, does effectually
resist the pestilential poison, cleanse away the dross, and any Tartarous
tenacious matter, by Urine, Sweat, expectoration, exhilarates the Archeus,
pacifying the fury and exorbitance thereof.

Elixir Proprietatis prepared by a Menstruum free from corrosion, not with the
common oil of Vitriol or Brimston, etc. is a very noble Medicine to prevent
Contagion. The legitimate spirit of Sulphur and Vitriol endued with that
Leptomerie, that there is a manifest avolation of its parts, grateful to the
smell, pleasant to the taste, friendly to the Membranes, leaving no evil
impression, where it touches, is none of the inferior Remedies; to prevent and
Cure this infection. Spirit of Salt well deflegm'd, and its much acidity
allayed by a benign Spirit familiar to our Nature, is highly to be commended
in this case.

Likewise Spirit of Sal Armoniack, well corrected with Salt of Tartar, is of
Noble efficacy.

Common Sulphur often sublimed with bay salt decrepitated, affords an admirable
Diaphoretick, promoting the circulation of the blood, as I have experimentally
found.

Antimonium Diaphoreticum (whose exquisite preparation is neglected by the
Galenists, and the approved use thereof much more unknown to them) is a Remedy
(though ordinary in comparison of some Chemical elaborate Medicines) far to be
preferred before all dreggy obtuse Electuaries, Opiates, and Confactions, as
Mithridat. Theria. Elect. de Ovo, etc. I dare avouch that any Physician
thoroughly acquainted with the due preparation, application, and appropriation
of this innocent thing (for if it be hurtful, it is because unskilful men
touch it) may do more service for his King and Country, toward the Cure of any
Endemical Sickness, then any mere Dogmatist in Europe.

Opium corrected in such a manner, and menaged with that Method and Discretion,
as that pract cally learned Dr. Starkey has taught the world, ought to be
highly esteemed for the quieting and mitigating the rage of the Archeus, and
the carrying of Malignity Diaphoretically.

The best Oil of Amber, and the pure salt thereof spiritualized, that the
Archeus may the better hold correspondence with it, strengthens the Stomach,
Womb, all the other membranes and sinews, seasoning the vital spirits with such
a specifique odor, that they are not easily affected with a fracide, putrid,
pestiferous scent.

Concerning Prevention; I know not any one thing for Inward use, as a more sure
staff to lean upon, under God, then the Best Flowers of, quite bereaved of
their vomitive faculty, and converted into a Diaphoretick and a little
purgative property (where the first and second Digestions abound with soul and
fluid excrements) without circumcising and robbing them of their virtue by
acide violent corrosives, or the Torture of the fire.

Mercury sublimed five or six times, and afterward dissolved in a mild
Menstruum, grateful to the smell, and pleasant to the taste, wherein the
polite blade of a knife dipped is not denigrated, or sullied with an obscure
color, may safely be taken into the body without the least prejudice, for the
dulcifying the Latex become eager, acide, or austere, the impulse of the blood
in its proper ducts, the prevention of its concretion, and for the Protrusion
of the venomous Atoms from the Center to the Circumference, as I have tried
with constant desired Success.

Crude Mercury well clarified, and clean Lune without any Alloy, brought to an
Amalgama, powdered, then cast into coinimon Sulphur, liquified in a Vessel of
Mars, and afterward this mass being often sublimed in a very strong close body,
with a firm head to it, is at length reduced to a brownish powder, fixed, of
extraordinary effect in all illconditioned Fevers, causing no disturbance at
all either by Vomit or Stool, but by its emicant Blas does animate the Archeus,
to profligate any thing that is hostile to Nature.

Whosoever purchases some of these Noble Remedies, need not doubt to cure,
prevent, and so far as Art will permit, that stubborn, chronick disease, the
Scorbute, which according to my Judgment in Loimologia, has furthered and
fomented the late Pest. And since I wrote that little Tract, I have been much
confirmed in my opinion therein, by several Experiments and Instances. For this
reason, all those things that resist the malignity of the Scurvey, are approved
of use also to prevent this acute Sickness. Wherefore in general the vital
strength is to be augmented, the ambient Air clarified, an adaptation of mumial
Ferments prevented, the Archeus of the stomach carefully cherished and
fortified, the blood purified, and kept freely running in its Pipes, the Venom
mortified, the morbifique Idea expunged, and the whole body disposed to a
continual Transpiration, by that means the good God of Nature has bountifully
provided for us; for this purpose nothing is to be preferred before the richly
endowed juice of that Vegetable (which Liber planted to free poor melancholy
man in some measure from care and sorrow) separated into various parts by a
skilful Analysis of them, each being exalted, mundified, and afterward united
again. In this one Concrete lies hid an infinite Treasury of Secrets, the true
value of which for sanation of languors, the Pseudochymists do no more
understand, than a Dunghill Cock, the worth of a precious pearl; if they did,
they would never thus prescribe small Beer, Barley water, Posset Drink made
with water and Ale, and such like poor faint Liquors in such a case, when the
Spirits (without whose vigor nothing can be done aright) are subjugated and
depauperated by a predominant Sickness.

Among Specificks ordained against the Pest, I find the Viper rightly prepared,
discreetly menaged and applied, to be deservedly worthy of praise, as the
Experiment on my self, as well as others, taught me. Now the best way that I
always discovered it most effectual, was to dissolve the flesh by digestion in
a delectable Liquor, conspiring with, and advancing the Balsamical Alexiterial
virtue thereof, likewise ushering it into remote parts, that they might be the
better seasoned with its odor, and the terrifying imagination of the Archeus
the sooner abolished.

The more subtle and spiritual part of Amber, is endued with incomparable
power, both to prevent, and also Cure the Pest, as I can Practically attest:
For I must needs subscribe (being sufficiently instructed by Fact) to that just
Commendation the profound Philosopher Van Helmont gives of Amber: Nil sane
(says he) Stomachos, Intestinis, Nervis, imo and Cerebro est gratius Succino
in spiritu Vini resoluto: There is not any thing that does more gratify the
Stomach, Intestines, Sinews, and Brain, than Amber dissolved in the pure spirit
of Wine.

Camphire free from Dross, and married to pure Spirit of Wine Tartarized, is,
as I can judge of it by some little experience, very beneficial to keep off and
destroy by its eminent odoriferous Crasis, the poisonous odor of the Pest.
Horseradish fresh cut into thin slices, and steeped in White Wind, or Malago
sulphurated in that manner as I have described in Loimologia, is very sanative
of the Scorbute, and a great defensive against the Pest.

The proper Urine of him that has drank Wine, either taken by it self, or made
into a clear Posset, is without question an excellent Defensive, especially
taken with confidence, for it attenuates the tartarous blood, and carries it
off by Sweat and Urine.

Juniper, Ivy-berries, Ginger bruised, and English Saffran steeped in well
rectified Spirit of Wine, that it may be impregnated with the virtue of the
foresaid Ingredients, is a powerful Preservative, if a Spoonful be taken
thereof Morning, Noon and Night with any other spriteful Liquor.

Some things outwardly applied and worn are much commended, as the Emerald and
Sapphire and other precious Stones, which often drawn in a Circle about a Bubo
or Carbuncle placed directly against the Sunbeams or light, as (Helmont
advises) do magnetically extract the virulence and malignity in the body, as is
evident by a blackness arising from those fuliginous cauterizing Atoms that
exhale.

As for Periapta, Amulets, a Verse out of David, Solomon, or any Prophet,
Superstitious Words, Characters, Signatures, Sculptures framed according to the
Conjunction and Aspects of the heavenly Bodies, Talismanical Gamaheus, and such
like Inventions, they are by no means to be trusted to. Neither do I approve of
those appendances of Quicksilver sublimate Auripigment, Arsnick uncorrected,
etc. which I have observed are very uncertain in answering the expectation of
him that hangs them about his Neck, or applies them to the Pulses as an
Zenexton. I confess (what Helmont says) That the strong Conceit of the person
that uses the foresaid things, may be of some force to prevent Infection for a
little while, yet the Terror of the Archeus is not taken off, or so much as
mitigated by them; and all that is hereby performed by them, is, that there is
for some short time a privative exclusion of any notable persuasion, that an
evil effect of Contagion can seize upon the person. The forenamed Author
affirms, That many Thousands dyed of the Sickness at the Siege of Ostend,
notwithstanding these supposed defensive Amulets which they so trusted to, and
those Blisters which were raised by Trochiscks of Arsnick, and the like: and,
Illae sunt (says he) Tragoediae Medicae, Italicae Imposturae, sinales Periodi
Iudaei porr^ and Ethnici. This is the Cheating Galenical Doctrine fetched from
Padua. Sweet smelling Spices, Perfumes, and several odoriferous things made up
into a Pomander, a powder quilted in a Bag, or contained in a spongy Body,
continually held at the Nose; when our Dogmatists feel the Pulse, aversa facie,
looking Westward, when their hands point Eastward, as if conscious of their own
guilt, they were ashamed to look their infected Patients in the Face. These are
most ridiculous shifts, under which none but unwitting Physicians will ever
shelter themselves, as helmont has it, Quasi venenum desineret esse, Aromate
saturatum! and non intraret penitius comite grati odoris! ac quasi ipsa Aromata
non contagio essent subnoxia! quasi Arsenicum Napellus Ambari grys^o maritata
cessarent nocere! quasi adoratissimum vinum non statim contaminaretur fracido
cado! i.e. as if that lost its poisonous property, that had good store of
Spices mixed with it, and was not rather conveyed farther into all parts by the
conduct a grateful odor! as if Spices were not liable to be infected! as if
Arsnick or Woolfsbane copulated with Ambergreese, gave over their hurtful
Nature! as if the most fragrant Wine was not in an instant polluted by a musty
Vessel! These are Naeniae, pitiful things to put any confidence in. A true
Zenexton, or outward preservative is quite of another Nature (as the
Philosopher decides it) for it depends not upon the mere fantasy excited, or
unmovable belief of the person; but its groundwork is laid in Nature, which
has bestowed upon it this active gift to do so and so. A true Zenexton,
according to Helmont, ought to be no way capable of Infection, if any expect it
should keep him from the same. And here we may take Notice that man's Pest
differs from Brutes, so that theirs is not mortally infectious to us, nor ours
to them, by reason of the disproportion of mumial ferments that is between
each; however their skins or flesh may be so contaminated by our pestiferous
Emanations, that they may be a means to convey it from one man to another.

Our Noble Chemical Philosopher does very much commend Amber for a Zenexton or
Preservative, from the testimony and experience of Gordiola a Spanish
Chyrurgion, Master of the Pesthouse at Ostend, who, as he relates, was
preserved the space of Three years, during the Plague there, by means of a
piece of Red Amber his Zenexton, which he chafed, till it grew warm upon the
seven principal Pulses; to wit, the Temples, the Wrists, the Ankles, and Left
Pap (I wonder he omitted the strongest beating Pulses in the Groin) he, as
Helmont was an Eyewitness, always continued in health, when the rest of his
Mates miscarried; and the same Author backs this experimental Effect with
prevalent Reasons, taken first from its powerful attractive force manifested
and stirred up by Frication, next from its first Transparency, Gummosity,
Porosity, and Rarity of parts, which make it more susceptible of our warmth and
mumial odor; lastly* from the universality of its Traction, being not limited
as the Loadstone to Iron, but generally drawing any thing, so it be light and
tractable, whereupon he infers, It may abundantly be able to draw the pestilent
virulent Air to it, since it attracts light things, especially when it shall
acquire an appropriation and adaptation by a mumial ferment. Questionless most
admirable is the radiant influence of precious Stones, and other translucent
scintillating bodies (rightly applied) upon our Spirits, even like the Stars of
Heaven: wherefore it ought not to seem strange, if such a shining Concrete as
Amber, have such an extraordinary gift of preserving from the Pest bestowed
upon it, by (...), the good Father of Lights, for the relief of the poor
distressed man, that is not able to purchase costly Gems.

Another most effectual Zenexton that he highly extolls, is a Creature called
by the Greeks, (...), and (...) a (...), flatu distendo tumefaceo, from its
swelling property in Latin, Bufo, a (...) and (...), quod bobus mortifera est;
a Rubeta quod in Rubis vivat, vel a rubro color, in English a Toad. It seems
to be marked out, and to have a stigmatical Signature impressed upon it, to
denote what a dotal excellency is contained in it against a Disease that is
often conspersed with variety of Spots.

The great difficulty to bring this Animal to a true Zenexton, lies in an
exquisite preparation of it, the manner whereof, that great Investigator of
Verity, Van Helmont, has thus delivered, as he received instructions from
Butler an Irish man, who (to Helmonts knowledge) had Cured some Thousands of
the Pest at London. He gave directions that a large Bufo taken in the Afternoon
in the Month of June, should be hung up by the Legs nigh the fire over a vessel
of yellow Wax made into the fashion of a Dish or Platter: After three days
that the Bufo had hung in this manner, it vomited up a terrene matter, and
certain Insects; Flies of a greenish color, with wings shining like gold, then
the Bufo forthwith dyed. This Butler told our Philosopher, That a Bufo ordered
aright, was a sufficient remedy for Forty thousand persons. But unhappily the
right knack of this business was not yet fully discovered to Helmont, which he
promised he would perform, had he not been suddenly banished, and sent packing
away. However, perspicacious Helmont proceeded thus with great success; he took
the cadaverous Bufo dried and beaten in to powder with that filth it had
vomited, and so made it up into Trochisks with Tragacanth, which he used with
good event both for precaution and sanation of the Pest. After this he made a
further progress thus; he got in the Month of July (the Moon decreasing) a
Bufo, the oldest he could find, whose eyes standing out, were full of white
Worms with black heads, insomuch that both the inward parts of the eyes were
changed into Worms closely joined together in each corner, their heads
appearing outward; and if any attempted to get away, the Bufo presently
suppressed it with its Paw. These he disposed and menaged in the same manner as
is set down before, and found them a most incomparable Zenexton. Gestati autem
Trochisci, says he, ad mammam sinistram arcebant contagium and loco infecto
alligati statim virus extrahebant. Trochisks made of a Bufo thus prepared, and
applied to the left Pap, kept away Contagion, and fastened to any place
infected, did immediately extract the Poison; moreover, that which is
remarkable, Erant Trochisci promptiores and validiores si in usum aliquoties
recidissent quam recentiores: The oftener they were used, the more speedily and
powerfully did they perform their business, beyond those that were fresh, and
never used.

Now Adepti gives this Philosophical reason of the rare operation of the Bufo
in this kind; for being a Creature naturally very timorous, that bears a
perfect hatred against man, and augmenting the same by an extraordinary fear it
conceives at the presence of man; when it dies, the whole body is seasoned and
distained with such an Idea of Fear, that even the Cadaver retains the
impression thereof after Death. Qui terror ab homine, says Helmont, naturalem
energiam sibi acquirit and imprimit, contra imagines territi Archei in homine;
siquidem terror Bufonis interimit and annihilat Ideas territi Archei humani:
This terror in the Bufo arising from the aspect of man, acquires an Energy
against the imagination of the terror of the Archeus; that which is natural,
mortifying this which is accidental: And forasmuch as no Poison exerts its
violent power without the ferment of man's Mumie (which being different from a
Brutes, is the reason that our Pest does not annoy them) neither can the Pest
infect any, unless there be a symbolical Congruity and Participation of the
Ferment; wherefore it is the nature of this Zenexton to hinder the mumial
Ferment from receiving and appropriating the pestilent Poison to it self, and
so disturbs it, that it cannot roost in that immediate Subject, or be fitted to
it. Hence it falls out, that that venomous Idea of Hatred and Terror in the
Bufo, annihilates the image of the pestilent Poison in the Archeus, which
strait is corroborated, perceiving not only an extinction of the virulent Idea,
but also finding an appropinquation of something more desponding and timorous
than it self; for it is observed that the Bufo is a Creature so extremely
fearful, that if you take the advantage to look upon it with a firmly fixed
intentive eye for a quarter of an hour, there being no avoidance of your
countenance, it will shortly dye with very terror, as I have tried. Thus man's
Archeus beholds as it were in a Glass, the picture of the Bufo's pusillanimity,
with a delectable reflection by means of this applicated Zenexton, which by
Divine institution procures his Sanity.

Diverse good Topical Remedies may be made use of with good success, as
Watercresses, Garden-cresses, Bank-cresses, Horseradish, Dittander, Napellus,
Aconitum, Figgs stamped and boiled in Vinegar, which applied to Bubo's and
Carbuncles, have an excellent Faculty to extract the Venom, and dissolve any
tartarous matter in the part.

That which I have found most laudable, and of approved experience in Botches
and Carbuncles, is a Plaster made of the Balsom of Antimony, of the Balsom of
Brimstone, Bals. Fuliginis, and Burgundy Pitch, which may be trusted to above
any thing I have met with.

THE AUTHORS APOLOGY against the Calumnies of the GALENISTS.
WHat some men cannot obtain by fair honest upright means they will try to
purchase by indirect, unjust, foul courses, by slanders, obloquies,
scurrilities, forgeries and detractions. One Comfort is, I never knew the
Contrivers thereof long to prosper, but still at length they drew upon
themselves the greater Odium from those credulous Persons, whose unhappy fate
it was to be seduced by them; and however they might for a while set a good
face upon their unhandsome Actions, deceiving some indiscreet eyes; yet in
conclusion, when they were discovered in their genuine colors, they always
came off with deserved disgrace. Certain scurrilous, lying Pamphlets have been
vented abroad against me, under disguised Names, which some subtle sly Wits
made use of to shelter themselves, being conscious, that if they should come to
a Chemical Trial, they would be found most Dross. Now how far this is from
Candor and Integrity, let any impartial man judge. If I have spoken, writ, or
done any thing amiss in Physic, I am forthwith ready to clear my self; if I
do not, let me suffer any condign punishment. The principal Design of the
Galenists, is to weaken the sinews of Truth, by scandalously and falsely
disparaging my Person, calling me Fanatic, one of an Anarchical Principle; who
have always (as my friends can testify) been Loyal to my Sovereign. They
whisper behind my back, that I am no Scholar; because that I have not spent my
time altogether like themselves, a company of Pedants, Cavillers about Lana
Caprina, Captious Sophisters, great Disputers, or rather Wranglers Pro and Con
about Quidlibets, and Quodlibets, such as study Cicero to confute Helmont; who
stand more upon a word mis-placed, a Grammatical Error, than upon the Loss of
a Man's Life. If any of these false Impeachers dare appear to my face, I should
easily make it out, that the Galenists are a company of grand talkative
Impostors, Ignorant in the main thing that belongs to their Art, the radical
Cure of Diseases, and this I will maintain, expressing my self in congruous
Latin, Greek, and Hebrew Terms, not as a Parrot or Daw, that has only learnt
Verba, praeterea nihil; but intellectually, fruitfully, for the benefit of
Mankind. As for their endeavors to vilify my Reputation, by making the World
believe, that I was at first a Practitioner in Surgery, before I applied my
self to Physic (although an untruth) yet it conduces much to my Credit, though
otherwise intended by them: For let me tell these men, that are little else but
smooth Orators, Polyglossi, multiloquous Doctors, that if they were but truly
Chirurgi, Operators with their own hands, they would have attained ere this a
far greater excellency in that Art, in which I am sure they are extremely
deficient, to their remarkable shame. Withal I would have my Enemies know,
that I was so well-grounded, principled, and had acquired such Theorems in the
Profession of Physic before I entered upon the Practical part, that I was able
to give a fair Rational Account of that fraudulent way, improperly called
Methodical, as well (I suppose) as the best of them: Yea directly aiming at
this and no other Faculty, I made all Inquisition possible, that I might be
thoroughly instructed, before I entered upon Medicinal Action; and for that end,
after long Study, I sought for, and by good Providence found out a faithful
Friend, at first an Apothecary, omnibus suis numeris and partibus expletus,
every way accomplished in his faculty, afterward an expert knowing Physician,
one that was persecuted maliciously and wrongfully, to his overthrow, by the
Dogmatists, for preparing Lac Sulphuris, an innocent useful Chemical Medicine;
for which Act doubtless divine Nemesis will at length bring them to shame.
This Gentleman conducting me to his Patients, and informing me concerning
several remarkable things in Physic: gave me much light both in Galenical and
Spagyrical Practice; the last whereof, according as I could judge then, above
Twenty years past, seemed to be most effectual: yet unwilling to forsake the
old beaten Road of the Ancients, I did not presently subscribe rashly to that,
to which I was forced afterward by degrees to grant ipso facto to be Truth,
much inconsistent at that time with my Profit. Then desiring to do all things,
(...), decently, and in order, I purchased a Doctoral Diploma to justify my
Practice legally in any place of the world; which I would rather burn, than not
be worthy. Indeed it is an unsufferable Shame, and a lamentable Calamity to
this Nation, That Idiots, mere Dunces in Philosophy should take their degrees
Modo tot Annos (as Learned, Honest Mr. Burton says) in Academia insumpserint;
if they have been of so long standing in the University, it matters not a rush
whether they be Literatores an Litorati, modo pingues, nitidi, ad aspectum
speciosi, and pecuniosi: And as he proceeds, Philosophastri licentiantur in
Artibus, Artem qui non habent: Eosque sapientes esse jubent, qui nulla praediti
sunt sapientia, and nihil ad gradum praeterquam velle adferunt. Many such kind
of Medicasters we have, who ought to be degraded, that Deserving men, that have
a just Title and Right to this Honorable Profession, might be better esteemed,
and not be so vilified by a company of illiterate Pseudo-Chymists, who seeing
the Weakness of these Titular Doctors in their Art, take occasion to slight
those that have according to their due Merit been thus Dignified.

Thus much for the wiping off those Aspersions that they have wrongfully cast
upon my own Person, Next, I shall answer in short to some things thrown in my
Teeth, and often charged upon me in reference to others, and the noble
Spagyrick Science.

They upbraid me, That I frequently meet and join with an illiterate Rabble,
Gunsmiths, Heel-makers and Botchers, that Rail against the Universities, and
all Learning in general. This I confess ingenuously is the worst they can say
of me: That once I did for a time associate my self (for the Promotion of that
useful Chemical Art, some Learned Chemists, as Dr. Dey, Dr. Manwaring, etc.
true Disciples of Helmont, being likewise present) with several Unlearned,
Unexperimented Pretenders thereto; who, not invited, but intruded themselves
impudently among us: But perceiving in a short space my self defiled by their
Heady, High-minded, Rude Boasting, Insolent, Preposterous Carriage, I strait
withdrew, and washed my hands of such Dirty Companions: And when ever after it
was my Chance to come into any of their Company singly, I sharply Reproved them
for their bitter Invectives against Learning. When a Pragmatical Stickler not
long ago did speak in Contempt of Learning, asserting, That a man might be a
sufficient Chemist, without the Languages; I replied, That the same Person
would be far better, had he been qualified with Literature as he ought. So much
Respect have I for some Professors of Physic, though great Oppugners of true
Chemistry, yet otherwise very well endowed, That did they not abuse the Gift of
Tongues, to maintain the Idleness of their Hands, that pernicious course of
Bleeding, colliquating uncorrected Purgatives; did they not defend too
obstinately (against all demonstrative Conviction) fruitless, feculent, dull,
nastie Medicaments, Blisterings, Issues, Cuppings, and Scarifications, etc. And
did not man's Life stand in Competition with these Tenants, I should Honor,
Reverence, and Admire them above others. But as they have ordered the Matter, I
may in Verity affirm, That it had been happier that they had never known how to
have worded it so well, unless they had been more skilful to have worked better
for the Preservation and Cure of Mankind; for so far as I can understand, their
knowledge of words, which ought to be an Introduction to the right
understanding of things, is become a Remora, a Pull-back to themselves, that
they cannot make an effectual progress in what is most necessarily Scientifick
in Physic, and withal, not a little scandalous to others, who have harbored
but mean Conceits of Verbal Notions, seeing so few salutary Actions proceeding
therefrom.

I confess I am not a little ashamed, when I hear of, and am twitted with the
great abuses in Chemistry, committed by some of those, who have been thought
stout defenders of the same. When I am told of an illiterate, impudent fellow,
a very shame to the Art, that is in fee with Midwifes, Nurses, Busy, prating,
wandering women, that cry him up for a brave Doctor, who cannot, as the Proverb
is, say Boh to a Goose; being neither truly acquainted with the Theory or
Practick, has only got a fabric of fair beautiful Furnaces, which speaks
more for him, ten to one, than he can for the Art, or himself. When, I say,
this is objected to me, as undeniable, I cannot but break forth into
indignation, that such a Divine Science should be thus polluted, by every
profane Idiot. When a sad Relation comes to my ear, at length confirmed without
further doubt, that an upstart Chemist, taking upon him to be a Champion of
Hermes, and writing a copious Tract for the defense of this way, (containing
much Truth) should take into his hand a Patient, a Gentleman of Quality,
enjoying his Health at that time (according to his Friends testimony, better
than he had a long space before) should sequester him into a by-corner, mure
him up in a Quacks House, separate him from his entire Friends, should for
prevention of the Gout, without the least Tincture (as some knowing Physicians
affirm) of the Venereal Lues, salivate him, (or, as that Gang has found a new
Term, Nod him) to the one and twentieth day with Mercurius Dulcis, often
repeated, (a Medicine unworthy to be used by a freeborn Son of Art, if he knew
better) and that against his own Judgment, led, as he pretends, by the
Importunity of his Patient into this course: that he should after the
exhibition of prepared Pearl (whether Galenical or Chemical they best know)
prescribe a Diet-Drink on the 17th day, and then afterward slop him with syrrup
of Violets, Rose Water, and Milk, distilled with spotted Lungwort, Coltsfoot,
Sage, Wood-sorrell, Plantain, Succory, (O Brave Chemist! I am persuaded he will
write ere long for the Galenists) and then in the Conclusion to suffer this
distressed Gentleman, dying on the 24th day, to be concealed 9. days after his
death, from his dear Brothers, (without admission of other advice) who at
length inquiring of his Physician for his Corpse, was denied by him the
discovery thereof; and having at length with much ado found it out, summoned
the Physician and others together, that the Body (pretended to be embalmed, but
otherwise manifest upon the inspection) might fairly be opened for their own
satisfaction, and the acquittance of those that were about him: which
reasonable desire was denied by the Physician, and afterward prevented by him;
That this supposed Chemist should (to excuse this foul Business,) afterward
impeach an Honest laborious Chemist (who had given Physic to this person the
aforesaid Pseudo-Chymist his Patient two years before, and not since) that he
had a hand in this Gentleman's Death. Whereas I heard it attested by one of
Credit, that there was a grateful acknowledgement of the Patient at that time
both by word and deed, that he had received very great Benefit by the foresaid
falsely accused Physician. When, I say such an ugly Story comes to my ear,
often repeated to me as one concerned, by persons of Credit, confirmed by the
Brothers of this Gentleman deceased, men of Integrity and Good Report, who had
most of what I deliver here from the Pseudo Chemists own Mouth; when being
upbraided, I am made sensible how this Base filthy Action (not to be excused by
any, unless one of a superlative Impudence) reflects upon the Chemical
Profession, and the Honest Able Professors of this Illustrious Art, to the
diminution of its repute among, those that have not altogether a clear
understanding in these things, I cannot conceive otherwise, but some evil
Spirit of Darkness is changed into an Angel of Light, and and is become on a
sudden a Galeno-Chymist, a Pseudo-Chymist, a mere Logo-Chymist, and a Plano
Chemist, on purpose to bring an infamy upon Truth, to delude the world, and to
frustrate it of that happiness it might enjoy by Pious, Honest, Modest,
Learned, or Lovers of Learning truly expert laborious Spagyrists. But enough of
this: I shall leave this Antesignanus of Confusion and Deformity, with some of
his Accomplices, to be further examined by Justice, that there may be a full
discussion of this foul oblique Business.

I shall return once more to the Galenists, at whose doors most of these grand
Mischiefs in Physic may justly be laid. It Is through their Idleness, Pride,
Covetousness, Negligence, Ignorance, Egregious Insufficiency in their Art, that
such disguised Stentors in Chemistry, such scandalous Persons, Omnium horarum
homunciones, Nebulones, viles Scurrae, Idiotae, Fungi merum pocus; such as will
sell a man's life, rush into this Divine Art, and prostitute their Souls for
Gain!

I say, the Dogmatists are exceeding Culpable herein, that might in due time
have prevented most of these Iatrical Calamities; for had they followed their
Function as they ought, Heartily, Conscientiously, and Laboriously, these
things had never been. Notwithstanding all this, they still persevere in their
indirect way, as obstinate as any Jew; whereas if they would (laying aside
their present secular Interest) be so ingenuous to submit to Chemical Truth,
and that no farther than I, with some others, are able to demonstrate visibly
the certainty thereof. These Meteors in Chemistry, these inflated Bubbles would
come to Nothing.

But instead of this Candor and Ingenuity, they still stand upon the
justification of their Mortiferous Principles; for that end, one of that
Fraternity, Mr. N. H. has divulged a Sophistical Treatise, for Vindication and
Assertion of Galenical Opinions. Some little cursory View I chanced to have of
it, enough to satisfy me what this Juggler and his Assistants aim at. In his
Epistle, I took Notice how he importunes his Grace to promote the speedy
enacting of Convenient Laws, whereby Illegal Practisers may be restrained and
punished. I wish with all my soul that this Mr. N. H. might have his request:
supposed he and his Fellows might likewise be forced to undergo a Chemical
Trial, that their foul D^osse in Physic might be discovered, and their
Cutthroat Bleeding in the Small Pox, and other Malignant Fevers, to the Loss
of the Life of some Heroes, might be made apparent; then I am certain They, as
illegal Practisers, would be the first that the Law would lay hold on to
restrain and punish, according to their Demerits.

To conclude, had leisure been granted me to have strictly perused Mr. N. H.
his Garrulous Tract, (contrived by one of his Sophistical wily Brethren, lying
couched in time of the Pest, and garnished with many polite, trimm words, and
backed by specious Authority of Writers, but mis-applyed, mis-interpreted,
nihil ad Rhombum, nothing pertinent to the main thing, which every Honest Able
Physician is bound to take in hand, i. e. to cure Man as he ought.) I should,
perhaps, have given some answer to his egregious Folly; but it is enough that I
have challenged this (...) in Galeno-proclosis, to make it appear that he is
grossly Ignorant in the Fundamental Cure of any Malignant Fever. And once more
I propose to him this undeniably equal determination of our Controversies by
Fact, that he would vouchsafe to meet me in any Hospital, with competent
Arbitratours agreed upon by us both; and according as they shall Judge of our
Actions, so let them proclaim us to the World. If he deny to accept of this, I
am resolved to publish him, no other than a mere sounding piece of Vacuity.

FINIS.
Books Sold by Nathaniel Crouch, at the Rose and Crown in Exchange Alley, near
Lombard Street.
THE Complete Bone-setter Enlarged, being the Method of Curing Bones,
Dislocated Joints, and Ruptures, commonly called Broken Bellies: To which is
added, The
Perfect Oculist, Mirror of Health, Judgment of Urines.
Treating of the Pestilence, and all other Diseases, by Robert Turner Med.

The History of the Life and Actions of St. Athanasius, together with the Rise,
Growth, and Downfall of the Arrian Heresy. Collected from Primitive Writers,
by N. B. P. C.

Euclids Elements, the whole Fifteen Books, Compendiously demonstrated by Isaac
Barrow, in Octavo.

An Exposition, with useful Observations, upon the Prophecy of Ezekiel,
delivered at several Lectures in London, by William Greenhill.

The Knowledge of Christ indispensably required of all men that would be saved;
or demonstrative Proofs from Scripture, that Crucified Jesus is the Christ,
wherein the Types, Prophesies, Genealogies, Miracles, Humiliation, Exaltation,
and Meditorial Office of Christ are opened and applied, in sundry Sermons on
Acts 2. 36. by John Davenport of Newhaven in New England.

The Mystery of the Marriage Song, and mutual spiritual Embraces between Christ
and his Spouse: Opened in an Exposition, with Practical Notes and Observations
on the whole Forty fifth Psalm, by William Troughton Minister of the Gospel,
with an Epistle Commendatory, by Joseph Caryl.

A Treatise of the Person of Christ, and therein a discourse about the
knowledge, 1. Of God, who, and what a one he is. 2. Of the Son of God, who, and
what a one he is. 3. Of the first Promise of Christ, and first Publication of
the Mystery of him. 4. Of the Times and Years of the first Fathers. 5. Of the
Account of Years from the Creation to the Flood, and from both to the first
coming of Christ, and probably to his second Coming. 6 Of Election.

The Abrogation of the Jewish Sabbath, or Sabbath of the Seventh day of the
Week, by William Aspinwall.

An Improvement of the Sea, upon the Nine Nautical Verses of the 107th Psalm,
discovering the great and many Hazards Mariners meet with in tempestuous Seas,
and their Deliverances. Together with a full description of many various
Objects they behold on Sea and Land, viz. All sorts of Fish, Fowl, Beasts wild
and tame; all sorts of Trees, Fruits, Peoples, Cities, Towns and Countries. By
Daniel Pell.

FINIS.

