A DISCOVRSE OF THE FORBEARANCE OR THE PENALTIES Which a Due REFORMATION
REQUIRES.

BY H. THORNDIKE, One of the Prebends of Westminster Church.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for James Collins, at the King's Head in
Westminster Hall, 1670.

THE PREFACE.
ARistotle and Experience teaches us, that no Positive Law can provide for all
the Cases, that may arise upon the Terms of it. Religion indeed, in General, is
a Moral Virtue; But the true Religion, that brings Salvation, is a Positive
Constitution of Gods Grace, requiring the Condition of Christianity, to
qualify for the Promise of life everlasting. But upon several Terms,
heretofore, under the Law of Nature and Moses, and now, under the Christian
Faith. The Church of Christ, in all Ages, has been constrained, to provide new
Decrees, and seek new Laws, for the quenching of new Heresies and Schisms. They
that ever hoped to do that, by an Act of Comprehension, which the Act of
Uniformity has not done, would have proved themselves deceitful Workers; They
would have made many Breaches, by stopping of One. That which I am able to
propound, I confess, is rather possible than probable. For, were it so far
advanced, as to be inacted for a Law of the Kingdom; I should never believe,
that it would take effect; unless the Faith and the Laws of the Catholic
Church might be received, to give Bounds to all emergent Disputes. No more then
I can believe, that the Reformation will ever prevail, after one Breach in
Germany, after another since in the United Provinces, and these last here
amongst us; unless we unite our selves upon the same Principle. Whether I have
said enough to prove it well grounded, or not, I must refer that to Judgment.
But he that excuses me not, in such an innocent Proposition as this; How would
he have Almighty God to excuse me, if, having attained this Resolution, I
should not declare the Consequence of it, in our present Case? Especially,
considering the Duty, which the Law of the Land, justly and necessarily imposes
upon all of my Order; to Reduce Recusants to Church. For, there are now two
sorts of Recusants: And those that are bound to reduce them, must do it upon
such Reasons, that by reducing the one sort, they drive not the other sort from
Church. Let them that have more skill then I show, how it can be done, without
employing my Principle. I, that am resolved, it can by no other means be done,
must declare my Resolution, though I were to suffer for it; Which, from a
Christian Kingdom, I cannot do. One thing I have adventured, upon my own Head;
Granting, that the Government of the Church was Regular, till after the sixth
General Council: And so, that the the Acts of the Church before that time, are
effects of it. But that is not to say, that the Corruption of the Church, which
we Protest against, and Reform, began not till that time. Religion began to be
corrupted earlier in some, and later in other Points. But this Corruption had
not the force of Law, till after that time: And especially, till the Usurpation
of the Sea of Rome. It is enough, that there is difference Visible, in any
Point, between that which was from the beginning, according to the Scriptures,
and that which was, when the Reformation was attempted. That which can be made
out hereof, will serve to cramp both sorts of Recusants: That which cannot,
should be no cause of difference. He that reduces the sense of the Scripture,
within the Faith and the Laws of the whole Church, warrants the Penalties of
Recusants. Let the Laws do their Office, and make it a Disgrace, to be out of
the Church; And then we may expect, to see the Blessing of God, upon his own
Ordinance. But without restoring Discipline, without Canons and Laws to restore
it, without the Office of the Synods, in providing those Canons, let no man
think, that temporal Penalties will serve to do the business. For, though there
can be no reason sufficient, for violating the Unity of the Church; yet, if the
dissatisfaction that has caused it, resolve into a defect of the Laws, it can
no more be ended, without redressing the Laws, then a Disease can be cured,
without taking away the Cause of it.

Errata.
Page 10. lin. 13. r. Prophesies sent, since the Ground o Salvation was
declared, is -- p. 17. l. 5. the Church, read this Church, p. 20. l. 27. the
Article of this Church, r. the Law of this Kingdom, p. 22. l. 3. Christians, r.
Christian, p. 25. l. 27. decay, r. decays, p. 36. l. 1. or to be believed to,
r. to be believed or to, p. 42. l. 29. Laws, r. Law. p. 63. l. 20. the best, r.
their best, p. 99. l. 28. Churches, r. Church, p. 109. l. 28. making, r. and
making, p. 113. l. 5. Christ's, r. Christ, p. 121. l. 12. which, r. of whom, p.
125. l. 21. to come to, r. come to, p. 151. l. 17. Idolaters, r. Idolatry, p,
153. l. 18. Invocations, r. Invocation, p. 263. l. 16. these, r. those.

OF THE FORBEARANCE OR PENALTIES Which a due Reformation requires.
CHAP. I. The Case, in which forbearance is pretended for weak Consciences.
IT is a long time, that the forbearance due to tender Consciences has been
alleged, for the means to restore Unity in this Church. And certainly, were
the Case stated, in which S. Paul prescribed it to the Church of Rome, that so
it might be drawn into Consequence in our Case; the Scripture must needs
produce that which would be of advantage for Peace, without prejudice to Truth.
But, when the bare Phrase of Scripture is tossed up and down, in the discourse
of them that care not to understand, either the Reason upon which it is
grounded, or the Effect to which it sorteth; no marvel to see the decay of
Religion proceed from the abuse of the Scripture. We need not the Heresies of
the Primitive Times; even the abominable Villainies of the Gnostics; to tell
us, what irreligious pretenses may be set forth in Scripture Phrase. Our own
Fanatics would furnish sport enough, with the fooleries which they pretend, as
from Gods Spirit, because they can deliver their nonsense in the Phrase of
Scripture; could such irreligious madness move any thing, but the compassion
and lamentation of Christians. It is enough for my purpose, that, unless the
Precept of the Apostle be limited to that consequence, which the reason of the
Case will produce; the two-edged Sword of the holy Scripture may prove an edge
tool, to cut their shins with, who take upon them, and have not the skill to
handle it. For the state of the Case, to which S. Paul speaks, I will say no
more at present, but this; That he prescribes only to the Church of Rome, at
that time, when the care was, not to loose the Jews, by winning the Gentiles to
be Christians. There could then be no question, of establishing a National
Church, by the Law of a Kingdom; which Church, and which Kingdom shall; by that
Law, reform that which it protests to have been decayed, and depraved, in the
Faith and Laws of the then present Church. We have a Reformation established by
certain Laws of the Kingdom; which, all men know, how great a part of the
Kingdom declineth, because the Sea of Rome disclaimeth it. And therefore the
question is, what that Law should be, that may oblige Recusants, to the
Reformation which we profess. For, division in Religion can never so deprave
men's senses, as to punish them for refusing that, which they are not obliged to
embrace. And yet, who would have the Kingdom to establish that Reformation,
which they would not have it inact by competent Penalties? Now, such is our
Case, that, since the afflictions, which this Nation has been visited with,
have revived the humor of departing into Conventicles, Independents and
Fanatics decline Communion with this Church, as much as Recusants; And, if we
will speak properly, to be understood according to the Laws, we must
distinguish them, by the addition of Popish or Fanatic Recusants. Whereupon
the question arises, what Penalties are competent to the one and to the other;
whether the same or diverse. For, as there can be no Law, if there can be no
Penalties to enact it with; So, there can be no Penalty, unless the Legislative
Power be Judge of the Cause, why the Parties decline the Law; and may secure
them in Conscience, that they ought not to decline it. Can any Christian Power
punish the disobeying of that Law, concerning which, it cannot secure the
Consciences of them that obey? But there is a further difficulty in our Case,
in regard of the Presbyterians; Who, whatsoever they may do, or may have done,
since the time of disorder, have always pretended to the service of the Church;
so far from disclaiming Communion with it. For, grant they do usurp the liberty
of Conventicles, to hold their People at the more distance, from being reduced
to Law; their pretense is not, to be obnoxious to the Law, for violating it,
but to make the Law obnoxious to themselves, by reforming it. Suppose we them
then, comprehended with the Clergy, (whose Authority is included in the present
Laws) in the same Privilege, of ministering in and to the Church; Our Case is
not stated, till we consider that, which all Pulpits ring of, that no Religion
stands to be the Religion of the Kingdom. The Case was like to come to this,
when Cromwell first usurped. For then it began to appear, that this would be
the fruit of his Course, in maintaining all Parties in the Religions, which the
licentiousness of the War had allowed them to exercise. The Laws having
recovered possession, and the dispute remaining, by what Penalties to be
exercised, whether any or none, whether those that are, or what others; I need
not say, that there is any Profession of Atheism; (which could never be
professed among the very Gentiles) This I say, that, whosoever favors it, will
necessarily shelter himself under the Law, professing that which it
maintains. And therefore, that it is to come into the state of our Case, in
which, Forbearance is demanded for tender Consciences; how it is to be limited;
That those who have No Religion, if any such should be, may not have the
Benefit of it. So, the question now in hand is of the same consequence, as if
it were demanded, upon what terms the Reformation of the Church is to be
stated. For whatsoever comes to debate, the question will always be, how far we
ought to depart from the Church of Rome. The other part of the question; What
Penalties the Reformation, duly stated, may or is to be inacted with; will
depend upon this, for the greater part of it. For, what can render the subject
of this Kingdom liable to Penalty, for not obeying the Law which our
Reformation is established with; but, that he is first bound in conscience to
embrace the Reformation, and to do the duty of a Christian according to it?
Only what Penalties, and how great, or or how grievous, it is to be, or may be
inacted with; This will further require the reason, which makes it the duty of
Christian States, to join in Reforming the Church.

CHAP. II. That a private Person may be obliged to declare in it.
THis is that which obliges a private person, as I am, to declare his Opinion,
when so great a concernment of his Conscience is at stake. For, who could ever
think the Reformation could stand, were not the Clergy obliged, as the Law
obliges them, every one in his place, to reduce Recusants to the Church? Or,
how should they either do this, or stand obliged to do it, if the Reason, upon
which the Reformation, and the Law by which it is stated proceeds, enable them
not to convince them, that they are bound in Conscience to embrace it? These
hundred years has the dispute been on foot. Very nigh so long it is, since the
Bull of Pius V. acquitted the Subjects of the Kingdom, of their Allegiance to Q.
Elizabeth. The Government being then jealous of that Party; those that had
appeared before in the Troubles of Francford, to challenge a share in the
Government of the Church, thought this the time to set their pretensions on
foot. It is to be seen, by Camdens Annals, that, when the Recusants first
forbore coming to Church, about that time, did this Party begin to be known, by
the name of Puritans. Ever since that time, did these embers lie raked up in
deceitful ashes, still most appearing, when the State was most solicitous; till
at length the Party appeared in Arms against the late King; and, prevailing in
those Arms, became divided into those several Parties, which remain united in
the Plea for tender Consciences. For, the Laws recovering by His Majesty's
return, the same embers, which it was then thought fit to rake up again, in the
same deceitful ashes, upon the first rub, have flamed out again, to demand Law,
to justify that which they usurp, by way of Fact, against Law; Both pleading,
that their Consciences cannot be subject to any Law in the Case; and that
Christianity has not wherewith to clear up those doubts, against which if they
proceed, they are damned. It must therefore needs be said, that the present
Laws have been justified, beyond all contradiction, that may pretend, any thing
to be commanded by the Laws, which Gods Law forbids; So that, the demand of new
Laws seems to be a demand, that the Conclusion be contradictory to that which
is inferred by the Premises. And, what should Weakness demand of Reason, that
is to give Law, but inconsequence? Only, let not inconsequence in Reason draw
mischief upon us in effect. We have hitherto answered the demand; Where was
your Church before Luther? That it was where it is; The same Church Reformed,
which was decayed and depraved before. Neither can we ever answer otherwise,
till we renounce our Creed, and deny that One Holy Catholic Church, which, we
must be saved by believing, and by continuing in the Unity of it. Depart we
once from these terms of our Reformation, what shall we plead, with a good
Conscience, to bring Recusants to Church? It will be said, that the Pope is
Antichrist, and the Church of Rome all I Idolaters: that there can be no
question, of abandoning Idolatry and Antichrist. But is there no question of
holding the true Faith, of continuing a true Church, parting with Idolatry and
Antichrist? Were Papists Idolaters, and the Pope Antichrist a thousand times,
the Reason, and the Rule of Reforming the Church would be where it is; and will
require, that it be so Reformed, as to continue a Member of one Catholic
Church, as it was unreformed; saving the Unity, which cannot be held, without
the consent of those that will not be reformed. Not that I grant the pretense
of Idolatry and Antichrist; Or, that I intend to dispute against it at present,
being a question too large to be voided, by so short a Discourse as this. But
that, to ground our Reformation, and Salvation, upon the interpretation of
Prophesies, is a thing without the compass of Reason to do; And also a
departure from that Plea, upon which our Reformation is hitherto stated. Having
therefore placed my business, and spent my time, in considering the
Controversies, which the Reformation has occasioned; Because the Disputes we
have among our selves concern nothing, but how far we are to depart from the
Church of Rome; I thought my self tied in Conscience, to publish the Resolution
I had attained, both under the danger, that might be expected, from the late
Usurpation, and at His Majesty's happy return. So that, the publishing of my
Opinion in the Case at this time in dispute, is but a declaration of the
consequences, that have ensued, because a palliative cure has not served the
turn. If they that break Unity in the Church, have liberty to plead for their
their Conventicles, which they Vsurp against Law; why should not my Opinion
expect a favorable Audience? Protesting before God, that, how advantageous
soever I think it, to the Salvation of Souls, yet I do not desire that it
should take place, but by the free Act of this Church and Kingdom.

CHAP. III. That the Rule of Reformation is the Catholic Church.
IN the first place, therefore, I hold my self bound in Conscience, upon this
occasion, freely to declare to my Superiors; That there is no Power in this
Church and Kingdom, to reform it self in matter of Religion, but only by that
Form, and to that Form, which may appear to have been held by the whole
Primitive Church, before the Corruption came in, which we pretend to Reform.
And the reason hereof is unanswerable; being immediately grounded upon the
Article of our Creed, whereby we profess to believe one Catholic and
Apostolic Church. For, if there be such a thing in the world, then must there
be one Catholic Faith, the Profession whereof is the condition of Communion
with it; And one and the same Laws, the violating whereof is the forfeiture of
the same. And here I crave leave, to call all Canons, all Customs of the
Church, whether concerning the Rites of Gods Service, or other Observations;
whether delivered in writing, or received by silent Use and Practice; by one
and the same general name, of Laws of the Church; Only, that I may be the
better understood. Being therefore well assured, that the Church cannot be
Catholic, but it needs must be Visible; Because it cannot be Catholic, till
it may be Visibly distinguished, from Heretic and Schismatic both; I must
also infer, that it can never be Visible, till it become Catholic. That is the
only way, to justify that which has been always pretended; that this Church
is the same, that it was before Luthers time. For, as the Church had never been
Catholic, had it been confined to one Nation, as the Synagogue was; So I do
believe, that it had never been called Catholic, had there not been Heresies
and Schisms, before it was so called. It had been One Church of all Nations, by
virtue of the Conversion of the Gentiles. When Heresies sprung up, as Tares
among the Corn, then was it called Catholic, for distinctions sake. It was
visible, that the true Faith was spread all over; Heresies and Schisms
prevailed but here and there, where they were raised. So, if an Heretic or
Schismatic were asked the way to the Catholic Church, he durst not have
showed the way to his own, says S. Austin. Nor is it a question to be asked a
Christian, why the true Church should be Catholic; The answer being so
obvious, that it was Aposiolick. Say why the Faith preached by the Apostles
prevailed, why the Communion settled by their Authority; (whereas Heresies and
Schisms were known but here and there) and you have said, why the True Church
was Catholic. We that profess the Reformation are agreed, that this provision
of Gods goodness is no Promise of God, against man's malice; That corruption may
become Catholic, for the present Age, though not from the Apostles. This is
the common ground of Reforming the Church; If the measure and bounds which it
limiteth were also common, all our divisions were at an end. Nor can any
private Spirit, expounding the Scripture without these bounds, derogate from
it. It is a sufficient prejudice, against any Interpretation of Scripture, that
it stands not with the Faith, and with the Laws of the Primitive Church. S.
Paul challenges the prophets at Corinth, to show themselves Spiritual men, by
submitting to his Orders; Having said, that the Spirits of the Prophets are
subject to the Prophets: and inferring, that all their Spirits are to be
subject to his, being an Apostle, 1 Cor. XIV. 32, 36, 37. The same is the Case
to the Worlds end; the promise of our Lord, Behold, I am with you to the worlds
end; being made to the Apostles, and to all that should be Christ's Disciples,
and learn of the Apostles, to do all that he has commanded, Mat. XXVIII. 19,
20. For, who can think he continues in the Doctrine of the Apostles, departing
from their Authority, in any thing subject to their Authority? Or what is not
subject to their Authority, excepting that which our Lord had commanded, before
he gave them their Authority? His own Commands being the condition of
Salvation; Their Authority, the means provided, to enable us to attain it, by
observing and learning his Commands. So, as it is Heresy, to depart from the
Faith which they preached; so is it Schism, to depart from the Authority which
they left in the Church, till the Worlds end. Were not the Catholic Church a
Warrant to particular Churches, they could not Reform themselves, without the
consent of the Whole. But, seeing abuses are and were Visible at the
Reformation, it is necessary to grant, that particular Churches (and secular
Powers, by whose Laws they subsist) may restore that which may appear to have
been decayed; But it is also necessary to say, that Reformation is the
Restoring of that which was, not the introducing of that which was not.

CHAP. IV. That the Church is no further Visible, then it is Catholic.
ANd thus shall the Church become Visible, according to the Will and Ordinance
of God; which, being in decay by the malice of man, though not Invisible, yet
must needs become hard to be seen, at least to the purpose of Gods goodness.
For, by the discourse premised it appears, why it pleased God to provide, that
the true Church should be Catholic. That is to say, that when it was so easy
to discern the True Church, from all that pretended, being indeed Heretics or
Schismatics; the simplest were left without excuse, if they made a wrong
choice. Which if it be true, how can it be in the Power of any Church, or of
the secular Powers that maintain it, being bound to continue a Member of the
whole Church, to introduce that for Reformation, which cannot appear to be
restored, but may seem to be innovated? Which, how should it be done, without
owning that ground of Reformation, which I have delivered; and by consequence,
those bounds, which the said ground infers? And I do very well believe, that
none of those, who decline Conformity with the Church, would have the Face to
deny this, had they to do with the now Missionaries of the Church of Rome. For
it would not serve their turn, in answer to them, to plead, that the Pope is
Antichrist, and the Papists Idolaters; having Reason to challenge, that God
has founded a Visible Church. It would be absolutely necessary to plead;
though the goodness of God has instituted a Visible Church, yet, that, by the
malice of man, it might be, and is become Invisible, for the difficulty of
finding Salvation by it; though absolutely Visible, because Salvation might
always be had in it. It is easy for him, that would answer them with a good
Conscience, for Truth and not for Victory, to maintain the Church to be
Visible, so far as the Faith and the Laws thereof continue Visible. But that,
so far as the Faith and Laws thereof may be disguised, from that which was from
the beginning, so far it may and is to be said, that the Church, which by Gods
Ordinance is and ought to be Visible, by humane disorder is become Invisible.
Which being said, it follows immediately, that, as all estates in the Church
are obliged, in their several qualities, to do their utmost, that the Church
may be Visible; (the Salvation of all Christians requiring them to Resort to
the Communion of the Church, which they believe to be Catholic) so, there is
no other way to make it Visible, but to restore the Faith and the Laws of the
Church, that from the beginning made it Visible. And therefore, no Christian
Church or State can have Power, to Reform the Church any otherwise, then, by
restoring that Faith, and those Laws, which the Church may appear to have had
from the beginning. It would be Sacrilege, and Usurpation upon the Faith,
which God has built his Church upon; and upon the Laws, which either the
Apostles have delivered to the Church, or enabled the Church to deliver to
posterity; to introduce any thing else for the Reformation of the Church. Which
seeing it must needs bind over the Church and Kingdom, to the wrath of God; as
either destructive, or at least prejudicial to the Salvation of the People;
must needs bind over him that has this opinion, to the same, if, upon so just
an occasion, he should forbear to publish and to plead it as he may, without
offense. And therefore, I take leave to blame all those, who declare, in behalf
of this Church, that it departs, and separateth it self from the Church of
Rome. For, seeing it has been granted, in and by this Church, ever since the
Reformation, that there is and always was Salvation to be had in the Church of
Rome, as a true Church, though corrupted; I am very confident, that no Church
can separate from the Church of Rome, but they must make themselves thereby
Schismatics before God; though, before the Church, they cannot be condemned
for such, because the Church of Rome, (the Authority whereof must needs be
ingredient into the Sentence) cannot oblige any Body, to stand to the
Authority, which it so abuses. For, if God have tied all Churches to Communion
with all Churches, how should it not be Schism, to profess Separation from a
true Church? And it is every whit as easy to say, that we intend only to
Reform our selves: and that the Separation has come to pass, by the rigor of
the Church of Rome, Excommunicating those that Reform themselves without her
leave.

CHAP. V. How far this Rule is owned by this Church.
HEre, it will perhaps be demanded, whether or no, the Law of this Land make
this the Rule of the Reformation which we Profess. And my Answer is, that in
effect, and by consequence it does. For, by maintaining the three Creeds to be
part of the Service, wherewith we glorify God, by Professing the Catholic
Faith; and by maintaining the four Councils, whereby, both the Faith, and the
then Canons of the whole Church are established; it does in effect maintain the
Primitive Church, not only till that time, but beyond it. For, seeing it is
evident, that the fifth and sixth Councils are but appendances of the Fourth;
(tending only to maintain and enforce the decree of it) how can it be doubted,
that the Article of this Church; receiving all Councils, that have decreed
according to the Word of God; receives and inacteth those, which tend only to
enforce the Fourth; which it owneth, for decreeing that Faith which the Word of
God teaches? Besides the prayers for the prosperity of the Catholic Church;
whereby we prove our selves no Schismatics, to the Sea of Rome, when we repay
the Curses of it with our prayers. Besides that Injunction of Edward the VI,
which obliges all Preachers, to expound the Scripture, according to the
Consent of the Ancient Fathers. Which, as no man can say, why it should not be
in force; So, had it been in force, we need not have come to the question now
on foot. And indeed, it is, in effect, that which I demand. For it will be
found, that the Consent of the Fathers is not to be had, but in the common
Faith, and in those Laws, which the whole Church either enjoined, or allowed
particular Churches. So that, to expound the Scriptures according to the
Consent of the Fathers, is to expound them within those bounds; and to trouble
the heads of Christian people with nothing, that is without the same; As if
their Salvation could be concerned, all being safe within those bounds. Here I
must take notice, that the reason, why the Church Catholic, is to be held, may
be miskenned; if it be extended to all that is called Christians, and not
limited to that, which, maintaining the Faith, violateth not the Unity of the
Primitive Church. If the profession of Christ and Christianity were enough, to
make men members of the Catholic Church, why should not Socinians and
Anabaptists belong to the Church dispersed over the face of the whole earth?
Again, the Eastern Christians, that are thought to come from Nestorius; the
Southern Christians under Prester John, that maintain the memory of Dioscorus,
and condemn the fourth Council of Chalcedon, cannot be admitted to be
Catholics, by any man that owneth the four Councils. But, in regard it
appears not, that they own the Heresies of Nestorius and Eutyches, though
they own the memory of their persons; and in regard there is cause enough to
presume, that they would, with all their hearts, be reunited to the Church, did
not the Sea of Rome refuse all terms of Reunion, that include not the infinite
power which it challenges; they cannot be included within the Catholic Church
without reserving a liberty to exclude them, whenever, in point of Faith, it
shall appear, that they own the Heresies of Nestorius and Eutyches. As for the
Canons of the Church, it was never neceslary, to the maintenance of Communion,
that the same Customs should be held in all parts of the Church; It was only
necessary, that several Customs should be held by the same Authority. Which is
to say; That the same Authority instituted several Customs, which they thought
to be for the best, in several times, and in several places. For so, they might
be changed by the same Authority, and yet Unity remain. Whereas, questioning
the Authority; by questioning whether the Acts of it be agreeable to Gods Law
or not; how should Unity be maintained? This is the Reason of that which I said
even now; that the Fathers do not agree in any thing, but in the Faith and the
Laws of the Church. For it is manifest, that they could not have agreed in the
Laws of the Church, if any had excepted against any thing, used in any part of
the Church, as if Gods Law had been infringed by it. Seeing therefore it is
manifest, that there are certain Canons and Customs, known to have been the
Canons and Customs of the Primitive Church, owned by this Church; it follows
of necessity, that nothing can be disowned by this Church, as contrary to Gods
Law, which holds by the Primitive Church. So, it is not my intent to say,
that the Canons and Customs of the Primitive Church ought to be in force: And,
that there is no other means to restore Unity in the Church. But, that nothing
can cause a Breach in the Church, that has Authority from the Primitive
Church. And that nothing can have Authority in the present Church, that
infringeth the Authority of the Primitive Church; as if Gods Law were destroyed
by any Act of it. Further, there are two points in the Title and Cause of the
late War; Episcopacy and Sacrilege; wherein, the Cause of the Crown has been
so united to the Cause, both of this and of the Catholic Church, that I may
well say, that, to disowne the same Cause in other points, alike Primitive and
Catholic, would be to deny the Conclusion admitting the Premises; Or to keep
diverse weights and measures in the same Budget. The Plea for Episcopacy, and
for Consecrate Goods, has made out so much evidence for it self, that it has
helped to recover the Laws of the Kingdom. And shall not the Laws of the
Kingdom, so recovered, maintain the same Plea, in all other things? For, the
Visible Unity of the Catholic Church, as it never subsisted, but in the
consent of Bishops, so was it never maintained, but out of Consecrate Goods.

CHAP. VI. What Errors have followed, because it is not so expressly.
BUt I do freely acknowledge, that, though this Church has many Obligations,
to own this Principle, for their Rule; yet, it is not formally and expressly
inacted, by those Laws of the Land, whereby Religion, and the Rights of the
Church are established. For I do further claim, that the want of inacting and
enforcing it, and driving it home to the true Consequence, in every point, is
the Cause and Sourse, not only of the disorders, which diverse pitiful plasters
have been tendered to cure; But of all disorders, imperfections, and decays of
Religion, which have succeeded upon the Reformation; having been made without
limiting those bounds. And, that the present disorders in Religion are the
Symptoms of a common disease, which all men are offended with, but cannot be
cured, without recourse to the Unity of the Catholic Church, and the terms of
it; wherein that health of Christianity consists, which all division
impeacheth. I do therefore freely acknowledge, that I find two positions, to be
the sourse of all those Excentrical Opinions in Religion, which caused that
Confusion, upon the issue of the War, that helped to make way for his Majesty's
happy Return. The first is, that there is no Condition for the Covenant of
Grace; That there is no Contract in it, but a mere Promise. The second is, that
there is no such thing as a Visible Church, instituted by God; But, that men
are first Children of God by Faith, then members of a Church, of free choice.
Of these Positions, the one necessarily depends upon the other. For, the
Faith of the whole Church from the beginning requires Baptism to Salvation. And
therefore, includes it in that Faith, which alone justifies. And by
consequence requires, that justifying Faith cannot be understood, without that
Profession of Faith, which a man makes at his Baptism. And this will
necessarily infer a Church, therefore Visible, because Catholic. For it is
agreed upon by the whole Church, that Baptism in Heresy or Schism, (That is,
when a man gives up himself to the Communion of Heretics or Schismatics, by
receiving Baptism from them) though it may be true Baptism, and not to be
repeated, being given in the form of the Church; yet is not available to
Salvation; making him accessory to Heresy or Schism, that is so Baptized. Now,
it is not my intent to say, that these two Positions were expressly and formally
professed, by Companies distinguishing themselves from others, by
Ecclesiastical Communion in the Profession; Which is the true signification of
an Heresy, in the eye of the Church. But the Positions I maintain to be
Heresies, in so much that, if there were such Companies, they must of necessity
be taken for Heresies, in the account of the Church. And my Reason is clear.
For it is acknowledged by the whole Church, clearly delivered by our Lord in
the Gospel, that the taking up of his Cross is a necessary condition to
Salvation. Now, since our Lord gave Commission to his Apostles, to Baptize all
Nations in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; it is evident, that ever
since, we take up Christ's Cross, when we undertake at our Baptism, to lay down
our lives, rather then deny the Faith of Christ, or transgress his
Commandments. And since this Promise is not available, unless it be deposited
with the true Church; it cannot be available, to him that continues not in the
true Church, that may exact the Promise deposited with it. If any man ask, whom
I can charge with these Positions, which, I cannot show to have been Professed
by Visible Bodies; I discharge my self upon a number of Pamphlets, of the time
of that Confusion, which was called the Blessed Reformation; wherein free Grace
was made to be the pardon of sin before it is done; Justification to be the
Revelation of predestination to Glory, and no sin to be seen in Gods Elect. One
particularly; which I have cause to believe was printed by Cromwells own
Appointment; because it answered a Petition of Welsh Fanatics, which charged
him to depart from his Principles; answers expressly, that the Principle of
Salvation is neither Faith nor good Works, but Christ living in the heart, and
abiding there, whatever Principles the Godly may change. And for the Church,
have we not seen our Independent Congregations, or, do we not see them in
New England, refuse Baptism to all, that will not take the Covenant, which they
appoint themselves to take; and own no other Churches, but such Congregations?
I suppose, no man in his right senses will imagine, that there can be a
Catholic Church, consisting in the Communion of all such Congregations: Or,
that there can be any Faith, to give Law to their Communion; who have the Law
in their own hand, to be to morrow Socinians if they please; Or any other Sect,
that allows Independent Congregations. For, the Socinians may seem to have the
Eldership of New England, for Independent Congregations. On the other side, do
we not see the Leviathan, that Monster of a Christian, openly Profess, that he
is bound to renounce Christ with his mouth, if his Sovereign command; Though
still bound to believe in him at the heart? So utterly persuaded, that there is
no such thing as a Church, of Gods Ordinance; But only by the Act of Sovereign
Powers, within the respective Dominions of each of them; That he had rather
renounce his Baptism, (and so the Benefit of it) then own any Creed, or any
Catholic Church.

CHAP. VII. That it is for the Interest of the Reformation, as much as of the Sea of Rome.
HAving therefore observed (upon due consideration, as I hope) that all the
Errors, which have had Vogue during our late Confusions, are reducible to
these two Positions, destructive to two Articles of our Creed, that Profess one
Catholic Church, and one Baptism for remission of Sins; I am still led by the
same Consideration, to think my self tied in Conscience, freely to Profess;
that, where these two Positions clearly renounced, and the sense of those two
Articles duly established, and received by all Parties, that own the same
Creed, the Reunion of the whole Church, must needs follow. For, the Power of
the whole Church being so stated, as to presuppose the whole condition of our
Salvation: and to extend only, to the determining of those things, which may
promote edification in it, without endangering the Unity of the Church; why
should not I think, that there is found, by the consent of the whole Church
from the beginning, so clear a resolution of all that is disputed, to maintain
Separation, concerning the Condition of the Covenant of Grace, that it cannot
be refused by the Parties, owning the common Faith? There is great cause to
fear, that, notwithstanding the mischiefs we feel by our own Divisions, some
would think it still a greater mischief, that the Whole Church should be
reunited; Though upon just Terms, and such, as must needs reunite our selves.
But, if the Christian Religion oblige us to do men good against their will; He
that demands nothing, but the Right Understanding of two Articles in the Creed,
to the Re-uniting of Christendom, intends the greatest Charity, that those who
love Division can receive. Whether his demand be sufficient to do his Work or
no; he must leave it to the World to judge. For, it is to be acknowledged,
that, when the Condition of our Salvation is settled, and all that causes
Division upon the Account of it; there remains, besides, very many Disputes,
concerning Public Orders, as well in the Offices of the Church, as in the
public Government of it; and the Interest, as well of the State as of the
Church, in the same. But, let not therefore those that love not Unity pretend
Difficulty. For, they shall find such Principles laid, to the determining of
them all, in the Visible Laws of that one Church, which cannot continue One,
but by owning the same; that the due bounds of Reformation cannot escape them,
that will not decline the thread and the grain of these grounds. And yet, in all
this, no man declines the Scripture for the only Rule of Faith. But, he that
refuses the Sea of Rome for Judge in the Sense of it; which is all that remains
in question; may well crave leave to decline the Judgment of any private
Spirit, not confined within the bounds, which the Visible consent of the Church
determines. Not as if the sense of the Scripture were not more and more to be
discovered; which is indeed discovered every day more and more. But, because
the true sense of it will always fall within the compass of that, which the
Church has always received. I am very well persuaded, that the Sea of Rome
will never hear of any Terms of Reconcilement, so long as they see our
Divisions increase. But I am very well assured, that the Divisions of the
Reformation can never be Reunited, so as to prevent the like for the future;
but upon that Ground, which, being received, will serve to reunite the Whole
Church. There can never be One Visible Faith, One Visible Church, upon any
other terms. There can be no such sin as Heresy to violate Faith, as Schism to
violate Charity, upon other terms. And therefore, it is out of Love to the
Reformation, that I insist upon such a Principle, as may serve to reunite us
with the Church of Rome; Being well assured, that we can never be well
reunited with our selves otherwise, That, not only the Reformation, but the
Common Christianity must needs be lost, in the Divisions, which will never have
an end otherwise. And he that can take measure, how much of it is lost in
thirty years time, since these Troubles began; even among them that enclose the
Name of Saints, and the Godly to themselves; will easily believe, that it has
not long to live, unless Division be put to death. And yet the vain hopes of
the Parties, ever since the Division, may make it appear, that both have Reason
enough to be reconciled. They of the Sea of Rome have long expected; a hundred
and fifty years or thereabouts; that those Christian Princes, that have looked
upon the Reformation as dangerous to the Peace of their Dominions, should give
them assistance, to reduce all that Protest against the abuses thereof, by
force of Arms, to submit to their Will. Which would be, to make that Will the
Law of Religion, as well to themselves, as to those that should be so reduced.
But the experience of so much time evidences, that the Powers of Christendom
have something else to do, then to employ the forces of their Dominions to that
purpose: And that, if it prove for the Interest of some of them, at some times,
it will prove not to be for the Interest of others, at the same or other times.
Of which Interest, as they are indeed, and in Conscience, to give account to
God, and not to the Sea of Rome; so, that they will ever make the Sea of Rome
the Judge of them, what appearance can there be? So, it is time of the day for
them to hearken to Reason, whether they regard God, and Religion, or Interest,
and themselves. But is not our Case the same? Or, are not we transported as
far, with the conceit that they are limbs of Antichrist and Idolaters, as they
are, with the conceit, that we are Heretics and Schismatics? Have we not as
long expected, when the Kings would join to strip the Whore of Babylon naked,
as they, when they would join to reduce the Heretics by force? And is it not
yet time of the day for us; whatsoever opinion, those that employ their time,
in searching the meaning of a Prophecy, may have; at least to make it no
Principle of our Profession, nor to maintain Separation upon the Account of it?
Knowing, that were the Pope twenty times Antichrist, and the Papists Idolaters,
he can never be Antichrist, nor they Idolaters, for any thing, that the consent
of the Catholic Church either allows, or injoyneth. So, that, whatever
become of any Prophecy in Gods Word, and the sense of it, the bounds of
Reformation will be the very same; And he will be no less an Heretic or a
Schismatic, that makes the Pope Antichrist, or the Papists Idolaters, for
doing or believing any thing, which the Church from the beginning has enjoined
or allowed, to be believed or to be done, then if he pretended no Prophecy to
prove it. If ever any people had cause to reflect upon the sad consequences of
this conceit, we are they, that shall find no probable reason, to impute the
mischiefs of the late Usurpation to, but the hope of fulfilling this sense of
this Prophecy. It is a vain thing to think, that a man, who believed no God,
could Act a counterfeited Religion throughout, as we have seen the Usurper do.
He that could hope to be saved, either without Faith, or without good Works, by
having Christ alive at the Heart, why should not he think, that all the foul
way he went through was the Service of God, having intended to strip the Whore
of Babylon by his means? Neither Manichaeus, nor Mahomet, nor any Enthusiast
can be barred, of the like aim with this, if once he make his private Spirit
parallel to the Scripture. For, that which the same Authority last dictates, as
in Wills and Testaments, must take place. I say not that this is the Case of
those, that interpret this Prophecy of the Sea of Rome. I believe they follow
their Reason, in expounding Scripture by Scripture. But if their Reason be not
the Reason of Religion, the Reason of that Christianity which we all have
Interest in, the private Spirit that follows it may take all for Gods Service,
though never so wicked, that is done in prosecution of it. In the mean time,
Division increasing among us as it does, I think, I gratify our selves, and
not the Sea of Rome, in proposing that truth, which reconciles the Interest of
Reformation, to the Interest of Unity in the Church. For in Civil War; as
Schism is nothing but a Civil War in the Church; that Party that divides is the
likely to Ruin. And though the first hopes of the Sea of Rome have proved
addle, yet if our Divisions prevail, they must needs have fresh hopes to
prevail, by our Divisions.

CHAP. VIII. That it is the Duty of this Kingdom, and of all Christian
Soveraignties.
ANd therefore, I must freely profess my opinion, without any manner of hope,
that ever the Sea of Rome will abate any thing of their rigor; Though the
Reformation should content themselves with these terms. For, I find, by the
proceeding of former times, that it is their Maxim, to stand to that which
they have once done: And to mark those Popes to posterity, that have abated any
thing, from the rigor of their Predecessors. For, being arrived at this
Greatness, by this Rigor and obstinacy in all Pretenses, right or wrong, they
will always think themselves obliged, in Reason of State, not to yield so much
as the Cup in the Eucharist; Though the Council of Trent leave it in the Popes
Power to grant it. Because, granting, that any thing is and has been amiss;
who shall secure them, that nothing more shall be questioned, then is indeed
amiss; when we see no point in Religion remain unquestioned, some time or some
where? Not considering, all the While, that this Rigor is the cause of
Division, and Division the cause of these Questions: And that, the Reason of
Reformation being owned on both sides, there is a Ground restored, for
Confidence, that they who accept of it will stand to those Bounds which it
setleth. But, if the Sea of Rome can have no Power against the Whole Church;
Much less can any other Church, or any part of the Church, or any Secular Power
that protecteth it, make that to be Reformation, which the Whole Church
allows not; Or secure their Subjects Consciences of the Salvation they seek,
in exercising their Christianity according to their Laws, but by confining the
Reformation which they maintain, within those Bounds, which the Faith and the
Laws of the Whole Church either require or allow. Now, how can the Interest of
the Nation be secured, without due ground, for hope of Gods blessing upon that
which shall be done? How can there be ground to expect Gods blessing, till it
appear, how all Subjects of this Kingdom shall stand discharged at the day of
Judgment, following that form which the Kingdom inacteth, rather then that
which the Sea of Rome requires? For, there are other Christian Princes and
Soveraignties, that command their Subjects to obey the Sea of Rome; whose
Subjects must as well stand discharged to God, upon the same Plea, as the
Subjects of Reformed Princes and States. And how shall the Consciences of them
that make Laws be secured, if they cannot secure the Consciences of them for
whom they are made? Or how can Gods blessing be expected, if this security
cannot be evidenced? It is not yet time to ask, how, those that allow not the
Reformation, upon these Terms, should be punished; Because there are that
pretend, that no punishment can be inflicted, for disobeying any Law of the
Kingdom, by which Religion is settled. But it is time to say, that they make it
a very ridiculous thing, for the Legislative Power to make Laws for the
Kingdom, which they can inact by no Penalty. And how shall this difficulty be
voided, but by demanding nothing, but that which Christianity will require of
all Christians? That no Christian Kingdom can have Power, to introduce any
thing, for Reformation in the Church, but that which the Consent of the Whole
Church either injoyneth, or allows. Not as if the least Tittle of Scripture
were not enough, to warrant, that which it injoyneth to be the Reformation of
the Church. But, whereas the sense of the Scripture is that which remains
questionable, not the Authority of it; that nothing can be the true sense of
the Scripture, which the Consent of the Whole Church contradicts. And
therefore, that, though there be an appearance of truth in such a sense, yet,
it is not for a Christian Kingdom to inact it for Law, till it be duly
debated. And, that being done, it will infallibly appear in all, which in most
things appears already; that the Consent of the Whole Church cannot
contradict the true sense of the Scripture; And that it is nothing else, but
not knowing the one or the other, that makes it seem otherwise. If the
Scripture it self is not, nor can be owned for Gods Word, but by the Consent of
Gods people, from the beginning, attesting, the Motives of Faith related in the
Scripture to have been infallibly done, by submitting to the Faith which they
enforce; Then must the same Consent be of force, to assure common reason, that
the Faith, and the Laws, wherein the whole Church agrees, came from the
Authority settled by God, not by any Consent of all Christians, to fall from
that which they Profess. And therefore, though a Kingdom may force the Subjects
thereof, to call that Reformation, which they inact; yet they can never make it
Reformation, in that sense, which the Salvation of Christians requires, if it
be not within these bounds. It may be called Reformation, to signify a New
form, but it can never be Reformation, to signify that form which should be,
unless it signify the form that has been in Gods Church. For, that being One
and the same, from the first to the second Coming of Christ, can authorize no
other form, then that which it may appear to have had from the beginning.

CHAP. IX. That it cannot be done without the Synods of this Church.
ANd therefore, it being granted on both sides, that the Sovereign Power of
Christian Kingdoms and States, proceeding duly, obliges the Subjects, to
submit to the Reformation of the Church; and cannot exact Legal Penalties of
them which refuse, upon any other Terms; I do except, in the second place, that
it ought to proceed in all Reformation, by and upon the Authority of this
Church; That is, of the Synods. For what does the whole Church agree in so
Visibly, as in this; That the Authority which God has instituted in his Church
should give Laws to his Church? And how can a Christian Kingdom promise
themselves Gods blessing, upon such Acts, as they have no Power nor Right from
God to do? For, granting there is such a thing as a Catholic Church; it is not
possible, that any Christian Kingdom, which must be a part of it, should have
Power to inact any thing Prejudicial, much less destructive to the Whole; to
the Visible Being, which is, the Visible Communion of it. And therefore, the
Faith and the Laws of the whole being the Condition, under which the parts are
to communicate; no Christian Kingdom can have Power from God, to give New Laws
in Religion, to the Subjects thereof, which the Church of the Kingdom
warranteth not, to be according to the Laws of the whole Church. If any thing
may appear to have been in force, in the Primitive Church, and, by the abuse of
succeeding times, to have become void; I do not deny, that the Secular Power
may Reform the Church, by restoring it, though the Church should refuse their
Consent to it. The reason is, because the Church would be without help, if
there were no Lawful way to restore the decays of it; Which, we agree, have
come to pass; without the consent of them that are chargeable for the decay of
it. Now, the Faith and the Laws of the Catholic Church are the Birthright of
all Christians; Purchased, by undertaking to Profess one Catholic Church, at
their Baptism: And Christian Powers are to protect their Christian Subjects in
their Birthright. And, the Authority of the present Church is not seen, in the
Faith and the Laws of the Whole Church. For, it is mere matter of Fact, what
they are; The evidence whereof (praeexistent to the Authority of the present
Church) cannot be understood to require, or to presuppose it. And therefore,
the Authority of the Church cannot be violated, by reducing the Faith and the
Laws of the Primitive Church into force. Nevertheless, in regard, that which is
decayed can seldom be restored, without determining new Bounds, which the
present state of the Church requires; It is manifestly the Office of the
Church, to determine the same: Nor can it be done by Christian Powers of this
World, without assuming to themselves that Authority, in which they are to
maintain the Church. For, though Sovereign Power has Sovereign Right, in all
Causes and over all Persons Ecclesiastical, yet is it capable of no
Ecclesiastical Power, or Right; But is to maintain those that have it, by the
Laws of the Church, in the use of it. If any thing were done at the
Reformation, setting aside the Synods of this Church; which, I am here neither
to deny, nor to acknowledge; it must be justified upon this Account, that they
refused the Authority of the Whole Church, in authorizing the Reformation of
this Church. If any thing now may appear to be demanded upon the same Account;
let the Authority of the Synods be passed by, for their punishment, if they
hinder the Reformation of the Church, by refusing it. But that cannot appear,
till it may appear; First, that the matter demanded ought to have the force of
Law in the Church; having been of force, and since decayed, by the injury of
time, or corruption of men: Secondly, that it is of such weight, that Religion
is like to have more advantage, by restoring it, then the Unity of the Church
shall suffer, by violating the Regular Authority of the Church. What thanks I
shall have of my LL. the Bishops for this, I know not; For I deny, that they
themselves can have any Authority in the Case, that shall not be confined
within the same bounds. But it is not possible, for him that is the most
jealous of the Rights of the Crown, in Church Matters, to say, what danger
there can be to this Crown, in securing the Conscience of the Kingdom, by the
Authority of the Church. For, the acknowledging of those Bounds, which the
Authority of the Church is confined to, as well in respect of Sovereign Power,
in the Dominions whereof it subsisteth, as of the rest of the Church; leaves
no Plea for it to Vsurp, either upon the Crown, or upon the Christian Subjects
of it. And all this I claim by S. Paul, where he commands all Christians, to
abide in that state in which they are called to be Christians. Which cannot
otherwise oblige all Clergymen, to be Subjects, upon the same terms, as they
should be, if their Sovereigns were not Christians; but, that it must oblige
all Public Powers, to maintain the Clergy in the same Rights, which they had,
and must have had over Christian People, did not the Public Powers profess the
Faith. And therefore, though I do claim, that the Synods of the two Provinces,
and their Decrees, ought to be confined within the bounds so often said; yet I do
demand of All, (especially of those that may have made the Oath of Canonical
Obedience, to their Bishops) how they can profess to own Episcopacy;
especially according to their Oath; that pass over this Right of the Synods.
For, that which is done without, or against their Consent, shall make them no
Bishops; That must receive Law from their Clergy, if the Secular Power make
their sense of the Scripture Law to the Kingdom. Whereas I, that take the
liberty to prove all this, without their Authority, can clearly Profess, that I
think it a point not subject to Canonical Authority, which I plead for; And
that otherwise, I should think it inconsistent with the Oath of Canonical
Obedience which I have made.

CHAP. X. The Case in which S. Paul forbears the Weak.
COme we now to that Scripture of S. Paul to the Romans, upon which, the whole
Plea for tender Consciences is grounded, and to state the Case, in which he
prescribes. And see, what forbearance it will enforce in our Case. S. Paul,
having showed the Romans; who, before they were converted to be Christians, had
been, some Jews, some Gentiles; that Righteousness and Salvation comes only by
Faith, or by Christianity, and not by the Law, or by Judaism also; proceeds
in the fourteenth Chapter of that Epistle, to Order them, to forbear one
another; The Jews not to censure the Gentiles, for not observing the Law; The
Gentiles not to scorn the Jews; if, not understanding the freedom of
Christians, they lived as Jews, in all or in some things. It is manifest, who
are the strong and who are the weak, with S. Paul, in that he is one of the
strong, where he says, XV. 1. We that are strong ought to bear the infirmities
of the weak. They that understand, how Righteousness and Salvation comes only
by Faith; notwithstanding that it was to be had under the Law, as well as before
the Law; these are the strong. One man believes he may eat any thing; though
forbidden by the Law; but he that is weak, and sees nothing else on the Table
but that which the Law forbids, eats herbs. One man makes difference of a day
above a day, according to the Law, another esteems every day alike, XIV. 2, 5.
These two instances are put for all indifferent things, prescribed or forbidden
by the Law. He that understood the purpose of God in giving the Law, which he
intended to make void, or rather to fulfill, in due time; So that Salvation came
not by it, when it was to be had under it; He is the strong with S. Paul. He
that understood it not, and yet continued a Christian, that he might come to
understand it, the weak. Let no man marvel, that the Romans, who took S. Paul
for an Apostle, should not understand that which S. Paul had proved, by this
whole Epistle. For he proves it by the Mystical sense of the Old Testament;
Which, they who had submitted to the Faith could not own, nevertheless, until
they understood the reason, why God gave the Law, with an intent to bring in
the Gospel by it. Let no man think, that they were not fit to be baptized, (for
such were they all to whom S. Paul writes) that understood not this, belonging
to the Foundation of Faith. Baptism makes all Disciples of Christ, and
therefore finds them not so. It is necessary, that he who is baptized should
undertake all that, which, he shall come to learn, that Christ has taught. It
is not necessary that he should know what it is; knowing that Salvation is not
to be had, without doing all that, whatsoever it is, which, it shall appear,
that Christ has taught.

CHAP. XI. Compared with his Orders at Corinth, and elsewhere.
BUt, seeing S. Paul forbids the Corinthians to scandalize the weak, in
eating meats that had been sacrificed to Idols; we must not state the Case of
the Romans, without considering, how the Case of the Corinthians may concern
it. Here S. Paul distinguishes scholastically; that such meats might be eaten,
either as Gods Creatures, materially, or formally, as meats sacrificed to
Idols; which Idolaters feasted upon, after their Sacrifices, in honor of their
Idols; as we see by his words, 1 Cor. X. 7. Nor be ye Idolaters, as some of
them were; As it is written; The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up
to play. And Dan. V. 4. They drunk wine, and praised the Gods of gold and
silver, of brass, of iron, of wood and of stone. S. Paul then resolves, that
Christians may eat meats sacrificed to Idols, as Gods creatures; and that they
cannot be polluted, by being sacrificed to Idols, which are nothing. But that,
when there may be occasion for Christians to think, that a Christian eats them
as Idolaters did; (as eating them in an Idol-Temple, or, being invited home by
an Idolater) in such Cases, it was necessary to forbear, for Christian
Charities sake; least a weak Christian, seeing a strong Christian eat them,
should think he eat them as Idolaters did; and, doing so himself, should fall
into misprision of Idolatry, 1 Cor. VIII. 7, 10. X. 27, 28. And by this example
we may gather, by the way, what S. Paul means, Romans XIV. 15, 20. Destroy not
him with thy meat, for whom Christ dyed. For meat destroy not the work of God.
He means, that the danger was no less, (if the Gentiles should not forbear the
Jews, but despise their weakness, that could not see themselves free of the
Law) then, that they should fall into dislike with the Faith, and return to the
Jews Religion again. So, the danger at Corinth was Idolatry; at Rome Apostasy.
S. Paul then, forbids the Corinthians, to make inquiry for conscience sake, 1
Cor. X. 25. whether that which is sold in the shambles had been sacrificed to
an Idol or not. But Daniel did make inquiry for conscience sake, when he
resolved, not to be polluted with the Kings meat, Dan. I. 5, 8. taking all of
it to be dedicated to Idols, in the first fruits of it. For this, being the
custom of the Heathen, made all their meats suspicious, as dedicated to their
Idols. Tobit is not Canonical Scripture; But it is as Old as the Old Testament
in Greek. The Author of it relates, for his commendation, that he kept himself
from eating the bread of the Gentiles, when his Brethren and kindred did eat of
it. Tobit I. 10, 11, 12. because he remembered God with all his heart. This
signifies, that the more Religious did observe it, though not commanded by the
Law. It seems they were only forbidden by the Law to go to the feasts which
they, the Gentiles, made of their Sacrifices; lest they should worship their
Gods, as they that invited them did, Exodus XXXIII. 15. and as they did with the
Madianites, Numb. XXV. 2. The forbearing of Idolaters meat, was a hedge to the
Law, that they might be the further off from transgressing it; But brought in
under the Prophets, and observed by the more Religious. And the Jews have
reason, when they tell us, that, Nehemiah was dispensed with, for drinking the
wine of the Gentiles, because he was Cup Bearer to the King. Whereby it
appears, that S. Paul leaves it to the Charity of every Christian, to use his
freedom so sparingly, as not to offend a weak Christian. But, under the Law, it
became a Rule, that all the strong should forbear that, which might possibly
offend the weak. And therefore, when the Apostles at Jerusalem enjoin those
that were converted of Gentiles, to abstain from meats sacrificed to Idols;
they do forbid them to eat such meats, even materially: And command them to
make inquiry for conscience sake, as the Jews used to do, and as converted
Gentiles did in the Land of Promise. For the Ordinance of Acts XV. 23.
addresseth only to the Churches of Judaea, and to those, which Paul and
Barnabas, being sent from Antiochia, had founded in Cilicia, and the parts
adjacent, Acts XIII. 2, 3, 14 -- XIV. 26. XV. XIV. 4. The reason of this
difference is manifest, by the words of S. Paul, 1 Cor. XII. 2. Ye know ye were
Gentiles, carried after these dumb Idols, as ye were led. Whereas Paul and
Barnabas addressed first to the Jews, and founded Churches of them, for the
greatest part. So that, the hopes of winning the Jews remaining, the
dispensation was to take place. But the Church of Rome consisted of Gentiles,
as well as of Jews; whereas, in the Church of Corinth, there is no account at
all had of the Jews. And therefore, the forbearance required at Corinth is out
of fear of Idolatry; at Rome, of Apostasy.

CHAP. XII. The present Case of this time stated.
HAving thus stated the Case, in which S. Paul orders this forbearance, let
us state our Case, in which it is demanded, by consequence. But that cannot be
done, but out of the premises. We must suppose, the Church of England, a member
of the whole Church, desires to Reform it self, because the rest of the Church
will not join in the same work; But desires to continue a member of the whole
Church, and not to give any cause of interrupting Unity, by improving
Christianity. I know, some of them that demand Toleration do not allow any such
thing, as a Church of England, when they are understood. For, how should they
own any Right of Sovereign Powers, to give Law to the Church of their
Dominions, that allow them no Right, to punish the transgression of such Laws?
But the Case must be stated upon the Terms proposed, nevertheless, as to those
that acknowledge National Churches; Excepting for those that make this Plea,
when we see time. This only, I think, would be said, that the Church of England
is not now to be Reformed; but, having been Reformed, is now questioned, as if
the Reformation of it were not yet perfect; And therefore the boldness is
taken, by a private person of my condition, to give an Opinion, what is most
wanting in the Reformation of it. Because it cannot be said, what is unduely
demanded, until it may be said, what is due to be done. But it must be
remembered, that the demand is made in behalf of those, that had made a Schism
in the Church of England, by Ordaining or being Ordained Presbyters by
Presbyters, without and against the will of their Bishops. In behalf of those
it has been demanded, that their Ordinations may stand valid and good, and the
persons enabled, by the Law of the Land, to minister the Offices of their
Orders, and to be trusted with the Cure of Souls, by their Bishops. And not
only so, but it has been further demanded, that some of those Laws, by which
Religion is settled in the Kingdom, be repealed, for their sakes; That they may
have no pretense to scruple the Office of the Ministry. Not that it is now
said, (as for this hundred years it has been said) that the Laws which they
would have repealed are against Gods Law; And that therefore they cannot yield
them obedience. But that the Ministers, or People that will follow them, have a
doubt in Conscience, which they cannot be cleared of, that it is not Lawful for
them to yield them obedience; and that they cannot do it without sinning, and
incurring damnation, by doing against their Consciences. And this is also the
Case, in which, those that acknowledge no Church of England, no Right in
Christian Powers, to give Law to the Church within their own Dominions, do
demand liberty to separate from the Church, into their private Conventicles.
Protesting, that they cannot hold Communion with the Church settled by the Laws
of the Land; No not though Reformed to the content of those hitherto mentioned.
And pretending the same reason from S. Paul, that they should incur sin and
damnation, doing it in that doubt, which they cannot be cleared of.

CHAP. XIII. The Mistake which causes Weakness in our Case.
THe Case thus stated, I must, in the first place, ask both Parties, whether
they do think in their Consciences, that S. Paul had not showed the Jews at
Rome, that were become Christians, sufficient reason, to clear them of the
doubts they had, concerning their obligation to the Law of Moses; that they
were indeed free of it, and ought to be free of those doubts. I suppose they
will think it fit to say, that, though S. Paul enjoin them to forbear one
another, so long as they did not understand their freedom; yet, that they might
understand it, and were bound to understand it. For, is there any man so little
a Christian; now that the time of forbearance is past, that there is no more
hope to gain the Jews, by compliance, without making our selves Jews; as to
make a question of offending a Jew, by not abating the Profession of his
Christianity? The consequence whereof is all that I demand. If S. Paul would
have the Jews forborne, that the provocation, which they might meet with, might
not move them to dislike their Christianity; certainly he held them to be under
a light, which obliged them not to dislike it. Otherwise he should not have
done the work which he pretends to do by this Epistle; to show the Law to be
void, because Salvation comes only by Faith. And certainly, there can be
nothing more opprobrious to Christianity, then that which is pleaded, for
abatement in the present Laws; That the weak are not under a light, inabling
them to see those things to be lawful, which indeed, and to the strong, may be
lawful, and appear such. For how could this doubt be cleared, if a weak
Conscience should be pretended, when the question is, whether to turn Christian
or not? Is it possible, that there should be such a doubt in that point, that a
man, to whom the Reason why he ought to be a Christian is sufficiently
proposed, can be said to be under a light, that convinces him not? Which if it
be true, then is there nothing in Christianity, which there is not a sufficient
light, to convict that man of, to whose Office it belongs. Otherwise, it could
not being to his Office; not being able to discern the Obligation of it. It is
therefore a horrible reproach to Christianity, to say, that any doubting
Conscience is not under a light, sufficient to resolve it. Scruples of
Conscience there may be, which may eternally have recourse; and that no
disparagement to the Faith; Because the Faith provides a Resolution, that they
who have scruples in Conscience, are bound in Conscience to lay them aside; Nay
to act positively against them. But he that says, that, being a Christian, he
is not under a light sufficient to clear him, in any doubt of Conscience, says,
that the Faith obliges him to sin; Whereas it is not the Faith, but the want
of it, which, obliges not the erring Conscience to sin, but intangleth him so,
that he must sin, if the obligation of acting fall out before the error be
removed. Suppose the Jews convict by the Epistle to the Romans, that Salvation
comes only by Faith, and not by the Law also; And you suppose them under a
light, that, neither the Law, nor any Ordinance, then standing by virtue of the
Law, could oblige. But, suppose them in love with themselves, and with their
Ancestors, and to have such an Opinion of Salvation intailed upon them and
their issue, by the Law, as to think, that they could not have it by God that
gave the Law, if the Gentiles might have it as well as themselves; and they
might (very well, for consequence of Reason, though very ill, for their own
account) oversee the light they were under. Suppose we now, those that make
this Plea, not to believe one Catholic Church, and one Baptism for the
remission of sins; But had rather gratify the Socinians, and deny that any
Christian can be obliged, to any thing that appears not to his own Reason, out
of Canonical Scripture; Then imagine he should gratify the Papist, if he
should grant, that Catholic Communion always made the Catholic Church;
Suppose them not to believe, that the Faith which only saves includes Baptism
in the Catholic Church; And that this Church is not Reformed, unless it be
restored to the same form; I say supposing them possessed with such prejudices as
these, and marvel not, to see them eternally doubting, whether or no, it be
lawful for them, to obey the Laws, which this Church and Kingdom is able to
make. Nay, to see them break out into Schism, as all Parties now seem to do,
rather then obey them, when they shall be out of hope, to give their own Law to
the Kingdom; Never forecasting, how it may appear to continue a Church, when
they have given such Laws to it.

CHAP. XIV. That it is not Forbearance to allow their Orders.
I Suppose, they who make this Plea, will not grant, that they are in any
error so near the Foundation, as these which I name. Nor do I think, that
those Christian Jews at Rome, that doubted of transgressing the Law, when they
knew that Salvation comes only by Faith, did deny the Foundation of Faith. For,
as long as they lived in the Church, they were in the way to learn, and
understand, how both were true. Neither will I say, that any of those, who
desire Forbearance for the weak, are in any error destructive to the
Foundation of Faith, and the hope of Salvation, till they break out into
Conventicles. When that is done, I am thenceforth bound to charge them with all
the Error, which the Title of their Schism can signify. And therefore I charge
them with Hypocrisy, when they pretend to Forbearance because they are weak,
and yet break out into Conventieles. when they do so, then they can be counted
no more the weak among Christians, then those Jews which S. Paul will have to
be forborne, as the weak among Christians; supposing them to have renounced the
Faith afterward, rather then continue in the Church. And therefore, the Plea
of weak Consciences cannot be allowed those that engage in Conventicles. They
have cut themselves off from it, by leaving the Church; Let them return, and
then make the best of it. As to them, the Church is under a new Precept of S.
Paul, which says; A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second
admonition avoid. Knowing that such a one is out of the way, and sins, being
condemned by himself, Titus III. 10, 11. Because, says S. Hierom, after S.
Cyprian; Whereas other sinners are put out of the Church, by those that manage
the Keys of the Church; Heretics and Schismatics put themselves out of the
Church. Therefore Titus; that is, all Titus his flock; are to avoid them for
Excommunicate persons, who do Excommunicate themselves. As for those that
continue in the Church; though with a pretense of giving such Laws to the
Church, as no man knows how soon they may unchurch it; let them make their best
of it. But being grounded, at least upon a pretense of weakness, there can be
no question made, but some error must be granted, for the ground of this
weakness. Let themselves, at their leisure, assign what error they will
acknowledge, if they like not that which I have assigned. Only let them show
the world; that is, the Legislative Power of this Kingdom; what error it is,
that they have hitherto had, which being avoided for the future, all those
difficulties will cease, which, this Discourse pretends, cannot be met with,
but by bounding the Reformation within the Faith and the Laws of the Catholic
Church. In the mean time, let me go on to show, that those who were Ordained in
and for the late Schism, (composed by the Laws, at his Majesty's Return) by
Presbyters against their Bishops, cannot claim by virtue of it, to be owned for
Presbyters; Or, in the terms of the Ancient Church, to be received in their own
Orders. A thing which there can no question be made in, by any body that
understands, what the Church, or what a Schism signifies. And it is marvel,
how, they that would be thought to allow Episcopacy should question it. To
acknowledge the Authority of giving Orders in the Bishops, according to the
Laws, by which we both maintain this Church to be Reformed; and yet to allow
those that are made Presbyters by those Bishops, (not to Ordain others, but to
Minister the Office of their Order, according to the Reformation settled in this
Church) I say, to allow them to Ordain others, to Minister their Office by
other Laws, not only without, but against the consent of the Bishops, from whom
they have their Orders, is nothing else but to imagine, that God has given
Power to divide (that is, to destroy) his Church. For what is setting up Altar
against Altar, but to Usurp Power to Consecrate the Eucharist, and give the
Communion of it, in despite of them, whom they allow to have Power to do the
same; because they do it by Authority received from themselves? In all the
Records of the Church, there is but one Case expressly remembered, in which it
can be said to have been done. That fell out in Egypt, at the time when the
Church was divided, between the Arians and the Catholics. But before that
trouble, there was another division on foot, about receiving back into the
Church, those that had fellen from the Faith, in the persecution of Diocletian.
For Meletius, Bishop of Lycopolis, had proceeded to Ordain Bishops, in as many
Cities as he could, in opposition to those Bishops, that stuck to the Sea of
Alexandria. In these distractions, Coluthus, one of the XII Presbyters of
Alexandria, became the Head of a Party by himself; and to propagate his Party,
took upon him to make Ordinations of Presbyters, to Minister to those of his
Sect. Aerius is the man, that maintained the Authority of Bishops and
Presbyters to be all one. Yet do I not remember, that it is any where said,
that Aerius took upon him to Ordain Presbyters, being himself one. Much less,
that he was able to hold up a Sect, by such Ordinations. Audius was a
Presbyter, that became the Father of one of those Sects, that Epiphanius writes
against. But Epiphanius says expressly, that he had Bishops that embraced his
Opinion, and propagated his Sect by Ordination. Tertullian became the Father of
a Sect, which continued at Carthage, till S. Austines time; by whom they were
reduced to the Church. And truly it is to be presumed, that the Father of the
Sect did propagate it, by Ordinations made of his own Head. For what should he
stick at, that takes upon him to divide the Church, and to set up Altar against
Altar? But I have not found it said, that he did do it. Nor have I found, that
any Presbyter did ever undertake to do it, but Coluthus. At the Council of
Nicaea, to unite the Meletians to the Church, the Bishops Ordained by him were
allowed to succeed, when the present Bishops should dye; yet so, as to be then
lawfully Ordained, though they had been Schismatically Ordained before. But when
the Coluthians pretended the same privilege, Athanasius pleads for himself,
that all Coluthus his Ordinations were made void. Which is thought to have been
done, by that Synod at Alexandria, which Hosius was present at, with Commission
from Constantine. This is the only Example of Presbyters Ordained by a
Presbyter, without and against his Bishop. All the rest are mere conjectures,
which cannot stand, unless we suppose, the Canons of the Church were not
observed, because it is not recorded how they were observed. Whereas all reason
requires us to suppose, that they were observed, because they might be
observed; and because there followed no dissension, upon their not being
observed. Such Ordinations then, being mere nullities, as presumed to be done
by them, that never received Authority from the Church to Ordain; do further
induce Irregularity, by the Canons of the Church. And who can deny, that all
reason and Conscience requires it? For, who can believe his Creed, professing
one Catholic Church, and not think the Church more disobliged by Schism, then
by any other Crime, that renders a man incapable to be promoted to Orders?
Certainly, if Rebellion be the Crime, that is hardest to be reconciled to Civil
trust, then is Schism hardest to be reconciled to trust in the Church.
Nevertheless, because Unity is to be preferred before Discipline; and because
experience shows, that, when men are taken off from an engagement in division,
they prove the more trusty, the more weary they were of their engagement; it
has been often practiced by the Church, to receive, not only Schismatics, but
even Heretics also, (That is, such as had received Orders of those, that
parted from the Church, upon an error in Faith) in their respective Orders.
But always upon condition of renouncing the cause of their division; Whereupon
they were to receive the Blessing of the Church, by Prayer with Imposition of
Hands. The reason was, because neither is Baptism in Schism effectual to
Salvation, nor Ordination in Schism effectual to Grace, by the Ministry of any
Office in Schism. But, being renounced, there remains no Cause, why their
Ministry should not be effectual to their people; Their Baptism and their
Ministry to their own Salvation; supposing it sincerely renounced. Therefore
the Reason, why they who are Ordained by Presbyters cannot be received in their
respective Orders, is peremptory; Because, the Schism, consisting in Ordaining
against Authority, cannot be renounced, unless the Ordination be voided. For,
so long as the Ministry may be usurped, upon such Ordination, so long is the
Schism on foot. I do very well know, that the Ordinations of Arians were
allowed by S. Athanasius, in a Synod at Alexandria; who had made the Ordination
of Ischyras by Coluthus void. And I remember the high acclamation, which S.
Hierom applauds his Act with; That thereby, the world was snatched out of
Satan's jaws. But I read, that the Tertulliniasts were received into the Church;
not that they were received in their Orders. I find difficulty made by Foreign
Churches, of receiving the Donatists in their Orders; Notwithstanding the
complaints of the African Bishops, that, without them, they had not Clergy
enough to serve the Church. Hereby it is to be judged, how severe this Church
was, with them that had received Ordination by Presbyters. The Canon of the
whole Church makes all Irregular; Ordainers and Ordained. Because they had
concurred to bring back his Majesty; (Which was the restoring of the Laws, and
so of the Church) the forfeiture was wholly passed by, and nothing required of
Ordainers, more then of the Clergy; Which is an utter Oblivion of the attempt
made by those Ordinations. And is not that a very great degree of Forbearance
in our Case? S. Paul, when he injoyns Forbearance, does he enjoin, that those
who did not understand, how men were saved by Faith alone, that were saved
under the Law, should be promoted to Orders, indifferently with those that did
profess it? That were indeed something like that which has been demanded, that
Weakness should entitle to the Clergy; which orderly supposes strength. But
does he enjoin farther, that they should Minister without Orders? That,
continuing Laymen, they should commit the Sacrilege of Usurping to Celebrate
the Eucharist? That, if their Ordination be void, by the Law of the Land, there
should be a new Law made, to make their Ordination good and valid, which was
void when it was made? Then must he enjoin, that it be lawful for every Layman
to celebrate the Eucharist; Forasmuch as every Layman has as much to do, to
celebrate the Eucharist, as he whose Ordination is void. Surely S. Paul, that
commands Christians to be without offense to the Jews and Gentiles, as well as
to the Church, commands them also to be without offense to Papists. And will
not we have those, that would be enabled to consecrate the Eucharist, by such a
Law, to show us how to satisfy the Papists, that such Orders are good? At
least those, that by their sufferings have preserved Ordination by Bishops; Let
them at least be satisfied of the Validity of Ordination without Bishops. At
least, let no man impose upon them, that they cannot yield the Forbearance,
which S. Paul requires for tender Consciences, unless they receive the
Sacrament consecrated by Laymen; That is, by those, whose Ordination they
believe to be utterly void.

CHAP. XV. That the Orders of the Reformed Churches are not void, because these
are.
NOw I am to look an Objection in the face, which, at a distance seems to admit
of no Answer; but, if it be a little considered, will appear, to have neither
Reason nor Religion at the bottom of it. It is said, that hereby, we shall make
void the Ordinations of the Reformed Churches of France, and others Reformed
according to Calvin; And so, make them no Churches. Here we agree, that it was
necessary for the French, as well as for our selves, to Reform themselves; That
it was necessary for all to Reform themselves, unto the Form of the Primitive
Catholic Church, I say not we do agree; I say, that, till we do agree, there
remains no hope of Unity, because no Rule for Reformation, in the Church. But
to the Objection; Who has the Conscience to think, or the Face to say, that if
Ordinations made by Presbyters against their Bishops be void; Then, Ordinations
made by Presbyters, where they could not be had by Bishops, are void? For, that
is the difference of the Cases. It is manifest, that the Bishops of this
Church, when they Ordain Presbyters, Ordain them to Minister their Office,
according to the Laws; That is, under their Bishops. And can any man imagine,
that hereby, they give them Power to Ordain others to Minister their Office, by
what Laws they please themselves? And, had the French demanded of their
Bishops, to Ordain them Presbyters, that should Minister their Office,
according to the Reformation, does any man think they would have done it? So,
the necessity of Reforming, which we all agree in, made the Ordinations of the
Reformed Churches; The Pride and Presumption, which causes all Heresy and
Schism, usurping Authority never received, made the Ordinations of our
Presbyters. And shall they be as valid as those? All that can be questioned is,
how it may appear, that it was not of choice, but of necessity, that they
embraced that way, of settling and propagating their Reformation, which they
embraced. And for that, we have sufficient Presumption, from the Albigenses;
Who secretly Reforming themselves, under the Sea of Rome, did certainly do it,
by the Authority of Bishops, who propagated their Order by Ordinations. This
may be proved by other testimonies, if need be; But it is sufficient, that the
Case of the Bohemians is so well known. They, having resolved, exactly to
Reform themselves; and having chosen the Persons, whom they would have for
their Bishops; were at a stand, how to compass their succession from the
Apostles, by having them Ordained by Bishops. In this nonplus, they understood,
that there were in Austria, of the Albigenses, that kept secret Communion among
themselves, under their Bishops; notwithstanding that publicly, to avoid the
Laws, they went to Mass. To them they sent their Bishops elect, protesting
against their dissembling; but desiring Ordination for their Bishops, which
thus were propagated. And this may well seem to be the Reason, why, they that
Reformed in the Empire, according to Luther, (in the name of whom Melancthon
has offered, to be subject to their own Bishops, admitting the Reformation)
set up such a Form of Episcopacy, as they could, of themselves. For, they had
cause to think, that the Bohemians had not advantaged themselves enough, by
that Ordination, which they had been able to procure. For, it is to be noted,
that they, the Bohemians, had sent all over the World, to learn, how to get
such Ordination, as might authorize their Ministry, according to the
Reformation which they pretended. And are not we, hereupon, to presume, that
the French, by these degrees, finding a necessity of balking the Authority of
the Episcopacy, which they were under, did think themselves, thereupon, free,
to cast themselves into that Form, which they use? For, if it be said; That, by
this time, they had profited beyond their Predecessors, in discovering the
Whore of Babylon; that they found Episcopacy to be the Body of Antichrist, and
therefore renounced it; It will appear, by many Reasons, that this cannot serve
the turn. First, how can the common sense of men endure to believe, that the
Pope is Antichrist, by reason of that Greatness, which, it is certain and
evident, that he has attained, by Usurping the Rights of his inferior
Bishops? And yet, those inferior Bishops be the Body of Antichrist; by
suffering those Usurpations, which they cannot help? Secondly, it is manifest,
that they who should hold this Plea could not pretend, by virtue of their
Orders, received from the Bishops of this Church, to Ordain Presbyters; Unless
they would say, that they may have their Authority from Antichrist. This Plea,
therefore, must remain for the Independents; to authorize them, (that think
themselves in the State of Grace, before they are members of the Church) to
make their their Congregations Churches, and Usurp the Authority of Apostles,
in Ordaining their own Ministers. Lastly, it appears sufficiently, that very
many learned and religious persons, of those Churches, have not only approved
the Episcopacy here settled; But have wished the benefit of it, to themselves.
Whereby it is manifest, that those Churches cannot own this Reason; when
another, so far from it, is owned by their principal Members. I have another
Reason to allege, which weighs as much with me as all these; And, that is, the
Communion, which has always been used, between this Church, and the Reformed
Churches. For, should they hold Communion with us, and yet think our
Ordinations authorized by Antichrist, how could they expect to be believed, so
grossly contradicting themselves? And therefore, though I must not take upon me,
either to justify, or to condemn their Ordinations; Averring on one side, that
they are not according to Rule; Seeing on the other side, that they are owned
by my Superiors; yet I must acknowledge, that there are very great Reasons to
hope, and to presume, that God accepts of their Ordinations, though not made
according to Rule; In consideration of the necessity that drove them to it, and
of the Reformation, which they were used to propagate. Whereas, those that
Vsurp the Power of the Keys, and the Consecrating of the Eucharist, by virtue
of Ordinations made in despite of those Bishops, from whom they have all the
Authority, which they can challenge by their Orders; what pretense is there to
imagine, that there can be any such Crime as Schism, if this be not it? That
God should bless that, which is done by such gross Usurpation, as this is? And
when all this is said, it remains free for me to say, That there is no other
way to restore, and to preserve Unity within the Reformation, but by
establishing and maintaining Episcopacy, in that Authority, which it has
always had, for the determining of differences; Nor maintain that Authority,
but by confining it, within the Bounds, which the Faith and the Laws of the
whole Church do limit. As for the Fanatics, which make our Orders void,
because the Pope is Antichrist, and the Mass Idolatry, whence our Bishops
received, and where they exercised their Orders; I will only consider the Case
of the Donatists, forejudged by the whole Church. They pleaded, in point of
fact, that Caecilianus was Ordained by Apostates. A thing which the Church was
so clear in, that the African Bishops offered to give up their Sees, if it were
proved. But besides, in point of Right, had it been proved, and Caecilianus
owned by the Church, because it did not appear, or because they thought the
Canons ought to be dispensed with, for Unities sake; those that Ordained
Caecilianus having repented of their Apostasy; shall we imagine, that the
Church was lost, by owning those that had been Apostates, and their
Ordinations? The Donatists are branded for Heretics and Schismatics,
maintaining all the Laws of the Church, but that of Unity. And shall
Lay-Christians, presuming to authorize Lay-Christians, to consecrate the
Eucharist, and set up Churches, be esteemed less then Heretics and
Schismatics? Let those that pretend to Unity find that Forbearance, which a
favorable construction of their actions signifies. But Charity to the sound
obliges, to take the profession of Schismatics in the worst sense, which if
we do, the making of Independent Congregations Churches will be the denying of
One Catholic Church; and the making of them Heretics that do it.

CHAP. XVI. That changing the Laws for the Weak is not Forbearance.
BUt if it be a thing absurd in common sense, to allow them their Orders, much
more absurd will it be, to change the Ecclesiastical Laws of the Land for their
sakes; Which is nothing else, but to purchase their Ministry, at the price of
our Religion; which the Ecclesiastical Laws contain. Here, we must distinguish
two questions; For it may be lawful for Christian people, to live by those
Laws, which it was not lawful for Superiors, in Church and State, to make. A
thing evident to all that believe, that it was possible for our Ancestors,
before the Reformation, to be saved, under the abuses of the Church of Rome.
But our question is, whether or no, the Laws of Superiors enjoin that, which
Gods Law forbids Inferiors to do. Otherwise, it is pernicious to all
Government, that Inferiors should take upon them, to judge the Acts of
Superiors. But if the matter of the Law be within the Power that makes it, to
require an Exception for tender Consciences is to say, that there is no Power
in the World to give any Law to those tender Consciences. Was there ever any
Heresy, any Schism, any Religion pretending Christianity, that did not allege
Scripture for themselves? Did ever any man allege it, that would not be
thought, to be touched at the heart with it? What is there for a Christian to
doubt at, where the Exception of tender Consciences lies not? Or how shall we,
that agree against the Sea of Rome, but agree not in the terms and grounds of
Reformation, be tried, in the sense of the Scripture? Can any man imagine, that
S. Paul intended to destroy his own Authority, of giving Law to the Church,
which he exercised, when he ordered the Jews and Gentiles at Rome, to forbear
one another? Or is this Authority dead with the Apostles? What Church then can
there be alive, if there be no Authority deriyed from the Apostles, to give Law
to it? But the Authority is not questioned, so it provide for weak Consciences.
Episcopacy will be owned, if the Secular Power will force it, to take them for
their Presbyters, whose Ministry they cannot give account to God of; Being both
authorized and exercised by Laws made, without and against their Authority.
This, no Christianity can justify. Christianity maintains the Estates of the
World, in all the Right they had, when they became Christians; And cannot
justify it self to the World otherwise. How should the World receive it upon
other terms? But if the World stand upon the same terms, having received
Christianity, as before; then must Christianity, and the Church, continue in the
same Rights, which it had before the World received it. No exception to be
allowed, but as before; If it appear, that the Faith and Laws of the Primitive
Church be decayed. Not if it seem to private Spirits, that the Scripture is not
fulfilled. In the mean time, is it for the honor of the Religion we profess,
that Weakness, (which at the best is negative ignorance, in truth, perhaps,
wilful ignorance) should give Law to it? Is it reason, that they, who have
failed to destroy both Church and Kingdom, should give Law to both? As if a
Child should govern the House, because he will be framfold, and disquieted,
otherwise. Surely it is that, which the Emperor said to his Niece; Put as tibi
injuriam fieri nisi imperas? But is that the way to have Peace in Religion?
When Inferiors shall be made to tread upon the necks of their Superiors, they
will be so modest for the future, as to stay there. They will be content, to
have their Doctrine regulated by them, as the Law of the Kingdom requires. Or,
they will think fit, that the Bishops be content with their Revenues, and leave
them to Preach what they please. Surely, they that can carry the dispute of a
hundred years; wherein the Bishops had so visibly the better, that Club-law was
found requisite to get the advantage; will not lay down the Cudgels here. So,
they that agree, in conforming to the Laws, differing every day, in that which
the Law determines not, the Recusants on both sides may make hay in the heat of
our Contentions; and profit more by such a Law, then by the War which destroyed
this Church. But especially the Atheists, who have profited so well under these
Contentions, as to make that visible, which was but foreseen under the Usurper;
That no Religion would in time stand to be the Religion of the Kingdom; They,
having the Privilege of the Laws, and not liable to any Infamy, when the
differences maintained make Religion contemptible, shall have cause to thank
all that shall have done their work, by soliciting such Laws.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Opinion of Regeneration by Baptism.
ONe point I must not pass over in silence, which has been named for a point
to be changed; That all passages, seeming to determine the Opinion of Baptismal
Regeneration, be altered in the Liturgy and Rubricks of it. For, this point is
an instance, how easily, the substance of Faith, necessary to Salvation, may be
questioned, or abated, or renounced, by a Clause of such an Act. I grant it is
clearly S. Paul's Opinion, S. Peter's Opinion, our Lord Christ's Opinion, the
Opinion of Gods whole Church. Be it the Opinion of those, whose Opinion is our
Faith. But he that would have it no more then Opinion, must teach us a new
Faith. No Remission of Sins but by Baptism; Entering us into the Covenant of
Grace, which the Vow of Baptism inacteth. Entering us into the Church, into
which the Sacrament of Baptism introduces. Abate the Covenant, which the
Sacrament of Baptism inacteth, and how shall a Christian be regenerate? Abate
the mention of it in the Service, and where will be the Faith, which this
Church, with the Whole Church, hitherto professes? Show me any Christian, that
ever questioned it, till it was questioned, what was to be Reformed in the
Church, and let it be abated. Could Pelagius have questioned it, his Heresy
had not so easily been quelled. He that traveled all the Church, from Britain
to Jerusalem, had he found any Church, any received Doctor of any Church, that
durst maintain Salvation due by the Covenant of Grace, to any man that dies
unbaptized, he had made the Church more work then he did. No Baptism, no
Original sin; no Cure for Original sin but Baptism; no Salvation without the
Cure. They that think to confute Anabaptists, abating this point of Faith, no
marvel if they make Anabaptists; when they make men think, that the Church has
no better Reason to confute them with, then they will use. Some perhaps, that
are not so well taught as they should be, may think it unagreeable with
Christianity, that Salvation should depend upon a Bodily act, as the washing of
Baptism; and that in the Power, not of him that is Baptized, but of the Church,
or of him that is to minister in behalf of the Church. But S. Peter has
answered this Objection, by distinguishing two things in Baptism, 1 Pet. III.
21. the one, the washing of the Body, which saves not; The other, the Answer
that is made out of a good Conscience, to the Examination tendered him that is
Baptized; whether he will undertake Christianity or not; And this saves, if S.
Peter say true. And what account can any Christian give himself, to ground the
hope of his Salvation upon, but (...) Christianity; which the Gospel tendreth,
which Baptism inacteth? Or what can be necessary to Salvation, if the ground of
the hope thereof be not? This is that one ground, which overthrows both those
Heresies, in which, I said, all the erroneous Doctrines, of that Confusion
which we have seen, do resolve. The Profession, which we make at our Baptism,
is the Condition on our part, upon which, the Promise of the Covenant of Grace
becomes due on Gods part. The Profession so made, nothing can defeat the hope
of a Christian, but the transgressing of it; Being transgressed, nothing can
repair this hope, but the restoring of it. All Arts to disguise this Faith, all
over the Scripture, signify nothing, but the hope of Salvation, without living
the life of Christians. I will hope, whatsoever Fanatics or Atheists would
have, that there was never any intent to demand, so great an Apostasy from the
Faith to be inacted, by a Law of the Kingdom. I will hope much more, that, had
it been demanded, it would have been rejected, with that indignation, which so
great Apostasy deserves. But I am glad, and give God hearty thanks, that I
have lived to the day, when I may and do testify to my Country, and to the
Church of God in it, that he who should demand of them, to renounce this point,
must demand of them to unchurch themselves, and to be, for the future, that
which the Sea of Rome would have us to be.

CHAP. XVIII. Conference for Satisfaction is Forbearance.
BUt is there then no effect of S. Paul's precept, in our Case? Can we break the
Unity of the Church, without breading the Charity of Christians? Or can
particular Christians be tied to forbear one another, and Christian Powers not
be tied, to cause both to do the same? Here is indeed the Hinge, upon which the
truth turns; and resolves all questions, and clears all difficulties, which
must and will entangle the World in confusion, upon the account of
Christianity, till it be owned. Christian Powers may constrain their Subjects,
that profess Christianity, to be Christians; and punish them if they be not.
But they must protect them for their Subjects, though they be not. The reason
of this has not been declared, by the Reformation; though they have just cause
to complain, and do, as they have cause, complain of the Sea of Rome, for
authorizing capital Penalties upon Heretics. Under that name they comprize
also Schismatics; And Schismatics, in their language, (as also in the
language of all that claim the Authority of the Church) signifies all that
maintain Communion apart; though the Cause make the Crime before God. But if S.
Paul have Reason, when he commands every Christian to continue in the Estate in
which he was called to be a Christian, then can no man's Life or Estate become
forfeit, for not being a Christian; And much less, for not being Orthodox, but
an Heretic. If the Life or Estates of Subjects should Eschete to the
Sovereign, for not being Christians, that temporal Dominion of Sovereigns must
be founded upon the Grace they have to be Christians. All such Right S. Paul
disclaims, and discharges. But shall Sovereign Power, that is Christian, be
therefore disabled, to give Law to Subjects professing Christianity? That is
our Case; the whole Kingdom professing Christianity, though the Whole cannot so
properly be said to profess the Reformation. For, the Reformation settled by
Law, we see, is refused, as well by those that separate from it, for a
Reformation of their own, as by those that adhere to the Sea of Rome. Shall the
Sovereign then lose the Right, that all Christian Sovereigns have, of giving
Law to their Subjects, in point of Religion, because he is a Christian? Or
shall the Subject, by being a Christian, stand obliged to the Laws of his
Sovereign, commanding him to stand to the Christianity which he professes?
Suppose the Christianity commanded to be Visible, before Christian Powers
command it, and you enable their Laws to oblige their Subjects. Not supposing
it, you cannot say, how the Laws of Sovereign Powers should oblige Christian
Subjects; seeing the Papacy, as well as the Reformation, maintained by
Christian Sovereigns. For, by the same Reason, for which, the Subjects of those
Powers that maintain the Reformation are tied to their Laws; by the same
Reason, should the Subjects of those that maintain the Papacy be obliged to
obey the Laws, by which they maintain it. There can be no Reason for a
difference, if that which they maintain be not Visible, before the Law maintain
it. I suppose it will not be though a good Plea, at the day of Judgment, for a
Subject to say; that he was either Protestant or Papist, because his Sovereign
was so. Now, Christianity can be Visible, by no other means, but, because it is
the Visible Profession of the Visible Church. If it become Invisible, by
differences betwixt Parties, it must be in Sovereign Powers, to bring the
Parties to trial; Provided, that there be no trial, but by the Visible Church.
This is the Forbearance that may be extended by Pastors, and may be required by
the Sovereign, in our Case. For, the present dissension shows, that the
Reformation was well begun, indeed, but not perfected. Does not the World know,
that there was an Act in force, for nominating Commissaries, to Reform the
Ecclesiastical Laws of the Kingdom? I am not to say, why this Act took no
effect. I think I have said it, when I have observed the rise of the Puritan
Party, and the seeds of the late War, sowed in the beginning of Recusancy. But
I am to say, it could not have taken good effect, without taking in the
Principle which I maintain. What could be more just, and discreet, then to
appoint Commissaries, in equal number, of Bishops, Divines, Civil and Common
Lawyers? But what could have had force, but that which had been done, to
restore and maintain the Faith, and Laws of the Primitive Church? There are
very great Reasons, why, those that desire to serve the Church should be
satisfied, in all that this Exception will allow. There can be no Reason, why
more should be allowed. To bring them into dispute with their Pastors, is to
put the Authority of the Church to compromise. To compromise any Law of the
Kingdom, to dispute of Divines, upon this Principle, is no more, then to
oblige, either Popish or Fanatic Recusants, either to stand to the Result, or
to suffer Penalties competent to their disobedience; and the hazard which the
Public Peace runs, when the Peace of Religion is disturbed. If that which
has been pretended be all that is intended; That some small things are
scrupled; Let the Legislative Power be satisfied, that the preservation of
Religion, and of the Authority of the Church; in which the preservation of
Religion consists; is only sought. The Interest of the Parties, to give and
to receive mutual satisfaction, is so great, that if there can be ever hope of
Peace, by dispute, this is the time, and ours the Case, wherein to hope for it.

CHAP. XIX. Probability of recovering the Presbyterians.
FOr, I cannot have so hard an opinion of men, whose zeal, for the advancement
of Discipline in the Church, I have always esteemed; as to think them resolved,
to ruin the Common Christianity, without hope of doing their own business;
seeing this to be the unavoidable consequence, of holding up the difference on
foot; rather then taking up, with so much of their own Pretensions, as the
State of the Catholic Church will allow. Let them consider, in the first
place, the Recusancy of the Fanatics as well as those of the Church of Rome;
What hope their Principles can give them, either to make their Recusancy
punishable by the Law of the Land, or to reduce them, by convicting them of
that sense of the Scripture, which they only allow themselves to convict them
with? I set aside, for the present, those Prophesies of Daniel and the
Revelation, by which, they pretend the Pope to be Antichrist, and the Papists
Idolaters. For, I must argue in due place, that the Recusancy of the Papist
cannot be punishable by Law, upon this Account. But how will they, either
reduce the Recusancy of the Papist, by those punishments, which the Recusancy
of the Fanatics must suffer; or give the Kingdom, God, and the World, a Reason
for the why not? which the best of them is here challenged to undertake. Then,
let them consider the wantonness of these times, and the wits of them, that
think it good sport, to call in question the foundation of Christianity, upon
the belief of Original sin, by introducing the praeexistence of Souls; That
think it but sport, to make ready their studies in Divinity, for the Pulpit, by
Episcopius his Works; denying Original sin both name and thing, and making the
Faith of the Holy Trinity unnecessary to Salvation. Or rather by the Works of
the Socinians, collected and united together in Holland, on purpose to prepare
us, for the same Apostasy to Socinianism, which they are in so much danger of
there. Let them consider, what hope they have, to make the Universities good
Presbyterians, that have sowed the seeds of this danger in them, by the
dissatisfaction they had of their Doctrine, when they were in Possession there.
Then let them tell me, what we shall say to the Papists, to persuade them, to
come to Church; when as they shall say, that they cannot be secured, that their
Curate is no Socinian, or Origenist. For, the Arminian Congregations in Holland
having admitted the Socinians into their Communion; and the Canon of the Church
making all Socinians, in the eye of the Church, that Communicate with
Socinians; how shall they be secured against those, that take their Doctrine
from the Socinians; Or from them, who communicate with Socinians? Besides, let
them but remember the time, when they had the Ball at their Foot; an Ordinance
of Parliament for setting up their Presbyteries; And how much they gained upon
the People, (whom they had disordered out of all Ecclesiastical Government)
when they came to be at what they would be at. I think they will be at so great
despair, of reducing the World to their intent, (having nothing in the Law of
the Land to favor it) that they will think, that they have cause to thank God,
of a good opportunity, to bring them off from an engagement, in which they are
like to gain so little, by hazarding the common Christianity. As for the Clergy
of this Church, I suppose there is none of them so little a Christian, as to
repute it a loss to the Party, to see their Adversaries capable of that trust
in the Church, and those rewards of it, which they have suffered for
themselves. For, if the necessity of the Kingdom has required an Act of
Oblivion, much more must the necessity of Religion; which cannot be attained,
without a cordial conspiring, of those that are to manage it; enforce a mixture
of Interest. And that being considered, let any man tell me, how that can be
made, but by a Third, in which all are alike Interessed; That is, by owning the
Faith and the Laws of the Catholic Church, whereby the Papist is either
reduced, or left punishable as the Fanatic.

CHAP. XX. The Cure, by repairing the Revenue of the Church.
BUt all this is but a Cure for the Symptom. Should such a Conference take
effect, the Cause of the disease would remain entire. For, the Cause of our
Divisions is not these differences; which are too inconsiderable, to produce so
incomparable a mischief, as that of Schism. It rises, and is fomented, by those
Interests, which the imperfection of two Laws of Henry VIII. has created. So
that, the Reformation is no way obliged to answer for them; Only, if it refuse
not to mend them, now that time has discovered the mischiefs which they have
produced. I call them two Laws, not as if they were comprised in two Acts of
Parliament; but because they concern, one of them the indowment, the other, the
Rights of the Church. We all know, that, when the Monasteries were given to the
Crown, the indowment of those Churches, which had been impropriated to those
Monasteries, was transferred, by the Crown, into those hands, that could not
Officiate the Cure of Parishes; as the Monasteries, by some of their Members,
or by their Vicars, had done. And, though the Right of the Crown (which could
be no more then the Monasteries had) could not abate the Original Right of the
Bishop, in settling a reasonable portion upon the Vicarages; yet, in the hands
of those that claim under the Crown, it has appeared so strong, that such
Vicarages are generally impoverished; But where the Cure lay upon the Covent,
there, there now remains no indowment, no Provision for the Cure of Souls;
Which falls out most in Cities, and places that were most frequented with
Monasteries, as well as with People. What the consequence hereof has been, it
is plain enough; Even a sort of Mungrel Clergy of Lecturers; Who, being
Authorized by the Bishops Orders and License, but paid by the People, to
supply the Office of Preaching, which the Benefices of the Church were not able
to maintain; Like a Pack of Dogs, that are ruled by the Huntsman that seeds
them, and sets them a work, not by the Master that provides for them; No marvel
that they own not the Bishops, for Judge of their Preaching, whether according
to the Law or not. He that sees not, that this was the sourse of the late War,
of him is the Proverb, that says; No man so blind as he that will not see. And
the worst is, that so great a part of the Gentry, as have shared with the
Crown, in the spoils of the Monasteries, think it their Interest, to hold up
that Party, which, they think, would justify their Title in point of
Conscience; Whereas it is found by experience, that those very Preachers, that
would Reform the Church by force of the People, would question their Tenure, as
soon as they saw themselves in condition to do it. Now, I intend not here to
dispute, that, foundations to intents of false Religion; as for redeeming Souls
out of Purgatory; are ipso facto forfeit to the true. God himself has
recommended this Course to the Church, in the Case of the Censers of Core,
Dathan, and Abiram; which he challenges for his own, to the use of the Altar,
though consecrated to the use of their Schism. But the Christian Emperors of
the Primitive Churches, inacting those Penalties upon the Conventicles of
Heretics and Schismatics, which we read, in the last Book of Theodosius his
Code, the fifth Title de Haereticis; have confiscated the places where they met
in nine Laws, and forfeited them to the Church, in five. Whereby it appears,
that the Primitive Church, living under those Laws, did not think, that goods,
so consecrated, do, of necessity, eschete to the Church. My present purpose
obliges me only to suppose, that the Tithes; which, all the world saw, that
they had been consecrated to God, for maintaining the Cures of the Parishes;
These, if there be any such thing as a Church, could not be alienated from it,
without Sacrilege. But I say not, therefore, that they can never be held bona
side; Which is that which makes the jealousy incurable, in those that find
their Estates consist much of them. And, yet, I undertake not to warrant,
generally, the holding of them; Only think, that, in some particulars, it may
be warrantable. For, when they are come into such hands, that the support of
Estates depends necessarily upon them; and that, by mean contracts, and
originally such, as had in them no ill Faith; I say not I can warrant them, I
think they may be warrantable. Now, I know there may be an Act of Oblivion done
by the Church, as well as by the Kingdom. And the Church of Rome knew it well
enough, when they reconciled this Kingdom, under Q. Mary, without restoring
these Possessions. By the same Reason, for which Heretics and Schismatics
were always dispensed with for Canonical Penalties; (leaving the Pardon to God,
that the Unity of the Church might be recovered) By the same, may the Church
leave all to their own Consciences; not warranting their pardon from God,
neither yet refusing them the Communion, as unpardonable. But alas, what would
this Act do in our Case, did the whole Clergy understand themselves tied in
Conscience, by it, not so much as to mention, much less to reproach any such
Tenure? So long as the mischief once done remains unprovided for, by the Law,
which gives the Title and Possession; the contradiction between the Canonical
and Popular Interests can never cease. But if the Kingdom consider, that it was
an Act of Parliament that did the wrong, they must necessarily find, that
nothing but an Act of Parliament can repair it. And if the People consider,
that a Parliament may transgress the trust which they repose in them; (which of
necessity may come to pass, unless we make the Parliament infallible, and the
Pope not) they will easily find, that a Parliament cannot repair the wrong that
a former Parliament has done, but upon the Charge of the people. For
Churchgoods, under Christianity, cease not to be the Goods of the People,
though the Church be trusted with managing them, being founded by God for that
purpose. And he that admits of the necessity of all this, will find it no
considerable Charge for the whole Kingdom, to furnish contribution, necessary
for the founding and indowing of Churches, requisite for the Resort and Cures
of all Assemblies, requisite for a Reformation regulated by the Primitive
Church. And if this be one Cause of our Divisions, and that the Kingdom cannot
be counted a Christian Kingdom, till it take a course in it; let no man marvel
to see the Judgments of God, in our Divisions, when he sees the Sin of the
Kingdom continue. And if this were considered, the discourses that walk up and
down in all Assemblies, of relieving the Public Charge, by seizing the pitiful
remainder of the Church-Revenue, would appear to be, as they are, the
productions of Atheism, not of pity to the peoples purses.

CHAP. XXI. By limiting and restoring Ecclesiastical Discipline.
THe other Law, concerning the Right of the Church, in the Supremacy of the
Crown, over all Persons, and in all Causes, as well Fcclesiastical as Civil,
may seem to extinguish the Right of the Church, over the same Persons, and in
the same Causes: Which could not be called Ecclesiastical, if there were no
such thing as a Church, (as one of the Articles of our Creed professes) endowed
by God, with a Right in and over the same. And therefore, I do not attribute
the cause of our divisions to it, as unjust, but as indefinite, and unlimited.
And I instance in the Tenure of our Ecclesiastical Courts; Which, by a branch
of this Law, are declared to be the Kings Courts, and the Judges of them the
Kings Judges. A thing necessarily following, upon the Resumption of the Rights
of the Crown, usurped by the Sea of Rome, into the Crown. But which has turned
so great dissatisfaction, in the establishment of Religion by the Law of this
Land; because the Right of the Church, in that part of their Jurisdiction,
which necessarily arises from the Founding of the Church, by our Lord Christ,
has not been reserved to the Church, by express Provision of Law. Thereupon
followed another Law, which gave the Judges of these Courts the Privilege of
being Married: At such time, as the Law of the Land allowed not the Clergy to
Marry. And by consequence, made them no Clergymen, whom the Law owned for the
Kings Judges of these Courts; Exempting them thereby, from the Canonical
Obedience, which they of Clergy owe their Bishops; And leaving their Ministering
of the Laws, in their respective Jurisdiction, to their own discretion, as well
against, as without the consent of their Bishops. It is true, they subsist by
Patents granted by their Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Dignities, endowed
with Jurisdictions. But, the Law having declared them the Kings Judges, I refer
it to Judgment, whether it were any marvel, that the Bishops, and other
Dignities with Jurisdiction, should discharge themselves of their Jurisdiction,
upon such Judges, as the Law had qualified, rather then cross the Law, in
taking them upon their own charge; Part whereof, in ministering the Power of the
Keys, and in correcting the inferior Clergy, is essential, and necessary to
the Office, which Ordination makes the Clergy (Bishops, and Presbyters) capable
of. For it is resolved upon, by the Sages of our Laws, that, such a Patent
being granted for term of life, the Patentee is enabled to exercise the whole
Jurisdiction, without and against the consent of him that grants it; and shall
be maintained against him, in so doing, by the Law of the Land. I am neither to
blame, nor to excuse them, that have not done their utmost, to redeem the
Office, which we are consecrated to a capacity of managing, out of that
Possession, which the Law of the Land thus ingageth. For, it is granted, and it
is to be granted, that the Church cannot pardon sin; As if it could pardon him
that is not qualified for pardon: Or keep him from pardon that is. But the
Church pardons sin, by bringing him to be qualified for pardon that is not: And
declaring him pardoned that is. If we were Fanatics, and believed no Condition
of pardon, but only, to imagine that we are pardoned; There would be no Church,
(...) Keys of the Church to manage. If we believed, as some understand the
Council of Trent; That sin is pardoned, by submitting it to the Keys of the
Church: And that the mortification of the flesh serves only to redeem the
temporal Penalty, remaining due when the sin is pardoned; A Lay Judge, having
knowledge, might manage the Keys of the Church, as well as a Priest. But,
because a notorious sinner becomes qualified for pardon, when the Concupiscence
is mortified, which his sin gratifies: And, because he undergoes his
Mortification, because he cannot have the Communion otherwise; Therefore are
they only, that consecrate the Eucharist, to judge, whether he be qualified or
not, and to give or refuse him that which they consecrate. And, Commutation of
Penance, when it supposes not, the inward contrition of the heart performed, by
outward mortification of the flesh, is but the betraying of that Soul to
damnation, whom it admits to Communion, not being qualified for it. True it is,
nothing hinders him, that is discharged of Excommunication, to become qualified
by his own private endeavors. But, God would never have founded his Church,
upon the Power of the Keys, if the Office thereof were only, not to hinder, and
not also to procure, notorious sinners, to be fit for Communion with the
Church. And, that to procure, must be the Office of those, who, by the
Foundation of the Church, are to judge, who is fit and who not. If therefore
the Law of the Land provide not, that that Office of the Church may be in
force, to that effect, for which the Power of the Keys is given them that
consecrate the Eucharist; Is it any marvel, that the Judgment and Vengeance of
God should lie so heavy upon the Land, professing Reformation, and not inabling
that which it professes to take place? My present business therefore is now to
say; That the Interests which cause our Divisions are so far imputable to these
Laws, as, without the Reforming of the Laws, they cannot be cured. Two of these
Interests I name, contradictory the one to the other, in their Pretenses. For,
what does the World complain of, but of the abuse of Excommunication; daily
employed, to enforce the contentious Jurisdiction of these Courts; Never
employed, to the correction of sin, and recalling of sinners; Which, being the
Office of those that receove the Power of the Keys by Ordination, cannot be
exercised by the Laity, without Sacrilege. Now, granting, that the Usurpation
of the Sea of Rome, or the Indulgence of Christian Princes and States have
procured, or granted to the Clergy, a larger Jurisdiction then their Office
required; It would have been no Inconvenience, that the whole Jurisdiction
should be enforced, by Excommunication, signifying imprisonment by the Law of
the Land; If a difference had been made, between the proper Jurisdiction of the
Church, and the Accessory. For, in this part of it, it is an oppression to
Christian Subjects, that they should be barred the Communion, for maintaining
themselves and their Right, by Law, in matters of any Right of this World;
Though the Clergy were Judges, by the Law of the Land. But it would be no
oppression to them, that the Jurisdiction of the Kings Courts should be
enforced by imprisonment; which Excommunication might signify, by the Law of
the Land, without signifying a Bar to the Communion of the Eucharist; if these
were duly distinguished. In the mean time, the whole indowment of the Church,
in a manner, being irrecoverable by these Courts, without Excommunication; the
scandal of these Jurisdictions becomes a Popular Plea, to strip the Clergy of
their maintenance; Tyths being no farther paid, then it please Frantic
Fanatics, or contentious neighbors, to do right of good will; Knowing that,
Excommunication being odious, Imprisonment is not like easily to follow upon
it. I said, that there is another Interest on foot, upon a Pretense
contradictory to this. And I mean that, which vulgar Professors of the Laws of
the Land set up to themselves, out of these scandals; To reduce the whole
Jurisdiction of Ecclesiastical Courts under the Jurisdiction of the Laws of the
Land, and those Courts that minister the same. This Interest espouseth the
Opinion, which voids the Article of our Creed that professes One Catholic
Church; making Excommunication, and Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, founded by our
Lord Christ, a mere Imposture; declares it incapable of any Sacrilege, to be
committed in the using of it. In the mean time, the Clergy, whose Interest is
no ways concerned, in the Scandals, which the Ecclesiastical Courts may give;
Further, then as they are hindered, by the said Courts, to cure their Scandals,
by the due Use of their own Office; do suffer, not only the Scandals which are
done under color of their Patents; But even the affronts of the Ecclesiastical
Courts themselves; Receiving Appeals, from the Censure of their Bishops upon
the Clergy. For, a few examples, serving the Bishops, not to employ that
Jurisdiction, which is so easily affronted, it must be acknowledged, that the
debauches of the Clergy are come to that height, that, till they be Reformed,
Reformation is not duly pretended against the Sea of Rome.

CHAP. XXII. The ground of the proper Interest of the Church.
BUt perhaps there be those, that are persuaded by the Leviathan, that a Church
is nothing else but a Christian Commonwealth. And that the Civil Power
thereof, which is Sovereign, has full Right to enjoin whatsoever it please,
for the Christian Religion; exacting what Penalties it please of Recusants.
There be others besides the Leviathan, that have maintained some branches of
the same Opinion; but he is the only man, that has looked the whole Question
in the Face, with this Answer. I will but relate the Issue, which his own
Resolution has driven him to, and leave him to Judgment. For, having objected
to himself, in his Latin Book de Cive, that which is obvious to all
Understandings; That then, a Christian may be justly punished, for his
Christianity; He answers, that it is no inconvenience, that he should; Because,
by suffering, he purchases an abundant reward. I know not whether any man told
him, or whether himself took notice, that this was the answer of Julian the
Apostate, making himself sport with the complaints of the Christians; That they
were beholding to him for the Kingdom of Heaven, which they gained by suffering
his Persecutions; But, that it was not for the credit of his doctrine, to bring
Christian Princes into the predicament of Julian the Apostate. And therefore,
upon second thoughts, his Leviathan answers; That a Subject is bound to obey
all that his Sovereign commands in Religion, whether he be Christian or not:
Insomuch that, if he command him to renounce Christ, he is bound to do it with
his mouth, and shall be saved, believing in him with his heart, nevertheless.
This answer shows the necessary issue of this Opinion; That he who holds it, if
he be as bad as his word, is as necessarily an Apostate, as Julian the
Apostate. The hope of Salvation, and the Right of Communion with the Church,
lies not only in the heart, which believes to righteousness, but in the mouth,
which professes to Salvation. The Profession, which is made at our Baptism, is
a Condition, without which it cannot be had. It is the taking up of Christ's
Cross, which the Gospel requires. He that declares himself free, in any Case
whatsoever, to renounce Christ's, though he has not done it, has declared
himself free of the Bond, which he entered into at his Baptism; And as he is no
more a Christian to God, no more should he be to the Church. If further he say;
As the Propositions first maintained, and afterward recanted, by his late
Disciple at Cambridge, do import; That there is no difference between good and
bad, before Civil Power that is Sovereign inact it; Then must it be said
further, that he is properly an Atheist. For, if God govern not the World, if
he reward not the good, if he punish not the bad, though man do not, (pardon me
God and all good Christians, if I repeat Blasphemy, that it may never more be
repeated) then is he not God. Particularly, if Civil Power can oblige a man to
say or swear, that which he means not, there remains not that Ground for Civil
Society, which the Heathen themselves (whom nevertheless S. Paul truly calls
Atheists) maintained. For, what Ground for Civil trust, if there be no Law,
before Civil trust, to punish the falsifying of it? Let him that considers this
Consequence, (necessary upon all Opinions, that distinguish not the matter of
Ecclesiastical Law, consequent to the State and Constitution of the Church,
from the Force it has, to be a Law of the Kingdom, by the Act of the Kingdom)
I say, let him answer in Conscience, whether those Laws, by which the Rights of
the Crown, Usurped by the Sea of Rome, are Resumed into it, did proceed upon
this Opinion or not. For my part, I remember very well a solemn Protestation,
which one of them makes, that the intent was not, to innovate any thing in
Religion, by vindicating the Rights of the Crown. And therefore do infer, that
none of them can be understood, to extinguish the Rights of Religion,
concurrent with the Rights of the Crown, in Church Matters, which it does not
distinguish; Knowing how difficult it is, to distinguish between them; As not
knowing, that ever the ground, upon which they are to be distinguished, was
delivered till now. But there is an Act of the V. of Q. Elizabeth, by which,
that abatement in the sense of the Supremacy of the Crown in Church Matters,
which had been declared by her Injunctions, from the beginning of her Reign, to
prevent misconstructions, was made a Law of the Land. This Act, because it
undertaketh not to limit the Supremacy, by distinguishing the Interest of the
Crown from the Interest of the Church, (for the difficulty of satisfying all
Consciences) gives the Subject leave, to declare the sense, in which he takes
that Oath; reserving to himself, that which Religion requires a Christian to
reserve, for the Church. Which was not the sense of them that believed no
Catholic Church, no Visible Right of it. And, by virtue of this Declaration,
it is, that my self have undertaken to declare that limitation, which the
Catholic Church requires. For, how many Prelates and Divines of this Church,
(King James of excellent Memory in particular) have done the same? But it is no
other, then that which the Canons of K. James declare; when they describe this
Supremacy to be the same, which the Godly Kings of Gods Ancient People, which
the Roman Emperors of the Primitive times (before that corruption came in,
which we Protest against) did exercise. Here have you the due bounds of this
Supremacy, settled by Law, upon the true ground of it. For it is manifest, that
it cannot be derived from the Rights of the Kings of Gods Ancient People alone;
Because there could be no Catholic Church, before the calling of the Gentiles.
But, the Empire, embracing the Faith, when the Church was settled upon that
Faith, and those Laws, that are now as Visible, as the Laws of England, from
which present Titles are derived, can be Visible; must needs have that Right,
from which the Right of all present Soveraignties must be derived; Because the
Church, (whose Interest concurreth with the Interest of them all, in the same
matters) is always One and the same, and ought so to be, from the first to the
second Coming of Christ. And that answers any difficulty, that may be objected,
when any Law of any Roman Emperor, or other Christian Prince or State, seems to
infringe the Canons of the Church. For, the Protection of the Crown being of
such advantage as it is, both for the enlarging, and maintaining of
Christianity; It is enough, that the Church can continue One and the same
Visible Church, by one and the same Visible Laws; Though the force and effect
of them be hindered now and then, here and there, by some Acts of Secular Power,
which, in some regards, may advance the Church as much, as they hinder it in
others. It was necessary for the Crown, under Henry the VIII, to vindicate the
Supremacy from the pretense of the Popes Secular Power; which had been on foot
diverse Ages before. And therefore, not to have to do with him, that pretended to
assoil the Subjects of Princes, whom he should excommunicate, of their
Allegiance, till they might own him, upon terms, consistent with the
Protection they owe their People. And it was still more necessary, under Edward
the VI. when the Reformation was inacted; which, they knew well enough, that
the Pope would not endure. But, when the Right of the Crown in Church Matters
is declared by Law, to be the same, which the Kings of Gods Ancient People, and
the first Christian Emperors did exercise, the ground of that Interest, and the
bounds of that Interest, which the Church must challenge, if it will continue a
Church, are declared to be the same, which the Faith and the Laws of the Whole
Church from the beginning do allow.

CHAP. XXIII. Of restoring and reforming the Jurisdictions of the Crown, and of
the Church, in Ecclesiastical Causes.
ANd this makes the Reformation of our Ecclesiastical Laws as easy, as it is
visibly the cure of all distempers in Religion among us. It is in brief this;
That the Jurisdiction, which may by this means appear to the Kingdom, to be
invested in the Church by Gods Law, be, by a Law of the Kingdom, restored to
the Clergy; To the Bishops in chief, then, to the Chapters of their Cathedrals,
and to their Archdeacons; (And to these, not without the Assistance of the
Principal Clergy, of their Respective Jurisdictions) the Judges of the
Ecclesiastical Courts continuing the Kings Judges, as they are now by Law; to
manage the Interest of the Crown, (in all the Rights thereof, resumed into the
Crown, by the Acts of Supremacy) according to the Roman Laws, in those Ages of
Christendom, which passed before the Usurpation of the Sea of Rome had taken
place. If it be said; That it is not Visible, when those Usurpations took
place; I shall allow all the time, which that Code of the Canons contains, that
Pope Adrian sent to Charles the Great; In whose time, there can be no pretense
of Usurpation, upon the Temporalties of Princes, by the Sea of Rome. This Code
is yet read, under the Name of Codex Canonum Ecclesiae Romanae. I have
commended the Justice and Wisdom of that Commission, which was designed under
Henry the VIII, and Edward the VI, for the qualities of Persons limited by it.
But I do not think it possible for any Commission, to Reform the Alterations
introduced by the Popes Canon Law, after that time, in one Kings Reign, with
that circumspection which is requisite. The Jurisdiction which the Church
challenges, by Gods Law, can not be distinctly stated, with more satisfaction
to all Interests, preserving that of Religion, then by a Commission so
qualified. The Interest of the Kingdom, in preserving the study of the Roman
Laws, has always been thought considerable. But how shall the study of them be
maintained, if the Authority of them be not maintained? Or how shall that
Authority be maintained, but by adopting them into the Law of the Kingdom, in
matters necessary to be provided for by Law, but not provided for, by the
native Law of the Kingdom? Or what provision can there he, by the native Law of
the Kingdom, for those Causes, which, for so many hundred years before the
Reformation, the Popes Canon Law had sentenced, by the Authority of the
Kingdom? There is an Interest of Religion in Matrimonial Causes, in
Testamentary Causes, in Causes arising upon Elections of Corporate Clergy, in
Causes of Dispensation in Canons, in Causes of Tithes, in diverse sorts of
Causes, besides those which the Power of the Keys, in the Discipline of the
People, and the Correction of Inferior Clergy occasioneth. Let me not say, that
it were Barbarous, for a flourishing Kingdom, in a flourishing Age, for all
other Learning, to reduce the Trial of them, to the Arbitrary Verdicts of
Juries; (Who can never understand the Grounds, upon which the matter of Fact is
to be stated) when I can so clearly say, that there can be nothing more like to
mere Tyranny, then Arbitrary Justice; nor Justice more Arbitrary, then, where
it is manifest, that there can have been no other Law provided, because the
Canon Law has been hitherto used. As for those Causes, which are proper to the
Church, as rising from the Constitution of it; how can it stand with Religion,
and Reformation in Religion, which we pretend, to try them otherwise, then by
those, which, the Kingdom shall be satisfied, by such a Commission, that they
are by Gods Law capable of Authority to do it? And the Interest of the Crown,
and of the Subjects, which it is bound to protect, shall be secured, when
provision is made, by adopting the Roman Laws, for managing the Rights of the
Crown, resumed by the Act of Supremacy, within those Bounds, which the Roman
Laws maintained, before the Usurpation of the Sea of Rome. It cannot be denied,
that the Popes Canon Law (which the Law of the Land has already adopted, so
far as it contradicts not the Law of the Land) provideth for many things, not
provided for by the Primitive Canons, within the Compass of the Roman Laws. And
it would be too much rashness, to recall that Adoption, and to leave so much
matter to arbitrary Justice, rather then retain a Provision, which the Law and
Religion professed by the Kingdom owns not the Original of, though it own the
matter it has adopted. For, whatsoever shall prove, by time and trial, to
hinder the Reformation, which we pretend thus to ground, and thus to bound, the
faults that shall be found by experience must open the way of mending it,
because the Cure must be as particular, as the disease is. And upon these
Terms, it can be no dishonor to the Kingdom, and to the Reformation which it
professes, to use the Canon Law which it adopteth, till time show the way of
amending those particulars, which, time shall show, that the Reformation
pretended requires to be changed. For instance, we know, that since Henry VIII.
it is not the custom to take any degree in Canon Law; Notwithstanding the Law
of the Land adopteth the Canon Law. And, accordingly we all know, that
Graduates in the Civil Law of the Romans are privileged, by the Ecclesiastical
Law of the Kingdom. I would fain have any of them, that would wear the Face,
and the Conscience of a good Christian, and a good English man both; Give me a
reasonable Account of these their Tenures, waving that which I here set forth
for them; whom they will think too bold with their Freehold for it. For my
part, who am no man's foe, but my own, in publishing my Opinion thus freely,
upon this Exigent; I think I do good service to them, with my Country, to set
forth this Account, why and how the Roman Laws deserve to be adopted into the
Laws of the Kingdom; Namely, that the Popes Canon Law, which is already
adopted, may be limited within those Bounds, with the Roman Laws; (And by
consequence, the Primitive Canons of the Church, which the Roman Laws
acknowledge and enforce) do either prescribe or allow. I would make a further
Offer, of introducing the Roman Laws, both into the Study of the Law of the
Land, and into Authority in our Courts of Equity; And of reconciling, thereby,
the Cross-Interests of the Professions, upon competence of Jurisdictions. But,
though I must needs have that Opinion my self, which, I can see nothing
against, seeing much for it; yet I will trouble no man with an Opinion, which
neither my Profession obliges me, nor my skill inables me to make out. It shall
be enough for me to observe, that they shall deserve to be counted Professors
of the Roman Laws, that are trusted to minister the Canon Laws, by those
Bounds, which the Roman Laws allow. As for the Concurrence of that Jurisdiction
which is proper to the Clergy, by Gods Law, and that which is resumed by the
Crown, to be ministered by the Professors of the Roman Laws; I do acknowledge it
cannot be ended, but by Appeals; The issue whereof, whither it ought to resort,
when it is time to say, it will be then time to say also, how these Interests
are reconcilable. In the mean time, Episcopacy being owned by the Law of the
Kingdom, and the Law of God both, to be that which the whole Church, from the
beginning acknowledges; I think I do my Country, and the Church of God in it
no disservice, to propose a plaster large enough for the Sore of it, that
shall come within the bounds which I have proposed. For, the Chapters of
Cathedral Churches are, by their Birthright, Counselors to the Bishops, and
Assistants, in his whole Office; The Archdeacon his Minister, and principal
Commissary. Those, by the Rule first set on foot by the Apostles, and observed
always by the Church, of planting Cathedral Churches in Cities, and making the
Churches planted in Cities Cathedral Churches, for the Government of all
Christendom within the Territories of those Cities. This being, by his Order,
Ministerial to them, as well as to the Bishop, when both have part in the same
Office. And here I place the hinge, upon which I hang the Reconcilement of the
presumed Interest of the Presbyterians, with the true Interest of the Clergy;
Supposing the Conference proposed to have taken effect, and produced a Request
of both Parties, to the Legislative Power of the Kingdom, to make a Law of
those particulars, upon which they are (...) come to agreement, to be received,
and to exercise their Ministry. For, the Office of the Clergy being separated
from the Interest of the Crown, by an Act of the Kingdom; And the Professors of
the Roman Laws trusted to manage this Interest, in behalf of the Subject; (Only
assisting the Clergy, in that part of the Jurisdiction proper to the Church,
which will concern the Interest of Subjects, as Members of the Church, as well
as the Office of the Clergy) What shall hinder them, the Presbyterians, as well
as the rest of the Clergy, to exercise the Zeal, which they have always
professed, toward the Reforming of the conversation of the People, in
assisting that Discipline, as well over the Inserior Clergy as the People,
which the Chapters of Cathedral Churches, and the Archdeacons shall, by the
Bishop and under the Bishop, be trusted with? For what need all this hinder the
Prerogative of the Bishops Negative Vote; when as there will be more to do
under him, then hands will be found for, reserving to him those causes, which
he would choose to reserve? For, that will be found no more then requisite, to
preserve his Prerogative, that nothing be done without him; when nothing is
done without him, but that which he shall choose to be eased in. He that knows
what the Hierarchy signifies, must needs understand, that the same means, which
preserved the Whole Church in Unity, so far and wide for place, so long for
time, as Unity prevailed in the Church, and Christianity with it and by it,
knows that the same must be used, to preserve Unity in the Church of this
Kingom; The Question being, how to Reform it so, that it may continue a Member
of the Whole.

CHAP. XXIV. Some Principal Canons to be restored, in our present State.
FOr, let no man think, that any Law can be effectual to this purpose, till the
Case be stated, which the Law is provided for. We are in the State of Schism,
in spite of our teeth: Though we are to clear our selves of the crime of
Schism, upon the Terms settled; which cannot clear us, if it be possible, that
any other should clear us. King Henry the VIII. had reason to declare, that he
and his Kingdom should have nothing to do with the Pope, that Excommunicated
him for his Divorce; So many Popes having discharged the Subjects of Princes
Excommunicate, of their Allegiance. But, to make good the Protestation, that he
intended no further change in Religion; I need not say what he did, to give
succeeding Popes occasion to recall the folly of that Pope, which Excommunicated
him, by a timely Reconcilement. In the mean time, the way to preserve the
Kingdom in Peace was, to have nothing to do with the Sea of Rome. But, had he
been so well advised, as to have maintained his Divorce upon the terms which I
plead for; What could the Pope have said to that Code of Canons, which Pope
Adrian the I. sent to Charles the Great; which I would have this Church to
own? For it concludes, with a Synod of the Province of Rome, under Pope
Gregory the II. which pronounces Anathema, to whosoever shall marry his
deceased Brothers Wife. Let Julius II. Pope, that dispensed with Henry the
VIII. and his Marriage with the Lady Katherine of Spain, have bethought
himself, how to come clear of this Anathema; the Authority of the Sea of Rome
being entire. For K. Henry the VIII. or at least for his Kingdom, it was and is
enough, that, so long as he owned the Authority of that See, he must needs be
troubled in conscience at that Marriage, by which he must needs incur it,
preferring the former Act of a Council under Gregory the II. Pope, before a
Bull of Julius the II. Pope, dispensing in an Anathema of the said Council.
For, as the Primitive Canons are to be preferred, in Church-Law, before the
looseness of succeeding Ages, being still further from the Apostles; So the Act
of the Council, under the Regular Power of the Pope, is to be preferred before
a Bull; which now passes without the Consistory, as the Popes personal Act,
after the unlimited absolute Power of the Pope has taken place. As for King
Edward the VI. professing the Reformation, and protesting it as he did; so that
the Sea of Rome could have no pretense of correspendence, without owning it
themselves; there succeeds the necessity of a State of Schism, upon the
Excommunication following; The Crime of Schism remaining on that side that
Excommunicates, for vindicating and restoring the Faith and the Laws of the
Whole Church. This being the state of our Case: and the Laws of the Whole
Church, and the Faith thereof, necessary to the Title, that must justify
Reformation without the Consent of the Whole; Is it not manifest, to all
Understandings, that the Law, by which this State is to be Governed, must be
such a Provision, as the Laws of the Whole Church enable a part of it to make
for it self, in the Case? And therefore, we must affirm, as many of us as would
have no share in the Schism, as to God; being thus secured, that, to the
Church, we are not chargeable with it; That there is nothing to hinder such a
Provision, but the misunderstanding of them: And that we see not, what the
Consequence of our own Profession requires. A reason that presses me so hard,
that I do willingly expose my self to the displeasure of all, that shall find
themselves disgusted, with this freedom; Only to give my self the satisfaction
of publishing it, whatsoever displeasure it procure me; As being satisfied,
that there is no other cure for our present distempers. For in the first place,
it must be said, that it is in vain to talk of Regular Government, by the
Canons of the Church, without restoring the liberty of Synods, to the
respective Provinces. Not as if the Church needed any abatement, in the Act of
Henry the VIII., which forbids making, and perhaps advising of Canons to be
made, without the Assent of the Crown. But because the World knows, it was the
Usurped Legatine Power, that had brought Synods to nothing, by Usurping upon
the Ordinary. And therefore, it is but Justice in the Crown, finding the Right
of Synods, the Subjects thereof, Usurped by the Sea of Rome; to restore it to
the Subjects, upon whom the Usurpation had been made; The Supremacy of the
Crown being sufficiently provided for, by the said Act: And, the force of all
Acts of Synods depending upon the Legislative Power of the Kingdom. In the next
place, it is to no purpose, to talk of Reformation in the Church, unto Regular
Government, without restoring the Liberty of choosing Bishops, and the
Privilege of enjoying them, to the Synods, Clergy and People of each Diocese.
I say not, depriving the Crown of the due Interest of a Negative, to any Person
to be promoted a Bishop, in any instance of his Promotion. God forbid it should
come into my thought. But, the Supremacy being so provided for, so evident is
the Right of the Synods, Clergy and People, in the making of those, of whom
they consist, and by whom they are to be governed, that I need mark no other
Reason, for the neglect of Episcopacy, but the neglect of it; For the neglect
of Cathedral Churches, but the neglect, and alienation of their Office, under
and with their Bishops. This for certain, had not the Sea of Rome introduced so
much disorder, in the creating of Bishops, that we have not yet cured it, we
should have heard of it with both ears, from their Advocates. And, if I may
credit a person of unquestionable credit, his late Majesty was so convinced
hereof, when he was at Oxford, that he offered to part with it, if a way were
showed how to do it. As for the translating of Bishops; which done, as it is,
of course, must needs render the Office unfruitful to their People; As no man
can deny, that there ought to be a course, for dispensing in the Canon, for
public good; So cannot this pretense of public good come to effect, unless it
be maintained by the Office of Synods, to whom the State of the Church
vindicates the Right of it. That which I said before, of Appeals, belongs to
this place. For, what Law can provide, that, in Causes reserved to the Bishop,
parties shall rest content always with his sentence? Or whether can
Ecclesiastical Causes resort, from him, but to the Synod of the Province?
Again, what Christian Kingdom could ever prevent a mixture of Causes; That is,
a concurrence of Interest, between the Sovereign Power, and the Office of the
Church? Or what danger can be imaginable, to this Crown, in doing Right to the
Church; Having only its own Subjects to deal with? Or what can be more ready,
to receive Appeals of this Nature, then a Commission of Judges, delegate, as
well by the Synods as by the Crown, for the expedition of such Causes, in
which, the pretense of the Subject, as well as the Interest of Religion, may be
concerned? As for matter of Faith; Having admitted all that has been decreed
within the time of the six truly General Councils; I dare say, that there is
nothing, that the Sea of Rome can charge upon the Socinians, or Anabaptists, or
any Sect of our Fanatics, that is not condemned, in the Arians, Pelagians, or
other Sects, which the Whole Church has condemned, during that time. So that
there can be no cause, why Christianity should not be maintained, by the
Reformation, during this State of Schism, but neglecting the true consequence
of that which we our selves profess.

CHAP. XXV. Two Laws more, necessary to the Reformation of the Church.
THese are the principal points, in the Canons of the Whole Church, which the
Profession of Reforming the Church obliges us to restore. There are two points
more, the one concerning the People, the other the Inferior Clergy; which, till
they be restored, our Reformation cannot be that which it pretends. That all,
who shall be convicted in Law, of capital or infamous Crimes, stand
Excommunicate ipso facto, and if Execution pass, be deprived of Christian
Burial, unless they reconcile themselves to the Church; Unless the Law make
this good, how should the Kingdom be counted a Christian Kingdom? For, if
scandalous Crimes, that are notorious, be allowed Communion with the Church,
how can it be a Church? Conviction, which is the Act of the Law, making the
Crime notorious, how can Christianity be protected, and the Church not able to
renounce them that renounce it by their deeds? The increase of sin so flagrant
in this Nation, since the War began, makes the necessity of this Law flagrant.
I was speaking of the Leviathan, that Monster of a Christian, that with one
Book, (allowed by the Act of Oblivion, because the Doctrine was not damned,
when the Person was pardoned) has introduced that Deluge of Atheism and
Profaneness, which we are ready to be drowned with. Let Public Justice have
the convicting of the Blasphemies which he has taught, if the Church be not in
Case to bear the envy of such a trust. But to account for such a crime, by a
pecuniary mulct, is to sell our Christianity, at the price, at which it is
defied. Unless Infamy follow, and Excommunication, to bring it on, farewell
Christianity, which compoundeth with Apostasy. The Father of the Sect thinks,
I believe, that he has as good Right to the Communion, as the rest of His
Majesty's Subjects; Who, though he should profess Penitence for his crime,
could not be believed; having given the World warning, that he may be bound to
say, and to swear, that which he does not believe. What course but this, to
suppress the Vanity of committing Murder, under the name of a Duel? For, in
all Commonwealths, where men's memory is not liable to Infamy, sin is not out
of countenance. In that which is Christian, what can be infamous, if to forfeit
Communion with the Church be not? As for Adultery, what punishment has this
Kingdom left for it? Or how shall it be counted a Christian Kingdom, having
none? Be the trial of it, as Civil Interest shall require. If it pass without
Excommunication, though the Law of the Land lay no hold on it, what can clear
the Kingdom of the expectation of Gods vengeance? By consequence hereof, they
that are convicted of Simony in Civil Justice, must remain Irregular, to the
Church; That is, though their Ordination can never be void, yet their persons
must remain incapable of any trust, which their Clergy should make them capable
of. And why should not the Privilege of their Clergy cease, and they remain
Excommunicate for such a Crime? The other Law, concerning the Clergy, is the
confining of every one to one Diocese; Which is but the Restoring of that
Order, which the Sea of Rome had disordered, on purpose to engage in the
disorders of it, all that they obliged by such Privileges. For, the
Privileges reserved to the Crown, Nobility, and Bishops, whereby the abuse is
but displaced, will not be considerable, in comparison with the Reformation
which it hinders. It seems strange to those, that find themselves Interested,
that two Benefices with Cure should be allowed in one Diocese, not in several
Dioceses, though at less distance. But the Law cannot be understood to allow
all that it forbids not; Because there may be Reason, why the Public good will
not allow the forbidding of that, which is left to the Conscience of particular
persons. Were all Benefices restored to that Provision, which the Cures might
require, perhaps Privileges of Pluralities might be extinguished. In the mean
time, is it not enough, that, whatsoever the Quality be, the Office of Priest
and Deacon is relative to their Respective Bishops? that no man can be
answerable to one Bishop for a Charge, in which he is answerable to another for
the same? Which if it hold not in one and the same Diocese, the Reason of the
difference is both sufficient and evident. Always, the Ground being laid, that
the Reformation of the Church is to be Ruled by the Canons of the Primitive
Church; there can be no more question in this, then is in any thing, where the
Primitive Institution, is as Visible, as the decay and abuse. But this will
principally concern Archdeacons, and the Dignified Clergy, which are to bear a
part in the Bishops Office. For how should they be charged with that, which
they are not charged to execute?

CHAP. XXVI. Of Forbearance, due or not due, in two Instances.
I Have proposed a Conference, I have determined, that all is to be tried by
the agreement of the Catholic Church; But if we stay till the Parties agree to
that, there must be no Conference. What have we to overcome this difficulty
with? Considering, how the necessity of losing all Religion presses all
Parties, and considering how slight the pretenses of dissatisfaction at the Act
of Uniformity are; though I cannot depart from my claim, that the Reformation
cannot duly be made, but by and to that Pattern; yet I see it may be laid
aside in the Trial, not supposing that the Will of God is declared by it. But,
if the advantage be not allowed, which the consent of Christendom from the
beginning has, in the judgment of common Reason, above any Opinion of this
time, or any Party pretending Reformation; what course can they hold, that have
not reasonable Creatures to deal with? For how can they be counted reasonable,
that prefer their own Reason, before the Reason of Christendom? Or how shall
they distinguish their private Spirits, from the Enthusiasms of Fanatics, that
insist upon those Interpretations, and Consequences of Scripture, which, had
any man seen before them, the Church had never been as it has been? In fine,
the Case being stated, I see no cause, to apprehend any obstinacy in the
Parties, to prefer any faction, or partiality, before Reason so manifested, and
so concerning the common Christianity. I will insist upon two Instances. All
the World knows, that one of the abuses, which made the necessity of
Reformation most appear, was that of private Masses; where the Eucharist was
celebrated, and the people did not communicate. It is as well known, that the
Reformation according to Calvin contents it self with four Communions a year;
but no Assembly without Preaching. The Church of England has aimed at the
Communion every Lord's Day and Holy Day; at Sermons, as frequent as can be had,
so as to maintain the reverence due to Religion, to Preaching, and to the
Church. What question can there be in Religion, that the Eucharist is the
principal Office of Religious Assemblies? What pretense of Reformation, in
restoring Preaching, by silencing the Eucharist? It will be said, that there is
fear of profaning so Religious an Office. But where is Reformation, if it make
not the people fit for it? The Papists say; Private Masses are not commanded;
they would have the people communicate, and encourage them to it. But what do
they do to bring them to it? Surely more then they do, that silence the
Eucharist for the Sermon; That are not contented, till so much Preaching be
commanded, that they know the Eucharist must be silenced. Let them think what
abilities are requisite, to maintain so frequent Preaching, that there shall be
no time for the Eucharist; Let them think of the Scandals, that must needs fall
out, for want of due abilities; and they will find cause, I doubt not, to
prefer the Whole Church, before a late Party: and abate the Sermon, to restore
the Eucharist. Especially, seeing the Law of this Land must be changed, to bear
out what others have done; though it is manifest, they never gave any reason
for it. They will see cause to think, that the best Preaching is that which may
fit the people for the Eucharist; by understanding the Covenant of Baptism, and
the importance of daily renewing and restoring it, by Communion in the
Eucharist. The other Instance shall be the Psalms; that are sung in Cathedral
Churches, but allowed to be read where there is not company to sing them. For
it is plain enough, what excuses are made, and what endeavors used, to silence
this part of Gods Service: and to turn the Psalms; which this Church, with the
Whole Church, appoints for devotion; into Lessons of Instruction only. Hence
all the Plea against the Old Translation with points; all the endeavors to
crowd in the Psalms in Rhyme, instead of the Psalter, and all use which the
Church has always made of it. But, did not partiality and faction prevail over
that Reason, which all Christendom before the Reformation has always owned,
there could be no question of using the Psalter of David, for an Instrument to
tune the devotion of Christian people, by; transforming the expressions of
David unto our Lord Christ, in the first place; and, according to the Figure of
Christ, to the Whole Church first, and then to every particular member of it.
He that has learnt this from the Whole Church, will never think it reason, to
put this part of Gods Service to silence, whosoever they be, that desire or
desing it. He will rather endeavor, to reduce the singing of them into Parish
Churches; being evidently so much easier, then the singing of the Psalms in
Rhyme. But howsoever, retain the reading of them by Antiphones, and not quench
the Spirit of God, which breaths forth that transformation whereof I spoke.
Having thus instanced, I will not propose the Ground, upon which I maintain,
that all Reformation is to proceed, for the condition of the Conference which I
propose. I will think it a point of that Forbearance, which S. Paul commands
the Romans, not to insist upon those terms, which the Authority of the Apostles
does enforce. Because I see him, not insist upon the Authority of an Apostle,
with them; but, having infallibly proved his ground, of Justification by Faith
alone, forbear the consequence of it; charging the Romans, to hold that
indifferent, whatsoever his Authority, so grounded, declares such; yet
charging them to forbear those, that, for all his Authority and Reasons,
understood it not. For, I believe verily, that his reason and mine is the very
same; Namely, to keep both Parties in the Unity of one Church, a Member of the
Whole; Hoping that, by Gods blessing, upon the advantages, which the
communication of the Faithful one with another, and with their Clergy
affords, those that are now most keenly set against these little things, that
are excepted at in the Act of Uniformity, may, by that condescension, which the
Interest of Christianity obliges all Parties to, come to understand the only
Principle of Reformation and Unity both; The Authority of the Catholic Church,
in all things not determined by Gods Law, which is only the Gospel under this
time of Christianity. And I set before them, to that purpose, the example of
the Jews; Who, for all the Forbearance commanded by S. Paul, having stopped
their ears, at all his charms; with the Unity of the Church, have forfeited the
Faith, hitherto irrecoverably. For, being fully persuaded, that without this
Principle, it is not possible, either for this Church, or for any part of the
Reformation, long to subsist; Can I fear any less, then the utter loss of
Religion, for my dearest Country, and for the dearer Church of God in it?

CHAP. XXVII. How Recusants may, or may not be punished as Idolaters.
IT remains that I say, what Penalties this Position makes competent to those,
that refuse the Reformation thus limited. A thing easy for me to do, having
declared the Ground, upon which the refusing of Christianity is punishable;
Which the Reformation, hitherto, has not been able to do. The Position of
punishing Heretics capitally is generally decryed by them; And yet we see
Servetus and Gentilis put to death, at Geneva and Bern; and others elsewhere.
If, because sentenced for Heretics by them that put them to death; Why should
not the Powers that adhere to the Church of Rome execute the Sentence thereof,
upon those whom they pronounce Heretics? If, because so sentenced by the
Primitive Church, in which we both agree; Why own we not the Primitive Church
in the rest, as well as in that? If, because they that gave the Sentence are
competent Judges in Religion; What remains, but that contrary Sentences be
executed by the Sword, and Religion be no otherwise judged? But, supposing
Religion, and the Church, and the sense of the Scripture Visible, so far as the
preserving of Unity requires; Christian Powers must both protect Subjects in
their Civil, as well as natural being, though not true Christians; and yet
punish them for not being true Christians. Only, if they pretend freedom from
Allegiance, by Christianity, (and we know it is false Christianity that so
pretends) there will be also fit time to declare, why they may be capitally
punished. But those who declare the Pope Antichrist, and the Papists Idolaters
in the exercise of their Religion, have not declared, what Penalty is competent
to their Idolatry. And yet, till that be cleared, we are in the clouds. This
difficulty, I find my self able to look in the face, without ever disputing,
whether the Papists, by their Religion, are bound to commit Idolatry, or not.
The Law of Moses, indeed, seems to show, that, by the Law of Nature, Idolaters
may be put to death, for their Idolatry. For, there is no appearance, that the
Law of God would have enjoined that, which the Law of Nature allows not. But
the Case is otherwise under Christianity, then under the Law of Moses. The
people of Israel held the Land of Promise, upon Condition, not to suffer any
other God to be worshipped within the Bounds of it, but the true God, that gave
it them upon those terms. Therefore they committed a forfeit, whenever they
suffered Idolatry in it. But the Gospel was preached to the Roman Empire,
consisting of two Religions, of Jews and Gentiles; Maintaining the State of the
World upon the same terms which it found; saving that, which, if they embraced
the Faith, they must voluntarily change. When therefore the Sovereign Power of
the Empire came to profess the Faith; (and thereupon, an obligation to maintain
and propagate it, by all means, which the Right of Sovereign Power furnishes)
they could not answer God, for the right use of their Power, using any other
means, then the Interest of Christianity allows. They might have confiscated
Estates, where they might have taken away lives; But that would have made the
meekness, which Christianity pretends, to appear that Hypocrisy of our
Sects; Who are always humble, always for Toleration, till they get the Power
into their own hands. To shut up the Temples of Idols, and to forbid
Sacrifices, was no more then to suppress that Sacrilege, which the light and
Law of Nature discovers. If any of the Imperial Laws make it death to
sacrifice; it is to be understood, upon presumption, that those Sacrifices were
Inquiries into the life of the Prince, or of their enemies. To constrain them
to be Christians by Penalties, had been to make them counterfeit Christians.
Besides, the Nations that bordered upon the Empire were all Idolaters; And
Christianity pretended to convert them, as well as the Empire. If the Emperors
had punished their Subjects, being Gentiles, for being Idolaters, must not the
Neighbor Nations have persecuted the Christians, their Subjects, for being
Christians? The reason of the difference between the Law and the Gospel, in
this behalf, is that which S. Austin gives, why the Law of Moses voids the
Marriages of Jews with Gentiles; Whereas S. Paul advises those that ^ned
Christians, being married to Idolaters, to continue in Wedlock with them,
desiring it. S. Austins reason is this; That the Law, tendering only temporal
promises expressly, (which Gentiles as well as Jews, might and did enjoy in this
world) thought it too hard a temptation, to trust a Jew in Wedlock with a
Gentile; by wh^, he might be in danger to be seduced, to prosperous Idolatry.
Whereas Christianity, upon the advantage of the world to come, assured by the
Preaching of our Lord and his Apostles, challenges all other Religions, as
unable to resist it, when it is performed as well as professed. So that to
suffer Idolaters, in conversing with Christians, was but the allowing of
opportunity, for the converting of Idolaters. I think I have cause to make this
an argument ad hominem, that our Sectaries themselves cannot, nor do require
the Penalty of Idolatry, by Moses Law, upon Papists. They that remember the
time, when the late Q. Mother of Royal memory came over, do know, what
infusions the Pulpits then made, into the minds of the people, of the curse of
God hanging upon the Nation, for His Majesty's Marriage. The pretense was
wholly, upon the Law of Moses; Which, as I have showed, is not to the purpose
among Christians. But indeed, those prognostications were no other, then the
Prophesies of the Devils Oracles, among the Gentiles; Foretelling the
mischiefs, which they intended or desired to do themselves. This being a
sufficient reason, why the same pretense is not now on foot, because it cannot
be plausible, after so dear experience of the mischief it tends to; I think I
am to take advantage of it, in behalf of Truth and Justice; That no Party can
pretend, the Penalty of Moses Law to lie, in our Case; Supposing, not granting
the Papists to be Idolaters, according to Moses Law. And is not the Case the
same, between the Reformation and the Sea of Rome? At least it is so, if the
Reformation be that which it pretends. For then, the advantage must needs be
so Visible, that to allow conversation between the Professions that are at such
distance, is but to allow the means of bringing all Popish Recusants to Church;
when the Reformation is that, which it pretends. I grant that it falls out to
be otherwise, in our experience. For, they that are converted to the Sea of
Rome, at this time, are converted by this miscarriage, that they venture
themselves into dispute with those, which they are not able to deal with. But
the miscarriage is accidental; Because of the Divisions within our selves;
arising from hence, that our Reformation owneth not the Bounds which it
requires. For, by this means, the Clergy of this Church is in contempt with
their Flock; and private Christians venture themselves into dispute with
Recusants, (that is, with their Priests) without trusting their Pastors, or
acquainting them with what they do. Which if they did do, in due time, such
occasions would be opportunities of reducing Recusants to Church. Besides, to
pursue the Idolatry of the Sea of Rome, (supposing, not granting that so it is)
what would it be, but to draw the Sword on both sides, to try the quarrel of
Religion with? And therefore Sovereign Powers cannot give God account, that
they use the Right he gives them over Papists their Subjects, pursuing them to
the Penalty of Moses Law, as Idolaters. There is another reason for the same,
that appears now and then, in the disputes of them, that maintain the Religion
of the Sea of Rome to be Idolaters. For, they have many times found themselves
obliged to grant, that their Idolatry is another kind of Idolatry, then that
which is prohibited, and punished with death, by the Law of Moses. And if so,
it must be another kind of Penalty, that belongs to it. Now I suppose S. Paul
says true, that Covetousness is Idolatry, and that, there be those that make
their Belly their God. And whosoever understands the difference between the Old
and the New Testament, will allow, that S. Hierom understood it; Who, in his
Commentaries upon the Prophets, makes all that they, the Prophets say, against
the Idolatry of the ten Tribes, to belong to the Heresies and Schisms of
Christians; and, all Heretics and Schismatics to be Idolaters, in the
mystical sense of the Old Testament, under the New. Which is no more, then our
Lord says of the Samaritans; That they worshipped they knew not what; At such
time when it was well enough known, that the Samaritans were no Idolaters;
worshipping the only true God of Israel. For certainly, though all Superstition
be not Idolatry, yet all Idolatry is Superstition; Because the chief of
Superstitions is Idolatry. All Superstitions stand upon the same ground as
Idolatry, and aim at the same mark. Man is sensible, by that Conscience, which
the light of Nature creates, that one true God is to be worshipped; And that as
himself shall require, not as his Creature is willing to allow. And being
therefore sensible, that Concupiscence allows him not that Service, which
Conscience requires, they are willing to pay him in Coin of their own stamping;
Usurping the Prerogative of his Sovereignty, even in that, whereby they pretend
to pay their Allegiance. Is there any other sourse of Idolatry but this? For,
is it not reasonable to think, that men can satisfy themselves, and put off
the Gods they have made themselves, with that, which the jealous God, the true
God will not be served with? And therefore, Religion teaches, that Idolatry is
the Worship of the Devil. Not only, because he teaches it; But because he holds
the Opinion of a God, by corresponding with Idolaters in their Idolatries. And
what is all Superstition, but redeeming the Service of God in Spirit and Truth,
by the service of our Bodies or Estates; which may be done, when the inward man
is not subject to God? Such are the Invocations of Saints, the Worshipping of
their Relics and Images, the Pilgrimages and Indulgences commended or
commanded by the Sea of Rome; And such they may be owned to be, by him that
dare not undertake them to be that Idolatry, that was punishable with death by
the Law of Moses. And being such, it will be punishable in all, who, for an
undue respect to the Sea of Rome, will not have their fellow subjects freed
from superstitious customs; Nor obey the Laws of their Country, that give them
this freedom. But if this be the due Reason, for which it is punishable; the
same Reason will render them punishable, who think they serve God, by running
into Conventicles, in despite of the Laws of God and their Country. For, what
is that, but a pretense of paying the debt of Religion, which Christianity
makes due to God, by worshipping an Idol of their own setting up? That is, as I
said before, by worshipping God according to an Imagination of their own
erecting; and not according to that, which the common Christianity requires.
And thus I am come to the Conclusion, which I intended, without disputing,
whether or no, the Papists, by their Religion, do exercise that Idolatry, which
is punishable by death in Moses Law. For if capital Penalty lie not in our
Case; If it be agreed upon, that they are punishable upon the same Ground, for
which the other sort of Recusants are punishable; then is the way clear before
me, to proceed to declare, what Penalties, both sorts of Recusants are to be,
or may be punished with: Supposing our Reformation confined within those
Bounds, which the Faith and the Laws of the Catholic Church either determine
or allow.

CHAP. XXVIII. All that take Arms against the Sovereign, to Reform Religion,
may be liable to Capital Punishment.
BUt if the Papists cannot be liable to capital punishment, as Idolaters,
neither can they be liable to it, as limbs of Antichrist. The name of
Antichrist is a challenge of Sovereign Power; Because the name of Christ is so;
Signifying a Prince and a Prophet, raised and settled by Gods immediate Word,
which is the Sovereign Title. For Antichrist can signify nothing, but a
counterfeit Christ; One that pretends to be Christ, and is not; Our Lord Christ
being the Messiah, which the Fathers and Prophets from the beginning expected.
But the Sovereignty of Christ is declared by himself, to be a mere Spiritual
Sovereignty; which all the Jews, even the Apostles before our Lords death,
expected to be a temporal Kingdom. And therefore, whososoever it is, that
groundeth Sovereignty upon Christianity, though he be not Antichrist for that,
yet is he the enemy of all Christian States, for it. And so are the Subjects of
all Christian States, that think themselves free of their Allegiance to
Princes, or States, Excommunicated by the Pope. And upon this account, I deny
not, that Papists may become liable to capital punishment, or to banishment
with confiscation; Which seems to be, of the two, the greater punishment. But
this, neither common to all Papists, nor proper to Papists alone. For, that
this is not the Faith of all Papists, I need no more, then the distance between
the Secular Priests and the Jesuits here, to prove. And that it is not proper
to Papists alone, I need no more, then the Scottish Covenant, and the troubles
of the three Kingdoms upon it, to prove. And therefore, it is a thing
absolutely necessary, to make those Penalties just, which the Laws inflict upon
the Papists; that they distinguish between the Cause of Religion, common to
all, and the Cause of them, that make it a point of Religion, to violate their
Allegiance to a Sovereign deposed by the Pope. Nay it will be necessary, in
point of Justice, to impose the same Penalties, upon all of all Religions, that
may think themselves discharged of their Allegiance, upon any account of
Religion whatsoever. It is manifest, that they who take Arms against their
Sovereign, to reform Religion, do ground themselves upon the Title of Religion,
and think themselves tied by their Christianity to do it; As they who take Arms
against their Prince, deposed by the Pope, think themselves tied in
Christianity, to execute his Sentence. Those whom the people follow, in
reforming Religion against the will of their Sovereign; Those they make as much
Judges, in reforming Religion, as the other do the Pope. And all that refuse to
secure their Sovereign by Oath, that they will neither lead nor follow any man,
in reforming Religion, without his Authority, deserve to be out of the
protection of that Sword, which he wears not in vain. They fall into the Case
of the Jews, expecting the Messiah; For, when they imagine, that he is come,
they will think themselves dispensed with, by their Religion, for any Bond of
Allegiance. But Christian Princes and States are not wont, so far as I know, to
think themselves secured by the Oath of Jews. Let this be a difference, which
they make between Jews and Christians, to take the Oath of their Christian
Subjects, for security of their Allegiance; Because true Christianity obliges
all good Christians, to bear Allegiance to their Sovereigns, not to be
dispensed with, upon any account of Christianity; Notwithstanding we see, that
there are those, that count themselves the best Christians, that do think
themselves dispensed with in their Allegiance, upon diverse and several accounts
of their Christianity. But let this Kingdom, having had trial of contrary
pretenses, think it self bound, to declare the same Penalties, against the same
Crimes; And able to impose the utmost Penalties, upon all that shall refuse, to
secure their Sovereign by Oath, of their Allegiance. And since the allowance,
which the Law makes, in understanding the Oath of Supremacy, evidences, that it
may be understood, in a sense offensive, in point of Religion; let it be
thought time, to antiquate the old, and to inact a new form, that may tie all
Subjects as Subjects, without pretense of offending any Religion; by condemning
all Religions, that make difficulty to undertake it, for irreligious.

CHAP. XXIX. What Penalties the Protection of Religion requires.
NOw I am to say, how far Christian Powers are to punish Heretics and
Schismatics. For, it is too late for me to say, that they may punish their
Conventicles, having declared the reason, why they may do it; And being now
only to draw the consequence of that reason, how far they are to do, or may do
it. Here, I must first marvel at our Independents; some of whom have disputed,
in very good earnest, that it is not lawful, for Civil Powers, to impose
Penalties upon Religion. Whereas the World knows, that there never was any such
Religion in the World, as that of Independents, before the planting of New
England. And that since, those that framed Independent Congregations there,
upon a Covenant, whereby they renounce One Catholic Church, and One Baptism
for Remission of Sins; have not only banished Antinomians, and put Quakers to
death; But have imposed a Penalty of five shillings a Lord's Day, upon all that
come not to hear their Sermons. For, though this Penalty is not strictly
exacted at present, yet it lies at present. Whereby, the greater part of His
Majesty's Subjects in that Plantation, are not only hindered, from exercising
the Religion enjoined by the Laws of this Kingdom; But also their Children dye
unbaptized, themselves live and dye without the Communion of the Eucharist,
and, in fine, their Souls are murdered, by this Tyranny of their misbelieving
Fellow Subjects. Whether all this by their Fatent, or by Usurpation, I leave to
those that may redress it, to judge. But, if the Protection of Religion, and of
the Church lie, in maintaining those Rights, which the Sovereign Power finds
the Church possessed of, when it undertakes the Profession of Christianity; And
all the Right of the Church, (which it has, by the mere consent of those that
voluntarily undertake Christianity) resolves into Excommunication; Then is not
the Church protected in the Rights of it, by Christian Powers, unless their
Laws enable the Excommunication of the Church to lay hold on all their
Subjects. Nor can any inconvenience follow hereupon; Because the
Excommunication of the Church, when it is protected by the Civil Power, can
never proceed, but upon Causes which the Law allows. Now, there are two sorts of
Excommunicate persons, according to the Premises; One are they that
Excommunicate themselves; the other, they that are Excommunicated by the
Church. For, though they Excommunicate themselves, yet, because they are to be
avoided by the Flock, from whence they depart, when they Excommunicate
themselves, they are to be held, as if they were Excommunicate by the Church.
Now, if they who thus Excommunicate themselves should be under no Penalty of
Civil Power, for so doing, I would fain know, what that Protection, which
Christian Powers must needs own, to the Christianity which themselves profess,
can avail it. For, if the Church Excommunicate those that perform not the
Christianity which they profess, and the Excommunicate be free to run into the
Conventicles of those that Excommunicate themselves, whowill care for
performing the Christianity which he professes? Or how shall the Church and
Religion subsist, when no man need to care for performing the Christianity
which he professes? This is the danger which is come so near, to bring this
Church to nothing, at this time. On the one side, all Papists Excommunicate
themselves, on the other side, all that run into Conventicles. The Papists, we
all know, are under Penalties grievous enough; If we speak of that part, which
does not decline their Allegiance. As for those that do, I have already set the
consideration of them aside. And yet there is this Apology, for the severity of
those Laws; That they do take off the Penalty of perpetual imprisonment, which
by the Ancient Laws of the Kingdom, introduced under the Papacy, lies against
all that are Excommunicate; And therefore is to lie, against all that
Excommunicate themselves. If there be a reason, why such severe Laws should be
in force against them, can any, that wears the face of a man, say, why the
other sort of Recusants should be free from all Penalties? I think the World is
sensible hereof, in the suspension of the Penal Laws against the Recusants;
Which, under his late Majesty, was charged with such violent jealousies: and
now passes without discontent, because there is neither conscience nor shame,
to levy those Penalties upon them, and none upon the Conventicles. In the mean
time, Atheism, Profaneness, Blasphemy, Apostasy, Heresy shelter themselves
under the Communion of the Church, which the Laws protect; and will needs be of
that Religion, which they may profess, and need not perform. And, how long this
Church can continue this Church, upon those terms, let those judge, whom it
concerns. My business is only this; That, if those that Excommunicate
themselves be under no Penalty, those that are Excommunicate by the Church need
not care, that they are Excommunicate. And so the Church is not protected,
because the Excommunication of the Church is not in force; That is, it is no
Penalty to be Excommunicate, to all that can think it is none. And therefore,
unless it draw a Penalty of this World after it; that all may have occasion to
avoid the Penalty of the World to come, by avoiding the Penalty of this World;
the Church is not protected. It may be thought, that the Church is protected
nevertheless, by the Privilege of receiving the Tyths, of those that decline
it, and of the Trust it manages, of dispensing Church-goods. And this is,
indeed, part of the Penalty, by which they redeem their Recusancy; In as much,
as they are put to maintain the Religion which they invent; Church-goods,
though they be Public goods, yet, being originally affected to the maintenance
of that Church, which the Law protecteth. But that, being a Penalty of their
own choice, satisfies not the Protection of the Religion which the Kingdom
professes; until the Law make it a disgrace, and a degree of Infamy, to stand
Excommunicate, whether by themselves, or by the Church. And, seeing all
Discipline, even that of the Clergy, ends in Excommunication; To maintain the
Revenue, and let go Discipline, would be, to sell Religion for the Revenue of
the Church. For what would this be, but a tempting of the debauched, into the
Service of the Church, when there is no Discipline, to restrain their
debauches? The complaints of this time show this to be a Persecution, which the
Sects of the time bring upon the Church. For, Discipline is released, for fear
to stir, and for hope to gain Sectaries; and the fault is laid upon the Clergy,
that suffer in the releasing of Discipline. But Christian Powers are bound, not
only not to persecute the Church themselves, but not to suffer Sects to
persecute it. And to avoid trouble, by releasing Discipline, may be the way to
find it, in the means of avoiding it. Certainly, till Excommunication (which is
the utmost resort of all Discipline) be in force, we cannot say we have a
Church; but only, because we have Laws, by which it ought to be in force; And
because we hope to have Laws, by which it will be in force. Men may amuse
themselves, with the instance of the United Provinces; which, they say,
flourish in trade and riches, by maintaining all Religions. But the question is
of Religion, not of Trade, nor Riches. If it could be said, that their Religion
is improved, with their Trade, the example were considerable. But, they that
would restore and improve the Religion, that flourished in England thirty years
ago, must not take up with the base Alloy of that which is seen in the United
Provinces. Nor is this a reproach to them, but a truth of Gods Word; that
Religion and Trade cannot be both at once at the height. Besides, there is a
Religion of the State in the United Provinces: and other Religions are
tolerated there, because they were in being before the State was settled, or
contributed to the settling of it, upon expectation of being tolerated in their
Religions, when it should be settled. But when the United Provinces were in
danger to break in pieces, upon a Dispute in Religion, in the year 1618. and
when the point of Religion was decided by the point of that Sword, which
decided by the point of that Sword, which enabled the States General to give
Law to the States of Holland; Let him, that now may see more Aprons then Clokes
come from their Arminian Gongregations, tell me, whether the point were decided
by a Penalty, or not. But let him tell me also, whether it had not been better,
to have decided it no further, then the Catholic Church had decided it; then
to endanger the Reformation, (as now it is in danger, by admitting the
Socinians into Communion with the Arminians) in case the Penalty should prove
insufficient. As for the Discourses, that threaten the transporting of Estates,
upon Penalties for Religion; and, that would encourage strangers to plant and
improve Trade here; Who knows not, that the Conventicles now Usurped were first
erected by the late War? And therefore must be presumed to cherish the pretense
of it. And how easy is it, for those that inact Penalties for Religion, to
provide, that it be for no man's ease, to declare himself an enemy to his
Country? Nor let any man think, that strangers are affected in Religion, as
those at home are; who pretend, by Religion, to give Law to their Country. The
dissensions on foot among us may well discourage them from planting among us,
to improve Trade with us. The improving of the Reformation, and the settling of
it, would be but an encouragement to them, to pass by those frivolous
pretenses, which carry us to these frantic distances. In the mean time, be it
considered, that Independency, which was not in rerum natura at the planting of
New England, being once settled there, by the pretense which their Patent or
Patents gave, became so fruitful, that within twenty years, they were able to
cut off their Prince. For., all that love truth must acknowledge, that they
were Independents that did that horrible Act. And then consider, how you would
hope to have it restrained, if S. Paul's precept of avoiding Sectaries that
Excommunicate themselves be not in force, by Canonical Penalties, upon them
that are to avoid; And by temporal Penalties, upon them that are to be avoided.
For, conversing together, otherwise then for Trade and Commerce, experience
shows, that infection is unavoidable. And therefore the Protection, which the
Kingdom owes the Religion which it professes, necessarily requires, not only,
that it be maintained, at the Charge of the Schismatics in it. For, as that is
the proper Penalty, for them to redeem their Recusancy with; So is it the
Justice, which they owe their Fellow Subjects, whom they have hitherto kept in
that Egyptian Bondage. And this Reason will extend the same obligation, to all
other Plantations and Residences of English; To wit, that, if they be suffered
to live in another Religion there, account may be taken of them here, that they
be not admitted to Communion here, without renouncing that which they lived in
there. That they be not suffered there, without maintaining the Religion
professed here. It extends also to French and Dutch, and all Foreign Churches,
that, for Trade, or otherwise, may be allowed to plant here. For, either they
hold Communion with this Church, or not. If not, it must be Penal, both for
those of this Church, to Communicate with them, and for them, to admit those of
this Church. If so, yet, so long as there is cause of jealousy, there must be
provision, that neither Church be declined, upon any pretense of such
jealousy. I will here add one thing, before I make an end; Because it may be
demanded, how the Law of the Land may make Excommunication turn to disgrace,
and to some degree of Infamy. The answer is; Let the Law of the Land provide,
that no man may have Christian Burial, (that is, be buried in Consecrate
ground, and with the Office of the Church) but he whom his Curate knows to have
received the Communion within the year; And, I believe, the most part of them
that Excommunicate themselves will return of themselves. But then it must be
provided, and the Bishop must be enabled by Law, to discharge that Curate of
Office and Benefice, that shall falsify his trust in that point. Now give me
leave to demand, whether the Church be under Protection, or under Persecution;
If the Curate be not enabled by Law, to refuse Christian Burial to those, of
whose Salvation he can give no account, because they withdraw themselves from
his Cure.

CHAP. XXX. The Condition of reconciling Recusants.
BUt this not all; There is one point yet behind. For, whenever the Church
Excommunicates for notorious and scandalous sin, to restore him that is so
Excommunicate to Communion would be to murder his Soul, and Christianity both
at once; not supposing some proportionable presumption of amendment, in him
that is restored. This therefore must hold, as the Reason of it holds, in those
that Excommunicate themselves; In the reconciling of Heretics and Schismatics
to the Church. And this, the practice of the Whole Church of God from the
beginning shows them, that are willing to understand the reason of it, before
they tread that Authority under foot, which the common Christianity obliges all
to follow. Show me any Heresy or Schism ever restored to the Church, without
renouncing the same, and I will confess, that the Church it self turned
Heretic or Schismatic from the same date. Only there is a difference to be
put, between Heresy and Schism, and other Personal Crimes. For, I see no
reason, why we should not call other Crimes Personal, in opposition to Heresy
and Schism; Because we call it not Heresy or Schism, till Scparation be made.
A false Belief in Fundamentals is Heresy before God, a Resolution to divide
the Church is Schism before God, both destructive to Salvation, before
Separation be made. But Separation is the disease we pretend to cure, without
prejudicing the health of Gods Church. And therefore, should Separation be made
to maintain a Profession, that Simony, for example, or Sacrilege, or any other
deadly Crime is no sin, the Party so formed would be, ipso facto, an Heresy.
Personal Crimes, then, must be restored to Communion, upon presumption of
Personal Conversion from the same. But Heresies and Schisms becoming Bodies, by
professing an Engagement, may be reunited to the Church in Body, renouncing
the Separation in which they stood engaged. For, there is reasonable
presumption, that the Leaders would not renounce, if they did not repent them
of it. As for the People, that only follows and leads not, it is most true and
just to maintain, that Heresy and Schism is a Bar to Salvation; though we
allow hope of Salvation to the simple, that follow malicious Leaders, out of
invincible ignorance. It is therefore no blemish to the Church, to receive
them, as they departed, in company of their Leaders. For their Salvation is
provided for, when the Bar is removed. The experience of our Case makes this
considerable. At His Majesty's Return, it was inacted, that such Usurpers, as
were possessed of dead Places, should hold, without inquiring, whether Ordained
or not. Whereby it might seem to them, that found no fault with their own
Title, that the Law of the Kingdom owned their Ordinations to be good. But
without cause. For, the Kingdom being then under that Force, which was not as
yet removed, (a thing manifest enough; The Church not being yet restored) the
retaining of them, (which I am neither to justify nor to blame) was nothing
but the enduring of that Force upon Part, rather then call in question the
Whole. But hereupon, they that had got this color for their Possession, were
not like to disowne that Ordination, which the Law of the Land had seemed thus
far to own. So, the way was paved for the Schism on foot, by refusing the Act
of Uniformity, when they were employed, without reconciling themselves to the
Church, by foregoing their Schism. Some may think, that I abate more then this,
for their sakes, when I allow them Satisfaction by Conference; yea and Laws to
be changed for their satisfaction, if just cause may appear. But it is no more
then I would allow Popish Recusants, to justify the Penalties, that will be
always necessary, because they prefer the Authority of the Sea of Rome,
(forbidding all Treaty of Religion without it) before the common Christianity,
requiring Reformation in the Christianity of the Kingdom. For, do not they
deserve those Penalties, who refuse to assist their Country, in a work so
concerning the common Salvation, upon just terms? This I am sure, supposing
satisfaction, there can be no difficulty in departing from Usurped Ordinations,
and from the Schism grounded upon the same. And therefore, it is only the
solemnity of Renouncing that is abated, and the Irregularity that is pardoned;
And that, by the example of the first Great Council, in the Case of the
Meletians. And that, because they renounce not the Catholic Church, but
acknowledge a National Church; Which they cannot acknowledge, upon due grounds,
but they must acknowledge the Catholic Church. And therefore, I say not the
same of the Independents; Who are Banded into a Profession destructive to it,
upon a Covenant. For that Covenant is it, that must be expressly and formally
renounced, before they can be capable of Communion with the Church; And much
more of Orders. To grant them Communion otherwise, is to make the Church guilty
of their Schism, which it allows. And so, to give Popish Recusants a just
cause to refuse Communion with it. As for other Sects of Antinomians,
Anabaptists, and the like; When any man knows, upon what Grounds they
Excommunicate themselves, and how far they are Banded into Sects, it will then
be no difficult thing to say, how they are to be Reconciled, so as their
Schisms and Heresies may be duly Renounced. A thing which must be considered,
in those that were Presbyterians, before they broke into Conventicles. For,
since that came to pass, who shall warrant, that they have been guided by none
but such, as have Presbyterian Orders? Or that they stand now to that Religion,
which the Rebellion once made Law to the Kingdom? Which if they do not, who
shall warrant, or how shall the Church be satisfied, that they do depart from
their Schisms, with their Leaders? And indeed, the Independents, though they be
Banded into a Sect, by a Covenant; yet, if once they be disbanded, who shall
answer for them, that they will follow their Leaders? And all this by virtue of
the Sacrilege, whereby they all betray the Authority of the Church, and with
it the Christian Faith, to the Will of their People, to debauch them into the
same Schism with themselves. Which if it be considered, perhaps it will appear,
that the Forbearance which I have granted, can, for this reason, extend no
further, then to the Persons of those that deserted their Churches, rather then
submit to the Act of Uniformity. Nor shall it trouble me, if my Opinion be
found to come to no more. For the Opinions of private persons are to content
themselves, with declaring what may be; Leaving them that are concerned, to
judge what is. But, as for the way of Reconciling those which shall be
converted, to the Church; in that, the Apostolical Wisdom of the Primitive
Catholic Church is of necessity to take place. For, Schism or Heresy being
the Bar to the effect of Baptism, which is the Gift of the Holy Ghost; And the
renouncing of it being the removing of that Bar; It follows, that all that
shall return are to be reconciled by Confirmation, as always they were
reconciled to the Primitive Catholic Church. This were easier done, could it
be presumed, that all would follow their Leaders. But if that cannot be
presumed, if they must be reconciled one by one, yet is that no more, than the
work of an Episcopal Visitation, from Parish to Parish: A thing practiced and
usual in the Church, after the building of Parish-Churches, in the worst of
those times, in which, the Canons which I have commended took place. But now,
as for Quakers, we are no more to reckon them among Christians, then the
Gnostics and Manichees of Old, then the Mahumetans at present. For they do
openly own, the Dictate of their own Spirits to be as much the Word of God as
the Scriptures. And that is as much, as serves to create all such new Sects,
as, acknowledging the Scriptures so far as they please, introduce the pretenses
of their own Revelations, where they think fit. For, when the private Spirit is
equalled with Gods Word, the last Dictate, as in men's last Wills, must of
necessity take place. Only this difference; That, whereas Gnostics, Manichees,
Mahumetans, followed, or do follow their Leaders Spirit, Quakers follow every
one their own. And therefore are the more contemptible, and the more reducible,
whenever a course shall be established. Certainly, did they see, that they
cannot be reconciled but as so many Renegades, they would bethink themselves,
before they went on in their madness. Especially, did the Law set before them,
that this their Position is not reconcilable to Civil Trust: Always obliging
them, to the most desperate Acts of Treason, and violence to their Country,
that they can imagine their own Spirit to dictate. Upon which account, it
cannot be beyond the merit of their madness, that they are made servi poenae by
Law, as the Roman Laws call it; That is, that they are transported to work in
the Plantations. For, they that take upon them to impose upon their Country,
that the Offices of common Civility are Acts of Idolatry; What is not to be
expected from their madness, who, as the Case is, dare pretend, that it ought
to be Law to all Christians? But, since the Law is to provide for such People,
it is manifest, that it is to provide, that they may not fail of the trust
which the Church and Kingdom enters into, with those whom they receive to
Communion, but that they must fail of the Civil Trust of Subjects; That is,
that their Testimonies be not receivable in Law, that they be disabled to sue
at Law, that they be disabled to make Wills, or to get by Wills, or any thing
else within the effect of Civil Trust. And this must also be the Penalty of the
Leviathan, and all that have or may follow him, either into Apostasy or
Atheism. For, they who declare themselves at freedom, to forswear the Christian
Faith, can never be held by any bond of Civil Trust. It must also be the
Penalty of all Sects, that may relapse, after they may have been reconciled; At
least in that Proportion, which, that part of the Faith, which their respective
Sect denies, holds, to the whole Profession of Christianity; which Apostasy
and Atheism destroy at once. For, it may be a Question, why the Kingdom should
be counted a Christian Kingdom, if the Laws of it set not some mark of Infamy
or Disgrace upon the enemies of Christianity, according to the Rate of their
Enmity; Which, only the enforcing of Excommunication, by the Laws, can do.

FINIS.
Books Printed for and Sold by James Collins at the King's Head in
Westminster Hall.
A Blow at Modern Sadducism, in some Philosophical Considerations about
Witchcraft. To which is added, The Relation of the Famed Disturbance by the
Drummer, in the House of M. Mompesson. With some Reflections on Drollery and
Atheism. Plus ultra; or the Progress and Advancement of Knowledge since the
days of Aristotle. Octavo. A Loyal Tear dropped on the Vault of our late
Martyred Sovereign, in an Anniversary Sermon on the day of his Murder. Quarto.
All three by Jos. Glanvill, A. M. and Rector of Bath. The Triumphs of Rome over
Despised Protestancy: Written by Bishop Hall. Octavo. A Sermon preached before
the Peers, October. 10. 1666. being the Fast Day for the late Fire: By Seth Lord
Bishop of Oxon. Quarto. The Practice of Serious Godliness: Affectionately
recommended and directed in some Religious Counsels of a Pious Mother to her
dear Daughters. 12o A Discourse of Subterranean Treasure: By a Member of the
Royal Society. 12o The General Assembly: A Sermon by Francis Fullwood. D. D.
Quarto. Forty Sermons by Anthony Farindon. B. B. Fol. Rea's Flora, Ceres and
Pomona. Fol. Episcopacy Apostolical; or a Consent of the Foreign Churches to
the Discipline of the Church of England: Written by Bishop Moreton, and
published with a long Preface, by Henry Yelverton Baronet. Octavo. A Discourse
of the Use of Reason in the Assairs of Religion against the present Opinions of
the Sects of this Age. Quarto. A Private Conference between a RICH ALDERMAN and
a poor Country Vicar, made public, wherein is discoursed the Obligation of
Oaths which have been imposed on the Subjects of England, with other matters
relating to the present State of Affairs.

