Galeno-pale: OR, A CHEMICAL TRIAL OF THE GALENISTS, That their Dross in
PHYSIC may be discovered.

With the grand Abuses and Disrepute they have brought upon the whole Art of
PHYSIC and SURGERY, in their Method touching Phlebotomy and Purgation.

Their vain Curiosity in Anatomy reprehended; and their false Rule of
Contraries in the Cure of Diseases manifested.

Also, a full Answer to the Objections charged by the GALENISTS against the
CHEMISTS, and Chemical Medicines vindicated.

To which is added an Appendix, De Litho-Colo: or, An History of Three large
STONES excluded the Colon by Chemical Remedies.

By GEO. THOMSON, Medicinae Doctor.

(...). Homer. Odys. (...). London, Printed by R. Wood, for Edward Thomas, at
the Adam and Eve in Little Britain, 1665.

To the most Reverend Father in God, GILBERT, By Divine Providence, Archbishop
of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, and one of His Sacred
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please Your Grace,
AMong the many Moecena's of Hermetick Philosophy, I conceive none more fitting
to protect the Medicinal Verities here set down, then Your Grace; who has been
pleased to express very much kindeness and love for this Noble Art, to the no
small encouragement of the Professors thereof. And all things duly pondered,
where can Chemical Physic better shelter it self against Maligners and
Opposers of it, then under the wings of Divinity, on which it ought to attend
as an Handmaid? yea, there should be a Synergie, and conspiration of all Arts
and Sciences to advance Theology, which makes the better Part of us happy.

How can the Soul act aright when there is an Atonie, Ametrie, and Dyscrasie in
the Body? Since as the Chyle is, such is the Chyme, or rubified juice; as is the
Chyme, so is the Sanguis, or purest part of the Blood; and as this is, so are
the Vital Spirits (the immediate instrument of the Soul) either luminous and
clear, or dark and muddy; and so capable to act well or ill: How sollicitous
then should we be to search out those great Arcana's in Nature, which the good
Creator has ordained for the preservation and redintegration of these Bodies,
(which upon slight occasions from within and without, are obnoxious to be
valetudinary, and put out of frame) that the Diviner part may operate the more
freely, vigorously, and orderly.

Certainly there is no better way to attain this then by Spagyrick Philosophy,
which separates Tribulos and Spinas, what is Hurtful and Superfluous in every
Concrete, from the profitable, pure, and sincere; bringing it to such an
Entelechie and Excellency, that it is able to display that radiant Virtue which
God has implanted in it for the good both of Body and Soul. And were this
course closely followed, and generally countenanced, those rebellious and
enormous Vices of the Mind, too grassant at this day among us, which in great
part arise from the Feral, Anomalous, unheard of Prodigious, and untractable
Diseases of the Body, might in some measure be reformed; and certainly if there
be not some timely prevention, mox daturi progeniem vitiosiorem, most of our
Posterity is like to be born diseased.

Seeing therefore no Medicine is able to mortify these Seminal Principles of
Diseases, or wash off those Radical Tinctures which have been traduced to us
from our Parents, but the best sort of Chemical Preparations exalted to the
highest degree of perfection; some of which have been of late years brought to
light by the indefatigable industry of some Ingenious men, whom the Galenists
have endeavored to eclipse, and despitefully to suppress by Calumnies and
Reproaches; we humbly beg Your Graces favor to stand up for the defense of our
Art, so far as truth, sound reason and Optical Experiments shall permit; and
that Your Grace would be pleased to join with some other Heroes of the Nation,
either to stop the mouths of these Anti-Chymists, or to constrain them to make
good by matter of Fact, and fair equal Trials here proposed, what they allege
against us; that there may be a full discovery made who are the Physicians,
quos creavit Altissimus, and who are they that go about ludere cum corio
humano: And this present and future Age shall be bound to celebrate Your
Praises;

My Lord, Your Graces most humble and obedient Servant, Geo. Thomson.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
BE pleased to bestow what time you can well spare in perusual of this short
Treatise, which (how contemptible soever it may seem to thee) may perhaps be a
means to save thee from the jaws of untimely death, and prolong thy days. The
main Scope of the Author is, to do thee, his Country, and the whole World
service, in reference to that which (according to the innate law of
Self-preservation) every Creature desires (that is) Life: which if not
accompanied with Health, cannot but be very tedious.

That therefore thou may enjoy a sound Body and Soul, next Temperance in all
things, embrace an Honest and Able Physician; not one whom thou fancies, but
who is really so, according to these infallible signs here described.

The sum of this Discourse is nothing but a Touchstone depending upon matter of
Fact, to try whether a Physician be as he professes himself, and ought to be,
one that having a Commission from the Angel Raphael, is endued with the gift of
Healing, not palliating, dawbing and plaistering upon an unstable foundation.

Here thou may learn to keep thy Blood wherein is the Life, and not
prodigally to spend it, upon every trifling occasion, which may do thee more
service sometimes then the best Doctor in England, and help those Diseases he
cannot.

Here thou may be instructed to beware of uncorrected Purgatives, which do
but colliquate and putrefie the wholesome Chyme, or juice of the Body,
enervating it without any considerable ease, unless accidental; and to value
that Physic which carries off the occasional Morbifick matter to thy benefit,
without any notable Debility succeding.

In this Enchiridium thou will find the difference between a sincere and
corrupt Physician; one that dares act subdio, in the face of the Sun, that men
may behold him whether he does right or wrong, and so justify him or condemn
him; and between him that studies to be in the dark, and cast a mist before the
Spectators eyes, that he may play legerdemaine with them.

Lastly thou will see whose Actions are able to bear the test of the Fire best,
(by which every Work is to be tried) the Galenical or Helmontian, whose facts
like Gold or Silver, leave the least Scoria or Dross behind; and whose like
Lead or other base metals, leave most.

We hope no man that desires the preservation of himself, King, and Country,
but will allow these Operative Propositions to be just, equal, profitable, and
laudable, to put an end to that which garrulity and multiloquacity will never
determine.

Wherefore, Candid Reader, all that we shall request of thee, is to stand still
and see, that we may have right done us, forbearing to be prejudicate and
partial; and if ever thou should need us, we shall endeavor to gratify
thee with that Physic which we are confident no Galenist in England possesses.
Now if it fall out that our faithful and wholesome counsel herein should
(through the subtle wiles and and crafty devices of our enemies) be rejected,
we shall rest our selves contented that we have done our duty, and shall shake
off the dust of our feet upon them, qui valde volunt perire, being satisfied
that their perdition is from themselves.

Geo. Tomson.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. A Short Description of Galen, from whom they are denominated
Galenists. Page 1 CHAP. II. An account of that true Chemical Philosopher, and
learned Physician, Helmont, whom we Own for our Patron. page 4 CHAP. III. Of
the Abuses and disrepute the Galenists have brought upon Physic, and the
Reformation they have of late pretended. 7 CHAP. IV. How the Galenists have
domineered in the World, and deceived it. 15 CHAP. V. In what space of time a
good Physician may resolve his Patient of the Event of his Disease. 21 CHAP.
VI. How much precious time the Galenists spend in Anatomical Curiosities to
little purpose. 25 CHAP. VII. A just reproof of the Ignorance of most of them
in Surgery. 30 CHAP. VIII. What a noise our Adversaries make with their
Laboratory, and how they vaunt that they use Chemical Medicines according to
their Method. 35 CHAP. IX. An Answer to some Objections laid to our charge by
the Galenists. 38 CHAP. X. An Expostulation why the Dogmatists will not come to
the touchstone of true Experience. 41 CHAP. XI. How much to seek the Galenists
are in that necessary Philosophy which directs us to the Cure of Diseases. 44
CHAP. XII. Of the two grand Supporters of the Galenical Physic, Phlebotomy and
Purgation. 48 CHAP. XIII. Of the second Supporter, fruitless Purgation. 56
CHAP. XIV. Of that fictitious Rule of Contraries, by which the Dogmatists are
guided in the cure of Diseases. 65 CHAP. XV. A brief Examination of their
Pharmacopoea. 70 CHAP. XVI. A Cursory View of the Mineral waters, to which the
Dogmatists fly, as to a Sanctuary, in Difficult Cases. 77 CHAP. XVII. A
Vindication of Chemical Medicines from that false Accusation of being
Dangerous. 83 CHAP. XVIII. Of the Galenical Method. 90 CHAP. XIX. Of the
Helmontian Method. 96 CHAP. XX. Some Animadversions upon the late Attempt to
procure a Patent from His Gracious Majesty, for the Erecting a College of
Chemical Physicians. 103 A History of three large Stones excluded the Colon by
Chemical Medicines. 109

Galeno-pale: OR, A Chemical Trial of the Galenists, that their Dross in
Physic may be discovered.
CHAP. I. A short Description of Galen, from whom they are denominated
Galenists.
THe great Patron, to whose Decrees and Dictates (right or wrong) the
Dogmatists have obliged themselves to subscribe, is Galen of Pergamus in Asia;
who lived about fifteen hundred years past, in the time of Adrian. He was a man
doubtless of excellent parts, and very laborious, but took a very indirect
course to make a discovery of the Truth of things, as they are in themselves,
by bringing them to the touchstone of sound Experience; by making an Analysis
or Resolution of Bodies, that their Principles might be laid open, and their
Heterogeneities manifested; without which it is impossible for any man to be a
Philosopher as he ought.

He had a great ambition of writing much, as it plainly appears by those
voluminous Tracts that are now extant, besides what are lost; for it is reported
that he wrote four hundred Books in Physic: to what good purpose, any discreet
impartial man may easily judge. His loquacity has much affected some men, who
count Learning principally to consist in variety of Languages, Polylogie, and
plausible Argumentations, though deduced from false Axioms. Hippocrates his
concise Aphoristical Doctrine, written according to the sincerity and candor of
that age, was amplified and vainly enlarged by his fruitless and frivolous
Comments, to a huge bulk, contrived on purpose to get a fame in the World, by
those that are ready to subscribe to any Positions of Antiquity, for their
ease, rather then to Anatomize things as they ought by the Fire, that thereby
they may be reduced into the visible parts. So ignorant herein was their great
Master Galen, that he never saw either Rose Water or Quicksilver. How much to
seek he was in Anatomy, Vesalius has delivered; who makes it to appear in many
places, that he never dissected the Body of man. In the Botanicks, or knowledge
of Plants, he has instructed the World no more then Dioscorides his
predecessor, whom he has plainly transcribed in many places word for word,
concealing the Author, sticking in the mire of the four Elements, their
Mixture, Qualities, and Temperaments, neglecting the Virtus Cherionia, Crafts,
and specific properties of Simples. His followers have, and do even
obstinately to this day, to the destruction of millions, cry up his method; a
tedious way to cure Diseases, but a short one to get money. The two principal
Pillars that support this rare Method, are Phlehotomy and Purgation, both of
which we can demonstrate to be pernicious to Humane Nature, destroying more
then ever the Sword.

In the knowledge of the Causes, Quiddity, or Essence, immediate Subject, and
radical Cure of Diseases, (an incurable Catalogue whereof he has delivered to
posterity) that he was extreme blind, we shall undertake to evince and prove e
facto.

All this duly considered, would make a man stand amazed to see how
refractorily his Disciples do maintain (to this day) those rotten principles in
Physic derived from him; and how wilfully they hood-wink themselves,
delighting in the darkness of their own erroneous Tenants, lest they should
behold the bright beams of Chemical Philosophy, to the diminution of their own
sinister respects.

CHAP. II. An account of that true Chemical Philosopher, and learned Physican,
Helmont, whom we Own for our Patron.
HElmont a German, was without all question, ordained in these last times by
especial providence of God, for the comfort and relief of distressed Man; to be
an instrument to discover those gross Errors and notorious abuses in Physic,
that have relation to the Life and Soul of Man, committed by those that rested
themselves contented to be ignorant with Antiquity, and enjoy profit, honor,
and ease, rather then question any thing delivered to them (how false soever)
by making a severe scrutiny into the bottom of Nature, by difficult labors
with their own hands, and great expense of their purses. This Worthy Man who
(we confess) has instructed us in the Principles of Philosophy, was omnifariam
doctus; one that was very knowing in the Doctrine of the Ancients, having made
a wonderful speedy progress in the Learning of the Schools, as well versed in
the Languages as the best Galenist; who, after that he had rolled every stone
in the old Philosophy, and ran through that Cyclopeodie, or universal Learning,
yet could find no solid satisfaction in the natural Causes of things, till he
came to Pyrotechnie, wherein he labored fifty years complete, leaving those
lying Sophisms that he had imbibed, contemplating things as they were in
themselves. Hereby he learnt the genuine beginnings of all Concretes, making
separation of them into their fundamental parts; dissolving and coagulating,
fixing and volatilizing Bodies; looking narrowly into the defects, alteration,
life, and death of things; extracting, dividing, conjoyning several bodies,
bringing what was crude to maturation; and promoting natural Causes, by
removing those impediments that they could not arrive at their just ends. Hence
he dived into the Seminal virtues and properties of things, and was able to
give an account of their true, efficient, and natural Causes; bringing to light
the Doctrine of Fermentation, the Original and activity of Spirits, with the
rare Effects of Tinctures; and this by Mechanical demonstration of the Fire.
This is he that has plainly detected the most absurd perilous Doctrine of the
Galenists, proving their palpable ignorance of the Causes of Diseases, and
their proper Cures; setting down infallible Arguments to evince how destructive
their Bleeding and Purgations are to mankind; challenging them to make good
what he had delivered by visible instances and examples of fact; which they
would never come to, nor ever dared to answer him by way of confutation, but by
denying all that he had proposed, giving him scurrilous and opprobrious
language, (as it is their common custom when they have nothing to say for
themselves) calling him Fanatic, Innovator, Dreamer, carping at any lapse or
Peccadillo in his Writings with aggravations to the height: hating and
abhorring to the death all those that stood up in his behalf, naming them
Heretics in Physic; and all this gratis dictum, without the least tittle of
truth.

Thus has this worthy man been slighted, villified, and reproached, for not
still conniving at those capital Errors in Physic, which they have greedily
swallowed down without any scruple, to the ruin of millions. However, let
these pitiful Physicians rail at, and calumniate this Hero, it is our duty,
who have received so much benefit from him, to acknowledge him our Master, and
to maintain his true Positions, to the utmost of our power against all
gainsayers.

CHAP. III. Of the Abuses and disrepute the Galenists have brought upon
Physic, and the Reformation they have of late pretended.
YE have of late made a great stir, though to little purpose and credit, to
procure a Power from the Supreme Authority of the Nation, that ye might make a
Reformation in this Noble Profession of Physic, there being (as ye say) no
visible means left but your selves to compass it. But what was your drift in
this? Truly, we believe the first thing, next the enslaving the poor
Apothecaries, would have been a total Suppression of those that had opposed
your fictitious Principles, false Axioms, and indirect practices in Physic,
that then ye might have domineered as ye pleased. But stay a while, we hope the
Sage Magistrate will take it into consideration, that ye are the chiefest
persons that need reformation; and that your Purgations need purgation, they
being (as we can prove by matter of fact) not fitting, so uncorrected, to be
taken into the Body. We hope moreover they will take notice, that your Bloody
course ought to be voted cruel and unchristian, the Life or Soul being seated
in the Blood: God having created the Medicines of the Earth, not Bleeding,
cutting holes in the Skin, Blisterings, and such like butchering Tortures, to
cure miserable man. It Is true, there are sad exorbitancies, irregularities, and
abuses in Physic, but who we pray have been the principal occasions of them
but your selves? who have conjured up such Swarms of Quacks in every place,
(who like Locusts eat the bread out of honest Physicians mouths) by your
Profane Prescripts? and now you would fain lay them down, but ye cannot; for
they are become too potent for you, some of them having so well improved their
time, that they are like for ought we can see to cast you out of the saddle,
and to ride with Foot-cloaths themselves, dealing but deservedly with you. If
ye had better practiced the Pythagorical Doctrine, these things had never been;
or had ye delivered your selves, as ye find fault Paracelsus, Helmont, and
other sons of Art did, more obscurely, and Aenigmatically, who foresaw these
mischiefs, and endeavored to prevent them, Physic had flourished to this day
in its splendour and beauty: But as ye have handled the matter, every Good-wife,
any silly fellow may read your Dispensatory, use some of those Medicines
without your method, and sometimes no less success; yea, and may laugh at some
of those ridiculous Compositions discovered to them by your trusty servant
Culpepper. But all this is no hinderance but a furtherance to increase your
Practice, (as we have heard some of you say) since these illiterate Idiots do
but make work for you. Is it so, but we much doubt it; surely if ye aimed at
this at first, to multiply these men to augment Mortalities for your advantage,
it was a very wicked Design, not to be endured by a Nation: but if this be
fallen out through your incogitance accidentally, that these men have brought
in the more gain to you, to the detriment and ruin of the people, and simply
for this reason, ye desire to be Arnautists, or self-deniers, why do ye
(pretending to the Higher Powers a Public Good) not likewise instruct them in
some way, how the indigent Commonalty may be cured better and cheaper; giving
us infallible testimonies of some rare Cures above others, and your zealous
charity for your Neighbors, by abating your excessive Fees, and by curing him
gratis that has fallen into Thieves, like the good Samaritan. And we think it
were but just, that they who have gotten such Riches in Physic, as some of you
undoubtedly, by the destruction of those that might have been preserved, should
Zaccheus-like, impart a portion to those that are distressed. And certainly
there is now great need of this retribution, and as the state of things stands,
another course must be taken (without this costly Physic) to cure the Poor of
the Nation; which if our prudent Senators shall please to listen to, we shall
in all humility propose to their wise considerations; beseeching them to
consider what sad consequences must of necessity have come upon a Concession to
the presumptuous Desires of these men: How thousands of poor People must have
neglected the means, and so have run the hazard of perishing, having not
wherewithal to seek to these chargeable Doctors for recovery, the Apothecary
not daring to sell them a little London Treacle Mithridate, etc. unless
authorized by them; as if their Prescripts were able to infuse new Virtues into
Medicines. Neither should any have stretched forth his hand to have pulled his
languishing Brother out of the ditch, unless licensed by them.

What we pray should our City have done, if some Epidemical contageous Disease,
as the Plague, had reigned amongst us, since they (according to their Masters
Dictates) would all have run out of it: We plainly see the greatest Clarks are
not always the best Politicians, for we stand amazed to see such learned
Physicians, men so highly reputed for their parts, to carry on such an
unreasonable Project, merely for their own sinister interest, (the Public good
therein being altogether neglected) as to solicit the highest Court of
Judicature, to confirm such a Patent to them, that they might be sole Masters
of their Lives, Souls, and Fortunes, without controulment: That they might
Brow-beat, Insult, and Tyrannize over those that are no whit inferior to them
in worth. Did Ambition, Covetousness, and Revenge so blind them, that they
should think that such wise Senators would ever condescend to make themselves
and People Slaves and Vassals to the insolent lusts of those, who never gave us
any proof, pledge, or earnest of their Cures in Physic above many
Apothecaries; who have protested to us, that there were some of these stately
Doctors so extreme ignorant in materia medica, that they did not know the
Ingredients of certain trivial Compositions presented to their eyes: yea, and
that some of their Prescripts have been so notoriously extravagant and
pernicious, that the Apothecary has been forced to correct them, unless he
would have suffered the Patient to run the hazard of perishing.

We confess, the Apothecary in many defects and obliquities is not to be
excused, however (as Diogenes struck the Father when the Son offended) so we
think the Doctor deserves the lash for not rightly educating and instructing
his poor obsequious servant; for we are verily persuaded had they been more
discreetly tutored, they would have proved better. But hinc illae lacrhymae,
this is that which wrings the Doctor, and galls him to the heart, that he
should bring up birds to pick out his own eyes; that after so many years sweet
congress, and mutual correspondence, his Labourer, Drudge, or Excrement (as a
Doctor was heard to call him) should now stand in defiance against him, and
take upon him to cure Diseases equally with him. And to say truth, a man cannot
tell which of the two exceeds; for we are of that opinion, one may pick and
choose, but find never a barrel better Herring. The Servant is now become a
Doctor, the Dispencer a Prescriber: Both use the same Method, the same
Indications, the like Medicines, and with equal success for ought we can see.
Of the two we confess, the Apothecary has for the most part the start of his
Doctor, for as much as he not only knows the Composition exactly, and at his
pleasure can frustrate both Physicians and Patients expectation; but also being
more conversant with the Sick man, can advantage himself more then the other by
frequent observations, which opportunity the Doctor, partly through pride, and
partly through covetousness and idleness, loses. Now good Master Doctor Galen,
let us reason a little soberly; have ye not brought your Hogs to a fair market;
whether of us (we beseech you) have been most prudent and provident? ye that
have made this noble Science (the Professors whereof Divine Writ has charged
to be honored) to become a mere mercenary or a meretricious business; a very
Trade to get money, an Imposture to serve your own ends, setting up an
Apothecary your Emissary and Decoy, to fetch in gainful Practice; or we that
have always been tender of the reputation of Physic, and the Lives of the
infirm; and for that end have not only studied hard for many years, beating
our brains to do that which is fitting according to Art; but also labored with
our own hands night and day, not without hazard of our lives, and great
expenses, that we might understand what we do, and do what we ought for the
Lives of our poor miserable Patients; that we might always have in readiness
those Arcana's, of which the vulgus hominum is, and ever will be ignorant. Had
we prostituted our selves and the Art, or taken those indirect courses which ye
have done, we are certain we might have been possessours of Riches and Honors
equal with you.

CHAP. IV. How the Galenists have domineered in the World, and deceived it.
It Is unspeakable how these Galenists have imposed upon credulous men, how by
their plausible Rhetoric they have allured them, and made the people willingly
to resign their Lives up to their Judgments, notwithstanding all those sad
presidents lively represented to their eyes. What fair pretenses have they made
use of to gull them into their Physic? What a supercillious command have they
had over their obsequious Apothecary, to speak for them, to lie for them; yea,
and to do some things for them, to the hazard of his Soul; being forced to
maintain, and sometimes to own all their miscarriages, misdemeanors, and gross
aberrations in Physic, or else he, his wife and children must bite on the
bridle. These are they that have infused into the people abominable vulgar
Errors in Physic, which neither Doctor Primerose, Doctor Brown, nor a
thousand like them, are able by the best of Rhetoric or Logic to eradicate,
till some notable and eminent Cures relating to their Lives, by degrees, shall
convince them of the contrary; which is a hard thing to do, because these
Mysochymists and haters of truth, have prejudiced them against the Assertors of
it.

Great men are not a little entangled in their snares, being lured and caught
by their bewitching tongues, by their fame of being great Scholars, well
versed in all the Languages, excellent Mathematicians, Historians, Geographers,
which are qualifications very laudable, and which we very much respect; but
what is all this to a Sick Man that lies groaning upon his bed in a violent
Fever, tortured with the Gout, the Stone, the Cholick, the Iliack, haling for
breath as for life? What is this man's Learning to him, if he cannot ease him
and give him Relief, quatenus a Physician? If after all learned Argumentation,
and Eloquence of the Galenist, some trivial Chemist that has learnt something
by blowing the coals for his Master, shall cure him, without any long preamble;
be serious and tell me (as we are all Philautists, and desire
self-preservation) whether this man (though otherwise not to be justified in
his ignorance) be not to be encouraged and to be had in some estimation in any
well-governed Land? Consider this therefore Worthy Magistrates, that as ye are
the Sons of Adam, ye will always be prone to Diseases; and doubtless none of
you in such a case but will highly prize a man that shall offer, promise, and
perform a Cure for you, above another that tires you out either with none, or
false promises.

Great Patriots, be pleased to take notice how they have villified and
slandered true Artists, persuading the World falsely, that Chimical Medicines
(which we frequently use without strict weighing them) were dangerous, received
an Empyreuma, or hurtful impression from the Fire; that they did either Kill or
Cure in a short time: yea, some of them have been so impudently audacious to
assert, That whosoever took Chemical Medicines, although he were cured for the
present, yet in the revolution of a year it would cost him his life. So that in
their fury they have cast into the Kennel out of a very honest and able
Apothecary's Shop, a most safe, innocent, and effectual Chemical Medicine, and
afterward have endeavored the ruin of the poor man.

A quondam noted Galenist, in greatest part reclaimed from their fopperies, and
almost got out of that durty practice, protested that he knew a most eminent
Doctor of the College, that passes for one of the most learned amongst them,
that did not dare to venture to give five or six grains of Antimonium
Diaphoreticum, which we can give with confidence, security, and good effect,
often to thirty or forty grains.

They formerly cried down Oil of Vitriol by no means fitting to be taken into
the body, because it did corrode a Glove, supposing it would act the same in
the Stomach. As for Mercurius dulcis, and other Preparations of Mercury, they
concluded them all to be little better then poison; which now they frequently
make use of, not scrupling to give it to Children, but we fear to their
destruction sometimes, as they order the matter by their method, and a careless
preparation of it, which they always refer to another.

Yet it is not long since that a Galenist of great fame did upon some Discourse
of Mercury confidently affirm, that he knew he could do as much with crude
Mercury, as any with it never so well prepared: which he dares not (we are
sure) maintain to be true by any visible instance, but spoke it merely out of a
Vatinian hatred to Chemical Preparations; which nothwithstanding he and his
Fraternity are forced to make use of closely, laboring to pump and fish them
out of others.

Now at length finding that they have strived in vain against truth, by their
obloquies and false suggestions still kicking against a prick; and finding they
cannot obscure the bright beams of Pyrotechnical Philosophy, they take now
another supplanting course, and of a sudden will all become Chemists; but
Galeno-Chymists, as monstrous and Anomalous as a Centaure or Siren: and hereby
they think to blear the eyes of the world, to make them believe, that their
Method sweetens all our sharp Vitriolate Medicines, allayes all our Corrosives,
fixes all our Mercurial Preparations; and in short, makes all safe and sound,
which otherwise would be destructive in our fingers. Thus they still juggle
with, and delude the world, still protracting and spinning out the time, very
unwilling to part with ease, gain, and honor, notwithstanding thousands suffer
by their indirect practice, e're they will come in quietly, and sincerely
submit to the truth, for the good of the Nation; although they know at last
they must be forced to yield, time bringing that to light which is their
principal study to involve in obscurity. For we make no question but that
posterity will admire their obstinacy herein, and abhor them for it.

Well, come what will come, for ought we can see they are still resolved to
maintain their State and Grandeur as long as they can, for their present life,
and then let the world hereafter censure them, what care they: (...), as the
Greek Poet has it. Yet it happened that one of their greatest Donns, being
questioned by a Perspicacious Gentleman, what the reason was, that he ordered
something very incongruous in reference to his Patient; and being charged home
by him, whom he knew would not be baffled, made this express answer; Hang it
(quoth he) we are but a Company of Cheats. This was reported to us by a person
of Quality, that dares testify the truth of it to the face of him that spoke
it.

CHAP. V. In what space of time a good Physician may resolve his Patient of the
Event of his Disease.
HE is unworthy the name of a Physician, that in Acute Diseases does not on the
fifth or sixth day after his admission, either make Nature master of the
Disease, or else on the sixth or seventh give a positive prediction what will
be the conclusion thereof; and that with so much certainty, that he should
seldom be mistaken but as a man: For it is a grand ignominy, and an
intolerable disgrace, to see a Mechanic to engage himself to bring to pass
what he undertakes, and a learned Physician, either not to dare to promise you
any thing of a Cure, or wholly to frustrate your expectation. It is no wonder
if some men taking advantage of your weakness in this particular, have cast it
in our teeth, that our Art is altogether conjectural; and that we do all things
therein by hab nab, happy be lucky; hitting the mark with as much uncertainty
as those people called Andabatae, that fought with one another winking; we wish
these Scoffs and Taunts might lie at the doors of those that have justly
deserved them.

In Chronick Infirmities a longer time must needs be required to give
satisfaction to the Patient concerning his Recovery, the matter of the Disease
being many times fixed in the Body, and as it were settled on the lees, the
ferment of the parts being either vitiated, or in great part abolished; and the
Archeus or vital Spirit being much diminished, the immediate instrument of the
Soul, by which it acts for our health or sickness, in which every Disease
nestles, and is primarily seated and characterized, without the power of which
none can be cured; (of which the Galenists have been too ignorant, until such
time most Acute Helmont (like a bright star of truth) made it appear) As the
matter stands thus, a Physician may very well assume a fortnight or three weeks
at most, finally to conclude what he is able to do for his Patient; whether he
be capable (as he conceives) to be restored to health, if not, then to resign
him up to another that may be able to do more: for this wier-drawing course in
Physic, to keep a Patient long in suspense, without any relief, (peradventure
for some private ends) is to be abominated.

It Is a strong Argument of great Weakness or Deceit in a Physician, when in
some reasonable time he cannot or will not give an account what is like to be
the Issue of his labors: such an one is to be avoided as the Plague, that is
blind and cannot discover the Mark he is to shoot at; or aims at the Purse of
his Patient, rather then the Recovery of his Health. Be advised whosoever thou
art, not to suffer him that waits for a Crisis, and cannot give thee in a short
time a sufficient Testimony of an effectual Cure, to proceed any further; for
be assured that a good Physician never looks after a Crisis, (standing still as
a mere spectatour while Nature is oftentimes worsted upon unequal terms by its
enemy) but with all expedition unroosteth that unwelcome Guest, that has taken
up its lodging in the vital Spirits, wherein the longer it lurks, the more
difficult it is to eject; for cunctando crescit, and so at length confounds the
Economy of the whole Body: wherefore an Honest and Prudent Chemist, Principiis
obstat, falls forthwith upon the extirpation of any malady, whereas the
Galenist labors to circumcise and lop off here and there the Branches or
Symptoms, lulling his Patient asleep with some incorrected Opiate, mitigating
slight pains by Anodines, quenching his Thirst by cooling Iuleps, bedaubing
his Feet, Wrists, and Front, with Cataplasms, and the like, to the wearisomness
and vexation of the sick Man, without any real casement of his Grief. Hence it
falls out that some of our learned Galenists have protracted an Acute Fever,
to the one and twentieth day, and that in hope of a Crisis, which we are
confident might have been taken down before the seventh. Hereby they hatch up
some Chronick tedious languor, which usually follows at the heels of most
Malignant Fevers they take in hand, because they never searched the Soar to
the bottom, but only skinn'd it over. Oftentimes do these Botching Galenists
bring to light a viperous Generation of Long Infirmities, that might easily
have been destroyed at first in Ovo the Embryon, which afterward growing too
headstrong for them, elude and slight all their trivial Applications.

And all this they can still do under the notion of safe Medicines; when indeed
a generous man had better have dyed Caesar's death, and nimbly to have been sent
into the other world by some precipitate Quack, or venturous Pseudochymist,
where he might be at rest, then to crumble and moulder away in a languishing
feeble manner; and withal to sustain those torturing and racking
Carnifications, by their Blisterings, Cuppings, Scarifications, Cauteries, and
Setons, with their loathsome Potions, Consuming Purgatives, their severe
Cookeries, and rigid Diet-drinks, and at length to drop into the pit. Let any
discreet man judge whether such Doctors as these deserve a Patent, who have
nothing wherewithal to excuse their Homicide, but that they perform it with the
fairest Method in the world.

CHAP. VI. How much precious time the Galenists spend in Anatomical Curiosities
to little purpose.
OUr Antagonists raise no small dust, and make no little noise with their
Dissection of Bodies, which were much to be commended, if they did not spend
more time then needs, rather for ostentation, and to get a fame abroad, then
for any notable improvement in the Cure of poor miserable Man. For if it
savoured not too much of vainglory, they would rather exercise these
operations more privately amongst themselves, and instruct any ingenious
Gentleman, that desires to be informed therein, so far as might conduce for his
particular satisfaction; and not make a public Theatrical business of it, for
the entertainment of any rude fellows: but enough of that. As exact Anatomists
as these men are, we know this for a truth, that the lodging place of Diseases
is seldom to be discovered by the Knife; which indeed was boldly attempted
(though in vain) by an industrious Galenist of late years, who cut up a
Pestilent Body, to find out in what part the Plague did principally reside, to
the loss of his own life, perhaps for want of some Arcanum which an Helmontist
could have given him.

Anatomy we stand up for, as much as any, without which we are certain a
Physician must necessarily be much defective in Physic; in which (we dare say)
some of us have bestowed as much pains as most of our Opponents: and something
we can say without vainglory, that we were the first that in these parts of
Europe have made the Experiment effectually of taking out the Spleen of a Dog,
without which he lived perfectly well two years and a quarter; the same being
often repeated by others who stiffly opposed it at first. But what is all this
to the grand matter in hand, which crowns and gives life to all the rest, that
is, to be master of those Remedies which (proportionable to Diseases) are able
to tame and subjugate them to the law of Nature? What would it profit to tell
our Patients that we had taken the Spleen out of a Dog, if they (afflicted in
that part) could receive no benefit from us? what pitiful comforters should we
be in such a case?

It Is true, the Invention of the Circulation of the Blood by industrious Doctor
Harvey, is highly to be commended, and gives some satisfaction in the solving
certain Phenomenon in Physiologie and Aitiologie; yet we can see the
Therapeutick part little advanced thereby, so that many stubborn Diseases are
equally as hard to conquer (caeteris paribus) as they were before its
discovery. Are your Officinal Medicines, on which ye solely depend, any whit
more sufficient and powerful to cure now, then before the Venae Lacteae of
Asellius, and the Vasa Lymphatica of (...) were brought to light? Or ye (for
this reason) better Physicians then formerly, notwithstanding all your raking
and groping in these uncomfortable dark cadaverous Subjects? surely not at all:
if the Spagyrist had not somewhat supplied your want in that which is most
necessary; affording you a few more prevailing Helps for your Patients Sanity,
then ye ever possessed heretofore. What would it avail if ye knew the exact
site of the smallest string or fiber in the Microcosme, and yet were not able
to reduce it, dislocated, into its right place? How uncomfortable to one
afflicted with some grievous malady, is that Physicians Anatomical Lecture of
Man's Body, if he be ignorant in the Anatomy of some Active, Spriteful,
Enlivening Medicine, that may give him ease. Whatsoever therefore is
introductive, subservient, and of far less moment comparatively, ought to be
set behind, and have less pains bestowed upon it, then what is absolutely
necessary, and does primarily and immediately conduce to the attaining that
End, which both Physician and Patient desire above all things; and such is the
Knowledge of Generous Remedies, which can never be acquired without Herculean
labor: for the hammering out of which, our whole (...) if we should live an
hundred years) is too scanty.

It Is certain, every Mechanic ought to have a competent insight of that
Machine, as Watch or Clock, etc. which he goes about to mend; but if he want
Instruments and fitting Tools, how is it possible he should rectify any great
Defect in it: In like manner it behooves a Physician to be acquainted with the
Structure and Conformation of this (...), admirable Engine, Man's Body, so far
as is needful and expedient, to instruct him in the Reparation and Restitution
of it, when at any time it is cast off the Hinges of its Sanity, through any
occasion from within or without: But above all it concerns him, to spend the
greatest part of his precious time, to bend all his sinews, and to put forth
his whole strength, to find out those powerful Remedies, which are indeed
(...), able to reduce and compose any Ataxie, Exarthresie, or Exorbitance in
this lovely frame. Desist then ye vainglorious Galenists from spending your
days about impertinent and superfluous Searches in stinking Carcasses, which
are never able to teach you how to destroy the Rampant Diseases daily breaking
violently into these living Houses, without Pyrotechnical Anatomy, which alone
can reclude the Secrets of Nature, and show us where every Disease is seated,
and by what effectual ways it may be disturbed, and thrown out of that Vital
Light in which it lives and dies.

CHAP. VII. A just reproof of the Ignorance of most of them in Surgery.
CErtainly it was an evil Design at first, and a plain demonstration of
idleness and pride in Physicians, when they brake into parts those Faculties,
which did formerly, and should always indivisibly reside in one man. We
confess Fractures and Dislocations require the hand of a professed Artist, that
is thoroughly versed in Anatomy and accurate Experience in this kind; but when
Medicines taken inwardly are principally to perform the Cure, outward as well
as inward Diseases belong to the Physician, so it may be done to the
encouragement of the Professors of Surgery; since honos alit arts: as the
matter stands now, it is not amiss for the Surgeon to have a share in the
profit, although the Physician has the greatest hand in the Cure.

We have oftentimes admired the Ignorance of some Galenists, that have not been
able to undertake a Whitlow, a Scald, a green wound, a trivial Soar, but have
been forced to send them to a Surgeon living remote, as if it no whit concerned
them; and as if any one could be a true Physician, and be destitute of that
which essentially belongs to his Art. Needs must that Physician be extremely
mutilated in his knowledge, that is to seek to cure a Phlegmon, an Erysipelas,
Fistula, or malignant Ulcer: For we can confidently aver, and make it
evident, that it is the inward Medicament that must principally cure most
outward Discases, if they be ever radically and to a purpose healed, outward
Applications being oftentimes of no effect. Yet we will not deny some virulent
Ulcers may to a wonder receive sanation by virtue of Chemical Preparations
outwardly applied; as, Balsamum Fuliginis, Balsamum Sameck, the pure Sulphur of
Venus, Antimony, and other Minerals, of which none but a true Son of Art can be
possessour. But above all is to be extolled, that admirable Magnetical way of
curing, which doubtless if rightly improved would work stupendous things; so
that some Galenist would presently conclude that there is Witchery, or some
supernatural means made use of: So blind and stupid they are in the most
needful Philosophy, that what their Brains cannot conceive, they presently
reject as Diabolical or impossible. Tell them of the Alkahest, or universal
Menstruum, of Lapis Chrysopeius, Lapis Butleri, of a Panacaea, they will but
deride and flout at it, boldly and presumptuously denying any such thing to be
in rerum natura, because their shallow wits being altogether soused and steeped
in durty Humors, Qualities, Temperaments, Mixtures, and Contrarieties, never
had the happiness to have the least glimpse of the admirable perfections of
such things. This we can set down positively as a truth, that that Physician
that knows not something of the Cure of Diseases both inward and outward this
way, is but a mere novice, always learning, and never like to come to any
perfection in his Art: Let him be never so much applauded for his excellent
parts, and great Learning, he shall always be esteemed by the wisest, an Idiot
in Philosophy, altogether ignorant of the radical and intrinsecal causes of
things.

We doubt not but there is excellent use of Manual operation, where the Knife
is to perform the Cure, as in Amputations of parts, Lithotomie, and the like.
But we know this experimentally, that both Physician and Surgeon are too
forward to lop off parts, and butcherly to cut holes in the skin; whereas many
times this bloody course might be omitted, and the sick person restored in
great part, if not altogether, to his pristine health, without mutilation or
sauciation; as we could instance of late in a Gentleman, belonging to a Noble
man, whose Leg after all their tedious torturing, and frivolous attempts, as,
Blood-letting, Purgation, Salivation, Sudorificks, Diet-drinks, Mercurial
Applications, and Cauteries, they at length despairing of his Recovery, advised
to be cut off: which God (by means of his poor servant a Chemical Physician)
prevented, the Gentleman being restored to his perfect health, and his Limb
saved.

It were to be wished, that ye would study to dissolve and reduce into their
first matter, those Coagulations frequently happening; as, Scrofulous Tumors,
Nodes, Scirrosities, Ganglions, Wens, etc. without Scarifications and
Incisions: but especially to bend your whole strength, to find out some potent
Arcanum (which God no doubt has created) for the untying and colliquating that
monstrous Product, in man's Body, the Stone, without cruel Lithotomie by a
frightfull Knife. Did you not despond to find, and supinely slight the pursuit
of something in this kind, yea, if ye did not maliciously discourage others,
without controversy such an Arcanum might have probably been brought to light,
able to dissolve the Stone even in the Bladder. But it is enough for you to
rest your selves contented with the old profitable way of Perforating and
broaching the Body, which if it fail, ye presently protest ye have done as much
as Art can; which narrowly examined by a judicious Physician, would perhaps
prove very impotent.

How often have ye received credit and applause from the world, when in the
Dissection of dead Bodies, ye have found any of the Viscera corrupted, or hard
congealed substance; as, stones in the Kidney, Gall, or other parts, justifying
and magnifying your selves, that more could not have been done by Art; whereas
peradventure at that time ye were first admitted, the Corruption might have
been hindered, and Coagulations dissolved.

Some few years since a Chemical Physician expelled three large Stones nestling
about the region of the Spleen, the least as big as a large Turky's egg, out of
a Maidservants Body, by virtue of some Paracelsian Medicines, perfectly
restoring her to health, which she enjoyes to this day; whom we are confident
if a Galenist had undertaken, he would by his Blood-letting, pernicious
Purgation, Blisterings, etc. have destroyed, and the cause of her Disease
should never have been discovered, unless by accident the Knife had made it
appear; which would have sufficiently excused the Galenist, and cleared him as
one that did what possibly could be done by Art.

CHAP. VIII. What a noise our Adversaries make with their Laboratory, and how
they vaunt that they use Chemical Medicines according to their Method.
YE make your boast that ye possess (as well as we) your Laboratory, and
variety of Furnaces: That ye use Chemical Preparations, according to your
Method, not as we do, at random. That ye knowing the ill qualities and
properties of them, and how hazardous they are, do upon a pinch fly to them,
having made use of first other safe Medicines.

These are fair pretenses of truth we confess, but if we search narrowly to the
bottom, we shall easily discover them to be mere delusions. As to the first
which ye glory in, your Laboratory, we answer, It Is not the Laboratory or
specious Furnaces that simply makes the Spagyrical Physician, no more then a
vast Library of it self will make a learned Scholar. Is there any more in this
then a mere pomp and vanity, to have multiplicity of Instruments, and not be
able to make use of them according to the true principles of Art. For we dare
aver it, that that man that is an enemy to the Doctrine of Helmont, cannot
possibly arrive to be a true Chemical Philosopher. He may indeed be like one,
as the Ape is said to be like a man, and therefore most deformed; Simia quod
similis turpissima bestia nobis, etc. Do ye think ever to attain to this
difficult Knowledge by virtue of your Master Galens Rules, who never saw
Quicksilver or Rose water? whom incomparable Helmont has made appear
altogether blind in the true Fundamentals of Nature, not knowing aright the
Quiddity or Essence of a Disease, the Cause, the immediate Subject, or place
thereof, nor the direct and perfect Cure of it.

Be not deceived, for it is no such easy matter, as ye would make the world
believe, to become a Philosopher by the Fire: lay aside therefore your dearly
beloved Galen, who has made you so rich by the ruin of others, and study
Helmont night and day; and when ye have attained some of his Theory, then buy
(as he advises) Coals and Glasses. By this means we doubt not but ye will
become sound Physicians, if otherwise never.

To what you allege concerning your use of Chemical Medicines, we may safely,
say, it had been happy for the credit of this Art, if none had ever come into
your fingers, or been prescribed by you; having so perverted the use of them,
partly through adulterate and sophisticate Preparations, proceeding from
ignorance, supine negligence, or covetousness; partly through your dogmatical
Method, prescribing them unseasonably, when ye have suffered Nature to be
worried by a Disease, and thrown flat on its back; and exhausted it by cruel
Phlebotomy, poisonous Purgations, Blisterings, Scarifications, etc. upon this
ye take occasion to malign, slight, and villifie those Chemical Medicines,
which ye either never had good, or never knew how to use. Yet thus much we have
observed, when a Patient finds any benefit, it is for the most part by virtue
of some Chemical Medicine which ye mix (as ye usually do) with your trumpery,
merely to disguise the matter, lest too much respect should be attributed to a
Medicament which ye have borrowed from your Adversaries.

Moreover, let any indifferent man judge, whether it be not a part of the most
odious Ingratitude that can possible be devised, for these men to scoff at, to
rail against, to calumniate and backbite them, from whom they have received the
best means they enjoy to cure their Patients; without which they had been
before now exploded and thrust off the stage of the World with disgrace.

CHAP. IX. An Answer to some Objections laid to our charge by the Galenists.
OUr Adversaries object to us, that many ignorant Empiricks make use of
Chemical Preparations, to the destruction of many credulous persons: posting
themselves up in every corner of the Street, proclaiming themselves to be
possessours of great Arcana's, even to Panacaea's, whereby they profess they
can work wonders, and cure a Catalogue of Diseases which the Galenists count
incurable; but being brought to the touchstone of sound experience, they are
found to be mere Impostors, empty of all sound knowledge, no whit able to
perform any thing proportionable to their promises.

Moreover, they urge that our Chemical Authors are Hyperbolical, or excessive
in the praises of their Medicamens, extolling them beyond the activity of the
things themselves; and that they frequently set down false Processes, which
when a young beginner first puts to a trial, according to his Authors
description, he is disappointed and discouraged in limine, even in the first
essay or onset, which is enough to make us censure you Stentors and vain
boasters. This we confess ingeniously is not to be denied in part, and we could
wish it otherwise; but it is the fate of the best things to be corrupted, and
it is an ill Argumentation to conclude any thing to be evil, because some have
abused it. For our parts, we utterly disown and renounce these men's actions,
condemning their ignorance as severely as ye can, desiring they might be
suppressed, and chastized according to their demerits. Yet thus much we can say
for some of them, that having got some trivial Chemical Medicines perchance
from your Apothecary, neglecting your Method, (which many times ties you up so
fast, that ye want liberty to use some laudable Medicines for your Patients
recovery) they have performed some eminent cures to your disgrace and their own
applause; which has made some admire your great imbecility herein, to the
dishonor of Learning. We know a Chemist that desires no more Practice in
Physic to get a competent living by, then those Patients to whom ye cannot
make a promise of a Cure after two or three months time, whom he would
undertake to resolve in less then a month. And assuredly to any discreet man
this is proof enough, how erroneous ye are in that which chiefly concerns the
life of man. For our parts we should think it very strange, and be infinitely
ashamed, if any Patient should be cured by the Galenists, whom we have given
over, which (we are sure) ye on the contrary part cannot make good.

As touching Chemical Authors, that set you not in express terms the right way
to make some Medicines, and likewise prize some more then they deserve, for
these we Apologize not: But by your favor, we conceive that many times the
error lies in you, who want true Chemical Rudiments, and not in them who
think it not wisdom (seeing the unhappy success thereof) to set down all things
so plain, that an Apothecaries boy may understand them. For believe it, if ye
had those Philosophical Principles which Helmont has delivered to the world,
these trivial Authors could not so easily deceive you: In him we are sure ye
will find sound Doctrine, and demonstrable, by which we doubt not to confute
your false Theorems and Axioms in Philosophy. We plead not for any that
magnify any Preparations beyond what they deserve, it is enough if we engage
our selves no further with you, then wherein the things themselves shall
justify us.

CHAP. X. An Expostulation why the Dogmatists will not come to the touchstone
of true Experience.
WHy halt ye thus between two opinions, and will not come fairly and heartily
to give the World an assurance of your sound Practice, which concerns their
Lives and Souls, but still equivocate, playing fast and loose, tergiversating,
wrangling, and quarrelling about Punctilio's in Physic, assuming to your
selves a strange Heteroclite or Hermophraditical name, as Galeno-Chymists,
invented by your brains to blind the world; a name altogether inconsistent
with a true Physician, who may very well be expressed by two syllables.

Why has not your Sect yielded formerly to Helmonts fair Proposal, while he
was alive, that there might be a final conclusion of these Controversies by
matter of fact? (indifferent Judges appointed on both sides to give their
censure) Why do ye not accept of the same at this day, if ye were not conscious
to your selves of your own weakness? What poor shifts and starting-holes have
ye found out, what pitiful fig leaves have ye joined together to cover your
nakedness, and to wave this fair, necessary, and most evincing way, to discover
Truth by Action? Contrary to which, all your Sophistical Disputes, your
Paralogismes, your Quirks, your Tricks and plausible Juggles signify nothing;
no nor your great Schollarship, not rightly squared and applied to the use and
benefit of mankind, and the charity of your neighbor. Let not therefore any
Physignathus, inflatus scientia, supercilious Critic, chattering Linguist, or
one that knows how to dispute Problematically and Artificially to deceive his
Brother; let not such (we say) who professes and practices Physic, being
grossly ignorant of the right knowledge of things, for the commodity and use of
the world, boast or vaunt of his glittering endowments in this kind: but let
him rather lay his hand upon his heart, and considering his own emptiness,
reflect upon himself, how he has deceived and been deceived; and at length let
him, though a Senior, (for it is never too late to repent sincerely, and be
wise to salvation) embrace the sound Doctrine of Helmont, who will teach him to
save men's Lives as he ought.

If any be so ingenious to say, I have done what I can, and I know no other way
then Bleeding, ordinary Purging, and Sweating Medicines, and doubt whether
there be a better, and would willingly learn; we shall undertake to demonstrate
to this man, that which will be very satisfactory to him, and question not to
convince him, if he be not notoriously obstinate of his mistakes in this kind.

CHAP. XI. How much to seek the Galenists are in that necessary Philosophy
which directs us to the Cure of Diseases.
NEeds must the Galenist err in the cure of Diseases, when they are very
ignorant of their Causes. Their very Fundamentals and Principles in natural
Philosophy being false, as Helmont has plainly made it appear. What an
absurdity is it to take in Fire, which is neither a Substance nor an Accident,
to make up the four Elements, and to fetch it from the highest Region, next the
Moon, that it might enter into all Concretes: and from these Quaternary
Elements to deduce their four Humors, Complexions, and Temperaments, and
accordingly to proceed in the Cure of man; bending all their forces to remove
Qualities, Accidents, and Products of Diseases, leaving the Disease it self
behind?

What an erroneous Definition have they made of a Fever, and therefore it is
no wonder if they go unsuccessfully about the Cure; as if there were no more to
be done but to take an Indication from preternatural Heat, and so to cool in
the same degree, for the restoration of the Patient to his former sanity;
making that essential to a Fever which is but a mere product, depending upon
the exorbitancy of the Archeus, or vital Spirits?

What error can be more gross then to maintain, that the natural Heat of the
Stomach, by means of the parts adjacent, is able to alter what is taken into it
so powerfully, that in a short time even such hard Bodies, as Bones, Iron, and
Glass, are dissolved in it, which the Culinary Fire cannot easily conquer;
taking no notice that the Stomach of Fishes are actually cold, and yet digest
most vigorously. Surely it is very improbable that these men should rectify the
indigestion and defects of the Stomach, that know not how it performs its
office aright. Hence it comes to pass, that they often destroy by their
faeculent Medicines the Eucrasie or Tone of that part which ought to be taken
into care above any in the whole Body.

Analogous to Fire, they have brought in an Humor called Choler, part whereof
they say is gathered into a Receptacle of a Bladder, which overflowing and
exceeding (they affirm) causes the Jaundies, and many other Diseases depending
upon that Humor; reckoning that an Excrement (to be purged out with Rhubarb)
that is of most noble use, which no perfect Creature can want, neither Beasts,
Fowl, or Fish; ordained by God as a special Balsom, to preserve the Body from
putrefaction; by virtue of which the second Digestion is performed, the Acide
juice of the Stomach being converted into a Saline. Their ignorance herein has
produced many capital Errors in Physic, which would be too tedious to insist
upon.

From the Element of Earth they have deduced another Humor called Melancholy,
which they have placed in the Spleen, reputing it a part destinated for that
purpose; never dreaming till Helmont divulged it, that in it and the continuate
Arteries, is resident a ferment of most admirable use for the Digestion of the
the Stomach, which being interrupted through multiplicity of occasional Causes,
engender various Diseases; as, Scurvy, Plurisie, Quartanes, etc. which they
neither know how to cure, nor by their good wills would suffer others.

What a miserable Error is it in Philosophy to assert, that the Stone in the
Kidneys and Bladder is engendered from Phlegm, (which they say symbolizes with
the Element of Water) which Humor by power of a graduated Heat (but where to
be found in the Body we know not) is brought to that stony consistence; which
how to break they are altogether unwitting, unless by the knife.

It has been a common practice to keep their Patients some months to
Diet-drinks of Guaiacum, Sarzaparilla, Sassafras, out of an intent of drying up
superfluous moisture, and imaginary Catarrhs in the Body; as if one of their
strong Purges would not more effectually answer that Indication in one day,
better then their former course in a month. These things Helmont has plainly
showed to be ridiculous.

Who in his right wits will take these men to be found Philosophers, that
attribute the cause of extreme thirst in a Fever simply to Heat and Drought;
whereas at the same time a great quantity of cool liquor floats in the Stomach,
to some pints perhaps.

They see Hydropick persons abound with great quantity of moisture all over the
body, and yet cannot be provoked to sweat; however they never gave us any clear
Reason thereof till Helmont appeared.

Infinite have been their mistakes in Nature, and false Hypotheses, to the
detriment of man's life, which are sufficiently laid open by that great
Philosopher Helmont. And therefore having given you a little glimpse of these
things, that ye may conceive ex ungue leonem, we shall refer you to know more
of that worthy Author, who has delineated and characterized them exactly; from
whom we acknowledge to have received most part of our Instructions.

CHAP. XII. Of the two grand Supporters of the Galenical Physic, Phlebotomy
and Purgation.
DId the World rightly understand what destruction of mankind has been made
by this Sanguinary way of curing Diseases in all Ages, since this prodigal
emission of Blood came first in use, (suggested without all doubt by that sworn
Enemy to mankind the Devil) it would (being enraged) utterly abominate any
such Physician, or such a pretended remedy.

How happy may those Nations be reputed in this particular, (witness their
Longaevity and Sanity above ours) whom Nature has so well instructed, as not
to part with this precious treasure of Life, unless against their wills through
some violent separation of the connexed parts. And certainly were we but
governed by Nature, which intends all things for its own preservation, and
never erres therein, unless interrupted or put by its scope through some
transverse contingent, we would by no means admit of this Bloody course for a
Cure; being sufficiently convinced, that this Solar Balsom the pure Blood,
called by the Latins (to distinguish it from Cruor) Sanguis, the very Stamen
and Subtegmen, the subject and material foundation of Life, is never
exterminated or cast out of the Body by Nature, unless extimulated through some
exasperating and hostile matter that is gotten into it. And indeed to let out
promiscuously Sanguis and Cruor, good and bad together, which is unavoidable,
for qua data porta ruunt, is equally absurd, as to cut off part of the fleshie
substance of the Finger, that the Splinter or Thorn therein fastened may be
removed; or to suffer generous Wine to run out, that some distasteful and
fracedinous odor contracted from the Vessel may be taken off; or that the
Ebullition or Effervescence thereof, proceeding from the impetuous Spirits,
endeavoring a segregation of impurities in it, may be assuaged: whereas it is
more consonant to reason, to pick the Thorn out of the finger, to impregnate
the Wine and Vessel with some odoriferous fume or liquor, that it may become
fragrant and pleasing in smell; likewise to take down the fermentation of the
fretting acide Atoms thereof by some artificial means, that is able to lenifie
and appease the Spirits, and settle all quiet.

Doubtless the same may be accomplished in man's Blood, (when at any time
through some preternatural occasion it becomes tumultuous, exorbitant, and
degenerate from its genuine goodness) by ridding it of that pungitive acidity
and cadaverous foulness, which makes it disturbed and restless as long as it
remains in it; for omne vivens mortui impatiens esse solet.

And this we are certain an able Physician can effect, being admitted while
there is a competent strength, which we are always most careful to preserve
and augment, contrary to the tenor of your Practice. For so soon as we have
discharged the first and second Digestions, of what did burden and clog them,
we either exhibit some potent Arcanum, which upon its first entertainment into
the Stomach, does either pacify the fury of the vital Spirit, or by its
illuminating beams does disperse the black Atoms that obnubilate the same
Spirit, that it cannot act for the good of the whole: Or we give some Volatile
Alkali, enriched with the specific Virtues of fit Concretes, capable to be
circulated with the Blood into all parts of the Body, being allied to the
foresaid Spirit, and symbolizing with it.

These are powerful in Opening, Cleansing, Expectorating, Volatilizing any
congealed Blood, invigorating the natural, and correcting the preternatural
Ferment; extinguishing the acidity of the Latex in the Blood, dissolving
Scirrous and Tartareous-like matter, with which sometimes the Veins, Arteries,
and other parts of Body are as it were parietted. These are Diuretic,
Diaphoretick, and Antimalignant mortifying Erysipela's, breaking and
profligating Vomica's, or any Abscesses in the Body; and this we can engage our
selves to perform, without any notable diminution of the strength, or fear of
recidivation, or any dangerous lapse into some Chronick Disease, which the
Phlebotomists dares not promise with any security: for it often happens that
the Patient is sent Piecemeal to his grave, being (as it were) grated into his
first Elements, because his Disease was never rightly managed in the beginning.

Now the greatest Plea the Galenists have for Blood-letting, is taken from
Plethora sanguinis, an extraordinary fullness of Blood quoad vasa, or quoad
vires, as they call it; that is, when the Vessels are over-filled, or the
strength oppressed with too great redundance of Blood; and here they speak
equivocally, leaving us to seek what Blood they mean, either that which is
properly named Sanguis, the most pure sincere, and sublimest juice in our Body,
in which the Soul is chiefly seated, or that crude (lately rubefied liquor
called) Cruor, oftentimes abounding with superfluities and recrements: If they
take their Indication of Bleeding from the first, we can confidently upon sound
Arguments deduced from some experimental Demonstrations (which we would set
down at large, if succinctness which we aim at did permit) assert, that there
is no such thing really existent in the Body of man; for never had any man too
much of that most vital Balsom called Sanguis, the increase or diminution of
which, shortens or prolongs our days; for could there be every way a plenary,
absolute, and continuate reparation of the same, our Lives would be protracted
to an exceeding great length beyond what they are. This therefore is by no
means to be exhausted or squandered away upon trivial occasions, at the
unreasonable and arbitrary commands of a desperate Galenist, but to be
precisely preserved and hoarded up, as the only Treasure and Stock of Life.

Well, if they take their Indication to Bleed from fullness of the last called
Cruor, then since this consists of partly excrementitious matter, and partly
wholesome juice, disposed, and in a fair way to be made Sanguis by long
Circulation, they must necessarily by opening a Vein, let out without any
election, the laudable as well as the depraved parts in the Cruor, and its
inseparable companion the Sanguis, and all to satisfy one supposed palliating
Scope (of little moment in comparison of the rest) an inanition of that which
erres in quanto, which being attained, produces more hurt then profit any way;
and might easily have been corrected by Diaphoreticks, and those proper
Medicines that respect a Quale in the Blood, and cause a free Diapnoe thereof;
consuming insensibly (according to Sanctorius his Statica) no small quantity of
our Substance in four and twenty hours, sufficient in a very short space with
Abstinence joined thereto, to take down any Athletick habit of the Body* so
that the principal Indication in this case ought to be taken from Cacochymie,
which frequently infests us to our destruction, and that imaginary and
insignificant plenitude to be neglected.

There is we confess something to be said for the defense of immediate
derivation of some degenerate Blood, impacted any where, as when in a Phlegmon
the Vein contiguous to the part affected is opened, that the faeculent: Blood
contained therein, oppressing it, may be directly and moderately discharged,
that thereby the residue may be more difflable and easy to be discussed:
Likewise, when there is some muddy foul Cruor restagnant about the Spleen and
Womb, threatening an Abscess or some other malady, etc. in this condition the
Opening the inward Haemorrhoides or Uterine Veins may sometime profit, without
damage to the whole; supposed the Physician be destitute of those generous
Arcana's, that are able without any solution of continuity, to reach the part
affected, and to conquer the Disease radically, by mundifying the Blood, and by
ridding it of that Thorny, Vexatious, and Virulent acidity of the Latex that
oftentimes gets into it.

All this seriously weighed, who would not avoid this Blood-sucking course, and
rather commit himself to such a Physician, who, not as a mere illiterate
Empyrick or Quacksalver, ventures his Medicine at random, without any sound
reason or intellectual notion of what, wherefore, when, and how much of it he
gives; but being thoroughly acquainted with the Diagnosis of the Disease, is
able upon very firm grounds to make a Prognosis of it, and so to proceed to a
Therapeia, according to just, necessary, and direct Indications, accurately
designing an Adaptation, Appropriation, and Adaequation of the Remedy to the
Disease.

Away then with this detestable lavish Phlebotomy, that has destroyed more
then Tobacco or the Sword together, may it be banished the Court, City, and
Country, nor ever be depended upon hereafter in this Island, or any of His
Majesty's Territories, for the cure of any difficult Disease; but let it be
confined and inflicted as a feral Plague upon all those that delight in Blood,
and hate our Gracious Sovereign, and all his loyal Subjects.

CHAP. XIII. Of the second Supporter, fruitless Purgation.
It Is not without great reason that excellent Hippocrates mentions one Aphorism
no less then four several times, (...), that is, If that be carried out of the
Body by Purgation that ought to be, the sick man finds himself the better for
it, and his spirits more cheerful, and better able to bear his Disease; as if
he had foreseen the great mischief that was like to come upon indiscreet
Evacuation, with deletery Catharticks, which putrefie and colliquate the lately
tinged Chymus into a faetide and cadaverous substance; whereby some juggling
Physicians take opportunity to impose upon their credulous Patients, that they
are in a fair way of recovery, (though they find it otherwise) since so many
ill Humors, as Choler, Phlegm, etc. are purged out of their Bodies, whereas
in very truth not a jot of the morbifick Cause has been so much as touched.

We have a History to confirm this out of Helmont, and experto credamus, for
the worthy Author tells us, that taking his leave of a young Lady, holding her
by the hand he caught the Itch; whereupon he sent for two of the most eminent
Galenical Physicians in that City, to consult with for the cure of it: who,
upon the sight of a Purulent Scab presently delivered their opinions, That
there was abundance of Adust Choler and Salt Phlegm in his Body, which
occasioned a depraved Sanguification in his Liver. Upon this account, after
they had largely bled him, and prepared the Humor (forsooth) with their fulsom
and nauseous Apozemes, containing about fifty Ingredients, with addition of
Agarick, Rhubarb, every fourth or fifth morning, to the end that this supposed
retorrid Choler and Salt Phlegm might be drawn forth, according to that
innate similitude of Substance, that they would fain make us believe is between
the Purgative and the Humor; and at length they gave him those virulent Pills
de Fumaria every third day three times, which wrought so liberally, that they
almost filled two buckets with the foresaid Humors: But hear with what event
in his own words, Iam venae mihi exhaustae erant: Genae conciderant, vox rauca,
totus corporis habitus concidens tabuerat: descensus quoque e cubiculo atque
gressus erant difficiles, quia genua me vix sustinebant. That is, Thus at
length were my Veins emptied, my Cheeks fallen away, and I could hardly speak
for hoarsness; my whole Body was wasted, so that I could hardly get down out of
my Chamber, it being most tedious to me to stir, for my Legs were scarce able
to bear me up; yea, my Stomach failed, that I had neither Appetite nor
Digestion: and withal my Itch was as bad as ever.

Thus was this great Philosopher (who at first, setting aside this Cutaneous
infection, was found Wind and Limb as we say) brought almost to the gates of
Death by this enormous Purgation, who without doubt might have been cured very
suddenly, if that true peccant matter, which is the principal occasional cause
of Diseases, and is but little in quantity, had been carried off by some
appropriate Solutive, and the Miasma which stole in through the pores of the
Skin, and there settled in the innate Archeus, had been mortified; which course
Helmont at last took for his recovery, after he had been macerated, and
excarnified by a Hypercatharsis, always accompanied with a Dysphoria and ill
effect.

This remarkable Story of Helmont (the same being re-acted many thousand times
since) may give men a strict Caveat how they put their Lives into the hands of
such desperate, persidious Evacuators, who cast men into Purgatory, and yet
never expiate the Disease, Assuredly those Physicians that exterminate out of
the Body good and bad at random, the Cruor or good Juice, and the Scoria or
Dross, with such uncorrected Catharticks, that are no better then absolute
poison, leaving sometimes an impression behind hardly deleble; seldom giving
any alleviation, unless (as clavus clavum expellit) per accidens, may be very
well compared to a mad person, that in cleansing a foul house, casts out with
the filth some of the most useful Furniture belonging to it. And yet what is
more commonly practiced amongst the Galenists, who being consulted, do upon the
bare inspection of the Urine, frequently and rashly prescribe Bleeding and
Purging; the last whereof being best of the two, though bad enough as they
order the matter, does generally more mischief then good.

We speak not this utterly to condemn some moderate Evacuations, both by Vomit
and Stool, since we our selves oftentimes intend the same and make it our Scope;
but we never give them so uncorrected as they, to the injury and impairing of
Nature: but they are such that are always (...), consentient and competent
Remedies for the profligatiag the Disease, leaving behind an Euphoria, an
alacrity of the Patient, and an abatement of the Infirmity according to his
capacity.

Neither do we depend upon Solutives simply, as sufficient to cure any
difficult Disease, but having often that most excellent Rule of Hippocrates in
our thoughts, (...), that is, to carry the Morbifick matter that way Nature is
most inclined to send it our, supposed the passage be commodious. We never give
any Purgative Medicine, but the same is Diaphoretick, Diuretic, and
Expectorative: For whereas your Catharticks are often pernicious in malignant
Fevers, as the Pest, Small Pox, Spotted Fever, and the like, so that the
Archeus being distracted upon the admission of such an unwelcome guest, leaves
the propulsion of the malignant matter, and bends all her forces to conflict
with the late received poison, whereby it comes to pass that the venom of the
Disease, which before tended to the Peripheriae, or outward parts of the Body,
hastens forthwith to the Center, and there fixes upon some of the noble
Viscera, We on the contrary can safely exhibit, in any of the foresaid
Diseases, some Medicament that may rid the first Region either upward or
downward of trash and trumpery, which encumbers it there; and at the same time
both kill and drive out the Venom to the extreme parts, and grand Emunctory of
the whole Body the Skin: questionless he that omits this last principal
intention, shall seldom cure any Fever, or any other Malady as he ought. And
indeed it is most happy for us that what Hippocrates faith is most true; (...),
That is, our whole Body is porous and transmeable, especially our Skin: for did
we not freely breathe out those hurtful Atoms, that are engendered within, and
likewise insinuate into us from without, we should perpetually be obnoxious to
Fevers, and other horrid Diseases, that would quickly destroy the World; for
never did any one recover of a Fever, but by Transpiration either sensible or
insensible; which ought especially to be regarded by all legitimate Physicians,
that they may labor vigorously with their own hands to have in readiness such
noble Arcana's, that may reach the sixth Digestion, and there join with the
Archeus, to extinguish any malignity, to difflate and dissipate the gross
Peritomata, and virulent Excrements therein contained. He that is ignorant
herein, may as well presume to cure the stinging of a Scorpion, the biting of a
Viper, or Tarantula, by Purgatives, as with any assurance to heal most
Infirmities that are predominant among us at this day. For very many Diseases
have in them that (...) of Hippocrates, something of a more spiritual and
invisible Nature, then to be carried off by gross Purgatives.

Has not the Apoplexy (that destroys a man in the twinkling of an eye)
something in it like the poison of a Basilisk? Is there not in the Palsy
something of the stupefying Nature of the Fish Torpedo? Have not some Plagues
destroyed men suddenly like some Mephitical or pernicious Damps, arising in the
subterranean and deep caverns of the Earth, which happens to those that dig in
mines? Questionless the Letharigie arises from a poison analogous to Opium or
Hyoscyamus. The Itch may be compared to the venom of Cowich, The Spots in
Fever and the Scurvy, to the biting of Fleas. The small Pox to some virulent
Epispastick; and the Measles to Nettles or Gnats.

There is sometimes engendered in our Bodies an nitrosulphurous matter, that may
be compared to Gunpowder, which puts us as it were into a flame, and would
quickly shatter us in pieces like a Granado, were there not free vent for its
expiration through the pores of the skin. In a Gangrene, the part is mortified
as if some potential Cautery were applied to it. What a strange poison is there
in the Rickets, that often makes an Exostosis, and bends the Bones of Children
like a bow? But most prodigious is that poison in Plica Polonica, that in one
night does so complicate and contort the Hair, that all the art of man cannot
untangle and unsnatle it; which if you attempt to cut off with a pair of
Sciffers, a large Haemorrhagie or flux of Blood presently follows, to the
hazard or ruin of life.

Many more Diseases in this Microcosme might be instanced, that do manifestly
express a poisonous Nature of affinity with those in the Macrocosme; but this
may suffice to convince those men of most palpable ignorance, that think the
common course of Scouring the Body with ordinary and deletery Laxatives, is
sufficient to cure most Diseases that consist of so subtle and almost
immaterial substance. It is as possible to hinder the Magnetic Operation of
the Loadstone upon Iron, by the interposition of a piece of Lawn, as to be able
to cure the foresaid Diseases by faeculent colliquating Catharticks. Certainly
that cannot be an appropriate and adequate Remedy, that is not in some degree
proportionable to the Disease, as it is more or less graduated and sublimed in
its activity: For let us take into our contemplation, what an inconsiderable
thing in bulk is able from without to discompose, and disorder the whole frame
of our Bodies, turning them as it were topsie turvie in a trice.

In what a minute subject matter does the poison of a mad Dog, a Viper, a
Tarantula reside? of what little moment is it in bulk to our eye, and yet how
admirable are their effects to our speculations? Since then Venoms no whit
inferior to the forementioned, are oftentimes produced in our Bodies, being
exalted to that degree of malignity, that they sometimes destroy us solo
intuitu et radio, how sollicitous and sedulous should we be to enquire after
such Antidotes, which the great Creator has ordained, equivalent to their
poisons; that may be able with as much celerity and vigor to preserve and
restore us, as the other to pessundate and destroy us.

This undoubtedly might be compassed by industrious and learned laborers in
Chemistry, did not these obstinate Galenists (who always stick in the mire of
their stercoreous Purgatives, as, Scammony, Colocynthis, Agarick, and Rhubarb,
utterly to be sequestered from the Body of man so unprepared, (as is evident
through their whole Dispensatory) and never to be made use of so crude and
hostile to Nature by any Son of Art) discourage and disparage us, and take off
the hearts of Princes from favoring us, by falsely traducing this Honorable
Science, and the Professors thereof.

CHAP. XIV. Of that fictitious Rule of Contraries, by which the Dogmatists are
guided in the cure of Diseases.
THat Sentence, Contrariorum contraria sunt Remedia, is generally taken up by
the Galenists as a certain Rule, by which they presume to abate or remove most
Maladies; but with what little success, and what little verity there is in it,
may easily be obvious to any intelligent Observer, that has but seen a Fever
directly cured. What destruction has been made of mankind by this one
Position, to which they have adhered most superstitiously, (though altogether
false, having, as Helmont has proved, no absolute being in Nature) is
unspeakable. How many Orphans and Widows have reason to brand with a Curse
this one Sentence, whose Parents and Husbands might have survived many years,
had not their Physicians taken a contrary course to cure them, and thereby sent
them packing to the Grave? Some of us could relate notable storries not long
ago acted by them in this kind, which for brevity sake we shall now omit. For
the first thing they usually declaim against in a Fever (when they have got a
Patient in a hopeful way of recovery out of our hands, by their insinuating
close ways) is, that our Medicines (if they find that they be spirituous,
active, and strike upon the Nostrils any whit strongly, or affect the Tongue by
their Leptomerie and subtle penetrative Atoms) are too hot (forsooth) for the
Disease, and endanger the inflammation of the Blood, causing thirst, etc.
whereupon, having by their smooth eloquence possessed the Patient with a
dislike of such Remedies, they presently fall upon (according to the foresaid
Maxim) the prescribing of cooling Juleps, P^isans, Emulsions, Decoctions
saturated with crude Herbs, uncorrected juice of Poppy, and the like, hardly
allowing them a draught of small Beer, but by no means any Wine; whereby it
comes to pass that the Tone and Ferment of the Stomach is subverted,
Transpiration hindered, the Malignity detained, the Blood made restagnant, the
Vital Spirits depauperated, losing their activity and force, becoming torpid
and careless to preserve themselves, and the Morbifick matter more tenaceous;
and at length perhaps the sick Man rid of his Disease, and laid cooling in the
Churchyard.

Were it not far better to trust in a Fever to a Pepper or Mustard Posset, a
Decoction of Carduus Benedictus, Aron, and Horse-raddish-roots, that quicken
the Archeus, strengthen the Stomach, rarifying and cleansing away the febrile,
gross, viscous matter by Urine and Sweat, then to such dull, destructive, and
mortifying Iuleps of the Galenists, given according to the pernicious Rule of
Contraries? How do these men neglect the saying of Hippocrates, Naturae (that
is the vital Spirits principally) sunt morborum medicatrices, when they will
not support and invigorate them with a little Spirit of Wine, (with which they
symbolize above any thing) because it conspires with the Fever, and so too
hot; not considering those qualities of Heat and Cold are but Products and
Consequents of the Disease, which being removed, there presently follows a
cessation of them in an instant: so that it matters not whether the Medicine be
Hot or Cold, so it eradicate the Malady, which irritates and exasperates the
Archeus, that it is impatient till it have shut out such an unwelcome guest;
and according as it makes several Assaults and Onsets upon the occasional
Matter, so it varies in those momentary and transient qualities of Heat and
Cold in the extreme parts; which are but insignificant in comparision of that
which is primarily to be looked after, the enabling and advancing the
enormontick power of the vital Spirits, to profligate the Disease; which can be
done no better way then by spirituous Liquors, which whosoever denies
moderately and seasonably, for fear of some small inconvenience, which the
violation of the Maxim of Contrariety may induce, may very well be reputed a
pitiful ignorant Physician. For we are able to make it appear optically, that
Wine (as it may be ordered in the hands of an Artist) is able to conquer many
very acute Fevers, even that they call a Causus.

The same reason they observe for the curing of Diarrhaea's, Lienteria's,
Gonorrhaea's, Vomitings and Haemorrhagies, making use of Astringents and
Corroboratives, that may diametrically answer the Laxity and weakness of the
parts, whereby they many times constipate in the Body, and as it were wedge in
that which Nature went about to extricate; whereas any but a daubing and
palliating Physician, would aim at the extirpation of the original Cause of
these Effects; which being once expedited, all the Products, Symptoms,
Phoenomena, and Epigenomena cease immediately. But to be short, for I must but
touch upon these things, it is no wonder and these men take a contrary way to
heal Infirmities, since they have always been and still continue so contrary
and opposite to the most sound Pyrotechnical Philosophy, stiffly holding fast
their opinions (we fear) with one of their great ones, who swore in another
case, se nolle persuaderi etiamsi aliquis persuaserit: That he was resolved not
to be convinced that he was in an Error.

CHAP. XV. A brief Examination of their Pharmacopoea.
WHat invalidity and impotence to heal Infirmities there is in their
Preparations in general, set down in the Pharmacopoea Londinensis, as a pattern
and rule for all their Servants to follow, is obvious to any one that has made
a considerable progress in the Theory and Practice of Physic, so that he be
not prejudicated and carried away by sinister respects. It would require a long
time to scan and set down at large those Nonsensical, Ridiculous, Improper, and
Languid Medicaments they have ordained for the help of man: We shall only
compendiously give you a Glance of some of them. We find throughout their
whole Dispensatory these remarkable Errors inseparable and common to all their
Preparations.

First, we observe a great Defect in the Analysis, or opening the body of any
Concrete, that its Crasis or purer part may be obtained; so that what they give
is very little of its Virtue, separated by halves, or drowned and swallowed up
with the Scoria, Faeces, and Excrement of the whole; so that it is impossible
it should explicate its activity as it ought.

Secondly, we observe what a Congeries, Cento, Linsey Wolsey of Simples they
jumble and clutter together, to some scores, without any reasonable symbolizing
contexture or congruity, looking more ways at once, then ever Argus his eyes,
but still from the principal mark; clashing, conflicting, and at greater
hostility with each other, then ever their supposed contrary Elements; whereby
they castrate and rob many a single Ingredient (by this confused Hotch-potch)
of its eminent Properties, which being duly prepared and applied, would do a
Physicians business.

Thirdly, we cannot but especially take notice and condole the ineffectual,
frivolous, and vain Corrections of those virulent and poisonous Concretes,
which they take into many of their Compositions, thinking it enough to add to
them a little Anniseed, Ginger, Cinnamon, or some Gum, with the like, only to
disguise and palliate, no whit to mitigate the violent Powers of those things
that are of themselves destructive to our Nature.

It Is strange they should be so wilfully ignorant, in making no scruple of
prescribing ten or twelve grains of Scammony, and little less of Colocynthis,
manifest poisons so uncorrected, and yet startle at, and are very nice to give
four or five grains of Antimonium Diaphoret. whose supereminent Purgative
operation is taken off by virtue of a Spirituous Salt that purifies and fixes
it in the Fire. But it is the custom of these Polypragmones to busy themselves
about impertinencies, and to neglect matters of greatest weight, stumbling at a
straw and leaping over a block, straining at a gnat and swallowing a camel,
superstitiously precise in the regulation of the Patients Diet, over punctual
in the contrivances of Slibbersauces, and withal to offer him pestilent and
lethiferous Medicaments, which they are not at all sollicitous to correct. If
such be not ignorant in their Art, we would willingly be informed who are? that
neither know how to make a good Medicine, nor how to order it in every respect
when they have it, as we can make evident.

It cannot be denied but that the best of the Remedies in the Dispensatory are
Chemical, for which they are beholden to us, and these (we assure you) are of
the lowest Tribe and meanest trivial sort in comparison; neither are these free
from being sophisticated through inadvertency of some, and covetousness of
others, nor are they at the best such as they might be exalted to in the hands
of an Artist. We shall instance in some few that are frequently used: Who, but
such as are supine, and indifferent whether they kill or cure, would suffer the
flowers of Brimstone to be so slightly prepared, that we can see little
difference between it and the vulgar finely powdered? whereas if it be
Pyrotechnical handled, four or five grains sublimed shall effect more good then
a dram of the ordinary.

The most usual, safe, and best Vomit (in their account) is borrowed from
Antimony, called Infusio Croci Metallorum, and yet this acts but uncertainly in
the carrying off the morbifick matter; for wanting its due alteration and
correction, it causes sometimes no small discommodity in malignant Fevers;
moreover, their Method will not suffer them to use it aright; not knowing when,
how often, nor to whom it may be given with any confidence, that an Euphoria or
alleviation may follow: and the reason of their hesitation therein, is their
often being frustrated in their intention, and some sad consequences that have
come upon it.

They have taken into their Shops another Vomit called Mercurius vitae, which
we wonder they would ever venture to admit into a Catalogue of their safe
Medicines, with a -- etc. since they always heretofore railed at it, and are
not yet absolutely reconciled, calling it Mercurius mortis: Some of them having
had ill fortune with it, because their shallow wits understand not the right
process, the just dose, management, and use of it, which a Mountebank or
Quacksalver is better acquainted with (to their disgrace) then they; for by
virtue of this common Vomiting Powder, many an illiterate Empirick has gained
no small reputation in conquering those stubborn Effects which baffled them,
and were believed incurable. Now (setting aside the abuse of the thing) if
Mercurius vitae meanly prepared, and extravagantly given by Idiots, be able to
do such rare feats in Physic, what think ye might be done by it if graduated,
exalted, and perfected in the hand of a learned well experienced Chemist, that
utterly renounces the Galenical Method?

In Fevers and Agues they cannot but confess that they are much obliged to us
for the discovery of Oil of Vitriol, which does them the best service therein
of any one thing they possess, for the extinction of the thirst, and allaying
the Ebullition and Effervescence of the Blood; not by cooling, as they grossly
imagine, but by comforting the natural ferment of the Stomach, and by
correcting that Alkalizate, Exotic, and putredinous matter therein. How
difficult it is to procure this Medicine legitimate (and without exceptions)
from the Shops, let any Euchymist that has labored with his own fingers
herein be judge? For as those directions they have set down for the drawing it
over are very ordinary, and much inferior to the more sublime way, so likewise
their use and application thereof is very suitable; for the Prescription of it
is many times as absurd, and to be derided, as their ordering of four drops of
the Spirit of Vitriol in the composition of Electuar. Sassaphr. consisting of
two pound of Sugar and other Ingredients.

How poor, jejune, and barren is the Preparation of Pearls and Coral with
Vinegar, that does but only superficially divide them, and as it were
pulverize them into small parts or atoms, not at all penetrating them Centrally
and Essentially? What dull Preparations of Mars have they set down, more
becoming some Feminine Practioners then such learned Doctors?

Mercurius sublimatus dulcis, and Praecipitatus, are now exhibited by some of
them, for the Cure of knotty and stubborn Diseases, as, Lues Venerea, and the
like, but after a deal add, niceness, and scrupulosity, they were loath to
venture upon them, till some confident Surgeons lead them the way, and taught
them a better Method then their own, to destroy these Hydra-like monstrous
Diseases, that have of late sprung up among us.

How strangely blind most of them have been in the (...), or manual tractation
of Mercury, may appear by a Galenist, who bitterly enveighing against Chemical
Remedies in the presence of a Spagyrist, by whom when he was questioned, why he
did then prescribe Mercurius dulcis, as appeared in one of his Prescripts upon
the File, and being convinced of the truth thereof, and how it was a Mineral,
protested he verily thought it had been a Vegetable, and had its original from
the Herb Mercury. Hence we may learn how perfunctory and drowsy many of these
Prescribers have been, and what little inspection and scrutiny they have made
into that which is deservedly reputed by all Hermetical Philosophers, a miracle
in Nature.

Thus they credulously rest themselves contented, trusting to other men's Eyes
and Hands in things concerning Man's Life, thinking it sufficient if they can
get by roat the bare Names of some Paracelsian Medicines, though they neither
know the facture of them, what they give to their Patiens, nor how much, nor
when, as they ought. For did they take pains themselves, they would quickly
discover that these Mercurial Sublimates and Praecipates in the Shops are very
imperfect, compared with those that an Adeptus is able to produce.

CHAP. XVI. A Cursory View of the Mineral Waters, to which the Dogmatists fly,
as to a Sanctuary, in Difficult Cases.
HAd not kind Nature provided some better means and more forcible Helps for
the poor Diseased, ready to his hand, then the Galenist, he had been at a very
sad pass. How many by virtue of these Mineral Wells have been restored, that
have been brought to a very low ebb by Ill Physicians, having run through a
long and irksome course of Physic, even to desperation?

We are apt to believe, that those that lately endeavored to Engross all
Physical Practice into their own hands, would by their good wills likewise have
prohibitted the admirable use of the Waters, unless to whom they should have
prescribed them, that their Method might have gained the more credit: For we
are persuaded that they looked upon the Waters with as Envious an Eye, as ever
they did upon our Chemical Preparations; (although they have been forced to
make use of both upon a pinch) and why? Because when all their costly
Compositions could do no good, some few Draughts of a Cheap Mineral Water has
done the business. Which thing may very much plead for the rare Effect of
Minerals (which they have so declaimed against formerly) were not the
Dogmatists perverse beyond expression. One would think they should not so long
with such Heat have contended against them as dangerous, scarce allowing them a
place in the Apothecary's Shop, after so many visible Experiments of their
Sanative Property, to which they have been beholden at a dead lift.

Had they not minded their own, more then the public good, they would have
observed Nature, and contrived by Art those Medicines, that might at least have
equalled, if not excelled, what she was pleased liberally to afford us out of
the Bowels of the Earth for our comfort.

Who, that had not been lazy and supine, but would have found out e're this a
Succeda^eum to Natural Martial Liquors, that so powerfully rectify the Spleen,
and open the tuff Obstructions of the Hypocondries, cleanse away any Sabulous
Synagma, and gross impurities from the Kidneys, takes off the Acidity of the
Serosa Colluvies, and corrects the noxious Aspect of the Womb, pacifying and
amending its furious exorbitance? Were it not much for the repute of Physic,
to have always in readiness (at all Seasons of the year) some such Artificial
Preparations contracted into a small bulk, (proportionable to the foresaid
Natural) answering the like Intentions, that thereby the Patient might save the
labor of a long journey, and the Excessive Sumption of crude Water to his
prejudice sometimes?

What cannot a good Menstruum friendly to Nature, free from Corrosion, do in
this kind? that is able to reserate those secret Active Virtues that are fast
locked up in Metals, and bring them to light. By this means the Primum Ens of
Minerals may be discovered, and their Sulphurs extracted, which are able to
perform wonderful Cures in the hand of an Adeptus.

If the Esurine Salt of Sulphur Embryonate lightly touching a Vein of Iron or
Copper, and therewith imbued, is able to exert and express such powerful
Efficacy in Healing within and without; ought not this to excite any
industrious man to follow the footsteps of Nature, to observe the beginning and
progress of her Motions and clandestine Working in the innermost parts of the
Earth; and accordingly to imitate her in dissolving either of the foresaid
Metals, by an Appropriate Saline Liquor, that is able to penetrate them
Centrally. If ye took pains herein as ye ought, many a calamitous Disease might
be overcome in the beginning, which through delay and procrastination becomes
incurable, before the Patient arrives at the Mineral Waters.

It was not without Reason that a famous Empirick did cause an Esurine Water
every other day to be fetched fresh, which he made use of as the best Liquor to
receive and convey the Virtues of Concretes; which may be a fair president for
you that are destitute of better Remedies.

And since ye will not vouchsafe to foul your own fingers about matters of so
great moment concerning the Life, show your selves so far desirous to do
Righteous things, as to put in practice what Nature, or some laborious Artist,
shall offer you prepared. For our parts, few of us depend upon these Mineral
Fountains, having wherewithal to supply the wants of our Patients, and to
procure Sanity at home: and we conceive that (...), that is, some Vinous
Spirituous Liquor, a surer, safer, and more expedite means to overcome a fixed
Disease, then (...), the pouring in a great quantity of raw Water, not without
some inconvenience, as we have known, though prescribed by a most Exquisite
Galenical Method.

But the Offense in these Esurine Waters is far more Venial then the frequent
Oblation of Aqueous and maukish Iuleps in Fevers, sine Sale, aut Sole, without
either Spirit or Life; as Unsavory and Torpid as the Authors that Dictate
them, who with as much Judgment and Reason prohibit those the use of Salt,
that are inclined to the Duelech, Stone, and other Troubles, which we are
certain is most effectual to prevent them. Doubtless it is far better if
opportunity be offered, to take a journey to the Wells, and to drink moderately
of those Esurine Waters, abounding with Saline Corpuscles, then to be obliged
to take the dull Drench-like Potions of the Dogmatists, more fitting for a
Horse then a Man; for those being of thin parts quickly pass through, and carry
with them some Peccant Matter, seldom leaving any great evil Impression
behind: but these being gross and muddy put the Expulsive Faculty to much
trouble to discharge them, leaving many Faeculencies and Grounds behind, and
thereby debilitate the Digestion of the parts.

Now our faithful Advice in general to such as drink these Mineral Waters, is,
that they first take some proper Emeto-Cathartick, that may cleanse away any
filth lurking in the Stomach, Guts, and Mesentery. Secondly, That they begin
with a small quantity at first, and so rise higher by degrees, according to the
capacity of the person; always taking after the Water that which may rectify
its Crudity, corroborate the Ventricle, and other parts, stir up and increase
the Vital Spirits, furthering the Water in its operation. Thirdly, that the
Diet be very moderate, always gratifying the Appetite, offending rather in
Liquid then Solid nourishment; and here generous Wine taken soberly with
discretion, cannot but profit and produce many good effects.

CHAP. XVII. A Vindication of Chemical Medicines from that false Accusation of
being Dangerous.
IT is a hard thing to strive against the stream of a vulgar Opinion at any
time, but especially when countenanced and backed by men of eminent Knowledge
and Fame. Naught in this case save somewhat of a Miracle, is able to undeceive
those, that have obliged themselves to an implicit Obedience, and indisputable
Belief of whatsoever their admired Professors shall deliver, conceiving what
proceeds from their mouths must needs be Oracular. Such reverence does some
men's Authority carry with it, that they need not take pains to invent
Arguments, where an (...) puts the matter out of doubt. Indeed we much approve
of this in Religious Matters, but can by no means allow it in Humane Arts and
Sciences, which ought to have something of Demonstration to confirm the Truth
of them.

What Difficulties some of us have undergone to persuade some prepossessed
against us, (that have imbibed the Exitious Precepts of the Galenists) to admit
of those Chemical Remedies (which we knew would save their Lives) is well known
to those that have been made sensible of their Error herein. For the very name
Chemical did sound so Deadly in their ears, that many in those places (where we
practiced) did apprehend, that he that dealt in such Medicines had a design to
destroy them; and that he was to be avoided as a Necromancer, or one that
busied himself in some unlawful Art: So that if prevalent necessity had at any
time forced them to take these Preparations into their Bodies, they were even
sick with conceit; and we had more ado to cure their Misapprehensions and
Crazie Fancies, then their Diseases. Yea, now and then all our Eloquence and
best Reasons could not prevail to persuade them, that what we had given them
was innocent, leaving no ill effect behind; and that they were perfectly
restored without Relapse. Now their scrupulosity principally arose from this
ground, (besides what the Dogmatists had infused into them) because we
performed our business with quickness and dexterity, without those large
Purgations which they had been formerly used to. To satisfy all these foolish
and frivolous Doubts, which their great Doctors had buz'd into their ears, took
up no little time and patience.

Now, these things considered, have not the true Chemists been put to a very
hard task, to conflict with a sworn Enemy the Galenist, a peevish,
prejudicated, unruly weak Patient, and a predominating Disease. What, but
Omnipotent Truth, could ever have brought this Despised and Exploded Art into
any Estimation, that the Professors thereof should dare to look any Opposer in
the face, and defy what he can openly object against it.

Magnarum usque adeo sordent primordia rerum. The greatest things have but
minute and contemptible beginnings, attaining perfection by degrees. Never was
any excellent, useful Invention brought to light, inconsistent with some men's
Interest, but presently there emerged malicious Zoili, or proud Emulatours,
that contrived how they might strangle it in the birth, by defamation and false
suggestions.

This course the Galenists took in the Infancy of this noble Science, crying it
down with all might and main, conjuring the world that they should avoid all
Chemical Medicines as most dangerous; damning them all without distinction. And
when they saw they could not maintain this falsity long, e're some Benevolent
Patients that had found the contrary by experience, made it appear otherwise:
Then missing their aim here, they inserted this Hypothesis, If they be not well
Prepared; as if any Artificial thing could be innoxious if not well prepared;
for even our common Food not well ordered may be dangerous to us; and a nasty
Slut may poison a man, and verify the Proverb, God sends meat, and the Devil
sends Cooks.

Who that argues for Spagyrical Medicines does not take it for granted, that
they ought to be made by an Artist? Will ye never desist from diminishing the
worth of a good thing, because some have abused it? Is Chemical Physic in
express terms (without equivocation) any whit dangerous, unless depraved by you
and some illiterate Pseudochymists? How is it likely that ye should ever make
an approved Chemical, that never made a Good Galenical Remedy? Whose are most
saving, and consequently safe, yours, that are either like Chip in Potrage, or
else hazard the producing some mischief; or ours, that according to the
capacity of the Patient (due circumstances observed) acts as infallibly for his
welfare and preservation, as Fire burns and Water moistens, from a Power of its
innate gift, that the great Creator has bestowed upon it.

You would do very well to reflect upon your Dispensatory, wherein (except some
few Chemical lent you) all your Preparations either omit to do what they
should, or commit what they should not: And certainly these are dangerous per
se, supposing they be made accordingly to your best Art. If ours offend it is
but per accidens, because those Requisites set down are neglected to make them
such as we intend them.

For Example and Experience, which is the true Touchstone that must discover
us: Let any of you in perfect Health pick out of your formal Apothecary's Book,
stuffed full of supernumerary Preparations, the most Safe and Active of them,
that do you the greatest service, to the number of ten; weigh out the known
Dose of any one singly, with the strictest curiosity you please; take each of
you the same into your own Stomachs, and repeat the Dose as often as ye dare;
and so proceed likewise with another, and so on to the residue of the ten: When
ye have acted your parts, we likewise (every way sound) selecting ten of our
Arcana's, will swallow down (without trusting to the Scales) a sufficient
quantity of any one (that may be most suspected) which we commonly exhibit to
the Sick for their recovery; look how often ye have taken of each of your ten,
so often will we iterate or duplicate the sumption of any one of ours. And then
let any indifferent person judge who bears their Medicines best, having the
fewest bad Symptoms following, and so conclude accordingly whose are most
dangerous.

Such has been our zeal for the good of our Neighbor, that we have for some
years seldom given any thing to our Patients which we have not first taken into
our own Bodies perhaps many times: And consideratis considerandis, an Acute
Medical Observer shall learn more feelingly from himself, that which tends to
the right use of any Arcanum, then he shall from another. Assuredly for our
parts, we had rather run the hazard of an ambiguous Remedy our selves, who
know, and can best correct any supervenient inconvenience thereof, then to
proffer it upon uncertain grounds to another, who perchance through his
impatience and morosity will neither suffer us to amend what is fallen out
amiss, nor listen to any reasonable Apology how it came to pass. If the
Galenist did take this course, he would not give Chemical Preparations with
such a Tremulous hand as he does, being doubtful whether they be made as they
ought, and what certain effect they may have. For all this proceeds from a want
of that true experimental knowledge which he may (setting aside this timorous
childish apprehension of danger and hurting himself) acquire, by frequent
repetitions of ingesting that into his own ventricle, which may instruct him
far better then another.

We deny not but the Ambient Air, and the differing Constitution of several
individual Bodies do somewhat alter the Operation of that which works by
sensible vacuation, which is to be considered, but not to be insisted upon too
superstitiously; but we see no reason why some transcendent Arcana's which act
tono unisono invisibly, should not cure diverse persons alike indifferently, in
the East Indies, and this part of the World, with some small variation of the
quantity. So that an Adeptus may presume to induce, that if the best sort of
Medicines have a constant happy effect upon himself at all times of the year,
the same cannot but express the like energie upon others, presented by an
expert hand that has an eye in it.

It were to be wished that Physicians would animate some nice scrupulous
Patients, and convince them of those harsh conceits they oftentimes harbor,
(not without just cause) that they shall make an Apothecary's Shop of their
Bellies; (and if what they take do not work it will poison them) by swallowing
down the same before their faces, that they may recant of their folly, and be
further encouraged to submit to those Rules which are easy to observe, without
any rigor or danger in them. And we admonish any that desires to be approved
in the Iatrical Art, to make it his principal pains and study to be thoroughly
acquainted with the Practical use of those Medicines he possesses so exactly
and accurately, as a Shoo-maker with his Last, or an Artificer with his Tools;
that knowing what he can trust to, he may after a judicious examination of the
Sickness, begin and proceed in the Sanation of the same with confidence, and no
less real performance.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Galenical Method.
OUr Adversaries do much glory and vaunt in their Method of Curing, asserting,
that if a man have never so excellent Medicines, if he be ignorant therein, he
cannot discharge his duty as he ought. We desire first to know of these learned
Grecians, what (according to the Etimon) this word Methodus signifies. Is it,
we pray, any more then a short way of healing Maladies? How short ye come of
this, the world may easily judge, who keep your Patients in a course of Physic
so long, till ye run them quite out of breath, and all under a pretense of
Method. Is it worthy of a Physicians Method to dally with his Patient some
months, even years, and not absolutely satisfy him, whether he be curable or
no: or perhaps after he has exhausted his strength and purse, to send him into
the Country, to the Wells, or Bath; yea, sometimes into France, that the less
notice may be taken of it if he chance to dye (as we have known) by the way? Is
not this a rare Method to see a Physician keep a pudder, and make a great noise
about a sick man's Diet, precisely to enjoin him, upon loss of his Life, not to
violate the least punctilio; strictly forbidding those things which (given by
the Nurse or standers by, and concealed from the Physician) have cured him? To
see a sick wretch in a vehement Fever, almost parched up for want of moisture,
and not a draught of small Beer allowed him to quench his unsatiable thirst, or
a little Wine to refresh his drooping spirit, is enough to make a man afraid of
such a Method.

To hear them when a man is in a peracute Fever, Logically discourse of their
Indications, General, Subalternate, and Specific, Profitable and Unprofitable,
Artificial and Inartificial, Condications and Contraindications; with those
they call Consentientia, Correpugnantia, and Permittentia, and be extremely
ignorant of Indicata, or Remedies, proportionable and competent to cure the
Fever; suffering the Patient either to perish, or to fall into some desperate
Chronick Disease, and so to twindle and moulder away at length; whereas if
things had been rightly ordered, all this might have been prevented, is
sufficient to make a man explode and nauseate their Method.

When we hear how curiously they examine, which of the four Humors, arising
from the mixture of the four Elements, (which never had an existence in Nature,
as Helmont has sufficiently proved) abounds in the Body, that thereby they may
find out a convenient Purge; as, Rhubarb for Choler, Agarick for Phlegm,
etc. loosening the Body by stool sometimes fifty or sixty times; to the
consumption of the strength of the Sick party, without any ease, the Morbifick
matter still remaining behind untouched.

When they learnedly babble concerning Complexions, Temperaments,
Constitutions, being grossly ignorant of the Seminal, Formal, and Vital
Properties of things; not able to discover in the least without relation, or to
give any plausible reason thereof from their durty Elements, Humors, and
Qualities, that this man naturally abhors Posset Drink, a second Honey, a third
an Egg, which if they should take into their Bodies, in some Diseases, were
enough to cost them their lives. When they stand so superstitiously upon the
Season of the Year, the Climate of the Country, the Qualities of the Air, the
Time of the Day, that before they can take an opportunity, the Patient is ten
times more hard to cure, or perhaps past relief: All this (rightly understood)
would justly provoke a man to condemn, abhor, renounce, and defy their
Method.

Who that has any spark of charity in him, but must needs pity that
distressed wretch, who has a Physician attending him, that gapes for a Crisis
even to the one and twentieth day, doubtful what is like to be the issue then;
and in the mean time exhausts the purple Soul of his Patient by frequent
Phlebotomy, spending his Spirits by some torturing course, marring the ferment
of the Stomach; and is so far from assisting and furthering Nature, that he
becomes a remora, or hinderance to her; so that if strength of Body be not
extraordinary, it is impossible such an one should escape without a miracle:
Certainly a man may not offend to say that this is (...), Satan's device and
plot to destroy mankind. Or we may justly censure this Galenical Method, as
the word Methodus signifies, according to another interpretation, Fictio, or
Ludificatio; a mere Imposture or Cheat. Had not a man better either to trust to
God and Nature, or, if he can be procured, make use of some honest, plain
Physician, who without any deceit or pompous Preludium, shall fall to his work
of curing you.

It Is a sad thing to behold a young man in the flower of his years, in full
strength of body, abounding with Vital Spirits, sending for a Physician in the
beginning of his Disease, to be thus Methodized into his Grave, by them that
pretend to be such grave learned Doctors; who, if he had dyed in the Field
bravely, ought little in comparison to be lamented. Can any sober, wise man
blame any one that knows this to be true, and dares demonstrate it, that he is
Satirical and invective against these notorious actions? That man questionless
that knows he can prove these things to be so, cannot but damnifie his Soul, if
he make not a timely discovery of them for his Countries good. We invocate the
supreme Power, that it is not malice to any man's particular person, nor a
principal Design to be known in the World to our advantage, that has excited
us to declare our selves thus, to the detriment of any man's individual credit
and reputation: Far be it from us, for these things (if it could have consisted
with Charity and a good Conscience) should never have been published; and we
hope our future actions will sufficiently demonstrate our sincerity herein;
though we expect from our Adversaries nothing but harsh censures, underminings,
quick eyes to discover our lapses, calumnies, and reproaches. But it is
sufficient that we have done our duty, to give the world a fair warning of
these Abuses, which if it make not good use thereof, let it be upon their
score, since we have done what we ought.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Helmontian Method.
AS you magnify your own Method, so ye often cast it in our teeth that we use
none, and that we can give little account of what we do, but as Empiricks. As
to this we would willingly know of you, whether of the two performs things more
orderly and methodically, he that brings the Life into confusion, disorder, and
at last perhaps to a sad Catastrophe, by a tedious, impertinent, groundless,
absurd, and fruitless means, quite beside the mark; or he that sweetly
composes, pacifies, and allayes the disorders, irregularity, exorbitancies, and
tumults in the Microcosme, by direct and adequate applications and
appropriations of those friendly Medicines, which may assist Nature immediately
to conquer its grand enemy the Disease, that at length there may be a happy
conclusion to Health, without your insalutiferous Method?

What man that has been thoroughly cured of a dangerous Disease in a short time
by us, will ever find any fault that we did not use your long Method; a mere
Ens Rationis, invented to delude the world? Are ye to be excused that go far
about to destroy your Patients, notwithstanding your tinkling and trapped
Arguments and Conclusions deduced from false Premises? For our parts we had by
far rather enjoy an ability in our Profession, to relieve a languishing wretch,
tortured and racked with some cruel Malady, then by making a great noise in the
world, puffed up with empty knowledge, be reputed great and eminent Scholars,
but altogether ignorant in the cure of a Disease; Frustra fit per plura, quod
fieri potest per pauciora, is known to every ingenious man.

If we Heal in a fortnight a Sickness, that ye cannot in a month, are not we
the best Methodists? If we strike at the Root of a Disease, ye at the Branches;
if ye mistake in applying Agents rightly to Patiens, erring egregiously in the
Primary, Efficient, and Material Causes of a Disease, often blundering and
overseen in your Prognostics, and extremely blind in the proper Crasis of
things, thus groping in the dark, are seduced by the Ignes fatui of your
Elements, Humors, Temperaments, seldom (unless by accident) hitting the mark
(as ye ought) your Patients sanity: If we can give a better evidence and
Phisolophical account that we are in the right in Iatrical Practice above you:
If we, when we come to our Patient, after some short inquisition shall declare,
that there is such a cause of his Disease, and that the subject of it is in
such a part; and that if he be observant, we shall in some little time satisfy
him, whether we have a Remedy sufficiently potent to make Nature master of the
Disease or no; and so accordingly make our Prediction confidently, and that on
the fifth or sixth day after our first visit in acute Diseases: If we
peremptorily deliver, that by Gods help we doubt not but to cure him, and bring
to pass the same, without relapse or succeeding Diseases, far better then the
Galenists, will not any man say that we are the best Methodists?

What signifies it if ye abound with hundreds of Medicaments, composed by your
own Apothecaries, which ye say ye use according to Indications, and not one of
these a competent or adequate remedy for many great Diseases? Is it not better
to enjoy twenty or thirty good Auxiliary Preparations, made with our own
fingers, the meanest whereof shall be more effectual then the best of yours;
and these used not (as ye falsely object) at Random, at a Venture, but
Rationally, and according to a just Techmarsis, taken from Nature and the
Disease; the one whereof we shall (as ought to be done) assist to overcome the
other, by removing impediments, and occasional causes, by purifying and
strengthening the Organs, by tinging the parts with some excellent and
appropriate Balsom, by invigorating and rectifying the ferment of the Stomach
and other parts, by dulcifying the degenerate sharp Latex, which infests the
Blood, Viscera, or any instrument, by expunging and razing out the Character or
Idaea of the Disease in the Archeus, or Vital Spirits; lastly, by pacifying the
displacency, tumults, fury, and exorbitancy of the Archeus. And when we have
made the truth of these things appear in the presence of modest, indifferent,
and discreet Judges, we shall give sound, satisfactory, Philosophical Reasons
of what we have done, which we will undertake to elucidate thus.

We will so many of us on each side (as we shall agree upon) visit the sick
people of some Hospital, with equal and competent Arbiters or Censors: After
that each party has given his Verdict, and Opinion of the nature of the
Disease, inward or outward, we will make our Prediction what is like to be the
Epilogue or Event thereof, whether it be curable or no, and in what time
probably it may be brought to pass. Let the Galenist, or Helmontian, that does
(according to the Sentence of those elected persons, to whose award we are to
stand) perform his business best in the Diagnostick, Prognostic, and
Therapeutick part, prevail, and be taken into the favor and tuition of the
Magistrate; and the other be rejected, and banished out of the City with
disgrace, never to appear here to practice Physic any more.

Or we will deal with you in this manner, we will summon so many Patients that
have Fevers, or other Diseases, in the City, whom we will visit together, and
according to our former proposition, enter upon a direct proof, who may best
deserve a Diploma or Patent.

Or we will (if ye please) act severally, we will (with so many impartial
Judges) undertake twenty persons that have Acute Diseases, and so many
Chronick; after that we have illustrated the Nature, Condition, and Magnitude
of the Disease to the standers by, (our foresaid Arbitratours) we will enter
upon the Cure with a Prognostic, in Acute Diseases, after our first admission,
upon the fifth or sixth day; and in Chronick Diseases, in the space of three
weeks or a month at farthest. Ye shall be bound to act the like, the same
Supervisors attending you that did us; who, after they have seriously weighed
all Circumstances, being rightly informed, and considered what difficulties
both parties have been put upon, shall determine as each of us have done better
or or worse, who are the true Artists, and so receive a Reward or Mulct.

Moreover we declare, that we shall take into our hands twenty sick persons
that have Acute Fevers of what kind soever, and of these twenty, we will
engage to secure under God Sixteen of them upon the fifth or sixth day after
our approach, or to give a Prognostic upon the same days, how the Disease
will terminate; in which if we fail, we shall be willing to suffer accordingly,
supposed that ye come to the like trial.

And because ye insist so much upon Bleeding, and there is no Disease according
to your own Positions, that requires it more then a Pleurisy; we dare oblige
our selves to cure more Pleuritick persons, cito, tuto and jucunde, without
Bleeding, then ye shall, making use of the same.

This is the way, great Doctors, for you to redeem the credit of this noble
Science, and to restore it in some part to its pristine Renown, and doubt not,
if ye do your business as ye should, but that our Sovereign Lord the King will
give you a Diploma, and confirm a Patent to you ex condigno; for questionless
he is of Hannibals mind, Hostem qui feriet erit sibi Carthaginensis. Do well
and have well. But if ye fall to your wonted Scribbling, your quarrelling de
lana caprina, your captious and critical Censures, your guilful Sophisms, and
Paralogisms, making the world believe that this is but a foolish Contest, and
that Truth cannot be determined this way, by reason of the variety and
multiplicity of circumstances to be observed; and that to put these
Controversies to a trial in an Hospital, is to put our Sickle into another man's
Harvest, with such like Mormolyceia, or Bugbears, which ye returned us as
Answers, when some of us did urge by Letters, and Challenge you in particular
to this most expedient proof: Yea, one of you arguing with another of us in the
presence of some ingenious persons, (and the Galenist confounding the
Argumentation with much prattle, on purpose to amaze the Auditors, that they
might not rightly understand the Opponent the Chemist, (by whom, when he was
put upon then, as at several other times, an Essay of Action) made a pish of
it, objecting, that in difficult Cases, we Chemists had always a recourse to
Action. If (we say) ye shall continually deal thus with us, and disregard us,
that profess, and can vindicate our selves Scholars, and Philosophers, equal
with you, we are resolved (after this Epitome, being only an hint to the World
of some of your Indecorums in Physic) to publish an History of your Errors
therein at large.

CHAP. XX. Some Animadversions upon the late Attempt to procure a Patent from
His Gracious Majesty, for the Erecting a College of Chemical Physicians.
NEver was there a more just, honest, desirable, and useful Enterprise set
upon in this Nation, then an endeavor of some Chemists to purchase an
Influence and favorable Countenance from our Sovereign Lord the King, that
thereby we might be authorized and encouraged to meet together, and consult
(without interruption) about some expedite and effectual way, for the
regulating and reforming those present enormous Abuses in this excellent
Spagyrick Science; and for the prevention of the same for the future; and that
we might join our forces for the meliorating and advancing of that Art, which
in despite of all Adversaries, will in some short time manifest it self to be
Queen Regent in Physic. Moreover, seldom has there been any Design more
generally countenanced and animated by the learned Nobility, and ingenious
Gentry of England, then this.

But such has been our fate, that some malevolent ill-disposed persons (as
well from within as from without) have both maliciously and ignorantly cast
such rubs in our way, that we have been disappointed from attaining that end,
for which his Gracious Majesty has professed to have no small kindeness.

That therefore every Inquisitive man may in part receive some satisfaction,
what hitherto has obstructed our business, we certify him, that some of us
have been overseen at first in admitting among us certain very illiterate
persons, that were (...), Chymic^ Umbratiles, mock Chemists, no whit exercised
in Anatomy and Botanicks, inexpert in the History of Diseases, their Efficient
and Material Cause, their Event, or any Cure, of which they could give any
Philosophical reason: These have been among us (...), foul blots and disgraces,
presumptuous Boasters, heady and high-minded, intruding themselves to our
disturbance; whereby our subtle supplanting enemies have taken advantage to
defame us, representing us to the world a company of Fanatics, falstly
suggesting that we went about to tread under foot all Learning, and to
introduce a mere Empirical way of Practice in Physic, with such blasting
language, contrived on purpose to diminish our Repute, and to disenable us from
atchieving that which would prove so useful to the world; that they may the
better establish their pretended Polyarchical Government in the Galenical way.

That these Aspersions therefore may be taken off, and no more reflect upon us
to our prejudice, who profess our selves Philosophers by the Fire; we freely
declare, that we are Philomatheis, hearty lovers and promoters of Learning, and
shall never go about to derrogate from Schools and Academies, but shall
vigorously defend them so far as truth will admit; and shall be ready to
censure him that pleads for Amathie, or illiterature in the Body Natural,
disposed (if ever opportunity be offered to him) to stand up for Anarchie in
the Body Politic. And we are resolved upon mature thoughts, never to join with
such, that (disclaiming against Schollarship) go about to lay the foundation of
such an Illustrious Art, upon the sandy foundation of some wild and
extravagant Notions, that they have picked up by chance from some slight
Operations made at a venture. For whosoever enters upon Pyrotechnie, ought to
have beforehand some general knowledge in the Nature of things, and to acquire
some infallible Axioms and Theorems delivered to him, by those that have been
most expert; which how any one can attain to, without a competent knowledge in
the Scholastic Languages, we are much to seek. And certainly Helmont never
thought a rude and illiterate person destitute of any previous Theory, a fit
Agent to aspire to the Mysteries of this profound Science. For our parts we
should be willing to condescend to any thing below our selves, that such an
eminent Attempt as a Society of Chemical Physicians might be established; but
should unwillingly yield that such a Great Mistress of Knowledge should be
committed to those, that are no whit able to protect, adorn, or credit her.

It Is not a good Medicine, purchased we know not how, or stumbled upon by some
ridiculous chance, that makes a real Philosopher, nor multiplicity of Furnaces,
contrived on purpose to get a fame in the world, but undeniable and stable
Principles, that enoble an Adeptus, or son of Art. Le no therefore any blind
Bayard, that wants the discretion to hold the Reins of Phoebus his Steeds,
presume to drive the Solar Chariot of Pyrotechnie, lest instead of cherishing
and illuminating the World, he bring all into confusion and combustion, as some
Pseudochymists among us of late have endeavored.

To conclude, although we have been hitherto crossed in this noble Enterprise,
on one side by the Galenist, and on the other by the Pseudochymist, or
pretender thereto, (this most innocent Art being as it were crucified in the
midst between them) yet we question not but that at length in despite of all
opposition, true Chemistry will flourish, and moving in its right Sphere, will
scatter all black clouds and mists of Ignorance and Envy, and shine out in its
perfect splendour.

The Figure of two Colic Stones extracted out of the Body of Anne Tailor.



An Appendix. DE LITHO-COLO: OR, A History of three large Stones excluded the
Colon by Chemical Medicines.
THe importunity of some friends have moved me to expose (on a sudden) to
public view these prodigious and monstrous Stones, generated in the Colon,
that the World may be informed what strange Coagulations sometimes happen in
this Microcosme; and what need we have to look after Remedies of the
Superlative Degree, to dissolve and dispossess them of their lodging place. The
Narrative is thus:

In the Year, 1655. I was sent for in the midst of February to Anne Tailor
(servant to Mr. Sikes a Brewer, living at Rumford in Essex) about twenty years
old, of a florid ruddy color, having a square Body, Vivacious and Active, but
low in stature; who was suddenly taken with a violent Pungitive pain on the
left side, an inflation and distention of the Epigastrium, a Fever, an Aching
in her Loins, Inquietude, a nauseous Disposition, frequent Belchings, and great
constriction of the Belly. Having examined the Symptoms, I apprehended that her
Disease arose principally from the Spleen, stuffed with feculent degenerate
Blood, which having contracted Malignity, darted its venom at the Pleura,
Stomach, Intestines, and Reins; hence the Vital Spirits being disturbed, an
Estuation and Effervescence arose in the Blood, which caused a Fever. This
considered, I presently offered upon my first access in the Afternoon, an
Emeto-Diaphoretick, which making some small evacuation, gave her ease, but of
short duration, for a few hours after there was a recrudescence and
exacerbation of all the foresaid Symptoms.

The next morning I offered her an Emeto-Cathartick, intending to carry the
morbisick matter most downward, but in vain, for it still regurgitated, and
came away by Vomiting: however, she found an abatement of the racking pain of
her Side, and other parts, which yet still returned by fits. Then I plied her
hard with those things that were Diaphorerick, Resolving, Abstersive, for the
space of three or four days, making use of requisite Topics; not omitting
whatsoever might pacify and invigorate the Vital Spirits against future
paroxisms.

Upon the sixth day after my first admission, coming to see her, I found her
cheerful, (the Pain of her Side and Fever abated) with many hopeful signs of
speedy recovery, only she complained of a Weight of her left Side, tending
downward toward the Kidneys, and a straitness of her Belly, but yet she thought
a small matter more would perfectly cure her; so giving her precaution, I bad
her go on to take what remained, charging her to give me notice if any thing
fell out amiss.

The Sabbath day following, being the tenth from the first onset of her
Sickness, a messenger came in all haste to me to Horn-Church, relating the
anguish and cruel torments that this wretched Maid suffered about the Region of
her Loins, with straining to vomit, sharpness of her Urine, and difficulty to
make it, and continual watching. Upon this I began to think that the Kidneys
had a great share in the production of those Iragical Accidents, which formerly
appeared: wherefore I presently dispatched away to her another
Emeto-Cathartick, and some other Chemical Preparations, that were of force to
cleanse and sweep away any sabulous matter, or gross impurities from those
parts. Having taken the first she was put into great straits, and had many
pangs, yet upon my strict injunction they urged her to take whatsoever I sent:
which, upon every sumption and repetition, caused a Crispation and Convulsive
motion of the Genus Membranosum, the Archeus endeavoring to make an extrusion
of that which as long as it harbored in its bosom, could never be at rest; so
that by a frequent exciting the Expulsive faculty, and by corroborating the
Spirits at the same time, Nature by an Alternate vicissitude of rest and motion
producing Throws, was delivered at length by the help of some dextrous hands
of three strange stony Concretions, conceived in the upper part of the Colon
nigh the Spleen.

Now the first appearance of these was after a great Agony on Monday night,
being the eleventh day; for the Sphincter of the Anus being notably dilated, a
hard rough Body was discovered in the Fundament by a Midwife, or some of the
officious Women there present, who by frequently assaying, and tender
contrectation thereof, made shift to get out one of these deformed Stones (more
friable then the other two) by fracture and piecemeal, and then forthwith sent
to me to hasten to be a spectator of this monstrous Birth.

No sooner had I entered the House, sounding with the exclamation of the
Neighbors, but I was presented with some fragments of an Exotic matter, which
I beheld not without just admiration. This (quoth some of them) is nothing in
comparison of what is behind, wherefore we desire you to meet another Doctor
and Surgeon tomorrow morning about nine of the clock; which I easily assented
to in such a difficult case, both for instruction, and also the evasion of
slanderous tongues, which I knew had much partial respect for this safe
Galenist they sent for, that could (if she miscarried) maintain it Cum
Privilegio.

The next morning I precisely observed the time appointed, waiting three hours
for his Worship, but neither he nor the Surgeon coming, I thought good to take
my leave, and to resign her up to whom they pleased; but by persuasion of the
Master of the House, who told me (let the issue be better or worse) he would
undertake to defend me against the Galenical Gang; I fell to my work, and
having taken a strict view of the outward site of the bigger of these Stones,
whose Basis appeared every way about an inch to my eye; the Sphincter being
much expanded through great stress, I concluded that these lapideous
Concretions were either to be broken by a fit Instrument, and so to be drawn
out by parcels, or to be extracted whole, if it could be done without danger of
lacerating the Sphincter: To this end I presently sent for a plain Barber
Surgeon of the Town, Thomas Flemmin, since dead, whom I enjoined to fetch me
the strongest pair of Curling-Irons he had, which forthwith done, I directed
him to insinuate and worm them in between the Sphincter and the Stone, to lay
fast hold, and to try whether he could turn it about; which he did
artificially, and setting a strong hand, pulled it out confidently in a trice.
The other quickly followed, and the Patient was immediately freed from her
dolorous condition, a large quantity of Urine issuing forth which had been
stopped nigh forty eight hours. After this succeed an involuntary flux of
Excrements, through a weakness of the Fibers of the Guts and Sphincter
violently distended, which were at length restored to their former Tone by
virtue of a Fumigation which she received, sitting over a pan of quick coals.

Thus was this miserable Virgin recovered at length from an untimely death, by
force (under God) of some Chemical Medicines, which may add a little to the
luster of this useful Art: For none but Remedies more potent then ordinary
could have forced three such petrified Bodies of that bulk, lurking under the
left short Ribs, through the manifold Cells of the Colon down to the strait
Gut, and so to be voided.

Ever since she has enjoyed her health, only taking two or three years
(Spring and Fall) what was requisite; and since married an Innkeeper, Francis
Chatterton, living now at Rumford at the Sign of the Dolphin, by whom she has
had two Children.

For present satisfaction take this short Description of the three Stones thus:
Touching the first which the Midwife and some others brake out by their subtle
working into it with their fingers, in my absence, I cannot give that exact
observation as of these two I have in my own custody; for they having shared it
amongst themselves, desiring to keep it for a Rarety, had so dispersed it, that
I am not able to set down any certain Dimensions of it: but so far as my
conjecture can reach, according to their relation, it might very well be equal
in quantity to the greatest of these two, inclining to a Cylindrical shape, of
a friable and fragile substance toward the Superficies, but more tenacious
toward the Center; consisting of Dissimilar parts, wherein appeared many white
Filaments like Alumen Plumosum. The Cortex or outside was of a Pitchy color,
but the innermost part brownish.

The second of the three, and the first of the two which I extracted, and now
reserve by me, is of a Cone-like Figure, broad beneath and sharper above, nigh
three inches in length, two and a quarter in breadth abouut the Basts, one and
three quarters in the midst, and somewhat above half an inch on the top.

The outward coat covering the inward like a bark, is more compact, and of a
tartareous substance, partly blackish and partly mouse colored. It has four
great Dokes in it, two nigh the Basis, and two nigh the cone, beside many small
ones, and Tortuous Incisures. Under this Cortex lies a Calcarious matter,
which has a small quantity of a Thready or Lanuginous substance mixed with it,
tending to a gravel-like color. It weighs now not above two ounces seven
drams, being diminished and circumcised by those that handling it have out of
curiosity picked off something considerable; and withal the ambient Air has
made it somewhat lighter, but at first its weight was much more.

The second to this is Triangular, almost Equilateral, each side being about
two inches three quarters in length, and near two in breadth. Its substance much
resembles the other, only its outside here and there is softer to the touch,
feeling Plushie like some part of a Stags horn, to which it is like in color.
In the middle appears a harder Body dissimilar from the Angles, which seem to
be Appendices to it. In it are some small Cavities, but one very large, like
the hollow part of that the Latins call Astragalus, an Huckle-bone. It is
lighter then the other considering its proportion, weighing one ounce five
drams and a half.

We observed when these Colick-Stones first came to light, that many
Plum-stones and Cherrystones lay couched in several hollow places in them,
which had continued in her Body about half a year undissolved, appearing fresh
as if they had been newly swallowed. Hereby the bulk of these Coagulations was
increased, that they became more hard to be precipitated, their unequal
asperities impeding their passage, exasperating and galling the tender and most
sensible Tunicles of the Colon: Hence arose most exquisite Dolours, which this
poor wretch underwent for several days, which would undoubtedly have destroyed
her, had not her Vital Spirits been lenified, appeased, and supported by some
Spagyrical Cordials that were most amicable to them.

Throughout the whole course of the Disease, I avoided Cooling Iuleps, Barley
Liquors, ordinary Opiates, or any common papaverous Preparation of the
Galenists, which would have brought Nature into a nummed and drowsy condition,
and so have made it supine in the Expulsion of these Hostile Guests, that had
taken such firm possession in the Colon to its utter ruin.

I make no question but a Dogmatist would presently without any scruple (being
confirmed by those Indications there present to which they severely adhere)
have first Bled her perhaps two or three times, under the notion of a
Pleurisy, then Expectorated her with their nasty slaps; but failing here would
have given her Laudanum for the mitigation of her intolerable pains; and so
bringing her into an everlasting sleep, have sent these remarkable Coagulations
into the Grave with her unseen.

This Tragical History ending Comically, I have here communicated to the World,
that it may be allured to become a Phylo-Chymist, and understand the
insufficiency of Galenical Preparations to help in extremity; and to encourage
all Ingenious and Industrious Artists in their labors; that such a
Litho-tribon, or Break-stone Arcanum may be attained, that has power to
dissolve the Stone even in the Bladder, without direful Cystotomy.

To conclude, I shall hereafter (if God permit) give you a fuller and larger
account of this Colic Duelech, with some other unusual Observations, collected
in eighteen years diligent study and Practice; and shall likewise give you my
thoughts of Splenotomy, or exection of the Spleen out of a living Dog, his life
preserved: which I can (absit jactantia) vindicate to be the first that made
any sound and notable trial thereof in Europe known publicly, although some of
our Galenical Anatomists have very unhandsomly assumed the Credit of it to
themselves. In the mean time make good use of this here delivered, and be
grateful to the most High if thou reapest any benefit thereby.

The Stones before spoken of are in the Authors keeping, at his Lodgings near
to the Blue Boar Inn without Allgate; where any Ingenious Person that desires
to be further satisfied concerning them, may be freely admitted to see them.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 2. line 28. read their. page 42. l. 1. read Hermaphroditical. p. 60. l.
3. r. profligating. p. 62. l. 1. r. Perittomata p. 63 l 27. for magnetic read
specific. p. 68 l. 15. r. comparison. p. 74. l. 14. 1. Affects. p. 77. l. 8.
r. precipitates. p. 92. l 7. r. Coindications.


