THE Earl of Anglesey's STATE of the Government and Kingdom: Prepared and
intended for His MAJESTY, King Charles II. In the Year 1682. but the Storm
Impending growing so high prevented it then. With a short VINDICATION of His
Lordship from several Aspersions cast upon Him, in a pretended LETTER that
carries the Title of His MEMOIRS.

By Sir JOHN THOMPSON, Baronet.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Crouch at the Corner of Pope's-Head-Alley in
Cornhill. 1694.

TO THE King and Queen
May it please Your Majesty's,
THIS Paper was at first intended a Present to Your Royal Uncle; in which the
Noble Author has studiously contracted his many and large Experiences into a
compass suitable to the Leisure and View for which he designed it. How Wise and
Great a Statesman he was, and how fitted for an Argument of this Nature, by his
great insight into Men and Business, [having from his Youth breathed scarce any
other Air than that of Courts] how Valued and Esteemed by King Charles the
Second for his Wisdom and Dexterity in reducing Things to their True Temper and
Legal Standard, especially at an Emergency, when either the Folly or Design of
False or Weak Ministers had puzzled his Majesty's Affairs, and made them almost
desperate, Those who knew him can better tell, it becomes me to be silent, left
I should Injure his Memory by saying too little, or Displease others by saying
too much; if any have so much Curiosity they may themselves make the Judgment
by this Taste that is left us of his Mind, Thoughts, and Manly, Noble way of
Expressing himself, [a thing wherein his Lordship had a peculiar Happiness, not
disguised in the Taudry Dress, wherein he has been of late Injuriously Exposed.]

I have nothing to say in Excuse for my Presumption in this Dedication to Your
Majesty's, but that it was designed for the Service of the Throne, and
certainly a Discourfe of this Nature (wherein you will see the wide differences
between the Faithful and Wise Councils of the Dead, free from Flattery, Fear or
Design, and those of the Living, which are subject to them all) cannot but be
acceptable to Your Majesty's, especially in a Time of so much Action, Danger,
and Disappointment.

Your Majesty's Obedient Subject and Servant. John Thompson.


THE PREFACE.
THE Tombs and Dormitories of the Dead have always been held Venerable; to
Invade their Silence, or Disturb their sleeping Dust, much more to Mangle, and
then Expose them, yet scarce cold, is a Crime so detestably odidious, nothing
but a French Barbarity See the Account of the Inhumanity of the French this
Summer at Heidleberg.
could ever be guilty of; but for a Wise and Great Man to be abused in his
Thoughts, to be Presented to the World as one that took pleasure in deceiving
and imposing upon the understanding of others, to be made to think and speak
things so low and mean, so dull and insipid, nay quite contrary to his own
Sense and Apprehension, is a cruelty and savageness so much greater, as that to
be Mortal, and thereby subject to Violence and Injury, it the common Lot of
all, but to be a Fool a Knave is the particular Curse but of some few.

And yet it bas been the Misfortume of a late Noble Lord to be thus represented
to the World in a Book that bears the Title of, The Earl of Anglesey 's
Memoirs, but is indeed so very unlike him, it is strange any should have the
Confidence to Impose such supposititious thing on the World; certainly this
Lord might have expected better Treatment, after an Age worn out with Toil and
Pain for the Public, than to have his Study plundered, his Papers rifled, his
Thoughts debased by a dull and course allay, and bis Reputation set to sale for
a little private Advantage. Is there no Original left of such a Man to show him
to the World but this little miniature, these few Sheets? Where is that
expected Work His History of Ireland, just finished, as it were, before his
Death.
the Expense of so much Oil and Thought, in which he might have hoped to Live
to future Times? How can any that have either Value for the Memory of the Dead,
or Regard for the Censure of the Living, detain any longer so usful and so
finisbed a Piece, which was at first undertaken for the Service and Information
of the Public.

The Publisher perhaps might not design so maliciously, but this alters not the
Case; whoever reads that Pamphlet, and believes it to be my Lord Anglesey's,
must think him not only a knave and Fool, but somewhat more. His intention
seems only to make the best of his absent Friend, by borrowing his Name to get
a Penny, or to Ingratiate himself with a Party in hopes of Preferment when time
shall be; and withal, to let the World know what otherwise they were like ever
to be ignorant of, what a Man of Worth and Weight he is. Hence are those so
frequent and repeated Praises of himself. Page 4.
It is he that knows how softly to insinuate his Notions with the gentleness of
a Philosopher, Page 6
that has all the curious soft strokes of Rhetoric and Reason, and all the
Structures of a great Judgment and Fancy, Page 31.
all the mixtures of great and noble Colors, able not only to prop up the
great Characters of King Charles his Ministers, but to gild the Pillory for
Offenders, whose short hints, like the sclanting of Lightning, Page 6. and 22
or sudden glances by their quick movement, have power to create the Passions
of Love and Admiration. And in short, in the late Conjuncture, while the Vulgus
of Writers and Lachrimists were associated in Intailing the Popular Nuisance of
Fears and Jealousies upon us, Page 29. and 37, 39.
it was be alone who found out the way to remove them, by Predicting from
Natural Causes the Happy future state of our Country. And that the then
Fermentation would be perfective to it; instead of which had he told us K.
James's forsaking and deserting the Party that put the Crown upon his Head, the
disregarding the Opinion of his People, doing Actions that raised their
Distrust, Fears and Jealousies, the choice of Weak and False Ministers, the
taking into his Cabinet such as had Abjured their Religion, the Closeting and
Tampering with Parliaments, so that Nation had no hopes of having any, but such
as the Court were very well assured of, the appropriating and taking upon
himself the Faults and Miscarriages of his Favorites and Ministers, and in the
midst of all this, the deepest Security and Unconcernedness imaginable, would
at length prove Fatal to him, the Consequence had certainly been much more
Natural, and the Event justified the Prediction.

But how easily might this have been prevented had be followed the wise
Examples of his great Predecessors Edw. III. and Henry IV. who Learning by the
Misfortunes of Edward II. Richard II. and to whom he immediately suceeded, how
dangerous the Strains of Power, and loss of the Peoples Affections were, did
the more carefully maintain themselves in the good Opinion and Love of the
People, by granting them all the reasonable Securities they desired, Redressing
their Grievances, and Removing those (though Innocent) that were the least
distasteful to the Commons, of which we will mention a few Presidents.

In 15 Edw. 3. Declaration was made, That such as found themselves Agrieved
with the King or his Officers, should upon Complaint find Remedy; and in the
same Parliament at the Request of the Commons, that the Chancellor, and all
other Officers there named, may be Chosen in open Parliament, and be openly
Sworn to observe the Laws. It was Enacted, That if any such Officer died, or
otherwise his Place fall void, the King will have the Assent of his Nobles, and
such Officers shall be sworn the next Parliament according to their Petition;
and that at every Parliament the King will Assume into his Hands all such
Offices, so as the said Officers shall answer to the said Objections.

In 17 Edw. 3. The Commons Complain of the Transporting the Treasure, the
Discovery of the Secrets of the Realm, and that they neither Could nor Would
(they are the Words of the Record) any longer bear so strange Oppressions,
hereupon the Act of Provision was made.

21 Edw. 3. N. 58. The Commons Complain, That whereas diverse Merchants were
Slain and Robbed on the Sea by the King's Enemies of France, they which
undertook the Coundct may be made come into this present Parliament to make
Gree to the Merchants, who by their default have lost their Goods; To which the
King answers, Let Persons and Places be assigned for hearing the Plaints of all
that will Complain, to the end Right and Reason may be fully done to the
Plaintiff.

22 Edw. 3. N. 7. The Commons Petition, That all Wool and other Merchandise
may freely pass; To which the King answers, That the passage shall be free,
paying to the King his due.

So in the 36th of Edward the 3d. the King consents to a Statute for the yearly
holding a Parliament. Note, According to the practice and usage of that time, a
Parliament signifies a new Parliament; the sense and meaning of the Law was,
That there should be a new Parliament chose in the time prescribed, which
appears by this, that from the first of Edward the Third to the 14th of Henry
the Fourth, which was but 87 years; there are yet remaining, besides what are
lost by the injury of Time, and carelessness of Keepers, about 72 Original Writs.


So the 45 of Edward 3d Numb. 31. when Commons affirm the decay of the Navy to
arise by three Causes; viz. (1 st.) For that sundry Men's Ships are staid for
the King long before they serve, whereby the Owners are driven at their Charges
to find their Mariners to their undoing. (2dly.) For that Merchants, the
Nourishers of the Navy, are often restrained their Shipping; whereby Mariners
are driven to seek other Trades and Livings. (3dly.) For that the Masters of
the King's Ships do take up Masters of other Ships, as good as themselves are;
whereby the most of these Ships do lie still, and the Mariners are enforced to
seek new Livings; whereof they pray Remedy: The King promises to provide Remedy.

Thus also in 1 of Hen. 4. Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, by the
King's Command, tells them in Parliament, That it is the King's Will to Govern
by the Honorable, Discreet and Sage of the Realm, and by their Common Consent,
and not by his own Will, nor after his own Fashion to Rule the same; and
further enforced, That this Realm of any under the Sun might best Live of it
self.

And in the 5th of Hen. 4. At the Request of the Commons, the Lords According
that Four special Persons should be removed out of the King's House, viz. The
King's Confessor, the Abbot of Door, Mr. Richard Durham and Crosby of the
Chamber; whereupon Saturday the 9th of February the said Confessor, Durham and
Crosby came in to the Parliament before the King and Lords, where the King
excused them, saying, That he then knew no Cause wherefore they should be
removed, but only for that they were hated of the People, and therefore charged
them to depart from his House according to the Agreement; and the like he would
have also procured against the Abbot, if he had been present.

I am the more particular in these things, in Answer to that Assertion of the
Industrious Mr. Prynn, See Prynn's Preface to Sir R. Cotton's Records, Sect. 14.
That the King's Created and set up merely by Parliaments, and their own Power
in them, without any True and Hereditary Title, have seldom answered the Lords
and Commons Expectations in the Preservation of their Just Laws and Answers to
their Petitions.

It would exceed the bounds of a Preface to go through the rest of these
Memoirs. The drift of the whole, however it be disguised, is to tell the World
in my Lord Anglesey's Name, that the Business of Sir Edm. Godfrey, the Firing
of London. the Popish Plot, were only Fears, Jealousies and Surmises. Mem P.
112.
That Evidence did not rise high and clear enough to charge any Papist withit,
however the Parliament, and a great Minister, threw the Guilt on them. But how
probable it is that my Lord Anglesey should be of this Opinion, That he should
believe nothing of the Popish Plot, that without Malice, Motive or Evidence, he
should give his Voice for the Condemnation of my Lord Stafford, a Person he
himself thought Innocent, that he should be, first, so much a Monster, and then
so mere a Natural, as under his own Hand to testify as much? Whether all this
looks not more like the Fiction and Forgery of the Publisher, than the Genuine
Sense of that Great Lord, let every unprejudiced Reader judge.

The Account of Arthur Earl of Anglesey, Lord Privy Seal to your most Excellent
Majesty, of the true State of your Majesty's Government and Kingdoms. April
27th 1682.
HAving by the Obligations of your Royal Predecessors to my Ancestors and me,
for several Generations lain under the strictest Bonds of Duty and Allegiance,
to employ my Studies, long Observation and Experience, for the furtherance of
the Service of the Crown and Weal Public, I could not contrive how to do it
better and more effectually, than by offering the same to your Majesty's View
and Royal Consideration, by this Scheme thereof, which is without Intreigue for
any Parties Animosity, or Envy against and Persons, or Design of Advantage or
Advancement to my Self or any Relation or Friends of mine. And the Nature of
true Gratitude being to acknowledge and render Service for Favors received,
without Ambitious practice or expectation of further Reward or Recompense, then
what shall freely flow from your Majesty's Spontanious Goodness and
Consideration, how to dispose of your Subjects, so as may most advance your
Glory, and render you a redoubted King to your own People, and highly esteemed
and courted by all your Allies and other Princes abroad. I have spent many
hours to do it in the best manner I am able by the following Discourse; which
is not the result of Melancholy and Discontented Thoughts, but of the most
Serious and Dutiful Consideration of the present State of your Majesty's
Affairs, and how I might best serve you in contributing to render your Reign
Happy and Peaceable.

Your Majesty's discerning Judgment cannot but perceive, of what high esteem
with all your People, the Wise and Prosperous Government of Queen Elizabeth
over these Kingdoms is to this Day, and by what able Counselors (generally the
choice of her own Wisdom and Knowledge, not private Inclinations or Respects)
She swayed the Scepter thereof during a long Reign, to the universal
satisfaction of her Subjects, and her great Honor over all the World: And how
in Her time She made the right use of Parliaments, (Her great Council)
delighting in the frequency and faithfulness thereof, and in the unanimity of
her People, whereof that most Honorable Assembly well managed, will ever be
the surest bond to your Majesty and all your Successors. In her time England
Flourished, Religion the Darling thereof Prospered, and was firmly settled; none
durst attempt Incroachment upon the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects: The
Laws had their uninterrupted Course, and the several Benches were supplied with
most able Judges, who held it their Honor and Duty to serve that Renowned
Queen, on the Profits arising Legally by their Places, without further charge
to the Crown or reward, but advancement to higher degrees, after long and
faithful Service, which the Queen was a great Observer and Judge of. Your
Majesty's Royal Grandfather King James, as he followed her Steps, continued
most of her Council, built upon the happy Foundations She had laid; had a
Prosperous and Peaceable Reign, without other Interruption then what arose by
Heats between his Majesty and some of his Parliaments, which it is some blemish
on that time, that they were not managed so Dexterously as they had been in his
Predecessors times, and was an Introduction to succeeding Mischiefs.

Your Majesty's Royal Father was under some Impression from the same cause, and
by the long discontinuance of Parliaments, discontents increased, Jealousies
were fomented, and Affairs by Ill Ministers, and the unhappy accidents, and
Juncture of the times brought to such a Crisis, that when a Parliament was
called in the Seventeenth Year of his Majesty's Reign, and soon dissolved in
heat and dissatisfaction, the necessity of Affairs and Intervening Misfortunes,
and unhappy Circumstances, soon brought on the great Council of the Peers, and
by their advice, as the only Remedy for growing Evils, and to prevent Impending
Mischiefs, another Parliament was called and Sat the same Year; but by an
unadvised Act therein Passed, Derogatory to the Kings Prerogative, relative to
Parliaments, and temporarily changing the very Constitution thereof, a
Foundation was laid for those Divisions and Miseries which ensued, and ended
with the Ruin of that Parliament, and the Destruction of that Great Prince, to
the high Dishonor of the English Nation, but were continued by many changes of
Hands and Powers, till by the wonderful Providence of God, and Love and Duty of
your Subjects, your Majesty was (by a Parliament assembled as the Neceslity of
the time required, by your honest Subjects Usurping that Incommunicable
Prerogative of the Crown, for the restitution of Monarchy it self) called home
from your Banishment, and restored to the Throne of your Ancestors, with the
greatest and most unanimous Joy and Acclamation of your People, that had been
in any Age or Kingdom. And your Majesty Reigned many Years since, Fond of and
in Love with Parliaments, and received those marks and effects of their
Affection and Freeness to your Majesty by the settlement of a large Revenue,
and otherwise, which all your Predecessors from the very Original of
Parliaments put together had not done, to the Envy no doubt of all other Kings
and Princes, especially of the Ancient Enemies of England.

The unhappy Interruption that seems to be of late to those halcyon days, and
the occasions thereof, are secrets of State which none must presume to be bold
with, till your Majesty's Royal Heart, which cannot but be touched with a just
and sad sense thereof, shall incline to call for serious and free Councils
thereupon; by which it is not impossible to be informed how the change has
come, and by what means your Majesty's Reign may continue suitable to those
beginnings and former happiness, till the aged conclusion thereof, which all
your good Subjects wish you.

Toward this nevertheless as far as I may adventure in generals (and out of an
honest and dutiful mind) without being called, give me leave to unburthen my
Soul to your Majesty as follows.

I know nothing more inclines a People to reverence and admire their King, then
to see his Affairs, so governed that he needs not the Supplies of his Subjects;
and that he lets them find that he is so far from a mind to invade their
Liberties, or to advance his own Condition and Greatness by the Dimunition of
theirs; that he counts himself in this happy, above the most absolute Monarchs;
that he is King of a Rich, Free, Stout, and Mighty People; and that he takes
content Bountifully to expend his whole Royal Revenue (as your Majesty does,
though it be double to that of any your famous Progenitors) for the Honor,
Greatness, and Safety of your Kingdoms, and in Bounties to your Subjects;
wherein if your Majesty has exceeded (to the contracting of a troublesome and
dangerous Debt) Councils ought to be offered how you may be extricated, and
Supplies come from your Subjects in Parliament, not as the fruits of Practice
and Importunity, but as grateful returns for beneign and good Government, as
they were in the time of Queen Elizabeth.

Toward the accomplishing hereof, your Majesty may please to consider and be
informed by means that may be offered, of all the particular Bounties and
Favors that have flown from you since your Restoration:

And have a Book prepared for you as K. H. 7. a Wise Prince had, of all that
have Merited from, or been Obliged and Rewarded by the Crown, which your
Majesty may consult as a Guide to you, additional to your personal Knowledge of
Men (which is greater then any your Predecessors had) before you resolve on any
Grant or Bounty; wherein none ought to Importune the King, but leave him to his
own time and consideration; else the condition of Modest Men will be desperate,
and the boldest Beggars (tho perhaps the unfittest Persons) will be the surest
Speeders. Princes through their Bountiful Inclination and uneasiness at
Trouble, being more subject to be wrought upon by Importunity then other Men;
but when your Majesty upon deliberation has said the Word, let it be sacred
and unchangeable, except upon just cause avowed to the Parties shame.

In my time many are grown to great Estates under your Majesty's Royal Father
and your self, and many are in a course to arrive at the like, whilst your
Majesty sinks into a Debt; from such you may considently require diligent and
faithful Service and Care, to ease your Majesty and do your work; so that your
Honor and Dignity may be supported, and so that all your Subjects may see and
Rejoice, that you have conferred your Favors on fuch as render themselves
Worthy thereof, and ease the great pains and troubles that attend so weighty a
Crown as your Majesty's is, to which their Duty as well as Obligations bind
them; and the strise among them should be only who should serve so good a
Master best. I am sure I will have no difference with nor offend any of them
but upon that account, and therein I shall never doubt of Protection and
Countenance from your Majesty as far as I am trusted.

I know your Majesty has received much disquiet by the attempts to weaken or
shake the Legal Succession of the Crown, against your Majesty's deelared
Resolution to the contrary; and cannot forget that I have often assured your
Majesty, such endeavors will be best diverted by wise and gentle handling of
Parliaments, and the right use of your house of Peers in such contests, wherein
I have and shall ever be ready in a Parliamentary way, to do your Majesty all
the Faithful service I am capable of, and to find out such Expedients as may
satisfy your People, that their Religion and Liberties may be secured by other
ways, that shall neither displease nor discompose your Majesty, nor so much as
raise in you a Jealousy, that there is the least aim to invade your
Prerogative, or give you disquiet or disturbance.

It is within my Memory, that the great case of Habeas Corpus, the business of
the Loanes, etc. were bandied in Parliament, viz. 3 of your Fathers Reign,
which produced the Petition of Right to be made a Law. After that the Case of
Ship Money, which for more assurance after Judgment in the House of Peers
against it by their ordinary Authority and Power of Judicature, was branded and
condemned by Act of Parliament as Illegal and Arbitrary and all the Judges
questioned for their Extrajudicial Opinions; and yet in this Case, not only his
Majesty's Learned Council, but all the Judges upon a Case stated, were
unanimous for the King Right; but being drawn Ex part (as the other Cases were
also) it was very easy through Fear or weakness of Judgment, or want of the due
Ventilation and digestion, that causes of such import were wont to have, after
many Days hearing of Council on both sides, and Arguments at the Bar and Bench
to engage im mistakes; which therefore afterward came to a public
Disquisition in the Court of Kings Bench, and by Writ of Error in the Exchequer
Chamber, upon the opposition of private Subjects, who would not sit down in a
Case of that Consequence, where they conceived and were advised the right lay
on their sides, against the Opinion of the Judges; who being pre-ingaged by
Exjudicial Opinions, had before both in the Kings Bench, and all the Judges of
England, excext Three or Four in the Exchequer Chamber, upon the Writ of Error,
given Judgment against the Subject, yet by the Division of the Judges when it
came to be a Chequer Chamber Case, (which I heard entirely) and the Free and
Learned arguing thereof, and view of the Records for supporting of the
Liberties of the Subjects, the Eyes of People were so opened, that the
opposition to the payment of it grew general; and the first Parliament which
was called after, (as is before mentioned) put an end to that controversy for
ever. The Progress and conclusion of this Case ought to sway with your Majesty,
to be wary and circumspect in all Cases of Law for the future, that are not
warranted by known Law and Practice, appearing upon mature consideration and
debate. For here was more then ordinary caution used, before the King would
impose a new Burden upn his Subjects, though his Necessities were by the long
discontinuance of Parliaments, and intervening accidents very great. And he had
better vouchers then are ever like to be had again in a Controversy between
the King and the Subject; and yet all came to a sad reckoning, and raised
Jealousies which are not quite Extinguished to this Day. And by attempts in new
Cases, which draw consequences that will raise apprehensions of insecurity to
the Subject may unhappily revive. I have always thought it more dangerous to
the Crown, by color and pretense of Legal Authority, to do a thing of general
and standing import and allarm to the Subject, then without consideration to do
transcient Acts of Violence, which I am well assured your Majesty never will.

And your Majesty having not only by your Coronation Oath (at which I was
present) Legally and Solemnly obliged your self to the Law and Customs and good
Government of England, but by many Declarations since in Parliament and
otherwise, to the great satisfaction of your People of all degrees, removed the
apprehensions some had taken up to the contrary, and are by too many still
retained and improved, from the late unexpected Dissolution of diverse
Parliaments, and their proving Abortive.

I cannot but in Zeal to your Majesty's Honor and Safety, and that it may not
be in the power of any wicked instruments to foment Jealousies or to raise
Doubts any longer, humbly beseech your Majesty (since it cannot be supposed
that your Majesty is skilled in the Knowledge of all the Laws) that in all
cases of Difficulty, and which are not of ordinary Cognizance and Practice, but
such, wherein the Lives, Liberties and Properties of your Subjects in general
may be concerned: your Majesty to the end you may perform what you intend to
your People, will require the debates and advice of your Council at Law, and
your Privy Council, before your Majesty be engaged in points of Law, that upon
further Consideration and Trial will not hold, but raise Disputes and bring
Blemish upon your Majesty's Proceedings; which else must light upon those whose
Duty it is Faithfully to advise your Majesty, and within the bounds of your
Oath and Legal Pleasure so often declared.

The late War between your Royal Father and his Parliament, was little expected
(as any is now) to arise in this Kingdom; but it came on insensibly and by
degrees, and the intervening of unlooked for accidents, till it raised a
Current that carried all before it, and had a dreadful Progress and Conclusion;
yet the rise of it was but Fears and Jealousies (no bigger I may say then a
Man's Hand Visible to us) whasoever might be in the Womb of Providence. Its true
no Arming or Gathering of Forces now appears, there is no Parliament in Being,
not Act in Force, for any to continue till they will dissolve themselves: But
the same English People which they were wont to represent, live in their own
Houses, claim their good old Laws and Liberties, and are watchful over them;
who knows what the present Licentious paper War may produce, Its come to open
quarrelling already, and quarrels bring Bloodshed. The scence is only changed,
from Skirmishes and Battles in the Fields, and Sieges of Cities and Towns, its
come now to contention in every House, to altercations and Fightings between
Sheriffs and other Officers, Grand Juries and Petty Juries and they and the
Courts of Justice, who by Law are the Conservators of our Peace, are engaged in
the quarrels, and Verdicts are found and Judgments given as the litigant
parties exceed one the other in power and practice, more then by the Merits of
the Cause, which ingageth almost the whole People of one side or other in every
Case.

So that now Justice has lost its old deep still Channel, and all Causes are
carried by a Fierce Impetuous Torrent, which in time (if not diverted) may
break all our Banks, and prove a general Inundation; for its come to this
already, that all Reverence to Ministerial Officers, Juries, Judges, is lost;
and there is now no case of moment almost wherein there is not mustering of
Parties, and instead of Parliaments, Appeals are made to the People, who can
neither meet nor judge in a Body, and therefore end all Controversies by
quarrelling Parties, whose Judgment if it were legal can neither be known nor
executed but in Parliament, where the Collective Body of your People meet by
representation, and where these ill symptoms of a divided and distempered
Kingdom, can only hope for and receive a Cure, which God and your Majesty Grant.

The Oracle of Truth has said, That a Kingdom divided against it self cannot
stand. Things Frame as if it were the design on all Hands, to increase and
foment Divisions instead of pacifying them; whence else is the intolerable
License of giving Nick Names, and Marks of Distinction and Reproach to one
another, to challenge and publish Chartels of Defiance, to Scuffle and Fight in
the very Streets and Coffee Houses, and the Dissenters in Religion blamed and
suffer for all this, as of old the cry was, Christianos ad Leones, when there
is such a general ferment of Ranchor and Malice throughout the Kingdom, as is
never like to be removed, but by such Remedies as shall be offered before I
Conclude.

To the discomposed Estate of your Majesty's own Kingdoms, the disjoynted and
dangerous condition of Christendom, by the overgrown Greatness and Usurped
Dominion of the French King over other Princes and States, does not a little
contribute, and when he shall have leisure and power, to finish his secret
Councils and Intreigues, to Corrupt and Engage in his Designs, your Majesty's
Disaffected or Ambitious Subjects, or prevail with your Majesty to believe that
his Purse or Power and strict Friendship with your Majesty are necessary, or
but probable means to support your Crown and Dignity, and bridle the Subjects
which his Artifices and Insinuations have raised a Jealousy of; it will
occasion such a Paroxisme and such Couvulsions in the State, as may dangerously
Shake and Hazard the Peace of your Kingdoms, if not render your Great and
Renowned Government a Prey to Foreigners.

But the Fatal Cause of all our Mischiefs present or apprehended, and which if
not by Wisdom Antidoted, may raise a Fire which will Burn and Consume to the
very Foundation; is the unhappy Perversion of the Duke of York (the next Heir
to the Crown) in point of Religion, which naturally raises Jealousy of the
Power, Designs, and Practices, of the old Enemies of our Religion and
Liberties, and Undermines and Emasculates the Courage and Constancy even of
those and their Posterity, who have been as Faithful to, and Suffered as much
for the Crown, as any the most pleased or contented in our impending Miseries,
can pretend to have done.

In short, though the Supreme Wheel of Providence must be owned in all that is
or may come upon us, yet every one seems to be at Work to dig the Kingdoms
Grave; and if God has determined our Confusion, the least accidental disorder
will too naturally bring things to a general Complaint and Quarrel about
Religion, Laws, Liberties and Properties, unless before the Gangreen spread
further, it be by competent and wise Council and steady Government made appear,
that all these are secuted, past the Fear or Apprehension of all Good and
Prudent Men, and thereby that handle of Contention wrested from the Enemies
Foreign and Domestic of our Religion and Peace.

Toward the attaining that wished for end, and the delivering us from our
Divisions and Fears, and rendering your Majesty and Kingdom Safe, Glorious and
Happy; I shall now set before your Majesty, the most proper Means and Remedies
that occur to me, upon the most serious Consideration.

1. To begin with Parliaments, where your Majesty is in your greatest Glory,
and your Kingdom in its greatest Strength, Activity and Usefulness; your
Majesty by your many Declarations of your Love to and delight in them, and
Resolution of frequent Assembling them, has set such an edge upon the Spirits
of your People (ever fond of Parliaments) that hope deferred will make their
Hearts Faints, and raise Jealousies which may breed Ill Blood before their
Meeting. But preparatory to a better understanding, it were to be wished, that
the licentious Liberty now taken to asperse the Memory and weaken the very
Constitution and Power of Parliaments were seasonably Discountenanced and
Corrected. The blaming and reprehending of Parliaments, or either House
thereof, is a peculiar and prerogative fit for your Majesty alone (who are the
Head of them, and whose great Councels they are) and which is to be exercised
according to the example of your Majesty's most Wise and Prosperous
Predecessors only in Parliament time, when they may be heard and acquit
themselves, or any Slips, Errors or Faults that shall appear may be reformed,
amended or redressed, or in cases disputable, new Remedies applied to prevent
future Contests. And as the Peopls in general out of Parliament have no
Authority herein, much less a part of them; so I count it of very pernicious
Example and Consequence, and no ways serviceable to your Majesty by whomsoever
encouraged, that any Numbers or Degrees of Men, have presumed (under what
Color soever) to trample upon the Honor of Dissolved Parliaments, and Arraign
their Proceedings, which are only to be Examined and Judged by Parliament, who
can alone rectify the same, if found Erroneous and Unwarrantable.

And I heartily wish this Innovation may not prove one of the greatest
Obstacles to a good Intelligence, the next Parliament, and that it may never be
questioned with two much heart and resentment, which whosoever shall be chosen
to serve therein, may think it their concern to do effectually, for the safety
and preserving the chief Privileges and Rights of Parliament, which are
Freedom and Protection (so that none may entertain and vent dishonorable
Thoughts of them, to the violation of their good Names or Persons) and an
Examption from being questioned or impeached in any other Court or Place but in
that, the only Supreme Court of the Kingdom.

2. It will be your Honor and Safety, to encourage and employ your Ancient and
deserving Nobility and Gentry, whose interest in their Countries will be of
more use and avail to your Majesty, then all the bold and confident
undertakings of those, who seek themselves chiefly in all their pretenses of
Love and Duty to your Majesty, and really weaken and diminish the Admiration,
Affection and Esteem, which otherwise (from your Gracious and Wise Government)
your Majesty may have will all your People, who are the most Dutiful and fond
of their Prince in the World, if well and kindly used, as the most Turbulent
and Fierce under the Sun, if by ill or unsteady management of Affairs, and too
much subjecting of them to the Will and Humor of their fellow Subjects, and
the oppressions which their too much presuming on his Favor brings upon them
(which they easily discover (being a discerning People) they find themselves
transferred from the Clemency, Bounty and Kindness of their Sovereign, and
abandoned to the Pride, Malice, and Imperious Arbitrariness and Will of those
who are but Subjects as well as they, and who want that natural Affection and
Tenderness which their Sovereign Liege Lord cannot but retain toward them, and
whose Wisdom (which God who advances them to the Throne, usually indues them
with (must needs persuade him, that he is weakened and made a less Monarch, by
loss of the Love and Duty of his meanest Subject.

3. The Two Great Instruments of Government, with which your Majesty in Right
of your Imperial Crown, is solely entrusted by the Law, are Reward and
Punishment. Let the first be always dispensed freely, freely, as your Personal
Knowledge or the best information that may be had shall Guide you, by your own
immediate Hand, that others may not receive the Thanks and Dependence due to
you alone.

Sir Henry Sidney (Great Sir Philips Father) who was Lord Deputy of Ireland
many times, and my Great Grandfather Sir John Parrot, who succeeded him in the
same Great Charge and Trust; and diverse others, though they refused not to
serve your Predecessors, yet grew weary of the place, when in those troubled
and dangerous Times, they were forced to spend of their own to support the
Dignity and Honor of the Crown: Such as serve your Majesty so, in expectation
of future regard to be had to their deserts, ought not to be forgotten, when
higher Preferments or more profitable permanent and easy happen, then those
they served in with Submistion and patient expectation. Nothing is more
discouraging and offensive to the generality of Subject, then to see Men rise
over hastily, and before their Merits are known or taken notice of, perhaps
whilst their Demerit has brought them into disesteem; wherewas, those that are
advanced by just degrees, are seen Shining in Merit before they are clothed
with Honor or Preferment, rejoice the Kingdom, and are no more Maligned, then
those who have served their Apprentiships, and come to be Lord Mayor.

Thus in the best time, Men have risen in the Kings Household, and in other
Establishments from low Degree, and after long approved Service and
Faithfulness, to high Preferment and Trust. And this incourageth Industry and
Dutiful Service, and is a Bond of Safety; whereas bought preferment, or
attained by Ill Arts, is Odious, and Dangerous to the Master; and when Money is
the only qualification, People mind solely how to come by that, let the means
to compass it be what they will.

As for the other, which is Punishment, let your Majesty's Love and Clemency to
your People make it appear to proceed from you unwillingly and of necessity,
for the support and strenthning of Government, and be so executed, that it may
not seem or so much as be suspected, to come from any Principle of Cruelty, or
Delight in the Pressures of Fall of any Persons. The known Clemency of a Prince
and Inclination to Mercy, does more to oblige Subjects, then the strongest
Impressions of Dread or Fear; it being natural to the veriest Worm to turn
again, if he be unmercifully trod upon, and despair to Please, or causelessly
conceived Jealousy, many times occasions the loss of most Useful and Honest
Servants.

4. I know your Majesty to be a great Patron of the Church and Churchmen, and
therefore for their sakes (who are seldom wise for themselves) I presume to
implore, that you will never Countenance and of them, that shall busy them
selves with matters of State and Government, out of their Sphere. In all my
Reading and Experience, I find, that in the most dangerous Disorders and
Revolutions of the World, they have ever had a principal Hand; when their chief
work should be to pray for and promote the Peace of Church and State, in the
Calling God has set them. And it never yet came under my Observation or
Knowledge, that any Kingdom was Happy or Prosperous, where they had too great
and influence, since the Primitive Time and Zeal, nor that ever it succeeded
well to themselves, or gained upon those under their Charge, when they showed
themselves Active in Temporal Affairs, having a Calling competent to employ the
whole Man, and are to give themselves to all diligence and piety, wherein they
are promised a Blesling; as their great Master has warned them, that his
Kingdom is not of this World; and that they should not Fight, nor Strive, nor
Entangle themselves with the Affairs of this Life. Its observable, what the
pretended power of one to do so, In ordine ad Spiritualia, has brought the
World to, and how difficultly Encroachments of that Tribe are removed; your
Majesty is not to scruple the distinct and incommunicale exercise of that
Authority, which the Law gives your, and all your People have bound themselves
to acknowledge your peculiar.

Its a hard Imposition on your Majesty, that you should (who are the Father of
your People) be called upon to Imprison, Consiscate, Banish or otherwise
Afllict and Distress any of your Peaceable and Industrious Subjects, because
other taken upon them (by what right let them consider) to denounce them
Excommunicate; that were to punish their Bodies because their Souls are
punished; for the Clergy cannot so much as pretend a Power to go further. And
the Magistrate has little reason to hearken to those Clergymen, who are so
diffident of their pretended Authority, that though they cry up the power of
the Keys as their Office, yet when they have done, yield it to be so
uneffectual a shadow of Power, as can do nothing without the Civil Magistrates
force, below whom it is to be debased, to be the Clergies Executioner in
punishing, before he have tried the Cause. The Magistrate that sees a Man
Excommunicated for this fault, should rather delay his Civil Force against that
Man, to see what effect his Excommunication will have, for the Conjunction of
the Sword with the Excommunication makes the fruit of it undiscernable, so that
none can see whether it did any thing at all, or whether all was done by the
fear of the Temporal Sword. And to force Ministers to absolve or give the Holy
Sacrament to such as had rather take it then lie in Goal and be undon, is to
set up such new Terms of Christian Communion, as Christ never instituted, nor
will approve, Church Communion being a privilege due only to Volunteers and
true Penitents.

It were worthy your Majesty to recommend for the Clergies Practice and
Experience, the Grace of Self Denial, they Preach to others; for generlaly none
live more easy and pleasurable Lives then they; instead of the Primitive
Austerity, Mortification and Piety, or less pity, or oppose differences and
disorders; well were it if too many of them did not Forment and Encourage them;
these things have brought that Contempt upon many of the Clergy, that I am
sorry to see, who remember the times, when for their unblamable Life, painful
discharge of their Calling, Hospitality and Watchfulness over Men's Souls, those
of their Flocks thought nothing too much, and were ready to pull out their
right Eyes for them.

5. As a prime Foundation of your Majesty Greatness and Honor, Let the
Setriement and Increase of your Majesty's Revenue be laid to Heart, I have
often secretly Lamented to see your Majesty, who have the greatest and surest
Revenue of any Potentate in Christendom, but one, many times brought to such
great streights by the ill management thereof, that I know not whether your
Majesty did not enjoy your self more in the time of your Exile, being deprived
of all your own, then you do now; and your Servants and Followers better
contented with Hopes and Expectations, then they are now with their lank
Enjoyments, Retrenchments, and Suspensions.

Toward the redress hereof, such should be sought out and encouraged, that are
able and willing to improve your Revenue to the best advantage, without greedy
pursuit of their own priate gain, such Men no doubt your Majesty's Kingdom does
afford, and may be found, and by a just Calculation of the vast Estares some
have raised to themselves, by a loose, and despicable way of ordeing it, it
will appear, how and by what means your Majesty becomes Poor, whilst others
wallow in your Riches; and what a vast detriment you are at, till this great
Work be vigorously taken in hand and regulated, by which no doubt your Revenue
may be raised to some Hundred Thousands of pounds Sterling, above what it now
amounts to. Let me bear the disgrace of being accounted an Imposter, if I
Evince not what I have said; and then your Majesty will be the best Judge how
you have been served since your Restoration; though I accuse none that have
served you hitherto, but desire all Errors and Failings may be remitted and
forgotten, upon condition that they who have had the misfortune (to give it no
worse a Character) of coming short of doing your Majesty that Service which is
now propose, may with Patience and without Envy or Practice, see you better
served by others for the future.

The Shrunk Sinews of your Government being thus enlarged and strengthened, and
the design appearing certain to your Majesty, I do humbly propose, 1. That the
greatness of your Household may be restored to that of your most renowned
Predecessors, this will indeed advance your Honor and Esteem bot at home and
abroad. I who have live to see the great Hall of the Kings House, and his
Sollers, Buttry and Pantry full of Strangers at Dinner, and between Meals, have
been heartily ashamed to see the times, when a Dinner or a Cup of Wine is
hardly to be had for the best Guess, nor so much as Food for his Council and
other great Persons that attend in progress, and when the Court is in the
Country. When in Parliament your Majesty had a full and ample recompense given
you for purveyance, and which will more then double supply the want thereof, it
was little expected things would come to this pass; but though there was then
no appropriating of the Hereditary Excise granted in recompense, their
intention that it should so applied did sussiciently appear, and has been
generally expected. 2. The plentiful provision for your Household, having set
your Majesty and Family at ease, the second thing to be cared for, is the
Security of your Majesty and Government, by a well established provision for
your new Guards, till the unanimous Love of your People, which I will not
despair to see, may make your Majesty judge it a Superfluous Charge, and the
old Guards your Majesty's Anecstors were safe in, with the united affection of
all your Subjects (which your will deserve as well as any that ever swayed the
Scepter of this Kingdom) sussicient. 3. To uphold your Sovereignty of the Seas,
and to procure your Majesty's being feared and redoubted abroad, and your
Subjects accounting themselves safe at home, and in their Trade and Commerce to
all parts of the World, whether they shall carry your Name and Fame, nothing
will contribute more then a powerful Fleet, which the circumstances of Affairs,
and the change thereof in that point all the World over require, should much
exceed those of your Predecessors; though they ever claimed the Dominion of the
Seas; and that the best use may be made thereof, and with best Husbandry and
most certainty, that your Storehouses, Yards and Wharfs, may be timely
replenithed with all Warlike Provisions and Necessaries whatsoever, for
thespeedy setting cut of Fleets to Sea, and you Ships kept always in good
repair for that end; without which such surprises may happen as we have
formerly felt, and occasions for Service never again to be recovered, may be
lost, both being equally Dishonorable and Mischievous to your Majesty and
Kingdoms. 4. The next thing to assure the Obedience of your Subjects, and to
advance your Majsesties Honor of Justice may run uninterrupted, this being the
chief end that the chief Magistrates or Kings are advanced above their
Brethren, and have a divine stamp set upon their Authority as as Bond of Awe
and Obedience. In order hereunto let your Majesty's principal Care be to choose
freely, the most able and honest Men, and of the greatest Integrity for Judges
in all the Courts; they who punish others had need be very unblamable
themselves; and here it ought to be well considered, whether of all Persons
Judges should not hold by the freest Tenure, and enjoy their places quamdiu se
beme gesserint, at least, and never be discountenanced or displaced, but upon
good proof of Crimes or Offenses, which render them unworthy that Trust and
Dignity, and their Punishment for which will rejoice your Subjects; they of all
Men ought to be placed above the Tempations of Hopes or Fears, as much as is
possible, then Judgment will run down like a Stream, and Righteousness like
mighty Waters.


And where Justice is to slow immediately from your Majesty, as toward all
Officers and Domestics that hold by no Tenure but your Royal pleasure, care
would be taken of every step leading thereunto; Pick-thank Informers and
Sycophants, are the worst Instruments that can get into Princes Courts; but if
they do, they are not to be admitted to the Kings Ear nevertheless if Intruders
happen, let your Majesty be so upon your Guard, that no Man be undermined, born
down, or ruined by a Whisper: It is but Justice, for your Majesty to heart.
Servant you have esteemed, or perhaps rewarded as Faithful, before you condemn
or grieve him, or to make way it may be, for a worse prejudice your self, and
undo him and his Family; such Errors many times cost Princes dear: and your
Resolution being known, to hear before you Judge, you will be delivered from
Tale-bearers and mean Spirits, that have not the Courage of Honesty to avow the
Accusations they make; and when just Complaints are brought before your, by
honest and owned Informations, your Majesty may be Judge your self; whereas,
otherwise your Majesty is but made the Executioner of Vile-mens Malice, Villainy
or Ambition, and your best, and most useful, and faithful. Servants may be
Whispered from your, and your Majesty lest in the hand of those who for Ends,
Human Frailty, and designing Ambitious Men are subject to, will not spare to
runine or betray your Majesty for advantage; the same secret way they destroyed
their fellow Subjects unseen.

Whereas, those who intend your Majesty real Service, will openly, and like Men
of Honor (who fear the Frown of no Man) charge the Guilty for Justice sake.

Another main branch of Justice is (that you may be King of all your Subjects
Hearts) To find out ways to unite your People, and for that Happy end, to avoid
countenancing divided and dividing Addresses, and Invasions upon the Liberties
and Franchise of your People, granted by your Royal Predecessors or your self,
especially when the train and design of them is visible, or has its rise from
your own Court, or tend to soment heats and discontents, and raise jealousies.

The great Lord Bacon Viscount St. Albans, who was not only a Wise Statesman,
but Lord Chancellor of England, advises the King to be of no Faction or Party,
but to make use of and be above all, if any be in his Kingdom, or they will
much prejudice his Authority and Business. If any great Man or others, be
suspected on good Grounds Guilty of dangerous Practice or Crime, let the
Authority of the Law and not the Cry of the People (whether by Art of
Inclination drawn to it, bear them down) who bawle Hosanna and Crucify with
equal Zeal even against their Savior; better it were that Ten Malesactors
escaped then one Innocent Person should suffer by Practice, Injustice or
Violence.

I should rejoice to see your People unanimously kind to your Majesty, but for
any to pretend it in diminution of better Subjects then themselves, and in ways
provoking, Offensive and Reproachful, tending to the disquiet of your Majesty,
and disturbance of the Peace of the Kingdom, all Good and Wife Men from their
very Souls abhor, as time will shaw, when this Land Flood of Contention and
Humor, if not Jesuitical Practice has spent it self, which it will soon do it
not dangerously kept up and countenanced; in which Case as a Kingdom divided
against it self cannot stand, so if my Fears upon such Intrigues, succeed till
the breach be wide as the Sea, I have delivered my own Soul by this timely
warning, which I hope you will graciously consider. And the working Pens of
Libellers being daily at work, to undermine our Peace and soment Divisions, not
unlikely employed by the worst Enemies of this Kingdom and Government, it will
be the highest recomendation of your Majesty's Kindness to and Care of your
People, that this soul common-sewer of distempered Brains and tainted Hearts,
be diverted or shut up, least it Infect and Poison the whole Kingdom past
Recovery, and render the happiest Church and State in the World a Scorn to
Fools. And to prevent so great Mischief, it will be Glorious in your Majesty,
to discountenance even the Libellers boldly, pretending to write in support of
the Crown (which God be thanked stands os untaken upon your Majesty's Head, as
upon that of the greatest of your Ancestors) as to punish others upon vain
pretenses, taking the same License; so that the Silencing and Confusion of all
Libellers, as far as the Law will warrant, may be one happy effect of your
Majesty's good and powerful Government, and when the make-bates and Sowers of
Division cease, then mutual Love may be restored.

5. The last thing I shall trouble your Majesty with, is concerning the
provident management of your Revenue, which will be the greatest help to keep
all the parts of your Government in order.

I know well, and can make it manifest beyond Contradiction, that vast
Reducements may be of your charge in England, to general satisfaction, and with
the discontent only greedy Officers and Suitors, whose places may be better
supplied of Meritorious Persons or their Issue, who being intayled to the Crown
by former Favors to them or their Ancestors for just Merit, must be accounted
better and stronger supports to your Majesty, then those whose Ambition or
Covetousness makes them crowd the Court, yet never intail your Favors to any,
will beget Diligence and raise expectation in your Followers and Dependents.

I beseech your Majesty to consider, what great things the Crown of England
has done in former Ages, with its own bare Revenue and by the Love of his
Subjects, both in England, Ireland and Foreign Countries; how your Majesty
comes now to be in pinching wants, and none of those great undertakings upon
your Hands is fit to be inquired: one thing is obvious to me, which will
persuade that other instances of ill management and mispense may be produced.
Your Majesty spends now Yearly in Irelands full Peace, more then served to
defray the Charges of the Crown, in the greatest Rebellions of the Oneils
Tirones, Desmond, and others; nay, I want not good warrant to assure your
Majesty, that the chief Governors prosits alone in that Kingdom, amount to
more now then maintained the Government of Ireland, both in the Civil and
Military Estate thereof, in some of the troubled and dangerous times of that
Kingdom, and has incident to his Office diverse Favors, Civil, Ecclesiastical
and Military, to oblige your Subjects both Great and Small with, which should
most properly be dispensed by your Majesty's own Hand, to weaken dependence on
fellow Subjects, and fix greater and stronger on your Majesty.

To Conclude, Though your Majesty is in your own Person above the reach of Law,
and Sovereign of all your People, yet the Law is your Master and Instructor how
to Govern, and your Subjects assure themselves, you will never attempt the
enervating that Law by which you are King, and which your have not only by
frequent Declarations, but by solemn Oath upon your Throne, been obliged in a
most Glorious Presence of your People to the maintenance of; and that therefore
you will look upon any that shall propose or advise to the contrary, as unfit
Persons to be near you; and on those who shall persuade you it is Lawful, as
Sordid Flatterers, and the worst and most dangerous Enemies your and your
Kingdom have. What I set before your Majesty, I have written freely and like a
Sworn Faithful Councellor; perhaps not like a wise Man, with regard to my self
as things stand, but I have discharged my Duty, and shall count it a Reward if
your Majesty vouchsafe to read what I durst not but write, and which I beseech
Good to give a blessing to.


