A TRUE HISTORY Of ALL the Memorable Transactions That have happened in
England, Scotland, Ireland, Flanders, etc. Relating to State Affairs, Sieges,
Battles, Sea Fights, and other Naval Matters.

WITH A particular Relation of all the PLOTS and CONSPIRACIES against the Life
of King William and his Government, at Home and Abroad: Also by what Means they
were Discovered and Defeated, by Signal Providence: From his coming to the
Crown, to this present year, 1696. Especially a large Account of the late
Horrid Conspiracy, to Assassine his Sacred Life, and bring in a French Power.

LIKEWISE The Confessions and Executions of diverse of the CONSPIRATORS, and
other things worthy of Note.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Rhodes, at the Star, the Corner of Bride-Lane in
Fleet Street. 1696.

Price Bound, one Shilling.

The Preface to the READER.
REader, In this labored Work you are Accomodated with all the Memorable
Transactions that have happened in Courts, Camps, and on the Watery Element,
ever since the Establishment of the happiness of these Kingdoms, in admitting
an Illustrious Prince and Princess, to the Throne, Born for great Actions, and
particularly by prudent Councils, Heroic Valor and Conduct, to strike off the
Chains of Opressed Europe, viz. From the Coronation of King William, and the
late Queen, being the Quintesential matter of large Volumes; wherein at a small
Expense both of Money and Time, you may look back upon the great Actions of
mighty Princes, and be Induced to Admire and Adore Almighty God, for his
wonderful Providence in preserving the Life of his Anointed, from the Hands of
violent Men, and in so doing, the Happiness and Tranquillity of a numerous
People, whose safety and welfare depend upon so Precious a Pledge of Heavens
Love and Favor.

In this Book you may as in Map, take an easy Prospect of the great Affairs
that have been Transacted, not only in his Majesty's Dominions, but in
Neighboring Nations, and see Laurels Sprouting; and geathered from Sea and
Land, the Malice of our Enemies defeated, and not only their Arms foiled and
weakened, but all their Plots, Conspiracies and dark Councils discovered, and
turned back upon them to their Confusion; more particularly the last Conspiracy
and Intended Invasion, that they had laid, as they thought so sure as made them
Confident of Enslaving our Religion, Laws, Liberties, etc. and that Heaven may
so continue its Favors toward, is us the Prayers of

Your Frind to serve you J. S.

ENGLAND's NEW REMEMBRANCER, etc.
AFter the happy Coronation of Their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, was
on the 11th of April, 1689. solemnized at Westminster, with all the
Magnificence, Pomp and Splendour of a willing Nation, spreading a general Joy
through every Corner of the Land, carrying a sound of Triumph even to the
farthest Shore; diverse great Officers and Ministers of State, and others fitly
qualified for the Interest of the Government, made and entrusted, and as a
Loyal Gratitude and great Example to others; on the 12th of April the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses then Assembled in Parliament, waited upon their
Majesty's to Congratulate their Coronation, which was done by Henry Powle
Esquire, their Speaker, and had the Honor to kiss their Majesty's hands; and
on the 19th following both Houses Addressed his Majesty, to render him Thanks
for his Declaration, and repeated Assurances that he will maintain the Church
of England as by Law, and that he would be pleased to Summon a Convocation of
the Clergy of the Kingdom, to consider more fully of the Matters in point of
Religion, which was accordingly done.

And the Kingdom of Scotland, though incommoded with Insurrections in the
Highlands, not to be behind-hand in Loyalty, to a Prince who had put his Life
and all that was dear to him in the, Balance, to rescue them from impendent
Ruin; having declared the King and Queen Sovereigns of that Kingdom, put forth
a Proclamation, that none should presume to own, or acknowledge the late King
James the Seventh for their King, obey, accept or assist any Order, or
Commission, that should be admitted by him, or any way to correspond with him
by writing, etc. and Commissioners were nominated to go for England, to offer
the Crown to their present Majesty's, and they took all convenient Care to
raise Forces, to quiet and suppress those that disturbed the public Peace;
upon which, the Viscount Dundee who headed a Party of the Rebels, retired to
the North, with about 80 Horse; but soon after his number increased, as will
appear in the Series of this History.

The Duke of Gourdon upon the first Account of the Revolution in England, etc.
having seized the Castle of Edenbungh, the strongest Hold in Scotland, he was
closely besieged and pressed so straightly, that all Communication was cut off:
But the bleeding State of Ireland was to be considered, where the late King was
already Landed, and as well a formidable Army as a confused Rabble of Papists,
with all the Outrages imaginable, oppressed the Protestants, by plundering and
burning their Houses, imprisoning their Persons, and threatening a universal
Massacre; so that notwithstanding an Order of Imbargo in Scotland, Ships were
allowed to go over to fetch off those miserable People, that fled the
Persecution of their implacable Enemies, and stood trembling on the Shore, in
hopes of a seasonable opportunity to be transported.

The Parliament of England being highly sensible of the Danger Ireland was in;
there being a great many Forces and other Supplies Landed from France, and many
Towns, not Tenable, abandoned and swept away, the Commons Addressed his Majesty
in these Words.

WE your Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Commons in this present
Parliament, Assembled, most humbly lay before Your Majesty our earnest Desires
that Your Majesty would be pleased to take into Your most serious
Consideration, the Destructive Methods taken of late Years by the French King,
against the Trace, Quiet, and Interest of Your Kingdom, and particularly the
present Invasion of Your Kingdom of Ireland, and supporting Your Majesty's
Rebellious Subjects; there not doubting in the least, but through Your
Majesty's Wisdom, the Alliance already made with such, as may be hereafter
concluded on this occasion by Your Majesty, may be effectual to reduce the
French King to such a Condition, that it may not be in his Power hereafter, to
violate the Peace of Christendom, nor prejudice the Trade and Prosperity of
this Your Majesty's Kingdom.

To this end, We most humbly beseech Your Majesty to rest assured upon this our
hearty and solemn Promise and Engagement, that when Your Majesty shall think
fit to enter into a War against the French King, We will give Your Majesty such
Assistance in a Parliamentary way; as may enable Your Majesty (under the
Protection and Blessing of God Almighty has ever afforded you) to support and
go through with the same.

To this Request and Resolution of the Commons, very grateful to the Nation,
His Majesty was pleased to Answer, viz.

I Receive this Address as a Mark of the Confidence you have in me, which I
take very kindly, and shall endeavor by all my Actions to confirm you in it: I
assure you, That my own Ambition shall never be an Argument to incline me to
engage in a War, that may expose the Nation either to Danger or Expense, but in
the present Case I look upon the War so much already declared, in effect with
France against England, that it is not so much an Act of Choice, as an
inevitable Necessity in Our own defense.

I shall only tell you, That as I have ventured my Life, and all that is dear
to me, to rescue this Nation from what is suffered, I am ready still to do the
same, in order to the preserving it from all its Enemies, and as I do not
doubt, of such an Assistance from you, as shall be suitable to your Advice to
me, to declare War against a powerful Enemy; so you may rely upon me, That no
part of that which you shall give for the carrying it on with Success, shall by
Me be diverted to any other use

And that the World might see the King was in earnest, he put out a Declaration
to encourage the French Protestants to transport themselves into England, by
which those large Territories must of necessity be weakened, they making no
inconsiderable number. Also a Proclamation prohibiting the Importation of all
sorts of Manufactures, or Commodities whatsoever, of the Growth, Product, or
Manufacture of France; which were as the Lightning forerunning the
Thunderbolt, viz. Denunciation of War; and His Majesty going to the Parliament
House, and seated in the Throne; he gave his Royal Assent to an Act, for
raising Money by Poll, and otherwise toward the reducing of Ireland, and an
Act for preventing Doubts and Questions, concerning the Collecting the public
Revenue, also a Private Act: He likewise settled the Judges of the several
Courts of Westminster, etc. the Chief Justice of Chester, Attorney General,
Solicitor-General, etc.

During these happy Transactions in England, things went with a high hand in
Ireland on the Popish side, though the Protestants few in number, were not
wanting to make all the Resistance they could, whilst the more Timorous, such
as could get off, left the Kingdom and the greatest parts of their Effects
behind them; though the Masters of Ships, on pain of Death, were commanded not
to carry them off. Monsieur d' Avaux and the French Generals bearing all the
sway in the Army, and Councils of the late King, but a Squadron of the English
crusing on the Coast, pursued the French Fleet standing that way, and followed
them, till they found they were got into Bantrey Bay on the Irish Coast, being
about 44 Sail, whereupon the next Morning the Fight began, we continued
battering upon a Stretch till Five in the Afternoon, when the French Admiral
tacked from us, and stood farther into the Bay: In this Action Captain Aylmer
of the Portland, with a Lieutenant and 94 Seamen were killed, and about 250
wounded, and the Enemy, according to Computation, lost a far greater number.

About six days after this Sea Encounter, their Majesty's were pleased to
denounce War against the French King, the Declaration bearing Date the 7th of
May, declaring the Reasons, Necessity, and Justness of the War; most of the
Confederates now in Alliance, having done the like before.

On the 11th of May his Majesty gave the Royal Assent, to an Act, for the
better securing the Government by disarming Papists, and reputed Papists; with
diverse other Acts; and a Proclamation was exhibited for amoving Papists and
reputed Papists, from the Cities of London and Westminster, and ten miles
distant, except such as were qualified to stay by reason of their Places,
Stations, or Vocations, as specified by an Act Entitled, An Act for amoving
Papists, etc.

The Commissioners from the Estates of Scotland, being now arrived, viz. The
Earl of Argyle, Sir James Montgomery, and Sir John Dalrimple, to offer the
Crown of that Kingdom; they waited upon their Majesty's, seated on the Throne
under a Canopy of State in the Banqueting House, and first presented a Letter
from the Estates to his Majesty, then an Instrument of Government; and Thirdly,
a Paper containing the Grievances which they desired might be redressed; and
then an Address to his Majesty for turning the meeting of the Estates into a
Parliament, all Signed by his Grace the Duke of Hamilton President of the
Meeting, and read to their Majesty's; upon which the King was pleased to return
a favorable Answer.

After this the Coronation Oath was tendered, the Earl of Argyle speaking the
words, and the King and Queen holding up their Right hands, after the manner of
taking Oaths in Scotland, repeating them after him: Their Majesty's having
Signed the Coronation Oath, and the Commissioners, and the Scotch Nobility
present, had the Honor to kiss their Hands. About this time the Duke of
Schomberg, and the Earl of Devonshire were installed Knights, Companions of the
Noble Order of the Garter.

The Fleet that had engaged the French, being put into Portsmouth, his Majesty
went thither, being every where received with all the Demonstrations of Joy,
where he was pleased to dive on, and declared his Royal Intention of conferring
the Title of Earl of this Kingdom upon the Admiral, and accordingly he was
afterward created Earl of Torrington, Baron of Torbay, etc. Captain Shovel, and
Captain Ashby were then Knighted, and such as were engaged with the French had
Ten Shillings a man bestowed on him as a Donative.

On the 24th. of May his Majesty gave the Royal Assent to an Act for Exempting
their Majesty's Protestant Subjects dissenting from the Church of England, from
the Penalties of certain Laws, etc.

The Estates of Scotland meeting on the fifth of June, the Duke of Hamilton
acquainted them, That His Majesty had been pleased to send him a Commission, to
represent his Royal Person in the ensuing Parliament; and that the had received
Instruction from His Majesty, to give His consent to an Act, for the turning
the Meeting of the Estates into a Parliament, and then to Adjourn to the 17th.
all which was performed, and exactly observed; and the English Forces under the
Command of Major General Mackay, and others, being entered that Kingdom, the D.
of Gourdon, who till this time, had possession of the Castle, finding no hopes
of Relief, surrendered it upon diverse Articles, to Sir John Lanier; and so that
important place that had for a long time been a Terror to the City of
Edinborugh, as Commanding it with its Cannon, was put into safe Hands, the Duke
casting himself wholly upon the King's Mercy, without making any Article for
himself, although he took care to do it for others, saying, He had so much
respect for all the Princes of King James the Sixth's Line, as not to make
Conditions with them for his own particular Interest; so he rendered himself
entirely to King William's Discretion; and the Parliament meeting according to
appointment, passed an Act for Recognizing, and Asserting Their Majesty's
Authority, and accordingly took the Oaths; and a Correspondency in the Army
being discovered to be held with the Rebels, Lientenant Colonel Levingston and
other Officers were seized, and made Prisoners; so that a timely Discovery
defeated the whole Design; and being brought upon their Trials, before a
Council of War, and severally confessed their Crime, throwing themselves upon
the King's Mercy; and a Proclamation published for apprehending the Viscount
Dundee, and others his Associates, with a Reward of a 8000 Marks, Scotch Money,
to such as should apprehend Dundee, and deliver him to any of His Majesty's
Officers, dead, or alive; and indeed, he survived not long after; for on the
26th of July, Major General Mackay marching from St. Johnstoun with about 4000.
Foot, and 40 Troops of Horse, and Dragoons, Two Mile on this side the Blaye of
Athol, came within sight of the Enemy, and drew up his Men to attack them; and
on the 27th. the Fight began about Five in the Afternoon, and continued very
hot for some time, so that being exceeded in number, some of our Regiments gave
way; however, Dundee Charging furiously at the head of the Highlanders, to
encourage them was slain by a Shot, although he had Armor; which so
discouraged his Party, that they suddenly retreated; and after that, Colonel
Cannon, who had been sent out of Ireland with some Forces, took upon him the
Command, and rallied the scattered Rebels: As for the Body of the Viscount
Dundee, it was afterward exposed in Blaire Church, and then decently buried;
and with him his Party lost, the Prime of their Courage, never after being able
to make any considerable Head; though the Earl of Dumferling, and others,
undertook to manage them; for many of the Highlanders scattered, and went home,
and some of the Heads of their Clans submitted.

During these Transactions in Scotland, the Army in England marched from all
parts toward Chester, and Highlake, to embark on the Ships appointed, under
the Command of the Duke of Schomberg, consisting of between Five and Twenty,
and Thirty Thousand effectual Men, great Stores of Ammunition, Provision, and
considerable quantities of Moneys were Shipped off, and his Majesty appointed a
Camp to be on Hounslow-Heath on the 14th of August, to be composed of such
Forces as remained; but it continued not above three or four days; and in the
mean time a Declaration of War against France was published in Scotland.

During these Transactions, the Iniskilling-men being in Arms, made many
Incursions into the Enemies Quarters, beat several of their Party, and
possessed themselves of a great deal of Plunder; and upon notice that one
Maccarty was abroad with a strong Detachment, marching toward Lisnaskea,
Lieutenant Colonel Berry early the next day marched out with 8 Troops of
Horse, 2 of Dragoons, and 3 Companies of Foot; but upon a serious search
finding the Enemy, with whom another Party was joined, much superior in
Number, he sent to Colonel Woosly at Iniskilling for Relief, and after a brisk
Encounter killing a considerable Number, put the rest to flight; but they
rallying again upon new Reinforcements, another hot Engagement happened near
Newtown Butler, where having posted themselves advantageously, they gauled our
Horse with their Cannon; but our Foot and dragoons passing the Defiles, drove
them from their Posts, and seized their Cannon, whereby the Horse having
advantage to come up, the Enemies Horse upon the first charge deserted the
Foot, and they finding themselves in a great strait, fled likewise; many being
killed and taken; insomuch that that Party that had so long haz^rded the
Country, was by this means quite broken and disordered, 3000 being computed to
be killed and lost in the Lough, into which they desperately threw themselves
to escape the Sword.

Londonderry was a place extremely aimed at, and not doubted to be won, yet
they found themselves mistaken in their Account, as in the Relation of that
Siege, though but briefly, will even to a wonderful Providence be manifested;
indeed upon the first Approach they made themselves Master of the Castle of
Culmore, where were only 3 pieces of Cannon, and the Garrison distressed for
Water; and although they made Conditions to march out with their Swords, yet
were they plundered by the Irish: And now to wave Interruption in the Thread of
History, though many things intervened, take a brief Account of this famous
Siege, the greatest, considering the Situation and weakness of the place,
against a numerous Army, that has been perhaps in many Ages.

This City was built by diverse Companies of the City of London, upon their
Settlement of Collonies in Ireland, as a Fortress against the Incursions of the
Irish, and named by its Original Founders Londonderry, and so prosperously is
succeeded, that it has hitherto baffled their most strenuous Attempts, and as
if Providence had so ordered, to defeat the Councils of Tyrconnel. Upon the
first News of the Invasion, all the Irish Forces were drawn out of it, being
mostly Papists, and sent into England to assist the late King; insomuch, that
the Protestants without much Difficulty took Possession of it, when they were
forced from other places; and when Colonel Lundy and others despaired of
holding it, as a place not Tenable against such a numerous Army, as drew down
against it, though considerable Forces were sent from England, and safely
arrived under the Commands of the Colonels Richards and Cunningham; it being
abandoned by those Commanders, the enraged People resolved to defend it,
against the utmost Efforts of the Enemy; and thereupon proceeding to choose Mr.
George Walker a Minister, and Major Baker their Governors during the Siege,
they chose Colonels, and Regimented their men, in all amounting to 117
Companies, each Company consisting of 60 men, the total 7020 Soldiers, and 341
Officers; and then a View being had of the Stores, and necessary Orders given,
all Offers made by the Enemy of Favor and Protection were refused; so that
finding a defense was resolved upon, they drew up a Demi-culverin within 118
Pearches of the Town, and played without any considerable Damage; unless to the
Market-house, whereupon a Sally was made, and 200 of the Enemy killed, together
with Mamow the French General, and other Officers of note; and although the
Enemies Horse came up furiously, yet no more of our side than four private
Soldiers, and Lieutenant Mac Phedris were killed; but the Besiegers not seeing
this available, planted four Demi-culverins at the lower end of an Orchard, and
those playing Incessantly, hurt diverse People in their Houses and other places;
but the Cannon playing as furiously from the Town killed a great many of their
men, and several Officers of note, as Lieutenant Fitz Patrick, Lieutenant
Colonel Oneas, etc. together with two Friars, who were zealous in the Cause.
And to make more effectual work, they placed some Mortars, and threw in diverse
Bombs, which did little or no Execution; but to prevent further mischief. ^he
Besieged made another vigorous Sally, and killed several of the Enemy at
Penniburn-Hill, in which Action they lost only 2 men, and had 18 wounded, and
farther to recompense it, from a shot of one of the Bastions, a Gunner of
theirs was killed, and one of their Guns broken; whereupon they proceeded to
draw a Trench cross Windmill-Hill from the Bog to the River, raising another
Battery; but a Sally being made from Ferrey-Gate about four in the Morning, one
part of the Assailants beat the Enemies Dragoons from the Hedges, and the other
possessed themselves of the Trenches, and possessed themselves of an
advantageous Ground with considerable Booty, killing in this Sally 200 of the
Enemy, and wounding 500, of which many dyed, with the loss of 3 men and 20
wounded; and so barbarous were the Enemy, that having taken in these or other
frequent Sallies, Lieutenant Douglas and Captain Coningham, after Quarter
given, basely put them to the Sword; and for a farther Mark of their Treachery,
having allured Mr. Walker the Governor to a Treaty upon hanging out a white
Flag, they fired at him about a 100 shot, even upon the Proposals of the
Treaty, but he saved himself by the shelter of an Adjacent house; and they not
finding their Attacks succeed, they removed their main Body, and pitched their
Tents upon Belly Vgry-hill, two miles from the Town, yet kept it straightly
besieged, and possessing themselves of the Wells of Water, much Blood was shed
in Sallies to recover them.

On the 4th of June, the Besieged made an Attack at a Windmill work with a Body
of Horse and Foot, the former being mostly composed of Gentlemen, had bound
themselves in an Oath to mount the Besiegers Line; but although they came on in
good Order with loud Huzzas, they were beaten off; and although the Foot had
Faggots, and after those failed them, they took up dead Bodies to defend them
against the Besieges, and the Horse had mostly Armor, yet 4000 of them were
killed, with the loss of about 6 on our side; and Captain Butlers being taken
Prisoner by too eagerly pressing after the Enemy, and some few killed by their
great Shot from the other side the Water, but in the Nightime the Enemy
played their Bombs of 273 pound weight, which in their fall ploughed up the
Streets, and broke down several Houses, and killed several sick People, that
were not capable of leaving their Houses, and in the daytime their great Guns
thunder^ upon the Walls, so that by this ti^^ through Sickness, more than the
Shot (...) the Enemy, the Garrison was reduce^ to 6185 men; and now there being
(...) multitude of useless People in the Tow^ Famine, which no Walls can keep
ou^ began to stare them in the Face, and many dyed through want; yet there ye^
remained hope; for on the 15th of June they discovered a Fleet of 30 Sail in
the Lough, and had notice it was the Flee^ sent from England, under the Comman^
of Major General Kirk, with Men, Provision and Ammunition for their relief^ but
though some Ships attempted to com^ up the River, yet they were at that tim^
hindered by the Fire of the Enemy, from the Shore, they having raised severa^
Batteries; as also by Bombs made o^ Timber, Chain, and Cable laid a-cros^ in
the narrow passage, and fastened from Shore to Shore; where the Forts were
strongest; and therefore for some time only Signs passed between the Town, an^
the Ships, and no Communication cous^ be had; but by such as privately Swa^ the
River in the nightime, or made other private Attempts for great Rewards, in
which some were intercepted and others lost; and by this means Ma^or General
Kirk sent this Letter to Mr. Walker, to encourage him in a stout ^esistance.

SIR,
I Have received yours by the way of Inch, I writ to you a Sunday last, that I
^ould endeavor all the ways imaginable for ^our Relief, and I find it
impossible by the River, which made me^sond a Party to Inch, ^^hether I am
going my self, to try if I can ^^at off their Camps, or divert them, so that
^^ey shall not press you: I have sent Officers, Ammunition, Arms, Great Guns,
etc. to ^niskilling who have 3000 Foot, and 1500 Horse, and a Regiment of
Dragoons, that ^as promised to come to their Relief; and at the same time I
will attack the Enemyby Inch. I expect 6000 men from England every Minute, they
having been shipped these ^8 days, I have store of Victuals for you, and ^m
resolved to relieve you. England and Scotland are in a good posture, and all
things very well settled; be good Husbands of your Victuals, and by God's help
we shall overcome these barbarous People. Let me hear from you, as often as you
can, and the Mes^enger shall have what Reward he will. I have several of the
Enemy has deserted^ me, who all assure me they cannot stay lo^^ I hear from
Iniskilling the Duke of Be^ wick is beaten, I pray God it be true, (...) then
nothing can hinder them from joyni^ you or me.


In the mean time Famine raged exceedingly, and though many Attemp^^ were made
to reach the Ships by the River, yet the Boats could not endu^^ the Fire of the
Enemy; and Major B^ker falling ill, Colonel Michelburn wa^ was chose as
Assistant Governor t^^ Mr. Walker. The Enemy seeing ho^^ little their Force
prevailed, Couzard (...) Rosen the French Marshal General newl^ arrived at
their Camp, swore by the Belly of God he would demolish the Town, and bury the
Besieged in the Ruins, with other the like Rhodomanta^ does; but neither these
not his cunnin^ Insinuations availed; and although the Iron Bullets were spent,
the Besiege^^ cast Balls of Brick over with Lead t^ the like weight, and indeed
it was time^ for this French General began to sti^ himself in running a Line,
placing more Mortars and Culverines, and making diverse formal Approaches; but
by the vigilence of the Besieged they succeeded not (...) his purpose, and in
that Attempt a ^^eat many men were lost; and upon a ^esperate Sally the Lord
Clancarty was ^eaten out of the Trenches with the loss (...) an 100 of his best
men, and several ^^fficers and Soldiers were wounded, ^^ho died of those
Wounds; though the ^rish bore themselves mightily upon this ^^ord, in
consideration of a Superstiti^^us Prophecy, saying, That a Clancarty should
knock at Derry- Gate. On the 30th of June Major Baker dyed, much lament^d of
the whole Garrison; and about ^^e same time Lieutenant General Hamilton came to
offer Conditions, but was ^ejected with Reproach and Scorn, as ^aving betrayed
his trust in revolting to ^he Enemy. Upon which General Rosne ^ent a Letter to
this Effect:

That if the Besieged did not deliver the Town to him ^y six of the Clock in
the Afternoon on ^he first day of July, he would dispatch his Orders as far as
Balishanny, Charlemont, ^elfast, and the Barrony of Inishowen, and ^lunder all
protected as well as unprotected Protestants, that were either related to the
Besieged or their Faction; and that they should be driven under the Walls of
Derry, where they should perish if not relieved by that Town: He threatened
likewise to bur^ and lay waste all the Country, if there should appear the
least probability of any Troop^ coming to their Relief; yet if the Garriso^
would become Loyalists, (as he termed it (...) and surrender the Town on any
tollerabl^ Condition, he would protect them from a^ Injuries, and give them his
Favor.


But these Threats and Promises were received with Contempt and Indignation^
which put the Frenchman into an extraordinary heat, though to no purpose.

This Intriegue failing, a dead. She^^ or Bomb without Powder was thrown into
the Town, wherein was a Letter to let the Soldiers know what term^ had been
proposed, as if the Governor had keep them in Ignorance; but their Resolutions
were firm, and i^ availed not, notwithstanding some treacherous Persons
dispersed Copies to the like purport, and so unanimous they were, that it was
made Death so much as to discourse of a Surrender. And now the Cruelties of the
Besiegers appeared, for they drove the poor hal^ naked Protestants that they
had gathered in the adjacent Countries, under the walls, like so many Beasts
for slaughter^ of all Ages and Sex; yet Providence so ordered it, that in
firing from the Walls by mistake, as not knowing the meaning of such a Crowd,
the Bullets hit only two or three of those that were driving them; nor would
the Besiegers suffer those miserable People to retire, till the besieged set up
their Gallows, threatening to hang the Prisoners they had taken; even those
Prisoners themselves confessing, they could not blame the besieged in putting
them to death, seeing their People exercised such Severity and Cruelty upon the
Protestants that were under their Protection; and desired leave to write to
Lieutenant General Hamilton, which was allowed, having written to Rosne before,
and received no Answer: And although they had now but a slight Answer returned,
the Intercession of their Friends prevailed, and the miserable Protestants had
leave to repair to their Habitations with this Advantage, that some able
Persons were got into the Garrison, and other ^ck or weak Persons shifted
amongst them, and great Industry was used secretly to incense the Soldiers
against the Governor, as intending for his Advantage to betray the Town; but
it little availed; for upon a right understanding it dissipated: Yet through
Sickness, occasioned by Famine, and the many Sallies that were made, on the
25th of July the Garrison was reduced to 4892 effectual men; yet the same day a
vigorous Sally was made, the mai^ design being to bring in some Cattl^ the
Enemy had feeding within sight^ whilst the Action continued; and s^ well it
succeeded, that three hundre^ of their men were killed, besides Officers, but
no Cattle gained: and the Garrison now being reduced to 445^ men, the Famine
daily increased, insomuch that Horseflesh was sold for 1 s. 8 d. the Pound;
the quarter of a Dog for 5 s. 6 d. a Dogs-head 2 s. 6 d. a Ca^ 4 s. 6 d. and so
of other things proportionably; as Rats, Mice, Tallow^ Greves, and all things
noisome; and one fat Man thinking they had an Ey^ upon him to eat him,
concealed himself for some time for fear. But now when even hope it self began
to fail^ and nothing expected but to fall into the hands of a merciless Enemy,
Providence worked in a Miracle; for o^ the 13th of July, an hour after Sermon^
some Ships in the Lough were discovered making to wards the City, for Major
General Kirk finding the place could not hold out much longer, ordered them to
force their way in spite of all opposition, in which they succeeded; and the
Mountjoy and Phoenix laden with Provision, convoyed by the Dartmouth, and other
Men of War, came up with little loss; though the Enemy fired from the Shore
without intermission. And thus the besieged were relieved with Provision, when
they reckoned but upon two days Life, having only 9 lean Horses left, and one
pint of Meal to each man, 4200 men being left, whereof a fourth part were
rendered unserviceable.

The Enemy perceiving this seasonable Relief, on the the last of July raised
the Siege in some disorder, burning and plundering as they retreated, but were
pursued by the besieged, and some Parties of the Iniskilling-men that were
abroad, and many of them cut off; yet they made a Halt at Straban; but having
notice that the Iniskilling-men had defeated the Forces under Lieutenant
General Maccarty, they removed their Camp, breaking for haste four of their
great Guns, and casting twelve Cart Load of Arms into the River: And thus after
105 days close Siege was this City delivered, the Enemy losing between 18 and
19000 me^ before the Walls, and 100 of their be^^ Officers.

Upon the coming of Major General Kirk to this City, he was received with great
Joy, and it was agreed, that Mr^ Walker should go for England, and present
their Majesty's with an humble Address in the Name of himself, and the
Principal of those that had been in the place during the Siege, in reference t^
all the Inhabitants, and upon his Arrival he was very Gracioussy received His
Majesty, as a mark of his special Favor, ordering him Five thousand Pounds and
promised him a further continuance of his Royal Goodness, and he was courted,
admired, and treated by the Nobility, Clergy; etc. and since we have dwelt so
long upon this memorable Siege, that in Point of time has carried us beyond
many other notable Transactions, it will be convenient to look a little back,
and see what was done in other parts of the Kingdom.

Major General Kirk has been related coming with a Resolution, and express
Orders to relieve the besieged; seeing if he longer delayed it, it must fall
into the Enemies hands, after the Provision ships had been sent up to endeavor
its relief, he hasted to the Isle of Inch, and found all things in a very good
order, and there it was he had the News of the raising the Siege, and that the
Enemy were marched over Clandy, having blown up Kilmore Castle and Red Castle,
with all the Houses down the River, and set the Country for Ten miles in a
Flame; and since we are got to Inch, let us s^ what happened in those parts,
being the chief Refuge of the Protestants from the 7th of July, to the raising
the Siege of Derry.

On the 7th of July, a Detachment was sent of 600 men, under the Command of
Colonel Stewant, and on the 9th. he got up with the Island of Inch, and there
had the Luck to hear, that the Irish kept at a place called Tully, Six miles
from Ralfemullin; whereupon he sent a commanded Party of 60 Musketeers, who
were put ashore in the Nightime, and on the 10th in the Morning, Captain
Richards, the King's Engineer, Landed with an Ensign, and 20 men in the Isle of
Inch, and had scarce marched a mile before he come to the great Strand, much
overflowed with the Tide; yet staked out a redent Work with Redoubts, sending
for some Fieldpieces, as also more Men and Instruments to work with, and about
a 11 in the Morning the Ground growing dry, a great many distressed Protestanta
came thither with their Cattle; to hinder which, a Party of the Enemiea Horse
came to the opposite Shore, but as they attempted to pass the Strand they were
beaten back, and Lieutenant Colonel St. John's coming in with 200 fresh men;
they retired, and (...) men having fresh Assistance and Supplies fortified
themselves in that Island, raising a Battery of four small Pieces, which kept
the Enemies Horse at a distance; they having posted 5 Troops of Dragoons, as if
they intended to make an Attack upon the Works before they could be brought to
perfection, and a Ketch was sent to Fern Lough to setch off 40 Irish
Protestants, who were retired into a small Island, and Cattle taken from the
Enemy sent to the Fleet in Lough Derry, and on the 12th some of the Enemies
Troops of Horse came upon the Strand, and made a halt about half way, drawing
up likewise on the other side Three Troops of Horse and Dragoons; but our men
drawing up Tow Fieldpices, and Firing amongst them, they divided and fell into
a strange disorder, and by this means they were beaten to the foot of the
Hills, so that more Forces coming, Time was allowed to finish the Batteries and
Redoubts, joining them by Lines of Communication; and in a while Ten Companies
were completely formed, and the Duke of Berwick with 1500 Horse attempting a
Party of our men at Ralfemullin, they Barrocaded the Streets, and so stoutly de
fended themselves, that he was beat off with the Loss of 240 men, and on our
fide Lieutenant Cuningham, and an Ensign was wounded: and now the Enemy having
for several days past made motion of attacking our men, were nevertheless kept
in awe by our Guns, and still our Works were vigorously carried on, and Forces
increased.

The French General Rosne upon his approach was wounded in the Leg, and his
Horse in the Body; Stones were beaten up by a Cannon Bullet, and Two Troopers
near him killed, and Parties daily sent out, brought in so many Cattle, that in
that small Island they had no less than a 1000 Head, and subsisted in spite of
the many Attempts that were made upon them; the miserable People flowing from
all Parts for Succor and Refuge.

On the 13th of August, the Duke of Schomberg. Landed at Carickfergus, with all
the Forces under his Command, and sent Two Regiments to Belfast; and after a
reasonable Refreshment of himself and his Army, proceeded to settle the Affairs
of that disordered Kingdom, passing on by slow Marches, after he had secured
the Passes, and caused the Enemy to retire before him, so that the Country came
in on all hands to bring Provisions for the Army, and offer their Services
amongst the Enemy; so that a great many Gentry and others were Listed and
Entertained; Provision appearing to be very plentiful, and the Town of
Carrickfergus wherein the Irish had Garrison, refusing to surrender, Seven
Regiments of Foot were commanded to invest it, and the Cannon was brought
before it, the Ground broke, etc. which the Enemy seeing, desired to come to a
Parley, but that granted, and they requiring time to know the late King's
Pleasure, and have his Leave to surrender, it broke off; and the Cannon and
Bombs played against the place, battering the Lord Dungal's House, where the
Besieged had planted Two pieces of Cannon; as likewise against the Half Moon,
and the Trenches were carried on with great Diligence, very fierce Firings of
great and small Shot, being continued on both sides; in which, we lost a
Captain and a Lieutenant, with some few Soldiers, and on the 22 of August, 50
Ships came into the Lough, having on Board four Regiments of Foot, and one of
Horse; and the Siege being vigorously carried on, the Besieged on the 23d.
desired another Parley, agreeing to surrender it if they might march with part
of their Baggage; but no other Conditions than to be made Prisoners of War
would be granted; so that after a very great Havoc made with the Cannon and
Bomb, which beat down, and set several places on Fire; they, on the 27th hung
out a White Flag, and surrendered on the Condition to march on to the next Irish
Garrison, and kell, their marching out Sir Henry Ingol was Regiment was put into
the Townly, that the Army being augmented by mor Forces from England, marched
toward Belfast, and on the Second of September were Two miles beyond
Lisnegarny; whilst the Enemy in their retreat set diverse places on Fire; which
so incensed the General, that he sent to let them know, if they desisted not,
he would give them no Quarter; which caused the saving Dundalk; for the Enemy
abandoned it without setting Fire to it, on whose Plains our Army encamped,
expecting the heavy Cannon and other necessaries; whilst the Enemy between 40
and 50000 strong, fortified themselves with Trenches about Ardee.

Flying Parties being now abroad, a Body of the Enemy about Conaught, to the
number of 5000 Horse and Foot, intending to make themselves Masters of the Town
of Sligo, Colonel Lloyd drew up the Iniskilling-men, and other Forces to the
number of 1000 Horse, Dragoons and Foo^, and lining the Hedges of the Lane of
Boil with his Foot, posted his Horse on a rising Ground, Charged the ^^emy so
sudden and unexpectedly, that (...) a hot Dispute they were put o (...); and
the Colonel taking a Cir^ ^^erence with his Horse and Diagoons got unto Boil,
Through which the Enemy needs must pass, and Charged them in the Front, whilst
the Foot fell in their Rear; so that after a Bloody and obstinate Fight, about
700, were killed on the place, and near half as many taken Prisoners; amongst
which O Kelly, who commanded them, and 40 other Officers, and the Plunder was
very great; for besides Arms and Ammunition 8000 Head of Cattle were taken from
them, which they had taken from the poor Country People. This Victory created
such Joy in the Camp, that the Guns, by Order of the General, were Fired round.

During this Success in Ireland, the Affairs in England and Scotland were
carried on very prosperously; several very Loyal Addresses were presented to
their Majesty's; the People every where cheerfully expressing their Resolutions
to oppose the Enemy with their Lives and Fortunes: And as our Arms were
Successful against the Rebels in Ireland, so were they in Scotland, for on the
22d. of August a Party of the Rebels, assisted by the Athlone-men, came toward
Dunkell, where the Lord Angus's Regiment was posted, who received them so
warmly, that they were driven back to the Hills with the Loss of 115 killed,
and several taken Prisoners, on our side: Lieutena^^ Colonel Cleeland was
killed, with 7 me^^ and Major Henderson, with about 14 mo^^ wounded; upon which
Major-Genera^ Mackay resolved to march into Atho^^ This smart Encounter put
such a^ effectual stop to the Incursions of the High-landers, that many of
them, o^^ of Love with their Trades, dispersed an^ went home, and Colonel
Cannon retired with his men to Loughabar: the Lord James Murray, and the young
Lord o^ Ballacan demanded the Benefit of the King Indemnity for themselves;
and the Father of the latter, and many of the Marquess of Athol's Vassals came
in with their Cattle and Substance, submitting themselves, and taking the
Oaths. Whereupon Colonel Cannon, who made the only Figure for the late King,
retreated toward the Isle of Mull, doubtful whether be should continue longer
or go to Ireland; and the Major General, the better to keep those parts under,
put a Garrison in the Castle of Blaire; and upon his March Northward, most of
the Leading men of the Highland Clans came in, and took the benefit of the
Indemnity, and delivered up their Arms; upon which he returned to Edinburgh,
accompanied with the Earl of Argyle; and the Lords of Levingston and Duffus,
with the Earl of Collendar, were set at Liberty, having together with the Earls
of South-Esk, Brodalbane, and the Lord, Strathmore, etc. taking the benefit of
the Indemnity, and gave sufficient Sureties for the Securities of the Peace; so
that several Troops of the King's Forces in that Kingdom were embarked for
Ireland, and the Face of things appeared very Calm and Serene in that Kingdom;
so that on the 1st. of October, a Proclamation was published for the
Adjournment of the Parliament, from the 8th of October, to the 20th of December
ensuing; and the Major General took great care to view the Garrisons in the
North, to be the better provided in the Spring against any Commotions, that
might happen by new Insurrections.

On the 20th of September, the Parliament met at Westminster, pursuant to a
late Adjournment; where his Majesty's Pleasure was signified, that they should
Adjourn further, to the 19th of October ensuing; and that he intended they
should then sit, whereof he had ordered Notice to be given by Proclamation, and
accordingly the Two Houses Adjourned; and about this time we had a very good
Account from the Western Plantations, that the English stood upon their Guard,
and had in most Places gotten the better of the French, driving them off the
Islands, and possessing themselves of many Important Places; in the Particulars
of which we shall be somewhat large hereafter.

During the glorious Success of our. Arms in Ireland, there wanted not a
treacherous Design; but it was happily discovered; for a Captain of one of the
French Regiments being informed that four Soldiers and a Drummer, who were
Papists, designed to go over to the Enemy, he caused them to be secured, and
found Letters about one of them to Monsieur D' Avaux, and upon strict
Examination he declared he had the Letters from one Du Pleshy, a^ ^apist, who
served as a private Soldier in one of the French Regiments, though he had been
formerly a Captain of Horse in France, from whence he was forced to retire upon
the Account of a Murder; and this Person being seized, he did confess that he
had written to the late King; and D' Avaux giving them an Account that there
were diverse Papists in the French Regiment, and promising to bring them over to
the Irish Camp, upon Condition he might have the Command of them, and his
Pardon in France: upon which Confession he and his Accomplices were tried
before a Council of War, and being Sentenced, were accordingly Executed. After
which the three French Colonels made strict enquiry what Papists were in their
Regiments, and found about an 150, which by the Generals Order were secured,
and sent Prisoners to England, most of them having this Summer deserted the
French Service, and came for England by the way of Holland, upon notice such
Regiments were raising; but what their further Intentions were, remains
doubtful; however, if Treachery was their design of entering the Service, it
was by this timely discovery defeated and frustrated.

The beginning of November a Party of the Army decamped from the Plains of
Dundalk, where they had lain about eleven weeks; and soon after the Duke of
Schomberg marched away with the remainder to Lisnegarny, and so to Lisburn; no
extraordinary Action happening in the Field during this Incampment, the Enemy
declining, giving any opportunity of that kind; though their Army was near one
half superior in Number: Yet soon after, they sent out a select Party to
Newry, as soon as the day began to dawn, in hopes to surprise some of our
advanced Parties; but the greatest Execution they did, was to kill the Out
Sentinels, though they gave warning by two Discharges; and although they got
into the Town, they were soon beaten out by a Party of Colonel Ingoldsby's
Regiment, in which dispute a Captain and six or seven Soldiers were lost, and
a Lieutenant and an Ensign wounded: Yet soon after they rallied and got over
the Bridge, but again they were beaten, and diverse slain, they carrying off
several Officers dead, to prevent their loss coming to our Knowledge. And now
the Garrison of Charlemont being a curb upon those Parts; some Parties were
sent out to view the Place, but found all the Hedges and advantageous Passes
lined by the Enemy; yet they were forced from thence by our Men, and several of
them killed: and soon after Brigadie: Stewart receiving notice that some
Parties of the Enemy were scouting about with a design to surprise the Town,
and Pass at the Newry, he drew out the Horse and Foot he could hastily get
together, making about 250, and at the head of them attacked the Enemy so
vigorously, that they fell into rout and disorder, thirty being killed on the
Place, and 17 or 18 taken Prisoners, of which five were Officers: And by this
Defeat a considerable Booty of Cattle were taken. Nor were other of our Parties
idle; for Colonel Woosly commanding a Party of the Iniskilling-men, marched
with much secrecy in the Night to Belturbat, which brought such a Terror upon
that Garrison, as made them surrender upon the first Summons; agreeing to be
conducted to the next Garrison.

Whilst these things were doing, a strong Party of the Irish went out to
plunder and possess themselves of the Lady Newcomen's House, of which she
having timely notice, fortified it against them, with a Garrison of her Tenants
only, and beat off the Enemy in several Attacks, till such time as they brought
Bombs and Fieldpieces to play upon it; and then after some further resistance,
capitulated, That she and her Servants should continue in the House without
molestation; but that the Garrison should march out to Eisnegarny with their
Arms and Baggage. And now a further Eye being had upon Charlemont, the General
went to view it with a small Party, and without any Opposition brought away 50
Horses that were feeding under the Carmom of the Garrison: And for the better
ordering the Army, and that a more immediate Blessing might be upon it, the
General caused his Proclamation to be published, forbidding Cursing, Swearing
and Profaneness in Commander^ and Soldiers, under pain of Displeasure and
other Punishments: This for a time put a stop to that so unnecessary and
unprofitable Wickedness, too much reigning amongst Officers and Soldiers; and
the Army was supplied with Provisions and Stores from England, bearing the Ill
conveniences of the Weather, which were great, without the least Regret;
though several died of the Distempers of the Country. Wherefore, to keep them
in Action, the better to prevent it, about the middle of February, upon Advice
the Enemy was in motion near Dundalk, he drew out a strong Party and marched to
Dramore, whilst Colonel la Melionere and Sir John Lanier, who advanced as far
as Carlingford, returned with an Account, that only three Regiments of the
Enemy were at Dundalk; that Garrison, as likewise Drogheda, containing their
former Garrisons without any Reinforcement; upon which most of our Troops were
commanded back, only a flying Party of 500 Horse and Dragoons, with a like
number of Foot, were sent abroad to observe the Motions of the Enemy, and keep
them from plundering the Country; between whom and the Out-Parties some
Skirmishing happened.

The General being returned to his head Quarters at Lisburn, received an
Account from Colonel Woosly of a great defeat he had given the Enemy at the
Town of Cavan, the Particulars were, That Marching from Belturbat with a
Detachment of 300 Horse, and 700 Foot, he passed the River at Night, two Miles
beyond Calyhay's; but it was not done so secretly, but the Enemies Scouts
discovered it, and gave the Alarm by firing their Muskets, and making a great
fire upon the Hill. However, notwithstanding the badness of the Ways, he got to
the. Town about half an hour after daybreak; when contrary to expectation he
found the Duke of Berwick arrived that Night with 2500 men, making with the
Garrison about 4000, drawn up in good order near the Fort; but the Colonel
disposing of his men as the Ground would give a Convenience, he charged the
enemy; and after an hours hot dispute beat them out of the Field; in which
Action the Duke of Berwick had his Horse shot under him, and Colonel O Rely,
Governor of Cavan, was killed on the spot, with two Lieutenant-Collonels, and
diverse others of Note: Whereupon our men entered the Town and fell to
plundering; which the Enemy perceiving, made a strong Sally from the Fort, and
had cut off a great many of them in that Disorder, had not the Colonel came
opportunely in with a fresh Reserve of about 250 Foot, and 80 Horse; and to get
his Soldiers out of the Town, he found himself constrained to set it on Fire,
and having quitted it, and joined those that were fighting, the Enemy about 150
strong were beaten into the Fort with considerable loss; but the Army being
tired out in the Action, it was not thought convenient to attack it at that
time; and this firing the Town proved very disadvantageous, considering the
Plunder that might have been had, for all the Houses were full of Bread, Meal,
Oats, Beans, and the like; Stores to suffice the Garrison for six Months. And
here it was reported by the Prisoners, that the Duke of Berwick was to command
a Body of 10000 men, to be detached out of all the Regiments, and so to make
Incursions as he saw Opportunity; but by this defeat the design was frustrated,
for all the Ammunition that was in the Town was blown up. In this Action we
lost about twenty men, and amongst them Major Trahern, Captain Armstrong, and
Captain Mayo, with one Captain La Maugere, a French reformed Officer, and
Captain Blood an Engenier, were wounded; though the loss of the Enemy is
computed at no less than 300, and amongst the others, four Captains, five
Lieutenants, two Ensigns, one Quartermaster, and about 200 taken Prisoners, and
those that fled the Field were many of them desperately wounded; and scattered
all the way with the Arms they threw down, for the greater speed and pushing on
this Success: Many other Places of Note were gained, and good Booties of Cattle
daily brought in by the flying Parties; though the Season proved somewhat sharp
and intemperate.

About this time the Queen of Spain being on Board under a Convoy of a Squadron
of Englishmen of War, and being upon our Coast, the Duke of Norfolk was sent
to Complement her Majesty in the Name of Their Majesty's of England, and it was
performed with much Ceremony and Grandeur; and the Wind soon after coming about
fair, she arrived safe in the Groin, and so passed to Madrid, and the English
Ships after having this Honor, were dismissed with liberal Gratitude to the
Commanders.

And now Elections for Members of Parliament went on apace; every one
contending to choose Loyal and worthy Gentlemen, to undertake a Trust, on which
the welfare and safety of the Nation depends; and the King put out a
Proclamation for a General Fast, to implore the Protection of Almighty God, in
the Preservation of his Majesty's Sacred person, and Prosperity of his Arms in
Ireland, and the Naval Forces; to begin, the 12th day of March, and be
Religiously observed every Third Wednesday in the Month; and accordingly it was
observed, till his Majesty returned from Ireland, Crowned with Victory and
Success, and then it was turned into a Day of Thanksgiving.

On the 20th of March, the Parliament, Pursuant to his Majesty's Writs of
Summons met at Westminster, and his Majesty being in his Royal Robes, seated on
the Throne in the House of Peers, attended with the usual Solemnity the Commons
were sent for by the Black-Rod, who attended at the Bar of the Lords; Sir
Robert Atkins Knight of the Bath, Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, by his
Majesty's Command, signified to them, That they should forthwith proceed to the
Choice of a Speaker, and present him to his Majesty the next Morning after
which, they returned to their House, and made Choice of Sir John Trevor Knight,
and the next Morning he was approved by his Majesty, and his Majesty proceeded
to make a very. Gracious Speech; telling them, amongst other things, his
Resolution was to go for Ireland; his Presence being necessarily required for
the Reducing that Kingdom^ further signifying his Presence to leave the
Government in the Queens hand^^ during his absence; and accordingly before his
Departure, an Act passed to that end; and the Right Honorable Sir John Lowther
of Lowther-House, Baron Vice-Chamberlain to his Majesty's Household, Richard
Hambden Esquire, Chancellor, and Under Treasurer of the Exchequer, Sir Stephen
Fox Knight, and Thomas Pellam Esquire, were appointed Lords Commissioners of
the Treasury.

And now the rest of the Danish Force^ Landing in Ireland, our Army grew very
formidable, so that the Garrison of Charlemont being Blocked up, Colonel
Cullimotte possessed himself of a small Village within a mile of it; upon
notice of which the Enemy came out with about 300 men, yet were repulsed with
considerable Loss, and the next day our men cast up Works to stop the Sallies,
the Enemy was obliged to abandon their Outworks; and Colonel Cullimotte
marched with a party of his Regiment, and a Detachment of Colonel St. John's,
making in all about 20 Officers and 80 Soldiers, whom he caused to embark in
Three Boats; when being come within half a mile he Landed, and leaving a Guard
with the Boats, marched bravely to the Town, though they were discovered at a
good distance, the Moon then shining; yet they passed the Ditch, and made
themselves Masters of the main Guard, dividing themselves in two Parties, one
marching toward the Gate of the Castle, to hinder the Enemy from Sallying, and
the other to attack a Redoubt that covered their Bridge within Thirty paces of
the Counterscarp, being guarded by 15 men and a Sergeant; and after some
resistance entered, killing Six and taking the rest Prisoners: and whilst this
was doing, Monsieur de la Board took another Redoubt with 30 men, and plundered
and burnt the Houses as far as Armagh, which the Enemy had abandoned; but day
coming on, our men retired with much Booty; their Drums beating, and Colors
flying; and in this Enterprise the Enemy lost 50 men, besides wounded and taken
Prisoners; on our side Major la Board was killed with a Cartridge-Shot of the
last Cannon, Two more Officers wounded, and one Soldier killed, nor were other
Parties idle; so that several small places were taken, and other Blocked up,
till the Season grew more ripe for Action.

In Scotland Affairs went pretty well the Rebels, since the Death of Dunde^,
and the defeat of his Party, daily dwindled; insomuch, that those who had been
concerned in it, began to think of making their escape, and the Heads of the
Highland Clans grew so discouraged, that they laid down their Arms and
dismissed their Followers, making an Interest to have the Benefit of the King's
mercy, and under Promise and Obligation to live peaceably and obedient to their
Majesty's and their Government, many of them obtained it; however, several that
were making their escape to the late King in Ireland were taken, amongst which
were the Two Sons of the Provost, Bell of Glasgow, one Forrester a Clergyman,
and one Dunbar that had been a Gunner in the Castle of Edinburgh; but upon
their Submission and Promise of discovery were admitted to Bail, or other ways
set at Liberty, and the Countess Dowager of Arrol removed, at her Request, to
^enburgh Castle; the Lord Bellcarrus was likewise Bailed, with many others that
submitted, and made a Resolution to be obedient to the Government: so that
those restless People seeing their Error, in disturbing the Government, under
which they may live peaceably, will no doubt give over their Pretensions, to
defend they know not what, and we may expect to hear that Kingdom free from
Broils and Encumbrances of War; so that Matters being at this pass, his
Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Lords of the Privy Council, in pursuance
of his Majesty's Pleasure, signified to them by his Letter, issued out a
Proclamation about the latter end of March, for continuing the Adjournment of
the Parliament, from the 27th of March, to the 15th of April ensuing;
Certifying all the Members that the Parliament would then Sit.

Many of our Ships being abroad, though no considerable Action, yet a great many
considerable Prizes were brought in, and great Preparations madefor Stores, and
Manning of the Ships; a great number of Voluntier Seamen coming in, or entering
themselves on Board, and the Land Forces were recruited with great diligence;
sp that the Face of things appeared very active and cheerful; and now the
Season advancing, the Army in Ireland moving toward the Enemy, they retreated;
so that Colonel Tiffuny Commanding at Ballishannon, taking the advantage, sent
out 200 Firelocks of his own regiment, and 20 Dragoons; Commanded by his
Lieutenant Colonel, with Orders to advance within two miles of Sligo, where
the Enemy kept all their Cattle; and accordingly they arrived there before day,
and brought away Cattle, Sheep and Horses to the value of 2000 Pounds; but the
Enemy taking the Alarm pursued them, and disputed it for a time; but having
lost a Captain and 16 Soldiers, they retired in disorder, and our men went off
with the Booty.

The Parliament of England now sitting at Westminster, his Majesty came to the
House of Lords, with the usual Solemnity, and being in his Royal Robes seated
on the Throne, and the Commons attending, he passed an Act, For Granting their
Majesty's a Subsidy for Tonage and Poundage, and other Sums payable upon
Merchandise, Exported and Imported. An Act, For Enabling the Sail of Goods,
distrained for Rent; in Case the Rent be not paid in a reasonable time. An Act,
To Enable Algernoon Earl of Essex, to make a Wife a Jointure, and for raising
of Moneys for the Payment of 60000 Pounds, borrowed to make up the Lady
Morpeth's Portion, and to make a Settlement of his Estate on his Marriage. An
Act, To make some Provisions for the Daughters and younger Sons of Anthony Earl
of Shaftsbury: with several other private Acts of the like Nature.

His Majesty in his Princely Wisdom, considering that the Trade from England to
Ireland was necessary to such parts as we possessed, was pleased to pass this
Order in Council, viz. It is this day ordered by his Majesty in Council; that
the late Embargo be, and it is hereby suspended, and taken off from all Vessels
Trading along the Coasts of this Kingdom, and from all Ships with provision
bound for such parts of Ireland, as are under Obedience to their Majesty's; the
respective Masters and Owners of such Vessels, given security to the Officers
of the Customs in the Ports, from whence they shall set Sail, not to Trade
under pretense of this Liberty unto any Foreign parts, or into any part of
Ireland, that is not now under Subjection to their Majesty's.

This greatly encouraged industrious Persons, to send over such Necessaries as
wonderfully relieved the Army, and put it in heart for vigorous Action,
insomuch that the Enemies advance parties were beaten, and forced to quit
several advantageous Posts: but leaving this Kingdom a while, and return to
Scotland, to consider the Affairs of that Nation, not yet thoroughly quieted
from the Attempts of some restless men, who resolved to be buried in the Ruins
of their tottering Fortunes; and so it happened, that on the 4th of May, the
Lords Commissioners, and the Privy Council received from Sir Thomas Levingston,
Governor of Inverness, an Express of the defeat of the Highland Rebels, who
were drawn together to make a descent into the Lowland Country as follows.

Sir Thomas Levingston being informed, that the Rebels had appointed their
General Randezvous at Siratspey, and that Colonel Buchan, and Colonel Cannon
were already arrived there, with 2000 men, and that they expected within four
days to be four Thousand strong; he thereupon drew together his own Regiment of
Dragoons, Two Troops of Horse Commanded by Captain Hays, and Captain Burnet,
Six Companies of the Lord of Grant's Regiment, 400 men of Sir James Lesley's,
and a Company of Highlanders, commanded by Captain Mackay and with these Forces
he marched toward the Rebels, and getting Intelligence of their number, and
how they lay encamped, he came about the middle of the Night to Ballagh Castle;
and having notice there were Two Fords, one near the Enemies Camp, where they
had posted a strong Par y in a Church, and another further up the River, which
was not Guarded; so that slighting the former, he passed the latter, with the
greatest part of Troops, and ordered the rest to attack the Enemy in the
Church; who upon the first Firing fled to their Camp, which our Horse and
Dragoons entered about the same time, and put those they found there into so
great a Consternation and Confusion that they immediately betook them to
flight; but ever they could recover the Hills many were slain in the pursuit,
the Computation being no less that 400, and 100 taken Prisoners, most of them
Gentlemen and Officers; Colonel Cannon, and Colonel Buchan escaping very
narrowly, not having had time to put on their Clothes. After this Sir Thomas
Levingston sent a Party to attack the Castle of Lethindy, in which the Enemy
had a Garrison under the Command of Colonel Buchan's Nephew, who surrendered
at Discretion; and our Men, besides Arms, Ammunition, and 400 Bowls of Meal,
took the Standard, designed to be set up for the late King James; and in this
extraordinary Action it is not known that one Man was killed on our side, nor
above four or five wounded.

On the 13th of May, Don Pedro de Ronquillo, Ambassador Extraordinary from the
King of Spain, had a public Audience of his Majesty, to notify the Marriage
of the King his Master, from whom, as also from the Queen Mother of Spain, he
delivered Letters. to his Majesty, wherein they thanked his Majesty for sending
a Squadron of his Ships with the Queen, and expressed the great Esteem they had
for his Majesty's Royal Person and Friendship And now after a long Blockade,
and the Reducement of the Stores of Charlemont in Ireland, that Garrison being
pressed by our Troops, found it self necessitated to capitulate, though it was
strongly situated; and on the 11th of May the Governor demanded a Parley,
which was allowed, with leave to send to the Lieutenant General, the next day
the Lieutenant, a Governor, and a Colonel came from thence, and the same day
the Articles were agreed on for the Surrender of the Place, very Advantageous
and Honorable to his Majesty; and in pursuance of the Capitulation, the
Governor Tege O Regan, and the Garrison, who had in a manner consumed all
their Provisions, marched out 800 strong, leaving in the Place a good quantity
os Ammunition, 17 pieces of Brass Cannon, and two Mortars: And the Duke of
Schomberg upon this Surrender went to Legacory to see the Garrison as they
marched away, and afterward visited the Place, which is very strong and
considerable by its Situation, being one of the strongest Places the Rebels
held in these Parts; so that it gave a Prospect to the future Success of
entirely subduing the Kingdom.

Whilst these Affairs went forward in Ireland, the Parliament was active in
England, and great Preparations were made for his Majesty's passing over, to
facilitate the Irish War, in order to which, on the 20th of May, his Majesty
gave the Royal Assent to an Act, For the Exercise of the Government by her
Majesty during his Majesty's Absence. An Act, For Reversing the Judgment in Quo
Warranto against the City of London; and for Restoring the City of London to
its Ancient Rights and Privileges. An Act, To declare the Right and Freedom of
Election of Members to serve in Parliament for the Cinque Ports; and several
private Acts. And now the Season advancing for Action, the Forces moved apace
toward High-Lake, and other advantageous Ports, in order to their Embarking
for Ireland; nor did the King delay this great and glorious Undertaking, which
proved Successful to the three Kingdoms, as in the Sequel will appear; for all
things being in a readiness, he left White Hall on the fourth of June, with a
very splendid Equipage, and the next day arrived at Litchfield, where he was
received (as in all other Places through which he passed) with a great
Concourse of the Gentry, and all possible Demonstrations of Duty and Affection
from all sorts of People; and having stayed some time at Chester, and about the
Coast, he Embarked on the Fleet attending him, and stood over for the Coast of
Ireland, arriving on the 14th at Carrickfergus, and from thence by Land he went
to Belfast, the Duke of Schomberg, and diverse great Officers waiting on him,
his Reception being with General Joy, and the Loud Acclamations of the People:
His Majesty at his Arrival found his Forces in a very good Condition;
Provisions plentiful, and the Ground full of Corn, and Grass well grown, with
all things to his Satisfaction. And on the 19th his Majesty went from Belfast
to Hilsburg, and from thence to Loubricklin, and the Newry; the Forces marching
in two Bodies: And soon after they Encamped on the Plains of Dundalk. In the
mean while a considerable Body of the Enemy lay about Ardee, there Intrenching
themselves as if they were bent upon a desperate Opposition.

Since we have made this Progress in Affairs, it may not be amiss to look a
little back and consider what happened in relating to Dublin, the Metropolis of
Ireland, upon King William's Arriving in that Kingdom: The Camp before his
Landing had been laid out about Atherdee, and the late King had disposed his
Army to Randesvouz there, from diverse parts of the Kingdom; and o^ the 16th of
July he marched out o^ Dublin to join them with about 6000 French Foot, most
old Soldiers well Armed and Clad. One Regiment of these were Dutch Protestants,
who were narrowly observed for fear o^ deserting. The whole Irish Army was
composed of about 36000 men, besides 15000 which remained in Garrisons ^ and
the same day the Late King left the Town, there marched in 6000 of the Country
Militia, and the Colonels Luttrel and Mac Gillicuddy, as his Assistants, were
left Governors.

It was expected the Irish would have been disheartened upon the News of King
William's Landing, and the late Kings leaving the Town; but on the contrary,
boy'd up with vain hope, they rejoiced, as if they had got the King of England
in their Possession, and the day their own; being too fondly assured, the
French Fleet would cut off his return, or that an Insurrection would be made in
England, as being told, that 100000 men were ready to rise, under the Notion of
declaring for a Commonwealths so that the Protestants knew not what to think,
being mostly Imprisoned, or under Restraint; and the Irish Papists were so
assured of Success, that some of them told their Protestant Friends, they would
be glad to go to Mass within a Twelvemonth; and this hope afterward appeared
to be grounded on the little Intelligence the English had of the strength of
the Irish Army, as was manifested by the Letters of Tyrconnel to the late Queen
in France, surprised at Dundalk; yet this gave the Protestants an apprehension
of their Houses being burnt, and plundered, in case the Irish Army was worsted,
of whose Success they had not the least thought, as knowing their Cowardice,
where they came upon equal terms; for they had neglected at all times, to
fortify the place; and on the 19th. when the late King was gone to encamp, the
Governor ordered all People walking the Streets without Bayonets, or Swords,
to be taken up; for the Papists had a secret notice not to go without them, so
that this fell upon the Protestants only, and accordingly many were secured,
out of which they culled those they suspected. and sent them to diverse Prisons,
and then they put out a Proclamation, That not above Five Protestants should
meet in any place above the Family, upon pain of Death; and thereupon the
Churches were shut up, which, by an extraordinary Providence, had been kept
open, except Christ-Church, and frequently twice every day at Prayers; for
although the Protestant Clergy that remained there had lost their Subsistence,
by an Act of the Irish Parliament, yet the People voluntarily contributed with
great Zeal and Diligence, so that they acquitted themselves bravely; being
particularly influenced by the Bishop of Mead, and Dr. King, Dean of St.
Patricks; but the latter was on the 24th. of June, made Prisoner in the Castle,
and many other Protestants of note in the College, now made a Garrison, and
other public places. The Galloway Protestants, being about 200. having been
those of Sir Tho. Southwell's Party, brought up in order to be exchanged, were
removed from White Friars, to the Round Church, and all the Newgate Prisoners
were put to them, where they were almost stifled; as for those that had been
made Prisoners of War, they were brought from Kilmainham to St. John's Church;
insomuch, that the liberal Contributions raised every Sabbath Day, for their
relief, was intercepted, and they reduced to great Extremity; few Protestants
daring to walk the Streets.

This was the Case of the Citizens of Dublin, before the Battle of the Boyne;
and it was given out, That the late King resolved as much as in him lay, to
avoid Fighting, designing to weary out the English, by walking them along the
River, supposing it was impossible for them to pass it, seeing his Forces, as
he thought, were sufficiently strong, to defend the Banks at such a
disadvantage; and after he had done that, to cross the Country, to Limerick:
However, as it appeared, he distrusted the Issue; for to provide against the
worst, he sent to Sir Patrick Trant, first Commissioner of the Revenue, and
another Gentleman for Waterford, there to prepare Ships for carrying him off,
if the Army was defeated, as apprehending, by reason of the violent pushing on
of the English toward Dublin, he could not prevent coming to a Battle within
Ten days, unless he abandoned the defense of that City, which he then seemed
resolute to defend; yet soon after advancing further, and changing his
Measures, diverse Councils were held to various purposes. Some light Skirmishes
happened in diverse parts of the Kingdom, and our Party abroad brought in
considerable Booties, the main Body of the Army still watching the motion of
the Enemy, so that they had little rest, and every day grew nearer to a Battle,
so that nothing was wanting to draw it on, but the Enemies standing a Field,
which was wished by our Soldiers, full of Courage, and Vigor, bearing the
fatigue of much Duty, and frequent Marches; promising in their Looks, and
Behavior, a prosperous Event.

Now the Enemy being encamped at Dundalk, and having secured it; as likewise
the Bridge, called, Four-mile-Bridge, which made it difficult for our Army to
force the passage; it was resolved the Forces should March to Market-Hill, and
from thence to fall into the great Road that leads from Armagh to Dundalk;
whereupon his Majesty ordered Major Scravemore with a Detachment of 300 Horse,
and 200 Dragoons, to observe the Road, and visit the Passes; also to find out a
convenient place to Encamp in, and approach as near as possible to Dundalk, to
discover the posture of the Enemy; which succeeded so well, that a small Party
of the Enemy seeing this Detachment marching early toward Market-Hill,
supposed it had been the Vanguard of our Army, and gave that Account; whereupon
the Enemy immediately decamped, and marched off their whole Army, and a Party
of 25 Dragoons, and 50 Troopers went so near, as to discover all their Motions,
and see them set fire to their Camp, and returned with that News; which was so
surprising, that it not easily gained Credit; however, it being confirmed, His
Majesty thought fit to change the March, and Orders were sent immediately to
the Forces at Armagh, and Tenargee, to begin their March by the great Road
toward Dundalk, and a Detachment of 50 Dragoons, and 200 Foot going from the
Newry toward Dundalk, were drawn into an Ambush of 500 Horse, which the Enemy
had laid for them, between whom a sharp Encounter happened, and in it we had 20
of our Men killed, or wounded, and the Enemy lost as many, with the Officer
that Commanded their Party, whose Horse our Men brought back with them.

And now the King resolving to push o^ and oblige the Enemy to fight or retrea^
marched on the 13th of June by brea^ of day, from his Camp at Ardee toward
Drogheda, where he found the late King's Army encamped along the River Boyne
above the Town; but it being late before the Foot and Artiller^ arrived, his
Majesty could do no mo^^ that day, than visit the posture of the Enemy, and the
Fords thereabouts, which he found to be very difficult to pass whereupon he
encamped his Army with in reach of their Cannon, which had almost given us the
must fatal blow i^ the World; his Majesty receiving a Sh^^ on his right
Shoulder with a Six Pounder, the Wound was large, but not deep^ rasing only the
Skin; and as soon as (...) was Dressed, he took Horse and continued on
Horseback four hours, and i^ the Evening Commanded Count Schomberg with the
Right Wing of Horse, and two Regiments of Dragoons of the Left Wing,
Trelawney's Brigade of Foot, and 5 small Fieldpieces to go early in the
Morning, to Two or three Fords, about Three miles beyond the Camp, and there
endeavor to find a passage; and either attack the Enemy in the Flank, or
oblige them to decamp. The Count upon his arrival found 8 Squadrons ready ^o
receive him, but in a little time, and without much resistance he be at them
off, and passed the Ford, driving them before him, and drew up his men on the
other side, ready to march toward the Enemy, so soon as he should receive the
King's Orders, to whom he had sent the News of the advantage he had gained.
Upon this the Enemy detached a great number of their Troops, who put themselves
in order, as if they would give Battle; which his Majesty perceiving, and that
the Right Wing had passed the Ford, and were posted over against the Enemy,
commanded three Attacks to be made; the First at a good Ford before a small
Village, which was advantagiously possessed by the Enemy; at the Second, the
Foot waded to the Armpits; and at the Third, the Horse was forced to Swim. The
Dutch Regiment of Foot-Guards passed over first, wading to the middle,
sustaining all the Enemies Fire, and not returning it till they came up close;
whereupon all that were in the Village, and behind the Ditches gave back; but
before the Third Battalion of that Regiment had passed the Ford, five of the
Enemy's came up at the d^^stance of a Pikes length to beat (...) back, but our
men Fired so thick upon them, that they were forced to retrea^ in disorder,
with the loss of many me^ and one of their Colors; but our me^ advancing
beyond the Village, we^^ twice vigorously attacked by the Enemies Horse, but to
no purpose: (...) the mean time the Danes came up t^ the Left, as also the
Brigades of Ha^more and Melionere, on the Right; the first was attacked only by
the Dragoons, and the other by the Horse but neither of them could do much by
reason they had no Pikes: In the mean time 30 of the Officers, an^ others of
the Enemies Lifeguard com^ing fiercely up, were all killed but (...) who
endeavoring to escape through the Village, unluckily met with the Duke of
Schomberg, who was there killed with a Pistol-shot in the Neck, an^ diverse Cuts
over the Neck with Sword^ falling form his Horse without speaking a word; and a
French Captain who alighted to relieve him, wa^ Shot in his Arm: he had not
above 300^ behind him, when the Enemies Horse made a desperate Charge, in which
he received two Cuts in the Forehead; but not very considerable, the French
be^ind him Firing very furiously; it is thought he received from one of them
the Wound of which he died; and yet more to allay the Glory, and Joy of Victory
so near at hand, Doctor Walker, who behaved himself so gallantly in defense of
Londonderry, having passed the Ford, received a Shot in the Belly, of which he
died.

Upon this, the King marched with the few Horse he had about him, and 17
Battalions of Foot, to the Assistance of those Troops that were engaged with
the Enemy, who in the mean time had not advanced much toward the Right Wing,
whom his Majesty reinforced with 12 Battalions of Foot, and 9 Squadrons of
Horse, and with them marched against the Enemy, who without staying his
Approach, retired before him in much Confusion; and our Horse pressed on to
overtake them in such haste, that they left the Foot behind them, taking only 5
Fieldpieces, which did some Execution; after which our Dragoons backed by the
Horse, attacked their Rear-Guard; at which time the King appearing with his
Troops upon the Mountains, they all fled, and the Country being full of Bogs,
and narrow Passes they the more easily escaped, our Fo^^ pursued them but to
Duleek, four Mil^ from the place of Battle, where the King stayed, but the
Horse followed the Chase four Miles further, till Nigh^ came on, and parted
them; and the^ the King sent to Command them to return to the place where the
Foot remained, and sent to the Camp at Drogheda for Tents, and Baggage,
intending t^ encamp there, and rest his Troops for a day: most of the Enemies
Baggage fe^ into the hands of our Men, as Chariots, Tents, Cannon, Ammunition,
Arms, and the Arms of one whole Regiment was found Regimentally laid; the
Owners being run from them, without striking a stroke; the number of the Slain
was very considerable, not being accounted less than three or four thousand,
and amongst them many of Note; Lieutenant General Hamilton was taken Prisoner.

Upon this great Defeat of the Enemy, the King sent Colonel De Melionere, to
summon Drogheda, and let them know, that if they forced him to bring his
Cannon, they must expect no Quarter: which so terrified the Governor, that he
ren^^ed up the place.

The late King retreating with part of ^^is broken Army, staid not till he
reached Dublin, where, sending for the Ma^istrates, and calling a Council he
told ^^em that he had a very good Army in England, which had deserted him, when
^^e expected most from it; and although they ^^ad not quite deserted him, yet
their not ^^anding for the greater part of them, a ^ingle Charge, but cowardly
flying, had ^urned it much to the same effect, as to ^is Interest; saying,
amongst other Expressions, He would never trust himself ^t the Head of an Irish
Army again; and that now he must shift, and so must they, but Commanded them
not to fire the Town, ^s had been before deliberated in Council, in case things
came to extremity; and having staid there one Night, filling the place with
Fear and Confusion, he went away the next Morning with the Duke of Berwick, the
Earl of Tyrconnel, and the Marquess of Powis. The Count de Lauzun, who
Commanded the French Horse, had not left with him above 3500, the rest being
killed, and wounded.

As soon as the late King had quitte^ Dublin, the Protestants were release^ who
possessing themselves of the Milit^ Arms, which were easily yielded to them and
with the assistance of the Bishops o^ Mead, and Limerick, formed a Committee
to take care of things, sen^ Letters to the King, to give him an Account of
what had passed, and humbly to pray his Majesty to Honor the City with his
Presence; for most of the considerable Papists, upon News of the Defeat, and
the hasty departure of the late King, fled from Dublin; and we afterward had
an Account, that the late King, having discharged a great part of his menial
Servants, went to Bray, and so along by the Sea to Waterford, where he took
shipping for France, and got out to Sea, but was driven in again, yet continued
restless, till he got clear off, so that the Terror of Popish Cruelty, which
they had a long time apprehended, vanished from the Protestants; yet some
disorders happened by the Rabble's getting together, and had, perhaps, ended in
the plundring, and pulling down the Papists Houses, and outraging their
Persons, had not Captain Fitzgerald, and others, stayed their Fury by Threats,
and Entreaties, getting together some well affected persons, to secure the
Castle, and guard the Stores for the King's use, and kept things in good order,
till a Troop of Dragoons entered, who were received with unspeakable Joy, by
the Protestants; and on the 4th. of July, the Duke of Ormond, and Monsieur
Overkirk where sent by the King with Nine Troops of Horse, and his Majesty
following after, and encamping near Finglas, came to St. Patrick's Church the
Sunday following, and heard a Sermon, Preached by Dr. King, the Substance being
about the Power and Providence of of God, in protecting his People, and
defeating their Enemies; Sermon ended, His Majesty went back to his Camp to
Dinner, suffering only his Guards, and some prime Commanders, to enter the
City; upon his approach to the City, he had been presented with two Loyal
Addresses; the one by the Bishops of Mead, and Limerick, in the name of the
Clergy, and the other by the Magistrates in the name of themselves, and the
Citizens expressing an extraordinary sense of Gratitude, and Joy, for so great
a Deliverance, having a little before been Prisoners, and every hour in danger
of their Lives.

This great Defeat, and scattering of the Enemies Forces brought a sear upon
the Garrisons they had left, and the Town of Wexford, being deserted by its
Governor, it declared for the King, which happened in this manner: Colonel
Butler, Lord Lieutenant of the County, passing after the late King upon his
Flight, sent for his Son to follow him into France; as likewise to Captain O
Kelly, who Commanded the Castle, to set it on fire, and bring away his Company;
but this Letter falling into a Protestant Gentleman's Hands, he concealed the
firing part of the Letter, so that the Castle escaped; and after this Company
was withdrawn, the Protestants rose, and disarming the Papists, sent to the
King to acquaint him with what had passed; who, thereupon, sent to secure it,
and many other places followed its Example. And now the King, to give the poor
deluded People that had been drawn into this War, an assurance of his
Protection, put forth his Declaration of Pardon to the Irish Commonalty, that
returned to their Allegiance, and would live peaceably, and look after the
Harvest, to get it in for a Winter Supply, being ordered to pay those Rents
held from Protestants, to the Proprietors, but to keep the Rents of such as had
been in Rebellion, in their hands, till they had notice from the Commissioners
of the Revenue, to whom they should be accountable; but as for the Ringleaders
of the Rebellion, they were exempted the benefit of this Declaration.

During this glorious Success in the Kingdom of Ireland, it was something
clouded nearer home, for the French King to favor his Design in Ireland, in
the beginning of June, set forth the greatest Fleet that ever saluted the
Ocean, from France, and stood to our Coast, to make a show to fight our Fleet,
then under the Command of the Earl of Torrington, our Admiral, who on the 24th.
of June sailed from St. Hellens, the Wind at North East, and stood toward the
French Fleet* which was seen the Evening before off of Fresh watergate, in the
Isle of Wight, in order, as it was expected, to fight them; but the Wing taking
them short, he came to an Anchor off of Dunnose, within Five Leagues of the
French, who at Eight the next Morning, were at Anchor in Compton-Bay, so that
every one was big with the Expectation of an Engagement, the French no ways
seeming to decline it, and our Men were full of Courage, and desirous of
nothing more than to be at it; and that Afternoon their Majesty's Ship the
Lion, and several Dutch men of War, joined our Fleet, and many other additional
Strengths were joined by such Ships coming in, as had been cruzing abroad, and
on the 30th. of June, off of Beechy, the two Fleets drew up in Lines, and about
Nine in the Morning, the Dutch that had the Vanguard fell on, and fought very
bravely, as likewise some of the English; but not being seconded, by reason of
the Admiral's unexpected standing away; several of the Dutch Ships were burnt,
and sunk, and the English that sought much, battered, though not without doing
considerable damage to the Enemy: this Fight continued till toward the
Evening, when the French bear away, and came afterward to an Anchor: The
principal Officers killed, were the Dutch Rear-Admiral Jan Dick, Rear-Admiral
Brackle, and Captain Nordle. Of the English, Captain Botham, and Captain
Pumroy, with two Captains of the Marine Regiments, and Captain Goes lost his
Ship; as to the particulars of the Enemies Loss, no certain Account is yet come
to our hands; their Fleet consisted of 82 Men of War, besides Fireships, and
Tenders, keeping the Coast, and moving their Galleys near Torbay; and at last,
that they might have something to talk on when they came home, they sent their
Boats ashore at Tinmouth, a little Village of Fisher's Cots, and set it on
Fire; as also two or three small Vessels in the Harbor, but they durst not
abide the coming down of the Militia, who were up in those parts; but stealing
a few Sheep, and some small Plunder, they retired to their Ships, and having
lain some time on the Coast, to no further purpose, returned to Breast, with the
story of a vast Expense.

A further Account of this Action we have from a very good Hand, which take
for, your better Satisfaction, viz.

Before the arrival of Admiral Everts^^, who was to Command the Dutch, it was
agreed between the two Nations, that the Hollanders should have the Vanguard,
which in all likely hood was to do them Honor; but after they had been under
Sail, about three Hours, they were obliged to come to an Anchor, by reason of
the Fogs, and bad Weather; but soon after they perceived the French Fleet to
bear up toward them, with the Wind at East, and immediately they weighed
Anchor, and endeavored to gain the Weather-Gage, viz. the Dutch, which they
did with that Success, that the Earl of Torrington gave the ^ignal for the
first Squadron to engage, but the French thought fit to retire, and for four
days after, the two Fleets were always in view of each other; but in regard the
French Fleet was much the stronger, both for number, and bigness of Ships, it
was judged not fit to fight in the open Sea, and the Earl of Torrington did his
part so well, that he avoided engaging till he was come to Bevesire, which was
favorable for his purpose, and there it was that he received the Queen's
Orders, not to delay engaging, if the Wind and Weather would permit, which was
the reason that we went to seek the Enemy, who expected us in order of Battle;
and so about Nine in the Morning, the Engagement began between the blue
Squadron of the French, and the Vangaurd of the Dutch, and both sides fired
desperately for three hours, till the French Squadron, not liking their
Entertainment, bore away with all the Tack they could make; but about One there
happened a Calm, which not only prevented the Hollanders pursuit, but put them
into a little disorder: upon which the French, which the same Calm hindered from
getting away, were constrained to begin the Fight again, which lasted till Five
of the Clock in the Evening, with an extraordinary Fury. As for the English,
but a few Vessels fought, and those were carried on by the Courage of the
Captains, as it is said, against Torrington's Will; the rest stood ^ookers on;
so that the main Body of the French fell into the Rear of the Dutch; so that
having fought from Morning till Evening, and having defended themselves so long
against such a prodigious number of the Enemy, that assailed them on every
side, they were so much battered, that hardly three were capable of making any
defense; which constrained them to make their way through the French Fleet, and
bear away to the Coast of England, between Beversire and Ferly: Admiral Frakle,
Jean Dick, and Captain Northbey were slain; the Vreislandt having lost her
Masts, and not being to be towed off, by reason of the Calm, was taken toward
the end of the Fight: and to come nearer, Admiral Evertson declared, That of
all the Dutch Officers, and Soldiers, there was not one but did his Duty, and
had ours engaged with the like Bravery, no doubt, the French had gone home in a
worse condition than the Spanish Armado did in 1588; but what is past cannot be
recalled, and so it remains, what was imperfectly done with more Courage and
Bravery.

The Dutch Ships were under Vice Admiral Collenburgh. Guns 1. The Vtreicht, 64
2. Alk^are 52 3. Tho^^n Guns 60 4. West-Friesland 82 5. Princess 92 6.
Castri^^m 52 7. Agath^ 50 Under Admiral Evertsen. Guns 8. The Stadtenland, 52
9. Maeght Van Enchysen 72 10. Nort Hollands 44 11. Maega Van Dort 60 12.
Hollandia 70 13. Velue 60 14. Province of Utreicht 50 15. De Mees 64 Under
Vice Admiral Vandar. Guns 16. The Vreislandt, 68 17. Elswont 50 18. Rigersburge
74 19. Gekroondeberge 62 20. North Hollandt 72 21. Vere 60 22. Cortine 50

The States General having received the News of his unhappy Mischance,
assembled without any Consternation, and after some Debate, gave express Orders
for the building of Fourteen new Men of War, and all hands were employed in
that work, that their Quota might be extraordinary, as soon as the Seas would
give leave to be in Action of this kind. And to proceed farther in this Matter,
it is reported in a Letter, that a person of Honor sent from England to the
Lord Darsly, that the Holland Squadron behaved themselves with so much Bravety,
that if the L. T. had fought, in all probability, we had won an absolute
Victory.

Had our Fleet been as successful as His Majesty's Arms in Ireland, no doubt,
even France had trembled, and looked pale, and even the hopes of those that
wished well to our Enemies, had sunk into Despair, of having them fulfilled,
and soon dwindled into nothing; and indeed, this Miscarriage in a large manner,
bore up the Spirits of the Irish, and Scotch in Rebellion, to whom the
advantage was magnified to the highest degree, insomuch, that it was credibly
reported amongst them, that the English Fleet was destroyed, and a mighty Army
of French landed, and joined with such as were in Arms for the late King's
Cause, and perhaps it was so agreed in secret Confederacies: but it succeeded
not, the mighty Project being frustrated, and blasted, by the vigilance of
those in Power, and the readiness, and cheerful undertaking of the Militia,
taking Arms in their respective Countries, to oppose the Invading Enemy, and
keeping under such as were willing to give them any Assistance, had their
Attempt been more prosperous, as no doubt, some restless Spirits wished it
might have been.

Whilst the French Fleet was on the Coast, laboring to gain Intelligence, by
sending their Boats, and other ways, of the Power and Strength of the Kingdom,
one Godfrey Cross, an Innkeeper in Kent, was seen to go aboard one of their
Boats, which conveyed him to the Fleet, whereupon, some that knew him, resolved
to watch his return; and thereupon apprehending him, upon search, two
dangerous, or treasonable Letters were found in his possession, so that being
committed to Goal, he was some time after tried at the King's-Bench-Bar at
Westminster, and there, upon a full hearing, Convicted of High Treason, and
pursuant to that Verdict, Sentenced to be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered, which
Sentance was accordingly executed on him, near St. Thomas a Waterings, between
Southwark, and Deptford, in the Kentish Road.

Whilst things happened in Ireland, and on the Coast of England, etc. the
Scotch in Rebellion, promising themselves great Advantages, as deceived by
false Reports, assembled to the number of Fifteen Hundred in the County of
Murray, Commanded in Chief, by Colonel Buchan, and Colonel Cannon, sending
word to the Villagers, that if they would not come and join them, they would
burn and destroy their Houses, and Goods: of which Sir Thomas Levingston had no
sooner notice, but with a considerable Force, he advanced toward them, by
speedy Marches; and being near them, marched all night, so that discerning
their Camp by their Fires, and perceiving the Resolution of his Soldiers to
engage, he let them rest about half an hour, to refresh themselves, and then
getting Intelligence of the Fords, of a River that lay between him and them,
and within Musket Shot of the Enemy; he found the lower one guarded by a strong
Party, but that about a Mile up the River left unguarded; whereupon he took the
latter, and passed without Opposition, making a false attack at the other, with
Two Hundred Firelocks, to amuse the Guard; the Project was so well man g^^^^nd
executed, that our Horse and Dragoons were upon the Pell-mel before they
perceived them; so that a General Consternation happening, they made but little
resistance, and then turning their Backs, fled, in all imaginable hurry and
Confusion, and being pursued by our Horse and Dragoons, Four hundred of them
were killed, and the rest totally routed and dispersed; and if a great Fog that
then happened had not put an end to the pursuit, they had been utterly
destroyed, their chief Commanders hardly escaping; the Soldiers by this,
enriched themselves with a considerable Booty, having got all the Enemies Bag
and Baggage, their Provision, with a great quantity of Claret, Meal, etc. and a
Standard which was to have been set up for the late King James.

The Prisoners taken in this Action were many, and diverse of them of Note, viz.
Captain Allen Malclean, Captain John Malclean, Captain Lieutenant Cullo,
Lieutenant John Maclean, Lieutenant Halliburton, Lieutenant Midleton,
Lieutenant Shewell, Lieutenant Christian, Lieutenant Drummond, Ensign Ray,
Ensign Dunbar, Ensign Aucinaghton, Captain Hutcheous, Lieutenant Beard, Captain
James Buchan, Captain Brown, Lieutenant Searcher, Lieutenant Brandy, Lieutenant
Aughmonty, Ensign Rose; some of these were taken in the Fight and Pursuit,
others in the Castle of Lethindy, and were sent under a strong Guard to the
Tollbooth, and Canigate of Edinburgh.

This Defeat utterly broke the Measures they had taken, and weakened the poor
Remains of the Rebels; these being not only the choicest, but the greatest
number they could draw into the Field, being mostly Men of desperate Fortunes,
having nothing to lose; and therefore, contrary to what many of the Heads of
their Clans, had promised, they took up Arms to get what they could by Plunder:
For to be plain, the Highlands of Scotland are a sort of People, that have
rarely any Consideration of Honor, Friendship, Obedience or Government, than
what consists with their Profit; and therefore in all Revolutions and Changes,
are ready to break out into Rebellion, Robbing, Plundering, etc. as opportunity
offers: if there be a Mark or Footstep of Religion amongst them, it is that of
the Roman Catholic; and by some insinuating Persons of that persuasion,
amongst them with great Promises of speedy Aid, and many false Stories of the
Success of the late King in Ireland, and a Revolt in England; as also,
magnifying the Power of the French, they were drawn to this, for which as you
have heard, they severely smarted. And now, though what we are about to relate,
may seem a kind of Digression, yet being pertinent to History of this kind, it
will not be out of the way to relate it.

After the late King left Ireland, he hasted to St. Germains in France, to give
perhaps the first notice of his defeat; at which the People exceedingly
wondered, for they could not apprehend the cause of his Return, at a time when
they were held in hand, that the English were beat by Sea and Land; for so the
Rumor was spread to bear up their Courage, fancying to themselves, that
following his Success, and having subdued all Ireland, he should rather have
passed over into England, where as it was hotly reported, the People would
receive him with open Arms; this began to make the more thinking part of them
imagine he was utterly defeated, and his Forces had received the Foil; and it
was reported, that the Irish had given Ground at the River Boyne, but they
easily comforted themselves for that inconsiderable Loss when it was told them,
that the Duke of Schomberg was dead; and soon after the News spread of the
Death of King William; at this they were so over-joyed, that they never
enquired into the Proofs of it; the Report of one of the late King's Lackqueys,
who got out of Ireland some few days after the Battle, was sufficient to
persuade the whole Court of the truth of it; and it was about Midnight they
received the News of King William's Death; yet though it is not usual to make
Bonfires for the Death of an Enemy, before he is defeated in Battle, the
Commissaries immediately run about the Streets, crying out to the People, to
rise and make Bonfires; so that in less than two hours all Paris shined with
Fires, and nothing was to be heard but the Shouts of the People, Drums,
Trumpets, and Hoitboys; after this the Rabble made the Effigies of King William
and Queen Mary, dragged them through the Streets, and at last threw them into a
Fire; the Bells rung, and the great Guns roared from the Bastile, nor was any
thing omitted, that is usually done on such occasions. This Rejoicing continued
for several days, and though the Dutch Gazette, which they received some days
after, expressly told them that King William was in good Health; and
notwithstanding they had no Letters from Count Lauzun, to confirm the first
News, yet they would not give over their Credulities, and held it a Crime, that
any should question the truth of it; the Physicians were likewise consulted,
who gave their Opinion, that the Wound of a Cannon Bullet was mortal, and they
concluded, because King William had received such a Wound, he must of necessity
be dead: but now let us leave France to its mistake and folly, and return to
Ireland.

The King having secured the City of Duklin in trusty bands, and appointed all
things necessary for its safety and well being, published, for the greater
Settlement of the People minds, an Act of Oblivion, to all that had submitted,
or should submit before the 11th of August, which, together, with the Clemency
used toward those who had already submitted, wrought so effectually, that a
great number laid down their Arms and submitted, his Majesty still appointing
Sheriffs and other Officers, as he passed through the Countries that yielded
him obedience; and to show his extreme Love to the Duke of Schomberg, and how
much he was troubled for his Death, and sensible of the Services he had done
him, expressed both his Sorrow and Gratitude in the most obliging Terms to
Count Menard his Son, and as a Pledge of his future kindness, gave him the
place of Grand Master of the Artillery, which was before possessed by his
Father.

Thus this Successful Battle, in a manner, settled the Affairs of Ireland, a
great many considerable Towns, Castles, and strong Places surrendering, so that
his Majesty believing his Presence more useful in England, resolved to repass
the Seas; but then understanding that things were Calm and in good Order, and
that there was no further fear of the French upon the Coast this Year, he
resolved to stay longer; and having reduced Waterford, Duncannon, etc. he
caused the Army to advance toward Limerick, where Tyrconnel and Lauzun had
rallied and drawn together the late King's broken Army; and on the 19th. of
August, our Forces came within sight of the Town, and in the mean time General
Douglas lay before Athlone, where his men suffered very much, especially the
Cavalry; for the Irish had wasted the Country, and destroyed the Forage for ten
miles round, of which his Majesty being informed, thought it convenient not to
spend more time in that Enterprise; whereupon General Douglas had Orders to
quit Athlone, and join the Body of the Army at a place appointed. But no sooner
did Tyrconnel and Lauzun understand the approach of the English Forces, but
leaving Monsieur Boisleau Governor, they retired from the Walls of the City,
having furnished it as well as they could, with all things necessary for
defense; and Tyrconnel retired with the main Body of the Irish several miles
into the Country, whilst Lauzun with his French, expecting there to imbark for
France; but the Inhabitants instead of receiving them, shut their Gates, and
would not let them enter; insomuch, that they were constrained to Encamp before
that place, and endure much Hardship, till Tyrconnel prevailed by Letters to
the Inhabitants for their Admittance, where they committed diverse Outrages, and
we are told, some, who at first had opposed their Entrance, were put to Death.

When our Army came near Limerick the Enemy was posted about a mile from the
Town on the other side of the River, Firing from the Thickets and other places
very furiously upon our men, though without doing any considerable Damage, and
being beaten back, the King, though it was late, resolved to pass the River,
and attack the Enemy in their Retrenchments, and Posts on the other side; but
upon debate the Officers declared their Sentiments, that it was now late, and
that his Majesty might do it with more convenience the next Morning; but by
that time, through sear, the Irish had dislodged in such haste, that they had
left part of their Tents, Arms and Baggage behind them; so that the River
proving at this time shallower than had been known for many Years, the English
passed without resistance, and encamped within Cannon shot of the Town, and
raised Works to secure them from the shot of the great Guns, yet they received
some Damage by them; whereupon his Majesty sent to Summon the Commander (...)
to surrender, and offered advantageous Conditions on that Consideration; but he
sent back word in a Letter to his Majesty's Secretary, because he would wave
giving the King the Title of Majesty, wherein he wrote, that the Town was
entrusted to his keeping, by Persons whom he was obliged to obey, and
therefore, that the P of Orange would have a very mean opinion of him if he
should surrender, before so much as a Gun was fired at him; wherefore he was
resolved to defend the place to the last Extremity, whereby he hoped to gain
his Highness's Esteem.

Upon this, the Trenches were opened, and the great Guns were impatiently
expected at the Camp to batter the Walls; but the Convoy that guarded them,
together with diverse Wagons laden with Ammunition and Provision, were
surprised by a numerous Party, under the Command of Colonel Sarsfield, who
killed several before they could put themselves into a posture of defense; not
sparing the Waggoners Wives and Children, they brought in their Arms; they
likewise burnt some of the Wagons, and Carriages of the Cannon, nailing up
some of the great Guns, and broke others; but the Allarm being taken by the
English Forces, lying there about, the Chevalier Cunningham, who Commanded the
Iniskilling men, having notice of it, marched directly toward them, with a
considerable Party; but the Enemy made a hasty retreat, yet being pursued, many
of them were killed, and a great Booty recovered, about 20 of them being
killed, with a Major and a Captain; and by a Party sent to a^tack Tyrconnel,
who lay hovering with his Forces about 7 miles from the City of Limerick, he
was obliged to march higher into the Country; so that the 15th. of August, the
King's Army encamping before Limerick, laid hard Siege to the place, having
made themselves Masters of the Enemies Out Works, and killed about 80 of their
men; yet for want of having Cannon, some time was spent without making any
considerable advances, for the great Guns were to come from Waterford by Sea:
In the mean time, the Besiegers made themselves Masters of a small Fort near
Limerick, called Clonmel, the Garrison surrendering at Discretion, and being all
made Prisoners of War, by which means they opened a Passage into a wide
Campaign Country, abounding with Forage, which was the main thing they wanted.

By this time the great Guns being come up, the Batteries were raised and all
things made ready for making Breaches in the Walls; on the 17th..... ^^e Prince
of Wirtemberg, Lieutenant General, Major General Kirk, and Pet^au, Sir Henry
Bellasis Brigadiers, with even Battalions, entered the Trenches, and advanced
300 paces, and took two Redoubts from the Enemy; on the 18th. ^hey were
relieved by Lieutenant General Douglas, Lord Sidney, and the Count ^f Nassau,
Major-Generals, and Briga^ier Stewart; who approached another strong Redoubt of
the Enemies. On the 19th. they were relieved by the Prince of Wirtemberg and
others, who continued to advance toward the said Redoubt; and on the 20th.
Lieutenant Douglas, etc. being on the Gaurd, the Sign was given by 8 Guns about
two in the Afternoon, forattacking the said Redoubt, and our men detached for
this Service, being about 150 besides Officers, immeately fell on with such
extraordinary Vigor and Bravery, that they entered the Fort, and drove out the
Enemy, killing about 40 of them; and a Deserter who made his escape told us,
that the Enemy lost about 300 men this day. About half an hour after we had the
Redoubt, the Enemy made a great Sally with Horse and Foot; but the next day we
finished the Trenches, so as to hinde^ any more Sallies of that Nature; and o^
the 22d. raised a great Battery against their high Towers, and levelled them
and in the Nightime threw several Bombs, and Carcasses into the Town, setting
many Houses in a Flame, which took up a considerable time to quench; and on the
23d. continued to throw Redhot Balls and Bombs, which did great Execution in
Firing, putting the Besieged into a mighty Consternation, as being no where
safe from the Force of these deadly Engines; nor could they not extinguish the
Fires in the space of Six hours: On the 24th. all our Battery were finished,
and 30 pieces of Cannon mounted on them, and the Trenehes the next day advanced
within 30 paces of the Ditch; on the 26th. the Shot widened the Breach, that
was made in the Wall they day before, and beat down part of their Counter
scarps and Palisadoes. On the 27th. the King ordered an Attack to be made on
the Counterscarp, which was begun about Three in the Afternoon, a detached
Party of Granadiers made the Onset, and were seconded by other Detachments, who
with great Resolution gained they Counterscarp, and a Fort the Enemy had under
the Wall; ^ut in the heat of Action, instead of Lodging themselves as they were
ordered, seeing the Breach open, they rashly attempted to enter the Town,
following the Runaway Irish that mounted the Breach; so that the Besieged
turning their Cannon on them with Cartridge-shot, a great many of them were cut
off, and some blown up, or hurt by a Mine sprung in the Ditch; the Dispute
lasted for the space of Three hours, mostly against the Old French Soldiers,
and in it is supposed, we had killed and wounded about 100, and of the Enemy,
though their Loss could not be known to us, no doubt as many. On the 28th. at
Night, our Trenches were advanced about 20 Yards, and we had enlarged the
Breaches, and every one was in Expectation of a general Assault, but the Rains
falling so excessively, and the Rivers beginning to overflow, the Garrison
being withal extremely strong, this Siege proved not so Successful as was
expected, for his Majesty to spare his men, and avoid the many Ill conveniences
he foresaw, by reason of the Advancement of the Season, thought fit, on the
30th. to send away the Cannon, and heavy Baggage, and the next day the Army
decamped, and marched off in good Order toward Clonmel, from whence a strong
Party was detached toward Cork, and Kingsale: And indeed there appeared on all
hands, a very great Reason for the raising this Siege, for by reason of the
Water his Majesty's Forces could not attack it on all sides; so that the
Besieged were not constrained to divide their Forces, and the Walls were of
such an extraordinary Thickness and Hardness, that the Cannon made the Breaches
with much Difficulty; and moreover Tyrconnel had taken Care, before the coming
of our Army, to lay the Country as much Waste as he could for several miles
round; so that on^ men were constrained to go a great way for Forage and
Provision, and the continual Rains and bad Weather, that happened about that
time, had so moistened the Ground, that the Camp was all in a Quagmire up to
the Ancles, an^ to the Knees in some places; a great de^ of Water was in the
Trenches, an^ the River Shannon began to swell an^ overflow, which afterward
quite fille^ them up, and drowned the Fields round about; so that at least the
Communication of Quarters would have been hindered, if not many men destroyed by
the Innundation, as has often happened by the overflowing of that great River.

All these pregnant Reasons obliged his Majesty to abandon the Siege, and refer
the reducing Limerick to a more favorable Season and Opportunity; so that
after he had raised the Siege, and found that the Season would not permit him
the undertaking of any Consideration meriting his Presence, he resolved to
return for England, constituting the Lord Viscount Sidney, and Sir Thomas
Conningsby Governors of Ireland, and having as well as could be expected,
settled the other Offices and Trusts in confiding hands, and giving all
necessary Orders, his Majesty embarked, Accompanied by the Prince of Denmark,
and attended by his men at Duncannon, and arrived safe at Kingsroad near
Bristol; and so having Dined at a Farmer's-house by the way, to put off the
many Invitations of the Nobility that time would have delayed, he came to
Windsor, to the extraordinary Joy, and Rejoicing of the whole Kingdom, for his
safe Return and Success in Ireland; and now having been so long detained in
Ireland, let us look a little back into the Affairs of England.

The Queen, in whom the Regency was placed, during the King's absence, managed
the weighty Affairs of Government with extraordinary Prudence and Conduct, as
appeared in the raising the Militia, and keeping a strict Eye over such
dissaffected Persons, as perhaps wanted but an opportunity to rise in Arms, had
they found the French forward to Land; but her Majesty's Care, and the good
Order she took for every thing, broke all their Measures, and prevented the
mischiefs that threatened the Kingdom; so that the French Fleet as strong and
numerous as they were, durst attempt nothing considerable on the Coast; the
Militia of London showed their willing and cheerful Resolution, to oppose the
Attempts of the Enemy in a gallant appearance in Hide-Park, before her Majesty,
to her great Satisfaction; being between 9 and 10000 effectual men, well Armed
and appointed, and the whole Militia of England up in Arms in their respective
Counties, were computed to be about 150000 Horse and Foot: Upon Complaints
against the Earl of Torrington, for the Miscarriage in the Fleet, he was sent
for in Custody of Messengers, and appeared before the Council at White Hall, by
whom in regard there were strong presumptions against his Lordship, he was
committed to the Tower, and carried thither by Water, to prevent, perhaps, any
Rudeness that might have been occasioned by the incensed Rabble.

The wounded of Dutch and English Seamen came daily to London, where they were
provided for in the several Hospitals, the People, all the way they came,
bestowing Money on them; and when they were recovered, Care wasta. ken to send
the former into Holland; and as soon as we had certain information that the
French Fleet had quitted the Coast, and were gone into their Harbors, the
Trained-Bands, and other Militia were sent home; in the mean time a great many
Hands were set at work, to Rig and Equip the Fleet with all speed, so that 32
Men of War rode at Spithead, and the Dutch had recruited again to 28 stout
Ships, and came to to the Gunfleet, having immediate Orders to join the
English, and eight Regiments were embarked at Portsmouth, not counting the
Marine Regiments, Commanded by the Earl of Marlborough in Chief, as General,
and Mr. Trelawney, as Major General; there was shipped likewise, all manner of
Warlike Ammunition, and in brief, whatever is necessary for the Field, or the
Siege of Towns; so that it being not certainly known on what design they were
bent at such a season of the Year, the Peoples Conjectures were various; but it
soon appeared they were bound for Ireland, and what they did there you will find
in the sequel of this History.

About this time we had News of the great Success of the English over the
French in America, and that they had beaten them out of the Isle of St.
Christophers, and many other places of Note, and taken great Booties of Cattle,
Corn, and others Stores, and Provisions: And from America we have further
notice, that a great number of French were, according to the Articles agreed
on, sent to Martinico, and that the English had reduced the Fort on the Island
of Statie; and farther Advice, that two of our Privateers fell in with Twelve
Merchant Ships on the Coast of England, bound for St. Maloes, under the Convoy
of a Frigate of Twelve Guns, and took four of them, forcing the rest on shore
about Cherbourg, where they were all shipwracked, except the Frigate, and most
of the Men drowned.

On the Eighth of September, the Parliament met at Westminster, when, after a
short continuance, the House of Peers adjourned to the Friday following, and
the Commons till the ensuing Thursday; and His Majesty was pleased to order in
Council, a Commission to be prepared for the Proroguing the Parliament, to the
second day of October ensuing, and a Proclamation was issued out, to give
notice, that the Parliament should then sit; and to require the Peers of this
Realm, and the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of Commons, to
give their Attendance on the said second day of October accordingly; and no
sooner was the notice of His Majesty's Glorious Achievements spread abroad,
but the Ambassadors, and Ministers of Foreign Potentates, congratulated his
Success, and Universal Joy, filled the Courts of the Neighboring Princes.

The Parliament of Scotland sitting, gave their Majesty's a new Subsidy of
three Months Cess on Lands, and laid a Tax of Fourteen Pence upon every
Fire-Hearth, (Hospitals, and such as live upon Charity, only accepted,) and a
discovery was made, that the Colonels, Buchan, and Cannon, intended to go
Northward, and join the Earl of Seaforth, and the rest of those of the Name of
Mekenzy, to have surprised the Garrison of Inverness; but they marching over
the Hills, and coming within Eighteen Miles of Sterling, where the Earl of
Drumlanerig was posted with 3000 Horse and Foot, he attacked them, and the
Major General Mackay being in the Rear, as in pursuit, upon the Advice that had
been given; the design was altogether frustrated, and the Rebels obliged, after
a long fatigue, to shift for themselves, receiving a considerable Loss,
insomuch, that they being daily discouraged, again dwindled away,
notwithstanding the fair promises that had been made them of extraordinary
supply of Men, and Money; and the wiser part, or such as had other ways
wherewithal to subsist, withdrew, and left the more obstinate, to strive
against the Stream, that would in all probability drive them back to their
Ruin; and perhaps after the many Attempts of open Force, our Enemies might
have proceeded to have given us the most fatal blow in the world, by base and
ignoble ways, and villainous attempts. We shall for once, begging his pardon in
this matter, quote the New Observator, an Author of Credit.

When we reflect, (says he) upon the horrible Methods put in practice by this
Embroiler of Christendom (meaning, as we suppose, by the foregoing Paragraphs,
the French King) to rid himself of those he fears; there are to be found in all
the Steps of all Illustrious Life, some of the brightest Rays of Benign
Providence, that in an especial manner, watches over Kings. If a certain great
man, (says he) late in their Majesty's own hearing, had not given a hint of a
singular piece of Villainy designed against their wonderful Life; I should not
have ventured to mention it here, though acquainted with it before: Yes! to the
Eternal Infamy of the Apollion of Europe be it said, That sacred Life was in
equal hazard from the Cannons, and from the Poniard, and from a Poniard
employed, and paid by France; what all the Engines of Death were not able to
do in the field, was to be supplied by an Assassinate at home, and the thread of
a glorious Life which stood proof against all Efforts of open War, was designed
to be cut off by a secret Treachery. Let then this designed Parricide, be
ranked amongst the rest of the inglorious Actions of a Reign, fatal to its own
Subjects, to its Neighbors, and to Mankind in general; and if there be any
knowledge of Humane Affairs in another World, let the Manes of the Illustrious
Duke of Lorain rest satisfied with the approaching Revenge of a Prince his
Friend, upon their common Enemy that had doomed them both, though with different
Success, to the same dismal Fate. And thus far this Author, in this Matter, to
whose judicious Papers, in other cases, we refer the Reader, as approved, and
applauded by most.

By this we may see, the persons of good Kings are Sacred, and above common
Danger, the Eyes of Providence ever watching over them, and the Guardian-Angels
ever hovering round about them, that they may remain in safety, even when the
greatest Dangers threaten.

About this time the Dutch and English Privateers made great prize of the
French, three Dutch Privateers arriving on the 16th. of September with seven
Prizes at Mounts-Bay, where they had been cruising, and some of the French
Privateers thinking to fetch them up, and recover the Prizes, were put to
flight upon the appearance of Sir Clously Shovel, with the Squadron of English
Men of War, under his Command, who sent two of his Frigates to give them the
Chase, and three Flushing Privateers, one of 20, another of 16, and the third
of 14 Guns, brought into the same Port, Nine Prizes, several of them laden with
Sugars, Indico, and Tobacco, from the West Indies, and some with Wines, and
Brandies, and the rest were bound for Ireland, with Necessaries, and
Provisions, for the supply of the Enemy; and Captain Young, in the Graefton
Frigate, having notice, that a French Privateer of six Guns, and two
Pattereroes, and fifty Men, had taken about Portland, a Vessel belonging to
Pool, he immediately sailed out of the Harbor of Weymouth, and being got up
with the Frenchman, after some dispute, took him, and carried him into
Dartmouth, and a Dutch Caper brought in a French Vessel of Forty Tun; and soon
after the Grafton Sloop brought into Dartmouth, a French Privateer of six Guns,
and two Pattereroes with forty eight Men belonging to Dunkirk, which she took
after? running Fight of three hours, in which the French had nine Men killed;
and as many wounded, and on our side, only four wounded; so that by this we may
see if so many be taken in a short space, the French Trade, and Piracies at
Sea, are in likelihood, in a fair way, to be weakened, and in a short time may
be brought to nothing, though their Confederacies on the Coast of Barbary, so
often solicited, should join with them in all their Designs, to interrupt the
Trade of the two Nations.

All this while the Affairs of Scotland went on very prosperously, and the face
of things of that Kingdom looked very pleasantly, the King's Forces prevailing
in all places, and even those that headed the Rebels were disheartened, upon
notice the French Fleet was gone home, and that no Commotions happened in
England, to favor their Design; but that which disquieted them most, was the
disappointments of Ammunition and Provision, without the latter, especially,
they knew they could not subsist, and the Rocks and Mountains afforded little,
the barren Islands less, to which they had reserved their last Retreat, in
hopes to be fetched off; but when they were certainly informed, that the late
King, and the French had left Ireland, and Boisleau, the Governor of Limerick,
had quitted that place; many threw away their Arms, and went to their
Habitations, resolving to live privately; others who were sensible their
Characters would make them be taken notice of, came in and submitted.

They had notice our Fleet was abroad upon some extraordinary Design, and knew
not but it was to attack them in the Rear, and by that means they should be
barred of any Retreat; but the Design of the Fleet, which made many wonder, to
think whereto it would tend, was otherways disposed, for it stood away to the
Coast of Ireland, so unexpectedly to those that were in Arms there for the late
King, as to startle, and put them into Confusion, especially on the SeaCoast,
and immediately roused those out of their Security, whose incredulity only
imagined it at first a Fantom, or a Fleet in the Clouds, only Imaginary, and
not Substantial; but the loud roaring of the Cannons, to give notice of their
coming to our Forces, Quartered thereabouts, soon convinced them of their
Mistake.

The Lord Marlborough arriving with the Fleet in Cork Harbor, resolving to
attack that place, Major General Scravenmore with 1200 Horse, and Dragoons,
who, together, with Major General Tetteau, and two Battalions of Danes who were
posted near the black Water, marched to join him, and soon after several
Detachments out of the Dutch, and French Regiments, which with those Danes, the
Prince of Wirtemberg Commands in Person, made a Body of about 4000 Foot; and
although a strong Party of the Enemy were gathered under the Duke of Berwick,
who styled himself General Commander of Ireland; they upon the News of this
important Conjunction of our Sea, and Landforces retreated from Bri, and were
followed by Lieutenant General Douglas, with a resolution to attack them, but
were hindered in that design, by the Bogs, and Defiles that covered the Enemies
Camp. And about this time we had notice, that the Earl of Tyrconnel, and the
Count De Lauzun were gone for France with the French Forces as despairing of
maintaining the Interest of King James in Ireland, having set sail two days
sooner than was designed, upon notice, that a squadron of English Ships, were
coming that way, and therefore their hasty flight occasioned them to leave many
of their Sick in the Suburbs of Galloway.

The Fleet, as is said, arriving the 21st. of September, before Cork Harbor,
came to an Anchor, the Flood being down, and little Wind, and the next day
entered the Harbor, receiving some Shot from a Battery of eight Guns, but
having sent two or three Armed Boats on shore, the Enemy were forced from their
Guns, and they being dismounted, their Carriages, were thrown into the Sea: the
following day about four in the Morning, the greatest part of the Landforces
were sent up to the Passage, six Miles from Cork, the rest marching in the
Afternoon; so that the 24th. between 5 and 600 Seamen, Gunners, and Carpenters
were Detached, to be employed in mounting, and placing the Cannon, to batter
the Town, and then, before day, diverse Boats with Armed Men, were sent up to
assist in attacking the place, Stores and Provisions for their Subsistence
arriving from Waterford; and upon our encamping within a Mile of the Town, the
Enemy drew out, but upon our Firing some small pieces of Cannon upon two Troops
of their Dragoons, they all retired, and that Evening 1000 Men were detached
with Orders to possess themselves of several Advantageous Posts within
Musket Shot of the Town, upon which the Enemy set Fire to the Suburbs; and
thereupon the Earl of Marl borough, with several Officers, went to take a
nearer view, and found the Enemy had quitted a place called Catts-Fort, of
which an advanced Detachment immediately took Possession, and then the Camp
advanced within Musket Shot on the South; and the Danish Forces under the
Command of the Prince of Wirtemberg did the like on the North; so that on the
26th. of September, our Guards were advanced unto the Ruins of the Suburbs, and
played upon the Old Fort from two Batteries, and the next day made a Breach in
the Wall, from Two Batteries of 24 Pounders, and Three 18 Pounders; so that
fearing our men would enter by Storm, they beat a Parley in the Evening,
sending out an Officer to Capitulate, and Hostages were exchanged; but the
Enemy not agreeing to the Terms proposed, on the 8th. in the Morning, Four
Regiments were appointed under the Command of Brigadier Churchill, to pass to
the Island lying near the Wall, where the Breach was made, which passing
through the Water; they performed with great Courage, although at Low-tide it
was up to the Armpits; the Granadiers Commanded by the Lord Colchester, having
the Van, marched forward, exposed to all the Enemies Fire, through the Island,
within 20 Yards of the Town-wall. Among the Volunteers, who went on with the
first Detachment, were the Duke of Grafton, who was dangerously wounded with a
Shot, of which soon after he died; the Lord O Brian, Colonel Granville,
Captain Cornwall, Captain Leighton, Captain Fairborne, Captain Neville, and
several other Sea-Officers; and immediately after this, the Enemy beat a Second
Parley, but the Lord Marlborough would allow them no other Conditions, than to
be Prisoners of War, and to that they agreeing, the Capitulation was Signed.

And was to this Effect, viz. That the Garrison should be received Prisoners of
War, that there should be no prejudice done to the Officers, Soldiers or
Inhabitants; that the General would use his endeavor to obtain his Majesty's
Clemency toward them; that they should deliver up the Old Fort within an hour,
and the Two Gates of the City, the next day at 8 in the Morning; that all the
Protestant Prisoners should be immediately released; that all the Arms of the
Garrison, and Inhabitants should be put into a secure place, and that an exact
Account should be given of the Magazines, as well Provision, as Ammunition; and
accordingly the same Night, we put 200 men into the Old Fort, and the next
Morning took Possession of the Town; the Garrison, which consisted of between 4
and 5000 men, being made Prisoners of War, according to the Articles of
Agreement, among whom of Note, were the Earls of Clancarty and Tyrone, Colonel
Ma^gillicot, who was Governor, with several other Officers, and in the taking
this Important place, on our part, not above 50 men were killed.

Upon this great Success, the Enemies flying, Army retired farther, and a
Detachment of Horse and Dragoons, were sent out of our Camp, to Summon the Town
and Forts of Kingsale; a very advantageous Seaport, and things being put in
order here, the Army soon followed; for on the 1st. of October, the Earl of
Marlborough marched out of Cork to Five-mile-Bridge and the next day came near
the Town, which was possessed by an advanced Detachment, who prevented the
Enemy from burning it in their retreat to the Forts; and toward the Evening he
encamped, and took his Posts about the new Fort, and Major General Tetteau was
ordered with 800 men to attack the Old Fort, in which the Deserters and others
reported, there were but 150; in order to which, he passed the River in Boats,
he found there, which prevented his going ten miles about, and by break of day,
on the 3d. of October stormed the place, making a show of attacking it, where
it was weakest; whilst in the mean time, he a caused Detachment to make an
Assault in another place, where the Enemy least apprehended it; and this
succeeded so well, that our Men all at once gained the Bastions, at what time
several Barrels of Powder took fire, and blew up above 50 of the Enemy, and
many others were killed by our men, the rest flying into an old Castle in the
midst of the Fort; for instead of 150 as had been reported, there were about
450 men in the place, of which about 220 were killed and blown up, and the rest
submitting, were made Prisoners.

During this Consternation, some endeavoring to escape to the New Fort by
Water, and the Tide being against them, they were mostly killed in their Boats,
by our Shot from the Shore; as for the Governor of this Fort, and several
Officers, they were found dead upon the Ramparts, and our Soldiers got a great
deal of Plunder.

This Fort being entirely won, the Lord Marlborough sent to Summon the New
Fort, that yet held out; to which, the Governor sent word, that it would be
time enough to Talk of that a Month hence: whereupon the heavy Cannon coming
up, two Attacks were ordered to be made by the English on the Right, and the
Danes on the Left, and continued, from the Batteries raised, to play against
the place with great fury.

Whilst these breathing Thunders were shaking our Enemies out of their strong
Holds, a thing very unusual in these parts, a terrible Earthquake happened at
Dublin, and in diverse parts of England, giving at one and the same instant very
terrible shocks.

On the 5th. of October, the Trenches were opened against the new Fort; and on
the 9th. they had advanced them to the Counterscarp, but the ill Weather
hindered the coming up of our Cannon ^ill the 11th. at what time part of it
arrived; and on the 12th. in the Morning, Six pieces were mounted at the Danes
attack, and two Mortars at the English, which Fired all that day; on the 13th.
Two 24 Pounders were placed on the same Battery, and on the 14th. the rest of
the Cannon arrived, three of which were placed on the English Battery; for the
Danes on their side had made a reasonable large Breach; and the Night
following, to disturb the Enemy, they made a false attack: on the 15th. the
Cannon played all the Morning, and every thing was prepared to have laid our
Galleries over the Ditch, but at One a Clock the Enemy beat a Party, and
desired Hostages might be exchanged, in Order to a Treaty about the surrender
of the Fort; which being done, the Articles were Agreed and Signed about
Midnight; by which the middle Bastion was to be delivered up the next Morning,
and the Garrison, consisting of about 1200 men, to march out the next day
after, with their Arms and Baggage, and to be conducted to Limerick: in taking
this place there were killed and wounded, in the several attacks about 150 men;
and now there having been diverse Persons made Prisoners of War at this place
Cork and other places, several of the Principal of them, were sent Prisoners to
England, amongst others, Colonel Ricaut, who escaped out of the Tower of
London; but we hear since, he was taken in Kent, upon his applying himself to a
Justice of Peace, for a Pasport to go to Holland, and recommitted to the Tower.

About this time, we had a very full Account of the proceedings of ou^ Forces,
against the French in the West Indies, or Leeward Islands; of which it will not
be amiss, to set down a brief Account for the Satisfaction of those that have
Relations there, or Trade thither, viz.

As soon as the Fleet, commanded by Captain Lawrence Wright, arrived at Nevis,
the Governor raised the Forces of that Island, and of Antigoa and Montferrat,
and Embarking, set Sail toward St. Christopher's, and came to Frigats-Bay,
with a Design to Land some Forces; but finding the Coast Guarded by about One
thousand men, that had strongly entrenched it, it was resolved, that Sir
Timothy Thornhill with between Four or five thousand men, should Land the
following Night in another small Bay, about half a mile from that, and fall
upon the Backs of the Enemy in their Trenches, and by that means facilitate the
Landing of the rest at Frigats-Bay, and accordingly about one in the Morning
they were all Landed, and were guided over the Mountains by a Negro, and by
break of day they met a Party of the Enemy, but soon routed them, and beat them
to their main Body; so that in this Consternation, General Codrington Landed
with about 600 men, and attacked the Enemy on the other side, who after a
resistance of Two hours were beaten from their Trenches, and put to flight, and
during the heat of this Action, the rest of our Forces landed, and pitched
their Colors in the the French Trenches; and being put in Order marched
toward Backstar; but in about 4 miles march they found the Enemy, that had
Rallied and posted, between, Two Hills; so that a hot Dispute began, but our
men advancing close upon them, after an hours fighting, put them to flight, and
so marched to Backstar without Interruption; whereupon Captain Wright weighed
with his Squadron, and Sailed down to Backstar Road, with a Resolution to
batter the Town and Fort; but the Enemy spared him that trouble, for they had
abandoned them before his coming, and fled to the Mountains, leaving part of
the Town on Fire; and in the mean time the General continued his March with the
Landforces, and Lodged them on a plain about a mile beyond the Town, near the
Jesuits College; having sent a Party to the Town to quench the fire, which
they quickly did.

In these Actions we had about 130 men killed and wounded, and some of them of
Note, and of the Enemy about 200 were killed; however, the General resolved to
follow the Enemy, and the Fleet thereupon set Sail into Old Road, near which
the Land Forces then encamped, and brought several Guns on shore; it was
resolved, that a Battery should be raised against a Fort the Enemy had there,
and after a considerable Battery, and forcing the main Body of the Enemy to
retire, that then lay encamped at a small distance, the Fort desired a Truce
for Three days, and the next Morning sent Articles about surrendering being
allowed to march out with all the Baggage they could carry, and about Forty
Gentlemen with their Arms: this Garrison at the beginning of the Siege
consisted of 480 men, but 60 were killed and wounded in the Siege.

Upon this Surrender, Sir Timothy Thornhill with his Regiment marched to the
Island of St. Eustacia, where he Landed without any resistance; they had in
that Island a strong Fort, which, upon the sight of our Landforces and Fleet,
beat a Parley, and though at first they came to no Agreement, yet seeing our
great Guns mounted, they upon a Second Partly surrendered, upon the Terms given
those of St. Christopher's; and in this Fort there were about 80 men, so that
the scattered Remains of the French Army, seeing all lost, fled to the Woods
and Mountains, having for the most part sent their Wives and Children to other
Islands.

On this occasion, so serviceable to the Crown of England, General Codrington,
Captain Wright, Admiral of the of the Fleet, Colonel Holt, Commander of the
Duke of Bolton's Regiment, Sir Timothy Thornhill, who commanded the Militia of
those Islands, with all other Officers and Soldiers in general, behaved
themselves with great Conduct and Bravery in their respective Stations, showing
great Resolution and Affection to their Majesty's Service.

And now diverse Addresses were presented to his Majesty, to Congratulate his
Safety and happy Return; and the Parliament was not slow in considering ways,
to raise a considerable Fund of Money, to carry on vigorously the War at Land
and Sea; for although a great part of Ireland was reduced by the Success of his
Majesty's Arms, yet those that held out were not so contemptible, but they
might be doubted: And indeed, soon after the taking Kingsale, the Enemy with
1500 Horse and Dragoons advanced to Macrone, the rest of their Troops being
reckoned, in all between 8 and 10000 men, not being above Five miles behind;
but upon notice that Lieutenant Ginkle was marching toward them, with the
Forces quartered about Cashel, they decamped, and hastened toward Limerick,
and in their retreat plundered and burnt several Towns and Villages, though
they wanted where with. all to subsist. On the 12th. of October, the Breda
Frigate took fire in Cork Harbor, and blew up, so that most of the men were
lost; Captain Tennet the Commander was taken up alive, and died within two
hours after, and of 26 Irish Officers and Soldiers, who were Prisoners on
Board, not above 4 or 5 were saved; soon after this we had the Account of
Lieutenant General Douglas who had taken the Castles of Bahom and Rea, in which
Baldarock O Donnel had put a 100 men, who were all made Prisoners of War; so
that by reducing these two important places, the Irish were confined to the
Province of Vlster, yet they continued Roving about in Parties, and burnt
several Villages and lone Houses; however, being frequently met by our men,
diverse were cut off, and upon notice, they had a Design upon Caperquin, and the
other Passes upon the Black-Water; Lieutenant General Ginkle immediately drew
his Troops that way, and marched to Clonmell; upon which they retired with all
imaginable speed, burning by the way, the Lord of Orrery's House at
Charleville. And now a parcel of Vagabond People got together, and chose
themselves Leaders, called by the Name of Rapparees, and did great mischief in
Plundering the Villagers, taking away and destroying their Cattle, and many
times Firing their Houses, and murdering them: to prevent which growing
mischief, our Forces were Quartered in the most advantageous Posts, and
frequently snapped them up, and many of them were put to Death, as Thieves and
Robbers, not being Soldiers of War. The Design of expelling the Rebels out of
Scotland, was about this time put in Execution with great Vigor; so that it
was thought convenient to dispossess them of the strong Holds, they yet
maintained in that Kingdom; and thereupon the Castle of Fedret was attacked,
but those that were in Garrison perceiving our Forces preparing to Storm it,
desired a Parley, and after a short time to debate about the matter, those that
held it surrendered at Discretion, and the Lord Fendrat with 18 Persons more of
Quality, besides their Servants, etc. were made Prisoners: but to allay this
good News, we had Advice from the Isle of Mull, whether some of the Principal
of the Rebels were retired, that the Dartmouth Frigate which came to block them
up, and hinder their escape, was driven from her Anchor in the Sound of Mull by
a violent Storm, that suddenly arose and forced upon a Rock, where she broke in
pieces; and Captain Porringer the Commander, with most of the Men perished in
the Waters; yet the Earl of Argyle entered that Island with his Forces, and put
the Rebels to great Distress.

On the 21st. of October, an humble Address was presented to their Majesty's,
from the Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of Nottingham, by one of the
Aldermen, Accompanied with diverse of the Gentry of the County, to Congratulate
his Majesty's Success in Ireland, and his happy Return, which was graciously
received.

The renowned Duke of Grafton's Body being brought over from Ireland, was
received and interred with all manner of Honor, Decency and Respect, as became
a Person of his Quality Conduct and Valor, and on the 28th the Earl of
Marlborough arrived at Kensington from Kingsale, having disposed of things in
Ireland to the best advantage, and was very favorably received by their
Majesty's, and much applauded for his Valor and Conduct, in reducing two such
important places as Cork and Kingsale, in so short a time, and with so little
Loss.

The Sieur de la Tour Baron of Bourdeaux, Counselor of State to his Royal
Highness the Duke of Savoy, President of the Finances in the Savoy, Intendent
of his Household, and his Envoy Extraordinary to their Majesty's, had on the
Second of November his first public Audience of the King and Queen to
congratulate their Majesty's happy Accession to the Crown; and since the
Speeches he made have received such general Approbation that we must
acknowledge it is not without reason that the Court of Savoy is looked upon as
one of the most politic Courts of Europe, it will not be amiss to recite the
Speeches he made, as we find them done into English.

The Speech of the Duke of Savoy's Envoy to the King of England.
Sir,
HIS Royal Highness congratulates Your Majesty's glorious Access to the Crown,
due to your Birth, merited by your Virtue, and maintained by your Valor.
Providence ordained it for your Sacred Head, for the Accomplishment of Heavens
Designs from all Eternity; that Providence, which after long forbearance,
raises up chosen Instruments at length to suppress Violence, and protect
Justice: The wonderful beginnings of your Reign are assured Presages of the
Blessings which Heaven is preparing for the Integrity of your Intentions, which
have no other Aim than to restore this flourishing Kingdom to that Grandeur
which it anciently enjoyed; and to break off those Chains, under the weight of
which all Europe at present groans. This magnanimous Design, so worthy the Hero
of our Age, soon filled his Royal Highness with unspeakable Joy, though he were
constrained to keep it undisclos'd for a time in the privacies of his Heart;
and if afterward he could not forbear to let it break forth, the Obligation
for that Happiness is due to your Majesty, who have at length inspired him with
Hopes of Liberty, after so many years of Servitude.

My Words, and the Treaty which I have already signed at the Hague with your
Majesty's Envoy, but faintly express my Master's passionate Desire to unite
himself to your Majesty by an inviolable Devotion to your Service. The Honor
which he has of being one that appertains to your Majesty, has knit the first
knot of this Union; and the Protection You grant him with so much Generosity,
has brought it to the perfection of being indissolvable. These are the sincere
Sentiments of his Royal Highness, with which I dare not presume to intermix any
thing of my own: For how ardent soever my Zeal may be, how profound soever my
Veneration of your Majesty's Glory, I know not how better to express it, than
by the Silence of Respect and Admiration.

The Envoy addressing himself to the Queen, made this Speech.
Madam,
Virtue, at the same time with your Majesty's, ascended the Throne, and all
Europe beheld it with Admiration. But the Effects have been to none more
joyfully Grateful, than to his Royal Highness, while You have the Goodness to
be the Support of his Concerns, and He the Honor to depend so nearly on your
Majesty. I return your Majesty most humble Thanks on his behalf, and beg your
Protection of a Prince most confidently assured that he shall still uphold the
Dignity of his High Degree, if Heaven vouchsafes to support the Justice of his
Cause, by the King's Valor and your Majesty's Prudence. That Prudence which
you made appear last Summer after a most wonderful manner, not only winning the
Hearts of your Subjects by the Mildness of your Government, but striking a
Terror into your Enemies by the Constancy of your Courage. This is a Felicity
that will always attend your Majesty's Heroic Virtues, and unite to your
Immortal Glory, the Eternal Happiness of your Kingdoms. And this, Madam, is
that which I altogether wish, with as fervent a Zeal, as the most faithful of
your Servants.

The 4th. of November being his Majesty's Birthday, was celebrated with great
Demonstrations of Joy and dutiful Affection to their Majesty's and their
Government; the Nobility and Gentry appeared at Court in great Splendor, and
in the Evening were entertained with a very rare Consort of Music, Vocal and
Instrumental; and afterward with a Play: And the 5th, of November (ever
memorable for the miraculous Discovery of the Powder Treason, in the Reign of
King James the First, and for a Second Deliverance in his present Majesty's
Arrival to overthrow and put to the rout Popery and Arbitrary Power) was
likewise observed with extraordinary Solemnity and a general Rejoicing through
England; and his Majesty put forth his Proclamation for the apprehending diverse
notorious High-way-men, who for many years had infested the Roads with
Robberies and Outrages, with a Reward of 10 l. upon which, several of them have
been taken, and amongst others John Bennet, alias Freeman, commonly called the
Golden Farmer, who having received Sentance at the Old-Bailey, for the Murder
of one Tailor, he was executed on a Gibbit, at Salisbury-Court-end in
Fleet Street, where he shot Tailor, in endeavoring to apprehend him. And about
this time a mighty Storm arose, continuing for two days and nights, the Wind
mostly at South, making a great havoc and destruction at Sea and Land,
insomuch that about 20 Merchants Ships, and others, were accounted to be cast
away upon our Coast, and in the Habours, and forcing some disabled French Ships
into our Ports; the Men rather choosing to be taken than swallowed in the Waves;
yet our Men of War rid it out very well, and those that stood out to Sea
recovered their Ports after the Storm was allayed. And about the beginning of
this Month one Mrs. Mary Wharton, an Heiress, being taken away from her
Guardianess, his Majesty was pleased to issue out the following Proclamation
for apprehending the Persons mentioned therein, viz.

Whereas We have received Information, that James Campbel, commonly called
Captain Campbel, Archibald Montgomery, and Sir John Johnston, together with
diverse other ill disposed Persons, designing to Ravish, and against her Will,
to marry Mary Wharton, only Child of Philip Wharton Esquire, being a Virgin of
a great Estate, and about the Age of Thirteen years; for that purpose, did Arm
and Assemble themselves, and having found opportunity on Friday the Fourteenth
day of November in the Evening, at Great Queenstreet, did in a forcible manner
seize upon the said Mary Wharton, and carry her away; We have therefore thought
fit (upon the Advice of Our Privy Council) to issue this Our Royal
Proclamation, and We do hereby Command and Require all our Loving Subjects, to
discover, take, and apprehend the said James Campbel, Archibald Montgomery, and
Sir John Johnston, and all others their Confederates, wherever they may be
found, and to carry them before the next Justice of Peace or Chief Magistrate,
whom we do hereby require to commit them to the next Goal: And we do also
hereby give notice to all Persons, that shall be Aiding and Assisting in the
concealing of the said James Campbel, Archibald Montgomery, or Sir John
Johnston, or any of their Confederates, or furthering their, or any of their
Escape, that they shall be proceeded against for such their Offense, with the
utmost rigor and severity according to Law.

In pursuance to this Proclamation, Sir John Johnston was apprehended, and upon
his Trial at the Old Bailey, was Convicted, and receiving Sentance of Death, was
accordingly executed at Tyburn; the others named in the Proclamation, were so
prudent as to make their escapes, and we do not hear any of them are as yet
apprehended; Parson Clewer, Mrs. Collingwood, and her Maid, who were tried with
Sir John Johnston, were acquitted, as not being present at the first seizing
the young Lady, but collaterally concerned in this Affair: However, the
Parliament then sitting at Westminster, agreed to a Bill, For disanulling, and
making void this Marriage, and it passed into an Act, by the Royal Assent, to
frustrate any claim of Marriage, that is, or shall hereafter be made by the
aforementioned James Campbel, to Mary Wharton, her Estate appearing in Court,
upon the Trial of Sir John Johnston, to the value of 1500 l. per Annum, and
1000 l. in Effects.

Dublin, in the Kingdom of Ireland, having, as you have heard, been reduced to
His Majesty's Obedience, the restless Papists grudged the English the
possession of so important a place, rather, as it appears, not only wishing it
were, but contriving it might be reduced to Ashes, as appeared by some Letters,
found by one Mr. Gambal, who Commanded a scouting Party, which through fear,
and have, had been dropped by those that carried them, and amongst others, one
written by Mrs. Hoegan, alias Ruth Coffee, written to her Husband, who is
Colonel in the late King James's Army, wherein she acquainted him, that the
English were secure, and negligent in their Quarters, by which means her
Friends, meaning the Rapparees, had done considerable Service in most parts of
the Kingdom, under the Obedience of the English, and more particularly in the
County of Wicklow, where they took some Horses, and Kettle-Drums near
Mullenger; and that the French residing in Ireland, were not unmindfull of
their Cause; and that Tyrconnel would soon visit them with considerable Forces
from France, and that the Soldiers in Dublin were few, and poor, and might be
induced to do any thing for Bread; so that if Sarsfield moved over the Shannon
with any considerable Force, not only the Army, but the Militia, would be drawn
hence, and then her Friends could easiy set Dublin on fire, by proving
Incendiaries in their own Houses, and Lodgings; and whilst the People were
busy in saving what was valuable from the Flames they had Force enough to
destroy them: and adds, That that which hindered them in this resolution, coming
to a speedy Result, was the Consideration, the Records of the whole Kingdom
would be burnt in that Conflagration, that being the principal Seat of
Judicature, where they were kept; but that upon more mature deliberation, they
had found out a way to solve that scruple, and therefore were resolved upon the
Undertaking.

The Woman who had writ this Letter, being apprehended, and brought before the
Lords Justices, who had the Night before received His Majesty's Letter, to call
a Privy Council, they ordered Mr. Gambal to attend; he upon their sitting,
produced the Party with the Letter, and she upon Examination, was so far from
denying it, that she declared she wrote it, and thought none could blame her
for doing what she had done: whereupon she was secured, and the Lords Justices,
to prevent the threatened Mischief, put out a Proclamation in these Words,

Sidney Tho. Conningsby,

IT having been observed, that diverse Papists, and others, disaffected to the
Government, some of whom are lately come out of the Enemy's Quarters, do daily
resort unto this City of Dublin, and into the Liberties of St. Sepulchers,
Thomas Court, and Donore, and do presume, not only in the day, but in the night
time, to meet in Numbers, to the Intent, as we have great reason to apprehend,
then to consult how to raise Disturbances, to the prejudice of their Majesty's
Government, and to continue the Rebellion of this Kingdom, as also to destroy
the City by Fire, which some of them. (as we are credibly informed) have
threatened, and designed to do; for Remedy therefore, of the Mischief that may
happen upon such. Resort, and Meetings, We do hereby strictly Charge, and
Require all Persons whatsoever, of the Popish Religion, who have not been noted
Housekeepers within the City or Liberties aforesaid, for the space of Three
Months last past, that within Forty Eight Hours after the publishing this Our
Proclamation, they depart out of the said City, and Liberties, and repair to
their several Habitations, or other places in this Country, at least Ten Miles
distant from this City, which if they shall neglect, or refuse to do, they
shall be apprebended, and proceeded against, as Spies, and Persons designing
the Disturbance of the public Peace, and in order to the more effectual
execution of this Our Proclamation, We hereby require the Lord Mayor, and
Sheriff of Dublin, and the Seneschals of the said Liberties, to cause diligent
Search and Enquiry to be made immediately after the ^ime hereby limited, for
the departure of such Persons as aforesaid, in all Houses, and places
throughout the City, and Liberties; and a true Account to be taken of the
Names, and Qualities of such as shall be found therein not qualified as
aforesaid, which is forthwith to be returned to Us, under the Hands of the said
Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, and Seneschals of the said Liberties; whereupon, We will
give order to have them proceeded against with the utmost Rigor of their
Majesty's Laws; and We do hereby further declare, That if any such Papist, or
other disaffected Person, after the Fourth of December next, not being
Housekeepers, as aforesaid, shall repair unto the said City, or Liberties, and
there abide by the space of 24 Hours; after such Person, or Persons shall come
thither, without rendering Him, or Her, or themselves to the Lord Mayor, or one
of the Sheriffs or Aldermen of the said City, or one of the Seneschals of the
said Liberties, to the end it may be known in what House He, She, or They take
up, His, Her, or Their Lodging; or if above the number of Five Papists, or
disaffected Persons as aforesaid, whether House keepers, or others, shall meet
together in any House within the Cities, or Liberties aforesaid, on any
pretense whatsoever, either by day or night, or shall be out of His, Her, or
Their Lodging, or Lodgings, after Nine of the Clock at Night, in either of
these Cases; if any Person, or Persons shall be so hardy, as not to give due
Obedience to Our Directions aforesaid, they shall be prosecuted with the utmost
Severity, as Contemners of their Majesty's Royal Authority: And because
Rewards, as well a Punishments, are necessary, conducing to the discovery of
such as shall offend in the particulars aforesaid; We do hereby publish, and
declare, that as We will severely punish such Offenders as before said, the
Receivers, and Harbourers of them contrary to this Our Proclamation, so we We
will give a Reward of Twenty Shillings to each Person who shall give
Information against any such Offenders in any of the aforesaid Particulars, to
be immediately paid out of their Majesty's Treasury, upon Proof of such
Offense, or Offenses made before the Lord Mayor of the said City.

Pardon us, Reader, if this Proclamation at length may seem tedious in Reading,
since in some measure it may not prove only satisfactory, as to the Resolution
of the Protestants of that Kingdom, but more than probably to the saving the
Metropolis of Ireland, from being reduced to Ashes, and the defeating the
Designs the Papists had upon the Lives of its Inhabitants; and indeed, upon
this, and the securing some few Persons, the whole Design was blown over as to
that time.

The Commons of England Assembled in Parliament, out of a true Sense of His
Majesty's miraculous Deliverance from the Danger that so nearly threatened him
in Ireland, and high Esteem of the Wonders his Valor acted there, made the
following Address.

May it please your Majesty,
WE your Majesty's most Dutiful, and Loyal Subjects, the Commons Assembled in
Parliament, do beg leave Humbly to represent to Your Majesty, the grateful
Sense we have of that unparalleled Goodness, and tender Affection to your
People, which for the Rescuing your Kingdom of Ireland from a Tyrannous and
Foreign Yoke, and the easing the Subjects of this Kingdom, of the excessive
Charge of a lingering War, did induce you to undertake a hazardous Voyage, and
too freely to expose to all the Dangers of War, that invaluable Life, upon
which the whole Protestant Interest, and the common Liberty of Europe does so
much depend, it is next under God, to your Conduct, and Example, that we must
ascribe the Success of the Expedition, and to which we must one our Hopes of
the speedy and entire Reduction of that Kingdom, and in seeing our selves in a
Condition to make your Enemies sensible of the Strength and Power of England,
under a King who knows, and pursues its Interest: We do from the bottom of our
Hearts Congratulate Your Majesty's Successes, and Your return to your People,
who are unanimously persuaded, that their Peace, Security and Happiness, are
bounded up in your Safety; and We do in the Name of all the Commons of England,
assure Your Majesty, that We will be ever ready to assist to the utmost of our
Power, and as the best and truest way of expressing our Gratitude, will
endeavor effectually to support your Government against all your Enemies.


This was very Graciously received by the King, as was another Address
presented to the Queen, by the Members of that Honorable House, viz.

May it please Your Majesty,
WE Your most Dutiful and Royal Subjects, the Commons in Parliament Assembled,
do most humbly beg leave to express the deep Sense we have of the Goodness,
Wisdom, and Courage, which Your Majesty did manifest in the greatest
Difficulties, and most pressing Dangers, during His Majesty's Absence at a
time, when a powerful Enemy was upon the Coast; when the Nation was weakened in
that part which is its proper Strength, and deprived of the Security of His
Majesty's Presence; the Resolution Your Majesty showed in your Administration,
gave Life to your Subjects, and made them exert a Strength and Force unknown to
the former Reigns, and Your Zeal for the public encouraging them to show such
cheerfulness in their Duty, as disappointed the hopes and designs, of all the
open and secret Enemies of the Government; the grateful Remembrance of this,
which renews the memory of Our most happy times, will for ever remain in the
Hearts of your People, and can never fail to be expressed in all Instances of
Loyalty and Obedience from us, and all the Commons of England.


And now that Seamen might not be wanting to Man the Fleet, to be out early in
the Spring; the Masters of Ships were Charged under great Penalties to carry
out with them, or take and keep on Board no more English Seamen, than should be
allotted them by the Commissioners of the Customs, or had been given in, on the
clearing at at the Custom-house; and considerable Encouragement was given to
such, as would voluntarily enter themselves on Board their Majesty's Fleet; and
the Parliament went cheerfully on, in giving their Majesty's Supplies for the
carrying on the War; and amongst other Acts, his Majesty gave the Royal Assent,
to an Act, for doubling the Excise upon Beer, Ale, and other Liquors, during
the space of one Year; and afterward was pleased to make the following Speech
to both Houses.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Take this occasion with great Willingness to assure you, I am extremely
sensible of the Zeal and Cheerfulness of Your Proceedings in this Session of
Parliament, and of the Readiness, your Gentlemen of the House of Commons, have
showed in Granting such large Supplies, toward the pressing occasions of the
Navy and Army.

And I do farther assure You, that I shall not be wanting on my part, to see
them carefully Applied to the Uses, for which You intend them.

At the same time I must observe to You, that the posture of Affairs abroad
does necessarily require my Presence at the Hague, before the end of this Year;
and by Consequence, I must desire you to lose no time in the dispatching, and
perfecting such further Supplies, as are still necessary for the Navy and Army,
and not for them only; but it is high time also, to put you in mind of making
some Provision for the civil Expense of the Government, which has no Funds for
its Support, since the Excise, which was designed for that Service, and also
other Branches of the Revenue have been applied to other public Uses; and
therefore, I must earnestly recommend it to Your speedy Consideration.

The Parliament was not slow in fulfilling his Majesty's Requests, but
proceeded with such indefatigable Care, Zeal and Industry, that they soon let
our Enemies see, they were resolved to go Courageously thorough with all they
had undertaken.

His Majesty, who ever made it his Business to Honor and Recompense those that
had well deserved it, about this time, was pleased to confer a Mark of his
Royal Favor upon Colonel Cutts, in creating him a Baron of the Kingdom of
Ireland, by the Style and Title of Baron Cuits of Gowran in that Kingdom. And
accordingly his Majesty dispensed his Favors to such as merited them, without
respect to Degree or Person.

Scotland at this time appeared in a very good Settlement, and the Affairs of
that Kingdom disposed to their Majesty's Interest; insomuch, that it was not
doubted, but every thing would redound to a Peace and Settlement; the Rebels
being every where routed, or forced to a Compliance; and those that stood out
were to extreme Necessities; those that were supposed to be dangerous being
every where seized, so that any Design is rendered thereby invalid.

In Ireland his Majesty appointed the Lords of his Privy Council, as follows,
viz.

The Lord Primate of Ireland; the lord Chancellor for the time being; the High
Treasurer for the time being; the Archbishop of Dublin for the time being;
James Duke of Ormond, Edward Earl of Mead; Henry Earl of Drogheda; Francis
Earl of Longford, Richard Earl of Ranelagh, Arthur Earl of Granard, Adam
Viscount Lisburn: The Bishop of Mead for the time being; Robert Fitz Gerrard
Esquire the Vice-Treasurer for the time being; the Chancellor of the Exchequer for
the time being; the Chief Justice of the King's Bench, for the time being; the
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, for the time being; the Chief Baron of the
Exchequer, for the time being; the Master of the Rolls, for the time being; the
Principal Secretary of State, for the time being; the Master of the Ordnance,
for the time being Sir Henry Fane, William Hill, Esquires.

The Judges that are appointed were these: For the King's Bench, Sir Richard
Raynell Chief Justice, Mr. Justice Ly^don, Sir Richard Stephens one of the
Justices.

For the Common Pleas: Mr Justice Cox, Mr. Justice Jeffordson.

For the Exchequer: Lord Chief Baron Hely, Mr. Baron Echlin, Sir Standi^
Harstrong, one of the Barons; and (...) this manner the Judicature being
settled by his Majesty's indefatigable Care and Prudence, there little of doubt
Remains, but these Gentlemen, supported by the Military Forces, will, by their
Conduct, put that Kingdom into good Order; and diverse of the Bishoprics being
vacant in Ireland, his Majesty was pleased to dispose of them in this manner,
viz.

Dr. Marsh Bishop of Ferus, to be Archbishop of Cashel, Dr. Tenison Bishop of
Killala, to be Bishop of Cloglier, Dr. Digby Bishop of Limerick, to be Bishop
(...) Elphin, Dr. William King to be Bish^^ of Londonderry, Dr. Vigors Dean
(...) Armagh, to be Bishop of Ferus, Dr. Wilson Dean of Rapho, to be Bishop of
Limerick, Dr. Fitzgerald, Dean of Cloim, to be Bishop of Colnfort, Dr. Lloyd
Dean of Achonry to be Bishop of Killala.

About this time their Majesty's ships Grusing in the Soundings, under the
Command of Sir Clousley Shovel, discovered a French man of War of 18 Guns, and
10 Pattereroes, to which the Crown and Debtford gave Chase; and the Crown being
got up with her after they had exchanged some Guns laid her on Board, and took
her; the French Captain, and his Lieutenant were wounded; and the Master with
diverse men killed, and several other French ships within a short time after,
were brought in by the English and Dutch; and the Lord Sydney and Sir John
Trevor, Speaker of the House of Commons, were sworn to be of his Majesty's
Privy Council.

The Earl of Torrington having continued a Prisoner in the Tower, and their
Majesty's having declared the Commissioners of the Admiralty invested with all
the Power, Privilege and Authority, which formerly the Admirals of England,
were wont to enjoy, and which had been Granted them by former Parliaments he
had notice of his Trial, though he had desired he might be tried in Parliament,
and had been carried up to the Bar of the House of Commons; where amongst other
things he set forth, that the French had 82 men of War, and the English and
Hollanders not above 56; that in several Debates in several Councils of War,
between the English and Dutch Officers, it was concluded, That the Enemy was
too strong to be attacked, and that it would be sufficient to attend their
Motion, and hinder them from Landing; that the Hollanders had not above 10
Ships, that were able to Fight; that they were beaten, because they did not
keep their Line, but suffered themselves to be surrounded by the Enemy; that
after all this they would make him bear the blame of their ill Conduct; that
the Secretary of State did not rightly inform him of the Condition of the
Enemies Fleet; that they might see by the Letter written to him by the
Secretary, of which he produced a Copy, and by the Queens Orders, which
Commanded him to Fight the Enemy; that he had not exposed the Honor of the
Nation, with a Fleet much inferior to the Enemies, but in obedience to the
Orders sent him: then he was asked, why he did not Second the Dutch, when he
saw they fought so well; to which, not giving such a Satisfactory Answer as was
expected, the cause was dismissed from before that honorable House; and this
Lord, as is said, having timely notice of his Trial before the Commissioners of
the Admiralty, was carried on Board the Kent, ^ing in the River Medway, where
he was tried by a Jury of Sea Captains, who after a long hearing of the
Witnesses, and what he had to say in his own defense, upon a long Debate, he
was acquitted, perhaps contrary to his own Expectation.

The Parliament still Sitting, his Majesty came to the House of Lords, and gave
the Royal Assent; to an Act, For Granting their Majesty's a certain Impo^tion
upon all East India Goods, and Ma^factures, and upon all wrought Silks, and
^veral other Goods and Merchandise to be Imported after the 25th. of December,
1690. An Act, For continuing several former ^^cts, therein mentioned, for
laying several ^^ties upon Wines, Vinegar and To^^ce. An Act, For punishing
Officers and Soldiers, who shall Muting or Desert their Majesty's Service, and
for punishing false Musters. An Act, For reviving a former Act for regulating
the Measure and Price of Coals. An Act, For Paving and Cleansing the Streets of
London and Westminster, etc. with 16 private Acts: And his Majesty was pleased
to constitute, the Right Honorable Henry Lord Viscount Sidney, one of his
Principal Secretaries of State, and at a Chapter, of the most Noble Order of
the Garter held at Kensington, in the Presence of the Sovereign, his Highness
George William Duke of Zell, eldest Prince of the most Serene House of
Brumswick and Lunenburg, was Elected a Knight Companion of the said Order.


And now his Majesty being intent on his Voyage for the Hague, the Parliament
hastened to dispatch the Bills before them; the Chief of which we have lately
mentioned, at what time his Majesty made the following Speech to both Houses.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Must repeat to you upon this occasion, how sensible I am of Your good
Affections to me, and of Your sincere Endeavors to promote the true Interests
of Your Country, in continuing to provide further Supplies, toward the
defraying the Charges of the War; and as I am very secure, that you will not
fail on Your part, to do all that shall be necessary in order to that end, so I
assure you, I shall not be wanting on mine, to see, that there be a diligent
and strict Application of the Supply you gave to the Uses only, for which you
intend them.

I have lately told You, that the posture of Affairs abroad, would not admit of
defering my Journey to the Hague, much beyond this time; and I put You in mind
of it again, now in hopes, that Consideration will prevail with You, to use all
possible dispatch, in what still remains, to be done for the more vigorous
Prosecution of the War.

I must not conclude, without mentioning to You, Gentlemen of the House of
Commons, that if some annual Provision could be made, for the Augmenting of the
Navy, and building of some new Ships of War; it would be a very necessary Care
at this time both for the Honor and Safety of the Nation.

Upon this Gracious Speech the Commons returning to their House, made a further
Inspection into the Accounts of the public Charges, by their Committees, etc.
and in fine, found them stated to their Satisfaction.

Whilst these things were in hand, his Majesty's Equipage was preparing for
Holland, and several Troops passed over to be in a readiness against his
Arrival; so that things being now come to a ripeness, for that Glorious
Undertaking, His Majesty on the 5th of January, being seated on the Throne, in
the House of Lords, the Commons attending, gave the Royal Assent To an Act, For
Appointing and Enabling Commissioners to examine, take and state the public
Accounts of the Kingdom. An Act, For raising the Militia of this Kingdom, for
the Year, 1691. Although the Months pay formerly advanced be not ^^paid. An
Act, For Relief of poor Prisoners for Debt, or Damage. An Act, For preventing
Vexations Suits, against such as Acted for their Majesty's Service, in defense
of the Kingdom. An Act, For the Encouraging the Distilling of Brandy and
Spirits, from Corn, and for laying several Duties on low Wines, or Spirits of
the first Extraction. An Act, For Granting their Majesty's several Additional
Duties, on Beer, Ale, or other Liquors for four Years; from the time that an
Act, For doubling the Excise, upon Ale, Beer, and other Liquors, during the
space of one Year, does expire. An Act, for the more effectual putting in
Execution an Act entitled an Act, For prohibiting all Trade and Commerce with
France: and Four private Acts.


His Majesty after this, made the following Speech.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
HAving lately told you, that it would be necessary for me, to go into Holland
much about this time; I am very glad to find, that the Success of your
Endeavors, to bring this Session to a happy Conclusion, has been such, that I
am now at ^iberty to do it; and I return you my hearty Thanks, for the great
dispatch you have made, in finishing the Supplies you have designed for
carrying on the War, which it shall be my Care, to see duly and punctually
applied to that Service, to which you have given them; and I do likewise think
it proper, to assure you, that I shall not make any Grant of the forfeited
Lands, in England and Ireland, till there be another opportunity of settling
that matter in Parliament, in such manner as shall be thought most Expedient.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
AS I have reason to be very well satisfied with the Proofs you have given me,
of your good Affections in this Sessions of Parliament; so I Promise my Self
the continuance of the same at your Return into your several Countries; and as
every day produces still fresh Instances of the Restlessness of our Enemies,
both at home and abroad, in designing against the Prosperity of of this Nation,
and the Government Established; so I do not doubt, but that the Union and good
Correspondence, between Me and my Parliament, and my earnest and constant
Endeavors for your Preservation, on the one hand joined with the Continuance
of your Zeal and Affection, to support (...) on the other, will by the Blessing
of God be at all times too strong for the utmost Malice, and Contrivance of our
common Enemies.

After this gracious Speech had been received with much applause, the
Lord-Chief Baron, Speaker of the House of Lords declared to both Houses, That
it was his Majesty's Pleasure that they should adjourn themselves until the
31th. of March ensuing; and that if his Majesty should think fit, the
Parliament should then sit, he would give them timely notice thereof by his
Proclamation, and accordingly both Houses of Parliament did adjourn to the time
mentioned.

The King having all things in a readiness for his Voyage, left White Hall on
the 6th. of January, about Noon, attended by the great Officers of his
Household, and diverse others of the Nobility and Gentry, and lay that night at
Sittingborne, and the next day arriving at Canterbury, he was, upon his
Entrance into that City, received by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and
Common Council in their Robes, with diverse Gentlemen: the Recorder made a very
Loyal and Dutiful Speech to his Majesty, expressing the great Joy his Royal
Presence gave that City; and assuring him of their Loyalty and Duty; which was
seconded by the loud and repeated Acclamations of all sorts of People: the
Mayor at that time surrendered the Keys of the City, and had them returned by
his Majesty; when bearing the Sword, and the eldest Alderman the Mace, they
marched before the King's Coach, through the street; which was lined by the
Militia of the City, and part of the Marine Regiment, quartered in those parts;
and his Majesty's Lodgings were prepared at the Lady Coventry's House, where
the Sub-Deans and Prebends (the Dean being absent) waited upon his Majesty, to
pay their Duty to him, and by the City he was presented with a splendid Banquet
of Sweetmeats, and the day was concluded with Healths, and all Demonstrations
of Joy, by Bonfires, and ringing of Bells, accommodated the night: But the
King, upon further consideration, finding the Wind was set in Easterly, and
that a hard Frost was set in, thinking at that time no safe Passage or Landing
could be gained, after he had done Sir Joseph Williamson the Honor to lie in
his Return a Night at Cobham-Hall, came to Kensington, where he was received
with all imaginable Demonstrations of Joy: however taking the first opportunity
of the Fair Wind, and breaking off of the Frost, he went to Graves-end, where
he embarked with diverse of the Nobility, and other Persons of Quality; and the
next day he was off of Margaret-Road, standing with a fair Wind to the Coast of
Holland; where coming up with the Goree, the Weather being thick and foggy, and
being informed by a Fisherman that he was not above a League, and half from the
Shore, he left his Yatch, and attended by the Duke of Ormond, the Lord Steward,
and Lord-Chamberlain, the Earls of Portland, and Monmouth, Monsieur Overkirk,
and Monsieur Zulestein, and went off with Three Shallops, designing to land in
an hour or two; but the difficulties he met with from the Ice, and the
fogginess of the Weather were such that it was about 8 the next Morning ever
his Majesty could reach the Goree, where he went on Shore with his Retinue, and
after some Refreshment went into his Boat again, and about Two in the Afternoon
landed at Oramen Haak, near Maesland Stuys, and at Houslayerdyke was met by the
Deputies of the States, but his Majesty made no stay there, but passed to the
Hague, where the States General, the States of Holland, and Council of State,
with other Colleges, made their Complements to him, as also the foreign
Ministers residing at that Court; and a day being set apart for his Majesty's
more magnificent Reception, the Preparations were extraordinary, the
States General erecting one Triumphal Arch, the Magistrates two; the first to
be set on the Piazza's called the Buyton Hoff; the second in the public
Piazza, and the third in the Marketplace of the Hague.

The first was a triumphant Architecture compounded of the Dorick Orders, with
three open Gates, the middlemost being the highest, supported with eight
Pillars, upon large Basements, backwards and forwards, separated from the Body
of the Work, and upon each Basement stood two Pillars, with a Copulo of 8 Faces
upon the Overture; in the middle and on the Copulo, a Pedestal, upon which his
Majesty was represented on Horseback, very richly gilded; to the Horses on each
side were fastened two Slaves or Statues of Brass color, prostrate, and the
whole Work, as it were, the color of Freestone: between the Pillars, and upon
each side inward and outward the Spaces are replenished with pictures, in which
are comprehended some Historical Representations and Hieroglyphical Figures,
referring to the Life and glorious Actions of his Majesty: At the Frontispiece
of that Arch, and upon the Pillars, as well backwards as forward, and at each
side are placed in the same order, of both Sexes, 8 Statues, to proportion of
Life, and in the part of the Arch facing the end of the Town upon a high
Pedestal is a Nep^une lying along with his Trident in his hand, and this Motto,
Let him triumph upon the Seas. At the other side of the Arch, looking toward
Cingel-street, a Plough-man or Rustic stands upon a Pedestal with a Spade in
his hand, and this Motto, Let him reach to Jupiter's Throne. and about the
Copulo was written, viz. To the pious happy Renowned William the Third, the
triumphant Father of his Country, Governor, Stadtholder, and Restorer of the
United Netherlands; England's Liberator, Scotland's Preserver, and Ireland's
Pacificator, now returned. Upon the Frontispiece underneath the Statues, viz.
After great things done at home and abroad, as having made a strict League with
the Princes; the Revenger of his Subjects Wrongs, and the Defender of the
oppressed: and upon a large Picture under that, a Table, upon which are
represented several Armed Men fighting with a Dragon, and this Motto, viz.
Being united, they make a strong opposition. and in the second hollow Seat
this, viz. Being passed beyond the Sea, he has rescued great Britain; and being
adorned with Scepters of a vast extended power, he has been received in his own
Country with all demonstrations of public Joy. and in the Table beneath is
represented. Balances, in one Scale a Sword, and in the other diverse Crowns,
the Sword outweighing those Crowns, and this Motto, viz. Rewards are not
answerable to Merit. in the third hollow Seat, viz. Our Country mourning and
bewailing; Europe in Tears; the most ancient Family of Nassau fertile in
producing Hero's; Emperors and Princes afflicted.

A Phaenix in a Table underneath, is represented burning with this Sentance,
viz. Born after his Fathers Death, shines so much the more, and in the Fourth
hollow Seat, viz. William, born after his Fathers Death, the Third of Great
Britain, and of Orange: The hope of his own Country, and the support of the
Commonwealth. And in a Table underneath, is represented a Scepter, and Three
Crowns with this Motto; viz. Tender Age is an Ornament to Diadems. On the
Backside of this Arch toward the Palace, were Four hollows in the
Frontispiece, with these Inscriptions: First, Fate favorable to Europe, has
bestowed him from Heaven, and portending his future Majesty, foxed him for
Example, when he was exceeding Young. on the other side, above a large Picture
was a little Table, and represented on it a young Eagle, soaring to the rising
Sun, with this Motto, viz. Young and Tender as he is, he strives with all the
force of his Wings, against the Wind.

In the Second, viz. Who having spent his Youth in many Hardships, tossed with
Feuds, Wars, and Sedition, in so much Hazard vanquished all before him, and in
the Table underneath, was represented presented a Castle upon a Hill, and a
Spear planted at the Foot of it, from which sprouted Laurels with this Motto,
viz. Darted forth in presage of Triumphs.

In the Third this Inscription, viz. The Netherlands Tottering, and he made
Chief Commander by Sea and Land, has re-established the Government in its first
Luster, Conserved our Religion, and secur^d the People: and in a Table
underneath, a Boat with armed Men rowing it forward with this Inscription, viz.
There will be another Tithys. And in the Fourth hollow Seat, viz. His merited
Triumphs surmounting Fame it self, more glorious still, by happy Marriage with
a Princess born of Royal Ancestors. and in a Table underneath, a Lion and
Unicorn, the latter driving away many venomous Creatures, with his horn with
this, Motto, They drive away the venom, and repel the force of it. and on one
side of the Pedestal, where the King was placedon Horseback was written, The
Peoples welfare, the Glory of the State; and within the Ceilings of the Arches,
were four Historical Representations different from each other, and in the
First, viz. He reviveth the Golden Age. in the Second, We are preparing for New
Worlds, and New Scepters. In the Third, viz. Your part is to overcome and
forgive, and in the Fourth, viz. All other things are Transitory.

As for the Arch it self, it was adorned before and behind, and at the top of
the Overtures, the Arms of England, also the Arms of Holland, with Two flying
Fames appearing to blow Trumpets; as for the Arch of the public Piezza, it was
exceeding Magnificent; the Pillars were colored like red and white Marble, the
Body of the work black and white, and the Basis and Chapter gilded with four
Pictures, Two before, and the other behind; the foremost, representing a Battle
of the Romans by Sea and Land, and those behind, War and Peace, withother
curious Devices; and upon this Arch the King was represented on Horseback, to
the bigness of the Life, with this Motto, To the Triumphant King: And above the
King on Horseback, Wreaths covering and crossing his Head and above it a Royal
Crown with the Scepters, a Cross underneath; on one side the Arch two Squares,
in which, behind and before, were transparent Pictures done upon Silk, which by
the Lights put into them in the Evening, discovered on the one side a Cloud,
and a Pillar of Fire on the other; the Corner being adorned with Green, and at
the gilded Frize of the Arch, was written by Land and Sea, In repressing
Tyranny, and restoring the Felicity of the Age. And on the Right side of the
Frize, viz, To him that Excells all Heroes. And on the Left, viz. To him who is
greater than any of the Ancients. and on each side the Pedestal, where the King
was represented on Horseback, were two gilded Arrows, two covered with Silver,
and two adorned with Feathers with Trophies; the Arms of England, and the
King's Cipher, and upon the Wings of the Arch, were represented diverse
Histories of Hercules, Perseus, Phaeton and Andromeda's deliverance; with the
Escutcheons of England; Scotland, France and Ireland; and round about, and
underneath this Arch were the following words, viz. Honored with Scepters,
Armed with Armies, provided with Fleets, and received with Acclamations. and on
each fide this Arch were two pictures, One representing Europe in Distress, and
Neptune Ravishing of her, with this Motto, Snatch the wretched from the
Ravisher. and the Motto of the other, viz. Defending Right. and above the Door
was written, The Town of the Hague erected this Arch by the Deeree of their
Magistrates. That erected in the Great Marketplace, was no less stately adorned
with Pictures, and some of them transparent; and upon the Arch a Rainbow with
Three Crowns, seeming to hang in the Air; and upon that Arch a Sphere, and on
it flying Fame, with other-like Devices, and Trophies; on the Backside the
Imperial Coat of Arms of Nassau: That of the Emperor Adolphus of the same
Family, with Eight Quarters on every side, and round about this Arch, viz. To
the First of Noble Heroes, the greatest of Generals: William the Third, a
Posthumus, the Gift of Heaven. and above the Pictures, erected on the backside,
viz. Erected to the Victories and Trophiesde signed for a most valiant and
prudent Commande^^ And on the bottom of the Arch, on one fide, viz. William the
Third, King of Four Kingdoms, Governor of the united Provinces, shining with
Virtue and Triumphs: And indeed, so admirable and curious were the Devices and
Motto's of this Arch, redounding to the Glory of his Majesty, that for brevity
sake we think fit to leave you to guess at the rest, by what has been laid
down. The Cannon loudly breathed his Welcome, and the Peoples shouts ecchoed,
Feasting Crowned the Day, and the Fires by night made all seem but one great
Light, and nothing was omitted, that a willing People could any ways contribute
too.

Nevertheless, the Burgesses of the Hague had prepared a long time before for
his public Entry, and had been at considerable Charges to make a glorious
Appearance, and all the Towns adjoining had prepared to be present at the
Solemnity, In a word, all the Hollanders were willing to see the King in
public, and to assure themselves with their own Eye, that a Prince whom they
loved so infinitely, and of whom the common Enemy had spread so many false
Reports, was still alive, and returned into their Provinces; which obliged the
States to entreat his Majesty to make a public Entry; which he refused a long
time; that such Ceremonies were but the loss of that time which he had resolved
to spend altogether in Action. At length all that they could obtain from him
was, that he would Dine about a quarter of a League from the Hague, at a House
of the Earl of Portland's, and return in his Coach through the midst of the
Burgesses, ranged in Files, from the Court to the end of the City, which was
done the first of February about four of the Clock in the Afternoon, ^o the
unexpressible Satisfaction of the People, all the Inhabitants of the Towns
round about being got together; and perhaps there never was seen at the Hague
such a vast Concourse of People.

The King receiving many Complements and Congratulations, had still his mind
upon weightier Affairs; so that at his first appearing in the Assembly of the
States General, he took his Place at the upper end of the Table, and did with
many obliging Expressions, declare his Affection, and Royal Inclination to the
States General, and the Provinces; telling them to this Effect, as we find it
translated from an Extract of the Register, of the Resolutions of the
States General, of the United Provinces, viz.

That when he was last in the Assembly of the States General, he then signified
his Intention to go over for England; and thanked them for the Assistance they
had given him toward the relieving England from great Grievances, under which
it groaned, being well nigh brought to the brink of Ruin; that God Almighty
had been pleased to prosper his Enterprise, as thereupon to Crown it with
desired Success, more favorable and speedier that he could ever have hoped; so
that the Consenting Nations offered him the Crowns of England, Scotland, and
Ireland and that he had accepted them not out of any boundless Ambition (as he
called God to Witness) but alone to preserve the Religion, Well being, and
Tranquillity of those Kingdoms, and to be in a more powerful Condition of
assisting the Confederates, and particularly the States, and to defend them
against the overgrown Power of France; That he could well have wished it in his
Power, to have given them all neceessary Assistance the last Year, but that he
had been hindered by the business of Ireland, but the Affairs of that and his
other Kingdoms, being now brought to a better posture, he was come over, not
only to converse with the Confederates about Measures to be taken the next
Campaign; but also to take upon him the Charge of Captain General of this
State, for which State, from his Youth upward, he has had a very great love
and Affection, and that the same was daily increased by the Proof and Tokens of
Kindness, that he found both from the Government and People; that his Affection
in this kind was so great, that it could not possibly be much greater; that be
should always keep and preserve the same, and contribute all that lay in his
Power for their Welfare, and at all times should be ready to venture his Life
and Person for them: That he hoped God ^ould be pleased to use him as an
Instrument to remove all the Apprehensions they now labored under, and by
settling Europe in Peace and Safety, to put that State also into a full
Security; and that being done, he should rest highly satisfied, etc. and
concluded in recommending himself to the good Wishes of their High and Mighty
Lordships.

The States having deliberated upon his Majesty's Speech, and the resolution
taken thereon; the Here Wicker, President of the Assembly, in the name of the
rest, made a very affectionate return of their thanks to his Majesty, for the
Honor he had done their Lordships, by vouchsafing his Presence amongst them,
and testified their great Joy for his Majesty's coming into their Country;
together with the great obligation their Lordships had to his Majesty, for the
constant care and concern that his Majesty with so great Affection had born,
that State, without the least declining any Danger; withal assuring his
Majesty, that their high and mighty Lordships, shall as much as possibly in
them lies endeavor to acknowledge, with all thankfulness, all the good Offices
done to this State by his Majesty: And further wish all happiness and
prosperity to attend his Sacred Person and designs with assurance also, that
they would to the utmost of their Power, concur with his Majesty in all things,
contributing to the furthering what they think best, to conduce to the entire
Satisfaction of his Majesty.

These were the great Undertakings, and resolutions abroad undertaken to make a
glorious Progress in War, and in the end fix a lasting Peace in Europe: But
whilst Laurels sprouted abroad, and so fair a Progress being made for carrying
on the War and compelling the French King to do reason to those he had injured;
and the Confederacy proving formidable to the French Court, they betook them to
their old Stratagems, viz. fomenting underhand Treatcheries, not only in the
Confederate Provinces abroad, but in England by a wonderful providence, this as
many others were discovered and frustrated, the intended mischief falling
mo^ily on the contrivers of it: The design was laid to raise Commotions, bring
in the French by facilitating an Invasion; the Conspirators having already
betrayed to them the stength of the Nation, and given them an exact Account of
our Seaports, Fort, and Fleets, and how they were best to be attacked, but
before this could be any ways brought about the Lord Viscount Preston, John
Ashton, and Edmund Elliot, were to go over, to give the French Court an Account
^^w things were disposed in England, but were taken in the River, in a small
Vessel they had ^^ed to carry them for France, by Captain Billop, and a Packet
of Letters was found with a Plumet fastened to it, ready to have been thrown
over^oard, if the Surprise had not suddenly happend; therein was contained the
heads of the Design, also the Lord Prestons Seal, and the Seal of his Office
when he was Secretary of State to the late King James, upon which
notwithstanding the ^^id Lord offered Money for the concealing the Papers; they
were brought with them to WhiteHall, and the Papers being of dangerous
consequence, containing matters of high Treason, the three mentioned parties
after a strict Examination, were committed to Newgate, and an inditment of
High Treason being found against them by a Middlesex Grand Jury, they were on
the 16th of January Arraigned upon their Inditment, at the Sessions House in
the Old Bailey, pleading not Guilty; then the Lord Preston pleaded for longer
time to prepare for his Trial, which was granted to the Saturday following,
viz. the next day; then he insisted on his Peerage, but was over ruled by the
Court, that having been prejudged in Parliament by reason his Patent was dated
at St. Germain in France after the Abdication of King James, and thereupon
having a Panel of the Jury allowed him, and made his Exceptions, Twelve were
Sworn and the Court proceeded for his holding Correspondence with the Enemies
of the Nation, and designing to betray the Fleet, Seaports, etc. into their
Hands by giving them Intelligence of the Strength of them and the measures we
were taking when having made all the Defense he thought convenient, and
Objected what he would as to the Evidence, or any other matter material to his
purpose: The Jury receiving their Charge from the Court, withdrew for about an
hour, and then gave in their Verdict that he was guilty of the High Treason, as
laid in the Indictment.

On the Monday Mr. Ashton, who had been a Captain under the Late King, came
upon his Trial, and was Charged with the like High Treason. It was proved the
Treasonable Papers were found about him, and that he was endeavoring to escape
with them to France, to give Notice to our Enemies to Invade the Kingdom; that
he was knowing and consenting to the wicked Practices on foot, for the designed
Subversion of the Government, and many other Treasonable Matters by Overt Act
adjudged High Treason; so that, having made a feeble Defense, excusing that he
knew not the Contents of the Papers found about him but that they were the Lord
Priston's, and only entrusted with him; after a fair Hearing the Evidence being
summed up by the Court, the Jury withdrawing a while, returned their Verdict,
he was guilty of High Treason; and so in the Close of the Evening, he, together
with the Lord Preston, received Sentence of Death, as in that Case the Law
requires, viz. To he Drawn, Hanged and Quartered; As for Elliot, he came not
upon his Trial, but was a long time continued a Prisoner.

The Week following, Mr John Ashton was Executed at Tyburn, dying resolutely,
and appearing by Words and a Paper he delivered, to justify himself in the
Wicked Undertaking: But the Lord Preston, on his humble Submission found
gracious Mercy, and Elliot also escaped: Nor was this any shallow laid Plot,
many Persons of Note being concerned in it; ^o^ upon the Discovery of it,
Francis Turner late Lord Bishop of E'y, fled (as it is thought) beyond the Seas,
it since (as credibly reported) appearing he had writ a Letter to the Late
King, to encourage him to make an Attempt on the Kingdom, as also did one
Graham and others; whereupon the King issued out his Proclamation to apprehend
them; and so for this time their Projects failed, and the great Expenses in
managing the Plot, were utterly lost.

This seems to have been earlier begun, and consequently as deeply laid as
their Policy could contrive; for a good while before, one Mr. Crone a Retainer
to the Late King, was Tried at the Old Baily for High Treason, and there it was
proved against him That he with diverse other wicked and disaffected Persons,
had held a Correspondence with the French to subverr the Government, etc. of
which upon a fair Hearing, he was found guilty of High Treason, but Reprieved;
and so plain it early appeared, That Heaven declared again ^ the Enemies of
this Nation, and securely guarded His Majesty's Sacred Life, as appeared by a
wonderful Preservation; for the King going early over in the Spring to give
necessary Orders, and head the Forces in Flanders, the Season being advanced,
and he in the Field, in sight of the Enemy. as he stood under a Tree to view
them, they supposed by his Attendants it must be the King, and therefore
levelled a Piece of Cannon against him, taking the better Aim by the help of
the Tree, when to save the most Precious Life in the World, Heaven so ordered
it, that it came into his mind to step from thence, and give some necessary
Orders, which he had not done above a Minute, before a Bullet came and split
the Tree in the Place where he had stood: So exceeding is the Care of
Providence over Good Princes.

And now finding their main Designs would not take, they began to practice
small Games of Treachery; for their Confederates the Turks being routed by
Prince Lewis of Baden in Hungary, Ten Pieces of their Canon taken, with all
their Baggage and Ammunition, and about 23000 of them killed, with the Loss of
about 4000 Germans; the Marshall of Luxemburg finding his Success likely to be
little this year in Flanders, if he relied on main strength, proceeded to
stratagem, viz. To Bribe some of the Persons attending our Ammunition-Waggons
to set them on fire, and by that means destroy the Bombs and Powder; and
accordingly it was begun by Lighted Matches being put among the Bombs and
Barrels of Powder, but so timely prevented, that only two or three Bombs went
off, and so luckily a Design of this Nature fell out, that one of the Parties
concerned in it, was apprehended, who confessed he bad been a little before in
the French Campaign, and, was hired to do it by the Duke of Luxemburg, and
thereupon was sentenced to have his Right Hand cut off, half strangled, and
then burnt: Which Sentence was put in Execution, to deter others from this or
any such Treacherous Attempts: After this, the French sustained considerable
Losses, though no great Action by Land presently ensued: But this discouraged
not their Designs on England, as longing to reap the Spoils of so fair a
Harvest; whereupon in the Year, 1692 the late King was encouraged to make a
Descent, and in order to it, he published his Declaration, dated at St.
Germains the 20th. of April, wherein he promised great Advantages to the
English that should submit to him, yet excepted diverse, from the Lord to the
Fisherman, who misused him on his going from Whitehall to Feversham: But on his
departure conferred Honors on diverse Persons, Knighting the Pretended prince
of Wales, and inversing him with the Order of the Garter, and so on the 24th.
of April, arrived at Cane in Normandy, where he stayed some days and so
departed to Haverdegrace, in the Company of the Marshall d' Bellfonds. The
Randevouz of the Soldiers that were to embarque, were appointed between
Cherbourg and La Hogue, which he found to be about 20000 Men, 15000 of which
were to make the Descent and the rest to Guard the Coast. The Duke of Berwick,
Colonel Graham, Buchanon, Cannon, and some Scotch Lords came to the Camp on the
29th. and on the 30th. the Soldiers began to Embarque, but the Vessels that
crossed from Haverdegrace to La Hogue, meeting with foul Weather, were many of
them driven on shore, and suffered much damage; yet the Forage Places were made
for four Regiments of Horse, counting into the Number one of Dragoons, but they
were not to set sail till D'Estres arrived with his Squadron, and Monsieur
Torville had fought some of our Squadrons of the Lesser Rates, which they
thought only abroad, and that the greater Ships being deceived by their Advice,
could not get out in any considerable time: They flattered themselves likewise
with some part of our Fleet coming over to them. and as it is said, had a
Dependence on Rear Admiral Carter on that occasion, but he gave them an
unexpected Welcome in the Language of his Canon, as will appear hereafter.

Whilst these Projects were in hand D' Estres's Squadron was disabled by stress
of weather, and could not suddenly join them: On the Third of May Tourville was
in the Road of Bertaume, not being able to stir out; and other ships were
forced to put into Bell Isle by stress of weather, and the ship Le Mode Villete
of an hundred Guns, was so rudely handled by the Tempest, that she was looked
upon as unserviceable for that year: Monsieur Nesmond being put to Sea with his
Squadron, was driven in again, and two of his ships ran foul, one losing her
Boltsprit, and the other her Mast, so that they were constrained to put into
Harbor; and refit. Two long Barks laden with Canon, were funk, and about
Thirteen other Transport Vessels laden with Provision and Ammunition, are said
to be lost passing from Grandville to Haverdegrace. insomuch that the Officers
and others had Orders to leave the greatest part of Horse and Baggage behind
them: But this vast Preparation was disappointed by Heaven and came to nothing:
For though the King was Warring in F^^nders. the Queen having the power of
Governing in his Absence, had no sooner the News of this intended Invasion but
disdaining to fear, she prepared to oppose it, sensing Orders to all the Ports
to hasten out the Fleet, and to the Deputy Lieutenants, to have the Militia in
a readiness, and six Regiments of Regular Troops, not yet gone over, Count
r^manded, and Reinforcements sent to the Isles of Guernsey and Jersey; to
oppose the Enemies Attempts on that side, and many other necessary Orders were
given; and upon some buzzings abroad by Disaffected Persons, to raise
ajealousie of the Commanding Officers in the Fleet, as if there was some Design
to betray it to the Enemy: A very Loyal Address was signed by them, and sent to
the Queen, promising all Constant Fidelity and Loyalty which much rejoiced her
so that she was pleased to say the had always this Opinion of the Commanders,
but was glad this was come to satisfy others: And indeed they made good their
Promise; for our Fleet being well Manned, and timely getting out, under the
Command of Admiral Russel, Sir John Ashby, Sir George Rook, Sir Cloudsly
Shovel, Mr. Carter, etc. being joined by the Dutch Squadron under Admiral
Allemond. On the 19th of May, out Scouts gave the Signal for seeing the Enemy,
and very early in the Morning, we made the French Fleet in a Line, Cape
Baresleur bearing South-west and by South, so that about Eleven a Clock they
bore down, and Engaged Admiral Russel at some distance, Tourville commanding as
Chief on their side, and the Engagement continued with great Fury till Three in
the Afternoon, and something more, at what time the French began to bean away;
then it grew calm till six, at what time a Fresh Gale springing up, the Blew
Squadron renewed the Fight, and continued it till Ten at Night; during the
Engagement, three Ships were heard to blow up, concluded to be French, because
we wanted not one of ours then: It was calm all the Night, and foggy next
Morning; but about eight of the Clock clearing up the French were discovered
about Two Leagues off very much lessened, not above Thirty Six Men of War, who
were flying, and so closely they were pursued, that running on their own Coast,
Vice Admiral Delaval burnt under Cape H. the Royal Sun, wherein Tourville was
Embarked, carrying 104 Guns, being the bravest Ship that ever Sailed from
France: Also the Admirable, his Second; of 102 Guns, the Conquerant of 80 Guns,
and 3 of lesser Rates. The Prisoners declared, That during the Fight, four or
five of their bigger Ships were destroyed: In the mean while Admiral Russel
came before le Hogue, into which many French Men of War were gotten, and sent
Vice Admiral Rook in with his Boat, who burnt six of them, as also the next
Morning seven more with seven Transport Ships and Ammunition Vessels, 6 of them
being of 3 Decks, and afterward many others were destroyed; so that their Loss
was very great, viz. about 36 Capital Men of War, besides many of small Note,
some thousands of the Enemy perishing in the Fight and Waves to avoid the
Flames; and this was done in the sight of the Late King, and Land Forces that
were to make the Invasion: We lost not one Ship, and not many Men of Note, only
Colonel Hastings, who Commanded a Marine Regiment, and Rear Admiral Carter, who
failing the Expectation of the French, fell on with great Fury, and having his
Leg shot off, dyed through the great Effusion of Blood.

This Glorious Victory made King James send a Melancholy Letter to his Brother
Lewis the Fourteenth, excusing it on his hard Fortune, that his Forces fighting
in his Interest, had caused the Current of his Victories to turn against him,
desiring that himself and his might retire to any Corner of the World, that
upon the account of his Ill Starr'd Fortune, that an always before Victorious
Monarch might not have his Glory eclipsed; but the French King by a surprising
Advantage having in thirty days taken the Town and Castle of N^mure, was so
puffed up, that he seemed to lay little stress upon this great Loss and
Disappointment in his Expectations of carrying England by Invasion, and
therefore sent the Late King a Consolating Letter to raise his drooping
Spirits: However, there was great Joy in England and all the Confederate
Countries for this Se^ Victory, and the great Disappointments our Enemies lay
under by it.

The King of England soon after their taking Namure, being desirous to engage
the French to Battle, pressed them to it often, but they used all possible
means to avoid it; but his Majesty being informed that the Duke of Luxemburg
was upon the point of Marching to Enguien, he decamped from Genappe, thinking
to prevent him, but did not so that Luxemburg being first there posted himself
in such a manner between Enguien and S^eenkerken. that his Majesty thought he
might be able to attack him and on the second of August he put all things in a
readiness so the Execution of the design, and about one in the Afternoon our
Men were fully Engaged with the Enemy, so that the Duke of Wirtemberg pushed
them so vigorously with his Infantry that he seized on several pieces of
Cannon; in the mean time some of our fresh Foot coming up, there began a
terrible Fight for some hours, so that many were slain on both sides, and many
brave Commanders fell, especially in the marrow way, where the Enemy flanked
our Men through the Hedges, and behind cast up Banks; so we lost Lieutenant
General Macay, who had before Reduced the Rebels in Scotland, the English and
Scotch Colonels Douglass, and the Lord Angus, Colonel Gees who commanded the
Regiment of Nassaw, and others of note, the Enemy doing the like on their side.
The King in this brave undertaking exposed his Penson amidst the Firing from
the beginning to the end, riding continually in the hottest of the fight, to
give every where the necessary Orders, and having led on himself several
Battalions against the Enemy, he was also the first at the head of the Troops,
and the last in the Rear upon the retreat, so that his preservation was looked
on as a Miracle, and had not the disadvantage of the Ground hindered, the
French had been certainly beat out of their Camp; however we took several
Colors, and Prisoners of note.

Yet against this brave and generous Prince, who has so often outbraved their
Swords and Fire in the head of his Army, a place where Lewis the Fourteenth
never appeared in Fight, they had again bent their. Treachery to take away his
Life by base and Cowardly ways, which in the Field they Trembled to Assault:
The Scene of Villainy was laid at the French Court, and diverse Desperados
bribed, and maintained to take an opportunity of Assassinating his Majesty,
when he should ride out of his Camp, or otherwise as they found it convenient:
The chief under Agent in the wicked Conspiracy was a French Knight of desperate
Fortune, viz. the Sieur Grandval, But the managers of greater Rank, as the
Marquess of Barbesieux the French Kings Secretary of State, who no doubt moved
by his Masters directions; this Wretch upon the design being discovered by one
of his Confederates, was apprehended and Examined, where there being a strong
Proof against him, he was brought to his Trial before a Court Martial at his
Majesty's Camp at Limbeck, where diverse Noblemen and great Commanders being
assembled, it was charged against him, that he had with one Leefdale and
others, wickedly Conspired the death and final Destruction of his most Serene
Majesty of great Britain, which appeared by Informations, Intercepted Letters,
and other Authentic pieces, that some of the chief Ministers in the French
Court had laid a design to Assassinate his Majesty of great Britain, and among
others had chosen him as an undertaker to manage and comp^ss the wicked
Enterprise, by finding out fit Persons to Assassinate him; that he had made
choice of one Bartholomew Linier; and understanding that one Anthony du Mont
had been formerly Engaged in the design, by the Marquess Lovois Father to
Barbesieux, he found him out, and proposed it to him in the Campaigne before,
but being then disappointed by Providence, they nevertheless went on with their
design, and soon after he discovered it to one Leefda^e at Paris, who seeming
willing to comply with him, but Secretly gave notice of it: A Friend in Holiand
hinting that he should take care and Inform his Majesty of it; the like Dumont
had done to the Duke of Zell; so careful is Providence of the Life of Kings,
that the Conspirators for the most part seem compelled by a divine Power, to be
Instruments by their discoveries in preserving them.

The Duke no sooner had this notice but he Acquainted the King with it, and
Grandval not knowing it was discovered, went from Paris with Du Mont and
Leefdale to Vden in Ravestein, and in his way to Brussels Imparted his design
to one John D' Amors, but coming to Einhoven he was Apprehended and with his
Companions carried to Bois le Duc.

Upon these Heads the Witnesses were Examined, and first Leefdale, who
confirmed what has been mentioned before; moreover that the Prisoner sent Du
Mont 200 Pistols the last Winter, and ten Ducates from Brussels by a Bill of
Exchange to keep him fixed to the design, he being then very necessitous.

The next Witness was John D' Amors who said Grandval had told him that he had
a great business to do, and being demanded what it Imported, and whether he had
any thing to say to the King of England, he replie^ to break his Neck, and that
being admonished of the difficulties of the attempt, he replied he had given
his word to the Marquess of Barbesieux and would do it. And further he
proceeded to a Transcendent piece of Wickedness, viz. he went to the Jesuits
College to say a Paternoster, etc. and desire God to bless his undertaking; a
true bigoted Son of Rome, and therefore a fit Instrument for French Cruelty
and Revenge. For where in the World should we have found even among Infidels,
any that durst implore the Assistance of a just and Righteouss God, to be
contributing toward the perpetrating so horrid an Impiety; but no doubt those
that set him a work had employed Priests to Case-harden his Conscience, and
Blind the Eyes of his Reason. But to proceed;

The next Witness, viz. Du Mont, owned the Matter of Fact in all the
Circumstances, saying, Madam Maintenon, the French King's Mistress was
acquainted with the Design, and consequently she concealed it not from her
Lover, or rather he from her, from whom it is no great difficulty to believe
she had the Knowledge of. He added likewise, that he acquainted Monsieur Bedal,
the French King's Minister at Hanover, with it, who like a Bloody Villain, told
him it would be a good Business if it could be done, and lent him fifty Crowns
for his further Encouragement.

This Evidence being over, but more at large, yet to the same purpose Grandval
was brought up nearer to the Court, who having heard the Examinations of the
former, and finding the Intreague and Mystery of Iniquity was plainly
discovered, he thought if any safety remained for him, it must proceed from an
open and ingenuous Confession, especially when he saw his own Letters produced
against him, he did proceed to confess the whole Matter in all its detestable,
yet amazing Circumstances, laying down from time to time who had employed him
what Money he had received, and how when he pushed on to enterprise the Attempt
his heart failed him, or some unexpected and surprising Providence stepped
between to prevent him; so that, after the Judges had met several times to
consult about this weighty Affair, they gave the definitive Sentence, viz.

That whereas Bartholomew D' Liniere, Knight, Sieur d' Grandval, a Native of
Picardy, had before the Court Marshal confessed, and without any Constraint,
and it farther appearing that the Marquess Louvis, late Secretary to the French
King, had contracted with Dumont about the Murder of King William, upon which
the said Dumont presented the Marquess with a Plat of the Design how to bring
it to pass.

That upon the Death of Louvis, the Marquess of Barbesieux his Son, also
Secretary of State, revived the Conspiracy with Dumont, giving him the thirty
Pistoles which his Father had ordered. That Grandval came acquainted with
Dumont at Monsieur Rebenacks house, and there one Papperil saying, That Dumont
would be a fit Person to seize the King; Dumont replied, He would carry the
King off alive or dead, as he had promised Louvois.

That Dumont, having delivered the same o^ another Project to Barbesieux: The
Prisoner, to promote the Design, had several Conferences with him and Papperil,
and being informed the King wore a Coat of Mail, he informed Dumont of it: He
said it was no matter, he would kill him for all that: That the said Grandval
was engaged with Colonel Parker in the Design, who told him he had before laid
the like Design, before the Marquess Louvois.

That the Prisoner Barbesieux, Papperil and Dumont did agree upon the manner of
Executing it, viz. That he and Parker should meet at the Grand Guard of
Luxemburg, who was to furnish' em with 1500 Horse: That Dumons was to scout and
watch when the King went to view the Main Guard, and there shoot him, and then
the Prisoner and Parker were to rush in with their 1500 Horse, and bring him
off; and that for this purpose, Barbesieux gave the Prisoner an Order to the
Duke to supply them with that Detachment of Horse, or as many as he should
think requisite for the Design: That the Prisoner by the Marquesses Order
received 80 Louidors, and according to Direction, gave 50 to Dumont: That he
was promised an Annual Revenue of 20000 Livers, and to be made Knight of the
Order of St. Lazarus, if the Design took Effect: That he took some Measures in
order to effect it with Chamlays, Quartermaster General to the French King,
and then Leefdale came acquainted with him, by the means of one Sterck, and
discovered his Design to him toward the latter end of March, 1692. That the
prisoner and Parker went to St. Germain on the 16th. and there made know the
Design, finding Encouragement to proceed in it, from those of great Rank: That
Dumont's Wife delivered several Letters to the Marquess, which were sent by her
Husband from Hannover, where the Prisoner continued his Correspondence with
him, and engaged him by Letters of April 20th, 25th, and 12th of May, to meet
him at Vden, in order to make their final Resolution: That the Prisoner,
Leefdale, and Chamlays agreed on the manner to perpetrate the Assassination,
viz. That when the King should pass along the Line, or ride our to take a View
of the Army, or when the Army should decamp Dumont should lie in Ambush, and
when the King should come within 100 paces, he should fire upon him, and that
Chamlays should be ready with 3000 Horse to bring him off. This may be supposed
to have encouraged him on, but whether he had come off or not, it is ten to one,
whether the French Court had ever regarded, so that they had got their wicked
Ends (which God forbid) by sacrificing a desperate Villain. But nearer to the
purpose:

That Leefdale and the Prisoner left Paris the 17th. of April last, and soon
arrived at Mons, where they stayed for Chamlays; but he failing, they resolved
to go to the place of the general Meeting; but the Business having took air,
Grandval and Leefdale were made Prisoners at Eynhoven: All the Matters maturely
deliberated and considered, the Court adjudged the Prisoner guilty of High
Treason. and sentenced him to be Drawn, Hanged and Quartered, his E^tate to be
Confiscated, and to bear the Cost and Charge of the Trial, which Sentence was
pronounced in the Head Quarters of the Army, by the Earl of Athlone, President
General Van Scravenmore, Lieu^. General Talmash, and diverse other great
Officers,

After this, he was on the 13th. of August, 1692. Executed according to
Sentence, in the Camp, owning the Fact, and desiring the Prayers of such Roman
Catholics as were present, for his Souls Health, appearing by dying very
sensible of his Crime, and expressing some Reluctance for undertaking it.

In Prison, he drew up two Petitions to the King wherein he declared, That he
Acted by Barbesieux and Chamlays Orders, and being told the former would be
sure to dissown what was said; He Replied, He had an Original under his hand,
which was lodged with a Friend, who would deliver it to none but himself, and
in that it was plainly made out.

The Morning before the Execution, he wrote to Madam Jure, to go to the Arch
Bishop of Rheims, to get him prayed for and let him know it cost him his Life,
for obeying Barbesieux Orders.

The Malice of the French Court being thus happily defeated by a Miraculous
Providence, it will not be amiss to remark another signal Preservation of His
Majesty's Royal Person, and the Care Heaven has over it, viz. On the 8th. of
September this year an Earthquake happened, almost general throughout Europe,
giving a considerable shock in England: This happening between two and three in
the Afternoon, His Majesty was then at Dinner in an old decayed House in
Flanders, which shaking with great Violence, not a Tile fell from it, till His
Majesty, at the Persuasion of his Nobles, were retired from the danger, and
soon after concluding this years Campaign, and giving necessary Orders for
Winter Quarters he came by the way of Holland for England, where he was
received with great demonstrations of joy, and found all things in a good
settlement, by the prudent care and management of his Royal Consort, whom the
City, by the hands of Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council, had humbly
Addressed with Thanks, for the Princely Regard she had to secure their Trade
abroad and at home in ordering a Committee of Council to hear all Complaints
and Grievances relating to Abuses in Trade, and to redress them as far as in
them lay: The Parliament likewise thanked her for the prudent Management of
Affairs.

The Winter passing over, and the Parliament giving large Supplies toward the
carrying on the War for the year 1693. His Majesty sent over his Orders and
hastened to make an early Campaign, going on the 30th. of March for Gravesend,
where he embarked and sailed for Holland, and the Elector of Bavaria, being by
the King of Spain appointed Governor of Flanders during his Life, he sent the
Duke of Arco to Congratulate His Majesty's safe Arrival at the Hague, and to
open the Campaign with Action, 80 French were taken Prisoners by 100
Newburghers to a Village called Maltern; yet this did but lead on to greater
Actions For the Vadois in the Valleys fell upon the French, and killed a great
Number of them taking many Prisoners of Note, and a great Convoy going to
Pignerol; however the French getting their Forces together in the Palatinate,
ravaged and burnt diverse places, as Frankendale, Spires, and the Famous Town of
Heydleburg, hlowing up the Castle, and demolishing the Fortifications, ravaging
the Country, and plundering the Poor Inhabitants in all places where they came;
but the Governor of Heydelburg, for cowardly surrendering it, no sooner arrived
in Prince Lewis of Badens Camp on the Rhine. but he was put under an Arrest,
and the French finding the Spaniard strong in Flanders, to prevent his sending
any more Forces, made a War in Catalonia, where with much difficulty the Duke
De Nouailles took Roses, but in the mean while, the Duke of Wirtemberg, with a
Considerable Detachment of Horse and Foot from the King's Army in Flanders,
forced the French Lines, and marching without Opposition, put the Country under
Contribution, raising a Million of Livers, sacking diverse small places, and
taking very much Booty: Whilst these things happened at Land, Fortune was
something unfavourable to us at Sea; for our Streights and Turkey F^eet
convoyed by Sir George Rook, with about 20 Men of War, Dutch and English, near
Lagos-Bay, sell in with the French main Fleet; but whilst some of the Men of
War disputed it most of the Merchants creeping under the shore, got into diverse
harbors, as Cadiz, Alicant, Lagos, and some into the Tagus; so, though the
En^my's Design was fairly laid, yet in the main miscarryed; and our Men of War
being of the lesser Rates, finding they were unable to resist so great a Fleet,
made a safe Retreat, and Returned into the Channel.

The Campaign in Flanders passing over in Bickering and Skirmishes, taking some
small Places and Booties on both sides, a bloody Scene of War came on; for the
French commanded in chief by the Duke of Luxemberg, being privately reinforced
by suddenly draining their Garrisons, and they having Notice, That a good part
of our Army was absent with the Duke of Wirtemberg framed a Design to Attaque
the Confederate Camp near Landen; and accordingly they prepared for a secret
March all night on the (...) of (...)

The King had by his Scout^ notice of their March, with a Resolution to attack
the Considerate Camp, so that the Foot were ordered to their Arms, and the
Troopers to Mount, in which Po^^ure they remained all Night. At break of day
the Enemy appeared in two Lines upon the higher Grounds of St.
Gratruden-Landen, and an other Body advanced toward our Retrenchments on the
side of Winden; at Sun rise they advanced nearer, and our Cannon began to Play,
so that for about two hours they made no Motion; but about six they came down
from the high Ground in several Lines, and when they were within the reach of
our Cannon, they left the middle of the Plain, and caused their Infantry to
File off to the Right. toward Winden and Larre, and on the Left toward near
Landen, sustained by Horse marching on both sides of the Plain, causing a Body
to pass on the other side of the Rivulet of Landen, to make a show as if they
would fall on our Left Wing, whilst they should make the greatest Effort on our
Right: Which about seven hours after they Attacked.

The Fight for several Hours Lasted with doubtful Success the Enemy advanced
and were three times repulsed, and some Squadrons that got over the Rivulet
below Larre, and came into our Camp, were mostly cut off; whilst these things
passed, the Elector of Bavaria gave order to the Right Wing to charge
advantageously, so that thereupon the Enemy gave way, and were driven into the
Plain; and Brigadeer Ramsey, who had been forced to give Ground, regained his
Post, as did the duke of Hanover with his Infantry, also the Prince of
Brandenburg with his Foot. The French never theless remained in some parts of
the Village of Winden, but finding they could not force the Right Wing, they
Attacked near Landen on our Left, where having been beaten back after a very
furious Fight, they renewed their Attack with fresh Troops, which obliged the
King to come from the Right, to give the necessary orders at the Left, where
the Fight was Renewed every warmly with small shot, which continued about an
hour, and then we became Masters of the Village; so that the Enemy beaten out,
carried their Troops to their Left; and our Right yet keeping part of the
Village of Winden, and the Hedges of the rising Ground, which laid the Flank
of our Retrenchement open to them. The King who was in every place. where his
presence would be useful, after having given necessary Orders on the Left,
returned to Winden, and brought up twice to our Retrenchments the English and
Scotch Foot, where they behaved themselves as they had done every where else,
with great resolution and Courage. The Elector of Bavaria the mean while
disposed two Battalions on the Enemies Left Flank, whilst three others Attacked
them in the Front, but before this could be put in Execution, the Enemy
strengthened with new Forces, became masters of the Passage into the Village,
and made an overtur, through which the Horse began to pass, sustained by the
Foot that lay behind the Hedges; the Horse that passed that first were beaten
back, but our Foot at the Retrenchment, not being able any longer to endure the
Fire in their Flank, retired, and our Cannon on that side abating its Fire, the
Enemies Horse crowded through the passage and began to extend them toward
their Left. all along the Hedges, which were possessed by their Foot.

As soon as they had formed their Squadron, they Attacked the Troops of Hanover
and Brandenburg, on the Left of the Right Wing, and forced them to retire, by
taking the advantage of the Motion of part of them; as also they did the
Spanish Troops, and Hanover Horse: His Majesty to rectify these disorders
caused part of the Left Wing to Advance; but being far off, the Enemy did not
give them time to form themselves, but having beat the Dutch Horse on the Left,
before the English had got into the Line; they after having fought desperately,
were quire Encompassed: So that the King finding the Enemy overpowered us,
himself this day having led up nine times the Battalions and Squadrons to
Fight, and wonderfully Preserved among showers of Bullets, He sent Orders to
the Generals of Foot, and those of the Left Wing, to retire to Leewen, a Fort
near the Camp, and the King's Dragoons and Granadiers made their Retreat
through Dormel; the Foot and part of the Horse Right Wing, by Orsmel: The King
by this time having given the necessary Orders, and finding himself in a manner
Encompassed on all sides, thought fit to go over the River, and passed with
great difficulty, the Bridge that had been made near Hespen, where he found his
Guards and other Troops, Rallied by the Elector of Bavaria.

In this great and long Continued Battle, the Enemy lost about 13000 Men of
their best Officers and Soldiers, many Persons of great note; our loss being
Computed about 6000. The Renowned Duke of Ormond was taken Fighting Valiantly;
and we took the Duke of Barwick for whom he was afterward Exchanged; and so our
Army retired toward Brussels.

Upon this Retreat, the Duke of Wirtemberg was immediately sent for, with the
Forces under his Command, and other Recruits coming in, the Army was made up to
near 80000 Men; so that the French having had a fatal Experience of English
Valor, durst attempt nothing further on that side; yet in Savoy Monsieur
Catinat gave Battle to the Dukes Army, where in an obstinate sight of 7 hours,
a great many of the French Nobility were slain, and some on our side,
especially the Valiant Young Duke of Schomberg, who being persuaded to retire,
would not leave the Head of his Battalion, but charging into the thickest of
the Enemy, and doing wondrous Acts of Chivalry, was at last overpowered with
Numbers, and slain; and though the Duke of Savoy's Army retired from the Field,
the French bought the Bloody Victory at a dear rate, and in repassing the
Mountains late in the Season, many thousands of them perished in the Snow, with
some Wagons, Canon and Ammunitiou-Carriages: And thus, as to what is
memorable, concluded the Campaign of the year 1693.

In the opening the Campaign 1694. the Enemy, by reason of their great Losses
and Diseases among their Horses, were slower than usual in taking the Field, so
that the Confederates had time to get together, and become very formidable; and
his Majesty on the 5th. of May embarked Fubs Yacht attended by 8 Dutch Men of
War, and sailed for Holland, and from thence passed to the Army in Flanders,
where he was joyfully received. About this time the Elector of Saxony dyed at
Dresden, by whose Death the French gave out, they should reap great ^^nefit,
but were disappointed; for Prince Frederick Augustus his Brother, succeeding
him in that Principality confirmed to the Confederates all the deceased Elector
had agreed to, and entered into a strict League with them; and the great Master
of the Teutonick Order, who stood in Competition with Prince Lewis of Bavaria;
for the Bishop of Liege dying, the French Party at Rome endeavored to hinder
the Confirmation of the l^tter: But the Pope, to whom it was referred, declared
in favor of that Prince, and our Naval Forces being abroad under the Command
of Admiral Russel, destroyed a great Fleet of French Ships in conquest Bay,
laden with Corn and Naval Stores from Sweden, Denmark, etc. and the French main
Fleet being gone into the Streights to favor the Duke D' Nouailes Warring in
Catalonia. the English Admiral joined by diverse Dutch Men of War, followed and
blocked Tourville up in Toulo^n altogether disappointing him of his Design: In
the mean while, the Lord Barky, with a Squadron and some Land Forces on Board,
Commanded by Lieut. General Talmash, made a Descent at Cameret Bay, under the
favor of 7 Men of War, battering the Fort, but the French being strongly
entrenched with Horse and Foot, they were constrained to Retreat, the Lieut.
General being wounded in the Thigh, which gangreening, he dyed of that Wound
soon after at Plymouth; yet our Canon ruined the Enemies Batteries and killed
them a great many men. But about the middle of July, Diep, a considerable
Seaport in Normandy, was bombed by the English and Dutch, almost all consumed
by Fire, the great Magazine being blown up, and some Ships in the Harbor were
burnt.

On the 17th. of July they came before Hacerdegrace, an other eminent Seaport
Town, and found the Shoars strongly guarded; and although the Enemy fired
furiously from their Batteries, the Bomb Boats stood in, and burnt with their
Bombs a great part, and the rest had followed the same fate had not the Sea
grown high, by reason of a strong Wind. The next day the Lord Berkley sailed
toward La Hogue, alarming all the French-Coast Towns in his way, and soon
after he made an Attempt upon Dunkirk with a great Machine filled with Bombs
and Carcasses, which being fired rent and shattered their Outworks in a
dreadful manner, and afterward bombed Callis, not any of the French Men of War
daring to stir out of the Harbor.

Whilst things passed thus at Sea, the King took Huy in Flanders; and Prince
Lewis of Balen Commanding the Imperial Army on the Rhine, together with the
Saxon Troops, entered the French Countries, forced their Army to a Retreat,
cutting off many in the Rear, and brought away a great Booty, having put the
Country for many miles, under Contribution; and to strengthen the Alliance, the
Elector of Bavaria Married the King of Poland's Daughter. After this happened
many Skirmishes by Parties, during the Campaign, in which the Enemy for the
most part were put to the worst, and many of the French deserted, and came over
with Horse and Arms, declaring the great Scarcity that was in the French Camp
The French this year set upon the Island of Jamaica, but were beaten off again
by the Inhabitants, after they had surprisingly committed some Outrages, hoping
at this time for success upon the Account of the ill condition they supposed
the Island to be in, by the shocks of a violent Earthquake that had ruined
Port Royal, and destroyed many People; and the Vaudois in the Valley of Lucern
and other places falling on the French that came to surprise them, killed many,
and took more Prisoners. The Turks and Tartars that came with a great Convoy,
to the Relief of Camenic, were overthrown by the Poles, losing 5000 Men, and
5000 Wagons laden with Oil, Rice, and other Provisions.

Our Fleet in the Streigh^s pressed hard on the French, blocking them up in
their Harbors, so that they could not get out to sail for Breast; the great
Ships were disarmed and the Seamen compelled to travel over Land, leaving only
a few to Man some Cruizers. And thus as to Material Action, this Summer ended,
and the King returning by way of Holland, having received the Thanks of the
States General, returned for England, and was met by the Queen with
unexprerssible Joy. But as all things on Earth are Transitory, so this
h^ppened. But in the mean while the Parliament sitting, the King told them
among other things, that a stop had been this Year put to the Torrent of the
French proceedings, which had altogether put them to a stand; and was a happy
Omen of Future Success, and that nothing might be wanting on his part to oblige
his loving Subjects, an Act passed for the frequent meeting of Parliaments, to
the high satisfaction of the Kingdom.

But now a sad and Melancholy Cloud of Sorrow Overspread the Nation, for on
the 22 of December the Queen was taken with a Vomiting and Pain in her Back and
Head, which soon after turned to the Smallpox of the worst sort; upon which
she was Prayed for in the Churches and Chapples: But the prevaling Disease, to
Rob three Nations of so Virtuous and Pious a Princess, deri^ing Art, she, much
lamented, Died on the 28 of the same Month, and was laid in State at
White Hall, her Corpse being brought thither from Kinsington; and a considerable
time after was with all Funeral Pomp conveyed to King Henry the Seventh's
Chapel, and Intrered among her Royal Ancestors; a stately Mausoleum being
raised for her Remembrance, in the Abbey of Westminster, where it was observed
that a Bird called a Robin-Red-Breast perched daily on it, and at certain Hours
Sung Melodiously to the Numerous Spectators; and to show their Affection to the
Deceased Queen, not only ours and most People of note in the Nation, went into
Mourning, but all the Courts of the Confederates.

In the beginning of the Year 1695. the Parliament having given the King
Liberal supplies, greater Preparations than the last were made, and the
Confederates were in a considerable Posture; so that the King early in the
Spring went by the way of Holland to Flanders, attended with diverse Nobles, and
put the Army in such a Posture, as not to fear the Attacks of the Enemy, but
rather to seek them, and dare them to Battle. Indeed the Duke of Luxenburg was
dead; however the French King Nominated the Duke de Villeroy in his stead, as
General of his Army in Flanders; though wanting his Experience in Martial
Affairs: Therefore the French Court doubting the success of their Arms in the
open Field, underhand Treatchery at the beginning of the Campaign was used:
Dixm^yde and Demse, was thereupon surrendered to them, contrary to the Minds of
his Garrison Officers and Soldiers in General, for which Monsieur D' Ellenburg
was afterward Beheaded; and others concerned in so base an Action suffered
disgrace. However the French for a time retaind the Garrison Soldiers, and
compelled most of them to Enter into their Service against their minds. This
much dissatisfied the King of England, and thereupon after many Skirmishes that
happened between Parties, he laid Seige to Namure, a City that Commanded a
large Province; where the French had geathered great Riches, and accordingly on
the third of July it was Invested, and the Siege carried on with all imaginable
Vigor, by the Duke of Bavaria and other Princes, so that the City was taken,
but then the Marsschal de Boufflers who had thrown himself into it, retired to
the Castle on the other side the River, upon Articles signed the fourth of
August by the Elector of Bavaria, and Count Guiscard Governor of the place, a
Second Siege in a manner was laid to the Castle, being very strongly Fortified,
and in it a numerous Garrison, yet such was the Courage of the Confederates,
that they gave the Besieged little Rest, the Batteries Incessantly playing, and
diverse Bombs thrown into the Castle and outworks, which did great damage; and
though when the Trenches approached, the Enemy made diverse vigorous Sallies yet
were they beaten off with considerable loss, and many brave Officers on both
sides slept in the Bed of Honor. But whilst they manfully defended, the Place
Expecting to be relieved; Villeroy with an Army of 100000 Men stood looking on,
not daring to Attack the out-Guards of the Confederates; and at last having
made some Bravadoes, drew off, writing in Excuse to his Master, that he had
called several Councils of War, wherein the General Officers unanimously.
Concurred that the Confederates lay so Advantageously posted, that it was not
safe to hazard the Success of a Battle.

The Besieged being in this manner left to shift for themselves, the Besiegers
having beaten down a great part of the Works, prepared for a general Assault,
both upon the Castle and Cohorn-Fort, and the Signal was given to fall on with
10000 Men, the Lord Cutts with 3000 Spaniards and Bavarians; Major General Le
Cave with 2000 Brandenburghers, and Major General Swerin with 2000 Dutch; one
upon the Devils-house, and two upon Fort William, and the Fourth upon Terra
Nova: The Encounter was Bloody and Obstinate for four hours; however at length
the Besiegers became Masters of the Devils-house and Cohorn-Fort, lodging
themselves therein; but the Attack upon Terra-Nova had not the same Success,
where after they had planted their Colors on the Breaches of the Old Castle,
they were repulsed by the Besieged. During this Assault the Enemy Sprang two
Mines; the Besiegers by casting in Bombs, blew up two small Magazines in
Williams Fort, and the next day every thing was in readiness for a second
General Assault; and the Elector of Bavaria to Encourage his Officers and
Soldiers, promised a Reward to every one according to their Demerits But the
Besieged prevented it by a timely Parley, which attended by the Surrender of
the Castle: The effect of the Articles of Surrender being these;

That the outward Fortifications should be delivered up on the second of
September, by nine in the Morning.

That the Besieged should quit the Castle the 5th, with 2.24 Pownders, 2.12
Pownders, and 2.6 Pownders, 2 Mortars.

That they should be furnished with Horses for their Cannon and Mortars; and
Wagons, and Boats to Convey the Garrison thence, with what Baggage should be
allowed them.

That the Besieged should leave Officers and Commissaries to take care of the
Sick and Wounded, and the remaining Baggage that cannot be carried away when
the Garrison Marches out, and other Articles to the same purpose. And thus was
the famous City and Castle of Namure Regained, after it had been three Years in
the Hands of the French; and in it the Enemy lost about 11000 Men, and the
Confederates not a less number before the Town and Castle: But upon the passing
out of the Garrison, the Marshall de Boufflers was Arrested by way of reprizal
for the Troops and Foot Forces detained, contrary to the Cartel, that were
taken in the Garrisons of Dixmuyde, etc. But he was Honorably used, and upon
an Order from the French King for the Release of these Soldiers, Ordering them
to be Reduced under their former Commands, he was discharged, though he
departed with much displeasure, and not without Muttering some threats, which
no doubt he hoped to put in Practice, if Heaven by a wonderful Providence had
not prevented the intended Assassination, and Descent, which on all Hands is
Evident he approved of.

The Siege ended, and no Enemies that might give Suipicion of Danger appearing
in the Field, the place was ordered to be Fortified, and a good Garrison put
into it, and some other places of lesser Note being Secured. The Season
advancing, the King disposing things in good Order, (the Forces being then
ready to go into Winter Quarters) returned to England, where he was recieved
with the accustomed Rejoycings for his happy Return.

But whilst he was Consulting the good of his People, restless minds were at
Work to Involve us in Blood and Ruin, being agitated and encouraged by the
Courts at Versalies and St. Germain: For diverse Persons coming over to that
end, of which Sir George Barklay as yet seems the chief Agent; a design was
contrived against the most Precious Life in the World; in order according to
the usual French Method, to Facilitate an Invasion: So mean a Barbaritie, when
a Prince Exposes himself so bravely in the Field, in the Head of his Army
against the most daring of his Enemies; that certainly no Barbarian can refrain
to abhor and detestate what you will find in the Remainder of this history, to
be contrived by one who vainly Styles himself the Great, whilst the Magni blush
to allow such an Epethite to any, but the Brave and Generous.

A horrid Conspiracy against the King's Life was contrived in France, and
diverse Ruffians sent over to Execute it, to favor an Invasion by King James,
with a French Power: For though their purpose was defeated Anno: 1692. by the
Destruction of their Fleet at La Hogue, and in other Ports, they gave not over
their design; for I find from that time it continued privately to be carried on
in Expectation of a more favorable opportunity: And though the Conspirators met
with many disappointments, they considered not the Providence that so Ordered
it, but went rashly on in their wicked purposes, till many of them were taken
in the Snare they were so secretly laying for others: And Winter last was
Twelve-Months, they began to push on with Vigor, though they found Grandval
had miscarried, and was deservedly Executed, as has been said; and in January
1695. diverse were sent over from France, to receive Orders from Sir George
Barklay here, for Assassinating the King; who as a Mark to be known by them,
had always when he went abroad a white Hankerchief, half Hanging out of his
Pocket; and several were Entered into Pay, the Troopers that came over having
five Shillings a day Subsistence Money; and in January there were several
meetings about concerting this wicked Affair: However they came to no positive
Result, as to the manner of Acting it till February. In the mean while they had
diverse Supplies of Money, by Orders from France, and on the 10th of Feb. they
sent two of their Accomplices to View the Ground, on the other side the Water
near Richmond, how they might most Advantageously do it, when the King went a
Hunting, but that Place was disliked, as too Open; and they came to a point, do
do it in a narrow Lane; near Turnham-Green, by about 40 Men well Armed on
Horseback, most of the Horses and Arms being already provided and planted at
Inns and Livery-Stables, in Westminster, Holbourn, and about 5 in
Sommerset-House, under the charge of Mr. Lewis, the Earl of Feversham's
Gentleman of his Horse; So that on the 15th they made ready for this
Undertaking, having notice from Chambers, and another Scout, at Kensington,
that the King was to go a Hunting that day; but all was quashed again upon
further Notice, that his going was put off, and the Guards hastily returned.
Yet on the 22d it was resolved to be done near Turnham-Green, Captain Porter
being to Command one Party, and Brigadier Rookwood another, to Attaque the
Guards, while Sir George Barclay with another Party, was to set on the King's
Coach, to Murder him and others they should find in it. But in the mean time,
remorse of Conscience smote Monsieur De la Rue, who was privy to all the
Design; that he proved restless and altogether uneasy in his Mind, till on the
18th he went to Brigadier Levison with a charge speedily to acquaint the King
with it, which he did; and soon after, the Conspirators meeting Pendergrass,
one of them being absent, they suspected he had discovered them, and resolved
among themselves to Stab or Pistol him wherever they met him; of which having
notice from Captain Porter, he immediately went to Kensington and discovered
the Conspiracy to my Lord Portland, who communicated it to the King; upon which
concurring Informations, a List was had of the Names of many of the
Conspirators, and Advertisements from the Duke of Wirtemburg, that the French
Forces to the number of 20000 were drawn down to Dunkirk, Calais and other Sea
ports, where a great Fleet of Transport Ships and Men of War, lay ready to
Embark them: Then the King put off his intended going a Broad on the 22d, and
resolutions were taken to Seize the Conspirators; so that the Lord Cutts in
order to it receiving his Majesty's Instructions, went with a strong Guard, and
that Night and on Sunday Morning, secured about Fifteen of them; and many more
were soon after Apprehended upon His Majesty's putting out a Proclamation,
wherein diverse of them were Named, with the Reward of 1000 l. to any that
should Apprehend one of them, and so for every one; with a prohibition to
Entertain, Harbor, Aid, or Further their Escapes; also that all Seaports
should be stopped, and none suffered to pass without a Certificate under His
Majesty's Sign Manual: Bur the Duke of Berwick, who had been in London, in
order to forward this Business, was got away (as it is thought) the day before
the Plot was kown to be discovered, carrying many Letters to King James, who
sent him with them to the French Ksng, to give him an account of the
preparations and forwardness of the Disaffected Party here; whereupon the
Troops were Embarked, to have Landed in Kent, Sussex, and in the Mouth of the
River; but His Majesty going to the House of Peers, and sending for the
Commons, informed them of the intended Assassination of his Royal Person, and
intended Invasion from France; telling them further, that he had ordered the
Royal Navy to be fitted out, and sent for such a number of Troops as might be
able to oppose the Attempts of the Enemy; that diverse of the Conspirators were
Secured; and that he would take such other necessary care, as he doubted not
through the Mercy and the blessing of God, would disappoint their Designs.

Upon this, both Houses waited on his Majesty with a very Loyal Address. and
entered into an Association to stand by His Majesty; and if he should come to a
violent Death, to revenge it on his Enemis and their Adherents; which good
Example has been since followed by the greatest part of the Kingdom. Upon this
all Papists were by Proclamation to retire Ten Miles from the Cities of London
and Westminster, except House keepers and Merchant Strangers, etc. And other
Proclamations were put out, to Apprehend more of the Conspirators, as their
Names came to be known; and a day of Public Thanksgiving ordered for the
discovery and defeat of this horrid Conspiracy; which was Religiously observed
April the 16th.

And now the French, who ye knew nothing of this happy Discovery, but expecting
the Signal from Dover, by casting up a Bomb, as had been agreed, when the King
should be Murdered, were stranely Surpised to see Admiral Russel with a
Squadron of Sixty Men of War, Fireships, Bomb ketches, and other Vessels, on
their Coasts, blocking them up so; that we having beaten many of their Vessels
to pieces, and Bombarded Calais, setting it on Fire in several places, they
were Constrained to disembark.

Thus a wonderful Providence having defeated their Designs, it was thought fit
to bring the Cospirators to Justice: and an Indictment of High Treason being
found against Robert Charnock, Edward King, and Thomas Keys they were on
Wednesday the 11th of March Arrainged at the Sessions House in the Old Baily,
for designing the Assassination of the King, in Order to the bringing in a
Foreign Power; and a Jury of twelve Men being Sworn, Captain Forter gave
Evidence against them, that they had several meetings to Consult about Measures
for taking away the Life of the King, particularly at the Globe Tavern in
Hatton-Garden, the Nags head in Covent Garden, at the Sun in the Strand, at the
Blew-Posts in Old Spring-Garden, and other places; that Mr Charnock had brought
him Accquainted with Sir George Barcklay, and that it was agreed in these
meetings to Attack the King's Guards and Assassinate him; and then they were to
seize the Exchequer, Tower, and Magazens other to provide them with Money and
Stores; Charnock after faying that when once the little Spark was out of the
way, King James would be presently here: He had also been over in France with
him, to desire him to prevail with the French King to send an Army hither:
That a Commission to Leavy War sent: That they had often Drank a health to the
Squeezing the Rotten Orange. The other Evidence against them were De La Rue,
Pendergrass, Bartram, and Boise, who all agreed that the Prisoners liad
Consented to the Assassination of his Majesty, and was to Act in the Attempt:
So that after a long and fair hearing. and all Objections Answered, the
Evidence summed up, the Jury withdrew, and within half an Hour brought them in
Guilty of the High Treason; and the same Evening they Received Sentence to be
Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered, and on Wednesday the 1^th of M^rch, they were
Executed at Tyhurn, where they made no Verbal Speech; But Charnock owned in a
Paper he then delivered to the Sheriff; that King James intending to Invade,
England, he and others to Facilitate the Invasion; had Agreed to Attack the
Prince of Oranges Guards (meaning the King) but for any Order of Commission
from King James to Assassinate his Majesty he denied to be knowing of it,
faying the late King had rejected such Proposals, when they were made to him;
he Confessed he heard of a Commission arrived for levying War, but had not seen
it, Laboring to clear she body of the Roman Catholics, of having and
Knowledge of the Detestable design. King said in his Paper that he never saw
any Order or Commission from King James, for the promoting the Assassination,
and that it was not undertaken with the knowledge of any Body of Men, either
Catholics or Protestants, nor by him out of any King-Killing principles, but
through Rash and unadvisedness; Keys Paper Contained little more than a Prayer.
After they were cut down, they were Quartertd, and their Heads and Quarters set
on the City Gates.

On the 23 of March came on the Trial of Sir John Friend at the same place for
High Treason, in designing to levy War, and further an Invasion: The Evidence
against him were Captain Porter, Brice Blaer, and Bartram. It was proved
against him that he had received a Commission from King James, to raise a
Regiment of Horse, of which he was to be Colonel; that he had listed and kept
in pay diverse men; that he had written to King James, and Received a Letter
from him to this purpose, that he had sent Charnock over to procure French
Forces to Invade England; that he owned he knew of the Intended Assassination,
but was not to Act in it; that he had paid diverse large Sums of Money toward
the forwarding the designs, and Especially 100 l. toward the procuring the
Escape of Colonel Parker out of the Tower of London, whither he had been
Committed for formerly Conspiring the death of the King; upon this and other
the like Evidence, he called some Witnesses to prove he was a Protestant, and
how he had behaved himself; but the Jury going out, returned their Verdict that
he was Guilty or the High Treason.

On the 24th Sir William Parkins was brought upon his Trial at the fame place,
against him the principal Evidence was Captain Porter, and Mr. Sweet, with
other Circum. stantial Evidences, who being Sworn, deposed that Sir William was
to raise a Troop of Horse, and that he had listed most part of them old
Soldiers; that he had been at several meetings where the Assassination was
proposed, and was to Contribute Horse and Arms toward the furthering it. That
he had received a Commission from the late King, and much more to this purpose;
so that having made his Objections and they being Answered, and overruled by
the Court, the Charge was given to the Jury. who returned their Verdict that he
was Guilty of High Treason; and that Evening he and Sir John Friend Received
Sentence to be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered. And

On Friday the third of April, they were Conveyed in a Sledge to Tyburn, and
were Assisted by three Non jurant Persons, viz. Mr. Snatt Mr. Colliar, and Mr.
Cook; having declined the Assistance of other Divines; who prayed with them,
and when they had Acknowledged they were in full Charity, they gave them
Absolution, though by their words in the Cart, and in their papers delivered,
they owned for the most part what had been charged against them, justifying
themselves therein. Sir John Friend in his Paper said he believed it to be the
Cause of God; Praying for the late King and Queen. and the pretended Prince of
Wales, etc. After they were Executed, their Heads and Quarters were set on
several of the Gates, particularly on Temple Bar.

On Tuesday the 21st of April, Ambrose Rookwood, and Charles Cranburn were
tried at the Kings-Bench-Bar for High Treason, in Intending to Assassinate his
Majesty; the Witnesses against them were Captain Porter and George Harris; they
were tried Single, but the Evidence much to the same purpuse, viz. shat
Rookwood, being a Brigadier in King James's Guards, was sent over to obey the
Order of Sir George Berclay, who had acquainted him with the intended
Assassination; that he Embarked in the Design, and was to Command a Party to
Charge the King's Guards, and to frame the Design, had been at diverse
Conferences, at the Globe, Nags-Head, Porter's Chamber, etc. that he had showed
a List of the Men that were to be under his Command in this Design, and ordered
Harris to get Horses and Arms, which were provided for him: It appeared
Cranburn was one of the Men of his Party, and agreed to the Killing the King,
procured a Sword-Cutler to furnish Arms, drank the health of the Rotten Orange,
and was firm to the Design: So that the Evidence summed up, they were found
guilty of the High Treason.

On the 22d Major Robert Lowick was Tried on the same Indictment; against whom
it was proved, he had consented to the Assassination, was to act in it, and
much the same as the Evidence against the former. They were allowed Counsel,
according to the new Act; but he as well as the other, was found Guilty, and
all three received Sentence of Death, to be Orawn, Hanged and Quartered.

Sir George Rook Arrived from the Streights soon after, with the Men of War and
a Rich Fleet of Merchants Ships: So that our Naval Forces united, the French
instead of Invading England, must look narrowly to their own Coasts, if they
intend to 'fcape a Scowring.

FINIS.

