THE HISTORIES OF THE Gunpowder-Treason AND THE Massacre at Paris:

Together with a Discourse concerning the ORIGINAL of the POWDER PLOT; proving
it not to be the Contrivance of Cecill, as is affirmed by the PAPISTS, but that
both the Jesuits and the Pope himself were privy to it.

As also a Relation of several Conspiracies against Queen ELIZABETH.

LONDON, Printed for J. Leigh at the Sign of the Blew Bell near Chancery Lane
end in Fleetstreet. 1676.

THE HISTORY OF THE Bloody Massacres OF THE PROTESTANTS IN FRANCE IN THE Year
of our LORD, 1572.

WRITTEN In Latin by the Famous HISTORIAN JA. AVG. THVANVS, and faithfully
rendered into English.

LONDON; Printed for John Leigh at the Sign of the Blew-Bell by
Flying-horse-Court in Fleet Street, 1674.

A brief Introduction to the History of the MASSACRE.
THE Lords of the House of Guise, whether through the instigation of the
Jesuits, whom they first introduced into France, and highly favored, or
through their emulation V. Discourse, sect. 40.
against the Princes of the Blood who favored the Reformed Religion, or both,
professing themselves great zealots for the Papal Authority, and irreconcilable
enemies to the Hugonots, (as they called them of the Reformed Religion)
especially after the dissentions grew high between them and the Princes, to
whom they doubted not but the Protestants would adhere, as well upon the
account of Religion as of the Right of the Princes, having V. Disc. sect. 41.
by force gotten the young King Charles 9. into their hands, endeavored by all
means to raise in his mind as great prejudice and hatred against the
Protestants and the chief men of their party as possible. The young King thus
trained up in prejudice against them, and moreover from his youth inured to
cruelty, and the slaughters of his Subjects even in cold blood, whereof by the
D. of Guise he had been early made a spectator, was scarce out of his minority
when he was ivited by the Pope, V. D^sc. sect. 42.
the K. of Spain, and the D. of Savoy to join in a holy League for the
extirpation of the Heretics: but being by nature of an Italian genius, and
well instructed by his Mother in the policies of her Country, he chose as a
more safe and surer way to attempt that rather by secret stratagems and
surprise than by open hostility. And therefore at an enterview at Bayonne
between him with his Mother, and his Sister the Queen of Spain accompanied with
the D. of Alva, having by the way had secret conference at Avignon with some of
the Pope's trusty Ministers (the Pope having persuaded that meeting, and
earnestly pressed the King of Spain himself to be present at it) it was
concluded to cut off the chief heads of the Protestants, and then, in imitation
of the Sicilian Vespers, to slaughter all the rest to the last man. But the
design being discovered to the Prince of Conde, Colinius and others of the
Nobility, when they perceived such preparations made for the execution of it,
as, unless timely prevented, they were likely suddenly to be all destroyed, V.
Disc. sect. 43.
they put themselves into a posture of defense, whereupon broke out a Civil
War. But that being contrary to the design to effect the business by stratagem
and surprise, it was in few months composed for the present; but shortly after,
when the same design was again perceived to be carried on, and the like
inevitable danger approached as near as before, was again renewed in the former
manner, and continued somewhat longer and hotter than before. V. Disc. sect. 45.
Whereupon the King perceiving that the greatest difficulty was to beget and
confirm in the Protestant Nobility a trust and confidence in himself, used all
arts imaginable to do that; and to that purpose in all solemn manner granting
and confirming to the Protestants in France very fair terms of peace and
security, he at the same time pretended a resolution to make a war with Spain,
entered into a League with the Queen of England, and with the Protestant Princes
of Germany; and, which was the principal part of the policy, proposed a match
between the Prince of Navar, the first Prince of the Blood, and chief of the
Protestant Party, and his Sister Margaret, as that which would not only serve
his purpose to beget a confidence in the Protestants of his sincerity and good
intention, but moreover afford him a fair opportunity at the solemnization of
the Marriage, of effecting his design at last, which had been so often and so
long disappointed. All which having managed with wonderful art and
dissimulation, he at last obtained what he desired, as in the following History
is more particularly related.

THE HISTORY OF THE MASSACRES OF THE Protestants at PARIS, and many other
places in FRANCE, in the Year of our Lord, 1572.
1. THE day of the Nuptials [between Henr. King of Navar and Margaret Sister to
the King of France] drawing on; Lib. 51.
which was appointed the August 18th.
15th. of the Kalends of September; the King by Letters solicits Coligni, that
he should come to Paris, having before given in charge to Claudius Marcellus
Provost of the Merchants, that he should see to it, that no disturbance did
arise upon Colignie's coming to Paris. Likewise Proclamation was published the
third of the Nones of July, July 5th.
when he was at Castrum Bononiae, about two miles from the City, wherein it was
forbidden, that any of what condition soever should dare to renew the memory of
things past, give occasion of new quarrels, carry pistols, fight duels, draw
their swords, especially in the King's retinue at Paris, and in the Suburbs,
upon pain of death. But if any difference should arise among the Nobles
concerning their Honor or Reputation, they should be bound to bring their
plaint to the Duke of Anjou, the King's Deputy throughout the whole Kingdom,
and to pray justice of him: if they were of the Commons, they should betake
themselves to the High Chancellor de l'Hospital: if it shall happen among those
that shall not be in the Court, but in Paris, they shall go before the ordinary
Magistrate. It was also provided by the same Proclamation, that those who were
not of the Courts of any of the Princes or Nobles, or of the Retinue of others,
or were not detained upon some necessary business, but were of uncertain abode
and habitation about Paris or the Suburbs, should depart from the Court and
City within 24 hours after the publication of this Edict, upon the same pain of
death. This was published for three days together, with the sound of Trumpet in
the Court, and through the City, and it was ordered that the publication should
be repeated week by week upon the Sabbath Day. Also there was adjoined to the
guards of the King's body for his greater security, a guard of 400 choice
Soldiers; all which Coligni full of confidence and good assurance so
interpreted, as if the King desirous of the public Peace, did (only) prepare a
contrary strength against those which were seditious, and movers of troubles.
Therefore he comes into the City, though many were greatly disturbed at it: to
whom, when they importunately dehorted him both by letter and word of mouth,
he, after he had given them thanks, answered in one word; That he was resolved
now that Peace was concluded, and things past forgotten, to rely upon the faith
of the King, and that he had rather be dragged through the streets of Paris,
than to take up Civil Arms again.

2. Among other letters there was one brought to him being now come to Paris,
written very smartly after this manner. Remember that it is an established
Decree of the Papists, upon the account of Religion, and confirmed by the
authority of Councils, that Faith is not to be kept with heretics; in the
number of which Protestants are accounted. Remember also that Protestants upon
the account of the former Wars, do lie under an eternal odium; so that it is
not to be doubted but this is the Queens resolution, that Protestants be rooted
out by any means whatsoever. Add to this that it cannot be, but that a woman
that is a stranger, and an Italian, descended of the race of the Popes, (whom
they oppose) and of a Florentine and guileful nature, should study all
extremities against her enemies. Consider moreover in what School the King was
educated, in which he drew in with his milk under his good Tutors this
Doctrine; that he should make it a sport to swear and forswear, to use the name
of God profanely, to defile himself with Whoredoms and Adulteries, to
dissemble his Faith, Religion, Counsels, to set his countenance (according to
occasion). And that he might be accustomed to the effusion of the blood of his
Subjects, he was taught from his childhood to behold the slaughters and
butcheries of And of men also, v. l. 24. p. 275.
beasts: that he is settled in this persuasion to suffer no Religion in his
Kingdom but that which may uphold his state, (according to the opinion of his
Master Machiavel) otherwise it would never be at Peace, so long as two
Religions flourished in it, and that it was instilled into his ears that the
Protestants did decree to spoil him of his Life and Empire. And therefore he
would never suffer the Protestants who had once, whether upon a just or unjust
cause, taken up Arms against him, to enjoy the benefit of his Edict, but that
he would with Arms revenge what was done with Arms against him; nor would he
look upon himself obliged to keep his Covenants which he had entered into with
his armed Subjects. These are the Arts of Princes, the Elements of Policy, the
Arcana Imperii. So Commodus of old commanded Julian, whom he owned and embraced
as his Father, to be slain. Thus Antonius Caracalla, under pretense of
mustering, slew the prime youth of the City. So Lysander cut the throats of
eight hundred Milesians called together under pretense of friendship and
society. So Sergius Galba raged upon six thousand Spaniards: and lately by the
command of Antonius Spinola, the chief men of the Isle of Corsica were called
together to a Feast, and slain. In our memory did Christiern a King of a
barbarous nature use the same arts in the Massacre of Stockholm. So heretofore
Charles 7, though reconciled to the Duke of Burgundy, yet abstained not from
killing him, though he begged for his life. Nor are the discourses that the
King lately had with his mother at Blois unknown. For when in a jocular manner
profanely using, as his custom is, the name of God, he asked her whether he had
not acted his part handsomely at the coming of the Queen of Navar? the Queen
answered that he had begun well, but these beginnings would little advantage
him unless he proceeded; But I, said he, with often repeated oaths, will bring
them all into your toils. From these words, the truth whereof you may be
assured of, you ought to take counsel, and if you are wise get out of the City,
and so from the Court, as from a most filthy sink, with all the speed as may be.

3. Coligni having read this letter, though he was not a little troubled at it,
yet that he might not seem altogether to neglect the admonitions and entreaties
of his friends, made answer; That there was no place left for these suspicions,
that he could never persuade himself that so great perfidiousness could enter
into so good a King, than whom France for this many years never had a better.
That Anjou indeed was more averse to the Protestant party, but that hatred
would now cease, even out of respect to the affinity contracted with the King
of Navar. For the rest, the League entered into with England, and that which the
King was now making with the Protestant Princes of the Empire, did sufficiently
show how he stood affected to the Protestants, when as he would have one of the
Sons of the Elector Palatine in his retinue: and some one of the English
Nobles, as Leicester or Burgleii, who were most forward for Religion. Moreover
he had given his Faith to the Prince of Orange and Nassau his Brother
concerning aids against the Spaniards, and that a great supply was preparing in
the place of those who were routed under Jenlis their leader. That John
Galeacius Fulgosius, who lately returned from Florence, did assure them, that
Cosunus would lend the King two hundred thousand Aurei toward that War. That
the King's Ambassador did carefully pry into the counsels of the Duke of Alva,
and daily acquaint the King with them. That this he knew every day from the
King. That the Navy that Philip Strossy and Polinius Garda do command at
Broage, and upon the Coasts of Poictou was not prepared to any other use but to
disturb the Spanish Fleet, which being done, it shall go to help the Prince of
Orange at Flushing. As for himself and his own particular safety, all might be
secure of that; for that he through the King's means is reconciled to the
Guises, each engaging their Faith to the King, that they would neither of them
hereafter impeach one the other. Lastly, that the King did all he could to make
Peace at home and War abroad, and that he might transfer the War into the
Low Countries, and against the Spaniards. Wherefore he prayed the Author of the
writing, and others that are of his mind, that they would no more with these
suspicions trouble his mind, which was taken up with more weighty businesses,
and better designs, but rather that they would, joining their prayers with his,
beg of God that he would prosper things so well begun, and bring them at last
to an happy end, for the good of the Church and Kingdom.

4. The same things were written to Coligni from the Rochellers, which he did
in as friendly manner take off with all moderation and constancy. Therefore
when they could not divert him from that mind, they set upon the King of Navar
with Letters dated 6 of the Eids of July, July 10th.
in which they dehort him upon the same accounts, that he should take care of
himself, and not go to Paris. He was then at the Nuptials Vid. l. 50. p. 787.
of Henricus Condaeus his Unckle's Son, and Mary of Cleve his near Kinswoman,
which were celebrated at Blandia a Castle of Jo. Roan Marchioness of Rotelin,
who was Mother to Frances of Aurleans Vid. l. 35. p. 559.
last Wife to Lewis of Conde, within the jurisdiction of Melun. Therefore he
despising the warnings of his Friends, the Nuptials of the Prince of Conde
being finished, comes to Paris with him, and a great retinue of Protestants in
the beginning of August, where new delays are purposely invented by the Queen;
for whereas at first there was hope given of favor to be obtained from the
Pope by the Cardinal of Lorain, who was then at Rome, to remove the obstacle of
proximity and difference in Religion, a Breve was brought to Charles Cardinal
of Burbon, designed to finish the business; wherewith notwithstanding he said
he he was not satisfied: therefore he desired another more full might be sent
from Rome, wherein it might be more amply provided for him. Therefore the King
laid the fault of the delay upon the Cardinal of Burbon, who he said, by way of
scorn, was tied up by superstition, and I know not what scruples of conscience;
and by that means great injury was done to his Margarite (so he called his
Sister) who bore it very impatiently to have the fruit of her so long expected
joy deferred.

5. When in the mean time Coligni pressed that the public proclaiming of the
Low Country War so often deliberated about, and approved of, and now whether
he would or not begun, might be no longer deferred, he again made delays, and
declined it, and often replied to him, importuning him, that he had not any
Counselor or Officer of his Army to whose faithfulness, industry and diligence
he could commit so great an affair. For some were wholly addicted to the party
of the Guises; others had other faults of their own: of his Secretaries there
was only Bernardus Fiza whom he could entrust with this secret. At last it was
agreed that the affair should be committed to Momorancy and Fiza: with which
shows of unfeigned familiarity, as he took it, and ingenuous freedom, Coligni
being deceived, would not persuade himself any thing otherwise than of truly
Kingly virtue, or think hardly of the most excellent King.

6. Amidst these delays (those) things, as it should seem, being altogether
composed, about which before there was a difference among the Conspirators,
there came Letters by secret comport from the Kings Ambassador with the Pope,
in which the King is certified of a dispensation now granted, and shortly to be
sent from Rome by Post, wherein the scrupulous conscience of Burbon was fully
satisfied: therefore when, upon the 16th. of the Kalends of September, August
17th.
they were contracted by Cardinal Borbon in the Louvre, the next day after the
Nuptials were celebrated.

An high Scaffold is erected before the gates of the great Church, by which
they descended by stairs unto a lower Scaffold, which being on every side
railed in to keep off the multitude, did lead through the Church to the inner
apartment commonly called the Chore. From thence another Scaffold encompassed
with rails did receive those that went out of the Chore toward the left gate,
which reached to the Bishop's Palace; thither came out of the Louvre with all
Royal Pomp, and most magnificent show, the King, the Queen Mother, with the
Brethren the Dukes of Anjou and Alanson, the Guises, the Colonels of the Horse,
the chief Peers of the Kingdom leading along the Bride, who lodged that night
in the Bishop's Palace. And from the other part, the King of Navar, with the
Princes of Conde and Contie his Cousins, Coligni Admiral of the Sea; Franciscus
Count de la Roche-fou-eault, and a great company of the Protestant Nobles, who
came together out of all Provinces of the Kingdom.

When the King had ascended to that higher Scaffold, the Ceremonies in manner
as was agreed being performed by Cardinal Borbon, the King and Navar with his
Party came by the lower Scaffold into the Chore, where having placed his Wife
before the great Altar to hear Mass, he with Coligni and Count de la
Roche-fou-eault, and the other Nobles of his Retinue went into the Bishop's
Palace by the contrary door before mentioned; from whence after Mass was ended,
being recalled by D'Anvil, he came into the Chore again, and kissing his new
Bride before the King, Queen, and the Brethren, when they had entertained one
another some little while with discourse, they returned into the Bishop's
Palace, where dinner was provided. And I well remember when as Mass being
ended, I was admitted through the rails into the Chore, and standing nigh to
Coligni, while I fixed my eyes upon him, and curiously observed him, I heard
him say, discoursing with d'Anville, and looking up to the Ensigns fastened up
and down, and the sad Monuments of the Battle of Bassac and Moncountour, That
ere long these being taken down, others more pleasing should be set up in their
places: which words, then he meant of the Low Country War, which as he thought
was now resolved upon, others interpreted as though he had thoughts of a new
Civil War, which he so much abhorred.

7. After Dinner they went into the Palace, where a royal Supper was prepared,
and all orders of the City and the Senate, together with with the Courts of
Accounts, Customs and Treasury are entertained according as is usual in a most
sumptuous manner: a short time was spent in dancing; afterward interludes were
brought in. The representation of three Rocks silvered over, upon which the
three Brethren, the King, the Duke of Anjou, and Duke of Alanson did sit, and
seven more, upon which Gods and Sea Monsters were set, which followed, being
drawn along in Coaches, and were brought through the great Hall of the Palace,
which was divided by a triumphal arch in the middle, and when they made a
stand, some choice Musicians recited Verses in their own Tongue, composed by
the best of their Poets. And thus a great part of the night being spent in
interludes, they afterward betook themselves to their rest.

The next day being not able to rise before the Sun was got high, at three a
clock afternoon they went to dinner at the Duke of Anjou's Palace, where after
dancing they went toward the evening to the Louvre.

The day following being Wednesday, running at Tilt, and interludes which had
been a long while in preparing, were exhibited at the Cardinal Bourbon's
Palace: there were represented upon the right hand the Mansions of the blessed,
and a little below the Elysian-fields possessed by 12 Nymphs, on the other side
on the left hand was represented Hell flaming with fire and brimstone, and full
of sprights and frightful ghosts. The Brethren, the King, the Duke of Anjou,
and the Duke of Alanson defended Paradise as they called it: which many Knights
Errant seeking to break into, of whom Navar was Captain; they were every one of
them repulsed, and at last thrown headlong down into Hell. Then Mercury riding
upon a Cock, and together with him Cupid came sliding down to the defendants,
and then after much discourse with them returned into Heaven. Then the three
defendants came to the Nymphs wandering in the pleasant green fields, and led
them into the middle of the Hall, where the Spectators were with much pleasure
entertained with new Dances about the Fountain for a full hour. Then the
defendants being prevailed upon by their entreaties, the Knights Errant that
were shut up in Hell were released; who presently in a confused skirmish break
their spears: at last the Gunpowder that was laid by pipes about the Fountain
being fired, fire-broak forth with a great noise, and consumed all their
Scenes, and so all departed.

This show was variously interpreted, for that the assailants who were most of
them Protestants, did in vain attempt to get into the seats of the blessed, and
were afterward thrust down into Hell: for so they put a mockery upon the
Protestants, and others did bode that it portended some mischief. However,
certain it is, that Francis E. of Momorancy, whether suspecting some evil, or
being indisposed by reason of the tossing of the Sea, as lately returned from
his Ambassy in England, having obtained leave of the King, went to Chantilly
for his healths sake; leaving in the Court Henry d'Anville, Carolus Meruvius,
and Gulielmus Thoraeus (his) Brethren, and that very happily for that most
Illustrious Family: V. Da. p. 370.
for it was the general opinion, that the plotters of the following Massacre
would have comprehended them all in this conspiracy, had they not feared that
Momorancy, who was now absent, would have revenged it.

The next day being Thursday, there was running at Tilts held in the Courtyard
of the Louvre, in which on the one side the King and his Brethren, together
with the Duke of Guise, and the Duke of Aumale in the habit of Amazons; and on
the other side the King of Navar, with his party in Turkish habits, contended
with their lances; Scaffolds being set up on either side, from which the
Queen Mother, the King's Wife, Lorain, and all the Court-Ladies beheld the
sports.

8. Two days before the Counsel concerning the Massacre being not yet
concluded, the King with great show of kindness bespeaks Coligni (thus). You
know, Father, (so he called him upon the account of his age and honor) what
you undertook to me, that you would offer no injury, so long as you are at
Court, to the Guises: and they again engaged, that they, as they ought, would
behave themselves toward you and yours honorably and modestly. I repose very
great trust in your words, but I have not the like confidence in their
promises. For, besides that I know the Guises do by all means seek revenge, I
know their daring and haughty nature, and in what favor they are with the
people of Paris. It would be a very great grief to me, if they who under
pretense of coming to the Marriage, have brought with them a great party of
soldiers well appointed, should attempt any thing to your hurt; for that would
be an injury to my self: Therefore, if you think it expedient, I think it
convenient, that the Regiment of the Guards be drawn into the City under these
Commanders, (then he named those who were no way suspected), who, if any
turbulent persons attempt any thing, may be ready at hand to secure the public
Peace.

To such friendly discourse Coligni easily yielded his assent out of a desire
of domestic Peace, and being already overcome by the Court-flatteries:
therefore a Regiment is drawn within the walls, without any suspicion of the
Protestants.

9. This being done, they enter into Counsel Lib. 51. He mentions a former
Consultation between the Queen Mother, Anjou, Cardinal Lorain, Aumale, Guise,
Birage, and others in the same Chamber, wherein Guise was afterward by the
King's Command killed, and afterward in the same buildings where the King
himself Henr. 3. here called Anjou, was murdered by a Friar.
again, and after some debate the thing was left undetermined, their opinions
varying according to the condition of places, and of the persons admitted to
the Council. For thus it was discoursed before the King, with whom were in
Council the Queen Mother, the Duke of Anjou, and others.

There are two factions in the Kingdom; one of the Momorancies, to whom the
Colignies were formerly added, but now upon the account of Religion, by which
they have engaged many (to them), they constitute a new faction. The other is
of the Guises: nor will France ever be quiet, or that Majesty that is taken
from Kings by the Civil Wars thence arising, ever be restored till the chief of
their Heads who disturb the most flourishing Empire, and the public Peace, be
stricken off. They, by the troubles of the Kingdom, have grown to so great
Power, that they cannot be taken away at the same time: they are severally to
be taken off, and set-one against the other, that they may destroy one another.
Coligni must be begun with who only survives of his Family, who being taken out
of the way, it would much weaken the Momorancies, who lie under so great an
odium upon the account of their joining with Coligni. But this is an unworthy
thing, and not to be suffered by you, (said they, directing their discourse to
the King), that a man whom only Nobility commends, one that is advanced to
honor by the favor of Kings, now grown burdensome to the Nobility, equal to
Princes in honor, grievous to your self, should come to that height of madness
and boldness, that he should count it a sport to mock at Royal Majesty, and
every day at his own lust to raise Wars in the Kingdom. Certainly his madness
is above all things by you, if you be indeed King, to be restrained, that by
his example all may learn to bear their fortunes decently, and use them
modestly. Nor only shall the faction of the Momorances be broken by his death,
but the power of the Protestants shall be over-turned: of which, when he is the
very heart and soul, in him alone the Protestants seem to live, and he being
dead, they will fall with him. This is not only useful, but necessary for
settling the public Peace, when as experience does show, that as one house
cannot keep two Dogs, nor one tree relieve two Parrots, so one and the same
Kingdom cannot bear two Religions. This may be done without danger or blame, if
some cutthroat, as there are enough of them to be had, be suborned to take
away the life of Coligni, encouraged by some present reward, and hopes of
future; who having done the thing, may make his escape by the help of a light
horse prepared for that purpose. V. Dav. p 368, 370. The opinion of Alberto
Gondi Coun. of Retz.
For then, without doubt, the Protestants, who are very numerous in the City,
supposing it to be done by the Guises, will presently, as you know they are a
furious sort of people, take up Arms, and setting upon the Guisians, they shall
easily be cut off by their greater numbers; (for the people of Paris are much
addicted to them), and perhaps the Momorances so hateful to the Parisians,
shall be involved in the same tumult. But if the thing proceed not so far, yet
at least the blame of the fact, from which you shall receive great advantage,
shall be translated from you upon the Guisians, (as bearing yet in memory the
murder of their Father) whom, having destroyed their Rivals, you shall soon
reduce into good order. This thing being done, you shall forthwith be able to
determine concerning the chief leaders of the Protestants, whom you have in
your power, who, no doubt, will return to their old Religion, and due
allegiance to you when evil Counselors shall be removed.

And when it was debated in the Queens Council among those that were to be
trusted, their discourse went further, that not only the Momorances with
Coligni should be taken off, but that the Guisians should at some fit
opportunity be slain, as those whom the Queen ought in no wise to trust or
spare, being heretofore grievously and often offended by her. For so the
Counselors ordered the matter, if the Protestants should go about to revenge
the death of Coligni, they and the Momorances should in the conflict be
oppressed by the people, as being inferior in strength, but not without great
loss to the adversaries; whom the King having drawn a great number of
Soldiers, which he had then at his command, into the Louvre, sitting as a
spectator, might at last set upon, being broken, and weakened by fighting, and
as though they had taken Arms without his command, and by way of sedition,
might command them all to be slain together with the Nobles, as taking this or
that party: for whiles they remained safe, there would be no end of murmurs and
complaints against the Queen; whom the seditious cry out upon as a stranger,
and so fit to be removed from the Government of the Kingdom.

10. These were their diverse counsels according to the diversity of the
persons, but they all agreed in the executing of the matter. The Duke of Guise
being at last taken into the privity of the fact, though otherwise he knew
nothing of the other Counsels, an Assasine was sought for, and presently
Morevell appears, being as it seemed provided for that purpose; who having
formerly undertaken to do such a villainy, he fled into the Camp of the
Protestants, but being affrighted by the danger of it, lest he should seem to
have done nothing, he treacherously slew Arthurus Valdraeus Moius, Monsieur de
Muy at the siege of Niort. Dav. p. 376.
and from that time often changing his lodgings, he concealed himself in the
house of the Guises, in which Family he was brought up from a child. An house
was also pitched upon in the Cloister of St. German Auxerrois, as they call it,
the house of Peter Pila Villemur, who had formerly been Tutor to the Duke of
Guise himself; by which Coligni returning home, must needs pass.

Therefore upon the Friday, Coligni having dispatched much business in the
King's Council, where Anjou was present, and composed a difference between
Antonius, Marafinus, Guerchius and Tiangius, chief of the Nobility of the
Burgundians, forward men; he attended upon the King to the next Tennis-Court,
from whence, after a promise from the King, the Duke of Guise and Teligny,
betaking himself homeward, walking on foot by the house of Villemur, going
gently along, and reading a Petition which was then by chance presented to him,
Morevel discharging a Musket from a window that had a linen Curtain drawn
before it, he was shot with a brace of bullets, whereof one struck off the
forefinger of his right hand, and the other wounded him more dangerously in his
left-arm, while Guerchius was upon his right hand, and Rochus, Sorbaeus,
Prunaeus upon his left, who as likewise all that were there, were exceedingly
astonished at what was done.

But he with a countenance not disturbed, only showed them the house whence the
bullets came, and presently commands Armanus, Claromontius, Pilius, and
Franciscus Movinius, that they should go the King, and in his name acquaint him
with what was done: then binding up his arm, and leaning upon his domestics,
he came on foot to his lodging, which was not far off: and when he was advised
by one of his company that he should see to it, whether the bullets wherewith
he was wounded were not poisoned, he answered, that nothing should befall him
but what was ordered by God.

Forthwith they force the house whence the shot proceeded, and breaking open
the doors, found the Musket in a lower room. A young maid and a page that were
found there, were taken and bound; for Morevel at a back-dore getting upon his
horse, was already fled to St. Antony's Gate, where changing his horse, and
mounting another that was ready for that purpose, he made his escape.

11. The King receiving the news, as if he had been astonished at an unexpected
accident, Shall I never, says he, be at quiet? and must new troubles always
arise from day to day? and then throwing his rocket upon the ground, he
withdrew into the inner Castle. Guise leaving the Tennis-Court, departed
another way.

Here all were full of wonder, and many were disturbed, being troubled in their
minds to think what those things would come to. Many, even of those who bare no
great good will to Coligny, detested the fact. But Navar and Conde presently
repair to him, and when as in their presence he was handled by the Chirurgions,
he was heard amidst all his pain to say (only) this. Is this the goodly
reconciliation that the King did undertake for? then turning to Moore, Chaplain
to the late Queen of Navar, he pronounced these words, Ah my Brother, now I
know I am beloved of God, for that I have received these wounds for his most
holy Names sake. God grant I may never forget his accustomed mercies toward
me. But when Ambrosius Paraeus the King's Surgeon told him that the Gangreen
growing on, his finger must be cut off, and did attempt to do it with an
instrument that had no good edge, though he was forced to open and shut the
shears three times, yet he gave no sign of sense of his most sharp pain: when
he came to his left arm Merlin Conde's Chaplain came in, who when he began to
comfort him out of the holy Scriptures, he brake out into these words; My God,
forsake me not in these troubles, nor cease from thy accustomed mercies toward
me. Then he whispered in the ear to one who held up his arm, that he should
deliver to Merlin an hundred Aurei to be distributed to the poor of the Church
of Paris: this I have often heard Paraeus speak of, almost in the same words.

Thence Navar and Conde go to the King, and complain of the indignity of the
fact; and since they and theirs could not be secure at Paris, they desire leave
to depart. Upon this the King aggravating the matter to the highest, and adding
deeper oaths than before, promised that he would take such revenge upon the
Assasine, the authors and abetters of this fact, as should satisfy Coligny and
his friends, and should be an example to others for the future: that what was
done was as great a grief to him as to any, but since what was done could not
be undone, he would take the greatest care that might be for a remedy, and
would make all men understand that Coligny had the wound, but he had the smart:
and that they might be eyewitnesses of this thing, he desires them that they
would not depart out of Paris.

And he discoursing thus, Queen Katharine, who was then present, seconded, and
says, The affront was offered to the King, not to Coligny; and if this villainy
should not be punished, it would ere long come to that pass, that they would
even dare to set upon the King himself in his house: therefore all means are to
be used most sharply to revenge so great a villainy. These words being spoken
with much heat, and seeming indignation, the minds of Navar and Conde were
somewhat appeased, who did not believe there was any dissimulation, so that
there was not a word more made of their departure out of the City.

Presently some were sent to pursue the Assasine, though none as yet knew who
he was. All the gates of the City are shut up till search had been made, except
two, by which provision was brought in, and even they were kept by a guard
appointed by the King. In the mean while the maid and the boy that were taken
in Villemur's house, who was then from home, were examined apart by
Christopher Thuanus, and Bernardus Prevotius Morsanus, Presidents of the Court,
and James Viole a Senator: and the maid confessed that a few days since
Villerius Challius, a servant of the Guises, brought a Soldier to that house,
and commended him to her, as it he had been the Master of the house, being a
very near friend and familiar acquaintance of his, and that therefore he made
use, as long as he was there, of Villemur's Chamber and Bed; but what his name
was he did industriously conceal. The boy who had served the Assasine but a few
days, said he was sent by his Master, (who dissembled his name, and called
himself sometimes Bolland, sometimes Bondol the King's Archer) in the morning
to Challius, to desire him from him, that he would have the horses in
readiness, which he promised him. From all which discoveries it was yet
uncertain who was the Assasine: but when as they both agreed in Challius, it
was given in charge to Gaspar Castraeus Naucaeus, Captain of the King's Guard,
that he should seize him, and bring him forth to examination. Then Letters are
written to the Governors of the Provinces by the King, in which he detested the
fact, and commanded that they should make it their business that all might
understand that it did highly grieve him, and that ere long there should be
given a most severe example of so great a crime.

In the mean while d'Anville, Cossaeus and Villarius Marshals, visiting Coligny
about noon, saluted him in most friendly manner, and told him that that they
did not come thither to exhort him to patience and fortitude: For that, say
they, these virtues are as it were natural to thee; thou have been wont to
admonish others, and therefore wilt not be wanting to thy self. He answering
with a smiling countenance, said, I speak truly, and from my heart, death does
nothing affright me. I am ready most willingly to render to God that spirit
which I have received from him, whenever he shall require it. But I do
greatly desire an opportunity to confer with the King before I depart this
life; for I have some things to acquaint him with, which concern both him, and
the safety and honor of the Kingdom, which I am well assured none of you dares
carry to him. Then d'Anville told him he would willingly acquaint the King with
that (his desire); and having so said, he with Villarius and Teligny daparted,
leaving Cossaeus there, to whom Coligny said, Do you remember what I said to
you a few hours since? be wise, and take heed to your self. What he meant by
these words was not understood by all.

12. But when the King knew by d'Anville and Teligny his desire, he in show
seemed not unwilling to come to him about the afternoon. There came together
with him the Queen Mother, with the Brethren, Anjou and Alanson, Cardinal
Borbon, Monpensser, Nevers, Cossaeus and Tavanius, Villarius, Meruvius,
Thoreus, Momorancies Brethren, Marshals, Naucaeus and Radesianus. These being
let in, the rest are by the King's command shut out, except Teligny and a
Gentleman of the Family, who stood at the Chamber Door; here it is published in
writing, that some secrets were discovered to the King by Coligny, but others
deny it, and say that the discovery of this secret was purposely hindered by
the Queen, left the King, whose nature she began to distrust, being mollified,
and persuaded by the word of Coligny, should change his resolution. That which
was openly heard was this, when Coligny gave the King thanks, the King with a
sad and troubled countenance did earnestly enquire of his state, and did
protest, that what had happened to him was a very great grief to him. The wound
is thine, said he, but the pain is mine. But I swear (then according to his
manner he swore) I will so severely revenge this injury, that the memory of it
shall never be blotted out of the minds of men. To this Coligny answered, God
is my witness, before whose tribunal I now seem (ready) to stand, that I have
been all my life long most loyal and faithful to your Majesty, and I always,
and with all my heart, desired that your Kingdom might be most flourishing and
peaceable. And yet I am not ignorant that there have been some who have called
me Traitor, and Rebel, and a perturber of our Kingdom; but I trust, God will
some time or other judge between me and them, before whom I am ready, if it be
his pleasure that I should at this time depart out of this life, to give an
account of my faith and observance toward you. Moreover, whereas I have been
advanced by Henry your Father to many and great honors which your Majesty has
been pleased to confirm to me; I cannot but according to that faith and love
that I have for your affairs, desire that you would not let slip so notable an
opportunity of an happy enterprise, especially now that the breach is already
made, and there are many tokens and pledges of your mind, as to the Belgic
Expedition; so as if the matter now begun be relinquished, it will be very
dangerous to your Kingdom. Is it not a most unworthy thing that an egg cannot
be moved in your Privy Council, but presently almost before it be turned, a
messenger runs and reports it to the Duke of Alva? Is it not a most base
thing that 300 either Gentlemen or gallant soldiers taken in Jenlis his fight,
should by the command of Alva either be hanged, or undergo some other kind of
punishment? which thing I do yet perceive to be here in the Court a matter of
jesting and laughing. A third thing which I did desire to discourse with your
Majesty about, is the contempt of the Pacificatory Edict offered by those that
are in place of Jurisdiction, who do in most grievous manner daily violate the
faith that was given by you; of which faith and oath even foreign Princes are
witnesses. But as I have often told your Majesty and the Queen Mother, I do not
think there is any surer way of preserving peace and public tranquillity, than
by a religious and severe observance of the Edicts. But they are so contemned,
that of late at Troyes there was an assault made upon the servants of the wife
of the Prince of Conde: and when as she, according to the form of your Edict,
had chosen a certain Village called Insula, in which our Religion should be
exercised, yet notwithstanding, of late, a certain man, and a nurse, and an
infant, that was brought to the holy font, were slain upon the way whiles they
were returning from a Sermon that was made in that place. August 10th.
And this happened a little before the 4th. Eid, 6 til.

To this the King answered. I esteem thee, my Father, as I have often assured
thee for a valiant and faithful person, and one that is most careful for my
honor. Lastly, I look upon thee as one of the chiefest and most valiant
Commanders of my Kingdom; nor if I had any other opinion of thee, would I have
done what I have for thee. As for the Edict which I lately issued out, I have
always wished, and do wish that it may be most diligently observed. And to that
purpose I have taken care that some choice persons should be sent through the
Provinces, that may make this their business; whom if thou do suspect,
others shall be sent in their places; (for in discourse he had said he did
suspect them who had condemned him to death, and hanging, and set a price of
fifty thousand Aurei upon his head). Then, that he might break off this
discourse, he added, I see, my Father, that you speak earnestly, and that
earnestness may hurt both you and your wounds. I will take care of this affair,
(and again, swearing by the name of God), I do assure you that I will most
severely revenge this injury upon the Authors of it, as if it were offered to
my self. Then he, there is not need of any great search for the Author of the
fact, nor are the discoveries already made very doubtful. But it is enough, and
upon that account, in the most humble manner that I can, I give your Majesty
thanks that you are pleased graciously to promise me to do me right.

Then the King taking aside that Gentleman of the household that stood at the
door, commanded him to show him the bullet wherewith Coligny was wounded, and
which was taken out of the wound, that he might look upon it. It was a brazen
one: then he enquired of him, first, whether much blood flowed out of the
wound; next, whether Coligny did signify the grievous pains he felt by
outcries and complaints. And having commended his constancy, and the greatness
of his mind, he commanded that Gentleman that he should not depart from him.

These things passed for about the space of an hour in the Chamber of Coligny:
the King drawing out the time with wandering discourses, and that he might put
off the business of the Belgic War, to the mention of which, it is observed
that he made no answer. Among these discourses Radesianus spoke to a friend of
Coligny's concerning the removing him into the Castle of the Louvre for his
greater security, if the people should tumultuate; which thing the King himself
did sometime repeat, which almost all did interpret as an argument of the
King's care of the health of Coligny. But when the Physicians, and chiefly
Francis Mazilles the King's chief Physician, answered there was danger, if his
body should be shaken in the carrying whiles his wounds were fresh, he would by
no means be removed.

13. After the King departed, the Nobles of the Protestant party take counsel
together, and John of Ferriers Vidame of Chartres, in the presence of Navar and
Conde, conjecturing what was indeed the matter, said that the Tragedy was begun
by the wound of Coligny, but would end in the blood of them all. Therefore he
thought it most safe, that without delay they should depart the City: he
produced testimonies and tokens for his opinion from the rumors that were
spread abroad; for it was heard by many, when upon the day of Marriage the
Protestants went out of the Church that they might not engage in worship; the
Papists said, by way of mirth, that within a few days they should hear Mass.
Also it was openly spoken in discourse by the chief of the City, that at that
Marriage should be poured out more blood than wine. That one of the Protestant
Nobles was advised by the president of the Senate, that he should with all his
family betake himself for some days into the Country. Besides these things, the
counsel of Johannes Monlucius Bishop of Valence (when he was going Ambassador
into Poland) given to Roch-fou-cault, that he would not suffer himself to be
intoxicated, and turned about by the smoke and unwonted favor of the Court,
which deservedly ought to be suspected by all wise and cautious persons, that
he would not be too secure to run himself into danger, and that he would timely
withdraw himself, together with other Nobles, from the Court. But Teligny being
of another mind, and saying that he was abundantly satisfied of the sincere
love and good will of the King, Ferrerius, and those that thought as he he did,
could not be heard.

The next day the Page was again examined, and new witnesses produced. In this
examination Arnold Cavagnes was engaged, for so Coligny did desire, and all
things were done in show, as if there had been a diligent enquiry into the
business.

The next day, when as Coligny, and by his command Cornaton in the name of his
fellows (who, he said, knew for certain that the Parisians, that is LXM deadly
enemies of Coligny would tumultuate, and take Arms), desired of the King and
his Brother Anjou, a guard of some Soldiers to be set to protect the house of
Coligny, that if the people should make any disturbance, they might be
restrained by fear of the King's guards, they both of them answered kindly and
freely, and it was given in command to Cossenius Colonel of the Regiment of the
Guards, that with some choice Bands he should keep watch before the doors of
Coligny. To these were joined, to avoid suspicion, some, but few in number, of
the Switzers of the guards of Navar. Moreover, for the greater security, it was
ordered by the King, that the Gentlemen of the Protestants who were in the
City, should lodge near Coligny's house, and it was given in command to
Quarter Masters forthwith to assign lodgings: and the King gave command with a
loud voice, that all might hear it, to one of the Colonels, that no Catholic
should be suffered to come thither, nor should they spare the life of any that
should do otherwise. Upon this occasion the Corporals went from place to place,
and wrote down the names of Protestants, and advised them to repair near to
Coligny; for that the King would have it so.

These and such like signs and whisperings abroad, though they had been enough
to have warned the Protestants, if they had not been infatuated; yet by the
constant dissimulation of the King it came to pass, that Coligny and Teligny
could not persuade themselves that any such cruelty was in his mind. Therefore
when the Nobles entered into consultation in the Chamber of Cornaton, in the
house of Coligny, upon the same matter, and the Visdame of Chartres persevered
in the same opinion, that they should depart the City as soon as might be, and
prevent that imminent danger, though with some disadvantage to Coligny's
health, who yet was that day somewhat better. Teligny was of opinion, and Navar
and Conde agreed with him that they should stay in the City, otherwise they
should offer a great affront to the King, that was so well affected toward
them.

14. There was a suspicion lest this should be carried to the King by one that
was then present, that was Buchavanius Bajancurius, one very familiar with the
Queen, who presently hasted to the Tuilleries, where a Counsel was held by the
Conspirators under a color of walking; there was the last time that they
consulted of the manner of executing the design. There were present besides,
the King, Queen, and Anjou, the Dukes of Nevers and Angolesme, the Bastard,
Biragus, Tavannes and Radesianus. And since by the death of one man whom the
Physicians did affirm was like to recover of his wound, the grievance of the
Kingdom, which was nourished by him, and diffused into many, could not be
extinguished, it seemed good that it should be suppressed by the ruin of all;
and that wrath which God would not have to be satisfied with the blood of
Coligny alone, should be poured out upon all the Sectaries. That was their
voluntary resolution at first, and now by the event, necessity and force is put
upon their counsels; that the danger that hangs over the King and the whole
Kingdom, cannot be avoided without the ruin of Coligny and all the
Protestants. For what would not he do so long as the faction of the Rebels
remains entire after such an injury? who, when he was no way provoked, was so
long injurious to the King, and hurtful to the Kingdom? whom now all might
foresee, and dread, going out of Paris with his party, as a Lion out of his
den, raging against all without respect. Therefore the reins are to be let
loose to the people, who are of themselves ready enough, nor ought they any
longer to withstand the will of God, which would not that more mild Counsels
should take effect. After the thing is effected, there will not want reasons
whereby it may be excused, the fault being laid upon the Guisians, which they
would gladly take upon them.

Therefore all agreed upon the utter ruin of the Protestants by a total
slaughter. To which opinion the Queen was even by her own nature and proper
design inclined; some time was spent in deliberating The Duke of Guise was
urgent to have the King of Navar and the Prince of Conde slain with the rest.
Dav. p. 370. It was also debated whether among the rest they should comprehend
the Marshal d'Anville, and his Brothers, who professed the Catholic Religion,
but were nearly related to Coligny; but they were spared, because the eldest
Brother Marshal Momorancy was absent. Da. p. 370.
whether Navar and Conde should be exempt from the number of the rest; and as
for Navar, all their suffrages agreed upon the account of his Royal Dignity,
and the Affinity that he had lately contracted. For that fact which of it self
could not but be blamed by many, would be so much the more blamed, if a great
Prince near of Blood to the King, joined in a very late affinity, should be
slain in the King's Palace, in the arms as it were of the King his
Brother-in-law, and in the embraces of his Wife. For there would be no
sufficient excuse, nor would those arguments prevail to excuse the King, which
might cast the blame upon the Guisians. Concerning Conde there was a greater
debate, he lying under the load of his Fathers faults: yet both the dignity of
the man, and the authority of Ludovicus Gonzaga Duke of Nevers, affirming that
he would be loyal and obedient to the King, and also offering himself as a
surety for him, upon the account of that close and manifold relation that was
between them; (for Conde had lately married Mary of Cleve the Sister of Henrica
Wife of the Duke of Nevers), did prevail that he should be spared, and exempt
from the number of those that were designed for the slaughter, as well as Navar.

15. Upon this the Duke of Anjou and Engolesme the Bastard departing, as they
rode in their Coach through the City, they spread abroad a rumor as if the King
had sent for Momorancy, and was about to bring him into the City with a select
number of horse.

The very same hour there was one apprehended who was suspected of the hurt of
Coligny, who confessed himself to be a servant of the Guises; which, when it
was understood, Guise and Aumale, and others of the Family went to the King to
remove that suspicion; and complain that they were oppressed through the favor
that was showed to their enemies: that the ears of Judges were open to
calumnies cast upon them, and that tho they were guiltless, yet they were
manifestly set against: that they had a long time observed that they were, for
what cause they knew not, every day less gracious with the King: but yet that
they did dissemble it, and hoped that time, which is the best Master of truth,
would at last inform him more certainly of the whole matter. But since they
find no place for their innocence, they did, though unwillingly, and as forced
to it, desire that with his good leave they might return home. This was done
openly, and it was observed that the King answered to these things somewhat
coldly, and the rather, that he might persuade the Protestants that he bare no
good will to the Guisians.

Upon this the King advises Navar that he should afford no occasion of
mischief to the audacity and violentness of the Guisians, things being so
enflamed, and the people enclining to the Guisian party. That he should command
those whom he knew most faithful of his servants to come into the Louvre, to be
ready upon any sudden accident; which Navar did, interpreting it in good part,
calling those which were most active to lodge with him that night in the Louvre
Castle.

Wise men also did presage some future commotions, when they observed armed men
to run up and down about the City and the Louvre, the people to mutter,
threatenings to be every where heard. This being brought to Coligny, he who no
way doubted of the good will of the King, but thought it to be the devise of
the Guisians to inflame the people, sends one to the King, who should in his
name acquaint him with it. To whom the King answered, that Coligny need fear
nothing: for those things were done by his command, to compose the tumults of
the people that were stirred up by the Guisians. Therefore, that his mind might
be secure,

It was also told Teligny the very same hour, that Porters laden with Arms were
seen to be brought into the Louvre: but he contemned the message, and answered,
that unnecessary suspicions were sought for in this sad and dismal time, and
forbad that this should be made known to Coligny, affecting the unseasonable
reputation of prudence and moderation, from his despising of reports, and
consequently of dangers: and excusing the matter, as if those Arms were carried
into the Louvre upon the account of a Castle represented and assaulted in a
show.

16. Forthwith Guise, to whom the chief command of the execution of the whole
matter was committed, calling together in the deep of night some Captains of
the Switzers, and the Captains of the French Troops, explains to them the Kings
will and pleasure. That the time was come wherein, by the King's command,
punishment should be taken upon that head that was so hateful both to God and
men, and also upon the whole faction of the Rebels: that the beast was now in
their toils: that they should take care that he escape not: that they should
not be wanting to such an opportune occasion, of obtaining a more glorious
triumph than they ever yet obtained in all their former Wars, with the blood of
so many Royallists: that the Victory was easy: that rich spoils are proposed,
which they might acquire without blood, as rewards of their good service.

Upon this the Switzers are placed about the Louvre, to whom are joined the
French Troops, and command was given that they should look to it, that no man
of the Family of Navar or Conde should go out of the Louvre. The keeping of
Coligny's house was committed to Cossenius, to whom was given a party of
Musquetteers to lie in the neighboring houses, that none might escape them.

Matters being so disposed as to the foreign Soldiers, the Duke of Guise calls
to him, John Charron, President of the Court of Revenues, (who, after a long
canvasing, and often repulses, was at last put into that Office in the place of
Marcellus Provost of the Merchants), and commands him that he should give
notice to the Corporals to command their Soldiers to their Arms, but that they
should remain at the Town Hall till midnight, there to understand what was
needful to be done.

The same thing was given in command to Marcellus, who though he was discharged
of his office, yet for some private good offices that he had done, was retained
in the Queens favor, and kept his authority, though he lost his dignity. He by
often going to the Court, brought himself into an opinion with men, that he was
in favor with the King and Queen; and upon that account was acceptable to the
people, and from his mouth the people, that were of themselves apt enough to
stirs, were certified, That it was the King's pleasure that they should take
Arms to cut off Coligny and the other Rebels; that therefore they should see to
it that none were spared, nor that those wicked men should be any where
concealed. So the King will have it, so he commands, who also will provide that
other Cities of the Kingdom do presently follow the example of the Parisians.
The sign at which they should rise, is the tolling of the bell of the
Palace-clock. The Mark whereby they should be distinguished from others, is
white linen-cloath bound about their left arm, and a white cross in their hats.
That good store of them should therefore be ready with arms and good courage,
and take care that candles be lighted in their windows throughout all their
houses: that no stir or tumult arise before the sign given.

The commands and admonitions of Marcellus are readily received by the
Corporals, Colonels, Captains and Wardsmen of the City, who put themselves into
a posture with the greatest silence that the sudden state of things would
permit; setting their Guards in the streets and passages, but at first within
doors. On the other part, the Duke of Guise and Angolesme did what they could
that things might be done as they were ordered.

The Queen fearing lest the King, whom she thought she did observe still
wavering and staggering at the horridness of the enterprise, should change his
mind, comes into his Bed chamber at midnight, whither presently Anjou, Nevers,
Biragus, Tavannes, Radesianus, and after them Guise came by agreement. There
they immind the King, besitating, and after a long discourse had to and fro,
upbraided by his Mother, that by his delaying he would let slip a fair occasion
offered him by God, of subduing his enemies. By which speech He died in less
than two years after of a Bloudy-flux, proceeding, as was suspected, from
poison given him by the procurement of his Mother and Brother Anjou. v. l. 57.
the King finding himself accused of Cowardice, and being of himself of a
fierce nature, and accustomed to bloodshed, was inflamed, and gave command to
put the thing in execution. Therefore the Queen laying hold of his present
heat, lest by delaying it should slack, commands that the sign which was to
have been given at break of day should be hastened, and that the Bell of the
nearer Church of St. German Auxerrois should be tolled.

17. The Soldiers had for some time stood ready in their Arms drawn up in the
streets, expecting the sign with greedy ears and desires: by whose clattering
and unusual noise at so unseasonable a time, the Protestants who lodged by the
King's command in the neighboring lodgings, being awakened, went forth, and
repaired toward the Louvre, where the concourse was, and enquiring of those
they met what was the meaning of that concourse of so many armed men, and why
so many candles were lighted, they, as they were instructed (beforehand)
answered, that there was a certain mock-fight preparing, and that many from all
parts did flock together to the sight. But when notwithstanding they went on
further, they are injuriously repelled by the Guards that stood near the
Castle, then railed upon, and reviled; lastly, they were beaten; the first blow
being given by a Gascoign, and one of them having received a blow, the rest
fell upon them.

Which the She lived to procure the extirpation of all her Posterity, and to
see the death of all her sons but Anjou, who survived her but few months, being
after a furious rebellion against him by Guise and this faction, murdered by a
Friar. August 24th.
Queen understanding, being impatient of all delay, she thence took occasion to
tell the King that the Soldiers could not now be restrained, that he should
command the sign from the Palace presently to be given; for it was to be
feared, that if it were delayed any longer, all would be in a confusion, and
things would fall out otherwise than he desired. Therefore by his command the
Bell of St. Germans Church is tolled before break of day ix Kal. VII br. which
day is the Feast of St. Bartholomew, and fell upon a Sunday. And presently
Guise with Engolesme and He was slain in March following, before Rochel. l 55.
Aumale go to Coligny's house, where Cosserius kept Guard.

Mean time Coligny being awakened, he understood by the noise that they were
risen into sedition, yet being secure, and even sure of the good will of the
King, whether through his own credulity, or through the persuasion of his
Son-in-law Teligny, he thus thought with himself; that the people were stirred
up by the Guisians, but as soon as they should see the King's Guards under the
command of Cossenius for the defense of him and his, as he supposed, they would
immediately fall off.

But the tumult growing on, when he perceived a Gun discharged in the
Courtyard of the house, then at last, but too late, conjecturing what the
thing indeed was, he rose from his bed, and putting on his nightgown, he
raised himself upon his feet to his Prayers, leaning against the wall. La Bonne
kept the keys of the house, who being commanded by Cossenius, in the King's
Name, to open the Gate, he suspecting nothing, immediately opened it;
strait-way He was slain 18 Apr. following, before Rochel, l. 56.
Cossenius going in, la Bonne meeting him, is stabbed with daggers; which, when
the Switzers who were in the Courtyard saw, they fly into the house, and
shutting after them the next gate of the house, they barracado it up with
Chests, and Tables, and other household stuff, one only of the Switzers being
slain in that first conflict by the Cossenians, by a Musket discharged. At
last the Gate being forced open, the Conspirators strive to get up the stairs.
They were Cossenius, Abinius, Corboran, Cardillac, and Sarlaboun, chief
officers of the Companies, Achilles, Petruccius of Siena, all clad in Coats of
Male, and Besmes a German, educated from a child in the Family of Guise; for
Guise himself, with the rest of the Nobles and others, remained in the
Courtyard. In that noise, after Prayers ended by Merlin, the Minister Coligny,
turning to those who stood about him, who were for the most part Surgeons,
and a few of his retinue. I see, says he, (with an undaunted countenance),
what is doing; I am prepared patiently to undergo that death which I never
feared, and which I have now long since embraced in my mind. Happy am I who
shall perceive my self to die, and who shall die in God, by whose Grace I am
raised to the hope of eternal life. Now I need not humane helps any longer.
You, my friends, get ye hence with all the speed that may be, lest you be
involved in my calamity, and your Wives hereafter wish evil to me being dead,
as though I were the cause of your deaths. The presence of God, unto whose
goodness I commend this soul which shall shortly fly from my body, is
abundantly sufficient. Which as soon as he had said, they go into an upper
room, and thence through the roof every one his way.

Mean while the Conspirators, breaking open the Chamberdores, rush in; and when
as He was killed about two years after, l. 60.
Besmes, with his sword drawn, asked of Coligny who stood by the door, Art thou
Coligny? He, with an undisturbed countenance, answered, I am he: but, young
man, reverence my gray hairs; whatsoever thou do, thou can not make my
life (much) shorter. Whiles he said so, Besmes thrust his sword into his
breast, and drawing it forth, struck him with a back-blow over the face,
whereby he quite disfigured him: then with repeated blows he fell down dead.
Some write that these words, showing his indignation, fell from Coligny as he
was dying. If at least I had died by the hand of a man, not of a scullion. But
Atinius, one of the Assasines, repeated it so as I have written, and adds, that
he never saw man in so present a danger bear death with such constancy.

[Much otherwise did Guise bear the sense of his less apparent approaching
death. For when after his conspiracy and rebellion in the H League against the
next King, he was with such like arts as had been here used, brought into the
snare which the King had laid for him, and having before neglected the warnings
of his friends, at last began to be suspicious of his danger though nothing
visible appeared, his vehement fear so prevailed over his dissimulation,
whereby be endeavored to conceal it, that his whole body, though he sat by
the fire, shaked and trembled, and, to immind him of this present fact, a
stream of blood flowing plentifully from his nostrils; as he called for a
napkin, he was fain to call for some Cordials to comfort his spirits: but yet
nothing of danger visible, when in the midst of this his fear and languishing,
he was by one of the Secretaries, who knew nothing of the design, called into
the Kings Privy Chamber, whereupon, having saluted each of the company, as if
he took his last farewell of them, going directly thither, he was no sooner
entered, but the door was boulted, and one of those who were appointed for the
business, struck a dagger through his throat downward into his breast, whereby
his mouth was presently filled with blood, and stopped, that he could not
speak, but only fetch so deep a groan as was heard with horror by those who
stood by. This stroke was seconded by many others upon his head, breast, belly
and groyn. And to this end he came, not as Colinius from his Prayers, but,
after all his other wickedness from his whore, with whom he had indulged the
night, and therefore came later than the rest this morning into the Counsel.
Thu. l. 93. It was their different lives and actions which made this difference
in their deaths; for otherwise Guise was a man of great courage as well as
Colinius.]

Then Guise asking Besmes out of the Courtyard, whether the thing were done?
when he answered, it was done, he could not persuade Angolesme unless he saw
it. Therefore Guise replying, and bidding him throw down the body, it was
thrown out of the window into the Courtyard, as it was all besmeared with
blood; when He was after^ards stabbed ^o death. l. 85.
Angolesme not believing his own eyes, wiped off the blood from his face with
his handkerchief, and at last perceiving it was he, and as some add, kicking
the corpse in scorn, going out of the house with his fellows into the way, Go
to, fellow Soldiers, says he, let us prosecute what we have so happily begun;
for so the King commands: which words being often repeated, when forthwith
the Bell of the Palace clock rang out; they every where cried, Arm, arm, and
the people presently ran to Coligny's house; then the carcass after it had been
abused in a strange manner, is cast into the next Stable, and at last cutting
off his head, (which was sent as far as Rome), and his privy-members, and his
hands, and his feet, they dragged it about the streets to the bank of Siene;
which thing he had formerly presaged by an ominous word, though he thought no
such thing. When he was about to be thrown into the River by the boys, from
thence he was drawn to the Gibbet of Mount Faucon, where, with his legs upward,
and his body downward, he is hanged in iron-chains: then a fire is made under
him, by which he is only scorched, not consumed; that he might as it were be
tormented through all the Elements, slain upon the earth, drowned in the water,
burnt in the fire, and hanged in the air. There when (his corpse) had been
exposed for some days to the lust and rage of all spectators, and to the just
indignation of many, who did boad that that rage would hereafter cost the King
and all France dearly, Francis Momorancy, who had timely withdrawn himself from
the danger, being near of kin, and nearer by friendship to the dead, took care
that he should by some trusty men be taken down by might, and committed to the
earth in a Chapel at Chantilly.

In Coligny's house were slain in the tumult whosoever they met, or found
hiding themselves; and then the Soldiers betake themselves to plunder, and
breaking open Chests, they take away money, and other precious things, only they
preserve letters and papers, for so the Queen commanded.

18. Thence Nevers, and Tavannes, and Monpenser, (who joined himself to them,
through the hatred that he bore to Protestants) ride armed through the City,
and spurred on the people that ran already, telling them, That Coligny and his
Associates had laid a plot against the King, the Queen, the King's Brethren and
Navar himself, and that it was detected by the singular Grace of God, and that
the King prevented them only in time: therefore, that they should not spare the
blood of those wicked men, who are the capital enemies of the King and Country,
but that they should fly upon their goods as spoil lawfully gotten; that it was
the King's pleasure, that that pestiferous serpentine seed should be
extirpated, that the poison of heresy being extinguished, there should for the
future not so much as a word be spoken of any Religion but that of their
Forefathers.

Then all being let loose to satisfy their hatreds, every one prosecuted his
enemy and rival with embittered minds. Many brake into houses through desire of
prey; all ran upon the slaughter without distinction. At the same time Francis
Count de la Roche fou cault, being for his facetiousness and pleasantness in
discourse very gracious with the King, when as but the day before he had,
though unseasonably, drawn out the night till late in jesting with the King,
and from thence betook himself to his own house, he underwent the same fate
with Coligny. For Bargius Avernus knocks at Roche-fou-cault's house, and
telling him he had something to acquaint him with from the King;
Roche-fou-cault himself commanding the doors to be unlocked, he is admitted in;
when he saw men, as he thought, in disguises, supposing the King was not far
off, who had sent men in jest to beat him, he beggeth them that they would deal
better with him: but miserable man, he found that the thing was not to be acted
in jest, but in earnest; when his house being plundered before his eyes, he
himself half naked, was most cruelly butchered by one that stood by him.

Also Teligny the son-in-law of Coligny having, by running over the tops of
houses, escaped the hands of many, and at last being espied by the Guards of
Anjou, he is also slain.

Antonius Claromonlius Marquess of Revel, Brother, by the Mother, to Prince
Porcian, who had a contest with Ludovieus Claromonlius Bussius of Ambois,
concerning the Marquesat of Revel, came to Paris in the company of Navar,
hoping there to put an end to his troublesome controversy. But the matter had a
quite other end than he expected: for when in that tumult he fled into the
house that was next to his, at length he fell into the hands of his
Cousin-German, pursuing him, who being his enemy upon no other account but the
matter in controversy, cruelly slew him. But not long after the controversy
being brought to an hearing, sentence was given for Bussius, but with no more
happy success: for by virtue of an Edict afterward made in favor of the
Protestants, the sentence was repealed, and Ludovicus himself was for a far
different cause, with the same cruelty beheaded.

Antonius Marasinus Guerchius a stout man, who the day before had asked Coligny
that he might lodge in his house, when, being in distress, he had not time to
hide himself, taking his Cloak upon his arm, and drawing his sword, he for a
long time defended himself against the Assasines; yet he slew none of them,
being all in Coats of Male, but at last was overpowred by the multitude.

The same calamity involved Baudineus, (the Brother of Acierius) Pluvialius,
Bernius, being cruelly slain by the King's Soldiers: as also Carolus
Quellevetus Pontius, President of Armorica, who had married Katharina
Parthenaea, daughter and heir of John Subizius: but the Mother of Parthenaea
complaining of the frigidity of her son-in-law, a Suit had been commenced to
dissolve the Marriage, but was not yet determined. Therefore, when the bodies
of the slain were thrown down as they were slain before: the Palace, and in the
sight of the King and Queen, and all the Court retinue, many Court-Ladies not
being affrighted at the horridness of such a spectacle, did with curious eyes
shamefully behold the naked bodies, and especially fixing their eyes on
Pontius, did examine if they could by any means discover the signs of his
frigidity.

Carolus Bellomanerius Lavardinus, the Kinsman of Pontius, and sometime Tutor
to the King of Navar in his childhood, fell into the hands of Petrus Lupus
President of the Court, a good man, who when he would have saved him; and was
commanded by the Emissaries of the Court to dispatch his prisoner; he, as he
was a man of a ready and pleasant wit, asked so much time as till he could
raise his passion; by which speech he for some time eluded their cruelty; but
by and by a Messenger coming from the Palace as from the King, he was forced to
deliver him into the hands of the Guard, who were to carry him before the King;
but they in the way first stabbed Lavardinus with daggers, and then threw him
over the Mill bridge into the River.

The same fortune, and in the same place, ran Claudius Gaudimdus, an excellent
Mositian in our Age: who set the Psalms of David, as they were put into verse
in the Mother Tongue by Clemens Marot, and Theodoret Beza, to diverse pleasant
tunes, as they are now sung in the public and private meetings of the
Protestants.

Briolius a Gentleman who was Tutor to Marquess Conte in his childhood,
venerable for his gray head, being now an old man, was likewise slain in the
embraces of his Pupil, who stretched forth his arms, and opposed his own body
to the blows.

Truly lamentable was the spectacle of Franciscus N^mpar Cammo^dius: who had
lodged in that neighborhood, but which fortune, sporting after her manner,
mingled with an event of unexpected joyfulness: he with his two sons, whom he
loved with a paternal affection, being taken in bed by the murderers, who
prosecuted him with his children, not through an hatred of his Religion, but
through hope of gain, was slain with one of his sons: the other being all
bloody with the blood that flowed upon him, saving himself from their blows, as
he could at that tender age, (for he was hardly twelve years old), by the
interposition of the dead bodies, dissembling himself dead, he was at last left
by them for dead: a little after, more (...) flocking to the house for prey, of
whom some commended the fact, as well done; (for not only wild beasts, but
their whelps are altogether to be destroyed); others that had more humanity,
said, this might be lawful to be done upon the Father as guilty, but the
innocent off spring, which perhaps would never take the same courses, ought to
be spared. Among those that came toward the evening of that day, when as one
did highly detest the fact, and said God would be the avenger of such impiety,
the boy stretching his limbs, and a little lifting up his head, gave signs that
he was alive: and when he asked him who he was, he answered not unadvisedly,
that he was the Son and Brother of the slain, not telling his name; concerning
which, when he was asked again, he answered that he would tell his name, if he
would lead him where he desired: and withal, asked him that he would take care
to conduct him to the King's Armory, for he was near of kin to Biron Master of
the Ordnance or Artillery: nor should he lose his reward for so great a
benefit: which thing he carefully performed. This James Nompar, that is his
name, with great gratitude rewarded the man brought to him by the Divine
Providence, and afterward married the Daughter of Biron, and is now chief of a
Noble Family in Aquitania, Godfry Caumont his Uncle being dead, and leaving
only one Daughter. Being raised by the King to great honors, of which he
carried himself worthy, as Colonel of the King's Lifeguard, and Governor of
Bearne, he seems to be preserved from that danger by the singular Grace of God,
that he might by his numerous off spring which he had by his Wife, propagate
that Family that was reduced to a few, and by his virtue add the highest
ornament to the honors of his Ancestors.

The same day were slain these Protestants of great note, Loverius thrown out
of a window into the highway, Montamarius, Montalbertus, Roboreus, Joachinus,
Vassorius, Cunerius, Rupius, Cobombarius, Velavaurius, Gervasius Barberius,
Francurius, Chancellor to the King of Navar Hieronimus Grolotius Governor of
Aurleance, and Calistus his base Brother, who were both inhumanely dragged
about the streets, and at last cast into the River, by the instigation of those
who gaped after his office and goods.

Stephanus Cevalerius Pruneus, the King's Treasurer in Poictou, a man of great
integrity, and one that was very solicitous for the good of the Commonweal,
who had been the principal mover for the building the Stone Bridge of Vienne,
laid at Eraldi-castrum, was by certain cutthroats sent by Stephanus Fergo
Petauderius, (who sought after his Treasurer-ship), after the payment of a
great sum of money, cruelly murdered, and thrown into the River, and Patanderius
is, by the commendation of Monpenserius, whose affairs he managed, put into his
office.

Also Dionysius Perrotus the Son of Aemilius, Senator of Paris, (a man not less
renowned for his integrity than his knowledge in law), worthy of such a Father,
underwent the same fortune.

19. Nor did they spare those whom Navar (being advised so to do by the King)
had brought into the Palace: for they were by the King's command made to come
down from their Masters chambers into the Courtyard, and being brought out of
the Palace, their swords being taken from them, they were many of them
presently slain at the Gate; others were hurried to the slaughter without the
Palace. Among these were Pardallanius, Sammartinus, Bursius and Armannus,
Claromontius, Pilius, famous for his late valor in defending the Temple of St.
John. He, when he was led out to be butchered, standing before the heaps of the
slain, is said to cry out, Is this the King's faith? Are these his promises? Is
this the peace? But thou, O most great and most good God, behold the cause of
the oppressed, and as a just Judge avenge this perfidy and cruelty: and putting
off his Coat which was very rich, gave it to a certain Gentleman of his
acquaintance that stood by; Take this from me as a remembrance of my unworthy
death: which gift he not accepting under that condition, whiles Pilius said
these things, he was thrust into the side with a spear, of which wound he fell
down and died.

Leiranus now grievously wounded, but escaping out of the hands of the
murderers, rushing into the Queen of of Navars chamber, and hiding himself
under her bed, was preserved; and being carefully commended by Margaret to the
King's Physicians, was healed. Bellonarius formerly Tutor to the King of Navar,
having a long time lien under the Gout, was slain in his bed.

The King received to his grace Grammontanus Lord of Gascoign, Johannes
Durforlius Duralius, Joachimus Roaldus Gamarius, and Buchavarius, having
promised to be faithful to him: and they were worth their word.

Then the King calls Navar and Conde, and tells them, that from his youth, for
many years, the public peace had been disturbed by often renewed wars, to the
great damage of his affairs; but now, at last, by the grace of God, he had
entered into such a course as would extirpate all causes of future wars. That
Coligny, the author of these troubles, was slain by his command, and that the
same punishment was taken, throughout the City, upon those wicked men who were
infected with the poison of superstition: That he remembered what great
mischiefs had befallen him from them, Navar and Conde, who had headed a company
of profligate persons, and seditiously raised war against him. That he had just
reason to revenge these injuries, and now also had an opportunity put into his
hand; but that he would pardon what was past upon the account of their
consanguinity, and the lately contracted affinity, and lastly of their age: and
that he would think that these things were not done by the advice or fault of
them, but of Coligny and his followers, who had already, or should shortly
receive the just deserts of their wickedness: that he was willing that those
things should be buried in oblivion, provided they would make amends for their
former offenses, by their future loyalty and obedience; and renouncing their
profane superstitious Doctrine, would return to the Religion of their
Ancestors, that is, to the Roman Catholic Religion: for he would have only
that Religion professed in his Kingdom which he had received from his
Forefathers. Therefore, that they should look to it that they do comply with
him herein, otherwise they might know that the same punishment which others had
suffered, did hang over their heads.

To this the King of Navar did most humbly beg, that no violence might be
offered to their consciences nor persons, and that then they would remain
faithful to him, and were ready to satisfy him in all things. But Conde added,
that he could not persuade himself that the King, who had engaged himself by
solemn oath to all the Protestant Princes of his Kingdom, would upon any
account violate it, or hearken to their enemies and adversaries in that matter.
As to Religion, that was not to be commanded, that his life and fortunes were
in the King's power to do with them what he pleased; but that he knew he was to
give an account only to God of that Religion that he had received from God.
Therefore that he was fixed and resolved never to recede from his Religion,
which he knew assuredly was true, no, not for any present danger of life. With
which answer the King being highly provoked, he called Conde stubborn,
seditious, Rebel, and the son of a Rebel, and told him, that if he did not
change his mind within three days, his head should pay for his obstinacy.

20. Many of the Protestant Nobles had taken up their lodgings in the Suburbs
of St. German, and could not be persuaded to lie in the City. Among these were
Johannes Roanus Frontenaeus, Godofridus Caumonlius, Vidame of Chartres, Gabriel
Mongomerius, Jo. Lafinius, Bellovarius, Segurius Pardallanius, and others. The
destroying of whom was given in charge to Laurentius Maugironus: and besides
Marcells was ordered to take care that 1000 Soldiers of the City Trained-Bands
should be sent thither to Maugironus, who went but slowly on in his business.

While this was doing, tidings came to Mongomery of the rumor of taking up Arms
in the City, who signified the same to the Vidame of Chartres, and presently
they met all together, uncertain what was to be done; for that many confiding
in the King's faithfulness, persuaded themselves that this was done without the
King's command, by the Guisians, encouraged by the forwardness of the seditious
people, therefore they thought it was best to go to the King, and that he would
succor them against any violence.

In that doubtfulness of mind (though the more prudent did not doubt that these
things were done by agreement, and by the King's command) were many hours
spent, so that they might easily have been destroyed, but that another
impediment happened to the Conspirators; for whiles Maugironus does in vain
expect Parisians to be sent from Guise, who were all busied in plundering,
Guise impatient of further delays, calls forth the King's Guards out of the
Louvre, intending whiles they passed the River to go thither himself. And when
he came to the gates, it did too late appear that they had mistaken the keys,
therefore while they sent for others, it being now broad day, the Switzers and
others of the King's Guards passing the Siene, were seen from the other side:
and upon the discharging of a Gun on the other side of the River, as was
thought by the King's command, the Associates take counsel to fly and before
they came, were gotten a good way off. Guise pursued Mongomery and others to
Montfort, but in vain, and meeting with Sanleodegarius, he commands him that he
should follow them with fresh horses. There were some sent to Udencum, and to
Dreux, who should intercept them if they went that way: but all in vain.

Franciscus Bricomotius, who could not be destroyed in the tumult, flies to the
English Ambassadors lodgings, In Bernardinorum caio.
where he for some days lay hid. Arnoldus Cavagnius also hid himself not far
from hence, with a friend, who fearing the danger, desired him to provide for
himself; but both being taken, were cast into the Palace prison, and with that
event which we shall show anon.

In the mean time Guise, with Aumale and Angolesme, return into the City, where
the King's Guards did commit outrages upon the lives and fortunes of the
Protestant Nobles and Gentlemen, even of those that were their familiars, and
well known to them. This work being assigned to them in particular, whiles the
people incited by the Sheriffs wardsmen and tything-men that ran about, did
furiously rage with all manner of licentiousness and excess against their
fellow-Citizens, and a sad and horrid face of things did every where appear.
For the streets and ways did resound with the noise of those that flocked to
the slaughter and plunder, and the complaints and doleful outcries of dying
men, and those that were nigh to danger were every where heard. The carcasses
of the slain were thrown down from the windows, the Courts and chambers of
houses were full of dead men, their dead bodies rolled in dirt were dragged
through the streets, blood did flow in such abundance through the channels of
the streets, that full streams of blood did run down into the River: the number
of the slain, men, women, even those that were great with child, and children
also, was innumerable.

Annas Terrerius Chapius, being eighty years old, and an Advocate of great name
in the Senate, was slain. Also Jo. Lomerius Secretary to the King, having
compounded for his safety, was thrown into Gaol by Johannes Parisiensis Judge
of Criminals, and having sold Versalium fundum.
his Estate at Versailles to his adversary, with whom he had a Suit depending
about it, at a low rate, and leaving his office upon the account of another,
was afterward slain by the command of those with whom he had those dealings.

Magdalena Brissonetta the Relict of Theobaldus Longiolius (an Irishman,
Master of the Requests) Niece of Cardinal Gulielmus Brissonettus, and besides,
a woman of most rare accomplishments, and of no mean learning, when in old
apparel, taking with her her daughter Francisca, and Johannes Spina a noted
Preacher, who was her household Chaplain, she would have fled out of the City,
being discovered by the cutthroats, and in vain put to renounce her Religion,
being thrust into the body with pike-staves, half dead, she was tumbled from
the Key into the River, where swimming about, a company of boats being drawn
together, as if it had been to destroy a mad dog, with many gentle blows, she
was at length most inhumanely drowned: Spina not being known, escaped in the
throng, and CL. Marcellus coming in, they spared her daughter for her ages sake.

Peter Ramus, who was born at Vermand, when he had for a long time taught good
learning, Philosophy, and at last Mathematics, in Prelaea Schola, of which he
was Master, and afterward in the King's School, he at last brought erroneous
doctrine into his Philosophy, vehemently opposing Aristotle both by word and
writing. When as there were great disputes between him and Jacobus
Carpentarius, Claromontanus, as formerly there had been greater with Antonius
Goveanus, and Joachinus Periomus; yet herein he was worthy of commendation,
that by his wit, diligence, assiduity and wealth, he did what in him lay to
promote. Learning, instituting a Mathematick Lecture, to which he gave out of
his own Estate a yearly stipend of 300 pounds. He being drawn out of his Cell,
wherein he had hid himself, by some murderers sent by Carpentar, his Rival, who
also promoted the sedition, after he had paid (some) money, receiving some
wounds, was thrown out of a window into the yard, whereby his bowels gushed
out; which the boys, set on by the fury of their enraged Masters, threw about
the streets, and whipping his carcass with scourges in reproach to his
profession, dragged it about in a most shameful and cruel manner. Which thing,
when it came to the hearing of Dionysius Lambinus, Monstroliensis, King's
professor of humanity, and of both Languages, and who, by many books that he
had published, deserved well of Learning, and he was otherwise no friend to the
Protestant Doctrine, yet was he so affrighted at the example of Ramus, that he
could not be comforted, and it made so deep an impression upon his mind, that
he fell into a most grievous disease, of which about a month after he died.

From their contentions the name of Politic took its beginning, which
afterward became a note of faction, being given by the seditious, by those
that favored the King's party, and the peace of the Kingdom.

21. This fury did extend it self to those that never professed the Protestant
Doctrine. For Gulielmus Bertrandus, Villemorius Master of Requests, (son of Jo.
Bertrand Vice Chancellor, and afterward Cardinal) a good man, and liberal, and
one that was injurious to none, was spoiled of his money, and then slain by
cutthroats sent by the abovementioned Fergo.

Also Jacobus Poliardus, a Senator of Paris, and Fellow of the Sacred College,
otherwise an unquiet and quarrelsome man, and one that was troublesome to the
Parisian Captains, when he had for some days lien hid in the house of a Priest,
his Friend, being discovered by the prattling of a Girl, was at length delivered
into the hands of the murderers, and by one Cruciarius, (that was his name) a
Goldsmith after he had for some time kept him between hope and fear, had his
head cut off. I have often beheld and heard that man that very well deserved a
Gallows, in a strange kind of cruel madness boast, stretching forth his naked
arm, that with this arm he had in that massacre slain above 400 men. Afterward,
whether induced to it by repentance, or the terror of his conscience, he put on
hair cloth, and being infamous for so many murders, that he might avoid the
fight of men, he went into solitude, professing the life of an Anchoret: where
yet he could not forget his cruel nature: for in these late wars he was
accused, and almost convicted, that by the help of such men as himself, he had
cut the throat of a Flemish Merchant, whose necessity compelled him to repair
to his Cell.

Lastly Petrus Salseda a Spaniard, Vici in Mediomatricibus praefectus.
who stirred up the Cardinals war, of which we have spoken before, though he
was no way inclined to the Protestant Doctrine, was the same day slain by those
who sought to revenge a former injury.

[ One Ronlart a Catholic, and Canon of Nostre Dame, and also a Counselor in
the Parliament, uttering certain speeches in misliking this lawless kind of
proceeding without justice, was apprehended, and committed to prison, and
murdered as disorderly as any of the rest, wherewith diverse of the Catholics
themselves were offended. This manner of proceeding breeds general mistrust
in them of the Nobility, and every man fears God's vengeance. Walsingham,
Let. 16. Sept. 1572. In the Complete Ambassador, p. 246.]

And many of the Nobles escaped with great danger, and especially Thoreus, who
warned Coligny when Cossenius was designed to guard him, that he could not be
committed to a more deadly enemy; and that now it was true that the sheep was
committed to the woolf. But it was believed that upon the account of the
absence of his Brother Momorancy, he and his Brethren Damvilla and Mernvius
were spared. Cossans his life was also in danger, for that he joined with the
Momorancies, and favored not the Guisians.

Bironus in the Armory fearing upon the same account what would become of him,
planting two Culverins against the City, fortified himself till the fury of the
people and the g^^^ deceased.

Among the Protestants that were of any note, there escaped by a rare kindness
of fortune, Joh. Sancomoulius, Sauromarius Cugius Bricomolius Junior, and some
few others, Jacobus Crussolius Acierius, by the commendation of his Brother
Antony Uticensium ducis.
Duke of Uzes, and command of the Queen, with some others of the Nobility, were
preserved by the Guisians to this intent, as it was reported; that they might
cast the odium of the Massacre upon the King and the fury of the people; as
though they had no other design than to revenge their private injuries upon the
head of Coligny, and also that they might by such a benefit hold those whom
they preserved ever obliged to them. Nor did their expectations fail them.

Gulielmus Altamarus Fervacius did endeavor to procure the same favor from
the King for Franciscus Moninius, but all in vain; but he being discovered by
his means, strait-way it was given in command to Marcellus to cut him off by
the cutthroats. That day were slain to the number of two thousand.

Toward the evening Proclamation was made to the multitude by sound of Trumpet,
that every one should betake himself to his own home, nor might any stir
abroad; that only the King's Guards, and the Officers with their Troops of
Horse, should go about the City upon pain of death to them that did not obey:
so that when it was thought that there was an end put to those slaughters and
rapines, the same massacre and liberty of plundering was continued the night
following, and the days following.

22. The same day the King, whether troubled at the horridness, or fearing the
odium of the fact, by Letters directed to the Governors of the Provinces,
casts the odium upon the Guisians, telling them That the sedition was raised
without his privity or consent: that they, as soon as they perceived that the
friends and kindred of Coligny, whom he still called cousin, did intend to
revenge the wound given him, that they might be beforehand with them, stirred
up so great a party of the Nobles and Parisians, that they, by their help, cut
off the Guards that he had assigned to Coligny, and as many of his friends as
they met: and this example was followed with such fury and violence throughout
the City, that such a remedy as might be wished, could not be applied in any
due time. Now at last the sedition that seemed to be allayed, was again upon
old grudges between the two Families, revived; which thing, since it happened
contrary to his will, he would that all should understand that the Edict lately
published, was not thereby in any part violated: but he did command that it
should be religiously observed, and that the Governors should see to it; that
mutual slaughters should not be committed in other Cities, nor that they should
take Arms one against another, but that every one should keep home in the City
and Country, and abstain from violence upon pain of death to those that did
not obey. In the end of the Letter these words were added; Here I am with my
Brother of Navar, and my Cousin Conde, ready to undergo the same fortune with
them. The same day were Letters of the same contents written by the Queen, sent
not only through the Kingdom, but to the Diet or Assembly of Switzers, and
dispersed by the King's command through England, and diverse places in Germany.

23. The next day slaughters and rapines were continued. Petrus Platius
President of the Court of Customs, a man eminent for his gravity, learning and
integrity, (whom one Michael by name, Captain of a Band, had the day before
cheated of a great sum of Gold) by the help of slingers lent to him by Nic.
Bellofremontius Senescaeus, and Carronius Provost of the Merchants, defended
himself from the fury of the people. That Senescaeus was lately by the King put
into the place of Innocentius Triperius Monstrolius, great Provost del'
Hospital: under whom that Office, whose jurisdiction belonged only to some mean
person, of the King's Retinue, after that began to be conferred upon Gentlemen,
as all those things which belong to the Master and Colonels of the Horse. He
first obtained the name of great Provost, those being much offended at it, who,
by how much was added to him in titles did complain that by so much their
jurisdiction was diminished. That so large jurisdiction for some time after the
death of Monstrolius had ceased, which at last the King conferred upon
Senescaeus, for the Nobleness of his Family, and such learning as with us is
rare in a military person. Therefore Senescaeus coming this day from the King
to Placius, told him that though the King resolved utterly to root out the
Protestants by slaying them, that there should not remain one that pisseth
against the wall, yet that for many reasons he would give him his life, and
sent him to conduct him to the Louvre, for that he did desire to learn from him
many things concerning the affairs of the Protestants, which it behoved him to
know. Then Placius desired to excuse himself, and desired that he might stay
till the fury of the people were somewhat allayed; that in the mean time he
might be kept prisoner wheresoever it pleased the King! On the other side
Senescaeus, who had received such command from the Queen, did hasten him, that
he should without delay obey the King's command, and assigned him Pezovius, one
of the privy leaders of the Sedition, for his greater security as he said: by
whom he was delivered into the hands of those that lay in wait, and being
thrown off his Mule upon which he rode, he was stabbed with daggers: his body
was dragged, and thrown into the stable of a public house; and his house lay
three days open to ransacking, his wife being sled, and his children wandering
hither and thither. His office, which in his absence, in the time of war was
managed by Stephanus N^^llius, affections and blood thirsty man, and who was
believed to have hired these cutthroats against the life of Placius, was by
him obtained of the King.

24. Such cruelty raging every where, while the Heavens seemed more than
ordinarily serene, an accident happened whereby the minds of the enraged people
were after a strange manner inflamed. An O^yacantha, which is a kind of shrub
which they call white thorn, growing in the Churchyard of St. Innocents, did,
whether of its own accord, which sometimes happens, when nature sailing, that
plant is come to that, that it is about to dry up; of whether by warm water
poured upon it by imposto^s, did in an unusual time put forth its flower. All
which, the factions flattering themselves in their madness, did refer to God,
signifying by these toke^^, that what they had done was acceptable to him. And
therefore they said, that the Heavens did rejoice to see the Massacre of the
Protestants. And James Carpenter alluding to the Month, in a writing that he
published, called that light Augusto. Therefore the seditious flocking together
at the same of the blossoming thorn, did skip about with great joy: which they
also testified by the unusual beating of a Drum, though without command, (for
even that they might do then) and so interpreted it, as if the Protestants
being rooted out, the Catholic Religion, and the Kingdom of France should
recover its ancient splendour and flower. But the Protestants argued otherwise;
and if this were to be looked upon as a Miracle, they said this was portended
by this sign; that though the Church might seem by this wound to be utterly
extinct, yet it should come to pass that it should in a wonderful and
incomprehensible manner revive and flourish; which also they did confirm by the
example of the wonder showed to Moses in the bush, which, though it burned, yet
was it not consumed. They added, that it might be said rather to belong to the
commendation of innocence, than the approbation of butchery, because the thorn
blossomed in a place which took its name from Innocents.

The same day some drawn out of the King's Life Guard by Gasper Castreus
Nanoaeus, are by the King's command sent to Castillionem ad Lupam.
Chastillon, to take and bring Coligny to wife and children, as also the sons
of Andoletus. But Franciscus the Eldest Son of Coligny, and Vidus Lavallus the
Eldest Son of Andoletus, had already saved themselves by flight. All the rest
are taken, and brought with all their precious household stuff to Paris.

25. It was the King's design, that as soon as the slaughter of Coligny and his
followers had been performed, the Guises should immediately depart the City,
and go every one to his own house, that thereby all might take notice, that
whatsoever had been done at Paris proceeded from their faction. But the Queen
and Anjou especially (who did both of them with an over weaning affection
incline to the party of Guise) did intercede: (seeing) the King was at first
enraged only against Coligny, as not yet forgetting his flight from Meaux, drew
him on, who yet wavered, to the slaughter of all the Protestants in the City;
so that not knowing where he set his foot, they brought him by degrees to this
pass, that he should take the whole blame upon himself, and so ease the
Guisians, who were not able to bear such a burden. And to that end Anjou did,
as it it was laid, produce Letters found in Teligny's desk, written by the hand
of Momorancy, in which, after the wound given to Coligny, he did affirm that he
would revenge this injury upon the Authors of it, who were not unknown with the
same mind as if it had been offered to himself.

Thereupon the Queen and Anjou took occasion to show the King, That if he
persisted in his former dissimulation, things were come to that pass, that he
would endanger the security of the Kingdom, his Fortunes, Riches, and
Reputation. For the Guisians, who do by these Letters, and otherwise,
understand the mind of the Momorancies, being men desirous of troubles, and
seeking grounds of them upon every occasion, will never lay down their Arms
which they have by the King's command taken up, to offer this injury: that they
will still keep them under pretense of defending their safety, which they say
is aimed at by the enemy; and so that which was thought to have been the end of
a most bloody war, will prove to be the beginning of a more dangerous one. For
the remainders of the Protestants, who see their matters distressed, will,
without doubt, gather themselves to the Momorancies, who are of themselves
strong, and thence will take new strength and spirits: which if it should
happen, what a face of the Kingdom will appear, when the name and authority of
the King's Majesty being slighted and trampled upon, every one shall take
liberty to himself, and indulge to private hatred and affections according to
his own lust? Lastly, what will foreign Princes think of the King, who suffers
himself to be overruled by his subjects, who cannot keep his subject in their
duty, and lastly, who knows not how to hold the reins of legal power? Therefore
there is no other way to prevent so great an evil, but for the King to approve
by his public Proclamation, of what was done, as if it had been done by his
command. For by this means he should take the arbitrament and power to himself;
and on the one hand disarm the Guises, and on the other hand keep the
Momorancies from taking up Arms; and lastly should bring it about, that the
Protestant affairs now already very low, should be separated from the cause of
the Momorancies. That the King ought not to fear the odium of the thing: for
there is not so much danger in the horridness of a fact, (the odium whereof may
be somewhat allayed by excuse), as in the confession of weakness and impotency,
which does necessarily bring along with it contempt, which is almost
destructive to Princes.

By these reasons they easily persuaded, an imperious Prince, who less feared
hatred than contempt that he might recall the Guisians to obedience, and retain
the Momorancies in their loyalty, to confirm by public testimony, that
whatsoever had been done, was done by his will and command. Therefore in the
morning, viz. upon the Tuesday, he came into the Senate with his Brethren, the
King of Navar, and a great retinue of Nobles, after they had heard Mass with
great solemnity, and sitting down in the Chair of State, all the orders of the
Court being called together, He complained of the grievous injuries that he had
from a child received from Gaspar Coligny, and wicked men falsely pretending the
name of Religion: but that he had forgiven them by Edicts made for the public
Peace. That Coligny, that he might leave nothing to be added to his wickedness,
had entered into a conspiracy how to take away him, his mother, his brethren,
and the King of Navar himself, though of his own Religion, that he might make
young Conde King* whom he determined afterward to slay likewise, that the
Royal Family being extinct, he usurping the Kingdom, might make himself King.
That he, when it could not otherwise be, did, though full sore against his
will, extinguish one mischief by another, and as in extreme dangers, did use
extreme remedies, that he might extirpate that impure contagion out of the
bowels of the Kingdom. Therefore, that all should take notice, that whatsoever
had been that day done by way of punishment upon those persons, had been done
by his special command.

After he had said these things, Christophorus Thuanus, chief President, in a
speech fitted to the time, commended the King's prudence, who, by dissembling
so many injuries, had timely prevented the wicked conspiracy, and the danger
that was threatened by it, and that that being suppressed, he had now settled
peace in the Kingdom, having well learnt that saying of Lewis XI. He that knows
not how to dissemble, knows not how to reign.

Then the Court was commanded that diligent enquiry should be made concerning
the conspiracy of Coligny and his Associates, and that they should give
sentence according to form of Law, as the heinousness of the fact did require.
Then lastly Vidus Faber Pibraccius, Advocate of the Treasury (or
Attorney General) stood up, and asked the King whether he did will and command
that this declaration should be entered into the acts of the Court, to the
preservation of the memory of it? whether the orders of Judges and Civil
Magistrates, which he had complained were corrupted, should be reformed? And
lastly, whether by his command there should be an end put to the slaughters and
rapines? To these things the King answered, that he did command the first; that
he would take care about the second, and that for the third he did give command
by public proclamation through all the streets of the City, that they should
for the future abstain from all slaughters and rapines. Which declaration of
the King astonished many, and among the rest Thuanus himself, who was a man of
a merciful nature, and altogether averse from blood, and feared that example,
and the danger that was threatened thereby: who also did with great freedom
privately reprove the King, for that, if the conspiracy of Coligny and his
company had been true, he did not rather proceed against them by Law. This is
most certain, he did always detest St. Bartholomews day, using those verses of
S^^tius Papinius in a different case, Excidat illa dies aevo, nec postera
credant
Saecula, nos certe taceamus, and obruta multa
Nocte, regi propriae patiamur crimina Gentis.
So that he seems to have commended the King's art by a speech fitted to the
present time and place, rather than from his heart.

The advising of the King to enquire into this conspiracy, is thought to have
been from James Morvillerius Bishop of Orleans, who had left his Bishopric to
give himself wholly to the Court: a man of a cautious nature, but moderate and
just, and who was never the author of that bloody counsel. But when as that
which was done could not be undone, he thought it was best for the reputation
of the King, and for the public Peace, that since the odium of it could not be
wholly abolished, yet that it might by some means be mitigated, he persuaded
the King and Queen, that to the things being now done, they should, though in a
preposterous manner, apply the authority of Law; and that proof being made of
the conspiracy, judgment should be passed upon the conspirators in form of Law;
which thing Thuanus himself approved, being consulted about it by Morvillerius
upon the King's command.

Two days after a Jubilee is appointed, and Prayers are made by the King, and a
full Court in a great assembly of people, and thanks were returned to God, for
that things had succeeded so happily, and according to their desires. And the
same day an Edict was published, wherein the King declared, that Whatsoever had
happened in this matter was done by his express command; not through hatred of
(their) Religion, or that it should derogate from the Edicts of Pacification,
which he would have to stand still in force, and to be religiously observed,
but that he might prevent the wicked conspiracy of Coligny and his
confederates. Therefore, that he did will and command that all Protestants
should live at home quietly and securely under his protection and patronage,
and did command all his Governors to take diligent care that no violence or
injury should be offered to them, either in their lives, goods or fortunes;
adding a sanction, that whosoever did otherwise, should understand that he did
it under pain of life. To these things a clause was finally added, which the
Protestants did interpret to contradict what he had said before; that, Whereas
upon the account of their meetings, and public Assemblies, great troubles and
grievous offenses had been stirred up, they should for the future abstain from
such meetings, whether public or private, upon what pretense soever, till
further order was taken by the King, upon pain of life and fortunes to those
that disobeyed.

26. These Edicts and Mandates were diversely entertained in the Provinces,
according to the diverse natures and factions of the Governors; for those that
were addicted to the party of the Momorancies, made a moderate use of them, but
great was the rage and fury of others to whom secret commands were brought, not
in writing, but by Emissaries, following the example of the Parisian Massacre.

The beginning was at Meaux, as being nearest, where the same day that the
Massacre had been at Paris, above two hundred were thrown into prison by
Cossetus Advocate of the Treasury, an impudent man, who was chiefly assisted by
Dionysius Rollandus an Apparitor, and Columbus a Mariner. The next day they set
upon the Market that is out of the City, and the men being slipped away, they
fell upon the women, whereof 25 were slain, and some of them violated by the
rude murderers. The day following, after they had every where rifled the houses
of the suspected, they come to those that were imprisoned, who being called out
one by one by Cossetus himself, were there slain as Oxen, by Butchers, in a
Slaughterhouse, and thrown into the Castle-ditch, and the greatest part of them
(the cutthroats being wearied) were drowned in the River Marne. And then
Cossetus exhorts the neighboring places that they should proceed in what had
been so happily begun. But the presence of Momoranty President of I'^sle la
France, who was then at Cantilia, not far from thence, did hinder the seditions
from stirring at Senlis.

But great was the rage at Orleans, which being once or twice taken by the
Protestants, the sad ruins of the demolished Churches lying open to the eyes
of all, did enkindle the minds of the people to revenge their injuries, being
yet fresh: the day following therefore they began upon Campellus Bovillus, one
of the King's Counselors, whom being ignorant of what had happened at Paris,
Curtius a Weaver, the leader of the seditious, with some of his party, went as
it were to visit in the evening; he thinking that they come as friends to sup
with him, entertained them as at a feast; which (entertainment) the murderers
having received, they acquaint him with what was done at Paris, and withal
demand his Purse, which being delivered, they in the midst of their
entertainment stay their Host. From thence as if this had been the sign given,
they flock together for three days to murder and spoil; above 1000 men, women
and children, as it was thought, were slain, part were cast into the river
Loire: those that were slain without the City were thrown into the ditch. Great
was the plunder that was taken in all that time, and especially the copious
Library of Peter Montaureus (a learned man, who died four years since of grief
of mind, at Sancerra) furnished with Books of all sorts, especially with
mathematical Manuscripts, the greatest part of them Greek, and corrected and
illustrated by the labors of Montaureus himself, as also with instruments
useful in that Science, contrived with admirable artifice, was with a most
barbarous outrage taken away.

Also some were slain at Gergolium, the people raging through the neighboring
Cities, Towns and Villages, after the manner of the Inhabitants of Orleance.

The same was done at Angiers, they beginning with Johannes Massonius Riverius,
who was most barbarously slain as he walked in his Garden, by a cutthroat let
in by his Wife, who suspected no such thing: as also others. Barbeus Ensign of
the Prince of Conde's Regiment escaped the danger by flight, as also Renatus
Roboreus Bressaldus, one that was very troublesome to Priests, many of whom he
had unworthily maimed, was after wards executed.

The Townsmen of Troyes, of whom Coligny had a little before complained to the
King, when they heard of the tumult at Paris, presently set guards at the City
gates, that none might slip forth: and having upon 3 Kal. VII bris, August 30th.
cast all the suspected into prison, five days after, by the command Anna
Valdraeus Simphalius, Governor of Troyes, upon the instigation of Petrus
Bellinus (who, as was believed, came lately from Paris with private commands)
they were brought out one by one, and slaughtered by the cutthroats, and
buried in a ditch dug in the very prison: and presently after, the King's
Proclamation, wherein they were commanded to leave of killing and spoiling, was
published by Simphalius, who, as it is said, received it before the slaughter
was committed.

At Vierzon, when as at the yet uncertain report of the news, the Gates of the
City were shut up by the diversity of Letters that were sent in the King's
Name, the Townsmen held their hands for some time from violence, contenting
themselves to have cast the suspected into prison, till at last stirred up by
the example of the men of Orleance, they raged with the same madness against
the imprisoned. Franciscus Hottomannus, and Hugo Donellus, who prosessed Civil
Law in that City, by the help of their Scholars, and especially of the Germans,
escaped the present danger.

Two days after the uproar at Paris, the Regiment of Horse that belonged to
Ludovicus Gonzaga, under pretense of muster, and receiving their pay, seized on
la Charity, a Town lying upon the River Loire, below Nevers, and the people
being stirred up by Letters from Paris, 18 were slain in the Town; Petrus
Mebelinus, and Johannes Lerius, well known by his voyage into America, did
beyond their hopes escape the hands of the murderers, and fled to Sancerra.

27. The greatest Massacre of all was at Lions, for in that: City, as it is
very populous; the Gates being presently shut, many are taken and cast into
prison, by the command of Franciscus Mandelotus, Governor of the Town, under
pretense, as he said, that the King's Guards might protect them from the rage
of the people: but many while they are lead by the seditious, as if it had been
to prison, are slain in the blind lanes of the Town, and presently cast into
the Rivers la Saone and Rhone. The ringleader and chief promoter of this was
one Boidonus, a wicked debauched fellow, who afterward came to his deserved
end, being executed at Claremont in Auvergne. Three days were spent in rifling
houses, and finding out those that were suspected: which being done on Friday 4
Kalends of VII br. August 29th. Conchiliatorum equitum torque donatus.
Duperacus (a Citizen of Lions, but lately advanced to the order of Knighthood:
the honor of this order for many years being decayed, since it began to be
bestowed upon unworthy persons) came from the Queen with instructions and
letters of credence, bringing also letters from Claudius Rubius, and other City
Officers, men of like manners, who managed the affairs of Lions at Paris, and
in the Court; in which (letters) is declared what was done at Paris, and withal
it was added, that the King did will and require that the men of Lions should
follow the example of the Parisians. Mandelotus, a prudent man, though he was
looked upon as inclined to the Guisian faction, abhorred the barbarousness of
the thing, and obtaining of the urgent multitude some days truce, till he had
deliberated upon the matter, and till letters came from the King, which he said
he daily expected; in the mean time he made open Proclamation, that the
Protestants should repair to the Major's house to hear from him what was the
King's pleasure. They poor wretches coming out of their hiding places, as if
they had been received into the King's protection, came to him, and by his
command were committed to several prisons; for the King's prisons upon the
River Rhone were not able to receive such a multitude. Rodanenses Regii.
Upon this, Petrus Antissiodorensis Chamberlain of the City, a man wicked and
infamous for dishonest lusts, rode post, and without letters, as if the dignity
of the man had carried authority enough with him, affirms to Mandelotus, that
this was the Kings and Queens will and pleasure, that the Protestants that were
taken, or could be taken, should be slain, without expecting any further
command. Therefore Mandelotus being overcome by the importunity of the
multitude that stood round about him, to whom Antissiodorensis had told the
secret, yields, and turning to the messenger of so horrid a sentence, I will,
says he, say to thee Peter, what Christ heretofore said to Peter; whatsoever
thou bindest, let it be bound; and whatsoever thou loosest, let it be loosed;
and presently all ran to the slaughter and spoil, Morniellus and Clavius,
wicked men, and ready for any mischief, joined themselves to Boidomus. When
they would have had the help of the Common Hangman in that matter, he refused,
and said that he was ready to obey the sentence of a lawful Magistrate, but he
would not meddle not trouble himself with such promiscuous executions: when the
same thing was commanded, the guards of the Castle, they likewise being much
moved at the motion, answered with disdain, that they were no Hangmen, nor did
such dishonorable employment become Soldiers: those miserable men never
injured them: therefore they hired men from the Shambles, and shameless persons
out of the dregs of the people; [but neither would they do it;] at length all
these detesting the fact, they came to the City Train-Bands, which consisted of
300 Townsmen, who did readily undertake against their own fellow-Citizens, what
hangmen and strangers had resolutely refused. Out of these Bands therefore are
chosen all the veriest rake-hells, and they leading on, they ran violently to
the house of the Franciscans, (this was done upon the following Lord's Day)
where part of the Protestants were kept, and then to the house of the
Celestines, where a great slaughter was made: whiles Mandelotus, with Sallucius
Manta Governor of the Castle, ran with all speed to the tumult raised by the
people in the suburbs next the River Rhone, they make an assault upon the
Archbishop's house, where 300 chief Protestants were, by the Governor's order
kept in prison: and first carefully examining their purses, they most
barbarously slew them, praying unto God, and imploring the faith of men.
Supplices and Dei hominumque fidem implorantes.
A miserable sad fight! while the Sons hanging about the necks of their
Fathers, and Fathers embracing their Sons, Brethren, Friends; exhorting one
another to constancy, they were slain like sheep by merciless Butchers,
Porters, Watermen, among the sad lamentations and horrid cries that did
resound all over the City. Which thing Mandelotus in all haste returning from
Guilloteria, but yet after the thing was done, seemed to be much troubled at,
as if it had been done without his consent or privity, and coming to the place
of the Massacre, taking the King's Officer along with him, that he might
enquire into the matter in a legal way, and proofs being taken by a public
Notary, in a ridiculous dissimulation, he commanded Proclamation to be made,
that those that knew who were the Authors of this outrage, should tell their
names, an hundred Crowns being proposed to the informer and discoverer for his
reward. In the evening the same Butchers went to the public prison, upon
Rhone, and raged against the prisoners with a new sort of cruelty; and
miserably tormented them with halters put about their necks, and dragged them
half dead into the River that was near. The night following is spent in
slaughters and plundering; household stuff is carried out of houses, and wares
out of shops: those that hid themselves are by spies brought out of their
hiding places, and many thrown into the River. Mandelotus being offended at the
horror of the sight of the bodies of the slain lying in the Court of the
Archbishop's house, commanded them to be put into boats, and carried to the
other side of the River, that they might be buried in the Churchyard of the
Monastery of Aisnay, where was formerly the Altar of Lions, and sent men
thither to see them buried. But the Monks said they would never suffer that,
and that those carcasses were unworthy of burial. Therefore, upon a sign given,
there is a concourse made, and they are thrown by the enraged people into the
River; the grosser bodies being given to the Apothecaries, upon their desir,
for their fat, as is reported by those who wrote whiles things were fresh. Nor
did the slaughter stay here, For not long after the (two) Brothers, Darutii,
Merchants of great account, Labessaeus, Galterus, and Floccardus, honorable
Citizens, being brought out of the prison, had their throats cut, and were cast
into the River Rhone. Among these slaughters some escaped by the help of the
guards, and the favor of Manta the Governor, among whom were Jo. Ricaldus, and
Antonius Callia, Pastors of the City, when as Joannes Anglus, chief Pastor, was
slain in the first tumult, it is said that 800 of all kinds and sexes were
barbarously slain: the carcasses of the slain swimming down Rhone to Turnonium,
lay so thick about the banks, that the Townsmen affrighted at the accident,
cried Arm, Arm, as if the enemy had been coming upon them: by and by being
amazed with horror, and detesting the authors of such a villainy, though they
had no favor for the Religion of the Protestants, to remove that sad
spectacle, they set men to thrust the bodies off with poles from the banks,
which the swift stream brought down. So horrid a spectacle they also detested
at Vienne, at Valence, at Burgh, at Viviers, at the Temple of the Spirit, yea,
at Avenion, where there is great hatred of the Protestants. But at Arles, when
through want of wells and springs they drink of the water, of the River; the
Townsmen, besides the detestableness of the villainy, were grievously
distressed; when as they would not use the fishes and water that they could be
supplied with only from Rhone; yea, they abhorred the very sight of the River.

28. But in Dauphine and Provence things were carried after far another manner.
For Claudius Sabaudus Count of Tend, who was very nearly allied to the
Momorancies, when Letters were brought him about the same business by Josephus
Bonifacius Mola, who two years after came to an Being executed, and his
quarters set upon the Citygates.
unhappy end at Paris, ingenuously answered that he did not think that that was
the King's pleasure, but that some that were evilly affected to the public
Peace, did falsely pretend his name, when as not many days since he had received
quite other commands: that therefore he would rather obey the former, as more
worthy of the King's Faith and Clemency. But he not long after being at
Avignon, died of a sudden disease, to the great grief of the people of
Provence, not without suspicion given him by the Emissaries of the seditious.

In Dauphine, Bertrandus Simienus Gordius, educated in the Family of the
Momorancies, receiving the same command, he excused himself, pretending the
great danger he was like to be in from the powerfulness of Mombranius, and
other Protestants in In allobrogibus.
Savoy and Dauphine, yet some were slain at Valence.

Also at Romans there were some slain, though it were late first, Septembr. 22.
viz. 10 Kal. VIII br. where, when many of that great number that was cast into
the prison, for fear of death returned to the Religion of their Ancestors, only
seven were stabbed with daggers by the raging people.

Also Santeranus Governor of Auvergne, who also was well affected to the
Momorancies, used the same moderation, and made the same answer to those that
came posting to him from Court, that the Count of Tend had done before him,
adding to this moreover, that he would never obey such commands, unless the
King in person did command him.

Greater was the fury that did rage at Toulouse: for news of what had been done
at Paris being brought pride. Kal. VII br. August. 31.
which was the Lord's Day, upon which the Protestants went out of the City to
Castanetum to Sermon, straitway the Gates were shut up, and care was taken that
no one should go out, but that whosoever would might come in. But many of those
that had gone out would not return into the City, but went thence to Podium
Laurentii.
le Puy, St. Laurence, Montauban, Regium montem.
Regimont; and some one way, some another. Two days after, by authority of the
Senate, public Proclamation was made, that no violence or molestation should
be offered to the Protestants. The day following, Guards being set at the Gates
of the City, and in the Streets, those that were suspected are some of them
distributed into Monasteries, others are cast into the common prisons; some
days after, upon the coming from Court of Delpechius and Madronius, rich
Merchants, and most bitter enemies to the Protestants, they were all thrown
into the Palace prison, where presently in the night, by certain cutthroats
chosen out of the Students of the Civil Law, that went to the Fencing-School,
(among whom one Turrius was most eminent), together with other men of lewd life
and conversation, 200 were barbarously slain, and among them some Senators, and
in the first place Johannes Corasius: who afterward, to double their cruelty,
were hanged in their Senatorian habits, upon an Elm growing in the Palace-yard:
the bodies of the dead were buried in a ditch made in the Archbishop's house.

At the same time, but with greater slaughter, were things carried at Rouen,
where Tanaquilius Venator Carrugius, the Governor of the chief Nobility of
Provence, a man of a merciful disposition, did what he could to hinder it. But
at last, not being able any longer to withstand the violence of the seditious,
(and especially of those who, the year before, were, by the decree of the
Judges, delegated from Paris, proscribed, who hoped that, by this course, they
should both revenge the injury offered them, and also obliterate the memory of
the Decree), many were thrown into prison, and afterward 15 Kal. of VIII br.
being called out one by one by the voice of the Crier, were cruelly slain by
those Emissaries, September. 17.
Maronimus a most wicked wretch leading them on. Upon this they set upon
private houses, and that day and the day following they sell upon men and
women, without distinction, and 500 of both sexes and all ages were slain, and
their bodies being stripped, were cast into the ditches ad Portam Caletensem,
and their garments all bloody as they were, were distributed among the poor,
they seeking even by these murders to ingratiate themselves with the people.
This the Senate was in show offended at, and began to proceed against the
Authors of this fact: but through connivance it came to nothing, the murderers
and cutthroats for a time slipping out of the City.

This example raged through other Cities, and from Cities to Towns and
Villages; and it is reported by many, that It was Credibly reported that there
were slain above 40000 Hugonots in a few days, says Davila, p. 376.
more than thirty thousand were slain in those tumults throughout the Kingdom,
by several ways; though I believe the number was somewhat less.

[In September, Castres, a City in la Paix Albigeois, which was held by the
Protestants, when after great promises by the King for their safety, it was
delivered into the bands of Creuseta one of the principal of the neighboring
Gentry, it was by him cruelly plundered, and laid waste.

[In the beginning of October happened the Massacre at Bordeaux. The Author and
chief Promoter of it is reported to have been one Enimundus Augerius, of the
Society at Claremont, who also is said to have persuaded Franciscus Baulo, a
very rich Senator of Bordeaux that he should leave his wife; and being
supported by his wealth, he had founded a rich School in that City: He, when as
he did in his Sermons daily inflame his Auditors, that after the example of the
Parisians they should dare to do something worthy of their piety: so specially
upon S. Michael's day, when he treated of the Angels, the ministers of the
grace and vengeance of God, what things had been done at Paris, Orleance, and
other places, he did again and again, by often repeated Speeches, inculcate, to
have been done by the Angel of God; and did both openly and privately upbraid
Romanus Mulus the King's Solicitor, and Carolus Monferrandus Governor of the
City men of his faction, as dull and cold in this business, who contented
themselves to have interdicted the Protestants the liberty of meeting together,
and to have kept the Gates of the City with guards; but otherwise they wholly
abstained from violence and slaughters, being admonished so to do, as is
believed by Stozzius, who had a design upon Rochel, and who did fear, lest that
should hinder his attempts. But when as about that time Monpesatus came to
Blaye, as though the sign for effusion of blood had been given by his coming,
certain men were slain in that Town. But when he arrived at Bordeaux, the
people began to rage, and the seditious to run up and down. Enimundus thundered
in his Preaching more than ever: at last, after some days private discourses of
Monpesarus with Monferrandus, though it be uncertain whether he did discourage
or persuade the thing, when Monpesatus was departed, (who) a little while after
died of a Bloody Flux. V Non. VIII br. which fell upon a Friday, Octobr. 3.
the Magistrates of the City with their Officers, as they were sent, came after
dinner to the house of Monferrandus, bringing with them lewd and impudently
wicked men, who were drawn together by Petrus Lestonacus, and receiving the
word of command from him, they ran through the City to the slaughter, being
distingushed by their red Caps, a sign very agreeable to their bloody design.
They began with Joannes Guill^chiu, and Gul. Sevinus, Senators, who were both
cruelly murdered in their houses, which were presently rifled. Also Bucherus
the Senator, who had redeemed his life of Monferrandus for a great sum of money,
did hardly escape the danger, whose house was also plundered. Then promiscuous
slaughters and rapines are committed for three days together throughout the
City, wherein two hundred sixty four men are said to be slain, and the Massacre
had been much greater, had not the Castle of Buccina and the other Castle of
the City yielded an opportune place of refuge to many. Jacobus Benedictus
Longobastonus President of the Court was in great danger of death, and was
hardly preserved by the help of his friends.]

29. Nor were they in the mean time in quiet at Paris and at Court, where, by
the Queens special command, and the diligence of Morvillerius, Coligny's
Cabinet was examined, if by any means they might find any thing in them which,
being published, might take off the odium of so bloody a fact either in the
Kingdom or with foreign Princes. Among those Commentaries which he did every
day diligently write, which were afterward destroyed by the Queens command,
there was a passage in which he advised the King that he should be sparing in
assigning the hereditary portion, which they call Appennage, to his Brethren,
and in giving them authority, which having read, and acquainting Alanson with
it, whom she had perceived to favor Coligny; This is your beloved cordial
friend, says the Queen, who thus advised the King. To whom Alanson answered,
How much he loved me, I know not; but this advice could proceed from none but
one that was faithful to the King, and careful for his affairs.

Again, there was among his papers found a breviate, wherein, among other
reasons that he gave for the necessity of a War with the Spaniards in the
Low Countries, this was added, as being omitted in the Speech which he made to
the King, lest it should be divulged, and therefore was to be secretly
communicated to the King, that if the King did not accept of the condition that
the Low Countries offered, he should V. Walsingham's Letter 14 September. 1572.
in the Complete Ambassador, p. 241.
not transfer it to his neighbors of England, who, though they were now, as
things stood, friends to the King, if once they set footing in the
Low Countries and the Provinces bordering upon the Kingdom, would resume their
former minds, and being invited by that convenience, of friends would become
the worst enemies to the King and Kingdom. Which being likewise imparted to
Walsingham, Queen Elizabeth's Ambassador, and the Queen telling him, that by
that he might judge how well Coligny was affected toward the Queen his
Mistress, who so much loved him. He made her almost the same answer, and said,
He did not know how he was affected toward the Queen his Mistress; but this he
knew, that that counsel did savor of one that was faithful to the King, and
most studious of the honor of France, and in whose death both the King and all
France had a great loss. So both of them, by almost the same answer, frustrated
her womanish policy, not without shame unto her self.

About the end of the month wherein Coligny was slain, the King fearing lest
the Protestants should grow desperate in other Provinces, writes to the
Governors with most ample commands, Carnii Comes.
and principally to Feliomrus Chabolius President of Burgundy, in which he
commanded that he should go through the Cities and Towns that were under his
jurisdiction, and friendly convene the Protestants, and acquaint them with the
tumult at Paris, and the true causes thereof. That nothing was done in that
affair through hatred of their Religion, or in prejudice to the favor that was
granted them by the last Edict: but that he might prevent the conspiracy made
by Coligny and his confederates against the King, the Queen, the King's
Brethren, the King of Navar, and other Princes and Nobles. That it was the
King's pleasure that his Edicts might be observed, and that the Protestants
every where taking forth Letters of security from the Presidents, should live
quietly and safely under the King's protection, upon pain of death to any that
should injure or molest them in any thing. On the other hand, he should
admonish the Protestants that they should keep themselves quiet at home; and
because in their Meetings and public Assemblies there used to be such Counsels
among the Protestants as were suspicious to Catholics, and which might put
them upon new stirs, therefore, that they should abstain from those meetings,
and expect the same favor and safety from the King's clemency and goodness as
he does exercise toward others. But if they should foolishly neglect this
advice, command and promise of the King, and should presume to meet publicly,
stir up troubles, and take up Arms under color of their own defense, he would
then proceed against them as against Rebels. To the same effect were Letters
sent to Melchior Monpesatus, President of Poictou, Pria President of Toures,
and the Presidents of other Provinces. Chabolius managed his office with great
prudence and moderation, having learnt that the Protestants, who had hitherto
been exasperated by severity and cruelty of punishments, might be better
reduced to their duty by clemency and mildness. And matters were ordered
without almost any bloodshed in Burgundy; many returning either through fear,
or of their own accord, to the Religion of their Ancestors, renouncing the
Protestant Doctrines. Only Claromontius Travius of the prime Nobility, whose
Sister Helena Antonius Grammontanus had married, was, when the news was hot,
slain at Dijon, in the absence of Chabotius, by the people. Those that were
suspected at Mascon, being by the King's command apprehended and cast into
prison by Philibertus, sustained no further damage.

30. So foul a tempest in France being in some sort allayed, and the liberty of
killing and plundering repressed, when the more prudent, that yet no way
favored the Protestant party, did, upon the sad thought of the present state
of things, by little and little, come to themselves, and abhorring the fact,
did curiously enquire into the causes of it, and how it might be excused, they
thus judged, That no example of like cruelty could be found in all Antiquity,
though we turned over the Annals of all Nations. These kinds of outrages had
been confined to certain men, or to one place, and might have been excused by
the sense of injury newly offered, or their rage did only exercise it self upon
those whom it was their interest to remove out of the way. For so by the
command of Mithridates King of Pontus upon one message, and the signification
of one Letter 40000 Romans were slain in one day throughout all Asia. The
Sicilian Vespers.
So Peter King of Arragon commanded 8000 Frenchmen to be slain in Sicily, who
had seized upon it in his absence: But their case was far different from this:
For those Kings exercised their rage upon strangers and foreigners, but this
(King) upon his own subjects, who were not more committed to his power than to
his faith and trust. They were obliged no otherwise by their faith given than
to the strangers themselves, but he was bound in a late league with his
neighboring Kings and Princes, to keep that Peace which he had sworn to. They
used no arts unworthy of royal dignity to deceive them, he for a snare abused
his new engaged friendship, and the sacred Nuptials of his own Sister, whose
wedding garment was even stained with blood. These are the virtues that use to
be commended in Kings, Justice, Gentleness and Clemency; but savageness and
cruelty, as in all others, so especially in Princes use to be condemned. Famous
through all ages was Publius Scipip, who was wont to say he had rather save one
Citizen, than slay a thousand enemies; and Antonius, who was called the Pious,
did often use that saying. Kings indeed have power of life and death over the
Subjects of their Realm, but with this limitation, that they should not proceed
against them till their cause was heard upon a fair trial. This rage and
blindness of mind was sent by God upon the French, as a judgment for the daily
execrations and reproaches of the Deity, from which the King himself, ill
educated by his Mother, and by those Tutors that she appointed him, did not at
all abstain; the example whereof proceeding from the Court to the Cities, and
from the Cities to the Country Towns and Villages, they now at every third
word, swore by the head, death, blood, heart of God. Moreover, the patience of
God was even wearied with their Whoredoms, Adulteries, and such lusts as are
not fit to be spoken. Lastly, nature it self does now expostulate as it were
with God for his so long patience and forbearance, nor could the Country of
France any longer bear such prodigious wickedness. For as for the causes which
are pretended against Coligny, they are feigned with such improbability, that
they can hardly persuade children, much less can they be proved. For how is it
probable that Coligny should enter into such a conspiracy within the walls of
Paris, who though he were guilty before the Pacification, (to suppose that),
yet certainly after the Edict, if indeed the public Faith and the King's
promises ought to be observed, he came to the King guiltless, altogether
abhorring a Civil War, and solicitous only about the Belgic War? But whereas
they say he conspired-after he had received his wounds, this has less color
of truth. For how could Coligny that was indisposed by two such wounds, now
grown old, disabled in both his arms, one of which the Physicians talked of
cutting off, rise with three hundred young men that attended him, against an
Army of sixty thousand men, that bare him deadly hatred, and that were well
appointed with Arms? How could he in so little time consult concerning so great
and vast a design? for he lived hardly forty hours after he had received his
wound, in which all conference was forbidden him by his Physicians. Then, had
he been accused of any crime, was he not committed to Cossenius and his guards,
and the passages being every where secured, was he not in the King's power,
that he might in a moment, if it had so pleased the King, been thrust into
prison? and witnesses being prepared, after the manner of judicial proceedings,
might he not have been proceeded against in form of Law? Moreover, if Coligni
with his Dependents and Clients had conspired against the King, why must needs
the rest that were innocent, so many Noble Matrons and Virgins who came thither
upon the account of the Marriage, so many great-bellied women, so many ancient
persons, so many bedridden persons of both Sexes and all professions, that were
ignorant of these last counsels of Coligni, be comprehended in the same guilt?
To whom does it not seem absurd and most ridiculous that Coligni should at so
unseasonable a time conspire against Navar that professed the same Religion
with him, and whom he had in his power for four years together? Thus many did
discourse, and so they judged, that upon the account of this fact the French
Name would for a long time labor under an odium and infamy, and that posterity
would never forget an act of so great unworthiness.

Typographical Errors to be Corrected as follows, in
THe Hist. of the Massacre: Page 5. l. 1. Burleigh, l. 7. Cosmus, p. 7. l. 4.
compact, p. 8. l. 10. when he, l. 36. Palace near the Louvre, p. 12. l. 1.
receive, p. 13. l. 28. Antonius Marafinus Guerchius (without commas), so p. 14.
l. 2. Rochus Sorbaeus Prunaeus, l. 7. Armanus Claromontius Pilius, l. 8.
Moninius, l. 26. racket, p. 18. l. 7. your Kingdom, p. 21. l. 9. as he did, p.
28. l. 11. Cossenius, l. 36. Atinius, l. 37. Sarlaboux, p. 29. l. 5. Merlin the
Minister, Coligny, p. 32. l. 32. Claromontius Marquess of Renel, p. 34. l. 19.
Caumontius, p. 35. l. 25. Montalbertus Roboreus, Joach. Vassorius Cunerius,
Rupius, Columbarius, Velavaurius, Gervasius Barberius Francurius, p. 36. l. 15.
Armanus Claromontius Pilius, l. 32. Bellovarius, l. 36. Durfortius Duracius, l.
37. Gomacius and Buchavanius, p. 40. l. 36. Perionius, p. 41. l. 13. Languages,
who had private feuds and contentions with Carpentar, and l. 22. to those, l.
30. Roliardus, p. 43. l. 2. Sancomontius Sauromanius, l. 3. Bricomotius, p. 53.
l. 33. Meletinus, p. 57. l. 17. Arles, where, l. 36. suspicion of poison given,
p. 58. l. 2. Momhrunius, p. 62. l. 20. Helionorus Chabotius, p. 63. l. 11.
Chabotius.

THe Hist. of the Powder Plot: Page 8. l. 27. Harrington, p. 14. l. 30. detest,
p. 15. l. 21. for wikes, r. de Vic, p. 16. in marg. So on the, p. 22. l. 27.
dele Book entitled, l. 29. for Provincial, 1. Father General.

A TRUE NARRATION Of that Horrible CONSPIRACY AGAINST King JAMES And the whole
PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND, Commonly called the Gunpowder TREASON: Written in
Latin by Jacobus Augustus Thuanus, Privy-Councillor to the King of France, and
President of the Supreme Senate of that Kingdom.

Faithfully rendered into English.

LONDON, Printed for John Leigh at the Sign of the Blew Bell by Flying-Horse
Court in Fleet Street. 1674.

The History of the Powder Plot, Translated out of Thuanus, lib. 135. MDCV.

NOw shall we in a contiued Relation declare that Horrid, and by all Parties
justly So detestable it seems it was to some of the Students of the English
College at Rome, that being informed of the discovery of the Plot, Sixteen of
them (abhorring such juggling and bloody Designs) forsook the College, slipped
into France, some of them turning to the Church of England, whither they came.
Foulis, Hist. of Popish Treasons, li. 10. c. 2. p. 692.
detested Conspiracy entered into aagainst the King of Great Britain; which
being discovered about the end of this year [1605] was in the next year
suppressed by the Death of the Conspirators.

To the Petition for Liberty of Conscience made by the Papists in the former
Session of Parliament, and rejected by the King, there was a rumor there would
be another preferred at the next Sessions, (which had been now often deferred)
which should be in no danger of being denied as the former, but should carry
with it a necessity of being granted by the King whither he would or not.
Therefore those that managed the Affairs of the Kingdom under a generous and no
ways suspicious King, fearing nothing worse, did make it their business to
avoid such Petitions, and that necessity that did attend them. But among the
Conspirators it was consulted, not, how they might obtain the Kings favor,
which they now despaired of; but how they might revenge that repulse, though
with the ruin of the Kingdom, which the other never thought of.

The beginning of these Counsels are to be derived from the latter end of Q.
Elizabeth. For then, as appeared afterward by proofs and confessions, Robert
Winter (to whom Oswald Tesmond alias Greenwell, of the Society of the Jesuits
joined himself as his Companion) was by the advice of Hen. Garnet, Provincial
or Superior of the said Society in England (Robert Catesby and Francis Tresham
of the Gentry, instigating) privately sent into Spain, in the name of the
Catholics, with Letters Commendatory to Arthur Creswell of the same Society
living in Spain, Dec. 1601. Mandatis.
and with Commands to the King; of which this was the sum.

That he should forthwith send an Army into England, for which the Catholics
would be ready in Arms as soon as it came over. In the mean while that he
should assign yearly Pensions to some Catholic Gentlemen. Furthermore, that he
should insinuate it to the King, that there were some Gentlemen and Military
persons that were aggrieved at the Present state of things, whom he might
easily draw to his Part, by relieving their necessities. And whereas the
greatest difficulty, after the Landing such an Army, would be for supply of
Horses; they in England would take care to have Two thousand Horses ready
provided upon all occasions.

This thing was secretly transacted by the Mediation of Creswell with Petrus
Francesa Secretary to King Philip, and Franciscus Sandovallius Duke of Lerma,
and he affirmed that the thing would be very acceptable to King Philip, and
that he had offered his utmost assistance: that it was also agreed among them
of the Place of Landing. For if the forces were great, then Kent and Essex
would be most commodious for their Landing; if less, Milford in Wales; and that
King Philip had promised by Count Miranda toward that Expedition Ten hundred
thousand Crowns. Decies centena aureorum M.
Stored with these promises, Winter returns into England, and acquaints Garnet,
Catesby, and Tresham what he had done.

These things were transacted under Q Elizabeth: who dying about this time,
Christopher Wright who was privy to these Matters, is speedily sent into Spain,
Mar. 1603.
who bringing the News of the Queens Death, Sir Will. Stanly.
presses the business of the Pensions and the Expedition. With him was sent
from Bruxells by William Stanly, Hugh Owen, and Balduinus, (one of the Society
of the Jesuits) Guido Fawkes, 22 Jun. 1603.
with Letters to Creswell that he should speed the business. To him was given
in Command, that he should signify to the King that the Condition of the
Catholics, would be more hard under the new King, then it had been under Q.
Elizabeth; and therefore that he should by no means desist from so laudable an
Enterprise. That Milford lay open for an easy Landing to Spinola.

But the state of things was changed by the death of the Queen, and King Philip
returned an Answer worthy of a King, that he could no longer attend to their
Petitions, for that he had sent Ambassadors into England, to treat of Peace
with the new King.

Therefore despairing of their design as to King Philip, the Conspirators fly
to their last and desperate Counsels, and in the first place they make it their
business to satisfy their Consciences, and that being done, they confirm their
resolutions to attempt some great Enterprise. And thus their Divines discoursed.

To depose Kings, to grant their Kingdoms to others, is in the power of the
Supreme Judge of the Church; But all Heretics being ipso jure separated from
communion of the Faithful, are every year on Holy Thursday, Caena Domini.
excommunicated by the Pope. And this holds not only in Professed Heretics,
but in those that are covertly such, because being reputed ipso Jure
Excommunicate they do incur the (same) Penalties, which are ipso facto deserved
by professed Heretics. From thence it follows, that Kings and other Christian
Princes if they fall into Heresy may be deposed, and their Subjects discharged
of their Allegiance. Nor can they recover their Right again, no, not though
they should be reconciled to the Church. When it is said that the Church, the
Common Mother of all, does shut her bosom against none that return to her,
this is to be understood with a distinction, viz. provided it be not to the
damage or danger of the Church. For this is true as to the Soul, but not as to
the Kingdom.

Nor ought this punishment to be extended only to Princes that are thus
infected, but also to their Sons, who for their Fathers Sin are excluded from
Succession in the Kingdom. For Heresy is a Leprosy, and an Hereditary
Disease: and to speak more plainly, he loses his Kingdom that deserteth the
Roman Religion: he is to be accursed, abdicated, proscribed; neither is he, nor
any of his Posterity to be restored to the Kingdom: as to his Soul, he may be
absolved by the Pope only.

Thinking themselves abundantly secured within by these reasonings, they begin
to seek outward strengthenings to their Conspiracy: and chiefly Secrecy, which
they sealed by Confession, and the receiving of the Sacrament. To this end
there was an Oath drawn up amongst them, May, 1604.
in which they did engage their Faith by the H. Trinity and the Sacrament,
which they were presently to receive, that they would neither directly nor
indirectly by word or circumstance discover the Plot now to be communicated to
them, nor would they desist from prosecuting it, unless allowed by their
Associates.

Thus being encouraged by the Authority of their Divines, they be take
themselves to the adventure (as) not only lawful and laudable, but meritorious.
This was done before John Gerard of that Society.

Unto this, after Confession, by the Sacrament of the Holy Altar, were drawn
in, the next May, at first five of the Conspirators, Robert Catesby, Tho.
Winter, Tho. Percy, Kinsman to the E. of Northumberland, John Wright, and the
aforementioned Fawkes called out of Flanders.

Catesby, the Author of this Tragedy, thought it not enough that this, or that,
or any single person should be aimed at, but that all, together, and at the
same time, should be comprehended in this Conspiracy.

For so he reasoned with himself.

The King himself might many ways be taken away, but this would be nothing as
long as the Prince and the Duke of York were alive: again, if they were
removed, yet this would advantage nothing so long as there remained a
Parliament, so vigilant, so circumspect to whatever might happen: or if the
Parliament could or the chief Members of it, could be destroyed, there would
remain still the Peers of the Realm; so many Prudent Persons, so many powerful
Earls, addicted to that Party, whom they could hardly resist, and who by their
Authority, Wealth and Dependants, would be able, if occasion should be, to
restore things to their former state. Therefore not by delays, but at one blow
all were to be swallowed up, and so laudable an Achievement was to be brought
to effect altogether, and at once.

At Westminster there is an old Palace of very great Honor and Veneration for
its Antiquity, in which the great Councils of the Kingdom are used to be
celebrated; which by a word borrowed from us, they call a Parliament. In this,
the King with His Male issue, the Bishops of His Privy Council, the Peers, the
English Nobility, the Chief Magistrates, and those that are delegated from
particular Counties, Cities, Towns, and Buroughs; in short, the Men of
greatest Wisdom and Counsel do meet together.

Here Catesby thought a convenient place to execute his so long studied and
digested Plot: and having made a Vault, and storing it with a great quantity of
Gunpowder, to involve all those together, who could not severally be taken,
together with the King and His Family in the Rubbish of the same Ruins.

Therefore when he had dealt with Piercy, and he after many bitter complaints
of the King, through impatience, broke forth into these words, That there was
only one way left to be delivered from so many Evils, and that was to take the
King out of the way, and to that end, as he was ready for any attempt, did
freely offer his own Service. Catesby, who was more cautious and cunning,
moderated the Gentleman's heat, and, God forbid, said he, that this Head of
thine so dear to all good men should be so fruitlesly exposed to such danger.
The business may be undertaken and accomplished, yet so as that you and such as
you are may still be preserved for further consulting for Religion and the
Public weal.

Then he opens his design in very plausible words, and with like Artifice shows
him the manner how it was to be effected. Piercy agrees, and presently hires an
House nigh to the place, and very opportune to work his Vault.

The Parliament that was called the year before, was deferred till February
following. Nov. 1604.
Mean while, Tho. Bates, Catesby's Servant, a dextrous Fellow, and one in whom
his Master did much confide, being, least he should suspect any thing, taken
into the privity of the Fact, when at first be seemed to be moved at the
horridness of the thing, he is sent to Tesmund alias Greenwell, (for those men,
that they might the better be undiscovered, went under two Names, sometimes
under three) by whom he was persuaded, and strangely confirmed to the Execution
of the design, being made sensible of the Meritoriousness of the work.
Afterward Roben Keys, and after him Ambrose Rockwood, and John Grant, were
taken into the Plot. III Eid. Xbr. the Vault was begun, Dec. 11.
Christopher Winhie, and a little after Robert Winter being also taken into the
Society.

The work being often intermitted and often repeated, at length the Vault was
brought to the Wall of the Court, where a new difficulty arises from the
hardness of the Wall, and the thickness of three Else; so that under a long
time the work could not be finished, and there were now but a few days to the
sitting of the Parliament.

And now the pertinacious industry of the Workmen had almost beat its way
through the middle of the Wall, and they seemed not so much to want good minds
(to the work) as time, when as the Parliament was put off till the Month of
October. Then was Despair turned into Joy, with certain confidence that they
should effect their design: and it was observed that whiles they brithly beat
upon the Wall, there was a noise heard upon the other side of the Wall. Thither
Fawks is sent to enquire out the cause. He brings word back that there was a
Cellar under Ground, from whence they were removing Cole, he beinst lately Dead
who had hired that Cellar for his own use. Therefore the Conspirators thinking
that Cellar more commodious, by the help of Piercy, let out their other Houses,
and bring all their Materials and hopes into this. Such was the opportuneness
of the place (for it was almost directly under the Royal Throne) that so
seasonable an accident did make them persuade themselves, that God did by a
secret Conduct favor their Attempt. These things happened about the Feast of
Easter. The Gunpowder is at their leisure carried into the Cellar from
Catesby's House over against the Palace, where it had been with great care and
diligence brought together; First, Twenty Barrels are laid in and covered with
Billets and Faggots.

Then the Conspirators being sure of the good event, began to consult what was
to be done after they had effected their Plot: First, they considered of taking
the Prince, who about that time, they came to understand, would not come to the
Parliament with his Father, contrary to what they concluded in the beginning,
and against him they plotted destruction, as one that was no Friend of theirs,
and they had found out a way for it.

The next care was for Supplies of Money, concerning which they thought they
had sufficiently provided. They had also provided that the Peers and Gentry
addicted to Popery, should, as much as might be, be exempt from danger. Lastly,
they debated concerning calling in Foreign Princes to their assistance; but
being doubtful of their faith and secrecy, they thought fit not to send to
them till they had accomplished their design; for commonly such Actions are not
commended but by their Event.

They passed their Judgments upon them severally, the Spaniards seemed to be
more opportune for them, but too remote, and too slow in raising Forces. The
French was near, but fearful and suspected for the close league he held with
the Dutch. The most present help was from Flanders, from whence they might most
commodiously expect Supplies; for which Stanly was designed the Captain or
Commander.

Moreover, that they might the more easily deceive the world, and least by
their passing to and fro to those places they should give some cause of
Suspicion, they go their several ways; some into the Country, some a great
way out of the Island, waiting for the time appointed for the Execution. Fawks
went into Flanders that he might acquaint Stanly and Owen with the whole
Matter, nor did he return into England till the latter end of August.

Catesby, that he might not be idle in the mean time, gets Francis Tresham and
Everard Digby to his Party, agreeing with them for Supply of Money, and the
former promisd Two thousand pounds of English Money, the other Fifteen hundred.
Piercy, that was prodigal at another man's charge, promised whatsoever he could
scrape together of the Revenues of the E. of Northumberland.

In the mean time, Ten more Barrels of Gunpowder are added to the former, and
four more greater than the rest, upon suspicion, least by the moistness of the
place, the former should have been spoiled; and again, they are all covered
over with a great heap of stones and wood

And now the time of the Parliaments convening drew on, which was again put off
till the Nones of November. 5 Nov.
Therefore the Conspirators did again repeat their consultation, and some were
appointed who, on the same day that the Enterprise was to be Executed, should
seize upon the Lady Elizabeth (the Kings eldest Daughter, who was brought up
under the Lord Farrington in Warwickshire) under pretense of an Hunting Match,
which Everard Digby, who was privy to the matter, had appointed with great
preparation at Dunchurch. Her they decreed publicly to Proclaim Queen.

They taking to themselves the Titles of the Assertors of liberty, did nothing
less at first than profess themselves the Authors the Fact, They purposed when
the blow was first given -- but the success thereof doubtful, to father the
fact on the Puritans. Fuller v. Foulis. p. 690.
or make any mention of Religion to the People, but purposed to hold that in
suspense for some time, and by a Proclamation published in the Queens name to
redress great grievances for the present, and feed them with hopes of more for
the future, till the Faction growing strong, either by favor or severity of
new Edicts, they might draw the People to their Parts and Obedience; and the
odiousness of their fact so by degrees discovering it self would in time, and
together with their good success grow off.

Nor came it in so long time into the minds of any of them how many Innocents
all about them, how many Infants, how many that agreed with them in Religion,
how many who perhaps had deserved well of them that vast ruin would over-whelm.

Now all things are ready, and the last Scene was going to be Acted, when as by
the unsearchable Judgment of God, one who desired to save another, brought
destruction both to himself and his Associates.

There were ten days to the Parliament, when upon Saturday in the Evening a
Letter was brought as from a Friend to the Lord Monteagle, but by whom written,
is uncertain, and by whom brought unknown. By it he was warned to forbear
meeting at the Parliament for the two first days of the Session; forasmuch as
some great, and sudden, and unsuspected mischief did threaten that Meeting.

The hand of him that wrote it was unknown, and the writing it self purposely
so ordered, that it could hardly be read. No date to the Letter, no
subscription, no inscription put to it, and the whole composure of words
ambiguous.

The Lord Monteagle was doubtful what he should do; therefore late in the night
he goes to Robert Cecil Earl of Salisbury, and chief Secretary to the King,
and giving him the Letter, freely declared to him how he came by it, and how
little he valued it. Cecil did not make much more account of it, and yet
thought it was not altogether to be neglected; and Therefore showed it to the
chief Counselors, Charles Howard, Chief Admiral of the Seas, the Earl of
Nottingham, to the Earls of Worcester, and Northampton.

The thing being considered of amongst them, although at first sight the Letter
seemed of no great moment; yet they thought that not the slightest discovery
ought to be despised, especially where the safety of the King was endangered,
nor such great care to be blamed in them, to whom the preservation of His
Majesty did both by Office and Duty belong.

The King was then gone to Royston, to Hunt. It seemed good to them to
determine nothing before they had consulted the King. For they said that they
had oftentimes experienced the quick apprehension, and happy conjecture of the
King in unriddleing things that were liable to greatest doubtfulness.

1. Nov.
Upon the Calends of November, the King returned to the City, and forth with
Cecil taking him aside, unfolds the matter, and shows him the Letter, which it
seems worth while to insert here for the perpetual remembrance of it; forasmuch
as not without cause it afforded such matter of dispute between him and his
Counselors.

The love which I bear to some of your Friends makes me careful for your
safety. Wherefore I advise you, as you love your life, that you would invent
some excuse for your absence from the Parliament. For God and Men, as it were
by agreement do hasten to punish the wickedness of this Age. Do not make light
of this warning, but depart as soon as you can into your own Country, where
you may securely expect the event. For although no signs of troubles do appear,
yet I admonish you, that that meeting shall receive a terrible blow, and shall
not see who smites them. Do not despise this discovery, it may be profitable
to you, it cannot hurt you. For the danger is over as soon as you have burnt
this Letter. I hope by the grace of God you will make good use of this
Counsel, to whose protection I commend you.

The King having read the Letter (though through the generousness of his mind,
he was no way prone to suspicion) did conjecture that some strange thing did
lie hid under it, and that the notice given, was by no means to be neglected.

On the other side, Cecil said, it was certainly written by some Mad man: For
no man well in his wits would speak at this rate of a danger which he does
admonish so much to beware of. The danger is over as soon as you shall burn the
Letter. How small a danger could that be which should vanish in so short a
moment.

On the other side the King, in whose breast the first suspicion had a now
taken deep root, urged the foregoing words, That assembly shall receive a
terrible blow, and shall not see who smites them. And whiles walking in the
Gallery he deeply thought of these things from one particular to another, it
came into his mind that a sudden blow by Gunpowder was intended by those
words: For what more sudden then a blow by Gunpowder?

Thus the King and Salisbury so broke off their discourse, that the King did
strongly persevere in his conjecture. Salisbury to free the Kings mind from
fears and cares seemed in his presence to make light of this notice given; but
in the mean time admiring within himself the Kings uncouth and unusual
interpretation, and so presently suspecting it, did conclude, that it was not
lightly to be regarded.

The next day the thing being again considered of by the King, and His
Counselors, it seemed good that the Palace with the places near adjoining,
should be diligently searched, and that business was assigned to the Lord
Chamberlain, who upon the Monday which preceded the Parliament, about the
Evening, that he might give no occasion of Rumors, goes with the Lord
Monteagle to those places: entering into the house that Percy had hired, they
found a great heap of Billets and Fagots and Coal in a Vault under ground; and
Wineard the Keeper of the Kings houses being there present, Wardrobe.
he was asked for what use they were brought in thither? they understood that
the house was hired by Percy, and that heap was brought in by him.

Moreover the Chamberlain spying Fawks standing in a corner of the Cellar,
asked who he was, and what business he had there? Who answered, that he was the
Domestic Servant of Percy, and the Keeper of that house in Percy's absence.

Having thus done, they return to the Court, reporting What they had seen, and
conjecturing worse things then formerly they had done. For it came into
Monteagles mind upon the mention of Percy, that he was highly addicted to the
Popish Religion, that they had formerly been acquainted, and lived as Friends,
and it might be that he was the Author of that Letter which gave ground to all
this suspicion.

The Lord Chamberlain among other suspicious matters, did revolve in his mind,
that that store of wood in the house of Percy, where he seldom resided, was not
brought in thither to no purpose, and that that Servant of Percy whom he saw in
the Cellar, looked like a desperate, wicked Knave.

All which things did increase the Kings suspicion, who would have that Vault
further searched again; but least if nothing were found, the Counselors should
make themselves ridiculous to the People, as if they were afraid of every light
report; and moreover, fearing, least whiles they appeared to suspect Percy, who
was allied in Blood to the chiefest Peers of the Realm, they should seem to
suspect the Earl of Northumberland himself: yet when the safety of the King did
prevail upon them, they so ordered the matter, that search should be made
without noise or injury to any.

It was given in command to Sir Thomas Knevet, Justice of Peace for
Westminster, that in the dead of the Night he should go with a convenient
company to that house, and should take Wineard a long with him, under pretense
that he had lost some Hangings and Tapestry.

Thither Sir Tho. Knevet going, finds Fawks, Percy's Domestic Servant, who
under a feigned name called himself John Johnson, before the House booted and
habited for a Journey; and he gives command presently to lay hold on him. From
thence going into the Cellar, he speedily removes the Wood and Coal, which
being removed, the Treason appeared, one little Barrel of Gunpowder being
first discovered by it self, and afterward the heap being removed 36 Barrels of
different magnitude were found there.

Then turning to the Prisoner, and examining his Garments they found in them
tinder, and three Match cords.

But he being taken in the Fact, and not able to deny, the case being now
desperate, he of his own accord confessed the Crime, and with an unappalled
countenance (as he was a man of a resolute mind to undertake any desperate
attempt) he added, that it was well for them that they found him before the
house, now lately come out of the Cellar, in which all things were ready: for
if they had found him within, he would not have stood to have buried himself
and them together, by putting fire to the Train.

Knevet having discovered the matter, returns forthwith rejoicing to the
Palace, about Four a Clock in the Morning, and acquaints Salisbury and the Lord
Chamberlain; who presently with a noise rush into the Kings Bed Chamber, and
tell him the Treason was detected, and they had the Author of it in Custody and
Bonds.

The fame of this being spread abroad, for in so great a matter of Joy it could
not be concealed, the Conspirators fly some this way, some that way, and meet
together at Holbech at the house of Stephen Littleton, in the borders of
Staffordshire.

Thither came those that were privy to the Conspiracy out of Warwick shire and
Worcestershire; although they were ignorant of the discovery of the Plot,
having taken away by force from Gentlemen's houses their Warr-horses; thereby
giving a manifest token what they would have done when they had got the power
in their hands, when as they ravaged with such boldness, while the event was
yet doubtful.

The Leaders of the Faction trusted that great numbers of Men, and a
considerable Army would flock into them, as soon as they should appear in Arms.
But the Lieutenants and Sheriffs being before, while the Treason was only
suspected, Commanded by the King to ride about their Counties, their attempts
were all made void, and scarcely an Hundred of all that number appeared in
Arms. And they were encompassed by Richard Walsh, High Sheriff of the County of
Worcester, who came upon them unexpectedly with a strong power of Men, so that
they could not escape.

When despairing of Pardon, and their troubled Consciences putting them upon
desperate exploits, the Gunpowder that was drying by the Fire, took fire by a
sparkle that fell into it, and so suddenly burnt the Faces, Sides, Arms, Hands
of the Besieged, that they were rendered unable to handle their Arms, and so
lost their strength and courage together.

Catesby and Percy, that were most active, together with Tho. Winter, while
they betake themselves to a corner of the house, are both shot through with a
Leaden Bullet. Winter being wounded, fell into the hands of the Kings Party,
both the Wrights were slain; Grant, Digby, Rockwood, and Bates were taken
Prisoners. Tresham whiles shifting his Lodgings in London, he sometime escaped,
yet at last was taken. Robert Winter and Littleton a long time wandering up and
down the Woods, at last fell into the hands of the Guards, and were all
committed to the Tower at London.

Being Examined without the rack, (for only Fawks was put under this way of
Examination, and that but moderately) they severally discovered the whole
series of the matter as we have before recounted, and taxed none in Holy
Orders, which many looked upon as purposely avoided, because they were bound by
Oath not to do it. When as Francis Tresham had before he dyed in Prison of his
own accord nominated Henry Garnet, being admonished thereof by his Wife he
wrote a Letter to the Earl of Salisbury, and excusing his too rash confession,
he so discharged Garnet as much as in him lay by a solemn adjuration
interposed, that he did entangle himself in a notorious lie, affirming He took
it upon his Salvation, even in articulo mortis, (a lamentable thing) for within
three hours after he dyed. Proceedings against the late Traitors. C c 2.3.
that he had not seen Garnet of sixteen years; when as it did appear afterward
by the confession of Garnet And of Mrs. Anne Vaux, who confessed that she had
seen Mr. Tresham with Garnet at her house three or four times since the Kings
coming in; and that they were at Erith together the last Summer, and that
Garnet and she were not long since with Mr. Tresham at his house in
Northamptonshire, and stayed there. Proceedings, ibid.
that they had often and for a long time together conversed one with another,
before the six Months last past.

MDCVI.
Digby confessing the matter as it was in truth endeavored He sought to clear
all the Jesuits of those practices whith they themselves have now confessed ex
ore proprio. Proceedings, ibid. Even at the time of Garnets Trial was current
throughout the Town a report of a Retractation under Bates his hand, of his
accusation of Greenwell. Proceedings, ibid.
to excuse the horridness of the Fact, which he acknowledged and seemed to
detect, by the desperateness of their condition: For being made to hope that
the new King, upon his coming to the Kingdom, would indulge liberty of
Conscience to those of the Popish Religion, and would permit the exercise
thereof with some restriction; This being denied, it drove those miserable men
unadvisedly to pernicious Counsels.

Here the Earl of Northampton and Cecil, (who together with the Earl of
Nottingham, Suffolk, Worcester, and Devonshire, did sit as Judges in that
Cause) interposed, affirming that the King never gave them any hope of liberty,
nor ever engaged his word for it; but factious persons did maliciously throw
such a report abroad, that they might have a pretense wherewith to excuse both
themselves, and such as they were, for the Seditions which they raised in the
Kingdom.

At length being Convicted and found Guilty, they are condemned to the
punishment wont to be inflicted by the Laws of the Realm upon Rebels and
Traitors.

Everard Digby, Robert Winter, John Grant, and Thomas Bates were Executed at
London, nigh the Western Gate of St. Paul's Church in the later end of January.
The day following, Tho. Winter, Ambrose Rockwood, Robert Keys, and Guido
Fawks, who confessed that they had wrought in the Vault, were Executed at
Westmonaster in the Old Palace yard near the Parliament house.

Upon this many, who for this cause were banished, or of their own accord
changed their Native Soil, were most courteously received at Calice, by
Dominick Wikes, Vicus.
the Governor there; for so the King commanded.

Of whom one was of such a perverse mind that when Wikes did show himself to
bewail his and his Companions fortune, and for their comfort added, Though they
had lost their Native Country, yet by the Kings grace they had a Neighboring
one allowed them. Nay, says the other, It is the least part of our grief, that
we are banished our Native Country, and that we are forced to change our Soil,
because every good man counts that his Country where he can be well: this does
truly and heartily grieve us, that we could not bring so generous and wholesome a
design to perfection.

Which as soon as Vicus contrary to his expectation, had heard he could hardly
for anger abstain from throwing that man into the Sea, who gloryed in such a
Plot as was damned by all men. For so I remember I have heard Vicus often say,
when together with Alexander Delbenius, he came courteously upon the account of
our Ancient friendship to visit me, a little before he went from us.

The Plot being discovered, the Parliament among public rejoycings was held
with great security. To whom the King made a most weighty Oration, and set
forth the inexpressible Mercy of God over all his works, toward Himself, his
Family, and His whole Kingdom, largely aggravating the thing from its several
circumstances. This temperament being And this conclusion with no less truth;
That as upon the one part many honest men, seduced with some errors of Popery,
may yet remain good and faithful Subjects: So as on the other part, none of
those that truly know and believe the whole ground, and School conclusions of
their Doctrine, can ever prove either good Christians or faithful Subjects. He
had said a little before, That many honest men blinded peradventure with some
opinions of Popery, yet do they either not know, or at least not believe all
the true grounds of Popery, which is indeed the mystery of Iniquity.
with great Justice added, That he did not say, All that were addicted to the
Romish Religion were to be included as guilty of this Crime: for that there
were many among them, who although they are involved in Popish Errors (so he
called them) yet had they not lost their true Loyalty to Princes, but did
observe the Duty both of a Christian man, and of a good Subject; and that he in
return had good thoughts of them: and that he thought the Severity of the
Puritans was worthy of flames, who deny that any Papist can be received into
Heaven.

This likewise was worthy the Wisdom of a most just Prince, that he did Judge
that no Foreign Prince nor Commonwealth, nor none that did manage affairs for
them had any hand in this Conspiracy, as who did judge of them according to his
own mind and temper, and would think of others what he would that they should
think of him.

Therefore he did will and require, that when any mention should be made of
this Conspiracy in Parliament, every one should speak and think honorably of
them. Which thing was done for the respect that he bore to the Spaniards, with
whom desiring to keep that peace which he of late made with them, he would not
leave any the least appearance of an alienated affection or a suspicious mind.

He added this most generously, That, he would that all men should understand,
that resting in Gods protection, the tranquillity and quiet of his mind was not
at all disturbed by this accident, and that he did wish that his breast were
transparent to all, that his People might behold the most secret recesses of
his heart.

But when he judged it might conduce much to Example and Public Security, that
he should severely punish the Authors of so horrid a Crime, and because there
was a suspicion arising from Letters, Confessions and Proofs made, that Gerard
alias Braek, Hen. Garnet, Oswald Tesmond alias Greenwell, were either privy to,
or promoters of this Conspiracy; therefore upon the XVIII. of the Kalends of
February, 14 Jan.
a Proclamation is published against them, and a reward proposed to him that
should discover and bring them to their Trial, as also a Penalty added against
those who after the publishing of this Proclamation should entertain, nourish,
conceal, or be any way aiding the persons named in that Proclamation, or should
at all endeavor that those who are accused of this horrid Crime should not be
found out and apprehended.

In order hereunto diligent search is made, and strict enquiry after them, who
concealed themselves; at length Hen. Garnet and -- Hall and Garnets Servant
were taken in the house of Abington a Papist, and sent to London, and cast into
the Tower. The wretched Servant for fear least he should be forced by torments
to accuse his Master, or despairing upon some other account, did lay violent
hands upon himself in the Prison, and with a blunt knife (for he was not
permitted to have a keen one by him) he cut up his own Belly, and drew out his
Bowels: and although his wound was bound up yet before he could be Examined, he
dyed.

Garnet was very gently used in his Imprisonment, as he himself afterward
confessed.

At first he denied all things; and when it did appear that nothing could be
drawn from him voluntarily, and the King that he might avoid calumny was
unwilling to use torments upon him, resolves by craft to illude his cautious
pertinacy, and to bring him to larger Confessions (who would answer little or
nothing) whether he would or not.

He secretly imploys a man, who by deep groans, and frequent complaints against
the King, and his Counselors, and the deplorable condition of the Catholics
in England, did in the end persuade Garnet that he was Popishly inclined, and
so crept into intimate familiarity with him. This man he sends with a Letter to
a Gentlewoman, that was Imprisoned for her Religion, who kept her family at
Whitw^b and other places, and received with great hospitality those whom he
commended to her. In which Letter he wrote plainly, and yet sparingly: what
things he had already confessed, what he was not yet examined upon, and by what
means he would excuse those things (which he had confessed) and conceal these.

He wrote likewise to Rookwood the Priest, who was Prisoner in another Prison,
and wrote his Letter with Ink in the middle, about some familiar matters that
any one might read, but left broad Margents on both sides, which he filled with
his Secrets, written with the juice of an Orange, denying all whatsoever he had
confessed before the Lords. As to the Spanish Expedition, he said he had
obtained the Kings Pardon. As to this last Conspiracy he should avoid Judgment,
because he knew they could make no sufficient proofs against him. But however
it went, he added, having too high an opinion of himself, that which was spoken
of the only Redeemer of the world, It would be necessary that one man should
die for the People.

The Letter was by the Kings Counselors, who smelt out the cunning, held to
the fire, and presently the writing appeared, and the fraud was discovered.

He being every day more and more confident of his instructed Keeper, told him
he did exceedingly desire to have some conference with Hall, his Companion. He
promised to bring it about, and brought both of them to a place where they
might easily hear one another, and where he himself to avoid all suspicion
might be seen by them both. In the mean time, he placed two men of known credit
near the place who (they knowing no such thing, and minding only the return of
their Keeper who was gone abroad) might hear whatsoever passed between them.
There each of them freely discovered what they had confessed, what they had
been Examined about, what excuses and evasions (for these were their words)
they had prepared for every particular, and many other such things, which being
carefully taken, were delivered to the Counsel in writing. The next day (the
Prisoners suspecting no such thing) Delegates from the King came to them, and
Examine Garnet and Hall a part, and object to them that they had yesterday held
private conference with one another.

Garnet thinking they spoke this only upon conjecture Upon his Soul,
reiterating it with so many detestable execrations, as wounded the Lords hearts
to hear him. Proceedings, Y 3.
stiffly denied it, and forswore it upon the word of a Priest.

At last, Hall having confessed the Fact, and he finding that there was no
avoiding it, begged Pardon for his contrary asseveration which he sought to
elevate by a forced Interpretation or Equivocation. And professing that he
would speak the truth ingenuously, He answered, that he had hitherto so
constantly denied it, because he knew that no man (living) but one, (he meant
Greenwell, could accuse him as guilty of the late Fact. But now that he saw
himself encompassed with such a cloud of witnesses, he would no longer
dissemble, but did confess that above V months agone he was acquainted by
Greenwell with the whole matter. That before that, Catesby had in general told
him that the Catholics in England were attempting some great thing as to
Religion, and asked whether if good men should be involved in the danger, this
were to be made matter of Conscience. But that he, who had a contrary command
from the Pope, that he should not engage in any Conspiracy refused to hear any
further of it. That he did pour out Prayers for the good success of the great
cause, and amongst other things, used the Hymn that was commonly Sung in the
Church, but intended nothing else when he did so, but only prayed God that in
the next Parliament no grievous Laws might be made against the Recusants: so
they are called in England, who keeping within their own houses, have their
liberty and refuse to Join in worship with the Protestants.

Garnet being twenty times Examined, 12 Feb. and 26 Mar.
between the Eids of Febr. and the VII of the Calends of April, two days after
he is arraigned at the Public Tribunal in London: The reason whereof the Earl
of Salisbury declared at his Trial. See the Proceedings, Y
[Guild Hall.]

Here the Crimes are laid to the charge of the Prisoner, by Sir John Crook,
which are afterward enlarged on in a long Speech by Sir Edward Cook, the Kings
Attorney General. Then after Garnet had said something for himself, and
especially something concerning Equivocation, she was Examined by Cecil and
others, that sat as Judges in that case. And lastly, the Earl of Northampton
made a long and elaborate discourse against him, in which he largely handled
the Authority which the Popes arrogate to themselves of deposing Princes, and
discussed that Chapter of Nos sanctorum, the ground, as he said, of this and
such like Conspiracies.

At length Sentence is passed by the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench,
that Garnet should be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered.

His Plea for himself was only this, that although he did a long time before
know of the Conspiracy, by common fame and Rumors, (for Greenwell only
informed him of all the particulars; but under the Seal of Confession, by the
Laws of which he was forbidden to discover it to any man living): yet that he
did admonish Greenwell to desist from the Fact which he did very much
disapprove of, and to hinder others engaged in Conscience or privity in it.

Here Cecill severely reproved him, For, said he, if he did disapprove of the
Fact, why did he afford Greenwell the benefit of Absolution before he had by
his penitence given testimony that he did truly and from his heart detest the
Fact? Furthermore when as he understood the matter from Catesby, where there
was no Seal of Confession, this was sufficient to have made a discovery of the
Plot if he had so highly abhorred it as he did pretend.

But there were other things that lay heavy upon his charge, and these chiefly
which were amongst his Confessions, written with his own hand and sent to the
King, viz. That Greenwell did acquaint him with this not as with a sin (he had
to confess) but as an Act which he well enough understood, and in which he
required his advice and counsel.

That Catesby and Greenwell came to him to require his advice upon the matter,
and that the whole business might be resolved among them. That Tesmund (for so
he was now called, who e'rewhile was Greenwell) and he, did not long agone
consult together in Essex of the Particulars of this Conspiracy. Lastly, when
Greenwell asked who should be Protector of the Kingdom; Garnet answered, that
that answer ought to be deferred till they saw how things should go.

When these things were brought to his remembrance, and did make it appear that
he knew of the Conspiracy otherwise then by the way of Confession, all that he
answered was, that whatsoever he had signed with his own hand, was true.

Being brought to Execution the Third of May being Inventio crucis [Holy rood
day] he said, he came thither that day to find an end at length of all the
crosses that he had born in this life; that none were ignorant of the cause of
his punishment; that he had sinned against the King in concealing it; that he
was sorry for it, and humbly begged the Kings Pardon: that the Plot against the
King and Kingdom was bloody, and which if it had taken effect he should have
detested with all his heart, and that so horrid and inhumane a Fact should be
attempted by Catholics, was that that grieved him more then his death. Then he
added many things in defense of Anne Vaux, who was held in Prison, and lay
under great suspicion upon his account.

Being accused that he had while Q. Eliz. was alive received certain Breves
from Rome, v. Proceedings, Q 3.
in which he and the Peers inclined to Popery were admonished, that when that
miserable Woman should happen to die, they should admit of no Prince, how
nearly soever related in blood, but such as should not only tolerate the
Catholic Faith, but by all means promote it; he said, he had burnt them, the
King being received for King. And when he was again Examined upon the same
things, he referred Henry Montacate who asked him about it, The Recorder of
London.
to his Confessions subscribed by him.

Being taxed for sending Edmund Bainham to Rome, not to return to the City
before the Plot should take effect; This he thus excused, as if he had not sent
him upon that account; but that he might inform the Pope of the calamitous
state of England, and consult with him what course the Catholics should take;
and therefore referred them again to his Confessions.

Then he kneeled down upon the Stage to his Prayers, and looking about hither
and thither, did seem to be distressed for the loss of his life, and to hope a
Pardon would be brought him from the most merciful Prince: Montacute admonished
him that he should no longer think of life, but if he knew of any Treachery
against the King or Kingdom, that he should as a dying man presently discover
it; for that it was now no time to Equivocate. At which words Garnet being
somewhat moved, made answer, that he knew the time did not admit of
Equivocation; that how far and when it is lawful to Equivocate he had
otherwhere delivered his opinion, that now he did not equivocate, and that he
knew nothing but what he had confessed. Then he excused himself that he did at
first dissemble before the Lords; That he did so because he did not think they
had had such testimony and proof against him, till they did produce it; which
when they did produce, he thought it as honorable for him to confess, as it
would have been at first to have accused himself. He added many things to
excuse Greenwell, professing that unless he thought he were out of danger, he
would not have discovered the guilt of his dear Brother in this Conspiracy.
Then praying that the He said also, I exhort them all to take heed they enter
not into any Treasons, Rebellions, or Insurrections against the King.
Catholics in England might not fare the worse upon his account, he crossed
himself, and after he had commended his Soul to God, the Ladder being taken
away, he was hanged to death.

In his behalf Andreas Eudaimon-Johannes a Cretian, of the same Society, wrote
an Against which Robert Abbot wrote his Antilogia, edit. Land. 1613. 4.
Apology, in answer to Sir Edw. Cokes (Book Entitled) Actio in Proditores,
(for so much the Title does imply) published four years after, and approved by
Claudius Aquaviva Provincial of the Society, in which chiefly the Doctrine of
Equivocation is defended and explained from Scripture, Fathers, Schoolmen, and
Thomists; and the necessity and matter of the Seal of Secrecy or Confession is
debated, and the chief heads of his Accusation are answered; the Speech of the
Earl of Northampton is refuted. Moreover he does endeavor to evince that
Garnet never knew any thing of the Conspiracy but by the way of Confession; and
that he did always abhor the Treason.

Then some things are related of his Constancy at his Death, which are not
related in the History of it. And as a conclusion of his Commentary, there is
the memorable Story of the Straw upon which the Effigies of the Dead was seen,
at which he says his Adversaries were very much disturbed.

Whiles the Body was quartered by the Hangman, some drops of blood fell upon
the Straw that was there provided to light the fire. John Wilkinson who was
there present, that he might gather some relic of the Body of Garnet, carried
home with him an Ear, that was sprinkled with blood, and deposited it with a
Gentlewoman, Hu. Wis.
who kept it with great veneration in a Christal-glass. Afterward it was
observed with great admiration, that the Effigies of Garnet was plainly
expressed in that blood.

Then with great Zeal was the same of the Miracle spread abroad; which others
did presently elude by a contrary construction; saying, It ought to seem no
wonder if a man brought up among Exiles in Flanders, improved at Rome in Italy,
authorized to a Conspiracy in his own Country, and breathing nothing but
revenge, did as long as he lived thirst after the blood of his Countrymen,
should when dead deserve to be pictured in blood. So dangerous a thing it is in
these corrupt times to say any thing for the honor of any man in those things
which do exceed belief and the common course of Nature, which may not presently
be retorted to his disparagement.

This end had this Conspiracy; the strangest that either our, or former ages do
make mention of, for contrivance, daringness, or cruelty. For it is often heard
of, and fame does deliver it down to posterity, that many Princes are cut off
by Treachery, many Commonwealths are attempted by the snares and falsehood of
their Enemies; But no Country, no Age ever bred such a Monster of Conspiracy
as this, wherein the King with the Queen, the Parents with their whole Issue,
all the States of the Kingdom, the whole Kingdom it self, and in it innumerable
Innocents should all be destined to one Destruction in one moment, for a
Sacrifice to the lust of a few enraged Minds.

But it was very well, that that Monster, which they themselves that bear the
blame of it, do both by word and writing every where detest, being so long
before conceived at home, should be strangled in the birth before ever it see
the light.

A little while after, Isaac Casaubon when he went into England, thinking of
nothing less than to be engaged in this business, upon occasion of another
Apology sent to him, and by him delivered to the King of Great Britain, wrote
an Elegant Epistle to Fronto Ducaeus, in which he shows, that Garnet knew
otherwise then under the Seal of Confession of the Powder Conspiracy, by his
own Confession and Testimony written with his own hand, and does at large
discuss the Doctrine of Equivocation, as ensnaring and pernicious, against the
Arguments of Eudaimon-Johannes. Against which, not Ducaeus, but
Eudaimon-Johannes does rail sufficiently.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE ORIGINAL OF THE POVVDER-PLOT: Together with a
Relation of the CONSPIRACIES AGAINST Queen Elizabeth And the Persecutions of
the PROTESTANTS In FRANCE To the death of Henry the Fourth.

Collected out of Thuanus, Davila, Perefix, and several other Authors of the
Roman Communion;

As also Reflections upon Bellarmine's Notes of the Church, etc.

LONDON; Printed for John Leigh at the Sign of the Blew-Bell by
Flying-horse-Court in Fleet Street, 1674.

TO THE READER. An Account of the Occasion, Matter, Method and Manner of
Writing of the Discourse annexed with the Reasons of it.
THE Narration of the Gunpowder Treason by Thuanus being commended to me,
after I had looked into it, I persuaded a friend to translate it into English,
which being done, I gave it to the Bookseller to print, and for a Preface to
it wrote the first Sect. of the Discourse, not intending any more than that:
which was printed, but not all the sheets wrought off, when having met with
that notable passage of Del Rio briefly cited in a Book lately printed, and
perusing the same more at large in Del Rio himself, I thought it worthy of
further consideration; and therefore ordered the Printer not to work off that
Preface, but go on with the Translation of Thuanus, and the while wrote so much
of the ensuing Discourse as concerns THE ORIGINAL OF THE POWDER PLOT, that is
to Sect. 24; (though the whole Discourse through want of timely notice to the
Printer bears that Title); and that was all I then intended. But when I came to
the conclusion of that part, I began to perceive that COMBINATION OF ROME AND
SPAIN AGAINST ENGLAND, which continued all the time of Queen Elizabeth's Reign,
and does not a little confirm what had been said in the former part of the
Discourse: and though I thought that the former part of the Discourse did not
stand much in need of confirmation from this, yet I thought it very pertinent
and useful to show that Combination in their various practices against that
Queen, but as briefly as I could. This continues to Sect. 37. nor did I then
intend more. But reflecting upon the admirable Providence of God in preserving
that blessed Queen from so many and so various attempts against her, and in my
turning over of Thuanus for the Story of the Combination having perceived
something of the unhappy issue of her Neighbors Persecutions of the Professors
of that Reformed Religion which she happily established and defended, I began
to perceive something of that DISTINGUISHING PROVIDENCE, which is very
Observable and Remarkable in the ensuing part of the Discourse to Sect. 61.
Wherefore having cursorily run over some of the principal parts of that Story,
and satisfied my self that it would make good what I undertook; I thought it an
unworthy piece of laziness or negligence not to add that part also, so
pertinent, so remarkable and necessary; but hoped to have done it more briefly
than I found I well could, when I again set my self to the perusal of the
History. Having finished this, I made some Reflections upon the whole and
thereupon added the OBSERVATIONS, Inferences and the rest which make up the
last part and conclusion, And this was the Occasion, this the Matter and Method
of the Discourse. Now for the Manner of writing it; when I began I was wholly a
stranger to the Story, and to all or most of the Books I have made use of; had
never read two leaves in Thuanus, save part of the History of the Powder Plot;
had never seen Davila; had only occasionally, if at all, looked into any other
of Books I have made use of. Besides being most of it written in the Country,
and my own stock being but short, I could not have that assistance from variety
of Books which I desired; and yet it pleased God many things fell in my way
beyond my expectation; and the Authors I have generally used are such whose
Authority is beyond all exception, the incomparable Thuanus, Davila, Perefix,
and others of the Roman Communion; for I have but rarely followed any Writers
of the Reformed Religion, and more rarely without the concurrent authority of
others. But what is most considerable, the greatest part being sent away in
single sheets by the Post as it was written, I could neither my self have the
perusal of the entire work together, nor have it perused by my friends before
it was printed. This I mention for my excuse of such mistakes as possibly may
occur in it. For I did not design to injure the Truth in any particular, nor
have I to my knowledge done it in any thing material; only Sect. 12. you will
meet with Lovain in Flanders, which perhaps is in Brabant, though by Flanders I
then meant than part of the Low Countries which was then under the King of
Spain or the Archdukes Obedience; and I know the name Flanders is used in as
large a sense by many, and commonly by the Italians, and Sect. 34. page 48.
it is said, he made them amends for it afterward, whereas that excommunication
there mentioned was before, which I did not then observe when I wrote it. Again
Sect. 42. page 74. you will find, the D. of Tuscany [Father to the Qu: Mother]
which is a mistake; for he was of the same Family, and succeeded her Brother,
but was not her Father; and therefore the Reader may either amend it, or quite
strike it out. But these are such mistakes as are rarely escaped by those who
write at more leisure, and are no prejudice at all the Story. If any other
mistake that is material shall come to my knowledge, whether by my own
observation, or the information of any other, whether friend or foe, I will not
fail, God willing publicly to acknowledge the same, and if this discourse
shall be thought worthy of another Edition, to reform it. For I approve not the
use of Piae Frauds, and think Lying and Slandering, as always unlawful and
unworthy of a Christian; so where matters of Religion are concerned, to be
profane and sacrilegious. The God of Truth is able to defend his own cause,
the Truth, without such wicked shifts; and when be pleases to suffer it to be
oppressed for a time; he does with great wisdom permit it; but in the mean time
allows not us to vindicate it by such indirect means whereby we do, as much as
in us lies, oppose the design and course of his Providence. Numquid Deus
indiget vestro mendacio, ut pro illo loquamini dolos? Job. 13.7. But if my have
has made me in any thing through mistake to mis-represent any actions of the
Papists to their prejudice, it is likely it has made me overlook as much more
which might have been said against them. Nor have I thereby so much injured
them, as they have injured themselves and their cause by such indirect and
wicked practices as are beyond all contradiction, to the great scandal of the
most Holy Christian Religion; which is that which in some places has made my
expressions more sharp than what otherwise I should have used. Nor had it not
been for that, and for the great danger I apprehend our Country to be in by
their restless mysterious practices for the discovery and prevention whereof,
the discovery of their former Policies and Practices may be of good use, should
I have delighted in such an undertaking. I have otherwise no prejudice against
them, and could heartily wish that all which I have written had been false; but
since it is not only too true, but we are still in danger from the same
principles, though the manner and method of their operation and practice, may
in some respects be altered, I cannot but think the undertaking both lawful and
necessary. Nor is the honor of Religion ever a whit secured by palliating the
irreligious practices of spurious Professors; but better vindicated by
publicly detecting and condemning; and, where there is a just Authority,
condignly punishing or correcting them. This is more agreeable to the will of
God, and the course and methods of his Providence, who uses not to dissemble
the most secret miscarriages of his dearest children, but either to detect
them, and bring them to light, to the end they may be punished by the Ministers
of his Justice; or, if they, through want of knowledge, power, or fidelity, do
fail therein, to do it himself by his Divine Judgments upon the offenders,
unless they prevent the same by timely and seriously judging themselves. But
still it may be objected; but why such haste? If it must be published, why not
upon more mature deliberation? Why not the Errata though never so
inconsiderable first corrected? and perhaps, why not the style first better
smoothed and polished, and some things removed to their proper places? I
answer, If we must stay till we can be secure against all mistakes, we should
have very few books ever published; but it is sufficient if we can be secure
for the main, whereof I am very well satisfied as to this work; and for the
style and ornaments, which most concern my self, they were not tanti with me,
who neither undertook it, nor proceeded in it upon self-respect: but besides, I
was beyond my first intention engaged in it, and the Press was at work and
being so engaged, I endeavored to have kept pace with it, if I could; though I
had before little thoughts of ever appearing in Print, and much disliked that
precipitate way of writing books, which by Fortius Ringelbergius is recommended
to his Students, and do still dislike it, unless upon special occasion. And
indeed that which was a special motive and incitement to me to hasten it what I
could, was the consideration of the forwardness, activity and busy practices
of the Popish Emissaries and Agents, and of some others influenced by them
further than they themselves are aware of, and the dangerous consequence
thereof not only to the subversion of the reformed Religion, and the Scandal of
Christianity it self; but also to the subversion of our Government, as the most
effectual method for promoting their designs, and disturbance of the Peace of
the Kingdom. But these things I have touched toward the end of the Discourse,
and therefore shall add no more here, but only desire the Readers favor to
correct some of the more material errors of the Press, as is here after
directed, and to bear with the rest:

Errors of the Press in the Discourse to be corrected as follows:
PAge 1. line 10. and also l. 17. Reader) l. 18. others; yet, p. 2. l. 27. an
old, p. 4. l. 26. Confessor. but, This, p. 5. l. 15. confession, p. 6. l. 1.
contrivance, l. 5. nothing more, p. 7. l. 1. and p. 8. l. 32. Machinations, p.
9. l. 2. Broccard l. 4. Turk l. 8. dele ( Camden 1600. p. 769.) and put it in
the Margin at lin. 10. l. 27. 4. Nor p. 12. l. 31. we may again, p. 13. l. 1.
that we find, p. 14. l. 22. Ducaeus l. 23. 7. Non. Jul p. 15. l. 32. Sancte, l.
33. c. 2. sub fin, p. 19. l. 25. Incendiaries, p. 20. l. 20. Care, l. 22. 1 in,
p. 25. l. 27. Wilton, l. 29. certainly, l. 32. Lopez, p. 27. l. 33. but the
same, p. 29. l. 9. for Pincia read Villadolit, p. 30. l. 13. p. 31. l. 10. p.
32. l. 16. Ridolph, p. 31. l. 15. faillir, p. 32. l. 17. p. 35 l. 6. p. 46. l.
27. aureos, p. 33. l. 16. Lord Darnly, p. 36. in marg. Collect. of the
Felicities of Qu. Eliz. p. 40. l. 25. Creighton, p. 50. l. 31. Lopez ( with his
accomplices) Cullen, p. 52. l. 22. Fitz-Girald, then to John Fitz-Girald, and
lastly, p. 59. 33. same time that, p. 60. l. 5. with whom, p. 61. l. 9. du
Bourg, p. 62. l. 23. Olivier, p. 67. l. 36. Edict of July, p. 71. l. 27. Sect.
42. For, p. 72. l. 12. Legates, p. 73. l. 4. whiles, it, p. 74. l. 2. Valois,
who, l. 5. secret, p. 75. l. 2. contrived, l. 34. Rescripts, p. 80. l. 34. And
with, p. 82. l. 2. This done, away goes, l. 26. detested, p. 83. l 6.
Marchands, l. 21. Telinius, p. 86. l. 10. way designed, p. 90. l. 2. with the,
p. 94. l. 8. bewrayed, l. 19. detested, p. 95. l. 3. as did, l. 13. that than
that never, p. 96. l. 27. exagitates, p. 97. l. 23. superstition, ibid.
Successor, l. 30. for obduration r. obcecation, p. 98. l. 9.600, or 700, p 102.
l. 16. and p. 103. l. 10. Sarcerre, p. 103. l. 19. Talar, l. 20. others* l. 35.
a Fifth Civil War, p. 110. l. 26. reasons he gave him, put him in mind, p. 112
l. 12. concourse, l. 38. instructed, p. 113. l. 24. Lords, p. 114. l. 32.
Vincennes, p. 120. l. 22. dele not, p. 122. l. 19. Aumale, at Senlis, p. 123.
l. 7. unexpected, ibid. in marg. mensibus, l. 33. line, p. 124. l. 17. give, p.
126. l. 2. man, l. 15, 16. in the exit, p. 128. l. 2. inexorable, p. 129. l.
37. she established, p. 130. l. 19. the Guises, p. 133. l. 17. dele of, l. ult.
drawn of, p 134. l. 6. impostures, l. 9. 11. Landrianus, p. 136. l. 26. an
adscititious, p. 138. l. 33. incentors, p. 139. l. 2. instant stooping, p. 141.
l. 22. that in places, p. 145. l. 4. Evaristus, l. 5. Aquaviva, p. 147. l. 10.
15. Commolet, p. 148. l. 34. which yet the Pope contends is, p. 154. l. 27.
from doing it, p. 155. l. 3 Aquaviva, p. 156. l. 8. which as, p. 158. l. 1.
party; touches, l. 28. conseil, p. 159. l. 24. p. 160. l. 8, 14, 29. p. 161. l.
14 Ridicove, p. 161. l. 1. Clement, l. 10. confession, l. 37. Sarta, p. 162. l.
25. Balth, p. 168. l. 27. terror, p. 172. l. 7. in hand, p. 175. l. 14. or, as
some say, decree and command of, p. 177. l. 12. (...), p. 181. l. 25. all
sincere Christians.

Insert

Page 10. l. 12. -- to conceive. Or rather being more particular secrets, and
more worthy of observation, they are reserved for private conference with his
Majesty, as not fit to be committed to paper; as he says, c. 27. sub fin.

Page 57. l. 2. -- Spain, for three weeks before troubled with a perpetual flux
of blood through all the passages of his body, (Perefix, p. 163.) and at last,
if not --

A Discourse concerning the Original of the Powder Plot.
Sect. 1. ALthough several Relations of this Conspiracy have been long since
written and published in English, both by several writers of the History of
those times and others who have inserted the same among other Historical
Relations, as Stow in his Annals, page 874. Speed in his History of Great
Britain, l. 10. s. 31. -- The Appendix to the Book of Martyrs Fuller in his
Church History, Bishop Carleton in his Historical Collection of Deliverances,
and of late by Mr. Foulis in his History of Popish Treasons, lib. 10. cap. 2.
And also alone, as King James his Discourse of the manner of the Discovery of
the Powder Treason, Printed in quarto, 1605. but without his name to it, and
since in his works 1616. page 223. and the Proceedings against the late
Traitors, Printed in quarto, 1606. (whereof neither is more than what the title
does import, and the latter enlarged with long Speeches, which possibly may
seem tedious to the Reader, and it may be some others; (yet because many (as
well for the rare and admirable contrivance and discovery of the Plot, as
because we are all obliged to the Annual Commemoration of it) may be desirous
to read some Relation of it, who yet may not be willing to purchase those
larger works, and those Relations of it which have been Printed alone, being
now long since out of Print and therefore rarely to be met with: It was thought
convenient to publish this Translation out of Thuanus, rather than to reprint
any of the other; and that for these Reasons: 1. Because it seems to be more
complete than most or any one of the other Relations, which have yet been
Printed in English, whether alone or incidentally in larger works. 2. But
especially, in respect of the Great Authority of the Author, a person, not only
of great Quality and Place in his Country, Privy Counselor to the King of
France and President of the Supreme Senate of that Kingdom, but of known and
confessed Candor, Impartiality, Faithfulness and Exactness, as an Historian.
And being one who lived and dyed a Catholic in the Communion of the Church of
Rome, his Authority has in that respect some advantage above any of the other
Relations, which have been written by any of the Reformed party: which of it
self may be sufficient to refute the Impudence and vanity of all such as would
have had the world believe that it was the contrivance either of the This
bloody design, found in the hands of the malefactors, was notwithstanding
fathered upon the Puritans (as Nero did the burning of Rome upon the
Christians) by some impudent and cunning Jesuits -- Which, some years after, I
had opportunity at Bruges in Flanders, to make Weston, and old Jesuit, active
in the Powder plot, ingenuously to confess, Wilson, ibid.
Puritans, ( V. Speed Sect. 48. Wilsons History of King James, page 32. Foulis
page 690.) or of Cecil the then Secretary, to draw those unhappy Gentlemen into
it. ( V. Foulis, page 694. The Papists Apol. answered page 31 -- 33. edit.
1667.) the contrary whereof may easily be perceived in the series of this
Relation. And indeed the first of these projects was extinguished almost with
the plot; and the other has been long since sufficiently disproved, and the
plot it self confessed by some, and defended, magnified, and gloried in by
others of that party, and now scarce denied by any to have been of their own
contrivance; so that more need not now be said as to that particular, though
the following considerations, if need were, might be made use of in that
respect.

2. This design of Blowing up the Prince and People together, has been
commonly taken to have been the contrivance of Catesby, and of no ancienter
Original than their despair of foreign assistance, upon their last negotiation
with Spain. Of that mind seems our Historian here to have been, So also Speed,
Sect. 33, 37. Proceed. E. 4.
page 3. And the truth is, there is scarce to be found in print any direct and
express proof of other author and contriver or more ancient original of it,
though possibly we may ere long see it further proved to have been designed in
the Queens days against her, but upon further consideration of her age, not
likely, according to the course of nature, to live long, deferred till the
coming in of King James. In the mean time it may be remembered what is often
seen in Judicatories and Trials of Causes both Civil and Criminal, that those
things and works of darkness which are carried on and managed with so much
secrecy and caution, that no direct proof can be made against them, are
notwithstanding often discovered and brought to light by a heedful and
circumspect observation and comparing of circumstances: insomuch, that the
evidence of the truth, which is by this means made out, is not seldom more
satisfactory to all present, than the direct and express proof and testimonies
of witnesses, which many times prove false, even then when they seem to be most
full and punctual. And therefore to prove this contrivance proceeded from other
heads than Catesby 's alone and was of longer standing than has been commonly
thought, what is yet wanting in direct proofs, may in some measure be made up
by the consideration of the following Circumstances.

3. And first, it may be noted that though Catesby be the first of all these
Conspirators taken in this plot that did propose it to the rest, for ought
appears by what was discovered at their examination and trials, yet does it not
thence follow but it might have been before proposed to him (being the most
active of them) by some other: nor does it any way appear that it was of his
own only devising, as to omit other reasons is manifest from their attempt who
would have fathered it upon Cecil, as a trick to ensnare those gentlemen; for
otherwise there would have been no ground or color for that pretense.

4. It may 2. be remembered that this was not the first time that this means, by
blowing up by Gunpowder, has been proposed by confederates of that party for
the destruction and murder of our Princes. For it had been long before
proposed by one Moody to be laid under Queen Elizabeth's bed and secretly
fired. (Camden, Anno 1587. principio.) So that this may seem to have been but a
further improvement of a former project.

5. But 3. to come nearer to this present business, There is a passage of the
Jesuit Del Rio, 6. Disquis. Magic. cap. 1. edit. Lovan 1600. which, with the
concurrence of other circumstances, makes it very suspicious that he was privy
to the Contrivance, if not the Author of it; and which though published in
Print some years before the discovery of this plot, has scarce been taken
notice of, as to this purpose, till of late. And this it is,

Page 154.
Sect. 2. This Section, says he, I add by reason of the simplicity of some
Confessors, and the rashness and malice of some Judges, etc. Then he first
gives us this note, that the Seal of Confession has the same force in all
crimes even the most enormous; as in the crime of Treason, and then makes a
distinction between offenses committed, and offenses to be committed, and as to
offenses committed, he says it is the opinion of some, which seems to be the
common opinion of the Canonists, that the priest may reveal the offense already
committed, which he has learned, not in the Sacrament of Penance, but without
it, under a promise of secrecy, and of the seal of Confession; yea that he
ought to reveal it before the Judge if he be produced for a witness. This
opinion, Page 155.
says he, is rejected by others -- but I think both probable, but the latter
more safe. Then, as to offenses to be committed, when a person will not abstain
or amend himself but resolves to accomplish the crime, there has been some
Jurists, says he, that have thought, that they may be revealed by the
Confessor. This is a dangerous opinion, and withdraws men from Confession; and
therefore he concludes that, the common contrary opinion is altogether to be
followed, That it is not lawful to detect, not even Treason against the state.
In order to a further proof of this Conclusion, he tells us what limitations
they of this opinion do put upon it, this among the rest, If the penitent have
partners accomplices, and he indeed is penitent and promises amendment, but he
discovers that yet there is danger still, lest while be desists, the mischief
be committed by his accomplices: For then they think that, to prevent the
future damage, the Priest may reveal the offense which is to be committed,
although the penitent consent not. And, as to this limitation, he says it
depends upon this Question, Page 156.
Whether a Priest may at any time make use of the discovery, which he has made
from Confession, so much as for government and the averting of imminent evils?
which he illustrates with this Instance, A Malefactor [Maleficus] confesses
that himself or some other has put Powder or something else under such an
entry (or groundsel,) and except it be taken away the house will be burnt, the
Prince destroyed, and as many as go into or out of the City will come to great
mischief or hazard; and then for some reasons resolves for the Negative,
(contrary to the common sense and opinion of almost all the Doctors, as he
there acknowledges,) whereof this is one, viz. because Pope Clement VIII. by
his decree had commanded the Superiors of the Regulars to be most diligently
cautious that they should not make use of that knowledge of sins, which they
had by confession for exterior government: which shows says he, that the Pope
does most approve that opinion, which will have Confessors so to carry
themselves, as if they had heard nothing at all in confession. At length from
this Doctrine he draws these Consequences. The 1. to this purpose, If one
Malefactor confessing, among the circumstances of his sin, discover his partner
(in it,) and the other also presently comes and confesses, but conceals that
sin wherein he was partner with the other, the Confessor may not use this
knowledge to examine him concerning that sin (which his partner has
confessed.) The 2. is, That a Priest may not, no, not for fear of death
threatened him, reveal this crime to any one; and that in that case he may say
that he knows not, nor has heard any thing of such sin; because in truth he
does not know, nor has heard it, as (he is) a man, or as a member of the
Commonwealth, (but as a Priest.) Yea, he might say that he has not heard it in
Confession, or that the accused person has not confessed this to him, if he do
but the while think in his mind, (viz. so, that I may reveal it;) and all these
he may confirm upon Oath. Nor may the Priest be compelled to reveal it by any
one, no not by the Pope, much less by any other. This passage has so many
suspicious circumstances both in it and concurring with it, as all together may
be equivalent to a full and direct proof of what is said, that Del Rio was
privy to the contrivuance of this horrible Powder Plot, if not himself the
Contriver of it.

6. For 1. if we consider the Nature of the Instance, nothing could have been
better fitted to express this plot of blowing up the Prince and People
together; more agreeing in all particulars; by burning a house, not firing a
City; destroying Prince and People, King and Parliament, not the Prince alone,
or also with his family and household only; by powder, not by poison,
assasination, or open rebellion; by laying it under a house, not under a bed as
Moody proposed: and all this in so unusual and extraordinary a case, when
instances enough and mischievous enough might have been given of more ordinary
and usual designs, and when he had other Doctors who write concerning the same
question under his consideration, who must needs have put other instances into
his mind, had not this been studied by him, and here made use of upon design.
If any of those Doctors whom he there cites give any such instance, he may
reasonably be absolved from all suspicion which otherwise will lie very heavy
upon him. But it may be thought that perhaps he did this in conformity to the
subject which he handles, Magic; and therefore makes his instance of a Witch
or Magitian, and of Powders, and placed under a groundsel or entry. But first,
were there not many other instances of notorious wickednesses more usual or
frequently done or reported to be done by such Artists? And secondly, was ever
any such thing done or pretended or reported to have been done by Art Magic?
We may therefore reasonably suspect that this instance was not devised merely
for conformity to his subject of Magic; but rather proposed under that notion
and those terms for a blind a little to disguise and hide the design from such,
as having no thoughts of such enterprises, might easily be diverted from any
supition of it, while yet it might be plain enough to such minds, as were
sufficiently disposed to practice such projects.

7. And 2. if we consider the Case, wherein this Instance is given, viz. Of
Concealing Confessions; his Resolution of it, and that contrary to the common
sense and opinion of almost all the Doctors, as he confesses; And lastly his
Confirmation of his resolution by the Authority of the then present Pope, and
directing the practice of it by equivocation, this may direct us to his End and
Design in divulging both this Instance, and in this very case, his Doctrine and
Resolution, and that confirmed by the Popes Authority, for concealing
Confessions, viz. By the one to insinuate and intimate the Contrivance; and by
the other to encourage and promote the Practice and Execution of it, by
confirming the Confessors in Concealing Confessions, and encouraging the others
to the more security of not being discovered. To which end and purpose also was
probably the Treatise of Equivocation which was found in Treshoms lodging, V.
Foulis, page 700.
then very seasonably written and designed, which was seen and allowed by
Garnet, (v. Proceedings I.) And this with Del Rio so mutually conspiring in a
tendency and subserviency to the same end, do confirm the conjecture of the
design of both. And it seems very consonant to the subtle practices of the
Jesuits, rather in this sly, secret manner, underhand to insinuate this
project, than directly and expressly to have proposed it: so that it had been no
great wonder if it had been longer, before it had been apprehended and put in
execution; and it is not improbable that Garnet, V. Foulis, page 695, 696.
Abbot. Antilogia, cap. 11.
who had been engaged in former Conspiracies and held correspondence in
Flanders, might long before have knowledge of it, though he would seem to have
received his first knowledge of it, by Creswel from Catesby.

8. Again 3. if with the form and composure of this instance, we shall compare
the mysterious and aenigmatical form and composure of some other things
relating to this conspiracy, which are now plain enough to be understood, the
plain explication of those will teach us how to unriddle the mystery of this,
and direct us how to expound it. Such was that form of Prayer, which was taught
to some of their party, some time before the intended execution of this Plot,
for the prosperity of their Labors and downfall of Heresy, in these words,
alluding to the working in the Mine and blowing up of the House: Prosper, Lord,
their pains that labor in thy cause day and night: Let Heresy vanish like
smoke: Let the memory of it perish with a crack, like the ruin and fall of a
broken house, (Foulis, page 698.) And that very Letter which was the occasion
of the happy discovery and prevention of that horrible design, in these words:
Though there be no appearance of any stir, yet, I say, they shall receive a
terrible blow this Parliament, and yet they shall not see who hurts them. This
Counsel is not to be contemned, because it may do you good, and can do you no
harm; for the danger is past as soon as you have burned this Letter. To these
may be added that rumor cast abroad of another Petition which should be in no
danger of being denied, here mentioned by Thuanus, page 1. And though in its
first conception, this project was doubtless known but to few, yet when once
resolved on, as the time of its execution drew nearer, the more frequent were
these and such like Indications and Symptoms of it. So Parsons Rector of the
English College at Rome, orders the Students to Pray for the Intention of
their Father Rector; the meaning whereof when the discovery of the Plot had
unriddled to them, the horridness of it made diverse of them desert the
College. ( Foulis, page 692.) So the Jesuits at Lisbon a little before this
exploit should have been acted in England, are at some expense of Powder, on a
Festival day, to experiment the force of it; ( Foulis, page 693.) And other
Instances of this nature may be observed.

9. Here 4. The Time when this notable Instance was published, though so long
before the discovery of the Plot, may be very considerable, and perhaps afford
us greater evidence, than if it had not been published till some years after it
was. A time when the Pope and his sworn V. Review of the Counc. of Trent. l. 5.
c. 7.
servants the Jesuits were as studious in their Machimations and Contrivances,
and active in their exploits, as well against all of the Reformed Religion in
general, as the Queen and State of England in particular, as ever. And 1. for
this Pope ( Clem. VIII. who was elected 30. Jan. 1592, and died 2 Mar. 1604/5.)
It was contemporary with the holy league instituted by him against the
Protestants, wherein almost all Popish Princes, except the King of France and
the Great Duke of Tuscany were engaged, as we are told by Fr. Brouard the Popes
Secretary, M S.
for the promotion whereof he much endeavored a Peace between the Emperor and
the Tutk, and often complained that the war had been continued full forty years
against the Turk, in which time the Church of Rome might with less cost have
recovered her Authority in Europe. 2. Contemporary with his Bulls ( Cambden
1600 page 769.) to encourage and promote the Irish Rebellion. ( V. Foulis, lib.
9. cap. 3.) 3. Contemporary with those Bulls, Foulis, p. 693.
the one to the Catholic Nobility, Gentry and Laity, the other to the
Archpriest and the rest of the English Clergy, Not to admit or receive, Speed,
sect. 4. Foulis, p. 693.
after the death of Queen Elizabeth, when ever she should happen to depart this
life, any for King, how near soever in blood, except they were such who should
not only tolerate the Catholic Faith, but withal endeavor and study to
promote it, and, after the manner of their ancestors, undertake upon Oath to
perform it. (Proceedings Q. 3.) And these are the Bulls which have been long
since deemed the foundation of this Conspiracy ( Tortura Torti, page 279.
Foulis, page 693.) And this is the Pope who had formerly [ sc. Note, the same
year that Parsons came from Spain to Rome. Font. page 686.
1597] exhorted the French and Spaniard to unite, invade England and divide it
between them. ( Foul. page 677. ex D'Ossat. Let. 87.) who had he lived but some
few months longer, might have been as ready with his Breves to second the
success of this Conspiracy as was his Successor Paul V. with V. Andrews Resp.
ad Bellar. cap. 5. p. 113. Foul. p. 692.
his. 5. Nor were they only the heads of the Pope and Grandees at Rome and
other places, who were busy and active at that time in contriving projects and
conspiracies for the subversion and ruin of our Government and Religion, but
of persons also of meaner quality, and they not only the Popish Incendiaries of
our own Nation, but forreiners also of the Romish Faction. Thus we may observe
Campanella's book de Monarchia Hispanica exactly contemporary with this of Del
Rio, as the Preface to the English Edition does demonstrate, viz. that it was
written between the years 1599 and 1600. In this book he shows in part, what
Preparations may be made before hand; that so soon as ever Queen Elizabeth (
who is now very old) is dead, they may be immediately put into Execution.
These, says he, and the like Preparations may be made, etc. But what are
these? Why, in general 1. Causing Divisions and Dissentions among themselves,
and continually keeping up the same. 2. Sowing the seeds of a continual war
betwixt England and Scotland. 3. Rouzing up and encouraging to action the
Spirits of the English Catholics. 4. Dealing with the chief of the Irish
Nobility, to new model Ireland, as soon as they hear of the Queen's death. For
the accomplishing of all which he has several subservient means, Chap. 25. But
for the like what they may be, is left to the Readers judgment to conceive.
Only it may be noted that he who would not scruple to cause and keep up
Dissentions, to sow the seeds of a continual war, to excite Rebellions among
us, would hardly have scrupled at such a project, as by one blow would have put
us quite out of our pain. It would be too long to note all the Projects of
private men to this purpose, which were on foot at that time: but this of
Campanella for the promotion of the Interest and designs of the King of Spain
is the more pertinent and observable, because our conspirators had their
Negotiations with him, their Ledger there, and built their greatest hopes upon
his assistance at the same time.

10. But there is an other particular, as to this circumstance of Time, very
considerable, which is intimated to us in those words of Campanella. For as we
may easily perceive many heads at work at this time, many projects on foot
contemporary in the contrivance; so do they all agree in the Time designed for
Execution. So Campanella's Preparations, so soon as ever Queen Elizabeth is
dead, are immediately to be put in Execution. So Pope Clements Bulls had
respect to the same time, Quandocunque contingeret miseram illam foeminam ex
hac vita excedere. (Proceed. Q. 4.) And the Reason of all this is very
apparent. For now the King of Scots, as Campanella observes, Page 158.
hovers, as it were, at this time over England, not only by reason of his
neighborhood to it, but also because of his Right of Succession. -- And
therefore the time now draws on, that after the death of the said Queen
Elizabeth, who is now very old, the Kingdom of England must fall into the hands
of their Ancient and Continual Rivals, the Scots: a thing very grievous no
doubt, both to Rome, Spain and Flanders; and therefore no wonder if all beat
their brains to prevent so great a mischief. For whereas England alone, Page
158.
notwithstanding in a manner continually at wars with their ancient and
continual Rivals, Page 155.
appeared both against the Catholic King in the Low Countries, and against the
most Christian King in France, assisting the Heretics both with her Counsels
and Forces, what will Great Britain do, when not only the occasion of those
wars shall cease, but both Nations be united under one and the same King? No
question but the forethoughts of this set wiser heads on work than Catesbys, or
any other of those unhappy Gentlemen, who are vainly pretended to have been
trapan'd by Cecil; and something no doubt was resolved upon, the time drawing
on, and the Queen very old. And this might be the reason of their long
expectation, that change of State, would change Religion, also ( Speed sect.
37.) And if we consider the Principles and practices of these men, and what
before had been attempted against the late Queen, not only by open Hostility,
as becomes Kings and States where they have just cause, but also by base secret
conspiracies and treacheries against her person, instigated and fomented, as
well by other Princes and by their Ambassadors, even whilst Legers here (as
Mendoza and Labespineus,) as by the Pope, we can hardly think any thing so base
or barbarous that they were not like to attempt upon this occasion. And if we
again consider, how all their former endeavors, whether more justifyable
before men, as by open hostility, or more base and unworthy, not only by
promoting rebellions, but also by poison and assasination, had hitherto been
ineffectual and defeated, we may not unreasonably think that they might at last
arrive at some such project as this, as their last refuge and most effectual
and infallible means to accomplish at last their so long studied designs. And
lastly that it really was so, the punctual observance both of Campanella's
preparations, by endeavoring to alienate affections and raise jealousies
between the English and Scots, and other differences and dissentions among us
and stirring up the spirits of the English Catholics, etc. which were
practiced immediately upon the Queens death and the Kings coming to the Crown
of England (and have ever since been prosecuted) too long here to be related,
and also of Del Rio's Instance, and Doctrine of Concealing Confessions, and
that by Equivocation even in examination upon Oath, so well fitted to this
purpose, and as well and exactly followed and prosecuted, may reasonably
incline us to believe. This circumstance of the time designed for the Execution
of this Plot is also visible in Catesby's Reasonings (see the Hist. page 4.5.)
which he might well learn from the same Tutors from whom he learnt the project
of the Plot it self; for if to take off King James alone, unless also the
Prince, the Duke, and moreover the Peers and whole Parliament, would not serve
their turn, much less would it have served, to have taken off Queen Elizabeth
(now ready to die of her self) though with her Parliament, while the King,
together with the addition of another Nation to this, was ready to succeed her.

11. And thus we see the business is very plain as to the time so long before
resolved on in all their Councels both at Rome and Spain. It now remains to
consider how the attempt in point of Time did answer this resolution. The Queen
deceased the 24 of March. 1602. the next day was King James proclaimed, who
came to Barwick 6. April, and to Land. 7. May following, Anno 1603. and was
Crowned July after. The Parliament began 19. March following and continued till
7. July 1604. Then was prorogued till 7. Feb. and then again till 5. October.
1605. and then at last till the fatal day 5. November. following, when this
unhappy Plot was happily discovered: From whence we again run it counter to its
Original, thus: 11. December. 1604, was the Mine begun; Fawkes Confess.
and in May preceding, did the Conspirators actually engage in the design under
an Oath of Secrecy. Proceedings R. 4.
The Lent before Catesby imparted the design to Thomas Winter, Winters Confess.
and in September before that (which was Anno 1603.) to Proceedings R. 2.
Percy; which was before the Parliament began: and that being the time
designed, it is a very fair evidence to our purpose, that find it on foot at
that very time, which was by all those Councels so long before designed: and
before this we cannot reasonably think that it should have been imparted to
many even of the most trusty of their party, by the first contrivers of it, who
notwithstanding might long before have resolved upon it, and did all the while,
secretly and as behind the curtain, steer and manage the motions of those who
were to be employed in it. But before we follow the trace further, if any one
should here make this question Why they had not prepared their mine against the
first sitting of the Parliament? though we might well content our selves with
this answer, that it may be sufficient in all reason to satisfy us and them
too, that we have this evidence, that the project was then on foot, and that
many accidents might unexpectedly intervene, which might though unknown to us,
move them for some time to defer their preparations, as, even after it was
begun, Thuanus tells us, that the work was often intermitted and often
repeated, and we find that by such an accident as the Scotch Lords sitting at
Percy's house, Winters Confess.
it was for some time deferred; yet to leave no scruple or pretense for it, we
can tell them the true reason, viz. that being a thing so horrid and inhumane
in it self, and also V. Winters Confess.
scandalous to their Religion, it was thought fit that first more gentle means
should be used, as a Treaty of Peace by the King of Spain, and Petition by the
Papists at home, whereunto they were encouraged by some great hopes they had
conceived, but upon very uncertain grounds, of a Toleration. But when the King
of Spain, being well-pleased for his own part with the proceedings of the
Treaty, fell off from his former promises of assistance, and their Petition
was rejected at home, they presently conclude that a desperate disease must
have a desperate remedy, and in order thereunto, V. Winters Confess.
Catesby begins to broach the project, which against this time had been kept
secret in store, and imparts it to some of his most trusty confidents; who
thereupon might probably think that it was of his contrivance, as others from
thence have since thought it to have been; and that the rather, because in all
their dealings preceding this, even to the first intimation of it by Del Rio,
nothing visible did appear as to those conspirators in particular, but only
Negotiations with Spain and Flanders for foreign assistances, and an invasion;
which wiser heads upon the consideration of the former ill successes of such
attempts could not think of it self sufficient; and therefore we may more
reasonably believe that they who secretly and underhand managed the business,
so ordered these Negotiations as well for a blind to conceal the main design,
as for a necessary means to second it, when it had once taken effect. But
besides these Negotiations abroad, we find other matters at home in agitation,
by persons of the same party, to wit the Jesuits in general. For Watson and
Clark, two Priests who were apprehended July 1603. before the King was crowned,
for another plot of a lower rate and more ordinary nature, in their Confessions
upon their apprehension, affirmed that there was some treason intended by the
Jesuits, as appeared to them, by their provisions of Money, Arms and
Ammunition, dissuading the Catholics from acceptance of the King at his first
coming, (but withal) wishing them not to stir, but keep themselves quiet, till
they heard from them. ( Proceed. K. 3.) Of this, Casaubon, who had perused
their Confessions, writes thus to Fronto Duraeus in his Epistle dated 7 Novem.
July 1611. page 188. This is the first Conspiracy against the King which after
his arrival in England came to light; but that there were others also at the
same time in agitation, both the same Watson and Clark gave us notice, and
those things which from thence have ensued, have proved. They said, and often
and constantly affirmed, that when they communicated their counsels to the
Jesuits then living in England, and desired them that they would be partakers
with them of so noble an enterprise, they received this answer, that the
Jesuits could not join with them; forasmuch Ut qui suam quoque ipsi parilem
telam orsi, memorabilem in aevum texturam pararent, tempore opportuno exitum
habituram.
as they had a business of their own in hand which should be famous to all
ages, and which in due time would take effect. And these confessions and
affirmations of these Priests, the truth whereof might be further cleared, were
it either necessary or not too long to undertake it, bring us to that very
point of time designed for execution in all these projects contemporary with
Del Rio's Instance, and sufficiently show us that some first motions toward
the execution of this plot were then on foot, though the more plain and
downright preparations, were for some such reasons as abovesaid for some time
deferred, and sometimes, it may be, adjourned for want of fit opportunity. And
therefore, since Del Rio's instance is contemporary with these projects, and
this enterprise of the Powder Plot with the time designed in them for
execution, we may very reasonably think that he gave an instance of that which
was then as certainly designed as it was now punctually practiced, saving only
that little distorting of it to the subject of his book, which does but make it
the more suspicious.

12. And that we may see that there is no circumstance but does, not only well
agree with this conjecture, but some way or other help to confirm it, we may
also take notice of the Place, where this book of Del Rio 's was written and
first Printed, viz. Lovane, in Flanders; where these Conspirators had Father
Baldwin, a Jesuit, Ledger, and others of their confederates, as Sir William
Stanly and Owen, Resident; whither they had often recourse, and from whence
they expected their most present help after the blow should be given. So that
it was not hard for them to meet with some intimation among their frequent
consultations about these matters there, in Flanders, of some such notable and
most effectual project, not only by means of this book there published, but
even from the Author himself, or the Approbators of it their correspondents.
And of Catesby in particular, upon whom this contrivance is fathered, that he
held correspondence there, is plain enough; so likewise of Garnet, who was
afterward had in that esteem at Lovane, that it was once publicly prayed
there, -- Sanctae Henrice, Ora pro nobis (Foul. l. 10. c. 10. sub fin)

13. Now if from the consideration of the book, we proceed further to the
consideration of the Author, we shall find all circumstances still concur to
the confirmation of the Conjecture. 1. One of the Society of the Jesuits, into
which he was admitted, Ann. 1580. and who about the time of publishing this
book became the Popes sworn Servant, quatuor jam votis solemnibus obstrictus,
being obliged not only by those three vows, Common to all the Religious Orders,
but moreover by that fourth peculiar to that Society, of special obedience to
the Pope. 2. Of that height of zeal against Heretics, that at the very mention
or least remembrance of them in common discourse, he would change color and
his stomach rise against them. 3. Before he entered into the Society, he had
been one of the chief Senate of Brabant, then Chanceller of Brabant, and had
the management of the Kings Exchequer. ( Phil. Alegambe in Biblioth.) 4. And
being first well qualified by these employments, and then sufficiently
instructed in the Jesuits Society, he at length became a Politician, and had
his projects and devises for an Innovation to be made both in Church and State
throughout the whole Roman Empire, which the Jesuits earnestly endeavored to
put in practice; the sum whereof, as they are related from his own mouth by
William Freake of the Practice of the Jesuits, page 58. were, to raise such
divisions and differences among the Princes of the Empire, by working upon
their contrariety of opinions in matters of Religion, etc. that they may wast
and weaken themselves one against another, that their strength and power may be
broken, or at least weakened, and become utterly unable to withstand a common
foe, when he shall come upon them. Where he sets down more particularly how
differences may be raised between such and such particular Princes. Lastly, his
Opinion and Judgment of this Gunpowder Plot, may in some sort be understood by
his esteem of Garnet, whom he Delr' vind. Areop. cap. 27. page 104.
compared with S. Dionysius Areopagita. He died at Lovane 19. October. 1608. not
full three years after the discovery of this Plot.

14. If from the Author of this Instance we come to the Actors of this Plot,
and the Authorizers and Abettors of it, we shall find all circumstances still
to agree very well. 1. They were all either of the same Society with this
Author, v. Tortur. Torti, p. 280. Jesuitas Consultores. and Consentientes, and
R. Abbot. Antitogiae, cap. 9.10, 11.
Jesuits or their Jesuited Disciples; such to whom the Jesuits were
Confessors, and had the Conduct of their Consciences; such who were by them
resolved in point of Conscience in all things concerning this Plot; received
the Sacrament upon their Oath of Secrecy from them; and by them were absolved
after the Plot defeated. Nor do we find any in Holy Orders, (except the Pope
himself) to have had any hand in it or particular knowledge of it, but such as
were of this Society of the Jesuits. For the Secular Priests, though two of
them, in pursuance of the Popes Bulls, immediately upon the coming in of the
King, were engaged in a Conspiracy of their own (if not trapan'd by the
Jesuits, V. Stowe and Fuller, Anno 1603. Sect. 14.) against him, but of a
lower and more ordinary nature; and by the Actions of the Jesuits perceived
something in general, that the Jesuits had then some notable Plot in
agitation: yet we may reasonably believe, that they were utterly unacquainted
with the Kind and Particulars of this so high and refined a project, above the
pitch of their imaginations to conceive; not only from what has been already
said out of their Confessions, but also by reason of the differences and
dissentions, which were then and have since continued between the Jesuits and
them. ( V. Declarat. Motuum. Edit. 1601. and Watsons Quodlibets, Edit. 1602.)

15. 2. Nor were they two or three Jesuits only in a corner, and they of the
lower rank, or of mean or ordinary authority, but such as were of greatest
reputation place and Authority among them, who were concerned in this business:
as, besides Osw. Tesmond alias Greenwel, who with Robert Winter was by Garnet,
Catesby and Tresham, Anno 1601. sent into Spain, with Letters commendatory to
F. Creswel, to Negotiate the then intended Spanish Expedition; besides Gerrard,
and Hammond and Hall; besides V. Wilson Hist. of King James.
F. Weston who, heretofore Anno 1595. at Wisbich castle, by his contention for
a Superiority over the other Priests as well as Jesuits, began the differences
which have since continued between them; and in his book de Triplici hominis
Officio, Printed Anno 1602. foretold of many calamities, storms and dangers
that were like to ensue upon the Queens death, (as did also the Author of The
Ward-word Printed at Lovane 1599. said to be Parsons) as was observed and noted
Answer to the Supplication, chap. 4. Edit. Land. 1604.
in Print before this Plot was detected; besides all these and many more no
doubt, not yet discovered, the Superior of the whole Order of English
Jesuits, even their Provincial himself here in England, F. Hen. Garnet, who
had been eighteen years here in England, and a promoter of former conspiracies,
and held correspondence with diverse other of prime note and authority in
foreign parts: as, with F. Creswel in Spain, who being many years
Vice-praefectus Anglicanae Missionis, Sub-provincial and Ledger there, did great
matters, and by the Authority which he had with the two Philips II and III.
Kings of Spain, obtained many things of them for the good of the Catholic
cause in England, as we read in Alegambe, and about a month or six weeks About
the time that Banham was sent by Garnet to the Pope.
before this Plot should have been effected, went from Villadolit to Rome, to
be created a Cardinal, says L. Owen, but more probably upon some other
negotiation concerning this great business then in hand: (L. O. of the Engl.
Col. in foreign parts, page 74. Land. 1626. quar.) also with F. Baldwin in the
Low Countries, of like place and Authority there ever since the year 1590. at
which time Del Rio read Divinity at Doway, as he did afterward at other places
in those parts, as Liege and Lovane, who being so famous as he was in those
parts, and so great a zealot against heretics, it is not to be doubted that he
had frequent converse with F. Baldwin and diverse others of the English
Fugitives of the better quality: Lastly, at Rome with the English Assistant
there F. Parsons, whom we may conclude to have had particular knowledge of this
design, not only from what he wrote concerning the Journey or Pilgrimage to S.
Winefreds-well, and the mystical prayer which he ordered his Students to use,
to say nothing of the many projects which his working brain continually
devised, and his furious zeal as earnestly urged and prosecuted, or of his
Letter wherein he wrote ( Anno 1600.) that he had then been ten years dealing
in such matters; but we are moreover given to understand so much from some of
his own Religion, though not of his Order, and that he was highly accessory to
it, both before and after the discovery, as might be proved by great and
manifest instances. (The Jesuits Reasons unreasonable, Doubt 1.) But for his
Correspondence at Rome, we need do no more but first remember who Garnet was,
viz. Provincial of the English Jesuits, and then reflect upon the continual
weekly or octiduan Intelligences, which the Provincials from all parts
constantly transmit, concerning all matters of moment, to their several
respective Assistants at Rome, who immediately impart the same to the F.
General of the whole Society, always Resident there, and he or they, as the
matter requires or deserves, to the Pope: (of which the Discourse of the
Jesuits Politics, written under Paul v. Printed in the Mist. of Jesuit. part
2. and other Writers give us an account) and then we cannot doubt of his
correspondence there, not only with the English Assistant Parsons, but also, at
least by means of the Assistant, with the F. General Claudius Aquaviva, and
with the Pope himself, and that in this very particular, being a matter of so
great moment; which does more particularly appear by the Bulls prepared to be
sent over hither, as soon as the plot had taken effect, and other instances not
necessary here to be insisted on. So that if we consider the Persons and their
Correspondences and Intelligences, it will not be hard to conceive how easily
this Plot, wheresoever or by whomsoever invented, might be communicated, if by
Del Rio, to our Incendians here; if by any of them, to him; if at Rome, both to
him and to them, or, for the more secret conveyance of the notice of it, from
thence, by him, to them. Which is not unlikely that it was, and that it was the
contrivance of F. Parsons, who at that time, Anno 1600, had been ten years
dealing in such matters, and studying and promoting projects against his
Country, as we may perceive by his aforesaid letter then written.

16. Lastly, if from the Actors we come to consider their Actions and
Management of the whole business, we shall find a wonderful agreement, from
first to last, in all the Circumstances, not one crossing or thwarting our
conjecture, not one failing, not one that does not afford some matter or ground
to confirm it. For 1. If we consider the whole Section of Del Rio, and with it
compare the Actions and carriage of the Conspirators, in all, there is so
punctual an agreement, that without further proof, it seems to own and bewray
its parent, being as like him, as if (according to our proverb) it was spat out
of his mouth; at least to discover that it was nearly related to him. Thus with
his Instance agree the undertakings of the Conspirators; with his Doctrine of
not revealing things discovered in Confession, though the most heinous Treasons
and most pernicious to the State, the Practice of their Confessors; with his
means for concealing the same by Equivocation, and Confirmation thereof by Oath
or most solemn protestations, their punctual, strict and resolute use and
observance thereof. All which is so plain and manifest from what is before
recited out of that Section, and observed in it, and from the following
History, and the Proceedings against the Traitors, that nothing more need be
alleged to prove it, as nothing can be said with any color of probability to
disprove it.

17. And therefore 2. We may also, as to their Actions, take notice of the
great Care and Caution and Secrecy, together with their Juggling indirect
Practices, wherewith they managed their business; and that in these two
respects: 2. in general for the better securing of their design and
undertakings from discovery. And this appears in diverse Instances, as 1. In Th.
Winters Dealing, first with Sir William Stanly, to whom, though a good friend
to the Catholic Cause, he positively affirmed that there was no resolution to
set any project a foot in England; as he tells us in his Confession: then with
Fawkes, to whom though sent for by him to act in this tragedy, he imparted only
a resolution of a practice in general against his Majesty for relief of the
Catholic Cause, as appears by both their Confessions. 2. In that the business
was very sparingly communicated, at first but to few, and afterward to more as
the intended time of Execution drew on, and under an Oath of Secrecy, in the
most solemn manner confirmed, by receiving the Sacrament upon it. And Garnet
himself often religiously protested to them both by word and writing that he
would never betray them, in his Letter dated on Palm Sunday ( Tortura torti,
page 286.) which implies that he was often thereunto urged by them. 3. In that
reason which Catesby alleged, when he desired leave to acquaint some others
with the business: for many, said he, may be content that I should know, who
would not therefore that all the company should be acquainted with their names,
as it is in Winters Confession; and it is not unlikely that he learnt this
reason by experience at the same time and from the same person, as he did the
contrivance it self; which might possibly, for the more secrecy, be thus
conveyed to him, through diverse intermediate hands, from the first Author or
Authors of it.

18. And 2. more especially, for securing the reputation of the Society, in
case the Plot should be detected: and this appears in the Actions and indirect
Practices both of the Jesuits, and of the other Conspirators. Hence it was
that Garnet the Provincial, being of greatest Authority, and therefore likely
to bring most Discredit and greatest Odium upon the Society, if such a man as
he should be discovered to have any hand in so foul and infamous a matter, at
first would not be known even to Catesby himself, the principal visible actor
in the Plot, or to any other, but of his own Order, that he was made privy to
it. And after the Discovery of the Plot, how sollicitous was he, and concerned
for the whole Society! At at, actum est de Societate; which he feared would
suffer for it, as being conscious they well deserved. Then upon his Examination
and Trial, how ready and dexterous was he with his Equivocations, and
desperately impious in stiff Denyals, upon his Soul, and with detestable
Execrations, of those very things which were after so manifestly proved against
him, that he could not longer deny them! And for the other Conspirators: 1.
They taxed none in Holy Orders, which many looked upon, says Thuanus, as
purposely avoided, because they were bound by Oath not to do it. And certainly,
Garnet, when he so often engaged not to betray them, would not be less careful
for the Society, to oblige them not to discover any of it. 2. Nor did they only
carefully abstain from accusing, but most desperately endeavored by all means,
even the worst of means, by lies and false protestations to excuse them. Such
were Digbys Protestations, whereupon the Earl of Salisbury observed, what faith
was to be given to these men's protestations, who sought to excuse all Jesuits
how foul soever, out of an opinion that it is meritorious so to do, at such
time as they had no hope of themselves, and to clear them of those practices
which they themselves have now confessed ex proprio ore. Such was also that
lamentable attempt of Tresham upon his deathbed to excuse Garnet, wherein he
was disproved, by the Confessions both of Mrs Vaux, Garnets intimate, and of
Garnet himself. To these may be added, Their Design to have fathered the
enterprise upon the Puritans; and since, Their impudent groundless Imputation
of the Original of it to Cecil: which makes the relation of that design more
credible; and that again makes this imputation more apparently void of Credit.

19. Now of these Observations of their Secrecy and Practice we may reasonably
make this Use: 1. To manifest the validity and Sufficiency of these and such
like Arguments and Proofs, from Circumstances and by way of Inducement, in this
case. For where such Works of Darkness, as to the main substance of them are
plainly and fully proved, and as plainly and evidently proved to have been
managed with so much Secrecy and Practice, we cannot reasonably expect greater
Proof and Evidence of any Circumstance belonging to them, than so plain a
concurrence and agreement of all other Circumstances with it. 2. To manifest
the Insufficiency of what ever should he urged from their Confessions against
us. For since they did not only stiffly deny plain truths, but also must
impudently affirm manifest falsehoods, especially where it was thought necessary
for excusing any of the Society, what ever shall be alleged from their
speeches for that purpose may reasonably be suspected to have been fained and
devised for that end, and deserves no credit at all. 3. To Answer the Objection
that might be made, and Correct the Mistake that has been committed,
concerning the first Author and Original of the Plot, as if it was at first of
Catesby's Contrivance, and not till their Despair of Assistance from Spain,
upon their last Negotiation there.

20. To which it might be Answered, from their Practice to excuse their
Accomplices especially the Jesuits, that they attributed the Contrivance to
Catesby, because he being dead could accuse no other, and assigned That Time,
as being a good probable Occasion of it. But 2. It may be Answered, perhaps
more satisfactorily and fully, From their Secrecy, and from Catesby's own
words, that some might be willing to be known to him, who would not be known to
the rest to be privy; and the rather because this was an old policy formerly
practiced in order to the Spanish Invasion; which was after attempted in 88.
when many were so cunningly engaged that they knew not of, and so were not able
to accuse any, but the person that engaged them, (as Sir Francis Bacon in his
Observations upon the Libel published 1592. and in his Collection of the
Felicities of Queen Elizabeth, shows from a Letter of one of their Principal
Heads, which was intercepted;) and not only practiced before, but also repeated
immediately after this Plot, when Five had severally undertaken the Earl of
Salisbury's death, and vowed the performance of it; and yet it was so ordered
that none of those Five knew who the other Four were, for the better preventing
the discovery of the rest, if any one by attempting and not performing should
be apprehended; from hence it may well be answered: That it is very probable,
that Winter and Fawkes, from whose Confessions this mistake has arisen, and
the Objection may be made, and most of the other Conspirators, did indeed know
of no other Author of the Contrivance, but Catesby. And yet it may very well
be, that He received it from others the first Contrivers of it, either
immediately or mediately, either the full Project expressly, with the Reasons
mentioned by Thuanus, under some Oath of Secrecy or Engagement not to discover
from whom he received it, or at least some such Hints and Intimations of it, as
were sufficient to set on work a mind so active and well disposed to improve
the same to the utmost; and without any such engagement, he might be apt enough
to take the Invention upon himself; not only out of Devotion to the Society,
whose reputation he might thereby the better secure in case it should miscarry;
but even out of an Ambition to be reputed the Author of so Glorious an
Enterprise. And that He should be entrusted with so Great a Secret, and the
Chief visible Management of it, rather than any of the rest, was very likely,
1. Because he and his Family had been addicted and devoted to the Jesuits from
their very first coming into England; and were harbourers of Campian, who with
his Comrade Parsons (the two first and principal who were designed and employed
for that Service) came into England Anno 1580. where he was apprehended 22.
July in the year next ensuing; as we are informed by Sanders 3. de Schismate
Anglicano. From which time it is not unlikely that he held correspondence with
F. Parsons, who soon after returned to Rome, and continued there Rector of the
English College, till some years after the discovery of this plot, he was
shamefully turned out of Rome by Mounsieur Bethunes the French Ambassador, and
Order from the King of France, being discovered to plot a new treason against
his Majesty, to introduce the Duke of Parma; as we are told by a Romanist. But
2. this was not all why Catesby was preferred before the rest in this service:
for in this respect Tresham might perhaps have claimed that honor, as well as
he, as we may see in Sanders; but Catesby had another more special
qualification, as being more Cautious and Cunning, as we may observe in Thuanus.

21. But because so plausible a Pretense, for the Occasion of these desperate
resolutions at that time, as the King of Spain's then deserting of the
Conspirators upon his Treaty of Peace with England, may seem to have some
weight in it; though it must be noted, that this seems rather to have been the
Conjecture of the Historians and others, than that any such thing was expressly
alleged by the Conspirators, for ought appears in the Printed Confessions of
Fawkes and Winter; yet that we may leave no scruple, and make it further appear
that we have not only the concurrence of all Circumstances to confirm our
belief of the truth of what has been said, but have also sufficient matter and
ground for Answer to all Objections, we shall return such Answer, though
touched before, as may both sufficiently solve this doubt, and be of some use
to other purpose. And therefore it must be remembered, 1. That all the
neighboring Popish Princes, especially France, Spain, and the Archdukes of
Austria, toward the latter end of the Queens Reign, were not a little concerned
upon Fear of what Consequence the Union of the three Kingdoms, (viz. of
Scotland with England and Ireland) might prove in time; as is not only apparent
in it self, but intimated to us by the Papists themselves in their Supplication
to King James before the discovery of this plot; and thereupon bent all their
Consultations, and used all Means to prevent or hinder it, as well after the
Kings coming in, as before, and even by their Ambassadors here, did not only
tamper with some of the Prime Ministers of State to corrupt them, but also
practiced to raise stirs and Rebellions: Of the French, Cambden tells us that
the French Ambassador studied to move Commotions, ne duo divisa Britanniae
Regna, Angliae and Scotiae, in unum coalescerent; and others inform us of his
tampering with some of the Prime Statesmen here. And of Count Arembergh,
Ambassador Extraordinary for the Archdukes, we find him reported to have been
an agent in the Treason of Watson and Clark, and not only so, but that He and
they were the Contrivers of it, and that He drew into it the Lord Cobham, and,
by his means, his brother Brook, Parham, the Lord Gray of Wilson, and at length
Raleigh also was brought in.

22. And 2. we must take notice that there was certainty a deeper mystery in
the Counsels of Spain, than merely an Invasion intended. For long before this,
The King of Spain (as Sir Fr. Bacon in his Report of the Treason of Loper,
Invasion of England, laid aside the Prosecution of his Attempts against this
Realm by Open Forces, and by all means projected to trouble the waters here by
Practice, first to move some Innovation in Scotland, then, he solicited a
Subject within this Realm, (being a Person of great Nobility) to rise in Arms,
and Levy war against her Majesty. [Perhaps he means the Earl of Darby, whom
Richard Hesket endeavored to persuade to assume the Title of King, Mary
daughter of Hen. VII. and made him large promises of Aids and Money from the
Spaniard, threatening him with sudden destruction if he did not do it, and
conceal the business. Cambd. Anno 1593.] Lastly, either of himself, or his
Counselors and Ministers using his name, descended to a course Against all
Honor, all Society and Humanity; Odious to God and Man; Detested by the
Heathens themselves; to take away the life of her Majesty, by Violence or
Poison. A matter which might be proved to be, not only against all
Christianity, and Religion, but against Nature, The Law of Nations, The Honor
of Arms, The Civil Law, The Rules of Morality and Policy; Finally, the most
Condemned, Barbarous and Ferine Act that can be imagined, etc. What then would
he have said, and what must we think of this so far transcendent Inhumane and
Antichristian Powder Plot! But he goes on: Certain it is, that even about this
present time, there have been suborned, and sent into this Realm, diverse
persons, some English, some Irish, corrupted by Money, and Promises; and
Resolved and Conjured by Priests in Confession, to have executed that most
wretched and horrible Fact. Of which number certain have been taken; and some
have suffered, [as Patrick Cullen, an Irish Fencer; and afterward Ri. Williams
and Edmond York, for whose encouragement and reward an Assignation of forty
thousand Crowns, under the hand of Stephano Ibarra, the Kings Secretary at
Bruxels was deposited with Holt a Jesuit, who kissing the Consecrated Host,
swore that the money should be paid as soon as the murder was committed, and
engaged them two by Oath upon the Holy Sacrament to perform it. Camd. Anno
1594, 1595.] And some are spared, because they have with great sorrow confessed
these attempts, and detected their suborners; [ there were also designed at the
same time for this purpose, as the others confessed, F^ulis l. 7. c. 7.
one Tipping, Edmund Garret an Ensign, with a Wallon, and a Burgundian, and one
Young, and perhaps some of them might be taken and spared.] But says Sir
Francis, Among the number of these execrable undertakers, there was none so
much built and relied upon, by the Great Ones of the other side, as was the
Physician Lopez; And then he proceeds in the particular relation, how one
Manuel Andrada, who had revolted from his own King of Portugal Don Antonio to
the King of Spain, having before won Doctor Lopez sworn Physician of her
Majesty's Household to the King of Spains service, coming freshly out of Spain,
treated with Lopez touching the empoysoning of the Queen, which he undertook
for fifty thousand Crowns, but staying the execution, till by Letters from
Spain he should have Assurance of the payment of the Money, those Letters, the
one from the Count de Fuentes and the other from the Secretary Juara, which
were delivered to the messenger by the Count's own hand, being happily
intercepted, the Practice was discovered, and the Great Service, whereof should
arise a Universal Benefit to the whole world, as the Letters expressed it, very
opportunely disappointed, and Lopez with Em. Louys and Ferrera de Gamae,
whereof the one managed the business abroad, and the other resided here to give
correspondence, were apprehended and arraigned; who upon these Letters and
their own confession being found guilty, were condemned, and about three months
after executed at Tiburne, as Camden tells us. The like practice we find again
some few years after repeated in Spain, whence by Walpole the Jesuit, some time
Rector or at least of great authority at Villadolit where, as I take it, the
Spanish Court was at that time kept, Edw. Squire was sent over to poison the
Queen, under pretense of redeeming Spanish Captives, being by that Jesuit
encouraged upon the score of merit, with promises of Eternal Salvation, and his
blessing. Camb. Ann. 1598. out the same Providence still preserved her.

23. And to these pitiful and base unworthy Arts, did the Grave Spanish
Counsels and high vaunts at last descend; and this was a fair Introduction to
the Contrivance of this Masterpiece and last refuge of the Powder Plot, which,
from what has been said before, we have great reason to believe did shortly
after succeed. Now if these things be considered, and therewith the State and
Condition of England and Spain at that time, which we may find well compared to
our hand by Sir Francis Bacon in his considerations touching a war with Spain,
it must needs be a very weak and childish thing for any man to imagine that
Spain should have been so inconsiderate as to have had any thought of Invading
England at that time, notwithstanding any combination of whatsoever party ready
to receive him here, of Papists and discontented persons, (whereof he had made
greater preparations against the Northern Rebellion and 88.) did he not build
upon some such mystery of the Powder Plot. And indeed, if we well examine the
Preparations then made or designed both abroad and at home, we shall find them
rather proportionable to second some such feat as this, when the King and the
Nobility and a great part of the Gentry were destroyed, and the whole Kingdom
under so great a consternation and confusion as must there upon unavoidably
have ensued, than otherwise to have achieved any conquest of this Nation. And
if this was so that all did depend upon some such secret machination, it was
very agreeable to the Counsels and Practices of the Spaniards, (who, as Sir Fr.
Bacon observes, are great Waiters upon Time, and ground their Plots deep) 1. By
these means, to As they had before done in order to the Invasion of 88. by
rumors, and Printed Books.
hold up the minds of the Papists, and keep them in continual readiness till
the Queens death, at which time all the Popish Consultations, for sundry years
before, aimed, as has been sufficiently manifested; and then after her death
to enter into and go on with a Treaty of Peace (as they did in 88. till the
noise of the Cannon gave notice of the Invasion, and as Don Jo. of Austria had
before done) and by that means provide for themselves, in case the other
project failed; and in the mean time underhand to insinuate that contrivance,
to them who were apt enough of themselves to put it in execution; but yet in
appearance so to desert them, as if it should be discovered, they might not
appear to have been in the least privy to it. In the month of Sept. Thu. l. 129.
came the Spanish Ambassador, and in the same month was Proceed. R. 2.
Percy by Catesby acquainted with the Plot. It was rumored, as our historians
tell us, that the King of Spain was a fomenter of the Plot; but for his
Ministers, they could not be unacquainted with our Author Del Rio, a famous
Jesuit who had once been in In Supremum Brabantiae Senatum cooptatus est Sed
probitate and doctrina suffragantibus altius evectus, Palatinis and militibus
jus dicere, mox etiam Brabantiae pro Cancellario esse, Regiumque Fiscum curare
jussus est: Alegamb. Lipsius Anno 1578 inscribes an Epistle to him at Lovain,
Mart. Ant. Delrio Consiliario Regio.
Honorable Civil employments under that King, a member of the Supreme Senate
of Brabant, Judge of the Marshals Court, Advocate of the Kings Exchequer,
Chancellor of Brabant, and Counselor of State, and afterward entered into the
Society at Pinira in Spain, and if they were otherwise ignorant of it, might
from him have learned the contrivance, who himself might possibly have seen a
little experiment or Emblem of it in Stiria whither he went about the year
1600. when the Protestant Ministers were cast out by the Decree of the Archduke
through the instigation of the Jesuits, and among other Outrages, a Church,
wherein were the Monuments of a Noble Protestant Family the Hofmans, and the
dead carkases and bones blown up, not casually, but with Gunpowder, for that
purpose put under it; As Thuanus reports, Anno 1600. l. 124.

24. But to conclude this Subject; If we look into the Beginning, Progress and
Succession of all those Tragical Attempts, which upon the score, or at least
under the Pretense of Restoring the Catholic Religion in England, have been
made or promoted, during the Reign of Queen Elizabeth of Blessed Memory,
against Her and Her Kingdoms, we shall find in all from first to last such a
Combination of Counsels and Mutual Assistances between the Bishops of Rome and
the King of Spain with his Netherlands, as will very much confirm what has
been said, and may reasonably persuade us to believe that the same was also
continued in this. It would be too long to make a particular relation of all;
but yet it may not be amiss, briefly to take notice of the principal of them;
not so much to confirm what has been said, which needs it not, as to observe
the true Principles, from which all have proceeded, and what use and benefit we
may make of the whole discourse: and in this respect it matters not much who
were contrivers of that Powder Plot, since it is out of question that it
proceeded from the same principles with the rest.

Paulus IV. who was Pope when Queen Elizabeth began her Reign, not living out a
year after, did not at all molest her. Nor did his Successor Pius IV. whether
being diverted by other business of nearer concern at home, in the Intrigues of
the Council of Trent, or by the means of Ferdinand the Emperor then in hopes to
marry his son to her; but Pius v. Catena who was Secretary to his Nephew,
Cardinal Alexandrino, and wrote his life) he employed one Robert Bidolph, Hier.
Catena in vita Pii v.
a Gentleman of Florence, residing here under pretense of Merchandise, to
engage a party against the Queen; which he so effectually did, not only among
the Papists, but Protestants also, that the Duke of Norfolk was drawn into the
Conspiracy, by promise of marriage with the Queen of Scots; and in the mean
time he persuaded the Spaniard to assist the Conspirators; 1569. Thuanus l. 46.
Sanders 7. de visib. Monarch.
and at last to promote the business, sent over Doctor Nic. Morton to certain
of the principal English Papists, to denounce the Queen an Heretic, and
therefore fallen from all Power and Dominion, and by them to be accounted as a
Heathen and a Publican, and they disobliged from her Laws and commands.
Hereupon, ( Chapinus Vitellius being first come over, under pretense of
composing differences about Trade, to observe the success of the ensuing
Rebellion, and to head the Spainards forces which were to be sent out of the
Low Countries) the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland with 600. Horse and
4000. foot, rise in actual Rebellion, and Declare for the Restitution of the
Roman Religion; 3. De Schismate Angl.
but the rest of the Catholics, says Sanders, because Sentence of
Excommunication by the Pope was not publicly Denounced against the Queen, nor
did they seem absolved from her Obedience, not joining with them, they were
easily by the Queens forces chased into Scotland; where afterward
Northumberland was taken, and brought back into England, and at York, by a
Glorious Martyrdom, says he, happily ended his days. And in this Rebellion, for
the King of Spain, besides Vitellius and La Mot the Governor of Dunkirk, who
came over in a common Sailers habit to sound our Havens, Bacon Observe.
the Duke of Alva his Lieutenant in the Low Countries, and Don Guerres d'Espees
his Lieger Ambassador here, were discovered to be the Chief Instruments and
Practisers. Camd. Anno 1569.
This Beginning was immediately seconded by Leonard Dacres, but with like
success.

26. But the Duke of Norfolk, and Bidolph, and others being a little before the
Insurrection secured upon some suspicions, and so prevented from appearing in
the Rebellion, the bottom of the business was still undiscovered, they not long
after released, and the Conspiracy still carried on. And the Pope, to prevent
that failure for the future, which had been committed the year before, and to
give more satisfaction and encouragement to all good Catholics to join in
Rebellion against the Queen, in the entrance of the next year, sends out his
Sentence of Anathema against her. Wherein he first sets out his own Title and
Authority, Sanders 3. De Schis. Angl. page 368.
in these words: He that reigns on High, to whom is given all Power in Heaven
and Earth, has committed the One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church, out
of which there is no Salvation, to One Alone on Earth, to wit, to the Prince of
the Apostles, Peter, and to Peter's Successor, the Bishop of Rome, to be
governed in Plenitude of Power, etc. Next he acquaints us with his own great
care and endeavors for the discharge of this great trust; then draws up a
particular charge of several crimes and misdemeanors against Elizabeth
pretended Queen of England, whom he calls the Servant or Slave of wickedness,
Flagitiorum Serva. And therefore, says he, Supported with his Authority, who
was pleased to place Us, though unable for so great a burden, in this Supreme
Throne of Justice, out of the Plenitude of Our Apostolical Power, We do Declare
the aforesaid Elizabeth (being) a Heretic, and Favourer of Heretics, and her
Adherents in the matters aforesaid, to have incurred the Sentence of Anathema,
and to be cut off from the unity of Christ's Body; and Her to be Deprived of her
pretended Right to the Kingdom aforesaid, and of All Dominion, Dignity and
Privilege whatsoever; and also the Nobles, Subjects and People of the said
Kingdoms and All others who have in any sort Sworn unto her, to be for ever
Absolved from the same Oath, and from All manner of Duty of Dominion, Fidelity,
and Obedience; As we do by Authority of these presents Absolve Them, and
Deprive the same Elizabeth of her pretended Right to the Kingdom, and of all
other things abovesaid. And we Command and Interdict All and Every the
Noblemen, Subjects, People and others aforesaid, that they Presume not to Obey
Her, or her Monitions, Mandates and Laws. Those who shall do otherwise we
Innodate in the like Sentence of Anathema. This was sent over, and toward the
end of May affixed upon the Bishop of London's Palace Gates; England, sent to
Bidolph; Catena.
who, having by the Popes Order distributed 150000. Crowns (Aurea) among the
Confederates, and all things here being again made ready against the Queen, is
sent to acquaint the Pope with their preparations; which he approving presently
sends him to the King of Spain; Spaniard presently gives express Command that
Vitellius with an Army shall Invade England; and the Pope prepares his money in
the Low Countries. But it pleased God that a messenger coming over with Letters
to the Queen of Scots, the Spanish Ambassador, Norfolk and others, being
intercepted, the whole business is discovered, Norfolk and others committed,
and all their Preparations and Hopes disappointed. Which, says Catena, the Pope
took sadly, and the Spaniard condoled, who said before Cardinal Alexandrino the
Popes Nephew, (not long before sent to him from the Pope) that no Conspiracy
was ever more advisedly undertaken, nor with greater unanimity and constancy
concealed. Which in so long time was revealed by none of the confederates: and
that the forces might easily have been transported from the Low Countries in
the space of twenty four hours, which might have suprised the Queen and the
City of London, restored Religion, and settled the Queen of Scots in her Throne:
especially, when as Th. Stucley an English fugitive had taken upon him at the
same time, with 3000. Spanish Soldiers, to reduce all Ireland to the Obedience
of Spain, and with one or two scouting Ships, to fire the English Navy. The
Duke of Norfolk was brought to his Trial the 16. of January following, and
Condemned; and the 2. of June after beheaded. The Pope in the mean time, the
first of May, being called to his trial and to give an account for these things
before a far other Supreme Throne of Justice,

27. Before we leave this Pope Pius v. we may take notice of two notable horrid
exploits, about his time practiced in our neighbor Countries; The first in
Scotland, the murder of the Lord Darby, King James his father, in the first
year of his Papacy, and the house wherein he was murdered at the same time
blown up with Gunpowder; in relation to which Thuanus tells us: Ad haec
Pontificis, and, ut passim jactabatur, Caroli Lotaringi Cardinalis Literis
incitabantur; nam cum per eum a Pontifice petiissent pecuniam ad instaurandam
majorum religionem, responsum fuerat, frustra ipsos conari, nisi sublatis iis,
per quos stabat ne res exitum sortiretur. etc. lib. 40. ad finem Anni 1566. The
other in France, that barbarous Massacre at Paris, which though not executed
till near two months after this Popes death, yet it is observable that
Cicarella notes in his life: Ad Regem Galliarum, ejusque Ministros optima misit
documenta, ad eosdem Hereticos Regno illo exturbandos: and what these documenta
were, we may the better guess, if we take notice of the temper and employments
of this man; a most severe, austere man, who had with so much rigor exercised
the business of the Inquisition wherein he was employed, as made many dread his
severity when he was chosen Pope. And the same Author notes his
irreconciliabile in Hereticos odium, though he looks upon it as matter of
Commendation. But how exceeding mad he was against them, condemning and
burning, even for familiarity with Sectaries or those that were suspected such,
may be seen at large in the Noble Author de Thou. lib. 39. pr. And in both
these exploits is observable, the Care that was taken to cast the Odium of the
fact upon others. But to return to our own story,

28. After the death of this man, the thirteenth of the same month was Gregory
XIII. chosen Pope. And although with their late disappointment, their party
also in England was much broken and disabled for the future, the chief heads
being taken off, yet was it not long before this Pope was also engaged in the
same Combination. Which was first begun between him and Don John of Austria,
base brother to the King of Spain, Low Countries, and in pursuance thereof, the
Pope wrote to the King of Spain. But Don John's Exploits were prevented by his
own death before ever he could put them in practice. 1578. Thu. lib. 65. Camd.
hoc An.
Yet the like Consultations were soon resumed by the Pope and the King himself;
and now England and Ireland both are to be invaded together, and Th. Stucley,
whom the Pope had honored with the Title of Marquess, Earl, Viscount and Baron
of several eminent places in Ireland, is to command the forces thither, the
Pope providing men, and the Spainard money. But this storm was blown over into
Africa, where Stucley and part of his men were slain. However the next year is
sent into Ireland, from Spain, James Fitz-Morice with some Companies of
Soldiers, 1579. Thu. lib. 68.
and with them from the Pope Nic. Sanders, our Author above mentioned, with
Authority Legatine and a consecrated Banner: 1580. Thu. lib. 70.
and to them the years after San Joseph with seven hundred Italian and Spanish
Soldiers, and arms for five thousand more to arm the Irish, and some store of
money; these being but Bacons Observations.
the forerunners of a greater Power, which by treaty between the King of Spain
and the Pope should have followed; and the Pope to animate the Irish, sends
them his Breve, with Apostolical Benediction, wherein reciting that he had of
late years by his Letters exhorted them to the Recovery of their Liberty,
Ofullenan Hist. Cathol. Hibern.
and Defense of it against the Heretics etc. and that they might more
cheerfully do it, had granted to all such as should be any ways assisting
therein, a Plenary Pardon and Forgiveness of All their Sins; he now grants to
all such, whom he also exhorts, requires and urges in the Lord to endeavor to
help against the said heretics, the same Plenary Indulgence and Remission of
their Sins, which those who fight against the Turk do obtain. And to this
expedition the Pope promised a Cruciat and 1000000 Aurea. But all these with
their Irish Confederates, the Earl of Desmond, his brothers and their party,
were very happily defeated by the Queens forces, at the very instant when
diverse ships upon the Sea were bringing them more forces and assistance; and
the Popes Legate, Sanders, died miserably of hunger, and, as some say, mad upon
the ill success of the Rebellion.

29. About this time the Seminaries began to swarm; and because the Bull of
Pius v. had not yet sufficiently produced its intended and expected effect even
with a great part of the Papists themselves, Sanders p. 372. Camd. p. 180.
who seeing the neighbor Popish Princes and Provinces, not to abstein from
their usual commerce with the Queen, continued still in their Obedience to her,
and were offended at the Bull as a mischievous snare to them: therefore for
their satisfaction it is Decreed at Rome, Thu. lib. 74. Camd. an. 1580.
that the Bull does always Oblige Elizabeth and the Heretics, but not the
Catholics rebus sic stantibus, but only then, when they should be able
publicly to put it in execution. And that it might in due time be effectually
Executed, Missions are made into England to Prepare a Party to adhere to the
Spaniard at his coming to invade us. Bacon Observe. Collect. and Consid.
And the better to conceal and disguise the Practice and make the Queen and her
Council the more secure, it is Resolved not to have any Head of the party here.
But the Emissaries coming daily over in various Disguised Habits, deal
particularly, and so more effectually, Camd. fine Ann. 1580.
with the people in their secret Confessions, Absolving them particularly in
private from Obedience and Fidelity to the Queen, as the Bull of Pius v. had
done in public, but only in general: Camd. p. 315. 348.
and severally Engaging them in that secret manner, as has been before
mentioned, so as none could be privy to others engagements. And these Doctrines
were every where inculcated: Camb. fin. An. 1581. Thu. l. 74.
That Princes not professing the Roman Religion, are fallen from their Title
and Royal Authority. 2. That Princes Excommunicate, are not to be Obeyed, but
thrown out of their Kingdoms (and that it is a meritorious work to do it.) 3.
That the Clergy are exempt from the Jurisdiction of Secular Princes, and are
not bound by their Laws. 4. That the Pope of Rome has the Chief and Full Power
and Authority over all, throughout the whole world, even in Civil matters. 5
That the Magistrates of England are not Lawful Magistrates, and therefore not
to be accounted Magistrates at all. 6. That what ever, since the Bull of Pius
v. was published (which some hold to have been dictated by the Holy Ghost) has
by the Queens Authority been acted in England, is by the Law of God and Man to
be reputed altogether void and null. These Doctrines thus secretly instilled
into men's minds in private, were seconded with several pernicious Books in
print, against the Queen, and Princes Excommunicate. And as well to deter the
rest from Obedience, and move them to Expectation of Change, and Reconciliation
to the Church of Rome, as to encourage their own party, Camd. an. 1580. l. 318.
they not only by Rumors, but also by printed Books gave out, that the Pope
and King of Spain had conspired to subdue England and take it for a prey. This
is true, says Sir Fr. Bacon, Collect. of the Churches.
and witnessed by the Confessions of many, that almost all the Priests, which
were sent into this Kingdom from that year 1581. to the year 1588. (at what
time the Design of the Pope and Spain was put in Execution) had in their
Instructions, besides other parts of their Function, to distill and insinuate
into the People these Particulars; It was impossible things should continue at
this stay; They should see ere long a great change in this State; That the Pope
and Catholic Princes, were careful for the English, if they would not be
wanting to themselves. Which are almost the very words of Sanders mentioning
the considerations upon which these Seminaries were at first founded. But
notwithstanding this, we are not to think that All the Priests which were sent
over, Camd. an. 81. Thu. lib. 74. Bac. Collect.
were acquainted with the Arcana and Secrets of the Design, but only the
Superiors and some of the best qualified for the business, who managed and
steered the actions of the rest, according to their private Instructions.

30. Hereupon, says Rishton, who published and enlarged Sanders his book,
speaking of these Missions, soon after ensued a great change of minds, and
wonderful increase of Religion. Which, that we may know it by its Fruits,
presently appeared in several desperate attempts and Resolutions to Kill the
Queen. First, by Somervil, Hall a Priest and others whom he confessed, was
three days after found strangled in the prison, for fear, probably, least he
should have discovered others. Then, to pass by the practice of Bern. Mendoza
the Spanish Ambassador Lieger here with Throgmorton, and Martins book, by
William Parry Doctor of Law, 1584. Thu. lib. 79.
encouraged thereunto by Ben. Palmius a Jesuit, Ragazonius the Popes Nuncio in
France, Cardinal Como, and the Pope himself, who sends him his Benediction,
Plenary Indulgence and Remission of all his Sins, and assures him, that besides
his Merit which he shall have in Heaven, his Holiness will remain his debtor,
to acknowledge his desert in the best manner he can: and after all this very
much excited to it by Dr. Allens Book, which, says he, teaches, that Princes
Excommunicate for heresy are to be deprived of their Kingdoms and Lives. All
which Parry confessed, produced the Letter from the Pope written by Cardinal
Como, and was executed in March 1584/5. and the Pope soon after, in April, was
called to account in another world. Immediately before this in Thuanus precedes
the relation of the murder of the Prince of Aurang 10. Jul. by Bal. Gerard
confirmed in his resolution by a Jesuit at Treves, promising him if he dyed
for it, he should be happy and be put in the number of Martyrs, and also
encouraged to it by a Franciscan at Tourney, and three other Jesuits at Treves.

31. To Gregory succeeded, as well in his practices, Sixtus v. chosen Pope the
twenty fourth of the same month of April, and about this time John Savage,
into whose head the Doctrines that it is meritorious to Kill Excommunicated
Princes, and Martyrdom to die for so doing, being by the Giffords and Hodgeson
priests thoroughly inculcated, made a vow to kill the Queen. And soon after the
same resolution is taken up by Antony Babington, Ballard a Jesuit, who incited
him to it, as not only Just and Holy in it self, but moreover Honorable and
Profitable to him, if he should overcome the difficulty. For what could be more
Just and Holy, than with the hazard of his Life to vindicate his Country, and
the Cause of Religion, without which Life it self ought to be nothing esteemed
of. Elizabeth was now long since, by the Lawful Successor of Peter, cast out of
the Communion of the Church: from that time she does not reign in England, but,
by a usurped Power contrary to the Laws, exercise a cruel Tyranny against the
true Worshippers of God. Whoever should kill her does no more than he that
should slay a profane. Heathen or some damned accursed creature: he should be
free from all sin either against God or Man; yea would merit a Crown of Glory:
and if he survived the enterprise, should doubtless obtain a great reward:
under the notion of Reward not obscurely insinuating his marriage with the
Queen of Scots. Thus is this Jesuits discourse with him represented by the
Excellent Thuanus, who there informs us that this business was transacted with
the Spanish Ambassador Mendoza, and was to have been seconded by a foreign
Army, and Paget a gentleman of a Noble family sent into Spain about it. And at
last all things being agreed on both at home and abroad, the day appointed for
the perpetrating the business is S. Bartholomews day, memorable for the
Parisian Massacre fourteen years since, and for that reason purposely made
choice of. But before the day came, the business being detected, Ballard and
Babington, and several other of the Conspirators were apprehended, whereof some
had sworn to be the Executioners of the Queens murder, and among them Savage
now again swore it, and others were to be of the party, which the while was to
rescue the Queen of Scots; and upon their own Confessions and Letters
intercepted, were Convicted, Condemned and Executed. And in this Conspiracy was
a project of making an Association under pretense of fear of the Puritans.
These were executed but the twentieth of September and in January following was
the French Ambassador l'Aubaspinaeus, a man wholly devoted to the Guisian
Faction, and Lieger here, projecting the same business; Camb. an. 15^^
and to that purpose treated with William Stafford, a Gentleman of a Noble
Family, to kill the Queen, at first more covertly, but afterward more openly by
his Secretary, who promised him great Honors, a huge sum of Money, great
Favor with the Pope, the Duke of Guise and all the Catholics. Stafford
refused it himself, but commended to him one Moody; and in Consultation how to
do it, Moody proposes to lay a bag of Gunpowder under the Queens Bedchamber,
and secretly give fire to it. But this being discovered by Stafford, the
Secretary thinking to be gone into France was intercepted, and upon his
examination confessed the whole matter.

32. Hitherto had the Actors and Abettors of most of these Conspiracies, to put
the better Color upon their unjustifiable attempts, besides the Cause of
Religion, pretended also the Title of the Queen of Scots to the Crown of
England, Camb. an. 1586
who having been discovered to be privy to most of the former, and found guilty
of that of Babington, was therefore condemned; and now this being found to have
been designed upon the same pretense, Queen Elizabeth, by great importunity of
the Parliament, who had confirmed the Sentence, was prevailed with to sign a
Warrant for the Execution, whereupon she was beheaded the eighth of February
following. And here we must not omit a Notable Artifice of the Jesuits, who
being at last out of hope of Restoring their Religion by Her or Her Son, began
to set up a feigned Title for the King of Spain, Camb. an. 86.
and employed one of their Society into England (as is discovered by Pasquier a
French Writer) to draw off the Gentry from Her to the Spaniard, and to thrust
her headlong into those dangerous Counsels which brought Her to Her end: and at
the same time, least the Guises her kindred should give her any assistance,
stirring Them up to new enteprises against the King of Navarre and Conde. And
agreeable hereunto was the discovery of that for which she was condemned, viz.
by Gilbert Gifford a Priest then sent over into England, to immind Savage of
his Vow, and to be the Letter carrier between the Queen of Scots and the
Confederates, who presently goes and offers his Service to the Secretary
Walsingham to discover them; (and that forsooth out of Love to his Prince and
Country, although he had not long before been one of those who provoked Savage
to his vow to kill her,) and accordingly he first conveyes them to Walsingham;
by whom they are opened, transcribed and carefully sealed up again and returned
to Gifford, who then conveys them to the Queen of Scots, Babington or who ever
else they are directed to; which is so plain a prosecution of the same design,
that it is a wonder that Camden should be so much at a loss to find out the
mystery of this undertaking of the Priest. More might be observed to manifest
this Juggle, if it were necessary to the present business.

33. The Design of the Pope and Spaniard to Invade England had been now long
since perceived here, not so much by printed books, which were designed only to
work upon the vulgar and their own party, as by the secret Letters of Morton
and others which were intercepted, and Chringhtow the Scotch Jesuit's papers,
miraculously, as himself acknowledged, when by him torn and thrown into the
Sea, blown back into the Ship wherein he was taken. But now their preparations
being in good forwardness as well for the assault from abroad by their Navy and
Army, as for their reception and admission here by their party prepared by
their Agents the Emissaries, the better to disguise the business and to make
the Queen and her Counsel the more secure, Camb. an. 1586
they not only publish a Book, wherein the Papists in England are admonished
not to attempt any thing against their Prince, but to fight only with the
weapons of Christians, Tears, Spiritual Arguments, Sedulous Prayers, Watchings,
Fasting, Thu. lib. 89. Camd. an. 1588
but also a Treaty of Peace is earnestly solicited by the Duke of Parma with
Authority from the King of Spain, which though not soon yielded to by the
Queen, who suspected some fraud or deceitful design in it, yet being at last
obtained, kept on foot till the engagement of both fleets break it off in the
famous year of 88. At which time all the preparations being fully completed
for execution, the Pope, who had before promised the assistance of his
Treasure, begins first to thunder out his Bull: Which, with a book written by
Doctor Allen, is printed at Antwerp in English in great numbers to be sent over
into England; in which book, for the greater terror of the people, are
particularly related their vast preparations, which were so great, that the
Spaniards themselves being in admiration of them, named it the Invincible
Armado; and the Nobility, Gentry and people of England and Ireland are exhorted
to join themselves with the Spanish Forces under the conduct of the Duke of
Parma for the Execution of the Popes Sentence against Elizabeth. With this Bull
is Dr. Allen, (being, extraordinarily Thu. l. 100.
out of the time allowed by the Canons even of this Pope, made Cardinal of
purpose for this exploit) sent into Flanders, to be ready, Thu. l. 89.
upon the Spaniards Landing, to pass over into England, as the Popes Legate cum
plena potestate, Some such Officer we may suppose was entrusted with the three
Breves, which were in like manner sent to be in readiness to be sent over and
published in the Popes name in three principal places of this Kingdom, as soon
as the Powder Plot was discharged and had done its execution, as Bishop Andrews
reports from the Spontaneous confession of a Jesuit at the time of his writing,
who was then here in prison. Respons. ad Apol. Bellarm. cap. 5. page 113.
and here to publish the Bull, In which Bull the Pope, by the power, which he
says is, from God, by the Lawful succession of the Catholic Church, descended
to him over All persons, for several causes there in specified, and more fully
expressed in the Bulls of Pius v. and Gregory XIII. does again proscribe the
Queen; Takes away all her Royal Dignity, Titles and Rights to the Kingdoms of
England and Ireland; Declaring her Illegitimate and a Usurper of those
Kingdoms; Absolving her Subjects from their Oath of Faith and Obedience to her;
Threatens All of what condition soever, under danger of the wrath of God, not
to assist her in any wise after notice of this Mandate, but to employ all their
power to bring her to Condign punishment; Commands All Inhabitants of those
Kingdoms diligently to execute these Mandates, and as soon as they have certain
notice of the Spaniards coming, to join all their forces with them, and in all
things be obedient to Parma, the King of Spain's General; and lastly, Proposing
Ample Reward to those who shall lay hands upon the proscribed Woman and deliver
her to the Catholic party to be punished, in conclusion, out of the Treasury
of the Church committed to his Trust and Dispensation, he draws out his
treasure, and Grants a Full Pardon of All their Sins to All those who should
engage in this expedition. This Thuanus relates more at large, and presently
adds: It was agreed in secret that King Philip should hold the Kingdom, when
reduced to the Obedience of the Church, of the Pope in Fee as of the Holy See,
according to the Articles of the contract by Ina, Henry 2. and King John made
and renewed, with the Title of Defender of the Faith. And to reduce it to this
Obedience, these were the foreign Preparations which were made according to
Thuanus his Account: A Navy of 150. Of vast burden, says Cicarella, besides an
infinite number of small ships; In vita Sixti v.
Ships extraordinarily well furnished; and in it of Mariners and Seamen 8000.
Gally-slaves, a great number, 2080. says Camden, of Soldiers 20000. besides
Gentlemen and Volunteers; for scarce was there any family of note in Spain,
which had not son, or brother or cousin in that fleet; Brass Guns 1600. Iron
Guns 1050. Of Powder, Bullet, Lead, Match, Muskets, Pikes, Spears and such like
weapons, with other instruments and engines, great abundance, as also of Horses
and Mules, and Provisions for six months. And that nothing might be wanting as
to matters of Religion, they brought along with them the Vicar General of the
Sacred Office, as they call it, that is the Inquisition, and with him of
Capucines, Jesuits and Mendicants, above 100. And besides all these, were
prepared in Flanders and those parts, by the Duke of Parma, of Flat-bottomed
Boats for transportation of men and Horse and other necessaries 288. of Vessels
for Bridges fitted with all things necessary, 800. and of Armed men 20900.
50000 Veterane Soldiers says Sir Fr. Bacon. But all these preparations and
forces were not greater, than was the Spaniards expectation and confidence of
an assured Victory and Absolute Conquest of this Kingdom, and that not only in
respect of the strength and greatness of their Forces, though so great that in
admiration of this Navy, they named it, as has been said, The Invincible
Armado: and so was it called in a Spanish ostentation throughout Europe, and
has indeed been thought the greatest Navy that till that time ever swam upon
the Sea; though not for number, yet for Bulk and Building of the Ships, with
the Furniture of great Ordnance and Provisions. But that which very much
heightened their Confidence, was the supposed Goodness of their Cause, and
presumption of the Divine assistance accordingly favoring them in it, and
thereby signally ratifying the Sentence of Christ's Vicar, this being assigned
as an Apostolical Mission against the Incorrigible and Excommunicate Heretics
to reduce them to the Obedience of the Catholic Church (of Rome,) and to
execute his Holines's Sentence of Excommunication against that accursed
Anathematized woman; (though this, that we may note it by the way, was properly
and anciently reputed, the Office only of Satan and his Angels and Ministers,
and never taken out of their hands till Pope Gregory VII. after above a
thousand years exercise of it, by the Plenitude of his Power, took upon him to
dispose, as it seems, of the Kingdom of Darkness, as well as of the Empires and
Kingdoms of the Earth.) But the Judgment of Heaven was contrary to their
expectations; and as the Scripture tells us The Curse Causeless shall not come,
so it pleased God to turn their curse into a Blessing. For with this Monstrous
Navy, though the Spaniards persuaded themselves, that the English terrified
with the fight of it, would not dare to assail it, but only sailing at a
distance, observe their Course, and the while give Parma an opportunity,
without difficulty, Thu. p. 253.
to waft over his Forces and pour them in upon London, yet did the English,
though, through the abuse of that fraudulent Treaty, and some reports of the
Spaniards not coming out that year at the instant purposely cast abroad, not
altogether ready and prepared, courageously engage; and in few days, having
taken and sent home two of their great ships, so distressed this Great Navy,
that they were forced to fly; and having chased them toward the North until,
for want of Powder, they were forced to give them over, returned home with the
loss not of an hundred men, and but of one Ship; while these Executioners of
the Popes Anathema, according to the Curse in the Scriptures, Camd. p. 533.
came out against us one way, and fled before us seven ways, being driven about
all Britain, by Scotland, the Orcades, Ireland, grievously afflicted with
Tempests, Shipwracks, and all kind of Miseries, and very much curtailed; and at
last Resolving in Council, that, for as much as the Heavens and the Sea being
their Enemies, Thu. p. 255.
their condition was now such as by no Humane Strength, Virtue or Counsel,
could be restored, every one should return into Spain which way he could, and
all meet at a place appointed: they accordingly held their Course for Spain,
and many by Tempests and other misfortunes being lost by the way, the rest
returned with Ignominy and Disgrace: having lost as the Spaniards write, says
Thuanus, 32. Ships, 10000. Men, and 1000. more carried Captive into England;
but as the English and Dutch write, above 80. Ships, and as some of their own
say, the greatest part of that so Glorious Fleet: which had been the
preparations of five whole years at the least, Cicarel. in vita Sixti v.
(says Bacon) through Spain, Italy, Sicily, Flanders, their most expert
Commanders and Veteran Soldiers, being sent for even out of America, and had
cost, before ever they set out to sea, Camd. page 513. 516.
not so little as 12000000 aurea (centies vicies centena millia aureorum) as
appeared by their books of account, as the Spanish Ambassador informed the
French King in the hearing of Thuanus.

^^80.
34. Notwithstanding this defeat of his Military Forces, after so great
preparations, and that with so great expense of his Treasure, yet it seems the
King of Spain was so well pleased with the proceedings of his Agents the
Emissaries here, that he thought good to erect another College for them the
next year, and, that they might not be far from his Court, at Villadolit. Which
in short time, about two years after, sent out a Mission into England, the
Emissaries coming over in the Disguised Habits of Seamen, Merchants, 1590. Thu.
l. 100.
Soldiers, etc. In the mean time Sixtus v. dyed about 27. Aug. 1590 in so
great hatred of the people, for his intolerable Exactions and New Impositions,
that there was presently in the vacancy a concourse of the people to throw down
the Statue which in his life time was erected for him in the Capitol. Cicarel.
in vita ejus.
At his Election, the Cardinals in the Conclave were all first sworn, that
whoever of them should be chosen Pope, among other things for the Benefit of
(their) Religion, the Dignity of the Holy See, and the Splendor of the Sacred
College (of Cardinals,) should to the best of his Power, Engage the Catholic
Princes to fight against the Turk, Heretics and Schismatics. And how well
this man being chosen prosecuted the design of his Oath, may be understood in
part by what has been said already, and may be further seen in his dealings
with our Neighbors in France. Whereof an instance or two by the way, and a
word or two of his quality and manners, will not be much beside our purpose. He
had his Original, as himself used to glory, from an Illustrious House; for, for
want of Covering, it was in all parts illustrated by the Sunbeams; being born
of poor parents in a pitiful Cottage. But his good qualities were must
conspicuous after his Election to the Papacy, being a most Imperious, Proud,
Ambitious, Vainglorious, Gluttonous, Covetous, Unjust, Revengeful, Inhumane,
and rashly severe man, the contraries whereof, by a special faculty of
Dissimulation, he had before simulated, as he is described by Thuanus and
Cicarella in his life. He began the exercise of his Authority with a rash and
unjust condemnation of a young man of Florence to be hanged, Thu. l. 83.
Cicarel. in vita.
for only refusing in his Masters house to deliver an Ass to the Popes
Officers, which was not his in whose name they demanded it, but the young man's
master's, all men pitying the hard case of the poor fellow. Nor was this
dealing used only with men of inferior quality; for by his command the
Cardinal Saluiato at Bononia, having summoned Count John Pepulus, a man of
prime Nobility and of no less Piety and Probity, for entertaining certain
Gentlemen who were exiles, in some places, out of the Popes Territories, which
were anciently granted to him by the Emperor, when he pleaded a Prescription of
the Emperors Privilege, caused him in the night to be pulled out of his own
house, and, having a Priest ready to confess him, presently to be strangled.
And that we may see how well he could use both swords, in the beginning also of
his Papacy, he sent out his Excommunication against the King of Navarre and the
Prince of Conde; after a glorious Preface concerning the Authority given to
Peter and his Successors, far above all the Powers of Earthly Kings and
Princes, which never swerves from right judgment, Declaring them to be
Sectaries, and public and manifest Favorers and Defenders of Sectaries;
guilty of high treason against the Divine Majesty, and Enemies of the Catholic
Faith; to be fallen from all Right of Dignity; and them and their Successors to
be unworthy to succeed in any principality, particularly in the Kingdom of
France: Absolving their Subjects from their Oath of Fidelity; and lastly
Exhorting the King of France to be mindful of his Oath at his Coronation, and
to Extirpate all the seeds of the Sectaries. And we may suppose that he was
true to his Oath and the Interest of his See, when he deceived the expectations
of the Leaguers in France and their assistants the Spaniard, least, as
Cicarella notes, if the King of France and his party should have been overcome
by the Assistance of Spain, the Spaniard might take the advantage of it to
enlarge his own Dominions too much, which might have proved dangerous to the
Holy See. Thu. l. 96.
But he made them amends for it afterward, though without any expense of his
Treasure, for he sent out his Excommunication against the King of France
himself, although a man of an irreconcilable hatred against the Protestants,
and who had been a promoter of the Parisian Massacre, unless within ten days he
should set at liberty the Cardinal Bourbon, whom the Rebels desired to make
head of their party. This was published in May, and the 1. of August after, was
the King murdered by James Clement a Jacobin, who was thus resolved in the
Case by the F. Edm. Burgoin, who was afterward excuted for it, drawn in pieces
by four horses, his quarters burned, and his ashes scattered in the wind.
Danita, l. 10. p. 857.
Prior of his Covent, that if he undertook it, not out of hatred or desire of
private revenge, but inflamed with the love of God, for Religion and the good
of his Country, he might not only do it with a safe Conscience, but should
merit much before God, and without doubt if he should die in the act, his soul
would ascend to the Quires of the Blessed; and as some say he was likewise
encouraged by F. Commelet and other Jesuits. This fact of Clement was highly
extolled in France both in Sermons and Printed books: and the Leaguers had that
opinion of his Martyrdom (for he was presently killed in the place, and
afterward pulled to pieces and his body burned) that they came to the place,
and scraped up the very dust and earth whereon any of his blood lighted as
Sacred Relics, and put it into a Vessel in which they came, intending to carry
it to Paris, and there erect a Monument of his Martyrdom ad adorationem; but by
a vehement wind, which suddenly arose, both vessel and passengers were all
drowned, not one escaping, and the relics cast away. Nor was the fact less
extolled at Rome, even by the Pope himself, in a Premeditated Speech in the
Consistory, wherein he not only preferred that wicked wretch before Eleazar and
Judith, but most impiously and blasphemously compared his fact, for the
greatness and admirableness of it, to the Mystery of the Incarnation and
Resurrection of our Lord and Savior. The King had caused the Duke of Guise,
who was head of the Rebels, to be slain; and this was one main matter, which
incensed the Pope against him. Thu. l. 94.
For the Pope had agreed with Guise in secret, to marry his Niece to the Prince
of Jonvil, Guise his son and heir, and to depose the King, thrust him into a
Monastery, and compel him by the Popes authority to renounce his right to the
Kingdom, and to set up Guise the father, King in his place. But how zealous and
jealous he was for the Dignity and Authority of the Holy See, is worth our
further notice, in an instance related by a good Catholic, the learned Civil
Lawyer William Barclay, in his book De Potestate Papae dedicated to Pope
Clement VIII. None of all the writers of the Popes part, says he, has either
more diligently collected, or more ingeniously proposed, or more smartly and
subtilely concluded their reasons and arguments for the Popes Authority than
the Eminent Divine Bellarmine, who although he attributed as much as with
honesty he could, and indeed more than he ought to have done, to the Authority
of the Pope in Temporals, yet could he not satisfy the Ambition of that most
Imperious man Sixtus v. who affirmed that he held a Supreme Power, over All
Kings and Princes of the whole Earth and all People and Nations, delivered to
him, not by humane, but Divine Institution. In so much, that he was very near,
by his Papal Censure, to have abolished, to the great detriment of the Church,
all the works of that Doctor, which at this day oppose heresy with very great
success, as the Fathers of that Order of which Bellarmine was, have seriously
told me, cap. 13. But enough of Sixtus; By whom, for example, we may guess, by
these fruits, what likelihood there is, that he and such as he whereof there
has been no small number Popes, since the tenth Age especially (that Seculum
Infelix, when with a great Eclipse of Learning, the Popes of Rome, as even
Bellarmine notes, degenerated from the Piety of the Ancients) were partakers
of, and directed by that Holy Spirit, which God gives to them that obey him,
to conduct them in all truth, or rather the Spirit of the world, the Spirit
that works in the children of disobedience, whose works they have done.

35. The three next succeeding Popes, Urban 7. Gregory 14. and Innocent 9. did
not all of them live out half three years from the death of this; Clement VIII.
who was elected Pope 3. Feb. 1591/2. Hesket, Lopez and, Accomplices his Cullen,
York and Williams (who confessed some others) and Squire, Lopez by the King of
Spain's Ministers of State, not without the privity and consent of himself; all
the rest incited and encouraged by the Jesuits, who for the like practices at
the same time against the most Christian King, though then become Catholic
too, Thu. l. 111.
were exterminated out of all France, and a Pyramid erected for their perpetual
Infamy. But from all these God still preserved her, the Emissaries being
discovered, taken and Executed. Nor did he only preserve her from their
attempts, but shortly after blessed her with happy successes in an Expedition
against the Spaniards then preparing again to Invade England; 1596. Bacon
Observe.
wherein the King of Spains Navy of 50. tall Ships, besides twenty Galleys to
attend them, were beaten and put to flight, and in the end all, but two which
were taken by the English, burned, only the twenty Galleys, by the benefit of
the Shallows, escaping: the town of Cadiz, manned with 4000. foot and 400.
horse, taken sacked and burnt but great Clemency used toward the inhabitants:
and at last the English returning home with honor and great spoils, besides
the two Gallions, Camd. an. 1596.
and about 100. great brass Guns and great store of ammunition and provisions
of war taken in the town, and with very small loss, and but of one person of
quality: the Spaniards having lost in all first and last, 13. of their best men
of war, and 44. other Ships of great burden, and in Ships, great guns and
military provisions, by the estimate of the most knowing persons above 3000000
ducates. And when the King of Spain not long after, that he might repair this
loss, in a heat had from all parts gathered together all the Ships he could,
and manned even the strangers Ships which were in the Ports of Spain, and set
out this Navy to Land upon the Coasts either of England or Ireland, the Heavens
fought for her, and so favored her, that by a horrid tempest which arose, most
of those Ships were either sunk by the waves, or broken against the rocks, in
so much that she sooner heard of the destruction of her enemies, than of their
setting out to Sea to assault her. The year ensuing, the King of Spain became
well inclined to a peace with England, which, died the 13. of Sept. after.

36. But the death of the King of Spain did not dissolve the Combination, no
more than the deaths of so many several Popes before had done. For it still
survived in his son Phil. III. with Clement VIII. Only so many former attempts
having proved altogether unsuccessful against England, there was now with the
persons some change also of their Counsels; and all their Consultations against
England, were afterward so directed as to depend for their execution upon the
death of the Queen. Yet in Ireland there seemed some hopes that something might
be effected at present, by assisting the Rebels there; and therefore for their
encouragement and assistance, the King of Spain by his Agent Don Martin de la
Cerda, Matthew de Oviedo, whom he designed Archbishop of Dublin, Promises of
Indulgence, with a Phoenix plume to Tir-Oen their General; That whereas of long
time, being led on by the Exhortations of his Predecessors and himself and of
the Apostolic See, for the recovery and defense of their Liberty against the
Heretics, they had with United minds and Forces, given aid and assistance,
first to James Fitz-Girald, and lastly to Hugh Onel Earl of Tyron Captain
General of the Catholic Army in Ireland, who with their Soldiers had in
process of time performed many brave achievements, fighting manfully against
the enemy, and for the future are ready to perform the like; that they may all
the more cheerfully do it, and assist against the said Heretics, being willing
after the example of his Predecessors to vouchsafe them some Spiritual Graces
and Favors, he favorably grants to all and every one who shall join with the
said Hugh and his Army asserting and fighting for the Catholic Faith, or any
way aid or assist them, if they be truly penitent and have confessed, and if it
may be, received the Sacrament, a Plenary Pardon and Remission of All their
Sins; the same which used to be granted by the Popes of Rome to those who go to
war against the Turks. (18. April 1600. Camd. p. 750. Foul. p. 651.) And the
next year again for their further encouragement, letter to Tyrone, wherein he
Commends their Devotion, in engaging in a Holy League, and their valor and
atcheivements; Exhorts them to continue unanimous in the same mind; and
Promises to write effectually to his Sons, the Catholic Kings and Princes, to
give all manner of Assistance to them and their cause; and tells him, he thinks
to send them a peculiar Nuncio, who may be helpful to them in all things as
occasion shall serve. (20. Jan. 1601. Foul. p. 655.) The King of Spain likewise
sends his Assistance; a great fleet, who landed at King-Sale 20. Sept. under
the conduct of Don John d'Aquila; who sets out a Declaration, showing the King
of Spain's pretense in the war, which, he says, is with the Apostolic
Authority to be administered by him; that they persuade not any to deny due
Obedience (according to the word of God) to their Prince, but that all know,
that for many years since, Elizabeth was deprived of her Kingdom, and All her
Subjects Absolved from their Fidelity, by the Pope; unto whom he that reigns
in the Heavens, the King of Kings, has committed All Power, that he should
Root up, Destroy, Plant and Build, in such sort, that he may punish temporal
Kings (if it should be good for the Spiritual Building) even to their Deposing;
which thing has been done in the Kingdoms of England and Ireland by many
Popes, viz. by Pope Pius v. Gregory XIII. and now by Clement VIII. as is well
known, whose Bulls are extant: that the Pope and the King of Spain have
resolved to send Soldiers, Silver, Gold, and Arms with a most liberal hand:
that the Pope Christ's Vicar on Earth, does command them (the Papists in
Ireland) to take Arms for the defense of their Faith, etc. ( Camd. p. 829.
Foul. 658.) And not long after more Supplies were sent from Spain under Alonso
de Ocampo. Thu. l. 125. Came. an. 1601. and 1602.
But it pleased God to make the Queen still Victorious over All; and part of
them, with the Irish Rebels, being beaten and routed in the Field, the rest are
brought to articles, upon which they Surrender All, and are sent home, when
more forces were coming from Spain to their recruit. The next year most of the
other Rebels being defeated and subdued, last of all Mac Eggan, the Popes Vicar
Apostolic, 1602.
with a party of the Rebels, which he himself led, with his Sword drawn in one
hand, and his Breviary and Beads in the other, was slain by the Queens forces
and the Rebels routed in January 1602/3. and so the whole Kingdom, Tyrone also
submitting to mercy, totally subdued. ( Camd. an. 1603. Foul. p. 664.)

37. And now this Blessed Queen, having by an Admirable Providence of Almighty
God, been Preserved from All these both Secret Conspiracies, and Open
Invasions, through a long Reign of four and forty years complete, and made
victorious over All her Enemies, as well abroad as at home: Outlived her great
and bitter enemy Phil. 11. King of Spain, who himself lived to be sensible of
the Divine Judgment of the Iniquity of his Actions against her, and to desire a
Peace with her, though he lived not to enjoy it: Outlived four Kings of
France, eight Popes, and the greatest part of the ninth: and maugre all the
Powers of Hell, the Malice and Wicked Machinations of Men of most turbulent and
Antichristian Spirits, Defended that Purity of Religion, which, even at the
very beginning of Her Reign, she had, with Mature Deliberation, and a Generous
and most Christian Courage and Resolution, notwithstanding all Difficulties and
Dangers which on every side threatened her undertakings, established, was by
the same at last brought to her Grave in Peace, 1603.
in a Good Old Age. Her very Enemies admiring, as well her Worth and
Excellence, as her Glory and Felicity; (see the one extolled by Sixtus v. Thu.
l. 82. p. 48. and the other by An. Atestina, l, 129. and both more largly
described by the Noble and Ingenuous Thuanus l. 129. and Sir Francis Bacon in
his Collection of her Felicities) while her Neighbors, who wickedly and
barbarously persecuted the Professors of that Reformed Religion, for their
Religion sake, which she with great and Christian Moderation toward the
adversaries of it, happily established and defended, either lived not out half
their days, or died violent deaths, and were murdered by their own Subjects of
the same Religion with themselves, or were otherwise unhappy in their attempts
in that Eminently Remarkable manner, as is so far from being impertinent to our
subject and design briefly to note, that it would be a great fault and unworthy
neglect not to do it. Certainly who ever shall impartially, and without
prejudice consider the History of this blessed and happy Queen, and with it
compare the History of the Times both precedent and subsequent to her reign,
and especially of her neighbors in France dur ng her own times, must needs
acknowledge, not only an Admirable Providence over Her, in both Preserving and
Blessing her in all her Affairs, but a Special Distinguishing Providence, thus
favoring her, and at the same time in a very remarkable manner dis-favouring,
Crossing, Blasting and Severely Punishing and Revenging the different and
contrary Courses and Practices of her Neighbors and others.

38. We might here remember the Story of Don Sebastian King of Portugal, who in
the heat of his youth and devotion to the Sea of Rome, had tendered his service
to the Pope, and engaged in an Expedition against England and Ireland; but
having raised a great Army and prepared a great Fleet, was by the King of Fesse
prevailed with to assist him in the recovery of his Kingdom in Mauritania.
Where, with Stukely, (who commanded the Italian Forces raised by the Pope and
King of Spain, for the service against Ireland) whom he persuaded to go with
him first to the African war, he was slain, dyed without issue, and left his
Kingdom a prey to the Spaniard; whereby not only the present storm which
threatened the Queen was blown over, but the Spaniard also for diverse years
diverted, by his wars with Portugal from molesting the Queen in that manner,
which otherwise it is likely he would have done, and from some such Invasion as,
though then intended, was not actually undertaken till ten years after. We
might here also remember Don John of Austria, in the heat of his eager designs
upon England, cut off by the Plague, in the flower of his age; Thuan.
if his heart was not broken, as was thought, by the disappointment of his
ambitious designs, after he had foully, Raleigh.
by the Popes Dispensation, falsified his Oath taken to observe the Treaty made
with the States General. And we might here likewise take notice, not only of
what some may think observable in the Death of the King of Spain, Thu. l. 120.
if not devoured, yet in a great measure wasted and consumed by Lyce bred in
his own body, which in so great quantities issued out of four several tumors
in his breast, as that it was as much as two men, by turns, could do, to wipe
them off from him with napkins and clothes: but of that which others may think
more remarkable in his Life, which is, that having twice most solemnly Sworn to
the States General of the Low Countries (over which he held only a kind of
Seigniory) Raleigh.
to Maintain their Ancient Rights, Privileges and Customs, which they had
enjoyed under their thirty and five Earls before him; and afterward obtained
from the Pope a Dispensation of his Oaths (which Dispensation, says Sir Walter
Rawleigh, was the true cause of the war and Bloodshed since) when he sought
contrary to his Oaths and all Right and Justice, not only by new devised and
intolerable Impositions, to tread their National and Fundamental Laws,
Privileges and Ancient Rights under his feet, and both by Arts, (dividing
their Nobility,) and by Force, to enslave their Persons and Estates, and make
himself Absolute; but moreover by introducing among them, the Exercise of the
Spanish Inquisition, to Tyrannize also over their Consciences: and in pursuance
hereof had committed many barbarous Murders and Massacres among them; by the
Just Providence of God, he was thrown out of all, and those Rights and
Privileges, which he sought to abolish, and that Religion which he sought to
oppress, were by that people retained and enjoyed with greater freedom and
liberty than ever; so that in conclusion the recompense of that oppression and
cruelty which he exercised upon them, was the loss of those Countries, which,
says Raleigh, for beauty, gave place to none, and for revenue, did equal his
West Indies, besides the loss of an hundred millions of money, and of the lives
of above four hundred thousand Christians, by him cast away in his endeavors
to enslave them. If besides this we reflect upon his many and various attempts
against the Queen of England, Thu. l. 120.
some of them with so great study and vast expense of his Treasure; his unhappy
Wars in aid of the Rebels in France, which his ambitious hopes had no less
devoured, than they had England; all of them unsuccessful and remarkably
blasted, and himself at last so weary of them, that he was glad to desire peace
with both; his fruitless wasting of 5594. Myriads of Gold, as himself
confessed, without any other profit, than the acquest of Portugal, which he
thought might be as easily lost as his hopes of the Kingdom of France had
suddenly vanished, and however was sufficiently balanced with his loss in
Africa and elsewhere; the death of his eldest son, by his own command, as the
Jesuit 9. Ration. Temp. 12.
Petavius says expressly, and the less of all his other sons, save only Phil.
111. who succeeded him, and was the only son of all his four wives, who
survived him; If we seriously, I say, reflect upon all these, we may look upon
the prolongation of his life, in respect of himself, but as a continuance of
trouble and misery to him; and in respect of this blessed Queen, to have been
designed by God, for an Exercise of her Faith and Virtue, and a necessary
means, to render his Favor and never failing Providence over her, the more
Manifest, Conspicuous and Exemplary to encourage others to Fidelity to him, and
Resignation to his most Wise, Powerful and Gracious Providence. But though
these things do well deserve our notice, yet that which I call a Distinguishing
Providence, is yet more admirable and remarkable in her nearer neighbors in
France.

39. When Queen Elizabeth began her Reign in England, Henry 11. was King of
France. His Father Francis 1. who, in the beginning of his Reign, which was
about the time of Luthers first appearing against Indulgences, had unhappily
entered into a league with the Pope ( Leo x.) which in the judgment of many,
says Thuanus, brought destruction upon his affairs and family; though in many
things unhappy throughout his whole Reign, yet certainly was he in nothing more
unhappy, than in the guilt of so much innocent blood, Thu. l. 6.
as was shed in the barbarous and horrid murders and slaughters which were made
upon the Protestants of Merindol and Cabriers, condemned merely for their
Religion, by a most rigid and severe Sentence of the Parliament of Provence,
after which he never enjoyed himself, says Raleigh, nor indeed his life long
after his approbation of that Execution, wherein their towns and villages, to
the number of two and twenty, were burned, and themselves, without distinction
of age or sex, most barbarously murdered. But being touched with remorse of
Conscience, and repenting of it, upon his death bed he charged his Son, that
the injuries done to that people should be enquired into, and their murderers,
who in the cruelty of their execution had exceeded the severity of the
Sentence, to be duly punished: threatening him with Gods judgments, Thu. l. 3.
Davil. p. 14.
if he neglected it. And among other Admonitions which he then gave him, this
was one, to beware of the Ambition of the Guises, whom, he foresaw, if admitted
to the administration of the Kingdom, would reduce both his Children, and the
People of France, to great miseries. But Henry 11. no sooner came to his
Fathers throne, but he presently began to practice the contrary to his
directions, Davila p. 15. 19
displacing those that before had any part in the government, and substituting
in their room the same men whom his Father had discharged, and Guise with the
first, and at length the three brothers of Guise got into their hands all the
principal governments, and chief dignities of the Kingdom, together with the
super-intendancy of all affairs, both Martial and Civil; the Consequence of
which did afterward make good the truth of his fathers prediction. Nor did he
much better perform his fathers charge, in doing Justice upon the bloody
offenders; for though he gave the cause a long hearing, Thu. l. 6.
yet did not the issue of the judgment answer the great expectations, which the
so many horrid crimes whereof they were accused did raise in men's minds: one
only of the offenders, for want of friends at Court, being executed; but the
principal actors of that wickedness, restored to their former dignity and
places; so that instead of that Justice, which, if duly executed upon the
offenders, might possibly have averted or mitigated the Divine vengeance, which
has since prosecuted his fathers guilt in his posterity, he not only by
neglect thereof, but also by his own continuance of the like cruelties, and for
the same cause of Religion, appropriated his fathers guilt to himself, and with
the addition of his own, transmitted the same to his posterity, with the Divine
Vengeance further provoked attending it. He began his Persecutions of the
Protestants in the first year of his reign, and continued the same to the last
days of his life, with that resolution, that no solicitation of neighbor
Princes, his allies, could mitigate his fury. He used his uttermost endeavor,
says Davila, p. 40. to extirpate the roots of those seeds in their first
growth; and therefore with Inexorable Severity resolved, that All who were
found convict of this imputation, should suffer death without mercy. And
although Many of the Counselors in Every Parliament, either Favoring the same
Opinions, or Abhorring the Continual Effusion of blood, made use of all their
skill, to preserve as many as they could from the Severity of his Execution;
notwithstanding the Kings Vigilance and Constancy was such, chiefly by the
Incitements of the Cardinal of Lorain, (one of the Guises) that he had reduced
things to such a point as would in the end, though with the Effusion of much
blood, have expelled all the peccant humors (he means the Protestants) out of
the bowels of the Kingdom, if the accident which followed, had not interrupted
the course of his resolution. That which he calls an accident, was the violent,
and, in respect of the course of nature, untimely, but, in respect of Gods
Providence, most seasonable, death, of that cruel King, in the height of his
Resolutions of Inexorable Severity against the Protestants, by the hands of
that same man, whom he had but few days before employed to apprehend and
imprison some of the chief Senators, for no other cause but their Religion, and
their free delivering of their Sentence, according to the Laws, in Parliament,
concerning the cause of the Protestants; and at the same that Queen Elizabeth
was (...) Her Senators Consulting and Resolved to Establish that Religion,
which he persecuted: which she happily by Gods Blessing effected, and procured
a Blessing upon her self and her Kingdom, while he furiously fighting against
God, was in a Ludicrous fight, running at Tilt, by a Splinter of a broken
lance, which found entrance at his eye though his head and body were clad in
armor, cut off from further prosecuting his resolutions, in the midst of his
years, and in the midst of his public Solemnities of the Nuptials of his
eldest daughter to the King of Spain, which whom he had concluded to make a war
against the Protestants, and of his only Sister to the Duke of Savoy, in the
view of the Bastile, where those Senators were kept in Prison, and within two
or three days, if not less, after one of the chief of them was declared
heritick, and delivered over to the Secular Power; Leaving behind him a Curse
upon his posterity, and Misery and Confusion to his Kingdom, principally caused
and promoted by those very instruments, whose Counsels and Instigations he had
followed in his wicked and bloody practices.

He left four sons, all in a manner children; the eldest Francis 11. who
succeeded him, under the age of sixteen; who by reason of his youth, Lib. 1.
or rather, as says Davila, his natural incapacity, requiring, if not a direct
Regent, yet a prudent, assiduous Governor, till his natural weakness was
overcome by maturity of years, the Ancient Customs of the Kingdom called to
that Charge the Princes of the Blood, among which for nearness and reputation
it belonged to the Prince of Conde, and the King of Navarre. But Katherine of
Medicis the Kings mother, and Francis Duke of Guise, with Charles his brother
Cardinal of Lorain, uncles to Mary Queen of Scots, whom the King in the
lifetime of his father had married, severally aspiring to the Government; to
which neither had right by the Laws of the Kingdom; and therefore despairing by
their own power and interest, to obtain and retain it alone, they resolved to
unite their several interests and powers, and to share it among them; and they
quickly obtained, she by her interest in the King her Son, and they by the
means of their Niece, (...) Queen, that to the Duke was committed the Care of
the Militia; Davil. l. 1.
the Civil affairs to the Cardinal; and to the Queen Mother the Superintendance
of all: the Princes of the blood and others of the prime Nobility being
excluded not only from the Government, but also, by arts and affronts removed
or repulsed from the Court it self. The Guises, having thus intruded into the
Authority aforesaid, continued the same Resolutions of Severity, against those
of the Reformed Religion, which they had infused, or at least fomented and
agitated in the former King; which they instantly put in execution. And the
same month that this King came to the Crown, his Order is sent out for the
trial of the Senators imprisoned by his father. Whereof one, Anne du Boury, was
afterward, for his Religion, executed; but the rest not being convicted were
only degraded. While these were brought to their Trial, by the command of the
Cardinal, Severe Inquisition is made at Paris, Thu. l. 23.
into all suspected of that Religion; and many both Men and Women are taken and
clapped into Prison; and many, to avoid the danger, forced to fly; many leaving
their infants and little children behind them, who filled the streets with the
noise of their lamentable cries: their goods taken out of their houses were
publicly sold, and their empty houses proscribed: and to increase the Odium of
the people against them, the same Calumnies, which were heretofore cast upon
the Primitive Christians, of promiscuous copulation in their Nocturnal Meetings
the lights being put out, were now renewed against these, and base people
produced by the Cardinal to prove it, who though upon trial convicted of fraud
and falsehood, were yet suffered to go unpunished. The City being thus
diligently searched, the same Course is immediately taken in the Suburbs, at
S. Germans, and presently after in the rest of the Cities of France, especially
at Poictiers, Toulouse, Aix, and throughout the whole Province of Narbon.
Shortly after command is given to the Court, to proceed severely against those
who were suspected, and with all diligence to attend to the trial of them,
without intermission. Whereupon the Prisons were all soon emptied, some being
condemned to death, others banished, and the rest punished with other mulcts
and penalties. Nor did all this satiate the fury of these cruel and merciless
men: for dreading the very mention of an Assembly of the Estates, which might
correct the Exorbitances of their Usurped Power, they accused all those as
Rebellious and Seditious, who desired it: and when they perceived the
Protestants, who were now very numerous notwithstanding all the cruelties used
against them, to concur in the same desire, new Arts and Snares were devised to
apprehend them; wherein also others who were not of their Religion, were often
unawares surprised. For every where, at Paris especially, were erected Images
of Saints, in the Streets and by-ways, with lighted Candles set up to them in
the day time, and a deal of Superstitious Worship; and boxes set by them, into
which, they who passed by were pressed to cast in money for providing of the
Lights, and such as refused to do it, or neglected to give reverence to the
Images, were suspected, and instantly assaulted by the Rabble: and happy was
he, that in such case could escape with his life, though immediately thrust
into prison. All this was done the same year that Francis came to the Crown.
And although in the entrance of the next year, about 12. Thu. l. 24.
Mart. lest the Protestants exasperated by all these Cruelties, should be
provoked to join with them, who at that time held a Consultation against the
Guises, to remove them and the Queen Mother from the Government, this severity
by the mediation of Colinius the Admiral and Olinier the Chancellor, was by a
public Edict, for the present in part remitted; Yet no sooner was the danger
of that Confederacy over by the defeat of the Enterprise at Amboise, but the
Edict was recalled, 1660.
and new resolutions concluded for the utter ruin and extirpation of the
Protestants: and that upon this further occasion, and by the means following.
The Guises nothing doubting but that the late attempt at Amboise, to surprise
and remove them from the Government, was secretly excited and managed by the
Princes of the blood, to whom the right, during the Kings inability, did
belong; and that the Protestants, thus provoked by such unjust persecutions,
would favor the right of the Princes; resolved to cut off both: But
considering that it would be difficult and hazardous, by open Force to get the
Princes into their power, Davil. l. 2.
they resolved to essay to accomplish that by Art; and therefore first by all
means to conceal and dissemble their suspicion of them: and to that purpose,
endeavored to have the late business at Amboise imputed to the Protestants,
and to attribute all to Diversity of Religions; which might also serve them to
a further purpose, viz. to render their own cause and proceedings more
plausible to the people, and the others more odious; and to urge this yet
further, they endeavored to possess the King with great apprehensions of the
danger of his own person from that party, and the people with an opinion that
that attempt was designed against the King himself; which was so gross a
Calumny, that Davila himself, though otherwise partial enough against the
Protestants, thought it not fit to be credited; and at last, having used all
their Arts to beget a confidence in the Princes that they had no designs
against them, to accomplish their designs, they cause an Assembly of the
Estates, whereat the Princes by their place were to attend, to be appointed at
Orleans. Where against the Protestants in general, Thu. l. 26.
they presently proceed more openly; and having obtained an Edict that all
should exhibit a profession of their Faith, according to a Form, 18. years
before prescribed by the Sorbon Doctors, and that they who refused, should be
punished with loss of life and Goods: such were sent out throughout the whole
Kingdom, who should apprehend all that were suspected to be of the Reformed
Religion, with command to pull down the Houses and Castles of those who made
any resistance. And the Princes, being at length with much Art and difficulty,
wrought upon to come to the Assembly, though contrary to the persuasion of
their friends, are instantly upon their arrival secured; Navar under a kind of
Guard, but Conde close prisoner. Having thus gotten them into their hands, they
without much difficulty resolve to circumvent Conde with Accusations of
Rebellion, and put him to death under color of Law. But for Navar, they were
not a little doubtful what to do with him, and at last conclude to murder him
secretly. But when all these designs against both the Protestants in general,
and these Princes in particular, were brought to the very point of execution,
and the Tragedy already begun, It pleased God, by the same means, whereby he
had decreed to prosecute his judgments and vengeance against this persecuting
House of Valois, to deliver those who were designed for slaughter; and by the
seasonable intervention of the otherwise untimely death of this young King,
before he had accomplished the age of eighteen, to confound and disappoint all
the subtle machinations, of these ambitious unchristian persecutors. As the
force and violence of thunder, says Davila, uses in a moment to overthrow and
ruin those buildings which are built with great care and long labor; so his
unexpected death, destroying in an instant those Counsels, which with so much
art and dissimulation were brought to maturity and concluded, left the state of
things (already in the way (although by Violent and Rigorous Means, yet) to a
certain and secure end) in the height of all discord, and more than ever they
were formerly, troubled, wavering and abandoned. Thus he, but we may rather
observe the unsuccessfulness of such violent and Rigorous Courses, though for
the attaining of never so good and lawful ends, and that not so much of their
own nature, as by the special Providence of God, who does frequently suffer
wicked and proud conceited men, confident of their own wit or strength, to
proceed in their wicked policies and the exercise of their malicious practices,
till they be at the very point to receive their expected fruits of all, and
then by some little occurrence to frustrate and blast all their hopes, and make
them so much more miserable by their disappointment, by how much they thought
themselves nearer and surer of the enjoyment. Such were the Popes and Spaniards
disappoinment mentioned before Sect. 26. page 32. and that of 88. Sect. 33. and
others. Whereas Queen Elizabeth's moderate proceedings, but in a better cause,
were all along blessed with happy success.

41. To this young King, thus cut off in his youth, and leaving no issue behind
him, (though some) years married to a beautiful young Lady, succeeded his
brother Charles the nineth, a Child of about Eleven years of Age; who, by
reason of his Minority, 1560.
being incapable to exercise the Government, by Agreement between the
Queen Mother (now sufficiently weary of the Ambition and Insolences of the
Guises, and suspicious of their designs) and the King of Navarre first Prince
of the blood (though the Guises used all their Arts to renew the former
differences between them) She is made Regent, and He President of the
Provinces; Thu. l. 26. Dav. l. 2.
and a Decree is made by the King, with the counsel and advice of the Queen
Regent, Navarre, the rest of the Princes of the blood and others, Privy
Counselors, whereby the Supreme Regimen of all is committed to Her. Hereupon
the Guises being accustomed to govern, and not able to conform their minds to
their present condition, sought all manner of opportunities, whereby they might
again raise themselves to their former greatness. And whereas at the instance
of Navarre, with the consent of the Regent and the Council (many disliking the
effusion of so much blood for no other fault than profession of the Reformed
Religion) a Decree of Council passed 28. Jan. 1560/1.
for the Release of all Prisoners committed only for matters of Religion, and
to stop all Inquisition appointed for that cause, to prohibit disputations in
matters of Religion, and particular persons from reviling one another with the
names of Heretic and Papist, and commanding all to live together in Peace,
etc. this served them, to dissemble the true cause of their grief; and
therefore they made show of being moved and offended only at the tacit
toleration permitted the Calvinists; covering in this manner (says Davila) with
a pious pretense under the vail of Religion, the interests of private passion.
And having, by the arts and subtilty of Diana late Mistress to Hen. 2. gained
to their party An Momorancy Constable of France, (who, being at that time in
the same danger with them and others of being called to refund the large
donations which they had obtained of the two last Kings, and besides had been
very active in the former persecutions against the Protestants, was with the
less difficulty wrought upon, especially in the absence of his son, a sober and
prudent person, who dissuaded him all he could) they enter into a league for
the preservation of the Catholic Religion, and mutual defense of their several
Estates. And when the Protestants, Thu. l. 28.
after some other Edicts and Decrees, partly indulging some kind of liberty to
them, and partly restraining it, were permitted a public Disputation at
Poisey, (which was first proposed by the Cardinal of Lorain, and as was
thought, to hinder the Convention of a National Synod, which he knew would be
little pleasing to the Pope, but was much desired in France by the most sober
and pious of both sides, who were studious of the peace and good of the Church)
there was presently a V. Thu. in l. 36. a Conspiracy between Guise and the King
of Spain, qua nulla audacior in regno memoratur, which also was in agitation at
this time, though not discovered till after Guise his death, an. 1564
secret consultation held by the Grandees of the Popish Faction of France with
them of Spain, King Philip being wonderfully moved at the news of that
Conference: and Arturius Desiderius, incited by the Sorbon Doctors, and as was
believed by many, not without the privity of the Cardinal of Lorain, hastens to
King Philip with a Supplication and Private Instructions, Complaining of the
increase of the Protestants, the remisness of the King and his Counselors in
restraining them; and imploring his Aid; and committing to his Patronage the
Honor, Lives, Fortunes and Estates of the French Nobility; with which he was
intercepted in his journey at Orleans. Not long after, this Thesis, among
others, is set up to be disputed publicly, That the Pope, as the sole Vicar of
Christ, and Monarch of the Church, has All Christian Princes subject to his
Spiritual and Secular Power; and that he may turn out of their Kingdoms those
that are rebellious to his Commands. Wherewith the King being acquainted, his
Delegates were sent to complain of it to the Parliament; which ordered the
Sorbon Doctors to deprecate the offense, and to recant this error brought in
About the year 1300.
by Pope Boniface 8. and since his death generally condemned. The Guises in the
mean time dreading a National Synod so much desired, as fearing that the
Protestants would prevail in it, spared no endeavors to keep it off. To which
end also, Philip of Spain solicited by the Pope, sends over his Ambassador,
who with threats added to his entreaties daily importunes the Queen R. to
Severities against the Sectaries. But because the Guises thought that Navarre
would be a main obstacle to these endeavors to keep off the Synod, they
resolve with the Spanish Ambassador and the Popes Legate (who was admitted in
France, but held strictly to the conditions by the Laws appointed) to set upon
him, a man though otherwise of parts, yet through indulgence to pleasures and
ease, grown facile and easy, to draw him to their party. To which end, having
first corrupted some of his confidents, they first propose to him, to divorce
his Queen for her heresy, and marry their niece the Queen of Scots, with whom
he should have also the Kingdom of England, of which the Pope was about to
deprive Elizabeth for her heresy. But when this, by reason of his love to his
Queen, a woman of great worth, and by whom he enjoyed a good estate (though
they promised him the continuance of this by the Popes Authority
notwithstanding the divorce,) and to his children he had by her, would not take
with him; they propose that the King of Spain, for satisfaction for his Kingdom
of Navarre (which the Spaniard unjustly held from him,) should give him the
Isle of Sardinia, which though a pitiful thing, they very much magnified, and
promised the assistance of Spains Treasures and Forces if he would desert the
Lutherans, whom by the means of his Queen he was brought to favor, and take
upon him the Patronage of the Catholics in France. By which abuse (for it
proved no other) they prevailed upon him, and so made up the Triumvirate, of
Navarre, the Duke of Guise, and Momorancy the Constable, and laid the
foundation of that Civil war, which shortly after ensued, and in the compass of
about a year after put an end to his hopes and life also; Thu. l. 33.
when being wounded he became sensible of his abuse, and declared that if he
recovered, he would embrace the Protestant Confession of Augsburg, and live and
die in it. About the same time or not long after, the Queen Regent and the
Council, upon the complaint of the Protestants of that little liberty, Thu. l.
28.
which was permitted them by former Edicts, being abridged by or under pretense
of the Late Edict of Italy, which they said was surreptitiously obtained by a
fraud in numbering the Votes, resolve upon another Assembly at S. Germans,
where was made that famous and much Celebrated Edict of January, 1561/2. Thu.
l. 29.
whereby the Protestants are permitted to assemble at Sermons so it be out of
any City; and the Magistrates commanded not to molest, but protect and defend
them from all injury; and the Protestants that they should hold no Synod or
Consistories, unless the Magistrate first called was present, their Pastors
should engage to observe the Edict, to teach the people the pure word of God,
and nothing contrary to the Nicene Council, the Creed, and the books of the Old
and New Testament, and that both sides should abstain from all reproachful
words, speeches and books against one another: and when the Senate interceded
against the promulgation of the Edict, a mandate was sent out to them to
promulgate it without further delay, which being again and again reiterated,
they at last obeyed. The Guises, the Constable and others of their party, in
the mean time leaving the Court, contrive to hinder the Execution of it, and
oppose the Hugonot Faction, as they call it, not doubting, (but having, by the
Arts aforesaid gotten Navarre to their party) to obtain their desires. And
first they endeavor to insinuate into the Lutheran Princes of Germany, and if
possible to engage them against the Protestants of France (who in a point or
two, wherein Luther and Calvin differed, incline rather to Calvin's opinion) or
at least to render them more slack in affording them their assistance. Then
after a three days secret consultation with the Duke of Witenberg to this
purpose at Zabern, to which they had invited him, and an out-ragious violence
committed in the way by the Duke of Guise his company upon an Assembly of the
Protestants at Vassy, met to hear a Sermon, whereof sixty men and women, were
by them slain, and above two hundred more wounded, the Duke with a great
retinue speedily repairs to Paris, in an insolent manner, without any respect
to the King by the way, and contrary to the Queens express will and pleasure;
and not contented to go the nearer way by S. Martins, he goes about with his
attendants, being accompanied by the Constable, the Duke of Aumale his brother,
and the Mareshal of S. Andre, and enters by S. Denis gate (by which the Kings
of France in Royal State are used to make their entrance to that Metropolis of
the Kingdom,) being met by diverse of the Magistrates of the City, with the
acclamations of the Rabble, in such sort as is used by the people to their
Kings. Hereupon the Queen after diverse other insolences of this party, fearing
that under pretext of asserting the Catholic Religion, they would usurp the
Supreme Power of the Kingdom, and get into their hands the King, her self, and
other Children, She commends all, Dav. l. 3. Thu. l. 29.
and the whole Kingdom to the Care of the Prince of Conde the next Prince of
the blood, and earnestly and frequently importunes his assistance, to stop the
proceeding of the Confederates. But they, who upon longer Consultation had made
sufficient preparation for what they intended, easily prevented him: and having
exasperated the people with feigned rumors from all the Provinces of the
Kingdom, of pretended injuries done to the Catholics by the Protestants (an
Artifice wherein the Cardinal of Lorain's greatest skill consisted,) the Duke
draws out a party, and at Fountain-bleau seiseth upon the King, whom with the
Queen and Her other Children, they carry by force to Paris, the King weeping to
see himself his mother and brothers carried as it were into Captivity. The
Queen the same day they were seized, renewed her importunity to Conde, desiring
him not to abate his courage or neglect his care for the preservation of the
Crown, or suffer their enemies to arrogate to themselves the absolute Power in
the Government. The Confederates on the other side being come to Paris with the
young King and the Queen (having in the morning, by a party led by the
Constable, fired one of the places without the Gates where the Protestants
assembled to Prayers and Sermons, and in the afternoon another, whereby also
the neighbor buildings were consumed, and permitted license to the Rabble to
abuse and injure those they suspected for their Religion) held frequent
Consultations how best to Order their affairs for their own advantage. In which
Counsels the Duke of Guise openly declared that he thought it most expedient to
proceed to a War with the Hugonots, so to extinguish the fire, before it burst
out into a consuming flame, and to take away the root of that growing evil.
Thus was the first Civil War begun, the Confederates pretending the Authority
of the King and Queen Regent, whom they had by force gotten into their power;
and the Prince alleging the express Authority of the Regent, and that the
Orders sent out in the Kings Name against him, were by the Confederates
obtained by force and dures. This I have related the more largely, because
hitherto the Protestants had been only passive, that, since now they had
engaged in Action, as many of them did in this service of the Prince, it may
the better appear upon what grounds they did Act; which was not upon pretense
of Religion, though no doubt that was a great motive to them, but for defense
of the Laws, and for the Liberty of their Prince and Lawful Governor, and
against those who did aspire not to the Regency only, but to the Crown and
Kingdom it self, by a long train of policies and violent Cruelties. But this
War was rather sharp than long, which, besides the slaughter of eight thousand
men in one battle at Dreux, besides great bloodshed and mischief in many other
places, was in short time the destruction of two of the principal Authors of
it, Navarre and He was shot returning from the Camp to his Quarters by Poltrot,
who being taken, upon his examination said he was employed by Colinius and
exhorted to it by Beza; but being brought to the rack he utterly denied it, and
concerning Beza persevered in his denial to the last; but concerning Colinius,
being brought to execution, and with the terror of his approaching execution
being besides himself, he one while affirmed and another while denied it.
Colinius and Beza, calling God to witness, utterly denied it, and Colinius
wrote to the Queen, that before his execution, the business might be further
examined; but he was in few days after executed. Thuanus, lib. 34. But was it
really so, Who employed and exhorted Parry, not against a Commander of an Army,
but against his Prince? who Lopez? who so many more against Queen Elizabeth?
who James Clement to murder Henry the third of France? who Jo. Chastel to
murder Henry the fourth? To mention no more.
Guise being both slain; and the Constable the only surviving Triumvir being
taken Prisoner, thereupon an Accommodation followed without difficulty, upon
these Conditions among others; That all free Lords, not holding of any but the
Crown, might within their Jurisdictions freely exercise the Reformed Religion;
that the other Feudataries might do the same in their own houses, for their own
families, provided they lived not in So Davila, but Thuanus, lib. 35. modo ne
in pagis aut municipiis habitent, quae majori jurisdictioni, regia excepta,
subsunt.
any City or Town [where the Courts resided]. That in every Province certain
Cities should be appointed, in the Fauxburg whereof the Protestants might
Assemble at their Devotion. That in all other Cities and Towns, every one
should live free in his Conscience without trouble or molestation. That all
should have full Pardon for all Delinquences committed during, or by occasion
of the War; declaring all to be done to a good end, without any offense to the
Royal Majesty, and all be restored to their places, etc. And these and the rest
were ratified in Counsel by an Edict of Pacification under the Kings own hand
and Seal, verified in Parliament and Proclaimed by sound of Trumpet, in March
1562/3. which had they been honestly and justly observed, might by Gods
blessing, have been a means of much peace and happiness to that Kingdom; but we
find the contrary as to the Observance, and therefore no wonder if the contrary
also to so hopeful and happy consequence and issue of it. For no sooner was
this War concluded upon this Edict of Pacification, ratified with all the
formalities and solemnities used for the establishing and confirming of Laws in
France, but the Edict began presently to be violated, the Protestants in diverse
places, both disturbed in their Religious Assemblies, which this and other Laws
allowed them to hold, and injured in their Civil Rights, and in diverse manners
frequently and grievously oppressed, and that not only by concourses and
assaults of the vulgar and Rabble, who, having no pretense of Authority, were
many times with like force repulsed by the others, Thu. l. 35, 36, 37, 39.
but even by the Presidents of the Provinces and other Magistrates, whose duty
it was to have seen the Laws justly observed, but did the quite contrary, and
that not only by connivance at the exorbitances of the vulgar, but also by
their own actual iniquity, and (that no part or kind of injustice might be
wanting) both by force and violence, Thu. l. 37.
and also by fraud, by breach of faith, by subornation of witnesses, Thu. l. 39.
by false calumniations. By which means and such like arts, together with the
mediation of their potent friends at Court, the passionate young King being
before prejudiced by the Arts of the Guisian faction, especially the Cardinal
of Lorain, and further incensed by the Legate of Spain, the Pope and Savoy,
who, notwithstanding the late Edict, urged him to banish and otherwise punish
the Protestants, and revoke the Liberty granted by it to them, they easily
obtained that the Complaints of the Protestants, which were daily brought to
the King, were anteverted, and either totally rejected or eluded, and the
persons employed to exhibit the same ordinarily so discountenanced and
discouraged, that they were forced to return without any effect, if not
imprisoned, and for the greatest violences and enormities, even murder it self
(by which as some write not so few as three thousand had perished since the
Edict of pacification) could obtain no remedy or redress. And of all this many
plain and notable examples and proofs might be produced out of our Noble
Excellent Historian, Lib. 35, 36, 37, 39.
were it not too long to do it. We might instance in that notable practice of
the Bishop of Pamiers, which gave the first occasion of that very tumult, which
that smooth Italian Davila mentions, and while he exaggerates the actions of
the Protestants in it, with no little partiality conceals the first and true
occasion of it; but perhaps being a Courtier, he relates it and other such
passages, as they were then, by the Artifices and means above mentioned,
represented at the Court. Nor was the Royal Authority abused to concur in this
Iniquity and Injustice only by connivence and permission of these things thus
done by the Kings Ministers and Officers in fraud and violation of the
Agreement of Peace and the Edict made in Confirmation of it, but also to give
further occasion and countenance to it by diverse fraudulent and elusory
Interpretations of the Edict. By which means, whiles it seems, it was thought
too gross plainly and directly to revoke it, they did notwithstanding
indirectly elude its effect and the benefit expected by it: in such sort, that
had the Protestants been of those pernicious principles, that their adversaries
indeed were, and endeavored to represent them to be, the most subtle and
malicious enemies of that Kingdom could not have devised and promoted a more
effectual means and method of its confusion and ruin. And the truth is this
was it, which the principal Authors and Fomenters of those courses, the Guises
at home and the Spaniards abroad, aimed at, and by these means in conclusion to
make themselves Master of it. Which though at that time not so visible to every
one, yet was afterward very apparent. The Pope also, because France stood too
much upon their Liberties and Privileges, being a well wisher to their
designs, especially of Guise, though not so much of Spain, as not desiring so
potent a Neighbor. But all these oppressions and Injuries though they provoked
some little tumults of the vulgar, yet were they not sufficient to produce and
necessitate another Civil War, which not only the Spaniard desired, as well for
his own security to divert a War from himself, as in order to his further
designs, but also the Cardinal of Lorain, his Nephews now growing up, though
his brother the Duke was slain; and therefore besides these, other means were
thought on to do that at least, if they should fail to make way for their ends,
by taking off those who most stood in their way. And to this purpose, besides
some lesser Confederacies for an irreconcilable war against the Protestants,
there was a Conspiracy, which was begun indeed by the Duke of Guise in his life
time, but renewed again and carried on by the same faction, with the King of
Spain, for the cutting off of those of the Nobility who favored the Protestant
doctrine, and particularly for surprising the Queen of Navarre and her
Children, (the next heirs to the Crown of France after the family of Valois,)
who were all children and in their power already) and clapping them into the
Spanish Inquisition. But this being discovered by the Queen of Spain in receipt
to her mother the Queen mother of France, who easily perceived what was aimed
at, and by others to the Queen of Navarre, and so prevented; the Legates of
Spain, the Pope and Savoy were by the means of the Cardinal of Lorain, sent to
persuade the King to admit the Council of Trent in France, and to that end to
invite him to a Consultation of the Catholic Princes at Nancie in Lorain, to
enter into a Holy League for the extirpation of the Heretics, but the Queen
mother neither liking the admission of the Council, nor to engage so openly
against the Protestants, the Legates were under some other pretenses dismissed.
Wherefore the next year, the King being declared out of his Minority, and with
his Mother making a progress through all parts of the Kingdom, an Enterview
between them and the Queen of Spain accompanied with the Duke of Alva is so
ordered that a more secret Consultation is held at Bayonne for the extirpation
of the heretics, Jan. 1565. Davila. l. 3. Thu. l. 37.
and a Holy League made between the two Crowns for mutual assistance to that
end, and at last it is concluded according to the opinion of Alva, which he
said was the judgment of King Philip, to cut off the chief heads of the
Protestants and then in imitation of the 30. Mar. 1282 When the French were all
at an instant without distinction of age or sex cruelly slaughtered; as were
the Danes here in England 280. years before that.
Sicilian Vespers to slaughter all the Protestants to the last man: and because
the intended Assembly at Moulins was already talked on, that it would be best
to make a slaughter of the Nobility assembling there from all parts, and upon a
sign given to exterminate the rest through out France. This Thuanus relates
from Jo. Bapt. Hadrianus, who he says wrote his history with very great
fidelity and prudence, and, as is very likely, extracted many things from the
Commentaries of the Duke of Tuscany [Father to the Queen Mother:] But, as he
further relates, either because they did not all meet there, or that for some
other cause it seemed unseasonable, that business was deferred to another time,
and was seven years after, as was then continued, put in execution at Paris at
a more convenient place and occasion. But from this time the Prince of Conde
and the Colinies being admonished, by their friends at Court of these bloody
Counsels, and thereupon suspicious of the Court designs, were more cautious and
wary. Yet was Colinius at the Assembly at Moulins in January following, Thu. l.
39.
and there by solemn Oath purged himself of the death of the Duke of Guise; and
possibly might then make some further discovery into these secret counsels;
which, if as is said, they were at first designed to be put in execution there,
seem by the succeeding History to have been deferred for want of sufficient
Forces ready, and of fit instruments. For afterward, by the advice of Alva,
Thu. l. 41.
6000 Swissers were hired, and levies of Soldiers made in Champain and
Picardy, under pretense of guarding the Frontiers against Alva. But this
pretense quickly vanished by Alva's withdrawing from those parts, (as it was
afterward more fully detected of fraud and collusion, by his sending them
Forces in the War soon after following): nevertheless the Swissers were still
retained.

43. Whereupon, Thu. l. 42.
all very well knowing that there was a better accord between the Courts of
France and Spain, especially since the enterview at Bayonne, than that there
needed any such Guards, the Prince of Conde, Colinius, Andelot his Brother, and
the rest of the Protestant Nobility and Gentry, began to be very sensible of
their near approaching danger of ruin; and, after a long patience under
Slaughters, Banishments, Calumnies, loss of their Estates and Fortunes, to
consult together what course might be taken for the safety and preservation not
only of their estates and liberties, but of the lives of themselves, and their
wives and children. They had seen and felt the Edicts made on their behalf,
partly eluded by the interpretations of new Edicts and Proscripts, partly
violated by the malice and iniquity of Judges and Presidents of the Provinces:
injuries and mischiefs every where done to them, and even the murders of no
small number connived at, and permitted to go unpunished. And besides all this,
they had certain intelligence of those secret consultations held for their
destruction, and of other secret counsels held by Ambassadors with the Pope,
who fomented the hatred of those two Kings against them, and, besides the
speeches and threats frequently given out that they were not like long to enjoy
their Assemblies, they saw plainly that those preparations, which (after the
Cities which they inhabited were dismantled, and Forts therein built, and
Garrisons put into them) were at first made under such pretext as was no way
probable, and now continued without any at all, were designed against them; and
were also informed thereof by intelligence from their friends, Sures, p. 768.
and by letters intercepted from Rome and Spain. Notwithstanding after a
consultation or two, it was resolved by common consent of all, to use all mild
and gentle means; and therefore, since now there remained no further pretense
to retain them, the Prince of Conde, by his friends, desires that, since Alva
is now retired into Belgium, the Swissers may be dismissed. But when instead of
being dismissed, or retained only to guard the Frontiers, they found them daily
march on nearer to the heart of the Kingdom, and had further notice from the
Court of their designs, they at last assemble in great confusion; and though
every one saw the danger which hanged over their heads, and was now ready to
involve them all, yet great question there was how it should be prevented: To
complain, they by experience knew what effect of that might be expected: to
Arm, though in so great occasion of necessity and extremity, they easily
foresaw many inconveniences attending that. [They only unhappily not foresaw
the proper remedy by their great Master prescribed in such case, to fly, though
it had been to the greater humanity of the uncivilized Indians: whereby they
might perhaps better have consulted their own safety, and also have promoted
his service in the propagation of his Truth and Gospel.] But to Arm, besides
the mischiefs of a Civil War, they thought that could not be without many
calumnies and slanders cast upon them by their adversaries, as if they were the
Authors of it, and undertook it against the King, to whom they did not so much
as impute their former injuries and oppressions, or present dangers, but only
to their adversaries, who having at first by force gotten the King into their
power, abused his immaturity and authority to ruin and destroy them: and
although they should take up Arms only against them, and merely for the
necessary defense of the lives and fortunes of themselves, their wives, and
children, and for the preservation of the Kingdom, yet should they not escape
that imputation: and therefore they unanimously agreed rather being innocent,
after the example of their ancestors, to bear what injuries should be done
them, than to offer any to those who were indeed nocent; lest by an ill defense
of a good cause they should desert that Equity or Justice which had hitherto
stood on their part: till by the discourse of Andelot, a person of great
authority among the Peers, and besides of known probity and virtue, they were
persuaded, that after so often breach of Faith by their adversaries, there was
no further trust to be given to them; and for the calumnies and slanders which
should be cast upon them, the issue of their so necessary undertakings, if it
pleased God to bless them in so just a cause, would sufficiently clear them.
Upon which they changed their resolutions, and agreed to take up Arms for their
own defense; which accordingly they did, to the no little joy of the Cardinal
of Lorain, that the business was brought to the necessity of a War, which,
Cardinali Lotaringus rem ad belli necessitatem deductam gaudens, says Thuanus;
and a little before speaking of him, Turbas consiliis suis opportunas
existimans.
after several ineffectual treaties for an accommodation, shortly ensued. And
these were the true causes and occasions of the second Civil War; which after
many Noblemen and Gentlemen of both sides slain at the Battle of St. Denis, and
among them the Constable, (the last of the Triumvirate, and a principal Author
of the late oppressions, at least by protecting the actors in them from
Justice) and some other acts of Hostility was about six months after it began,
by a fraudulent peace rather intermitted than concluded: for about six months
after it broke out again, upon the like causes and occasions.

44. In the mean time, that we may note it by the way, Philip King of Spain, a
principal promoter and inventer of those oppressions and troubles to his
neighbors, escaped not a remarkable judgment of God upon him: for at this same
time, Thu. l. 43.
his eldest, and then only son, Prince Charles, designed to kill him; or at
least he thought so; or however suspecting that he favored the Protestants in
the Low Countries, or for some other reason, pretended so; and therefore caused
him to be taken out of his bed in the night, and committed to custody.
Whereupon the young Prince falling distracted, and often attempting to kill
himself, he was, at last, by Philip his Fathers own command, having first
consulted with the Inquisition, poisoned. Few months after, his Queen, whom he
had employed in those bloody consultations at the enterview at Bayonne, died
great with child, and not without suspicion of poison by his own means, being,
as was thought, jealous and suspicious of her too much familiarity with his own
son, whom he had not long before thus murdered. And in her, who was the eldest
daughter of Hen. 2. of France, married at the time of his death, as has been
said, and in this late consultation in France prosecuting his cruelties, and so
by her own act contracting a participation of his guilt, we may take notice of
the divine vengeance pursuing his posterity. Nor was this divine vengeance upon
King Philip thus remarkable only in those his domestic troubles, but also in
the Civil Commotions both in the Low Countries, which by his bloody
consultations with the Inquisition (the just judgment of God giving him up to
be infatuated by them and the Jesuits) and the the cruelties of Alva, the same
instrument whom he had employed to raise those troubles in France, and now made
Governor of the Low Countries, produced there; when he thought all things so
safe and secure, as that he might be at leisure to assist in the troubles which
he had raised in France: and besides these (which as they at present afflicted
him, so afterward produced his loss of a great part of those Countries) in
those Commotions even in Spain it self, Thu. l. 43.
by the Moors in Granada, which for two years during those wars which he had
caused in France, made him feel the smart at home of such commotions and
troubles as he had procured to others abroad. And by these means, as on the one
side his pernicious counsels were justly punished, so on the other was he
diverted from prosecuting the same, by sending those Forces against the
Protestants in France, which otherwise he had undoubtedly done. And to these
might be added his loss of Goletta in Africa, (an. 1574. Thu. l. 58.
) and with it the Kingdom of Tunis, (which concerned him in point of safety and
security for navigation, as well as of reputation,) but that some few years
intervene.

45. But to return to France, the War, after six months intermission, upon the
like causes and occasions, breaking out again, like diseases upon a relapse,
was both more violent, and of longer continuance. Yet the counsels of the
Queen Mother prevailing, who according to the genius and mode of her Country,
sought all along rather by her Italian arts and surprises to compass her ends,
than by the hazard of a Civil War, which Spain and the Guises most desired, as
best accommodate to their designs, it was within the compass of two years
brought to conclusion, Thu. l. 47.
upon such conditions granted to the Protestants, as were so much more fair and
reasonable, by how much with greater fraud and deep design to ensnare them,
they were granted; and yet so qualified and limited, as not to give cause of
suspicion by too great indulgence. And now the King was grown up to a capacity
of deriving upon himself his Fathers guilt, and the guilt of all those murders
and cruelties acted indeed under his authority, but yet in his minority, by his
own actual and voluntary management of affairs for the future; whereunto he was
in no mean degree disposed both by his natural temper and disposition, and by
his education: by nature beyond measure choleric, says Davila, and yet had
from his Mother derived so great a share of the Italian genius of deep and
subtle dissimulation, as did most notably qualify him for the most effectual
execution of malice and revenge. Nor was his Education less accommodate
thereunto, having from his childhood been inured to the effusion of his peoples
blood; for which purpose, as was said, it was that he and his brothers, while
yet children, were by the Duke of Guise caused to be spectators of the
slaughters at Amboise, Thu. l. 24.
where the River was covered with the dead bodies, and the streets with the
blood of those who by precipitate condemnations without due process of Law,
were executed and slaughtered, and the whole Town turned into a kind of grove
of Gallowses and Gibbets, with people hanged on them: he was arrived to the age
of twenty years and upwards in the midst of Tumults, Oppressions, and Civil
Wars; had imbibed as great a a prejudice against the Protestants, as all the
arts and calumnies of the Cardinal of Lorain and that Faction could infuse into
him; and that incensed by the foulest mis-representations of the late actions
of the Protestants that could be devised, and by his Mother was instructed in
all the Italian arts of Government and Policy; Thu. l. 50.
Optimis a matre ad been recteque regnandum monitis instructus, says he of
himself. Being thus qualified for it, he now of himself undertakes the
execution of the conclusions at Bayonne; and resolving to prosecute the same,
not after the Guisian and Spanish methods by the continuance of the Civil War,
but by the more subtle and safe Italian method of his Mother, his first
business is to beget in the Protestants an opinion and hope, Thu. l. 47. 50.
that since he was now grown up to take the reins of Government into his own
hands, they might henceforth expect to find more reasonable and moderate usage
under his Government, than they had received from them who had abused his
tender years to injure and oppress them; and to raise in them a confidence and
assurance of his favorable disposition toward them. And therefore, having
granted them as fair conditions of Peace, Thu. l. 50. 51.
as without danger of suspicion of his too great favor he could, he speedily
takes order for the effectual restraining and repressing of the injuries and
oppressions which were presently after the peace concluded begun again against
the Protestants, and gives them leave to call and hold Synods: (by which means,
had he dealt sincerely, and proceeded soberly and steadily therein, he might
certainly much better have secured the peace and happiness of his Kingdoms to
himself and his successors, than he did by those contrary, crafty, and violent
courses which he followed) with the chief of the Protestant Princes and
Nobility he deals more particularly. He had even at the treaty of Peace caused
some speeches to be given out, as if upon the conclusion of that Peace at home,
Thu. l: 47:
he intended a War in the Low Countries against the Spaniard, which could not
but have been for the benefit and advantage of the Protestants there: And
shortly after upon another occasion causes the like speeches to be repeated
again, Thu. l. 50.
and a motion by the by to be made in secret of a Marriage between the Lady
Margaret his Sister and Henry Prince of Navar. Of both which there is again a
proposition made by some Protestant Gentlemen sent by the King to Navar and
Colinius for that purpose, and to assure them of the Kings extraordinary good
will toward them, and to invite them to come to Court, which the King also by
letters and other special messengers earnestly solicited. And to create a
further confidence and assurance in them and the rest of the Protestant
Nobility of his sincerity, Thu. l. 50. 51.
he causes an overture of a Marriage to be made to Queen Elizabeth of England,
between her and his brother the Duke of Anjou, and moreover enters into a
League with her, and at the same time also with the Protestant Princes of
Germany against the Spaniard. And having by these arts at last prevailed with
Navar and Colinius to come to Court; with the Prince he proceeds in the treaty
of Marriage; and Colinius is received with all the expressions of favor and
kindness imaginable: he consults with him how to carry on the Belgic War,
gives him leave to raise what Forces he will in the frontiers in order to it;
and in so great favor is Colinius received at Court by the King, his Mother,
and Brothers, that the Guises forsooth are so offended at it, as thereupon to
leave the Court. In sum, such were the arts and deep dissimulation which were
used, as effectually deceived this prudent person, and a great part of the
Nobility; and such was the King's ear of secrecy, and to whom his designs were
imparted, that as soon as he perceived that Ligneroles (who yet was his brother
the Duke of Anjou's confident) was but acquainted with the design, he presently
caused him to be murdered. The management of this first business having
succeeded according to the King's mind, the next thing to be considered, is the
manner how to accomplish the design. Thu. l. 51.
And of this he holds a consultation with the Queen his Mother, his brother
Henry Duke of Anjou, (who was afterward Henry 3.) the Cardinal of Lorain, Cloud
his Brother Duke of Aumale, Henry the young Duke of Guise, and Ren. Birage
Vice Chancellor, and some others. Thu. l. 51. Da. p. 361.
This done away, goes the Cardinal to Rome, to treat with the Pope about these
secret Counsels; and to manage the present affairs with more secrecy, he goes
seemingly as discontented at the Court of France. At last the Marriage
concluded, and the Pope's dispensation obtained, the time of solemnity is
appointed; whereunto, besides the principal Nobility of the Protestant Religion
in France, Cambd. an. 1572.
from England is invited the Earl of Leicester and the Lord Burleigh, and out
of Germany the Prince Elector Palatine's Sons, that if it were possible they
might at once cut off all the heads of the Protestant Religion. For now in
conclusion is put in execution that horrible Massacre, which for the matter was
as long since as the enterview at Bayonne resolved on, though for the manner
and method of execution not till of late fully concluded. Da. p. 363. Thu. l.
51.
And first they begin with the Queen of Navar, who being a woman and a Queen,
they thought fittest to take her away by poison, and that so prepared and
administered by the perfume of a pair of gloves, as to work only upon her brain,
and put her into a fevor, and therefore her body being dissected in open view,
but her head under color of respect untouched, it was divulged, that by the
testimony of skilful Physicians she died of a fevor, as Davila relates the
story. The next to be made sure of in particular was that brave person
Colinius, a man who, though through necessity engaged in them, yet detected,
out of an innate hatred of such broils, the late Civil Wars even to his own
ruin and destruction at last, as Thuanus upon several occasions often notes,
and as real a well-wisher of his King and Countries good as any Subject in
France, as appeared more fully in some instances discovered after his death.
But the King and Queen Mother by the arts of the Guisian Faction being
pre-possessed of a contrary opinion of him, after all their fraudulent
expressions of favor to him, caused him to be shot by a retainer of the
Guisian Family, Da: p. 367. Thu. l. 52.
to secure themselves from the imputation of so odious a fact; but being
thereby only maimed, not killed outright, they presently according to their
former dissimulations, repair to his lodgings to visit him, and with great show
of sorrow for the accident, appoint him Physicians and Surgeons, and a guard
for his defense, and order a strict search for the apprehension of the
assasine. This done upon the eve of St. Bartholomew being Sunday, Da. p. 371,
372.
the Duke of Guise by order from the King, having about twilight given
direction to the Provost des Marchand (the chief head of the people of Paris)
to provide 2000 armed men, with every one a white sleeve on their left arm, and
white crosses in their hats, to be ready upon notice instantly to execute the
Kings commands, and that the Sheriffs of the several Wards should also be
ready, and cause lights, upon the ringing of the bell of the Palace-clock, to
be set up in every window; himself at the hour prefixed, with the Duke of
Aumale, and Monsieur d'Angoulesme the King's bastard-Brother, and other
Commanders and Soldiers to the number of 300, went to the Admiral Colinius his
house, and having forcibly entered the Court-gate kept by a few of the King of
Navar's Halbardiers and the servants of the house, who were all killed without
mercy, they likewise kill the Admiral himself, (and threw his body out of the
window), Felinius his son-in-law, with other persons of quality, and all the
rest that had relation to him. This done, Monsieur d'O, Colonel of the King's
Guards calls out the principal Protestants that were in the Louvre one by one,
who being come into the Court, were all killed by the Soldiers, that stood in
two long ranks with their arms ready for that purpose: there died diverse
Noblemen and persons of great quality, and others to the number of 200. At the
same time the bell gave the sign, and those who were prepared for the deed,
having received order what to do, fell a killing the Protestants throughout all
the lodgings and houses where they were dispersed, and made an infinite
slaughter of them without any distinction of age, sex or condition, and of many
of the Papists among the rest. And those who fled were pursued by the Duke of
Guise with a great many horse and foot, and being overtaken, some without
shoes, some without saddles, some without bridles, but all more or less
unprovided, were scattered and cut off. There were killed in the City that day
and the next above 10000, whereof above 500 were Barons, Knights and Gentlemen,
who had held the chiefest employments in the War, and were now purposely met
together from all parts to honor the King of Navar's Marriage. Thu. l. 52.
A sad time it was; what through the noise and clatter of those who every where
ran to killing and carrying away of their prey, and the doleful groans and sad
cries of those who were slain and murdered without mercy, young and old, rich
and poor, men and women, women great with child, and others with their little
children sucking at their breasts, and in the dead time of the night plucked
out of their beds and houses; what with the horrid spectacle of dead bodies
thrown out of the windows, and trod about the streets, and the channels running
down with streams of blood into the River. And yet so little moved were the
Court Ladies with all this, that without either fear or shame, in an impudent
manner they beheld and stood gazing upon the naked bodies of the Noblemen and
Gentlemen which lay on heaps before the Court. The day after the Admirals
death, Da. 375.
the Duke of Anjou with the Regiment of the Guards went through all the City
and Suburbs, causing those houses to be broken open that made any resistance;
but all the Protestants were either already dead, or else being terrified, had
put white crosses in their hats, (the general mark of the Papists) endeavoring
by that means, and by hiding themselves to save their lives; but being pointed
at in the streets by any one, or discovered any other way, they were without
mercy torn in pieces by the people, and cast into the River. The day before
this terrible execution, the King dispatched Posts into diverse parts of the
Kingdom, commanding the Governors of Cities and Provinces to do the like. And
the same night at Meaux, and the days ensuing at Orleans, Rouen, Bourges,
Angiers, Tholouze, and many other places, but above all at Lions, there was a
most bloody slaughter of the Protestants, without any respect of age, sex, or
quality of persons. Most sad and lamentable stories, says Davila, might be here
related; for this cruelty was prosecuted in so many several places, with such
variety of accidents, against people of all conditions, as it was credibly
reported that there were slain above forty thousand Protestants in few days.
The King himself, as In vita Greg. 13.
Cicarela relates, told the Pope's Nuncio that seventy thousand and more were
slain. Some days after the King dispatched his Grand Provost with all diligence
to seize upon Colinius his Wife and Children; but his eldest Son, with the
widow-Lady his Mother-in-law, and others being already fled secretly to Geneva,
the younger children both male and female were condemned to death in their
tender years. About two days after the Massacre was finished at Paris, a
Jubilee was there appointed, and a public Thanksgiving kept by the King, the
whole Court, and a great confluence of the people, for the business so happily
managed according to their wish and desire. Thu. l. 52. 53.
In memory whereof St. Bartholomew's day was by a decree of the Parliament of
Paris appointed to be observed as an Anniversary Thanksgiving-day.

46. Thu. l. 51. 53.
This horrible act of most barbarous and inhumane cruelty is highly extolled by
the Italian Writers, as a good and laudable deed, and the politic contrivance
of it as most worthy the subtle wit of a magnanimous Prince. And certain it is,
that the news of its being effected was received at Rome with triumphant joy by
the new Pope and his Cardinals, but how far his predecessors were concerned in
the contrivance and promotion of it, in regard of the great secrecy wherewith
all was managed, would be very difficult fully to discover, as to all the
particulars and circumstances, yet that they had a great hand in it, is evident
enough in many passages of the story. For when after the first Civil War, the
King, Thu. l. 36. Da. p. 189.
instructed by the Queen Mother, had dismissed the Ambassadors sent in the
joint names of the King of Spain, the Pope and the Duke of Savoy, with thanks
to their Masters for their wholesome counsel, and proffers of Forces and Aid, to
expel and extirpate Heresy out of his Dominions; assuring them that he would
live according to the rites of the Church of Rome, and take care that all his
people do the like, and that he had concluded the peace to that end, to expel
his enemies out of his Kingdom; and promising by Ministers of his own to
acquaint the Pope and other Princes particularly with his resolutions; they
resolved under pretense of a Progress, among other things, Da p. 190.
to come to a Parley with the Duke of Savoy in Dolphine, with the Pope's
Ministers at Avignon, and with the King of Spain or the Queen his Wife upon the
Confines of Guienna, that so they might communicate their Counsels to them
without the hazard of trusting Frenchmen, who either through dependence or
kindred, might be moved to reveal them to the Protestants. And having
sufficiently informed and fully satisfied Savoy with their intentions and way,
Da. p. 194.
designed to free themselves without noise or danger from the trouble of the
Protestants; at Avignon they confer with Ludovico Antinori one of the Pope's
trusty Ministers, and a Florentine, being according to the Queens desire come
thither, and give that Answer to the Pope's Embassy which they would not trust
to the Ambassadors, concerning their purpose to extirpate Calvinism by secret
stratagems, without the danger or tumult of new wars. And here no doubt was
some matters of no small moment transacted, Thu. 36.
for the King having gone by Arles and Aix as far as Marseilles, returned again
to Avignon immediately under the Pope's Jurisdiction. But whatever they were
in particular, so well it seems was the Pope pleased with the means and method
resolved upon for the extirpation of Calvinism, Da. p. 194.
that in order thereunto he consented that the Publication of the Council of
Trent in France should be deferred till such time as they had brought their
designs to maturity. And probably for the same purpose, by the mediation of the
King and Queen Mother, desisted from his Excommunication of the Queen of Navar,
which by his Monitory he had threatened against her. And at his instance was the
next year held that Consultation at Bayonne before mentioned, Thu. l. 37. p. 74.
at which he desired that the King of Spain himself should have been present,
to whom it is not to be doubted but he sent his advice concerning what was
there to be resolved. But this Pope dying soon after, his successor Pius 5.
being as yet unacquainted with the mystery of them, began presently to be
offended with the proceedings in France, Da. p. 210.
till he was better informed of all those reasons which Ludovico Antenori had
represented to his predecessor, with which he remained fully content and
satisfied, says Davila. The Queen also acquainted him with her Counsels, Thu.
l. 53.
not only by Cardinal Sancta Crux, four years before they were executed at
Paris, by him desiring the Pope's confirmation, but also by letters under her
own hand, as Capilupus testifies, who says that he had seen the very letters
themselves. Nor was he only privy to these Counsels of the King and
Queen Mother, but likewise communicated his counsel and advice in the same
business to them. He sent to the King of France and his Ministers most
excellent instructions for the rooting out of those Heretics out of that
Kingdom, says Cicarella, Cicarel. in vita Pii, 5.
but tells us not what they were, yet that is not hard to guess at from the
consideration of his nature and actions, (as has been mentioned before) as
well disposed to promote cruel and bloody designs as could be. And when those
Civil Wars, which for the space of three years interrupted the course of those
Italian policies and stratagems, broke out, he ordered them also the assistance
of his Forces. But when the War was concluded, and the King with his Mother and
Cabinet-Council, had resolved to make a Marriage between the young Prince of
Navar, being now grown up, and the King's Sister, to be the train to draw the
Protestant party into that snare which had been so long before devised, the
Pope not yet acquainted with this circumstance, (for though the thing which was
to be done had been long resolved on, yet the method and manner how to bring it
about, was often altered, as accidents and occasions did intervene) when he
heard of the treaty of the Marriage, but had not notice of the mystery of it,
and moreover heard of the preparations for a War against Spain, he began to be
suspicious that the King had forgotten his former kindness and excellent
instructions, and therefore ordered his Nephew Cardinal Alexandrino in his
return from Spain, to debate the business with him. Whereupon the King assured
him that he did all this to obey the instructions of P. Pius. But P. Pius lived
not to receive this satisfaction, Catena in vita Pii, 5.
or not long after, not to see that joyful day which his successor Greg. 13.
did, and kept with great joy and solemnity for the wished success of these
Counsels. For the promoting whereof, being persuaded by the Cardinal of Lorain,
Da. p. 361. Answer to Philanax. p. 100.
(and told that this Marriage was intended as a trap to destroy the Prince of
Navar and his Protestant party) he presently gave his dispensation for the
celebrating of it, and encouraged the design: which was as much as he could do
at present, things being already ripe for execution. But having received an
account of the Massacre by letters from his Legate at Paris, Thu. l. 53.
he read his Letters in the Consistory of Cardinals, where presently it was
decreed that they should all go directly thence to St. Marks, and there
solemnly give thanks to Almighty God for so great a blessing conferred upon the
Roman See and the Christian world; In Minervae aede.
and that the Monday following a public Thanksgiving should be celebrated in
the Church of Minerva, and that the Pope and Cardinals should be at it; and
thereupon a Jubilee should be published throughout all the whole Christian
World, and among other causes thereof expressed, this was the first, To give
thanks to God for the destruction in France of the enemies of the Truth, and of
the the Church. Toward the evening the Guns were fired at St. Angelo, In
Hadriani mole.
Bonefires every where made, and nothing omitted of those things which used to
be done upon the greatest victories for the Church of Rome. Two days after
there was a Procession to St. Lewis, with very great resort of the Nobility and
people; the Bishops and Cardinals going before; then the Switzers; then the
Ambassadors of Kings and Princes; then under a Canopy the Pope himself, a
Deacon Cardinal on either side him, and the Emperors Ambassador bearing up his
train, and a troop of Knights and Gentlemen following. Being come to the
Church, which was adorned with more than ordinary magnificence, Mass was said
by the Cardinal of Lorain, (who for the incredible joy which he conceived for
the so much desired news, had ordered a thousand Aureos.
Franks to be given to the Messenger, who was a Gentleman sent by his Brother
the Duke of Aumale). Upon the Church-doors was set an Inscription, in which the
Cardinal of Lorain, in the name of the King of France, did congratulate the
Pope and the College of Cardinals the most wonderful effects and incredible
issue of their Counsels and Assistances. This done, Cardinal Vrsin is appointed
to go Legate into France, who speedily took his journey, Thu. l. 54.
and being come as far as Lions, (where, next to Paris, was the most bloody
slaughter) he began to extol with many commendations, the Faith of the
Citizens; and publicly praised Boidon, a most vile, wicked fellow, who
afterward came to a death worthy of his wicked life, being executed at
Clermont, but now was the ringleader and principal promoter of the barbarous
and horrid slaughters and murders committed at Lions; and upon him he also,
Etiam ei potestatis plenitudine gratiae beneficium impertinit.
out of the plenitude of his (legatine) power conferred some of the Pope's
favors and graces. And although by the King's Ministers (who were now much
otherwise affected with the sense of the barbarous slaughters of their
Countrymen; than was the Pope and his Ministers) he was admonished to be very
sober and sparing in his speech of the Massacre, yet could he not hold, but
everywhere, both in private conference and in public, to commend the King's
prudence and magnanimity in that business: and so full was he of it, that being
come to Paris, and endeavoring to persuade the King to the admission of the
Council of Trent in France, he urged it with this as a most weighty argument,
That the memory of the late fact, which is to be commended to all ages, as
conducing to the glory of God, and the dignity of the holy Roman Church, might
be as it were sealed by the approbation of the holy Synod. For so would it be
manifest to all, who now are, or hereafter shall be, that the King consented to
the destruction of so many lives, not out of hatred or revenge, or sense of any
private injury of his own, but out of an ardent desire to propagate the glory
of God. That what could not be expected whilst the faction of the Protestants
stood, now they being taken away, the Catholic Apostolic Roman Religion,
which by the Synod of Trent is cleared and defended from the venom of the
Sectaries, might be established beyond controversy, and without exception,
through all the Provinces of the French Dominion. But the King had no mind to
admit the Council, much less to make that an occasion to perpetuate the memory
of that fact which he was already contriving how to excuse. And therefore was
the Legate dismissed without any effect as to that particular, to the Pope's no
great satisfaction; yet he solaced himself with achievement of the Massacre,
which, because it had happened in the beginning of his Papacy, he reckoned a
most prosperous omen, Thu. l. 52. Seres p. 794.
and among his greatest felicities. And to increase his comfort, the head of
Colinius was sent him to Rome for a present.

Thu. l. 54.
47. But alas, in France, all men generally, and the King himself had already
far other thoughts of that Tragedy; and the Legate found a far other face of
things there at his coming, than he expected, and had left at Rome: for the
King now more sensible of the foulness and odiousness of the fact, when done,
(as is usual in such cases, the heinousness of sin seldom appearing to wicked
minds till actually committed) was in great perplexity whether to own it or
not, and how to excuse it. And therefore it was long debated at Court, whether
to admit the Legate at all, or by some handsome excuses to put him off without
audience, though out of respect to the Pope, and to the person of the Legate,
thought well affected to the interest of France, it was at last permitted, but
not without such caution and admonition to him as has been mentioned. For this
unhappy King had no sooner accomplished these deep designs, from which he
promised himself so great security, content and happiness, but he found himself
surprised and involved in inextricable difficulties, perplexity and misery. And
besides the daily secret horrors of his mind and conscience, Thu. l. 57.
which appeared in their nocturnal effects and productions, disturbing and
interrupting his sleep with direful and frightful dreams, which drove him to
the use of Readiness remedy, by Music to refresh and quiet his disturbed spirits,
1 Samuel 16.
that anxiety which arose in his mind after the fact committed, from his fears
and doubts of what might be the ill consequence of it, was now no less than his
hopes had been before of that happiness and tranquillity which he had promised
himself that he should obtain by it. For though he had before promised himself
great security by the destruction of the heads, and slaughter of so great a
party of the Protestants, yet having done the deed, that desperation into which
he apprehended his perfidious cruelty had driven those who remained, and by the
articles of the last agreement of Peace held Rochel and other strong places in
their possession, rendered them not a little formidable to him, and perplexed
his mind with doubts and fears of new troubles from so just and great
provocation. These cares of what might be the consequence of this action at
home, Thu. l. 53.
were increased and aggravated by his apprehension of what effects so barbarous
an act (which is reported to have filled with stupor and amazement, the Great
Turk himself at the hearing of it) might produce in his neighbors abroad, lest
they thereby might be moved out of commiseration to send their aid and relief
to his so injuriously oppressed subjects. Wherefore all ways and means were
studied and devised to give some satisfaction to the Protestants at home by
treaties and favorable Edicts, (though his former often and foul breaches of
his Faith made this very difficult) and to excuse the foulness of the late fact
both to them and to the Princes and States abroad. Thu. l. 52.
It had been considered beforehand out of that sense and pre-apprehension they
had of the wickedness and foulness of the design, how to cast the imputation of
it upon the Guises, who also out of the same sense and pre-apprehension
endeavored all they could to avoid the odium of it. And being done, the King
immediately, whether affrighted and terrified, says Thuanus, with the atrocity
of the fact, or fearing the odium of it, dispatched his Letters to the
Presidents of the Provinces, to lay all the blame upon the Guises, alleging
that it was done without his privity or consent; that they, fearing that the
friends and relations of Colinius would revenge the injury done to him upon
them, had raised the tumult, which he was not able to repress in time; with a
great deal to this purpose. And to the same purpose were Letters written by the
Queen, and sent not only through France, but also to the Helvetians, and
dispersed through England, and in diverse parts of Germany. But as it usually
happens upon the perpetration of such horrid crimes and wickedness, that the
authors of them distracted with the horrors of their guilty conscience, when
they find no satisfaction or assurance of security in any course they take to
conceal or palliate their crime, continually devise and attempt new ways and
means, and by their often change and inconstancy to any, promote that discovery
which they seek to evade; so it happened in this case. For as these Letters
were disproved by his express commands, which, as Davila relates, he had but
few days before sent out; so does he now again in few days after contract the
same, and in full Senate declares that all was done by his own will and
command, and orders so much to be entered of record in the public acts of the
Court. Cicarel. in vita Greg. 13. Thu. l. 53.
And though to the Pope and Spaniard he owned that he did it upon the score of
Religion, yet knowing that with others, this would not so much excuse as
aggravate and increase the odium of it, some other cause was to be devised and
pretended. And therefore first to extenuate the fact, V. l. 54.
he pretends that his commands extended only to the cutting off of Colinius and
his Confederates, which thing being once undertaken, the tumult at Paris
proceeded further than he intended, or was able, so soon as he desired, to
restrain; and that other Cities taking example from thence, did the like
without his license, and to his great grief and trouble: and then for the cause
pretends a Conspiracy against himself, his Mother and Brothers, and Navar
himself, and to make Conde King, and afterward to kill him also, and set up
Colinius. And though the causes pretended against Colinius, in the judgment of
the most prudent men, who were not at all addicted to the Protestant party,
says Thuanus, had not so much color of truth as will persuade even children to
believe them, much less any sufficient proof; yet to put some color upon the
business, a Trial was ordered to be had in form of Law; and two days after a
Jubilee (as has been said) was appointed, and an Edict published, wherein the
King declares, that what had happened was done by his express command, but not
out of hatred to the (Protestant) Religion, or to derogate from the Edicts of
Pacification, which he still desired should be inviolably and religiously
observed; but to prevent the Conspiracy of Colinius and his Confederates, etc.
and Letters to like purpose were sent to the Presidents of the Provinces,
declaring, as was pretended, the TRUE causes of the tumult, and commanding them
to treat the Protestants in all friendly manner, Thu. l. 53.
etc. And that nothing might be wanting, says Thuanus, to the height of
madness, that they might seem to glory and triumph in so detestable an
enterprise, in emulation of the ancient Emperors, Medals were coined with the
Inscriptions, VIRTUS IN REBELLEIS and PIETAS EXCITAVIT JUSTITIAM. Diverse other
such like arts were used to put a face upon the business, and make it look like
a happy prevention of some terrible Conspiracy. But what was the most
detestable of all, by the accumulating of sin upon sin, as is usual in such
cases, was the gross abuse of Justice it self, whereby the Courts of Justice
were drawn into the participation of the guilt, by an horrible and abominable
Sentence, not only against Colinius who was dead, but his children who were
alive; and also against Monsieur de Briquemaut, who had fled to the English
Ambassadors; and Arnald Cavagnes Master of Requests, who had hid himself
hard-by with a friend, who admonished him of the danger, but were both taken
and imprisoned in the Palace, and the same day that Sentence was given against
Colinius, were condemned to death, which Cavagnes suffered with admirable
constancy, reciting Prayers out of the Psalms by heart, in Latin, for three
hours together, with his eyes steadily fixed toward Heaven: but his companion
at first, affrighted with his approaching death, made an unworthy offer for the
redemption of his life, to discover a means how to surprise Rochel; yet
afterward, when the King refused that condition, but offered him another,
which was, that he should acknowledge himself guilty of the crimes objected to
him, and confess before the people that there was a Conspiracy entered into by
Colinius against the King, he refused that, and chose rather to suffer death,
which accordingly he did with Cavagnes. While these and such like arts were
used to excuse and disguise the business at home; to do it abroad, besides the
Queens Letters abovementioned, were several Ambassadors employed in Helvetia,
Germany, England, Poland, and other foreign Countries, where they either
resided before, or were sent on purpose for this service, and Learned men
suborned and persuaded to do it by printed Books. But all these, not having any
certain ground of truth, as a common foundation for all to build upon, while
each alleged, not what he did know or believe to be true, but what his own
genius dictated as most plausible and likely to put some color upon the
business: some extenuating the fact as to the King's acting in it; and others
on the contrary justifying the same; some excusing it only by way of
recrimination for things done in the late Wars; and others insisting upon the
pretended conspiracy of Colinius; were not only confuted by others, who also in
print answered their writings and speeches, but of themselves betrayed and
detected the vanity of their several pretenses and allegations, by their
inconsistency and disagreement one with another. The Learned Lawyer Fr. Baldwin
was hereunto solicited, but was more ingenuous than to be retained in the
patronage of so foul a cause: and yet among those who undertook this office,
besides the Mercenaries, were some persons otherwise of honor and repute, who,
because what was done could not be undone, partly to consult the credit of
their King and Country, partly to accommodate the present state of affairs,
endeavored either by feigned praises, or officious excuses, to cover and
palliate that fact which in their hearts they detected. And some were therein
so far transported, and over-shot themselves, out of zeal for the honor and
good of their Country, that our ingenuous author deplores their actings in it,
especially as to that foul business of the Trial and Sentence abovementioned.
But generally the French Courtiers, who were more ingenuous than to prostitute
their reputation by asserting that pitiful pretense of the conspiracy, yet used
all their art to represent the case, as a sudden accidental thing, and not so
long before contrived as the Italians and Spaniards relate.

48. It is very usual and even natural to men, especially to the more
considering minds, when any thing rare and extraordinary does occur, not to
rest satisfied with the bare contemplation of the thing, but also to reflect
back, and enquire into the causes of it. And therefore since Thuanus relates
that the more prudent of those, Lib. 53.
who, being no way addicted to the Protestant party, with good and honest
meaning sought how to excuse this execrable fact, yet in their heart detesting
the same, did also seriously consider the causes of it, their sense and
judgment in that respect may likewise deserve our observation. They saw
apparently that so infamous and pernicious counsels could not proceed but from
minds so strangely infatuated and blinded, and did seem to argue a special
judgment of God upon them. And of that, the causes to which it might be
reasonably attributed were very obvious and easy to be discovered. For such was
the profaneness, debauchery and wickedness; which prevailing in the King,
(through his evil Education by his Mother and those Tutors to whom she
committed him) and in the Court, were by the evil example thereof derived to
the City, and thence to the Countrey-Towns and Villages, and so diffused
through the whole Kingdom, as could not but provoke the Holy Majesty of God to
send down his judgments upon them. This is the sum of their judgment, only he^
gives more particular instances in the sins of common Swearing, Adultery and
Fornication, to which others add many more, and tell us in general, that then
never was there any more vicious or more corrupted Court. And indeed, those
were such causes, as, being so obvious and notorious, no serious Christian
believing, and instructed in the Sacred Scriptures, but would readily assign in
the case. Romans 1.
For thus does St. Paul inform the Romans, of such as hold the truth in
unrighteousness, (and our Romanists might do well to be admonished by it) that
because when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, their foolish heart
was darkened, and he gave them up to the lusts of their own hearts, to vile
affections, and to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not
convenient, being filled with all Injustice, Fornication, Murder, Deceit,
breach of Faith, etc. Whatever be the profession which such men make of
Religion, most certain it is, that there is either great error and corruption
in their Religion, or little sincerity and life in their profession, or lastly,
such impotence in the professors, that the prevalence of their sensual
affections does easily overpower and fascinate their reason; which argues
their desertion by that Sacred Spirit which infuses light and life, and heat
and power into humane souls, as they are disposed to receive it, no less than
does the Sun communicate its kind influences to the corporal and animal nature.
And as this does maturate and sweeten crude and sour fruits, and confirm and
strengthen the tender plants; so does that, where it is indeed heartily
embraced, admirably dispose men's minds to sweetness and tranquillity in
themselves, to sweetness and devotion to God, to sweetness, kindness and
benignity to men; and makes these dispositions strong and powerful in them.
Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is power: it informs the mind and
understanding, it reforms the will and affections, and transforms the whole man
into its own likeness. These are the fruits of the Spirit by which we are to
judge of the tree. This is that whereby all true Christians have a real and
internal, not merely external or political, communion and union with their Head
Christ Jesus, and through him with the fountain, from whom, by him, it is
derived to all his true members; (of his fullness we all receive), and one with
another, they are all partakers of the same Spirit, (a nearer alliance than
that of blood) and are filled with a tender affection to all the children of
the same Father, and love to all the creatures of their great Lord, and for his
sake even to their enemies, to those that persecute and injure them; pitying
their blindness and madness, and desiring their conversion, not destruction.
But no sooner or further is any man deserted by this blessed Spirit, or devoid
of his sweet influences, but he presently becomes so much the more obnoxious to
all the malevolent aspects of wicked spirits, and is impregnated and filled
with the poison of their infections, which excites and exalgitates to
exorbitancy his sensual affections, dementates his understanding, and
continually foments and promotes the assimulation and likeness of their own
nature in him, cherishing and fructifying the roots which are in him, of Pride,
Ambition, Envy, Malice, Revenge, Perfidiousness, and all manner of lusts and
wickedness, according to his particular disposition. And because there is so
strong and powerful a propensity to Religion rooted and fixed in the very
nature of man, as is very difficult, if not impossible utterly to extirpate or
depress this in such a person, is by the subtle operation of these agents,
either, if more languid and remiss, diverted, by exciting him to an eager
prosecution of his other more strong inclinations; or, if more intense and
active, perverted either into superstition, or some other conceived heroic
acts of a partial Religion, consisting and concurring with the satisfaction of
his other inclinations: whence ordinarily proceeds much of that heat and zeal
which we frequently see in men for their several parties, for the shells and
outsides of Religion; for opinions and notions, no more necessary to be known
and determined to make men complete Christians, than the speculations of
Philosophers; and often for pernicious and destructive principles, especially
in the Romanists; and inconsiderate endeavors, by fraud and injustice,
sedition or oppression, and violent persecutions, and such like most
unchristian actions, for the advancement of the cause which they espouse;
whereby they encourage themselves with secret hopes to expiate their
licentiousness and indulgence to their own inclinations in other matters, and
easily persuade themselves that so long as they are such good Catholics, or
well affected to the truth and the cause of God and his Church, that all must
needs be well with them. And hence proceeded this not only unchristian, but
barbarous and inhumane, perfidious, bloody action of Charles 9. Hence the
suspicion of his Brother and Successors Henr. 3. Hence all the licentiousness
and wickedness which we see every where in the World. And to all this is no
small occasion given by the complying Conduct, Commutations of Penances, and
other practices of the Jesuits and other Romanists. But the same Apostle
informs us of another cause near of kin to this, and no less effectual to the
provocation of this judgment of obduration of men's minds, which is very likely
to have had no little influence in this case: and that is the resisting,
rejection, or not receiving and embracing of the Truth when offered: which he
mentions in a passage, which, if I be not much mistaken, concerns the defection
of the Church of Rome, and has been so understood by the Christians in all
ages, (though somewhat obscurely and imperfectly, as is usual in the
interpretations of prophetic writings before they be fulfilled); as well
agrees with the conjecture. Because they receive not the love of the Truth,
says he, For this cause God shall send them strong delusions. 1 These. 2.
And this it is very likely had no small influence in this case. For if out of
the Roman Religion we take all that which the Protestants receive and profess,
which the Romanists must needs confess to be truly Catholic, the greatest part
of the rest has been either introduced, or so new modelled and accommodated to
the secular interest and advantage of the Sea of Rome within this 600 years
last past, as has not only given occasion to most of the troubles and
mischiefs in Europe ever since, but very much injured, dishonored and
prejudiced Christianity it self. And when it pleased God by his providence,
both long since, and again of latter days, to raise up a people in the Confines
of France, who retaining that which of all sides is confessed to be truly
Catholic, rejected those novel corruptions and abuses, (though perhaps with
them some things which might be tolerated), and thereby gave so fair occasion
to the French upon further consideration, and with more mature deliberation to
reform the same, (as Queen Eliz. did here), that a great part of the most sober
and pious of the French Nation, even Bishops and Cardinals, being thereupon
sensible of the need of it, did earnestly desire and solicit the convention of
a National Synod to that purpose; the French Kings were unhappily so far
wrought upon by the arts of Rome, as not only ungratefully to reject that
benefit offered by the Divine Providence, but at last to persecute those who
were made the occasions of it. And this seems to have been so manifest a cause
of the troubles, mischiefs and adversities, which by the providence of God have
befallen that Nation and their Princes since the beginning of that Century,
1500.
that it is strange (but that the height of contentions then on foot might
perhaps hinder it) that neither those prudent considering men did take notice
of it in this case, nor yet our judicious and candid Author, who relates their
judgment, and had himself observed almost as much in Lewis 12. If it be fit,
says he, for a mortal man to speak his opinion concerning the eternal Counsels
of God, Lib. 1.
I should say that there was no other cause why that most excellent Prince, in
so many respects commendable and worthy of a better fortune, should meet with
so many conflicts with adversities, than that he had contracted so near
alliance with Pope Alexander 6. and cherished the cruelties, lusts,
perfidiousness, and fortunes of that impure Father (the Pope) and of his Son
(Caesar Borgia) a man drowned in all kind of wickedness: and then relating the
King's calling of a Synod, upon his provocations by the next Pope Julius 2.
(undoubtedly so ordered for the same purpose by the Divine Providence) first at
Lions, and then at Pisa for the reformation of the Church, and his medals
coined with this Inscription, PERDAM BABYLONIS NOMEN, and how after all this he
renounced the Council at Pisa through the importunities of his wife, and
subscribed to the Lateran Council to gratify the next Pope Leo 10. and adding
that in the judgment of many he had done more advisedly if he had persevered in
his purpose of reforming the Church, he concludes; These therefore were the
causes both of the declination of our Empire, and of the adverse fortune of
Lewis: who after all his other misfortunes died without issue male, which he
much desired to succeed him. And in this King is very observable, that as there
was in him no want of magnanimity, humane prudence, or care for himself, the
glory of his Kingdom, and prosperity of his affairs, to which his misfortunes
could be imputed, which makes the judgment of God therein the more apparent; so
neither could any vice or other fault be noted in him, which might be assigned
as a cause of that judgment, but what is here mentioned, the neglect of that
duty whereunto he was so fairly led, and whereof he was so far convinced, as
that he began to put it in execution. In the time of his successor Francis 1.
all things seemed to conspire in giving occasion every where to the Reformation
of the Church, what through the Pope's differences with several Princes, which
produced the abolition and abrogation of the Papal Authority for some time in
Spain, and afterward in England; what through that abominable imposture of
Indulgences and other their gross wickedness and abuses, which provoked Martin
Luther and other learned men to search into, and detect their mystery of
iniquity, and discover many gross errors and abuses crept into the Church,
whereupon ensued the Reformation happily begun and promoted by many Protestant
Princes and Cities in Germany, and other parts. But Francis not only neglected
the occasion, and rejected and made himself unworthy of the common benefit of
it, but moreover contracted that He married his Son Henr. 2. to Katharine of
Medices daughter to Lawrence D. of Urbin, who was Nephew to Leo 10. and Cousin
to Clem. 7.
alliance with the Popes, and at last began those V. 3. Sect. 39. page 56.
persecutions, the unhappy consequence of both which we are now relating. [Nor
was the King of Spain much more happy in his persecutions of the Protestants in
the Low Countries, the consequence whereof was the loss of the best part of
them: and all he got by the Inquisition in Spain, was but the exclusion of
light and truth from his people, and his own slavery to the strong delusions
and infatuations of the Jesuits, who precipitated him into diverse
dishonorable, unsuccesful, and to his own affairs pernicious undertakings.]

49. But to return to the effects and consequences of that bloody act, whereof
what has yet been related, was but the first fruits of those Counsels from
which so much happiness, tranquillity and glory were so long expected, instead
whereof was reaped only horror, shame and anxiety, whereunto succeeded a
plentiful harvest of other real troubles. For the King and that Faction which
prevailed at Court, after so many former breaches of public Faith, by this so
inhumane cruelty and foul breach of Faith, so much the greater, by how much the
greater arts and deep dissimulation had been used before to raise a trust and
confidence of their sincerity, had now driven those of the Protestants who
remained alive to that distrust and jealousy (the usual fruits of
perfidiousness) of whatever Letters, Promises, Edicts, or other means could be
devised to satisfy them, that nothing could give them any assurance of their
lives and safety, but retaining those places which by the last agreement of
Peace were left in their possession for their security, (and were now, had the
agreement been performed, Thu. l. 53.
to have been delivered) to stand upon their defense. And though many of them
not only doubting of their strength, but making scruple of the justice of the
cause, now since not only the Princes of the blood, to whom the administration
of the Kingdom did belong, were absent, but moreover the King himself was grown
a man, did dispute against it, and from both those grounds urged all the
arguments they could: yet against the first of these, the horror of these
slaughters, which they had so lately seen, and did foresee, prevailed, and
despair made the most timorous courageous. And this also made the answer which
was returned by others to the latter, more satisfactory to the rest; that to
take up Arms for their just defense, not to offer violence to any, but only to
repel the injury, and save themselves from slaughter, was neither by the Laws
of God or man unlawful; that it ought not to be reputed a war against the King,
but a just defense against their enemies who abused the King's authority to
destroy them, who if so powerful as to have proceeded so far in the late tumult
beyond his consent or privity, or prevalent with him as to work his assent to
so unjust and foul an action, they had the more reason to secure themselves
against their power and treachery, till justice should be done upon them; nor
ought they to doubt, but in so just a cause upon their serious repentance,
trust in God, and humble supplications to him, he would graciously pity their
misery, and provide some unexpected means for their relief. And therefore
seeing La Charity was surprised at the time of the massacre, and the same was
attempted against Montabon, Da. p. 377.
and being further warned by what was lately done at Castrum in Albigensi agro.
Castres, which after great promises of safety by the King, was notwithstanding
permitted to be plundered, and laid waste by the slaughters and rapines of
Creuseta, Rochel, having for some days kept a solemn fast, with diverse other
places prepare for their defense. And at last when arts failed, especially
after the massacre at Bordeaux, in the midst of their treaties, the King's
Forces were sent to assault them. And these (says Thuanus, after a more
particular relation of them) were the beginnings of the Fourth Civil War in
France, the more memorable, because from so small beginnings, beyond the hope
and expectation even of those who through necessity rather than upon counsel
and design did manage it, when, so many Commanders being slain, the Nobility
who remained dispersed abroad, and the people in all places astonished, all was
thought subdued, within the compass of a year, without the foreign aid of any
Prince, and money every where after so great plunders failing them, it restored
the affairs of the Protestants to good condition again. And yet this was only a
defensive War on their part, and, as he says, of necessity, wherein those poor
people fought only for their lives and safety, and not to neglect the King's
commands, were willing to keep their meetings at Sermons only secretly in the
night, and not openly in the daytime, which yet could not be denied them
without manifest injustice and breach of public Faith. But such were their
apprehensions of the perfidiousness and cruelty of their enemies, and
resolutions thereupon, that they chose rather to suffer all the miseries and
necessities that humane nature is able to bear, than again to trust to the
mercy or promises of them whom they had so often found perfidious, and moreover
at last so barbarously inhumane and cruel. And therefore at Samerre it is
almost incredible what they suffered. Thu. l. 55.
Having spent their stores, they killed and eat their Asses, Mules, Horses,
Dogs, and all other living creatures they could meet with; and when that also
was spent, they devised ways to make Hydes, Skins, Parchment, Bridle-rains, and
whatever was made of leather, edible; and Bran, Straw, Nutshels, the Horns and
Hoofs of Beasts, even dugg out of the dunghils, and the very dung of Horses,
and such things as scarce any other creatures will feed on; insomuch, that
whereas in eight months siege they had not lost 100 slain, in forty days above
500 died of hunger, and 200 more were famished almost to death. Rochel indeed
was not driven to that extremity, Thu. l. 56.
partly having made better provisions for themselves, partly by an
extraordinary supply, little less than miraculous; for all the time of the
siege, the tides, it being a Sea-Town, left the poor people such plenty of a
kind of shellfish, as very well supplied them with food; which, when the siege
was ended, presently vanished, and were not seen in such plenty much longer.
Yet did they testify as great abhorrence of the perfidiousness and cruelty of
their enemies, by their incredible courage and activity, even of their women in
the repulse of several fierce assaults, and also in sallies: and in conclusion,
the assailants seeking rather occasions how to raise the siege with credit,
than having any hope to obtain the City by force, Thu. l. 56.
they came to this agreement for themselves, Montabon and Nismes, Da. p. 392.
confirmed by an Edict, That free profession of their Religion should be
permitted them, according to the Edicts made in behalf of the Protestants;
their privileges confirmed; no Garrison imposed on them; only the King should
appoint them a Governor, and they should be governed by the Laws and Customs
which they had used even since they became Subjects to the Crown of France,
etc. Some time after Samere obtained by agreement to enjoy the benefit of the
Pacification made with Rochel, but paying 40000 l. for the saving of their
Movables. And this end (says our Author) had this fourth Civil War after the
tumult at Paris, when the Courtiers thought all subdued by that slaughter,
begun and finished in the assaulting of certain Cities, and especially in the
siege of that one City of Rochel, which for so many months did most stiffly,
beyond the opinion of all men, sustain, and at last break the strength and
force of the whole Kingdom raised against it, besides Aumale, Tular, Cossens,
Goa his Brother, and other, 40000 Soldiers (the very number said by Davila to
have been slain in the massacre) being slain, and dead of sickness, and among
these 60 chief Ordinum Ductores.
Commanders (and as some say, most of the actors of that tragedy) besides a
vast deal of money and military provisions spent, and at last things being
reduced to those streights, that the King contrary to what had before been
falsely persuaded him, thought himself a greater gainer by that Peace, than by
the Parisian slaughter. Such were the effects whether of the Italian Policy, or
the Romish Doctrine of not keeping Faith with Heretics.

50. He had no sooner ended this War, Thu. l. 57.
but he began to be grievously afflicted with that fatal disease which in few
months after put an end to his life, not without suspicion of poison by his
Mother and Brother Anjou, and besides in the mean time, by her arts, and the
influences of the Guises upon her, was presently involved in a fit of Civil
War. And this not only against the Protestants, whom having sufficient cause
from former experience to beware of the perfidiousness and cruelty of their
enemies, after other new occasions of suspicion, she forced again to provide
for their security, and stand upon their defense, by a perfidious attempt to
surprise Rochel by her emissaries, who had corrupted some in the City to betray
it to the Forces, which for that purpose they had drawn near it; but also
against a considerable party of the Catholics, (as they call them) whom, while
she thought it necessary for the continuance of her power and authority in the
government, to keep up, and foment factions among the chief Nobility; she, by
over-doing what she designed, forced, for their own safety and security, to
join their complaints and forces with the Protestants. Whereby (considering the
division of that party) she in some sort repaired the loss which the Protestant
party had sustained by the massacres; the Providence of God undoubtedly thus
ordering it to manifest the vanity of their former hopes of peace and
tranquillity by such wicked courses for the destruction of the Protestants, and
to punish by their mutual dissentions among themselves, their former unanimity
in persecuting them. The chief of this party were the sons of the old Constable
Momorancy, (in his time an active persecutor of the Protestants) the Viscount
de Turenne, and others, whom the Queen, favoring the contrary faction of the
Guises, continually by diverse calumnies incensing and exasperating the King
against them, and by other stratagems which they discovered, drove into despair
of safety by any other means; which no doubt was not a little increased by the
experience which they had seen of her perfidiousness and cruelty in the case of
the Protestants, all men being suspicious of those whom they have observed
false and perfidious to others. And to these Alancon the King's younger
Brother, upon the same occasions, besides some other causes of discontent,
joined himself as head. Besides those of the Nobility, there were two other
subsidiary Factions in the Court. Thu. l. 59. pr.
The one of those, who desirous by any means to retain the Religion of their
Ancestors, and careless for any amendment or reformation of it, did easily
suffer themselves, in favor of them who took up Arms under pretense of
defending it, to be drawn in either by fraudulent interpretations to elude, or
plainly and altogether to violate the Faith given to the Protestants. The other
of those who would not depart from the religion of their ancestors, but yet
desired many things in it, in tract of time, through covetousness and gross
ignorance, brought in to the dishonor of God, and offense of many, to be
corrected; and therefore being more favorable to the Protestants, held that
things ought to be transacted in a friendly manner with them, that the Faith
publicly given them should be faithfully kept, and that by any means peace,
without which the business of reformation could not proceed, should be settled.
The first favored the Guises, who sought all occasions of War, the latter the
Momorances, who persuaded Peace. Of this last opinion were those famous men
Michael Hospitalius Chancellor of France, Paulus Foxius, Many others were of
the same mind, as Jo. Monlue Bishop of Valence, and Car. Marillac Archbishop
of Vienna. Thu. l. 25.
Christophorus Thuanus, Christophorus Menilius, though they never engaged in
Arms on either side. And this was the party which were called Politics, a
name, says our Author, by the seditious attributed to them who were studious
for the good of the King and peace of the Kingdom, (li. 52.) and male contents.
But that faction which desired stirs always prevailing in the Court, hence it
came to pass, that so many Edicts (of Pacification) were made one upon another,
and as often violated, the War being so often renewed, and with the same levity
wherewith it was begun, laid down again. Whereof the King by this time became
sensible, and observed, but when it was too late, Thu. l. 57.
that that unhappy massacre had, contrary to what was expected, dissolved the
bonds of peace and public security. And therefore with indignation perceiving
that the Counselors of it had more respect to the satisfaction of their own
private hatred and ambition, than to the public Faith and quiet (of the
Kingdom) without which he could never keep up his Royal Majesty, being not a
little incensed against them, he resolved from that time to remove them from
the Council, and to send away from him his mother her self, under a more
honorable color of visiting her son Anjou in Poland, (whom he had newly,
almost by force, thrust out of France, having, to be rid of him, procured him
to be chosen King there). And believing that the Civil Wars in France were
raised not so much for the cause of Religion as through the factions of that
Kingdom, and that the chief leaders of them were the Guises and the Momorances,
he resolved, without any regard of the Law, or the justice of either cause, to
destroy both these potent Families, being no less exasperated against Guise
than Momorancy, and therefore had often thoughts of taking him out of the way.
But in the midst of these troubles without, in his Kingdom, and others within,
in his mind and body, after very grievous and long pains, so that long before
his death he felt himself dying, he ended his life every way miserable, by that
sickness which few thought natural, but rather procured by his own Mother and
Brother Anjou, Pauci naturalem ei rebantur, memores quae summus dissimulandi
artifex prae impatientia interminatus and matri and fratri esset, neque ignari
quam non sponte nonus Rex Galliam relinqueret, p. 441. in octav. and again, p.
493. Mortui corpus a Chirurgis and medicis apertum; in quo livores ex causa
incognita reperti, conceptam multorum opinionem auxerunt potius quam minuerunt.
l. 57.
as our Author does sufficiently intimate, and was further remarkable by the
effusion of his own blood, who had so perfidiously and barbarously shed the
blood of so many of his subjects. Davila says he began some months before to
spit blood; others that he died of a Bloudy-flux, and that much blood issued
out of all the passages of his body; and that he happened to fall down, and
wallowed in his own blood. And whereas Davila says that he ended his life with
grave and pious discourses, others say that he ended it with imprecations and
cursings, and that his last words were mere blasphemies. Whereof, which is most
credible, the reader considering his natural temper, life and actions, may
easily judge. He died under five and twenty years of age, without issue male to
succeed him, leaving only a daughter by his Queen, with whom he had been above
four years married, and a bastard-son. And these were the fruits which he
reaped of his bloody and perfidious counsels and practices.

51. Nor did his next Brother Anjou, called Henr. 3. reap any better fruits of
his counsels and actions in the massacre and other enterprises against the
Protestants; who in great haste, Thu. l. 58.
upon notice of his Brother's death, shamefully stealing from his Kingdom of
Poland, in his return to France was well admonished by the Emperor Maximilian,
that at the beginning of his Reign, and first entrance into France, he should
settle peace among his subjects: and the same counsel was often repeated to him
by the Duke of Venice in the name of the Senate. Yet he was no sooner arrived
in France, but by the counsel of his Mother and the Guisian and Italian
faction, (the same Cabal which contrived the massacre) he resolved the
contrary, till finding it a work too hard by open force to destroy the
remaining part of the Protestants, being moreover strengthened by the
association of the Politics with them, there was at last a Peace concluded
upon such terms, as, Thu. l. 62. Davila. l. 6.
had they been granted in sincerity, and justly performed, might have produced
much happiness to that Kingdom. For, besides what related to the particular
concerns of Alancon, D'Anvil, and others of the Politics and malcontents, to
the Protestants was granted full liberty of Conscience, and free exercise of
their Religion, without exception of times or places, etc. and Towns for their
security till the Articles should be fully and perfectly performed. And these
Articles were concluded by the Queen Mother her self in person, and confirmed
by a public Edict with all the solemnity that could be, the King himself being
present in Parliament, sitting in his Throne of Justice. But these Articles,
says Davila, as soon as they were known to those of the Catholic party,
exasperated most of their minds in such manner, that they not only murmured
freely against the King himself and the Queen Mother, but many were disposed to
rise, and would have taken Arms to disturb the unjustness [as they call it] of
that Peace, which was generally [by them] esteemed shameful, and not fit to be
kept, if within awhile they had not manifestly understood, that the King and
Queen, purposely to recover and draw home the Duke of Alancon, had consented to
conditions in words, which they were resolved not to observe in deeds. For, (as
he presently adds) having exactly performed all things promised to the Duke of
Alancon, none of the other Articles were observed either to the Protestants in
general, or to the King of Navar and Prince of Conde in particular: but the
King permitting, and tacitly consenting to it, the Assemblies of the
Protestants were every where violently disturbed, etc. And the Guises, who were
not slack in laying hold of any opportunity to augment their own greatness, and
to secure the state of that Religion, which was so straightly linked to their
interests, began upon the conjuncture of so great an occasion, secretly to make
a league of the Catholics, in all the Provinces of the Kingdom, under color
of opposing the progress and establishment of heresy, which by the Articles of
the Peace was so fully authorized and established. And this was the Faith of a
Catholic Prince, whose Conscience was directed by the religious Jesuits, and
so great a votary, that though a King, he would often make one of the
Flagellantes, and was believed would have changed his Kingdom for a Cell, Thu.
l. 61: Busbeq. epist. 20.
though Guise had never attempted to force him to it: this the obedience and
loyalty of his Catholic Subjects. But this was nothing to what followed; for
this was but the beginning of that Holy League, which may justly put to silence
all clamours, and answer all calumnies against the Protestants in France, upon
occasion of any miscarriages of theirs under so long and grievous oppressions
and unjust persecutions; and was the pattern and precedent which was followed
by that faction here, which the Romish Emissaries and Agents partly raised, and
partly ruled, or secretly influenced to promote their own designs, as may be
perceived by comparing such evidences and testimonies as are to be met with of
their mysterious practices in their works of darkness, with their Principles
laid down to undermine this Church and State, extant in printed Books. Lib. 6.
p. 449. Lib. 8. c. 2. p. 496. Thu. l. 63.
The form of the League may be seen in English at large in Davila and Fonlis,
to this effect: The Covenant of the Princes, Lords and Gentlemen of the
Catholic Religion, for the entire restitution of the Law of God, and
preservation of his holy worship, according to the form and rites of the holy
Church of Rome, abjuring and renouncing all errors contrary to it. 2. For the
preservation of King Henr. 3. and his Successors, in the State, Honor,
Splendour, Authority, Duty, Service and Obedience due to them, etc. 3. For the
restitution of their ancient rites, liberties and privileges to the Provinces
of the Kingdom, etc. In case there be any opposition against this aforesaid, or
any of the Covenanters, their friends or dependants be molested or questioned
for this cause, by whomsoever it be, all that enter into this Covenant shall be
bound to employ their lives and fortunes to take vengeance upon them, either by
way of justice or force, without any exception of persons whatever. They who
depart from this Covenant shall be punished both in body and goods. All shall
likewise swear to yield ready obedience and faithful service unto that Head
which shall be deputed, and to give all help, counsel and assistance, as well
for the maintenance of this League, as for the ruin of all that shall oppose
it, without exception of persons; and those that fail shall be punished by the
authority of the Head, etc. All the Catholics of the several Cities, Towns and
Villages shall be secretly advertised by the particular Governors to enter into
this League, and concur in providing Men, Arms, and other necessaries, etc.
Into this League, (framed with so much art, Davila, p. 451.
that making a show to obey and maintain the King, it took from him all his
obedience and authority to confer it upon the head of their Union, as Davila
notes,) when many were engaged in France, they began secretly to treat at Rome
for Protection, and in Spain for men and money; nor did they find in either
place any aversness to their desires. Da. p. 461. V. Thu. l. 63.
And though they thought it unfit to dispute openly whether the States were
superior to the King or no, yet while these things were acted in secret without
his knowledge or consent, they sought cunningly (by a kind of cheat) to take
away his prerogative, and (with his consent) to settle it in a certain number,
who should have power to conclude and determine all business without
contradiction or appeal; and to that end At the Assembly of the States at
Blois. (which consisted most of such who had subscribed to the Catholic
League.)
petition the King, that for the dispatch of all business with speed and
general satisfaction, he would be pleased to elect a number of Judges not
suspected by the States, who, together with twelve of the Deputies, might hear
such motions as from time to time should be proposed by every Order, and
conclude and resolve upon them, with this condition, that whatever was jointly
determined by the Judges and Deputies together, should have the form and vigor
of a Law, without being subject to be altered or revoked; which had been in
effect to unking him, and leave him little more than the title. But the King
not ignorant of the importance of that demand, Thu. l. 63.
became sensible of their designs, and of his own danger, which more manifestly
appeared in certain secret instructions to Nic. David, with which he was sent
to the Pope concerning the deposing of the King, and thrusting him into a
Monastery, and setting up Guise in his place, etc. which being taken with David
in his journey, and published by the Protestants, were not believed at first,
till the same being also sent to the King of Spain, the French Ambassador there
happened to get a copy of them, and sent them to his Master, as Thuanus relates
from his own mouth. The King therefore returns them a wary answer, such as
though not altogether denying their demand, yet gave them no great
satisfaction. But though they failed in this attempt to unking the King with
his own consent, yet they resolved, though without, or contrary to his consent,
not only to moderate the last articles of Peace, but to break them utterly, and
again with more force than ever to begin the War against the Protestants,
whereby they brought the King to this necessity, that he must either plainly
and openly break his faith given to the Protestants, (which he had done before
only by connivance) or engage with them in a more dangerous War against the
Leaguers. And diverse dissuaded him from breach of his Faith, among the rest
William Lantgrave of Hesse, Thu. l. 63.
besides the reason he gave him in mind of that late and memorable example of
Ladislaus 4. King of Hungary, who having sworn a Truce with the great Turk
Amurath 2. being persuaded by the Pope and Cardinals, out of a vain hope that
they could absolve him from the obligation of it, perfidiously broke it.
Whereupon in the first encounter (the Turk lifting up his eyes to Heaven, and
calling to Christ to behold and punish the perfidious dealing wherewith his
followers had dishonored him) he was himself slain with 30000 of his men: on
the other side the French Theologists did openly both in Sermons and printed
Books contend that the Prince is not obliged to keep Faith with the Heretics,
alleging to that purpose the Decree of the Council of Constance, and therefore
War is to be undertaken to extirpate them. And by the advice of the Bishop of
Lymoges and Morvillier (sometime Bishop of Orleans) the King determined, since
he could not by open resistance hinder the designs and progress of the League,
(which already had taken too deep root) to make himself Head and Protector of
it, and draw that authority to himself, which he saw they endeavored to settle
upon the Head of the League, both within and without the Kingdom; which
accordingly he did, causing it to be read, published, and sworn in open
assembly, and with high protestations declared that he would spend his last
breath to reduce all his people to a unity in Religion, and an entire obedience
to the Roman Church: which done, he without much difficulty prevailed with
Navar and the Protestants to yield to some restraints of the public exercise
of their Religion. And thus by a new Edict of Pacification, were things in For
in the midst of peace nothing but the persecution of heresy was daily
threatened. Da. p. 479.
some sort quieted for some time.

52. But after the death of Alancon the King's youngest Brother, who died
without issue, and not without suspicion of poison, in the flower of his age,
being about thirty, (wherein we may take notice, by the way, of the Divine
Vengeance by degrees extirpating that Family; which so wickedly sought the
extirpation of the Protestants) the King having no issue, nor like to have any,
Busbeq. ep. 5.
(notwithstanding all his visits and supplications at the Monuments of Saints
and Religious places) whereby the Crown was likely to descend to the King of
Navar, a Protestant Prince, who was next heir to it, the Leaguers presently
begin new troubles, Thu. l. 80.
the Preachers from the Pulpits fill their hearers minds with fears and
jealousies, meetings are every where held, Soldiers secretly listed, and
Officers appointed, and the more to enrage the people, while the Preachers fill
their ears with the noise of approaching dangers, Thu. l. 81.
dreadful and horrid representations of most terrible persecutions which the
Catholics are said to suffer in England, are presented to their view, both in
printed Books, and also in Cuts and Pictures which are set up in public
places, and persons appointed to relate the sad stories of them, and tell the
people that thus it will be also in France, if the King of Navar be admitted to
the Kingdom; and therefore to secure themselves of a Catholic King, they
resolve to set up the Cardinal Bourbon for head of the League at present, and
to succeed the King in case he should die without issue. And the better to
strengthen themselves they renew their League with the Spaniard, Da. p. 526.
and having suddenly raised a considerable Army, contrary to the King's express
prohibition by his Edict, Da. p. 535.
they begin to make themselves Masters of many Cities and Fortresses, some by
secret practices, some by open force of Arms, Da. p. 550.
driving out the King's Governors and Officers, and in short time, through the
fury of the people, and great converse of the Clergy in favor of the League,
became so formidable to the King, that he was forced to a new agreement with
them against the Protestants, Da. p. 557.
to banish their Preachers, confiscate their estates, and with all speed
denounce a War against them, wherein such men should be made Commanders, as the
League should confide in, and a great deal more, partly against the
Protestants, and partly to strengthen their own party. Da. p. 598.
This agreement was made by the King only to comply with his present necessity,
and not with any intention to perform it. For being now out of hope of issue
himself, he resolved to further Navar's right, and to unite himself with him,
as his lawful Successor, and make him partaker in matters of Government, to
which end he held secret correspondence with him. Da. p. 600.
But the Leaguers force him to go on with the War; and upon the score of his
treaty with Navar raise great clamors and calumnies against him, that the cause
of Religion is betrayed, the Protestants openly favored, the course of the War
interrupted, and that the King shows openly that his mind is averse to the
Catholic party, and that he desires by all means to cherish and maintain
heresy. Da. p. 606.
And now the minds of the people are more than ever inflamed against his person
and proceedings, which were publicly inveighed against in the Pulpits, and
particularly slandered in private meetings, Thu. l. 86.
but especially by the Priests at the secret confessions of the people, whom
they refused to absolve, unless they would enter into the League; and for the
more secret carrying on of the business, entrusted in this new Doctrine, that
as well the Penitent, who shall reveal what he hears from his Confessor, as the
Confessor who reveals what the Penitent confesses, does incur the guilt of
mortal sin. From calumnies and slanders they proceed to conspiracies and
actions. And at Paris they set up a new Council of sixteen, Da. p. 606. Thu. l.
86.
which hold their secret meetings, first at the College of Forlet, commonly
called the cradle of the League, afterward at the College of the Dominicans,
and at the Jesuits College they plot to surprise Boulogne, and there to admit
the Spanish Fleet prepared against England. Da. p. 609. Thu. l. 86.
They also consult about taking the King himself, as he returned from the Boys
de Vincernes with a small guard. And both these enterprises being discovered to
the King, failing, Thu. l. 87.
they set up a seditious Preacher to inveigh against the King and his
Counselors, and not doubting but thereupon the King would send to apprehend
him, they determine upon that occasion to stir up the people, and thereupon
take up arms and destroy both him and those about him, who were faithful to
him. Which in part proceeded, and perhaps had been accomplished, if the King
had not timely recalled those he had employed: whereupon he was advised to
depart from Paris, which he did; but not long after returning thither, he is
presented with a Petition, which at a Consultation at Nancy (where it was
concluded that Guise and the other confederate Lord, Da. p. 668. Thu. l. 90.
should not enter to oppose the King at the very first) was so contrived, that
if he granted it, their desires would be effected without noise or trouble; and
if he refused, he should thereby give them occasion and opportunity to make use
of arms, and to acquire that by force, which he would not consent to of his own
accord. And though the King did not so much refuse, as by excuses delay to
answer it, the Preachers labor to cast all the odium they can upon him,
inveigh against him as favoring the heretics, and on the other side highly
extol and magnify the Catholic Princes, so they called the Guisians. And Guise
his coming to the City is by frequent Letters much importuned; which though,
according to the former conclusion, he at present deferred, yet were some
experienced Soldiers sent to them, he not being willing to trust to the City
Commanders alone. And now reckoning their strength 20000 men, there is a new
Conspiracy to fall upon the Louvre, and killing the guard, and all about him
whom they suspect, to seize upon the King. But this was also discovered, and
the Council of sixteen, who thought there might be some hazard in that, resolve
upon a more safe course, to seize upon him when he should be in procession, as
he was wont, in the habit of a Penitent among the whipping Friars, and shut him
up in a Monastery with a strong Guard; and in the mean time a report should be
spread abroad, as if the King was taken away by the Protestants, at which the
people should take up arms and fall upon the Politics, and those they
suspected. And this being also discovered, the King consults how to secure
himself against the Conspirators. In the mean time the Duke of Guise
unexpectedly comes to Paris contrary to the King's command. And while the King
seeks to strengthen himself, and preventing the Leaguers to secure the most
important places of the City, the Parisians are raised at the ringing of the
Bells, make Barricadoes cross the streets, come up to the Louvre, and begin to
assault it. Whereupon the Queen Mother goes to Guise in her Sedan, being denied
passage in her Coach, and confers with him, but brings back nothing but
complaints, and exorbitant demands. But the siege pressing much on the one
side, when it was feared they would likewise besiege it on the other, the
Queen Mother going again to Guise, and having notice by the way that 15000 men
were preparing to enclose the Louvre on the other side, holds him in a long
treaty, while the King with 26 Gentlemen steals secretly away to Chartres, to
the no small grief of Guise and the Leaguers who had lost so fair an
opportunity. Whereupon they secure and strengthen Paris, lay siege to the Boys
de Vincernes, which yielded without resistance, as did also St. Cloud, Lagny,
Charranton, with all the other neighboring Towns. The King being again reduced
to his former straits of accepting the assistance of the Protestants, or
yielding to such terms as the Leaguers would please to give him, after long
consultation at length resolved to use the same means against Guise, which he
remembered had been used in the reign of his Brother Charles against the Admiral
Coligny and his Adherents, and to that end feigned to consent to the opinion of
those who persuaded him to unite himself to the Duke of Guise. And having upon
a treaty concluded a Peace upon almost the same conditions which were contained
in the Petition framed at Nancy, Thu. l. 91.
he receives Guise much after the same manner that his Brother did Coligny,
with great expressions of honor, causes the Edict of the Union to be presently
published, the War against the Protestants proclaimed, for the prosecution
whereof, according to the Articles of the Peace, two several Armies were
appointed. Guises achievements were highly magnified by the Leaguers in
France, and no less by the Pope at Rome, who sent to him and to the Cardinal
Bourbon his Congratulatory Letters, full of high praises, which were presently
published in print, and dispersed abroad. Wherein he commends their piety and
zeal in promoting the business of Religion, comparing Guise to the Holy
Maccabees, the defenders of the people of Israel, so highly extolled in the
Sacred Scriptures, and exhorting him to continue succesfully and gloriously to
fight for the advancement of the Church, and the total extirpation of the
Protestants, acquaints him with his own uncessant prayers for the Divine
assistance to him, adding that nothing could be more seasonable for the present
occasion, than that he should have his Legate in France, by whose means and
authority their endeavors might be promoted for the good of the Kingdom, and
of the Catholic Religion. And if any thing more be necessary to be done by
him, he desires to be certified of it, who shall never be wanting to their
cause. Guise and the Leaguers being not a little animated by these things, Thu.
l. 93.
the Assembly of the States at Blois, which was called upon this late
agreement, and were most of the faction of the League, especially the Order of
the Clergy, which did in a manner wholly incline to that side, with great heat
pronounce the King of Navar for his crime of heresy unworthy of the succession
of the Kingdom: which being decreed by the Clergy, and upon their signification
and admonition universally subscribed by the other two orders, holding it a
great fault in the cause of Religion to dissent from the Ecclesiastics, the
Archbishop of Ambrun, with twelve of each Order, repair to the King, and
desire that by his authority, and a public Edict, the Decree may be confirmed.
But the King utterly averse from it, though he would not plainly deny it, yet
put it off as well as he could; but such was the obstinacy of the States, that
he was forced at last to answer that he agreed to the general vote, and would
think of causing the Decree to be framed. Guise also with all his might urged
the receiving of the Council of Trent, whereunto, though the King consented,
yet was it rejected with great contradiction, not only by the Nobility, but by
a great many of the Clergy. This was urged by him partly as a powerful engine
against the Protestants, partly further to oblige the Pope, if it succeeded,
and to raise a prejudice in him against the King, if it succeeded not by his
default. And to ingratiate himself the more with the people, he moves for ease
of grievances by impositions and taxes, though a thing inconsistent with the
prosecution of the War against the heretics. But the King finding now a
convenient opportunity to execute his design, acquaints some of his confidents
with it, and having ordered all things so as to avoid the suspicion of Guise,
much after the manner heretofore used against Colinius, he commands him to be
slain, which was accordingly The manner of his death, see in the notes upon the
history of the Massacre. Sect. 17.
done; and the Cardinal his Brother being with many Lords and adherents of that
Faction, at the same time committed to custody, was about two days after by
the King's command in like manner slain. Thus do those who had wickedly
conspired the barbarous slaughter of so many innocent Protestants, now, by the
just judgment and vengeance of God upon them, mutually conspire one another
destruction. And that City which was then so forward in executing the wicked
counsels and commands of savage and perfidious men, is now as forward in
executing the just judgments of the righteous God upon one of the chief Authors
of them; and they who before had been the instruments of his cruelty, are now
made the instruments of his punishment.

Thu. l. 93. Da. l. 10.
53. Upon the news of these things spread abroad, the Leaguers are all in an on
uproar, and at Paris, having held a Council where nothing almost was heard but
reproaches against the King, and cries for revenge, the Duke of Aumale is
called out of a Monastery to be their Governor; the Preachers from their
Pulpits thunder out the praises of the Duke of Guise his Martyrdom, and
detestations of that slaughter most cruelly committed by the King; in such
manner, that not only the minds of the baser people, but also of the most noted
Citizens were won by their persuasions, and inflamed with an infinite desire to
take revenge; Thu. l. 94: Da. p. 762. Fonl. c. 5. p. 530.
and the Council of sixteen cause a writing to be presented to the famous
College of Divines called the Sorbon, in the name of the Provost and Eschevins
of the City, containing these two Questions. 1. Whether they should not be free
from their Oath of Fidelity and Obedience to Henry the third. And, 2. Whether
they might not with safe Conscience, arm, unite, eollect and contribute money
for the defense and conservation of the Roman Catholic Religion in this
Kingdom, against the wicked counsels and endeavors of the King aforesaid, and
all other his adherents whomsoever, and against his breach of public Faith at
Blois, etc. Whereunto upon mature deliberation at an assembly of seventy
Masters of that Faculty, and solemn resolution, it was answered nemine
refragante, 1. That the people of this Kingdom are free, and at liberty from
their Oath of Fidelity and Obedience to King Henry aforesaid. 2. That the same
people lawfully, and with safe conscience Dav. p. 763. that the King had
forfeited his right to the Crown, and that his Subjects not only might, but
ought to cast off their obedience, etc.
may arm, unite, collect and contribute money for the defense and conservation
of the Catholic, Apostolic and Roman Religion, against the wicked counsels
and endeavors of the aforesaid King, and whomsoever adhering to him, since he
has violated the public Faith to the prejudice of the Catholic Religion, and
of the Edict of the holy Union, and of the natural liberty of the assembly of
the three Estates of this Kingdom. Moreover, they think fit that this Decree or
conclusion be sent to the Pope, that he may by the authority of the holy See
approve and confirm it, and afford his help and assistance. Fonl. p. 533.
And accordingly a Letter is drawn up, and sent by the Parisians in the name of
themselves, and the rest of the Catholics in France, wherein they represent to
him the zeal of the people, all good men being ready to lay down their lives
rather than suffer that Tyranny; and more than 10000 of the Parisians filling
the streets with cries to Heaven for vengeance against the Tyrant; others
whipping the statue of the Tyrant, breaking it to pieces, and throwing it into
the fire. Da. p. 763.
And indeed after this Declaration (to use Davila's words) the people as it
were loosened from the bonds of obedience, and having broken the rein of
modesty, ran violently to the breaking down of the King's Arms and Statues
wherever they found them, and began furiously to seek out all those whom they
accounted dependants of his party, by them called Navarrists and Politics;
which forced many quiet men to leave their houses to save their lives, which
others were fain to compound for with money, V. Thu. p. 397.
and others unfortunately lost: All Churches echoed with voices of the
Preachers, who aggravated the parricide committed by Hence Charles Steward here.
Henry Valois, no longer called King of France, but the Heretic, Tyrant, and
persecuter of the holy Church; and all places were full of Libels both in verse
and prose, which contained and amplified the same things several ways. And the
Council of sixteen, having prepared the Preachers to be ready, in case any
tumult should arise, to appease the people, cause all the Counselors of
Parliament and Officers who adhered to the King, to be imprisoned in the
Bastille, as enemies to the public good. This done, they assemble a kind of
Rump Parliament, which substituting others in the place of those they had
secluded, make a public Declaration for the deposing of the King, and a new
Decree and Engagement of holy Union for defense of the Catholic Religion, the
safety of Paris, and other united Cities, to oppose those who, having violated
the public Faith, had taken away the lives of the Catholic Princes, to take
just revenge for their murder, and to defend the liberty and dignity of the
States of France against all persons whoever, without exception, etc. And this
was proposed to be sworn to by all: whereupon there was presently a general
engagement throughout the whole Kingdom, and for a Head of the Union they make
choice of the D. of Mayenne Brother to the late D. of Guise, who at the request
of the Leaguers comes to Paris, where a Council of the Union consisting of 40
of the chief Leaguers, whose Orders all are to obey upon pain of death, being
instituted, he is by the Parliament declared Lieutenant General of the State
and Crown of France, and solemnly sworn to defend the Roman Catholic
Apostolic Religion, the Royal State, the Authority of the Supreme Courts, the
privileges of the Church, and of the Nobility, the Laws and Customs of the
Kingdom, etc. In the mean time to heighten and inflame the odium of the people
against the King, nothing is omitted either in the Pulpit, or out of it, by
slanders, calumnies, and false reports. And while among other devises they
endeavor to represent him as a worshipper of Satyrs, and a Magitian, they
exercise a kind of magic or witchcraft against him, devising religious
execrations, and instituting strange superstitious rites, women and maids clad
only in such fine linen that their bodies might be seen through it, and some
carrying burning tapers in their hands, they sang over certain mysterious
rithms with dissonant and confused tones and voices, and then suddenly
extinguished their torches, as if they hoped or wished that the King's life
should be thereby, or in like manner also extinguished; and a great deal such
stuff too long to be here related. By these means were the people every where
incensed and enraged against the King; but especially by the new Doctrines of
the Preachers and Confessors were the minds of men generally so perverted, that
they made it almost a sport to break Faith with him, and betray their trust,
and many thought it their duty; so that the Cities daily revolted from his
obedience. Thu. l. 94. fin.
At Bourdeaux the Jesuits for a conspiracy and tumult raised there, were by
the President of the Province expelled the City, to prevent the like for the
future. And when from thence they repaired for refuge to Again and Vesuna
Paetrocariorum.
Vesuna, those Cities thereupon presently rebelled. But the greatest fury and
rage of the people was at Toulouse, stirred up, as was believed, by these new
Theologists. While the Leaguers are thus busy both at home and abroad, Thu. l.
95. pr. Thu. l. 94.
the King is not idle, but treats with his Neighbor Princes and States for men
and money, and to mitigate the fury of his own people, with great importunity
and submission, solicits for absolution for killing the Cardinal, from the
Pope, who was highly enraged against him, for that sacrilegious act as he
pretended, but probably more for killing the Duke, if that be true which the
State of Venice, and the Dukes of Tuscany and Mantua certified the King, that
the Pope and the Duke had agreed in secret to marry the Pope's Niece to Prince
Jonvil the Duke's Son, and to depose the King, thrust him into a Monastery, and
make the Duke King in his place. His Ambassador going about this affair to
Rome, was by the way admonished by the Duke of Tuscany, that the King should do
well to trust more to his own forces and strength at home, than to the Pope's
favor; for if things succeedeed well with him in the beginning of those
commotions in France, he should have friends enough at Rome, and among them the
Pope himself; but if otherwise, he should find them his bitter enemies. And so
it proved, for when this proud and insolent Pope, to gratify his own pride and
ambition, and magnify his authority in the opinion of the people, had drawn on
the King and his Ministers to do all acts of submission and base prostration to
him, as far as he could, he turned him off at last without any absolution, and
not not long after began to proceed to Excommunication against him. Wherefore
the King, when he could obtain no favor from the Pope, Thu. l. 95.
treats more openly with the King of Navar, and concludes an agreement with
him, to the no little joy of all sober men, who thought there was no such way
for settling that Kingdom, as by this reconciliation of the King of France with
Navar, the first Prince of the Blood, the next Heir of the Crown, and an
excellent General and Commander. Had he done this at first rather than so
basely and foully broak his Faith, he had certainly by God's blessing (which he
might then with more reason have expected) prevented the growth of this faction
of the League to this height, and most of this trouble to himself and his
Kingdoms. But this now afforded new matter for the Preachers, and Writers to
exasperate the minds of the people withal. And the Pulpits ring, and the
Presses sweat with virulent Sermons and Books against the two Kings. Among
those who bestirred themselves in this kind, were Father Comolet the Jesuit,
Genebrard, Fr. Feu-ardentius, and Bucherus famous for his Book de Justa Henrici
3 Abdicatione, and many others mentioned by our Author. And in their Sermons,
besides those ways of moving the people by stirring up their passions of fear
and hatred, they had another part to act, which was to encourage them to action
by moving their hopes and expectations, and this was done by acquainting them
with the victories and happy progress, and prosperous success of their Armies
and friends abroad, amplifying the same as much as might be. And whatever news
came, whether good or bad, the Preachers were generally the publishers of it;
if good, to magnify, and set it out to the best advantage; if bad, to represent
it to the people as occasion served, partly comforting and encouraging them
under the misfortune, and partly stirring them up to more forwardness, and
greater assistance to the War. So that these matters were the general and
ordinary subject of their Sermons. And besides these good services which they
performed severally, the famous College of Sorbon it self, by a public Decree
order that the Kings name, and the Prayers for him be put out of the Canon of
the Mass, and instead thereof, other Prayers for the Catholic Princes be
inserted, and that those who shall say Mass otherwise than by this Decree is
appointed, shall be held for excommunicate, etc. And not to be wanting to the
encouragement of his devoted Sons in so meritorious undertakings, their good
Father the Pope sends out his Monitory against the King, whereby he is
excommunicate, unless within ten days he will do the Leaguers the kindness to
set at liberty the Cardinal of Bourbon, whom they, having already agreed to the
deposing of him, may set up for their King; and moreover make his submission
within the term of 60 days from the publication of the Monitory, which was
posted up in Rome the 23 of May, Da. p. 811.
and within a few days after published at Meaux ten leagues from Paris. These
dealings of the Pope with the King seemed so hard and unreasonable to the
Princes of Italy, that they advised the King no longer to treat with him as a
suppliant, Thu. p. 430.
but to deal with him according to his own rough nature, and presently to seize
upon Avignon and the County of Veniessine. Da. p. 811.
But the King was not a little grieved at it, and said, That he thought it very
hard that he who had ever fought and labored for Religion should be rashly
excommunicated because he would not suffer his own throat to be cut by the arms
of his Rebel-subjects; and that those who had Charles V. anno, 1527.
sacked Rome, and kept the Pope himself prisoner, had never been
excommunicated: to which the King of Navar, who was present, answered; but they
were victorious, Sir. Let your Majesty endeavor to conquer, and be assured the
censures shall be revoked; but if we be overcome, we shall all die condemned
heretics. Whereunto the King assented, and all the bystanders did the like;
and upon that hope order was given that the Army should march; and the Kings
affairs began to proceed very prosperously against the Leaguers. For having
first by supplies coming in from the King of Navar put a stop to the D. of
Mayenne's progress at Tours, and about the same time given a great defeat to
the D. of Aumale by the assistance of La Noue (one of the chief Commanders of
the Protestants) taken Gergean, Thu. l. 96.
Piviers, Chartres, Estampes, Poissy, Montereau, Pontoise, and all such places
and passages of the Rivers which were fit to strengthen the City of Paris, or
furnish it with victuals, he forthwith with an Army of 42000 fighting men lays
close siege to the City it self, himself on the one side, and the King of Navar
on the other; whereby the Parisians were so straightened and dejected, Da. p. 814.
(though the Preachers used all their arts in their Pulpits to animate them,
and the Priests and Friars themselves took up arms, putting themselves
generally upon Military Duty), that there was no man but thought that within a
few days the King would be Master of it. But in the midst of this success, and
height of his hopes, a zealous young Friar Da p. 816, 819. Thu. l. 96.
Jaques Clement, stirred up by the Sermons which he heard daily against Henry
Valois, the Tyrant and Persecutor of the Faith, resolved in conscience, as has
been mentioned before, and exhorted thereunto by the Prior, (one of the chief
Counselors of the League) and other Fathers of his Convent, (in all
likelihood, It being unlikely that the chief men of the Union, and particularly
the Prior, a trusty Counselor of the Grand-Council of it, should not have
confered about the fact with the Princes, and with their privity exhorted, and
with effectual motives spurred on the simplicity of the Friar. Da. p. 819. v.
Thu. l. 96. Serres, p. 879.
not without the privity of the Catholic Princes), affirming to him that if he
lived, he should be made a Cardinal; and if he died for freeing the City, and
killing the Persecutor of the Faith he should without doubt be Canonized for
Saint, by an expected stab, put an end to his hopes and his life together,
within Duobus post mentibus and aliquot diebus, quam Pontifex hanc Sententiam
excommunicationis tulerat. Cicarel. p. 446.
few days after the aforesaid term of 60 days, prefixed by the Pope, (who had
foretold his unfortunate end) was expired, to the great joy of the Leaguers and
the Pope, as has been related before, (Sect. 34.) this account of the French
Story not being then intended. The Da. p. 857. Thu. l. 98.
Prior of the Convent was Father Edmond Bourgoin, who being afterward taken at
Paris, and convicted by witness to have publicly (in the Pulpit) for several
days together praised this murder in studied speeches, and to have counseled
and instigated the murderer, comparing him also in his Sermons, after the fact,
to Judith, and the dead King to Holofernes, and the City delivered to Bethulia;
he was by judgment of the Parliament of Tours sentenced to be drawn in pieces
by four horses, his quarters burned, and his ashes scattered in the wind: which
sentence was afterward severely executed. Not long after at Vendosme was taken,
and likewise condemned to death, Da. p. 861. Thu. l. 97.
Father Robert Chesse a Cordelier (or Franciscan Friar), who had there
publicly praised the King's murderer, and with his Sermons stirred up the
common people.

54. This end had Henry 3. when he had scarce lived out half his days, and in
him thus dying without issue, (after 14 years Marriage, many visits to Saints,
and the use of hallowed shirts and smocks for obtaining of issue), the whole
life of Valois, his Bastard brother also, the Duke of Angolesme not escaping a
violent death some years before by a stab. Thu. l. 85.
In this King, besides the hereditary guilt of his Ancestors descended upon
him, there are two things especially observable in his own actions, whereby he
involved himself in the participation of the common guilt of his Family, and
aggravated the load of it upon his own head: the one during the Reign of his
Brother, in the Massacre, wherein he was both a Counselor and an Actor; the
other after he came to the Crown himself, in his breach of public Faith with
the Protestants. Of both which we may observe a very correspondent and
exemplary judgment and punishment. His sickness of a Da. p. 777. Thu. l. 94.
Bloudy-flux for some time before he was stabbed, his death without issue, and
ere he had lived out half his days, may perhaps have respect to his
Grandfathers and Fathers sins, seeking by bloody courses to extirpate the
Protestants; because these were not peculiar to himself, but common to him with
his other Brothers. But when we see that very City of Paris, where the
Protestants, with the concurrence of his Eorumque (Lotaringorum) in gratiam
praecipuus author and suasor Parisiensis lanienae fuisse creditur, de qua and
gloriari saepius auditus est. Thu. l. 96.
counsel and assistance, had been so furiously destroyed, now no less furious
against him; that City which to others had given example of cruelty against the
Protestants, now gives them example of rebellion against him; and him on the
other side no less enraged against it, saying but the day before that fatal
stroke, that he hoped within a few days there should be neither walls nor
houses, but only the very footsteps of Paris: when we see almost all those who
had been the executors of that Massacre, and were not cut off at the Siege of
Rochel, (as most of them were, of the common sort especially) now engaged in
Arms against him; and those who had joined with him to destroy the Protestants,
now conspiring his destruction: when we see him excommunicated by the Pope,
whose pretended authority is the principal part of that Religion, which with so
much cruelty and perfidiousness was sought to be established by that Massacre.
Lastly, when we see, after all imaginable injuries and indignities offered him,
his murder not only plotted and counseled by the chief of the Grand Council at
Paris, but also executed by an Emissary sent from thence, by a religious Zealot
of that Religion, for which himself had been so barbarously cruel, and in that
Thu. l. 51. Serres p. 789.
very place at St. Cloud, where some time the Council of the Massacre had been
held: This we may, not without reason, look upon as the just judgment of God
upon him, for his wicked dealings in that barbarous Massacre. Again, when we
see his Popish Subjects every where break faith with him, and all bonds and
oaths of Obedience and Fidelity to him, and teach and hold it to be their duty
so to do: when we see them, through whose importunity he had violated the
public faith given to the Protestants, to rage and storm, and furiously
exclaim upon his breach of faith with themselves: when we see him brought to
need and desire the assistance of the King of Navar and his Protestants, with
whom he had broken faith, against those for whom, to comply with their
perfidious and rebellious humors, he did it; and by them notwithstanding thus
brought to his end and murdered, with whom he had so basely complied in that
perfidious dealing; this we may likewise with great reason look upon as a just
judgment of God upon him, for that his perfidious dealing with the Protestants.
And certainly, if all the circumstances of the History from that barbarous
Massacre of the Protestants at Merindol and Cabriers, under Francis 2. to the
death of this his Grandson Henr. 3. the last of his race, for almost 50 years,
be duly considered, it will be hard to find in any History a more eminent
example of Divine Vengeance prosecuting a Family to the utter extirpation of
it, than this: an example wherein the judgment of God is more conspicuous and
remarkable, or the causes of that judgment more manifest and apparent, wherein
the sin and the punishment do more exactly agree; or of a more remarkable
distinguishing providence, if with this, the hapy reign and actions of their
neighbor Prince Queen Elizabeth be impartially compared. This was a judgment
not upon one person alone, nor upon a Family, so as to involve all in one
sudden destruction, as is sometimes seen; but a continued prosecution of
vengeance against a whole Family for three generations, without intermission:
V. Sect. 39.
the Grandfather (Fran. 1.) not long enjoying himself or his life after he had
authorized that fatal persecution; His Son, Henr. 2. (having time to repent and
reform, and admonished so to do by his dying Father, but persevering in his
Fathers sin) cut off by a violent death in the height and heat of his
persecutions against the Protestants, and upon his consummation of an agreement
for a War against them; His four Sons all living to be men, but not to half the
age of men; three of them coming successively to the Crown, but so as rather
only to wear the Crown, than, by a just and peaceable exercise of their
authority, to sway the Scepter, being at first overruled by the deceitful and
pernicious counsels of their Mother and her Italians, and the violent courses
of the Guisian Faction to destroy their subjects; and at last necessitated, by
the bold attempts of the Guisians, and fury of the Leaguers, to fight for
Crown, Liberty and Life against them; whereby they and their Kingdom were
continually embroiled in Civil Wars, and miserable confusions: each of them
succeeding other, as in their access to the Crown, so in their unhappy reign,
(if they might be said to reign, while so obnoxious to the wills of others, and
continually imbroiled in such confusions) and exit and catastophre of it: the
first (Francis 2.) cut off by a death remarkable, though not for the kind, yet
for the time and season of it, both in respect of his years, and of those who
were preserved by it; (V. Sect. 40. p. 63, 64.) the next (Charles 9.) living
some years longer, and thereby more capable, by his own personal management, of
the affairs of the Kingdom, to derive the guilt of his Ancestors miscarriages
upon himself, and increase it by his own, which accordingly he did in no mean
degree, being likewise cut off by a death every way remarkable, in respect both
of the time and all other circumstances; and lastly the third Brother (Hen. 3.)
coming likewise to that unhappy end, which has been but now related; all of
them, with their Brother Alancon, dying without issue to succeed them. Nor did
this fate attend only the succession, but light also upon those who were
incapable to succeed in the Government; their bastard Brother Angolesme, who
had been a forward actor in the Massacre, being also, as has been said, cut
off by a violent death; and of their Sisters, Elizabeth the eldest V. Sect. 39.
p. 60.
married to Phil. 2. of Spain, (a Marriage concluded, with an agreement between
him and her Father, of a War against the Protestants, but solemnized with the
otherwise untimely death of her Father), and by Philip her Husband first
employed in the V. Sect. 42. p. 74.
Consultation at Bayonne, and at last brought to that V. Sect. 44.
unhappy end when great with child, and in the 23 th. year of her age, which
has been mentioned before, and is more fully related in the late French
History of Dom Carlos: and Margaret the youngest, first forced by her Mother
and Brother Charles to a Marriage with the King of Navar, (that unhappy
Marriage which was made the introduction to the Massacre), afterward for her
V. Busbeq. ep. Aug. 27. 1583. Da. p. 599. Thu. l. 80.
lewdness and incontinency reproachfully turned from the Court by her next
Brother Henr. 3. and at last divorced from her Husband when King of France,
without issue by him, unless she had any by any other which was kept secret, as
her Brother objected to her. If their other Sister Claud married to Charles
Duke of Lorain was less unhappy in this respect, she seems less to have merited
the like misfortune, for we meet with no mention of her in all the story of
these confusions in France. Thus were five Kings in a continued succession cut
off, besides three others of the same line, (the youngest son of Francis 1. in
few months after the beginning of those persecutions, at his age of 23. and the
second and youngest of Hen. 2.) who never came to the Crown, and their whole
line and posterity extirpated in France, while they sought the extirpation of
the Protestants there; whereby the Crown at last, notwithstanding all
opposition and endeavors to hinder it, descended to a Protestant Prince; and
all this by a constant course of Divine Vengeance upon that Family for about 44
years, for so long it was from the execution of the Decree of the Parliament of
Province, Apr. 1545. and the death of the King's youngest son Sept. 8.
following, to the murder of Henr. 3. Aug. 1589. the very same space of time
which Queen Elizabeth happily and prosperously reigned in England, and most of
it contemporary. Wherein it is very plain and observable a triple difference
between her and them, viz. a different cause, or end and aim of their actions,
a different manner of proceeding, and a different success. As to the Cause;
they designed and endeavored the suppression of the reformed Religion, and
extirpation of the Professors of it in their territories.; she established and
promoted it in her Dominions. As to their manner of proceeding; they fought to
attain their ends by fraud and violence, slaughters and inexecrable severity,
either without Law, or contrary to Law, or by executions exceeding in severity
the very rigor of the Decrees, Laws or Edicts against the Protestants; and all
for no other cause but their Religion; a Religion which teaches nothing
dishonorable to God or Christ, or injurious to man; which embraces all that
can reasonably be proved to have been taught by Christ or his Apostles;
receives, honors, and commends to the diligent study of all the sacred
Scriptures; such a Religion, as they who persecute it, confess to be true in
what it affirms, and is the most essential part of their own, only believes not
what they are not sufficiently convinced to be true, and with no little reason
suspect to be false, or not proposed to their belief by Divine authority. She
did nothing without Law, or contrary to the Laws; was very moderate in making,
and no less in executing any Laws against Papists: The first she made in the
first and fifth years of her Reign, being so far from introducing any new
severity, that they take off from the harshness of what was in force before;
and those and the rest not being made against their Religion in general, but
upon special and particular, necessary and urgent occasions, for the necessary
asserting and preservation of her own just authority against those who
endeavored to set up a pretended foreign jurisdiction against her, to absolve
her subjects from all duty and obligation of obedience to her, and excite them
to rebellions, and to join with foreign enemies, or by assassination to destroy
her; whereby she was necessitated and forced, through their continual wicked,
seditious and rebellious practices, for the curbing and restraining of them, to
proceed, contrary to her own disposition, to more and more severities of Laws,
which, though none of them made without just cause, and some special
provocation, yet were executed with admirable moderation; the next, after those
above mentioned, which was made in the thirteenth year of her Reign, V. Camd.
an. 1577. p. 286.
being occasioned by the Northern Rebellion, and the Pope's Bull, to absolve
her subjects from their obedience; yet notwithstanding in six whole years after
was not put in execution against any one, though there were those apprehended
who had offended against it; and in ten years after that rebellion were there
but five executed, till the further provocations before mentioned in the 29 th.
and following Paragraphs necessitated the execution of the Laws then in force,
and the enacting of some others in the 23, 27, 29, and 35 years of her Reign;
and yet did not the severity which was exercised in all her Reign against
Papists, equal what was done against the Protestants in two years of her
Sisters Reign, and oftener than once, in few days in France, and professedly for
their Religion only, whereas it cannot be proved Sir Fr. Bacon in his
Observations upon the Libel, point 3. and Collection of the Queens Felicities,
and the late Treatise of the Grounds, Reasons and Provocations necessitating
the Sanguinary Laws, (Edit. Land. 1664. quarto).
that throughout her whole Reign there was any one executed merely for their
Religion. Such certainly was her lenity and moderation in this respect,
considering the daily and high provocations against her, as plainly argues an
admirable magnanimity and piety in her, and is scarce to be paralleled in any
History, not to be denied but by such as have cast off all ingenuity and sense
of their own credit and reputation, and has extorted the V. Watson,
Widdrington, etc. apud Foulis, l. 7. c. 2. The Jesuits Reasons unreasonable.
confession, and provoked the free acknowledgment of her more candid and
ingenuous adversaries. There might also be observed a great difference between
the actions of the Protestants in France, and the Papists both here and there
too, but that, for brevity sake, shall be left to the Readers own observation
from what has been related of each. Therefore lastly, as to their success,
they, while by fraud and violence they sought the utter extirpation of the
Reformed Religion, and Professors of it in France, were themselves extirpated
there, and the last of their race cut off by his own Subjects of that same
Religion, which by those wicked courses was sought to be established, and the
Religion which they sought to suppress and extirpate, took deeper root, and
flourished more, notwithstarding all their opposition and persecutions: She,
while, with rare moderation, and a generous plain-dealing constancy and
resolution, established the Reformed Religion, both easily and happily attained
her end, and was her self established in her Throne, and in a long, happy, and
prosperous Reign, as long as all theirs from the beginning of their
persecutions, preserved from all the secret plots, and machinations, and open
rebellions, and assaults of her enemies, made victorious over all, and at last
brought to her grave in peace, and in a good old age, leaving her Kingdoms in
peace, and in a flourishing condition, and a blessed and glorious memory behind
her; while they were cut off in the flower or middle of their age, and left
their Kingdom embroiled in Civil Wars, Confusion and Misery, and an infamous
memory of their no less unsuccesful, than perfidious and barbarous actions.

55. Nor was this distinguishing Providence thus visible only between her and
those who persecuted the Reformed Religion, but also between her and those who
deserted the same, as is to be seen in the next succeeding King of France,
Henr. 4. (the greatest part of whose Reign was contemporary with her), 1561.
See before Sect. 41. p. 67.
and in his Father before him Antony King of Navar, who being drawn in by the
Pope's Legate and Guises, in hopes to recover his Kingdom of Navar, or
satisfaction for it, to desert the Protestants, and become Head of the Popish
party, within the space of about one year after, ended his life by a shot
before Rouen. Had he lived longer, says P. 22.
Perefix, the Hugonots had without doubt been ill dealt with in France. But
having received his deaths-wound, he became more Thu. l. 33.
solicitous for his own salvation than for his Kingdom, for which he had thus
wavered in his Religion, and at last declared, that if he recovered, he would
openly embrace the Protestant Profession, and live and die in it. His son Henry
4. of France was bred up from his childhood in the Reformed Religion, and when
he was grown up 1569.
professed himself Head of that party, and so continued till his Thu. l. 45.
1572.
unhappy Marriage with a Popish Lady, Margaret Sister to Charles 9. then King
of France, which, though for its warrant it had the specious color and
pretense of confirming the Pacification, and begetting and establishing a
better accord between the two parties by so near an alliance between the two
Heads of them, yet proved, as it was intended by the others, a snare to the
destruction of the chief persons, and of great numbers of the rest of his own
party; and to himself, not only unsuccesful in respect of his wife, and that
not so much through her sterility, as her inconstancy and unfaithfulness to his
bed; but also a snare, whereby, after he had seen the lives of his best
friends, and of great numbers of innocent people of his own Religion most
barbarously and inhumanely taken away, he was himself forced, for the saving of
his own life, to change his Religion, in show and appearance at least. But this
being by constraint, Thu. l. 96.
and only in appearance, (for Religion (as was well perceived by Henr. 3. after
he had received his deaths-wound) which is planted in men's minds by God, cannot
be commanded or forced by men). returned again to the open profession of that
Religion, which in the mean time he retained in his heart, and constantly
professed and maintained the same till after the descent of the Crown of France
to him. This happened very seasonable for him in many respects, being then not
a child or youth unexperienced in the World, Thu. l 69.
recommended the Kingdom to him, and exhorted the Lords there present to
acknowledge him for their lawful Sovereign, notwithstanding his Religion, and
obey him accordingly; being then not in Bearn or the remoter parts of the
Kingdom with small or no forces, but before the chief City of it in the head of
a great Army under his command, many of those in the Army who disliked his
Religion, yet being, by the consideration of his undoubted right, the
recommendation of the deceased King, and their own fresh experience of his
virtue since his coming to the Army, reconciled to his person, acknowledging
his sovereignty, and submitting to his obedience, now not as General, but as
their lawful and undoubted Prince. This was 20 years after he had first
professed himself Head of the Protestants, 13 years after he had again returned
to the profession of that Religion wherein he had been bred and educated; when
he had been all this while preserved, notwithstanding all the power of France
against him, and had withstood all the tentations which, after the death of
Alancon, whereby he became next heir to the Crown of France, could invite him
to change his Religion; and when, after all opposition, he was, as it were, led
by the hand to the possession of the Kingdom. Yet was he not so entirely
possessed of it, but that there was still matter and occasion left him to make
him sensible of that Providence which, having preserved him all this while, had
at last raised him to the Throne; and to exercise his dependence upon the same
for the future, for his entire possession of the Kingdom. He was, like David,
after many and long trials, advanced to the Throne; but yet, like him, not
presently put into the full possession of the Kingdom. For the Leaguers, who
thought his being an Heretic, as they reputed him, was a sufficient disability
to his right to the Crown, thought the same a sufficient warrant for them to
keep him from it, and to continue the rebellion against him which they had
begun against his predecessor.

Thu. l. 98. Foul. 8. c. 7.
And to remove or prevent all scruple of Conscience in that respect, the
College of Sorbon gave them their solemn resolution, (May 7. 1590.) That they
who opposed him should merit much before God and Men, and if they resisted (so
mindful were they of the Apostles Doctrine, Romans 13.) to the effusion of their
blood, should obtain a reward in Heaven, and an immarcessible or never-fading
Crown of Martyrdom. And, lest this should not be sufficient, they institute a
Procession, which was made in the presence of the Pope's Legate, Cardinal
Bellarmine, and all the Bishops who came with him from Italy, wherein Rose
Bishop of Senlis, and the Prior of the Carthusians holding in one hand a Cross,
and in the other a Halberd, led the Van, the Fathers of the Capucins,
Foliacens, Paulians, Franciscans, Dominicans, Carmelites, following in order,
all accoutred, their Cowles hanging back upon their shoulders, and having on
instead of them, Head-pieces, and Coats of Male; and after them the younger
Monks in the same habit, but armed with Muskets, which they frequently and
inconsiderately fired at those they met, with a shot whereof one of Cardinal
Cajetans domestics was killed, who being slain at so religious a show, was
therefore held to be received into the blessed companies of the Confessors.
After this was made another Procession by the Duke of Nemours, and Claud
Brother to the Duke of Aumale, who commanded the Infantry, and the rest of the
Officers of the Army, who upon the great Altar of the principal Church renewed
their League and Covenant, and swore upon the Gospel to live and die for the
cause of Religion, and to defend the City against Navar. The Pope also, that
this Rebellion might want no authority which his infallibility could give it,
though there was no other scruple to his right and title but only his Religion,
fought against him with both swords; by his Monitory against the Prelates, etc.
who submitted to his obedience by his Legate, Cardinals, and other Emissaries
sent to encourage the Rebels, and by his forces and money, whereof in about 10
months time he wasted 5000000 of aureos, Thu. l. 102.
most upon the French War, when there was more need of it to have relieved the
poor, who in the mean time died of famine at home: and Clem. 8. who not long
after succeeded in that Chair, Thu. l. 103.
said he was resolved in himself to spend all his treasures and blood too, if
there was need, to exclude Navar from his expected possession of the Kingdom.
Nor was their good son the Catholic King of Spain wanting to the promotion of
so just a cause. And in his own Army, though many, Thu. l. 97.
otherwise of the Romish Religion, submitted to him without any conditions or
delay, and others were satisfied with his word and promise, (which his former
faithfulness had made of great authority even with his enemies, v. Perefix, p.
112.) that he would refer all matters of Religion to a Lawful, General or
National Council, and others with his Oath, yet many having more regard to
their own private interest and concerns than to their duty, deserted him, and
either stood neuter to see which way the scales would turn, or turned to the
Leaguers. Nevertheless, not only of the Nobility, Gentry and Laity, but also of
the Clergy, Prelates, Archbishops, Bishops and others, many were more sensible
of their duty than either to be drawn with such false, though specious
pretenses, or to be affrighted with the terrors of the Pope's pretended
authority from it. And therefore when the Pope's Mandates were read in the
Parliament which sat at Tours, Thu. l. 101.
they made an Act of Parliament whereby the Monitorials made at Rome, Mar. 1.
were declared Null, Abusive, Seditious, to be damned, full of impieties and
importunes, contrary to the sacred Decrees, Rights, Immunities, and liberties
of the Gallican Church, and it was decreed that the Copies of them sealed with
the seal of Marsil. Landiranus, and signed by Sextil. Lampinetus, should be by
the common Hangman publicly torn, and burnt before the Palace Gates, etc.
that Landiranus, who, pretending himself the Popes Legate, brought those
Mandates should be apprehended, etc. and Gregory calling himself Pope the 14
th. of that name, was declared an enemy of the public Peace, of the Union of
the Catholic Church, and of the King and Kingdom, a partaker of the Spanish
Conspiracy, a Favourer of Rebels, and guilty of the cruel, detestable and
inhumane parricide treacherously committed upon the most Christian and truly
Catholic King Henr. 3. And this was required to be published by the
Archbishops and Bishops through their Diocesses. The like was also done at
Chaulom and Caen. The next day after this was an Edict made in favor of the
Protestants, with the general consent of all as necessary, published, whereby
the Edict of July was revoked, and the former Edicts in favor of the
Protestants restored. And very fair they were to have created a Patriarch of
their own in France, which the Senate urged, but was opposed by the new
Cardinal of Bourbon, a man of no worth, who was out of hope of being the man
himself, and was a promoter of a new faction of the Thirdlings among the King's
party, yet in those things which concerned the Collation of Benefices, they
gave that power to the Archbishop which the Pope had usurped or pretended. The
King in a speech to a great Assembly of the Nobility and Officers of his Army,
upon the death of the former King, had told them, that of those things which,
Thu. l. 97.
as they knew, his Predecessor had at his death recommended to him, this was
the chief, That he should maintain his Subjects of the Roman Catholic, and of
the Reformed Religion in equal liberty, (aequabili in liberate) till by the
authority of a lawful Ecumenical or National Council something should be
decreed concerning that difference, which he would religiously observe: and
professed before them all, that he had rather that day should be his last, than
to do any thing whereby he might be said to waver in his Faith, or to have
renounced that Religion which hitherto he had professed, before he should be
further instructed by a lawful Council, to whose authority he did submit
himself: and therefore he gave free leave to those who were not satisfied with
this to depart, adding; and when they have forsaken me, yet God will never
forsake me who, I call your selves to witness, from my childhood has as it
were led me by the hand, and heaped upon me great and unconceivable benefits.
Nor did the beneficence of God toward David appear greater, or more miraculous,
than when beyond the expectation of all, through so many difficulties and
dangers he brought me to the Throne; so that I ought not in the least to doubt,
but he who breaking through so many obstacles has called me to the Kingdom,
will preserve me in it, and defend me against all the assaults of my enemies,
etc. I value not the Kingdom of France, no, nor the Empire of the whole World
so much, that for the obtaining of them I would make any defection from that
Religion, which as true I have from my tender years imbibed with my Mothers
milk, and embrace any other faith than what, as I have said before should be
resolved in a lawful Council. The like confidence in God, Da. p. 900. Perefix,
p. 147. Thu. l. 98.
with resignation to his will, he afterward expressed in a pious Prayer in the
head of his Army before the Battle of Yvry, after which he obtained a very
notable Victory over a much greater Army. Yet notwithstanding, after all this,
whether through the importunity of the Roman Catholics of his own party, or
the violence of his enemies, who were assembled to elect a Catholic King,
which was much urged by the Pope and the King of Spain, he fell off from his
constancy, Thu. l. 106, 107.
and without the determination or instruction of any lawful General or National
Council, changed his Religion, and at last also submitted himself to the Pope.
The report of this being brought to Queen Elizabeth, who had been very liberal
in her assistance to him upon the score of Religion, Camden. an. 1593.
and was very solicitous for him, she presently dispatched Th. Wilkes to know
the truth of it, and if not already done, earnestly with reasons which she sent
in writing to dissuade him from it. To whom the King excused himself from the
necessity of his condition; which he also did by Morlantius to the Queen her
self, with great offers of amity and kindness, calling her his Sister, (as is
usual), whereat, being much grieved and troubled, she presently took her pen,
and wrote the ensuing Letter, in what Language I know not, but thus in English
out of the Latin in Camden.

Alas, how great grief, what a flood of sorrow, what sighs did I feel in my
mind from those things which Morlantius has told me? O the faith of men! is
this the World? Could it be that any earthly thing could drive the fear of God
from you? Can we expect an happy issue of this deed? Or can you think that he,
who with his right hand had hitherto sustained and preserved you, was now about
to leave you? It is a thing very dangerous to do evil, that good may come of
it. Yet the good Spirit, as I hope, will inspire a better mind into you. In the
mean time I will not cease, in the first place of my Prayers, to commend you to
the Divine Majesty, and to beseech him that the hands of Esau may not spoil the
blessing of Jacob. That you solemnly offer me your Amity, I know that I have
indeed well deserved it; nor truly would it repent me, had you not changed your
This has respect to his submission to the Pope, and to some passages wherein
he called her Sister, or himself her Brother.
Father. Certainly now can I not from thence be your Sister by the Father.
However, I (for my part) will always more dearly love my own, than our
adscititious Father; which God best knows, whom I beseech reduce you to the
right path of a more sound judgment.

Your Sister if it may be after the old mode, With the new will I have nothing
to do. ELIZABETHA R.


56. Thus this good Queen: but the King who had before loosened the ties of
Conscience for the saving of his life, and began now to break through the same
for the satisfaction of his lust, and the enjoyment of a Gabrielle d'Estrees,
v. Perefix, p. 194.
woman; it is no wonder if he did the same for the enjoyment of a Kingdom,
which perhaps he might have better secured otherwise, and his life with it. It
is true, he never went so far as to persecute the Protestants, as his
Predecessors in the Kingdom of France did, and his Father began to do, and
perhaps had proceeded further, had he escaped that fatal wound; but while he
took liberty to himself to change that profession, gave them the liberty to
retain and enjoy it, and under better conditions than ever they enjoyed, or
were granted them before, which was a principal cause which made his Reign so
much more prosperous and happy than theirs. Yet, as in those two particulars,
for his lust, and for his Kingdom, he did forsake his Conscience and Religion,
so did God at last, after several fair warnings, forsake and leave him to the
V. Perefix, p. 400, 461, 462.
ruin of his health, by the satisfaction of his lusts, the disappointment of
his counsels, by the treachery of the Jesuits, and the loss of his life by the
hand of a zealot of that Religion which he had chosen; whereas this blessed
Queen who gave him this pious admonition, and her self continued faithful to
her God, and constant in her pious resolutions to the last, was to the last
blessed and preserved, notwithstanding all the Plots and Conspiracies,
Rebellions and Invasions, and attempts of her enemies the Romanists against
her. By this act of his he broke indeed the faction of the Leaguers, and so
more easily quieted his possession of the Kingdom, yet had he soon an occasion
to immind him how uncertain and short his enjoyment of it was like to be,
unless still preserved in the midst of Peace by the same Providence by which he
had been hitherto preserved in his Wars, and advanced to it through so many
dangers and difficulties. Thu. l. 107.
For within a month after his conversion to the Romish profession, was
apprehended an assasin, Peter Barrier, who from place to place had followed him
to kill him. This fellow had confered about it with a Carmelite and a Capuchin,
who both encouraged him to it, and when he made some scruple by reason the King
was turned Catholic, as he said, he was confirmed in it by Chr. Aubre Curate
of St. Andrea, who for his further confirmation led him to Varade Rector of the
Jesuits College, who eased him of all scruples, and further animated him to
perform the undertaking, and when he had been confessed, and received the
Sacrament in their College, dismissed him to that purpose. Having provided him
a knife for the purpose, it was not long before he had an opportunity to have
done it, but was strangely restrained, being pulled back as it were with cords
tied about his heart, as he afterward confessed. The like opportunities he
often had at other places whither he followed the King for that purpose, but
was by some little accident or other still prevented, or had not the power to
do it, though otherwise a fearless man. At last being discovered and
apprehended, and brought to his trial, he confidently confessed the whole
matter, railing upon the Sectaries and his Judges. Before his execution, he was
ordered to be racked to make him confess his accomplices; but in the mean time it
was thought fit to send some to him to admonish him of his error, whereof he
was so thoroughly convinced by Oliver Barengarius, a Dominican, who had all
along been of the King's party, that acknowledging his error, he reckoned
himself happy that he was prevented from committing so great a wickedness as he
intended, though by his own most miserable death, detesting his purpose, and
those who had persuaded him to it, and told him that if he died in the
enterprise, his soul should immediately be received by Angels into Heaven,
there to enjoy an eternal happiness with God, and admonished him, that if he
should happen to be taken and tortured, he should not name any of them who had
persuaded him to it, for then he must know, he should incur the pains of
eternal damnation: and before his execution he gave notice of two Priests, who
at Lions had undertaken to kill the King, and, for the greater caution,
described their persons. This renewed the odium of the Jesuits, who were
reputed not only to have been the So Dav. in the Story of Chastel, calls them
the first authors and continual fomentors of the League, p. 1232.
first inventers of this mischievous War, but also, what by their profane
Sermons, what by the poison of their naughty Doctrine secretly in confession
instilled into the minds of the enraged people, to have exposed, by a
pernicious example, the sacred persons of Princes to be murdered by every one.
The next danger of this kind which he was in came yet a little nearer to him,
Thu. l. 111.
when in the Chamber of his Perefix, p. 229.
beloved Mistress, happily at the instant, stooping to salute a Gentleman that
came in, he received that stroke only at his mouth, and without greater hurt
than the loss of a tooth, which was designed at his heart by John Chastel a
Scholar of the Jesuits, who, through a flagitious life grown desperate, hoped
by so heroic an act for the cause of the Roman Catholic Religion, to merit,
though not Salvation, whereof he despaired, yet some mitigation of his
punishment, perhaps from the eighth degree to the fourth. He was educated and
studied in the Jesuits School, and was assistant in Philosophy to John Guerret
a Priest of that Society; and though vicious above his age, yet was in esteem
with those Fathers, who used to admit him among their choice disciples, to
their more secret conferences and religious exercises; and had often heard in
that Society, that it was not only lawful to kill the King, but a thing much
conducing to the cause of Religion, whereof it seems he was so thoroughly
persuaded, that notwithstanding the terribleness of his execution, he expressed
no signs of sorrow or repentance; but on the contrary, being first put to the
rack, gave out such assertions as the Court declared seditious, contrary to the
word of God, and condemned by the sacred Decrees, and made it treason to repeat
them. As he had before freely confessed, Da. p. 1332.
so when he was tortured he confirmed the same, that he was bred up in the
Schools of the Jesuits, and had often heard it discoursed, and disputed, that
it was not only lawful, but also meritorious, to kill Henry of Bourbon (the
King) a relapsed Heretic, and often said that he learned that Doctrine from
them. Whereupon their College being searched, among the papers of F. John
Guignard were found many writings that taught that Doctrine, many things
against the late King, and that praised the murder of him; and likewise against
the present King, that persuaded the killing of him, and tending to sedition
and parricide: that it would be well done to thrust Navar, though professing
the Catholic Religion, into a Monastery, there to do penance: if without war
he cannot be deposed, war is to be made against him; if war cannot be made, he
must by any means be taken out of the way, etc. all which he was convicted to
have written with his own hand, and was therefore hanged. Also John Gueret the
ordinary Confessor of Chastel, F. Alexander Hay, and John Bell, all of the
same Society were likewise convicted of the like offenses, but were condemned
only to perpetual banishment and confiscation of their goods.

Thu. l. 37.
57. The Society of the Jesuits, to whom the Bishop of Clermont gave his house
in Paris called Clermont house, from whence they were called the Society of
Clermont by those who disliked their ambitious, arrogant appropriating to
themselves the Title of Jesuits, as that which does belong to all true
Christians, was by the recommendation of Charles, Cardinal of Lorrain, (the
Guisians always highly favoring this new Society), first admitted in France
in the year 1550. by Henr. 2. of whom was obtained a Charter for them to build
and erect a School at Paris, but there only, and not in other Cities. But when
this Charter and the Pope's Bull of confirmation of their institution were
brought into the Court to be allowed, and were read, the Parliament referred
them both to the consideration of the Bishop of Paris, and of the College of
Divines. Whereupon they gave their Sentence in writing, to this effect; That
this new Society, by an insolent Title appropriating to themselves the name of
Jesus, and so licentiously admitting any persons, howsoever illegitimate,
facinorous and infamous, without any respect, and which nothing differs from
other secular persons in Rites, Ceremonies, or rule of living, whereby the
Orders of Monks are distinguished; moreover, is endowed with so many
Privileges, Liberties and Immunities, especially in the Administration of the
Sacraments, to the prejudice of the Prelates, and of the Sacred Order, and also
even of the Princes and Lords, and to the great grievance of the people,
contrary to the Privileges of the University of Paris; seems to violate the
honourableness of the Monastic Order, to enervate the studious, pious, and
necessary exercise of Virtue, Abstinence, Ceremonies and Authority; and also to
give occasion to others to forsake their Vows, to withdraw their due Obedience
from the Prelates, unjustly deprive the Lords, both Eeclesiastical and others,
of their rights; to introduce great disturbance in the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Government, Quarrels, Suits, Dissentions, Contentions, Emulations, Rebellions,
and various Scissures; that for these causes, this Society seems very dangerous
in respect of Religion, as that which is like to disturb the Peace of the
Church, to enervate the Monastic Discipline, and to tend more to Destruction
than to Edification. This so startled the Society, that they desisted from any
further prosecution till the Reign of Francis 2. When the Guisians, who highly
favored this new Society, carrying all before them, they resumed the business
again, and first the Bishop of Paris, Eust. Bellaius, was required to give his
Sentence, which he did in writing; That that Society, as all new Orders, was
very dangerous, and at these times instituted rather to stir up Commotions,
than to make up the Peace of the Church: and after a sharp censure of their
arrogant title, adding, that in the privileges granted to it by Paul 3. are
many things repugnant to the Common Law, and prejudicial to the power and
authority of the Bishops, Curates, and Universities, and therefore it would be
more advisable, that since they are by the Pope appointed and bound to instruct
the Turks and Infidels, and publish the Gospel among them, yet in places which
are near to them they should have their Colleges assigned, as heretofore the
Knights of Rhodes had in the borders and out-skirts of the Christians. This and
the other sentence being read, and considered by the King in Counsel, the Court
notwithstanding, through the instigation of the Cardinal of Lorrain, was
commanded to publish as well the Pope's as the King's Charter, without any
regard to the intercession of the Bishop and College of Divines; and the
Jesuits exhibited a supplication to the Court, whereby they subjected
themselves to the Common Law, and renounced all privileges contrary to it. But
the Parliament thought fit rather to remit the whole business to a General
Council, or to a Convention of the Gallicane Church. And at a great meeting of
the Bishops at the Conference at Poisy, they were admitted to teach, but under
many conditions to change their name, be subject to the Bishop of the Diocese,
and to do nothing to the prejudice of the Bishops, Colleges, Curates,
Universities or other Orders, or their Jurisdiction and Function, but be
governed according to the prescript of the Common Law, and renounce all
contrary privileges, etc. Hereupon was opened Clermont School at Paris. But
when this liberty was interrupted by the whole University of Paris, the
business was again brought before the Parliament. The University having before
advised with Carolus Molinaeus, his Consultation or opinion and resolution of
the Case, which was afterward published, was, that the University had good
cause to declare against them for a Nuisance, because they had erected a new
College contrary to the ancient decrees of Synods, the General Council under
Innocent 3. the Decrees of the Court, etc. their Institution was not only to
the detriment of the several Orders, but to the danger of the whole Kingdom,
and every wise man might justly fear that they might prove spies, and betray
the secrets of the Kingdom; they seemed to be instituted to lie in wait for the
estates of dying people; they set up a new School in a University, to which
they would not obey, which was not only monstrous, but a kind of sedition, etc.
And it was argued on both sides in full Parliament, by Pet. Versorius for the
Society, highly commending their Original and Institution, and by Steph.
Paescasius for the University, as much condemning both their Institution and
their Practice: their Institution, in respect of their obligation by vow both
to their General, who is always chosen by the King of Spain, and whom they
profess to respect as God present upon earth, and promise a blind Obedience, as
they call it, to him, absolutely in all things; and to the Pope, to whom,
because they are so obsequious, they ought so much the more to be suspected by
the French, who indeed acknowledge the Pope as Head and Prince of the Church,
but so as that he is bound to obey the sacred Decrees and Ecumenical Councils
as inferior to them; that he can decree nothing against the Kingdom, or their
Kings, or contrary to the Decrees of the Court (of Parliament), or in prejudice
of the Bishops within their limits; and therefore to admit those new Sectaries,
would be to nourish so many enemies within the bowels of the Kingdom, who, if
it should happen that the Popes in a fury should raise arms against us, would
denounce war against the King and Nation of France: also in respect of their
unreasonable and exorbitant privileges contrary to the Common Law; and of
their ambitious Title: their Practice, for corrupting of youth, and ruining of
Families; and lastly, addressing himself more especially to the Senators, he
admonished them to beware that they did not, when too late, condemn their own
credulity, when they should see through their connivance, that the public
tranquillity not only in this Kingdom, but through the Christian World, should
be endangered by the craft, guiles, superstition, dissimulation, impostures and
evil arts of these men. But the Senate, whether through security, or hatred of
the Protestants, whom these men were believed born to subdue, determined to
deliberate further on the business, in the mean time granting them liberty
publicly to open their Schools and instruct the youth. And here we may take
notice by the way, 5 Apr. 1565.
who were the first and chief favorers and introducers of the Jesuits, and
thence further observe whose Scholars they were, who were the chief actors in
those troubles in France. But thus hung the cause till, Apr. 1594. Thu. l. 110.
after the discovery of Barrieres conspiracy, the University with unanimous
consent nemine reclamante renewed their Suit, and prayed Judgment, by their
supplication to the Parliament, wherein they set out, that the Estates in the
Senate had long since complained of this new Sect, that great confusions were
then raised by them in the discipline of the Schools; that from that time they
have given occasion of greater troubles, since the factious did openly addict
themselves to the Spaniards party, and have confounded not only the City but
the whole Kingdom with horrid seditions; that this was prudently foreseen from
the beginning by the College of Divines, who by their Decree declared this new
sect to have been introduced to the destruction of all Discipline as well Civil
as Ecclesiastical, and namely denying the obedience of the University, as well
to the Rector of it, as moreover to the Archbishops, Bishops, Curates and
others the Prelates of the Church; that notwithstanding those Jesuits made
supplication to the Senate to be incorporated into the University, and the
cause being heard the Senate suspended the the Suit, Salvo partium jure, so
that nothing in the interim should be innovated in the cause in prejudice of
the Decree; that yet the Jesuits have not only not at all obeyed the Decree of
the Court, but forgetting their sacerdotal profession have thrust themselves
into public businesses, carried themselves as spies for the Spaniards, and
managed their concerns: and therefore pray, that since all these things are
openly and publicly known, the Senate will interpose their authority, and by
their Decree command that Sect to depart not only from the University of Paris,
but out of the Kingdom, and exterminate them thence. Hereupon, after various
delays by the Jesuits, the cause came again to an hearing in the Parliament,
not openly, but at the instance, and through the importunity of the Jesuits
and their friends, the doors being shut. And Ant. Arnald of Counsel for the
University, deploring the condition of France heretofore formidable, but of
late become despicable to all through factions, which factions have been caused
by the Jesuits, largely confirmed from experience of what had since been
acted, the truth of what was wisely foreseen and foretold so many years before.
That the Emperor Charles 5. when, fortune favoring him, he conceived hopes of
obtaining and transferring to his Family a universal Monarchy, and by his own
sagacity and long experience found that many were tied up by scruples of
conscience; could not devise a more effectual means to work upon them, than by
introducing men of the Spanish design (the Jesuits) to the destruction of
others under show of Religion, who in secret at confessions, and openly also
when occasion should be offered, in their Sermons, alienating the credulous and
simple people from the obedience of their lawful Governors, should insensibly
draw them to his party. That the principal Vow of these men is, to be
absolutely and in all things obedient to the General of their Order, who for
the most part is a Spaniard, or subject of Spain, as appears from the series of
those who for these 50 years from the beginning of their Society, have been
their Generals; for such were, 1. Ignatius Loiola their founder, 2. Jac. Lain,
3. Enaristus, 4. Fr. Borgia, and, 5. at present Cl. Aquanina: that to their vow
these horrible words are annexed, in which they profess to acknowledge Christ
as present in their General: that their Sect, whereas in Italy and France at
the beginning it was generally opposed, was with great applause approved in
Spain; they pray day and night for the safety and prosperity of the pious,
prudent, vigilant Catholic King of Spain, who opposes himself as a wall of
defense for the house of God and the Catholic Faith; but for the most
Christian King of France never: and let the F. General say the word that the
King of France should be killed, the command of the Spaniard must ex voti
necessitate be obeyed. That though upon their petition at Rome for the Popes
Confirmation an. 1539. they were at first opposed, yet at last obtained it,
this fourth vow being added to it, that they should be ready to obey the Pope
at a beck, which is that which does so much ingratiate them at Rome, but ought
to make them so much the more suspected in France. And that their Counsels tend
to the subversion of the Kingdom is hence manifest, that when ever the Popes
exceeding their authority, have sent out their censures against the Kingdom of
France, there have not been wanting pious men, who with the common suffrage of
the Gallican Church, have courageously opposed such their rash attempts, (as he
shows more at large from diverse instances in the times of Carolus Calvus,
Ludovicus Pius, Philippus Pulcher, Carolus vi, and Ludovicus xii.) but now in
these late tumults it has fallen out quite contrary, the sacred Order being
corrupted with the venom of this sect, and taught, that be who is once chosen
Pope, although of the Spanish Nation or Faction, and a sworn enemy to the
French, may notwithstanding give up the whole Kingdom for a prey, and absolve
the French from their Faith and Obedience which they owe to their Prince. That
this is a schismatical and detestable opinion, altogether contrary to the word
of God, (who has divided the spiritual power from the secular as far as Heaven
is from the Earth) and as much repugnant to the safety and conservation of
Kingdoms, as it is certain that the true Christian Religion is necessary
thereunto. That these monsters have kindled these furies in the minds of the
French, and excited so many slaughters and horrid confusions every where. Hence
that public assertion of Tanquerellus 33 years since, V. supra sect. 41. p. 66.
that the Popes may declare the King's subjects free from their Oath of
Fidelity. Hence that resolution 5 years since, by the greater number of the
College of Sorbon, that is, those who were new molded in the shop of the
Jesuits, that Subjects may be absolved from their Obedience to their Prince.
V. sect. 53.
That this Vow instituted by the Castilians (of Spain), which with so strait a
tie binds men's consciences to the perpetrating of any kind of enterprise, and
to the killing of Kings themselves by suborned emissaries, has dissolved and
wholly abolished the glorious institutes of our Ancestors, the Laws of the
Realm, and the liberties of the Gallican Church: whereas we have received this
Law from our Ancestors, that the Oath of Fidelity, whereby the Subjects of
France are obliged to their Kings, can by no censures of the Popes be
dissolved; which is so conjoined with the safety and weal of the Kingdom, that
without certain ruin it cannot be severed from it: that the Royal Power in
that suffers no rival, nor admits any equal Jurisdiction. That these emissaries
and assertors of this excessive power in the Pope crept in insensibly at first
in small numbers into France, but in short time filled the whole Kingdom, and
with secret frauds and seditious Sermons have stirred up the wars. That the
first Conspiracies, more pernicious than the Bacchanals and that of Cataline,
were hatched in their College at Paris; that the Spanish Agents did often
secretly convene there; that there the Nobility at their secret Confessions
were enjoined for the expiation (or satisfaction) of their sins, to engage for
the League, (viz. by a special commutation of penance into an heroic act of
virtue) and those who refused were denied the benefit of absolution. That by
them was the sedition at Vesuna stirred up, and the rebellions at Again,
Toulouse, etc. and the Spanish Soldiers brought into Paris; that by their
counsel the Council of xvi emboldned by the foreign Forces, offered the Kingdom
of France to the King of Spain, and 13 days after ensued that detestable
butchery of the principal Senators. That at their Schools at Lions and
afterward at Paris was made the late Conspiracy for the murder of the King, as
is attested by the confessions of Barriere; for among them they are held for
real Martyrs, who lay out their lives for the killing of Kings. Hence F.
Commotet the last Christmas, taking for his text out of the book of Judges the
example of Ehud, who slew the King of Moab, and fled away, cried out, We have
need of another Ehud, whether Monk, or Soldier, or Lacquey, or Shepherd it
matters not. Hence the furious speeches of Bernard and Commotet, calling the
King Olofernes, Moab, Nero, Herod, and every where bawling in their Sermons
that the Kingdom may be transferred by Election, etc. That among these
counterfeit Priests it is a symbol of their profession, One God, one Pope, and
one King of the Christian World; meaning the Catholic King, to whom they
design the universal Monarchy of the whole World, stirring up every where wars
and rebellions, that thereby the vast body of that Empire may grow up and
devour the lesser Princes. That by them, Philip King of Spain, when he had long
gaped after the Kingdom of Portugal, and foresaw that so long as the King and
Nobility continued in safety, he could not obtain his desires, persuaded the
young King Sebastian, having removed his intimate and faithful friends from
him, to sail into Africa, and rashly engage in fight upon great disadvantage,
contrary to the opinion of all his party, wherein himself and almost all the
flower of the Portugal Nobility perished. Nor did they cease till they had also
ruined Don Antonio, and till the King of Spain V. Harlaeum apud Thu. l. 132.
not so much by his Arms, as by their Arts, had made himself Master of the
Kingdom. Nor ought it to impose upon the credulous, that they are vulgarly
reputed serviceable for the V. Sim. Marion. apud Thu. l. 119.
instruction of youth, whose manners they rather corrupt, instilling evil
principles into their tender minds, which in that age make the greater
impression upon them, and under a show of Piety teach them to embrue their
hands in their Princes blood, to be disobedient to Magistrates, to stir up
seditions among the people, to cast off all affection to their own Country, and
be affected with an adulterous love to foreigners: and being thus seasoned with
pernicious errors, they will in time, when grown up, bring the same into the
Church and State. And indeed already, since this new sect has as it were
seized upon the youth, the manners of our Ancestors have, not by degrees
insensibly degenerated, but like a torrent been precipitated into corruption.
Nor have whole Families escaped ruin by them, by their arts youths being
enveigled from their Parents, and the inheritances and estates of their
Ancestors transferred to these new Lords. The complaints and examples of diverse
Noble Families thus spoiled are known, as of Petrus Aerodius, Mombrunius,
Godranus, Bollonius, Largilactonius, the Marquis Canilliacus, whose Brother was
not admitted to his vow in that Society, till they were certain of his
succession to his elder Brothers Estate. And for this purpose they have now
their Book of Life, as they call it, wherein they describe the secrets of
Families, which they learn from confessions. These things and much more having
largely discoursed, in conclusion he urges the necessity of a speedy remedy,
and therefore prays that according to the supplication, the Jesuits may be
decreed to depart the Kingdom within 15 days after denunciation to the several
Schools. Some days after was Ludovicus Dolaus heard for the Curates (or
Ministers) who also became Plaintiffs in the Suit, Id. Jul. 1594.
who among many other things urged, That by the Popes were many things
inconsiderately and blindly granted them: by Paul, 3. Power to make new
Statutes, and to change those which their Founder had established; also to
absolve heretics, which, if the Pope contend, is more than the whole Gallican
Church can do. By Paul, 4. To absolve penitents from all kind of crimes, even
those which are not comprehended in Bulla Coenae Dominicae, and from those also
which the holy See has reserved to it self, and pro tempore to commute vows
and pilgrimages, etc. by Jul. 3. to give indulgence from fasts and prohibited
meats. Lastly by Greg. 13. to converse with sectaries, and for that purpose to
wear secular habits, (viz. for a disguise) a thing prohibited by the S. Canons;
and to correct all kind of Books, and so to mend the writings of the Fathers,
wherein what Plagiaries they have been, is known to them who converse with
Books; that from thence have great confusions been brought into the Church, and
the Discipline generally been dissolved; for by the Breve of Paul 3. the people
are allowed to leave their own Pastors, and run after them, and to receive the
Sacraments from them; to whom Greg. has committed (authority) to animadvert as
well upon the Clergy as the people, that all may be done rightly, and after the
Roman mode; so that from Priests, whether regular or secular it is uncertain,
they are suddenly become universal Pastors of the people, or rather wandering
vagabond Bishops, (Periodentas and circumcelliones and hamaxarios Episcopos)
that there is nothing which they cannot now do at Rome, where they are called
the Popes eyes; mentis Pontificiae oculi): that their Principles are
inconsistent with the French: that it is certain that to them is principally
given in charge that they should oppress the Gallican liberty, at first by
guile, and afterward with open force, even as in these last wars they have
endeavored to do; that with them they are reckoned anathema who take the Kings
part, but that the French think the contrary, and that not to obey the King is
as to resist God, and to fight against Heaven: that they think that the Pope
may excommunicate Kings and People when he pleases; but the French on the
contrary hold them for Sectaries who think that the Pope may interpose his
authority in any difference of State: that they attribute to the Pope an
infinite power over all Kingdoms, and set him above the Church, above Councils,
and in fine, make his power equal to his will, (to do what he please): but the
French hold his power to be finite, or limited. And for their good deeds and
practices, that Claud Matthew, a ringleader of the faction, whom Henr. 3. had
familiarly used in his private devotions, and who therefore was well acquainted
with his piety (and devotion to the Romans Cath. Religion) with great impiety and
ingratitude went to Rome, and would have persuaded Greg. 13. to have
excommunicated him, unless he would comply with the leaders of that pernicious
faction, which being denied by him, was after his death obtained of his
successor Sixtus: that Varada of the same society confirmed Barriere in his
purpose to kill the King, when he made some scruple at it; that they confess as
much, but with frivolous cavillation seek to excuse it. Nor are these the
faults of single persons among them, forasmuch as it is a usual thing (or
constant custom) with them, when they have any enterprise in hand, to confer
together about it, etc. that by their occult art of prying into secrets they
have by little and little insinuated themselves into the minds of the simple,
and acquired a dominion in their consciences. Whereof there is a fresh example
in the five (Popish) Cantons of the Switzers, whom when the Jesuits had in
vain attempted to draw them from their League with the other Cantons of the
Protestants, made for their common safety, they, leaving the men, like the
serpent which deceived our first Parents, set upon the women, and persuaded
them not to lie with their Husbands till they had broken off the League. But
the Switzers discovering the fraud, showed themselves men, and handled the
Conspirators according to their desert. The Venetians likewise, whose Justice
and Prudence the duration of their State does easily evince, saw as much, Yet
they since did it, an. 1607. v. l. 137.
and being warned by our example, they did not indeed thrust them out of their
Territories, for how could they do that, being so near neighbors to the Pope?
but did maturely shut them up within their own enclosures, and interdicted them
the hearing of confessions. And how powerful they are among us by these means,
they openly profess, and glory in it in their letters to their General. But
thus is the discipline (of the Church) overthrown, and (contrary to the prudent
prohibition of the Council of Nants, the saying of St. Aug. Neminem digne
poenitere posse, quem non sustineat unitas Ecclesiae: the judgment of the
ancient Christians, who condemned Audius for making separation in the Church)
the people seduced from their own Pastors are adulterously allured to communion
in sacris with them apart from others, and at last stirred up to rebellion
against their Prince, and emissaries suborned to murder him. Their conspiracies
are well known against Prince Maurice, which at last took effect; and in
England those of Parry, Cullen, York, Wikiams; in Scotland those of James
Gordon and Edmond Hay; and with us that so often mentioned of Barriere. But
among the ancient Christians these monsters were unheard of. Of the Christians
was no Cassius, no Niger, no Albinus, as Tertullian speaks. Nor was that crime
ever heard of in France till the coming in of the Jesuits. For it was brought
in by them from Spain, whence they had their original, where the Goths, as an
ancient Author informs us, took up this detestable custom, that if any of their
Kings pleased them not, they put him to the sword, and set up whom they pleased
in his place. On behalf of the Jesuits Cl. Dureus rather pleaded in bar of the
action, than spoke to the merits of the cause; but P. Barnius answered more
copiously in writing. But, as much of what was spoken by the others is here
purposely omitted for brevity sake, so those things particularly which I find
answered by him, except that of Portugal, which notwithstanding his answer,
seems very probable, as well agreeing with their principles and actions, though
such mysterious practices are not easy to be fully proved. And thus stood the
case with the Jesuits in France, when the King was about to Which was done 17.
Jan.
proclaim war against their great Patron the King of Spain: and whether the
particular consideration of these or either of these, to prevent what they
feared might be the consequence of them V. Perefix, 229.
did produce that attempt of their Scholar Chastel, or not; for he was more
deeply seasoned with their principles and instructions than to make a full
confession; yet certain it is that that attempt did produce a more speedy
determination of the cause than could otherwise have been expected, by a
Decree, 29 Dec. 1594. Thu. l. 111.
whereby the Court did ordain that the Priests and Students of the College of
Clermont (for they would not call them by the name of Jesuits) and all others
of that Society, as corrupters of Youth, perturbers of the public
Tranquillity, and enemies of the King and Kingdom, shall within three days
after denunciation depart from Paris and all other Cities where they have
opened School, and within fifteen days after out of the Kingdom, upon pain to
be prosecuted as guilty of Treason; and that their Goods and Lands shall be
employed for pious uses, and be distributed at the pleasure of the Court; and
all the Kings Subjects were interdicted to send their children to the Schools
of that Society out of the Kingdom to be instructed in Learning, upon pain of
Treason. This was executed the Summer following. Li. 112.
Some few days after this, was made another Decree, whereby Chastel's Father's
house, which was near to the Palace, was ordered to be pulled down, and a
Pyramid to be erected in the place of it, with the Decree inscribed upon it ad
aeternam facti memoriam; which was likewise done, with other inscriptions in
detestation of the crime. V. l. 134.


58. How necessary for the safety both of the King and Kingdom this was, and
that the Decree should be strictly executed throughout the whole Kingdom, and
duly and constantly observed for the future, many in the Court, and most in the
Parliament of Paris, and of the Clergy, were very sensible, and the King could
not be ignorant, especially after such fair warnings. And yet, whereas the
Jesuits, being by virtue of this Decree exterminated out of the Jurisdictions
of the Court of Paris, Thu. l. 129.
which extends to near half the Kingdom, and likewise of Burgundy and Normandy,
continued notwithstanding for three years after to keep up their Schools in the
Territories of Toulouse and Bourdeaux, to which many sent their Sons to be
taught, and many again from that Society, changing their habits as if they had
also renounced their vow, crept into other Schools; though the King was often
importuned to command those Courts by his Edict to publish the Decree, and it
was once or twice so resolved in Council, the execution notwithstanding was
continually retarded by the craft and subtilty (says our Author) of some about
the King, but perhaps some thoughts of a peace with Spain, which had been
proposed, might make it thought unseasonable at that time. But the Parliament
of Paris was not wanting to do what in them lay, 21 Aug. 1597.
and by another Decree, under a severe penalty prohibited all Cities, Colleges
and Universities to admit any of that society, though pretending the
renunciation of their vow, to preach, or to exercise any sacerdotal Ministry,
or to teach children either publicly or privately. Thu. l. 120.
The year following the King was again provoked through the obstinacy and
insolency of the Court of Toulouse, to send out his Edict commanding those
Courts to publish the Decree, and was moved by the Chancellor Ph. Huraltus
Cevernius so to do, but by some Courtiers, says our Author, the business was at
present delayed, and at last wholly put off; and very likely was now also
though unseasonable in respect of the King's desire to obtain a dissolution of
his Marriage with the Queen Margaret, that he might marry his beloved Mistress
La belle Gabrielle, Thu. ib. Perefix. p. 294.
whereof he began about this time to treat with the Pope's Legate. And indeed,
though I know not whether so much be written by any, yet it seems very legible
in the actions and occurrences which are written, that this was so powerful a
motive with him, as made him not only desist from further enforcing the
execution of the Decree, and total extermination of the Jesuits, but on the
contrary to yield to their Restitution. Thu. ibid.
For the Jesuits about this time taking occasion upon a Convention of the
Clergy to offer him a supplication, ceased not afterward till by supplications
and recommendations every where sought, they at last obtained their desire, the
Pope's Legates sparing no pains on their behalf. So our Author, who afterward
tells us, L. 129.
that when Ignatius Armandus their Provincial, about a year before they were
restored, had made a Speech to the King for them, the King answered that the
business was now in the Pope's hands, without whose direction he would
determine nothing (negotium penes. Pontificem esse, quo inconsulto nihil velit
decernere). But it may be more plainly perceived in a passage afterward at
their restitution; L. 132.
for when the Parliament interceded against their restitution, and were very
averse from publishing the Kings Eidict for that purpose, at last comes And.
Huraltus Messius into the Senate, and acquaints them from the King with the
whole series of the business, and tells them that above five years since the
Pope had dealt with the King that the Jesuits might be restored to the same
state in the Kingdom wherein they were before the Decree. This was about the
beginning of the year 1604, and the King having in the year 1598 treated with
the Legate about the dissolution of his Marriage, as has been said, in the
year 1599; he obtained the Pope's Breve to certain Delegates, L. 123.
who, upon hearing of the cause, pronounced the Marriage null ab initio; so
that this points us to the time exactly: and considering the common practice of
the Court of Rome to neglect no opportunity of promoting their own ends, it
cannot be thought that they would let this go without some assurance from the
King of the restitution of the Jesuits, which at the same time was earnestly
solicited. It is true that the King's beloved Mis. who had engaged him to send
to the Pope about it, died in Childbirth before the commission to the
Delegates was sent; yet this hinders not but she might before have prevailed
with him to give all satisfaction to the Pope in order to the obtaining of it,
and that thereupon he might so far have engaged to the Pope, that he knew not
afterward how to get off when he would; and this it seems was the true reason
why the business hung so long, and yet was done at last. For thus Messius goes
on relating the series of the business, the King, says he, put it off from day
to day as much as he could, (he did not refuse or excuse himself from denying
it, but sought delays) and when he could no longer shift it off, Quantum
potuerat diem de die dixisse.
he proposed certain articles almost uniform to the contents of the Decree, and
by his Ambassador labored with the Pope to be content with their restitution
under those conditions. For the Pope demanded their universal restitution
throughout the whole Kingdom, but the King offered it in certain places
appointed to a certain number, and in the Territories subject to the Court of
Paris were only two places assigned them. From that time two years passed
without any mention of the business, whereat the King, who desired to gratify
the Pope in it, was troubled; at length the King's Ambassador being instant
with the Pope, he answered that the articles proposed by the King seemed to him
to be such as the Jesuits ought to be contented with them, but that hitherto
he had deferred his answer, because the General of the Society (Aquanina)
showed himself not at all satisfied with them, nor would subscribe to them,
etc. that the business therefore was no longer in the King's power, but
transacted by agreement between the King and the Pope; (rem proinde amplius non
esse integram, sed de ea inter Regem and Pontificem quasi pacto transactum
fuisse) All which shows sufficiently that the Pope had then gotten some hank
upon him which he could not get off. Nor can any other be easily assigned so
probable as this which I have said. Only one thing more it is likely helped
forward the business, viz. a desire to secure his life by ingratiating himself
with the regicides: for so it is said, that when his great favorite the D. of
Sully dissuaded him from their readmission, Foul. l. 9. c. 2.
he answered, Give me then security for my life. And indeed though in his
answer to that grave speech of the chief President Harlay in the name of the
Parliament, and in behalf of the University, representing to him, both from
their principles and practices, the danger of what he was about, not only to
the Kingdom, but to his own person, he made show of great contempt of that
danger, and hopes, which upon mature deliberation he had conceived of the good
fruits which France might receive from their restitution, and also of
confidence in God, who had thus preserved him hitherto, for his future
preservation; yet since it does plainly appear by what was delivered by Messius
from him to the Senate, (and there can be no reason to think otherwise) that he
was sore against his will, (viz. through some inconsiderate pre-ingagement from
which he could not recede) brought to it, his other favors to them besides
their readmission, may be thought to proceed from this principle, and his show
of contempt of the danger to argue rather what he sought to conceal, than what
he pretended, or at least that that contempt proceeded from his hopes of
securing his own safety by this means. For, whatever he pretended, it could
not proceed from a well grounded confidence of God's protection; a thing
inconsistent with his living in continued known sin by reason of his Amores,
(which the Reverend Bishop of Paris does frequently deplore) and when he had
before violated his conscience by his change of Religion for securing his
Kingdom. For who can with confidence expect any favor from him, whom he does
daily knowingly injure and offend? Besides, that confidence is not always the
mere result of a good conscience, but is often raised in pious souls by the
special influence of the Spirit of God, who as he does more and more increase
it in those who continually and sincerely endeavor to persevere and go forward
in a diligent observance of his will, and to raise their souls by a constant
exercise of the dictates of Reason and Faith, above the animal or brutish
nature; so does he always withdraw the same from those who decline to brutish
affections, and if they go on so to do, at last leaves them dis-spirited, Quos
perdere vult Jupiter dementat prius.
and obnoxious to base and deceitful shifts and devices, whereby they pull down
mischief upon their own heads, especially when this is mixed with ingratitude
against great mercies. Nor can a sacrilegious and profane absolution, by those
who cry peace, peace, when there is no peace, serve the turn, without a due
repentance proportionable to the fault with all its aggravations, and a sound
reformation. And for what fruits he might expect from their restitution, for
the good of the Kingdom, his Parliament well informed him by the mouth of their
worthy President Harlay, in that notable speech which might well have deserved
a larger place here, had not so much been related already to that purpose from
others. As they have all one common Name and Vow, so have they, says he,
certain heads of Doctrine wherein they all agree: as, that they acknowledge no
Superior besides the Pope, and to him they give Faith and an absolute
Obedience, and firmly believe that the Pope has power to excommunicate Kings;
but that a King excommunicate is a Tyrant, and that his subjects may with
impunity make insurrection against him. That every one of them who is initiated
though but in the lower Orders of the Church, whatsoever crime he commits,
cannot possibly incur the crime of Treason, because they are not at all any
longer the King's Subjects, nor subject to his Jurisdiction. Thus are the
Ecclesiastics by their Doctrine exempt from the secular Power, and lawfully
may with impunity lay bloody (violent) hands upon the sacred persons of Kings.
This they assert in printed Books, etc. These false and erroneous Doctrines
cannot be admitted by Kings, and therefore it behooves that they who maintain
them should before all things renounce the same in their Schools. If they do
not, they ought by no means to be suffered, as those who maintain a Doctrine
devised to the subversion of the fundamentals of royal power and authority. If
they do, yet are they not much more to be trusted; for at Rome and in Spain,
where these new monstrous opinions flourish, they think one thing, but speak
See their Answers to the Questions proposed to them by the Court after the
murder of the King; in Foul. l. 9. c. 2. five, and the Answer to Philanax Angl.
chapter 5. p. 128.
another in France: and as they pass into this or that Country, so do they take
up or lay down these opinions. If they say that this they may lawfully do by V.
Spotswood, Hist. of Scotl. l. 6. an. 1580. page 308, 309.
secret Dispensation, then what certainty can be had of their Doctrine, which
is thus changed with their change of place, and is good or bad according to the
times? This Doctrine they embrace and maintain in common (all of them), and it
so thrives by little and little, that it is to be feared lest in tract of time
it infect the other orders, which are not yet levened by it. At first they had
none more their adversaries than the Sorbonists, now many of them are their
favorers* viz. those who received their first institution in their Schools.
Others who are now training up in learning under them will hereafter do the
like, and one day hold the chief dignities in the Senate; and if they shall
think the same in point of Doctrine also, they will by degrees withdraw
themselves from their duty of obedience to the King, set at naught the King's
Laws, and suffer the Liberties of the Gallicane Church to become obsolete, and
wear out; and lastly, will reckon it no crime of Treason which is committed by
an Ecclesiastic. Then he goes on, and imminds him of the fruits which had
already been produced from these principles; of Barriere, Varada, and Guignard,
and Chastel, and of the last King's murder, Gens ingrata.
against whom this ungrateful Society stirred up the people to sedition, nor
were they thought guiltless of that murder; that in the late wars, of other
Orders many persisted constantly in the King's obedience; but these conjoyntly
and unanimously conspired against him with the inveterate enemies of the
Kingdom, (the Spaniard) nor was there one of that Society found, who was of the
King's party, touches upon foreign examples, how in Portugal, they, and they
only, deserting the cause of their Country, adhered to the Spaniards, and were
the cause of the slaughters of so many Priests and devout Persons, two thousand
perishing under the Spaniards in several manners; and by a singular indulgence
obtained the Pope's pardon of so many confessed slaughters: then having spoken
of the reasonableness of the Decree which exterminates the Jesuits, and had
been received without contradiction in all other Courts, had not they withstood
it who were not well settled in the King's obedience, and were hardly brought
off from their inveterate hatred against him, and answered objections, he
presents the humble obsecrations and obtestations of the Parliament for the
continuance of it; and to these adds the humble supplication of the University;
and at last imminds him of the regard which his Predecessors had always had to
the intercessions of the Supreme Courts, at whose Petition or Advice they
revoked or altered their Edicts, if they contained any thing amiss; that this
the Courts of the Kingdom beseech his Majesty, and promise themselves from his
Grace, that he will please to suffer them to enjoy their authority entire,
which indeed is the authority of the King himself, as that which depends upon
him, etc. But all would not do; notwithstanding the intercession of the
Parliament, the deprecation of the University, the disswasions of those he held
both able and faithful to him; he had made an Edict, and it must be published,
and the Jesuits restored, mal-gre mesme les avis de quelques uns de son
Conscil. And they must not only be restored, but moreover have a new College
built them at La Flesche, which the King endowed with an annual Rent of 11000
Crowns (Aurei) and prevailed with the Clergy for 100000 more toward the
building of it; and he also orders that the hearts of Himself, his Queen, and
their Successors shall be there intombed in a Church to be built by himself;
and in the mean time a Father of that Society is admitted to the inspection and
conduct of his own, being made his ordinary Preacher and Confessor, viz. Father
Cotton, who presently thereupon began to show his zeal for the Pope against a
Sentence of the College of Divines passed two years before, wherein they had
asserted the Liberties of the Gallican Church against the Pride, and
Haughtiness, and Avarice of Rome; and among other things, that other Bishops
have power to order the public affairs of the Church within their own Diocese,
as well as the Roman Bishop in his; V. l. 129.
and at his instance by the command of the King; L. 144.
for the Court could not be brought to consent to it, not only the marble Table
whereon the Decree was engraved, but the Pyramid it self, with all the other
inscriptions in detestation of that fact of Chastel, was taken down and
demolished; and the printed-Cuts of it prohibited; which being notwithstanding
greedily bought up, diligent search was by the King's command made for the
brass Plate from which they were printed, which yet was not found till few days
before the murder of this King also renewed the common hatred against the
Jesuits.

59. But before we proceed to the murder it self of this King, it will be
necessary to take notice of some other Conspiracies against him, whereof some
were contemporary with those of Barriere and Chastel, though not discovered
till afterward, and some were since. The first of Nic. Malavicinus the Pope's
Legate resident with the Archduke at Bruxels, who having every where sought
for an assassine, at last light upon Chapter Ridicone a Dominican Friar of Gant,
who was very ready to lay down his life for the cause of Religion; but before
he would undertake this business, desired in the first place to have the
authority of the Pope and Cardinal's approbation; wherefore the Legate for his
satisfaction gave him a writing under his hand in the name of the Pope and
Cardinals, to that purpose; and having furnished him with Money, and blessed him
with the sign of the Cross, he dismissed him, giving him also for his better
security from discovery, a faculty or dispensation to wear a secular habit, of
a Soldier, and to ride, dance, fence, etc. Being thus prepared for the
business, the Jesuit Hoduma, to whom his Mother at confession had discovered
the agreement, desired to see him, and having viewed him, disliked nothing but
his little stature, saying that there needed a more robust man. In his journey
at Vermand he understood that the King was reconciled to the Church, and came
to the Crown by lawful succession, Pet. Arger of the same Monastery at Gant,
having first treated with Malavicinus at Bruxels, and then going to Rome, being
returned from thence, likewise undertook the design of killing the King. Some
time after Ridicone, with whom a servant of the Legates had afterward dealt in
secret, went also to Rome, whither Malavicinus had returned, where being by him
confirmed in his purpose, he took his journey by Milan, and having there
communicated the business to the Spanish Ministers, he came into France about
the same time that Alex. Medices the Pope's Legate arrived there, by the
frequent Sermons from the Pulpit, and daily Disputations in the School, which
he heard; and moreover the praises of James Clemont, as of a glorious Martyr
who had devoted himself for the liberty of the French, every where resounding,
not only at the Churches, but in the Markets, Streets, and at Feasts; he was
easily persuaded that he should do a thing pleasing and acceptable to God, who
should kill the cruel Tyrant, who without any right tore in pieces that most
Christian Kingdom with the loss of so many souls; and therefore when
Malavicinus did moreover furnish him with the authority of God and the Pope to
that purpose, he readily undertook it; being put to the rack he made no other
onfession than he had done before. At the same time was also executed one Nic.
Anglus a Capuchin Friar of St. Michel in the Diocese of Thoul in Lorrain, being
convicted and condemned for the same crime. The next year after Ridicone was
first apprehended, and while he was in prison, Ledesma a Minister of the King
of Spain, employed one Pet. Owen a Carthusian Friar, who, Thu. l. 118. 1597.
for his dissolute manners being censured in his Monastery, had fled into
Spain, to suborn an emissary to murder the King. Owen having treated with a
Soldier in the King's Army about it, to whom he had made great promises, was
himself the next year after apprehended and convicted both by witnesses and by
his own confessions; but was pardoned by the King in respect to the
Carthusians, being satisfied to have taken the evidence in a judicial manner,
whereupon he might when he pleased expostulate with the Spaniards. But shortly
after these things ensued the Peace with Spain at Vervins, and not long after
some hopes given of the restitution of the Jesuits, which was at last granted
as we have seen: whereupon one might have thought that his enemies being all
either subdued or reconciled, having reconciled himself to the Church, to the
Pope, to those of the League who remained unsubdued, to the Spaniard, and to
the Jesuits, that he should henceforward have enjoyed his Kingdom, his new
Religion which had brought all these blessings with it, and his Misses too, at
least his life, in safety. But alas, it may be feared he had forgotten to
reconcile himself truly to his God, which made the rest but male facta gratia,
que ne quicquam coit and refcinditur: For; when a man's ways please the Lord, he
makes even his enemies to be at peace with him. But while he was thus
endeavoring to engage the Jesuits to himself, the Spaniard on the other side
spared neither pains, Thu. l. 132. 1604.
nor cost, nor promises, that by their emissaries they might allure to
themselves the minds of those who through the late Civil Wars were alienated
from him, and under the specious color of Religion might invite them to
disturb the public peace and quiet of the Kingdom, laying hold on all
occasions for that purpose: and that they might discover his arcana and secret
counsels, and from the knowledge of them, the better order their own designs,
made it their main business to corrupt those who were employed by the principal
Officers and Ministers of State. Thus among others, Nic. L'Oste, whom the
Secretary Villeroy employed in decyfering letters, being corrupted by them with
an annual pension of 1200 Crowns, continually discovered all the secrets of
them to the Spanish Ambassador. L. 128.
They had before corrupted the Mareshal de Biron, and some other persons of
Quality, which being discovered, brought him to his end about two years since;
and now they not only again set upon the Count d'Auvergne, who had been
convicted of Biron's conspiracy, L 132. and 134.
and pardoned, but also the Seigneur d'Entragues, and the Marquise de Vernevil
his beautiful and witty daughter, the King's Miss, to corrupt them, and that by
no meaner or other agents than their Ambassadors in France, Jo. Taxis, and his
successor Batth. Sunica, who, to introduce him at first, made use of an English
fugitive Th. Morgan, an actor in the Conspiracies against his own Princess
Queen Elizabeth. L. 134. 1605.
The next year this same Ambassador Suniga, first in person, and afterward, to
avoid suspicion, by his Secretary Brunellus, treated, and at last agreed with
Lewis Merargues a Gentleman of Provence to betray Marseilles to the King of
Spain; which both Merargues and Brunellus confessed, being apprehended in
private conference in Merargues's Chamber; and in Brunellus his hose under his
garter was a paper found, written in Spanish with his own hand, which confirmed
the same. [ Un memoire contenant le plan de son entreprise. Perefix.] These
things I the rather note, because of use as well to confirm the truth of their
like practices in England, as to help to ground some conjecture on concerning
the murder of this King.

60. While the Spaniards are thus active to continue their old, and make new
friends in France, it is not likely they would be unmindful of the Jesuits,
whom they had always found such ready instruments to serve them, and in other
Countries were still as well affected to the interest of Spain and the house of
Austria, V. l. 135. 136.
though contrary to that of their own Country, as ever. Nor is it to be
thought that the Jesuits would be so easily drawn off from their old Friend
and Patron, by those little expressions of kindness, not sufficient to
compensate their injuries received; and besides, might be doubtful whether
proceeding from any real affection to them or not; especially considering their
subjection to the same F. General, by whom the motion of their society in other
Countries under their several Provincials, is in a correspondent uniformity
steered; only it is probable, as becomes wise men, they would be cautious and
wary how they did hazard the loss of what they had gotten, and therefore act
upon pretty sure grounds: yet we meet with some instances of their affection to
their old friend. For, to say nothing of F. Cotton, a prime man of the Society,
and the King's Confessor, his consulting a supposed Daemoniack concerning the
L. 132.
King's life, the same Father is reported to have P. du Moulin, Answ. to
Philanax, Chapter 5.
brought and recommended to the King a certain Spaniard, of whom the King a
while after received from Monsieur de la Force Viceroy of Bearne and Navar, a
description, with an advertisement that such a day he went from Barcelona into
France, with intent to kill his Majesty, and showing his letter to Cotton,
commanded him to bring the man again, but Cotton returning a good while after,
told him he was gone, and could not be found; and that not a year before the
King was murdered he was in disgrace for writing P. du Moulin, ibid.
diverse things to the Provincial of the Jesuits in Spain, which the King had
revealed to him in confession: and that Foul. 9. c. 2.
the D. of Sully proved to the King that he was guilty of betraying his
secrets. What these secrets were I find not; but this is to be noted, that he
had then a great design in hand, which, whether the same or not which he
pretended, and which is related by the D. of Sully, and from him by Perefix the
Archbishop of Paris, he had in pursuance of it raised a great Army, which
startled both Spain and Rome. Perefix, an. 1608.
He had about two years before his death entered into a League Offensive and
Defensive with those Heretics and Rebels against the Catholic King, the
Hollanders, whereof the Spaniards grievously complained, Don Pedro de Toledo
representing to him that the ruin or conversion of the Heretics was the
common interest of all the Catholic Princes, and what great wars his Master
had made upon that design: Foul. ibid. Per. an. 1609:
and was now, though the Pope had earnestly dehorted him from any more arming,
going in person, with an Army of 40000 choice men, to assist the D. of
Brandingburg with his Allies the Protestant Princes, in the business of Cleves
and Juliers, whereof the Emperor complained, as that which could not be without
wrong to the Catholic Religion; and what was worst of all, this expedition was
not doubted to be only a cover for some greater design, that business of Cleves
falling out very opportunely to furnish him with a good occasion to commence
the execution of his projects. Foul. ibid.
While the King was raising this Army, in France was a great Book secretly kept
by some Priests, wherein many did subscribe their fidelity and obedience to the
Pope, many of the subscriptions in blood; and at Rome, (the Pope having
dehorted him from arming) four months before he was murdered, Moulin, ibid.
was the Decree against John Chastel censured, and forbidden to be read, by an
Act of the Consistory, together with the History of Thuanus for relating too
plainly that horrid action of Chastel, and the part which the Jesuits had in
it; and likewise a Book of Mariana the Jesuit, but not that which approves
the murdering of King's, which by that means, was in some sort, that is,
tacitly and implicitly approved. At last, having as well ordered all things for
the Government at home in his absence, as perfected his preparations for the
Expedition, he was impatient to be gone from the City, partly through his eager
desire of pursuing the exploit, partly boding and presaging some mischief to
his person, if he should stay longer there. But the Queen, to whom he had
committed the Regency in his absence, assigning her a select Council, Per. p.
489: Quaere, who was this Conchini who put this into the Queens head? I think
an Italian of Florence.
through the instigation of Conchini and his Wife, being very importunate with
him that she might be crowned before his departure, he would not deny her that
testimony of his affection, though otherwise very unwilling, and withal told
her, That that Coronation did presage him some mischief; they would kill him;
he should never go from that City; his enemies had no other remedy but his
death; it was told him that he should be slain at the first grand magnificence
that he should make, and that he should die in a Coach; which made him taken
with a trembling when he was in one. He was counseled for the avoiding of the
unhappy prophecies to depart the next day, and to leave the Coronation, which
might well be done without him: but this extremely offended the Queen, and
therefore to satisfy her, he staid, with such success as was foretold. For the
next day after the Coronation, when in the morning Continuation of de Serres.
he had been very sad and pensive, one while casting himself upon his bed to
sleep, then again when he could not sleep, arising to his prayers, doing this
several times, in the afternoon he would needs go to the Arsenal to visit the
Duke of Sully, who was there indisposed, though the Duke of Vendosme imminded
him that he had been warned to beware of the fourteenth day; but contemning the
warning and predictions, out of a desire to conceal his fear, (just as he had
done before in the restitution of the Jesuits, contrary to the advice and
persuasions of his best friends) in the way his Coach being stayed by a stop
made by two Carts accidentally meeting in a narrow street, he was stabbed
between the second and third rib, Peref.
and at a second blow to the heart, whereof he died presently. The Assassin was
one Francis Ravaillac, formerly a Monk, but at that time a Solicitor. What
motives, persuasions or instigations he might have to this wicked act, is much
in the dark; but that it was, not out of revenge for any personal injury the
meanness of his quality may induce us to believe; and besides no such thing was
ever pretended or alleged. Nor was it out of hope of any temporal advantage;
for then he would have fled, and endeavored to have saved himself, which he
did not in the least; but therefore upon the score of Religion, which is
further manifest; for it seems he had in him some of the leven of the League,
and was persuaded that the King went to overthrow the Catholic Religion in
Germany. He See the Petition of the University of Paris in the continuation of
Serres; K. James's Defense of the Right of Kings sub finem; Foul. p. 646. from
the Examination and Process.
said that the King made War contrary to the Pope's liking, and boldly
alleged, at his examination, this reason for what he did, That the King had a
design to make war against God, because he prepared war against his Holiness;
for making war against the Pope, is the same as to make war against God. This
is further confirmed by his carriage both at his Apprehension, Examination, and
Execution. When he had redoubled his stroke, and offered a third, he never so
much as stirred from the place, or offered to conceal the knife, but stood
still, as if he desired to be taken notice of, and gloried in the exploit; and
(which may also help to satisfy us that he did it not of his own mere motion)
at his examination, V. The Petition and Moulin, p. 126. 137.
were evident marks found in him of the Doctrine of the Jesuits, and to the
Divines who were sent to him, he showed himself perfectly instructed in all
their distinctions and evasions about Rebellion and King-killing, though
otherwise very ignorant in all other Learning. Lastly, at his Execution, such
was his constancy in the midst of his terrible tortures, as strongly confirmed
the suspicion that certain Emissaries under the massque of piety had instructed
and enchanted him by false assurances that he should dye a Martyr, if he killed
him, whom they made him believe was the sworn enemy of the Church: and possibly
he might have been charmed by some such incantations as were heretofore used to
Barriere; and yet, as it is said, he did confess thus much, Foal. p. 642.
that he had informed Father d'Aubigny of his intended murder, and showed him
the knife; but it was in confession, and therefore not to be revealed; and the
Jesuit upon examination protested that God had given him the grace, that as
soon as any thing was revealed to him in confession, he presently forgot it.
The Jesuits were generally suspected and censured as guilty, and several
suspicious passages in their Sermons lately preached, particularly by F. Hardy
and F. Gontier, were called to mind: and thereupon the Parliament ordered the
Jesuit Mariana's Book de Rege and Regis Institutione to be burned by the
common Executioner: Continuat. of Serres, p. 1295 Foul. p. 646.
and afterward condemned a Book of Suarez (Defensio Fidei Cath.) as containing
many Seditious and treasonable Principles; and after this another of another
Jesuit, Ant. Sanctarellus (de Haeresi, Schismate, etc.) printed at Rome with
the approbation of the General, Foul. ibid. Moul. ubi sup.
and at the same time questioned F. Cotton, and other chief men of their
Society about their Doctrine in this respect; but this was many years after the
murder. But that the History is so sparing in this particular of the
accessories, it self gives us a good reason; the Judges themselves who examined
him, says Perefix, durst not open their mouths, and never spoke of it but with
a shrug of their shoulders; and that some grand thing was hushed up, may be
supposed from the public complaint of the Prince of Conde and others five
years after, that the discovery of this murder was stopped, and not fully
prosecuted. It should seem domestic and foreign jealousies conspired in it.
But that it was not done without the privity of others, is further confirmed
from the Predictions of it, the general bruit which fore-ran it, and the King's
enemies confident expectation of it. His enemies, says Perefix, were then in a
profound silence; which possibly was not caused by their consternation and fear
of the success of his arms, but for the expectation they had to see some great
blow, which was all their hope. It was foretold in an Almanac brought to
Peirescius out of Spain, printed November before; which Gassendus, though he
doubts not but the Artist might have some dealing with an evil genius, yet
thinks he might foresee by other means, as being privy to the conspiracy, which
indeed is the more likely because it was composed by a Beneficiary or Beneficed
man of Barcellonia or Barcinonia, from whence the Spanish Emissary above
mentioned came to Paris to Father Cotton, by whom he was recommended to the
King. Perefix.
And perhaps of the same kind with this was that Prediction of his approaching
death by a determinate blow, Continuat. of Serres.
which was found written in a paper upon the Altar at Montargis. The Provost of
Pluviers, who, it is said, was a Jesuit in Faction, and had a Son a Jesuit,
being accused to have said the same day that the King was murdered, that he
was slain or wounded that day, strangled himself in prison. And indeed such and
so many were the predictions and reports of it at the time, and before it was
done, which are mentioned by Li. 2. de vita Peireskii.
Gassendus, Perefix, and others, as make it very apparent that it was generally
fore-known both in Spain and Italy, or at least that there was then many
emissaries sent out to do it, and that it was confidently expected that it
would certainly be done. Only it is somewhat strange that those circumstances,
at his next Solemnity, in his Coach, and the very day of the month, should be
so precisely foretold, as it seems it was in that manner that he gave credit to
it, though no credulous person, and was so sad and dejected, that he was like
one condemned to death, though by nature neither fearful nor melancholy. He had
advertisements to this purpose by his Ambassadors, and namely by Jo. Bochartus
from Venice; and by others from twenty several places. But it seems it was
decreed, the Decree was gone out, and it must be executed.

This end had Henry le Grand in the height of his Grandeur; much like the fall
of some stately structure deceitfully built upon an infirm foundation, when
just raised to its height. He was frighted in his youth into a change of his
Profession, for the saving of his life, (the first, but bitter fruit of his
being unequally yoked) but that being only through teror and constraint, he
returned again, when he found a convenient opportunity to the open profession
of his own Religion. It was about the eighteenth year of his age, when his
youth might make his yielding to so extraordinary terror, heightened by the sad
spectacle of the horrid murders of all his friends, the more excusable. About
eighteen years after, when he was grown up to maturity, about the thirty sixth
year of his age, and had given some testimony of his constancy in his
Profession; and for his encouragement had received no small testimonies of
Divine favor, not only preserving and conducting him safe through many dangers
and difficulties, but leading him by the hand to the possession of the Kingdom,
and making way for him by the extirpation of a whole Family, another Trial was
assigned him by the great Agonothetes; V. Ecclesiasticus, 2. 1. 2, 3, etc.
who never cease to provide new matter and occasions of trial and exercise
for all those who once apply themselves to his service, till either by many
mutual experiments given and received of their fidelity and constancy to him,
and of his admirable Providence never failing them, but ordering all for their
good, they become more than Conquerors, and well settled and confirmed in his
service, (one great reason of the difficulties and adversities wherewith good
men are frequently exercised) or on the other side, after many acts of
unfaithfulness, whereby their courage and resolution is more and more broken
and abated, they become easily affrighted or allured from their duty, and at
last either wholly deserting, or little regarding the same, are accordingly by
him abandoned to the deceitful and pernicious courses of their own lusts and
devices. The former was a trial whether he would be frighted or forced from his
fidelity; this rather whether he would be allured from it. In the former he
failed; and now having had time to repent, and resume new courage and
resolution, he is again called upon the stage; and in the first assault he
behaved himself not much amiss. For, who can mislike his referring all to the
determination and advice of a lawful General, or National Council, had be been
sincere, and continued constant in this resolution? V. Thu. l. 98. 101, and 103.
Nor did he want encouragement in this respect from the forward and courageous
opposition which on his behalf was made against the Pope's Bulls, by his
Subjects even of the Roman Communion, and not only by the Civil Power, but the
Clergy also concurring therein; who moreover gave him a fair opportunity, and
kind of invitation either by setting up a Patriarch in France, V. Thu. l. 103.
(which had been very agreeable to the first flourishing state of the Church
after the times of Persecution) or by restoring to the Archbishops and Bishops
their ancient authority (which was in some sort done, and held for four years
after) to have cast of that Antichristian yoke of the Papal Usurpations, (under
which he afterward, neglecting that opportunity, unhappily enslaved himself
and his Kingdom) and so having reformed that grand, abominable abuse, he might
with the more facility, afterward have established, by the mature deliberation
of a lawful Council, such a Reformation of the Gallican Church as perhaps might
not have been inferior to any which has been made in other places. And
afterward, L. 107.
when he resolved to be reconciled to the Church, they admitted and absolved
him, notwithstanding the Pope's Legate opposed it all he could, contending that
he could not be absolved by any but the Pope. But these things which might have
given encouragement to a conscientious and truly pious mind, to constancy and
further dependence upon God, to him perhaps proved a further tentation; their
fidelity to him making their persuasions to change his Religion the more
prevalent with him; especially concurring with a more powerful motive, viz. the
reducing of the rest of the Kingdom to his obedience. And therefore, though
like David he waxed stronger and stronger, and the League, like the house of
Saul, waxed weaker and weaker, yet in about half the time that David was kept
out of the greatest part of his Kingdom, he began to yield to the tentation.
And first, when the Leaguers, through the incitations of the Pope and the King
of Spain, were about to assemble to choose a Catholic King, (though that was
not unlikely to break their party by their emulations and divisions concerning
the person) forgetting his former resolutions, and neglecting his conscience,
instead of dependence upon the Divine Providence, he applies himself to humane
Policies, and resolves to change his Religion, without staying for the
determination of a lawful either General or National Council. L. 107.
And this, after a few hours instruction, whereby he pretended he was much
informed of what he was ignorant before, being solemnly done, he next, not long
after, by a L. 107, 108.
special Ambassador makes supplication to the Pope to be admitted to his
favor. And though he had presently hereupon two notable experiments, by the
attempts of Barriere and Chastel, of the vanity and deceitfulness of such
shifts and humane Policies, without the favor of the Divine Protection and
Blessing, (besides a faithful and sound admonition from the good Queen
Elizabeth) yet his confidence and reliance upon God, being before weakened, (it
commonly proving with perverted minds as with corrupted stomachs, which turn
their natural food and nourishment into the nourishment of their disease) these
did but provoke him to the more earnest pursuit of humane politic means; and
therefore again, when he had already broken the party of the League, and Paris,
wherein their chief strength lay, L. 109. L. 108.
had submitted to him, and besides all this, the Pope had unworthily repulsed
his Ambassador, and given him a just provocation, (which certainly he might
have improved, with the concurrence and good liking of the French Nobility and
Clergy, toward the reformation of that abominable abuse of the Papacy, which is
the original or prop of all the rest) he was notwithstanding easily wrought
upon at the slight intimation of the Pope, (who, when he saw it was in vain
longer to oppose him, was very willing to receive his submission) to send
another Embassy, and basely prostrate himself to him: basely I say, L. 113.
because it is not likely that he did it out of Conscience or Religion, but
rather out of fear of Emissaries and Assassins, which is A percussoribus, qui
quotidie vitae ejus insidiantur metuentem.
expressly mentioned by his Agents to the Pope, as a motive to his
reconciliation: and for the same reason, it is likely, as has been showed
before, he at last, notwithstanding all persuasions, earnest intercessions and
supplications to the contrary, restored the Jesuits again, and among other
favors subjected the government of his conscience to them. This was the
foundation upon which he built his Greatness, which having laid for his
security, he presently set himself to heap up Treasures, and at last raised a
great Army for the execution of some grand design, which, whatever it was in
truth, he pretended to be for the promotion of the Christian cause against the
Infidels. But alas, all was built upon a sandy foundation; he had forsaken the
rock of his salvation, and relying upon vain policies had ungratefully forsaken
him, by whom he never had, nor should have been forsaken, so long as he
continued faithful and constant to his duty; and prostituting his conscience to
obtain a staff of reed, had broken the staff of his surest confidence, Isa.
36.6.
aggravating also the offense of his spiritual Fornication, and the burden of
his galled conscience (which is always heaviest in times of danger) by
persisting in the continual scandals of his Amores, whereof the Archbishop
Perefix often complains, as justly to be blamed Page 461.
in a Christian Prince, a man of his age, who was married, on whom God had
conferred so great mercies, and who had such great enterprises in his hand.
This was it which made his apprehension of his approaching death so strong and
lamentable, and subjected him to the effects of that Religion to which he had
subjected himself, as those who consult and crave the assistance of witches and
evil spirits, make themselves thereby the more obnoxious to their power and
malice. Thus did he fall from that Grandeur which by the space of near another
eighteens years he had been raising upon this false foundation. Such profane
policies subjecting Religion to a subservience to secular ends, though
succesful for a while, yet frequently at last concluding in an unhappy
catastrophie. Nor could the specious pretense of his grand design find
acceptance with him, who prefers obedience before sacrifice. This was it which
was in general foreseen and foretold by our good Queen by a more genuine spirit
of Prophecy, and from better Principles than they were moved by who foretold
the same indeed more particularly, but yet only like witches and evil spirits,
who foretell the storms they mean to raise. And she her self, who built her
assurance upon a better foundation, continuing constant to the last to her
Conscience and Religion, and to her God, was by him constantly blessed and
preserved to the last, during a Reign more than twice as long as his, and from
conspiracies neither fewer nor in themselves less dangerous than those against
him: and this was it which made her to hear the full relation of a horrid
conspiracy against her person with that undaunted courage which amazed him who
should have been the actor of it, Parry apud Cambd. an. 1585.
to behold it: and with admirable constancy to contemn the many like
conspiracies which she certainly knew were at one and the same time by the
Seminaries and Spanish Ministers in agitation against her, Cambd. an. 1594. See
before, p 26, 27. Ps. 31.14.
reposing her confidence in him whom she knew was able to save her, with this
pious ejaculation, Thou art my God, my times are in thy hand: not, They will
kill me, I shall never go out of this City, I shall dye, etc.

62. The same distinguishing Providence might be further observed in another
History, to which this is a proper introduction; but leaving that to the
observation of others, I will here conclude with some REFLECTIONS AND
OBSERVATIONS upon what has been already related, that we may see what use and
improvement may be made of it.

1. And first in the History of England, we may plainly behold the continuance
of the combination of Rome and Spain, which was the occasion of that part of
the discourse, even to the very time of those consultations, which were
designed to commence in execution immediately upon the Queens death; which may
therefore reasonably induce us to believe that it did not then cease; but was
continued in, and produced at last, that monster of all devilish and infernal
conspiracies of blowing up the whole State at one blow.

2. We may therein also clearly perceive the justice, reasonableness, and even
necessity of those Laws, which in the Queens Reign were made to prevent and
restrain those wicked practices of the Jesuits, and other Romish and Spanish
Emissaries, and their disciples; which has been acknowledged by some of the
more sober Priests.

3. We must also therein take notice of the admirable Providence of God in the
preservation of that Queen from so many, so various, so mysterious secret
conspiracies, (the truth of which is further confirmed by the like practices of
the Romish and Spanish Agents in France, and other places about the same times)
and from so great open hostility, one while diverting, another while defeating
her enemies, and making her victorious: and this notwithstanding the several V.
sect. 26, 33, 36.
excommunications, and solemn execrations and imprecations of several Popes one
after another against her; as of Pius 5. Greg. 13. Sixtus 5. and Clement 8.
which were all not only ineffectual, but rather turned into a blessing unto her.

4. In the History of France compared with the other, that distinguishing
Providence, which was the occasion of that part of the discourse, is no less
conspicuous and observable in a most remarkable judgment of God upon all those
who either persecuted, or deserted, or so much as refused or neglected that
reformation of Religion which she happily established and defended; for in this
last sort also we have V. sect. 48. p. 97-100.
noted it, though by the by, and this notwithstanding all the incitations and
encouragements of several Popes and Cardinals. So that here we have a most
remarkable example of their Curses turned into a Blessing, and their Blessings
into a Curse.

5. And here if we take for Principles the two last of Bellarmines Notes of the
true Church of Christ, 4. De Ecclesia, c. 17.
the one, the unhappy exit or end of those who oppose the Church. For (as he
adds) although God punishes his, and whips them, yet at length he casts the
rod into the fire; Deuteronomy. 32 43. Praise his people ye Nations, for he will
avenge the blood of his servants, C. 18.
and render vengance upon their adversaries: the other, the temporal felicity
by the Divine Providence conferred on those who defend it. For never, says he,
did Catholic Princes cordially adhere to God, but they most easily became
triumphant over their enemies. If, I say, we take these for our Principles, it
will be very easy for any one, upon what has been here related, to make the
conclusion; viz. which is the true Church of Christ, and which the meretricious
and adulterous; who have been true Catholic Princes, and who the Kings of the
Earth who have committed fornication with the great Whore, the woman drunken
with the blood of the Saints; and this will further appear from what follows.

6. And therefore in both these Histories we may also take notice of the
actions and practices of the Popes and their party, their Adherents, Agents,
Emissaries and Disciples, viz. exciting and fomenting wars and invasions among
Christian Princes, with breach of public Faith; seditions and rebellions by
Subjects against their own Princes, and the murders of Princes by their own
Subjects, encouraged thereunto by an impious pretense of absolution from their
duty of Obedience, and even oaths of Fidelity, and by promise of Reward, even
of greatest eternal Reward, for that which has been abhorred by all other
Religions, and always reputed contrary even to the Laws of Nations and of War;
and persecutions and horrible slaughters of Christian people by their own
Princes: and all this by an abominable abuse of Religion, and the most sacred
and solemn parts of Religion; and only for their own cause, for the upholding
of the Papal Innovations, Usurpations and Antichristian abuses.

Note; The persecutions and slaughters of Christian people excited by the
Popes, upon the account of Religion, since the first appearing of the Waldenses
and Albigenses, may be thought, for the numbers slain, to come near, if not to
equal the Heathen persecutions, or rather much exceed them. In the first
persecutions against that people, which were raised whether by the exhortation,
or decree and command, as some say, of Pope Innocent 3. are reckoned to be
slain in France alone 1000000 of people; and of later days have been reckoned
150000 Christians, within the space of scarce 30 years, consumed by the
Inquisition. But these are things out of our present story.

7. We may here likewise observe the nature and manner of their actions and
practices, which consist of the two great species of injustice, vis and dolus,
violence and fraud, open force, and secret and mysterious practices and
machinations, and so make up a complete mystery of iniquity. The one we may
behold not only in the Spaniard's Forces raised and employed at the instigation
of the Pope and his Agents, but also in the Forces raised by the Popes
themselves (who pretend themselves Vicars of the Prince of Peace, and as
Christian Bishops, should be the Preachers of Peace, and not the Trumpets of
War) both against the Queen of England and the King of France: and the other in
the secret practices of the Jesuits and other Confessors and Emissaries,
exciting to Rebellions, and to assassinate Princes.

8. And here taking another of Bellarmines Notes of the true Church, Ca. 13.
Mat. 7.16. Gal. 5.19, 22.
viz. Sanctity of Life of the Authors and Propagators of the Religion; and our
Savior's rule, By their fruits ye shall know them; together with his Apostles
Catalogues of the works of the Flesh, and of the fruits of the Spirit; for our
Principles, it will not be difficult to conclude whether these men be the
Authors or Propagators of the true Religion, (for here, for their Religion that
only is to be taken about which the difference is, and for which they contend,
seeking by these means to maintain and promote it) or rather of an abominable
innovation, and corruption of the true Religion; and whether their Church be
the true and faithful Church of Christ, 2 These. 2.
or rather that mystery of iniquity, that abomination of desolation, that man
of sin and son of perdition, who has set up himself in the Temple of God.

9. We may here also behold the Principles from whence all these actions and
practices have proceeded, V. Foul. l. 1. c. 4. and l. 2. c. 1. V. Foul. l. 2.
c. 2. 5, 6. V. Foul. l. 2. c. 3, 4.
viz. 1. That the Bishops of Rome, as successors of St. Peter, have a supreme
power and authority derived to them from Christ over all Christian Persons and
Churches, all Nations and Kingdoms, all Princes and States. 2. That by this
power and authority they may lawfully absolve subjects from all duty of
Obedience and oath of Fidelity to their otherwise lawful Princes and Governors;
and deposing them, may dispose of their Kingdoms and States to whom they think
fit. 3. That Princes excommunicate by the Pope are no longer to be obeyed by
their Subjects, but to be deprived of their Kingdoms and lives. 4. That to rise
in Arms against such Princes excommunicate, or by any means to murder and
destroy them, is not only lawful, but moreover meritorious even in their own
subjects; and that to die in such an attempt is martyrdom, etc. And of all this
we have here a more effectual evidence than only from the writings or printed
Books of some private men, viz. in the Bulls and Acts of the Popes themselves,
of Universities and Colleges of Divines, the frequent Sermons of their
Preachers, and Instructions of Confessors, and Practices of their Penitents.

Note; It is here to be noted that besides these Practices and Principles so
pernicious and destructive to the Sacred, though Civil Right of Princes and
States, and the peace and quiet of Common wealths, there are others no less
pernicious and destructive to the Church, and to the Salvation of particular
persons, which, because they come not within the compass of this History, we
take no notice of.

10. And here we may see what is the Religion of these men. For though there be
other points in controversy, whereof many little more than mere verbal, about
words and expressions, which are kept up only through heat of contention, and
might easily be agreed by sober, judicious, and disinteressed persons; and
others originally only the private opinions of some men of great authority in
their times, wherein the substance of Religion is no more concerned than in the
speculations of Philosophers, though now commonly received and adopted into
Religion by the Popes and their Faction, whether for secular advantage, or to
hold up their pretended Infallibility; yet these are their (...), their V.
Sandys Europae speculum of their Head Assertions, p. 24. in 4 to.
fundamental and ruling Principles for which they contend; the Principles from
whence all these Persecutions, Wars, Massacres and Murders have proceeded, and
the Religion, quae nunc novo exemplo Martyrs facit, as Vindic. Areopag. c. 27.
p. 124.
Del Rio speaks in the case of Garnet whom he and Bellarmine will needs have to
be a To whom we may say with Optatus, lib. 3. Si illos videri Martyrs vultis,
probate illos amasse pacem, in qua sunt Prima Fundamenta Martyrii: aut
dilexisse Deo placitam unitatem, aut habuisse cum fratribus charitatem. Nam
omnes Christianos fratres esse -- probavimus. -- Charitatem illos non habuisse
manifestissime constat, sine qua nullum vel nominari potest vel esse martyrium,
says he to the Donatists, p. 99.
Martyr whether he will or not. But perhaps some may say that this is not the
faith or practice of all of that communion. Nor do I think it is, but that many
are better Christians than to be imposed upon by the strength of such
delusions; such especially who living in such Churches as continue in that
communion, are not satisfied to separate from their own Church, though they
clearly perceive and abominate these abuses, and heartily desire their
reformation; and many such I doubt not but there have been and still are among
the most sober, judicious, and pious of the French, even of the Clergy. And
though I am very willing to think charitably of many of our English Romanists,
yet I see not how they can be excused who separate from the Church of England,
which is and ought to be their own Church, (so long as it continues a member of
the Church of Christ, which an unjust excommunication by an apostate Church
cannot hinder) to join with such a Faction. Nor do I see how they can be
excused who refuse to take the Oath of Allegiance, which I am very confident
not a man of the ancient Christians would have refused: and it is hard not to
think that because they received not the love of the truth offered to them,
that for this cause God has sent them strong delusions that they should
believe a lie, etc. But notwithstanding that some, who for the reason mentioned
continue in that communion, may by the mercy and grace of God escape these
delusions, yet it is apparent that these are the Doctrines of the Pope, the
Church and Court of Rome, and of the Jesuits; and the rest are generally so
seasoned and levened with such conceits of the Pope's authority, as are easily
improved into these when ever occasion is offered, especially if any thing of
private interest intervene, as is very observable in the History of France,
(though they of all Papists are least inclined to favor the Papal Usurpations)
where scarce a City, unless restrained by the powerful presence of some of the
loyal Nobility, or inhabited most by Protestants, but did, or was ready to
revolt to the League at every occasion.

11. And here again, if we take for our Principles two more of Bellarmine's
Notes of the true Church, viz. C. 11.
Sanctity of Doctrine, containing nothing false as to the Doctrine of Faith,
nothing unjust as to the Doctrine of Manners: and, C. 9.
Agreement in Doctrine with the ancient Church: we may hence also conclude
whether this Church of Rome has continued a true and faithful Church of
Christ, or has indeed made that defection, which was foretold should succeed
the dissolution of the Roman Empire, as the Christians in all ages have
unanimously and universally understood that which should be taken away, and
become the Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth, which is expressly
said of the mystical Babylon, the great City which then reigned over the Kings
of the Earth; the woman drunken with the blood of the Saints; whether there
reigns not that man of sin, the son of Perdition, who opposes and exalts
himself above all that is called God, (above all nominal Gods, as Kings and
Emperors) or that is worshipped, (or reverenced) so that he, as God, Cum super
Imperatorem non sit nisi solus Deus, qui fecit Imperatorem, dum se Donatus
super Imperatorem extollit, jam quasi hominum excesserat metas, ut se, ut Deum,
non hominem aestimaret, etc. Optatus l. 3. which with more reason may be said
of the Pope.
sits in the Temple (the Church) of God, (though adulterous and apostate
Church) showing himself that he is a God (above all earthly Gods as Kings and
Emperors, and the immediate Vicar of the true God). For the Doctrine of the
Primitive and Ancient Church, how contrary that is to these Principles and
Practices, every one may see in the sacred Scriptures, and it is almost
vulgarly known from the writings of the ancient Christians commonly cited as to
obedience to temporal Princes and Magistrates. But be this never so evident, I
know it will be hard to persuade one, who has been trained up in the Popish
Principles, to believe it. Not only the prejudice of Education, but more
particularly the opinion of the Perseverance and Infallibility of the Church,
which above all things from their tender years is deeply rooted in their minds,
will be a great obstacle and stumbling block in their way. But let them take
heed that a too particular application of a general promise do not deceive
them. The Jews had as express promises as any they can pretend; and were as
zealous as they are now; and yet were deceived with lying words, saying, the
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, as they do now the Church, the holy
Catholic Apostolic Roman Church.

12. Here also such Princes, as having escaped these corruptions, will again
subject their necks to the Roman yoke, may see what a snare they involve
themselves in, and what a slavery they must lie under to the Papal Tyranny; how
dangerous it is to have their peoples minds infected with these Principles, and
their consciences directed by such Guides. And here, King James's Defense of
the Right of Kings, sub fin.
if there be any truth in that speech of Cardinal Perron: That so long as the
Kings of France have kept good terms of concord with the Popes, they have been
the more prosperous, and, on the contrary, when they have jarred with the Holy
See, they have been infested with boisterous storms and tempests; here, I say,
if this be true, they may perceive the true reason of it, viz. in the one case
they were free from the molestation of the Popes and their Emissaries; and in
the other they were infested by them. But how little truth there is in that
assertion may partly appear by what has here been written, and is also proved
by our late learned King James in his solid confutation of it, by instances not
only in France but other Countries also. And in England who has been more
prosperous and succesful than she who wholly cast off the Pope's authority, and
would not be courted to so much as to admit his Legate? and who more unhappy
than they who have too much complied with them?

13. Lastly, we must here take notice of that which cannot but administer
matter of grief to all true and cordial Christians; and that is the scandal of
these Principles and Practices; the occasion which thereby is given to those
who are not well acquainted with the Doctrines and Practices of the ancient
genuine Christians, nor have well considered the great evidences of the truth
and excellence of the Christian Religion, to suspect it to be no other than
what they apprehend it to be in the lives and actions of such spurious
professors of it, viz. a mere Imposture with great subtilty and artifice
managed for secular ends: and the injury which thereby is done to the holy
Martyrs, when we shall see Rebels, seditious Traitors and Parricides honored
and magnified as Martyrs, and that not by the vulgar only, but by their Popes
themselves and Cardinals; by their learned Writers in printed Books, and
Preachers from their Pulpits; nay, when we shall see Relations in printed
Books, and representations by printed Cuts and Pictures of most horrible
persecutions and martyrdoms pretended to be suffered, where in truth was no
such matter, what a tentation may this give to weak, unlearned or prejudiced
minds to suspect that the ancient holy Martyrs either suffered not at all, or
if they did, were only such turbulent spirits or poor deluded souls as many of
these? Nor has the holy providence of God escaped their profane abuse by
entitling it to such trifles as a prudent Historian would disdain to mention,
and palpable lies, as may be seen in Sanders, Ribadeneira, and other such like
Writers. To which if we add the abuse of miracles by lies and forgeries, we
shall find that the gates of Hell, that is, the counsels have prevailed against
these degenerate successors of Peter with a witness. Nor could a more effectual
means be devised for the subversion of Christianity and all Religion, not the
very arms of Mahomet and his sect, than this mystery of iniquity; nor, if it be
well considered, has the whole World produced any thing which does better
deserve the name of Antichrist. And indeed, if we consider the present growth
of Atheism and Infidelity among us, and trace it to its roots and original, we
shall find it all to be of an Italian Extraction, and from thence propagated to
France, and so to England and other parts. Nor shall we find any other reasons
for it than what are here mentioned; the Italians perceiving better what is
acted among themselves, than those who are more remote. For let the Italian
subtilty be what it will, I think it is plain that they have made no deeper
search into either the secrets of Nature or of Antiquity (from one or both of
which they must derive their principles, if they have others besides what are
here mentioned) than other Nations have made.

63. And now, before I conclude, I must crave leave to make this address to
several sorts of persons distinctly. And first to all Christians in general,
that they will seriously consider, whether they be not obliged for the honor
and reputation of our holy Profession, and whether our great Lord does not
require it of them, to declare against this Romish Faction, and their
Unchristian, or rather Antichristian and abominable scandalous principles and
practices: that is all National Churches and Universities publicly by solemn
Decrees and Protestations, if not by excommunication; and all particular
private Christians by abstaining from their communion, and coming out of that
Babylon, that they be not partakers of her sins, and receive not of her plagues.

2. To those who are not of that Communion, and have hitherto escaped those
delusions, that they beware that they be not again entangled therein. For it
had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than after
they have known it, to turn from the holy Commandment. 2. That they be careful
that they do not hold the truth in unrighteousness, (Atrocius sub sancti
nominis professione peccatur) but walk worthy of their vocation, etc. worthy of
God who has called them to his Kingdom and Glory, out of darkness into his
mavelous light, as children of the light, and have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them, and as becomes the
Gospel of Christ: and that while they separate from the scandals of others,
they themselves do not administer occasion of scandal to others. 3. That they
who are in authority, whether in Church or State, be careful both by their
example and authority, as much as in them lies, to discourage and suppress all
manner of vice and debauchery; and to encourage and promote all manner of
virtue, and particularly piety and devotion in Religion. For as vice and
debauchery, and even coldness and indifference in matters of Religion in any
man, makes him the more obnoxious to the delusions of the Papists; so they well
perceiving so much by experience, are not without reason believed to endeavor
first the debauching of the Nation, that the people being thereby the better
prepared and disposed to receive their impressions, they may the more easily
compass their design; as Physicians, who cannot immediately cure the present
distemper of their Patient, are fain many times by art to divert it into some
other disease which they hope more easily to cure. Nor do the Papists look upon
debauchery as a more dangerous disease than that they call heresy. This is such
a means as is of natural efficacy to obviate and obstruct the endeavors of the
Papists, but of all most likely to be effectual by the blessing of God upon it;
whereas the neglect of it does both naturally expose the people to their
delusions, and is most likely to provoke the judgment of God to give them up to
be deluded by them. Nor need Governors to fear that their people will prove
less morigerous and governable, by being more devotely affected to Religion:
but may well hope the contrary, provided they will require nothing of them that
may be thought contrary to Religion; which certainly they need not,
Christianity containing nothing inconsistent with any solid principle of
policy. 4. That they be careful to walk worthy of their vocation particularly
in that wherein the Apostle does particularly instance, and which he earnestly
urges, endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, and
(...).
doing according to the truth in Charity; (Ephesians. 4.1, 3, 15.) for it must be
remembered that separation and division among Christians is, like homicide,
generally unlawful; and though the one as well as the other, in certain special
cases, and under certain circumstances, may be not only lawful, but an
indispensible duty; which the Romanists cannot with any reason deny, since it
has been the judgment and frequent, indeed too frequent practice of that
Church, both anciently, and of later ages; as is apparent in their
excommunications of whole Churches, even all or most of the Eastern Churches,
and in the last age many of the Western, for no other cause but the reformation
of many scandalous abuses, which the Church or Bishops of Rome by their Agents
had transfused into them, whereby they do unanswerably justify our separation
from them (were not themselves the authors of it) for just and necessary
causes: yet ought not this to be done but with great caution and mature
deliberation, and under such conditions as these; 1. That it be just and
necessary, for just and necessary causes. 2. That it be done with Charity, and
with intention and desire to return to communion again as soon as the causes of
the separation are removed and reformed. 3. And therefore that it be done with
Sobriety, not widening the difference, or quarrelling at such things as may be,
or ought to be tolerated, such as being in their own nature indifferent, are
left to the prudent ordering and disposition of each particular National or
Provincial Church, so as may be best for order, decency, and edification:
Unaquaeque Provincia abundet in suo sensu, etc. Hier. ep. 28. v. can. ult.
Concilii Ephesin.
that it proceed no further than for just and necessary causes it ought, lest
if we measure truth, as for example in this case, by its distance from Rome, we
not only with many errors and abuses cast off some truths and useful matter of
decency, but also become guilty of breach of Charity, while not insisting only
upon what is just matter of exception, we contend about that which is capable
of a charitable construction. That these conditions are necessary to be
observed to make breach of communion between several Churches justifiable in
either, I think no Christian will deny. And therefore as those Churches which
shall contrary to these conditions make a separation from others, do thereby
transgress the Law of Charity, and become guilty of Schism; so much more do
they who shall so separate from their own particular Church to which their
habitation and abode does subject them as special members; and besides to their
Schism and breach of Charity add also the guilt of disobedience; and, which
ought well to be considered among us, do thereby, though contrary to their
intention, effectually cooperate with the Romish Agents in the promotion of
their grand design, one of whose principal methods for the subversion of the
Reformed, and restoration of the Popish Religion, as might plainly be
demonstrated, is the raising and promoting of Sects, Factions and Divisions
among us; which were there no other obligation upon us, ought in reason to make
us very wary how we do that which gives so great advantage to the common
adversary. 5. That they who are of chief authority in the Church be very
cautious not to administer unnecessary occasion of separation to the weakness
of their brethren; which may be, and frequently is done by these two means
especially; 1. By rigorous pressing of things in their own nature indifferent.
For though these things be left to the prudent ordering of each particular
National or Provincial Church; yet when through the weakness and scrupulosity
of many they become matter of offense and scandal to them, and so occasions of
separation, in that circumstance they cease to be indifferent, and it would be
no less contrary to Prudence than to Charity to impose or longer strictly to
require them, and is plainly contrary to both the Doctrine and the Practice of
the Apostle, (v. Romans 14, and 15. and 1 Cor. 8. and 9.20, 21, 22. and 10.22. --
and 2 Kin. 18.4.) especially in so dangerous a circumstance as this, when it
gives so great advantage to such an adversary, who so studiously and
industriously endeavors our divisions, it can never be approved as any way
consistent with prudence, and that care of the flock which all faithful Pastors
ought to have, not to allow at least such indulgence and liberty in such things
as is necessary to the preservation of unity in the Church. 2. By scandalous
coldness in Religion and worldliness in the Clergy. It is certain both from
reason and experience, though perhaps not commonly observed, that there is
scarce any so universal and powerful a cause of separation and factions as
this. For the generality of people do rarely judge by any other rule than that
of our Savior, by their fruits, and are therefore very apt to judge of the
truth of men's Doctrine by the virtue and piety of their lives and actions. And
there is a certain authority of reputation which ought always to accompany
authority of Jurisdiction, and is in truth the more powerful of the two to
retain people in a sweet, voluntary, and so more perfect obedience; and this
being lost, the other which alone holds them only in a kind of violent and
forced, not natural and genuine, obedience, is very difficult to be managed,
very hazardous to be cast off, and is seldom of long duration. Now the former,
which is the proper authority of the Church and Clergy (for what is coercive
more than bare excommunication, is in truth a branch of the Civil Authority)
can never be retained by only abstaining from those we call scandalous sins,
but by the constant, sincere and vigorous practice of those great virtues of
Religion, Humility, Meekness, Heavenly-mindedness, contempt of the World,
devotion in Religion, and zealous endeavors for the Salvation of Souls; without
which the observance of the rules only of ordinary moral virtues will be
attributed rather to humane Prudence than to Religion. But to see men zealous
for the accidents and formalities of Religion, and cold in the practice and
promotion of the great essential and substantial parts, and the very business
of it: to hear men cry up morality as if there was nothing more in Religion
than that, and yet in the practice even of that to come far short of the very
Heathen Moralists: to see men profanely turn the sacred Profession into a kind
of trade; to design it, and apply themselves to it no otherwise than others do
to civil or secular employments, as a means to get a livelihood, to get wealth,
honor and preferment in the World, and when they have, and perhaps by indirect
means, heaped Living upon Living, and Preferment upon Preferment, accordingly
use or rather abuse the charity of our Ancestors, and the revenues of the
Church in such indulgence to Pride, Ostentation, voluptuous or delicious
living, as would be scarce excusable in the religious Laity; nay to vie with
them in such vanities, or insatiably to heap up treasures, not for the
necessary relief of their own Families, but to raise great Families in the
World, even of their more remote relations (that which the time has been has
been held no less than sacrilege) without any regard to such works of Charity,
and the promotion of Christianity as all good Christians, according to their
ability, are obliged to. These things, to which might be added the general
decay and neglect of the ancient discipline, do more effectually weaken the
proper authority of the Church and Clergy, than any Ecclesiastical Canons or
Civil Laws can establish it; and being naucious in the sight of the people,
provoke the more religious to run to private meetings and sects, and the rest
to jealousy and suspicions of all Religion, to Infidelity, Irreligion and
Profaneness; and so in both give great advantage to the Romanists, and help
forward the promotion of their labors and designs. The truth whereof is
confirmed by the happy success of those who take a contrary course. For thanks
be to God we are not without some, who by their good employment not only of the
revenues of their Ecclesiastical preferments, but also of their private
fortunes, their virtuous and pious lives, and their fervent, sound and
profitable Preaching, prevail with many of the several sorts of Non-Conformists
to become their auditors, and reclaim them. And were there some good and
effectual course taken that we might have more such lights set up in the more
conspicuous Candlesticks of the Church, we should find that the most effectual
means both to dispel the mists of Separatists, and keep out the Romish Foggs
from overwhelming us, and to promote and establish the honor and authority of
the Church and Clergy. Nor would the blessing of God be wanting to the pious
use of such means. 6. That they, the Clergy especially, will take example by
their adversaries, and not be less studious and industrious by just and proper
means to promote and propagate the true Religion in its genuine purity and
simplicity, than they their errors, abuses and corruptions of it by indirect
and evil means. They compass Sea and Land to make Proselytes, etc. and to that
end have heretofore readily encountered all difficulties and dangers, though now
they cannot much complain of either, and spare no pains nor cost. We, of this
Nation particularly, have long since had a large harvest proposed to us, and
nothing wanting to encourage us to the work but our own good will and zeal for
our Masters service; nay, like sloathful servants have been whipped to our
work, and both Conformists and Non Conformists have had their turns. It were
well if at last we would be sensible of this duty, before a third party come
and drive both to that which neither of themselves would willingly undertake.
Can we believe a Divine Providence, and yet think the discovery of that other
World was a casual thing? or can we acknowledge a Divine Providence in that,
and yet believe there was no other design in it than to employ our Sea men, or
furnish us with Tobacco? we have reason to believe that this neglect has not
been dissembled hitherto, nor will escape unpunished for the future, unless
timely amended. 7. That they will not be less vigilant and active for the
preservation of their Religion, and with it of their lives, liberties and
fortunes, and all that is dear unto them, than these sons of Perdition are to
confound and destroy them; and to that end make diligent search and enquiry
into their present mysterious practices; for the discovery whereof much light
may be taken from the due consideration of their former practices, and of their
principles. Their end in general is pretty well known; and what latitude they
are like to take to themselves in the choice of means for attaining that end,
may not only be conjectured by their former practices, but demonstrated
unanswerably from their certain principles. From which considerations, though a
man that is willing might easily satisfy himself what they are now doing, yet
because some who are concerned to be convinced of it, will not perhaps be so
satisfied, and because to the more effectual prevention of so great a mischief
a more particular discovery of the matter of fact, and of the instruments and
circumstances of it may be necessary, all who have any love to their Country,
or regard to the interest and safety of themselves or their relations, though
the consideration of Religion should not move them, are concerned to use their
utmost endeavor in it. But if neither the consideration of the horrid
confusions and massacres heretofore raised in France by these Furies; nor of
their continual Treasons and Conspiracies against Queen Elizabeth and her
Kingdoms, which they then would have betrayed to the invasions of the King of
Spain, as now probably they would to the King of France, that is, those who
steer their motions, though their common agents may be generally ignorant of
the design; nor of that horrible Gunpowder Conspiracy against King James, the
Royal Issue, and flower of the English Nobility and Gentry; nor lastly of our
late Civil Wars, which may in time be justly proved and demonstrated to have
been the product of the Romish machinations, to which might be added their
restless endeavors for the subversion of our Government, and for the breaking
of the great Metropolis of this Nation, as the two main obstacles in their way;
if all this, and besides all the safety of his Majesty's person, which perhaps
may be further concerned in it than is commonly apprehended, be not sufficient
to awaken us of these Nations to a speedy vigilance and activity before it be
too late, to discover and detect their machinations, and courageously oppose
their proceedings; especially those who are in authority within their several
Jurisdictions to look narrowly, if not into their matters of Religion, yet at
least into their provisions of Arms and Ammunition, into their correspondencies
and secret negotiations and engagements, and especially to discover those who
under several disguises not only insinuate themselves into familiarity with
persons of Quality, and creep into their Families under the notions of
Physicians, Painters, and other employments, but also get into public offices
and employments, and perhaps to be chosen into the Parliment it self; it may be
feared we shall ere long smart for our stupidity and supine negligence.

3. To those who still continue of the Roman Communion, and are in danger to be
drawn in to engage in such undertakings for the promotion of their Religion by
fraud and force, by disturbance or subversion of Governments, raising or
fomenting wars between Christian Princes and States, and such like means, that
they will well consider the justice and piety thereof. For most certain it is,
and agreed on all hands that they are contrary to the means used by our
Savior, and his Apostles, and Disciples, and their Successors for the original
propagation of the Gospel. Nor ought it to be replied, as some have impiously
said that that was for want of force, for he who could command legions of
Angels is not to be thought to have wanted force if he had pleased to make use
of it; nor had the Christians, for many ages before these Unchristian Doctrines
were ever thought of, less power in the World than they have had since, or less
occasion to have made use of it, had they thought it lawful; and besides, it is
no less contrary to their Doctrine than to their Practice. 2. The use of such
means is most injurious and scandalous to the most holy, pure and innocent
Religion, which has been always most propagated and glorified by the
magnanimous, sedate and constant sufferings of its genuine Professors, but
always most dishonored by the furious, violent and perfidious practices of the
spurious Zealots of the abuses of it. 3. It is contrary to the very nature of
the true Religion, and the express Doctrine of the sacred Scriptures. 4. It is
condemned by the judgment of God, disappointing, blasting and confounding all
attempts of that nature in these Kingdoms for near an hundred years together.
Nor will their zeal and good intentions excuse them; Paul had as much of both
when he persecuted the Christians as they can have; and of the Jews he
testifies to the Romans that they had the zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge; and our Savior foretold that they who should kill his Disciples
would think they do God good service in it. Nor will their following of the
probable opinions of their Confessors excuse them; for when blind guides lead
the blind, both fall into the ditch, as our Savior says. Nor will it be much
comfort to them who dye in their sins through the Priests default, that the
Priest also shall answer for it, as the Prophet says. But that which is the
secret root and main prop of their delusion, and most effectually deceives
them, is an unhahpy mistaken opinion deeply rooted in their minds of the
infallible authority of the particular Church of Rome. For, as Cardinal Perron
has well argued, V. King James Def. of the Right of Kings.
if these things be unlawful which have for so many ages been acted by the
Papal authority, (and that interposed with all the formality and solemnity that
could be) it would follow that the Pope has been Antichrist, and the Church of
Rome the Synagogue of Satan for so many ages past. This is it, whatever other
specious arguments and pretenses are alleged, which makes them no less
obstinate in their errors than the Jews are in theirs. A deceived heart has
turned them aside, and they cannot deliver their soul. But if they will but, 1.
Lay aside the prejudice of Education; 2. Consider the great evidence there is
that these things are contrary to Christianity; 3. And with that compare the
little real ground there is to believe this pretended infallible authority, it
may by God's blessing be a good means to undeceive them: but then as to the
third particular they must deal heartily and impartially, setting aside, 1.
Such proofs as concern only the perseverance of the Church of Christ in
general, 2. Such as concern only the authority of particular Churches over
their own members; for neither of these make any thing for the Church of Rome
more than for any other particular Church; and then what else they can allege
will be found to be far short of what the Jews might allege to prove that they
are still the true Israel of God. But the confounding of these things is that
which imposes upon their minds and judgments. The ancient Apostolic Creed,
and whatever other rule of Faith is mentioned by Irenaeus, Tertullian, or any
of the Ancients, and were held to contain the sum of the Christian Faith, are
to this day generally received and believed by all the Christian World: so that
Christ has still a Church upon Earth whatever become of the Church of Rome:
the like may be said of the sacred Scriptures; but in none of these is the
least mention of any such infallible authority of the Church of Rome; no, nor
of any such authority of the Church of Christ as the Church of Rome does
pretend to. Nor is there any color or pretense of proof that that authority
was ever in any one age to this day the general belief of the Christian World;
no, nor so much as of the Church of Rome it self for 700 years, I may truly say
for 1100 years and more. 2. That they will likewise well consider the prudence
of such undertakings, the Nobility and Gentry especially of these Nations, who
embrace the Roman Religion. They have had almost an hundred years experience of
the ill success and unhappy consequence of such attempts to themselves and
their party, whereby they have only made a rod for their own backs, provoking
and exasperating the severity of Laws against themselves; and when the Romish
Agents had lately dissolved the Government, and brought all things into
confusion, as is not a little apparent they did, when they had crept into the
Court, and insinuated themselves into the several Factions of the Kingdom, by
underhand dealings incensing them one against another, what did they advance
their cause by it, but only involved themselves in the same public calamity
wherein they embroyled the Nation? The Emissaries are men who have neither
Estates nor Fortunes to lose or hazard, nor wives and children to suffer with
them; and if their attempts prove unsuccesful, can easily retire to their
Colleges again beyond Sea. And their motions and actions are steered by
foreigners, who sit far enough out of all danger, and in great security expect
to make their profit and advantage of us all. So that both these have hopes of
advantage without any, or any great hazard, only the more honest and well
meaning Nobility and Gentry do certainly run a very great hazard without any
probability, if things be rightly calculated, of much mending their condition
at the best. For did they now suffer something in their Estates according to
the Laws (which certainly would never much be pressed, did they not continually
incense the Kingdom against them by restless attempts, through the instigations
of the Emissaries, endangering the peace and quiet of it); yet is that in some
measure recompensed by their freedom from the trouble and charge of diverse
public employments; and the rest would be dearly bought off by enslaving the
Kingdom again to the Roman Usurpations; and that with so much hazard both to
themselves, as in respect of conscience and the justice of the undertaking,
(for there is but little of true Christianity in him who will not readily
suffer a greater loss, rather than venture upon an unlawful or but doubtful
action): so also of the prudence of it; (for the higher they go in their
attempts, there is no doubt but it will fall more heavy upon them, after so
many and great provocations, if they miscarry therein, and of that the danger
is greater than can easily be foreseen); and to the Kingdom in general, the
peace and prosperity whereof they ought to desire and endeavor upon the
account both of natural duty and of interest. For whatever some, who do not
well consider it, may promise themselves, those who have Estates and Fortunes
here, be their Religion what it will, are like to have their shares of whatever
public calamity or mischief is brought upon the Nation; which they who at Rome
and from other foreign parts do steer the motions of the Emissaries and other
sticklers here in that cause, are not much concerned to consider. * * *

4. And lastly, to those who either through weakness and inconsiderateness are
scandalized at these and such like wicked practices of the Romanists or any
others professing Christianity; or through wilfulness and wickedness do make
use thereof to confirm or encourage themselves in their affected infidelity,
who having first sinned themselves into despair of any good by the observance
of Religion, at last seek to encourage themselves against all fear of evil by
the neglect of it. This last sort I intended not among Christians in general,
and yet do here join them with the other sort here mentioned, because what is
to be said to those may be said also to these. The scandal and ill use that is
made of these practices is either more particular from abuse of pretended
miracles and martyrdoms, whereby some may be induced to doubt of the ancient
Christian Miracles and Martyrs; (and for satisfaction in this particular, I
shall here for brevity sake refer them to the writings already written and
extant in print, some in the English Tongue, of the verity of the Christian
Religion) or from such practices in general, of men in great place in Church or
State, or repute for Learning, as are thought inconsistent with a real belief
of what they possess, whence some who affect to know more than the vulgar will
needs persuade themselves and others that all such are Atheists and Infidels,
and thereupon bring all Religion under a suspicion of being nothing else but a
more refined piece of policy; and because I have found by experience that many
have no better arguments for their affected infidelity than this, and yet few
of those who have written of the verity of the Christian Religion have taken
any notice of it, or thought it worth a particular answer, I shall recommend
these things to their consideration: 1. That this is no argument or evidence
against Religion, but only a bare supposed opinion and judgment of such persons
without any evident and express ground or reason for it. 2. That the opinion or
judgment of great Statesmen or Scholars, merely as such, is of no greater
authority in this particular than the judgment or opinion of other men; for
such men may in general well deserve that reputation which they have, and yet
be utterly ignorant of those Principles which are necessary to be known to
ground a judgment in this case. There are very rarely found any men that are
well skilled in all the parts of Learning, or of some one profession; as for
example of the Law, some are good Conveyancers, who are very unskilful in
Bar-Practice; many good Chancery-men who are no great Common Lawyers, etc. So
in Divinity, some are well skilled in Textual, some in Polemical, or
Scholastical, some in Casuistical Divinity, and yet but meanly skilled in the
other parts of it; and this part which considers the evidences of Religion, is
but rarely studied by any but such as have to do with Infidels, each man
ordinarily applying himself especially to that part to which his peculiar
employment engages him, and usually men in great place have of all others
least leisure for this particular study. 3. But were their judgment never so
considerable, yet could it not in this case be certainly concluded from their
actions. For, 1. It is agreed by all sorts of men, Christians and Heathens, and
daily experience confirms the same, that men frequently act contrary to their
settled judgment; and who may not often truly say, Video meliora proboque
deteriora sequor? Nor is the thing it self more apparent than the reasons of
it. But I shall not here trace it to its first and original causes, but only
show it in its next and immediate causes, which are Surprise, Impotence, and
Presumption. From Surprise there is certainly no man whose care and caution can
always secure him, that he may not sometimes through the heat of passion or
suddenness of a tentation be Gal. 6.1.
overtaken. This we may all observe in our selves, and in most we familiarly
converse with. Nay, our very caution it self in many things makes us apt to be
surprised by fear, and thereupon to do those things we otherwise would not, or
neglect what we would otherwise do. And though there be not a like Impotence in
all, yet is there more or less in every one, whence men often do themselves
contrary to what they would advise their children or dearest friends. We daily
see those who doubt not the directions of their Physicians to be good and
necessary to be observed, yet frequently overcome to transgress them to the
hazard of their health and life it self; nay Physicians themselves do the same,
whereof I could give a late notable instance in one of the most famous of his
time. Nor are we to think great Statesmen, Politicians and learned men more
exempt from all impotence than others are. It is sufficient that they be well
qualified for the places they hold, to which their very impotence in some
respects may sometime be a special qualification; and they who are not easily
overcome by one passion or affection, may yet be perfectly enslaved to another.
What is wanting to these two causes is frequently made up by Presumption,
whether upon God's mercy in general, and hope of pardon upon an intended
repentance afterward, or upon the privilege of being within the pale of the
Church by profession of Christianity, or being members of the Catholic Church,
or zealous for the party they espouse, that is as the Prophet says, Trusting
in lying words, saying, The Temple of the Lord, Jer. 7.3.
The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord; a Presumption so powerful
heretofore, that notwithstanding that reproof, and after a notable experience
of the vanity of it, we find it in our Savior's days still continued, and
again reproved by John Baptist; Think not to say within your selves we have
Abraham to our Father, etc. Mat. 3.9. And yet after all this, as experience
shows, still prevalent in our days, and very common among the Romanists and
the Disciples of the Jesuits, especially their new Proselytes, who seem to
hope for indulgence in their sinful courses, or to expiate the same, by their
zeal for the Church; whereunto great occasion is given by their abominable
abuse of Absolution, Commutation of Penance, Indulgences and complying Conduct.
2. These actions may proceed from error in the understanding, and ignorance or
mistake about some particular Christian Doctrine, through an erroneous
Conscience thinking that to be lawful, or a Christian duty, which is absolutely
unlawful; So our Savior tells his Disciples that they who should kill them
would think they do God service, Jo. 16.2. and Saul thought that he ought to
persecute the Christians, Act. 26.9.
and this may be consistent with a firm belief of the Christian Doctrine in
general. And this I take to be in truth the case of the Romanists, and that
they are given up to believe a lie through strong delusions, wherein they do
not more deceive their disciples than they are themselves deceived; for do but
admit me one or two of their Principles, and there is nothing so monstrous in
their actions but I think I can easily prove it lawful. I had therefore
intended to have showed from what Principles those actions have proceeded; that
those Principles are mistaken, and are no Christian but rather Antichristian
Doctrines; what has been the cause; occasion and progress of that mistake; and
lastly, that this defection from the Christian Doctrine and Manners has been
foretold by the first Propagators of the Christian Faith, in that manner as I
think would not only do much to the removing of the scandal, but moreover
afford no inconsiderable evidence to the truth of Christianity it self: but
that I see would be too long for this place and time; but I am well assured of
the truth of what I say, and doubt not but ere long it will be made manifest.
3. There is one cause more from whence men may act contrary to Christianity,
and that in the highest degree, and yet without the disbelief of the Truth of
it in general, or of any particular Doctrine of it: and that is through
desperation, the case of some who believe and tremble, Ja. 2.19. When men by
frequency and long continuance in sin against the light and checks of
conscience have sinned themselves into this desperation, this is often an
occasion to them to a further progress in wickedness, even to the height of the
most enormous sins, though they neither do, nor can doubt of the truth of the
Christian Religion, no more than do the Devils who believe and tremble; for
there is no sin which is not consistent with a full persuasion of it in such as
are once become desperate indeed. Even scoffing at and abuse of Religion to
evil ends are no certain arguments of unbelief in such as use them. There may
be and are false Professors of Atheism and Infidelity as well as of Religion it
self. There is more or less of humane frailty in all. Too many sin against
knowledge, and some thereby sin themselves into despair, and then run on into
all wickedness against that Belief which they would fain cast off if they
could. And there are so many causes and occasions of sins besides unbelief,
that they cannot in reason be attributed to it alone. 4. And lastly,
considering the strange wild fancies, which we often see men, learned men, and
otherwise sober men, fall into; considering the great force and prevalence that
the will and affections have to bias, blind, and corrupt the judgment;
considering the power, and malice, and subtilty that, according to the
Scriptures, the God of this World has to blind men's minds that they should not
believe the Gospel of Truth, it is not to be doubted but such there are who do
not believe it; but then the very same reasons may satisfy us what little
credit there is to be given to the opinions of such men, without better reason:
and yet I know and have found by experience that some professors of Infidelity
have no better reasons than this; they are like men in a panick fear, where
every one is afraid, but none knows the cause, only he supposes the rest do,
and is so much the more afraid by how much the more in number they are whom he
supposes to be in the same passion with himself: so, many who have no reason
at all for their unbelief, yet suppose others have, and would fain be thought
as wise as they.

This I thought necessary to add as an Antidote against that poison which some
might suck from those scandalous Practices and Actions which have been here
related.

FINIS.

