AIATIASIS: OR, The true way of Preserving the BLOOD In its Integrity, and
Rectifying it, if at any time polluted and Degenerate: WHEREIN Dr. Willis his
Error of Bleeding is reprehended, and offered to be confuted by Practice and
frequent Experiments: AND Certain Opinions of Dr. Betts in Physic rejected and
proved dangerously false: Phlebotomy also which he stands up for, declared by
Just Trials to be destructive: Whereunto are added A Stomachical Spirit
commended to the World. Diaetetical Instructions. The Nature and Cure of the
GRIPING of the GUTS.


By GEORGE THOMPSON, M. D.

Utcunque rem verteris Ignorantiae plenum est procurata debil^tate sanare
velle.

Van Helmont in lib. de Febribus. Printed (...) ^ath. Crouch at the Cross-Keys
in Bishops-gate-(...), near Leaden Hall, 1670.

Licensed July 24. 1669.

ROGER L'ESTRANGE.

Domini Verolamii Discipulis quibuscunque virtute insignitis veritatem expertis
ex rebus ipsis Dicat hoc Opusculum, G. T.
Viri Egregii,
VObis minime ignotum est quam v^li statu hodie versatur Ars Medica, antiquitus
maximo Honor decorata. Neque vos latet quaenam hujus Disciplinae tam Nobilis
degradationis causa sit praecipua, nempe Superbia, Ignorantia, Ignavia, and
Avaritia Professorum: quorum maxim interfuerit istius Turbae Profanae
Irruptionem in tam Divinam Scientiam enixe and opportune antevertisse. Si non
dedignati fuissent Iatri propriis manibus laborasse, nec Impensis pepercissent
ad acquirenda Arcana Medicum nobilitantia, nunquam in Seplasiarii manus
Incuriosi forsan Improbi vel Indocti tradidissent Pharmacopoean, a cujus
solerti Encheiresi totus Medendi (...) dependet qui solus Artificem coronet. Eo
temporis non prostituta fuissent venalia in Officina quavis Triviali and
cujusvis Homuncionis lectioni palam exposita Remedia qualiacunque quae intra
Conclavis Cancellos debuissent apt reconci.

Hucusque progressum est secure ac incaute in sanandi peritiae Dedecus atque
Mortalium cladem. Sed proh dolor non adhuc resipiscunt Academici, neque eunt
obviam tanti momenti malo totis viribus resistendo, susque deque habentes quid
de futuro Art Apollonea actum fuerit modo sibi cavere possint de praesenti ut
laute opulenter and granditer vivant. De caetero autem (...).

Vos vero quibus cordi sunt populi salus, Medicique splendoris restauratio,
annitimini obicem opponere, ne ulterius serpat haec vi^pendii vulgaris
Gangraena in totalem hujus facultatis eruditae subversionem.

Aegrotat nunc misere Medicina, quinimo ni mature succurratur, conclamatum est
de ea: Quapropter ut (si fieri possit) pristinam recuperet Integritatem Domi
medi^anda est Reformatio. Sordes prae foribus Doctorum illustrium contractae
everrendae sunt, i. e. Errores Dogmatici in Sanando Capit^s b^runcandi sunt
(...) nonnulli effulgente jam clariore veritatis luce etiamnum persistunt
defendere, opprobria nedum sibimet ipsis Reis sed etiam aliis Insontibus qui
meliora student accumulant. Quippe Ignara Plebs omnes ejusdem farinae
indistinctim reputant.

Quatenus autem sanguinis missionem (quam hujus Professionis uti scandalum
intueor maximum) pro praestantissimo Juvamine a quibusdam Doctissimis
venditatam laudibusque eximiis sed inique celebratam animadverterim; vos
sedulos Rerum exploratores Domini Verolamii Discipulos, Aequos Arbitros
appello, ut per Experimenta Practica public exhibita litem hanc dirimatis,
uter nostrum sanationis Scopum optime attingat Phlebotomus vel Aphlebotomus.

Hoc Offendiculo remoto, extemplo exuscitabitur quivis Candidus Auxiliator ad
Remedia supra Popelli captum perscrutanda, quae ad Radicem morborum extirpandam
sufficiant sine virium castratione, neque despondeat sic convictus de hoc
illegi^imo Galeni methodo; quin posset br^vi temporis spatio (si literis ac
Philosophia competenti imbuatur, jugis labor addatur atque a fideli Duce
aliquantisper premonstretur) enuclear^ ^iusmodi Medicamin^ quae tranquillitatem
intus applausumque ab extra ex condigno concilient. Hac divite supellectile
Remediorum instructus Medicus Eruditus, valeat omnium Agyrtarum,
Pseudochymicorum, Seplasiariorum, Empiricorum deteriorisque sortis
Medicastrorum Scommata, Aequiparationes, Aususque eorum temerarios facile
eludere. Non igitur aggredientur isti sordidi filii Terrae caput in propatulo
exerere, praesenti quocunque Philosopho tum Re literaria tum Spagyrica
ornatissimo.

Nam hinc illae lachrimae: ita male comparatu^ est quod isti perfricta front
praediti, nacta aliqua Praeparatione Chymica, cujus virtus long antecellit
quisquiliis Officinarum vulgaribus, eandem Amethodicos Praecipitanter ac
fortasse quadrupla Dosi offerentes, atrocissima quandoque Mala subjugarint,
quae alias insanabilia relicta fuerint a Collegis sagacibus in eorum Famae
diminutionem Eruditionisque ludibrium. At utinam haec non nimis crebro
contingerent, per Indiscretum vitae Balsami dispendium, Laxativa colliquantia,
Vesicatoria istiusmodi Mangonia atque Fucos ab Humoristis religiosissime
injuncta. Hisce transversis sanationibus si semel valedicerent Perdecti,
confestim accingerent semetipsos ad direc^m Morborum Medelam in horum
confusionem Medicorum umbratilium. Quo ad vero in Medicaminum Antiquorum luto
haeserint, nihil aliud expectandum est quam perpetuns hujus Scientiae delapsus
in deterius.

Male interim agetur cum vita Proximi, cum alii sub speciosa Eruditionis and
Methodi Larva coemiteria saginarint, alii vero sub mendacissima Panaceae
jactantia horrendum Homicidium impune perpetrarint.

Haec diutine serioque trutinatus, ex impulsu Animae cogortum acriter
redarguere rum etiam ex facto demonstrare, hanc venarum Depletionem (cujus
Reatus Doctoribus Dogmaticis a Pseudo-Medicis pudibunde objicitur, unde quidam
malae Praxeos libertatem sibi vendicant) sub Doctoris Willis Patrocimo
propugnatam (ad Therapeian veluti valde efficacem) esse nedum infaustum,
infidumque Auxilium, sed etiam Humano Generi perniciosissimum Inventu^. Hoc fi
non praestitero in conspectu Solis coram vobis Censoribus in alterutram partem
nullatenus inclinantibus, quodvis detrimentum sustineam.

Neque mihi imputetur ac si Conatus noster Pathologicus (...), Ambitum, aut
Singularitatem saperet, vel ex Thymosi atq^ ^idia adversus quemlibet in litem
accensus essem: Absit, hos enim respectus pravos abrenuntio.

Attestor enim me calamum reposuisse absque hoc taedio si Orphanorum, Viduarum,
Indigorum clamores, Artisque dehonestamentum illum non strinxissent.

Doctorem Willis laud dignum arbitror eo quod a Paracelso (in Chymiae Decus)
Initia Spagyrica licet a vero aliena, vendibilia tamen mutuatus fuerit ad
Physiologiae fundamentum stabilienoum, Splendidum at Sabulosum in quo apparent
ejus (...) ingeniumque Mangonicum: sed quia ista Quinaria Hypothesis Initians,
Gravia Fatalia in medendo vitia introduxerit, hanc Disciplinam ut Reprobam
argumentis solidis Praxique notabili annisus sum convellere.

Admiror vero Doctorem Bettum Institutionis Aristotelicae rudera (jamdudum ab
emunctioribus rejecta) pro Basi Naturae fundanda resumpturum esse, quae
Doctrina si reastrueretur, certo ominandum est Myriadum luem subsecuturam.

Aliquot ejus defectus periculosiores vitam humanam interminantes obiter
delibavi pluribus intactis donec detur opportunitas severius taxandi.

Quicquid in his viris (...) dignum judicavi, nequaquam ulterius credendum
expeto, quam Erperimenta nostra repetitim tentata comprobare valiant.

Adeste ergo vos (...), hujus Duelli Jatrici spectatores sententiam vestram
sincere allaturi prout alterutrius opera mereantur. Ut Philosophiam Hermeticam
in Omnipotentis Gloriam ejusque Progeniei Aerumnosae subsidium provehatis
medullitus exoptat.

Vestrum Observantissimus. Geo. Thomsonus.

TO THE READER.
Ingenious Reader,
I Have here exhibited to thy view, a Discourse of Blood according to many
years Observation, written in my Mother Tongue (not without Scholastic Terms
intermixed:) that the greater Benefit may be reaped by my Countrymen, I
request thee to read it without any Rash Judgment; first duly weighing some
Problems or Propositions. I conceive if thou be unsatisfied whether Opening
a Vein as it is indicated from Evacuation or Revulsion be a competent
sufficient Remedy for the Cure of a Pleurisy, or any high Fever; thou shall
find in this short Tract a Resolution in a Negative sense, grounded upon
Reason, Authority, but especially that which is the sum of All, Matter of Fact
delivered according to what Experiments are past, offered to be made good for
the future.

I beg nothing by way of concession, neither do I obtrude or pin any thing upon
thy sleeve. Whom Just, Equal, often repeated constant Trials will not convince,
nothing but a Miracle, yea hardly that will convert such an one from his
Obstinacy. Be as you please Tractable, yielding to what I have set down, or
Perverse and Refractory, I am indifferent, since I have improv^d my Talent in
giving thee a serious advertisement what mischiefs may follow this indirect
course of Practice. However I doubt not the time will come, yea is not far of,
that a Phlebotomist (as I have here characterized him) will be looked upon
little better than a Bronchotomist, a Cutthroat, as soon as the Harvest of
Noble Remedies come to full maturity: a large Crop whereof would quickly appear
if well cultivated by Learned Physiologers. I am fully persuaded a hidden
Treasure of Medicines far transcending these vulgar now in use, would soon be
detected, and kindly accepted if the evil Morality of this most vicious Age did
not intercept so great a blessing. For my own part, I am ready, willingly to
exert all the sinews of strength I have in my faculty, for the sanative
Instructions of languishing man, although my Re^iation has been naught else
hitherto but odious, Ingratitude from most, whose Lives I study to save in a
direct way.

Assuredly, were it not for fear of a greater diminution of the Honor of the
Art, the danger of eclipsing the Repute and Credit of a Legitimate Physician,
the prostitution or debasement of Arcana's (it being a sin to cast Pearls
before Swine) had I not seen the sad effects of publishing Medical Bills in
Apothecaries shops, I should without farther delay openly produce those
Remedies which would (in despite of the greatest Patrons thereof) stop the
Orifice of this pernicious Galenical Sanguimission. Now since this cannot be
done, I am ready to resolve any one who is capable, that the most Plethorick
Body taken with a Fever, or any one Cachochymick afflicted with a Pleurisy
may be cured without the Lancet more speedily, soundly, and safely, than using
the same. I know this will seem strange to those who are not acquainted with
our Chemical Philosophy, being nursed up in this Ignorant way of Phlebotomy,
being hurryed away by some private Interest, engaged to reserve a peculiar
favor for some Relation, or Eminent Doctors their choice friends, who have
infused this Opinion of Bleeding into them as Authentic, so that they had
rather go to the Grave by this means with their forefathers following the
French fashion, than to live to be Wiser. Such I shall leave to their own
fancies as unreclaimable, bewitched by those with whom I am bound to contest,
whom I principally charge as Antesignani, Ringleaders of this sanguinary
effusion. These I question not either to reduce to a better Judgment if they
stand to it, or if they shrink back, to make it appear they are no better than
Fugitives or Renegades in Physic. If what I have laid open be so far prevalent
as any way to reform the method of Healing, that the poor man traveling in
this valley of Tears, lying wounded by furtive Diseases, unpityed by the
Galenical Priest and Levite, may receive succor from the Chemical Samaritane,
I shall account it reward sufficient. Howsoever I shall rest contented, that
what I have delivered is Truth, not to be destroyed by all the Powers of
Darkness.

Lectori Malevolo.
SI quis Medicus Literis inflatus (quid enim Agrammati blaterent nil moror) per
se, vel per alios Surrogatos Praxim nostram Iatricam fraudulenter subruat, aut
dedecoret, Scripta pariter atque Remedia nostra sugillet, traducat, vel
vilipendat: Idem autem si quando postulatus retrocedat, ac clanculum se
subducat non ausus calumnias suas defendere neque per Experimenta Justa se
sinat convinci: certo sciat qualisqualis iste oblocutor deliberatum esse mihi
hunc ut Apostatam sive suae facultatis Desertorem Typis mandare,
indignitatemque oblatam divulgare ut illius malitia detegatur ac Innocentia mea
asseratur.

There are two other Treatises Extant by the same Author.
I. GAlenopale: Or a Chemical Trial of the Galenists. II. LOIOTOIA: Or the Pest
Anatomized, with an Historical Account of the Dissection of a Pestilential Body
by the Author, and the Consequents thereof.
Sold by Nath. Crouch at the Cross-Keys in Bishops-gate-street, near
Leaden Hall.

OF THE NOMENCLATVRE OF BLOOD, And its Definition.
CHAP. I.
THe Hebrews denominate it (...) ab Adam per Aphairesim, from its red color,
by the Greeks it is called (...), whence those who abound with this pure juice
are called (...), facetious, courteous persons; so great a power has this
liquid red matter to alter our conditions, that according as it is constituted
in Eumetry and Eucrasie, our morality may be good or bad.

The Latins give it the name of Sanguis, quasi Suavis vel (...) aut (...),
being a Defaecate most highly perfected sweet juice fiting to nourish all
parts, vel Sanguis quasi (...) Sanctus, for the Ritual Virtue it has of
purification of the soul in sacrifices. The more crude impure part is called
Cruor a (...), i. e. Crudus Concretus, which undergoes manifold Guises, and is
often the Subject matter of multitude of Diseases, being sometimes changed into
an Ichor Tabum, or Sanies.

Sanguis called blood, (...), is a most pure Sweet Homogeneous, Balsamic,
Vital Juice (for the most part of a bright Red or Reddish color) made by the
Archeus, by virtue of Ferments implanted in the Ventricles of the Heart, Lungs,
Veins and Arteries, causing a formal transmutation of the chyme or milky
substance into this sanguineous Liquor ordained to be the seat of Life, and the
principal matter for Sense, Motion, Nutrition, Accretion and Generation.

It is for good reason called Balsamum seu Condimentum totius Corporis, for as
much as it has a Sanative power, sweetly uniting all the parts of the Body for
the conspiration of the good of the whole.

It is a great preservative against Putrefaction as long as it remains in its
integrity, for consisting of many Saline particles, it seasoneth whatsoever it
touches with a pleasing Sapour.

It is the proper Habitation of the vital spirit, the immediate instrument of
the Soul, in which it shines, displaying its Radiant Beams every way, that
Sensation, Motion, Nutrition, and all other Functions may exquisitely be
performed.

Its color is various, in some White, as in Testaceous Creatures. In some
Black, as in the fish Polypus, but usually of a Reddish or Crimson Dye in the
most perfect Creatures.

The efficient cause of its Production, is the Archeus or Animal spirit, making
an Essential Alteration of a praevious Lacteous juice into this most highly
exalted Liquour of Life, through the efficacy of those Operative fermenrs which
the great Conditor of all things has destinated to reside in convenient
places, principally in the cavities of the heart.

CHAP. II. Of the different sorts of Blood.
THe Air, Climate, and Food, do not a little alter the blood of all Animals:
For creatures that live in lofty places more remote from the faeculent
exhalations of the Earth, (for as much as they participate of a more subtle,
clean, magnale) have their blood more rarefied, volatilized, and so
consequently Circulation the better performed without those Coagulations or
Grumosites, which those resting nigh the lower surface of the Globe, always
sending out some noxious emanations, are commonly incident to. Hereupon the
winged commonwealth that frequently draw breath in a sublimer Region, have
their juices for the most part better digested, mundified, and subtilized, than
those which are constantly contiguous to the earth. For it is certain, look
(Coeteris paribus) what air you draw in, such accordingly is the texture of the
vital spirits, as these are generated good or bad, so likewise is the blood, as
this is constituted, so are the Carneous, Membranous, and Osseous parts.

Laudable or depraved food conduces much to the meliorating or pejorating this
animal liquor, for as the diet is regulated in Quality or Quantity, so Euchymy
or Cacochymy follow making several discriminations therein.

Of all Creatures the blood of man is graduated to the highest Perfection,
fitting to be a Receptacle of so divine a Guest, the Immortal Soul, which as
long as it is here incarcerated, lying couched in the sensitive, being bound to
act by Corporeal Organs, suffers many Obscurations, Defections, and Eclipses,
through variety of Meteors arising in the Horizon of this Microcosm, from the
blood degenerate and depraved.

It would take up too much time strictly to examine this vital juice in several
species, and in certain Individuals, whose Qualities, Properties, Endowments,
Inclinations, Affections, Actions, and Passions depend upon the Seed, the
exquisite essential part of this animal Balsom, both of which make up Stamen
and Subtegmen, the Warpe and Woofe of every creature. This Liquor is in some
animals thick, gross, and fibrous, in others, thin; serous, and more fluid.
There are those who have it endued with a Medicinal virtue, as that of Cats and
Goats, the last whereof affords us an Arterial Balsom of admirable effect in
Pleurisies.

Others have in it an Intoxicating and Poisonous property, as Bulls, Dogs, etc.
In certain species it is intensly red, in others more remisly. There are
creatures which have only a Whitish Liquor in the body, there are those also
which possess it either obscure, or of a black color. The blood of some
animals is tangibly hot, in others it is sensibly cold, as in fishes. It is
more ponderous in those that continually adhere to the Earth, than in volatiles
soaring aloft.

Saturnine persons have usually a more gross and stable juice very fibrous,
causing deliberate pulse. Those who are jovial, have by nature a brighter,
thinner Liquor, with a pulse more quick. Many other distinctions of this
sanguine Balsom might be delivered, which for the present I can only lightly
touch upon, directly aiming at those things of greatest moment, in which the
welfare of man has a more peculiar interest.

CHAP. III. Of the Efficient, and Material cause of Blood.
THe Galenists have reckoned for this sixteen hundred years, four humors
analogous to the four Elements in man's body requisite for the essential
constitution of this ruddy mass, all of which they affirm are separable and
demonstrable to the eye. Thus they make a division of that which God and Nature
never intended other than Homogeneous, pure, plain, symbolical with that single
principle of the universe; for as much as every thing the more it has of
similarity in it self, the more capable it is to be altered into multiplicity
of diverse different specific bodies by the Magical power of metamorphising
ferments.

Now these Peripatetick Philosophers deliver to the World, that the contexture
of this vital juice is made up of choler, phlegm, melancholy and blood, which
united, produce as they would have it, the compounded body we call Sanguis: how
grossly erroneous and dangerous this Tenet is, most Learned Helmont has made
evident.

Wherefore we conclude with that Noble Philosopher, that blood is an univocal
substance, divisible only by some external accidental means, as the air or fire
which cause a various texture, and different position of its atoms, whereby it
seems to consist of those parts which are not really inherent in it, as is
manifest in its degeneration from its native color, sapour, consistence, and
goodness which it had, before it became corrupt in the Porringer, or underwent
the torture of the fire: Both of which do strangely larvate and disguise this
puniteous Balsom, giving occasion to the Galenists to frame their four
fictitious humors no where really exsistent. Hence occasion has been given of
taking wrong indications in the cure of those Diseases (easily sanable if a
firm foundation were laid) a great Catalogue whereof have been reputed
incurable.

Had they but considered how this vital moisture ebbs and flows in goodness and
pravity upon flight accidental occasions of any exorbitant passions, as Fear,
Sorrow, Anger, etc. the manifold impressions of the ambient air, Ill Diet,
immoderate exercise, diverse excessive evacuations, and long retention of any
recrement: Did they rightly understand how blood like Mercury may be
Polymorphised and changed into diverse shapes, and at length be retroduced to
the same state and condition, as when it was in its Primitive essence:
certainly then these Dogmatists would never be so forward to pierce poor man's
skin, rashly let out and throw away that substantial support of life, foolishly
and falsely apprehending that to be totally corrupt and deprived of what it was
in its former being, and in no wise capable to be retrograde, and return to it
self again; because it seems to their eyes when it appears abroad discolored,
invested with a contemptible apparel, as Yellow, Green, White, Blew, etc.
Moreover, one would think it should put a stop to their prodigal profuse
bleeding, if they did but meditate with what difficulty Nature brings this
solar Liquor to perfection, how many hazards of becoming spurious and abortive
it passes through; how easily it is stained by an extraneous tincture; how
often intermixed with something allogeneous and hostile to it; how many
elaborate circulations, digestions, and refinings it undergoes before it be
thoroughly animated, and made fit for the right use of the immortal soul.

Now that we may be informed concerning the efficient and material cause of
this vital juice, let us contemplate its original, the place where it is first
generated, or conception, as an Embryon of its Nativity, Growth, and full
Maturity.

The proper Womb where the blood receives a previous Rudiment, earnest or
signature, of what Nature intends to perfect by degrees, is the stomach, where
by virtue of a vigorous ferment, the food is converted into a whitish Chyle
subacide somewhat fixed, agreeable to the part involving or containing, and to
the subordinate instrumental cause, that is employed in this notable change of
what is ingested. After the Chyle has continued so long in the stomach, that
it has attained that scope Nature has intended: it is emitted out of this
vessel, either oppressed with abundance, or stirred up with an extimulating
sharpness, which makes an apertion of the Pylorus, through which it passes into
the Duodenum, Jejunum, and Ilion, where a very bitter, yet a most balsamical
dark deeply tinged Condiment attending the foresaid Acide juice, strait
converts the same into a saline exceedingly Volatilized chyme, the more pure
rarifyed part of which being made capable and pervious, is sucked up by those
invisible lacteous vessels implanted in the mesentery, the more impure and
grosser is discharged through the Intestines. In these small Fistulary cavities
runs this innocent white Liquor through the Pancreas, into the descending Trunk
Vena Cava, and through the Thorax, into the Subclavian Veins, by means of which
it is conveyed into the right ventricle of the heart dilating, where intermixed
with the blood it is immediately altered in several accidents, there receiving
the Character or Idaea of vitality by virtue of an inherent ferment concurring.
Upon the contraction of the heart the valves belonging to the Cava, hindering
regress, a fair way is laid open for its free egress through the Arteria
pulmonica, into that spongy body the Lungs, in which part it is freed from some
foulness and Dross which this Porous Parenchyma in its filtration as it were
imbibes and separates, (the ambient Air inspired, much conducing to the
mundification, rarefaction of the same bright red juice by helping the
fermentation thereof, and sending out many nocuous exhalations in expiration.
The matter being thus far prepared, it is at lenght brought down by Vena
Pulmonica, into the left ventricle of the heart expanding, whence it is more
vitalized and graduated in its excellency, and by a strong sudden constriction
yirked and exploded by the Arteries meliorating it through the extreme Orifices
of the forenamed vessels into all parts of the body, where some portion is
assimilated into the Identical substance of that which is to be nourished, what
juice fitting being spent in assimilation, the rest is taken up by the veins
returning it to the right ventricle, and so through the Lungs to the left:
where it is advanced to a greater degree of perfection (by often Circulation)
part of which is made fit for the generation of vital spirits, Accretion,
Nutrition, and Procreation. Thus much concerning the material cause of blood.
Now the Efficient or Agent is the innate Archeus or vital spirit, which chiefly
makes this formal Transmutation of whatsoever is nourishable. This works by his
principal instrument: the ferments in the Duumvirate, and in the rest of the
digestions. For this Primum Mobile, moving sine Motore alieno; sets all the
other wheels in motion, till being exantlated, and its vital power exhausted,
all the inferior Orbs forthwith subsist, are at a stand and fail. This Auto
Kineton is the seat or subject of the sensitive soul, where it is emicant and
translucent in the same manner, as the beams of the Sun received in by the air
in a serene, clear sky are effulgent and bright, but in a cloudy, dusky heaven
are offuscated and opacous. Needs must melancholy, sad thoughts attend the
mind, when the spirits are tenebrous, dim, and dark, being clouded and
overspread with dark, misty fogs of noysom, exhalations arising from impure,
feculent, malignant, degenerate moisture, which causes the soul lodging therein
to act irregularly, in as much as the primary instrument this vital steam by
which the soul operates, is depraved and bereaved of its genuine goodness.
Wherefore that this place of the life's residence may be capable to receive so
divine a guest; Nature has ordained and curiously fabricated several Pipes,
venal, arterial and nervous, with fit cavities and convenient parts adjoining
for the Circulation, Fermentation, Digestion, Exaltation, Purification of this
vital juice: So that if any thing dissonant, violent, adverse, incongruous, and
of a different Texture enter into it, the same is either forthwith exploded, or
a great inquietude, displacency, and confusion arises in the Economy of the
body, to the hazard of the whole frame of Nature.

Likewise if the stomach titubate and come short in its right digestion, all
the other succeedng shops ordained for maturation and perfecting this rubicund
Liquor, cannot correct the mistakes, errors, and defects of the first, so that
we may conclude without controversy, that this Noble Membranous cavity, lays
the foundation for the further erection and superstructure of the prime matter,
which makes this stately edifice entire and firm. Let not any harbor a
conceit, that the Liquor current in the veins and arteries will ever be brought
to that requisite maturity, and cleansed from that dross it is incident to,
unless the stomach, the Key that unlocks all the Privy Chambers and Closets of
this little world, be first set in order and rectifyed.

It Is all one, as if one should pump without stopping the leak, if he apply
Remedies, a Posteriori, to the consequent indigencies in the parts, neglecting
the main defect of the Duumvirate, a priori, which like the Helm of a ship,
reduces into the right channel, the aberrations of other Kitchins ordained for
the formal alteration of nutriment. For this purpose our principal study ought
to be employed about the search of such Remedies, that are amicable and
delectable to the Archeus, corroborate the tone of the stomach, augment,
regulate, and fortify its ferment, scour away any thing recrementitious in
it: dulcifie and mitigate what ere is acrimonious, preter-naturally austere,
acid, corroding, saline, or putride therein: This being duly performed by a
Pyrotechnical Philosopher, a sure door is opened for the exemption of Nature,
much oppressed from sundry grievous Diseases, (which otherwise would prove
incurable) banking and eluding all the trivial medicaments of the Galenists.

CHAP. IV. The manifold Occasions that alter, clarify, taint, and deprave the
Blood; Also the true signs of its purity or impurity, integrity or degeneration.
EXtrinsecal occurrences, and intrinsecal occasions, cause a goodness,
depravation, and deflection of the blood from its native sincerity. Those
inseparable things without which we cannot subsist, as air, diet, retention,
evacuation, exercise, sleep, watching, passions, and perturbations of the mind
do very much affect this noble j^ice. Above all, it is most altered by the air,
and the perturbation of the spirits: such fixed impressions are sometimes made
by these, that they become indeleble all our life after. Many laborious
Chemists have to their miserable experience found, that those deletery,
venomous fumes, and poisonous Realgars arising from minerals imbibed by the
air, and so inspired, have so infected this Balsom circulating through the
Lungs, that all the art of man has not been able by the greatest medicinal
Arcana's to expunge the malignity contracted thereby.

How insensibly do those virulent pestilential atoms fluctuating in the air
cause a miasm, contagion in this red mass, whereby it becoms coagulated or
colliquated: which inconveniences are no more to be avoided in some places,
than that it is possible for any one to live without air. Doubtless that
tedious Chronick disease the Scorbute, which is so predominant and Grassant in
this Nation, does in greatest part diffuse it self by means of the air, which
insensibly conveys its pernicious Nature from Body to Body. So that some few
having a high tincture of this evil, may in some short space, resorting to much
Company, annoy by a spreading ferment many hundreds, who according as their
Bodies are disposed and capable for the reception of this infectious Leaven,
suffer more or less in pollution of this Nectar of life which by degrees
falls off from its pristine goodness. If then timely prevention be not made
either by potent strength of Body, or a prevalent art, the man decays in his
faculties, the Archeus becomes aculeated, exstimulated, and becomes exorbitant,
framing variety of Exotic, Morbifick Idaeas, causing a Syndrom of Heteroclite
symptoms. Infinite are the exhalations flowing out from all sorts of Bodies,
greedily sucked up by the magnale or porosities of the air, which, when, where,
and how it affects the blood is not easily known to us: only this we can
assert, that we have received injury from this subtle ambient, that adheres as
close to us as we to place.

It Is a common Opinion taken up frequently by the vulgar, when they are
indisposed or incident to any disease, to say they have taken cold, thereby
mincing and extenuating the magnitude and malignity of many feral Diseases to
their final overthrow, being so taught by their Oracle like Galenical Doctors
(as they fancy them) whom they observed to insist upon bare Qualities (merely
transitory, momentany, and shadows of true substances) for the Cure of most
desperate Diseases, especially Fevers: which I acknowledge is often produced,
excited, and irritated by the ambient, but not merely from the bare quality
thereof quatenus cold, but as it is stuffed full of atoms Hostile to the
Texture of our blood, which rushing in through the more patulous passages of
the Body, or stealing in through the less visible pores, do frequently alter,
and contaminate this Aetherial Liquor. It Is granted, that cold does sometimes
accidentally put the Body much out of order, in as much as it stops up the
pores of the skin, in such wise, that many noxious recrements are constringed
within, to the depravation of the blood, the impediment of its Circulation, and
so to the great prejudice of the health, which otherwise having free vent, rid
nature of a burdensome clog, oftentimes pressing it down either into dangerous
or mortal Fevers.

In this case the principal means to be used, is to open the coarctation,
constriction, and constipation of this general membrane by proper
Diaphoreticks, withal rectifying the air, that there may be a free aporrhaea of
whatsoever does infest Nature and blood. The next notable cause that makes
great alteration for the worse in this vital juice, are the extravagant
perturbations, storms, and tempests that arise in this microcosm, raised
through mis-apprehensions, mis-applications, and mis-interpretations of things
obvious to our sense, contrived by a luxated or dislocated imagination, e. g.
Some frightful object presented to our eye, or a lamentable story related to
our ear, does strait disturb, the Archeus with its concomitant in such manner,
that a plain discovery is made what is done within by its sudden flux into, and
reflux from the face; the Index of the souls affections: Henquam difficile est
(says the Poet) Crimen non prodere vultu: Joy, Sorrow, Fear, Hope, Love, Anger,
Envy, Jealousy, are so conspicuously to be read in the countenance by means of
the access or recess of this sanguine matter, that the best of Politicians
study has been to conceal those evident Signatures, Impressions, Stamps, and
Characters of their Inclinations, Motions, Dispositions, and Affections arising
from the blood, but yet could never attain to any perfection therein.

How florid is the Front when the heart is cheerful? how sweetly diffused is
this spirituous Ruby through all parts in an equal proportion, circulating in
every vessel with a quiet stream: on the contrary, how luride, discolored,
tawney, yellow, dark, pale, wan for the most part is the aspect when sorrow
has laid siege to the fountain of life: what stagnations, coagulations,
unkindly colliquations, exorbitant fermentations, dyspepsies, apostases,
defections, transmutations, allogeneities, vapidities, malignities, austerity,
acidity, acrimony, is this juice liable to, at first disordered in part, at
length by degrees quite subverted from those deformed odious Idaeas of Sorrow,
Grief, and Anguish of spirit.

O triste nomen, O diis, odibile!
Melancholia lachrymosa Cocyti filia,
Tu Tartari specubus opacis edita.
This feral Brat of Hell melancholy, does so disturb the Economy of the souls
residence, that the ruddy Balsom of the Body has become (...), lutulent,
faeculent, deprived of its primitive excellence, so that whereas it was before
the fit matter of clear, luminous, active spirits, from whence arose regular,
sound, comformable actions, it is now being degraded the Original of a Black,
Fuliginous Archeus, which clouding the soul in such a manner; that the whole
frame is disordered, and all the powers are violently hurryed into an ataxie.
Briefly, all immoderate passions do exceedingly operate upon the blood,
spoiling it more or less of its integrity. Thus inter spemque metumque timores
inter and iras, is this subject matter wherein the soul delights agitated,
concussed, sometimes as it were charmed into a coagulum or curdly substance,
again then colliquated into a virulent corroding, fretting Ichor or Serum, now
a modest apprehension of shame, adornes the skin with a lovely rosy blush; a
sudden fear leaves the superficies of the body exanguious, pale and Ghost-like,
as likewise excessive love perpetrates the same by degrees, Pallidus omnis
amans: Envy consumes this vitae pabulum, as a Moth a Garment.

Jealousy as cruel as the Grave, never leaves till it devours its vigor and
fibrosity. Anger intoxicates it, pourtraying the perfect Idaea of madness
therein, which sometimes is so graduated, that no poison in this part of the
world seems to be more active, for a few atoms of this venomous gore
penetrating the Cutaneous membrane, has infected the whole ruddy mass
introducing most truculent symptoms: wherefore Ira furor brevis est, hanc tu
compesce catena. Let it be our whole endeavor, ut sit men's sana in corpore
sano, for if we be not Master of our unruly passions, it is impossible there
should be an Eutomie, an Eucrasie, and Eumetry, in this solar juice.

Likewise food is to be considered as powerful to make an Euchymy or
Cacochymie, for those things whose Vita Media are so tenacious, that they
cannot be conquered by the stomach, do often put Nature to very great stress,
causing it to frame many strange Images, so leading it captive into a morbifick
state. I have found experimentally, that flesh or any thing Dyspepton of
difficult digestion in any Fever putrifies in the stomach, contaminates the
blood, augments the Fever, which the good old man Hipp. verifies, (...), i. e.
if you give any thing very highly nutritiotous to one in a Fever, the same
will increase his Disease, weakening the Patient, which given to an healthful
body, would strengthen him.

Again, whatsoever superfluity is retained after the six Digestions are
performed, do either by their quantity or quality incommodate the blood,
causing it to deviate from its sincerity; likewise all profuse excretions do
much disturb it. Motion, Rest, Watching, and Sleep, passing their due limits,
cause great inconveniences herein.

The Phenomenon or signs whereby the blood may be judged good or bad are, some
apparently Visible: others more obscurely latitant. A skin tinged with a
preter-natural Black, Citrine, Yellow, Green, Pale color, supposed it be not
contracted from the impression of the Air, Climate, or any outward accident,
does certainly indicate that all is not well with the juice within, for qualis
color cutis, talis corporis habitus, sanguis and spiritus. A feverish state,
cutaneous eruptions, a spontaneous lasitude, difficulty of breathing, an
irregular pulse, Arythmus, Dicrotus, Formicans, Serratilis, observing no just
proportion. Degenerate excrements arising from several Digestions of various
colors, Green, Yellow, etc. of bad consistence, as lentous, viscous, clammy,
thin, sharp, fretting, cause some suspicion that the blood is impure. Likewise
if a man be melancholy without any just reason, (...), indisposed, dull,
delirious, forgetful, sleepy, or over-watchful, he may suspect all is not well
within. There is no greater sign of notable impurity in this mass, than when
there appears any excessive Haemorrhagy, as from the Nose, Piles, or Mouth; for
then we may conclude, that some irritating matter is got therein, which like a
Thorn extimulates the Archeus, so that it becomes impatient, fretful, and
furious, profusely squandring away the most precious stock of life in a
prodigal manner. Now if we desire to keep a constant Tenor of health, we ought
strictly to observe whether any of the six Digestions do at any time titubate,
or faulter, and forth with to seek out for means to correct the same, and
reduce it to integrity, since it is not possible that the liquor of life should
be free from feculencies, imperfections, and apostasies, if the Organ that
frames it be irregular and depraved.

Here I must give a Caution to all intelligent Persons, that they do not rashly
censure that blood let out in the Porringer necessary to be sent packing,
because it is disguised in various colors, as blackish, blew, green, yellow,
white, etc. supposing it to be corrupt, and so unfitting to be retained within
the verge of life. It is no such matter, I can maintain: for this superficial
alteration proceeds from the Air, spoiling it of its pristine goodness, not
that it was really corrupted in the vein. For the demonstration of this, I will
undertake upon forfeiture of a great penalty to open the vein of a Cachochymick
body, emitting about two or three ounces of the visible foresaid degenerate
matter, then stopping the Orifice, make use of proper Remedies to this
Individual, whose habit I doubt not so to alter in the space of about a
fortnight, that no such putrid matter as they improperly call it, shall be
found in any vein whatsoever opened, which may fully satisfy any sober
inquirer after truth, that the corruption was never really existent in that
while it was in the vein, which in so short a time is thus red integrated; for
corruption being an absolute privation of that formal essence of the thing: and
since there is no retrogradation in this kind, that an Ens losing its form by
dissolution, should assume it again, nam a privatione ad Habitum, non datur
regressus: it infallibly follows, that this juice thus restored Techni^s by Art
was never truly corrupted as they would have it. Hence it follows, that the
fair pretense of the Galenists, that the juice drawn out of the patient
forasmuch as it is corrupt in the Porringer, is happily discharged; appears a
mere imposture contrived on purpose to stop the mouth of those who scruple and
question Phlebotomy.

CHAP. V. Concerning the Latex or insipid aqueous Liquor, that is concurrent
with the Blood.
TReating of the blood, I cannot omit its inseparable companion that closely
perambulates with it through all the winding Maeandrous Pipes in this
microcosm. It is called Latex by Helmont, by some Lympha by the Gr. (...). It
is a Diaphanous clear liquor (...), fabricated in the second digestion by
virtue of a ferment there residing. It is the matter of Urine and Sweat. It
undergoes various alterations, partly from sanguine mass, and partly from the
solid parts of the body, whose ferments as they are mis-affected, so they
infect this limpid liquor. It is of very great use, first as a vehicle to the
blood to convey and usher it freely into all parts. Secondly, to hinder the
condensation and coagulation thereof, that it may not restagnate, and so be
hindered in its constant circulation. Thirdly, that it may carry off several
impurities and dross, that the parts contained and containing are obnoxious to,
mundifying, and as it were rincing away their contracted foulness by Urine and
Spitting, reposing the same either in certain Glandulous Emunctories, or
diffusing what is saline, acid, acrimonious, pontick or bitter, etc. through
the porous skin. Fourthly, it serves for the humectation of those parts,
otherwise prone to Aridity, as the bones and Cartilages; hence that Synonia or
albuminous substance that intervenes the extremity of each bone is maintained.
Fifthly, it is the matter of tears, spittle, sweat, and urine, all which are
rightly fabricated as long as the ferments perform their office as they should,
but becoming exorbitant, this Latex degenerates, causing great offense and
injury to the life of man. Hence fevers of all sorts, the Scurvy, Squinzy,
Pleurisy, Cephalalgy, grievous Gripes, Fluxes, Dropsies, Haemorrhoids,
Oedematous Tumors, Erysipelas, Phlegmons Cacoethes, and Fistulous Ulcers, and
cutaneous Eruptions, of multifarious shapes, wherein for the most part great
malignity and venomous nature is included. This depraved Latex is the cause of
intolerable thirst in a Causos or a high fever, which is indirectly attempted
to be allaied by Julips of the Galenists, who intend cooling and moistning, as
taking their Indication erroneously from heat and dryness, which then would
easi^y ^e corrected by a draught of cold water or small Beer. Whereas the true
way if rightly taken is to dulcifie the salfuginous or Briny Latex by
appropriate Remedies to destroy the malignity that harbors therein, and to
carry off by urine and skin sensibly or insensibly, that Ichorous matter which
annoys the whole mass, endangering the total coagulation of it, whereby the
Archeus is put into extreme displacency, being exceedingly heightened in its
perturbation at the presence of so tedious, vexatious, virulent and mortiferous
a sociate. It is not amiss sometimes to exantlate or pump up this sharp Serum,
and to send it packing per Ptyelismum, by salivation, supposed it be done by
those things that are free from a noxious property, leaving no impression
behind, which cannot be performed by dulce Turbith mine, Praecipie, and such
like imperfect preparations of Quicksilver, commonly sold in Apothecaries
shops, and frequently used by the Galeno-Chymists, who for that reason assume
the name of Chemists to the infamy of this Noble Science. By their leave I must
tell them, and I can assert it as a real truth, that no Legitimate Spagyrist,
if he be thoroughly grounded in his Art, will exhibit any of the foresaid
preparations of, yea moreover, nor oil of vitriol corrosive, nor the spirit
only a sower Phlegm, the best thing they have of an Adipson, on which they
depend for the abating of extraordinary Thirsts.

Bartholinus a very laborious Anatomist, has made a discovery of certain
Lymphaducts, Receptacles of this clear water, which taking their Original from
the Liver and Spleen, tend upward to the subclavian vessel, and downward to the
Renal cavities: so that Nature has been very solicitous to lay up as it were
in store this most necessary water, that it may upon all occasions be in
readiness to be brought forth for the Emergent use of the fluid and solid parts.

If this Latex offend in Quantity or Quality, perfect sanity cannot be enjoyed.
If it be deficient Atrophy, Consumption, Marasmus follows, if not timely
prevented, as appears in those whose pericardium being diffected, has been
destitute of any considerable moisture: if it abound Cachexie, a very ill habit
of body, and Dropsies ensue. If it be fretting, salt, or acid, many Idaeas of
Diseases arise to be specifyed according to the part affected. Now Omne Acidum
est Venis, Arteriis and Nervis, membranis, hostile, stomacho vero gratum,
according to our Philosopher: Whatsoever is sharp is pleasing to the stomach,
but very offensive to the veins, arteries, nerves, and membranes, which are
thereby vellicated, curled, convulsed, and corrugated at the presence of that,
whose Atomycal parts are like so many thorns.

In Infants the tone of this Latex being subverted, causes an Hydrocephalus, a
head very much tumefied. In a declining age it deviates from its integrity, and
much infests the Lungs.

The goodness or pravity of the Latex depends much upon the blood as it is
constituted, for although it is no essential part thereof, yet is it altered
for better or worse, according to the channels it passes through, the lodging
it takes up, and the condition of its associate, notwithstanding I will not
deny but that it may be sometimes impaired in its due excellency, and this
withal remain very pure and sincere. It is prone to be often damnifyed by
outward accidents, as the ambient air, any thing that impetuously rushes upon
it, making a contusion or solution of continuity, whatsoever does terrify,
colliquate, and gall the skin, or intoxicate it, putting the Archeus into a
violent passion, thereby turning the placid innocent Liquor into an unpleasing,
hurtful, corrosive menstruum.

Urine and sweat are by some reputed to be the same, however they are mistaken,
for urine comes from a putrefactive principle, whereby the Latex is turned into
an urinous Nature by virtue of a ferment proper to the Kidneys, which if it be
perverted, many Diseases emerge, Dysuria, Ischuria, Stranguria: if totally
destroyed there happens, that rare affect called Diabetes. The sweat comes from
the Latex, drawn thither by the Magnes of the membrana Carnosa and Cutis, whose
attraction is more powerful when promoted by exercise, heat, frication, and
attrition, etc. which are great means that that undulating moisture in the
inward part has its recourse to the Periphaeria or circumference of the body,
and so passes through the pores thereof in form of a dewy Mador. This water as
it is tinged or impregnated by diverse occurrent matter, it finds in the
passages where it is transient, so it retains an odor, or sapour, color,
consistence, for the sweat of some is very stinking and noisome in sent, sharp
in taste, yellow, greenish, darkish in color, glutinous, clammy, waterish, and
sometimes so fretting, that the Linen is even corroded thereby, as if it were
imbrued with a weaker sort of oil of vitriol, which expulsion is always
laudable, if it be performed by strength of Nature, (...) to (...), for an
Ephidrosis, particular sweats always portends debility of the Archeus, an
unequal strength, a defection of the attractive faculty, stubborn,
obstructions, and abundance of lentous, clammy, tough matter, not easily
capable to be tamed by the vital spirit.

Here I cannot but make an animadversion on that truculent Disease which
formerly raged in England, to the destruction of some thousands. It had its
original doubtless from a degenerate Latex turned into a malignant Ichor, which
caused a tabefaction or colliquation of the blood and Nutritive juice, which
issuing forth in a copious measure symptomatically, without any Euphoria
alleviation, quickly consumed the stock of life. The attempt made at first to
cure this malady, by stopping the sweat by astringents and cooling things,
proved not only frustraneous, but also very mortal, for the malignity being
thereby more concentrated, wanting a Momentaneous vent through the universal
membrane, it forthwith preyed upon the Archeus, extinguishing the Lamp of life
in such sort as a Mephitis or subterranean damp does obsuscate, and at length
put out the flame of a Candle. Now the proper adaequate Remedies that took
effect in this feral evil, were Eustomachicks, as likewise counterpoysons that
did immediately resist the venom by obliterating the Idaea thereof, by
corroborating the enormon, exterminating the intoxicated Ichor, and ill
conditioned Latex through the habit of the body, carrying it that way quo
natura vergere studebat.

Most stubborn Coughs oftentimes vex many, by reason this Latex is become
illegitimate and destitute of its primary eucrasie: for having contracted a
subtle pungitive acrimony, itexceedingly grieves the tender body of the Lungs,
through which it is continually circulated. Hereby this part is extimulated to
vexatious explosion, night and day without any considerable expectoration. The
Galenical Lohochs, Lambatives, syrups, and several mixtures signify nothing in
this case, for they do but prejudice the Mint where the Latex does first
receive a stamp, which being at first defaced, can never after be repaired and
brought to its perfect form. I have always found experimentally, that nothing
is more prevalent to master the Orgasmus and enormous cataract of this fretful
Liquor, than to give a vomit proper for the discharging any superfluity about
the stomach, no whit offensive to its ferment, nor diminishing its vital
strength. As for those vomits of the shops, which Galenists make use of, I
utterly renounce them, as unfitting to be used by a true Son of Art.

Here I shall insert something requisite, and peculiarly belonging to a vomit
that acts as it ought toward the cure of any dangerous Disease. 1. It ought to
be safe, -- so that one need not fear to sleep after it, to walk about the
house, nor be terrified that it work not by vomit or stool. 2. It is assistant
to Nature, that it may be able to discharge the morbifick matter, keeping up
its vigor after a sharp contention and victory over the Disease: not leaving
it very languide in danger to be encountered by second infirmities, as is
commonly observed to be the effect of the ordinary Purgatives. 3. It leaves
untouched whatsoever is sound, not coliquating the wholesome juice of the parts.
4. It conveys away by expectoration sweat, and urine, whatsoever is hostile to
Nature. 5. It sweetens the Acrimony and Acidity of the Latex. 6. It casts some
bright radiant luster upon the Archeus, whereby it is illustrated, and so by
reflecting beams enabled to scatter those dark cloudy mists and foggy
exhalations that obnubilate the life. That Physician that is furnished with
such an Arcanum, dares give a vomit to that Patient, to whom a Galenist of the
greatest fame dare not exhibit one (as I have heard) for a hundred pound. I
have this twenty years practice attempted many specious, highly applauded
medicines, for the regulating this spurious Latex, but never was I successful
to any purpose, till by long labor and expenses, I at length met with such an
Emetick, endued with the aforesaid properties, which was potent in amending the
errors of this limpha in the fountain or first source thereof, I mean, the
Duumvirate that governs the whole body. In short, the Physician that is to seek
in such a safe effectual means, shall never be able to strike at the root of
any fixed disease, but must be forced to palliate by bleeding, blistring,
venomous Purgings, issues, etc. ^t he may seem to do something, (...), after a
busy manner to content his Patient, least he should be thought to receive his
money for naught.

CHAP. VI. Of the manifold Diseases that take up their Lodging in the Blood.
QUicquid in sanis actiones sanas, id ipsum in morbis etia^ pravas edit. If as
we are taught, in the blood is L^e, Light, and Health, then necessarily
according to the foresaid Theorem in the same is death, darkness, and sickness;
yet is it to be taken in such a sense as this red spirituous liquor relates to
the fountain, from whence primarily it had a beginning. For in truth, diseases
generally are first embryonated and Characterized in the vital spirit, residing
in the Hypochondries, stomach, and spleen, from whence they are traduced
secondarily into other parts. For example, Cephalaea, i. e. an inveterate pain
in the Head, took its first beginning from the enormon of the Duumvirate, where
the seminal Rudiments and Idaea of this disease were obumbrated or shadowed
forth by the sensitive soul, excited to passion upon the apprehension of
something disagreeing and injurious to vitality. Afterward the same is
perfectly delineated in the Archeus of the brain, in which the scene laid below
is now brought to light above. Now is to be seen a syndrom of many symptoms,
which plainly show the Nature of the disease suitable to the part afflicted:
here the Latex and vital juice apostatize by degrees from their purity the
ferments, and consequently the digestions of the brain becoming viciated, so
that this Organ which at first suffered, per Deuteropathiam, is now alienated
from its former integrity, being disordered, per Idiopathiam, hereupon the
parts adjacent incur infirmities, as Amaurosis, or Gutta, Serena, Opthalmy or
inflammation, a Cataract, a Pterygion or film in the eyes, etc. a Parotis,
Inflammation, Tinuitus, or tingling in the Ears, etc. Yet however still the
fountain root and original of this, (...), came from the Duumvirate. So that if
any ligitemate Physician go about to make a Cure of the Cephalaea and other
supervening diseases, he must aim directly at the extirpation of that primary
cause, which first generated, propagated, and gave life to the second
infirmity. Now the efficient and material cause of all diseases, is the vital
spirit implanted, especially in the most pure juice contained, and parts
contained, for the supply of which the influent serves. This ingenite (...),
had at first (...), a power given from the great Conditor of all things, to
bring the fluxile seed into the conformation of an Embrion, and after that to
maturate it for parturition: since when it continues a despotical Government
over all the faculties, functions, offices belonging to this Republic, being
the seat and habitacle of life or light, form, or the sensitive soul.

As the soul inhabits the Archeus, so this is permanent in the blood, and all
three take up for their Metropolitan or chief place of Residence the stomach
and spleen, in which the soul by means of the Duumvirate acts freely. The
imbred spirit is implanted every where throughout the whole body, taking notice
of the least mischief which happens thereto in every single particle, so that
if a thorn, a splinter, the sting of a be, wasp, a Scorpion, the biting of a
Viper, Tarantula, Mad dog, or Rattle snake break the skin, touching the vital
juice: This Archeus forthwith frames Idaeas of indignation, fear, sorrow, etc.
According as the Nature of that which vulnerates it, such and such symptoms are
evidently contrived by this quick sented and tasted spirit, which nimbly
apprehends what is nocuous, and what is harmless to the life. This Custos I say
is ubiquitary in the body, carefully watching for its preservation, but it is
in an extraordinary manner concentrate, where the first preparation of the
sanguine mass is made, here the Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Palsy, Convulsions,
Lethargy, Scotomie, Delirium, Melancholy, Madness, Frenzy, Phthysis,
Quinsie, Peripneumonie, Incubus, Asthma, Dyspnaea, vexatious Coughs, Syncope,
Lypothymie, griping of the Guts, Diarrhaea, Dysuria, Arthritis, Gout in several
parts, Cachexie, Dropsies, the Scurvy, Hypochondriack Passion, all sorts of
fevers continual or intermitting, mild or malignant, the small Pox, Measils,
spotted Fever, the Plague, Marasmus, Erysipelas, Phlegmous Haemorrhoides, etc.
In this Mint they are all first coined, receiving an Impress Schem or Figure,
according to which they act uniformly upon the Scene of this microcosm.

That which makes a difference of Fevers and other Diseases, is the first
mover extimulated from an extraneous matter: Impatient withal of the Local
Possession of the same; for as it relisheth Excrements, so it is affected,
fashioning in the Hypochondries (...), the pourtraiture of that Ens M^rbosum,
analogous thereunto: and were there not a Discriminating fancy in the vital
spirit, whereby a disease is determinated to this or that kind, and made to be
Hoc aliquid Specificum, there would necessarily be a great confusion in the
Catalogue of infirmities, that none could rightly and distinctly understand the
Diganosis, the true Knowledge of them, but in a preposterous manner should
mistake one for another, becoming incapable to applicate, and appropriate
Remedies according to the Nature of what infests us. Since then it is otherwise,
that the symptoms of the falling sickness, Lethargy, Peripneumone, Asthma, etc.
do constantly evidently discover the species and essence of the Disease; this
can never be but from an efficient material cause or Principle above the four
humors of the Galenists, or the three principles of Paracelsus, and his
Sectary Dr. Willis, who adds to Sal, sul. and, Water and Earth. But how far
from solid truth, we shall ere long examine.

As for the former opinion, it is at this day exploded by most Scient
Philosophers, who have rejected that consuming Ens (which they would have to
make up one of their four Elements, and consequently the four humors, as a mere
fictitious conceit, fetched from the Utopian Elemental Region of fire
immediately next the Moon.

This latter opinion borrowed from the Chemists, I confess seems to be
plausible and very taking, as if it contained some verity: notwithstanding
narrowly searched into, and put to the fiery trial of experimental Philosophy,
the infallible Lapis Lydius or touchstone of our Works, whetner they be
allowed or Reprobate, it will appear expressly, that those so called five
Chemical principles, of which all bodies (as Dr. Will^ asserts) have their
initiated Synthesis, Cuncretion, or Composition, and into which their Analysis,
Dissolution is made, are not the essential, efficient, and materil cause of
diseases. I cannot subscribe to what Dr. Willis positively delivers as a truth,
in capii de ferment, that Corpora quaevis e Spiritu, Sulphur, Sale, Aqua and
Terra constare, i. e. Every body consists of Spirit, Salt, Sulphur, Water, and
Earth, and according as is the different motion and measure of these in
Concretes, so is the beginning and end of every thing, with the diversity of
their fermentations to be considered. I would willingly know of Dr. Willis as
expert an Anatomist, as he is in the dissection of Nature, when ever he
discovered visibly all these five principles in any body whatsoever, without
the torture and corruption of the whole.

If these can be otherwise extracted, and demonstrated to me by him, I shall
become more inclinable to his opinion: but since I am sure he cannot, I have
very good reason to maintain, that these parts separated from Bodies by the
fire, were never actually pre-existent in them, but are fabricated by Vulcan,
and so instead of being Principles or Elements of things, they become no other
than Products. Moreover if ever the Doctor beheld with his eyes, showing to us
the same (for to putatitious notions of the Brain we give no credit, since being
an experimental Philosopher, we hope he will not impose any thing upon us
barely, because he says it) these five supposed fundamental Principles
produced in any living body by any heat whatsoever, I shall forthwith submit to
his judgment, and Cure diseases according to this Hypothesis. Till then he must
excuse me, if I tell him that the stately touring structure founded upon this
Quinary Doctrine of Principles, easily captivating those that look only
superficially upon truth, will undoubted fall to Ruin. 2. These supposed
quinta prima, cannot be disgregated from some bodies by the fire, any Art or
sublunary machine of man, witness Mercury, which being a Homogeneous, similar,
Ens, (not conspurcated or fouled with any strange matter) cannot by any devise
of man whatsoever be brought into the foresaid parts. It may indeed be
disguised several ways by additaments, deluding the eye in the form of an Oil,
Water, Salt, Sulphur, and Earth, but they are only momentany dresses, which
this Proteus has assumed no whit Real, since it may in a short time be made to
retrocede to its primitive Individual Substance and Consistence.

Our great Philosopher Heimont, declares absolutely, Ex Arena silicibus saxis
non calcariis sul. aut nunquam trahi posse: That it is impossible to fetch out
of Sand Flints, and all sort of stones except Lime stones, Sulphur, or Mercury.
But he could by means of his Liquor Alkahest (never to be attained by Dr.
Willis, or any Galeno-Chymist, who dare not believe it has an existence, least
it should be expected they should spare time, take pains, and be at Charges to
acquire it) he was able I say by means of this great Dissolvent, to convert
Sand, or Stone, into salt aequiponderat to its former Bulk, which mechanical
Probation gives more satisfaction to any intelligent Person concerning this
truth, than any tedious Argumentation to the contrary, contrived never so
subtly and plausibly.

Again, what spagyrical hand did ever Analyze Water (not impregnated with a
seed) that the Quinta Prima might be made manifest. The Tria Prima according to
our Philosopher, may be said to be in it Analogicos, but in no wise really
existent therein. It Is true, we often use the Etymon of 3 Prima, for the
distinction of those parts that have a disparity in them created by the fire,
yet this does not conclude that they had their integral being in that body, out
of which they were extorted anamolos. No more than a Charcoal can be said to be
revera in Wood, Glass in ashes or sand: because by the Alterative power of
Vulcan, they have received this peculiar stamp differing from the quiddity of
the thing they were before. Helmont affirms an Aqua vitae may be drawn out of
any Vegetable that has not lignofity (...); i^ it then to be taken for a
Thefis, that Aqua vitae was a Principle of the same; after this rate we should
multiply principles, and of five make fifty, and perhaps more; if when ever we
see some notable Product from the fire, we should presently conclude that it is
Ens primum principians. If the Concrete had in it those many things that are
made of it, Chyle, blood, flesh, bones, and other parts should then be
materially contained in the grass, to which these substances do owe their first
original. The same water also that nourishes sundry Plants of a different
kind, should harbor in it so many sorts of specific juices fitting for the
nourishment and accretion of each distinct Vegetable. But this is ridiculous to
conceive, since we cannot but know that the seminal ferments of every thing
makes a transmutation of what it takes in, and by virtue of them, alters,
appropriates, and brings into an Identity with it self, that which before was
remote of another kind, and moving in another sphere. This formal transmutation
is frequently practiced by Nature: the Rain first exhaled from infinite number
of bodies, carried up into the middle Region, where the seed of every thing is
mortifyed, is there converted into water, which being ingravidated with
celestial virtues, is by their influence forced to descend upon the Earth, in
whose matrice it acquires a prolifick ferment, to which a Plastick-spirit is
forthwith invited to take up its lodging, being also excited to frame an Idaea
of that Vegetable Ens which it intends to produce: so falling to work, and
pourtraying the figure of the whole, from an invisible principle it becomes by
degrees manifest, bringing to perfection at length every part of the Plant,
that was before limmed in its imagination. This being devoured by a Sheep, or
Ox, is altered by the specific ferment of the stomach, changing it into an
acid Chyle or creamy juice, that passing into the Guts becomes saline by virtue
of that viscus vitale the Gaul: The purer part of this juice receiving now a
previous disposition for separation, is sucked up by those vessels they call
Milky which convey it into the veins, where intermingled with the ruddy Liquor,
it is called Cruor, afterward being circulated some considerable time, it is
made by the fermenting efficacy of the blood and bowels fit for nutrition,
accretion, and generation. This Beast feeding constantly upon this vegetable,
is at lenght impinguated, and made food for man, who eating thereof, transmutes
this flesh into Chyle, Chyme, and Cruor; at length having passed through the
first Kitchen and five several fermental operations, it is identifyed and
individuated with the substantial flesh of man. This man is devoured by a Shark
or the like fish, and passes through all that formal Metamorphosis, which this
fish makes in those several places of Cookery and digestion, at last from man's
flesh it attains to be (...), fish. It happens afterward, that this Water
creature is taken and eaten by man, so by the Protean force of the instruments
of life, it retires motu retrogrado, into (...) man's flesh again. Behold what a
versatile Scene of Alterations is here represented to our eyes, arising first
from simple water, which entering upon the stage of the Earth starts up,
showing it self in diverse shapes, according as the coercive seminal ferments
attire it. In this case sure no Philosopher in his right wits will affirm that
there is so many principles couched in the Water, as there are formal
Transmutations of things arising from the same. He will rather forthwith
understand optically, having made some serious Analysis of Bodies, and observed
a tendency in them to their prme initiation Water, that Heterogeneities and
distinct Phenomenon of substances in the Plant, Brute, Man, and Fish, and Man
again, are but the fruits of topical and acquired ferments, actuated by a
seminal Archeus; that Water also is the first foundation on which the manifold
stories of so many Entia, discrepating in form are raised, which being
ruinated, return into the same again. I could enlarge my self on this subject,
according to the various Experiments and Instances I have seen, but I must
contract, studying conciseness in whatsoever I deliver. 3. The inconstancy and
vicissitude of these supposed principles, powerfully refute them to be what he
would have them: for according to Aristole, Initia debent esse stabilia,
whatsoever are properly denominated principles, are to remain constant, and no
ways alterable one into another: now the contrary is found in these, forasmuch
as they may by Art (which I am sure I can perform) be mutually converted one
into another, as Sulphur into Salt, salt into spirit, spirit into water, again
spirit into salt, salt into sulphur, and sulphur into Water and Earth. Since
then there is such lubricity, such a m^mentany existence in them, that they are
in a short time coincident one into the other; how can they lay a solid Basis
for any Concrete, so as to be principles thereof, considering they are so
totering, unstable, and fluxile themselves.

Besides, let Dr. Willis use the best skill he can in extracting by fire any
four (for Water I except, looking upon it as the first, last, solid, real, and
only material original of all things) of his Quinta Initia, making either of
them as pure as possible his Art will permit, then let him deliver any of them
into my hands, and I shall plainly show him by means of Vulcan his error, that
what he thought was simple, is compounded of one or more of the rest. If this
here delivered be true, as I question not to prove it by Reason, Authority, and
Practice, then must the Doctor be forced to ^nravel that c^rio^s texture of
this specious Q^inary Doctrine, and to find out a more sure Warpe that will
hold out for the making of a more firm Woof of Physiology.

Did not these Traditions prove noxious and pernicious to man's life, in that
the groundwork of pathology is laid upon these Quinta prima, to which he
attributes the Efficient and Material causes of all Diseases, I should not be
much sollicitous to refell his Opinions in this kind. Whereas the Being of man
stands continually in jeopardy to be destroyed by these indirect positions, I
cannot in conscience suffer the ill effects thereof to pass without
animadversion.

It Is certainly true, and subscribed to by the hands of the best Philosophers,
that the (...) enormon of Hipp. that vital air innate and infl^ous, the chief
and immediate Organ of the soul, is the principal corporeal wheel that first
moves all that are subordinate to it in this admirable machine of man's body.
It Is this that in the beginning laid the foundation of this proud lofty
fabric, delineating exactly according to the Copy set it, every part continent
or contained, requisite to the discharge of those various Faculties, Uses,
Offices, and Functions, which all conspire for the preservation of the whole.
As it alone began, so it proceeds to finish this beautiful structure, and to
keep it in repair by a continual supply of new spirits, instead of those that
are daily expended and exhausted by the labor of body and mind.

It Is this Archeus (let no captious Sermocinal Galenist take exceptions at the
word, for it is proper enough according to the Etymon (...), principium vitae)
being duly constituted and modified, makes an Eutonie, Excrasie, Eumetrie, and
Eutaxie in this little universe. This implanted spirit (forthwith emerging
apparent so soon as the omnipotent Creator breathed into man the breath of
life) is really the Architectonical president of Generation, Accretion,
Nutrition, Sense, Motion, and whatsoever belongs to vitality, a puncto
initiante ad punctum definitum. This being granted by any intelligent moderate
Person, that (...), our sanity, or well being depends principally upon the
goodness, serenity, candor, peace, tranquillity, activity, and good condition
of the vitals.

It must necessarily follow (according to the formerly mentioned received
Axiom. Quicquid in Sanis edit Actiones Sanas, id ipsum in Morbis edit Actiones
vitiatas. That which is the chief Agent in maintenance of our health, the same
also principally acts in the production of Diseases) that (...), sickness, and
all diseases whatsoever spring from the same Root (the immediate cause of our
health) the Archeus depraved, clouded, disturbed, hurryed away with diverse
Passions, Anger, Fear, etc. Morose, Sullen, Dull, and Malignant. It is not
possible that a disease should harbor any where but in this Gas of life, for
as soon as it is extinct, all diseases forthwith cease: so that all irritating
and exasperating causes which strait disturb these luminous particles in a
living body, causing them to frame Idaeas of Indignation, Fear, Hatred, whereby
many kind of evils easily distinguishable one from the other, by certain signs
are hatched, do not at all cause any inconvenience in that which is defunct.
And although the Quinary principles of Dr. Willis are as demonstrative by the
fire (but no other way) in the Carkase as they were in the living body: yet
seeing that great Agent and Patient of (...) and (...), health and sickness is
wanting in that: no such passions are incident to it, as to the other. For
example, apply an Epispastick of Cantharides, or any Caustic, to what is
mortifyed, containing the Quinta Prima, no vesicle arises, nor is any
impression made. Let it be but laid on where there is vitality, the skin in a
short space is separated from the flesh by an Acrimonious Ichor, which the
Archeus fabricated, being put into a fretting condition upon the apprehension
of this virulent Plaster. Observe Cantharides does equally vesicate healthful
and crasie bodies: Hence this evidently discovers that the spirit of the part
conceiving ire upon the contact of what is odious to it, acts upon nutritious
juice, colliquating the same, and turning it into a Liquamen Corrosivum, making
a solution of those particles before united.

A thorn or splinter entering unawares, without the advertency of the person
into any part, and there impacted sometime, excites the vital spirit to
perturbation and discontent: hereupon it frames Characters of pain, throbbing,
fever, intumescence and redness in a body, where the soul is resident: of
which a Cadaverous matter being deprived, has not the least foregoing symptom
from the puncture and inhaesion of any thing extraneous: yet are there not
wanting these Quinta Prima made evident only by Vulcan.

I look upon every degenerate abortive, acid, acrimonious, malignant, virulent
matter assumed or acquired in the body, to be only an exstimulating occasional
cause of all sickness, and so is but exotic, and a mere stranger in comparison
of that which essentially makes the Quiddity of a disease. What if a depraved
sulphur or salt be generated and abound in the blood, are these able per se, to
generate, specify, or determine any sickness that it can properly be said to
be hoc aliquid?

All the excrements that are engendered in man's body through the errors of the
digestion, are either occasional and irritative causes of this or that
infirmity, or they are Products and consequents of the disease. If any
sulphurous, saline, (...), Refuse or Dross, Acid, Austere, Bitter, Nidorous,
Acrimonious, Fracedinous Dregs, any virulent, malignant, venomous Sanies,
Ichor, or Tabum be in progress of time brought to an egg by the Archeus of the
stomach principally (other digestions secondarily conspiring.) Then at length,
after long brooding this serpentine Mola or Cockatrice-like egg being hatched,
so hostile sometimes to nature, and that efficicient cause that produced it, as
the almost dead viper was to the Countryman, that fomenting it by the fire,
resuscitated that life in the Creature, which at length became prejudicial, if
not destructive to him) after a strong invasion made, it gives an Alarm to
that sentinel which continually watches for the preservation of this Citadel.
The guard, I mean the spirits being roused, finding an enemy at hand, all
possible force is raised to repel, retard, and expel this, (...), this
encroaching, invading mortiferous matter that instrumentally aims at the
cutting of the thread of life.

Hereupon presently arise Idaeas, Characters, Images, of discontent, fury,
fear, inquietude, despondency, pusillanimity, peevishness, sottishness,
prodigal effusion and confusion of all things. Thence is the perfect image of
this or that disease contrived, in this Ethereal exhalation, according to the
condition, nature, or property of that provocative, exorbitant, hateful matter
which at first put it into this passion and perturbation. Otherwise if this
efficient were not lascivious or extravagant in forging a numerous company of
different Pictures of diseases, how were it possible the sulphur or salt
separate or conjunct, could cause so many distinct species of fevers, or other
griefs. For take the blood or urine of five hundred persons afflicted with
fevers, whose constitutions have a manifest disparity in them, put them
mechanically to the test of Vulcan. Separate their sulphurs and salts by Art,
it will be found there is no such certain discriminating signs apparent either
by odor, or sapour, inspection or effect in any of each, that one may not be
taken for the other. If so, how will Dr. Willis make good his Assertion, that
sul. and salt which according to the trial of Pyrotechny (for I know no other
way to make a true discovery of them) seeming similar to sense though taken
from several bodies can possible produce such a Catalogue of calamitous
infirmities, differing in symptoms one from another, Toto Coelo. If he could
show us optically several distinct species of sul. or sal. any way
proportionable to the Idaeas of Maladies, which he would have to come
efficiently and materially therefrom, then were his Chemical principles more
plausibly taking. But since I am sure he cannot demonstrate this, I contemplate
the fermentation, exaltation, depression of sul. the fusion, fluidity and
coagulation of Sal borrowed from the speculation of Wine and Milk, analogically
introduced by him to confirm his Quinary Institutions of Pathology, to be no
immediate essential cause of diseases, as I doubt not practically to make
evident. If Dr. Willis seriously meditate, he shall find in Reality a vast
difference between the operations of the vital blood, and those proceeding from
the Zymosis of the juice of a vegetable, or the separation made by air, or any
other artificial means in Milk tending to corruption of the same. For these
dead things are in no wise able to give us adaequate light of those regular and
Irregular actions that are performed by a vital beginning, whose Type is of a
more sublime extract than to be paralleled by any thing inanimate.

I confess some small illustration may be made by way of simily between
animate, and inanimate, mechanical, artificial, and natural, which may please
the fantasy of those that are not thoroughly acquainted with the intimate,
Radical, and efficient causes of vital powers and actions; the priority of
which are not intelligible by any mortal, only we are taught a posteriori, the
effects of this primum movens, perpetrating every thing by such a platform,
that is unerring (unless impeded by intervening outward accidents) according to
that Mandate the great Creator has given it till the dissolution of the
universe. We believe there was the same principles of all Concretes before the
fall as since, and that the Archeus of the stomach before the lapse of the
Protoplastes did perfectly, entirely change whatsoever was taken in for
nourishment, without any Relic of annoyance of excrements, dross, or filth
those Tribuli and Spinae, which since the eating of the forbidden fruit, the
stomach of man being thereby vitiated, do continually infest it in such sort,
that the vita Media of every thing assumed, is hardly conquered an injurious
impress being oftentimes left behind.

Hence comes (...), the first rise of all our calamities, for the deviation of
the Archeus in (...), gives occasional matter to an infinite number of
infirmities. Not that the sulphur and salt of any Concrete is separated in the
first digestion, and so according as either is multiplied or degenerate
sickness breaks forth: No such matter, for let a strong vigorous stomach take
into it any sulphurous, fat, oily food, the ferment makes in some short space
such an essential transmutation, that the sulphur becomes acid, quite another
thing to what it was before and afterward in the second digestion, by virtue of
the vital contact of the Gall it is changed saline. Again, the Alkali of
vegetables is so altered in the stomach and other digestions, that use the best
skill you have you shall not be able to draw out of the urine, blood, or any
other part a lixiviate salt, although Dr. Willis erroneously attributes to
this, and an acid Liquor like vitriol, the cause why in a Scorbutical
Arthritis, a worm laid upon the part affected, becomes in a short space
mortifyed, v. p. 292. de Scorbu. Moreover pure spirit of Wine upon touch of the
vital spirits looses its inflammability, and its former saline sulphurous
nature being changed into something of an urinous substance.

And here I am bound justly to tax some Physicians of great ignorance, in that
they so scruple in fevers to give their Patients a large quantity of spirit of
Wine rectifyed as it ought, supposing they should add more fuel to the fire,
thereby to make a Phlogosis a greater efferviscence or conflagration in the
body: not considering that nothing is more congenerous, symbolizing with the
animal Gas of life, then highly exalted spirit of Wine being forthwith
embraced, united, and identifyed one with another, by reason of their affinity
and congruity. 2. They do not truly understand the energy of Zymosis, what a
powerful alterity is made by it, and how the sulphurous particles of the
vegetable becomes urinous like the spirit of the animal, whereby it is enabled
to profligate the morbifick matter, through all the Emmunctories, sluices, and
secret passages of the body. This really is the direct way of curing fevers
fundamentally, not seeming cooling Julips, Barley Water, Posset Drink made with
small Beer, least it should be too hot, prone to make the sulphur in the blood
as they allege incensed already, to become more impetuously headstrong no
ways to be reined or governed by the (...) Enormon; whose fate they conclude
must needs be sad, when such presumptuous Phaeton like Pyrotechnists drive the
mettalsome Horses of the Son of this microcosm so furiously. For all this, let
the Dogmatists say what they please, if they will vouchsafe to be spectators, I
can discover to them Autopsia, that I am able to cure (...), many fevers more
expeditely and effectually by those things they call hot: then by all the
infrigidating preparatious they can invent, or all the farraginous mixture
belonging to the Apothecaries shop.

I wish with all my soul, the Galenists would now at length reject those
insufficient invalid medicines made by others, and recond as a Treasure,
Arcana's, elaborated by their own fingers: then would they be truly said (...),
according to the equivocal sense of the word, making a unity in that profession
which through the Covetousness, pride, and laziness of Physicians has been
divided into a Tripartite station, to the great dishonor, debasement, and
total Ruin of a his Noble Science, if some Worthy, Prudent Magistrates, the
Heroes of this Nation do not timely prevent.

This Parergos, I return to Dr. Willis his Quinta prima, as the efficient
causes of diseases. Since as I have delivered, there is no separation of them in
a healthful living body: It follows, that if any at any time a secretion of the
five be made, then are they Products and Epigenomena from a disorder or
defection, then cannot they be properly said to be primary precedent causes of
the impairment of our health, but consequents of the same. Wherefore it is
preposterous to take in that for a cause, which is but a mere effect, whose
Posteriority plainly shows a dependency upon something going before.

For example, in a febrile state we see rejected by vomit, or any other way
excreted, a yellow matter which the Doctor may call sulphurous. This (as he
conceives) joined with something saline, causes an effervescence boiling or
Accension, whence arises the fever. First, let us examine, whence came this
excessive ebullition, what is the efficient cause thereof in a living body. 2.
What separates and expels these parts denominated salt and sulphur. 3. Whether
the Doctor or any other ever saw sul. so sequestered from an Animal so entire,
but that the same judged to be what it seems by color, consistence, odor,
etc. might not by the trial of Pyrotechny afford rather more sal than supposed
sul.

1. It Is demonstrative, the spirit implanted in the seed gave a Being to the
blood, which still continuing in it, does durante vita, (...) sanguifie, making
it good or bad according as all the digestive culinary Rooms, are well or ill
modifyed and constituted. If the (...), having a chief Prerogative above all
the rest, perform what is requisite completely toward nutrition: then all the
other fare the better, seldom erring in their intended ends. For it is a general
received truth: A defect in the first digestion can never be perfectly
rectifyed afterward, wherefore the Primum Mobile of sanguification, is the
stomach, able if any thing be out of order successively, to reform the same by
an influential Aspect upon all parts; if it fall out the chief Organ be
depraved, all the succeeding shops of transfiguration cannot restore it to
former integrity, especially if it be much impaired. For this respect they take
a wrong course, who let out the strength of the Limbs, when the mischief is
concentrated within. Well then, it is sure the Archeus acting regularly, a sound
pure juice is fabricated; if otherwise an unwholesome faeculent (...) made,
consisting of such Particles altogether discordant with Nature, yet not
presently to be determined sulphurous or saline; Aqueous or Terrestrial,
however being illegitimate, incongruous, virulent, and malignant, it becomes
tedious and odious.

Whereupon there arises a (...), a Confusion within at the presence of so
loathsome a Guest. Hence the Figure of this or that disease is strait
contrived: The perfect Type being drawn according to the property and native
force of the poison, or graduated malignity contained in the Abortive juice.

The stomachical Archeus being exasperated, a Thymosis, an Excandescence,
Effervescence, and great inquietude, seizes upon the spirits of all the
digestions. For according to Hip. (...), there is an undissoluble League,
Commerce, Correspondence, Fellow-feeling of all parts by means of this, (...),
which being in its full strength thus enraged, fretting, disturbed, brings all
belonging to it into the like condition, agitating, ransaking, and rifling
every place, chasing what is injurious to it hurrying here and there, breaking
it into small parts, laboring with all might to separate light and darkness,
that which is defunct from that which is living. This is the beginning and
progress of a fever. This is the Prologue before the variety of Scenes
belonging to every distinct Malady, whether Acute or Chronick, only in this,
the Archeus acts obtusely in a more Clandestine manner, in that more furiously,
evidently, being exceedingly extimulated. This pre-meditated: the Efficient and
Principal Agent which makes the (...), Effervescence, and ebullition in this
nutritious juice, is the Archeus or vital spirits, not a supposed Salt,
Sulphur, Mercury, Water, or Earth separate or blended together, transgressing
the bounds of their due Crasis or Mediocrity. They might, I allow, if they had
a true being in the body be excitative, extraneous, occasional, and fomenting,
not real, intrinsecal, radical, essential causes of sickness, for Nihil agit
ultra Sphaeram Activitatis, as soon as the vitals have forsaken the body, they
operate nothing in reference to any disease, although they cannot be denied to
be equally perfect after death as before.

2. It is to be enquired how salt and sulphur, etc. considered as they are
alienated from the primitive scope intended, are at length sequestered,
exterminated out of the Body, through all its obscure or patulous passages in
the manner of a White, Black, Yellow, Green, Blew, Red, Thick, Thin, Acid,
Acrimonious, Bitter, Sweet, Austere Substance. Certainly they are insufficient
of themselves, to make such a Chemical (...), secretion of such seculencies
that eclipse the solar light of the microcosm, and would totally extinguish it.
If this (...) did not bestir it self, to maturate, subdue, manure, secerne and
excern that, of which it is so impatient, never resting contented till it has
conquered the same by expulsion, or it self become annihilated.

I contemplate sal and sulphur, Water and Earth, as a Thorn, Splinter, or the
like fastened in living flesh: which of themselves are no way Energetick or
operative to produce a Malady, or exempt Nature from the same by a retrocession
that way it came in. But as it was an outward, exotic, provocative, occasional
cause, that the spirit is put into a high displeasure, chasing and f^ming at
the presence of that which is (...), quite of a differing kind being inanimate,
so this living thing is altogether actively busy in the extrusion of that
which is dead after manifold vexatious symptons introduced, neither will it
ever be at rest, unless pacifyed, or this hostile matter (only passive in this
case) be removed by its own strength assisted by Art.

This morbifick salt, sulphur, water and earth, are only Spurs and Goads in the
sides of Nature, to make it sometime run on full speed to oppose, repel, and
eject such a hateful intruding Guest, intending to cut off the thread of life
like a sword. Wherefore being incensed by the Idaea of anger, it quickly culls
out whatsoever incroached or invaded its Territories, separating any thing
Hostile, from that which is under its own Regiment, throws it out of doors if
it be able of it self (which is seldom) or calls for assistance from without.
This revera makes an acute disease.

The out-lets or places of egress for these disguised, supposed principles, are
as the matter is disposed the passage convenient and Nature inclined. Certainly
that good old candid Physician Hipp. gave us excellently useful instructions,
which I wish his pretended modern Sectaries would more observe (...) says he,
(...), i. e. to carry off any thing vicious that way, it and Nature do most
incline supposed the place be proper, I have found experimentally, there are
two eminent Emissaries or sluices above the rest through which the heavy clog of
impurities is discharged (...), the Gullet, the other (...), the skin, the
intestines, urinous, and the other pectoral passage not neglected. In fevers I
have found (...), an Orgasmus, a propensity in the stomach to vomit by reason
of an acid, acrimonious, salsuginous, nidorous matter, which irritates the
expulsive faculty. In this state an appropriated Emetick (I mean not the common
vomits) is of great force to break the ice for a future Cure. This I advise to
be repeated two or three times, if the patient be in a capable condition to
receive any benefit, yea when the stomach is sometimes dull, besmeared, or
imbrued with viscous, tenacious phlegm, wanting something to extimulate,
attenuate, and subtiliate this gross substance, incrustating as it were the
inward Coat, then have I found by strict observation, that such a gentle
Emeto-cathartick, which if it excite not this tender membrane neither by vomit
nor stool, will carry off any Scoria through the eccentrical parts or urinous
Pipes in no wise impairing the strength notably. This I pass over lightly,
intending to speak more expressly in some other place.

3. Quaery requires a mechanical demonstration or firm experiment, i. e.
whether the Doctor or any Philosopher ever saw sulphur sequestered in a living
body so entire, but that the sulphur judged what it seems by color,
consistence, odor, might not by the trial of Vulcan afford rather more Salt,
Water and Earth, each of them then sulphur: Assuredly so far as I can
apprehend, it is but equity that as these Chemical principles owing their first
discovery to the fire, gave occasion to some indirectly to improve and apply
them too rashly without serious advertency to the erecting a systeme of
Physiology: so likewise a thorough Pyrotechnical search may very justly excuse
those who are versed therein, not to accept of them upon these terms.

I have as I conceive, sufficiently made it good that Pyrotechny can only
detect them: that no Art of man can extract them out of some bodies, that they
are equivocal, mutable, transient one into another.

Now am I ready to discover in reference to the Cure of miserable man: that the
pretended sanguine sulphur or Cacochymy of any in a high fever does afford
more salt, water and earth each of them than sulphur. I have taken that
diseased blood termed corrupt, which might seem to some to abound with sulphur,
being cleanly conveyed into a Retort with a Receiver joined thereto, I have by
a gradual fire regulated very strictly, brought over what possibly I could. In
the upshot upon the separation of the several parts, I have found very little
of sulphur in comparison of each of the rest.

At another time I procured the purest blood I could get from a healthful
person, putting it to the same igneous trial, as the former degenerate of equal
proportion to it: then after sequestration of the parts, I could not perceive
any considerable difference in the quantity or quality of the several parts of
the sound, and that seemingly corrupt; which gives testimony that a fever does
not principally arise from an excess of sulphur, Reprobate too much advanced or
graduate, but rather from some other illegitimate matter, as Spurious Salts,
Lancing, Goading and Gauling, the most exquisitely sensitive Archeus, whereby
it becomes Active to lay the platform of th^s spec^fick Malady.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the Prevention, with the Cure of those Diseases that
take up their lodging in the Blood.
WE are taught by Divine Writ, that in the blood that Spiritus rubens is Life:
In the same also is contained death, as we find experimentally. If it be pure
in the fountain, free from mixture of a strange matter, notable defection,
apostasy or contagion, incessantly circulating in those Labyrinthaean Pipes
without impedidiments, health, vivacity, strength of body and mind attends that
person. If on the contrary it be sordid, feculent, degenerate from its native
goodness pestered with any thing of a Texture different from it, sickness,
dullness, melancholy, and a disorder in the whole frame follows. It ought to
be the labor and study of every individual if he have acquired any knowledge
of himself, to be well ve^sed in the Prophylactick part of Physic, by keeping
his blood (...), without staining and foulness, by preserving the digestions
strong, lively, especially that of the stomach introductory of good or bad to
all the rest. (...), Moderation in all things is a most excellent compass to
steer by.

It Is not the quality of what we assume, as the quantity that is injurious to
us: For I am of Celsus his mind, who advises a healthful man to eat any thing,
that his stomach can well alter. If he commit an error in eating or drinking a
little too much at one time, let him use abstinence afterward for the
correction of the same.

I have observed of late years a great proneness in the blood to be soiled and
conspurcated in an extraordinary manner, by reason of a great Scorbutical
malignity lurking in the body, the Procatartick cause of which may very justly
be deduced from our prodigious Lusts, our enormous Intemperance in
compotations. I am easily persuaded, that the Venereal Lues at first procreated
this spurious Brat, whose Heteroclite and discrepant existence from other
diseases, does plainly testify that an anomalous seed arising from the
conjunction of two evils differing in specie, brought forth this horrid Monster
to light, being since propagated and traduced from one to another, spreading
like a Leprosy over the whole Nation, by reason of a Clandestine miasm, or
infection that nestles within, whose subtle Aporrhaeas or Emanations diffuse
themselves in such contagious manner, that most of the Nation are thereby
infected.

It seems to me very dissentaneous to truth what Dr. Willis alleges to be the
fomenter of this calamitousevil among us, condemning the frequent use of Sugar,
and his reason is, that this matter being put to the proof of the fire (a
spagyrical Analysis made thereof) affords a Liquor but little less corrosive
than Aqua fortis, as if the ferment of the stomach did dissolve in the same
manner as the solution made byart, or that such a acid matter were really
contained in the Concrete, which d^stillation produced. He shall find the best
food we take in: if put into a glass set in hot sand, will send forth a most
nasty empyrematical Liquor: shall we therefore refuse such wholesome Aliment?
withal let him be pleased to take notice, that the effects of the fire are
Aequivocal, various, and mutable according as the matter distilled receives
such or such an Adjunct; for I can by virtue of Vulcans Art make the whole body
of the better sort of Sugar (adding something to it congenerous, or of like
kind) become excellently medicinal for the Cure of the Scurvy above all the
Apothecaries preparations, the Doctor makes use of: This I can demonstrate,
moreover I know no reason that a substance so pleasant to the taste of most as
it were a sweet Alkali, so useful for preservation and mundification of what is
foul and prone to corrupt, should be rejected guilty of so high a Crime as to
promote the Scurvy most infamously. For satisfaction of those that are wavering
in this thing, I dare undertake to keep half a score or more persons drinking
liberally every day Beer and Sugar, yea eating Sugar with meat plentifully, (as
I knew a Galenical Physician of great renown allow of as very wholesome) freer
from the Scurvy than any Dogmatist in England shall perform with all his Art
exercised on the same number, debaring them this delicious congeled salt Under
favor of better judgments (if I may deliver what I have observed without
offense,) I conceive our Sybaritical voluptuousness, ebriety, mangonical,
pampering sauces contrived as a shooing horn to the exciting the appetite to
the drawing in a greater quantity and variety of food then Nature can well
digest, is an extraordinary procurer of this grand malady grassant among us.
Above all, I much condemn the common abuse of Tobacco, out of which no other
sometimes than a Scorbutical venom is accidentally sucked. Agreeable to which
judgment of mine is that of the Legitimate Artist Dr. Maynwaring, who marks
where Tobacco is much taken, the Scurvy does most abound. I wish those who are
too forward to condemn Chemical preparations ordered by true Philosophers,
would reflect upon themselves and others as yet ignorant of Pyrotomy, how that
they are too forward in rushing into this Science: indirectly making use of a
Retort with a receiver, I mean, a Pipe and the mouth for the reduction of this
Plant into salt and sulphur, proving not a little injurious to them. If they
were conscious how subtle an enemy it is, how hardly to be dealt withal in a
moderate sense, how insinuating, tempting, deluding; how disagreeing to Nature,
as is manifest at first taking it, pretending an evacuation only of a
superfluous moisture when it also generates the same; how it wrongs the
Ventricle by reason of a continuity of its membrane with that of the mouth; how
it taints the nutricious juice; how it Dozes the brain, impairing its faculties
especially the Memory, they would quickly commit this herb to the hand of those
that know what belongs to the right management and improvement thereof.

I confess it has a dowry bestowed upon i^, which may make it very acceptable
to all ingenious Artists for inward and outward uses, yet ^s the matter is
handled indiscreetly, I know nothing introduced into this Nation has
discovered it self more apparently hurtful, in aggravating and graduating this
Scorbutical evil among us than Tobacco.

I am not ignorant what some object, that there are those who taking an
extraordinary quantity of Tobacco have lived to a great age, as 60, or 70,
years. 2. That multitudes not taking this fume are yet notwithstanding overun
with the Scurvy. 3. That some have protested they have received certain benefit
by this Plant, when other Remedies prescribed by able Physicians have been
invalid to relieve them. 4. That there are places where Man, Woman, and Child,
take in this smoke, none of these sad effects appearing.

As to the first I answer, one Swallow makes no Summer, I reckon this among
raro contingentia. I have known one very intemperate in Diet live to the
forementioned age: but doubtless, had he regulated himself according to the
Rules of Mediocrity, he might have doubled that age. Innate strength of body,
does carry a man sometimes through that without any great damage, which
destroys another.

2. I do not affirm that this vegetable is the sole coajduvant cause of the
Scurvy, it being certain there are many promoters thereof. Besides, yet granted
that your great Compotators Ventricolae, Gormandizers, (who have as the
Grecians, (...), Lazy Panches, little else to do but to take Tobacco to pass
away the time, filling pipe after pipe, as fast as possibly they can exhaust
it) are commonly incrdent to this feral malady. Hereupon this very same
specific disease may be diffused and communicated to others by e^piration or
effluvium sent out of a body infected therewith. So that it seems rare to me
that the Wife should be exempted from this Cacoethick sickness, if the Husband
be afflicted therewith, or the Husband be free if the Wife be vexed. Doubtless,
some Peoples breath does exceedingly taint the air, to the great annoyance of
others.

3. I condemn not medicinal appropriation and application of this Drug, for I
know it to be of excellent virtue: there is great difference, inter dictum
secundum quid and dictum simpliciter, between the censure of any thing as
absolutely evil, and the indirect practice of it. Moreover, what is one man's
meat, may be another poison.

4. The generality of smoking it in some places without those ill effects we
find, does not at all frustrate my assertion: for I have observed a more
moderate course of life in Diet, the goodness of the air, with an Hereditary
custom, has in great measure balanced the nocument or inconveniences, which
otherwise they would have contracted by excess thereof; neither are these
numerous Tobacconists acquitted from this evil, as it appears by those frequent
eruptions in the skin, whereby a greater mischief is prevented within, they
being only efflorescences of a Scorbutical pravity.

There are as I apprehend two principal reasons to be given why this Weed has
captivated so many thousands in such sort, that they become mere slaves to it.

One is the seeming delight it affords in the present taking thereof, inducing
a pleasing bewitching melancholy, exceedingly affecting their fancies, so that
they could wish with him in the Poet: Hic furor O Superi, fit mihi perpetuus, O
that I might always thus melanchollize, not considering though the Prologue be
cheerful, the Epilogue is often sad; though the spirits are as it were
titillated and charmed into a sweet complacency for a short space, yet
afterward a dullness, gloominess seizes upon them. Indeed how can it be
otherwise, seeing they are but forcibly lulled into this secure placid
condition, by that which is as far remote from the vitals, as the beams of the
Sun are from a black cloud.

I find in this smoke a stinking, retunding, condensing Opiate like sulphur,
and an acrid salt profligating, extimulating, so that by the bridling much of
the one, and the excessive spurring of the other, the spirits like a free
metalsome horse, are quite tired out at last. It is impossible that the
frequent insinuations of this subtle fume making show of affinity, but quite of
another tribe with the animals should not at length (let a body be never so
strong and custom how ever prevalent) either pervert or subvert his well
constituted frame.

Another Reason (observable only by those that are true Gnostics of
themselves) why Tobacco is so highly set by, and has so many followers is its
meretricious Kisses given to those that embrace it: oftentimes secretly
wounding them mortally, yet are they not thoroughly sensible who gave them the
st^oak. I have taken notice of very temperate persons in other things, who for
diversion have indulged their Genius ad Hilaritatem, continuing for urbanity
sake in company they liked longer than ordinary, have so closely pursued this
pernicious Art of sucking in the smoke of this Herb, that never any Chemist was
more sollicitous, in greater haste to fetch his matter over the Helm by
distillation. Behold what the event was: the next morning I have heard
complaints come from them, that their brains were something stupid, dozed,
their stomach nauseous, being thirsty, also feverish. The cause of all this
they attributed to their transgressing limits of sobriety in drinking, or to
the sophisticated adulterated Liquors. Not finding the least fault with the
extravagant use of Tobacco, which above all did them the most hurt privately.
Something I can speak experimentally to this purpose, for having been wedded to
it many years past, supposing I had got an Antidote against Hypochondriack
melancholy, with an Apophlegmatism, to discharge crude matter, I applauded it
in all Company without advertency at that time, how false and treacherous it
was, which afterward perceiving, I withdrew my self from the use thereof by
degrees, at length was altogether divorced from it.

Praevisa Spicula levius feriunt, could we see the poisoned arrows that are
shot from this Plant, questionless we would endeavor to avoid them, that they
might less intoxicate us.

Latet anguis in Herba, we are suddenly surprised by this Serpentine Plant
before we are aware; thus that which we take for an Antidote, becomes mere
poison to us, supplanting and clancularly confounding the (...), or good
Government of this Republic, consisting in the strength and goodness of a
seminal Archeus, vigorous ferments, the just constitution and harmony of every
part. Needs must then indigestions, crudities, degeneration, and illegitimation
of the nutricious juice follow promoting causes and Products of the great
poison of the Scurvy.

My advice therefore to any immoderate (...), a fume-succker, is that he would
as he tenders the preservation of Body and Soul, wean himself by degrees from
excess herein. If so, doubtless he will find if the Scurvy infest him much, an
abatement of the tedious symptoms thereof.

For the removing other Adjuvant causes of this Scorbutical malignity, let him
regulate Assumpta, Inspirata, Excreta, and Imaginata, what he receives into his
stomach and Lungs, what is fitting to be excreted or thrown out: Lastly, what
he harbors amiss in his thoughts. He ought to be very careful above all, in
the Election of what is potable, as Beer, Ale, etc. which must be strictly
looked after, that it be well brewed, kept, and spirituous. For I am no friend
to those poor small Liquors, which are (...), which have nothing of a spirit
symbolical with ours, for in these Northern parts of the World, whatsoever has
a Leptomery, a Tenuity of parts in it, Coeteris paribus, does best concord with
us, not only in respect our Archeus is elevated, embracing it more willingly by
reason of a consanguinity with it: but likewise for this, that the stomach
which is often (...), the Genitor of many raw, superfluous, gross, lent,
viscous tenacious matter adhering close to its Tunicles is excited, being
corroberated to attenuation, subtiliation, and abstersion of such sordid dross.
In former time the English Ale has been reputed a most excellent wholesome
drink: but this as many other things, through Avarice and Idleness is much
depraved. For a great deficiency is often observable in the materials or
preparation of this Liquor. Touching materials, I find the Menstruum or
Solvent, i. e. Water not seldom unfit for the reception of the virtue of that
which is dissolved therein. For being clogged, yea almost satiated with
multitude of diverse foul particles which the Thames of the City in particular
swallows up greedily by conveyances of common shoars, Jakes, Sinks, etc.
besides Offal and stinking Carkases thrown into it: never perfectly to be
cleansed by Tides, I say this water cannot be approved by any true Chemist, for
the making of the best English Ale, unless we had the Art to purify it, as the
Sea and certain Climates perform by a peculiar separation. Next I discover
sometimes though not very often the dissolutum our malt not altogether so good
as it should be, proceeding partly from the Barley, being in some unseasonable
years vitiated partly for want of due ordering it: so that it gives the Liquor
an odd Empyreumatical, musty, uncouth, fracedinous tang, very unpleasing to the
vitals. Concerning the just preparation of this old Liquor of England (the fame
whereof invited that honestable Philosopher, Benedictus Valentnius to come into
this Island, that thereby he might be thoroughly acquainted with the right
Manufacture thereof) we are too careless in boiling it as it ought, and
afterward in exciting it to fermentation, that thereby several impurities might
be sequestered; which flote in it to the contamination of our blood. Moreover
(as I am informed) additions of saeculent, fulsome, loathsome things are put
into it, enough to make it abhorred by us if we knew them. Well, this I am
sure, a great part of the Ale of this City as they contrive the matter is very
unwholesome and Scorbutical, so that I advise all living in this Metropolis who
love Ale, (being persuaded for good Reason, that it is available against some
infirmities) to mix it with the best stale Beer they can procure, which is of
great force to rectify the imperfections thereof. The solid food of this
Nation, is generally very gross, for few people in the world are greater (...)
flesh-eaters, than we at this day, likewise such (...), bread-eaters withal. I
suppose we commit no small errors therein, for repletio panis est pessima,
especially of bread that commonly is (...), a mere clung, dense, sometimes
half-baked pondrous past, no whit subtiliated by a proper Leaven, such as
commonly is our White-bread; this cannot easily be subacted by the stomach:
Hence crudities, viscosities, obstructions, acidities, the founder and fomenter
of the Scurvy, and many other diseases. He therefore that covets to be (...),
healthful and long-lived: let him be sollicitous that his Liquor and Bread be
well ordered, for these two much conduce for the well or ill being of a man's
life, according to their goodness or pravity.

As for variety of Edibles: The Poet tells us Nam variae res, ut noceant homini
Scito. It Is impossible that the vita media, the various, specific, formal
properties of several esculents, should not puzzle the chief form president in
a humane living body, before they can be reduced to do homage to it as
principal, and to other subordinate belonging to every particular part: yea
when each seems to be tamed, or totally subjugated to the Laws of specific
Nature, having passed through diverse alterations of Culinary fermentations: yet
still remains some Hogo, tang, or insensible odorous relick of what they were
before; so that often repeated impressions made hereby, cannot but put the
Archeus and ferments of the whole, with every part in particular into an
Ataxie, Atonie, Dyscrasie and Dyspathie: hereupon follows an Apostate juice, a
coacervation of recrements excommunicated from the Government of life,
afterward upon an irritating occurrence, the perfect shape of such or such a
kind of disease is drawn in the life.

2. Care is to be taken that inspirata what we breath in, be not injurious to
our Lungs through which most part of the blood of our whole body passes in a
few hours. In the air lies occult, sometimes a mortal enemy which glides into
this respiracle of life unseen, unfelt, making a stigma upon this ventilating
spongious Parenchyma, never deleble till its final Analysis. In this rare
subtle body the morbifick atoms are involved, stealing into us, (...), not
easily perceptible till we find the sad effects thereof. The condition of true
Philosophical Chemists are here to be pityed, whose lives are often in jeopardy
while they labor to save others partly from the medicaments they prepare (not
by remote means of an Apothecary) but (...), with their own hands, the most
certain (...) Ticket that can admit a man to be a legitimate Physician, to
enter into the secret closet of Sophia, there to contemplate the Archives or
evidences of natural knowledge by the help of Pyrotomie. The Gas (let Momus
deride the word I value it not) or incoercible spirit, with the manifest fumes
or Realgars arising from the dissolution of bodies, especially mineral, do so
strike upon the tender spiracle of incessantly laborious Spagyrists, while
their souls are intentively busy at their fingers ends for the welfare of
mankind, in so much as although they obtain Arcana's for the prolongation of
the thread of life, yet is it often cut off in the midst of its course by the
Truculent Exspirations. The truth of this Paracelsus has sealed: let his
enemies never so falsely, ungratefully asperse him to the contrary. Something I
can aver in reference to my own particular, that I have sustained many a
Mephitis, stinking, sulphurous smell, many Arsenical, Mercurial, vitriolate,
corrosive Corpascles, to the great annoyance of my blood and spirits, whose
coagulations and colliquations must needs have been destructive to me, had not
powerful Remedies (...), a reward of my labor and study relieved me, una
eademque manus vulnus opemque tulit: the same Concrete afforded me an Antidote
against its poison.

Again, Physicians suffer much in their blood and Lungs while they are
anxiously conversant among their sick Patients. I mean not those who dare not
stand to it, to contest with an Atrocious Pest, when there is most need, that
then they should make good their Diploma or Authority to practice by courage
and dexterity in Curing. No such matter I dare say, most of these Philautists
conscious of their own weakness, will hardly venture to come under the Roof
where an infected body lies, much less will hazard their own lives in the
dissection of a Pestilential Carcass, that their neighbors may be preserved.

Those I intend obnoxious to many inconveniences from the Paedour, nastiness,
foul stinks arising from transpiration and expiration of the sick, are they,
whose Charity incites them and Abilities animate, to help the poor distressed
man smitten with a venomous contagious arrow. This is a duty incumbent on those
no presumption (as some malevolent Zoili would fasten on me) to undergo any
jeopardy for their Countries safety.

As for those that are not thus obliged by their Profession, Freedom is granted
to such to avoid as much as they can any place, (...), where the magnale of the
air copiously imbibes saetid, sracid, unwholesome exhalations, also to make
choice of a Region serene, pure, free from such particles which infect our
blood.

Note that a certain topical air, not so commendable in it self, is yet more
agreeable to some individuals, then that which seems to have better
properties, so that the Lungs has as it were an (...), a gust peculiarly
belonging to it for the distinction of an air congruous or incongruous with its
texture, as the stomach has in reference to meat or drink; for this cause
Physicians may in my judgment as well enjoin that to be eaten by a Patient
against which he has an ingenite antipathy, as to commend an air approved by
their reasons to some tabid persons, with which the implanted Archeus of the
Lungs may altogether disagree.

3. He that desires to preserve this vital juice entire, must endeavor
carefully to expedite or discharge (...), those excrements which nature does
every day labor to proscribe as refuse of the digestions, for being (...)
defunct, they have no fellowship with (...), that which has vitality in it. If
he be costive, let him not miss every day to make use of (...), something which
may exonerate his belly: it is truth what the old Physician delivers, (...),
Torpidity in the intestines to throw off the Ordure contained in them, brings
the good Order of the Oeconomie into a Confusion.

The phlegm loose in the stomach if there be propensity in it, is to be
evacuated by Vomit. The tongue is to be scraped every morning, which I much
commend to all those that are incident to Squinzies, which course Helmont
allows of, and the (...), the excrements of the six digestion are to be
mundifyed from the skin by gentle frication made with a course cloth.

4. Above all, let him bend his study in obtaining a right imagination of
things, for this Laesa Imaginatio precipitates us into many furious passions
and perturbations of the spirits, whereby the rubicund spirit becomes vitiated,
and a Scorbutical venom soon contracted; for show me the person that is
over-clouded wi^h melancholy. I dare assert such an one will quickly be
overcome with the Scurvy in a high degree. Since the seat of the sensitive soul,
as principally is this chief ventricle there cannot any inquietude, commotion
or disturbance happen to it: but the root from whence sanguification arises
must needs bear a sh^re. We find manifestly our hungry appetite to our food
forthwith taken from us in a moment, when any unexpected very sad news suddenly
surprises us; yea, if a man be curious in observation, he shall be sensible of
a little stroke or impulse made upon the Orifice of the ventricle instananteous
with that punctum temporis, wherein the terrifying Relation comes to our ears.
I have known the yexing or Hick forthwith removed upon the apprehension of a
frightful object. I have also heard of those who have been Podagrical and
Clinical a long time, restored to their former valetude by the sudden invasion
either of some dreadful accident, or something exceedingly desired
extraordinarily pleasing their phansies, whereby those morbifick Idaeas
impressed a long time upon the vitals have been blurred, if not totally blotted
out. The Epilesie, Convu^sion, Madness, Small Pox, Pest, Trembling, whose
original cause is in the Duumvirate, have been first stirred up in some by
violent perturbations, pufillanimity or Thymosis of the Archeus, whose
imagination has been so dislocated through a false apprehension, that all the
Art of man was never able to set it right again. Hence we are to take notice,
that both health and sickness may come from an invisible principle: yea an Ens
Rationis, or non Ens; for could we understand the passions, irregular
concitations of this Enormon which governs the whole and every part, how it
disturbs the right imagination of the man, and this again, that by way of
mutual dependence one upon another, we should be better Philosophers than to
attribute the principal causes of all infirmities to sal. sul. water, earth.
It Is credibly reported of the Chinois, that if their Physicians, in whom they
place more than ordinary confidence prenuntiate to them a sickness on such a
day, they by the powerful activity of their Mercurial phansies operating upon
their spirits, do frequently make good what is prognosticated to them, although
otherwise their health of body before did not at all preindicate any such
alteration or lapse from salubrity.

I wish there were not among us Europaean Physicians, who having by reason of
their Grandeur, Magnificence, and strong opinion thereby acquired greater
Authority over their Patients than verity on their side, persuade them to be
obnoxious to this or that grief, of which as yet there is not the least guilt:
however in such a manner become they affected, that by frequent, serious, sad,
rumination thereon, they have by the power of their Magical Imaginations
brought that really to being, which before had no existence, as I could
instance in Consumptions, etc. Moreover there are those, who taking all their
Physicians speak for Oracles, (I wish they were so for the honor of Physic)
contentedly acquiescing in their Grave Sentences, have slighted all means
whatsoever for their recovery: for that they are informed what they labor
under is uncurable, according to their Galenical Catalogue. If it chance any
has so far condescended to the making use of Chemical medicines, it has been
with such regret, and strong thoughts of being (...), past Cure, with such
vacillating, anxious conceits, and prejudice infused into them by Mysochymists
against this most Effectual, Innocent way of healing, that let the best Artists
do what they can, contending against the torrent of their perverse conceits,
nothing but a Miracle can save them from the pit of destruction.

Some of these I have met with in my time, to whom I have engaged a Cure upon
condition of a resignation of their vain thoughts, but this Chymophobia
sigillated on their spirits by the virulent tooth of Zoil, has so rapidly
carryd them another way, insomuch as no Hydrophobus bitten by a mad dog, has
been more fearful of water than they of those Chemical Remedies, which I can
assert by multitude of repeated Experiments to be both safe and sufficient.
Such is the force of these prevaricating turbulent passions, that a man is
often led Captive by them whether he will or no to his own ruin. Wherefore my
Council to such whose imaginations is distorted, is to endeavor to rectify it
by virtue of right understanding and firm resolution, as that Philosopher who
vexed with Hydrophobia, after he had discovered the absurdity of his
apprehension, took resolution to throw himself into the water, saying, what
should a dog do always in the water, quid canis cum aqua: Although it is
confessed Chemistry can work no Miracles, which a sort of people in another
extreme expect from it; yet I am certain if any Physic be powerful to charm or
allay these evil spirits, suggesting a thousand deformed Idaeas in our souls,
to the contamination of our vitals and detriment of health, this Spagyrical way
can only claim right thereto. For having respect to the (...), this
Metropolitan ventricle, the Throne of life, the Root from which this ruddy
juice first arises, that all its actions may be performed (...), incessantly
vigorous; it cannot be concluded otherwise, but that there must needs follow
the more clarity, serinity, tranquillity, and regularity in mind.

In short, the direct Prophylactick course to keep this sanguineous liquor
desaecate, and consequently imagination sounder, is to mundifie the fountain,
i. e. to preserve it in good state by medicines fabricated by the hand of an
able Pyrotomist.

Thus much concerning Preservative directions. Next follow in order
Therapeutick or Curative instructions for the exemption of any mischief that
has seized upon this animal Balsom, the subject of all calamities of the body,
either in Radice vel in Ramis, in the Root or Branches.

Here I must make repitition of what I formerly delivered, (...). It Is of so
great use, and so much neglected, therefore it ought to be often renewed. The
stomach, (...), the root where the white juice ^s first prepared, afterward to
be rubefied, challenges right of priority above every Organ, in that it is
according to all probability the place of the souls chief Residence. The
errors committed by it in the first and last digestions accumulate innumerable
inconveniences upon the whole. Its indignation or mansuetude, its inquietude
or complacency, its fullenness or alacrity, deject or erect all that are
Clients and Retainers to this noble part: so that they are all forced to do
homage to its Sovereignty, without which they are not able to subsist. Regis ad
exemplum totus componitur Orbis: This being assisted by its Viceroy the Spleen
is that which is (...), Imperial in this microcosm, at whose smiles or frowns
an Eutaxie or Ataxie is discovered in this little Universe. The Blus
Alterativum and Motivum of this predominant vital viscus is perspicuous in all
infirmities belonging to this Synopsis of Nature. For when did any ever fall
sick of a fever of what kind soever without a defection in stomach and spleen,
herein is pregnant the Embryon or Seminal initations of Cephalalgie, Scotomie,
Epilepsie, Apoplexy, Lethargy, Madness, Coughs, Tissick, Squinsie,
Peripneumonie, Pleurisy, Haemorrhagy, Dyarrhaea, Lienterie, Dysentery,
dropsies, cachexie, atrophie, Marasmus, Dysuries, and Strangurie, external
tumors, Ulcers, and a multitude of Cutaneous affects. Although several of
these named in process of time become Substantives, moving in their proper
sphere: yet I find them generally like Comets, to have a dependence, and to
follow the Rhyme or Modulation of (...), the first moving cause, so that he
that intends ever to Cure fundamentally the secundary affect, must ever have an
eye to the primary: otherwise he will find his labor for the most part come to
naught. Besides, as these Entia morbida, own their first being usually to this
admirable membrane, whose influence and Aspect is remarkable upon the very
extimous particles: so likewise whatsoever extraneous occurs venomous, hostile
or repugnant to any outward part, the same in a short or longer time is
communicated to the stomach, as I was plainly sensible of, after the dissection
of a Pestilential Body; the poison of which stealing in through the pores of my
hand, never rested till it concentrated in the mouth of my ventricle, where I
found my self first afflicted, and from thence had it not been disturbed, a
Period must necessarily have been put to my life.

Touching those morbosities that take up their habitation in the spirits and
juice diffused in the divaricated Branches: their origination is commonly from
errors of the sixth digestion, whereupon many exorbitant images are here
deciphered. Although I confess the judications require that the Physician
direct his Remedies to the part affected (remote from the first digestion) as
to the main scope, yet he shall find that there is such a Sovereign power, in
this Chyliferous Tunicle, that what medicine is ingested into it, receives some
sanative impress or Character for the Cure of the disease that subsists by it
self. For nothing can come into the upper or farther distant Rooms before it be
thoroughly examined and receive a Ticket for its entrance by the first, and as
this approves the thing assumed, a Pasport is granted for its farther
permeation.

This acute membrane is endued with most exquisite sense for those things, the
energie whereof our Palate cannot in the least discover, is quickly made
manifest by the Odor and Sapour of the Archeus here implanted. For example,
many Mercurial and antimo. (...), insipid solutives, whose operation our
Lingual Gust could never find out, are by the nimble sent of this Stomachical
spirit plainly detected to be deletery and of a virulent Nature: whose sad
effects many times reach the nerves and extremities of the limbs by reason of a
colliquating, tabefying sigillation here set upon them, and so is by way of
influence or Actio Regiminis, Regular action over the whole injaculated into
other parts; yea such an inexpungible stigma is sometimes made by the (...),
fore-taster upon this tender membrane, that notwithstanding the Cathartick
matter be totally proscribed, yet the Cachoethick impress thereof remains, a
wasting Diarrhaea following.

I have formerly contemplated (not without great dissatisfaction til I
understood better things) concerning the true cause how some Remedies (without
any perceptible Odor or considerable sapour) not to be conquered by the
strongest reverbating fire, nor dissoluble by our stomachs could possibly
perform so great Cures in the consines of our body. As Lapis Ossifragus for
instance, which (according to the great Doctor of Nature Van Helmont, whose
Philosophy I am bound to follow, because I find practical verity therein)
powerfully heals Ulcers, Wounds and Fractures of the extreme parts: and yet
says he, non dissolvitur a Stomacho Humano, nec pro inde penetrat ad procul
dissita in materia sui lapidea: it goes no farther than the Stomach and
Intestines.

Antimonium Diaphoreticum (now at length allowable to be given, but not as the
shops frequently prepare it) is of rare virtue against diverse stubborn maladies
fixed in the Ramuscles of the Limbs. It makes a profitable Diaphaeresis,
edulcorates acidities, expels malignant pustles and spots, yet suffers no
deperdition of substance, neither is it admitted beyond the first long Cavity.
Some so dotated, as Antimo. Diapho. but of greater virtue do I use, which go no
farther than the stomach and its Appendix, however extend their admirable
effects to the superficies every way.

What incomparable sanative power is in the highly purifyed sulphurs of
minerals actuated only in the first digestion, is well known to those Adepti,
who become Masters of such Arcana's, being thoroughly acquainted with their
appropriation in time of greatest necessity. These while they are yet in the
first Receptacle, do appease, pacify, compose the fury of the Archeus by their
solar illumination, so that it reflects upon it self with exceeding delight, as
in a terse Mirror at the presence of these Specula Nitentia: whereby it gets
force to oppugn and discreetly to insult over that which before caused a
distraction, confusion, pusillanimity in its family.

This being granted (yet no farther than I can assert experimentally, that the
stomach with his Colleague the Spleen, for when I speak of that, I implicitly
intimate this his coadjutor appointed to minister a proper ferment upon just
occasions) is of so great Authority, that it is the Key of the whole Work, the
Helm that steers all faculties and functions aright, the (...), the chief Cater
or manciple that provides for all the Household, and the Root of health and
sickness: Then will it be worth inquiry, whether the Galenists that now
perforce denominate themselves, though improperly (Chemists) take an authentic
course in the Therapentick part of Physic.

And first I shall begin with Dr. Willis, whose method of Curing is founded
upon his Quinary Doctrine of sal. sul. mer. W. E. This knowing man seeming to
be a Paracelsian, according to those principles he borrowed from that great
Philosopher; should also imitate him in Re Medica, studying to dive into those
Arcana's, with which as the Epitaph testifies, he Cured Dira illa Vulnera
Lepram, Podagram, Hydropysim aliaque insanabilia Corporis contagia: A list of
those diseases which are accounted by the Galenists incurable. I conceive it no
whit more beneath Dr. Willis, than that genuine Philosopher Helmont to be an
interpreter of those (...) of Paracelsus, which were able to perform
stupendous Cures. Had he attained any of these, he would have scorned to
publish such poor, Pedantick, trivial Medicines in his Tracts, De Morbis
Convulsivis and de Scorbuto. I can hardly forbear to blush in the behalf of
this Eminent Science, when I read one ex^olled for a Hiatrical Chemist
prescribe for the Scorbute solutives, as P. 256. 257. (...), that make as well
as carry off corrupt matter being very slightly corrected, injurious to the
stomach and its ferment, such as Sena, Reubarb, Cassia, Tamarinde, Manna,
Mechoacan, Turbith, etc. Concretes that have couched in them a clancular
poison, and so must needs, being uncorrected rather increase than diminish the
malignity of the Scurvy deeply radicated: yea if it fall out that the Patient
seems to find a melioration, it is but by accident; for as the Poet says, Dat
saepe injuria luerum, that which is noxious may by chance produce something
commodious rather by hap than any good cunning: But what is this to level
directly at the mark, to exhibit what is adaequate or proportionable to the
venom of such an Atrocious malady. It is of little validity to purge away sal.
sul. water, etc. degenerate Products (no whit essential to this Plague) unless
the seminal poison be mortifyed, the Idaea thereof obliterated, and the
fountain of acidities stopped, the ferments of the shops, especially the 1. and
6. reformed, and the Archeus invigotated, which how these recipes, can effect a
Forrago whereof is there conglomerated, seem to me impossible: ever since I got
out of the mire of that fatal way. What a deal of superfluous trash (unworthy
of a sincere Spagyrist, who ought (according to the Etymon) to separate the
impure fruitless part, and to congregate the Crafis; the seminal virtue and
refined essence of every Concrete, that the (...), the Cook-room which dresses
for the whole, may be less tormoiled, pestered, and encumbered in its
preparation.) I say what refuse has Dr. Willis commended to the world against
the Scurvy under the form of Electuaries, Confections, Powders, Pills,
Tabulets, Decoctions, Infusions, Expressions, Syrups, etc. to inquire into the
absurdities, incongruities, insufficiencies of each particular, and to compare
them with the Chemical Standard, will take up more Ink and Paper than I have
allowed me.

Neither would I have any think I am an enemy to the specific virtue of any
single Concrete as it is entire, able to challenge a propriety by a certain
effect of what is attributed to it: In no wise: for I much applaud that. But I
utterly dislike a plurality of needless ingredients: Nam frust a fit per plura,
etc. a permission of their Faeculencies and Gummosities to remain to the
interposition or Sepulture of their virtues; their Castration, frivolous
corrections, a disparity in their conjugation, a connection of things which are
not (...), able to draw in the same yoke with the rest for the accomplishment
of the intention proposed.

If the Doctor declares himself an absolute Physician in that, he prescribes
Chymycal and Galenical Preparations according to his method, as occasion and
indications require, rather choosing sometimes the safest way a long time
trodden in, than this new Hazardous, perhaps desperate Tract, either quickly
killing or curing: Moreover, for his part he is much for this Pyrotechnycal
way, supposed it be modifyed or regulated by his Learned Pen, as appears by his
principles borrowed of Paracelsus (how true that severe Assertor of verity Van
Helmont has discovered in his Tria Prima Chymicorum) his prescriptions
likewise plead for him, wherein he stands up in the defense of Infu. Croc.
Metal. Mercu. Vi. Sulp. Anti. Glanb. as fitting vomits. Antimo.

Cremo. seu Crystal Tart. Sal and Tinctu Tartari Tarta. Vitrio. Chalybea.
(which I much question whether rightly prepared) Elyx. Propriet. Mixtur. Vitri.
Spir. simp rectificat. Spir. C. Cer. which according as his Theorems and
observations direct him, he puts in practice.

This here delivered I confess at first glance seems very specious and winning,
but thoroughly examined by an intuitive Sophist is to be rejected.

For first concerning his method, I deny it to be Legitimate, the shortest way
(according to the exposition of the word) and no otherwise than I can prove
demonstratively. What right order of Curing effectually, speedily, and surely,
can there be expected from this (...), this Hermaphroditical Linsey Wolsey
course, where the active energie of the one shall be retunded by dullness of the
other. This must needs cause a Hysteron Pro^eron in Nature, put it forward with
one hand, and pull it back with the other: so making of an Acute, a Chronick
disease. As for what may be alleged that this Galenick is the safest way, I
cannot understand it in any other sense than thus, that for a man to be
debarred of the most certain means to keep him alive, is the safest way to
bring him to his death. He that boils chips in water instead of something
Alimental to nourish a weak person, although he may pretend not to act any
thing positively injurious, yet privatively he is guilty of the debility he
lies under. Sir, you and I must answer for omissions, as well as commissions.
What may be said concerning the Antiquity of the way, is no way prevalent with
me, to free it from falsity:

Trita frequensque via per Amici fallere nomen,
Trita frequensque licet sit via crimen habet.
The malicious or ignorant aspersions thrown upon this most beneficial Art, do
not at all now move me who know the contrary, and can make a patefaction
practically: if I might be admitted, that no medicines whatsoever are generally
so powerful and safe, if rightly managed as Spagyrical, I mean not these common
Ant. mercural, of the shops, nor oil of vitriol sul. Salt, etc. but what are
made by a Philosopher, (...), with his own hands. The best Sack is no whit
degraded in its excellency, because some Vintners adulterate it, or intemperate
persons debauch themselves therewith.

I cannot deny, but Dr. Willis carrys a great Repute in the World of being an
eminent Philosopher, partly for his artificial compilement of a Physiologie
resulting from his Quinta Prima, partly from his frequent exhibitions of what
is Chymycal: yet under favor of so Worthy person, I am forced out of Cordial
Respect I have for Truth, my Neighbor, King, and Country, to avouch that this
famous man does much come short of the Substantial, Faithful, Rizotomus,
medicinal way which Van Helmont has delivered, an assertor whereof according
to certain Experiments, frequently repeated, I divulge my self against all
opposition whatsoever.

What poor, weak, inferior, pitiful Antidotes against these unwonted
Tyrannical, Truculent, Feral, Virulencies are these of the Doctors in
comparison of the Magnificent, Despotical, Sovereign Arcana's of Helmont.
Tinctu. lili ab El. Minerali Tincturi Anti-monial is vitae stibii pro^es
integra Diaphore fixus corallat. Elementum ignis e Cupro Lac Margaritarum Sal
volat, etc.

Now least this Learned man should question the real existence of the Medicines
of this great Pyro-sophist, as he has the Liquor Alkahest, I who am but
minimus Discipulorum, having lighted my Candle at his Torch, shall not fear to
enter into the lists with Dr. Willis, and practically make good the Aitiologie,
with the Theraputick method and medicines of this Noble Adeptus in the presence
of so many sincere virtuous Explorators, to whom we will appeal for the
Decision of this medical controversy between us, by way of infallible
Experiments, the only mean to detect each others errors. Above all, I shall
put out my self to the subversion and demolition of this (...) and (...),
weakening and destructive Phlebotomie upon the account of Evacuation and
Revulsion, a great Patron of which I find Dr. Willis to be to my astonishment,
that one so intelligible should be so grossly over-seen in a matter concerning
the Life and Soul of man. He takes upon him to be a proposer and defender of
bleeding, for prevention and Curation of acute and long infirmities, even
harboring a venomous miasm, as in the Small Pox upon the very nick of their
eruption, as in his Book de Febribus, p. 169. he sets down Nuper Experientia
D^ce (I hope he will stand to this, for I am chiefly for it) in quibusdam
casibus Sanguinem mitti omnino utile and necessarium comprobatur: make this
good by fact, that it is profitable and necessary in any such case to open a
vein (for (...), will never carry with me) then shall I forthwith become a
Proselite to your method. Assuredly this, I am certain of it was neither
profitable nor necessary for the Nation, that we should by this means loose
three persons of the noblest Extract. Again, for Prophylaxis in the Pest, he
holds section of a vein requisite. In the same Book p. 157. he gives his
advice, ubi adest Plethora cum magna Sanguinis Turgescentia aut quibus longa
consuetudine sanguis solenniter mitti solebat iis venam secari convenit: he
adds this Reason, quo enim sanguis mimus effervescit and sine Tumltu in vasis
circulatur eo tardius Lue pestifera contaminatur, i. e. in a plenitude and
huffing up of the blood, and want of any long customary evacuation a vein is to
be opened. For the less effervescence and disturbance is in the Circulation of
the blood, the less capable it is of Contagion. As if plenitude of which I
shall speak more fully hereafter, might not be abated by a more effectual way,
the effervescence allaid, and a customary evacuation brought into the same
current, or one as convenient without this prodigal emission of blood at
random, especially since it is unavoidable, but that the strength of the Archeus
hereby must needs be impaired, the only fortress against this potent enemy: as
for his Reason, it is frivolous, for spirituous Liquors cause an effervescence
and Enormontick motion in the blood, and yet is it at that time less obvious to
infection, in respect of the audacity of the Archeus resisting the venom, as
many examples confirm.

But that which is stupendiously a temurarious act in him, is to allow of
pertusion of a vein in one contaminated with this pestiferous poison: but he
says withal, Raro and admodum caute in hoc morbo celebrari debet: it ought to
be done seldom and warily, so it had need; for whosoever at any time upon what
pretense soever of Caution attempts Phlebotomy for the Cure of the Plague,
takes a course rashly to jugula^e the Patient, unless some extraordinary
Redemption happen. Certainly here the Doctor speaks by Rote, not experientia
duce: For had he Anatomized the Pest, investigated the nature of this atrocious
stroke as I have, feeling the smart of it three several times, he would as soon
allow of piercing a vein in him who has taken an intoxicating draught, as at
any time in this case, where the stomach alone is the place from whence the
poison is to exulated. It Is no wonder if the Galenists strait enjoin bleeding,
where they find a seeming foulness in the less malignant fever, when they dare
be tampering with it in the greatest. Assuredly were not strength of nature
sometimes so Robust, that it is able both to super-ponderate the malignity and
its augmentation by Phlebotomy, the world would quickly be satisfied that it is
no less criminal to suffer the blood to spin out in any ill conditioned fever
whatsoever, than in that which is so (...).

Touching Chronick maladies, it is observable above all the rest, the Doctor
maintains Phlebotomy in the Scurvy indicated, a sanguinis copia and
vitiositate, from the quantity and quality thereof, his words are p. 256. De
Scorbuto, cum enim liquor sanguineus valde impurus evasit nullo remediorum
genere certius emendatur quam crebra and parva extramissione, quippe sanguini
veteri corrupto quoties educitur recens melior and defaecatior existit. When
the mass of blood becomes very foul, no Remedy is of more certainty to correct
it than often letting it out in a small quantity, in that as often as the old
corrupt blood is discharged, a fresh supply is made of that which is better,
more free from impurity.

Here I observe our Galeno-Chymist waves giving a Reason of the indication of
bleeding, a Copia from fullness, the fairest pretense that Sect has for their
(...), Sanguineous effusions, and shelters his opinion (for I am sure it is no
other) under the pravity or naughtiness of the blood, which he doubts not so
certainly to rectify by this repeated extramission as well as any Spagyrical
Philosopher whatsoever, by his never so exquisite preparations. I would
willingly be resolved concerning some Questions I shall propose to our great
Phlebotomist. 1. Whether he can make an election of such a vessel for apertion,
wherein the foulest juice is contained. 2. Whether this seeming to the eye foul
or corrupt may deserve this Epithete, or may not harbor something that is very
useful to Nature: since Chemists take notice of a strange disguise put upon
things, making them seem to be what they are not really.) 3. Whether this
frequent emission in a lesser Quantity, considering the insufficiency of
Corroboratives exhibited by Phlebotomists, will excuse the ill effect of this
operation. 4. Whether a succession of a new supply for what is evacuated, will
produce any considerable melioration in it, according to our Authors assertion.
5. What Experiments the Doctor will undertake to testify unto us, that
Phlebotomy is a way equivalent with the best Remedies to amend Scorbutical
blood.

That this Ruddy juice is better or worse in some venal pipes above other, is
not to be doubted by any who has been Spectator when it spinneth out: but how
this is to be discerned within the vessels, I understand not unless a man had
inspection, intus and in Cute, could intuitively behold where it lies, and so
accordingly let out the worse, leaving the best. I have marked in my minority a
laudable sanguineous juice to come first out of the same vein, then afterward
more contemptible: in others the contrary. One time I have seen it extracted
inculpable, a few hours after vitiated, insomuch the Physician and Patient have
been sorry for the loss of that, and glad at the riddance of this. Yea Learned
men have advised sick persons to have a vein portunded, merely for this Reason,
that they verily apprehended a cacochymie within, whereas upon trial no such
matter afterward appeared, to the disparagement of the Art, and debility of the
Patient. Seeing then one is at no certainty this way to have what is depraved
taken from him, yea in danger to loose what is Euchymous: Me thinks this
incision of a vein for the Cure of a Scorbutical impurity should not be so
stiffly insisted upon by the Doctor, seeing he may as well miss as hit the scope.

2. It Is commonly pronounced by the Chirurgeous, and approved by their Masters
when the blood altered by the ambient, looks with any deformed aspect, as
Green, Yellow, White, or Blackish, etc. that it is happy this was taken away,
supposed to be the only subject matter wherein a Fever, Scorbute, etc.
roosted, to which the credulous Patient is sorthwith prone to assent, being
fully persuaded by his miserable unfaithful auxiliators, that so much of his
infirmity is abtruncated or dismembered, as there is bad blood extramitted. This
often lures him to a second and third evacuation.

But how inconsiderately this is done, the wosul cries of Widows and Orphans do
too often proclaim; for this very blood which they decry, rejecting it as very
bad and corrupt in the Porringer, was running in the veins free from
corruption, containing parts very useful to nature, which might by the activity
of powerful Remedies be as easily reduced to its native goodness, as Mercury
assuming the Vizard of salt, sulphur, water, sublimate, precipitate, etc. may
easily by means of fixed Alkalies and Vulnerarie Concretes be brought home to
it self.

Those supposed Phenomenon of sal. sul. water, earth, are but separations made
by a posterous corruption of the blood, excited thereto by the extraneous air:
for while it was under (...), the Government of life, it was of another
substance being preserved by the innate force of the vessels, from coagulation
even after death. So that granting it was bad enough here, yet (...), it is not
good removing it out of a place when it might be made better: and brought again
to its former integrity by adaequate, appropriate applications, which could
never be if it were corrupt, for corruption signifies an absolute abolition of
that essential form it had before, and assumption of a new: nam a privatione ad
Habitum non datur regressus: what is quite lost can never be recovered again by
way of retrocession to its pristine being. But this was redintegrable,
therefore not then corrupt. This I can make good, (...), by fact in the
presence of those that are my Lord Bacons followers, or let me suffer in my
good Name, which I value above all sublunary things.

Give me the opportunity of ten or twenty Scorbutical persons sanable, whose
blood is polluted and corrupt, in this sense the Doctor delivers as we shall
disclose by a previous letting forth a little. To these I will administer some
of my Arcana for a fortnight or at fart hest three weeks, with which I will
undertake so to defaecate and recover the degenerate juice of most of these
Scorbutic Patients, that upon the second elimination thereof at the time
expired, it shall appear in the Recipient no such thing as before; if I miss
this mark (according to the judgment of some of this Royal Society, I will be
bound to forfeit a considerable sum of money, upon condition the Phlebotomist
my Opponent will forfeit the same if I hit it right. Well, what will be the
result of this, if I accomplish what I propose. Thus much: It will convince any
ingenious sagacious man, that the Galeno-Chymists are guilty of a passive
fallacy at best, allowing the very sustenance of life so wastfully to be spent,
because they unadvisedly judge that fitting to be cast away, which being out of
its proper place, seems to their eyes as altogether unserviceable: Whereas being
impregnated (before it touched the air) with vital particles, it might by a
dexterous hand have been made very useful both for present and future sanity.

Me thinks this great Champion of bleeding, alluding to the mechanical
management and Ergasie of spirtuous Liquors, for illustration and confirmation
of his Quinary Hypothes. sal. sul. etc. endeavoring to make the cause and
manner of vital actions to be convertible and co-incident, with the operations
of things inanimate, artificially promoted by extrinsecal means, deriving both
from the same fictitious principles) should imitate the discreet Operator, who
when his wines through any outward accident super-ferment fret become sick,
disturbed, acid, vapid or degenerate: does not prodigallydraw them out good
with bad, throwing them away, but does wisely take off their excessive
fermentation by diverse contrivances he is acquainted with, stirs up or augments
the spirits of decayed, flat, depauperated Liquors, mundifies their impurities,
sweetens, their acidities, but still preserves what is capable to be made
better by Art.

Hic labor, hoc opus: Herein lies the difficult work of an exact Spagyrist, to
sequester the superfluous naughtiness of Animals, Vegetables, Minerals,
curiously reserving their virtues, excellent Dowry, and implanted gifts: Of
which if he be ignorant, he will incur gross mistakes, abjecting the Gold with
the Dross, the Spirits with the Phlegm, the most precious part lying occult with
that which is manifest, because his dim sight in this Philosophy cannot discern
and make a (...) of the precious and vile, profitable and unprofitable. Many an
excellent medicine lies involved in the dark corners of Natures Closet, which
might be brought to light if our Learned pretenders to Chemistry would
seriously take pains themselves, or encourage others: but alas! they are so far
from this Candor, that they will neither credit what suits not with their
Fancy or Genius, nor admit of a fair Experimental process to convince them.

Did I not savourly understand, being autoptically satisfied by long
Industrious Experience and Practice twenty two years, (having rolled every
stone, searched out every scruple to be informed concerning truth of the
Galenick and Helmontian way) that the blood termed foul and corrupt, may by the
transforming force of exalted Remedies while it is enclosed in the small
channels of a living body be cleansed, consolidated, and revegetated: I should
never presume to contradict or thwart Dr. Willis, endued wi^h Learning and
great Worth, who might if he pleased with some others condescending thereto
regain the Honor and Credit of this now prostituted and vilified Science, but
since I am sure I can by diverse instances and probations demonstrative make good
my position, none that is Philalethes will condemn me in this case before I be
tried.

3. Quaerie, is whether the frequent emission of blood in a lesser quantity,
considering the ins^fficiencies of corroboratives exhibited by Phlebotomists
will excuse the ill effect of this operation.

Here I shall put the Doctor in mind again of his analogical resemblance of
wine and blood, which as he would have to be symbolical in their excessive
fermentations impregnated with principles alike: so methinks he should proceed
to maintain the Corrections of one as well as the other to be equally congruous
and proportionable. But here I find him in the main to relapse and quite desert
his similitude; for he takes clean contrary course to the deportment of the
Vintner, whose care is ever to amend what is amiss in his Liquors; but withal
to save what is spirituous in them suffering nothing to run out be it never so
defective, if it can be restaurable. This (...), Wine-curer, is so far from
little and frequent extramission of his Liquors degenerate, agitated by an
extraordinary ebullition or effervescence that if it be possible he will not
let out any at all.

For he conceives it will come all to one upshot, to exhaust them by little and
little, several times repeated, as to draw out the same measure at once, being
assured that the end which he aims at will never be attained by this course.
Now I find our Phlebotomist conscious to himself that the Scorbute strangely
seizes upon the vitals, debilitating them in an anomalous manner injoyns
reiterations of a parcimonious bleeding least the patient should be too visibly
damnifyed in his strength (the custody of which should transcend all
indications whatsoever) therefore he minces the matter, supposing that what
impairment nature suffers hereby, will never be charged upon his minute
repeated furtive detraction of blood, but upon the malignity of the disease.
Wherefore the sum is this, rather than this sanguinary depletion shall fall to
ground to the disparagement of their Galenick method, it shall be prescribed in
such a moderate portion, that the ignorant, sick person shall never discover
the imposture thereof: so that if through innate strength and some accidental
means otherwise he find a relevation, Phlebotomy shall forth with carry the
credit thereof; if he be pejorated and thrown into a worse condition, hereby
afterward though not for the present, this irregular way is excused and all
must fall upon the pertinacous infirmity. Now it is plain, they will play at
small Games rather than stand out: Be doing something this way either to little
purpose, or little hurt; for if there be detriment in a greater portion, it
cannot otherwise be according to the doctrine of the mathematics, but there
should needs be some prejudice in a lesser, though not so sensible. Something I
confess might be better apologized for this extenuated way of diminishing the
strength, had the Phlebotomists Arcana's prevalent Restauratives sufficient to
subjugate the grief to the laws of life: as also for the reparation of that
debility their patients contract by their unwarrantable exinanition.

But that I am sure they have not, in as much as then they would never attempt,
yea, rather abhor to enervate in the least by the Lancet, the strength with its
correlative blood and spirits, without which there is no hopes of attaining a
desired Cure. For it is a most established verity taught by Hip. Naturae sunt
morborum medicatrices, the most assured means of sanation is to keep up the
vital pillars without which all falls to ruin. So that Van Helmont is without
controversy in the right, when he says, utcunque rem verteris ignorantiae
plenum procurata debilitate sanare velle, i. e. make the best you can thereof.
It savours of gross ignorance to assay to heal by bringing one into a weak
condition, and p. 84. De Febr. Satis sit medico (says the same Author) quod
aeger alioquin inexcusabili debilitate labascat, per morbum, inedias,
inappetentias, Inquietudines, Dolores, Anxietates, Vigilias, Sudores, etc.
neque idcirco fidus Auxiliator debet debilitatem addere debelitatibus,
fraudulentum est sublevamen quod venae sectio adfert: ejusque tam incertum est
remedium quod nemo medentum hactenus aufit polliceri sanationem inde futuram.
One would think it is enough and too much for the poor sick man unavoidably to
be brought low through a Disease, fasting, want of appetite, restlesness,
pains, anguish, watchings, sweating, wherefore in such a case whosoever is a
trusty supporter ought in no wise to add weakness to weakness: All the succor
the Lancet can afford is deceitful, and all the redress hereby is of such
uncertainty, that no Physician dare venture to make a promise of a perfect Cure
by this means, and to keep one from relapse.

For my part, I find it a task difficult enough to fortify the Citadel of
life against the assaults and batteries of the forenamed inevitable enemies,
with my best Remedies still supplying the spirits as they are cut off with
those things that are (...), agreeable to their Texture, avoiding all those
voluntary artificial devises introduced for the farthering the Consumption
rather than restitution of this already dilapidated treasure.

I conceive it not unseasonable for the confirmation of what Helmont has
declared to set down one remarkable History, among many I have taken notice of
in my time as no small evidence of the insufficiency of Phlebotomy as to
sanation with the Amphibologie or ambiguity of the Galenical Physical
predictions. For I look upon this right judicious prognostication to be an
inseparable distinguishable Character of a Phylosophical Spagaryst supplanted
by the Galeno-Chymist on one hand, and the vulgar distiller on the other, for
between these two this veridical Science suffers no little disparagement.

On the 9. of Aug. 1668. I was sent for to one Mr. Flavell, a Canary Merchant
about the age of thirty years lodging in Dukes-Place, (...), of a habit, such
as they call Athletick, laboring under a malignant fever, difficulty of
breathing a Parapleuritis, i. e. a Bastard Pleurisy, oppression at the
stomach, inquietude, Anorexia, Emesia, Lypothymia, a disposition to vomit,
ready sometimes to faint with a pulse very high, faster than ordinary, unequal.
In this case I advised him contrary to his expectation, to forbear bleeding,
which course some of his friends advertised him beforehand what Physician
soever he made use of would take. Withal I told him, if he would be ruled by
me, I could promise to relieve him in two or three hours, which he willingly
listened to: forthwith swallowing a proper Emeto-Cathartick, and a diaphoretick,
by means whereof a large quantity of foul excrements were evacuated, cum
Euphoria, with suc^ benefit that he began to slight his disease, passing over
that afternoon with such alacrity among his friends, as if he had been
perfectly cured. For all this I foretold him a Viper lay in the grass unseen,
declaring in express terms, that the venom he harbored within must either be
driven out in the form of pimples, sports, or red Blotches: otherwise all the
art of man could not preserve him, which according thereto fell out in part,
the next morning after a troublesome night.

Now for the farther promotion of nature in her work: I gave him on the day
following another Emeto-Cathar. with a Diaphor. which succeeded very well in
carrying off morbifick matter every way, pulling up some of the roots thereof
about the stomach and spleen.

After which, I followed him close with the highly exalted sulphurs of certain
minerals. He took also liberally of those Volatiles most amicable to the
vitals? These pacifyed the rage of the Archeus, encouraging and joining sorces
with it against a domestic enemy, sweetened in some measure the acidity of the
Latex, carrying it off by large profusion of universal sweats, bringing to the
superficies of his body (in such a manner as I predicted) that malignant blood
which lay lurking nigh the center of life: so that my patient was exceeding
well persuaded of me for the prospect I had of what hitherto fell out. All be
it, the Paroxysms were tedious, yet were they still kept down, so that no
mortal symptom appeared, though the assistants were terryfyed at some transient
Delirium or dotage proceeding in the (...), height of the fit, and a straining
to vomit from an Orgasmus in nature, striving to cast out remaining
superfluities and feculency, abundance whereof was exterminated before by Art.
All things being upon the fourth day from my first visit in a happy condition,
my patient being free from anyeminent danger of miscarrying as I often
intonated in their ears. Some of the inconstant vulgar about him (prejudiced
against this Chemical way that it was too violent and hot) affrighted at every
intense motion of the Archeus (invigorated by active medicines to profligate
whatsoever is hostle) were very busy in prompting to the sick man the worse,
representing every thing in the most deformed dress, enough to make him despond
to the postergation of the Cure.

Whereupon another Physician, a Kinsman of the Merchants formerly a great
Philo-chymist before he entered into the college, was by my consent admitted to
consultation, who approved of all I had done hitherto, neither could he deny
but that my Remedies were sufficient, yet being ignorant of the right use of
them, advised me to give not above the tenth part of what I exhibited, however
least he should visit for naught, an Apothecary, one Mr. Battesbee was
forthwith sent for, who I knew would soon disturb my method.

Now must Pottle glasses of Julips to cool him forsooth: into his grave (I am
certain had they not been counterchecked) be obtruded, which for quietness sake
I confess I connived at for the present, knowing all was in Vado secure, and
that the virtues of my Remedies were able to correct the vitiosities of the
other. Now a subtle Trade is carried on, they aim at the lopping off the
branches: I at the pulling up of the root. So at length we begin to jar after a
former harmony; for as soon as another opportunity was offered to me, on the
fifth day I gave him the third Emeto-Cathartick for more security, which he
willingly accepted still finding it beneficial, much, confiding in me for my
pre-monitions, although he was encompassed with those that were very
diffidently adverse to my Remedies. Now exception is taken by the coadjutor in
that I should presume to give a vomit before I consulted with him: I answered
his remoteness a mile and half of, and the fear of loss of the nick of time
since (...)) might very well excuse me. And since we were both concerned in one
principal End, the safety of the sick man (which I did then asseverate might be
attained, otherwise it should lie at my door (supposed he would be ruled) no
petty difference should arise between us. For all this, the Galeno-chymist was
troubled with a (...), a heart-burning, and attempted to allay it by proposing
and urging upon the sixth day when nature was victorious, the most non-sensical
application of Epispasticks or Vesicatories which I utterly refused, having
declaimed against them by my Pen: withal certainly knowing the main Cure being
already performed, I should both wrong my Conscience and my Reason if I should
condescend to such an abs^rd act. Then finding he could not corrupt me by all
his glozing Rhetoric and Paralogistical discourse of the rare effects of
Cantharides, etc. he flung away in discontent, saying, he would now leave the
sick man to my Custody, my reply was, and I to yours if the Patient be so
pleased, which would by no means be granted by him; being very sensible and
thankful that I took a direct means to save his life. I then proceed, asserting
upon good grounds that the danger of the disease was passed over; besides, I
would engage my self perfectly to cure him without relapses, and long vexatious
Ague, or any Chronick infirmity whatsoever: This I would make good, or I would
have no reward for all my pains and medicine; hereupon the patient gratefully
resenting every thing, fully resolved to resign himself over to my solitary
care: In the mean time there were not wanting instruments, any one may easily
guess at the prime agent to supplant me, and to introduce even upon the
eleventh day, when all the blustering storms of various symptoms were passed
over, the said Galeno-chymist who was represented to this convalescent person,
as able to do great matters for the removing his Ague by his cooling or more
temperate preparations, mine being looked upon (after I had helped him out of
the mire) as too strong and burning, now the reason of this my dismission, must
be colored over with a fair pretense that the Patient would betake himself to
Kitchen Physic: Through this door was the Galeno-Chymist with his Apothecary
entertained once again into the sick man's Chamber to attend him, who kept him
fast in their clutches for the space of a Lunary revolution, how and with what
they plied him all this while, any that has the least inspection into our
Phisosophy may conjecture. Blisters are raised without controulment, for what
reason I cannot tell, unless in opposition to my judgment, or least he should
recover too soon. This I am certain, they exceedingly wronged the ferments of
the stomach and spleen, thereby increasing the acidity of the blood, as
appeared by extreme dolor he suffered from the Haemorroides, the cause whereof
they attributed to my hot spirits, the continuation of his Ague at the months
end; for the cure of which, he applied himself to me, after that he protested
they had done what they could. Pretermitting what errors were past, for which
he might thank himself, I told him, I doubted not to cure his Ague, and take
away the Haemorroidal anguish radically, if he would be obliged now at length
to take what ere I gave without scruple; he consented in great part thereto
excepting vomits i. e. Galenical, with which he affirmed he was tired: It was
dispensed with, and his Ague in a short time cured with certain Pills I call
Polychrest, with other slight things; yet still the Haemorroides torment him. I
offer, if he will give me leave to act freely a fundamental abolition of them
without further prejudice: I my self having been miserably cruciated with the
same wound many years before I knew Pyrotechny, so having suffered in this
kind, Miseris succurrere disco: I could the better help others. Here he ties my
hands behind me, I leave him to another Galeno-chymist, who both ignorantly and
injuriously inveighing against my Pills, forthwith opens a vein in the arm to
his detriment, increase of the present pain of the piles, with introduction to
a future relapse: at length finding no comfort by thi^ Learned man, he commits
himself to a Chyrurgion, who by topical means asswages the grief, palliates and
cicatriseth without searching out the intrinsecal cause, which lying dormant
some weeks produces another fever, of which by accident he recovered nature
being benevolent (notwithstanding it was retarded by Phlebotomy, prescribed by
a third Galeno-chymist, who I am certain cannot maintain the solid truth of
this practice, if he and I come to an equal experimental determination in the
presence of virtuous explorators.

I have been a little punctual, and somewhat prol^x in setting down this
instance of (...), the Therapeutical deportment of the Galeno-chymists and my
self, in reference to this sick person, to the end the world may plainly
understand (if they please) by this Narrative, how one dares prom^se and
effect, having a firm foundation what the other will by no means engage himself
upon, being conscious of his rotten principles: I conceive it worth my labor
to collect some useful observations from this History. 1 None but the absolute
Spagyrical Philosopher can give any assurance of his Patients recovery in a
high malignant fever, seldom erring if he come in any seasonable time, neither
can any but one so instituted, give any certain prediction of the variety of
Phenomenon, several Scenes to be acted in this microcosm when ere it is put out
of order, and what will be the conclusion of al his sanative endeavors.

2. The Spagyrist can in a shorter space with confidence, without fear of a
relapse remove a Pleur^sie, or any pain of the side without bleeding, far
beyond the other executing the same.

3. It is all one to him who is (...), endued wi^h the gift of healing, whether
the sick bodies veins be fuller or emptier, turgid or flaccid: Since he knows it
is gross preposterous folly to think to dry up a River, without obstructing the
fountain, to save a ship from sinking, neglecting to stop a great leak therein.
The like madness it is to draw out of the Limbs a great deal of excessive bad
blood, and not to have recourse to the efficient cause thereof concentrated in
the Trunk.

4. The most upright, genuine, regular, immediate way to take off the
exorbitant commotion and tumult in the Archeus in the blood, so thereby to
reform it, is to eliminate with all expedition that sordid apostatized yellow,
green, clammy filth adhering to the Tunicles of the stomach like Bird-line, or
transmitted from the parts circumjacent, especially the spleen, to open the
passages of the Hypochondries obstructed, to carry off through all the
Emunctories of the whole body whatsoever is not under the Guardian-ship of
Life. This is to be done by that which Antimalignant cleansing away, (...),
wha^ is really excrementitious, not what is so made in great part by deletery
Laxatives of the shops.

5. The only noted sluice through which the poisonous matter of all malignant
fevers passes away, is the universal memorane, the skin on the which the
stomach has no small influence, govern^g this Catholic Coat at its pleasure
^n so much no successful sweat or eruption can be exp^cted as long as the
Duumvirate lies prostrate under any insulting calamity. Wherefore the arch
design of the Pysician, is to cherish, corroborate, and remove all impediments
of this eminent part, that it may protrude, explode, or ejaculate from its
bosom to the utmost limits whatsoever is virulent, closely supplanting the
fortress of life. Now whether bleeding be any competent Medium to achieve this,
let any one infferently versed in the knowledge of the Pest be judge, wherein
no honestable Artist dare open a vein, because it will attract the miasm
inward, hindering the extrinsecal motion of the Archeus, for the expulsion of
what is mortiferous. Albeit our Phlebotomists do extenuate the matter, setting
a fair gloss upon it by their sophistical evasions, pretending that in
malignant fevers of the inferior Class Plethorick, or cachomchymick
indications do manifestly require their utmost assistance before that
inconsiderable venom lying occult. I must by their favor, be bold to tell them
they will never solidly and speedily make a sanation of any great fever, or
any other disease till they handle it in some manner proportionable to the
plaugue: For there is quiddam Deleterium, a certain venenosity in most maladies
as I can prove ex facto. Had a vein been opened in this Plethorick,
Cachochymick Merchant when I first undertook him (as I make no question most of
that Sect would have strait consented thereto) they had infallibly destroyed
him, since all their medicines could never have expiated their first Crime of
retraction and fixation of that within, which by the Dowry of prevalent
Remedies afterward appeared without. Moreover I deliver it faithfully, I have
not acording to these ten years strict observation seen any one firmly evade a
vehement fever, unless there has been an (...), efflorescence or breaking
forth of something in the surface of the body: which cooling Julips,
Posset Drink made only with small Beer, Barley, Water, etc. repress.

6. The great offense the Galenists still lay to my charge, is that my
Medicines are too hot and violent, where the sulphurous particles are
advanced, preter-natural fermentation promoted, and so the fever increased.
This they would fain have granted without any proof, thinking it enough for
their purpose to buzz it continually into the vulgars ears, easily seduced by
their Authority. How many by this false allegation have been deterred from
making use of the right means I am not a little apprehensible. Me thinks these
men should be ashamed to censure that rashly, of which they are ignorant, nor
will be instructed in by any clear experimental probation. For if I do not
ratify by Art before my Lord Bacons Disciples, that what of my Remedies they
call too hot, burning, enflaming and violent, are effectually temperate,
amiccable to Nature, gentle in operation, and far from any excessive quality,
in no wise causing any Dyscrasie in the blood, although they be given in a
treble quantity, let me be forthwith made an exile from all Artists.

Now upon this stumbling block of a mis-conceit, that such or such things are
extreme hot, they do infinitely err in the oblation of one part of that,
whereof ten ought to be given where the state of the Pa^ent is very hazardous,
as it was in the fore-men^oned sick man, to whom the Dr. sent for to consu^t
with me after a gust of a spirituous Liquor, advised a srcuple to be g^ven for
one Dose of that, which I gave some ounces, otherwise I dare maintain he had
perished. By this it may appear how ridiculous and incogitant it is for any one
to detract, vilify another Arcana's, or impute any evil effects to that which
they neither know how to make or use, neither will be convinced by the
Touchstone of trial how far its virtue and dose extends.

7. I am satisfied by the late example, with some hundreds beside, that sulphur
clarifyed by a Philosophical hand, likewise volatiles prepared as they ought (I
mean not the ordinary sp^rits of Hartshorn, yet of very good use) have a gift
bestowed upon them to subjugate atrocious fevers, if they be given according
to substantial, not an accidental method depending upon poor, beggarly,
momentany Heats and Colds.

8. A true judicious Prognostication of the progress, state, and termination of
a disease, begets in the Patient a strong persuasion of the ability of his
Physician, and the sufficiency of his Remedies, this invites him to take
liberally of of them: this large sumption of what is efficacious will in a
short space alter the sad, scene, suggesting his restoration if he be capable
thereof, neither will there be need to stand gaping for a Crisis, since that may
be anticipated, and all secured before that time, if there be a regular
procession.

For instance, this person took the greatest quantity of my remedies above any
(except my self infected by the dissection of the Pestilential body) to which
he was instigated by his allevation, and my presagition of what would fall out
so that he expressly declared (not long before I was undermined nigh the
eleventh day) that I had foretold him whatsoever came to pass to that time, yea
withal had been an instrument to save his life. A man would think this should
be obligation sufficient, to keep a sick man from listening to the obloquies of
any slander. But behold how inconstant one is, and malicious the other. They
falsely now upon his Recovery inveigh against me, that I gave him violent hot
things: urging withal Vesicatories would have done him most good. He foolishly
gives credit to it, whereupon another must be entertained to reap the fruits of
my labors, to carry away the credit of the Cure.

Hos ego versiculos feci tulit alter Honorem,
Sic nos non nobis mellificamus Apes.
Well, what is the issue, their cooling, dull, flat sycophantizing slops, their
putrefying Vomits, Purges, their colliquating Epispasticks, their uncorrected
opiates continued for a months space could in no wise rid him of his Ague,
which I offered (upon the Reputation of the Spagyrical Science, valued by me
above any temporal thing) quickly to eradicate. Yea, the supinity and blindness
in sounding the bottom of the relic of the fever, gave occasion that an acid
or acride feculent blood restagnant about the spleen was afterward in part
derivated symptomatically to those tender vessels of the fundament, afflicting
him by anxious excretion, (...), in a dribbling manner, superstite causa
intrinseca materiali, the true cause no whit removed. Now Gentlemen, de vobis
fabula narratur, what ye wrongfully cast upon my hot medicines, I can make
appear, not saying only, but by doing something experimentally for the future,
that your (...), your erroneous practice brought all the succeeding mischiefs
upon this infirm subject too tractable and condescending to your Authority.

9. How unworthy of a Learned Philosopher, was it to let out the blood of the
arm, robbing a man of his strength for the pain of the Haemorrhoides, whose
efficient material cause was in the spleen, or the parts circumjacent not to be
reached by the Lancet. Since moreover there are some Amulets prevalent Anodines
for the mitigation of Haemorrhoidal Dolours, witness Van Helmonts factitious
metal, with which he could by bare application to the skin of the hand assuage
their anguish in the space of repeating an Ave Mar.

10. What a dis-repute is at this day brought upon the Honorable Science of
Physic through the ignorance of some famous Doctors, that a mere Chyrurgeon
should be esteemed more able to remove the grief of the Haemorrhoides or piles
depending upon an inward cause, then they who have made it their continual
study and care thirty or forty years, to be acquainted with the essential
properties of things.

11. That indiscreet bleeding, palliation, and a neglect of the original cause
of the vexatious piles, brought a fever upon this merchant the 2d. time is as
perspicuous to a genuine Artist as light at noonday, which if I had not
prevented (absit jactantia) had he been guided by my directions, I would have
been liable to a severe mulct.

12. Lastly, it is no firm argument at all, that the Lancet does directly,
solidly, or radically cure any great fever, because this Merchant at last
through innate vigor accidentally recovered: For this will be but Elenchus
causae pro non causa, unless they will stand to maintain it according to my
Lord Bacon's way of (...), experimentally.

After this little digression, I now return to our D^ctor, that we may examine
the fourth Quaery.

4. Whether the succession of a new supply of blood for the old corrupt
emitted, will produce any considerable melioration in it according to our
Authors assertion.

There has been of late an invention I suppose more ingenius than useful, of
the transfusion of the blood of one body into another, which according to
Report of some knowing men, has caused such an alteration in this balsamic
mass, that great diseases have been Cured. I wish this experiment might so far
hold current, that our Phlebotomists might infuse some laudable juice in lieu
of the depraved they effuse, then should I quickly concur with them in this,
(...), remotion of evil and reposition of good: then should I conclude they
were Spagyrists indeed, did really perform what they verbally express. But since
I see no such matter acted by them, their utmost scope they level at being the
piercing the vessels, and drawing out what is contained in them good or bad,
without any solicitude to make a vicisitudinary immission of what is better.

I have very good reason to contrad^ct this Phlebotomical method of curing,
which debilitates Nature by emission of blo^d, termed corrupt, the efficient
cause thereof remaining untouched.

For the Confirmation of this truth, I shall allege Reason, Authority, and
Experiment.

The means used to let out bad blo^d without removing the efficient cause
thereof, is no direct method of healing.

Now Phlebotomy lets out bad blood without removing the efficient cause
thereof, Ergo, Phlebotomy is no direct method of healing.

The major is thus proved: whatsoever suffers the cause to remain, can never
remove the effect; for manente causa manet effectus.

Now Phlebotomy suffers the cause to remain, Ergo, it can never remove the
effect.

The minor is made good by frequent experiments, if the cause of bad blood were
cut off the fever or Scorbute depending, according to Dr. Willis upon the
degeneration of sal. and sul. therein would quickly cease, but we plainly see
the contrary, for after the veins are much depleted, the d^sease becomes more
truculent, and oftentimes mortal, which could never be if this depraved blood
were any other than a Product or Effect of an essential morbifick cause. The
same Agent which in sanity sangu^fies regularly without any considerable
defection. In sickness becomes exorbitant, sending out a vicious juice into all
parts, be it good or bad, it still springs from a Root which continually feeds
the branches: so that it cannot be other than great folly and wrong to the
Patient, to let out that juice, though it seem never so corrupt, when another
of the like condition must needs enter into its place, derived from that shop
the Duumvirate, where it first receives a previous Rudiment, which ought in all
reason rather to be reformed, than to give vent to those easily evanid
particles inseparably joined with this ruddy Liquor, how ill soever
represented. If all contained in the veins (supposed to be corrupt) were
discharged, yet as long as the ferments principally of the first and sixth
digestion deviate from their right scope, there would in short space be a
succedaneous repletion of a matter equally contemptible, yea, worse in respect
of an enervation of strength than before. But since a total riddance of this
foul guest can hardly be made by Art in a very Cachochymick body without
hazarding the life, there being a kind of necessity to leave some behind: no
sooner is there an accession of any approved every way completed Chyme, but it
is forthwith deteriorated and infected by the contact of the relic of that
filthy reprobate Gore, which still harbors in the vessels wherein is a peccant
ferment endangering as long as it continues the faedation of the whole mass, a
little Leaven leavening the whole lump. Wherefore in my judgment, with humble
submission to better reasons the Doctor is much out of the way in taking this
course of mutilating and impoverishing the vitals, the preservation of which
transcends all other indications whatsoever, considering no solid benefit
accrues thereby, withal weighing how the cause of most calamities, as the
Scurvy, venereal Lues have their rise from a venomous seed ingrafted about the
Hypochondries: for the abortion or strangulation of which all our best Arcana
's are but little enough efficacious. In brief, the true method is to scour
every way by proper Mediums, the filth or feculency gathered together in the
first foundation, destroying likewise the venom, reducing the error of the
parts to their due Eupraxie, corroborating them: then need we not doubt
whatsoever is superstructed will quickly be brought to a handsome conformity,
whereby this stately structure may be kept Sarta tecta, in good reparations
many years.

2. The Authority I shall cite against this extramission of putrid blood, to
the diminution of the strength, without any amolition of the cause thereof, is
Van Helmont, who is to me as an hundred testimonies. His words are these, p.
184. lib. de Febr. Etenim ostendant non contradicere, quod febri proprium sit
Cruorem ipsum inquinare and hanc proprietatem tolli a posteriori a putrefacti
scilicet remotione? Etenim si primum Imperuor sanguis e vena depromatur,
iterato venam pandunt interim vires consternunt turbantque hinc and Crisis spem
tollunt, quid si tum rubicundior effluxerit. Certe exclamant. Quasi totum mali
Agmen ablatum prima vice, fuissetque febrium seeds, a Cord ad cubitum duntaxat
extensa bonus autem circa Hepar resideret, i. e. But let them make it appear if
this do not imply a contradiction, that a fever has a property to pollute the
blood, and that this properly can be taken away a posteriori, by a posterous
manner, to wit, by withdrawing what is putrefyed. For if first the fouler blood
be let out, they open a vein again: all this while they overthrow and confound
the strength, and so thereby wholly disappoint a Crisis. But suppose sometime a
fresh ruddy blood run out, they presently cry with open mouth as Cock-sure,
that a whole Troop of diseases is cut off at the first dash, as if the resting
place of a fever did only extend from the heart, to the bending of the arm,
and the good blood did take up its abode about the Liver. In another place of
the same page our Author delivers this, In confesso est quod Materia Febrilis
non consistit in vena supra Cor and per consequens neque vena Sectio Materiam
Occasionalem ullatenus exhauriat aut directa Medendi intention effective
sanet, i. e. It is taken for granted, that the material cause of a fever is
not seated in the vessels above the heart: then it must necessarily follow,
that breathing a vein does in no wise discharge the matter, which st^rs up the
fever: neither is this a downright effectual way of healing. Thus far he who
is instar Omnium.

Yea for the countenance of this truth, I have something very conducible from
Dr. Willis, his words are these, p. 75. de Feb. Prae caeteris vero observatione
constat quod crebra sanguinis missio Homines febri aptiores reddat, i. e. Now
above all, it is certainly known according to observation, that o ten bleeding
makes men more apt to fall into a fever: Again he follows it close, Hinc fit
ut qui crebro mutunt sanguinem, non tantum in febres sunt proclives verum etiam
pinguescere soleant propter Cruorem Succo Sulphureo^plus impregnatum, i. e.
Hence it comes to pass, that they who often breath a vein, are not only prone
to fall into fevers, but are also wont to grow fat by reason the blood is full
of sulphur. In another place to this purpose he drives it home, Qui sanguinem
habent sale volatilizato been saturatum ii sunt minus febribus obnoxii: hinc
etiam qui saepius sanguinem emittunt ad febres aptiores sunt, i. e. They whose
blood abound with volatile Salt, are not subject to fevers: For this cause,
they that use Phlebotomy often, are more liable to fevers. Well then, the
Doctor and I agree thus far in the main, that frequent bleeding procures
fevers, which is sufficient to back my assertion, that Phlebotomy is no good
method of healing, since it is plainly a Procatartick cause of fevers. For
whatsoever means exhausting the strength (as I can demonstrate this course,
does more or less sensibly or insensibly) inviting and making way for fevers,
instead of preventing them, is not to be approved of or allowed in Curing the
Scurvy or other diseases: unless we act like Tinkers, some of whom are reported
to mend one hole and make another; for how possible can it consist with the
Honor and Credit of a Physician, quem creavit Altissimus, to go about to
correct the blood by often letting it out in a Chronick infirmity, likewise
withal to usher in (...); as it were to be a Pander to the introduction of an
Acute fever, which in a short space dissipates that strength which this
Phlebotomical harbinger has in part worsted.

Certainly then there is a better way (if we could hit on it) to reform this
juice (without an elumbation of the vitals) by proper Medicines, which the good
Creator has ordained, able to supply the blood with a sufficient quantity of
volatile Salt, and to take away the exuberance of its sulphur (if the cause of
fevers) as this Learned Defendant would have, from whom I dissent, unless he
can convince me by practice, or mechannically show to my eye more sulphur in
the Pyrotechnical Analysis of blood taken from one afflicted with a high
fever, than from that extracted from a Scorbutical or venereal body, etc. The
sum of all is this, if it be so, that striking a vein often in a long tedious
disease, is a preparatory for a sharp eaver as we both herein jump right in our
observation: then am I certain that Phlebotomy repeated in an acute sickness,
is a door set open, an inlet for a long infirmity, so that this mode of
defalcating the vigor of the spirits does for the most part (as I have
strictly heeded many years) disarm and plunder Nature in such sort, that it
cannot resist the assaults of every pettey invading infirmity, witness those
multitudes, who after sharp conflicts fall either into Relapses or Agues,
Scorbute, Dropsies, Consumptions, Atrophie, Jaundies, Asthma's, etc. which
might be easily prevented, if a mature regular course were taken to give
convenient Emeto-catharticks, Analepticks, Diaphoreticks, which safely and
speedily cleanse the stomach, keep up the strength and breath, the whole body:
then need we not fear any mischief from this late invention, Redundance of
Sulphur or Salt in the blood, no more than choler, phlegm, and melancholy of
the ancients. I would fain be satisfied how this sanguimission is the cause of
such a congestion of sulphur in this bloody mass, out of which there is no
elective subduction of the Salt, and a reservation of sulphur behind, but both
fly out promiscuously, not to be discriminated by the eye till the fire which
produces these Phenomenon, makes a secretion of the homogenous juice into these
heterogene parts, inconfiderately denominated principles which are never so
separated by the Archeus, in so much, as if one spin o^t more than another, it
is by accident, never intended by Nature, then a fever may as well be
sometimes prevented, as invited according to the Aet^ological Hypothesis.

Neither can I apprehend where and how a greater quantity of sul. above salt
should be engendered after iterated Phlebotomy, unless be meant by sul. a
spurious matter growing out of kind, never intended by the scope of Nature,
which works regularly and uniformly. Indeed so this may very well be after the
stock of life is exhausted, that the stomach Archeus and ferments becoming
flaccid, more dregs and exotic strangely disguised, abortive conceptions do
forthwith start up, attiring themselves in various shapes, appearing afterward
upon some stimulating occasions upon the Theater of the microcosm acting
various Scenes of diseases according to the pravity and malignity of each
excrement dis-junctive or copulative. Me thinks it is more consentaneous to
Reason that a degenerate salt should rather abound in the body after this
unkindly evacuation, since all the shops of digestions endeavor much about acid
or urinous salts, as is eminently apparent in the first and second
Labora^ories, most of the visible excrements, urine, tears, etc. even of a hall
person being saline. Hence we may very well conclude, that our Phlebotomist is
much to seek in the cause and cure of a fever since he makes hat cause thereof,
which is only a Product of the fire, not really existent, withal pretends to
take it away by that means which brought it: for certainly what did mischief in
this kind, ab Anteriori, can hardly do otherwise, a Posteriori. What gave
occasion to admit it at first, cannot well be expected to dismiss it once
entered, unless it be for a while, that it may again return to take stronger
possession.

Serius ejicitur quam non admittitur Hospes. Experto Creed, What the great
Philosopher Van He^mont has set down before-cited, I can maintain as certain
truth by multiplied experiments above these two and twenty years, having in
procincture not a few Patients ready to appear upon meet opportunity to attest
how their veins have been acquitted of abundance of corrupt blood (as they
thought) yet their infirmit^es grown more strong and pertinacious, and Nature
more weak: so doubtless must have perished, had they no^ r^ceived succor at
length by this powerful C^ymical Art. Many medical Histories could I mention
apposite for this purpose, tending to the subversion of this Phlebotomical
method, but I conceive it will signify little with those, who are obstinately
prejudiced against whatsoever I relate in this kind. Wherefore I rather choose
(...), to come up close to them, earnestly pressing they would either stand to
some Aequi^able trials, as we shall mutually propose for the final decision
(according to the sen^ence of our experimentally knowing Philosophers) of this
Controversy of so great moment, wherein Princes, Noblemen, and the great^st
Hero's Lives are concerned: otherwise let them desist for the future prodigally
to spend this Balsom of life, keeping in its proper place for better uses that
Lancet which I may safely aver has been the destruction of more than the Sword.

At length I am put in mind of the last Quaery. What Experiments the Doctor
will undertake to testify unto us, that Phlebotomy is a way aequivelent with
the best Remedies, to amend impure blood corrupted.

Here now am I so zealous a (...), Indagator of verity by the Touchstone of
experience, that I even blush to deliver any great matter of importance in
reference to the health of man, unless I have made trial my self, or received
it from a Learned honest Pyrotechnist.

Were it not that I should be censured for a stentorian Boaster by those who
bear an Odium to this Science, I would presume to take to my self a privilege
of knowing more practically than all those Physicians, who altogether depend
upon the Gregal Pharmacopaean set up principally to foment Laziness, as
likewise to keep up a mere mercenary Trade for the Reciprocal interest of each
other, to the injury of thousands. Pish, why should I be dared by any mortal,
only speaking physical truth. Let Zoili or Momi do their worst, I value them
not. Thus much I can uprightly and boldly deliver. I have been both Agent and
Patient in the examination of the Galenical and Chemical Dispensatory: the
former of which (after a tedious expectation of some Benefit several years in
reference to my sickly cond^tion) gradually filtching away my strength, quite
tired me out, usque ad nauseam: so that I abhorred to look upon a painted
Gally-pot, or a bright Lancet. The last in a short space gave me Relief: not
long after totally eradicating my infirmity, repairing my decayed Constitutives
in some measure. Although some Philautists may judge me a little too venturous:
careless of my own safety in taking into my stomach Spagyrical medicines, the
effect whereof were as yet unknown to me, yet I have not in the least repented
thereof, being persuaded it was but Charity that I my self rather than my
Neighbors should run the hazard of virulency, if they had any. Withal I
thereby collected those Documents by frequent sumption of my preparations for
their correction and safe exhibition, which a vulgar head could never have
imparted to me. For this end I give not a Remedy effectually Authentic, which
these hands of mine have not contrived, and this stomach approved. Neither was
there any other Reason why I forsook this old smoothly beaten more profitable
Road, be^aking my self to this seldom trodden, rugged, poor contemptible way at
that time, but a plain forcible conviction within my self, that one was
erroneous, unsatisfactory, full of doubts and perplexities, seldom bringing a
man to his intended End. The other was veriloquos, right, scientifical,
performing for the most part what is promised.

Herein I acquired after some labor, a satisfactory notion of things, with a
sweet content, far surpassing any Pecuniary Reward: so that I could at length
after a serious libration of the symptoms, undertake a Cure with confidence,
succeeding prosperously therein. Assuredly this great Defender of bleeding
shall find me no other now than formerly, as it were Rasa Tabula, not at all
pre-occupated against convincing proofs, tending to the favorable suffrage of
his Hypothesis. I hope it will not be alleged for an excuse, that this case in
Question has so many intricacies, that it cannot easily be determined without
danger of derogating from the valor of truth, which often suffers unjustly
through humane mistakes. This I confess would seem plausible were the matter in
controversy merely Dogmatical putatitious, consisting in the rational
conceptions of the brain. But since it depends upon the conclusion of fact,
certainly we are not so enclosed with the darkness of mis-apprehensions, or
wildred in the Labyrinth of vain conceits, but we may by the conducting thread
of infallible experiments discoverable by our senses get out, though not at the
fore-door, yet at the backdoor. I mean, though we cannot understand the
essence of things a Priori, as they relate to their first cause, yet may we
attain some acquaintance with them a Posteriori, by their Fruits, Products,
Effects and Operations.

Now this Controversy between us concerning bleeding can either be
conclusively resolved by equal experiments, or it cannot. If it cannot, then
are we all alike groping in obscurity, never a barrel better Herring, the most
knowing of us being (as that most perspicacious Prince of famous Memory justly
upbraided some of his Physicians) at the best but good Guessers. If it can, as
I doubt not, let us put an end to this Debate, and let him that shrinks
pretending this or that evasion, be looked upon as one guilty of his own
insufficiency, which ought in all Reason to oblige him never to speak or Act
contrary to the testimonies of those Imperial Judges who are induced to give in
their verdict sincerely impartially, either in favor or discountenance of
Phlebotomy, according to what they see done by each of us.

I have in Galenopale proposed several commendable truths for the decision of
the different processes of a Galenift and Helmontian in Physic, but they have
been so far from being accepted, that instead thereof, a scurrilous Piece full
of untruths was published by one who did not dare to own it. I shall spare to
speak more of that Person who did me great wrong (for which I hope he received
a pardon from Heaven) since he and the Spiritus Antiloimoides, both vanished
together in the time of the Pestilence.

Worthy Sir, I expect more handsome candid dealings from you, being persuaded
that you are so far a hearty lover of truth, that you scorn to be displeased
with any one who shall offer any probable means for the indagation thereof. If
thoughts should arise in your breast that I have a mere design to eclipse your
Luster in the World, that I may be the more conspicuous, I assure you are much
mistaken therein: For were it not for the promotion of fundamental Physical
verities, I should hate to set Pen to Paper in derogation of any man's fame and
Repute, for the exaltation of my own. So desirous am I to know something
solidly useful in my Art, whereby my collapsed distressed Neighbor may be
edifyed, that I should think my self happy to be your Disciple upon such terms.
Be confident Sir, if I be not exasperated through indignities, you shall never
have cause to find fault with my Morality as it respects you, with whom I
should think my self happy to join for the Restoration in part of the
splendor of that profession, which at this day is deplorably obscured.

For that end, let us manifest to the world by each others actions, that there
is a manner and means of healing, beyond the Plebian Pharmacopaean or
Pseudo-Chymical reach, never to be attained but by a complete Philosopher.

Let us then in a friendly gesture meet and conclude upon those Perquisites
which may give us both content if we be sincere (...), cordially affected with
verity. What trials I have formerly offered, I shall stand to, and here make
repetition of them, adding some others thereto, directly aiming at the mark.

You and I, or so many of us on each side (as we shall agree upon) will visit
the sick people of some Hospital, with equal and competent Arbiters or Censors:
after that each party has given his verdict or opinion of the nature of the
disease inward or outward, we will make our prediction what is like to be the
Epilogue or Event thereof, whether it be curable or no, and in what time
probably it may be brought to pass: let the Galenist or Helmontian, that
(according to the sentence of those elected persons to whose Award we are to
stand) performs his business best in the Diagnostick, Prognostic, and
Therapeutick part, prevail, and be taken into favor and tuition of the
Magistrate; but let the other be rejected.

Or we will deal in this manner, we will summon so many Patients afflicted with
fevers or other diseases in the City whom we will visit together. So according
to our former proposition, we will enter upon a direct proof, who may best
deserve a Diploma or Patent. Or we will (if you please) act severally. We will
(with so many impartial Judges) undertake twenty persons vexed with Acute
diseases, and so many Chronick; after that we have illustrated the Nature,
Condition and Magnitude of the disease to the standers by (our aforesaid
Arbitrators) we will enter upon the Cure with a prognostic in acute diseases
after our first admission, upon the fifth or sixth day. In Chronick, in the
space of three weeks or a month at farthest: ye shall be bound to act the like,
the same supervisors attending you that did us; who after they have seriously
weighed all circumstances being rightly informed, considering what difficulties
both parties have been put upon, shall determine (as each of us have done
better or worse) who are the best Artists, and so receive a Reward or Mulet.

Moreover we declare that we shall take into our hands twenty sick persons
troubled with acute fevers of what kind soever. Of these twenty, we will
engage to secure (under God) sixteen of them upon the fifth or sixth day after
our approach, or to give a Prognostic upon the same days, how the disease will
terminate; in which if we fail, we shall be willing to suffer accordingly,
supposed that ye come to the like trial.

And because ye insist so much upon bleeding in a Pleurisy, we dare oblige our
selves to cure more Pleuritick persons, Cito Tuto and jucunde, without
Phlebotomie, than ye shall making use of the same.

These fair equal proofs formerly proposed, though somewhat oblique to our
present matter in controversy. I thought fit here to repeat, that the world
may understand I am no Tergiversator. These now following drive the Question
home.

We will search out ten or twenty persons overrun with the Scurvy, whose bloods
are certainly presumed to be foul by apparent symptoms, let them be divided
(...), as equally as can be into parts. Freedom shall be given to the Doctor to
make his election first of one half, leaving the other to me. Let him use his
best art to clarify and correct by often Phlebotomy as he pleases the corrupt
foul blood of his Patients for the space of a fortnight: I Will take the same
time, using only these Remedies which are (...), have a gift of healing without
spending the spirits by cutting a vein: then sub judice lis sit, let it be
defined according to our meritorious performances, who amends the impurity of
the blood best fundamentally.

Let our opponent the Phlebotomist assume to his care twenty more or less, such
as are very Scorbutical, let him give a Prognosis or Prediction in what precise
time he is able to cure every single patient: then let him fall to his method
of depurating the blood as he has divulged. I likewise receiving into my
custody the same number, presaging a set time of the Recovery of each, will
make application of my Arcana's: Then let my Lord Virulam his Disciples deliver
their mind impartially (as either of us accomplish the end best according to
our Judicious Prescience) whether possess the best means to rectify the
depraved mass of blood radically.

Let the Galeno-Chymist be pleased to manage by his Phlebotomical method for a
months space the cure of half a dozen of such whose blood is much contaminated,
I will also deal with the like number in the same condition for a month
according to my method, the time expired, one and the other subjects of our
essays shall be strictly viewed by the forenamed Censors, who shall give their
sentence who have been best ordered by us receiving the greatest benefit, and
whosoever on the other side at the time limited comes short of his Cure, shall
be delivered into the hands of the other Physician, to try what an alternate
change of Remedies are able to do.

Six, whose juice in the veins is very impure shall be equally divided to each
three, we will administer that peculiar means of depurating the blood which we
assert is most prevalent. At the end of five days a vein in the Arm shall be
opened in them all: Then shall we see whose mass running in the veins is most
mudifyed.

Of four (...), as nigh as may of equal condition of sickness, whose skin is to
be opened for the defaecation of the blood: Commit one, which you please to me
to be regulated, then shall we see at fortnights end which of the four will be
most vigorous, having the cleanest liquor contained in the vessels.

When any sick person is tired out some months by sanguimission and a tedious
course of physic, so that the Galeno-Chymist is at a stand whether he will
live or die: then suffer us to speak and act something in this case for the
credit of this Science.

We will also try who is best able to preserve any one Scorbutical (whose blood
is conspurcated) from a fever, or when fallen into a fever from the Scurvy,
for it is certain they are reciprocally incident one into the other.

He that suffers one afflicted with a fever to fall into any long maladies or
a relapse, shall be esteemed (if the Patient be conformable to his Rules)
insufficient in his faculty, and shall forfeit twenty pound; for as meanly as
our adverse party esteems us, we shall be willing to wage with them a
considerable sum of money upon every experiment.

Forasmuch as some who have the Scurvy much radicated in them, are cruciated
with long, foul cacoethick soars depending upon an inquinated bloody juice, an
essay shall be made whether the true Philosophical Spagyrist or Galeno-Chymist
are best able to heal the Ulcers fontally, speedily, securely, without danger
of lapse into a worse calamity or recidivation into the like.

Many more Apodeictical Processes could I start of great validity to convince
all aspiring souls, thirsting to know verity of things from their effects, that
there is a way to preserve in sanity, and recover in infirmity the frail Sons
of Adam without this never-intended or allowed of (by the God of unity) course
of making solutions of contenuity in the skin, for the letting out the Balsom
of life, but I shall request our famous propugnator of Phlebotomy to set his
Ingenie on work to find out more experimental proofs (not excluding the reason
of the natural causes of what we practice) for the ultimate discussion of this
debate, which is the principal partition wall that keeps us asunder. Assuredly
there shall be no man breathing more tractable and condescending than my self,
to accept of any offers tending to the putting a period to all altercations of
this kind for the future.

Thus much by way of confutation of sanguimission, as it is indicated by the
pravity or corruption of the blood. Next I shall strive to Arietate or batter
the main fortress grounded upon Plethora too great a quantity thereof. What I
have promulged in the XII. Chapter of Galenopale concerning Phleboromy, I am
ready to assert to be truth: wherefore I shall request any opponent to peruse
it and answer it if he can.

In the mean while I shall here examine the matter a little more. If by
plenitude be meant an excess of pure blood, I absolutely deny there is any such
(...), indication for Phlebotomy, for during the goodness of this juice there
must needs be perfect sanity arising from integrity of all the actions in the
body, so that it may justly be reputed madness to go about to broach this
Balsom of life, weakening nature thereby as long as there is health with
abundance of strength.

Imprimis notandum (says Van Helmont in cap. de Feb. p. 8.) ut nunquam vires
peccare possint abundantia nequidem in Methusalem: ita nec Bonus sanguis peccat
nimietate, eo quod vires vitales and sanguis sint Correlativa, i. e. We are to
take special notice that too much strength can never be offensive to any, yea,
not to Methusalem: no more can any one have too much blood, forasmuch vital
strength and blood are Correlatives. Well then it is plain, whatsoever sickness
seems to indicate Phlebotomy upon the account of (...), sanguineous
superpletion must necessarily come from an apostate juice generated by vitiated
digestions, which being hostile to life irritates the Archeus to frame the
Idaea of a disease, not as it is merely provoked from nimiety or plurality, but
from the pravity of the matter: wherefore the case is altered now, and the
(...), signification or demonstration of evacuating does in a strait line
immediately respect the Cruor or cacochymie, directing the artist to reform,
mundifie, and rid those impurities contained in the seemingly corrupt marred
juice, by proper means sequestring the vile from the precious, not to let it
out indistinctly what comes next at random to the furtive castration,
depredation, confasion of the Eutome, Lustiness, Liveliness, and strength of
the Patient, which is to be preferred before all motives whatsoever.

It Is certainly known to those who are thoroughly versed in the Analysis and
Synthesis of the parts of bodies, that ebullition estuation, effervescence of
febrile liquors arising from a pleonasm of degenerate sul. and sal. etc. as
they would have it, may be appeased and allayed by Remedies assisting the
vitals to make separation, and afterward an exclusion every way of what is
reprobate, reserving that which is acceptable. This being performed, there is
no fear that a plenitude simply of it self can do any harm, for hereby so
expedite a course is taken that the overplus is in a short time sent packing
by vomit, stool, urine, expectoration and sweat; for this reason considering
what strict abstinence the Patient is put upon in a fever, it is very unlikely
a plenitude should be of any duration. Is it not then greater prudence in a
Physician to minorate what is superfluous by safe, profitable ways of secretion
and excretion, still advancing the principal Agent, then for that end to give
vent indiscreetly to what comes next without any election, incommodating, if
not hazarding the loss of the vital principles. For believe it, whosoever has
any great quantity of blood taken from him either rues it for the present, or
hereafter: Let him that is Hetorodox prate what he will, alleging examples of
those sturdy, lusty bodies which have hereby received immediate succor, I can
make good by practice (and challenge any one who opposes me to to come to that,
otherwise let him forbear his Garrulity) whosoever is cured of a great malady
by the Lancet in this sort, is either prone to relapses, or to live more crasie
in his younger or elder years, although for some short time he may not by
reason of an engrafted Robust constitution be sensible of these inconveniences.

Moreover it is to be noted, what redress is by this means in this manner
received comes not from mastering and subjugating the disease, but from an
impoverishment and debellation of the Archeus, which being brought to a low
condition, becomes more remiss and impotent to contest with its enemy:
whereupon some symptoms very terrible to the standers by are remitted, which a
wise Physician knows are often forerunners of a happy expulsion, if furthered
by congruous volatiles, setting forward the Elastick motion of the spirits.

For the establishment of what I have before delivered, let us choose ten the
fullest bodies we can meet with laboring under fevers or other griefs: Dr.
Willis shall have his choice of five (whom he conceives do most require
bleeding) leaving the other five to me) to be ordered by my method. It shall be
put to reference who cures soonest, surest, and soundest.

Because I often observe many squaring their Therapeutick intentions according
to the definition of the fever, endeavoring to cool those who are in a great
scorching heat, by breathing a vein, let them know that a fever, whose
essential nature is to be enquired into for the use of man is very erroneously
defined, an accident for a febrile heat is certainly the product of a foregoing
cause which is primarily to be searched after, than whatsoever depends thereon
will quickly vanish.

Now this cutting a hole in venal vessels for the removing a bare Quality, is
all one as if one should lave out of the Pot ready to boil over a spirituous,
or some precious Liquor therein contained, to the intent it may thereby be
quailed, neglecting to withdraw the fire, the impulsive occasion of the violent
motion made therein. Do not they take the like absurd course, who think to cool
the body in a fever by throwing away whole Porringers of Nectar of life, never
looking after the ablation of the Causopoietick cause and focular matter sited
about the stomach, which makes an estuation and effervescence in all the other
parts. That way of frigidation which pillages the vitals, increasing the
malady, only abating obliquely a tedious quality, is never to be approved of by
a Legitimate Physician. He that will bring to a moderation the finger
excessively heated from a Thorn impacted therein, must extract the same,
otherwise he will take a wrong course by the use of mere frigafactives. So he
that will positively refrigerate in any preter-natural heat must eliminate that
spinous, aculeate, acid, acrid matter which goads the Archeus incensing it that
it becomes exorbitant, fretting, raging. Heautontimorumenos, gauling it self at
the presence of that which it abominates never to be pacifyed till it be
excluded, or some extraordinary sedative given (I mean not Opium vulgarly
prepared) which may for a time assuage its fury till it can have leisure to
thrust out the ^nwelcome guest.

Another pretended indication for sanguimission is Revulsion, by which they say
a violent flux of morbifick Liquor into any noble parts is intercepted, for
this end they use the Lancet in a Pleurisy, Peripneumomie, or any inward
inflammation: but how far they err herein is well known to the best
Practicioners, for although I confess they do sometimes in the beginning
suppress, and as it were crush the foresaid diseases, yet is it done
accidentally, very uncertainly, rather by way of distraction of nature for the
loss of its substantial Treasure, than from any true Revulsion or direct
pulling back of what is in flux or already flowed in. It Is true, when the
vessels are depleted, a repletion is forthwith made ob fugam vacui, to avoid
vacuity, but the supply is from what comes next: For As intro as well as intro
for as, however there is no straight immediate Revulsion intended from the part
affected to the Orifice.

In the up-shot this is but a contingent Cure, not at all Rizotomous, which
ought to be performed by those things which are (...), dulcifying the acid
Latex, carrying it off through all its Emunctories, rectifying the stomach, and
mortifying the malignity not by attracting into the fistulary Receptacles, that
which will undoubtedly, do mischief for the future. For it is verifyed by
observation, they who recover by this Apospastick means do for the most part
find a great Debility succeeding, are incident to Empyema's, Consumptions, and
prone to relapse into the like condition again. On the other side those who
rise from their sick beds, restored by virtue of adaequate Remedies are secured
from the forementioned discommodities. Assuredly of all those Pleuriticks, I
have handled above these half score years, I have not known one after their
evasion procured by a legitimate form of Physic; either live Crasie, fall into
secondary calamities, or recidivate into a Languor of the like Idaea.

As to that, the party of the adverse opinion urges in behalf of Phlebotomy,
that when ever there is any notable stagnation or coagulation in the blood it
is hereby set in free circulation, which liberal current being acquired, a
subtiliation and dissolution is made of stubborn Concretions, obstructing the
passages, endangering the loss of vital functions, I in no wise subscribe. For
seeing Grumosities or Coagulations are for the most part contracted either in
the Capillary vessels (seldomer in the greater, unless the poison be graduated)
or out of them procured by an acid or malignant cause: I cannot understand how
this depromption of the fluid juice should so set in motion what is condensed
in either of the foresaid places, that thereby a dissolution can be made
thereof, much less can abolish the Renet-like or venomous cause. Certainly were
there not a wilful fallacy in men's judgments, they would easily perceive how
the greater quantity of the spirituous, subtle, liquid part is deducted the
more, contumacious to remove must needs be the vapid, gross, tenacious left
behind, and the Archeus made more unable to resist the pungitive curdling
malignity.

And although Apoplectical strangulated persons seem to receive benefit by
sanguimission from a strange unwelcome alteration suddenly made, which rouses
up the Archeus to exert its ultimate power to blow up the spark of life: Nam
Animi Actiones incidente aliqua occasion fortius agunt presertim in Morituris
says Duretus. The soul upon a stress acts most vigorously as is observed in
those nigh death. Notwithstanding this Alarm is but given to the sentinel of
life by this puncture to do something if possible upon the apprehension of its
loss for the profligation of the enemy, now lodging in its Territories: All
this while not one jot of the specific venom or acid Latex thickning the blood
and spirits, making them Rigid and immovable, is touched to any purpose. Where
as a single design to relieve this syderated or suffocated Patient were to give
him if he can swallow down medicines which have a Leptomerie in them, such as
Sal. Tart. Volo. and other highly exalted sulphurous Alexipharmaca, which have
an influential faculty can permeate into all parts, quicken the Archeus,
absterge, incide, and dissolve whatsoever grumous, spurious, or congealed
matter they meet with, and to counterpoise any thing virulent.

If any ingenious man still continue to be after all these weighty Arguments
against bleeding, of astaggering mind whether he should assent to what I have
alleged against it. I shall only request such an one to accompany me in the
visiting those Patients, who are very Plethorick, Cacochymick, afflicted with a
scorching heat, the Pleurisy, Squinzie, etc. and to take notice of my
Prognostics and Therapeuticks, i. e. how I cure such according to the verity
of my predictions without the sharp iron, for the confutation of the
sanguineous evacuation supposed to be ordained for depuration, Refrigeration,
Revulsion, and dissolution of any Grumosity or unkindly Concretions. If I do
not convince him (if he be heartily inclined to know) that our Chemical method
is the best: let my mouth be for ever hereafter stopped from uttering the least
syllable in derogation of the Galenical process.

I hope likewise whosoever takes up Pen to defend the contrary by his conceited
Theory, will not think much if I justly put him to the trial of practice, for
the confirmation of what he writes: otherwise I suppose he will be censured to
do me wrong by all truly virtuous persons, as for others I value them not, since
I never expect right from such.

Wherefore dear ingenious Countrymen, whose Welbeing I exceedingly tender: let
no cunning Sophister work upon you by his (...), persuasive terms of Rhetoric,
that Phlebotomy is Aequivalent with the best Remedies for the Correction of the
impurity of the blood: But give ear to my Counsel following, observing this
method, when at any time ye find your health impaired, and the juices of the
body revolted from their good state, have special care to regulate the stomach,
whose Archeus, Ferments, and digestion are president over all the rest. In this
principal part are sowed the seeds of sanity and infirmity, here are the
Idaea's of valetude and invaletude chiefly pourtraied, although all the
membranes, as the Womb, Dura and Pia Matter, etc. have according to Helmont
Admirandas Potestates, admirable faculties inherent in them, yet this surpasses
claiming Sovereignty over them all and their Contents, insomuch as Catharticks,
Diaphoreticks, Diuretics, Apostethicks, and whatsoever carrys off by the
Haemorrhoidal or uterine vessels, must first be approved here if they be
properly effectual to bring to pass the end intended. Wherefore the direct
means to make all excretions of noxious matter in general successful, is to
begin with this Noble Ventricle to cleanse away whatsoever impurity is already
contained in it, or is Anarrhopon flows in thither from other parts: which is
chiefly to be performed, Per Emesimvel Ptysim, by vomiting or spitting, if
nature be so pleased to throw it off this way, if not, let it be such an
Emetick which may square with the Genius or inclination of the Archeus, to
carry the morbifick matter through what sluice it pleases, without damnifying or
making any ill impression on the stomach. Because I see great errors
frequently committed by Galeno-Chymists in the oblation of vomitive medicines
(i^somuch as they become scandalous to many, not enduring to hear the very name
mentioned) I am forced to tell them plainly, they neither know how to prepare
dexterously an Emetick, which can humor and comply with nature, neither if they
had it, could they tell how to use it as long as they still tie themselves up
so strictly to their obsolete method. It Is not Squils, infusion of
Crocus-metal: or other crude uncorrected Antimonial, Mercurial, Manufacture of
the shops, I mean, when I commend a vomit. In no wise: But 1. It Is as I have
elsewhere characterized it. So friendly to this tender membrane, that if it
chance not to purge up-ward or down-ward, yet does it operate other ways
profitably without leaving any mark of virulency behind. 2. Next it carrys off
electively what it finds bad, not perverting any thing good. 3. It keeps up the
vital spirits, exciting, illuminating, corroborating them to exclude whatsoever
infests them. 4. It profligates excrements every way from the center to
circumference, as well as in a direct line. 5. It resists malignity, dulcifies
acidities, reforms the ferments, pro Modulo, according to the sphere of its
activity. The ice being thus far broken, the Kitchen being in part made clean,
a door is set open for the mundifying the other Rooms, wherein lodge the vital
juices defiled with the mixture of diverse alienated Liquors, dross, and filth.
Here urinous and acid spirits rightly provided and duly administered, carry a
great stroke, not suffering the Physician to be ashamed of what he undertakes.

Yet note, I intend not the Seplasiarie spirits made more for lucre than Cure:
these indeed may be put in practice, and thought to be sufficient by a formal
prescriber, but certainly can never satisfy a sincere inquisitive Chemist; who
knows they can never execute great things, unless they be corrected and
advanced to a sublime condition of purity. If ye presently put me to the
question how this may be done, I strait return this answer, by labor of Head
and your own Hand Improve, stilling as well as Reading, then I dare engage such
refined Wits as yours will quickly find out the intricacy of these things. But
be sure you work with your own fingers, not committing the pursuit of such
Arcana's to another, whose entire desires are faint, and abilities too weak to
attain to such an excellency.

Acid and urinous spirits meliorated and brought to the highest Climacterical
pitch of clarity, are most commendable Remedies, earnestly to be sought after
by every one who is ambitious to be well versed in Physical Sophy, but fixed
Alkalies, i. e. Lixiviate salts volatilized in a genuine manner without
extorsion surmount all other, except the great dissolvent. Some progress I have
made in the acquisition of these volatiles, enough to satisfy me fully
(notwithstanding any sugillation of the credit of so a great a Hero) concerning
the truth of what Van Helmont sets down, p. 298. de Potestate Medica Adeo ut
fixa Alkalia si volatilizentur, magnorum Pharmacorum Potestates Adaequent:
Quippe vi incisionis Resolutionis and Abstersionis, delata usque ad limen
quartae digestionis tenacitatem Coagulatorum in vasis fundamentaliter t^ll^
(...) i. e. Insomuch if fixed Alkalies be made volati^e, they are advanced to
noble Remedies. For being a^mitted in^o the fourth digestion, having a virtue
to attenuate, dissolve, and cleanse, they utterly destroy all stubborn
coagulations Likewise in cap. 1. de Passiva Decep. Scho. p. 122. he declares,
Sin vero penitiori recessu aliquid pertinacius occultiusque restiterit:
assumenda sunt A^kalia volatilia, quae instar Saponis cuncta abstergunt. Mirum,
sane quantum Sal. Tartari, vel unici, volatile factum non praestiterit: nam
omnem e venis Amurcam detergit, and Obstruentium contumaciam, dispergitque
Apostematum suscepta conciliabula. If any stubborn matter lies couched in the
innermost parts, take volatile Alkalies which scour away whatsoever foulness
they meet with like Soap. It Is to be admired what salt of Tartar brought to
volatilitie is able to do of it self, for it cleanses from the veins every
dreggy, filthy stuff therein contained, opens obstinate obstructions, and
scatters the Collection of any imposthumated matter wheresoever it harbors.

Whosoever is master of this spiritual fire, need not fear to consume any
superfluities and foulness in the vessels without this mischievous
sanguimission, yea, he abominates any such anomolous course of attempting to
Cure by the abscission of the vital strength. Become then ye Learned Doctors,
Zeteticks, sedulous inquisitors herein, never desisting till ye be thoroughly
acquainted with the Philosophical (...) and (...), preparation and use of this
spiritual substance, which as Poleman expresses, Per se and solus tant^
vertutes habet in medicina, ut quis multiplices innameras vires ejus non satis
posset mirari, i. e. is of it self so rare a medicine, that a man cannot but
stand amazed to see the sundry virtues thereof, not to be reckoned up. That
great Reformer of Physic Van Helmont has in many places of his Writings given
us much Light concerning the beginning, progress and consummation of this
singular Arcanum, neither have some of his Disciples been wanting to illustrate
to us the Mystery of volatiles, as the forenamed Poleman in lib. de Sulphur
Philos. likewise Dr. Starkey, in his Pyrotechnie, a most deserving Tract, for
which the world is not a little obliged to him: Were our Linguists industrious,
(...), to work themselves, and to make inspection into their Handy-works with
their own eyes, they would soon aspire to great endowments, for the recovery of
the honor and Reputation of this faculty. Then none need use Arguments and
proofs against Phlebotomy, for of their own accord they would forthwith lay it
aside, recanting with detestation that they were so mistaken.

Fall to your business, therefore ye literate juniors (if the Seniors think
scorn) persevering to take artificially in pieces the Republic of salts,
afterward joining together in a congruous friendly manner, their parts
corrected and highly clarified, doubt not but ye will purchase such
satisfaction herein, that ye will all become as zealous Anti-phlebotomists as
my self, utterly renouncing the hodg-podge of the Galenical shops. Having once
got these spiritual essential salts, ye possess a key to open Natures Closet,
where ye may be furnished with all utenfils fitting to make a Physician
complete. Hereby ye will be able to unlock the fast enclosed sulphurs of Metals
and Minerals, whose virtues explicated in the microcosm, are like so many
benevolent Planets, illuminating and sweetly moving the vital spirits to
perform all functions aright. As kindly Emeticks and volatiles are destinated
for the ablation of the irritating or occasional matter of diseases, so
glorified sulphurs serve to the immediate demolition of the disease seated in
the very bosom of the Archeus, which being irradiated, actuated, well pleased,
and fortifyed, does forthwith obliterate that black exotic hostile Idaea
imprinted in it, exploding the Nosopoietick cause thereof: Sale and Sole nihil
utilius, is certainly true, nothing in the universe is more conducible for the
wellbeing of man's life, than true spiritualized salt, the sulphur of Gold, any
other Metal or Mineral exalted to its requisite perfection. For as the
Celestial Sun does heat, cherish, enlighten, and rouse up the spirit of all
things in general, whereby procreation, nutrition, accretion, and maturation is
exercised for the continuation of the species. So these Terrestrial Solar
Sulphurs do by their influence upon every individual Archeus proportionably
warm, foment, and animate it to the subduing Secretion and expulsion of
whatsoever obscures the Lamp of Life, introducing annihilation thereof. He who
has acquired any of these nobilitated sulphurs, may really say he is an
Adeptus Possessor of a Panacaea. Sunt videlicet says our Philosopher Sulphura
quaedam quibus correctis atque perfectis tota morborum cohors auscultat utpote
quorum pluralitas in unitatem Archei tanquam in pugnantem pugnum contrahitur:
There are some refined sulphurs brought to a high degree of perfection which
make a whole Regiment of diseases to truckle under them. For let them be never
so many, they are all comprehended as it were within the Clutches of one
Archeus. As their sanative power is of unlimited extent, diffusing it self
quaquaversum, in this Epitome of the great world, so likewise is their virtue
inexhaustible, divine goodness expressing it self as bountifully liberal to
indigent man in perpetuating the gift of healing, once conferred upon them as
he was in a continual supply of the Cruse of Oil, for the sustenance of the
poor widow. For after you have once made use of this luminous metalline Remedy
for the Cure of any, the same may be used many hundreds of times with equal
success as at first, without the least Consumption of its rare endowment, or
diminution of its weight or bulk. For the manifestation of th^s truth, our
great Philosopher has given us a pregnant instance in crude Mercury, which if
it be steeped in a large quantity of Water, does imbue it with an excellent
property to kill all manner of worms, yet does it not loose the least jot of
its substance. Sic unica uncia says he, Argenti vivi millies poterit mensuram
aquae infirere, attamen permanere in pondere and proprietate pristinis, i. e.
Thus an ounce of Quicksilver is able to stain virtually a pint and half of fair
water a thousand times, yet to continue in its integral weight and quality as
before. Wherefore undoubtedly as he proceeds there are Agents which operate
always freely, indefatigably without any passion or reaction of the Patient,
Perstante eodem semper sui pondere, Aequipollent and Aequiponderant to what
they were at first. This and other examples, which I could procure are
sufficient to convince any one intelligent, that if we would patiently put our
own hands to the fire, such Divine inconsumptible medicines might be procured,
which would make the Art and Artist flourish again, and totally abolish this
Truculent effusion of blood. Did we dexterously Anatomize Venus Stibium, native
Cinnabar, etc. we should at length enucleate such a Celestial fire out of these
Terrestrial undervalued gross bodies, which would consume many Truculent
contumacious Maladies, the Apoplexy, Epilepsie, Dropsy, Consumption, Madness,
Scurvy, Venereal Plague, etc. in some measure actively, as the Culinary fire
does any combustible matter, then would appear plainly where the Idaea's of all
infirmities do first take up their station or mansion, not in Putatitions,
Quinary principles, nor in the nerves as the Doctor delivers, unless
secondarily, but in this lofty fair Arched Room, where the soul does fit in
Council for the Regular Oeconomie of the whole Family. Had we once obtained,
this (...), the Philosophical Sulphur, we should easily master this (...) of
Hip. that morbifick malignity or venom, a reason whereof because he was not
able to render, he gave it this Appellation. For no sooner are these clear
bright Remedies taken into the stomach, but it may easily be perceived how they
display their beams, irradiating and illuminating every dark corner, whereby
health is accomplished either by altering the vitals, or by appeasing them, the
greatest part of indigested dross remaining still behind, which provoked them
to passion. It Is certain as our Author attests, the foresaid Mercurial water
destroys all kind of Worms, yet being quickly carried away by urine, comes not
corporally to the place where they harbor, but Basilisk-like by very Aspect it
strangely mortifies them without incurring that danger which I have observed in
the sumption of Mercurius dulcis. Did I not own some Arcana's, whose energie
suits with what our Philosopher extols (I confess) I should a little suspend my
belief, and eagerly seek after a knowing person, whom I apprehend to be able
experimentally to demonstrate any thing tending to the satisfaction of this
scruple: but being convinced by pract^ce, (...) in great part, that there are
fixed metalline graduated medicines, which according to this great Physiologist
operate upon the Archeus abstrusely in an Heteroclite manner differing from the
vulgar, citra sui dissolutionem aut interitum, citra sui Penetrationem, Intro
admissionem, Commisturam and Commutationem, their virtues being not at all
weakened or decayed their substance either not taken in, or going no farther
than the stomach and intestines not mixed with any thing else or altered: I
cannot but assert this Superlative way of Cure which Paracelsus, Helmont,
Butler, and other Philosophers were acquainted with, to be fundamental and
infallible according to the capacity of the Patient. To conclude, if this can
be effected, as I question not satisfactorily to illustrate the same: Then Dr.
Willis and all his adhaerents do err toto Coelo egregiously, in laying such a
sandy foundation of principles, the Phlebotomical superstructure being raised
thereon, which must of necessity come to Ruin. For who but one wanting
Hellebore would defend a method of Curing so uncertain debilitating nature,
shortning the life, prolonging maladies, or inviting them again, and oppose a
secure means, corroborating the vitals, lengthning the days, and overthrowing
the very Basis of all infirmities.

A brief Animadversion upon some notable Errors committed by Dr. Betts in his
Tract de Ortu and Natura Sanguinis.
I Cannot yet Repose my Pen, till I make some Correction in short upon a late
Treatise, de Ortu and Natura Sanguinis, written by Dr. Betts, in which I
confess I expected great things for my Medical instructions: but having taken a
survey thereof, I was far from reaping benefit thereby, so that I did not a
little admire that any professed Philosopher should at this day, when the
Sunshine of Truth is so experimentally Emicant, bring upon the Theater of this
sagacious Age such Antiquated Errors of the Peripateticks, justly exploded by
all Learned Pyrotechnists. Although he taxes not without cause the Chemists for
erecting principles extracted by the torture of the fire, and so made de Novo,
for the composition of all bodies: yet he endeavors here to revive a Doctrine
not only not plausible, but very absurd in Physiologie, and exceeding noxious
in Pathology; for which reason I must beg pardon if for my Neighbors sake, I
plainly detect some remarkable Passive mistakes (I will not say Active) of
which I am certain according to Evidence he is guily, to the prejudice of
Mankind.

First, touching his Analysis of the Lacteous juice contained in the vessels,
the immediate matter of blood into Serous, Butyrous, and Caseo^s parts, deduced
from the external separation of milk, a body ultimately perfected into Whey,
Butter, and Cheese, I cannot understand how he can maintain any such real
alteration and sequestration to be made by nature for generation of spirits and
nutrition. It Is granted a serum Latex or wheyish Liquor arising in the second
digestion, chiefly from what is potable runs along with the blood as a vehicle
to it, keeping it in due fluidity, that it may the better pass into all parts,
and carry off several impurities by sweat and urine, and other passages; this
indeed may have some Analogy with the Whey of Milk, yet is this more simple,
not so capable to be divided into parts as the whey of milk, neither does this
concur with that in respect of the manner and means of their disjunction, for
one arises from corruption caused in the open air, the other from a
preservative ferment within the bowels, the one is brought to its ultimate
perfection in facto esse: the other in its progress tends to further uses, to
be changed as the fermentative Corpuscles of every particular place shall
require. This Liquor is most visible, floting superficially in the porringer,
but for the Butter-like and Cheese-like parts, I could never yet behold their
separation in any blood rightly constituted. There is in the Cruor or cruder
part of the blood a disposition or potential capacity to be formally changed
into fat Membranes, Veins, Arteries, Nerves, G^is^es, Bones into p^rest Blood,
Milk, and seed by power of the seminal Archeus, operating by active ferments,
not by heat as any efficient cause, which is (...) impossible, as I shall show
hereafter: but I cannot apprehend how Butyrous or Caseous Portions of a
substance, having acquired its destinated end for the Lactation of the young,
being dis-joyned by the Air or by Art, destroying its texture should be so far
concerned as to establish therein the Origination of spirits, accretion,
nutrition, and generation, so that this white juice, the Chyme intermixed with
the blood, should contain the same Heterogeneities, as Milk made a complete
entire body by the Archeus and ferments reciding in the Glandles of the breast.

Show me if you can any pinguedinous or Caseous matter in the blood, unless
fabricated by Vulcan proportionable to the parts of milk, then will I listen to
your Lacteous division of this rubefied juice, which being Homogeneous is
sufficient without any milky partition to repair by means of archeal ferments,
all that is Continent or contained in the body, in the same manner as I have
seen an hundred different sorts of Plants, bitter, sweet, sharp, acrid,
austere, resinous, corrosive, purging, venomous, fed and vegetated in a very
small compass of Earth by Water. The seminal ferment of each Root changing this
similar Liquor attracted into a substance agreeable to its specific nature. (A
digestion or rarefaction, being made in the Root as it were the stomach of the
vegetable) it becomes capable to be transmuted by a metamorphizing Zymosis or
seminal spiritual diffusion of magnetic Gorganical effluviums arising from the
alterant, penetrating the matter alterable, whereby it becomes one with the
Bark, Stock, Stem, Leaf, Flowers and fruit.

Thus the Chyle having received in the stomach of animals a previous umbratile
signature for that ultimate end destinated, is in the second digestion
converted by the felleous contact from acid into saline, being made more
volatile in the intestines, from whence this white Liquor passing through
pipes, is swallowed up by the veins, and there rubefied by an urinous like
salt, then falling into the right ventricle, as into a gulf, where being
agitated by a most spirituous Zumosis, it forthwith impetuously boils up into
the Lungs, being whirled about into another profundity, the lest ventricle, out
of which it is violently forced by a strong current into the utmost confines:
hence is it again circulated or pelecanised. Thus in all these shops it enters,
is it by means of ferments and motion more and more refined, simplified, and
volatilized, that it may be the more easily convertible into the identical
substance of every part, altering what is needful for proper uses.

The same matter which serves the fabrication, augmentation, and nutrition of
the tender membranes, is also ordained for the structure of a Rigid Bone, and
that which is allotted for both, may also become spirituous if the Archeus so
please, without first as it were Churning, and adding a Renet thereto that
Butyrous and Caseous parts may be elicitated, for whatsoever restores this
frail body of man, must be made (...), i. e. volatile before it come to be
(...), fixed or solid: so that the Coagulation proceeds not from the nutritious
juice, but from the part to be nourished: As for the Creation of spirits, which
Dr. Betts would have to arise from a Butyrous matter, by virtue of heat
efficiently, as he delivers in p. 252. Butyrosa a caloris action in spiritus
abit, is by no means to be admitted for truth, by a Physical inquirer, who
studies to improve his knowledge for the benefit of others: For first I find no
sequestration of any thing really pinquedinous in the blood after it has stood
sometime in the Porringer, no unctuosity or inflammability of parts, yea if it
be put to the test of the fire little oily substance is extracted therefrom, in
comparison of what is saline. Secondly, neither whatsoever is fatty is easily
convertible into spirits, unless by ferment and addition of something else it
becomes saline; for as long as it remains unctuous, it does by its laxity and
softness hinder tensity and activity requisite for whatsoever is spirituous
consisting of saline particles: for if you draw over in glasses by what gradual
heat soever mere oil by it self an hundred times, yet still will it remain oil,
it may indeed be purifyed and made more subtle by reason of the grosser part
remaining behind, as a common effect of the fire, yet cannot it be changed by
this bare process, so as to be properly termed a spirit. The efficient cause
reckoned by the Doctor to be heat, for the framing of spirits is very
insufficient: For how can that be said to be the principal Agent of making any
thing which is made thereby, for fith as Helmont truly declares the spirits
issue from a fermentation and motion of the blood subtiliated and illuminated
vitally; how can heat be any more than a mere adjacent or consequent, depending
accidentally upon what went before in the same manner as fire succeeds the
rapid motion of nitrous effluviums emitted by strong and sudden mutual
concussions of the Flint and Steel. It Is not possible the native heat of
Animals, of which fishes are actually deprived, working upon the Butyrous part
of the blood (but where existent I would fain see) should produce as our
Peripatetick sets down page the 147. Mixtum quoddam aliquanto plus igneae
Naturae continens, a certain mixed thing somewhat of a fiery nature which he
would have to feed upon the unctuous Radical moisture in the same manner as our
Culinary fire does prey upon pinguedinous combustibles. Here he minces the
matter, describing the essence of animal spirits to be of a fiery condition, so
that being very much to seek what they are, he seems to vacillate in his
intellect, thinking it enough, if he tell us it is as it were fire, but no fire,
that is indeed he knows not what. Yet in another place (where he speaks of an
uncessant carrying of every little particle of the blood by insensible
transpiration) his words are positive, page 300, Quare cum in sanguine puro
emineat inque eo alte ac ubique insideat ignis, idem in corpore humano
efficiet, i. e. expressing how fire diffuses it self every way from the Center
to the Circumference, bearing along with it the particles of every thing
intimately involved in it. Wherefore seeing there is an apparent fire every
where still seated in the pure blood, it will perform the same in man's body;
which I absolutely deny can be done by fire, fine Capite mortuo, without
residence to the perpetual prejudice of the health.

It Is one of the greatest riddles in the world to me, that fire should be
actually in a place most incapable of it, where great quantity of moisture much
abounds, or if it be really present, as is here asserted that it does not
quickly destroy that body where it harbors: for fire being an anomalous Ens,
neither substance, nor an accident, created for the special use of man, is
always of a voracious nature, and is never seen but in some fit subject: which
it either quickly alters or consumes. Were there any thing of fire in man's
composition, it would either be quickly extinguished, or the frame of that body
soon consumed. Neither is it enough to mitigate this Hypothesis, to allege
that the purer part of the blood and spirits are of an igneous nature, though
not formally fire or flame. This is but to puzzle and wilder our understanding,
to make us more to seek what the spirits are: for if they be fiery, they must
needs have in them that which agrees with the properties of fire, as to burn,
consume, inflame, separate: otherwise the Epithete is very ill appropriated
thereto: now according to our Philosopher, Non verus censetur ignis, qui non
summo gradu ferveat connexiis Radiis in Cono Luminis centraliter haereat, i. e.
that can never be reputed real fire, which is not hot in the highest degree,
inhering centrally in the beams conjoined in the cone of Light, whether there
be any such graduated heat in man's body, let any judge by his sense of feeling.
Who ever felt any thing of fire in the healthful blood of any animal dissected
alive. Are not the blood of fishes actually cold? yet are they full of spirits,
as appears by their strength, pernicity, and extraordinary digestion.

Certainly were there any fiery heat in our bodies, it would be most pespicuous
in that place where it might be most requisite the first digestion, which our
Peripatetick would have performed by it as an efficient cause. I wonder any one
dare obtrude such absurd Tenants upon this nice circumspect age, contrary to
all sense and reason. Great gobbits of hard substances, even stones are
dissolved in some men's stomachs: bones in dogs, Glass, Stones, Iron, in winged
creatures, whole fishes devoured and digested by others: The Shark can bring to
a Chale by a specif^ck ferment, the leg of a Man or Horse, sooner than the
culinary fire can calcine it, yet are not the stomach of any of these tangibly
a little more than lukewarm, and some actually cold.

Will any virtuous person experimentous subscribe, that a Chimaerical heat of a
fiery nature, I know not where, nor what, no way truly discoverable can produce
this rare vital Analytical effects. Moreover, fire can but heat, rarefie,
condense, and disgregate, sending packing the thinner part, the grosser
remaining behind: but it can never make a seminal formal transmutation of a
thing which only belongs to fermental operations, excited by an accidental
heat, but never intrinsecally fabricated thereby, as our Peripatetick
undertakes to indigitate, making light to pass over the mystery of
fermentation, sicco pede, as if it consisted in nothing else but a certain
Rarefaction from heat, chiefly fire, that being a bare quality never subsisting
alone, in no wise capable of it self to produce a substance, that a Heteroclite
creature destinated to destroy, not to generate; for as much as it certainly
mortifies all seeds: wherefore the Nativity of the vital spirits can never be
from heat, efficiently subtiliating a pinguedinous matter, from which results
an unctuous fuliginous spirit (for that is the utmost solitary heat can bring
forth according to any mechanical trial, which our humorist calls a mixed thing
of a fiery nature, continually maintained by this oleaceous like substance, as
the flame of a Candle by the attenuated particles of Wax or Tallow. Those
Allusions, Comparisons, Analogies, and Metaphors which are cited to give Light
to the abstruse operations of nature, to the end that we may be more edified
and meliorated in the Therapeutical Science (suppose they still keep their
distance, not invading the privilege of vital Ergasie, whose secret working is
not to be every way matched or demonstrated by any sublunary thing whatsoever
inanimate) I am very well pleased and affected with, but when the shadow shall
stand in competition with the substance, as of equal validity with it, the
similie or Representation presume an univocal equality in every respect with
the thing represented, and that to the detriment, if not the subversion of the
Life and Soul of man in reference to the Curative part of Physic. Such
metaphorical expressions, comparisons, etc. I justly abominate and detest. What
truculent mischiefs come upon this and such like erroneous principles of Dr.
Betts, is sufficiently known to those whose Physical speculations are sincerely
regulated by the Canon of solid and Authentic experiments in practice. For
according to this Doctrine of heat as a principal Agent of all actions in the
body, and the igneity of the spirits, the Galenists curiously insist upon the
impertinent and Treacherous qualities of Calidity and Frigidity of Medicines,
for the Cure of most atrocious diseases, neglecting the seminal, formal,
specific; luminous, and spirituous virtues of effectual Remedies.

That the essential structure of the vital spirit may be more clearly
understood, for the sanative benefit of mankind I shall borrow our Great
Philosophers definition, page 443. de Aura vit. Est spiritus vitalis sanguis
per vim fermenti and motus cordis resolutus in Auram salsam illuminatam
vitaliter, i. e. the vital spirit is pure blood, relented or broken by the
power of a ferment and motion of the heart, into a thin airy salt substance,
endued with vital light.

The material cause is pure Homogeneous blood, part whereof is changed by the
efficient power of a ferment and vigorous motion of the heart into a substance,
as subtle as the clearest air of a saline nature, (not pinguedinous) where it
becomes capable of luminous (not igneous) vitality, which light in man and
other Terrestrial creatures effectively is hot, but in fishes actually cold.

I must wave for brevity sake to make a strict comment upon this definition,
and shall only at this time endeavor to prove that the vital spirits are
saline, luminous, without unctuosity or igneity.

1. Whatsoever concrete is disposed to be spiritualized, ought according
Pyrotomy to contain saline parts.

2. That matter which contains parts most salsug^nous, far beyond any
pinguedinous, is in all Reason more inclinable to be converted into saline
exhalations, such is the blood.

3. It is observed, the incessant work and grand design of Nature is to produce
abundance of salt in the macrocosm, as appears by the copious Niter in the Air,
and the notable brinishness in the Sea, being therefore called Salum. Wherefore
we may very well argue the same to be acted in the microcosm.

4. It Is mechanically demonstrable, two saline Liquors of a different kind
being mixed with each other, does forthwith raise a spumous ebullition,
ejaculating a Gas or wild spirit incoercible, which like motion is not observed
in the tangible concurrence of two Sulphurs how different soever.

5. The most strong, impetuous, explosive motion is commonly seen to proceed
from nitrous matter, exceedingly advanced in its Tonitruous eruption by an
Alkali.

6. Art can far more easily change a sulphurous or pinguedinous matter into
salt, than this into that, as is visible in common sulphur: hence we may take
notice of a tendency or propensity in every concrete to arrive to this
substance.

7. It is very considerable what abundance of salt is daily made in the body of
man, let the Aliment be never so fresh: Witness Urine, Tears, etc.

8. All parts of man put to the fire afford a great quantity of salt,
especially the Bones and Blood; yea, the excrements are full fraught therewith.

9. The blood in Dropsies is colliquated into a salsuginous Ichor.

10. Most diseases have their material irritating cause from a saline fretting
Liquor.

11. The better sort of Remedies are Haliptetica volatile salts, which have
great affinity with the vital spirit, symbolizing with it, being quickly
identified with it.

12. Spirit of Wine, with which the vital spirit ^olds much correspondence, is
by contact thereof transmu^ed into a salurinous like condition, loosing its
igneity and inflammability which it had before in the same manner, as when
affused to sal. Tartari, whatsoever was before sulphurous and combustible in
it, becomes Tartareous.

13. It Is apparent when any part is benumbed through compression, hindering the
free course of the spirits: that upon their return here is a pungitive sense as
it were of a multitud^ of Acicles or small needles which can be attributed to
nothing more than to saline particles.

14. The Chromatism or various color of bodies is chiefly attributed to salts
simple or intermixed: wherefore this deeply red tinged liquor may in all
likelihood arise from a copious salt in the blood whence the spirits emerge.

Lastly, I doubt not to prepare such a Halipneumatical spirit of so nigh kin,
Concordance as it were, Cousin German to the Animal: that upon the approach of
each other they shall forthwith embrace and be married together.

These foresaid experimental effects, with their circumstances being duly
weighed, any but one very obstinate may be induced comparatis comparandis per
Analogismum, to grant that this tenuicle expiration of the blood is of a saline
Hypostasis.

In the next place we are to contemplate the Luminosity of the spirits, wherein
I shall contract what I could deliver at large, chiefly aiming at an Hygiastick
end, that sickly man may be relielieved. For confutation of Dr. Betts his
opinion, that Light is a corporeal substance, I shall refer him to that Learned
Philosophical Tract of Helmont, De Ortu Forma, which I dare aver all the Wits
of the Galenists were they concentrated in one, are not able to disprove. It Is
enough ^f I can at this time instruct the Reader for a practical improvement of
his knowledge, that the Archeus has in it a formal or vital Light not igneous.

1. It Is certain there is a Light accensed without fire or heat.

2. Since heat is an inseparable property of a fiery Light where e're this is
existent, that must needs be apparent. Now in fishes there is no actual
tangible heat, yet do they abound with Luminous spirits as well as creatures
living in the air. For this we may conclude their Light ^s not fiery.

3. Let a fiery light be so modified or regulated, that it become tepid or
gently warm: yet cannot it efficiently produce an essential form, all it can do
is to excite and put the Architectonical spirit in the seed into action. If its
Lumino^s beams be united it torrefies, forcibly alters, d^ssolves, and consumes
every Concrete: so that now it only deserves the name of a Destroyer, not a
Genitor or Preserver.

4. No sooner was the Heavens and Earth created, but the spirit, the principal
Agent of all things living moved upon the waters, the material cause of
whatsoever was destina^ed for a being. This spirit was not only Luminous, but
the fountain of Light, which in a sort brooding upon this Element, made a
previous disposition in it for future productions. Afterward the igneous Light
being created, then diffused in an ample manner every way, was by the command
of the omnipotent gathered together, and as it were conglomerated into the
Globe of the Sun, whose fomenting beams being displayed and darted upon this
Terrestrial Orb in their just mediocrity, do stir up, allure, and provoke that
splendid spirit succedaneous or Vicegerent to that Protopneuma (with which all
the System of this sublunary world is impregnated) to prolification and
Reception of forms essential, vital, and substantial.

5. We have no Reason to question otherwise, but the Light of the Moon is
fontally cold, as the Sun is hot. That having a Blas or Influence upon Water
and Fishes living therein. This upon the Air, and whatsoever breaths therein:
so that it is plain, the Photism or Illumination of the spirits of all Animals
has no essential dependence upon the fire: but upon a vital formal principle
specified and individuated, which makes the quiddity of the thing.

6. Nothing expresses more visible luster and lucidity than salt, or what is
seasoned therewith, as is evident in the Sea, Bones, Glass, Precious Stones,
which may by a Technical Process be reduced totally into Salt. Since then the
spirits be saline no better subject can be imagined wherein the vital
Phosphorus can better reside. Neither is there need of any sulphurous
particles to feed it: for as much as it is not of a nature like the Culinary
fire, no longer continuing than it is maintained with something pinguedinous.

7. The Clarity, Diaphaneity, and Lucidity of the spirit, is most remarkable in
the eye, consisting of an Aqueous, Vitreous, and Christalline humor involved
in proper Tunicles, which parts being moist and cold, are a very unfitting
subject to entertain any thing of a fiery Nature.

8. If the spirits had any Igneous Light in them, the eyes of Cats, Owls, Bats,
would illuminate the medium. It being proper to fire, to send forth bright
enlightening beams wheresoever it is, if not intercepted. But no such Radiant
luster is emitted from them, therefore igneity cannot be present.

9. Nothing more lively represents Lucidity of the spirits, than the Gloworm,
yet is there nothing of perceptible heat to be found in this Insect.

Lastly, Metalline and mineral sulphurs are (not without merit) said to be full
of Light, yea some of them carry the denomination of fire, yet are we not to
understand this otherwise than in a metaphorical sense. For if it were meant a
mere literal fire, it must either be Intense, i. e. Light gathered together
Centrally, which must of necessity according to its property destroy not
preserve, or it must be Remiss in its degree, i. e. Igneum Calidum, a moderate
heat: then would it exert its virtue only by heating, not able to reach to a
greater excellency. Its active energy depending upon heat principally would
quickly (as the subject matter wherein it lodges is exhausted) become flaccid,
depauperated, and at length quite annihilated. Seeing therefore these sulphurs
are exempted from any such destructive, manifest easily tired out operations.
We must be forced to give in our suffrage that this formal light in them by
which they act to amazement, imitating as it were vitality, takes its Pedigree
from a more Illustrious extract, differing toto Genere, from that which is
(...), a burning light.

This Problem being so far illustrated, we must be forced to grant that the
spirits as they are saline; so are they endued with a formal light, differing
from what is fiery.

If so, then it is plain Dr. Betts and those of that Sect take an absolu^e,
indirect course to Cure diseases by Insipid, Watrish, Cooling, Unctuous,
Dreggy, Lutulent, Muccaginous, Glutinous Medicines, full of darkness and
obscurity, lightly regarding to seek after (by laboring with their own Hands)
those Remedies which symbolize being of affinity with the vitals, such a^ are
sublimed saline spirits, volatile Alkalies, bright, Luminous, glorified
sulphurs.

If this Peripatetick had but the gift of healing by means of such Arcana (the
true use whereof if he please, I can show him) he would no longer be
Haemoborus, a Consumer of this p^ecious Balsom, nimis Auctum, whenever as he
mis-conceives it too much abounds, taxing us of Haemophobia, as in p. 304.
because we spare to let it out good or bad promiscuously, being better
acquainted than himself with the efficient material cause thereof.

In a word, let me but enjoy so much of a fair reasonable request, that this
Phlebotomist will stand to equal trials, referring the Arbitrament to those who
are guided by my Lord Verulams Rules. I shall oppignerate or depose any thing
of what value soever I possess, supposed he will engage the same: that I can
make it appear practically, that Apoplexies, Fevers, any excessive
Haemorrhagie or the like do not arise, as he asserts in page 305. from mere
fullness of blood, but rather from something extremely acid, acrimonious,
degenerate, venomous, or malignant lurking therein.

A Stomachical Spirit or Essence commended to the World.
HAving in this foregoing Treatise of the Cure of diseases seated in the blood
mentioned (...), frequently proclaiming usque ad Ravim, that whosoever will act
the part of an Honest, Able Physician in order to sanation, must use his utmost
endeavor to preserve in health, as also to restore in sickness, the Eutonie
and vigor of the stomach, the Mine, Fountain, Root, and Womb of most
infirmities, (this being delivered not Gratis, but backed with practical
Demonstration) I apprehend my self obliged to improve my Talent so far for the
benefit of the world, this Nosocomion Catholicon, as it were an universal
Spittle, that it may enjoy the use of this Alexi-stomachon, or Stomach-Remedy,
of which I am certain none breathing on this Atmosphear but may stand in need.

Touching its Facture or framing, although it be reckoned one of my Medical
Secrets of the Lower Class, yet I shall still keep it within the Walls of my
Ergastery or Chemical working place, till I perceive more Sincerity, Candor,
and Gratitude abroad, than hitherto I have found.

I suppose there are some botching Mimetick Chemists, who will not be wanting
to attempt to sophisticate, adulterate it, imposing upon unwitting persons
their shadow for this substance, of such I advise all to beware, for they will
but disgrace and degrade the Medicine, to the prejudice of man's health, and
abuse of the Art. For this I can asseverate, none shall ever without strict
instructions ever find out the right Philosophical Manufacture thereof, unless
he himself be both Agent and Patient, that so he may be guided by the exquisite
gust, and peculiar taste of his own stomach, how to be able to correct his
aberrations in the purification or exaltation of every single Concrete, as also
afterward to make a right connection or combination of the same, that they may
be brought to act tono unisono, in an harmonious manner. Take this short
description of it: It is in color usually like Amber, yet sometimes much more
intense, even Ruddy. In Odor and Sapour very piercing, being very volatile,
endued with great tenuity of parts, it seems to be for the present a potential
fire, as it were a Caustic, threatening an Eschar: yet is it most innocent,
congruous to the Archeus or vitals, strengthening the part it touches, leaving
not the least ill impression behind, so that I can put it into my eye without
the least hurt, and have often distilled it into my ear.

It does as much transcend for medicinal use the common spirit or Oil of
Sulphur, Vitriol, Salt, such like fretting corrosive Liquors, quantum lenta
solent inter viburna Cupressi, as an Almond exceeds an Acorn in goodness. It is
most durable not to be corrupted, only it has Mercurial wings, it will quickly
take its flight if it be not kept close Prisoner.

I dare maintain there is not a Medicine of this Rank in the Nation more
active, efficacious, safe, of more general profit for the life of man: (this
Posterity will allow when it shall sufficiently understand it) than this Alexi
Stomachon. Yea it is pleasant enough if rightly ordered with a proper vehicle,
unless to those nice, waiward, untractable, unreasonable prejudiced persons,
whom like Children, hardly any thing will please if it go under that Bugbear
name of Chemical.

The virtue of this Alexi stomachon given experimentally, is of so admirable
use, that I may in verity aver it is able without an Hyperbole (let the
Aristotelian unsavory humorist value it as he please) to weigh down the
monstrous bulk of an Apothecaries shop.

It powerfully corroborates the spirits, serments, and digestion of the
stomach, rectifies the Spleen, discusses, expels flatuosity, wind, etc.
sweetens in some measure the sharpness of the Latex, or any fretting juice. It
subtly penetrates the Veins and Arteries, being circulated with the blood,
which it very much mundifies. It is Diaphoretick, causing a kindly breathing in
the skin. It is also somewhat Diuretic, carrying off gravel from the Kidneys,
hindering that it be not engendered, being helpful in the Dysurie and Strangurie.
It Is of great service against pains in the side, the Colic, Griping of the
Guts. It is Cordial, preserving from Lypothymie, restoring those who are
surprised with a defection or fainting of the spirits. It is Anti-scorbutick,
prevalent against the Scurvy. Anti-malignant, good against venomous Contagious
diseases. Antipyreton, effectual to anticipate fevers, as likewise to help to
cure the same. Antidypson, an excellent quencher of the Thirst, taking off
preternatural heat or cold, by removing the efficient cause, reducing the parts
to an Eucrasie. Anti-hystericon, affords aid against fits of the Mother, the
Whites, etc. It dissolves coagulations and grumosities, maturates crudities,
abates a nauseous disposition or vomiting, subtiliates and cleanses away slimy
tenacious phlegm, giving ease in difficulty of breathing, mitigating the
violence of the Tissick. It is available against melancholy Imaginations,
Hypochondriack passions, Cachexies, Dropsies, Atrophies. The frequent use
thereof strengthens the Brain, Sinews, Loins, invigorating the Memory, and all
the senses.

Being outwardly applied it challenges Noble effects. For it is very healing,
Balsamical, curing green Wounds and Soars, being lightly touched therewith
often repeated. I have found it very commodious in Ambustion, scaldings,
burnings: Some drops being frequently distilled thereon, forced inwardly by the
bottom of a smooth glass.

I cannot but commend it experimentally, as a singular Antiodontalgick, one of
the best Anodines or asswagers of the pains of the Teeth I have met with
hitherto, being of great force to perserve them from corruption, withal
resisting the putrefaction of the Gums.

Neither is it to be contemned for the mitigation of the pains of any part,
strengthening or quickening the Archeus, or vital spirit thereof.

With many more laudable properties is this Alexi-stomachon endued, which
frequent use thereof, and a longer, strict, sedulous practice will bring to
light.

The quantity to be exhibited is of great Latititude, from one to ten: yea, I
will undertake to give twenty times as much as the common portion, without the
least injury to any.

The ordinary Dose is twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, sixty drops in a draught of
any strong Liquor, as Beer, Ale, Wine, or whatsoever does best relish with the
person.

There is no need of being precise or curious concerning the time of taking it:
for when any one is Cacostomachical, troubled with indigestion, wind, pain,
gripes, or any of the foresaid affects, let him take liberally thereof.

He that constantly takes every morning thirty or forty drops, shall prevent
many mischiefs in reference to his health.

I am not ignorant the Galenists (whose Judgments in these Philosophical
Manufactures, and the experimental use of this and other Spagyrical Remedies
are as much depraved, as the taste of any man in a high fever) will not be
wanting according to their former Tenor, rashly to censure openly, or at least
privately to sugillate this salutiferous medicine, carping at it as too hot,
burning, violent or strong, representing to some persons easily to be seduced
Mormalocheia, Scarcrows of danger, they may incur hereby of consuming the
Radical moisture, putting nature to a stress: Of the great inconveniencie^ may
come from the custom of taking this stomach spirit, adding that although it
seem to do good for the present, yet in the future it will show its mischievous
condition by some unhappy event. Such like defaming undervaluing Language I
expect from some malevolents. But blessed be my Stars, my sense of Abuses
herein is become Callous: for I vallue not their obloquies, being assured I can
easily wipe of any of these Aspersions.

As to what is objected, that this stomach-spirit is too hot, burning, etc. I
answer, whatsoever is so properly denominated, must either harbor some
corrosive fretting salt, highly exasperating the Archeus. Or 2. Abundance of
Recrements discrepant, burdensome, offensive to Nature. Or 3. A Clandestine
poison, whose fermentescent Corpuscles being hostile to the vitals, stir up a
preternatural ebullition, effervescence in the juices, so consequently an
excessive heat.

That there is no such evil endowment or property in this medicine, I am fully
certified by experiment, and can make evident. 1. That the Textures of its
particles are not in the least fretting, gauling, or burning, but are
symbolical and amicable to the Animal spirits, sweetly closing in with them. 2.
That it is defaecated, rid of any impurity which may give the stomach any
trouble in digestion, so that it is no sooner admitted, but becomes a welcome
pleasing Guest, having freedom to exspatiate every way, no whit fettered with
any dross or filth. 3. It is so far from any malignity, venenosity, or
virulency that it is Anticacoethes, Antiphthora, an Antidote or counterpoison
mortifying (pro modulo) contagious Atoms, keeping Liquors from Hyperzymosis
super-fermentation, a tendency to corruption.

The terrefying phantasm of consuming the Radical moisture does not a jot
concern this Remedy: since it in no wise acts proportionable to the flame on
Oil, Tallow, or Wax: for these the more they are accensed, the greater expense
is made of them, therefore sooner exhausted. On the other side, the more there
is an Eclampsis, Effulgescence, Radiation of the vital Light by means of this
shining spirit, the more any defects in the ferments and constitutives of the
body are repaired, a prevention being made of their future decay, and so the
life prolonged.

This vain conceit does truly square with the Galenical, not the Helmontian
Doctrine, which as I have before explained, will not admit of the efficient
material cause of spirits, to be pingued^nous and fiery.

It is as far from truth to allege a stress or force, is put upon Nature by
the efficacious power of this Remedy, as falsely to accuse any one of offering
violence, who comes into the assistance of an honest Traveller, assaulted and
overpowered by a Robust thief.

A thing good of it self, is made never the better or worse by custom.

I know no reason why any one should be afraid to drink a cup of the best
C^nary at any t^me when he is faint, because he has thoughts he may go into a
place where no such pure Liquor can be purchased.

Notwithstanding if it fall out so, he may live comfortably without it, as many
can testify. It is madness to refuse what is innocently virtuous in case of
great need (when ever it is offered) out of a foolish apprehension the same
cannot be acquired another time. The last is a taunt, absurd, and malicious in
reference to legitimate Spagyrical preparations, wherefore I set light by it;
yet if any Learned Physician declare so much, I know how to deal with him: as
for the contumelies of Idiots, I count them not worthy my Pen.

Some other Eustomachicks and Haemacatharticks, cleansers of the blood,
subordinate to greater Arcana, I have in store, which (according as I find a
grateful Reception of this) I may bring to light.

Certain useful Instructions pertaining to the Diet of those in a Fever,
afflicted with the Scurvy, or any long Disease.
TAking notice of the frequent Errors committed by Learned Doctors in the
ordering the Diet of Acute and Chronick diseases, I conceive it my duty to
reprehend the same, as likewise to deliver some Regular Diaetetical Documents,
grounded upon firm medical trials, tending to the reforming several abuses
herein.

1. I observe some Physicians to scruple to give their Patients enduring
extreme Thirst in a fever, a draught of any Liquor for the mitigation of the
same, least as they unadvisedly fear it should cause a greater accension of the
fever, in such sort, as water cast upon burning Coals, seems almost to quench
it for the present, but afterward makes it burn more intensly violent.

Let such know their allusion to an Ens, inanimate (which upon the difflation
or carrying off on a sudden a great part of fuliginous ashes obstructing the
pores of the fuel, becomes more active, making a greater conflagration: the
combustible being disposed thereto) will not at all excuse their indirect
injunction of Abstinence from drink in a fever, being according to their
testimony, hot, dry, or thirsty. Wherefore the genuine indication directs us in
this Case to give Liq^ors which humectate, and although I am not ignorant, that
sometimes Rotten, Nidorous matter, having an Odor like some thing burnt, or
any filthy concretion in the stomach, may stir up in a fever excessive
drought, which requires peculiar Remedies for the extinction thereof: yet many
times it arises from a salsuginous Latex, or a defect of the aqueous Liquor,
which without dispute requires a supply of humidity. Let none then haesitate to
offer liberally what is potulent or liquid to one that is thirsty, for it is
both necessary and consentaneous to nature so to do: yea through this omission
the good juice or solid parts may suffer a deperdition. Moreover tenacious,
clammy, gross excrements may by means of good moisture taken in be made more
fluid, dilu^e, and so more capable to be expelled.

2. I find a sort of Physicians too forward in prescribing their languishing
Patients in fevers, Water Gruel, Broths, Jellies, Poched Eggs, or such like
aliments, supposing thereby to keep up and restore the strength of the infirm
person, not considering that the Stomachical ferment of any one febriculous is
so perverted, that whatsoever of the aforesaid food is ingested becomes
spurious, abortive, or Cadaverous, most unfitting for hourishment, increasing
both weakness, as likewise the febrile calamity: quite contrary to the effect
in a Hall Body, whose vital strength is augmented by w^olsome Diet.

This is ^e^fied by the honest able Hippoc. Si quis says he, Febricitanti
^ibum dederit q^m sano exhibet, valenti robur Aegrotanti morbus fit. What is
more pla^n? yet these self-conceited Galenists will not be convinced of their
folly in this kind, although taught better things by this Hiatrical Hero: whose
writings they verbally admire, neglecting to follow his Doctrine in a right
sense practically. Well, for all this they undertake to excuse their Culinary
solicitude or curiosity; pleading that such (...), things of easy digestion,
as Broths, Jellies, the juice of flesh, etc. may be admitted into the Ventricle
for sustentation of life: since they are fluid, thin, easily passing away
without any great nocument. I retort according to the vulgar Proverb, They had
almost as good eat the Devil, as the Broth he is boiled in; for these Liquors
impregnated, and sometimes satiated with nutritious particles, must needs cause
notable disturbance in this noble part, where the disease is chiefly seated.
For the Archeus intending to make a laudable Chyle, but mistaking, being
frustrated of its scope for want of fitting Organs tasting an ill smack,
finding nothing agreeable to its structure, does the more rage or fret,
changing what is otherwise alible into a filth of various colors and
consistence, as Green, Yellow, Black, Slimy, Phlegmatic, etc. Hereby the fever
must needs be graduated, the morbifick matter increased, and a confusion
brought upon the vital Oeconomie, an enemy from abroad being wilfully received,
which forthwith prevaricates, taking part with what is hostile within, to the
betraying nature sometimes into the hands of a mortal malady. Away then with
these Clogging, Dall, Flat, Vapid, debilitating Decoctions of the Kitchen, with
all their crude, vegetable ingredients, most injurious to a febrile stomach:
and learn from a Philosophical, Chemical Operatory how to order the Diet of any
one in an Acute evil, ministering what is congruous and delectable to the
vitals, without offering violence to the digestion of the Duumvirate, which
prompts me to proceed to another gross error in Diet.

3. As there are a Company of Non-sensical Physicians, who are loath to allow
the dry soul of one scorched with a fever a sufficient quantity of moisture to
allay the thirst: so are there multitudes of Learned Dogmatists (I am certain
egregiously ignorant in this particular) who although they assent, their
Patients should have good store of Liquor granted them, as properly answerable
to the indication of siccity or drought, yet must it be so qualified, that it
ought by no means to contain too many hot particles, least they should seem to
act contrary to the definition of a fever, which is as they proclaim, but
falsely, Calor praeter naturam, a preter-natural heat, wherefore they strictly
enjoin Posset Drink made with some poor starveling Liquor, Barley-water,
wherein cooling or very temperate herbs are boiled, small Beer, fair Water,
Rose Water, with some acid juice mixed, etc. to these they most devoutly keep a
weak wretch, not doubting to mitigate (although they have failed many million
of times) a Causos or any burning fit: How is it possible these men should be
successful in Cures, who are to seek in prescribing a Dietetick course aright?
uno absurdo dato mill consequuntur is infallible true in fundamentals. How
many men's lives has this one mistake of the essence of a fever cost? for
being most part intent to remove a quality or accident, they become very
forgetful to carry off the material cause of diseases: which can never be
performed aright, unless the strength be supported by what in some degree is
adequate to it, which is so far dis-respected by these Psycrologists
prescribers of coolers, that they will by no means approve of a Cup of Wine, or
a draught of strong Beer or Ale (because too hot as it is fancyed) the principal
corroborating Diet, which I constantly prescribe to all my Patients, and can
maintain to be most fitting for them; omitting Broths, Water Gruel, etc. For
having tried both ways, I find by certain daily experience, that vinous,
spirituous Liquors prepared as they ought, preserve the native vigor, stir up
the expulsive faculty, attenuate, resolve, cleanse away gross matter,
strengthen the stomach, augment the vitals, by means of which a Diaphaeresis, a
laudable breathing sweat follows, the direct way to help to Cure the Plague,
and all other subordinate fevers centrally: so that hereby one shall far
sooner be restored to perfect sanity, with less fear of relapse, with fewer
Relics of excrements, purer blood, better color, and far more active agility
and tensity of the nerves, fibers, and muscles: than he who is tied up to
maukish, insulse, vapid, cold (which is often a symptom of death) slops
wronging the chief place of digestion, obstructing or wedging in faeculent
dross, impoverishing the spirits, hindering the extermination of Thorny,
aculeate impurities, through all the Emunctories of the whole body, especially
the skin. Herein it appears how diametrical opposite the method of the
Galenists and Helmontians are as well in Diet as Pharmacy: they make it their
study to please the Palate for the present; withal to pessundate and starve
the animal Genius, for the avoidance of some petty inconveniences, as too much
heating or drying, giving thereby advantage and more force to the disease.
These i. e. Helmontians put out their utmost endeavors fontally to extirpate
what is noxious, indulging and animating the Archeus, that it may be enabled to
profligate its enemy (not startled in a vulgar manner at some seemingly
frightful appearances, as extraordinary heat, an inquietude, a little raving, a
swerving from right reason) being satisfied that these are but the effects or
fruits, of an Hormetick motion in the spirits excited and increased by good
Liquors, easily united with them for the routing and putting to flight every
way whatsoever does disturb its vital Government.

Were these Dogmatists as good Interpreters of Hippocrates, as the Learned
Chemists, still having in readiness at their fingers ends some of his
Aphorisms, they would never be terrefied at (...), any accident afflicting or
troubling the Patient, no evil cause or event attending. For my part, I always
look upon an intense heat following a draught of strong Liquor, rightly ordered
as forerunner of a succeeding sweat, the most kindly strait way to Cure a
fever: which not doubting to bring to pass, I value not the discommodity of
heat a rush: since the Branches will quickly wither when the Root is plucked up.
Moreover most or all vehement fevers have at this day notable malignity in
them: Certainly then according to the best Reason and soundest experiments,
confirmed by the late Plague, the most generous Liquors of the subtilest smack
are in this case to be exhibited largely without insisting upon the nicety of
any danger from heating, which though it be a terriculament to them, yet to me
it is great encouragement of a happy evasion: For I look upon those ill
conditioned seavers as most mortal, where there is but the mildest heat
manifested, by pulse, urine, and contact of the skin. For oftentimes madness,
deviation from right understanding, a Lethargical or sleepy disposition
suddenly break forth. Nihil est quod tam magnifice prodest quod non aliquo ex
modo obest. What matters it if the heat be magnified (besides the main purpose)
to some small trouble, if ten times greater benefit accrue to the sick. It is
impossible any Physician should perform his duty as he ought if he boggle at
the foppery of heat and cold, merely momentany and transient, often deluding
our senses. Forbear then ye jejune, miserable, cold comforters any longer to
wash this most exquisitely sensible membrane with any infrigidating, fruitless,
sluggish, dead decoction or infusion, in hopes thereby to allay the fever in
this preposterous manner: but take this course which I have known effectual
many years.

Permit the febrile Patient to drink at any time when he is very thirsty, but
let the potulent or what is drinkable be well impregnated or filled with a
sufficient quantity of spirits.

Spanish or French Wine are to be given either of themselves, or diluted with
Beer or Ale. The best strong Ale well brued, discreetly kept of a just age is
to be approved, if that cannot be obtained, I advise strong Beer somewhat
stale, with a convenient quantity of white powder Sugar therein dissolved, or
some addition of Ale, according as the palate relisheth, also a little Ginger
grated therein, and juice of Orange: For variety I deny not Posser-drink
prepared with a pint of the most Aedifying Ale, half a pint of white Wine, a
pint of milk, make it clear, tinging it with a little English Saffron, squeeze
the juice of Orange into it, spurting the Balsamical effluviums of the Pill
pared very thin into it.

If the infirm desire mace Ale, I shall not deny him: suppose it be well
Aromarised, the Liquor being but very little boiled, least the more subtle
virtuous part fly away: of which oversight some incogitant Physicians are
frequently guilty, for want of insight into distillation: this is the Diet
which I enjoin my Patients, always pleasing their appetites with what is
tolerable, excluding Broths, Water Gruel, or whatsoever is not lively. If any
Doctor contradict this way, I question not to make such an one to appear grossly
blind in Materia Medica, and very destitute of prevalent Remedies. In Chronick
calamities, as the Scurvy, etc. I give any one leave to gratify his stomach
with that which it can best digest, and to which it is most accustomed, though
perhaps none of the most commendable food: yet I generally condemn mere Milk,
which I find our Learned Colleagues when they are gravelled, knowing not what
to do more by their feculent compositions of the shops, prescribe with a great
deal of Ceremony to their poor debilitated Patient brought into an Atrophie (I
dare maintain sometimes by their uncorrected drossie Medicines) or a
Consumption (as they will make them believe) sending them into the Country to
feed upon the plain simple white juice of a red Cow (and why not black as well,
I could never understand.) By this means they hope (yet still come short,
unless by accident they recover from some other cause) to redintegrate the
health of one emaciated, never taking care to rectify the ferments of the
Duumvirate, which as long as they continue so depraved, it is impossible milk
should digest for nutrition: if so, it must needs precipitate them the sooner
(as it often does) into their Graves: whereas I am confident upon good
fundamental notions, were some Pneumatical lively potions given often to these,
thus usually extenuated from a Scorbutical seed; they would ten to one find
greater benefit than by a juice prone to coagulate or degenerate in a depraved
stomach: for according to our Hippoc. Lac Cephalicis exhibere malum: malum est
etiam febricitantibus and quibus suspensa quasique Pendula Hypocondria
murmurant and etiam siticulosis, i. e. Milk is naught for them that are
troubled with the Headache, a fever, and who are Hypochondriacal and thirsty:
Find me one Tabid Atrophon fallen away, who is not disquieted with any of these
symptoms (which is very rare) then shall I subscribe that the use of Milk is
laudable in such a case. Till then, I must publicly declare that it causes
far more mischief than good. Were I not stinted, intending brevity, I could
have enlarged my self upon this subject, discovering what notable damage
innocent Infants suffer from this Galacto trophia, nourishment by a Lacteous
juice; the tractation of this I shall reserve for a more opportune time. Not
only Milk, but likewise several preparations from it is to be rejected,
especially Cheese: the frequent much feeding on which, does not a little
promote the Scurvy, and other long infirmities. To eat plentifully any thing
made of Ceres, Heavy; Lumpish, clung as bread not well leavened, not thoroughly
baked, or that which is no better than paste is very unwholesome. Although I
have no great kindness for Milk, yet in protracted diseases, I admonish all
laboring under them to be more sollicitous for their fluid than sollid food,
for Hippocrates Aphorism dictates: Facilius est refici potu quam cibo, i. e.
according to our exposition suitable to Chemical Observations: Any one feeble
may sooner be revived, recovering his strength by thin, lusty, hearty daring
Liquors, as Wine, the spirit of Malt, or any other vegetable, than by gross,
lazy, rude, blunt provisions of the Kitchen.

Lastly, I have sometimes considered of how great a Deception, some Culinary
Doctors are guilty in prohibiting their Patients (infested with the Stone,
Gout, Scurvy, Tissick, and other maladies) the lawful use of common Salt, the
most necessary commodious creature next the Sun for the welfare of man's life.
Now the reason they give for this prohibition is (as they often dictate to the
sick) that it engenders salt humors increasing the saline matter of diseases.
I confess I cannot altogether exempt Table salt from some little inconvenience
(which most things are liable to) yet if the great benefit thereof be
comparatively weighed with the damage that does far transcend this. For it is a
great preserver against corruption, most grateful to the stomach, which it
corroborates, exciting an appetite. It attenuates, cleanses, dissolves,
mucilaginous excrements: being a great enemy to worms, yea as Helmont notes,
page 20. de Lithi, eaten in large quantity, it hinders the coagulation of the
Stone, destroying it while it is in the Egg. Hippocrates commended it in his
time as a powerful Antidote against the Plague. Let none therefore fear to eat
salt freely with their fresh meat, nor any food well corned (only forbearing if
they can) ship flesh or fish, whose best alible juice is consumed by long
excessive Conditure: the more volatile parts of the Salt being exhaled or
become fixed) for some part thereof is made urinous, the rest being discharged
by the Intestines or Kidneys, with profit to the health. Since also sugar is
reckoned to be a kind of sweet salt, I advise any one (according to sound
experience) Scorbutical or vexed with a long emaciating infirmity
(notwithstanding Dr. Willis prejudice against it from the delusion of the fire)
to take (if his stomach bear not an innate Odium to it) plentifully thereof
morning, and between meals dissolved in a proper Liquor, as stale Beer, white
wine, etc. with a small portion of Ale added, the worser sort of which is much
corrected by Sugar.

A short Discovery of the Nature of that malignant calamity, the Griping of the
Guts.
I Am constrained to pity distressed man, when I contemplate how his poor skin
is daily sacrificed to the Jaws of death through the transverse method and
medicines of those, who though they see their endeavors usually frustrated,
yet like a blind horse in a Mill, they will by no persuasions leave their ill
wonted Tract of Practice.

It is obvions to any circumspect observer, that our corporal infirmities as
well as our mental vices, are at this day exceedingly multiplied and magnified
in such sort, that Physicians are startled to see them so insulting and raging,
such innovations of truculent terrible symptoms accompanying them: yet for all
this, very few labor to acquire, applicate, and appropriate Remedies
proportionable to the grandity of our evils. Nay rather they who attempt so
noble a design, are discouraged, being looked upon as so many Heretics in
Physic.

There has of late among other upstart, feral Plagues, appeared upon the Stage
of this little World, a strange Heteroclite Monster called the Scurvy, acting
its part continually in diverse shapes, counterfeiting the guise of all or most
other diseases. Sometimes it consumes by little and little, as it were grating
and crumbling one into the Grave: then again it rends, distracts, separates the
union of body and soul in a very short space suddenly puffing out the Lamp of
life. Now it seems to be Couchant, then Rampant: so alternately Acute and
Chronick.

Among multitude of Phenomenon or appearances of this grievous calamity, there
is none at this day more eminently Atrocious, than this termed the Griping of
the Guts, which although it passes among the vulgar for a substantial Disease,
yet is it in reality only a Product, Concomitant, Accident fruit or effect of a
Scorbutical virulent Root, which must be struck at if any good be done to a
purpose.

I plainly perceived the Scurvy long before the late most fierce Pest brake
forth, did gradually get strength, spreading it self in an extrordinary
contagious form, insomuch as it arrived according to my prediction, to a high
pitch of venenosity, making havoc of thousands. This out-ragious Tragedy being
passed over, it returned in Statum quo prius, as it was before, still
harboring an occult poison, which works in a Clandestine slow, furtive mode,
to the insensible undermining and depredation of the vitals, till upon an
extimulating contingent, it takes advantage, making an assault or irruption
unawares upon the principal part the stomach (whose ferment was before
debilitated) as likewise its long Appendix, the Intestines, which it
lancinates, convels, and cruciates, colliquating the nutricious juices, turning
them into an acid, fretting, vexatious Ichor, bringing a damp upon the spirits,
and if not timely revoked, totally extinguishing them.

The excretions or evacuations of some are very large, to twenty, thirty,
forty, fifty, yea an hundred stools, with wringing Gripes usually, yea,
oftentimes with intolerable racking, Convulsive pains. One has only a flux
down-ward, another throws off both ways, by vomit and dejection. These
Torminous Griping pains have several other signs and symptoms accompanying them
as a fever manifest or hidden, Vertigo or Giddiness, Cephalalgie, great pains
of the head, a Sopor or drowsiness, tedious watching, frenzy or alienation
from right reason, lassitude, notable weakness of the limbs, difficult
breathing, a pulse commonly weak, inordinate, a palpitation or trembling at the
heart, Lypothimie, fainting away, oftentimes great drought, soarness of the
Throat, rough dry Tongue, pains about the sides, Haemorrhagies, fluxes of
blood, Cardiogmus, heart-burning, oppression at the stomach, a nauseousness or
loathing of every thing, yexing, unsufferable torment in the loins, spots lying
deep in the flesh, hardly to be discerned, urine for the most part like one in
health, sometimes thick and troubled.

The irritating or provoking cause of these torminous wringing passions, is a
very sharp fretful Cruor, Ichor, or Sanies generated by a seminal fermental
poison concentrated about the Duumvirate, which puts the Archeus into a great
indignation, whereupon it makes in some places a colliquation or tabefaction,
in other a coagulation of the wholesome juices. The foregoing causes are many,
as Air, Diet, Contagion, hereditary disposition, etc. which any one ingenious
may according to his own intelligible capacity examine how this calamity is
like to terminate, or what will be the event thereof, a judicious
Prognostication grounded upon Philosophical Remedies can best inform: for it is
impossible a Galenist should be Critical as he ought.

If there be a great malignity, virulency and extreme pravity in the Scorbutic
Gripings; so that it becomes graduated, a fever with other bad symptoms, as
Lypothymie, great pain in the head, yexing, convulsion, etc. joined thereto,
such an one must needs miscarry, unless the venomous matter be transmitted by
vigor of the Archeus to the skin in form of madefying large Sweats, or more
gentle Breathings, with eruption of great store of spots, pimples, or red
blotches. For it is a certain truth, a medullary Radical Cure can never be
performed unless this intoxicating Ichor or Tabum become Eccentrical, being
sent packing to the surface of the body (the readiest Emunctory or conveyance
of whatsoever is of a Deletery condition) having made a morbifick impression
upon the stomach.

If these malignant Gripes copulated with a Fever invade any who has been
enervated or debilitated by a long infirmity, it is very hazardous if such an
one escape.

Intemperate persons are in greater danger hereby than those who observe the
Rules of mediocrity.

If the ferment of the stomach be very much spoiled, the Archeus being at a
very low ebb, the case is very desperate.

If some of the worser symptoms appear, and the patient be also foolishly
adverse to take spagyrical preparations, that person is to be le^t to a
prognostic.

Whosoever evades by vulgar Medicines does often live crasie, being apt to fall
into some evil affect of the like Idaea, unless nature be extraordinary
benevolent.

It falls out (though rarely) that there is a Metastasis or translation of the
Torminous matter of the Gripes into the Limbs, whereupon a Palsy or Gout
supervene to the preservation of the Life.

The Indications directing the Physician to discharge his duty, are either
Preservative or Curative.

Principiis obsta venienti occurrite morbo: Prevention is the very Quintessence
of Polity. The best way is to break this Cockatrice Egg in time, wherefore
observing the Diet set down in the Chapter going before (if the Scurvy so far
get head, that it threatens these grinding torturing Gripes) the most certain
means I have found effectual is forthwith to offer a proper vomit, such as I
formerly deciphered. Afterward to give Eustomachicks, Anti-scorbuticks,
corroborating, dulcifying, Abstersive, Resolving, attenuating Specific,
Anti-malignant Medicines, as several factures of Tartar, infusion of
Scurvigrass, Hors-radish Aron Roots in spirit of Wine, also the volatile parts
of the foresaid vegetables brought over in a clean glass, tinged with a little
English Saffron. Garden Scurvigrass, Watercresses, Hors-radish,
Juniper Berries, Ginger, etc. steeped in strong Liquor. Drink thereof every
morning with perseverance, dissolving in every draught a scruple of Cremor of
Tartar poudered very fine, and Chalybeates technically made with the Artists
own fingers are of great validity: also certain Pills I call Polychrestae are
powerful to strangle this Scorbutical feed. Let any of these or the like be
taken according as the Idisyncrasie of the stomach of each individual does best
relish: but let none be startled at the subtle particles of the Medicine,
dreading they be too hot, listening to Dr. Willis, who erroneously delivers
there is a dyscrasie in the blood of one Scorbutical Sulphureosaline, in
another Salinosulphureous. Out of this respect he orders his Prescripts
suitable as the disease is more or less hot. Now this is merely Galenical to be
rejected by an Helmontian, who knows the Scurvy fontally is neither hot nor
cold, withal it is the part of an honest able Physician to eradicate, not to
insist upon the Lopping of qualities mere Suckers or Sprouts arising from the
Root.

Touching the Cure or removal of the vexatious Gripes frequently connexed with
a Fever: the best upright method is to search this primary Malady to the
bottom, i. e. forthwith to give an Emeto-Diaphoretick which may cleanse away
any fermenting impurity about the Duumvirate; likewise to carry off through the
pores of the universal Membrane, and other larger passages, the venomous
Scorbutical Serum or filth, sweetning the violent acidity thereof, and
mortifying the poison. Beware of mere Astringents whatsoever constipateth or
stops, for this course will but aggravate the grief. Alexipharmaca,
Diaphoreticks, Analeptick, Sudorificks, spiritual Liquors are to be followed
close without jealousy of heating too much (let the H^morist say what he will)
I much commend spirit of Tartar C. C. which although certain Galenists declaim
against as too hot, dangerous, etc. I Will stand to make it demonstratively
evident: there is not a more safe, effectual Remedy in all the Apothecaries
shops from one end of the Town to the other than this, if it be sabricated by a
true Pyrotechnist, as for that Caveat Empt^.

The essence of Ginger: Elixir Proprietatis Med. Helmont. Alexistomachon nost.
are to be approved, also spirit of Tartar well desaecated, Oil of Sulphur,
Vitriol spiritualized, Antimonium Diaphoreticum made Philosophically, as also
Lac Sulphuris a most safe Remedy, though formerly a great stumbling block to
those who run upon the false Sent of Qualities: The Tincture of Haema^es or
Bloud-stone. The exalted Sulphurs of Metals and Minerals. He that is acquainted
with the Spagyrical Manufacture of some of these forenamed, together with their
just use, need not doubt to act the part of an Artist in the solid Cure of this
and other Calamities.

FINIS.
The Contents of the Chapters in this TREATISE.
Chap. 1. OF the Nomenclature of Blood, and its definition. Page 1 Of the
different sorts of Blood. 3 Of the Efficient and Material Cause of Blood. 5 The
manifold occasions that alter, clarify, taint, and deprave the blood, also the
true signs of its purity, im-impurity, integrity, or degeneration. 11
Concerning the Latex or insipid Aqueous Liqur, that is concurrent with the
Blood. 19 Of the manifold diseases that take up their Lodging in the Blood. 27
Concerning the prevention, with the Cure of those Diseases that take up their
Lodging in the Blood. 52
Wherein Dr. Willis his Method of Bleeding asserted in his Books De Febribus,
and De Scorbuto, is detected by Reason, Authority, and Practice, to be indirect
and destructive to mankind:

Whereunto are added, A brief Animadversion upon some notable Err^urs committed
by Dr. Betts, in his Tract, De Ortu and Natura Sanguinis. 39 A Stomachical
Spirit or Essence commended to the World. 139 Certain Instructions appertaining
to the Diet in Acute, and Chronick Diseases. 163 A brief Discovery of the
Nature of that Malignant Calamity, The GRIPING of the GUTS. 174


FINIS.
SEveral Errors are committed at the Press, which the Reader is desired to
Correct himself, the Avocations of the Author not permitting him to Remark them.


