A LETTER Concerning the present State OF RELIGION AMONGST US.

A Letter concerning the present State of Religion amongst us.
MY dear Brother in Christ, no less then by birth; I have perused the
Ordinance for ejecting of Scandalous Ministers, and finding it likely enough to
send you a Pastor, that shall have have no authority from the Church, have
thought it necessary for me, to give you the reasons of that opinion which I
declared unto you, that in that case, you ought not in conscience to
acknowledge such a for one your Pastor, by going tohear him preach, and seeming
to join in his Prayers, much less to receive the Eucharist at his hands, if
such a one shall be so audacious as to celebrate it.

This that I may do, I must first propose the Case, as it is stated by those
Acts which pretend to settle Religion among us. For, first, the Act whereby the
present Government is esta^^^shed, declares, that the Christian Religion
contained in the Scriptures shall be held forth, as the public profession of
these Nations; And that, such as profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ, though
differing from this profession, in doctrine, worship, or discipline, shall be
protected in the exercise of their Religion, excepting Popery and Prelacy, and
those who under the profession of Christ, hold forth, and practice
licentiousness. In prosecution hereof an Ordinance is issued forth, giving
commission to certain persons, named in it, to examine and try all that have
come into possession of Churches since April. 13. 1653. all that have
augmentations from Parliament, all that shall pretend to come into Churches
that shall be void, whether fit for the Office and Benefice, by no other Rule,
then the Certificate of three godly Neighbors, (one at least a Minister)
concerning their conversation in godliness upon their own knowledge, and the
judgment of five Commissioners, that the grace of God is in their hearts, and
that they are fit to preach. In further prosecution hereof, issues forth this
Ordinance, whereby, no man is made scandalous for his judgment, but he that is
liable to the Act against Blasphemy of Aug. 9. 1653. And with him is ranked,
he, who shall frequently and publicly have read the Service since Christmasse
1653. whereby it appears, that those who have declared their perseverance in
the Religion which they have hitherto professed, by reading the Service, are
therefore counted scandalous; But those that can obtain the certificate of such
men as these Triers count godly men, together with their own opinion, that so
they are, and fit to Preach, are thereby qualified in Law, to be Pastors of
Parishes: And consequently to succeed those that adhere to the Christianity
which hitherto they have professed, being cast out by the Commissioners for
ejecting of scandalous Ministers.

In the first place then, I say, that the effect of these Laws is, to nullify,
and make void one Article of the Creed, which hithe^to to we profess; To wit,
the belief of one holy Catholic and Apostolic Church. This word Church may
signify two things. First, only the whole number of Christians; Secondly, a
Communion and corporation of those that profess true Christianity, founded by
the will of God, and the ministry of our Lord Christ, and his Apostles. That
Christians, when they profess to believe the Catholic Church, do not mean,
that they believe that there is in the world a number of men that profess to
be Christians, it is manifest, because all Christians hope to be saved by their
Faith: but they cannot hope to be saved, by believing that which they see; Now
all men see, that there is such a company of men in the world: therefore when
they say, they believe the Catholic Church, as part of that Faith, whereby
they hope to be saved, they do not profess to believe that there is such a
company of men, but that there is a Corporation of true Christians, founded by
our Lord Christ and his Apostles, which Heretics and Schismatics cannot have
Communion with, and that they hope to be saved by this Faith, as being members
of it. And this is that, which the style of the holy Catholic and Apostlick
Church signifies, as distinguishing the Body of true Christians, (to wit, so
far as profession goes) from the Conventicles of Heretics and Schismatics.
For this title of Catholic would signify nothing, if Heretics and
Schismatics were not barred the Communion of the Church. And let no man
imagine, that the Schism which the Reformation has made between us and the
Church of Rome, has dissolved the obligation of being members of the Church:
if that change which is called Reformation, preserve not such a Church, as
ought to be acknowledged for a true member of the whole, or Catholic Church,
it is no Reformation, but the destruction of Christianity. Now when these Laws
enable Soldiers, and Justices of the Peace, as well as those that call
themselves Ministers, to make public Preachers; as well such as have received
no Ordination from the Church, as those that have; It is manifest, that all
difference between Clergy and People, is by them dissolved, and made void; And
by consequence, the Corporation of the Church, which grounds and creates all
the difference, which hitherto by all Christians has been received, between
these two qualities. True it is, that for the present, as well those who have
lawful authority to officiate the public Service of God by Ordination from the
Church, are admitted or maintained in their Benefices by these Laws, as those
that have none; Though it be well enough known, that those who have such
authority do pretend to act by virtue of it, and not by this Law, further then,
as by submitting to it, they remove that force, which hinders their right,
otherwise gotten, to take effect. But it is as true, that supposing this Law to
continue an age, none such can remain. And when none such remains, then there
shall be no Church in England, but by equivocation of words, if the premises be
be true. And therefore, those that acknowledge such as have ^o other authority
but from this power, for their Pastors, cannot consequently profess to believe
one Catholic Church, nor hope for salvation by being members of it. For
supposing for the present, though not granting, that the power which makes
these Laws is from God, yet can it not be pretended to be from our Lord Christ
and his Apostles. And therefore this authority derived from it, cannot be
derived from any act of theirs constituting the Church, and inabling it to give
this authority, by acknowledging whereof, Christians presume that they are
members of the Church.

Now that you may see why the belief of Christ's Church is an Article of our
Creed; I say further, that you cannot acknowledge such men for your Pastors,
because you are not secured by these Laws, that they are not Heretics. For,
seeing the Act of Establishment pretends only to hold forth the Christian
Religion contained in the Scriptures, and that all the Heresies that are this
day in the world, do maintain themselves to profess the Christian Religion
contained in the Scriptures, it is manifest, that these Laws provide not, that
they shall not be Heretics, which are sent you for Pastors. Here I must not
complain, that, whereas all that profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ, though
differing from the profession held forth, are protected in the exercise of
their Religion, Pop^ry and Praelacy are excepted; though it cannot be denied,
that both profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ. Nor, that, those who hold the
profession established by the Laws under which we were born, are resused that
protection, which is tendered Socinians, enemies of the Trinity and satisfaction
of Christ, who manifestly profess Christian Religion contained in the
Scriptures, and Faith in God by Jesus Christ. For, my business is not to say,
what they that made these Laws, should have done by them; but, what you are to
do now they are made. But, if it be answered, that, those that make these
Laws, repose trust in them to whom they grant these Commissions, that they
will not take any to be godly men that are Heretics; To this I say, that will
not serve your turn for several reasons. For, those that profess all that the
Law requires them to profess, that is, Faith in God through Jesus Christ, and
the Christian Religion Contained in the Scriptures, cannot be judged ungodly
for whatsoever they profess besides, by any Power derived from this Law, but
by an arbitrary power to be exercised at the will of the Commissioners. And,
how are you assured that no Heretic shall obtain a certificate of three
Neighbors, and so answer their demands, that they shall have cause to think
him in Gods grace? However; you are not warranted to trust your salvation, and
the salvation of those that depend on you, either upon the judgment of these
Commissioners, or of them that make the laws. If it be demanded, why the
secular Power, and the Commissioners thereof are not as well to be trusted with
the salvation of the people, as those that may pretend authority from the
Church? the answer is ready: That, when you acknowledge a Pastor sent by the
Church, you neither trust his person, nor the person of him that sends him, but
the Laws which the Church has received from our Lord and his Apostles: in as
much as, by professing Christianity so limited, and according to them to
exercise the function which he receives, he becomes qualified for the charge
in which you acknowledge him: which Laws he that destroys, by dissolving the
Corporation of the Church, destroys the trust you are to have in those whom
you acknowledge your Pastors, that they are not Heretics.

And here I must not fail to give you notice, that those Presbyterians and
Independents, who, having departed from the Church of England, upon pretense of
erecting Presbyteries and Congregations, do now make themselves Commissioners
to execute these Laws, which destroy both Presbyteries and Congregations; have
thereby destroyed the ground of all trust which the Church might have had in
them, for conduct in Christianity. For what profession can it be presumed that
they will hold, when they hold not that, for which they have destroyed the
Unity of the Church? which is the reason, why Heretics and Schismatics,
though they may be readmitted to the Communion of the Church upon repentance,
yet, by the Rules of the Catholic Church cannot be readmitted to be of the
Clergy. These Apostacies having made them incapable of that trust, which the
Church must necessarily repose in the Clergy.

That you may see this is not for nothing, I say further, that there is among
us a damnable Heresy of Antinomians, or Libertines, formerly, when Puritans
were not divided from the Church of England, known by the name of
Grindletonians and Etonists. These, do believe so to be saved by the free grace
of God, by which Christ died for the Elect, that true faith is nothing but the
revelation hereof, and by consequence, that all their sins, past, present, and
to come, being remitted by this grace; to repent of sin, or to contend against
it, is the renouncing of Gods free grace, and saving faith.

Another opinion there is, which I cannot say the Presbyterians hold, or
require to be held; but in regard their confession of Faith, and Catechism
disclaimes it not, and therefore allows them that hold it to be of their
Faction, may well be said to maintain it; That, for a man to believe that he is
praedestinate to life, and that Christ died for him, is that faith, which alone
justifies a Christian. Whether of these opinions is the better, or the worse,
or, what is the difference between them, let the parties dispute. This I say,
that, allowing the merits and satisfaction of Christ to the Elect for remission
of sins, and a title to everlasting life, in no consideration, but of their
persons, it is more reasonable to say, that they can never become guilty of
sin, then, that the remission of their sins, and their right to life, should
depend upon the knowledge of their praedestination revealed by Faith: seeing
nothing is true because it is believed, but believed because it is true. And
therefore, I say, that both of these opinions are destructive to the foundation
of faith which the Church of England teaches, when, in the Office of Baptism,
and the beginning of the Catechism, it requires all that are baptized, not
only to profess the Faith of Christ, but to renounce the flesh, the world, and
the devil, and to fight with them till death, for the keeping of Gods
Commandments, assuring them hereupon, that they are regenerate and adopted Gods
children by his Grace in Christ. For he that is saved by undertaking and
persevering in this, cannon be saved by believing, that he is absolutely
predestinate to life without it. For, I must say, that it is one thing to be
absolutely predestinate to life; another thing to be predestinate to life, by
being absolutely predestinate to persevere till death. For he that is
predestinate to life, by being absolutely predestinate to persevere in the
Covenant of Grace till death, is predestinate to life in consideration of the
Covenant of Grace, in which he is predestinate to persevere. And whether a man
can be absolutely predestinate to persevere in it, of his own free will, and
voluntary choice, or not, is that which remains in dispute among Divines,
which I suppose not here, to be either true or false. But to say, that a man is
absolutely predestinate to life, and to say, that he is predestinate to life,
in consideration of his undertaking and persevering in the Covenant of Grace,
which must be the act of his own free will and choice, is to say express
contradictions, and to destroy the Covenant of Grace, (into which, by the
Baptism of the Church of England, every man enters) and all hope of
Salvation, which is merely imaginary, if not grounded upon it. Seeing then,
that the trial upon which these Commissioners proceed, is, the marks of
predestination, whether true or false, not distinguishing whether they suppose
the Covenant of Grace, the undertaking of it, and persevering in it, or not; I
say, that you are no way secured by these Laws, that the Triers themselves,
much less those whom they shall send you, are not accomplices of this damnable
Heresy.

I must not forget to advise you, that Dell, one so far of this Heresy, that he
has written a Book against Baptism it self, is now, and is acknowledged by
these Commissioners, master of a College in the University, (whereof several
fellows have been notorious Preachers of this Heresy) who cannot be
acknowledged a member of the Church by any good Christian.

The like I allege in regard of the Sect of the Anabaptists. In which point I
must suppose two things. First, that the Christian Faith supposes Original
sin. Secondly, that without Baptism there is no cure for it; which depends
upon the Premises, that there is no absolute predestination, without
consideration of the Covenant of Grace, which Baptism executes, to cure it.
For, whatsoever our Lord meant, when he said, unless ye be born again of water
-- it is manifest, that, though no man can become a true Christian, without the
operation of the Holy Ghost, yet the Grace of the Holy Ghost dwelling in a man,
is not granted, but, in consideration of his entering into the said covenant,
and that this only is the cure of Original sin. There is then no necessity of
showing an express precept in Scripturre, that all Infants be baptized: or
that the Church from the Apostles time did Baptize all while they were Infants.
If the Christian Faith suppose Original sin, if no cure for that, but by the
covenant of Grace, if no execution of that Covenant, but the Baptism of the
Church, (unless, where the outward act is prevented by inevitable necessity,
after the inward desire thereof was sufficiently resolved and declared) then is
this necessity a constraining precept, and has been so reputed by the Church,
even since the Apostles; which always has taken order, not that all should be
baptized Infants, but that no Infant should die without being baptized. For,
the diligent watch over all occasions, that might carry Infants out of the
world unbaptized, observed by the Church from the beginning, though neglected
since, demonstrateth, no legal assurance of the salvation of such as should die
unbaptized, whatsoever might be presumed of Gods goodness over and above what
he declares. But, as for those that shall become obliged and engaged to the
covenant of grace, by being consecrated to God through the act of the Church,
thereby obliging it self to show them the truth of Christianity, which obliges
all to whom it is shown; the necessity aforesaid, together with the practice of
the Church, is a legal presumption, of the cure of Original sin, and the
opening of Paradise, which it only shuts. If therefore our Anabaptists do
not believe original sin, they are Pelagian Heretics. If, believing it, they
believe notwithstanding, that it is cured by Predestination without the
Covenant of Grace, they fall into the damnable Heresy premised: And seem to
make, not only that Baptism whereby they make void the Baptism received in
the Church of England, a renouncing of the Christianity which they received and
professed at their Baptism; but, that also, which they give those whom they
will not have baptized while they are infants, utterly void, and ineffectual
toward God, as not pretending to bring them into Covenant of Gods Grace by
Christ, that is, into the profession of the true Faith, and of fighting against
sin till death, under the same: which, they that believe Salvation by Gods
Predestination revealed by faith, without undertaking and persevering in the
Covenant of Grace, can by no means pretend to do. Seeing then, that the
necessity of Baptism cannot be denied, but upon such a ground, as voideth the
Covenant of Grace, and seeing the Triers are either Anabaptists themselves, or
accomplices in the same Commission with Anabaptists (whereof there are in the
Commission of Triers, five or six that I hear of by name, and how many more God
knows, and in the Commission for ejecting of scandalous Ministers, in one
County of Hertford, nine of fifteen, as I am credibly informed) it is evident,
that, by these Laws, you are no ways secured of having Anabaptists for your
Pastors, who are expressly Schismatics (forsaking the Church for that which
the Church always did), and, by consequence of the premised reasons, Heretics.

As the Baptism of those men whom they pretend to send you for Pastors, is, by
this reason, void in point of right, so the Eucharist which they may pretend to
celebrate, will be void of the effect of a Sacrament toward you, but not void
of the crime of Sacrilege toward God. The reasons are two. The first, because
those who have not received the Order of Priesthood shall pretend to celebrate
it. For, the Scripture, interpreted by the un-interrupted practice of the
Church, allows no man, under the Order of a Priest, to celebrate the Eucharist.
Not, as if those who call themselves Ministers did commit this Sacrilege, in
consecrating the Eucharist: Though the name of Ministers signifies no more then
deacons, and, that it is truly Sacrilege for deacons to celebrate the
Eucharist: But, because those whom the Church lawfully gives not the power of
celebrating this Sacrament to, (though, by misunderstanding, those whom it
gives it to, may be called Ministers, and ought to be called Priests) their
Eucharist is no Sacrament, but Sacrilege. The second, because they know not,
nor acknowledge, the Consecration, that is requisite to the celebration and
being of this Sacrament, by the same Scriptures, understood according to the
un-interrupted custom and practice of the Church. For, the whole Church of
God, allowing the elements consecrated to be the Body and Blood of Christ
mystically, or in the Sacrament, allows this change to be made by the
consecration, before which they were only Bread and Wine. Not, as if after the
Consecration they were not so, but because they are then become that which they
were not before, to wit, the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood, or the Body
and Blood of Christ spiritually, and mystically, that is, in the Sacrament.
This Consecration being exactly maintained by the Church of England, they that
presume to celebrate the Eucharist, without acknowledging the fame, and
pretending to destroy the Law by which it is exercised, must be presumed, not
to acknowledge the necessity thereof, to the being of this Sacrament. And
therefore, they, and their accomplices in the Communion thereof, to be guilty of
the Body and Blood of Christ, as not distinguishing a sign of man's institution
from a Sacrament of Gods appointment and Ordinance.

As for the Office of Preaching and Praying, which they pretend to, in behalf
of the Church, I will mark you out two monstrous Impostures, in all the Sects
of this time. The first is this ground of the blessed Reformation of Religion
in England; That the Church is not to assemble for the Service of God, but when
there is preaching. This seems to stand upon a very gross mistake, of those
passages of the Apostles writings, which declare, the necessary means of
salvation to consist, in hearing the Gospel preached; As if they were meant of
Sermons in the Pulpit, which are only made to those that are already
Christians, not of publishing the Gospel to those that knew it not before,
convincing them that it is true, and instructing them wherein it consists. Or,
as if those that are already Christians wanted any thing necessary to
Salvation, supposing them to persevere in the Christianity which they have
professed. Not as if their Christianity did not oblige them to hear Sermons,
when the authority of the Church assures them to be without offense; But,
because, the Offices of public Prayers, and the Praises of God, especially in
celebrating the blessed Eucharist, are the end of all that instruction in
Christianity, which Christians receive from the Church; and therefore, all
Preaching subordinate to the same, as the means to the End: And because, they
may be daily so frequented, without offense, and to the increase of the
reverence of Christianity, as the experience of our time shows, that Preaching
cannot be. The second is, that, the first day of the week, called Sunday, is
the Sabbath, by force of the fourth Commandment. An Imposture so gross, that
it may well serve for an instance, what Faction can do, with men that are sober
otherwise. That God, by commanding the Jews to keep the seventh day of the
week, to wit, that day on which he ended the Creation of the world, and, for
that very reason commanding it, should be thought to command Christians to keep
the first day of the week, on which he began the Creation, and our Lord Christ
arose from the dead; That is, that the same words of the same Commandment in
writing, should oblige Jews to rest on the Saturday, which oblige Christians to
rest on the Sunday, is a thing, which when this fit of frensy shall be past us,
will scarce be believed, that ever any man would believe. True it is, this
first day has been observed, in, and ever since the Apostles time, but not by
virtue of that Law, which their office was to declare was expired, and out of
date; but, by the Act of their own authority, whereby they gave Laws to Christ's
Church. Let us now only compare the daily morning and evening Sacrifice of
Prayer and the Praises of God, established by the Order of the Church of
England, together with the more solemn service of Lords days and Festivals,
with a bare Sermon upon Sundaies, ushered in and out with a Prayer of every
man's own conceit, (setting aside the Heresy and false doctrine, the Faction and
Schism, the blasphemy and slander, the ridiculous follies which this Sermon and
Prayer may, and which we have known them contain) I say, comparing these
together, the blessed reformation pretended, is and ought to be accounted, the
abomination of desolation, in comparison of that Order which it destroys. And
therefore upon this account alone, those, who, not being invested with that
ordinary Power by which the Church is enabled to correct abuses in the Church,
shall usurp the Power of the Church to introduce this disorder, are thereby
Schismatics themselves, and those that acknowledge them for their Pastors,
accomplices of Schismatics.

It will be said, that these Laws will be amended, as it was many times said
awhile since, that the Parliament would settle a Ministry. To this I say, that
those that are sent you by virtue of these Laws, have every way as good
authority, as any, the Power that made these Laws, joined with a Parliament can
give to them, that are not otherwise qualified by the authority of the Church.
That is, that this Power of a Parliament together, though, advising with
divines, how the qualities of those whom they make Ministers are to be limited,
can do no more, then this Power, with advise of those Divines it uses, has
done: Both being Secular, and able to make men their Ministers, to maintain the
Interest of that Government which their Power constituteth, but not Ministers
of the Church, to maintain the interest of that Faith, and service of God,
which it is trusted with. If it be said, that, at the Reformation, those from
whom the Ministry is propagated, had not received by their Ordination, Power to
ordain others; I answer, that, it is agreed among all that profess the
Reformation, that the abuses crept into the Church were so great, that
particular Churches, that is, part of the whole, might, and ought to reform
themselves, without consent or concurrence of the whole: It is also agreed
among them that maintain it, that, there is in the Church a succession of
persons, endued with authority in behalf of it, as well as of doctrine, and of
the service of God; Though the succession of persons be of less consideration,
as subordinate to the succession of doctrine, as the means to the end. In this
case then I say, that, such inabilities, in persons vested with Ecclesiastical
Power by the Reformation, as became unavoidable by the refusal of the rest of
the Church to concur in it, cannot make Churches so constituted, no Churches,
nor void the effect of those Offices which persons so qualified shall minister
unto Gods people. But, such inabilities, as became unavoidable, only for want
of due information in those that undertook to reform themselves, as it would be
malice in man to justify, so, it may reasonably be presumed, that the mercy of
God excuses. But supposing, according to the premises, and the sense of all
that adhere to the Church of England, that the Presbyterians Ordinations tend
no more to maintain the primitive faith and service of God, once delivered to
the Church, and established in it by the Apostles, then they do to maintain
that which is hitherto established in the Church of England; I say supposing
this, to imagine, that an Assembly of Divines, by being lawfully ordained to
the office of Priests or Deacons, according to the Laws of the Church of
England, can by commission from the secular Power, make ordinations, which the
Laws under which they were ordained forbid, is to imagine, that God can enable
man to sin, or, that a Sovereign Power can authorize the subject to rebel
against it self. And therefore, though the qualities of persons to be sent you
for Pastors may be otherwise limited by Acts which Parliaments may make, yet
these qualities, (not being derived from the authority of the Apostles sounding
the Church, by any act of the Church, but from secular Power, and Commission
issued from it) make them no more Ministers of the Church, that are made by
Assemblies of Divines and Presbyteries, then those that are made by commission
of Triers, and ejecting scandalous Ministers: That is, both of them, being by
their creation Schismatics, and their profession not clearing them of
misprision of Heresy, they can no more be acknowledged by those that pretend to
adhere to the Church of England, then Belial by Christ, or darkness by light.

Hereby then you may conclude how to receive those, whom the Presbyt^rians may
send you for Pastors, by any change in the secular Power. For I charge not
them, that they do not believe the Church: which they would be themselves. I
acknowledge that they secure you from all Sects but themselves. But in as much
as they maintain Praedestination to life, only in consideration of what Christ
has already done or suffered for the Elect; in so much, I say, that they do
not, nor can Baptize into the Cross of Christ; that is to say, into the hope of
Salvation, in consideration of fighting against the flesh, the world, and the
Devil, for the keeping of Gods commandments, under the profession of the
Christian Faith. For, that which is absolutely due, as salvation is due to the
elect by the gift of Gods Praedestination, cannot be burdened with any
condition of Christianity afterward. And therefore that Baptism is no
effectual Baptism before God, (if Baptism received in the Church of England
be such) that is to say, it is no Baptism, but by Equivocation of words, in as
much as, the obligation of a man's Christianity is not declared, or understood,
to take hold of him, by virtue of it. For seeing the hope of salvation which
Christians have by their Baptism is grounded upon the condition of their
Christianity, that Baptism which promises salvation without providing for
this condition, is no Baptism, but by equivocation of words. I say further,
that the change, which they call Reformation, visibly tends, to introduce that
monstrous imposture of two Sermons every Sabbath, in stead of the daily and
ordinary service of God, (together with the more solemn service of God upon
Festivals and Lords days, and other extraordinary occasions) which the Church
of England, with the whole Church of God from the beginning has maintained, so
far, as there was means to maintain it. I will not here insist upon the order
of Bishops, and their chief power in their Dioceses, as of Divine Right, that
is, instituted and introduced by the Apostles. Let The Presbyterians think
themselves privileged to erect altar against Altar, upon so desperate a Plea,
as now they insist upon, that the Presbyteries are rather of divine right, then
the chief Power of Bishops, in their Dioceses; I insist now only, that this
Power of the Bishops, was not against Gods Law: which every man must grant me,
that acknowledges a Church in from the Reformation till now. In this case,
they, who, to introduce this Christianity, and this public exercise of it,
transgressing that authority to which they were called by the visible act of
the Church of England, take upon them, to share that Power from which they had
their authority, among themselves, and, to execute it by consent among
themselves, in their several precincts, cannot be said to constitute a Church,
by virtue of any act of the Apostles, or any authority derived from such act,
but by virtue of their own act, as all Apostates and usurpers do; That is to
say, that, they do not constitute such a Church, by being a member whereof a
man may reasonably assure himself of salvation, upon any principle of
Christianity, but such a Church, as is indeed no Church, unless it be by
equivocation of terms, but a conventicle of Schismatics with misprision of
the Heresy aforesaid. And therefore their Priesthood is no Priesthood, their
Eucharist is no Eucharist, (unless it by equivo^ation of words) but Sacrilege
against Gods Ordinance. Besides, that, what is requisite to the consecration
thereof, or, wherein it consists, they seem to be as secure of, and as little
to regard; as the most ignorant of those sects into which the once common name
of Puritans stands divided at this time. Neither is it in any secular Power,
though never so unquestionable, to cure these nullities and incapacities, in
the pretense, upon which they take upon them to be a Church; Though for the
present they are not so much as authorized to the world, by any privilege or
penalty enacted by any secular Power, but only protected by it. That all the
world may see, that there is nothing but their own usurpation, and the consent
of those whom they have debauched to their Schism, whereby they subsist as a
Church: And, that they will, by virtue of their Original, be as malignant to
any secular Power, that shall not maintain and authorize them, as ever they
were to that which they have destroyed, to introduce this shadow of a Church.

If it be objected, that your Estates will be liable to Penalties, that may be
enacted against those that withdraw from the exercise of the Religion publicly
held forth; To this I have no answer, but, that we are to obey God rather then
man, to prefer the next world before this, and to bear Christ's Cross, if we
expect his kingdom. Only thus much I must observe, that these Laws proceed
from a profession, that it is not lawful to force men's Consciences, in matter
of religion, by penalties. And therefore, though the Praelatical party are not
protected in the exercise of their Religion, yet cannot they be punished for
it, but by denying that which is declared upon the public Faith. Besides,
acknowledging the Christian Religion contained in the Scriptures, and
professing faith in God, by Jesus Christ, they are as much qualified for
protection, as those that are protected by the act of establishment. And, not
to allow the exercise of that Religion, the profession whereof is not
disallowed, seems to be, to forbid men to be Christians who are not forbidden
to be such Christians, and to expose them to popular tumult, contrary to the
public peace, whom no Law punishes. If the Papists continue nevertheless
liable to former Penalties, perhaps it is because they are reputed Idolaters.
But because these laws, and the profession from whence they proceed, may
change, I must confess, you cannot follow my advice, but that your estate may
become questionable: Neither would I give it, could I assure you of the kingdom
of heaven otherwise.

If you demand what means I can show you to exercise your Religion, withdrawing
from the means which these Acts provide: I answer, that there are hitherto,
every where, of the Clergy, that adhere to the Church, who will find it their
duty, to see your infants Christened, your children Catechized, the Eucharist
communicated to all thar shall withdraw from Churches forcibly possessed by
them whom you own not for Pastors. And if they cannot continually minister to
you, so dispersed, the ordinary Offices of Gods service; you have the Service
of God according to the Order of the Church, you have the Scriptures to read
for part of it, you have store of Sermons manifestly allowed by the Church to
read, you have Prayers prescribed for all your own necessiti^s and the
necessities of the Church; To serve God with these in private, with such as
depend upon you, and are of the same judgment with you (leaving out what
belongs to the Priests office to say) I do, to the best of my judgment,
believe an acceptable sacrifice to God, which you cannot offer at the Church in
such case. And though I censure not my brethren of the Clergy, that think fit
to comply with the power which we are under in holding or coming by their
Benefices, (I suppose in respect of their slocks, rather then to their fruits)
yet, if they believe themselves, and their flocks, to be members of Gods
Church, by being members of the Church of England, they must needs believe,
those flocks that acknowledge such Pastors, to be members of no Church, and
therefore acknowledge you, and own your departure, and declare themselves to
their own flocks, and instruct them to do the like, when the like case falls
out: And so the resusing to hear the voice of strangers, will unite us to make
a flock, under those whom we acknowledge our lawful Pastors.

I have found my self pressed, to Print Copies hereof, for mine own use,
thereby to declare thus much of my judgment to you, and to the rest of my
friends, because the consequence of owning such men for your Pastors, will be,
to make us members of several Churches. Which must disable me, to do any office
of a Clergy man toward you; unless it be the prosecuting of this, by showing
you further reasons, to justify what I say here, and to reduce you to it:
Though it shall always be my study, faithfully to serve my kindred and friends,
in all Offices of civility. And I hope they will consider, what appearance
there is that any thing should move me, to make my self liable to so much harm,
as the public declaring of this opinion will make me liable to, but the
discharge of my conscience to God and them, as the case shall require me to
discharge it.

FINIS.

