A FUNERAL SERMON Upon the much lamented DEATH OF Col. Edward Cook; Who died in
LONDON Upon January the 29th. and was Buried in the Chapple at HIGHNAM near
GLOVCESTER, on February the 2d. 1683/4.

By Edmond Thorn Master of Arts, and Fellow of Oriel College in OXFORD.

(...). Phil. 1.21. LONDON, Printed by T.B. for Walter Davies in Amen-Corner.
1684.

A FUNERAL SERMON Upon the much lamented DEATH of Colonel EDWARD COOK, etc.
Revelations, 14.13. I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write,
Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord from henceforth; yea, says the
Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.


THE two several readings of this Text, in our English Bibles, and in the
Common Service of our Church for the burial of the dead; though different in
words, yet are the same in sense; for let the particle (...) be spoken either
in Composition or Disjunction; place it either at the beginning or end of the
proposition, to which it most emphatically belongs; nevertheless, it will have
the same signification or importance in the scope and meaning of the words: And
as for that other seeming difference, one Translation of the particle (...)
being, that they may; the other, for they do rest from their Labors; there is,
in truth, no real difference at all, but only so far, as one and the same thing
may be rightly styled, either a good effect or a prosperous event.

This Categorical Assertion, that the dead are blessed; proceeding from the
command or impulse of the Spirit, is the first thing which here offers it self,
and worthily bespeaks a serious observation; which may the rather expect a
favorable Audience, as well for the great Improbability thereof, whilst Men of
all sorts have itching Ears after novelties; as for the good tidings which it
brings of eternal happiness; for that is indeed the mark at which all Men level
their affections, though too too many do foolishly mistake and loose their aim:
Upon this account St. Paul may, it is like, be much encountered, as he was of
old, with some Stoics and Epicureans of our evil days, accused and condemned
also for a Babbler, a Setter forth of strange Doctrine; because he Preaches
unto them a state of Bliss, and everlasting life, in the very gates of Death;
for at first hearing, it is a Paradox incredible, tedious and irksome to flesh
and blood, contrary to the natural Sentiments of mere human Reason, to the
tendency of all Creatures, and also to the received principles of true
Philosophy; for by those principles, enforced with common experience, it is
every where observed, that self preservation is the continual endeavor, and
one chief end of all things in the World; nay, the first principles of Religion
it self do seem to countenance and abet the Charge; for death was first of all
threatened, afterward inflicted upon Adam, To. 5.12. Gal. 3.13.
and all his Offspring, as a punishment for their sin, a curse only due
because of their Transgression; For as by one Man Sin entered into the World,
and Death by Sin, so Death passed upon all Men, for that all had sinned; and
therefore it is affirmed, That Christ has Redeemed us and all mankind from the
curse of the Law, being himself made a Curse for us: And that was completely
done, when he fulfilled the Law by his hanging on a Tree; being obedient unto
Death, even the shamful death of the Cross, wounded for our Transgressions, and
bruised for our Iniquities.

In Missali Romans
The Romanists, to my best remembrance, are ingenious even to that impious
contradiction of applauding Adams transgression, for its happiness, in
disserving such a mighty Ransom, that no Sacrifice, but only the Son of God
himself, could any way redeem the Criminal, and expiate for his gilt. O faelix
Culpa! Quae talem ac tantum habere meruit Redemptorem: It would surely better
become us all, sadly to bewail our selves, and imprecate with indignation the
malicious nature of the fact, which has deserved so great and severe a
Judgment; so terrible indeed, that (without infinite Mercy) should have rendered
all mankind obnoxious to the dismal Curse, both of Temporal and Aeternal Death,
beyond all hopes of any mitigation and releases; and certainly, be the Scene
laid where it will, either in the bottomless pit or no lower then the Grave;
each part will be very tragical, grievous and full of horror; there is no
question to be made (as Origin did once, in favor of the Devils themselves)
concerning the perpetual and insufferable pains of Hell; as comprizing all the
torments, which an Omnipotent angry God is able to bring about, or immortal
Souls can possibly sustain; for in the Scripture language, Jude 6. Mat. 25.41,
46. Isaiah 33.14.
it is the vengeance of Eternal Fire and Everlasting punishment, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels; In this respect Almighty God is termed a consuming
Fire, and his Judgment upon all impenitent Sinners, are set forth in those
lively, but fearful Emblems, devouring Flames and everlasting Burnings; nor yet
is even the first kind of death, however common both to the righteous and the
wicked, a thing much to be desired, but rather avoided; were it not for the
blessed hope of a future, enduring and more happy state; for doubtless it is a
bitter Potion, a Cup of Wrath, being the wages of Sin, sharper than a two edged
Sword, more piercing and corosive to the vital Spirits, then Vinegar and Gall:
And although some heathens have been highly valued by themselves and others,
for their brutish, and almost senseless contempt of Death, running first out of
their wits and afterward of their lives, yet Aristotle passed a better
judgment on it, more like a Philosopher and a sober Man, when he termed it the
frightfullest of all Evils, or the King of Terrors: And certainly it is no
small trouble and vexation of heart, when as Christ himself, in the substance
of our mortal flesh, touched with feeling of our Infirmities, has left it on
Record, as one part of those bitter Agonies, which preceeded his Crucifixion;
for, notwithstanding his perfect innocence being altogether free from sin; yet
he prayed earnestly three times in the same words; That if it were possible,
that Cup might pass from him; insomuch that nothing else but a filial obedience
and submission to the good will of his Heavenly Father, could make him drink it
without reluctancies and regret; from which passage two things are easily
Collected; (1) the certain truth of our Saviors manhood, with the malignity of
sin, that could make so pure a soul exceeding sorrowful even to death; atd (2)
the truth and reality likewise of his Godhead; for, without all peradventures,
it was that alone which enabled him to resist and withstand all the Powers of
darkness, even to blood; that was it which baffled all the Temptations of the
Devil and the World, confuted all the oppositions raised by sense, from the
lusts and affections of human flesh, and made stiff nature yield and submit her
self to God.

Seeing now, That our merciful and faithful High Priest has given up his
Innocent, holy Soul an Offering, and a Sacrifice for all our Sins, by suffering
that ignominious Death of the Cross; and since he victoriously routed all the
Forces, and loosed all the pains of Death and of Hell; triumphing over them at
his Resurrection first, and Ascension afterward; all true Christians may, for
that Cause, readily bear a part in St. Paul's joyful (...) or Song of Triumph
composed, it seems, for those very solemn Festivals -- O Death! where is thy
Sting? O Grave where is thy Victory? And forasmuch as the Merits of Christ, the
second Adam, are as mighty to save Mankind, as the Transgression of the first
was powerful to condemn; we may repeat the same words again, with comfort of
hope, and in full assurance of our Faith, in a cheerful Echo to that heavenly
Voice; Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord from henceforth; even so
says the Spirit; for they rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow
them.

These Words do plainly contain two general Parts. (1.) The first Part is a
perfect, express and affirmative Proposition; wherein is peremptorily asserted;
The blessed, unalterable State of all those Men, who depart hence in the Lord
-- Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord; or, according to the Grammatical
Order of the Words, The dead which dye in the Lord are blessed. (2.) The Second
general Part affords the strongest Reasons imaginable to prove and confirm the
aforesaid Assertion; This Confirmation thereof is twofold: (1.) From the best
Authority that may be; for it is evidenced by the most infallible Testimony of
the blessed Spirit, full of Grace and of Truth: (2.) From Reason, which is
double; The dead which die in the Lord are blessed. (1.) Because, They rest
from their Labors; and (2.) Because their Works do follow them.

For the clearer manifestation of the Truth now laid before us, in the Method
and Demonstration of the Spirit; the Terms of the Proposition would be first of
all explained in our Answers to these two Questions: (1.) What sort of men they
be, which the Spirit reckons to be dead in the Lord? And (2.) What is here
understood by their being Blessed? To the 1. Question, What sort of Men they
be, which the Spirit reckons to be dead in the Lord; Our Answer is briefly
thus: They are such Men as have not lived unto Themselves, nor to the World;
but like Strangers and Pilgrims upon Earth, having their Conversations and
Hearts in Heaven; That have mortifyed the Flesh with its Affections and Lusts;
being renewed in the Spirit of their Mind; That have truly repented of all
their Sins, and subdued all the proud, high Thoughts of their carnal minds, in
Obedience to Christ; That have resisted and repelled the Devil in all his
Attempts, either by secret Suggestions, or with open Force, and have likewise
renounced and overcome the World, with all its Adherents, Pomps and Vanities.
Now this Victory, which all true Christians must obtain, both over Themselves,
the Devil and the World, before they can dye in the Lord, is not otherwise to
be gained, than by sincere, unfeigned Repentance, manifest in all the Duties of
self-denial and mortification, a lively, persevering Faith in Christ, and a
constant, hearty (though not perfect) Obedience to Gods Holy Commandments. And
seeing the best Men living are not able to perform that entire and exact
Obedience, which the Law requires at their hands, to make them appear justified
in the sight of a righteous, holy God; being judged of him, according to their
own Works, but unprofitable Servants; whosoever thinks to depart this Life in
Peace with God, with consolation to themselves, must loath, detest and abhor
their past Wickedness, like pious Job, in dust and ashes; and, J^b. ^^^
with S. Paul, Phil. 3.9.
cast off the polluted rags of their own imperfect Righteousness according to
the Law; to put on Christ by Faith, and be found at last, in the white robes of
his Righteousness, that was made perfect through Sufferings. And, there is no
doubt, but those Men, who thus live unto the Lord, by faith and perseverance in
good works, even unto their end, may be sure of dying so too; because they have
discharged their whole duty, so far as to render it an acceptable service unto
God, by Jesus Christ: for having so duly testified both Repentance toward God,
and Faith, working by Love in our Lord Jesus Christ; they become thereby
justified, and obtain their peace and Reconciliation with God: Whereupon they
may safely cast the Anchor of their Hope on the promises, which God once made
unto their Fathers, and then depart in peace according to his word, in full
assurance of an happy Resurrection from the Dead; And having this hope, what
shall hinder Men from spending all their time, their care and pains, in
exerting vigorously the powers and faculties of their Souls; to purify
themselves from all filthiness of the Flesh and of the World, that so they may
grow still in Grace, perfecting Holiness in the fear of God? As the chased
Heart pants after the Water Brook; so these refined Spirits being wearied and
heavy laden, with all the frailties of their own Flesh, tempted by Satan, hated
and persecuted by the World, pant and groan earnestly for deliverance, breathe
and are athirst for their appearing before the presence of God; where
Mortallity shall be swallowed up of Life.

To the second Question, what is here understood by their being Blessed, who
die thus in the Lord? You may take this very plain, yet apposite, Solution;
notwithstanding Men's opinions about their Felicity, present, or to come, have
been as different, numerous and irrational; as concerning their very Gods
themselves; because one does naturally presuppose and infer the other; Felicity
being nothing else but a close intimate Fruition of God, in the notion of an
All sufficient, Immense Being, that is absolutely good of himself, and in his
Nature, and relatively too; being the Fountain of all the goodness and
pefection that can be met with, amongst all the Creatures and Workmanship of
his hands) yet, according to the common use and import of the word, there have
been always two things implied; First, a deliverance from evil, and then a
possession of something which is good: And with regard unto the many kinds of
good or evil, which may befall the Sons of Men; either in this present Life, or
in that which is to come, so their happiness or misery does both increase and
multiply: And because every Man is naturally compounded of the Flesh and
Spirit; of an immortal Soul united with an earthly fading Body; which
nevertheless are by Gods infinite Power, made capable of Life Eternal, in
dispight of Death or Hell it self; therefore he may be counted happy, (1) In
respect of this present world, and (2) with relation to the next, and thereupon
Man's happiness may be considered, either as it is Temporal or Eternal: Those
Temporal and Earthly Blessings, which are but equivocally good or profitable
unto Men; that are Creatures made for Eternity; Philosophers have drawn out
upon their Ethick Schems, into the distinct parts of bona Animi, bona Corporis,
and bona Fortunae; the first rank of these erroneously styled Beatitudes are
properly seated in the Soul; the second pertain especially to the Body, but the
last are the poor Largesses of blind chance, the treacherous Donatives of
deceitful, unconstant Fortune: They are all summed up in three words, Honor,
Profit and Pleasure; which like Ciphers can signify nothing by themselves, and
yet will enhanse our Accounts at the General Audit; according as they have been
superadded for the good use and improvement of better Talents; 1 John. 2.16, 17.
but after all, St. John the Divine (...), has set a true Gloss upon that
false Text; by comprizing all that is in the World, under the lust of the
Flesh, the lust of the Eyes, and the pride of Life: And then, for the confusion
of all vain Philosophers and wretched Miscreants, who fix their affections and
all their happiness on such pitiful empty things; He concludes they be not of
the Father, but of the World, that passes away together with all the Vanities
and Lusts thereof. And what Men having but so much reason, as to know
themselves and their eternal Interests, can be so very Brutish in the great
business of Religion; or so careless of their own precious and immortal Souls;
as to set up such gross and ridiculous Idols in their Hearts; to fall down,
worship and serve the Creature, instead of their Creator, that is God, Blessed
for ever? Do not those unreasonable Men exceedingly deceive their own Souls;
who trust in their uncertain Riches, and foolishly vaunt in those very things,
that perish even in their use, and will certainly come to naught? Are they not
the most absurd Idolaters in the World, that make their own Belly their God?
Who sacrifice to their own proud imaginations, and ambitiously court other
folks, for the vanishing breath of popular applause? Are any Men so mad or
beside themselves, as they be; who count their happiness more or less, by the
numbers of their Flocks and Herds, their large Fields and full Coffers? Or as
others, who forsake the living and only true God; and place all their Devotion
upon the Service of their own Luxurious Tables, and that, for no better end;
but only the pampering of those fleshly Lusts, that war against their Souls?
Believe it, such worldly carnal Wisdom is but Foolishness with God; it is not
from above, but from beneath; it is earthly, sensual, devilish, absurd and
irrational in its nature, destructive and pernicious in its end: Eccles. 5.
For in short, Riches may be kept unto the owners hurt; because they can yield
no real content or satisfaction, but are the cause of much trouble and vexation
of spirit; both in their persuit and fruition too: For as they will not suffer
the greedy wretch to sleep or take his rest; so they will certainly one time or
other make themselves wings, and fly away.

What confidence also can be reasonably fixed upon the strongest Arm of Human
Flesh? What true joy, what comfort can arise from Gorgeous Apparel, even to
Crowns and Scepters, Purple Robes and precious Jewels, with a numerous train of
obsequious hungry Servants, wherein lies the delight and pleasure of the
riotous Livers, which are truly burdens to the Commonwealth, and also to
themselves; being laden with their Sins and miseries at once; having their
Brains besotted, and their whole bodies infected with disease and surfeit, from
the spoils of nature and fopperies of art? For when those voluptuaries have
industriously ransackt all the Elements for the nourishment of their lusts;
having drawn up several courses in rank and file, and made their assaults
against the works of nature and of Art, with fierce and keen Appetites; rushing
like wild Horses into the Battle, and engaging all before them, like those old
Andebatae, blindfold, without either fear or wit; it has often come to pass,
the most unsatiable Assailants have been wounded shamefully with their own
Weapons: The preserving remedies of Health and Life were turned into the most
unhappy Instruments of Sickness unto Death, in spite of Nature and of God
himself, their Tables were become snares unto them; and those very things that
should have been for their wealth, were unnaturally misused for the sad
occasions of their fall.

There now remains, of all things under the Sun, but only one Blessing more,
that has any pretense at all to the present or future happiness of Mankind;
namely, the rare endowments both of intellectual and moral habits; which at
once enrich and adorn our Souls. These were the best means, whereby the
Philosophers ever dreamt of attaining happiness, with all their pains and
studies: But though knowledge and morality be two Pearls of no small price,
even with Christians; and are both difficult in their acquisitions, requiring
the most accurate endeavors of our Hearts and Heads, and also very profitable
in their use, being the most likely means for gaining that happiness which is
in truth our end; yet these things are insufficient of themselves, till
quickened by the warm influences of Gods Holy Spirit. For the subtlest
Politicians, the most profound Scholars in the World, could never come up to
the knowledge of the Truth, or of Gods reconciling the World unto himself by
Jesus Christ; with all their, otherwise excellent abilities, void of Divine
Grace; for the Gentiles, or merely natural men, 1 Cor. 2.14.
receive not those deep things of God, which are foolishness unto them; neither
can they know them, because they are spiritually discerned. For the same
reason, the most learned Rabbis amongst the Jews also, lived ignorant of those
obscure mysteries which lay hid in Christ; notwithstanding that unto them were
committed the first written Elements of Religion, those choice Oracles of God;
for had they known the great mystery of Godliness in Christ Jesus, they would
not have crucified the Lord of Life and Glory. Wherefore it is manifest, that
neither Jews nor Gentiles; remaining still ignorant of Christ, and his Gospel;
could be made wise unto Salvation: For, Acts 3. 1 Cor. 2.8. Joh. 17.3. Lu.
10.22.
This indeed is Life Eternal, that they may know thee, the only true God and
Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent: And no Man knows who the Son is but the
Father, and who the Father is but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal
him. From hence it is plain, That Man's eternal Redemption from the jaws of
death; his peace and reconciliation with God in Christ Jesus, could never have
been discovered by the wise Men or Princes of this World, that come to naught;
but merely by the demonstration of the Spirit and Power of God; as it is
revealed in the Gospel. And since the Gospel has alone declared and exhibited
Remission of Sins, by the Death and Passion of an Holy Jesus; who gave his Life
a Ransom and a Propitiation for the sins of the whole World: This conclusion
follows immediately thereupon, that no moral Philosophers among the Gentiles,
with all their very good and commendable precepts, nor any the straightest
Sects amongst the Jews, with all their external Rites and Ceremonies, and their
exactest skill and observance of the Mosaic Laws, could therewith appear
justified before God; Ps. 32.1, 2.
or be consequently Blessed; for briefly, those alone are truly Blessed, whose
Transgressions are forgiven, whose Sins are covered, and St. Paul interprets
Almighty Gods non-imputation of our Iniquities, Transgressions and Sins to be
the ready way for Blessedness; Romans 4.7.3 20.
the most effectual means of being accounted Righteous, rather by Faith in
Christ, then by the deeds of the Law.

It appears now, That every man at his very best Estate in this mortal Life, is
altogether Vanity; no better to be accounted of in the greatest affluence of
worldly Goods, than the fading Grass, or Flower of the Field; For he withers
as Grass, and like the Flower thereof, He quickly falls away: for all his
Wealth and Riches cannot possibly save him from Death; or, in the least, redeem
his miserable Soul from the destroying hand of Hell. The Crown shall then be
taken from the proud Monarchs Head, his Honor laid in the Dust, and his fatted
Carcass lamentably fall a Prey to Putrefaction, Stench and rottenness: Then his
feeble, macerated Soul will be freed, it is true, from the weight of his
abominable Flesh; but loaded still with his Transgressions; For she must appear
in that, instantly before the Judgment Seat of God, and receive her endless
doom, either of Bliss, or misery, proportionable to the Works done of her in
the Body; whether it be good or bad. In that horrible Day of Retribution,
wherewithal may the Wise, the Scribe and the Disputer of this World appear? For
their Wisdom and their Knowledge will be counted Madness, their Laughter will be
then exchanged into Mourning, and their Mirth for Heaviness: If they boast of
Prophesies they shall fail; If they plead their Skill in Tongues, they shall
cease; and, if Knowledge in all Arts and Sciences, it shall vanish away. But
then, you will ask, what shall become of those Men at last, which have lived
zealous, and strict Observers of Moral Precepts contained in the Law, with a
good Conscience, both toward God and Man? May not their good Lives in this
present World assure them of Blessedness in the next? Will not their Obedience
to Gods Commands in the Law of Moses afford them a just and full Title to the
Promise? For, however it be true, Jam. 2.14, 17.
That Faith or Knowledge cannot save any Man, without good Works, being dead and
alone; yet when it is made perfect, in bringing forth wholesome Fruits, worthy
of Repentance, are not their Persons thereby justified, in Gods Account, and so
blessed in their Deed? To. 2, 1, 2. Jo. 3.17.
For not the Hearers of the Law are just before God, but the Doers of the Law
shall be justified; and, Christ himself has said, That, if ye know these
things, happy are ye, if you do them; where, it seems, Obedience joined with
Faith or Knowledge has the Promise of Eternal Felicity with God in the Kingdom
of Heaven; which Position is not so strange a thing, as true, being frequently
delivered as well in the Gospel, as in the Law.

For answer to this very plausible Objection, we must needs take notice of a
considerable difference between Legal and Evangelical Dispensations; and, that,
under the first, nothing else, but only perfect, entire Obedience, even to the
smallest Jot, or Tittle of the Law, could ever acquit Men from the guilt of its
Transgression; or afterward rescue them from the Curse: Cursed be he that
confirms not all the Words of this Law, to do them: And although St. Paul
quotes the same Text, as if it were of like force under the Gospel too; however
it is observable, that he makes use of it, with a special Eye to Christ; whose
Obedience to the Law, both Active, in that he did the will of his Father,
without sin; and likewise passive, in suffering the full Viols of wrath, on
behalf of the Transgressors, was most perfect, and entire in every particular:
For which cause, Men are now to be justified, not by the Deeds of the Law, but
merely through free Grace, and a lively Faith in Christ Jesus; and their Faith
must be showed in their good Works, not as the meritorious Cause of their
Acceptance with God, but as the genuine effects, the signs and symptoms, tokens
and witnesses of the sincerity of their hearts, and the Truth of their Belief:
So that, you see, Faith in Christ, and Obedience to Moral Precepts are both of
them indispensable Duties, incumbent upon all Christians, even under this
Economy of the Gospel, according to the most rigid Interpretation of the Law,
that is enlarged by Christ, unto the very Thoughts and Intentions of our
Hearts, with the same Curse retained still because of its Transgression,
whether in thought, word or deed; howbeit there is reserved a full Treasure of
Grace, not in the merits of Saints or Angels, but in Christ's absolute
Righteousness; neither at Rome, but in the Court of Heaven; to perfect and fill
up our inevitable Failings and Imperfections. For, according to that Parable in
the 17th. of St. Luke's Gospel, the professed Servants of Christ are strictly
bound for to perform all his Commandments; and yet, having done at last all
they can, they must never think of pleading their own Deserts; but with
meekness and lowliness of mind, acknowledge themselves Unprofitable Servants:
And whatsoever becomes the final recompense of Reward, be sure to give Almighty
God All the Praise and Glory, that God in all things may be glorified through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

Our Answer to the Question has been hitherto Negative; by showing, That many
things (which are good enough and convenient in their kind, but not absolutely
such, being Evil in excess) are therefore ineffectual means for compassing that
happy Design, which all men would gladly propose unto themselves. Now it is very
certain, That our adequate, real and lasting Happiness consists not in those
mundane, transitory Goods, that we possess: Because this World, and all that is
in it, shall one day be dissolved; whereas our Souls are of more enduring
substance to continue for ever. Upon which ground the Poet has truly said, --
ultima semper
Expect anda dies homini est; dicique beatus
Ante obitum Nemo, supremaque funera debet.


The Roman Orator is quoted also by Lactantius; who concurs with him in the
same Opinion In hac vita virtutis praemium nullum est; sed praemium virtutis
post mo^tem; mors non extinguit Hominem, sed ad praemia virtutis admittit; Sen.
de Vit. Beat.
; nay, St. Paul himself has told us, That, if in this Life only there is hope
in Christ; his faithful Disciples are the most miserable Creatures in the
World. So then, all that happiness, which the dead in the Lord enjoy, or the
Living hope for, cannot possibly fall out in this World, but is peculiar to the
next: For, at present, as King Solomon has rightly found by good Experience:
All things here come alike for all men; there is one Event happens
indifferently both to the righteous and the wicked; both to the clean and
unclean; to him that sacrifices, and him that sacrifices not; as is the good,
so is the sinner; and he that swears, as he that fears an Oath.

Hereupon, we may resolve with confidence, That Almighty God, righteous in all
his ways, and holy in all his Works, has appointed a certain day, known best
unto himself, wherein he will judge the world in Righteousness, and make such a
notable Discrimination betwixt the righteous and the wicked; that all sorts of
Men will be forced (some with gladness of heart, others with shame and sorrow)
to confess: Verily there is a reward for the righteous; doubtless, there is
God, that judges the Earth. And that Reward is, no doubt, an everlasting State
of infinite, incomprehensible Felicities, which blessed and happy State
consists, as far as mortals are able to conceive it; First in a full and
certain deliverance for all kinds of evils and mischiefs; whether it be Sins or
Judgments; whether Tribulations in this World, or Hell torments in the next: To
the which very joyful deliverance, there naturally succeeds in the second
place, a complete endless enjoyment of all imaginable good, of goodness it
self; being even the Beatifick Vision of God, face to face, in the highest
Heavens; where there is joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

The (1) thing employed in our being for ever blessed, in the day of our death,
is a deliverance from evil -- According as Men take their course at present,
either in Vice or Virtue; so life or death eternal, ineffable happiness or
misery, will be made their end hereafter: And as it is one part of moral
virtues, to shun the fair and flattering appearances of Sin; so to be void of
Misery will be their first stepped to future happiness, and a deliverance out of
the Chains of darkness, the next way to the glorious Liberties of the Sons of
God, in their inheritance with the Saints in Light: Now this deliverance
whereby Sinners are plucked as Firebrands, out of devouring Flames, will be so
full and complete, as it is possible: For the dead in the Lord are absolutely
freed (1) from the guilt, the polution and dominion of all Sin; that is the
greatest and first evil that ever came into the World; for every Creature of
God is good, and sin is naturally bad, being directly repugnant both to the
nature and attributes of a Just and Holy God, that is the circumference of all
conceivable goodness, and the very Center of all happiness and perfection:
Whatsoever then deprives Men of Gods Blessing, in his gracious and favorable
countenance, is an abominable evil and a dreadful curse to boot; odious in the
pure Eyes of God, and most injurious to themselves: And if the proper effect of
Sin be nothing less then eternal death and misery, by the rule of contraries, a
freedom from sin is a sure preparative to the future happiness of our Souls, in
everlasting Life: For take away the true cause, and its natural effect will
presently fall of its own accord; cease from Sin first, and then be sure,
neither the Law, nor Death, nor Hell can have any power over you; therefore,
eschew evil, and be still doing that which is good, so shall you be for ever
blessed in the recompense of your deeds: blessed, as to the first part of your
deliverance, from that infectious evil of Sin: and also, from the second, that
is the sore evil of punishment; so grievous indeed, that no man could ever
express the pains thereof, but only those who feel them; and have learned the
woeful experience of their past wickedness, from their present miseries: how
lamentable a thing it is for men to serve their own lusts, and pleasures, when
they should honor, and obey their God.

It is one part of Gods happiness, that he cannot sin; and it is no small
portion of ours, that after we have sinned, we can find a way to escape the
punishment: It is Gods perfection, that his nature is invulnerable: and it is
one degree toward our own, that our wounds are capable of a cure. Now the
malady which all sinners contract upon themselves by their own defaults, is a
complicate disease, made up of all evils in the world: that is, their guilt,
and the punishment thereof, which last thing is really the lesser evil of the
two: because it is but Relatively such in respect of those persons upon whom it
is inflicted. For, punishment absolutely considered, is not evil, but rather
good; because Christ himself would have been found guilty by suffering: and so
the Course of Sin must have proceeded in infinitum, or without end: Nay, God
the Father should have passed for the first Cause, and Author of Sin: because
he has ordained the evil of punishment, making his only Son to be sin for us,
who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him: Amos
3.6.
The Prophet Amos demands therefore in this very Sense, no doubt, Is there evil
in a City, and the Lord has not done it? And God has said of himself, Jer.
45.7.
by the mouth of another Prophet, I form the Light, and create Darkness; I make
Peace and create evil, I the Lord do all these things: And again, it is plainly
spoke to the same effect, that when God saw the Ninevites return from their
evil ways, or sinful courses, Jonah 3. Non est per se malum; sed malum videtur.
he compassionately repented of that evil, or punishment, which he before had
threatened, and he did it not: upon which words, it is observed by St. Jerome,
that evil, which God has sometimes only threatened against his people: or else,
brought actually to pass, is not evil in its nature, and of it self, but merely
with regard unto those persons which feel the smart of it, and undergo the
pains, and anguish. Now, this brief account of the matter in hand will be found
most agreeable, and consonant, both to the nature of Almighty God: and also to
the general conceptions of mankind; which are more visible in the common
practice of the World; then with any show of reason to be denied: For it is
daily seen, how much men do love, and lust after notorious Crimes: whereas they
dread, and abhor the punishments, upon which ground, I dare say, the Scaffold
and Gallows do conduce almost as much to the peace and good order of our state,
that we may lead quiet, and peaceable lives, in all godliness and honesty, as
even Religion it self: Because, men for the most part, especially the vulgar,
live by sense more then by Faith, and have better thoughts, and apprehensions
of their present lives, then of any that is to come: Whence it proceeds for
current practice, that many persons appear honest and upright in their dealings
to the eye of the World, but are in truth very Knaves, Theives, and Murderers
in their Hearts: From a deep sense, and apprehension of the Judgment to come.
Felix, we read, was very much dismayed, and fearfully trembled: So that, an
assurance of ensuing punishment, makes the stoutest, and most resolved
Malefactor to be Conscious of their Crimes: and, though stolen Goods may be as
sweet, as Honey to their Mouths; yet the sight of a Tribunal pricks them to
their hearts, and strangely turns all their sweets into gall, and wormwood:
I Will give you but one instance of the present Case, our first parents had
observed the forbidden Fruit, in the 3d. of Genesis, and the 6 Verse, to be
good for food, pleasant also to their eyes, and very much to be desired:
whereupon, they never bogled at Gods positive Command, for the satisfaction of
their sensitive lusts, and appetites: But then, perceiving themselves to be
wretched, and miserable, because of the transgression, they were presently
surprised with horror, and confusion of face: they were extremely scared upon
the sight and presence of God, as a most righteous, incensed Judge, whom they
had wickedly disobeyed, as a tender, and loving Father.

And, seeing that we, their sinful off spring, are all involved in the guilt,
and liable also to the punishment of that first, and great offense; blessed be
the God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he left us not in such a
desperate condition; but has raised us up to the lively hope of a glorious
Resurrection from the Dead; blessed also be the Fountain of all our
deliverance, the Lord Jesus Christ; that Son of Righteousness, which came down
with healing under his Wings to visit us, who sat in darkness, and in the
shadow of death; and guide our feet into the way of peace; to redeem us from
the hands of all our Enemies; and bless us with all Spiritual and Heavenly
Blessings, together with himself in glory.

Thus we come now to consider the Grounds, and Reasons; which the Spirit has
fitted and laid ready to our hand, for the defense, and confirmation of the
Truth here asserted; and consequently for the building up, and establishing of
us, and all Christians, in our most holy Faith: which Faith, and the good
Fruits thereof, manifested in a blameless, and holy conversation, would appear
somewhat unreasonable, and vain; of little, or none effest; but only for the
good assurance which God has given us of a blessed, enduring substance; in
that he raised up Jesus from the dead; and has exalted him, in our Nature, to
the Throne of Heaven.

The truth of our assertion, that the Dead in the Lord are blessed, stands
unmovable, and firmly fixed upon a double Basis, visible in the very Letter of
the Text the first is divine Revelation; ordained purposely by God, for the
confutation of Socinians, and all other vainly conceited Sophisters; who take
upon them to measure, and weigh the profound Articles of our Christian Faith,
by the scant Line, the false Balance of their own corrupted Reasons; Blessed
are the Dead, that die in the Lord; even so says the Spirit: And, because the
Command here laid upon Saint John was to Write that saying, as from Heaven; or,
imprint the same in legible Characters on the fleshly Tables of men's hearts,
that should afterward be recorded, with Ink, and Paper, in all succeeding
Ages; it may serve to spoil the Papists of their needless, Oral Traditions;
invented (as it seems) in opposition to the dictates of the Spirit, and in
derogation to the most indubitable, perspicuous, and sufficient Oracles of God;
which are able to make us wise to Salvation, through Faith, 2 Timothy 3.15. Romans
15.4 Jo. 4. and last Verse.]
which is in Christ Jesus. for if we believe St. Paul whatsoever things were
written aforetime were written for our Learning; that we through patience and
Comfort of the Scripture might have Hope; and St. John says, he wrote his
Gospel in the later days concerning Christ's Person, Doctrines and Miracles;
for this end, that we might believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God;
and that so believing we might have life through his Name: the second Ground,
or Basis, whereon is built this impregnable fortress of our hope, is the reason
here alleged by the Spirit; of such convincing evidence; as to confirm his own
saying; and, also to stop the mouths of all proud Opposers: For, it mightily
confounds our Quakers, and all fantastical Enthusiasts, for divulging openly;
to the disturbance of the Church, and their own Destruction; their own private,
unreasonable Imaginations (in despite of Scripture, and all other Learning)
for immediate inspirations of the holy Ghost. From the method here used by that
infallible Spirit of God, we may learn, to beware of those false Prophets, who
put on such pretenses for a cloak of maliciousness; and then decry, with
insufferable noise, and impudence, all use of Reason, as to matters of
Religion; that so, they may safely bring in those damnable Heresies; whereby
the blind guides themselves, and all their bewitched followers cannot choose,
but fall into the ditch: For, if any, Man, or an Angel from Heaven preach any
other Gospel, than that ye have received, let him be accurs^d. Gal. 1.9.


Notwithstanding all that Opposition, which has been made upon this account
either by the Popes, or the Devils Emissaries; maugre all the wiles, and
stratagems; the Winds, and Waves of these implacable Enemies; the first
endeavoring with subtle Sophistry to defer; the second wholely to make void
the Saints recompense of Reward in everlasting Rest; yet this Anchor of our
Hope, this Pillar of our Faith remains very sure, and steadfast on the Rock of
our Salvation, the Lord Jesus Christ; against which the Gates of Hell are never
able to prevail; for, it is likewise ratified, and sealed by the Spirit of
Promise, that is Faithful, and cannot Lie: For, even so says the Spirit; from
henceforth blessed are the Dead, which die in the Lord. Against this
interpretation of the Text, there lies, I conceive, no probable exception; but
what must rise from the signification of the word, singly considered; or, as it
stands in relation to the Rest: The word, from henceforth, singly considered,
and of it self, is much varied amongst the Latins by those particles A modo,
Deinceps, confestim, Inde, Jam jam, and the like; all which denote this
instant, or indivisible point of time; wherein the Soul departs from the Body;
from henceforth, if the person dies in the Lord; with unfeigned Repentance for
all his former sins, and with a lively Faith in Christ; he is presently
blessed. It Is true! The Reverend, Learned, and Pious Doctor Hammond has well
enough applied this place, and many more to those temporal Afflictions, which
the Primitive Christians endured from Heathenish, Bloodthirsty Persecutors; as
if the good Spirit of Grace moved with Compassion, foretold of those perilous
times to come; and then pronounced them happiest, which endured to the end; or
otherwise died first: But, for all that, he does not exclude the future, and
everlasting State of Bliss, or Misery: but rather supposes it, as principally
there intended and implied; for (to cite no more Evidence in so plain a Case)
in his Paraphrase on the 2 Chap. of the Revel. 11 verse. To him that overcomes
will I give to eat of the Tree of Life, which is in the midst of the Paradise
of God; it is briefly said, he shall have deliverance here, and eternal Life
hereafter: And again, upon those words in the 10th. Verse. of the same Chapter:
Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life; he gives you
this Note, that however some Christians, in those dangerous times of Trials,
and Temptations were overcome, and prevailed upon; to renounce their Faith and
Professions, for the saving of their Lives; yet others, who continued constant,
and faithful unto death, were plenteously requited with a Crown of Life; having
received the honor of Martyrdom first, and then of never ceasing Bliss. Let us
once more consider the word, as it stands in relation to the Rest; and then it
cannot be so properly joined, in this manner, to the former part of the Text; I
heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me -- Write from henceforth. As if the
Subject, whereof the Spirit therein spoke, were some new piece of Doctrine, but
just then brought into the World; for certainly, 'twas made known long before;
even from the beginning, Almighty God having annexed Blessing, and Cursing;
Life and Death, in Paradise it self, to the violation, or observance of his
Laws; which Laws, and their Sanctions too, were engraved by Gods own Hand upon
two Tables of Stone, to be duly promulged by Moses, and the Prophets: And,
there is no doubt, but those holy Men of God under the Law; that spent their
Lives in being faithful unto death, were accordingly blessed, in the promise of
an eternal inheritance: But then, are Christians upon harder terms with God,
then all their predecessors? Will the Sunshine of the Gospel prove more
troublesome, and offensive, then all the dark shadows of the Law: Is the second
Covenant, or Ministration of Grace, and Truth, of less advantage then was the
first, which could work nothing but wrath, and condemnation? If the Souls of
Christ's good, and faithful Servants do not reap the blessed fruits of their
Labors, upon relinquishing their Bodies; and have their just Wages, according
to their Works, in a repose, and rest with God; what could be the meaning of
Saint Stephens devout Ejaculation? When falling asleep, he cried, Acts 7.59.
Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. And, can we think St. Paul was much beside
himself, when he desired earnestly to be dissolved, that he might be with
Christ? Or, when he showed such servent zeal, for his being absent from the
body, and present with the Lord? When he groaned so vehemently, to put off his
earthly Tabernacle; for a building of God, an house not made with hands, 2 Cor.
5.
eternal in the Heavens? Or lastly, shall we say, that Wise, and Learned
Apostle was very much deceived in promising himself, at the time of his
departure, a Crown of Righteousness; for that he had fought a good Fight; 2 Timothy 4.7.8.
finished his Course, and kept the Faith? Nay, further yet; shall we dare to
question Chri^s own words, Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit? Luke
23.46.
And if not, is there any Cause at all to suspect his wo^d, and promise to the
penitent Thief upon the Cross; Verily, I say unto thee, to day shall thou be
with me in Paradise? There be no Papists, I trow, so blasphemous, v. 43.
and irrational, as to deny Christ's humane Nature actual possession of bliss in
Heaven, when he left his abode on Earth; having then fully conquered all the
power, and malice of this present evil World; and victoriously triumphed over
the Prince, and the Dominions of Darkness. For, they dare not presume, I think,
to put our blessed Savior in a worse Condition, then all their canonized
Saints; which they religiously worship and adore as blessed Martyrs; and I am
sure, his blood was infinitely more precious, and spoke far better things at
the Thro^e of Grace; then a Campions, or a Garnets; a Benedictines, or a
Jesuits: neither again, is it probable on the other side, that such a
Malefactor, as our Thief; who died, not for his Religion, or his Faith
wrongfully; but justly for his evil deeds, worthy of death, should be reckoned
above the common pitch of all true Christians: and yet, this very person was to
be the same day with Christ in Paradise; having literally suffered with Christ;
2 Timothy 2.1.
he was to reign with him too Latro primitiae Derclicto^um introducit:
(asseriente Christo) in regnum ^^lorum: Ibi Latro locatur, ubi Lucifer corruit:
non ad loca purgatoria, flammosque peccatorum Vltrices confitens destinatur,
etc. Arnold Carnotens inter St. Cypr. Opera Oxonii Edit.

And, if all true Members do run the same fortune as the head, in being either
miserable, or happy: this Conclusion follows, both from a parity of Reason, and
from example too, that whosoever goes forth of this world, with repentance
toward God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ; and by consequence, in the
true love, and favor of God; they are no sooner delivered from the burden of
their flesh, then admitted into the joy of their Lord: For, we may further add,
as testimonies to the truth of our position, the general consent of the most
Orthodox Fathers in the Christian Church; by name Justin Martyr, St. Cyprian,
St. Chrysostom, St. Ambrose, St. Austin, St. Jerome, and many more such men that
were the glory of their times, famous in their Generations: who being dead, yet
speak in those admirable works, that are now the living Monuments of their
worth. Vid. Phil. mornaeum de Euchar. Lib. 3. cap. 9.

Besides, the distance between Earth and Heaven will not stand our Adversaries
in any stead, or prejudice our selves; because Man's rational Soul is an
immaterial and spiritual Being; all whose natural Motions are not confined like
Bodies, to the differences of time and place. But whether it is in or out of
the Body; nevertheless it subsisteth, and moves too, secundum se totam simul,
and semel: all at once and in a moment. No question therefore, but those who
die in the Lord, are actually Blessed: For, as no passible Reason can be given
to the contrary from the specifical nature of the Soul it self; being yet
capable of returning into Gods hand again, as quick as ever it came out; so
there is nothing on Gods part, which may be reasonably said against it. His
Power is no such Argument; for that is absolute still, and unlimited any more,
then with his own good will: So that he which first gave the Soul by the might
and power of his bare word, may so take it again, whenever he shall please,
and we need not fear the good will of our Heavenly Father, to give his obedient
Children, the Kingdom prepared for them, from the beginning of the World. 1
Cor. 6.20. Ephesians. 1.14.
For his infinite Goodness, Mercy, Love and Justice too, stand all of them
engaged for instating of holy Souls in their purchased everlasting Habitations:
For we truly suppose Divine Justice to be fully satisfied by that
All-sufficient Sacrifice, which our Savior made upon the Cross, for the
Redemption of Mankind: If it were not so, then our Preaching would be vain; our
Faith were also vain, we should be still in our Sins, without Hope, and without
God in the World: But if divine Justice were duly satisfied, and when Christ
made his Innocent soul an Offering for sin, by which means he perfected for
ever them that are sanctified; certainly there now remains no more sacrifice
nor any future satisfaction to be made for sin: for it is not possible with
God, or any good and honest Men, to demand further satisfaction after all their
Debts are paid: And St. Paul has affirmed, that God in Christ has forgiven us
all our Trespasses; Colos. 2.13, 14.
blotting out the Hand writing that was against us, and has taken it out of
the way, nailing it unto his Cross: Moreover, it is not in man's power to
satisfy God in any measure for the least offense, or violation of his
Holiness, because the demerit of every sin is infinite; being a trespass
against Almighty God, that is infinite in Goodness, and in Truth, in
Righteousness and Holiness; of purer Eyes then to behold Evil, or lo^k upon our
iniquities: Hab. 1.13.
but with Indignation and Wrath. For this cause, what man soever goes hence
without Repentance for his part; and forgiveness upon Gods, as he has lived
without Fear so shall he dye without Favor, and void of remedy: for Purgatory
flames will never extinguish those of Hell, where the Worm dies not, and the
Fire is not quenched.

The time would fail me to tell at large, how strangely the Papists have
outstript their forerunners, the Scribes and Pharisees; nay Pagans themselves
in folly, it is clear enough, how basely they have adulterated the pure Doctrine
and Commandments of God, with filthy dross of their own absurd inventions
Magisterially imposed on the credulous multitude, as Articles of their Creed,
thus crucifying Christ afresh, and putting once more the Lord of Glory to
Reproach and Blasphemy: Let it suffice in short that all the Doctrines which
they have taught, and obtruded on the World concerning those imaginary pains of
Purgatory, do make void in great measure Christ's real sufferings upon the
Cross, their propitiatory sacrifice of the Mass, with Prayers and Oblations for
Souls aggrieved with Purgatory torments, do very much diminish and vilify the
price of our Saviors Blood, and lastly pardons and indulgences for all
Trespasses and Sins past, present and to come, granted mercinarily from the
Popes Chair, do throw down the Mercy-seat, and exalt the Man of sin to the
Throne of God. All this Abomination of Desolation craftily brought into that
Holy place, the Church or Temple of God, rightly weighed in the Balance of the
Sanctuary, will prove lighter than Vanity, worse then nothing, full fraught
with Falsehoods, Contradictions and Blasphemies against God, even to their
denying the Lord that bought them, and the bringing down upon their own Heads
very swift and sure destruction.

That Vexata Question, or Ball of Contention (I mean Christ's descent into Hell)
stiffly bandied on all sides, without any final determination; whether it were
only Vertual, as some Learned men would have it, or also ^ersonal, real, and
local as others, may be well spared and let alone for once.

It Is enough to my purpose, that he which descended was the same that ascended,
the man Christ Jesus, and that he was made perfect through sufferings, which in
truth were all finished, when he bowed his Head and gave up the Ghost, For, he
then led Captivity captive in a pompous Triumph, spoiling Principalities, and
Powers, and making a show of them openly. And seeing now, that Christians are
like faithful Soldiers, to follow the Captain of their Salvation, by treading
in the same steps, at least in a spiritual sense, if they are made conformable
to Christ in his death, by mortifying their sins, or crucifying their Flesh,
with its Affections and Lusts, and also partake with him in the power of his
Resurrection, by rising again to newness of Life, in a constant course of Grace
and Holiness to their end, what shall hinder them from Ascending triumphantly
to the same Kingdom and seat of Glory? For, be sure the Almighty God is more
just and righteous, then to demand any thing more of sincere Converts, in
requital for their Trespasses and Sins, then what Christ once paid; when he was
delivered for all our offenses, and was raised again for our justification.
Romans 4.25. Eccl. 9.10, 5.6.
To conclude the point, in this difficult case betwixt an offended God, and
poor guilty Sinners: how can they possibly relieve either themselves or others;
For there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the Grave;
whether then go: therefore whatsoever thy hand finds to do, be sedulous
and careful in doing it with all thy might: 2 Cor. 6.2. Jo. 9.4. Ps. 115.17
For the dead have no more a Reward; nor any more a portion for ever in any
thing that is done under the Sun. But now is the accepted time, now is the day
of Salvation; before Night comes, when no man can work. For the dead praise
not the Lord; neither any that go down into silence. To day then if you will
hear the voice of God, and live; harden not your hearts; but repent in time,
and return unto the Lord, with Oil in your Lamps before the doors are shut:
Isa. 55.
Seek the Lord whilst be may be found, call upon him whilst he is near; Come
now to Christ, in this time of Visitation; laboring and heavy laden, Mat.
11.29.
with broken contrite Hearts, and having on the clean Wedding garment, that is
the Righteousness of Saints; that when the Bridgroom shall appear, ye may go
into the Marriage Supper of the Lamb, and there take refreshment: or, find rest
unto your Souls: For, those men who so live in the true faith and fear of God,
shall die with comfort, and be really blessed in their end: Because, they shall
rest from all their labors, Romans 8.2.
being free both from the law of sin, and of death; which can have no more
dominion over them: for the guilt of sin, as also the condemning power of the
Law will be quite and clean abolisht by the righteousness of Christ, Rev. 21.4.
which by faith is imputed unto them, and abundantly rewarded, as if it were
their own. All tears will then be wiped from their eyes: there will be no more
death, neither sorrow, nor crying, nor any more pain: for the righteous men are
in peace at the last; being taken away from all Evil that is to come; either of
Sin or Judgment: Death is then swallowed up in Victory; the powers of Hell are
all vanquished and overcome, and albeit they cease from all their Labors; yet
their works do follow them. For amongst their Acquaintance of all sorts; Enemies
or Friends; their Memories will survive their persons; and preserve the Fruits
of their own hands, to praise them in the Gates: And, above all, God Almighty
will then call to Remembrance all their good works; and recompense them for all
their pains; with full wages, and above their deserts; in those Heavenly
Mansions; where they shall for ever celebrate his holy Name with Hallilujahs,
or Songs of Triumph, Honor, Praise and Glory, to Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
one God World without end.

ALthough I have already wearied your Attention with a tedious, very jejune
Discourse, and may therefore presume on your forgiveness of the Sermon for want
of its Application; Yet I will rather trespass more upon your patience, then
expect your pardon: For however I am conscious of many Failings in this weak
performance; yet I don't fear the Censure, nor seek the savor of this
illnatur'd, captious World; but am sure of comfort and satisfaction to my self;
in that I have done it in Obedience to some irresistible Commands, with
singleness of heart, as unto God, and out of good will to the vindication of
the Truth.

Everlasting Happiness, consisting in a full, immediate fruition of Almighty
God, the Cause and Author of every good and perfect Gift; is a subject so very
suitable, and pleasing to the natural desires, and propensities of our immortal
Souls, that whoever stupidly neglect the Message, and like the deaf Adder, stop
their dull Ears to those ravishing Charms, will prove themselves to be men of
little understanding; nothing better, nay worse than the Beasts that perish:
And because ordinary prudence will engage Men upon the use of those means,
which appear most likely, for obtaining of their ends; whilst every one, at his
departure out of this World, earnestly seeks for an Assurance of being ever
Blessed in the next; I see no cause to fear a kind reception of wholesome
Exhortations to the practice of a good life at present, so long as it is
accounted a reviving Cordial at the hour of Death, and the day of Judgment: For
I suppose, there is no man of sufficient sense and reason, to believe the Joys
of Heaven, or the woeful conditions of damned Spirits in Hell; and is persuaded
also, that both sorts are Eternally decreed by the most Righteous Judge of all
the Earth, to be the certain Wages of all those good or evil Deeds which are
transacted in the Flesh; but he could wish with all his heart, like Balaam, to
dye the death of the Righteous, and that his latter end may be like his. But
alas! what can such faint wishes avail without answerable Endeavors in the
progress of our Lives? For, whoever yet won the prize, before he set out upon
the Race; or else, has tired, and sluggishly thrown himself down upon the way?
What Soldier yet has gained the Victory with honor and good success, which
has not held out, and maintained the Fight unto the last? Now, that all
Christians might happily finish the Race here set before us, and accomplish
their designs in that Holy War; obtaining a Brabeum, or Crown of Righteousness
for all their pains; and everlasting Rest after all their Travails in the ways
of Holiness and Righteousness; the Scripture abounds with Precepts and
Examples, Admonitions, Promises and Threats for that purpose: And seeing the
Precepts of the Gospel seem difficult and grievous to the men of this World,
that walk by sight more than Faith; and are sooner carried away with some
Visible Example, then with any troublesome Commands; I cannot think of a
readier way to beget their good liking to the Christian Precepts, then by
giving them some instance of their practice; nor can I possibly remember for
several years, a better Example, that what lies now before us.

Wherefore, that we may take this Worthy persons Upright Life as a pattern for
the well-framing of our own; I most humbly beseech your leave, to present some
Lineaments thereof in this rude imperfect draught, such as it is; for want of a
more skilful Hand, that would polish and complete the piece.

If Hercules could be seen at full stature by the demensions of his Foot; and
Historians are not thought much the worse, for describing vast Empires, with
all their Periods, in a few sheets; It Is hoped you will pardon the Composer of
these Lines, though very short of that ample subject, whereunto they do
pretend; And also, that you will supply those defects you cannot choose but
meet with, from your own better knowledge; or at least, with a charitable
interpretation of his audacious, but well intended, enterprise: And, if you
please to cast a favorable Eye, it is believed the full measure of a Man will
soon appear in the Perspective-glass, that is here put into your hands.

It Is true? the person, whose Funeral we are come hither to celebrate, was
enriched with many rare Accomplishments, not easy to be discerned by vulgar
Eyes; and hardly to be matched by those of greater advantages and higher
stations in the World; nor can they be set forth to their highest pitch, by
those mean parts that have undertook so difficult a task: For which cause they
must needs appear like the Stars, twinkling, and obscure by reason of their
distance; or like to the Sun it self, when it strikes the silly Gezar blind
with too much Light: Nevertheless, we may chance make some Discoveries, by
tracing out the course of his life in a few passages thereof; in regard both of
Himself, his Neighbor, and his God.

As for his own Person; his Body was of a temper and constitution most healthy,
vigorous and active; the strength whereof was not so much the good effect of
Nature, (though descended from the Loins of Honorable and Virtuous Ancestors)
as the product of his better tempered Mind; which governed, as Queen Regent of
that little World, and manfully subdued all his carnal Affections and Lusts; to
move in their proper Sphere, and serve like Handmaidens unto Reason; The
sensitive Appetites, that Beast with many Heads, could never so much prevail,
as to dismount his Reason from the Saddle; or so ride the Man, as it often does
in some others, till they become like Brutes for Intemperance and Lust. Now
it is truly said, Animus cujusque, is est quisque; The Mind is indeed, and
effect the man; because it is that alone which makes an essential difference
betwixt him and the Beasts of the Field; which being void of Reason, do live
and Act without knowledge, or discretion and are incapable of Commendation or
dispraise; which yet are indifferently due to Men, for that all their external
operations, properly called Humane, are Voluntary and Free; proceeding from a
Soul endued with Reason, to discern between things morally good and evil:
proceed we therefore in this our Inquest, from the Cabinet unto the Jewel there
contained; And, through this frail House or Tenement of Clay, take we notice
what a noble Guest lodged once in such a despicable Cottage.

Now, it is commonly known, that our Souls have two parts, or Faculties; that
is, our Understandings and our Wills; with several Affections, inferior and
subordinate thereunto: By the first of them we get the knowledge of Truth, to
distinguish it from Falsehood; By the second we come to loath and abhor Evil and
cleave to that which is Good: By the help of this familiar, yet necessary
distinction, we go forward in our search; First for his Intellectuals; and
afterward for his Morrals.

According to these different Capacities, we may complete; and admire the
Wisdom, the Goodness, and the Power of our infinite Creator; manifest in the
production of Humane Souls, far excelling the fairest and best compacted
Fabrics in the World: For in their primogenial State of Innocence, the parts
thereof were set in such good order and Semetry throughout; so much beautified
with Love and Unity between themselves; and so well fitted and prepared for
injuries from others; that if we do not with Pythagoras, affirm them to be
nothing else but Harmony; yet we may boldly say, the wise Master Builder could
be none but God; the prime A^thor of Peace, and the true Lover of Concord.

Now, that we might guess the better at the pristine State of this goodly
Building, by the Rubbish and Ruins that remains; that we may gain some little
prospect of Man's native Honor and Glory; being not much lower then Blessed
Angels; and somewhat like even to God himself; I cannot imagine a clearer
instance, then what is now prostrate in our Eyes; An Object, which employs our
present thoughts, and yet exceeds them too, does exercise both our Tongues and
Hearts at once; But is enough to make one blind with Grief, and the other dumb
with Admiration; for in good earnest, here is a large Inventory to be drawn, of
the choicest Goods that belong to Mortals; Goods, more precious then Rubies,
and more to be desired then much fine Gold: For, when as all these Earthly
things wax old and perish; the former will endure for ever, and continue like
the Soul immortal.

If then, you look after Wisdom, and good Understanding; Behold, there is the
Man, Blessed with a good Fancy; with a ready quick Apprehension; a tenacious
Memory; a sound and clear Judgment: These indowments are I confess natural, and
infused at the same instant with our Souls, and are afterward capable of
improvement, according as they are employed; and you cannot be ignorant of his
great experience in Civil matters; having been exercised in the strangest
varieties of Alterations, that ever happened in this Church and Kingdom.

His natural parts were, no doubt, excellently good, that could bring forth
such a plentiful Harvest as they did, with so little Cultivation; being
studiously manured but a few years to the best Advantage; and that either with
private Readings, and Contemplations, or with public Business: By the first
means of knowledge he settled that Foundation, which nature laid; By the
second, he finished the superstructure; that instilled the Principles of a
Civil active Life; This made out the Demonstration; one of them caused no
little skill in Books for that purpose; and the other begat in him an accurate
knowledge and acquaintance with Men, even from the Peasant upwards to the
Prince: In which respect, it may be truly said, Non diu fuit, sed diu vixit,
his time was but short; not reaching by seven or eight years, the common period
of Mankind; yet he lived more then some others of much greater Age: For, you
can bear me witness, he took no pleasure to frustrate the designs of his being
in the World; or of his God who placed him in it: he was not ignorant or
forgetful of his manifold Obligations; neither would prove himself that
unprofitable Servant, that should hide his Lords Talents in a Napkin; or misuse
them to the service of his own Carnal pleasure, instead of his Creator: He sat
not in his private Study like Cynical Diogenes in his Tub, gaping after Flies;
impertinently busied about frivolous and unuseful Triffles of none at all, or
very bad consequence; for Almighty God so prosper'd his Endeavors with
laudable proficiency and success; that from the Schools in Cambridge, he
proceeded successively to the Courts at Westminster: and after a while he was
there called unto the Bar; not as a Criminal to make Answer for himself; but
as an Advocate, which could plead the Cause for others: And in his latter days,
from standing as a Pleader at the Bar, he served his Country with sitting as
Justice on the Bench; for executing of Justice and Judgment in the Land; that
he might relieve the Oppressed, Judge for the Fatherless and Widows in their
distress; and see that such as were in need and necessity should have Right.
For these and all other Civil Offices he was richly furnished, as with right
understanding to discern; so likewise with a Mind and Will fervent in promoting
of Godliness and Honesty.

His Moral Virtues rooted in his Will and Affections were not inferior to
those of his understanding; he was eminent for both, and surpassed in each most
of his equals for other matters: The first prepared him for notable
Achievements to the benefit of other folks; the second made him a true Friend
or Benefactour to himself: For his Temperance and Moderation were commonly
known of all men, that were not altogether ignorant of his person, or of his
Conversation; he was no such Glutton to fare deliciously, like him in the
Gospel, every day; nor at any time to be overtaken with Excess; it being his
good purpose rather to repair the necessary decays of Nature, then to beget
more with indulging that evil Genius of Riot and Excess: He never sottishly
mistook his Dining Room for a Temple, his common Table for an Altar, and
himself to be the God, which he must needs adore and Worship; like some
Gourmondizers, who feed themselves as Heathens do their Beasts, till they fall
a Sacrifice to stench and Rottenness. No, no, he knew right well the true God,
whom he deligently served; and thereupon used the good things of this World
without injury to the Creature, himself or his bountiful Creator: His choice of
Diet was not Superstitious; by counting it any part of his Religion; like the
Pharisees of old, that were very precise and exact in some little things of no
Moment: Nor was he curious, like some Epicures of our days who busy
themselves exceedingly to please and carress their vicious Pallates; Nourishing
Diseases by the Remedies themselves; to the loss of their Health, and at last
of their very Lives; For he seldom, or never would eat, or drink, but when
'twas Necessary and an Habitual Abstinence for 24 hours bred in him a nauseous
dislike of those Meats, which other Men have made almost natural, by the
contrary Custom.

From his knowledge of the true God (whom he constantly worshipped with a great
deal of Reverence, and Devotion both in public and in private) He took his
measures of this Evil World; and then made the best use of it imaginable; not
like a Proprietor, but a Steward; that waits patiently for his Lords coming;
and hopes to give up his Account with joy.

He may be thought to be of the same Opinion with Plato; esteeming his Body no
better then a prison to the Soul: He therefore used it not for his Mansion, but
his Inn; looking upon himself as a stranger in the Land; or like a wafering
Man, which tarryeth but for a Night: Briefly, neither his Meat nor Drink, no,
nor Sleep were at all superfluous, or exceeding the bounds of that Soberness
which becomes Christians; For he never so clogged, and stupefied the Stomach
and the Brain, as to become indisposed for Action; exemplifying the Truth of
our Souls being one continued Act, whilst our Bodies are but the dull Engines
to those nimble Spirits: And he thereby testified also, that man is to live
here like the Israelites in the Desert; having no resting place, no continuing
City, before he comes up to Canaan, the good Land of Promise: Upon this
account, he virtuously contemned and slighted all the Pomps and Vanities of
this fading sinful World; and learned with Saint Paul to count their temporary
things not better then dung, in comparison to that life of Grace, which after
all our Tribulations will end in Glory.

Real Godliness, like Almighty God, the Spring and Fountain of it, is
exhaustible, restless, and impatient of constraint; before it flows over with
all imagninable Freedom, to enrich and beautify the Neighboring Fields and
Meadows: Thus we see the Clouds do liberally spend themselves in dropping
fatness; both on the barren Hills and more fertile Valleys; the Rain makes no
difference, and the Sun too sheds Light and Influence both on the Righteous and
the Wicked, High and Low, Rich and Poor, one with another: And is it any way
probable, that Man should be wonderfully made for himself alone? Can we think
that ever infinite Wisdom ever intended, that he should live at his own
pleasure, and so take his pastime, and sport himself upon Land, as the
Leviathan does at Sea; but much more unreasonably? to the Reproach of his being
in the World; and in open defiance both of his own Conscience and his God? This
Honorable Person here departed, was I am sure of another mind; more sensible
of Gods undeserved Munificence, and more conscientious in making all possible
returns of Gratitude in proportion to those engagements which accomplished his
Blessings: His Godlike Soul was endued in good measure, with all the Virtues
that could represent him once more in his Makers Image: If you pause a while
and impartially reflect on the former passages of his life; both in respect of
himself, his Neigbour, and his God; I believe you will readily acknowledge; that
God was in him of a Truth: for he had learnt of that grand Exemplar, his Lord
and Master, to be meek and lowly of heart; full of Contentment in every
Condition; choosing tranquillity of Mind, with a good Conscience void of all
offense, both toward God and Man; before abundance of Wealth and Riches,
Honors and Preferments with trouble and vexation of Spirit. He was sober,
grave and temperate in all things; even amidst many powerful Temptations to the
contrary Vices. He was obliged I suppose more than ordinary, To keep his Tongue
from evil, and his Lips from uttering any thing of deceit and Guile: For you
may remember, no corrupt Communication proceeded out of his Mouth; but only
such manner of Discourse as would Minister grace or knowledge for his attentive
Hearers: His familiar Conversation was affable, courteous, pleasant and
facetious, both from scurrilous, or obscene Language, and also from a Stoical
morose Taciturnity: He could seem angry sometimes, but still in imitation of
his God rather with the faults then persons of Men, with due regard unto the
Christian precept of being in Wrath, but without Sin: For Love and Charity that
Bond of perfectness, commanded all his Passions; possessed his whole Soul, and
crowned all other Virtues with good success: Being once Master of that most
excellent spiritual Gift; exceeding both our Faith and Hope; he was truly Rich
and Honorable too; these things were indeed his beloved inheritance; fairer in
his Eyes then stately Buildings and large Mannours; dearer unto him then many
thousands of Gold and Silver; sweeter also then Honey and the Honey Comb: He
seemed by the course of his life, to have taken Moses or much rather Christ,
for an example in renouncing the good things in this World, and in suffering
Evil; for he did always highly prize the Christians Ornament of a meek and
quiet, and inoffensive Spirit; above all the glittering Honors and ensnaring
Gayeties of an usurping Tyrants Court; choosing rather to suffer Afflictions
then to enjoy the pleasures of Sin for a season.

Godliness with Contentment, he judged rightly to be the most real Gain, having
the promise of this life, and of that which is to come, and its therefore much
greater and more lasting Riches, then all the Treasures in Egypt; and cannot be
purchased with all the Gold of Opher.

Thus he lived, and thus he dyed, in the true Faith of Christ; and in steadfast
Hope of a good Reward in the Resurrection of the Just, for he is now made free
from Sin; Death has no more Dominion over him; for that he has fulfilled the
Royal Law, by loving his Neighbor as himself; he frankly forgave his Enemies;
and likewise, did the best he could for men of all sorts, whether Friends or
Foes, without any distinction of Sects or Countries: In this charitable course
he followed the precept and Example of his Master Jesus Christ, forgiving all
men their Trespasses, either in words or deeds: For it was no part of his
Religion or his practice, to repel injury with wrong; to resist and recompense
evil for evil; he never so learned of Christ, as to retaliate and revenge
himself otherwise, then by those harmless defensive weapons; a patient silence
and magnanimous contempt: His great proneness to pity and compassion, by
forgiving other men their Trespasses produced in him remorse of Conscience, and
hearty sorrow for his own; thus Charity began at home; demonstrating to the
World, the soundness and sincerity of his heart, by the straight line of his
Conversation. As the Sun being always one and the same Agent, produces very
different effects: In like manner Charity bestows her Boons with one and the
same hand; but in very different ways of Dispensation, according to the
manifold Exigencies it meets with among the wretched Sons of miserable Men: It
clothes the Naked, and provides Bread for the Hungry, and draws forth Water for
those that are a thirst: But what? These are indeed very poor and ordinary
pittances, taken up almost at every ones door: The Person whose Charity we
commend would be very much disgraced by such trivial Encomiums. For his great
Soul was brought up in the Schools of Liberal Arts and Virtues, for higher and
more noble ends, for those worthy deeds, which do really deserve a choice Room
in the Records and Annals of our Age.

Now, it is not here to be dissembled, that when Faction acted her part in
Masquerade and Sedition appeared in open field, under the specious pretenses
and colors of Religion; This Gentleman (then very young) was blown up, and
incensed by evil men; who carried nothing but Laws, Liberty and Religion it
self in their mouths, (craftily concealing Seditions, Tumults and War in their
Hearts) to have an unfortunate share in that most infamous Rebellion: which as
it cannot be excused, so neither would he himself desire to be any otherwise
justified; then by declaring his own indignation, and by the Remonstrances of
his Repentance: For which he did not tarry till he could not avoid the
necessity, but very early had a true sense of, and sorrow for, his Crime; And
these things as they proceeded to a confession of his shame and dereliction of
the Vice, so they went forwards to the acquiring and practicing (his whole life
after) the contrary Virtues of Righteousness and Loyalty; fullfilling what the
Scripture does require of the true penitent, a remembering from whence he was
fallen of doing his first Works: From hence he became a true Servant of God and
the King, making what restitution he could for the Religion he had scandalized,
and the wrongs he had done: so that it will be a vain question to ask whether
his honor or his Soul be saved. For if the Tears of true Repentance mixed with
a lively Faith in our Saviors blood, will make a Lavium that will wash all
thoroughly from our Wickedness, and cleanse us from our Sins: I am confident the
crying sin of Rebellion, though to blood, will never be laid unto his charge:
neither in this World, because he long since heartily repented of it; and
received the Pardon of both Kings from their own Lips; nor in the next, because
Almighty God, that is Gracious and Merciful, Pardoning iniquities,
Transgressions and Sins, takes no pleasure in the Death of Sinners; but
compassionately wishes, that he would return and live.

This Loyal Converts true Repentance and remorse for that miscarriage was best
of all expressed in the real change both of his Judgment and of his Life too: for
being some years since with a person of Honor upon the day of the Martyrdom of
our late Gracious Sovereign and having performed his part in the public
service upon that very lamentable Occasion; toward Evening he was desired by
that Honorable person to go shoot with him at Butts (an Exercise he much
delighted in at other times): but the good Colonel replied instantly with no
small regret -- My Lord, it is your Happiness, that your Father and Family were
engaged on the Kings side; whereby you have not so much to answer for the Sin
of this day: But for my part I look upon my self to have so great a sh^re in
the guilt of it, that I can never take any pleasure on this day. The Colonel
being desired by the same person, to read over Dr. Nalsons and Rushworths
Histories, and give him an account thereupon; He told his Lordship, That he
found the first to be a very true, exact and faithful Historian; knowing many
of those things he asserted to be true of his own knowledge; and that he had
long looked upon those who managed the late War to be very bad Men, though he
could not have imagined them so bad, as that Book evidently made them appear to
have been: Then he added, that he was only sorry 'twas not his fortune to be a
Member of the last Parliament, that he might have spoken what he knew of them,
and probably have undeceived some honest Gentlemen.

When his youthful and unruly passions were chastised, and brought under the
command of Reason and Judgment confirmed by some years Experience, he then
perceived how much the Mask of Religion had been Hypocritically put on, till it
was fit for nothing but only to be thrown by, he saw the greatest impieties
that ever Christians committed, walking bare faced, and in the open Sun;
Majesty was trod on by the vilest of people, and the pensive Hearts of all
honest men were oppressed with fears of lamentable destructive consequents:
Then, then doubtless, the same infinitely gracious God workt upon his Heart
effectually to the full acknowledgment of the Truth; as he did on St. Paul at
his Conversion to the Christian Faith. For, when his Majesty was trapand into
the Isle of Wight, and marked out for a prey to Covetous, Proud and Ambitious,
discontented Spirits, our Loyal Convert appeared like St. Paul again, zealous
for preserving that Cause, which he did once endeavor to destroy: For, being
in that Isle he secretly made known to the King the cruel Designs that were
laid against his person, with a way that he contrived for his Majesty's making
an Escape, the particulars of which Adventure will be set forth at large by
authority, at the next Reprinting of the Kings works. But in spite of all
endeavors to rescue the King, the Church and State from ruin; these Barbarous
Rebels were so prosperous in their wickedness, that his Gracious Majesty fell
into the Hands of such wicked Men, whose tender Mercies were cruel even to
Death, Prove. 12.10.
for not long after a Monstrous High Court of Justice judged and condemned
their Lawful Sovereign; in whom alone was lodged the Right and Power of Life
and Death by the known Laws and Customs of the Realm: so that perjury was added
unto Murder, in their breaking those very Laws themselves, which those honest
men had sworn to maintain: As if the body Politic were not able to subsist,
but only by the loss of Innocent, pure and Royal Blood; As if neither Oaths,
nor Laws were of any further use; but the world must be turned upside down
overwhelmed once more with a Deluge of confusion.

Now, that all hopes were lost, and sunk into Despair; Death standing ready for
Execution of that Execrable Sentence; our Loyal Convert used all his interest
with Fairfax, Cromwell, and other chief Officers, to prolong and put off the
direful Execution of that unjust and unparalleled Judgment; that Majesty might
be saved from perishing by the most vile and meanest of his People: For which
end he fairly tendered the Names of several Peers in the nature of Hostages;
that would have pawned their own Lives and Fortunes to serve the King. But
those Devilish cunning Gamsters conceived it their safest policy to play out
the Game, they began with Hypocritical shows for the Government, and Religion
here established; until it were sure to conclude in utter Extirpation of the
Royal Seed, and in a Fatal Catastrophe of Blood; striving to protect themselves
from the Vengeance due for their past offenses, by committing more. And though
he failed of that Happy success in his Negotiation, which himself and good Men
would have joyfully embraced; yet he procured for his own part this immortal
Honor -- That he was at least in good will a true Patron of his languishing,
affl cted Country; a real hearty Servant both to Caesar and his God.

As Christ the King of Glory will impute the good usage of his Disciples, as it
were immediately confered upon himself; so that a Cup of cold Water on that
account shall not loose its Reward: So Christ's Vicegerent, in observance of his
Masters Will; first granted this penitent a full pardon of all Misdemeanors
whatsoever against his Government, or his Royal person; then graciously
returned into his Bosom a shower of thanks for his many kind services toward
his Friends that were in distress: viz. The Duke of Richmond, the Earl of
Lindsey and others. The Commission which he took up rashly to serve the
Parliament, being hurried thereunto partly by the importunities of some
Familiars, partly by want of Judgment, and too much heat of Passion; which are
the general infirmities of Youth; upon better advice, he laid fairly down;
withstanding resolutely Cromwels importunate offers of another; thus he quite
left the Field, when he perceived it was nothing else but an Akeldama, or Field
of true Christian Blood. Howbeit, he still maintained his interest with the
Kings Enemies, purposely to serve his Friends; in which very Charitable Service
he spent most of those Evil days, getting some of the Royallists out of
Prisons; and entering himself into Bonds, to keep others out of Chains and
Fetters.

When his Eldest Brothers whole Estate had been seized by the Parliament, which
yet could find in him no fault at all worthy of such unrighteous dealings;
unless it were his Loyalty, Justice and Equity, Pity and Commiseration for a
divided Kingdom, and a persecuted Church; ready both to be devoured of bloody
Vipers in their own Breasts; though 'twas in his power to have dealt with his
beloved Brother, as Jacob did with Esau; depriving him of his Birthright;
either by Violence or Fraud, Yet he voluntarily chose the better part, more
becoming a good Christian or a loving Brother, of one blood, and of the same
Household of Faith. For he proved a brother most faithful in a time of need, and
was highly concerned in the Restitution. Nor is that all --

His imcomparable skill in Civil Affairs, joined with great integrity and
uprightness of Heart, loving the Truth, and hating Covetousness; were Abilities
enough to recommend him to many great Persons of Quality; (The Right Honorable
Earl of Abingdons Mother for one) which appointed him in their last Wills, a
Trustee for their Estates, and a Guardian to their Children: As to the Noble
forementioned Earl, he discharged himself with so much Honesty; that he would
accept of nothing more than his labor for his pains; Traveling many times for
the improvement of that Estate, with expenses upon his own: And God be thanked
he saw the good end of all his Journeys, and the reward he most of all
expected, in a just increase of Wealth and Riches, of Honor and Authority, of
Wisdom, and all Heroic Virtues, that have made his Lordship more noble, or
willing, shall I say, to promote the public peace and welfare of his Country.
Our present most gracious King received a fair specimen of his Allegiance to
the Crown from the pains he took at home, and abroad for his Majesty's Person,
and his Kingdoms Restoration: Ireland.
And certainly, the King had no little confidence in his dextrous Wisdom, and
sincerity, requisite for State Affairs; when he gave him a Commission for the
settling of a Kingdom; and that extremely divided; as well in Religious, as in
Secular concerns: and yet he managed that ambiguous, and important Office with
so much prudence and equity; that he came off with Honor for himself, and gave
general satisfaction to those persons whose interest were there involved.

Our prospect has been hitherto like that of Moses before the Israelites;
wrapped up under the dark shades, and glimmering twilight of a Vail. It is now
time that we draw the Curtain off, and change our Scene; though the Stage be
still the same: we have only observed all this while, how this man of Renown
has acted his part in several changes on this unconstant Hypocritical World;
and that first, in respect of himself; and then with relation toward his
Neighbors, of all Ranks and Qualities: We come now to survey the more Heavenly
part of his Life, to the very point of his Decease: Thus from the second Table
of the Law promulged by Moses, and confirmed since by Christ himself; we go
backwards in order to the first; from his Conversation with Men as to Civil
matters; We pass on to the great business of Religion, with a special Reference
to God.

The whole sum and substance of Religion, as is contained in the received
Articles and Constitutions of our Church, is made up of three general parts;
namely Doctrine, Discipline, and Government. The First is the Formal object of
our Christian Faith or Judgment; the rest gives us Rules for practice in the
external Administrations of our Church. The Doctrine is for the most part
unchangeable; and so far necessary to Salvation, that whosoever pertinaciously
maintains any thing evidently repugnant, or contrary thereunto, stands
therefore guilty of a damnable Heresy.

Concerning the Discipline, and Government of our Church -- It cannot be well
remembered, without grief, and anguish of heart, what combustoins have been
raised, what havoc has been made upon that account, by a certain gang of
schismatical, factious, high-minded men: whose Religson tended plainly to
Rebellion: whose godliness in truth was no more but interest and gain: whose
faith so much cried up was only fanatic humor and conceit: and whose holy
discipline allowed of Murder, sacriledg, and rapine, for meritorious and very
godly deeds. These were the pious men, who brought in the Covenant, and the
Directory from the North: like the wild Boar, and subtle Fox, to devour the
Church, that Vine of Christ's own planting; both Root and Branch. Their
innovations both in Church and State (no better then Extirpation it self) were
brought on by the power of the Sword; and imposed in such unreasonable Terms,
as will force all good Christians to renounce their Consciences, their King and
even their God; or else to loose their Fortunes, their Liberties and their
Lives. In this heideous and amazing juncture of Affairs; our conscientious good
Man, (as I have heard from his own mouth) boldly refused the Covenant in plain
Field, at the head of Sr. William Wallers Army: Thus like little David, our
valiant Champion defied great Goliath of Gath in the face of the Philistines;
with undaunted courage and resolution for the God of Israel.

The Stars it is very probable, were at that time very propitious, and fortunate
in their Aspects: for thrice happy was the day, when he received like Saul, a
light from Heaven for the Conviction of his Error, and acknowledgment of the
Truth; and heard a voice from Heaven too, something like to that; Saul, Saul,
why persecuteth thou me? Thereupon his illuminated Mind scattered those
cheating Mists, that were cast before his tender Eyes, by the Juglers of those
times; and his understanding well informed wholly vanquished, nd put irreversibly
to flight all impeteous and juvinal passions; then he clearly discovered, how
basely the Laws, Liberties, and Religion it self had been deceitfully worn, as
a Cloak of Maliciousness, and all kind of Wickedness and Vice, all manner of
impieties appearing like the Prince of Darkness; under the form of Godliness,
and in the shape of an Angel of Light: He could plainly distinguish the Shrines
from the Goddess Diana that was there enclosed; which our Silver-Smiths and
Extortioners, had set up like those of Ephesus; and would have to be worshipped
as their God: their Profaness and Hypocrisies were noted with indignation just
and reasonable; for he beheld Gods Holy Temple abominably profaned into an
Exchange; the Law tuned a Pander to Sacrilege and Murder; Liberty loudly
voic'd up into Licentiousness; Religion took up as a Trade or Occupation; and
Gods House of Prayer made a Den, a Refuge for Theives and Robbers.

The same God (whose Hand is not shortened, or Goodness abated; that he cannot,
or will not save) plucked him at first as a Firebrand, out of those devouring
Flames, that have justly fallen upon their Heads, who prepared them first of
all for others: and the same infinite Goodness, and power have preserved him
ever since, (what his Majesty, lamenting for his great loss, affirmed of him) a
real, and true Convert. For in the latter part of this Life even to Death; he
was a true Son of the Church; and a subject very dutiful to the King: for both
in Opinion and Practice, he trod in the strait middle path; which the Church of
England has in all Respects very judiciously prescribed, neither inclining to
the dissenting Sectaries upon this hand, nor to the Superstitious Papists upon
that: he could not see Christ's beloved Spouse overlaid with a needless and
unprofitable Dress; that would exhaust her vital Spirits with Excrementitious
humors, nor stripped altogether Naked; that might expose her upon reproach and
profanation, to the danger of her life.

His Behavior in time of Divine service, whether it were at Home or in the
Church, was in all points conformable to the Rights and Customs that are
established by the Laws; Humble, Devout and Pious; performing his part in all
Offices with Reverence and Godly Fear; with all possible Meekness and Humility;
both of Soul and Body.

His Judgment concerning the Church of England, as it is now Legally settled,
is fully delivered in his Last Will and Testament; wherein he prosesses the
Doctrine to be pure and Canonical; the Discipline, Decent, and Agreeable to the
same; And the Book of Common Prayer, he most heartily embraced, as the best
Form of public Prayers, ever yet composed by Men; earnestly desiring that
wheresoever he should happen to be buried; it might be done by that Book. I
forbear any further mention of these things; being already prevented by the
interposal of another Hand.

The Religious and very necessary Duties of Prayer and Supplication, with
Thansgiving unto God, he most carefully performed in all the Course of his
Life, to the very Moment of his Expiration; when with great submission, he
resigned up his Soul into Gods merciful Hand who gave it; Bidding this World
Adieu in those comfortable words; I am well, I am well: which words I believe
he spoke in a joyous and thankful remembrance of our Saviors Exit upon the
Cross; who cried there, It is finished; then bowed his Head, and gave up the
Ghost.

Beloved in the Lord, you heard now this melancoly and gloomy Character of a
Person greatly good, and generally beloved; a man after Gods own Heart; denying
all ungodliness and worldly Lusts; to lead a Godly, Righteous and sober Life: A
man that was Master of himself, and a good friend of all besides: A Father to
the Fatherless; an Husband to the Widows: You have heard a description of a
Primitive Christian, even in our late Antichristian days; one, Orthodox in his
Faith; Regular and Conformable in his Practice: I have set before you the
Portraicture of a Son; obedient and submissive to that spiritual Mother; the
Church of Christ here established: of a Subject Loyal to his Prince; and above
all things, of a Servant very just and faithful, sincere and constant with his
God

And seeing that your deceased Friend, has so well fought the good fight; so
finished his course and kept the Faith; your Tears now should be dried up with
the Sunshine of joy and gladness; your Sighs and Groans be silenced with Hymns
of praise and thanksgiving; for you must needs know, that immoderate sorrow for
the Dead is against your own Reason, because it is in vain: it is against the
Faith and Hope which you profess in the Resurrection of the Dead: Nay further;
it is against that very Love, which you think to manifest by such unlikely
means; for you seem to begrudg him that Felicity, which he partakes of with
Christ in Glory: Lastly, it is against the Common Principles of Justice also;
because, you seem desirous, even to rob God himself of those things which are
his.

What then remains upon your part? But that you Religiously keep the Memory of
this Just Man, your dear friend; as a thing sacred, and precious in your sight;
That you make your own Heart become his Monument; and your good life, his most
legible and lasting Epitaph. That ye would embalm his Ashes with Practical
Commemorations of his Virtues; and Enshrine those Relics in the Temples of
your Hearts; not as Objects of your Adoration, but as Holy Charms and
Exorcisms; for the casting out of those unclean Spirits, your Sins; and healing
the diseases of your Souls: What Remains? But, that in the midst of all the
Winds and Waves of this Troublesome, yet fading World; you take the course of
his life, as the compass to steer out your own, That so passing through the
streights of Repentance and self denial, Faith and Obedience, we might arrive
with him at the Land of Promise, that Heavenly Jerusalem, where you shall be
for ever Blessed in the Perpetual Rest and Joy of your Souls; through the
Infinite Merits of Jesus Christ, the Righteous: To whom with the Father, and
the Blessed Spirit, be rendered and ascribed all Honor, Praise and Glory, both
now, and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

