THE ENGLISH REMEDY: OR, TALBOR's WONDERFUL SECRET, FOR CUREING OF Agues and
Fevers. SOLD By the Author Sir Robert Talbor, to the most Christian King, and
since his Death, ordered by his Majesty to be Published in French, for the
Benefit of his Subjects.

AND NOW Translated into English for Public Good.

LONDON: Printed by J. Wallis, for Jos. Hindmarsh, at the Black Bull in
Cornhill. MDCLXXXII.



THE BOOKSELLER TO THE READER.
THE Pulbisher of this Book in French, who is Chyrurgeon to the Duke of
Orleans, and Director of the College of New Discoveries in Physic, gives us an
Account, That by Orders from the French King his Master, he had received from
the hands of Monsieur D'Aquin, his Majesty's chief Physician, the Receipts of
that Arcanum of Sir Robert Talbor, which for a long time was so successful both
in England and France, in the Curing of all sorts of Agues; to be by him
Published for the Benefit of his Country. That it is the same which (as he
affirms) his Master purchased at a very dear rate from the Author, I think no
man need to doubt; since it is published by Orders of that King who is so
jealous of his Glory as not to suffer his Name to be abused, nor taken in vain
by a subject; and that the value of it is such as to render it a public
present suitable to the Grandeur of a great Monarch, the general Applause that
it has obtained from the Learnedest of the Faculty of Medicine in that
Country, and the Experience of thousands who have found the Benefit of it here
in England, do sufficiently evince. The truth is, the Publisher is not wanting
to set a just estimate upon the intrinsic worth of the Remedy, and to
recommend it to the World as it deserves; but when he reflects upon it as an
effect of the Liberality of his Prince (as indeed it is) he is transported into
such raptures of Gratitude, that the Praises which upon that occasion he offers
to his Majesty are so boundless, that little less than an Altar and Incense,
can excuse them from Flattery: And that is the reason why the Translator has
not Translated the Preface to the Book, seeing the humor of too many of this
Kingdom is so far from flattering, that it hardly enclines them to be grateful
to the very best of Princes, and much less to that King.

Nevertheless I think no good man will reckon me guilty of flattery to say,
That the French King has learned of an English man the Secret of Cureing Agues
in the natural body; so if occasion happen (which is not impossible) he may
learn from the prudent Conduct of Englands King (if it be not too hard to be
imitated) the Royal Secret of stopping the Ague-fits of the State, occasioned
by the Fermentation of corrupt and seditious humors in some of the Noble parts,
and in the lower region of the Body Politic, and of curing the Distemper
without much Purging and Blood-letting.

The Book takes well in France, and that made the Translator recommend it to
the Bookseller, who now publishes it for the Use and Benefit of his Country;
wherein he hopes not to have deserved ill of the Public, which on all
occasions he is ready to serve. Accept therefore of the Book, Reader, and make
use of it to thy best advantage, the more thou find therein the greater will
be the satiisfaction and interest of the

Bookseller.

THE ENGLISH REMEDY: OR, TALBOR's WONDERFUL SECRET.
QVinquina, or Kinakina, is the Bark of an Indian Tree, of the bigness of a
Cherry-Tree, whose leaves much resemble the leaves of a young Oak, and bears
a fruit not unlike to an Acorn, the figure thereof given by Johnstonus may be
seen at the end of the History of Trees written by Mantissa.

It is hardly as yet thirty years since this Drug became known in Europe: since
that time many Authors have wrote of it, as Johnstonus, James Chifflet, Denis
Touquet, in his Royal Garden of Plants; Roland Sturmius, Melipus, Conigius,
Gaudentius, Brunatius, Wolfangus, Hoeferus, Willis, Rolfincius, a Physician of
Leyden that has added to Scroderus, M. de Muve, in his Pharmaceutick
Dictionary, the Author of the Treatise of the Cure of Fevers, etc. And last of
all Mr. Lemery in the fourth Edition of his Course of Chemistry: several other
curious Remarks are to be found in our Journals of Medicine upon the same
subject.

These Authors do not all agree upon the Etimology of its name, nor upon the
place from whence it is brought; for some affirm that it comes from China, and
therefore many have called it Cortex sineasis, and to distinguish it from that
Root which is called China or Kina, they have named it Quinquina, or (which is
the same thing) Kina-kina: others again who are more in number, maintain that
it is brought from Peru, where the Fever or Ague is called Quina, whence comes
the name Quinquina; That the Natives of that Country call it Gannateride; that
because of its extraction it ought to be called in Latin, Cortex Peruviana, and
in the vulgar Language the Bark of Peru, and that the name of Jesuits Powder by
which it commonly goes, was given it, because the Jesuits were the first that
brought it from America, of which Peru is a part. However the matter be, they
begin now to call it in Latin, Cortex febrilis; and the Spaniards name it, Palo
de Culenturas, i. e. Feaver-wood.

The reason why it was thought to come from China, was because much of it was
brought from Portugal, but that makes nothing against the common opinion,
because it is known that the Portugueze have Commerce with both Indies.

Some Authors make two kinds of Quinquina, one which they say is wild and of
little value, and another which they think is cultivated, and therefore say
that it is the better of the two; but to make a true estimate of their quality,
it were fit one should be upon the place where they grow.

It is certain nevertheless that the goodness of it may be known by some marks
which experience has discovered; for the best has always its upper rind or
skin cut transversally or crossways with pretty deep streaks or lines, and
long-ways with very superficial ones when it is fresh, and now the most part of
the little squares or interstices of its skin, are of a silver white color; it
is otherways of a clear reddish color, compact, very bitter, and gives to the
boxes wherein it is kept a sweet and pleasant smell.

But it is to be observed that that smell is much weaker and less aromatic
than the scent of Cassia Cariophilata, which by cheats is Sold for Quinquina,
mingling it with the bark of Cherry-Tree, which for some days before they have
steept in Water wherein Aloes has been dissolved; and this is a very culpable
sophistication, seeing these kinds of barks have nothing of the virtue of
Quinquina.

There is besides this, another way of cheating the Public as to the matter of
the Jesuits Powder, for there are some Droguists that infuse it entire, and
having by that means extracted the first Tincture out of it, for their own
advantage, sell it afterward at the same rate as if it had not lost his chief
virtue.

Hitherto the price of Quinquina or Jesuits Powder, has been very various and
uncertain. When it was only in the hands of the Jesuits, it was sold at Rome
and Paris for Eight or Nine Shillings Sterling the Dose, which consisted only
of Two Drachms; but so soon as Droguists began to Trade in it, it began to fall
in Price, so that Three or Four Years ago, the best might have been had for
about Forty Shillings the Pound weight; but no sooner began the English Remedy
to be in vogue, but men began every where to make Experiments with the Bark of
Peru, which much enhansed the value of it: yet that was not all which raised it
to the highest price; for Sir Robert Talbot observing that Febrifuges were
prepared which came very near his own, and fearing least some body at length
might discover it, resolved to buy up all the Quinquina, that he could find at
Paris, and the other chief Towns of France, and of England also. The execution
of this Design making some noise, several Physicians, Surgeons and
Apothecaries, thought it concerned them, to make all have to provide
themselves; and some that they might not be wanting in Precaution, caused a
considerable quantity of the Bark to be brought from Roan and Bourdeaux, so
that Mr. Audry and Mr. Vilain, the two most famous Droguists in Paris, having
Sold all they had at the Rate of about Fifteen Pound the pound-weight; and not
being able to procure any more from any place, for above a Fortnight there was
not a bit to be had at any Droguist's shop in Paris, nevertheless some small
quantity came at length, but it was held up so dear, that it was like to have
gone off at the rate of an Hundred Crowns the pound-weight: since that time the
Merchants having imported much from Spain and Portugal, and the English Remedy
having lost the Advantages of the Mode; the price of that Commodity has fallen
daily, in so much that at present it does not yield above Four or Five Pound
the pound-weight; and I make no doubt, but that in a short time a Fleet from
the West Indies will make it much cheaper.

Amongst the Authors whom I have named, there are some who endeavoring to
explain the properties of Quinquina or the Jesuits Powder, according to the
principles of the ancient Medicine, think it enough to say that it is hot and
dry in the beginning of the Second Degree: and some others of the number of
those who have introduced bad Principles into the New-Philosophy, think to mend
the matter by saying, That Quinquina as an Alkali stops the motion of the acid
which occasions the Fever: but that is to illustrate one obscurity by others
that are far more obscure.

That we may give the World somewhat more satisfactory as to that point, we
must in the first place, (with Willis,) take our measures from Experience, and
allow with him, That all things which are actually bitter, have great virtue in
sifting preternatural fermentations; and upon that account it was that the Root
of Gentian was heretofore in so great reputation for curing of Quartan Agues;
and that the Flowers of the lesser Cantaury, the Root of Contrayerva, and
Serpentaria, the leaves of Wormwood and Chervil, Scammony, and many other
bitter Drogues, are really Febrifuges, though in virtue far inferior to the
Jesuits Powder.

Having laid down this from undoubted Truth, we must now enquire into the
Natural Causes which produce Bitterness in mixed bodies: now supposing (as it is
reasonable we should) that the true Elements of Bodies are acid, liquid, fiery,
etherean, and terrestrial corpuscles; it will be a very easy matter to
discover those Causes: for seeing all bitter things penetrate the Tongue, in
such a manner that they leave therein a sense of their action for a long time
after, and that of all the elements none are so proper as acids to produce that
effect, we must conclude that they are predominant in mixts which have that
taste; but also since being mingled with many liquid corpuscles, they produce
only sharp and corroding liquors, as the spirits of Salt, Vitriol, Alum, etc.
that being joined to fiery corpuscles, they make only Causticks, as corrosive
sublimat; the spirit of Nitre, cauteres, etc. and that being in intimate
conjunction with Sulphurous and Oily Particles, they only produce sweet mixts,
as Honey, Sugar, etc. It follows that none but terrestrial corpuscles mingled
with them in a proportionable quantity, can produce a bitter taste, and in
effect the more of Earth there is in Salt, the bitterer it is, and on the
contrary, the more it is refined and depurated, the less bitter it is: thus Sea
Salt dissolved in a moist Air, and afterward filtrated through brown paper, has
no other taste than of an acid spirit, though before that dissolution and
filtration it was considerably bitter.

Now since among the Elements that I have named, the acid is heaviest, and by
consequence the coldest; and that though the terrestrial be not so heavy as it,
nor yet as the liquid, yet it is more ponderous than the fiery and ethereal, we
may say that it is temperat; I mean, of a quality equally distant from the two
extremes, and that so, being with the acid predominant in a mixed body, the mixed
must certainly be cooling, or at least proper to preserve the just temperament
of our body.

But because there are no bitter things made up solely of acid and terrestrial
corpuscles, and that there are some wherein either the fiery, the ethereal or
liquid particles are likewise in a considerable quantity; so there are some
more or less bitter, and even more or less cooling and temperate; but if we
mind the dryness of Quinquina, and yet how unapt it is to take fire, it will
not be hard to conclude, That the three Elements which I have named last, enter
but in a very small quantity into the composition thereof, and that by
consequence amongst all bittter mixts none can be of a more temperate quality
than it.

From the Principle which I have now laid down concerning the nature of
Quinquina, all the other properties thereof may be deduced; for seeing its
predominant parts are the acids, whose property is to coagulate the more
substantial liquors, such as Blood, Milk, etc. and the terrestrial which by
absorbing the humidity and unctuosity that relaxates the solid parts, does bind
and strengthen them; of necessity it must be stiptick and astringent, and it is
in effect in these two qualities principally, that the rarity and wonderfulness
of its operation does consist, as I have made appear in former observations.

But it is not to be thought as some have imagined, that this property of
binding renders it so fixative as to keep within the febrifick matter, or other
morbifick causes dispersed in the humors, or adhering to the solid parts; it
is so far from that, that by reviting the homogenious parts of the blood, it
seperates them from the heterogenious or superabundant parts, whereby it
facilitates their expulsion, for which Nature alone does often labor in vain,
in the same manner as by strengthening and fortifying the viscera, it puts them
in a condition of resisting all attacks, and of discharging themselves of the
Impurties that oppress them.

Experience well agrees with these remarks, for the heat that dries up and
consumes the Hecticks is often extinguished by the use of several Preparations
of the Jesuits Powder. It is no less powerful against all other internal
Inflammations, Fevers, and generally against all extraordinary and
preternatural Fermentations; in a very short time it rectifies the depraved
motion and the altered consistency of the mass of Blood, and it many times
occasions such salutary evacuations, that having dreined the sourse of
Dropsies, by the depuration of the natural voices, which through their
depravation and transudation were become the antecedent cause of it, that it
becomes the principal cause of the expulsion of the extravasated Superfluities
which were the conjunct cause of the same.

It is nevertheless strange, that among so many Authors, who with admiration
have written of its effects, not so much as one have taken the pains to explain
them by their true causes, nor indeed thought that it could be done; for
Willis, who without doubt has spoken most judiciously on that subject limits
himself to this, that having never seen any other such like effects, and not
being able to ground a general conclusion upon a particular experiment, all
that is to be done is to endeavor to understand and well observe the
phoenomina that depends thereon, without troubling ones self with the efficient
principles thereof.

But to make appear how far one may err in the explication of things, when they
are not known by their proper causes, it will not be amiss here to relate some
opinions of that Author touching the effects of the Jesuits Powder upon the
mass of Blood: The first is that it always causes therein a certain
Fermentation that only destrovs, that of the Fever because it proceeds from
another cause: Now the Jesuits Powder does indeed sift the fermentation of the
Blood and the other Humonrs, but not excite any it self: The Second is, that it
maintains its effect no longer than it is in the Vessels, and that so soon as
all the parts thereof are spent and gone, the disposition that it had
suppressed infallibly wears, in so much that the Relapse is as certain as the
stopping of the Fit: Nevertheless, the contrary appears daily almost, to any
who knows how to use it aright: to be short, the Third is, that it stops not
the Fits of the Fever, neither by fixing nor yet by resolving the Blood as
other febrifuges do; nevertheless it is certainly true that the principal
effect of bitter, astringent and stiptick februifuges is, the reuniting of the
proper parts of the blood divided and scattered by the disordered Animal
Spirits, or by Heterogenious and superfluous matters.

The Author of the Additions to Scroderus has had no better luck, in saying
that Quinquina, or the Jesuits Powder cures the Fever by the virtue that it
has in Precipitating the Fabric Ferment, for besides that it is hard to be
understood how a matter contained within Vessels, and mingled with the Blood,
can be Precipitated by a Medicine whose principal action is directly opposite
to that of evacuatives; those kinds of Precipitations being only to be made by
Urines, by little and little, and in a considerable space of time, cannot
rationally be attributed to the Jesuits Powder, that acts so powerfully, and
so suddenly produces its effect, that many times a single Dose of it, stops and
prevents the immediately approaching fit of an Ague.

The Author of the Cure of Fevers and Agues by Quinquina, who makes the cause
of the Fever to consist in a certain Acide Ferment, refers the effects of that
Medicine to the faculty that it has of subduing, mortifying, and resolving
that Poison; but that Author has not minded, that if in effect Quinquina were
able to destroy or even to expel the Acides that are in the blood, it would not
be taken without entirely perverting that Liquor, seeing it would deaden or
drive out the very Acides that make naturally a part of the same, and that it
must necessarily lose its form and be changed into another kind of juice, if
the greatest part of one or the other of its Elementary principles were taken
from it.

Mr. Lame^y in his new course of Chemistry is not so wide of the Truth, when he
says that Quinquina does fix and coagulate the Feverish Humor, much in the
same manner as an Alcali sifts the motion of an Acide Salt; for in effect it is
the property of that remedy, to rally, bring together, and rounite the parts of
the liquid body wherewith it is mingled, as often as it is put in action by
necessary dispositions; but that Author has omited to take notice that this
reunion is only made of the proper parts of the blood, and that the Febrifick
matter remains confounded in the superfluous Serosity wherewith it is
evacuated, either by Transpiration or by the way of Urine.

The Principle that I have Established is of another Nature than the Opinions
which I have now related; it is plain, clear, just, and every way conforms to
all the Experiments that have hitherto been made upon the Jesuits Powder, and I
cannot tell but that I may say to all that shall be made hereafter, for whether
it be given for our sort of Fevers, or for another, for Vapors (against which
I take it to be very good) for Dropsies, or for other Distempers, whether it be
given in Substance, Infusion, Tincture, Opiat, Extract, or Quintessence: I am
persuaded that its pincipal effect will always be to separate the proper and
Homogenious parts of Liquors from those that are Heterogeneous and of a
different Nature to them, to reunite the one, and by that reunion to facilitate
the expulsion of the others, yet with this difference, that that effect will be
more or less considerable, according to the good or bad use and Administration
that shall be made thereof.

Moreover, That we may not too slightly pass over the different Preparations
that may be made of Quinquina, I am not to omit that Pol Fincius describes a
kind of Essence of it, which is nothing else but its Tincture Extracted with
excellent Wine, and afterward gentlely evaporated: That Sturmius makes a
description of another much like to it, that the Author of the Cure of Fevers
by Quinquina, will have it to be given in Bolus Extract, Fermented Liquors, and
in Infusions made in Wine, Ale, Distilled Waters, Tisance, and in common water,
that Mr. Lamery gives the Preparations of a Tincture, of an Extract, and of a
Salt of Quinquina, that there are other ways of preparing it to be found in
several Authors which I think needless, to cite, and that after all the more
simple and less artificial of all these preparations are the best, as will
appear in the description of the English Remedy; which being to be preferred to
all that have hitherto been prepared with Quinquina, ought to serve us as a
Pattern, until we have discovered some more Excellent.

It is an Error in Physic to make a hodge-podge of a great many ingredients
(though they be much of the same efficace) to satisfy one and the same
indication; and therefore as Quinquina or the Bark of Peru, whereof I have now
given you the History, is without contradiction the surest of all simple
Febrifuges, so is it the only basis of the English Remedy, and it will even
appear by the following description, that of the Physicians, Chyrurgeons, and
Apothecaries, that have endeavored to imitate it, those who have prepared it
most simply, have come the nearest to it, and hereby it is evident that that
Author who boasted every where that he had found it out, was very far from it,
since he always immagined that the virtue of Quinquina might be improved by
fermenttaion, and by the addition of the flowers and salt of lesser Centaury,
White Tartar, Sal-Armoniack, Sassafras-wood, Juniperberries, and some other
ingredients.

To conclude, though that Remedy consists in several different preparations,
yet still they refer indifferently to the principle of simplicity that I have
mentioned; and this will better appear in the Receipts of them, that Sir Kobert
Talbor gave the King, and which are here transcribed with all the exactness
that the matter requires.

The first infusion of Quinquina, or the Jesuits Powder making a part of the
English Remedy.
TAke a pound of the best bark of Quinquina beaten to a subtle powder and
searced, besprinkle it interchangably for the space of a day or two with the
decoction of Anis and the juice of Parsley, then put the powder into an Earthen
Pitcher holding about fifteen or sixteen quarts, pour upon it gently and still
stirring the matter, as much good Claret Wine as the Vessel will hold, and
having afterward stopped it well, let your mixture infuse for the space of eight
days without setting it near the fire, but not forgeting to stir it two or
three times a day with a stick or instrument fit to stir the bottom, afterward
having poured off your liquor, through a close strainer, put it into glass
bottles, which being well stopped and placed in a dry place not too Airy, will
preserve it in full force and virtue two or three months and more.

Directions given by the most Christian King's Chief Physician, concerning the
use of this first infusion.
This first infusion, which is the strongest and bitterest, is to be given to
stop the fits of an Ague or Fever that one would Cure, the Dose of it for
those of Age and strong persons, is five or six ounces, that is about half an
English pint; but for those who are naturally delicate, of a hot constitution,
or not much accustomed to Wine, this Dose ought to be a fourth part less, a
third part, yea and sometimes one half less, observing to correct each Dose
with the addition of a little of the juice of a Lemon or an Orange, when there
is no consideration that hinders from choosing the most convenient time to give
the first Dose of that infusion, it ought always to be at the end of a Fit, but
seeing in Quartan Agues that choice might retard the Cure for three or four
days, in that case it may be usefully given the night before the next fit that
is expected; but then it is good to fortify each Dose, by some drops of the
Essence or Tincture whereof we shall speak hereafter.

After one has began to give of this infusion, he must continue to make the
Patient take it once every three hours until the time of the next fit, unless
in time of sleep, which ought never to be interrupted, and renew again the use
of it in the beginning of the intermission, but with this observation, that
after the Patient has missed one Fit, it will be enough to give a Dose in the
morning fasting, and another a long time after Supper; which is only to be be
continued for five or six days.

The second infusion of Quinquina, making part of the English Remedy.
Take the setlings or remainder of the former infusion, put it into the same
Earthen Pitcher, or into another of the same bigness, with half a pound of
fresh Jesuits Powder prepared as has been said, fill the Pot with the same
Wine, and observe in general, as well for the preparation as the preservation
of that second infusion, all the circumstances directed for the first, with
this difference only, that for the making of this, ten days are to be employed.

Directions given by the King's Chief Physician, concerning the Use of this
second infusion.
When after the Fever has ceased, the first infusion has been given morning
and evening for the space of six days, the use of the second is to be begun and
continued for Eight days, observing the same Dose as of the first, but only
once a day in the morning when the Patient awakes.

The third infusion of Quinquina, making part of the English Remedy,
Take the settlings of the second infusion, and without any addition put it
again into the same Pitcher with the same quantity of Wine, and having let it
stand in infusion for the space of ten days, and observed the directions
prescribed for the preparation and preservation of the two former infusions,
keep it for the use hereafter mentioned.

Directions given by the Kings chief Physician concerning the use of the third
Infusion.
The eight days preseribed for the use of the second Infusion being expired, we
must begin with the third, which is then sufficiently strong. It is not to be
given for the first fortnight but in one Dose every other day, and then to
desist by degrees, that is, for the next fortnight to reduce it to a Dose once
every third day, and so to continue until the Patient has taken of all the
three Infusions about eight quarts.

The Essence or Tincture of Quinquina, making part of the English Remedy.
Take two Ounces of Quinquina, Pulverised, searched and then Alkolized upon a
Marble Stone, put it into a Glass Bottle, and pour upon it eight Ounces of the
best Spirit of Wine, set your Bottle in the Sun for the space of fifteen days,
taking care to stir and shake it well at least once a day, afterward pour off
your Tincture, and keep it in a Bottle closely stopped, to be used as occasion
shall require.

Directions given by the Kings chief Physician; concerning the use of the
Essence or Tincture of Quinquina.
Besides what has been said touching the use of this Essence or Tincture, when
we spoke of the time of giving the first Infusion, it is still to be observed
that the virtue of each Dose of that infusion is to be increased and fortified
by the addition of five, six or even seven or eight drops of this Tincture, as
often as the contumacy of the Ague has resisted its operation after several
Doses; but this addition is to be regulated by a skilful Physician, who is to
take his indications from the nature of the Disease, and the dispositions of
the subject.

An Opiat prepared with Quinquina, making part of the English Remedy.
Take what quantity you please of Jesuits Powder, prepared as is above
directed, and incorporate it with a sufficient quantity of the syrup of Lemons,
or of Grimes if it be for a Woman with Child; reducing all into the
consistencie of an Opiat by an exact mixture.

Directions given by the Kings Chief Physician, concerning the use of the Opiat.
There are some Patients upon whom the first infusion though fortified by the
addition of the Essence or Tincture has not sufficient virtue to stop the Ague
fits; to these the specific is to be given in substance, and the best and most
commodious way of doing it, is the Opiat that is now described, it may be given
from four to six Drachms, once or twice a day according as need shall require,
and that either upon the point of a Knife, in a Wafer, or in what other manner
one pleases.

A Purging Wine making part of the English Remedy.
Take an Ounce of good Hiera Pica, and infuse it for the space of eight days in
half a Pint or a little more of Claret wine, observing to stir the bottle
wherein you have put it, only once a day for the first three days, and not at
all to move or shake it during the other five, afterward pour out your infusion
gently by inclining the bottle, into another bottle which is to be closely
stopped, and keep it for the use follwing.

Directions given by the Kings Chief Physician, concerning the use of this
Purging-Wine.
When by reason of the Patients repletion, or a supervement constipation the
belly must be opened, we must add to each quart of the infusion of Quinquina
three or four spoonfuls of the above-described Purging-Wine, mingling all
exactly together, and use it in the same manner as has been directed when we
spoke of the infusions, that is to say, in a greater or smaller quantity,
according as it shall happen in the time of the first, second, or third
infusion, and also according to the indications taken from the present state of
the Patient, and of the Disease.

It is observed that when there is no considerable repletion, and that the
costiveness is but moderate, simple glysters made of Milk and the yoalks of
Eggs, are to be preferred before all kinds of purgatives, too great a looseness
of the belly being always contrary to the operation of the specific.

Other Directions given by the Kings Chief Physician, concerning what is to be
observed during the course of the English Remedy.
As it is sometimes useful to open the belly during the use of the English
Remedy, so at other times it is of great importance to stop it when by a
preceding or supervenient looseness, the digestion is weakened, and the chyle
rendered impure; for such dispositions are very much contrary to the Cure of
Agues: in such a case it is necessary that besides the Doses of the specific
that are given every day, there be at least two given mingled with an equal
part of the tincture of Roses, extracted upon hot embers with common water, and
without the addition of the spirit of Vitriol, or any other acid spirit; for
that effect an ounce of red Roses is sufficient for a quart of water: this
tincture is extracted in twenty four hours, and after it is poured off, three
ounces of good white Sugar is to be added to each quart.

In time of the intermission of the Fits, and as much as may be at the usual
hours of eating, the Patients may feed upon what their appetite enclines them
to, and choose such food as Nature seems to desire, without any reservation,
unless it be of salt Pork and Bacon, yet still observing to prefer solid food
before liquid, and in case of thirst or hunger, not to drink until a quarter
of an hour, and not to eat till an hour after each Dose of the Specific, that
the distribution and digestion that ought to be made thereof be not interrupted.

It is moreover to be observed, that water and tizanne or barley-water do
weaken the virtue of the remedy, and that so, Wine and Water, Beer or Ale, such
as men drink when they are in health is to be preferred before all other
Bevrage. Furthermore, seeing the operation of the Specific tends always to the
recovery of strength, and that other remedies do necessarily diminish it, they
cannot be used both at a time, without interrupting many salutary operations,
and without exposing the Patients to an almost certain danger, and especially
those who by their proper Constitution, by Age or the Contumacy of the Disease,
are already much weakened and extenuated; and therefore, as we have just now
observed, the operation of the Remedy cannot be more efficaciously assisted
than by the use of the most nourishing meats, because they concur with it to
the reparation of strength, and put the Patients in a condition of enjoying
perfect health so soon as the Ague is stopped.

Nevertheless a prudent Physician who intends to give the Specificker may
sometimes by Blood-letting, Purging, and other ordinary Medicines, correct the
bad dispositions of the body, that might hinder the benefit which is to be
expected from it; but these Remedies being only to be considered as simple
preparatives, they are always to be used before the Specific, which is never
more powerful than when it is given by its self.

Other Observations of the Kings chief Physician, concerning the Virtues of the
English Remedy.
Never did Remedy better deserve the name of a specific Febrifuge; for never
did any as yet come to our knowledge, that has so speedily and securely stopped,
and cured Fevers and Agues, as that has done. The truth is, Quinquind, which
makes the basis of it, and which we have had knowledge of for about thirty
years, does almost infallibly stop the fits of Intermittent Fevers, when it is
given in substance in white, some without other ceremony; that is to say,
according to the method Prescribed by the Jesuits, who were the first that
brought that Bark into Europe; And in Authors that have written since that time
some other preparations are to be found which are believed to be more
efficacious; but experience has convinced us, that these Authors had not as
yet found out the securest method to prevent those troublesome relapses, which
to this present rendered that Remedy contemptible, and we must confess that we
are in some manner obliged to Sir Robert Talbor, for having given us a
Preparation much to be preferred before all others, whether he has been the
inventer of it, or that he has hit upon it by chance; and it may be said, that
his boldness (which would have been taken for a criminal rashness in any but an
Emperick) has not a little contributed to the knowledge which we have at
present of its use and manner of application.

The most wonderful effects of this Febrifuge appears in all intermittent
Fevers, which are its true object; for it stops, and in fine wholly Cures
Quotidian Agues, Tertian, double Tertian, Quartans, double and tripple
Quartans, and sometimes also other kinds of Fevers; for there are some
continued Fevers, which having kinds of Intermissions and Regular Paroxysms
observable by some small cold in the extremities of the Body, or some horror
and shivering betwixt the Shoulders, are cured by the specific, almost as
speedily and securely as the true Intermittent Fevers; and this happens often
in respect of slow Hectic Fevers accompanied with a Consumption, such as
Children are commonly affected with, because they have certain inequalities of
remission and augmentation which give ground to the Remedy to exert its virtue
to second the attempts of Nature, and by consequence to reduce the blood unto
its former disposition, and to restore the Stomach to its Natural strength, so
that for the future providing only good and well digested Chyle, it sends a
Vivifying humidity to all the parts, which corrects their dryness and restores
the lost Plumpness and good habit of body.

It is nevertheless to be observed, that since the matter of continued Fevers
is diffused through the whole mass of blood, that herein it causes a corruption
hard to be rectified, and that it wholly takes up Nature without giving her any
respite, she cannot be in a condition to concur the with Specific, but till by
blood letting and Purging, the impure and Heterogeneous matter be in some
manner expulsed, the irritation of the Spirins calmed, and the humors be in
good enough temper to return into favor with Nature, without which the
Specific, which does not always excite regular Evacuations, is not powerful
enough to put a stop to the sedition, and compose the disorder, which is then
in the great Vessels, and in all the other principle and more necessary parts
of the body.

For the better understanding of the abovementioned directions and
observations, I would have it remarked, That every thing that occasions an
extraordinary agitation in the spirits, humors, and generally in the liquid and
fluid parts of our body, may be considered as the primitive cause of Fevers,
that is to say, of those irregular motions which happen so often in the mass of
blood, but seems the same motions would be quickly rectified by Nature, were
they not kept in being by some permanent cause, and that besides, by
discomposing all the economy of Nature, they corrupt the Ferments that serve
for Digestion, and by that means render the Chyle impure, and of a bad quality;
the depraved Chylification may be looked upon as the immediate and antecedent
cause of Fevers; so that a Remedy cannot truly be a Febrifuge, unless all at
once it correct both the bad disposition of Stomach, and of the Ferments, of
which I have been speaking, and that is the proper effect of the English
Febrifuge, for like the most part of bitter Medicaments, it is very
Stomachical, being proper to consume the superfluous humidities, and to restore
the bone of the relaxated Fibers of the Ventricle, and by that means to
increase the diminished appetite, and retrive it when it is wholely lost, from
whence depends the perfect digestion of the Victuals, even of the most solid
Food; I cannot tell if one may not affirm it to be also more Cordial: for
besides, that it re-establishes the scattered forces of the Body, and the
decayed natural heat, it fixes the heterogeneous Particles that cause the
Fermentation of the Blood, and rallies and calls together those which have been
divided and scattered during its ebullition.

This Augmentation of force and heat makes it sometimes appear as if this
Febrifuge did re-kindle the Fever after the taking of the first Dose; but it
only augments it that it may the better engage with it, and that apparent
disorder is the surest sign of its triumph: for the more violent it renders one
fit, the more we may be assured that it will not be followed by another.

Many Physicians cannot conceive how this Remedy which seems only to be
fixative, can radically cure Fevers and Agues (but it is to be observed that
though it causes not always a sensible evacuation, yet it so powerful seconds
the inclinations of nature, that during its operation the heterogenious, impure
or superfluous matters, are most commonly forced out to the superfice of the
body, to be evacuated by insensible transpiration, and even very often by
copious sweats, as also it is sometime the occasion of a critical looseness of
the belly, and in many Patients, the way of the urine serves for so salutary an
evacuation, that it cures both together, the Quartan Ague and the Dropsy
occasioned by it.

Furthermore, though the most certain and regular operation of the English
Remedy, be to stop the fits of intermittent Fevers, yet the use of it is not
to be thought of dangerous consequence; it causes no trouble in the economy of
Nature, being like other bitter temperate medicaments, incapable of making any
bad impression on man's body, for the reunion that it makes of the parts of the
blood, always facilitates the expulsion of morbifick Causes, and though they
should partly stay within after its operation; yet by means of it they are
corrected and reconciled to nature, or at least by reiterated and continual
digestions, they are at length concocted, ripened and dissipated,

Observations of the Kings chief Physician, concerning the practice of Sir
Robert Talbor, in the prepation and distribution of his Remedy.
The greatest secret of most of Empiricks, consists only in disguising the the
Drugs that they make use of; for since they are the very same whereof
Physicians know the Nature and Properties, they could not make them pass for
secret Remedies, unless they affectedly gave them an air of novelty; thus did
Sir Robert Talbor in the preparation of the Jesuits Powder, either to make it
be believed that the virtue of his Febrifuge did not depend on that Book, or to
make it be thought that he understood it much better than those that had made
use of it before him; for it was very ordinary with him to besprinkle fix
Drachms of Red Roses with two Ounces of the juice of Lemons; and afterward to
infuse them for the space of four hours in six Pound of Fountain water, to make
use of that infusion for the making of his Remedy, adding thereunto eight
ounces of Quinquina, powdered and besprinkled with four ounces of the Juice of
Fennel Root, and put into infusion only for the space of twelve hours.

Sometimes instead of that Juice he would employ the Juice of Smallage Leaves,
and at other times again that of Parsley, especially in Tertian, and double
Tertian Agues.

In continued Fevers, he assured us, that on the contrary he made use of the
Juyces of the Plantin and Lettice, and in Malignant Fevers of the Decoction of
Scorsonera.

In Quotidian Agues he commonly besprinkled his Powder with Vinegar of Squills,
at the proportion of one ounce upon eight of the Jesuits Powder, which he
afterward infused sometimes in Rhenish Wine, and sometime in White Wine.

For Quartan Agues he preferred the Juice of Pentaphyllum (Cinquefoil) and made
his infusion sometimes in Spanish Wine.

In slow and Hectic Fevers, he used the Juice of Colts Foot and Ground Ivy,
and made his infusion in one part of Wine, two parts of Barley Water, and one
part of the Tincture of Roses.

He followed that Practice indifferently for both Sexes, only with this
difference, that with Women he ceased the use of his Remedy during their
Courses, and Prepared it for those that were with Child, or in Childbed, in
this manner; After that he had wet his Quinquina with two ounces of the Juice
of Quinces, he infused it in equal parts of Wine and the Tincture of Roses.

In respect of Complicated Agues, he observed always to give his Febrifuge
either in the Declension of the Fit, or in the beginning of the sweating, but
that circumspection was commonly the more useless, that without considering, if
these kinds of Fevers were the cause or the effects of other Distempers, he
always bent himself wholly to the Cure of them; and it was by sticking to that
pernicious Maxim, that he erred so grossly in the Distemper of the Dauphin of
France, whose Fever proceeding from Vomiting and the weakness of his Stomach,
was increased considerably by the use of his Febrifuge, and on the contrary
ceased of it self, when Remedies were only applied to correct the indisposition
that was the cause of it; not but that that Remedy has some virtue against
Vomiting and weakness of the Stomach which proceed from Crudities, Indigestion,
and Relaxation of the Fibers of the Stomach; but it is absolutely contrary to
those that are raised by a hot intemperature of the Viscera, and fomented by
the irritation of overflowing choler, as that of the Dauphins was.

Hence one may judge how dangerous it is to trust the life and health of men, to
the conduct of such kind of People, whose knowledge is always too much limited,
to reach beyond the general Rules and Directions contained in their Receipts,
and to descend into the exceptions that are indicated by sound judgment,
experience, and the Principles of a judicious Doctrine.

It is true, Sir Robert Talbor did not always observe the directions prescribed
in his Receipt, touching the time of the infusion of Quinquina; but in that he
was the more to be blamed: for besides that, it is impossible that that Bark
can in twelve; nay, even in twenty four hours, impart all its bitterness and
virtue to the Wine; there is still much more time required to have the infusion
so depurated as it is to be wished, that it may not be nauseous, nor apt to
cause obstructions in the capillary Vessels, which has caused troublesome
inconveniences to many who have been treated by that Emperick.

Upon the same account it was, that in these late times thinking it best to
give the Jesuits Powder in Bolus, and by that means to revive in some measure
the ancient and primitive method, which was to give it in substance; he has
often been the cause of many Diseases far more pernicious than the Ague, which
he pretended to Cure, the different Juyces wherewith he besprinkled his Powder,
being incapable to render it so distributive as not to stick in some part.

But what preference soever the infusions contained in the description of the
English Remedy may deserve, it is still true that seeing they cannot be safe
but by the right use of them, it is no wonder if their effect has sometimes
badly corresponded to the undertakings of Sir Robert Talbor, since he gave them
indifferently in all times of the Fever, which cannot be stopped in the
beginning, without unpleasing consequences, that indisposition, to speak
properly, being only a kind of Crisis excited by nature to force out of the
Vessels, Grude impure and superfluous matters, which by consequent cannot be
stop too early, but that the ferments will lurk and remain in their Focus's
quarters, and subsist in full force, which has been the cause of those
dangerous relapses, that first brought the Jesuits Powder into contempt, which
notwithstanding is a most excellent Febrifuge.

I do nevertheless acknowledge that there are some occasions, wherein in the
very beginning of the Fever an urgent danger seems to demund a speedy truce;
but when, to have time to looae about us, we have capitulated with the Disease,
we have procured an advantage that cannot withou great danger be abused, and
whereof we cannot secure our selves the possession, but by observing the Maxims
long since received, concerning the use of the Jesuits Powder; that is to say,
without ordering a Diet, Blood Letting, and especially Purging, which by
experience we know to be of indispensable necessity.

And now since I speak of Purging, I ought not to omit to say that it may be
practiced with success, before, or in the time, and after the use of the
specific, observing the following Directions. When there is nothing that
hinders from preparing the Body to receive the Jesuits Powder, the essential
part of that Preparation consists in Purging Patients well, after they have
been once or twice Let Blood, and that with relation to the quantity of the
superfluities and the degrees of repletion. When the action of the Ferments
seems to resist the operation of the Febrifuge, and that therefore one is
obliged to administer Purgatives in the very time of using it, its force is to
be augmented, or the Doses doubled, to the end that by the motion of the
matters which are to be evacuated, the perturbation of the Blood be not
increased. In fine, when after we have done with the Remedy, we would by
Purgatives prevent relapses, it is better to give moderate and reiterated
Purges, than to give stronger Doses, and in less number.

Futhermore, the ambition of Sir Robert Talbor having inclined him to extend
the use of his Remedy beyonds its efficacy, it is well known that he has given
it on diverse occasions for continued Fevers, wherein there was neither
intention nor remission to be observed, which was always attended with tragical
symptoms, and very often with death it self; for that Remedy can never be
successfully given in those kind of Fevers, unless when some manifest
Paroxysms are observed, that they continued for several days, that the Patients
have been Purged by all ways, and that they stand in need of a respite to
recollect strength, and so to relieve Nature, and give her time to perfect the
Cure of the Distemper, which in vain she strove to surmount without that aid
and assistance.

He was guilty of a no smaller fault, in forcing, if I may say so, his Patients
to drink Wine, and to eat solid Food during the whole time of continued
Fevers, and in time of the Fit in Agues; for though in the abatement of the
one, and the intermission of the others, that kind of nourishment may back and
fortify the operation of the Remedy; yet they considerably oppress the
Patients, when Nature is taken up in defending her self against the vigor of
the Distemper that attacks her, and then it appears that the prudence and skill
of a Learned and Experienced Physician, are at least of as great relief on such
occasions, as the most efficacious and salutory Medicines.

I have no more to say to show how little confidence we ought to have in such
kind of Empiricks, but that it is strange that this man who has prescribed to
us so many juyces, and such like trifles about the composition of his
Febrifuge, whereof the principle effect is only to be attributed to the Jesuits
Powder, should conceal the use that he made of Opium, whereof he many times
added some drops of Tincture to this Febrifuge, which may be of great advantage
when it is given seasonably in over watchings, light headedness, and looseness,
which are frequent symptoms in Fevers, and always allayed by the virtue of
that excellent Medicine.

I hope the Reader will take in good part, that I describe in this place a
Febrifuge Opiat prepared with Quinquina, and afterward explain its effects,
with relation to the Nature of Fevers and Agues.

An Excellent Febrifuge.
Take of the Jesuits Powder, the Flowers or Leaf of lesser Centaury subtly
Pulverised, and of Treacle, of each a like weight, make them into an Opiat, of
which the Patient twice a day shall take the weight of a Dram and a half,
during the space of six days, drinking upon it a Glass of good Claret with
Plantin or Bugloss water.

Reflections upon the use of this Febrifuge.
The excellency of a Remedy is very often the cause why it is despised.
Antimony has been in our days a manifest instance of this, but the Jesuits
Powder, and the English Febrifuge continue us more plainly of the truth of it
so soon as chance or industry has discovered a secret for any particular
distemper; the people lay hold on it as of a Public Good, and apply it
indifferently to all sorts of evils; and if on some occasion it succeed not, as
it must unavoidably come to pass, it is cried down with as much Zeal and
Precipitance as it was brought in vogue. This is the fortune of all the new
Febrifuges, having seen wonderful effects of them in some kinds of Fevers, men
took them for Universal Remedies; but so soon as they found them produce bad
consequences in others for which they were not proper, it was then generally
concluded that it was dangerous to make use of them. For this reason, that all
scruples may be removed, which people may frame to themselves in the use of
this Febrifuge, I have thought it pertinent carefully to engage into the Nature
of Fevers, and to mark their differences, to observe those which are submitted
to this Remedy, and those to which it may prove prejudicial, and lastly to
prove with how much usefulness it may be employed, when that is done with all
care and necessary circumspection.

Two motions are to be conceived in the blood, that of the whole which is the
circulation, and another of the parts proceeding from its liquidity. A Fever
is a fermentation of the blood, fermentation is an irregular motion of the
insensible parts (motus intestinus partium insensibilium) We must look into the
causes of the regular motion of this liquid body, that by the rule of
contraries we may discover those of the irregular motion.

There are two causes that maintain Uniformity in the motion of the blood. 1.
Its quantity, and the constantly equal force of the spirits, which are the
immediate movers and impulsers of all the parts that compose this liquid mass.
2. the just proportion of the same parts, as well in their quantity and
quality, as in their situation, that is to say, when the Sulphurous, Acide,
Watery and Earthy corpuscles, are not only in a laudable proportion as to
quanty; but likewise are so well adjusted, and united together, that they no
ways annoy one another, and are moved by the Spirits or Celestial matter that
animates them, in a regular and uniform motion. As long as things are thus, it
may be said that the blood is in its Natural state of Health, and to that end
the Author of Nature has not only made our body transpirable, thereby to give
vent to the too great quantity of Spirits, but has also put in different
places, Bowels and percolatories designed to filtrate the superfluous and
exceeding parts, which might trouble the purety of that Liquor.

From thence it may inferred that there are two immediate causes of the
fermentation of the blood, the first is the too great quantity, or the tor
great motion of the spirits, which may be excited by the heat of the Sun,
violent exercise, watching, fasting, hot and spirituous nurishment; and the
passions and perturbations of the mind, and from thence it is that all Fevers
Ephemerae or of one days continuance, and simple Synoches, which are the
slightest of all, and may be cured by transpiration alone do arise, the second
is the mixture of irregular and fermentative corpuscles (rerum non miscibilium
mixtio) which confounding the order and alliance of the parts of the Blood,
raise a Sedition there, and deprave its motion. And of these Bodies some only
raise a simple Fermentation, which at length may be governed and subdued by
Nature, and the others being more Malignant and Venomous, cause Coagulations,
Dissolutions, and Colliguations in the mass of Blood, and can in no manner be
corrected. From the former of these proceed all intermittent, erratick, and
continued Fevers, which are called subintrant, and from the other spring
Burning, Pestilential, Malignant and spotted Fevers. It is now to be
considered in what parts of our Body, and how these humors are produced.

Though I have said that there are parts viscera appointed for the separation
of the superfluities of the blood, yet seeing they do not always discharge
their functions aright, either through a fault in themselves, or through the
too great abundance of the same superfluities, the same are hurried away by the
rapidity of the circulation, as filth is carried away by the impetuous current
of a River; but in the same manner as there happens a turning in that River
where the water is stiller, and where all that filth turning slowly with the
current stops; so these heterogeneous bodies turn aside by the coeliack Artery
into the branches of the Vena Porta, where the Blood circulates more slowly,
and which for that reason may be compared to a Lake or standing Pool of Water
in respect of the other vessels: there it is where wanting their former
agitation, they have the means of fastening and uniting together, to produce
obstructions which are the primitive Causes of all Fevers of the second order,
and sometimes, but seldom, of those of the third, as I shall now illustrate.

The Blood cannot be long stopped in a place without being exasperated and
growing eager.

The spirits which are constantly in motion fly away, and carry with them
first the more volatile parts, then the sulphurous which blunted and edge of
the Salts, and kept them as in fetters; which is the cause that these bodies
having now nothing to stop their activity, break off and diffuse themselves
through the mass of Blood to raise and ferment it, until that being dispersed
and dissolved in the serosity, they are expelled by the ordinary ways, or
otherways do so adjust and accommodate themselves with the other parts, that
they disturb their alliance and motion no more.

There is nothing in Fevers but may be explained by this systeme.

The obstruction and the ferment which remains in that part which is called the
Focus, make the Periodick Fits and Paroxysms, which are sometimes quicker and
sometimes slower, according as the exasperated humor is more gross or more
subtle: the duplicity of Focus's or Magazines make the double intermittent
Fevers. In a word there happen sometimes so many of these nests, that giving
no respite, they cause continued Fevers, which may be called subintrants.

But it sometimes happens that these acid Salts, whether through their their
too long continuance in a place, or by an excessive heat of the entralls,
acquire a pretty violent degree of corrosion, and are exalted to that height as
to become venomous enough for spoiling, and wholly ruining all the economy of
the blood, and causing those Fevers which by a general name are called
Malignant; but since the more common cause of these Fevers, are Vrsenical
Salts diffused through the Air which we breath, or lurking in the Food we eat,
and that it is rare that our Natural heat which is mild, should produce in our
Bodies that which the most violent fire of Chemists can hardly perform in their
Vessels; I said it was the less ordinary causes of those kinds of Fevers.

Having laid down these Principles, I say that this Remedy is useless for the
first, and dangerous for the third kind of Fevers; useless for the first,
because they are commonly cured of themselves, and dangerous for the third,
because a venomous Body, and such as in no ways can be subdued nor corrected
ought never to be fixed; on the contrary it ought with all expedition to be
driven out by sweats, or by other ways of evacuation: But I maintain that this
Remedy answers all the indications that we can have for the Cure of those of
the second order.

The Explication which I have given of these Fevers, which by a general name
may be called intermittent, furnishes me with four indications for their Cure.
1. To stop the Fermentation of the Blood. 2. To fix and correct the Acid which
is the cause of it. 3. To dissolve, attenuate and drive out by the ordinary
ways of evacuation the gross humors that make obstructions. 4. And lastly to
repair the loss of the Sulphurous and Unctuous Corpuscles which sweetened the
Blood, and which are evaporated by its offervescencie. 1. The feverish
ebullition of the Blood is sufficiently stopped by the terrestrial and astringent
parts of the Quinquina or Jesuits Powder, and by the lesser Centaury and the
Opium that enters the composition of the Treacle. 2. After so many fair
experiments, we have no cause to doubt, but that the fixed Salt of the
Quinquina is the true corrective of the Fermentative Acid of the Fever. 3. Of
all the ingredients that enter the composition of Treacle, there is none but
drives out by sweating and Urine the impurities of the Blood. Lastly we may be
easily persuaded that the lesser Centaury is most proper for restoring the
Sulphurous parts of the Blood which have been dissipated in the Fermentation,
if we consider its wonderful virtue in consolidating of wounds; and if we
observe that the reuniting of separated parts, is only performed by a Balsamic
and Unctuous Sulpher wherewith that Plant abounds. The wine that is given
immediately after contributes much also to that effect, especially when the
activity of its spirits is checked by the mixture of the Plant in water, which
on this occasson I should prefer before that of Bugloss. I pretend not for all
this to exclude the general and common remedies of Physic. Nay, I maintain,
that in the beginning once or twice Blood-letting, according to the strength
and repletion of the Patient are necessary, as well for facilitating the
circulation of the blood, as for remedying the pains of the head, and
oppressions that Blood swelling in the fermentation, may cause in passing
through the capillary vessels of the Brain and Lungs. This Remedy is not to be
given till first by a dissolution of Cassia or Catholicum, the excrements of
the lower region, which may trouble its operation, be evacuated. And lastly,
seeing the blood, like other Liquors in their ebullition, drives always toward
the Mesentery a great many impure and foeculent parts like a scum, it is
necessary in the declension of the evil to purge them out, if one would prevent
relapses, and sometimes more troublesome consequences.

Seeing it appears by the remarks of the Kings chief Physician, and by the
foregoing reflections, that Opium may usefully be added to the English Remedy,
and other Febrifuges of the same Nature; I make no doubt but that you will Read
with pleasure the Natural History of that excellent Medicine.

The History of Opium.
Opium by most of the Eastern people is still named Offium, in imitation of the
Greeks, who commonly change p. into an f. it is the thickened juice of the
Indian Poppy. Garrias du Jardin, says that these Heads are big enough to
contain four Ounces and a half. Our Poppies yield also a juice, which being
thickened may pass for a kind of Opium; but it has not the efficacy of that
which is brought from hot Countries. The Author of the Poor man's Physician,
proposes a very easy preparation of it, he would have us pound the Heads of
our Poppies about the end of May, then put them in digestion in White Wine for
the space of fifteen days, and afterward by evaporation reduce the digested
liquor into a due consistency.

The true Indian Opium comes from the Eastern Countries, according to the
testimony of Garrias du Jardin, and Cristopher de la Cost. The Poppies from
which it is taken grow commonly enough in Egypt, and therefore Merchands bring
much of it from Grand Cairo; this is in greatest esteem, and is called Thebaick
Opium.

Not to mention the Opium that may be made of the Poppies of Longuedoc and
Provence, nor of that which is made in Italy, we may divide into three kinds
that which is brought us from the Indies; for there is one sort of it White,
which the Indians keep for their own use, and which is only drawn out by
exstillation, having made incision in the Heads of the Poppies; and it is to
this properly that the Ancients gave the name of Opium; for as to the second
kind which is black, and which is extracted only by expression, they called it
Maeconium; the third sort is Yellowish and commonly sophisticated with the
juice of Glaucium, which is an Herb whose Leaves resemble those of horned
Poppy, and are bitter and of an evil smell: that Sophistication is discovered
by dissolving that kind of Opium in some Liquor; for because of that juice of
Glaucium which is Yellow, it looks like the Tincture of Saffron.

The good Maeconium, that is say Opium of the second kind ought to be black,
bitter, a little biting to the taste, of an unpleasant smell, pure, solid,
ponderous, inflammable, and shining within when it is newly broken.

In Europe it is only used in Physic, and most part of our Physicians are so
scrupulous in using it, that they seem to look upon it as a most dangerous
Poison, though it be indeed one of the safest and most wonderful of all our
Medicines; but the Africans and Asians make extraordinory great use of it both
in Health and Sickness; for most of them take it daily in so large a Dose, that
it amounts commonly to forty or fifty Grains, and sometimes also to four or five
Drachms, at least if we believe Garrias du Jardin; and which is more strange,
when they leave off taking of it they are in danger of death, unless they drink
Wine, which their Religion forbids: the reason of that custom is, because
thereby they find themselves more strong and vigorous, and therefore it is,
that the Turks never fail to take of it in a great Dose, when they are going to
charge an Enemy, or Attack a place.

Howsoevever it be, seeing pain is the cruellest Enemy that men have; so there
is nothing they ought to esteem more than what eases them of it; and therefore
some have called Opium a Divine Medicine; because it charms the most vehement
pain, by procuring a soft and sweet sleep, and does so quiet and still the
impetuous motion of the irritated spirits and exalted fiery Corpuscles, that it
stops the operation of all those sharp and biting juyces that depended
thereupon.

The Ancients in regard of these admirable effects, believed that the virtue of
Opium consisted only in fixation, which could not proceed but from a cold
quality; in the same manner as they believed that all dissolutions depended on
heat. The Moderns, on the contrary, have observed that because of the Countries
from whence it comes, its pierceing smell, and how easily it is dissolved in
the Spirit of Wine, it must of necessity be Resinous, Sulphurous and
consequently of the Nature of those mixts to which a hot quality is assigned:
In a word, some of the latest Authors who have written of it to reconcile those
two Opinions, say that there are two substances in it, the one cold, which
renders it stupefactive, and the other hot, which gives it a requisite
volatility to convey it to the Brain; but seeing neither the one nor the other
are in the right, as not having grounded their Opinions upon the true Nature of
Opium, that is to say, with relation to the number, quality and quantity of the
Elementary principles that enter into its composition; we must of necessity
take another course in explaining more exactly the properties of that rare
Medicine.

For that end, seeing Opium is of the kind of bitter Medecines, it would seem
that I should begin by an enquiry into the principles of bitterness; but seeing
I have been large enough on that subject, when I treated of the Nature of
Quinquina, I think it more pertinent to refer the Reader to that place; than
here to make repetitions (which doubtless would be as unpleasant as useless)
concerning the general Doctrine of bitter things.

Nevertheless that I may descend into the particular Nature of Opium, that is
to say into the enumeration of those things that distinguish it from other
bitter mixts, I confess that that distinction being founded upon this, that it
is both fixative and by consequence Febrifugrous, Somniferous, and by
consequent Anodin; we must enquire in what manner it acts upon the blood and
spirits in producing such wonderful effects: for a more clear notion of this,
it is to be observed, that the particular motion of the parts of the blood,
wherein its liquidity consists, becomes of necessity a hinderance to that of
the whole mass, when it is grown irregular by fermentative causes, because the
same parts being then violently agitated and every way dispersed, they justle
irregularly one upon another, and so in some manner resist the action of the
chief movers of the blood, that causes the depravation of its circulary motion,
which according as it is more or less considerable, causes a Fever, over
watching, particular inflammations, and the extravasation of sharp and biteing
juyces, that produce all kinds of pain.

Now seeing that some depravation may be rectified by bitter things, as I have
demonstrated when I spoke of Quinquina, and that if amongst all mixts of that
quality, those that are too week acting but imperfectly, and those that are too
strong irritating many times the humors in stead of fixing them, such as are
of a moderate force are of greature virtue than others; it is not strange if
Opium which is but moderately bitter, so efficaciously restore to the blood the
uniformity of its motion, and by consequent that pleasant tranquillity that
charms us a sleep and eases our pains.

But in as much as there are inflammations or (if one may say so) Fevers that
are peculiar to every part of the body, and that because of disquietness and
application to Study and Business, the Head is frequently subject to such,
which cause watchings, and which seem rather to proceed from the irritation of
the Spirits, than the depravation of the motion of the blood, it must indeed be
concluded that Opium which so quickly rectifies that disorder, has some
property which is not common to other bitter Medecines; but this is not hard to
be explained; for supposing that all, or almost all the drogues of that
quality, have the virtue to rally, reunite and fix the parts of the Liquors of
our body, in which they are diffused; it is sufficient that Opium above all
other bitter Medicines have as many volatile parts as are needful to make those
parts wherein its bitterness and virtue of fixing liquids does consist, to be
conveyed from the Stomach to the Brain, that by means of that Sublimation,
they may have occasion of acting upon the extravasated Liquors, and
consequently upon those that are appointed for retaining and hindering the
dissipation of the Animal Spirits, whose impetuous motion causes watching, as
their calm and stillness produces sleep.

But to speak somewhat more intelligibly upon this Subject, I would have it
observed in the first place, that the continual emission of Animal Spirits into
all the Nerves, and by consequence into those that constitute the organs of the
senses producing that state of Body, which we call being awake, and wherein the
Body is capable of all the Functions that depend on the Will; the dissipation
of the same Spirits, and every thing that hinders their passage, are the causes
or sleep; which may be defined a disposition wherein the external senses are so
dulled, that they are incapable of the perceptions which they give to the mind,
and wherein all the other parts of the Body are weakened, relaxated and improper
for those voluntary actions, to which Nature has destined them (...) for such
never sleep sound who have their eyes open, speak, walk, or perform those
functions asleep, which seem to depend on the Will, since they suppose the
swelling, strength, and in a word the motion of the Nerves, which can only be
referred to the motion of the Spirits, wherewith they are then possessed.

This being supposed, it will not be hard to conceive why one falls naturally
asleep after Labor and Travel, and after long Watching; for seeing those
things dissipate many Spirits, they are at length too few to fill all the
Nerves, to support the Body, and to render it fit for sansation and motion,
insomuch that it necessarily remains as without motion and sense, until the
Blood being depurated and subtilized by its continual circulation, discharges
into the Brain a sufficient quantity of Spirits to make up the loss of the
former dissipation.

With the same facility may be given the reason of dullness which is so common
during the digestion of Victuals; for seeing that cannot be performed without
the elevation of Vapors into the Brain, which entangle the Spirits, and make a
kind of obstruction in the Orifices of the Nerves, it is no wonder if the
extremities of the Body droop, and be weak and dull, since they cannot be
strong and proper for action, unless they have a continual and abundant supply
of Spirits.

This last Observation will be very useful to confirm the explication that I
have given of sleep which is procured by Opium, seeing its Volatile and
Vaporous parts are much more powerful than those that proceed from the
digestion of Victuals, whether for fixing of the humors and spirits, or for
obstructing the Nerves by which they are distributed through all the parts of
the Body.

Since then Opium procures sleep by the power that it has to stop the Spirits
in the Brain, it necessarily follows that it must assuage pain, suspend
preternatural evacuations, and stop all kinds of Vapors, seeing these
indispositions depend naturally upon the Fermentation of the Juice, and that
the Spirits flowing no more toward the part where it happens, it must of
necessity diminish as the Spirits that are contained in the fermented matter
are dissipated, and wholly cease, when the same Spirits are entirely dispersed,
because there comes no new supplies, and the substances that are destitute of
the same, ferment no more, as experience confirms in the matters of cold
abscesses and painless tumors.

Though this explanation of the effects of Opium be very plain, yet it makes it
evidently enough appear why it is so great a relief in watchings, frenzy,
inveterate and contumacious pains of the Head, Gonvulsions, Asthma's, Coughs,
loss of Blood, Dissenteries, Colicks, Fluxes and Looseness, Gonorheas, and
generally in all Diseases which are caused and continued by sharp, corrupt and
fermentative Juyces.

Furthermore, when Opium is prepared with Aromatic and Cordial Medicines, it
is called Laudanum; this Preparation is made with design to correct its
imaginary coldness, and is therefore needless. It may be given then in
substance without any scruple or ceremony, unless one had rather prepare it
according to the advice of the Poor Man's Physician; which consists in drying of
it well, that the impure Sulphers may exhale, and then dissolving it in rose
Vinegar, to Cure it of its bad smell, and lessen its Volatility; but its best
Preparation is barely to dissolve it in the spirit of Wine, that it may be
given by way of a Tincture, as the English Physician used to do, and is very
convenient.

Opiats have drawn their general Name from Opium, and I cannot tell why they
have given the Name of Confection to Orvietan, Treacle and Mithridate, whereof
it is an Ingredient; and on the contrary, have given that of Opium to many
Compositions into which it enters not; for it is certainly the most efficacious
of all Antidotes, and I have observed by experience, that Venice Treacle is
only more excellent than others, because it contains Opium in a greater
quantity.

It is said, that if it were pure and without all falsification, it would cause
blindness; but to prevent that, there is no more required than only to give it
in the necessary Dose for the effect which we expect from it: besides, the Dose
wherein we give that which is brought to us, being always proportionable to
that I have been speaking of, it would follow that that accident should happen
to those to whom it is given, if it were true that it is capable to cause it.
To conclude, they who pretend that it ought to be ranked among Poisons, should
confess that it kills not but when a bad use is made of it; and that so there
is no more Poison in it, than in the best Medicines: and I dare be bold to say,
that our very Food, of which Bread is he most innocent, being taken without
measure, may cause a Surfeit, and Mortal Suffocation.

FINIS.

