A SERMON Preached at the ASSIZES HELD AT CHELMSFORD IN THE County of Essex.
September 2d. 1691.

Before the Honorable Sir WILLIAM DOLBEN, Knight, one of the JUSTICES of the
Court of KINGS BENCH.

By STEPHEN THORNTON, Rector of Ludsdown in Kent.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1691.

To the Honorable Coll. John Cook, High Sheriff for the County of Essex.
SIR,
I Could have easily sat down contented with the good Reception this
Performance found upon the place; nor am I ignorant how impolitick it is to
push on too far upon the Flatteries of an happy beginning; but as your Commands
alone drew me from my private Station, so they have prevaled with me to be yet
more Public. If any thing prove worthy of blame in this Attempt, you must be
pleased to be in a great measure answerable for it, with those other Gentlemen
who would not be denied, and indeed whose Kindnesses have merited this and a
greater Obedience.

I confess it is something uneasy to think of being exposed to the Censures of
Men, which are not commonly so fair as they should be. But let them be what
they will, I ought to gratify you at some hazard; and for once will try the
Ingenuity of the World, in hope that what is here said may benefit some part of
it.

Not being conversant in Modern Writings, perhaps I have said nothing here but
what some others have said better before me. If any know where, they have my
leave to repair thither, and my Prayers for a Blessing upon their Applications.
I would not willingly be accessory to any man's loss of time and
disappointment. But I hope they will allow me a Province among those of lesser
Reading and Seize. And I assure you, Sir, there are those in the World to
whom the things here spoken are new, and some of them such as pretend to
converse and talk of Books, and from whom one might expect other things.
Writing would be at a stand, were every one bound to produce something
perfectly new, the Actions of the World being little else but a series of
Repetitions.

I never had the Vanity to think of pleasing all Men; on the contrary, I
certainly reckon upon it that I shall displease some. Perhaps too the fault
will be on their side, which I pray God to forgive them. If any shall desire to
triumph in my Infirmities, I shall prevent them in the honor of the Discovery,
being always ready to make a large confession of them. But if an honest
Intention may make amends, let them know that I am a great lover of Mankind,
and when I please them least, I desire to do them good. God grant this
Performance may attain that end, and I have mine.

That those who are skilled in Critics may not think themselves neglected, I
will excuse one thing to them. Perhaps some things may seem to be brought into
this Discourse impertinently. It may be necessary therefore to tell them, That
my Text was not only those few words of the Prophet prefixed to the Sermon, but
the temper of the World as it fell under my Observation. And if they think I
ought not to have accommodated my thoughts to it, it may be sufficient to tell
them, that I am of another mind, and if in an Error, not past all hopes of
being made sensible of it.

Sir, I beg your Pardon if I have done you any dishonor in this Dedication,
and shall take this Occasion publicly to acknowledge my Obligation to your
self and Relations, to whom I owe the Opportunities which I have of serving the
Church of God. That you may continue immovable in the love which I know you
have to our established Church, and your largeness of Soul toward all good
Christians; That you may still become your Honorable Station, and find returns
of all in this and another World, is the hearty Prayer of,

SIR, Your Most Humble and Most Obliged Servant, STEPHEN THORNTON.

AMOS V.XV. Hate the evil, and love the good, and establish Judgment in the
gate: it may be that the Lord God of Hosts will be gracious unto the Remnant of
Joseph.


BY the Complaints that make so considerable a part of this Prophecy we
understand, That the Kingdom of the Ten Tribes was at this time fallen into
great Corruptions of Religion and Civil Justice. For as if it had been but a
light thing to walk in the ways of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, who had taught
them to sin, they had multiplied their Impieties, and made the Abominations of
Gilgal and Beersheba as Famous as those of Dan and Bethel, ver. 5. The
bitterness of their Judgment, their Exactions upon the Poor, the Affliction of
the Righteous, and taking Bribes, make up the rest of their Character in this
Chapter, to such a suspension of Justice, that it was become a prudent thing to
keep silence, ver. 13. rather than to be wasted with delays, to dissemble an
Injury, rather than suffer a greater in form of Law.

All then seem to be silent but their sins, and the Prophet, who discharges his
Office at that rate, that the Land was not able to bear his words, Chap. 7.10.
Indeed the Land was not in case to bear much searching, and the poor Man found
by his Reception, that he had not much changed his Employment, when the Lord
took him from among the Herdsmen to make him a Prophet, ver. 14. but had now as
senseless Creatures to deal with as those he had fed in the Fields of Tekoa.
Yet no fear of disturbing the Land, which desired to be left in a quiet
Apostasy, nor any construction of disrespect to the King's Court and Chapel,
ver. 13. can make him suppress a Divine Message, but he fills them with
Reproofs, Lamentations, and Warnings of approaching Judgment, and sometimes
clears up into a milder Exhortation with Propositions of Mercy; of which latter
sort is the Text now under consideration, Hate the evil, and love the good, etc.

These words, Hate the evil, and love the good, are in themselves of a large
signification, but compared with the 6th. and 14th. Verses, and the occasion of
the Discourse, they seem capable of this limited sense, viz. Be Religious. To
establish Judgment in the Gate, is to administer Public Justice, which in
those Times and Countries was done at the Gates of Cities. By Joseph he
understands the Ten Tribes, which it seems the Syrian Wars and other Calamities
had now reduced to a Remnant. And the Particle (...), it may be, imports no
distrust of God's Mercy (for never any one so persuades Repentance), but is an
artificial propounding of a Difficulty, to heighten and warm their Applications.

I shall enlarge the sense of the Prophet into this general Proposition; That
beside the common Obligations to Religion and Justice, there is that of the
greatest Interest we have in the World, viz. The Establishment of a Nation in
the favor of God, and securing the Public Happiness.

I begin with Religion, and shall first consider the common Obligations to it;
then that of National Interest; and lastly, a Modern Prejudice against it.

First, Common Obligations to Religion are,

1. It Is Authority. This is that short way of Satisfaction so much in esteem
with some of the Philosophers, who saved themselves the labor of Reasoning by
the Authority of their Masters. And what is this setting up Men for Gods, but
worshipping Error and Impertinence? But if the Authority be truly Divine, it
self is the highest Reason. Now that the Religion which we profess has such an
Authority, was demonstrated by those Persons who were entrusted with the
propagation of it in the World, not by the pretense of secret Conferences with
Nymphs, or resort to far distant Oracles (as in the known Stories of Numa and
Lycurgus), but by the active Presence of a Divine Power with them in their
Ministry, and by a Conduct that might clear their Sincerity to Mankind. It
would be too much to send those that deny this so many Ages backward (they are
commonly too weak and lazy to travel so far after an Argument); let them then
but look about them at the Progress that this Religion has made in the World,
and give a tolerable account how all this could come to pass without such a
Divine Power. None speak more of the dullness and unpoliteness of the Apostles
than they. With what a spiteful sort of satisfaction are the Characters of the
same Virtue in Seneca admired, in St. Paul blasphemed? How have some Heathen
Writers in their judgment for fineness of Wit and Expression outdone the
Teachers of Christianity? Cast into this Account all the Contempts the
Corinthians treated their Apostle with (tho the most learned of them all,) his
presence weak, (perhaps homo tricubitalis) his speech contemptible, without any
graces of Oratory, 2 Cor. 10.10. Allow all their little Witticisms upon the
Apostles mean Accomplishments and way of Life. And what does all this come to,
but that it proves them assisted with a Divine Power? It Is true, Tully and
Seneca, etc. spoke fine things concerning Virtue and Felicity, but who ever
heard of their Conversions in the World? A Fisherman, under the prejudice of
Drunkenness, with a plain inartificial speech, brings in 3000 Souls, Acts 2. A
Tent-maker ventures to Preach at Athens, the Seat of Learning; and the
Mechanic finds Proselytes among the Philosophers, Acts 17. Look into the
present state of the World, and wherever there is Learning and Civility, the
Writings of these Men are kept, are reverenced, are consulted as Oracles. Never
was Philosophy, Wit, all Science so far advanced; and yet the wisest and most
accomplished of the Age grow old in studying these Apostles, nor has all Tully
so much Comment as one Paragraph of the Tent-maker. It will be hard to persuade
any considering Man, that all this could proceed from Men of their Figure
without the help of a Divine Power. St. Paul acknowledges that this treasure
was put into earthen vessels, and makes advantage of it in favor of the
Gospel, that the excellency of the power might be of God, and not of men, 2
Cor. 4.7. We must then confess a Miracle on one hand; for either those
attributed to the Apostles are true, or else the success of Christianity will
it self be the greatest Miracle that ever was in the World. And take which side
you will, it proves the Divine Authority of our Religion.

2. The Nature of the things it propounds, which are of the greatest
Consequence to us imaginable. The highest Enquiry of our Life is after
Blessedness, De Finib. l. 5. -- id esse in bonis ultimum secundum naturam
vivere. -- Ex hominis natura undique perfecta, etc.

-- Omnes sapientes esse beatos, sed tamen fieri posse ut sit alius alio
beatior.


and this Christian Philosophy kindly offers us her Hand in the Search. Cicero
(whom I mention for a Pattern) has a whole Treatise of Beatitude, wherein
beside some Learning in sorting the Opinions of the Ancients, we find little of
any thing positively asserted, but That our supreme Good is to live according
to perfect Nature, and that all Wise Men are happy, but in several degrees.
This goes a good way toward a Confession that Beatitude is to be expected in
some other state. But indeed herein was the weakness of that Philosophy, that
it still left Men upon the Confines of Felicity.

But a moderate Proficient in revealed Religion knows more than a whole Age of
Philosophers. From what cause proceed the Miseries that vex and embitter Humane
Life, what allays may be given to them here, what Corrections of Nature, what
approaches to be made to the Divine and Original Life; That our Souls are
immortal, and shall subsist in another state, wherein they shall better know
what belongs to Felicity; What Manifestations the Supreme Being has made of
himself and his Love to the World, how to understand and submit to his
Providence, and make use of all the parts of Life; what hope we have of Mercy,
and what assistance of a Divine Grace; by what Duties we may please and enjoy
our Creator; these are Propositions of our Religion. And how worthy are these
to employ our most serious Considerations? It is only in such that our Minds
are matched with an Object. What was Heavenly in them expires while they mingle
too freely with the Dust. Let our thoughts then arise and soar to the utmost
reaches of our Nature, and let us distinguish our selves from the Brutes,
leaving them their own Enjoyments. Nothing but Religion can sufficiently
vindicate us from being part of the Herd.

3. Its Reasonableness. This joined to its Authority is wonderfully obliging,
without which that might seem Tyranny over the Soul; but this brings the
engagement of Love. Now Religion is Rational as to Points of Faith. That God
is, is as certain as that there is a World, as that there is a Cause which it
self is not also the Effect of something else. He that knows his own frame,
finds a great many steps of a Divine Wisdom that has been there. Reason it self
is one of the greatest Wonders, and its own Argument of a God. The great
thoughts of a Soul show a great Original, and it can conceive no less of its
Powers, but that there is a Being who has them in perfection. It self is a
little Deity governing its own World, which must needs facilitate the belief of
something parallel in the Universe.

And as it is evident from Reason that God is, so that He is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek him, Heb 11.6. and consequently that there is a future
state. And tho we were not agreed upon Revelation as to the necessity of a
Redeemer, it would be no irrational Belief. We cannot but confess the Debt of a
perfect Obedience to our Creator, and yet all find a strange Iniquity in their
Natures (which God placed not there, and therefore is not bound to make
allowances for) which stains the best Life and the clearest Duties. The
Sacrifices of all Nations have been a kind of Confession that this needed
Blood. And indeed if on one hand we consider Sin in all its horrors, and on the
other the Purity and Justice of God, we may as soon bring Antipathies together
as God and Man without a Mediator. The Afflictions of this Life, were they
evenly distributed, would be far from clearing our Accounts with Divine
Justice; but indeed they are not so, therefore cannot be relied upon as
Satisfactions. And whatever some may think of the virtues of a true Repentance,
come to matter of Fact, and there is none so true, but, if it stand alone, it
self is a thing to be repented of, needs a Sacrifice, and leads to a Redeemer.

The other parts of Faith, which are a train of Propositions from these two,
There is one God, and One Mediator between God and Man, 1 Timothy 2.5. will be
Rational because they are so. And I know not why we should be afraid of that
way of speaking, That the Mysteries of this Religion are rational too, since
this cannot be denied of things above Reason, so they are not contrary to it,
which whoever affirms concerning the Revealed Acts of an infinite,
incomprehensible Nature, is himself most irrational. And perhaps some of these
things which are above Reason in its present state, may not be so much Secrets
to us in another, when we shall know as we are known, 1 Cor. 13.12. nor perhaps
are so now to some higher Reasons in the World.

The Active part of our Religion is reduced by our Savior to the exercises of
Love to God and our Neighbor, which are so confessedly Rational, that all
Moralists of good Credit have, tho in different terms, used them as Principles.
Therefore to be short with them, if that be Rational which makes us like God,
and admits us into his Favor, which employs and advances our diviner part, and
renders us profitable in the World; then nothing can be more Rational than
Religion. Thus have I considered some of the common Obligations to Religion.

Secondly, I shall urge the Obligation of National Interest.

I call this our greatest Interest, and indeed it is little to none but those
whose Souls are such. Other Creatures have a Principle that directs them to
preserve their own Being, but Man is (...), capable of a Public Care. Nay, we
might consider the Community so too, a Great Animal, whereof we are all parts,
living by one common Soul. And as it is unnatural that one of the Members
should rejoice whilst the rest suffer, 2 Cor. 12.26; so in this great Body none
should have a Felicity by himself. It Is monstrous that the Case of the whole
should not be the Case of particulars. By this our private Respects are to be
tried. The love of Parents in comparison with that of our Country scarce
deserves the name of Virtue; nor our fondness of Princes, but as they are a
Common Good; otherwise it is but a private Respect, to say no worse of it. I
believe it is our Duty to love our Country above any one part of it. It is hard
to think of this and not be a little warm against an unnatural Generation
amongst us that would sell us. We have many that speak half Ashdod, enough to
make it questioned whether they had English Fathers. But I will leave them to
other hands to be treated suitably to their Merits, and show how Religion
serves this Interest.

1. By a Natural Influence, inasmuch as it makes good Citizens. Fear might
indeed bring Men into Society, but there must be some other Principle to keep
them together. That makes them a great heap of People, but Love cements and
unites them. Without this, Society is but a more sly state of War, and Compacts
are but Snares to them that hold them Sacred. Now whatever tends to Settlement,
as Justice, Sobriety, Contentment, love of Peace and Common Good, is the
Dictate of Religion, whose Kingdom is in the Minds and Affections of Men, and
makes them not only a Society, but Sociable. A People is secure under
Governors that fear God of good Laws, and those in good hands; that they shall
enjoy their Labors, and find the Protection they pay for. They would know
their meaning in their Solemn Professions, and not fear their having Interests
distinct from their People. On the other hand, a Prince does not find that
Service from his own Laws as from Religion. Obedience from an inward Principle
needs not the quickening of Legal Penalties, but moves by an everlasting Spring,
and scorns to stay for Motives that were invented for Slaves and Cattle. Men
would more freely pay for their share in the Public Safety, and redeem it out
of some Chargeable Vanity. Religion would cut off Murders, Invasions of Right,
and all Disorders at the Root, and leave no work for the Law; and this, by
taking away Envy, unlawful Desires, and softning the Genius of Men: yet makes
them not so soft as to shrink from their Stations in a Just War, when their
Country requires their Service. That Is the effect of Vice and Luxury. These
will make Men great Soldiers in Peace, to distinguish themselves now and then
in a fit of drunken Valor, but dare not see an Enemy sober; and whilst others
spend their Blood and Rest for their Country, these lie inglorious at home,
dissolved and dispirited by a corrupt Life. It Is for want of a due sense of
Religion among Men, that a Government, notwithstanding the Caution of Oaths and
Tests, scarce knows her own.

I know that accidentally the true Religion brought a sword upon earth, Mat.
10.34; Pretenses to it have hurried Men into Immoralities; and some false
Religions have very Casuistically determined them Lawful. But let this be laid
to the Vices, and Passions, and Prepossessions of Men, which where Religion
could not reform, it irritated. Some from the hot advices of these fill the
World with Desolation, and call it Religion; and the undistinguishing Fool,
that says in his heart, there is no God, cants Lucretius, Tantum Relligio
potuit, etc. Certainly men would think it hard to be dealt with in their own
Reputations as they deal with that Wisdom which is from above, pure, peaceable,
James 3.17. no Parent of Strife or Ruin: its Mistakes and Pretenses indeed may
be so, but it self is naturally fitted to the Happiness of Humane Society.

2. As it procures God to be gracious to a Nation. Ambition can propound
nothing higher than to command the Creation, and this follows from the
Friendship of Omnipotence. In Calamities the Libertine would be glad of a God
too, to mend the state of the World. Now whether we can apply the promises of
the Old Testament or no, it is certain that the encouragement of present things
is no such strange found under the Gospel. Godliness has the promise of the
life that now is, as well as of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. and if ever
it be fulfilled in specie, it will be to Politic Bodies, to Nations. Were
there no more in it but the removing those things that provoke God against us,
it would deserve all the good we can say of it. When a People have had the
Gospel so long, that they are ashamed of it, and God so nigh unto them in all
things, that they are weary of him; such merciful vicissitudes of Providence,
and all presently forgotten like some antediluvian History; when Blasphemy has
corrupted the Language of a Nation, and bold Excesses and Fornication its
Morals, the case of such a People is not to be considered at a common rate. Had
they been placed in some dark part of the World, they might with more safety
have worshipped the Pagods, and fallen down to the Rising Sun.

Now in such public Danger how useful would true Religion be in the hearts and
lives of Men? One Property is, that it is full of Prayers, gets into the Gap,
and will not suffer Destruction to break in. With all those Cries of Sodom,
Genesis 18. had there been but Ten Righteous Men to have mingled their Prayers,
they had outdone them. Were then a Nation Religious, what a Security would
this amount to? What an Harmony of public Desires, what strong Cries? They do
much now with all the noise of Blasphemy; but were this the breathing of all
our Souls, what a sweet smelling savor would it be? We should with less
Expense tread down our Enemies: and if it be a greater Blessing to have none,
we should have that too; for when a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even
his Enemies to be at peace with him, Prove. 16.7.

The result of all is, That we cherish our Religion as our Palladium. What
Balak could not do by Balaam's Enchantments he compassed by his Counsels, To
lay a stumbling block before the Children of Israel, to eat things offered to
Idols, and commit Fornication, Rev. 2.14. We have much the same Obligation to
the debauched part of the Nation; nay, tho they talk high for the Government
and Church, and give the Enemies of them to the Devil, they do so too by their
own Souls and Blood every day. This helps not us, Hoc Ithacus velit. Let them
reform their Lives, and we shall be glad of their Prayers, otherwise let them
not name us. It looks like a desperate Cause where they have any Interest. Let
them take our Religion altogether, or go seek one to which their Lives will be
no scandal, but is as bad as themselves. They deprive us of our Rock, our
Strength, our Salvation, and instead of him they will defend us. Let them not
mistake us, (what Achish says in the case of David) Have we any need of Madmen?

Sirs, it is our hard Fate that we have our Nation to deliver out of the hands
of these Men as well as our most professed Enemies. If it be possible, let us
pray down their Blasphemies. Yet Prayers themselves will be but noise, except
they be the Offerings of pure Minds, and our Lives too be sanctified to God.
Thus we shall serve our Country better than in a Century of Campagnes.

But beside a Personal Reformation, some have Families to bring in to the
Common Service, some other Charges. And to Address with all Respect to you, The
Honorable and Worshipful the Magistrates, you are Ministers of God too, We are
not forgetful how greatly you merited of us in times when it was not very safe
to dare to be Englishmen. By you we do not look back with sorrow upon the Ruins
of a Nation, and cry, Fuimus Troes. Only pardon me if I remember you that your
worthy Conduct has raised our expectations to see the Laws against common
wickedness better executed, and that you have not saved them in vain. Our
Gracious Princes have not such Designs as stand in need of the wickedness of
their People. Stand up then for the Honor of God, who has imparted to you his
Authority, and his Name, Psalm. 82.6. Let not Vice bear it self out with State
and Quality, nor the floods of ungodly men make you afraid. We find that the
naked Proposition of Virtue will not do, and must beg your Hand for languishing
Religion. Mark Vice with the Infamy the Laws have assigned it, restrain Atheism
from Proselyting in this Light, at least frown all Profaneness out of gentile
Society; let it be seen that you really hate the evil, and love the good, and
we shall not take it ill if you call upon us too in our turns, that we may all
rise up with united Zeal for the Honor of our God, for our Altars, for all our
dearest Interests, and for our afflicted Brethren, the Remnant of Joseph.

Thirdly, I shall consider a Modern Prejudice against Religion. That good is to
be loved, and evil hated, scarce any will deny; but the perplexity is, that
what some Teachers of Religion call good, others call evil: so that some People
think it reasonable to be of none at all till they are agreed; which is so far
from being to be expected, that the same Teachers are not always at agreement
with themselves, but what they call good at one time, they call evil another.
It Is a scandal to some that a sort of Doctrines taught so earnestly a few years
ago, are scarce now to be heard of, except with some temperaments and
softnings; it is a scandal to others that they were ever heard of. The iniquity
of one Humor is unaccountable: The same People are angry with us for our
scruples about the present Settlement and our compliances too; our Repentance
is made our Crime; and if the Teachers of Religion know their business no
better, it is no matter what any of them say: nothing is certain of it, but
that it is all Cheat ( Priestcraft is the Modish word), and in vain Men heat
themselves so about Fundamentals, for the time will come when they will take
their turns too to be out of season.

This is the true state of the Objection, which I could not decline, however it
may seem to come in here. And indeed if all did not go to the account of
Religion, we could be silent, tho we want not what to say for selves. We could
in part deny the Fact. Men that never took the pains to understand our
Doctrines, may bring us in for more than we taught; and because we don't agree
with their Fancies, think we do not agree with our selves. If we now leave the
Nature of the Government to more proper Judges, in the main we teach the same
Obedience to it. If this be done with less heat, it is because the occasion is
ceased, and the Debaucheries of the Age (especially the Objectors) find us
sufficient work. But my Design is not to vindicate our selves, but Religion;
which I shall do upon a Supposition that what is contained in the Objection is
true.

1. In general; Differences in Religion rightly considered, are a Confirmation
to it: It has foretold them, There must be Heresies, 1 Cor. 11.19. By this Rule
Atticus of Constantinople counted the Novatians good Witnesses of the Common
Faith Soc. l. 7. c. 25.
. And tho the Marcionites seemed to be a scandal to Martyrdom, yet God accepted
the Confessions of some of them Eusebius. de Martyr. Palaest. c. 10.
; not because they gave a Testimony to Marcionism, but Christianity. It Is
generally agreed among the Contending Parties, that there is one God, that
there was such a Person as Jesus Christ, that the Histories of the New
Testament are for the main true, that there will be a Resurrection, etc. To
turn the Argument upon them, if we may in any case prejudge, it is here in
favor of Religion. These must needs be Truths of great Evidence, which are
preserved among the heats of so many different Disputes. Had we agreed in all
little Particulars, they would have had the better color to make a Plot of it.
But the Differences that have been amongst us from the beginning of
Christianity, do that Service as to refute any such Pretense. How would a
Confederacy have hung together of Men of such contrary Sentiments, Paul against
Peter, Barnabas against Paul, yet all ready to offer themselves for their
common Savior? In the mean time how inconsistent are these People with
themselves? Sometimes we are all united in one Design to cheat the World:
Sometimes we are so scandalously contentious, that the safest way is to believe
none of us. So like are the Arguments of Sin to it self, i. e. full of
Contradictions.

2. Supposing that the Teachers of Religion had in some things altered their
minds, this could only be an Argument against their Infallibility, which
without all this trouble will be confessed. We pretend to no other ways of coming
at Knowledge than other Men, the use of means, which God blesses in several
measures. Every Soul has its private relishes, a Natural kindness toward some
Reasons and Opinions more than others, which perhaps it brought from some
former state; and in this we are like the rest of the World, till by good
thinking we have recovered our selves. We have not an universal Genius, and
it is no wonder if when we are out of our Province we run into some small
Errors. Beside some things (especially relating to Government) may promise fair
in the Speculation, but deceive in Practice, and are of such a Nature, that
they admit of no Proof but Experience. And as a Man is not presently a Knave
for not foreseeing all Consequences; so when trial has showed him the weakness
of his Reasons, it is so far from Crime, that I think he ought to forsake them.

But if the Teachers of Religion be so fallible, what Security have those that
are taught that they shall not be deceived? I Answer, You have Moses and the
Prophets, hear them. You have the Gospel. We deny you no means that we have.
You are not to expect new Oracles from us, and if in explaining the Old we
corrupt them, you have them by you, Bring us to the Law and to the Testimony;
we decline not the Judgment of the Apostles of Christ. Except you contribute by
your own laziness, you are secure from Capital Errors; and those which you
cannot avoid by using all possible care and helps (of which we are but one
part) shall never be Capital to you.

But if Men can do all this themselves, what need is there of Teachers? I
Answer, This proceeds upon a wrong Notion of Teaching, which is not only
bearing Men down with Authority, but leading them by Reason. It Is true, every
Man must see for himself, but he that sets a matter in a clear light to him,
does him a service. Call no man Master, take Religion upon no man's Credit, but
we may from his Arguments. A very understanding Man has not always a good
Reason at hand, yet can see and immediately embrace one when propounded. And
this is the true use of Teaching in Religion, to help, not to supersede your
Enquiries.

3. If we must needs go by prejudices, there are enough against those that use
these Inferences. Mind them, and you will certainly find, that either they are
a lazy People that would fain throw all the trouble of their Salvation upon
their Teachers; or a sort of empty peevish Disputers, that for want of Argument
begin to be angry, and throw dirt; or most commonly a vicious loose Generation,
that would fain get rid of the restraints of Religion, and therefore catch at
any presumptions against it. If it were not thus, they would apply the same
Rule to other things as well as Religion. There are as many differences in Law;
almost every Cause supposes one; is there therefore no true sense of it? Will
they use no Physician that was ever in an Error, or confesses himself Mortal? I
know of some Heretics in Mathematics, but it would be pity they should ruin
the Credit of Demonstration. Nor will they say this, tho it be just the same
Inference; which is a certain sign they consult their Lusts, and not their
Reasons in their Arguments against Religion.

However since Arguments work as they delight, not as they conclude, it would
be well if we took them out of their hands. I wish our Differences were managed
with more Candor and ingenuous allowance for the various inclinations of Souls.
How happy are some of our Modern Controvertists if they can but make an
Opinion, which they cannot solidly refute, look like some old Heresy, or show
how Atheists may make an advantage of it? This too often proves teaching of
Atheism. We should carefully avoid these Excesses and making our Differences
wider than they are. Add to this Ingenuity an Holy Life, and we secure our
common Religion. Nor can Atheism find an Argument to delude with, after we have
stripped it of those which our Contests and Vices furnish it with.

I have been so large upon this first Head of Religion, that I have left my
self but little room to speak of Civil Justice. I shall therefore wave the
common Arguments, and only in my way to a Conclusion lay before you the
Obligation of National Interest.

1. Justice secures that Order by which Nations are established. The forming a
Society consists in the resigning of private Will, and submitting to one common
Rule or Law. Its end is a general good, which yet will be frustrated, except
there be some to put life into the Law by a vigorous execution. Cicero de
Legib. l. 3. calls the Magistrate a speaking Law, and the Law a mute
Magistrate. But what if the Magistrate will not speak, but is as mute as the
Law? Then the one may pass for a shadow of Power, the other for wast Paper. The
same Author calls Reason the Universal and Eternal Law, the Law of the Gods;
were it in effect the Law of Men too, a Nation might be Happy with a lesser
body of Statutes, and its Disorders provided against by the quicker Methods of
Conscience, Quo judice nemo nocens absolvitur, Juv Sat. 13. But this fits
rather with the Idea's of some Romantic Commonwealth than the true state of
the World. We are in foece saeculi, where if Men do not suffer Justice
sometimes, they will do none. This would tame those Men of Prey, the wicked in
Power, when there should be found those who would break their jaws, and pluck
the spoil out of their teeth, Job 29.17. Those that know no such thing as
Property, will rather allow it than be Martyrs for their Opinion. The poor Man
sows in hope, because he knows that tho his great Neighbor would enter upon
his Labors, there is a greater than he, the Law. But when Innocence has no
defense but it self, the poor comfort of Murus abeneus; when Cheating and Theft
never sin but in defect, viz. in not having made up a Sum worthy the
consideration of a Man of Place and Worship; when it comes to that, that Quae
Turpia Cerdoni, Volesos Brutosque decebunt, Juv. Sat. 8. and the Merit of Men's
Ancestors shall save all their Race from Justice; no wonder if Treasons,
Rapines, and an increase of all Villainy dissolve the Society, and all runs back
into Wilderness.

2. It turns away God's Wrath from a Nation. God is honored by Order, and
where that is duly observed it looks like his Kingdom. He is delighted in a
Nation where Laws are like Copies of his Will, and Magistrates are as ambitious
to resemble him in Righteousness as Power. The loins of the Poor shall bless
us; we shall make Friends of the Protected Orphans; and those that by our
Justice have escaped Sycophantism, Extortion, and other ways of Devouring,
shall return it us in rich and fruitful Prayers. God is so pleased with
Justice, that in the very instant of Vengeance it might make him drop his
Thunder, and turn to the importunities of his softer Attributes. When Israel
went a Whoring after the Gods and Daughters of Midian, Phinehas going a little
out of the way to execute Judgment stai^ the Revenging Plague, Psalm. 106.30 By
the Promise made in the Text to the House of Joseph, the Victorious Assyrians
had never entered their Gates, had they but established Judgment there. It seems
then it is a Fortification, as well as a Robe and Diadem, Job 29.

You see now, Honorable and Worshipful, and others entrusted with the Public
Justice, you see how much the Common Safety lies in your hands. Think your
Native Country flies to your Compassions, your Mother in Tears, it is well not
in Blood. Merit then a Crown, the Honor not only Servati Civis but Civitatis.
Dare to be Just; not frighted at a mighty Malefactor; such make a better
Sacrifice and a better Example. Like the hand of the Heroic Phineh^s, know no
Quality, otherwise the Zimries will laugh at your Title of Gods, and play with
the Sword you bear in vain. Those that destroy us are zealous, they fear not
the Day nor Law; and shall those in whose hands our Peace is entrusted, fear to
be singularly good, and devolve upon each other the Honor of Beginning?
Rejoice then, O ye Libertines, ye asserters of Nature!

But in commending Zeal we do not encourage all the Heats and Fits that Humane
Minds are capable of. A clear Zeal for Justice can hardly be carried too high,
but we must have a care we do not mistake our Passions for it. Even Zeal for
your own way of worshipping God may sometimes be out of place, when it runs
into transports against those that are protected by the same Laws with our
selves. What should I say more of other Corruptions so much below your
Character? Perhaps I have said too much already to Persons of your approved
Conduct.

I will only speak a word with those that shall come here upon their Oaths, and
I have done. You touch the Gospels out of which you shall one day be judged;
you call a Just and Omnipotent God for a Record upon your Souls: what is the
sense of all this if you falsify, but that you put your hands to your own
Damnation? As I take it, you that are upon the Juries represent your Country;
it will have but little reason to thank you for the Service, if you involve it
in Perjury and the Curse of God. Yet there are shameful stories in the World
about prepared Witnesses and made Juries. Sure Men kiss the Book they never
read. Do your endeavor to recover the Credit of our Constitution and of
Christianity, deliver us and your own Souls. And may God direct all that are
concerned in this Assembly so to discharge themselves, as expecting assuredly
one day to render an Account in a more fearful Assembly, when God shall Judge
the World; that so the Public Interests may receive no check from what shall
be transacted here. And let us all unite in such an hatred to Evil, and love to
Good, and so do our parts in our several Stations to the establishing of
Justice, that God may be glorified by us, and delighted in us, and as he has
begun, may continue to be gracious to the Remnant of Joseph.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Samuel Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1691.
A Sermon Preached at the Assizes held at Horsham in the County of Sussex,
August 23d. 1691. Before the Honorable Sir William Dolben, Knight, one of the
Justices of the Court of King's Bench. By Richard Lucas, D. D. Vicar of St.
Stephen's Coleman-street, London. In 4o. Price 6 d.

Enquiry after Happiness, Vol. the First, in 8o. 1685. Price 3 s. 6 d.

The true Notion of Humane Life: Or, A Second Part of the Enquiry after
Happiness, in 8o. 1690. Price 2 s. 6 d.

The Duty of Servants: Containing, First, The Parents Duty, how to Educate
their Children, that they may be fit to be employod and trusted. Second, What
Preparation is needful for such as are entering into Service, with some Rules to
be observed by them, how to make a wise and happy Choice of a Service. 3. Their
Duty in Service toward God, their Master, and Themselves; together with
suitable Prayers to each Duty, and some Directions peculiarly to Servants for
the Worthy Receiving the Holy Sacrament. Published for the Benefit of Families,
in 8o. Price 1 s. 6 d.

All written by the same Author.

The Wisdom of God manifested in the Works of the Creation, By Jo. Ray, M. A.
Fellow of the Royal Society, in 8o. 1691. Price 2 s. 6 d.

A New History of the Roman Conclave: Containing the Rites and Ceremonies used
and observed at the Death, Election, and Coronation of the Pope: As also an
Exact Description of the state of Rome, during the Vacancy of that Chair.
Together with a Brief Account of the Life of this present Pope Innocent XII.
4o. Price 6 d. 1691.


