A THANKSGIVING-SERMON.

Imprimatur

Z. Isham. R. P. D. Henrico Episc. Land. a Sacris
March 4th 1688/9
A SERMON Preached at LINCOLNS-INN-Chappel, On the 31th of January, 1688. Being
the DAY Appointed for A PUBLIC THANKSGIVING TO Almighty GOD For having made
His HIGHNESS The Prince of Orange The GLORIOUS INSTRUMENT of the Great
Deliverance of This KINGDOM from Popery and Arbitrary Power.

By JOHN TILLOTSON, D. D. Dean of Canterbury, and Preacher to the Honorable
Society of Lincoln's Inn.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil; And William Rogers, at the Sun over against St. Dunstans
Church in Fleet Street, M DC LXXXIX.

To the Worshipful the MASTERS OF THE BENCH, And the rest of the GENTLEMEN OF
THE HONORABLE SOCIETY OF Lincolns - Inn.
THough I was at first very unwilling to Expose to the Public a Sermon made
upon so little Warning, and so great an Occasion; yet upon second thoughts I
could not think it fit to resist the Unanimous and Earnest Request of so many
Worthy Persons, as the Masters of the Bench of this Honorable Society; to whom
I stand so much indebted for your great and continued respects to me, and kind
acceptance of my Labors among you for now above the space of Five and Twenty
Years. In a most grateful acknowledgment whereof, this Discourse, such as it
is, in mere Obedience to your Commands, is now humbly presented to you, by

Your most Obliged and Faithful Servant JOHN TILLOTSON.
Feb. 28th 1688/9
A THANKSGIVING SERMON.
EZRA ix. 13, 14. And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and
for our great trespass, seeing that thou our God have punished us less than our
Iniquities deserve, and have given us such a deliverance as this: Should we
again break thy Commandments, and join in affinity with the people of these
abominations? Would not thou be angry with us till thou had consumed us, so
that there should be no remnant nor escaping?
I Am sufficiently aware that the particular occasion of these Words is, in
several respects, very different from the Occasion of this Day's Solemnity. For
these Words were spoken by Ezra at a time appointed for Public and Solemn
Humiliation. But I shall not now consider them in that relation, but rather as
they refer to that Great Deliverance which God had so lately wrought for them;
and as they are a Caution to take heed of abusing great Mercies received from
God; and so they are very proper and pertinent to the great Occasion of this
Day. Nay these Words, even in their saddest aspect, are not so unsuitable to
it. For we find in Scripture upon the most solemn Occasions of Humiliation,
that good Men have always testified a thankful sense of the goodness of God to
them. And indeed, the Mercy of God does then appear above measure merciful,
when the Sinner is most deeply sensible of his own Vileness and Unworthiness.
And so Ezra here, in the depth of their Sorrow and Humiliation, has so great a
sense of the greatness of their Deliverance, that he hardly knew how to express
it; And have given us such a deliverance as this. And on the other hand, we
find that good Men, in their most solemn Praises and Thanksgivings, have made
very serious reflections upon their own unworthiness. And surely the best way
to make Men truly thankful is first to make them very humble. When David makes
his most solemn acknowledgments to God for his great Mercies to him; how does
he abase himself before Him? But who am I, and what is my people? And so
likewise, 1 Chro. 29. 4.
after he had summoned all the powers and faculties of his Soul to join in the
praises of God, he interposeth this seasonable meditation, He Psalm 103. 10.
has not dealt with us after our sins, nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities. The greater and more lively sense we have of the goodness of God to
us, the more we shall abhor our selves in dust and ashes; nothing being more
apt to melt us into tears of Repentance, than the consideration of great and
undeserved Mercies vouchsafed to us. The goodness of God does naturally lead to
Repentance.

Having thus reconciled the Text to the present Occasion, I shall for the more
distinct handling of the Words take notice of these two Parts in them.

First, Here is a Case supposed; should we, after all that is come upon us for
our evil deeds, and since God has punished us less than our iniquities
deserve, and has given us such a deliverance as this; should we again break
his Commandments.

Secondly, Here is a sentence and determination in the Case; Would thou not
be angry with us till thou had consumed us, so that there should be no
remnant nor escaping? This is not spoken doubtfully, though it be put by way of
question; but is the more vehemently positive, the more peremptorily
affirmative; as if he had said, it cannot otherwise be in reason expected, but
that after such repeated provocations God should be angry with us till be had
consumed us.

First, Here is a Case supposed; should we, I.
after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass;
and since God has punished us less than our iniquities deserve, and has given
us such a deliverance as this: Should we again break his commandments, and join
in affinity with the People of these abominations. In which Words these
following Propositions seem to be involved, which I shall but just mention, and
pass to the Second Part of the Text.

1. That Sin is the cause of all our sufferings, after all that is come upon us
for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass. Our evil deeds bring all other
evils upon us.

2. That great Sins have usually a proportionable punishment; after all that is
come upon us, there is the greatness of our punishment; for our evil deeds, and
for our great trespass, there is the greatness of our Sin. But when I say that
great Sins have a proportionable Punishment, I do not mean that any temporal
Punishments are proportionable to the great evil of Sin; but that God does
usually observe a proportion in the temporal punishments of Sin, so that
although no temporal punishment be proportionable to Sin, yet the temporal
punishment of one Sin holds a proportion to the punishment of another; and
consequently, lesser and greater Sins have proportionably a lesser and greater
Punishment.

3. That all the Punishments which God inflicts in this Life do fall short of
the demerit of our Sins; and seeing thou our God have punished us less than our
iniquities deserve. In the Hebrew it is, and have kept down our iniquities,
that is, that they should not rise up against us. The LXX. expresses it very
emphatically, thou have eased us of our fins, that is, thou have not let the
whole weight of them fall upon us. Were it not for the restraints which God
puts upon his anger, and the merciful mitigations of it, the Sinner would not
be able to bear it, but must sink under it. Indeed it is only said in the Text,
that the punishment which God inflicted upon the Jews, though it was a long
Captivity, was beneath the desert of their Sins: But yet it is universally
true, and Ezra perhaps might intend to insinuate so much, that all temporal
Punishments, though never so severe, are always less than our iniquities
deserve.

4. That God many times works very great Deliverances for those who are very
unworthy of them; and have given us such a Deliverance as this, notwithstanding
our evil deeds, and notwithstanding our great Trespass.

5. That we are but too apt, even after great Judgments, and after great
Mercies, to relapse into our former Sins; should we again break thy
Commandments. Ezra insinuates that there was great reason to fear this,
especially considering the strange temper of that People, who when God
multiplied his blessings upon them, were so apt to wax fat and kick against
Him; and though he had cast them several times into the furnace of Affliction,
though they were melted for the present, yet they were many times but the
harder for it afterward.

6. That it is good to take notice of those particular Sins which have brought
the Judgments of God upon us. So Ezra does here; after all that is come upon us
for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass; and, should we again join in
affinity with the People of these abominations.

Secondly, Here is a Sentence and determination II.
in the Case; would thou not be angry with us till thou had consumed us, so
that there should be no remnant nor escaping? Which Question, as I said before,
does imply a strong and peremptory affirmative; as if he had said, after such a
provocation there is great reason to conclude that God would be angry with us
till he had consumed us.

From whence the Observation contained in this part of the Text will be this,
That it is a fearful aggravation of Sin, and a sad presage of ruin to a
People, after great Judgments and great Deliverances, to return to Sin, and
especially to the same Sins again. Hear how passionately Ezra expresses himself
in this Case, verse. 6. I am ashamed, O my God, and blush to lift up mine eyes
to thee, my God. Why? what was the cause of this great shame and confusion of
face? He tells us, verse. 9. for we were bondmen, yet our God has not forsaken
us in our bondage, but has extended his mercy to us, to give us a reviving, to
set up the House of our God, and to repair the desolations thereof, and to give
us a Wall in Judah and in Jerusalem; that is, to restore to them the free and
safe exercise of their Religion. Here was great Mercy, and a mighty Deliverance
indeed; and yet after this they presently relapsed into a very great Sin, verse.
10. And now, O our God, what shall we say after this? for we have forsaken thy
Commandments.

In the handling of this Observation, I shall do these two things.

First, I shall endeavor to show that this is a sad aggravation of Sin, and

Secondly, That it is a fatal presage of ruin to a People.

First, It is a sad aggravation of Sin after great Judgments, and after signal
Mercies and Deliverances to return to Sin, and especially to the same Sins
again. Here are three things to be distinctly spoken to.

1. That it is a sad aggravation of Sin to return to it after great Judgments.
2. To do this after great Mercies and Deliverances. 3. After both to return to
the same Sins again.
1. It is a great aggravation of Sin after great Judgments have been upon us to
return to an evil course. Because this is an Argument of great obstinacy in
evil. The longer Pharaoh resisted the Judgments of God, the more was his wicked
heart hardened, till at last he arrived at a monstrous degree of hardness,
having been, as the Text tells us, hardened under ten plagues. And we find, that
after God had threatened the People of Israel with several Judgments, he tells
Lev. 26. 13.
them, that if they will not be reformed by all these things, he will punish
them seven times more for their sins. And if the just God will in such a case
punish seven times more, we may conclude that the Sin is seven times greater.

What sad complaints does the Prophet make of the People of Israel growing
worse for Judgments. Ah! sinful Nation, a People laden with iniquity, Isai. 1.
4.
children that have been corrupters, a seed of evil doers. He can hardly find
words enough to express how great Sinners they were; and he adds the reason in
the next verse, Why should they be Verse. 5.
smitten any more? they will revolt more and more. They were but the worse for
Judgments. This renders them a sinful Nation, a People laden with iniquity. And
again, The People turns not to him Isai. 9. 13.
that smites them, neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts; therefore his anger
is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. And the same Prophet
further complains to the same purpose, When thy hand is lifted up they will not
see. There Isai. 25. 11.
is a particular brand set upon King Ahaz, because affliction made him worse:
This is that King 2 Chro. 28 22.
Ahaz, that is, that grievous and notorious Sinner. And what was it that
rendered him so? In the time of his distress he sinned yet more against the
Lord; this is that King Ahaz, who is said to have provoked the Lord above all
the Kings of Israel which were before him.

2. It is likewise a sore aggravation of Sin, when it is committed after great
Mercies and Deliverances vouchsafed to us. Because this is an argument of great
ingratitude. And this we find recorded as a heavy charge upon the People of
Israel, that they remembered not the Lord their God, Judge. 8. 34, 35.
who had delivered them out of the hand of all their enemies on every side;
neither showed they kindness to the House of Jerubbaal, namely Gideon who had
been their Deliverer, according to all the goodness which he had showed to
Israel. God, we see, takes it very ill at our hands, when we are ungrateful to
the Instruments of our Deliverance; but much more, when we are unthankful to
Him the Author of it. And how severely does Nathan the Prophet reproach David
upon this account? Thus says the Lord God of Israel, I anointed thee King over
Israel, and delivered thee out of the hand of Saul, etc. And if this had been
too little, I would moreover have done such and such things. Wherefore have
thou despised the Commandment of the Lord to do evil in his sight? God here
reckons up his manifold mercies and deliverances, and aggravates David's Sin
upon this account. And he was very angry likewise with Solomon for the same
reason, 1 King. 11. 9.
because he had turned from the Lord God of Israel, who had appeared to him
twice. However we may slight the mercies of God, he keeps a punctual and strict
account of them. It is particularly noted, as a great blot upon Hezekiah, 2
Chro. 32. 25.
that he returned not again according to the benefits done unto him. God takes
very severe notice of all the unkind and unworthy returns that are made to Him
for his goodness.

Ingratitude to God is so unnatural and monstrous, that we find Him appealing
against us for it to the inanimate Creatures. Hear O Heavens, Isai. 1. 2.
and give ear O Earth! for the Lord has spoken; I have nourished and brought
up Children, but they have rebelled against me. And then he goes on and
upbraids them with the Brute Creatures, as being more grateful to men than men
are to God. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass her Masters Crib, Verse. 3.
but Israel does not know, my People does not consider. And in the same Prophet
there is the like complaint, Let favor be shown to the wicked, yet will he
Isai. 26. 10.
not learn righteousness. In the land of uprightness will he deal unjustly, and
will not behold the Majesty of the Lord. Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they
will not see, but they shall see and be ashamed. They that will not acknowledge
the Mercies of Gods Providence shall feel the strokes of his Justice.

There is no greater evidence in the World of an intractable disposition, than
not to be wrought upon by kindness, not to be melted by mercies, not to be
obliged by benefits, not to be tamed by gentle usage. Nay, God expects that his
mercies should lay so great an obligation upon us, that even a Miracle should
not tempt us to be unthankful. If there arise among you a Prophet, Deuteronomy. 13. 1,
2.
says Moses to the People of Israel, or a Dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a
Sign or a Wonder, and the Sign or the Wonder comes to pass, whereof he spoke
to thee, saying, let us go after other Gods and serve them; thou shall not
hearken to the words of that Prophet. And he gives the reason, because Verse. 5,
he has spoken to turn you away from the Lord God of Israel, which brought you
out of the Land of Egypt, and delivered you out of the House of Bondage.

3. It is a greater aggravation yet, after great Mercies and Judgments to
return to the same Sins. Because this can hardly be without our sinning against
knowledge, and after we are convinced how evil and bitter the Sin is which we
were guilty of, and have been so sorely punished for before. This is an
argument of a very perverse and incorrigible temper, and that which made the
Sin of the People of Israel so above measure sinful, that after so many signal
Deliverances, and so many terrible Judgments, they fell into the same Sin of
murmuring ten times; murmuring against God the Author, and against Moses the
glorious Instrument of their Deliverance out of Egypt, which was one of the two
great Types of the Old Testament, both of temporal and spiritual Oppression and
Tyranny. Hear with what resentment God speaks of the ill returns which they
made to him for that great Mercy and Deliverance. Because all these men Numb.
14. 22.
which have seen my glory, and my miracles which I did in Egypt, and in the
Wilderness; and have tempted me now these ten times, and have not hearkened unto
my voice: surely they shall not see the Land which I swear to their Fathers.
And after he had brought them into the promised Land, and wrought great
Deliverances for them several times, how does he upbraid them with their
proneness to fall again into the same Sin of Idolatry? And the Lord said Judge.
10. 11, 12, 13, 14.
unto the Children of Israel, did not I deliver you from the Egyptians, and
from the Amorites; from the Children of Ammon, and from the Philistines? The
Zidonians also and the Amalekites and Maonites did oppress you; and ye cried
unto me, and I delivered you out of their hand: yet you have forsaken me, and
served other Gods; wherefore I will deliver you no more: go and cry unto the
Gods which ye have chosen, let them deliver you in the time of your
tribulation. This incensed God so highly against them, that they still relapsed
into the same Sin of Idolatry after so many afflictions and so many
deliverances. Upon such an occasion well might the Prophet say, Thine own
wickedness shall correct thee, and Jer. 2. 19.
thy sins shall reprove thee: know therefore, that it is an evil and bitter
thing that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God. It is hardly possible but we
should know that the wickedness for which we have been so severely corrected is
an evil and bitter thing.

Thus much for the first part of the Observation, namely, that it is a fearful
aggravation of Sin, after great Judgments and great deliverances to return to
Sin, and especially to the same Sins again. I proceed to the

Second part, namely, That this is a fatal presage of ruin to a People; Should
we again break thy Commandments, and join in affinity with the People of these
abominations, would thou not be angry with us till thou had consumed us,
so that there should be no remnant nor escaping? And so God threatens the
People of Israel in the Text which I cited before, wherefore I will deliver you
no more. Wherefore; that Judge. 10. 13.
is, because they would neither be reformed by the Afflictions wherewith God
had exercised them, nor by the many wonderful Deliverances which he had wrought
for them.

And there is great reason why God should deal thus with a People that
continues impenitent both under the Judgments and Mercies of God.

1. Because this does ripen the Sins of a Nation; and it is time for God to put
in his Sickle when a People are ripe for ruin. When the measure of their Sins
is full, it is no wonder if the Cup of his indignation begin to overflow. It is
said of the Amorites, four hundred years before God brought that fearful ruin
upon them, that God deferred the extirpation of them, because the iniquity of
the Amorites, was not yet Genesis 15. 16.
full. When neither the Mercies nor the Judgments of God will bring us to
repentance, we are then fit for destruction; according to that of the Apostle,
What if God willing to show his Romans 9. 22.
wrath, and make his power known, endured with much long suffering the vessels
of wrath fitted for destruction? They who are not wrought upon neither by the
patience of God's Mercies, nor by the patience of his Judgments, seem to be
fitted and prepared, to be ripe and ready for destruction.

2. Because this incorrigible temper shows the Case of such persons to be
desperate and incurable. Why should they be smitten any more? says Isai. 1. 5.
God of the People of Israel, they will revolt more Matthew. 23. 37, 38.
and more. How often would I have gathered you, says our B. Savior to the
Jews, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings? and ye would not.
Behold, your house is left to you desolate, that is, ye shall be utterly
destroyed; as it happened forty years after to Jerusalem, and to the whole Jewish
Nation.

When God sees that all the means which he can use do prove ineffectual and to
no purpose, he will then give over a People, as Physicians do their Patients
when they see that nature is spent and their case past remedy. When men will
not be the better for the best means that Heaven can use, God will then leave
them to reap the fruit of their own doings, and abandon them to the demerit of
their Sins.

That which now remains is to apply this to our selves, and to the solemn
Occasion of this Day.

And if this be our Case, let us take heed that this be not also our Doom and
Sentence.

First, The Case in the Text does very much resemble Ours. And that in three
respects. God has sent great Judgments upon us for our evil deeds and for our
great trespasses: He has punished us less than our iniquities have deserved:
And has given us a very great and wonderful Deliverance.

1. God has inflicted great Judgments upon us for our evil deeds, and for our
great trespasses. Great Judgments, both for the quality, and for the
continuance of them. It shall suffice only to mention those which are of a more
ancient Date. Scarce has any Nation been more calamitous than this of Ours,
both in respect of the Invasions and Conquests of Foreigners, and of our own
Civil and intestine Divisions. Four times we have been Conquered; By the
Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Normans, And our intestine Divisions have likewise
been great and of long continuance. Witness the Barons Wars, and that long and
cruel Contest between the two Houses of York and Lancaster.

But to come nearer to our own Times. What fearful Judgments and Calamities, of
War, and Pestilence, and Fire, have many of us seen? And how close did they
follow one another? What terrible havoc did the Sword make amongst us for many
years? and this not the Sword of a Foreign Enemy, but of a Civil War; the
mischiefs whereof were all terminated upon our selves, and have given deep
wounds, and left broad scars upon the most considerable Families in the Nation.
-- Alta manent civilis vulnera dextrae.

This War was drawn out to a great length, and had a Tragical end, in the
Murtber of an excellent King; and in the Banishment of his Children into a
strange Country, whereby they were exposed to the Arts and Practices of those
of another Religion; the mischievous Consequences whereof we have ever since
sadly labored under, and do feel them at this day.

And when God was pleased in great mercy at last to put an end to the miserable
Distractions and Confusions of almost twenty years, by the happy Restoration of
the Royal Family, and our ancient Government; which seemed to promise to us a
lasting settlement, and all the felicities we could wish: yet how soon was this
bright and glorious morning overcast, by the restless and black Designs of that
sure and inveterate Enemy of ours, the Church of Rome, for the restoring of
their Religion amongst us. And there was too much encouragement given to this
Design, by those who had power in their hands, and had brought home with them a
secret good will to it.

For this great Trespass, and for our many other Sins, God was angry with us,
and sent among us the most raging Pestilence that ever was known in this
Nation, which in the space of eight or nine Months swept away near a third part
of the Inhabitants of this vast and populous City, and of the Suburbs thereof;
besides a great many thousands more in several parts of the Nation. But we did
not return to the Lord, nor seek him for all this.

And therefore, the very next year after, God sent a terrible and devouring
Fire, which in less than three days time laid the greatest part of this great
City in ashes. And there is too much reason to believe that the Enemy did this;
that perpetual and implacable Enemy of the peace and happiness of this Nation.

And even since the time of that dreadful Calamity, which is now above twenty
years agone, we have been in a continual fear of the cruel Designs of that
Party, which had hitherto been incessantly working under ground, but now began
to show themselves more openly: and especially, since a Prince of that Religion
succeeded to the Crown, our eyes have been ready to fail us for fear, and for
looking after those dreadful things that were coming upon us, and seemed to be
even at the door. A fear which this Nation could easily have rid it self of,
because they that caused it were but a handful in comparison of us, and could
have done nothing without a foreign force and assistance; had not the
Principles of Humanity, and of our Religion too, restrained us from violence
and cruelty, and from every thing which had the appearance of undutifulness to
the Government which the Providence of God had set over us. An Instance of the
like patience under the like provocations, for so long a time, and after such
visible and open attempts upon them, I challenge any Nation or Church in the
World, when they had the Laws so plainly on their side, from the very
foundation of it, to produce. Insomuch, that if God had not put it into the
hearts of our kind Neighbors, and of that incomparable Prince, who laid and
conducted that great Design with so much skill and secrecy, to have appeared so
seasonably for our rescue, our Patience had infallibly, without a Miracle, been
our ruin. And I am sure if our Enemies had ever had the like Opportunity in
their hands, and had overbalanced us in numbers but half so much as we did
them, they would never have let it slip; but would long since have extirpated
us utterly, and have made the remembrance of us to have ceased from among men.

And now if you ask me, for what Sins more especially God has sent all these
Judgments upon us? It will not, I think, become us to be very particular and
positive in such determinations. Thus much is certain, That we have all sinned
and contributed to these Judgments; every one has had some hand, more or less,
in pulling down this vengeance upon the Nation. But we are all too apt to
remove the meritorious cause of God's Judgments as far as we can from our
selves, and our own Party, and upon any flight pretense to lay it upon others.

Yet I will venture to instance in one or two things which may probably enough
have had a more particular and immediate hand in drawing down the Judgments of
God upon us.

Our horrible contempt of Religion on the one hand, by our Infidelity and
Profaneness; and our shameful abuse of it on the other, by our gross
Hypocrisy, and sheltering great wickedness and immoralities under the cloak
and profession of Religion.

And then, great Dissentions and Divisions; great uncharitableness and
bitterness of Spirit among those of the same Religion; so that almost from the
beginning of our happy Reformation the Enemy had sown these Tares, and by the
unwearied Malice and Arts of the Church of Rome the seeds of Dissension were
scattered very early amongst us; and a sour humor had been fermenting in the
Body of the Nation, both upon account of Religion and Civil Interests, for a
long time before things broke out into a Civil War.

And more particularly yet; That which is called the great Trespass here in the
Text, their joining in affinity with the People of these abominations, by whom
they had been detained in a long Captivity: This, I say, seems to have had,
both from the nature of the thing, and the just Judgment of God, no small
influence upon a great part of the Miseries and Calamities which have befallen
us. For had it not been for the countenance which Popery had by the Marriages
and Alliances of our Princes, for two or three Generations together, with those
of that Religion, it had not probably had a continuance among us to this day.
Which will, I hope, now be a good warning to those, who have the Authority to
do it, to make effectual provision by Law for the prevention of the like
inconvenience and mischief in this Nation for ever.

2. Another Parallel between our Case and that in the Text, is, That God has
punished us less than our iniquities did deserve. And this acknowledgment we
have as much reason to make for our selves, as Ezra had to do it in behalf of
the Jews; Thou our God have punished us less than our iniquities deserve. Thou,
our God, have punished us; there is the reason of so much mercy and mitigation.
It is God, and not Man, with whom we have to do; and therefore it is, that we
the children of men are not consumed. And it is our God likewise, to whom we
have a more peculiar relation, and with whom, by virtue of our Profession of
Christianity, we are in Covenant: Thou our God have punished us less than our
Iniquities deserve. He might justly have poured forth all his wrath, and have
made his jealousy to have smoked against us, and have blotted out the
remembrance of us from under Heaven: He might have given us up to the will of
our Enemies, and into the hands of those whose tender mercies are cruelty: He
might have brought us into the net which they had spread for us, and have laid a
terrible load of affliction upon our loins, and suffered insolent men to ride
over our heads, and them that hated us with a perfect hatred, to have had the
rule over us: But he was graciously pleased to remember mercy in the midst of
judgment, and to repent himself for his servants, when he saw that their power
was gone, and that things were come to that extremity, that we were in all
humane probability utterly unable to have wrought out our own Deliverance.

3. The last Parallel between our Case, and that in the Text, is the great and
wonderful Deliverance which God has wrought for us. And whilst I am speaking
of this, God is my witness, whom I serve in the Gospel of his Son, that I do
not say one word upon this Occasion in flattery to men, but in true
thankfulness to Almighty God, and constrained thereto from a just sense of his
great mercy to us all, in this marvelous Deliverance, in this mighty Salvation
which he wrought for us. So that we may say with Ezra, Since thou our God have
given us such a Deliverance as THIS: So great, that we know not how to compare
it with any thing but it Self. God has given us this Deliverance. And
therefore, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy Name be the praise. For
thou know, and we are all conscious to our selves, that we did in no-wise
deserve it; but quite the contrary. God has given it, and it ought to be so
much the welcomer to us, for coming from such a Hand. It is the Lord's doing,
and therefore ought to be the more mavelous in our eyes. It is a Deliverance
full of Mercy, and I had almost said, full of Miracle. The Finger of God was
visibly in it; and there are plain Signatures and Characters upon it, of a more
immediate Divine interposition. And if we will not wisely consider the Lord's
doings, we have reason to stand in awe of that Threatening of His, Because they
regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of Psalm. 28. 5.
his hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up.

It was a wonderful Deliverance indeed, if we consider all the Circumstances of
it: The Greatness of it; and the strangeness of the Means whereby it was
brought about; and the Suddenness, and Easiness of it.

The Greatness of it; it was a great Deliverance, from the greatest Fears, and
from the greatest Dangers; the apparent and imminent Danger of the saddest
Thraldom and Bondage, Civil and Spiritual; both of Soul and Body.

And it was brought about in a very extraordinary manner, and by very strange
means: Whether we consider the greatness and difficulty of the Enterprise; or
the closeness and secrecy of the Design, which must of necessity be
communicated at least to the Chief of those who were to assist and engage in
it: Especially the States of the United Provinces, who were then in so much
danger themselves, and wanted more than their own Forces for their own Defense
and Security: a kindness never to be forgotten by the English Nation. And
besides all this, the difficulties and disappointments which happened, after
the Design was open and manifest, from the uncertainties of Wind and Weather,
and many other Accidents impossible to be foreseen and prevented. And yet in
Conclusion a strange concurrence of all things, on all sides, to bring the
thing which the Providence of God intended to a happy issue and effect.

And we must not here forget the many Worthies of our Nation, who did so
generously run all hazards of Life and Fortune, for the preservation of our
Religion, and the asserting of our ancient Laws and Liberties.

These were all strange and unusual means; but which is stranger yet, the very
counsels and methods of our Enemies did prepare the way for all this, and
perhaps more effectually, than any counsel and contrivance of our own could
have done it. For even the Jesuits, those formal Politicians by Book and Rule,
without any consideration or true knowledge of the temper, and interest, and
other circumstances of the People they were designing upon, and had to deal
withal; and indeed without any care to know them: I say, the Jesuits, who for
so long a time, and for so little reason, have affected the reputation of the
deepest and craftiest Statesmen in the World, have upon this great Occasion,
and when their whole Kingdom of Darkness lay at stake, by a more than ordinary
infatuation and blindness, so outwitted and over-reached themselves in their
own counsels, that they have really contributed as much, or more, to our
Deliverance from the Destruction which they had designed to bring upon us, than
all our wisest and best Friends could have done.

And then, if we consider further, how sudden and surprising it was, so that we
could hardly believe it when it was accomplished; and like the Children of
Israel, when the Lord turned again the Captivity of Zion; we were like them
that dream. When all things were driving on furiously, and in great have, then
God gave an unexpected check to the Designs of men, and stopped them in their
full career. Who among us could have imagined, but a few Months ago, so happy
and so speedy an end of our fears and troubles? God has at once scattered all
our fears, and outdone all our hopes by the greatness and suddenness of our
Deliverance. O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the children of men.

And lastly, If we consider the cheapness and easiness of this Deliverance. All
this was done without a Battle, and almost without Blood. All the danger is,
lest we should loath it, and grow sick of it, because it was so very easy. Had
it come upon harder terms, and had we waded to it through a Red Sea of Blood,
we would have valued it more. But this surely is great wantonness; and whatever
we think of it, one of the highest provocations imaginable: For there can
hardly be a fouler and blacker Ingratitude toward Almighty God, than to slight
so great a Deliverance, only because it came to us so easily, and has cost us
so very cheap.

I will mention but one Circumstance more, which may not be altogether unworthy
our observation. That God seems in this Last Deliverance, in some sort to have
united and brought together all the great Deliverances which He has been
pleased to work for this Nation against all the remarkable attempts of Popery,
from the beginning of our Reformation. Our wonderful Deliverance from the
formidable Spanish Invasion designed against us, happened in the Year 1588. And
now just a hundred years after, the very same year, and at the same Season of
the year, this last great Deliverance came to us. That horrid Gunpowder
Conspiracy, without Precedent, and without Parallel, was designed to have been
executed upon the Fifth Day of November; the same Day upon which his Highness
the Prince of Orange landed the Forces here in England which he brought hither
for our Rescue. So that this is a Day every way worthy to be solemnly set apart
and joyfully celebrated by this Church and Nation, throughout all Generations;
as the fittest of all other to comprehend, and to put us in mind to commemorate
all the great Deliverances which God has wrought for Us, from Popery, and its
inseparable Companion, Arbitrary Power. And we may then say with the Holy
Psalmist, This is Psalm. 118. 23, 24.
the Lord's doing, it is mavelous in our eyes. This is the Day which the Lord
has made, we will rejoice and be glad in it.

Secondly, As the Case in the Text is much like Ours, so let us take heed that
the Doom and Sentence there be not so too. If after all that is come upon us
for our evil deeds, and for our great trespass, and since God has punished us
less than our iniquities did deserve; should we again break his Commandments,
and join in affinity with the People of these Abominations, would He not be
angry with us till he had consumed us, so that there should be no remnant nor
escaping? What could we in reason expect after all this, but utter ruin and
destruction? We may here apply, as St. Paul does, God's Dealing with the People
of Israel, to the Times of the Gospel; for he speaks of it as an Example and
Admonition to all Ages to the end of the World. Now 1 Cor. 1^ 9, 10, 11.
these things, says the Apostle, were our Examples, to the intent we should not
lust after evil things, as they also lusted; Neither be ye Idolaters, as were
some of them, etc. Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted,
and were destroyed of Serpents. For the explication of this passage we must
have recourse to the History, which gives this account of it. And the People
spoke against God, and against Numb. 21. 5, 6.
Moses, Wherefore have ye brought us up out of Egypt, to die in the Wilderness?
etc. impeaching God and his Servant Moses, as if by this Deliverance they had
put them into a much worse condition than they were in when they were in Egypt.
And the Lord sent fiery Serpents among the People, and they bit the People, and
much People of Israel dyed. But how was this a tempting of Christ? Neither let
us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted; that is, let not us, now under
the Gospel, tempt our Savior and Deliverer, as the Israelites did theirs, by
slighting that great Deliverance and by speaking against God, and against
Moses. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed of
the Destroyer. And how far this may concern Us, and all Others, to the end of
the World, who shall tempt Christ, the great Patron and Deliverer of his
Church, and murmur without cause, as the Israelites did, at the Deliverances
which He works for them, and against the Instruments of it, the Apostle tells
us in the next words: Now all these things happened V. 11.
unto them for Ensamples, or Types; and they are written for our admonition
upon whom the ends of the World are come. Let us not tempt Christ; who is now
beginning the Glorious Deliverance of his Church from the Tyranny of Antichrist.

To draw now toward a Conclusion; I will comprehend my Advice to you upon the
whole matter, in as few words as I can.

Let us use this great Deliverance which God has given us, [ such a
Deliverance as this] from our Enemies, and from the Hand of all that hate us;
not by using Them as they would have done Us, had we fallen under their Power;
with great Insolence, and Rage, and Cruelty; but with great Moderation and
Clemency, making as few Examples of Severity as will be consistent with our
future security from the like Attempts upon our Religion and Laws: And even in
the Execution of Justice upon the greatest Offenders, let us not give so much
countenance to the ill Examples which have been set of Extravagant Fines and
Punishments, as to imitate those Patterns which with so much reason we abhor;
no, not in the Punishment of the Authors of them.

And let us endeavor, for once, to be so wise, as not to forfeit the fruits of
this Deliverance, and to hinder our selves of the benefit and advantage of it,
by Breaches and Divisions among our selves. As we have no reason to desire it,
so I think we can hardly ever hope to understand Popery better, and the Cruel
Designs of it, than we do already; both from the long Trial and Experience
which we have had of it in this Nation, and likewise from that dismal and
horrid View which has of late been given us of the true Spirit and Temper of
it in One of our Neighbor Nations, which has long pretended to the Profession
of the most refined and moderate Popery in the World; but has now at last
showed it self in its true Colors, and in the Perfection of a Persecuting
Spirit; and have therein given us a most sad and deplorable Instance, of a
Religion corrupted and degenerated into that which, if it be possible, is worse
than None.

And since, by the undeserved Mercy of God to us, we have, upon such easy
terms in comparison, escaped their Rage and Fury; let us now at length resolve,
never to join in affinity with the People of these Abominations; since our
Alliances with them by Marriage have had so fatal an Influence, both upon the
public Peace and Tranquillity of the Nation, and upon the Welfare also of
private Families. I have known Many Instances of this kind, but hardly ever yet
saw One that proved happy; but a great many that have been pernicious and
ruinous to those Protestant Families in which such unequal, and, as I think,
unlawful Matches have been made: Not that such Marriages are void in
themselves, but yet for all that sinful; because of the apparent Danger and
Temptation to which those of our Church and Religion that enter into them do
evidently expose themselves, of being seduced from their Religion; not by the
good Arguments which the other can offer to that purpose, but by the ill Arts
which they have the Confidence and the Conscience to make use of in the making
of Proselytes.

And let us pay our most hearty and thankful Acknowledgments, chiefly and in
the first place to Almighty God, the Blessed Author of this Deliverance; and
under Him, to that happy Instrument whom God has been pleased, in great pity
to this sinful and unworthy Nation, to raise up on purpose for it, his Highness
the Prince of Orange; and to that end did in his All-wise Providence lay the
Foundation of our then future Deliverance, in that auspicious Match which was
concluded here in England, about eleven years ago, between this Renowned Prince
and our Excellent Princess.

This is that most Illustrious House of Nassau and Orange, which God has so
highly honored above all the Families of the Earth, to give a Check to the Two
Great aspiring Monarchies of the West, and bold Attempters upon the Liberties
of Europe: To the One, in the last Age; and to the Other, in the present. As if
the Princes of this Valiant and Victorious Line had been of the Race of
Hercules, born to rescue Mankind from Oppression, and to quell Monsters.

And lastly, let us beseech Almighty God, all whose Ways and Works are perfect,
That he would establish that which he has wrought, and still carry it on to
further and greater Perfection. Which, after such an Earnest of his Favor and
Good Will to us, we have no reason to doubt but that he is ready to do for us;
if by our own fickleness and inconstancy, disgusting the Deliverance now it is
come, which we so earnestly desired before it came; if by our ungrateful
Murmurings and Discontents, by our own foolish Heats and Animosities, kindled
and carried on by the ill designs of some, working upon the tenderness and
scruples of others, under the specious pretenses of Conscience and Loyalty: I
say, if by some or all these ways we do not refuse the Blessing which God now
offers, and defeat and frustate the merciful Design of this wonderful
Revolution; God will still rejoice over us, to do us good, and think thoughts
of Peace toward us, thoughts of good, and not of evil, to give us an expected
end of our long Troubles and Confusions. But if we will not know, in this our
day, the things which belong to our Peace, our Destruction will then be of our
selves; and there will be no need that God should be angry with us, for we
shall be undone by our own Differences and Quarrels about the Way and Means of
our being saved; and so be angry with one another till we be consumed. Which
God, of his infinite Goodness, give us all the Grace and Wisdom to prevent; for
his Mercies sake, in Jesus Christ, to whom, with Thee, O Father, and the
Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, Thanksgiving and Praise, both now and
ever. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS lately Printed for Brabaz. Aylmer.
THE Rule of Faith; or, An Answer to the Treatise of Mr. J. Sarjant: By John
Tillotson, D. D. Dean of Canterbury. To which is adjoined a Reply to Mr. J. S.
his Third Appendix, etc. By Edward Stillingfleet, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's.

The Advice of a Father: or, Counsel to a Child. Directing him how to demean
himself in the most important Passages of this Life.

The True Mother Church: or, a Short Discourse concerning the Doctrine and
Worship of the First Church at Jerusalem, upon Acts II. By Samuel Johnson,
Author of Reflections upon Julian. Price 2 d.

Books Printed for Brab. Aylmer and W. Rogers.
SErmons and Discourses, some of which never before printed: The Third Volume.
By the Reverend Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury. 8vo.

A Discourse against Transubstantiation. In 8vo. Price 3 d.

A Persuasive to frequent Communion in the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. By
John Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury. In 8vo. Price 3 d.

Books Printed for William Rogers.
AN Answer to a Discourse, Entitled, Papists protesting against Protestant
Popery; being a Vindication of Papists not Misrepresented by Protestants. 4to.

A Sermon preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of
the City of London, at ^uild-Hall Chapel, on Sunday, November the 4th. 1688.
By William Sherlock, D. D. Master of the Temple.

A Letter of Enquiry to the Reverend Fathers of the Society of Jesus. Written
in the Person of a Dissatisfied Roman Catholic.


