The most Reverend Dr. JOHN TILLOTSON late Archbishop of Canterbury.
portrait of John Tillotson

The Remaining DISCOURSES, ON THE Attributes of God. viz. His Goodness. His
Mercy. His Patience. His Long-suffering. His Power. His Spirituality. His
Immensity. His Eternity. His Incomprehensibleness. God the first Cause, and
last End.


By the Most Reverend Dr. JOHN TILLOTSON, Late Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Being The SEVENTH VOLUME; Published from the Originals, By Ralph Barker, D. D.
Chaplain to his Grace.

LONDON, Printed for Ri. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1700.

THE CONTENTS.
SERMON I, II, III, IV. The Goodness of God. PSALM. CXLV.9. The Lord is good to
all, and his tender Mercies are over all his Works. Page 1, 25, 51, 81.

SERMON V. The Mercy of God. NUMB. XIV.18. The Lord is long-suffering and of
great Mercy. p. 145. SERMON VI, VII. The Patience of God. 2 Pet. III.9. The
Lord is not slack concerning his Promise, as some men count slackness; but is
long suffering, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
Repentance. p. 143, 179. SERMON VIII, IX. The Long-suffering of God. ECCLES.
VIII.11.Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the heart of the Sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. p. 193,
239. SERMON X. The Power of God. PSALM. LXII.11. God has spoken once; twice
have I heard this, that power belongs unto God. p. 265. SERMON XI. The
Spirituality of the Divine Nature. JOHN IV.2. God is a Spirit, and they that
worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in truth. p. 299. SERMON XII. The
Immensity of the Divine Nature. PSALM. CXXXIX.7, 8, 9, 10. Whither shall I go
from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into
heaven thou art there; if I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there. If I
take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea,
even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. p. 331
SERMON XIII. The Eternity of God. PSALM XC.2. Before the mountains were brought
forth, or ever thou had formed the earth and the world, even from
everlasting, to everlasting thou art God. p. 355 SERMON XIV. The
Incomprehensibleness of God. JOB XI.7. Can thou by searching find out God?
Can thou find out the Almighty unto perfection? p. 377 SERMON XV. God the
first Cause, and last End. ROMANS XI.36. For of him, and through him, and to him
are all things, to whom be Glory for ever. Amen. p. 403
SERMON I. Vol. VII.
The Goodness of God.
PSALM. CXLV.9. The Lord is Good to all, and his tender Mercies are over all his
Works.


THE Subject which I have now proposed to treat of, is certainly one of the
Greatest and Noblest Arguments in the World, the Goodness of God, the Highest
and most Glorious Perfection, of the best and most Excellent of Beings, than
which nothing deserves more to be considered by us, nor ought in Reason to
affect us more. The Goodness of God is the cause, and the continuance of our
Beings, the Foundation of our Hopes, and the Fountain of our Happiness; our
greatest comfort, and our fairest Example, the chief Object of our love and
praise and admiration, the joy and rejoicing of our hearts; and therefore the
Meditation and Discourse of it must needs be pleasant and delightful to us; the
great difficulty will be, to confine our selves upon so copious an Argument,
and to set bounds to that which is of so vast an extent, the Lord is good to
all, and his tender mercies are over all his works.

Which words are an Argument, which the divine Plalmist uses, to stir up
himself and others to the praise of God: At the 3. v. he tells us, that the
Lord is great, and greatly to be praised; and he gives the reason of this, v.
8. and 9. from those Properties and Perfections of the Divine Nature, which
declare his Goodness, the Lord is gracious, and full of compassion, slow to
anger, and of great mercy; the Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are
over all his works; where you have the Goodness of God declared, together with
the amplitude and extent of it, in respect of the Objects of it; the Lord is
good to all.

In the handling of this Argument, I shall do these four things.

First, Consider what is the proper Notion of Goodness, as it is attributed to
God.

Secondly, Show that this Perfection belongs to God.

Thirdly, Consider the Effects and the Extent of it.

Fourthly, Answer some Objections, which may seem to contradict and bring in
question the Goodness of God.

First, What is the proper Notion of Goodness, as it is attributed to God.

There is a dry Metaphysical Notion of Goodness, which only signifies the Being
and essential properties of a thing; but this is a good word ill bestowed; for
in this sense, every thing that has Being, even the Devil himself, is good.

And there is a Moral Notion of Goodness; and that is twofold.

1. More general, in opposition to all Moral evil and imperfection, which we
call sin and vice; and so the Justice, and Truth, and Holiness of God, are in
this sense his Goodness. But there is,

2. Another Notion of Moral Goodness, which is more particular and restrained;
and then it denotes a particular Virtue in opposition to a particular Vice; and
this is the proper and usual acceptance of the word Goodness; and the best
description I can give of it is this; that it is a certain propension and
disposition of mind, whereby a person is inclined to desire and procure the
happiness of others; and it is best understood by its contrary, which is an
envious disposition, a contracted and narrow Spirit, which would confine
happiness to it self, and grudgeth that others should partake of it, or share
in it; or a malicious and mischievous temper, which delights in the harms of
others, and to procure trouble and mischief to them. To communicate and lay out
our selves for the good of others, is Goodness; and and so the Apostle explains
doing good, by communicating to others, who are in misery, or want, Heb. 13.16.
but to do good and to communicate forget not. The Jews made a distinction
between a righteous and a good man; to which the Apostle alludes, Romans 5.7.
scarcely for a righteous man, will one die; yet peradventure for a good man,
one would even dare to die. The righteous man was he, that did no wrong to
others; and the good man he, who was not only not injurious to others, but kind
and beneficial to them. So that Goodness is a readiness and disposition to
communicate the good and happiness which we enjoy, and to be willing others
should partake of it.

This is the Notion of Goodness among men; and it is the same in God, only with
this difference, that God is originally and transcendently good; but the
Creatures are, the best of them, but imperfectly good, and by derivation from
God, who is the fountain and original of goodness; which is the meaning of our
Savior, Luke 18.19. when he says, there is none good save one, that is God.
But though the degrees of Goodness in God, and the Creatures, be infinitely
unequal, and that Goodness which is in us, be so small and inconsiderable, that
compared with the Goodness of God, it does not deserve that name; yet the
essential Notion of Goodness in both, must be the same; else when the Scripture
speaks of the Goodness of God, we could not know the meaning of it, and if we
do not at all understand what it is for God to be good, it is all one to us
(for ought we know) whether he be good or not; for he may be so, and we never
the better for it, if we do not know what Goodness in God is, and consequently
when he is so, and when not.

Besides that the Goodness of God is very frequently in Scripture propounded to
our imitation; but it is impossible for us to imitate that, which we do not
understand what it is; from whence it is certain, that the goodness which we
are to endeavor after, is the same that is in God, because in this we are
commanded to imitate the Perfection of God, that is, to be good and merciful as
he is, according to the rate and condition of Creatures, and so far as we,
whose Natures are imperfect, are capable of resembling the Divine Goodness.

Thus much for the Notion of goodness in God, it is a propension and
disposition in the Divine Nature, to communicate being and happiness to his
Creatures.

Secondly, I shall endeavor to show, in the next place, that this Perfection
of Goodness belongs to God; and that from these three heads.

I. From the Acknowledgments of Natural Light.

II. From the Testimony of Scripture, and Divine Revelation. And,

III. From the Perfection of the Divine Nature.

I. From the Acknowledgments of Natural Light. The generality of the Heathen
agree in it, and there is hardly any Perfection of God more universally
acknowledged by them. I always except the Sect of the Epicureans, who attribute
nothing but Eternity and Happiness to the Divine Nature; and yet if they would
have considered it, Happiness without Goodness is impossible. I do not find
that they do expressly deny this Perfection to God, or that they ascribe to him
the contrary; but they clearly take away all the Evidence and Arguments of the
Divine Goodness; for they supposed God to be an immortal and happy Being, that
enjoyed himself, and had no regard to any thing without himself, that neither
gave Being to other things, nor concerned himself in the happiness or misery of
any of them; so that their Notion of a Deity, was in truth the proper Notion of
an idle Being, that is called God, and neither does good nor evil.

But setting aside this atheistical Sect, the rest of the Heathen did
unanimously affirm and believe the Goodness of God; and this was the great
foundation of their Religion; and all their Prayers to God, and Praises of him,
did necessarily suppose a persuasion of the Divine Goodness. Whosoever prays to
God, must have a persuasion, or good hopes of his readiness to do him good; and
to praise God, is to acknowledge that he has received good from him. Seneca
has an excellent passage to this purpose, He (says he) that denies the
Goodness of God, does not surely consider the infinite number of Prayers, that
with hands lifted up to Heaven are put up to God, both in private and public;
which certainly would not be, nor is it credible, that all Mankind should
conspire in this madness of putting up their Supplications to deaf and impotent
Deities, if they did not believe, that the Gods were so good, as to confer
benefits upon those who prayed to them.

But we need not to infer their belief of God's Goodness, from the acts of
their devotion, nothing being more common among them, than expressly to
attribute this Perfection of Goodness to him, and among the Divine Titles, this
always had the preeminence, both among the Greeks and Romans; (...), Deus
optimus maximus, was their constant style; and in our Language, the name of God
seems to have been given him from his Goodness. I might produce innumerable
passages out of the Heathen Authers to this purpose; but I shall only mention
that remarkable one out of Seneca, primus deorum cultus est deos credere;
deinde reddere illis majestatem suam, reddere bonitatem, sine qua nulla
majestas, The first act of Worship is to believe the Being of God; and the
next, to ascribe Majesty or greatness to him; and to ascribe Goodness, without
which there can be no Greatness.

II. From the testimony of Scripture and Divine Revelation. I shall mention but
a few of those many Texts of Scripture, which declare to us the Goodness of
God, Exodus 34.6. where God makes his Name known to Moses, the Lord, the Lord
God gracious and merciful, long suffering, abundant in goodness and truth.
Psalm. 86.5. Thou Lord art good, and ready to forgive. Psalm. 119.68. Thou art
good, and do good. And that which is so often repeated in the Book of Psalms,
O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good, and his mercy endures for ever.
Our blessed Savior attributes this Perfection to God, in so peculiar and
transcendent a manner, as if it were incommunicable, Luke 18.19. There is none
good save one, that is God. The meaning is, that no Creature is capable of it,
in that excellent and transcendent degree, in which the Divine Nature is
possessed of it.

To the same purpose are those innumerable Testimonies of Scripture, which
declare God to be gracious, and merciful, and long suffering; for these are but
several Branches of his Goodness; his Grace is the freeness of his Goodness, to
those who have not deserved it; his Mercy is his Goodness to those who are in
misery; his Patience is his Goodness to those who are guilty, in deferring the
Punishment due to them.

III. The Goodness of God may likewise be argued from the Perfection of the
Divine Nature, these two ways.

1. Goodness is the chief of all Perfections, and therefore it belongs to God.

2. There are some Footsteps of it in the Creatures, and therefore it is much
more eminently in God.

1. Goodness is the highest Perfection, and therefore it must needs belong to
God, who is the most perfect of Beings. Knowledge and Power are great
Perfections, but separated from Goodness, they would be great Imperfections,
nothing but craft and violence. An Angel may have Knowledge and Power in a
great degree, but yet for all that be a Devil. Goodness is so great and
necessary a Perfection, that without it there can be no other, it gives
Perfection to all other excellencies; take away this, and the greatest
excellencies in any other kind, would be but the greatest imperfections. And
therefore our Savior speaks of the goodness and mercy of God, as the sum of
his Perfections; what one Evangelist has, be ye merciful, as your Father which
is in Heaven is merciful, is rendered in another, be ye therefore perfect, as
your Father which is in Heaven is perfect. Goodness is so essential to a
perfect Being, that if we once strip God of this property, we rob him of the
Glory of all his other Perfections; and therefore when Moses desired to see
God's Glory, he said, he would make all his goodness to pass before him. Exodus
33.19. This is the most amiable Perfection, and as it were the Beauty of the
Divine Nature, Zach. 9.17. how great is thy goodness, how great is thy beauty?
sine bonitate nulla majestas, without goodness there can be no majesty. Other
excellencies may cause fear and amazement in us: but nothing but Goodness, can
command sincere love and veneration.

2. there are some footsteps of this Perfection in the Creatures, and therefore
it must be much more eminently in God. There is in every Creature some
representation of some divine Perfection or other, but God does not own any
Creature to be after his image, that is destitute of Goodness. The Creatures,
that want Reason and Understanding, are incapable of this Moral Goodness we are
speaking of; Man is the first in the rank of Creatures, that is endowed with
it, and he is said to be made after the image of God, and to have dominion
given him over the Creatures below him, to signify to us, that if man had not
been made after God's image, in respect of Goodness, he had been unfit to rule
over other Creatures; because without Goodness, dominion would be Tyranny and
Oppression. And the more any Creature partakers of this Perfection of Goodness,
the more it resembles God; as the Blessed Angels, who behold the face of God
continually, and are thereby transformed into his image from glory to glory,
their whole business and employment is, to do good; and the Devil, though he
resemble God in other Perfections of Knowledge and Power, yet because he is
evil, and envious, and mischievous, and so contrary to God in this Perfection,
he is the most opposite and and hateful to him of all Creatures whatsoever.

And if this Perfection be in some degree in the Creature, it is much more in
God; if it be derived from him, he is much more eminently possessed of it
himself. All that Goodness which is in the best natured of the Sons of Men, or
in the most glorious Angels of Heaven, is but an imperfect and weak
representation of the Divine Goodness.

The Third thing I proposed to consider, was the Effects of the Divine
Goodness, together with the large extent of it, in respect of the Objects of
it, the Lord is good to all, and his tender Mercies are over all his Works;
thou art good and do good, says David, Psalm. 119.68. The great evidence and
demonstration of God's Goodness, is from the Effects of it. To the same purpose
St. Paul speaks, Acts 14.17. He has not left himself without Witness, in that
he does good, and sends us Rain from Heaven, and fruitful Seasons.

I shall consider the Effects of the Divine Goodness, under these Two Heads.

I. The universal extent of God's Goodness to all his Creatures.

II. I shall consider more particularly the Goodness of God to Men, which we
are more especially concerned to take notice of.

I. The universal extent of his Goodness to the whole Creation, the Lord is
Good to all. The whole Creation furnishes us with clear evidences and
demonstrations of the Divine Goodness; which way soever we cast our Eyes, we
are encountered with undeniable Instances of the Goodness of God; and every
thing that we behold, is a sensible demonstration of it; the Heavens declare
the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy work, says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 19.1. And again, Psalm. 33.5. The Earth is full of the Goodness of the
Lord. The whole Frame of this World, and every Creature in it, and all the
several degrees of Being and Perfection, which are in the Creatures, and the
Providence of God toward them all, in the preservation of them, and providing
for the happiness of all of them, in such degrees as they are capable of it,
are a plentiful demonstration of the Divine Goodness, which I shall endeavor
to illustrate in these Four Particulars.

1. The universal Goodness of God appears in giving Being to so many Creatures.

2. In making them all so very good, considering the variety, and order, and
end of them.

3. In his continual preservation of them.

4. In providing so abundantly for the welfare and happiness of all of them, so
far as they are capable and sensible of it.

1. The extent of God's Goodness appears in giving Being to so many Creatures.
And this is a pure effect of Goodness, to impart and communicate Being to any
thing. Had not God been good, but of an envious, and narrow, and contracted
nature, he would have confined all Being to himself, and been unwilling, that
any thing besides himself should have been: but his Goodness prompted him to
spread and diffuse himself, and set his Power and Wisdom on work, to give Being
to all that variety of Creatures, which we see and know to be in the World, and
probably to infinite more than we have the knowledge of. Now it is not
imaginable, that God could have any other motive to do this, but purely the
Goodness of his Nature. All the motives imaginable besides this, must either be
indigency and want, or constraint and necessity; but neither of these can have
any place in God, and therefore it was mere Goodness, that moved him to give
Being to other things; and therefore all Creatures have reason, with the four
and twenty Elders in the Revelations, to cast their crowns before the throne of
God, saying, thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power,
for thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure (that is of thy mere
goodness) they are and were created.

(1.) Indigency and Want can have no place in God; because he that has all
possible Perfection, has all plenty in himself; from whence results
All Sufficiency and complete Happiness. So that the Divine Nature need not look
out of it self for Happiness, being incapable of any addition to the Happiness
and Perfection it is already possessed of, ipsa suis pollens opibus nihil indiga
nostri. We make things for our use, Houses to shelter us, and Clothes to keep
us warm; and we propagate our Kind, to perpetuate our selves in our posterity:
But all this supposes imperfection, and want, and mortality, to none of which
the Divine Nature is liable and obnoxious.

Nay it was not want of glory, which made God to make the World. It Is true
indeed, the glory of God's Goodness does herein appear, and Creatures endowed
with understanding have reason to take notice of it, with thankfulness, praise,
and admiration: but there is no happiness redounds to God from it, nor does he
feed himself with any imaginary content and satisfaction, such as vainglorious
persons have, from the fluttering applause of their Creatures and
Beneficiaries. God is really above all blessing and praise. It is great
condescension and goodness in him, to accept of our acknowledgments of his
benefits, of our imperfect praises, and ignorant admiration of him; and were he
not as wonderfully good, as he is great and glorious, he would not suffer us to
sully his great and glorious Name, by taking it into our Mouths; and were it
not for our advantage and happiness, to own and acknowledge his benefits, for
any real happiness and glory that comes to him by it, he could well enough be
without it, and dispense with us for ever entertaining one thought of him; and
were it not for his goodness, might despise the praises of his Creatures, with
infinitely more reason than wise Men do the applause of Fools. There is indeed
one Text of Scripture, which seems to intimate that God made all Creatures for
himself, as if he had some need of them, Prove. 16.4. The Lord has made all
things for himself; yea even the wicked for the day of evil. Now if by God's
making all things for himself, be meant, that he aimed at and intended the
manifestation of his Wisdom, and Power, and Goodness in the Creation of the
World, it is most true, that in this sense, he made all things for himself: but
if we understand it so, as if the Goodness of his Nature did not move him
thereto, but he had some design to serve Ends and Necessities of his own upon
his Creatures, this is far from him. But it is very probable, that neither of
these are the meaning of this Text, which may be rendered with much better
sense, and nearer to the Hebrew, thus, God has ordained every thing, to that
which is fit for it, and he wicked has he ordained for the day of evil; that
is, the Wisdom of God has fitted one thing to another, punishment to sin, the
evil day to the evil doers.

(2.) Nor can Necessity and Constraint have any place in God. When there was no
Creature yet made, nothing in Being but God himself, there could be nothing to
compel him to make any thing, and to extort from him the effects of his bounty:
Neither are the Creatures necessary effects and emanations from the Being of
God, flowing from the Divine Essence, as water does from a Spring and as light
streams from the Sun* If so, this indeed would have been an Argument of the
fullness of the Divine Nature, but not of the bounty and goodness of it; and it
would have been matter of Joy to us tha^ we are, but not a true ground o^
thankfulness from us to God; a^ we rejoice and are glad that the Sunshines, but
we do not give it any thanks for shining, because it shine^ without any
intention or design t^ do us good; it does not know tha^ we are the better for
its light, nor di^ intend we should be, and therefore we have no reason to
acknowledge its goodness to us.

But God, who is a Spirit endowed with Knowledge and Understanding, does not
act as natural and material Causes do, which act necessarily and ignorantly,
whereas he acts knowingly and voluntarily, with particular intention and
design, knowing that he does good, and intending to do so freely and out of
choice, and when he has no other constraint upon him but this, that his
goodness enclines his will to communicate himself, and to do good: So that the
Divine Nature is under no Necessity, but such as is consistent with the most
perfect Liberty and freest Choice.

Not but that Goodness is essential to God, and a necessary Perfection of his
Nature, and he cannot possibly be otherwise than good: but when he communicates
his goodness, he knows what he does, and wills and chooses to do so.

And this kind of Necessity is so far from being any impeachment of the Divine
Goodness, that it is the great Perfection and praise of it. The Stoic
Philosophers mistaking this, do blasphemously advance their wise and virtuous
man above God himself; for they reason thus, A wiseman is good out of choice,
when he may be otherwise; but God out of necessity of nature, and when he
cannot possibly be otherwise than good. But if they had considered things
aright, they might have known, that this is an imperfection in their wise man,
that he can be otherwise than good; for a power to be evil is impotency and
weakness. The highest Character that ever was given of a man, is that which
Velleius Paterculus gives of Cato, that he was vir bonus, quia aliter esse non
potuit, a good man, because he could not be otherwise; this applied to a mortal
Man, is a very extravagant and undue commendation; but yet it signifies thus
much, that it is the highest Perfection, not to be able to be otherwise than
good: and this is the Perfection of the Divine Nature, that goodness is
essential to it, but the expressions and communications of his goodness are
spontaneous and free, designed and directed by infinite Knowledge and Wisdom.

This is the first: the second particular is, that God has made all Creatures
very good, considering the variety, and order, and end of them. But this I
shall reserve to another opportunity.

SERMON II. Vol VII.
The Goodness of God.
PSALM. CXLV.9. The Lord is Good to all, and his tender Mercies are over all his
Works.


IN the handling of this Argument, I proposed to do these four things.

First, To consider what is the proper Notion of Goodness, as it is attributed
to God.

Secondly, To show that this Perfection belongs to God.

Thirdly, To consider the Effects of the Divine Goodness, together with the
large extent of it, in respect of its objects. And,

Fourthly, To answer some Objections which may seem to contradict, and bring in
question the Goodness of God. I have considered the two first; and in speaking
to the third, I proposed the considering these two things.

I. The universal extent of God's Goodness, to all his Creatures.

II. More especially the Goodness of God to man, which we are more especially
concerned to take notice of, and be affected with.

The First of these appears in these four particulars.

1. In his giving Being to so many Creatures.

2. In making them all so very good, considering the number and variety, the
rank and order, the end and design of all of them.

3. In his continual preservation of them.

4. In his providing so abundantly for the welfare and happiness of all of
them, so far as they are capable and sensible of it.

The First of these I spoke largely to; I proceed to show in the,

2. Place, that the universal Goodness of God appears, in making all these
Creatures so very good, considering the number and variety, the rank and order,
the end and design of all of them. His Goodness excited and set a work his
Power to make this World, and all the Creatures in it; and that they might be
made in the best manner that could be, his Wisdom directed his Power, he has
made all things in number, weight, and measure; so that they are admirably
fitted and proportioned to one another: And that there is an excellent
Contrivance in all sorts of Beings, and a wonderful beauty and harmony in the
whole Frame of things, is I think sufficiently visible to every discerning and
unprejudiced mind. The lowest form of Creatures, I mean those which are
destitute of sense, do all of them contribute some way or other, to the use,
and convenience, and comfort of the Creatures above them, which being endowed
with sense are capable of enjoying the benefit and delight of them, which being
so palpable in the greatest part of them, may resonably be presumed, tho'it be
not so discernable concerning all the rest; so that when we survey the whole
Creation of God, and the several parts, we may well cry out with David, Psalm.
104.24. O Lord how manifold are thy works, in wisdom has thou made them all!

It Is true indeed, there are degrees of Perfection in the Creatures, and God is
not equally good to all of them. Those Creatures which are of more Noble and
Excellent Natures, and to which he has communicated more degrees of
Perfection, they partake more of his Goodness, and are more glorious instances
of it: But every Creature partakes of the Divine Goodness in a certain degree,
and according to the Nature and Capacity of it. God, if he pleased, could have
made nothing but immortal Spirits; and he could have made as many of these as
there are individual Creatures of all sorts in the World: but it seemed good to
the wise Architect, to make several ranks and orders of Beings, and to display
his Power, and Goodness, and Wisdom, in all imaginable variety of Creatures;
all which should be good in their kind, though far short of the Perfection of
Angels and immortal Spirits.

He that will build a House for all the uses and purposes of which a House is
capable, cannot make it all foundation, and great beams and pillars; must not
so contrive it, as to make it all Rooms of state and entertainment: but there
must of necessity be in it meaner materials, rooms and offices for several uses
and purposes, which however inferior to the rest in dignity and degree, do yet
contribute to the beauty and advantage of the whole. So in this great Frame of
the World, it was fit there should be variety and different degrees of
Perfection in the several parts of it; and this is so far from being an
impeachment of the Wisdom or Goodness of him that made it, that it is an
Evidence of both. For the meanest of all Gods Creatures is good, considering
the nature and rank of it, and the end to which it was designed; and we cannot
imagine how it could have been ordered and framed better, though we can easily
tell how it might have been worse, and that if this or that had been wanting,
or had been otherwise, it had not been so good; and those who have been most
conversant in the contemplation of Nature, and of the Works of God, have been
most ready to make this acknowledgment.

But then if we consider the Creatures of God, with relation to one another,
and with regard to the whole Frame of things, they will all appear to be very
good; and notwithstanding this or that kind of Creatures, be much less perfect
than another, and there be a very great distance between the Perfection of a
worm, and of an Angel; yet considering every thing in the rank and order which
it has in the Creation, it is as good as could be, considering its nature and
use, and the place allotted to it among the Creatures.

And this difference in the Works of God, between the goodness of the several
parts of the Creation, and the excellent and perfect goodness of the whole, the
Scripture is very careful to express to us in the History of the Creation,
where you find God represented, as first looking upon, and considering every
days work by it self, and approving it, and pronouncing it to be good, Genesis
1.4, 10, 12, 18, 21, 24. at the end of every days work, it is said that God saw
it, and it was good: but then when all was finished, and he surveyed the whole
together, it is said, v. 31. that God saw every thing that he had made, and
behold it was very good; very good, that is the best, the Hebrews having no
other Superlative. Every Creature of God by it self is good: But take the whole
together, and they are very good, the best that could be.

3. The universal goodness of God further appears, in the careful and continual
preservation of the things which he has made; his upholding and maintaining
the several Creatures in being, in their natural state and order; those which
have life, in life, to the period which he has determined and appointed for
them; in his preserving the whole World, his managing and governing this vast
Frame of things, in such sort, as to keep it from running into confusion and
disorder. This is a clear demonstration, no less of the goodness than of the
Wisdom and Power of God, that for so many Ages all the parts of it have kept
their places, and performed the offices and work for which Nature designed
them; that the World is not, in the course of so many thousand years, grown old
and weak, and out of repair, and that the Frame of things does not dissolve and
fall in pieces.

And the Goodness of God does not only take care of the main, and support the
whole Frame of things, and preserve the more noble and considerable Creatures;
but even the least and meanest of them. The Providence of God does not overlook
any thing that he has made, nor despise any of the works of his hands, so as
to let them relapse, and fall back into nothing, through neglect and
inadvertency; as many as there are, he takes care of them all, Psalm. 104.27,
28. where the Psalmist speaking of the innumerable multitude of Creatures upon
the Earth, and in the Sea, These all (says he) wait upon thee, that thou may
give them their meat in due season; that thou give them they gather, thou
openest thine hand, and they are filled with good. And to the same purpose,
Psalm. 145.15 16. The eyes of all wait upon thee, and thou give them their
meat in due season; thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of every
living thing. The inanimate Creatures, which are without sense; and the brute
Creatures, which though they have sense, are without understanding, and so can
have no End and Design of self-preservation, God preserves them, no less than
men who are endowed with reason, and foresight to provide for themselves; Psalm.
36.7. Thou preservest man and beast. And Psalm. 147.9. He gives to the beast
his food, and to the young Ravens when they cry. And so our Savior declares to
us the particular Providence of God toward those Creatures, Matthew. 6.26.
Behold the fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather
into barns; yet your heavenly Father feeds them. V. 28.29. Consider the
lillies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin: And
yet I say unto you, that Solomon in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of
these.

And though all the Creatures below man, being without understanding, can take no
notice of this bounty of God to them, nor make any acknowledgments to him for
it, yet man, who is the Priest of the visible Creation, and placed here in this
great Temple of the World, to offer up Sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving to
God, for his universal goodness to all his Creatures, ought to bless God in
their behalf, and to sing praises to him, in the name of all the inferior
Creatures, which are subjected to his Dominion and Use; because they are all as
it were his Family, his Servants and Utensils, and if God should neglect any of
them, and suffer them to perish and miscarry, it is we that should find the
inconvenience and want of them; and therefore we should on their behalf
celebrate the Praises of God; as we find David often does in the Psalms,
calling upon the inanimate and the brute Creatures to praise the Lord.

4. The universal Goodness of God does yet further appear; in providing so
abundantly for the Welfare and Happiness of all his Creatures, so far as they
are capable and sensible of it. He does not only support and preserve his
Creatures in Being, but takes care that they should all enjoy that happiness
and pleasure, which their natures are capable of. The Creatures endowed with
Sense and Reason, which only are capable of pleasure and happiness, God has
taken care to satisfy the several Appetites and Inclinations which he has
planted in them; and according as Nature has enlarged their desires and
capacities, so he enlarges his Bounty toward them; he opens his hand, and
satisfies the desire of every living thing. God does not immediately bring
Meat to the Creatures, when they are hungry; but it is near to them, commonly
in the Elements wherein they are bred, or within their reach, and he has
planted Inclinations in them to hunt after it, and to lead and direct them to
it; and to encourage self-preservation, and to oblige and instigate them to it,
and that they might not be melancholy and weary of Life, he has so ordered the
nature of living Creatures, that Hunger and Thirst are most implacable desires,
exceeding painful, and even intolerable; and likewise that the satisfaction of
these Appetites, should be a mighty pleasure to them. And for those Creatures
that are young, and not able to provide for themselves, God has planted in all
Creatures a (...), a natural Affection toward their young ones, which will
effectually put them upon seeking Provisions for them, and cherishing them,
with that care and tenderness which their weak and helpless condition does
require; and reason is not more powerful and effectual in mankind to this
purpose, than this natural instinct is in brute Creatures; which shows what
care God has taken, and what provision he has made in the natural Frame of
all his Creatures, for the satisfaction of the inclinations and appetites which
he has planted in them; the satisfaction whereof is their pleasure and
happiness. And thus I have done with the First head I proposed, the universal
extent of God's goodness to his Creatures, let us now proceed, in the

II. place, To consider more particularly the goodness of God to men; which we
are more especially concerned to take notice of, and to be affected with it.
And we need go no further than our own observation and experience, to prove the
goodness of God; every day of our lives, we see and taste that the Lord is
good, all that we are, and all the good that we enjoy, and all that we expect
and hope for, is from the divine goodness, every good and perfect gift descends
from above, from the Father of lights, Jam. 1.17. And the best and most perfect
of his gifts he bestows on the Sons of men. What is said of the wisdom of God,
Prove. 8. may be applied to his goodness; the goodness of God shines forth in
all the works of Creation, in the Heavens and Clouds above, and in the
Fountains of the great deep, in the Earth and the Fields, but its delight is
with the Sons of men. Such is the goodness of God to man, that it is
represented to us in Scripture, under the Notion of love. God is good to all
his Creatures, but he is only said to love the sons of men. More particularly
the goodness of God to man appears,

1. That he has given us such noble and excellent Beings, and placed us in so
high a rank and order of his Creatures. We owe to him that we are, and what we
are; we do not only partake of that effect of his goodness, which is common to
us with all other Creatures, that we have received our being from him; but we
are peculiarly obliged to him, for his more especial goodness, that he has
made us reasonable Creatures, of that Kind which we should have chosen to have
been of, if we could suppose, that before we were, it had been referred to us,
and put to our choice, what part we would be of this visible World. But we did
not contrive and choose this Condition for our selves, we are no ways accessory
to the dignity and excellency of our Beings; but God chose this condition for
us, and made us what we are; So that we may say, with David, Psalm. 100.3, 4, 5.
It Is he that has made us, and not we our selves. O enter then into his gates
with thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise; be thankful unto him, and
speak good of his name, for the Lord is good. The goodness of God is the Spring
and Fountain of our Beings, but for that we had been nothing; and but for his
farther goodness, we might have been any thing, of the lowest and meanest rank
of his Creatures. But the goodness of God has been pleased to advance us to be
the Top and Perfection of the visible Creation, he has been pleased to endow
us with Mind and Understanding, and made us capable of happiness, in the
knowledge, and love, and enjoyment of himself. He has curiously and
wonderfully wrought the Frame of our Bodies, so as to make them fit Habitations
for reasonable Souls, and immortal Spirits; he has made our very Bodies
Vessels of Honor, when of the very same Clay he has made innumerable other
Creatures, of a much lower rank and condition; so that though man in respect of
his Body be akin to the Earth, yet in regard of his Soul, he is allied to
Heaven, of a divine Original, and descended from above. Of all the Creatures in
this visible World, man is the chief; and what is said of Behemoth, or the
Elephant, Job 42. in respect of his great strength, and the vast bigness of his
Body, is only true absolutely of man, that he is, divini opificii caput, the
chief of the ways of God, and upon earth there is none like him.

The Psalmist takes particular notice of the goodness of God to man, in this
respect of the excellency and dignity of his being. Psalm. 8.5. Thou have made
him little lower than the Angels, and have crowned him with glory and honor.
And this advantage of our nature above other Creatures, we ought thankfully to
acknowledge; though most men are so stupid, as to overlook it, as Elihu
complains, Job 35.10, 11. None says, where is God my maker? Who teaches us
more than the beasts of the earth, and makes us wiser than the fowls of heaven.

2. The goodness of God to man appears, in that he has made and ordained so
many things chiefly for our use. The beauty and usefulness of the Creatures
below us, their plain subserviency to our necessity, and benefit, and delight,
are so many clear Evidences of the Divine Goodness to us, not only discernable
to our Reason, but even palpable to our Senses, so that we may see and taste
that the Lord is gracious.

This David particularly insists upon as a special ground of praise and
thanksgiving to God, that he has subjected so great a part of the Creation to
our dominion and use; Psalm. 8.6, 7, 8. speaking of man, Thou have made him to
have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou have put all things under his
feet; all sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field; the fowl of the
air, and the fish of the sea, and whatsoever passes through the paths of the
seas. What an ininnumerable variety of Creatures are there in this inferior
World, which were either solely or principally made for the use and service,
pleasure and delight of man! How many things are there, which serve for the
necessity and support, for the contentment and comfort of our lives! How many
things for the refreshment and delight of our Senses, and the exercise and
employment of our Understandings! That God has not made man for the service of
other Creatures, but other Creatures for the service of man, Epictetus does
very ingeniously argue from this observation; that the Creatures below man, the
brute beasts, have all things in a readiness, nature having provided for them
meat, and drink, and lodging, so that they have no absolute need that any
should build Houses, or make Clothes, or store up Provisions, or prepare and
dress meat for them; for, says he, being made for the service of another, they
ought to be furnished with these things, that they may be always in a readiness,
to serve their Lord and master; a plain evidence that they were made to serve
man, and not man to serve them.

And to raise our thoughts of God's goodness to us the Sons of men yet higher,
as he has given us the Creatures below us for our use and convenience, so has
he appointed the Creatures above us for our Guard and Protection, not to say
for our service. Psalm. 34.7. The Angel of the Lord encampeth round about them
that fear him, and he delivers them; and then it follows, O taste and see
that the Lord is good. And, Psalm. 91.11, 12. He shall give his Angels charge
over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear thee up in their
hands. Nay the Apostle speaks, as if their whole business and employment were
to attend upon and be serviceable to good men, Heb. 1.14. Are they not all
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who shall be heirs of
Salvation?

3. The goodness of God to men appears, in his tender Love and peculiar Care of
us, above the rest of the Creatures, being ready to impart and dispense to us
the good that is suitable to our capacity and condition; and concerned to
exempt us from those manifold Evils of Want and Pain, to which we are
obnoxious. I do not mean an absolute exemption from all sorts and all degrees
of Evil, and a perpetual tenor of temporal happiness, and enjoyment of all good
things; this is not suitable to our present state, and the rank and order which
we are in among the Creatures; nor would it be best for us, all things
considered. But the Goodness of God to us above other Creatures, is
proportionable to the dignity and excellency of our Natures above them; for as
the Apostle reasons in another case, does God take care for Oxen, and shall he
not much more extend his care to Man? To this purpose our Savior reasons, Mat.
6. Behold the Fowls of the Air, they sow not, neither do they reap, and yet
your heavenly Father takes care of them; are not ye much better than they? And,
v. 30. Wherefore if God so cloth the grass of the field, shall he not much
more cloth you? And, Chap. 10.29. Are not two Sparrows sold for a Farthing?
and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father. But the very
hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear ye not therefore, ye are of more value
than many Sparrows. It Is true, God has a special care of his People and
Servants, above the rest of Mankind; but our Savior uses these Arguments to
his Disciples, to convince them of the Providence of God toward them, as Men,
and of a more excellent Nature than other Creatures.

And indeed we are born into the World more destitute and helpless, than other
Creatures; as if it were on purpose to show, that God had reserved us for his
more peculiar Care and Providence; which is so great, that the Scripture, by
way of condescension, expresses it to us by the name of Love; so that what
effects of Care the greatest and tenderest Affection in Men is apt to produce
toward one another, that, and much more, is the effect of God's Goodness to
us; and this Affection of God is common to all Men (though of all Creatures we
have least deserved it) and is ready to diffuse and shed abroad it self,
wherever Men are qualified for it by Duty and Obedience, and do not obstruct
and stop the emanations of it, by their Sins and Provocations.

And though the greatest part of Mankind be evil, yet this does not wholly put a
stop to his goodness, though it cause many abatements of it, and hinder many good
things from us; but such is the Goodness of God, notwithstanding the evil and
undutifulness of Men, that he is pleased still to concern himself in the
Government of the World, and to preserve the Societies of Men from running into
utter confusion and disorder; notwithstanding the violence and irregularities
of Men's Wills and Passions, the Communities of Men subsist upon tolerable
terms; and notwithstanding the rage and craft of evil Men, poor and unarmed
Innocence and Virtue is usually protected, and sometimes rewarded in this
World; and domineering and outrageous Wickedness is very often remarkably
checked and chastised. All which Instances of God's Providence, as they are
greatly for the advantage and comfort of Mankind, so are they an effectual
declaration of that Goodness which governs all things, and of God's kind care
of the affairs and concernments of Men; so that if we look no farther than this
World, we may say with David, Verily there is a reward for the Righteous,
verily there is a God that judges the earth.

I know this Argument has been perverted to a quite contrary purpose; that if
goodness governed the World, and administered the Affairs of it, good and evil
would not be so carelessly and promiscously dispensed; good Men would not be so
great sufferers, nor wicked Men so prosperous as many times they are.

But this also, if rightly considered, is an Effect of God's goodness, and
infinite Patience to Mankind; That he causes his Sun to rise, and his Rain to
fall upon the just and unjust. That upon the Provocations of Men, he does not
give over his care of them, and throw all things into confusion and ruin; this
plainly shows, that he designs this Life for the trial of Men's Virtue and
Obedience, in order to the greater reward of it; and therefore he suffers Men
to walk in their own ways, without any great check and control, and reserves
the main bulk of Rewards and Punishments for another World: So that all this is
so far from being any Objection against the goodness of God, that on the
contrary, it is an Argument of God's immense Goodness, and infinite Patience,
that the World subsists and continues, and that he permits Men to take their
course, for the fuller trial of them, and the clearer and most effectual
declaration of his Justice, in the Rewards and Punishments of another life.

Fourthly, and Lastly, The Goodness of God to Mankind most gloriously appears,
in the provision he has made for our Eternal Happiness. What the happiness of
Man should have been, had he continued in Innocence, is not particularly
revealed to us; but this is certain, that by willful transgression, we have
forfeited all that happiness which our Natures are capable of. In this lapsed
and ruinous condition of Mankind, the Goodness and Mercy of God was pleased to
employ his Wisdom for our Recovery, and to restore us, not only to a new, but a
greater capacity of Glory and Happiness. And in order to this, the Son of God
assumes our Nature, for the recovery and redemption of Man; and the pardon of
Sin is purchased for us by his Blood; Eternal Life, and the Way to it, are
clearly discovered to us. God is pleased to enter into a New and better
Covenant with us, and to afford us inward grace and assistance, to enable us to
perform the Conditions of it; and graciously to accept of our Faith and
Repentance, of our sincere Resolutions and Endeavors of Holiness and
Obedience, for Perfect and Complete Righteousness, for his sake who fullfilled
all righteousness.

This is the great and amazing goodness of God to Mankind, that when we were in
open Rebellion against him, he should entertain thoughts of Peace and
Reconciliation; and when he past by the fallen Angels, he should set his
Affection and Love upon the sinful and miserable Sons of Men. And herein is the
love of God to men perfected, that as he has made all Creatures, both above
us, and below us, subservient and instrumental to our subsistence and
preservation, so, for the ransom of our Souls from eternal Ruin and Misery, he
has not spared his own Son, but has given him up to death for us; him, whom
he has commanded all the Angels of God to worship, and to whom he has made
subject all Creatures in Heaven and Earth; Him, who made the World, and who
upholds all things by the word of his power, who is the brightness of his
Glory, and the express Image of his Person.

And after such a stupendous Instance as this, what may we not reasonably hope
for, and promise our selves from the Divine Goodness! So the Apostle has
taught us to reason, Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered
him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?

SERMON III. Vol. VII.
The Goodness of God.
PSALM. CXLV.9. The Lord is Good to all, and his tender Mercies are over all his
Works.


IN handling this Argument, I proceeded in this Method.

First, To consider what is the proper Notion of Goodness.

Secondly, To show that this Perfection of Goodness belongs to God.

Thirdly, I considered the Effects of the Divine Goodness under these Heads.

I. The universal Extent of it, in the number, variety, order, end, and design
of the things created by him, and his preservation and providing for the
welfare and happiness of them.

II. I considered more particularly the Goodness of God to Mankind, of which I
gave these four Instances.

1. That he has given us such noble Beings, and placed us in so high a rank
and order of his Creatures.

2. In that he has made and ordained so many things chiefly for us.

3. In that he exercises so peculiar a Providence over us above the rest, that
tho he is said to be good to all, he is only said to love the Sons of Men.

4. In that he has provided for us eternal Life and Happiness. There only now
remains the

Fourth and last particular to be spoken to, which was to answer some
Objections which may seem to contradict and bring in question the Goodness of
God; and they are many, and have (some of them especially) great difficulty in
them, and therefore it will require great consideration and care, to give a
clear and satisfactory answer to them, which undoubtedly they are capable of;
the Goodness of God being one of the most certain and unquestionable Truths in
the World. I shall mention those which are most considerable and obvious, and
do almost of themselves spring up in every Man's Mind, and they are these Four,
the first of them more general, the other three more particular.

First, If God be so exceeding good, whence comes it to pass, that there is so
much Evil in the World, of several kinds; Evil of Imperfection, Evil of
Affliction or Suffering, and (which is the greatest of all others, and indeed
the cause of them) Evil of Sin?

Secondly, The Doctrine of absolute Reprobation; by which is meant, the
decreeing of the greatest part of Mankind to eternal Misery and Torment,
without any consideration or respect to their Sin or Fault; this seems
notoriously to contradict, not only the Notion of infinite Goodness, but any
competent measure and degree of Goodness.

Thirdly, The eternal Misery and Punishment of Men for temporal Faults, seems
hard to be reconciled with that excess of Goodness, which we suppose to be in
God.

Fourthly, The Instances of God's great severity to Mankind upon occasion, in
those great Calamities, which by the Providence of God have in several Ages
either befaln Mankind in general, or particular Nations; and here I shall
confine my self to Scripture Instances, as being the most certain and
remarkable, or at least equal to any that are to be met with in History; as the
early and universal degeneracy of Mankind, by the sin and transgression of our
first Parents; the destruction of the World by a general Deluge; the sudden and
terrible destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them, by Fire
and Brimstone from Heaven; the cruel extirpation of the Canaanites, by the
express command of God; and lastly, the great Calamities which befell the Jewish
Nation, and the final ruin and perdition of them at the destruction of
Jerusalem.

These are the Objections against the goodness of God, which I shall severally
consider, and with all the brevity and clearness I can, endeavor to return a
particular Answer to them.

The First Objection, which I told you is more general, is this, If God be so
exceeding Good, whence then comes it to pass, that there is so much Evil in the
World of several kinds? It Is evident beyond denial, that Evil abounds in the
World. The whole World lies in Evil, says St. John, (...), lies in wickedness,
(so our Translation renders it) is involved in Sin; but by the article and
opposition St. John seems to intend the Devil. We know, says he, that we are of
God, and the whole World, (...), is subject to the evil one, and under his
power and dominion. Which way so ever we render it, it signifies, that Evil of
one kind or other reigns in the World. Now can Evil come from a Good God? Out
of the same Mouth proceeds blessing and cursing. Does a Fountain send forth
at the same place sweet water and bitter? This cannot be, as St. James speaks
in another case. But all Evils that are in the World, must either be directly
procured by the Divine Providence, or permitted to happen; and next to the
causing and procuring of Evil, it seems to be contrary to the Goodness of God,
to permit that there should be any such thing, when it is in his power to help
and hinder it.

Answer. To give an account of this, it was an ancient Doctrine of some of the
most ancient Nations, that there were two first Causes or Principles of all
things, the one of good things, the other of bad; which among the Persians were
called Oromasdes and Arimanius; among the Egyptians Osiris and Typhon; among
the Chaldeans good or bad Planets; among the Greeks, (...) and (...); and
Plutarch expressly says, That the good Principle was called God, and the bad,
Demon, or the Devil; in conformity to which ancient Traditions, the Manichees
(a sad Sect of Christians) set up two Principles, the one infinitely good,
which they supposed to be the original cause of all good that is in the World;
the other infinitely evil, to which they ascribed all the evils that are in the
World.

But besides that the Notion of an infinite Evil is a contradiction, it would
be to no purpose to suppose two opposite Principles of equal power and force.
That the very Notion of an infinite Evil is a contradiction, will be very
clear, if we consider, that what is infinitely evil, must be infinitely
imperfect, and consequently infinitely weak; and for that reason, tho never so
mischievous and malicious, yet being infinitely weak, and ignorant, and
foolish, would neither be in a capacity to contrive Mischief, nor to execute
it. But admit, that a Being infinitely mischievous, were infinitely cunning,
and infinitely powerful, yet it could do no evil; because the opposite
Principle of infinite Goodness, being also infinitely wise and powerful, they
would tie up one another Hands; so that upon this supposition, the Notion of a
Deity, would signify just nothing, and by virtue of the eternal opposition and
equality of these two Principles, they would keep one another at a perpetual
Bay, and being an equal match for one another, instead of being two Deities,
they would be two Idols, able to do neither good nor evil.

But to return a more distinct and satisfactory Answer to this Objection; there
are three sorts of Evil in the World; the Evil of Imperfection; the Evil of
Affliction and Suffering; and the Evil of Sin.

And 1 st, For the Evil of Imperfection, I mean natural Imperfections, these
are not simply and absolutely, but only comparatively evil; now comparative
Evil is but a less degree of goodness; and it is not at all inconsistent with
the goodness of God, that some Creatures should be less good than others, that
is, imperfect in comparison of them; nay, it is very agreeable both to the
Goodness and Wisdom of God, that there should be this variety in the Creatures,
and that they should be of several degrees of Perfection, being made for
several Uses and Purposes, and to be subservient to one another, provided they
all contribute to the Harmony and Beauty of the whole.

Some Imperfection is necessarily involved in the very nature and condition of
a Creature, as that it derives its Being from another, and necessarily depends
upon it, and is beholding to it, and is likewise of necessity finite and
limited in its Nature and Perfections; and as for those Creatures which are
less perfect than others, this also, that there should be degrees of
Perfection, is necessary, upon supposition, that the Wisdom of God thinks fit
to display it self in variety of Creatures of several kinds and ranks. For tho
comparing the Creatures with one another, the Angelical Nature is best, and
most perfect; yet it is absolutely best, that there should be other Creatures
besides Angels. There are many parts of the Creation, which are rashly and
inconsiderately by us concluded to be evil and imperfect, as some noxious and
hurtful Creatures; which yet in other respects, and to some purposes, may be
very useful, and against the harm and mischief whereof, we are sufficiently
armed, by such means of defense, and such antidotes as reason and experience
are able to find and furnish us withal; and those parts of the World, which we
think of little or no use, as Rocks and Deserts, and that vast Wilderness of
the Sea, if we consider things well, are of great use to several very
considerable purposes; or if we can discern no other use of them, they serve at
least to help our dullness, and to make us more attentively to consider, and to
admire the perfection and usefulness of the rest; at the worst, they may serve
for Foils to set off the wise order and contrivance of other things, and (as
one expresses it very well) they may be like a Blackmoor's Head in a Picture,
which gives the greater Beauty to the whole Piece.

2 dly, For the Evils of Affliction and Suffering; and these either befall brute
Creatures, or Men endowed with Reason and Consideration.

1 st, For those which befall the brute Creatures; those sufferings which Nature
inflicts upon them, are very few; the greatest they meet withal are from Men,
or upon their account, for whose sake they were chiefly made, and to whose
reasonable use and gentle dominion they are consigned.

It is necessary from the very nature of these Creatures, that they should be
passive and liable to pain: and yet it does in no wise contradict either the
Wisdom or Goodness of God to make such Creatures, because all these pains are
for the most part fully recompensed, by the pleasure these Creatures find in
Life; and that they have such a pleasure and happiness in Life, is evident, in
that all Creatures, notwithstanding the miseries they endure, are still fond of
Life, and unwilling to part with it: no Creature but Man (who only has
perverted his Nature) ever seeks the destruction of it self; and since all
brute Creatures are so loath to go out of Being, we may probably conclude, that
if they could deliberate, whether they would be or not, they would choose to
come into Being, even upon these hard conditions.

But however that be, this we are sure of, that they suffer chiefly from us,
and upon our account; we who are their natural Lords, having depraved our
selves first, are become cruel and tyrannical to them; nay, the Scripture tells
us, that they suffer for our sakes, and that the whole Creation groaneth, and
is in bondage for the sin of Man: And this is not unreasonable, that being made
principally for Man, they should suffer upon his account, as a part of his
Goods and Estate; not as a punishment to them (which under the notion of
punishment, they are not capable of) but as a punishment to him, who is the
Lord and Owner of them, they being by this means become more weak and frail,
and less useful and serviceable to him for whom they were made; so that the
sufferings of the Creatures below us, are in a great measure to be charged
up-us, under whose dominion God has put them.

2 dly, As for the Afflictions and Sufferings which befall Men, these are not
natural and of God's making, but the result and fruit of our own doings, the
effects and consequences of the ill use of our own liberty and free choice; and
God does not willingly send them upon us, but we wilfully pull them down upon
our selves; For he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men,
as the Prophet tells us, Lam. 3.33. Or as it is in the Wisdom of Solomon, Chap.
1.12, 13. God made not death, neither has he pleasure in the destruction of
the living; but men pull destruction upon themselves, with the works of their
own hands. All the Evils that are in the World, are either the Effects of our
own Sin, as Poverty, and Disgrace, Pains, Diseases, and Death, which are
sometimes more immediately inflicted upon Men, by a visible Providence and hand
of God, but are usually brought upon us by our selves, in the natural course
and order of things; or they are the Effects of other Men's sins, brought upon
us by the ambition and covetousness, by the malice and cruelty of others; and
these Evils, tho they are procured and caused by others, yet they are deserved
by our selves; and tho they are immediately from the Hand of Men, yet we ought
to look farther, and consider them, as directed and disposed by the Providence
of God; as David did when Shimei cursed him; God (says he) has bid him curse
David, tho it immediately proceeded from Shimei's insolence and ill nature.

Now upon the supposition of Sin, the Evils of Affliction and Suffering are
good, because they are of great use to us, and serve to very good ends and
purposes.

I. As they are the proper Punishments of Sin. Evil is good to them that do
Evil, that is, it is fit and proper, just and due. Psalm. 107.17. Fools, because
of their transgression, and because of their iniquities, are afflicted. And it
is fit they should be so, crooked to crooked is straight and right. A rod for
the back of Fools, says Solomon; and elsewhere, God has made every thing for
that which is fit for it, and the evil day for the wicked man.

2 dly, As they are the preventions and remedies of greater Evils. Evils of
Affliction and Suffering are good for wicked Men, to bring them to a sense of
their sin, and to reclaim them from it, and thereby to prevent greater temporal
Evils, and preserve them from eternal Misery; and not only good to the Person
that suffers, but likewise to others, to deter and affright them from the like
sins; to prevent the contagion of Sin, and to stop the progress of Iniquity,
upon which greater guilt and worse mischiefs might ensue; and they are good to
good Men, to awaken and rouse them out of their security, to make them know God
and themselves better; they are almost a necessary Discipline for the best of
Men, much more for evil and depraved dispositions; and we might as reasonably
expect, that there should be no Rod in a School, as that there should be no
suffering and afflictions in the World.

3 dly, As they are the occasions and matter of many Virtues. God teaches Men
temperance by want, and patience by reproach and sufferings, charity by
persecution, and pity and compassion to others by grievous pains upon our
selves. The benefit of Afflictions to them that make a wise use of them is
unspeakable; they are grievous in themselves, nevertheless (says the Apostle
to the Hebrews) they bring forth the peaceable fruits of righteousness, to them
that are exercised therewith. David gives a great testimony of the mighty
benefit and advantage of them, from his own experience, Psalm. 119.76. Before I
was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy word. And, v. 71. It is
good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes.

4 thly, The Evils of Suffering, patiently submitted to, and decently born, do
greatly contribute to the increase of our happiness. All the persecutions and
sufferings of good Men in this life, do work for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory. And if they contribute to our greater good and
happiness at last, they are good. The glorious reward of the Sufferings which
we have met with, in this life, will in the next clear up the goodness and
justice of the Divine Providence, from all those Mists and Clouds which are now
upon it, and fully acquit it from all those Objections which are now raised
against it, upon account of the afflictions and sufferings of good Men in this
life, which are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed in them.

III. As for the Evil of Sin, which is the great difficulty of all. How is it
consistent with the goodness of God, to permit so great an Evil as this to come
into the World? For answer to this, I desire these two things may be considered.

1. That it does not at all contradict the wisdom or goodness of God, to make a
Creature of such a frame, as to be capable of having its obedience tried in
order to the reward of it, which could not be, unless such a Creature were made
mutable, and by the good or bad use of its liberty, capable of obeying or
disobeying the Laws of his Creator; for where there is no possibility of
sinning, there can be no trial of our Virtue and Obedience, and nothing but
Virtue and Obedience are capable of reward. The goodness of God toward us is
sufficiently vindicated, in that he made us capable of happiness, and gave us
sufficient direction and power for the attaining of that end; and it does in no
wise contradict his goodness, that he does not by his Omnipotency interpose to
prevent our sin; for this had been to alter the nature of things, and not to
let Man be the Creature he made him, capable of reward or punishment, according
to the good or bad use of his own free choice. It is sufficient that God made
Man good at first, tho mutable, and that he had a power to have continued so,
tho he wilfully determined himself to evil; this acquits the goodness of God,
that he made Man upright, but he found out to himself many inventions.

2. If there had not been such an order and rank of Creatures, as had been in
their nature mutable, there had been no place for the manifestation of God's
goodness in a way of mercy and patience; so that tho God be not the Author of
the sins of Men, yet in case of their willful transgression and disobedience,
the goodness of God has a fair opportunity of discovering it self, in his
patience and long-suffering to Sinners, and in his merciful care and provision
for their recovery out of that miserable state. And this may suffice for answer
to the first Objection, if God be so good, whence then comes evil?

The Second Objection against the Goodness of God, is from the Doctrine of
absolute reprobation; by which I mean the decreeing the greatest part of
Mankind to eternal misery and torment, without any consideration or respect to
their sin and fault. This seems not only notoriously to contradict the Notion
of infinite Goodness, but to be utterly inconsistent with the least measure and
degree of Goodness. Indeed, if by reprobation were only meant, that God in his
own infinite Knowledge foresees the sins and wickedness of Men, and has from
all eternity determined in himself, what in his Word he has so plainly
declared, that he will punish impenitent Sinners with everlasting destruction;
or if by reprobation be meant, that God has not elected all Mankind, that is,
absolutely decreed to bring them infallibly to Salvation; neither of these
Notions of reprobation, is any ways inconsistent with the goodness of God; for
he may foresee the wickedness of Men, and determine to punish it, without any
impeachment of his goodness: He may be very good to all, and yet not equally
and in the same degree; if God please to bring any infallibly to Salvation,
this is transcendent goodness; but if he put all others into a capacity of it,
and use all necessary and fitting means to make them happy, and after all this,
any fall short of happiness, through their own wilful fault and obstinacy,
these Men are evil and cruel to themselves, but God has been very good and
merciful to them.

But if by reprobation be meant, either that God has decreed, without respect
to the sins of Men, their absolute ruin and misery; or that he has decreed
that they shall inevitably sin and perish; it cannot be denied, but that such a
reprobation as this does clearly overthrow all possible Notion of goodness. I
have told you, that the true and only Notion of goodness in God, is this, that
it is a propension and disposition of the Divine Nature, to communicate Being
and Happiness to his Creatures: But surely nothing can be more plainly contrary
to a disposition to make them happy, than an absolute decree, and a peremptory
resolution to make them miserable. God is infinitely better than the best of
Men, and yet none can possibly think that Man a good Man, who should absolutely
resolve to disinherit and destroy his Children, without the foresight and
consideration of any fault to be committed by them. We may talk of the Goodness
of God: But it is not an easy matter, to devise to say any thing worse than
this of the Devil.

But it is said, reprobation is an act of sovereignty in God, and therefore not
to be measured by the common rules of goodness. But it is contrary to goodness,
and plainly inconsistent with it; and we must not attribute such a sovereignty
to God, as contradicts his goodness; for if the sovereignty of God may break in
at pleasure upon his other Attributes, then it signifies nothing to say that
God is good, and wise, and just, if his sovereignty may at any time act
contrary to these Perfections.

Now if the Doctrine of absolute reprobation, and the goodness of God cannot
possibly stand together, the Question is, Which of them ought to give way to
the other? What St. Paul determines in another case, concerning the truth and
fidelity of God, will equally hold concerning his goodness; Let God be good,
and every Man a liar. The Doctrine of absolute reprobation is no part of the
Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures, that ever I could find; and there is the Rule
of our Faith. If some great Divines have held this Doctrine, not in opposition
to the goodness of God, but hoping they might be reconciled together, let them
do it if they can; but if they cannot, rather let the Schools of the greatest
Divines be called in question, than the goodness of God, which next to his
Being, is the greatest and clearest truth in the world.

Thirdly, It is farther objected, that the eternal punishment of Men for
temporal Faults seems hard to be reconciled with that excess of Goodness, which
we suppose to be in God.

This Objection I have fully answered, in a Discourse upon S. Matthew. 25.46. and
therefore shall proceed to the

Fourth and last Objection, against the goodness of God, from sundry Instances
of God's severity to Mankind, in those great Calamities which by the Providence
of God have in several Ages either befaln Mankind in general, or particular
Nations.

And here I shall confine my self to Scripture Instances, as being most known,
and most certain and remarkable, or at least equally remarkable with any that
are to be met with in any other History; such are the early and universal
degeneracy of all Mankind, by the sin and transgression of our first Parents;
the destruction of the World by a general deluge; the sudden and terrible
destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them, by Fire and
Brimstone from Heaven; the cruel extirpation of the Canaanites by the express
command of God; and lastly, the great Calamities which befell the Jewish Nation,
especially the final ruin and dispersion of them at the destruction of
Jerusalem. These and the like instances of God's severity, seem to call in
question his goodness.

Against these severe and dreadful Instances of God's severity, it might be a
sufficient vindication of his goodness, to say in general, that they were all
upon great and high Provocations; most of them after long patience and
forbearance, and with a great mixture of mercy, and a declared readiness in in
God to have prevented or removed them upon repentance; all which are great
Instances of the goodness of God. But yet for the clearer manifestation of the
Divine Goodness, I shall consider them particularly, and as briefly as I can.

1. As for the transgression of our first Parents, and the dismal consequences
of it to all their Posterity. This is a great depth, and tho the Scripture
mentions it, yet it speaks but little of it; and in matters of mere Revelation,
we must not attempt to be wise above what is written. Thus much is plain, that
it was an act of high and wilful Disobedience, to a very plain and easy
Command; and that in the punishment of it, God mitigated the extremity of the
Sentence (which was present death) by granting our first Parents the Reprieve
of almost a thousand Years; and, as to the consequences of it to their
Posterity, God did not, upon this provocation, abandon his care of Mankind; and
tho he removed them out of that happy state and place in which Man was created,
yet he gave them a tolerable condition and accommodations upon Earth; and which
is certainly the most glorious Instance of Divine Goodness that ever was, he
was pleased to make the fall and misery of Man the happy occasion of sending
his Son in our Nature, for the recovery and advancement of it to a much happier
and better condition, than that from which we fell. So the Apostle tells us at
large, Romans 5. That the Grace of God, by Jesus Christ, has redounded much more
to our benefit and advantage, than the sin and disobedience of our first
Parents did to our prejudice.

2. For the general Deluge, tho it look very severe, yet if we consider it
well, we may plainly discern much of goodness in it. It was upon great
provocation, by the universal corruption and depravation of Mankind, The earth
was filled with violence, and all flesh had corrupted its ways; the wickedness
of Man was great upon the earth, and every imagination of the thoughts of his
heart was only evil continually; which is not a description of original sin,
but of the actual and improved wickedness of Mankind; and yet when the
wickedness of Men was come to this height, God gave them fair warning, before
he brought this Calamity upon them, when the patience of God waited in the days
of Noah, for the space of an hundred and twenty Years; at last, when nothing
would reclaim them, and almost the whole race of Mankind were become so very
bad, that it is said, it repented the Lord that he had made Man upon the earth,
and it grieved him at his heart, when things were thus extremely bad, and like
to continue so; God in pity to Mankind, and to put a stop to their growing
wickedness and guilt, swept them away all at once, from the face of the Earth,
except one Family, which he had preserved from this Contagion, to be a new
Seminary of Mankind, and, as the Heathen Poet expresses it, Mundi melioris
origo, the source and original of a better Race.

3. For that terrible destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah by Fire and Brimstone
from Heaven, it was not brought upon them till the cry of their sin was great,
and gone up to Heaven, till by their unnatural Lusts they had provoked
supernatural Vengeance. And it is very remarkable, to what low terms God was
pleased to condescend to Abraham for the sparing of them; if in those five
Cities there had been found but ten righteous persons, he would not have
destroyed them for those ten's sake. So that we may say with the Apostle,
Behold the goodness and severity of God! Here was wonderful goodness mixed with
this great severity.

4. For the extirpation of the Canaanites, by the express command of God, which
has such an appearance of severity, it is to be considered, that this
Vengeance was not executed upon them, till they were grown ripe for it. God
spared them for above four hundred Years, for so long their growing Impiety is
taken notice of, Genesis 18.28. where it is said, That the iniquity of the
Amorites was not yet full; God did not proceed to cut them off, till their case
was desperate, past all hopes of recovery, till the land was defiled with
abominations, and surcharged with wickedness, to that degree, as to spue out
its Inhabitants, as is expressly said, Levit. 18.28. When they were arrived to
this pitch, it was no mercy to them to spare them any longer, to heap up more
guilt and misery to themselves.

Fifthly, and Lastly, As for the great Calamities which God brought upon the
Jews, especially in their final ruin and dispersion, at the destruction of
Jerusalem; not to insist upon the known History of their multiplied Rebellions
and Provocations, of their despiteful usage of God's Prophets, whom he sent to
warn them of his Judgments, and to call them to Repentance, of their obstinate
refusal to receive Correction, and to be brought to amendment, by any means
that God could use; for all which Provocations, he at last delivered them into
their Enemies hands, to carry them away Captive; not to insist upon this, I
shall only consider their final destruction by the Romans, which though it be
dreadfully severe, beyond any Example of History, yet the Provocation was
proportionable; for this Vengeance did not come upon them, till they had as it
were extorted it, by the most obstinate impenitency and unbelief, in rejecting
the Counsel of God against themselves, and resisting such means as would have
brought Tire and Sidon, Sodom and Gomorrah to repentance; till they had
despised the Doctrine of Life and Salvation, delivered to them by the Son of
God, and confirmed from Heaven, by the clearest and greatest Miracles; and by
wicked hands had crucified and slain the Son of God, and the Savior of the
World. Nay, even after this greatest of sins that ever was committed, God
waited for their Repentance forty Years, to see if in that time they would be
brought to a sense of their sins, and to know the things which belonged to
their peace. And no wonder if after such provocations, and so much patience,
and so obstinate an impenitency, the goodness of God at last gave way to his
justice, and wrath came upon them to the utmost.

So that all these Instances rightly considered, are rather commendations of
the Divine Goodness, than just and reasonable objections against it; and
notwithstanding the severity of them, it is evident that God is good, from the
primary inclinations of his nature; and severe only upon necessity, and in case
of just provocation. And to be otherwise, not to punish insolent Impiety and
incorrigible Wickedness, in a severe and remarkable manner, would not be
goodness, but a fond indulgence; not patience, but stupidity; not mercy to
Mankind, but cruelty; because it would be an encouragement to them to do more
mischief, and to bring greater misery upon themselves.

So that if we suppose God to be holy and just, as well as good, there is
nothing in any of these Instances, but what is very consistent with all that
goodness which we can suppose to be in a holy, and wise, and just Governor,
who is a declared Enemy to Sin, and is resolved to give all fitting
discountenance to the breach and violation of his Laws. It is necessary in
kindness and compassion to the rest of Mankind, that some should be made
remarkable Instances of God's severity, that the punishment of a few may be a
warning to all, that they may hear and fear, and by avoiding the like sins, may
prevent the like severity upon themselves.

And now I have, as briefly as I could, explained and vindicated the goodness
of God; the consideration whereof is fruitful of many excellent and useful
Inferences, in relation both to our Comfort and our Duty, But these I shall
refer to another opportunity.

SERMON IV. Vol. VII.
The Goodness of God.
PSALM. CXLV.9. The Lord is Good to all, and his tender Mercies are over all his
Works.


I Have made several Discourses upon this Argument of the goodness of God;
showing what it is; on what accounts we ascribe it to God; what are the Effects
and large extent of it to the whole Creation, and more particularly to Mankind;
and, in the last place, considered the several Objections which seem to lie
against it. I proceed now to the Application of this excellent Argument, the
considederation whereof is so fruitful of useful Inferences, in relation both
to our Comfort and Duty. And,

I. This shows us the prodigious folly and unreasonableness of Atheism. Most of
the Atheism that is in the World, does not so much consist in a firm persuasion
that there is no God, as in vain wishes and desires that there were none. Bad
Men think it would be a happiness to them, and that they should be in a much
better condition, if there were no God, than if there be one. Nemo deum non
esse credit, nisi cui deum non esse expedit, no Man is apt to disbelieve a God,
but he whose Interest it is that there should be none. And if we could see into
the Hearts of wicked Men, we should find this lying at the bottom, that if
there be a God, he is just and will punish sin, that he is infinite in power
and not to be resisted, and therefore kills them with his terror so often as
they think of him; hence they apprehend it their interest, that there should be
no God, and wish there were none, and thence are apt to cherish in their Minds
a vain hope that there is none, and at last endeavor to impose upon themselves
by vain reasonings, and to suppress the belief of a God, and to stifle their
natural apprehensions and fears of him. So that it is not primus in orb deos
fecit timor, fear that first made Gods; but the fear which bad Men have of the
Divine Power and Justice, that first tempted them to the disbelief of him.

But were not these Men as foolish as they are wicked, they would wish with all
their Hearts there were a God, and be glad to believe so. And the Psalmist
gives them their true Character, who can entertain any such thoughts or wishes;
Psalm. 14.1. The Fool has said in his heart, there is no God; for they are
Fools who do not understand nor consult their true Interest: And if this be
true which I have said concerning the goodness of God, if this be his Nature,
to desire and procure the happiness of his Creatures, whoever understands the
true Nature of God and his own true Interest, cannot but wish there were a God,
and be glad of any Argument to prove it, and rejoice to find it true, as
Children are glad of a kind and tender Father, and as Subjects rejoice in a
wise and good Prince.

The goodness of God gives us so lovely a Character of him, makes him so good a
Father, so gracious a Governor of Men, that if there were no such Being in the
World, it were infinitely desirable to Mankind that there should be; he is such
an one, qualem omnes cuperent, si deesset, as if he were wanting, all Men ought
to wish for. The Being of God is so comfortable, so convenient, so necessary to
the felicity of Mankind, that (as Tully admirably says) Dij immortales ad usum
hominum fabricati pene videantur, if God were not a necessary Being of himself,
he might almost seem to be made on purpose for the use and benefit of Men; so
that Atheism is not only an Instance of the most horrible Impiety, but of the
greatest Stupidity; and for Men to glory in their disbelief of a God, is like
the rejoicing and triumph of a furious and besotted multitude, in the Murder of
a wise and good Prince, the greatest calamity and confusion that could possibly
have befaln them.

If the Evidence of God's being were not so clear as it is, yet the
consideration of his goodness ought to check all inclination to Atheism and
Infidelity; for if he be as good as he is represented to us, both by natural
Light and divine Revelation, (and he is so, as sure as he is) if he tender our
Welfare, and desire our Happiness, as much as we our selves can do, and use all
wise ways and proper means to bring it about, then it is plainly every man's
Interest, even thine, O sinner! to whom after all thy Provocations he is
willing to be reconciled, that there should be such a Being as God is, and when
ever thou come to thy self, thou will be sensible of thy want of him, and thy
soul will thirst for God, even the living God, and pant after him, as the heart
pants after the water brooks; in the day of thy Affliction and Calamity, when
distress and anguish comes upon thee, thou will fly to God for Refuge, and
shelter thy self under his Protection, and would not for all the World, but
there were such a Being in it, to help and deliver thee. Deos nemo sanus timet
(says Seneca) furor est metuere salutaria, no man in his wits is afraid there
is a God; it is a madness to fear that, which is so much for our benefit and
advantage. Humane Nature is conscious to it self of its own weakness and
insufficiency, and of its necessary dependence upon something without it self
for its Happiness, and therefore in great Extremity and Distress, the Atheist
himself has naturally recourse to him, and he who denied and rejected him in
his Prosperity, clings to him in adversity, as his only support and present
help in time of trouble. And this is a sure Indication, that these men, after
all their endeavors to impose upon themselves, have not been able wholly to
extinguish in their Minds the belief of God and his Goodness; nay it is a sign,
that at the bottom of their Hearts they have a firm persuasion of his goodness,
when after all their insolent defiance of him, they have the Confidence to
apply themselves to him for mercy, and help in time of need; and therefore our
Hearts ought to rise with indignation against those who go about to persuade
the belief of a thing so prejudicial to our Interest, to take away the Light of
our eyes, and the Breath of our nostrils, and to rob us of all the Comfort and
Support, which the belief of an infinite Power, conducted by infinite Wisdom
and Goodness, is apt to afford to Mankind.

II. We should take great care of perverting and abusing this great goodness by
vain Confidence and Presumption. This is a Provocation of an high Nature, which
the Scripture calls, turning the grace of God into wantonness, making that an
encouragement to Sin, which is one of the strongest Arguments in the world
against it. God is infinitely good and merciful; but we must not therefore
think, that he is fond and indulgent to our faults; but on the contrary,
because he is good, he cannot but hate evil. So the Scripture every where tells
us, that He is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity; that the face of the Lord
is against them that do evil; he is not a God that has pleasure in wickedness,
neither shall evil dwell with him; the foolish shall not stand in his fight, he
hates all the workers of iniquity. He is ready to show Mercy to those, who are
qualified for it by Repentance, and resolution of a better Course; but as long
as we continue impenitent, God is implacable, and will deal with us according
to the tenor of his Laws, and the desert of our Doings. Despair is a great Sin,
but Presumption is a greater; Despair doubts of the goodness of God, but
Presumption abuses it; Despair disbelieves, but Presumption perverts the best
thing in the world to a quite contrary purpose from what it was intended.

III. The consideration of God's goodness is a mighty comfort and relief to our
Minds, under all our Fears and Troubles. Great are the Fears and Jealousies of
many devout Minds concerning God's Love to them, and their everlasting
Condition; which are commonly founded in one of these two causes, a melancholy
Temper, or mistaken Notions and Apprehensions of God; and very often these two
meet together, and hinder the cure and removal of one another.

Melancholy as it is an effect of bodily temper, is a Disease not to be cured
by Reason and Argument, but by Physic and Time; but the mistakes which men
have entertained concerning God, if they be not set on and heightened by
Melancholy (as many times they are) may be rectified by a true representation
of the goodness of God, confirmed by Reason and Scripture. Many good Men have
had very hard and injurious Thoughts of God instilled into them, from Doctrines
too commonly taught and received; as if he did not sincerely desire the
happiness of his Creatures, but had from all Eternity decreed to make the
greatest part of Mankind, with a secret purpose and design to make them
miserable; and consequently were not serious and in good earnest in his
Invitations and Exhortations of Sinners to Repentance; and it is no wonder if
such Jealousies as these concerning God, make Men doubtful whether God love
them, and very scrupulous and anxious about their everlasting condition.

I have already told you, that these harsh Doctrines have no manner of
Foundation, either in Reason or Scripture; that God earnestly desires our
Happiness, and affords us sufficient Means to that End; that he bears a more
hearty good will to us, than any Man does to his Friend, or any Father upon
Earth ever did to his dearest Child; in comparison of which, the greatest
Affection of Men to those whom they love best, is but as the drop of the
Bucket, as the very small dust upon the Balance. If we have right apprehensions
of God's goodness, we can have no temptation to despair of his kind and
merciful Intentions to us, provided we be but careful of our Duty to him, and
do sincerely repent and forsake our Sins. Plainer Declarations no words can
make, than those we meet with in the holy Scriptures, That God has no pleasure
in the death of the wicked, but rather that he should turn from his wickedness
and live; that he would have all Men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge
of the truth; that he is long suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance; that he that confesses and
forsakes his sin shall have mercy; that if the wicked forsake his ways, and
the unrighteous man his thoughts, and return unto the Lord, he will have mercy,
and will abundantly pardon.

As for outward Calamities and Afflictions, the consideration of God's goodness
is a firm ground of consolation to us, giving us assurance, that God will
either prevent them by his Providence, or support us under them, or rescue us
out of them, or turn them to our greater good and happiness in this World or
the next. St. Paul speaks of it as the firm belief and persuasion of all good
Men, that in the issue all their Afflictions should prove to their advantage.
We know (says he) that all things shall work together for good to them that
love God; and one of the greatest Evidences of our love to God, is a firm
belief and persuasion of his goodness; if we believe his goodness, we cannot
but love him, and if we love him, all things shall work together for our good.

And this is a great Cordial to those who are under grievous Persecutions and
Sufferings, This Sermon was preached before the late happy Revolution.
which is the case of our Brethren in a neighbor Nation, and may come to be
ours, God knows how soon. But though the malice of Men be great, and backed with a
power not to be controlled by any visible means, and therefore likely to
continue; yet the goodness of God is greater than the malice of Men, and of a
longer duration and continuance. And thus David comforted himself, when he was
persecuted by Saul, Psalm. 52.1. Why boasts thou thy self in mischief, O
mighty man? the goodness of God endures continually. The Persecution which
Saul raised against him was very powerful, and lasted a long time; but he
comforts himself with this, that the goodness of God endures for ever.

IV. The consideration of God's goodness, is a powerful motive and argument to
several Duties.

1. To the love of God. And this is the most proper and natural effect and
operation of the goodness of God upon our Minds. Several of the Divine
Attributes are very awful, but goodness is amiable, and without this nothing
else is so. Power and Wisdom may command Dread and Admiration; but nothing but
Goodness can challenge our Love and Affection. Goodness is amiable for it self,
though no benefit and advantage should from thence redound to us; but when we
find the comfortable Effects of it, when the riches of God's goodness, and
long-suffering, and forbearance, are laid out upon us, when we live upon that
goodness, and are indebted to it for all that we have and hope for, this is a
much greater endearment to us of that excellency and perfection, which was
amiable for it self. We cannot but love him who is good, and does us good;
whose goodness extends to all his Creatures, but is exercised in so peculiar a
manner toward the Sons of Men, that it is called Love; and if God vouchsafe to
love us, well may this be the first and great Commandment, Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind.

2. The consideration of God's goodness is likewise an argument to us to fear
him; not as a Slave does his Master, but as a Child does his Father, who the
more he loves him, the more afraid is he to offend him. There is forgiveness
with thee (says the Psalmist) that thou may be feared; because God is ready
to forgive, we should be afraid to offend. Men shall fear the Lord, and his
goodness, (says the Prophet) Hosea 3.5. And indeed nothing is more to be
dreaded, than despised Goodness and abused Patience, which turns into Fury and
Vengeance; despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and long-suffering, and
forbearance, (says the Apostle) and treasurest up to thy self wrath against the
day of wrath, and the revelation of the righteous judgment of God?

3. The consideration of God's goodness, is a powerful motive to obedience to
his Laws, and as the Apostle expresses it, to walk worthy of the Lord unto all
well pleasing, being fruitful in every good work. This Argument Samuel uses to
the People of Israel, to persuade them to obedience, 1 Samuel 12.24. Only fear
the Lord, and serve him in truth, with all your heart: for consider what great
things all he has done for you.

And indeed the Laws which God has given us, are one of the chief Instances of
his goodness to us, since they all tend to our good, and are proper Causes and
Means of our. Happiness; so that in challenging our obedience to his Laws, as
acknowledgments of our obligation to him for his. Benefits, he lays a new
obligation, and confers a greater benefit upon us. All that his Laws require of
us, is to do that which is best for our selves, and does most directly conduce
to our own welfare and happiness. Considering our infinite obligations to God,
he might have challenged our obedience to the severest and harshest Laws he
could have imposed upon us; so that as the Servants said to Naaman, Had the
Prophet bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done it? how much
more when he has only said, wash and be clean? If God had required of us
things very grievous and burdensome, in love and gratitude to him, we ought to
have yielded a ready and cheerful obedience to such Commands; how much more,
when he has only said, do this and be happy? In testimony of your love to me,
do these things which are the greatest kindness and benefit to your selves.

4. The goodness of God should lead Men to Repentance. One of the greatest
aggravations of our Sins is, that we offend against so much goodness, and make
so bad a requital for it; Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish People and
unwise! The proper tendency of God's goodness and patience to Sinners, is to
bring them to a sense of their miscarriage, and to a resolution of a better
course. When we reflect upon the blessings and favors of God, and his
continual goodness to us, can we choose but be ashamed of our terrible
ingratitude and disobedience? Nothing is more apt to make an ingenuous Nature
to relent, than the sense of undeserved kindness; that God should be so good to
us, who are evil and unthankful to him; that though we be Enemies to him, yet
when we hunger, he feeds us; when we thirst, he gives us to drink; heaping as
it were coals of fire on our heads, on purpose to melt us into Repentance, and
to overcome our evil by his goodness.

5. The consideration of God's goodness, is a firm ground of trust and
confidence. What may we not hope and assuredly expect from immense and
boundless goodness? If we have right apprehensions of the goodness of God, we
cannot possibly distrust him, or doubt of the performance of those gracious
promises which he has made to us; the same goodness which inclined him to make
such promises, will effectually engage him to make them good. If God be so good
as he has declared himself, why should we think that he will not help us in
our need, and relieve us in our distress, and comfort us in our afflictions and
sorrows? If we may with confidence rely upon any thing to confer good upon us,
and to preserve and deliver us from Evil, we may trust infinite goodness.

6. The goodness of God is likewise an argument to us to patience and
contentedness with every condition. If the Hand of God be severe and heavy upon
us in any Affliction, we may be assured that it is not without great cause,
that so much goodness is so highly offended and displeased with us; that he
designs our good in all the Evils he sends upon us, and does not chasten us for
his pleasure, but for our profit; that we are the cause of our own Sufferings,
and our Sins separate between God and us, and withold good things from us;
that in the final issue and result of things, all things shall work together
for good to us; and therefore we ought not to be discontented at any thing
which will certainly end in our Happiness.

7. Let us imitate the goodness of God. The highest Perfection of the best and
most perfect Being is worthy to be our Pattern. This the Scripture frequently
proposes to us; Math. 5.48. Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which
is in heaven is perfect. How is that? in being good, and kind, and merciful, as
God is. But I say unto you (says our Lord) Love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despightfully
use you, and persecute you; that ye may be the children of your Father which is
in heaven: for he makes his Sun to rise on the evil, and on the good, and
sends rain on the just, and on the unjust. And then it follows, Be ye
therefore perfect, even as your Father which is heaven is perfect. The same
Pattern St. Paul proposes to us, Ephesians. 4.32. and Chapter 5.1. Be ye kind one to
another, tender hearted; forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake
has forgiven you. Be ye therefore followers of God as dear Children, and walk
in love. We cannot in any thing resemble God more, than in goodness, and
kindness, and mercy, and in a readiness to forgive those who have been
injurious to us, and to be reconciled to them.

Let us then often contemplate this Perfection of God, and represent it to our
Minds, that by the frequent contemplation of it, we may be transformed into the
Image of the Divine Goodness. Is God so good to his Creatures? with how much
greater reason should we be so to our fellow Creatures. Is God good to us? let
us imitate his universal goodness, by endeavoring the good of Mankind; and, as
much as in us lies, of the whole Creation of God. What God is to us, and what
we would have him still be to us, that let us be to others. We are infinitely
beholding to this Perfection of God for all that we are, and for all that we
enjoy, and for all that we expect; and therefore we have all the reason in the
World to admire and imitate it. Let this pattern of the Divine Goodness be
continually before us, that we may be still fashioning our selves in the temper
of our Minds, and in the actions of our Lives, to a likeness and conformity to
it.

Lastly, The consideration of the Divine goodness, should excite our praise and
thankfulness. This is a great Duty, to the performance whereof we should summon
all the Powers and Faculties of our Souls, as the holy Psalmist does, Psalm.
103. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy Name.
Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. And we should
invite all others to the same Work, as the same devout Psalmist frequently
does, Psalm. 106. O give thanks unto the Lord! for he is good, for his mercy
endures for ever. And Psalm. 107. O that men would therefore praise the Lord
for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of Men!

And we had need to be often called upon to this Duty, to which we have a
peculiar backwardness. Necessity drives us to Prayer, and sends us to God for
the supply of our wants; but Praise and Thanksgiving is a Duty which depends
upon our gratitude and ingenuity; and nothing sooner wears off, than the sense
of Kindness and Benefits. We are very apt to forget the blessings of God, not
so much from a bad Memory, as from a bad Nature; to forget the greatest
blessings, the continuance whereof should continually put us in mind of them;
the blessings of our Beings; So God complains of his People, Deuteronomy. 32. Of the
God that formed thee, thou have been unmindful; the dignity and excellency of
our Beings above all the Creatures of this visible World; Job 35.10, 11. None
says, Where is God my Maker? who teaches us more than the beasts of the
earth, and makes us wiser than the fowls of heaven? the daily comforts and
blessings of our Lives, which we can continually receive, without almost ever
looking up to the Hand that gives them. So God complains by the Prophet, Hosea
2.8, 9. She knew not that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and multiplied
her gold and silver. And is it not shameful to see how at the most plentiful
Tables, the giving of God Thanks is almost grown out of fashion; as if Men were
ashamed to own from whence these Blessings came. When thanks is all God expects
from us, can we not afford to give him that? Do ye thus requite the Lord,
foolish people and unwise! It is just with God to take away his Blessings from
us, if we deny him this easy tribute of Praise and Thanksgiving.

It is a sign Men are unfit for Heaven, when they are backward to that which is
the proper Work and Employment of the blessed Spirits above. Therefore as ever
we hope to come thither, let us begin this Work here, and inure our selves to
that which will be the great business of all Eternity. Let us with the four and
twenty Elders in the Revelation, fall down before him that sits on the throne,
and worship him that lives for ever and ever, and cast our crowns before the
throne (that is, cast our selves) and ascribe all glory to God; Saying, thou
art worthy O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power for thou have made
all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were created.

To him therefore, the infinite and inexhaustible fountain of goodness, the
father of mercies, and the God of all consolation, who gave us such excellent
Beings, having made made us little lower than the Angels, and crowned us with
glory and honor; who has been pleased to stamp upon us the image of his own
goodness, and thereby made us partakers of a divine nature, communicating to
us, not only of the effects of his goodness, but in some measure and degree of
the perfection it self; to him who gives us all things richly to enjoy, which
pertain to life and godliness, and has made such abundant provision, not only
for our comfort and convenience in this present life, but for our unspeakable
happiness to all eternity; to him who designed this happiness to us from all
eternity, and whose mercy and goodness to us endures for ever; who when by
willful transgressions and disobedience, we had plunged our selves into a state
of sin and misery, and had forfeited that happiness which we were designed to,
was pleased to restore us to a new capacity of it, by sending his only Son to
take our nature with the miseries and infirmities of it, to live among us, and
to die for us; in a word, to him who is infinitely good to us, not only
contrary to our deserts, but beyond our hopes, who renews his mercy upon us
every morning, and is patient though we provoke him every day, who preserves and
provides for us, and spares us continually, who is always willing, always
watchful, and never weary to do us good; to him be all glory and honor,
adoration and praise, love and obedience, now and for ever.

SERMON V. Vol. VII.
The Mercy of God.
NUMB. XIV.18. The Lord is long suffering, and of great Mercy.


I Have considered God's Goodness in general. There are two eminent Branches of
it, his Patience and Mercy. The Patience of God is his goodness to them that
are guilty, in deferring or moderating their deserved punishment; the Mercy of
God is his goodness to them that are or may be miserable. It Is the last of
these two I design to discourse of at this time; in doing which, I shall
inquire,

First, What we are to understand by the Mercy of God.

Secondly, Show you, that this Perfection belongs to God.

Thirdly, Consider the degree of it, that God is of great Mercy.

First, What we are to understand by the Mercy of God.

I told you it is his goodness to them that are in misery, or liable to it;
that is, that are in danger of it, or have deserved it. It Is mercy to prevent
the misery that we are liable to, and which may befall us, though it be not
actually upon us. It Is mercy to defer the misery that we deserve, or mitigate
it; and this is properly patience and forbearance. It Is mercy to relieve those
that are in misery, to support or comfort them. It Is mercy to remit the misery
we deserve, and by pardon and forgiveness to remove and take away the
obligation to punishment.

Thus the mercy of God is usually in Scripture set forth to us by the affection
of pity and compassion, which is an affection that causes a sensible commotion
and disturbance in us, upon the apprehension of some great Evil that lies upon
another, or hangs over him. Hence it is that God is said in Scripture to be
grieved and afflicted for the miseries of Men; his bowels are said to sound,
and his heart to turn within him. But though God is pleased in this manner to set
forth his mercy and tenderness toward us, yet we must take heed how we cloth
the Divine Nature with the Infirmities of human Passions. We must not measure
the Perfection of God by the Expressions of his condescension; and because he
stoops to our weakness, level him to our Infirmities. When God is said to pity
us, we must take away the imperfection of this Passion, the commotion and
disturbance of it, and not imagine any such thing in God; but we are to
conceive, that the mercy and compassion of God, without producing the disquiet,
do produce the Effects of the most sensible pity.

Secondly, That this Perfection belongs to God.

All the Arguments that I used to prove the goodness of God, from the
acknowledgment of natural Light, and from Scripture and Reason, serve to prove
that he is merciful; because the mercy of God is an eminent Branch of his
goodness. I will only produce some of those many Texts of Scripture which
attribute this Perfection to God. Exodus 34.6. The Lord, the Lord God, gracious
and merciful. Deuteronomy. 4.31 The Lord thy God is a merciful God. 2 Chronicles. 30.9. The
Lord your God is gracious and merciful. Neh. 9.17. Ready to pardon, gracious
and merciful. Psalm. 25.10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy. Psalm. 62.12.
Unto thee, O Lord, belongs mercy. Psalm. 103.8. Merciful and gracious. Psalm.
130.7. With the Lord there is mercy. And so Jer. 3.12. Joel 2.13. Jonah 4.2.
Luke 6.36. Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful. The
Scripture speaks of this as most natural to him, 2 Cor. 1.3. he is called the
Father of mercies. But when he punishes, he does as it were relinquish his
Nature, and do a strange work. The Lord will wait that he may be gracious, Isa.
30.18. God passes by opportunities of punishing, but his mercy takes
opportunity to display it self; he waits to be gracious. To afflict or punish
is a Work that God is unwilling to, that he takes no pleasure in; Lam. 3.33. He
does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men. But mercy is a Work
that he delights in, Mic. 7.18. He delights in mercy. When God shows mercy,
he does it with pleasure and delight; he is said to rejoice over his people to
do them good. Those Attributes that declare God's goodness, as when he is said
to be gracious, or merciful, and long-suffering, they show what God is in
himself, and delights to be: those which declare his wrath and severity, show
what he is upon provocation, and the occasion of sin; not what he chooses to
be, but what we do as it were compel and necessitate him to be.

Thirdly, For the degree of it; that God is a God of great mercy.

The Scripture does delight to advance the mercy of God, and does use great
variety of Expression to magnify it. It speaks of the greatness of his mercy,
Numb. 14.19. According to the greatness of his mercy. 2 Samuel 24.14. Let me fall
into the hands of the Lord, for his mercies are great. It Is called an abundant
mercy, 1 Pet. 1.3. According to his abundant mercy. Psalm. 103.8. he is said to
be plenteous in mercy; and rich in mercy, Ephesians. 2.4. Psalm. 5.7. he speaks of the
multitude of God's mercies; and of the variety of them, Neh. 9.18. In thy
manifold mercies thou forsookest them not. So many are they, that we are said
to be surrounded and campassed about on every side with them; Psalm. 103.4. Who
crowns us with loving kindness and tender mercies.

And yet further to set forth the greatness of them, the Scripture uses all
dimensions. Height, Psalm. 57.10. Thy mercy is great unto the Heavens. Nay,
higher yet; Psalm. 108.4. Thy mercy is great above the heavens. For the latitude
and extent of it, it is as large as the Earth, and extends to all the Creatures
in it; Psalm. 109.64. The earth is full of thy mercy. Psalm. 145.8. His tender
mercies are over all his works. For the length, or duration and continuance of
it; Exodus 34.7. Laying up mercy in store for thousands of generations, one
after another. Nay, it is of a longer continuance; Psalm. 118. it is several
times repeated, That his mercy endures for ever.

And to show the intense degree of this affection of mercy or pity, the
Scripture uses several emphatical Expressions to set it forth to us. The
Scripture speaks of the tender mercies of God, Psalm. 25.6. Remember, O Lord,
thy tender mercies. Yea, of the multitude of these, Psalm. 51.1. According to
the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions. Jam. 5.11. The
Lord is very pitiful and of tender mercy. They are called God's Bowels, which
are the tenderest parts, and apt to yern and stir in us when any affections of
love and pity are excited, Is. 63.15. Where is the sounding of thy bowels, and
of thy mercies, are they restrained? Luke 1.78. Through the tender mercy of our
God. So it is in our Translation; but if we render it from the Original, it is
through the bowels of the mercies of our God. How does God condescend in those
pathetical Expressions, which he uses concerning his People? Hos. 11.8. How
shall I give thee up, Ephraim? mine heart is turned within me, and my
repentings are kindled together. Nay, to express his tender sense of our
miseries and sufferings, he is represented as being afflicted with us, and
bearing a part in our sufferings; Isa, 63.9. In all their afflictions he was
afflicted.

The compassions of God are compared to the tenderest affections among Men; to
that of a Father toward his Children; Psalm. 103.13. As a father pitieth his
Children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him. Nay, to the compassions of a
Mother toward her Infant; Isa. 49.15. Can a woman forget her sucking child,
that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea she may, it is
possible, though most unlikely: but though a Mother may turn unnatural; yet God
cannot be unmerciful.

In short, the Scripture does every where magnify the mercy of God, and speak
of it with all possible advantage; as if the Divine Nature, which does in all
Perfections excel all others, did in this excel it self. The Scripture speaks
of it as if God was wholly taken up with it, as if it was his constant Exercise
and Employment, so that in comparison of it, he does hardly display any other
excellency; Psalm. 25.10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy; as if in this
World God had a design to advance his mercy above his other Attributes. The
mercy of God is now in the Throne, this is the day of mercy, and God does
display it many times with a seeming dishonor to his other Attributes, his
Justice, and Holiness, and Truth. His Justice; This makes Job complain of the
long life and prosperity of the wicked; Job 41.7. Wherefore do the wicked live,
yea become old? etc. His Holiness; This makes the Prophet expostulate with God,
Hab. 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not look on
iniquity. Wherefore look thou upon them that deal treacherously, and hold
thy tongue? etc. And the Truth of God; This makes Jonah complain, as if God's
mercies were such, as did make some reflection upon his truth, Jon. 4.2.

But that we may have more distinct apprehensions of the greatness and number
of God's mercies, I will distribute them into kinds, and rank them under
several Heads. It Is mercy to prevent those evils and miseries that we are
liable to. It Is mercy to defer those evils that we have deserved, or to
mitigate them. It Is mercy to support and comfort us when misery is upon us.
It Is mercy to deliver us from them. But the greatest mercy of all is, to remit
the evil and misery we have deserved, by pardon and forgiveness, to remove and
take away the obligation to punishment; so that the mercy of God may be reduced
to these five Heads.

I. Preventing Mercy. Many evils and miseries which we are liable to, God
prevents them at a great distance; and when they are coming toward us, he
stops them or turns them another way. The merciful Providence of God, and those
invisible guards which protect us, do divert many evils from us, which fall
upon others. We seldom take notice of God's preventing mercy; we are not apt to
be sensible how great a mercy it is to be freed from those straits and
necessities, those pains and diseases of Body, those inward racks and horrors,
which others are pressed withal and labor under. When any evil or misery is
upon us, would we not reckon it a mercy to be rescued and delivered from it?
And is it not a greater mercy that we never felt it? Does not that Man owe more
to his Physician who prevents his sickness and distemper, than he who after the
weakness and languishing, the pains and tortures of several Months, is at
length cured by him?

II. Forbearing mercy. And this is the patience of God, which consists in the
deferring or moderating of our deserved punishment. Hence it is that slow to
anger, and of great mercy, do so often go together. But this I shall speak to
hereafter in some particular Discourses.

III. Comforting mercy. 2 Cor. 1.3. The father of mercies, and the God of all
Comfort. The Scripture represents God as very merciful, in comforting and
supporting those that are afflicted and cast down; hence are those expressions
of putting his arms under us, bearing us up, speaking comfortably, visiting us
with his loving kindness, which signify God's merciful regard to those who are
in misery and distress.

IV. His relieving mercy, in supplying those that are in want, and delivering
those that are in trouble. God does many times exercise Men with troubles and
afflictions, with a very gracious and merciful design, to prevent greater
Evils, which Men would otherwise bring upon themselves. Afflictions are a
merciful invention of Heaven to do us that good, which nothing else can; they
awaken us to a sense of God, and of our selves, to a consideration of the evil
of our ways; they make us to take notice of God, to seek him, and enquire after
him. God does as it were by Afflictions throw Men upon their backs to make them
look up to Heaven; Hos. 5.15. In their affliction they will seek me early.
Psalm. 78.34. When he slew them, then they sought him, and they returned, and
enquired early after God. But God does not delight in this, he does not afflict
willingly, nor grieve the children of men. When afflictions have accomplished
their work, and obtained their end upon us, God is very ready to remove them,
and command deliverance for us; Isa. 54.7, 8. For a small moment have I
forsaken thee; but with great mercies will I gather thee. In a little wrath I
hid my face from thee; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee,
says the Lord thy Redeemer.

V. Pardoning mercy. And here the greatness and fullness of God's mercy
appears, because our sins are great; Psalm. 78.38. Being full of compassion, he
forgave their iniquity. And the multitude of God's mercies, because our sins
are many, Psalm. 51.1. Have mercy on me, O Lord, according to the multitude of
thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions. Exodus 34.7. He is said to pardon
iniquity, transgression, and sin. How many fold are his mercies, to forgive all
our sins, of what kind so ever! The mercy of God to us in pardoning our sins,
is matter of astonishment and admiration; Mic. 7.18. Who is a God like unto
thee, that pardons iniquity! But especially if we consider by what means our
pardon is procured; by transferring our guilt upon the most innocent person,
the Son of God, and making him to bear our iniquities, and to suffer the wrath
of God which was due to us. The admirable contrivance of God's mercy appears in
this dispensation; this shows the riches of his grace, that he should be at so
much cost to purchase our pardon, Not with corruptible things, as silver and
gold; but with the precious blood of his own Son; Ephesians. 1.6, 7. To the praise of
the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved; in
whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according
to the riches of his grace.

Having dispatched the three particulars I proposed to be spoken to, I shall
show what Use we ought to make of this Divine Attribute.

Use 1. We ought with thankfulness to acknowledge and admire the great mercy of
God to us. Let us view it in all its dimensions; the height, and length, and
breadth of it: in all the variety and kinds of it; the preventing mercy of God
to many of us. Those miseries that lie upon others, it is mercy to us that we
escaped them. It Is mercy that spares us. It is of the Lord's mercies that we
are not consumed, and because his compassions fail not. It Is mercy that
mitigates our punishment, and makes it fall below the desert of our sins. It Is
mercy that comforts and supports us under any of those Evils that lie upon us,
and that rescues and delivers us from them. Which way so ever we look, we are
encompassed with the mercies of God; they compass us about on every side, we
are crowned with loving kindness and tender mercies. It Is mercy that feeds us,
and clothes us, and that preserves us. But above all we should thankfully
acknowledge and admire the pardoning mercy of God; Ps. 103.1, 2, 3. where David
does as it were muster up the mercies of God, and make a Catalogue of them, he
sets the pardoning mercy in the front; Bless ye the Lord, O my soul, and all
that is within me praise his holy Name. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget
not all his benefits; who forgiveth all thy iniquities.

If we look into our selves, and consider our own temper and disposition, how
void of pity and bowels we are, how cruel, and hard hearted, and insolent, and
revengeful; if we look abroad into the World, and see how full the earth is of
the habitations of cruelty; we shall admire the mercy of God more, and think
our selves more beholden to it. How many things must concur to make our hearts
tender, and melt our spirits, and stir our bowels, to make us pitiful and
compassionate? We seldom pity any unless they be actually in misery; nor all
such neither, unless the misery they lie under be very great; nor then neither,
unless the person that suffers be nearly related, and we be someways concerned
in his sufferings; yea, many times not then neither, upon a generous account,
but as we are someways obliged by interest and self-love, and a dear regard to
our selves, when we have suffered the like our selves, and have learnt to pity
others by our own Sufferings, or when in danger and probability to be in the
like condition our selves; so many motives and obligations are necessary to
awaken and stir up this affection in us. But God is merciful and pitiful to us,
out of the mere goodness of his Nature; for few of these motives and
considerations can have any place in him. This affection of pity and tenderness
is stirred up in God by the mere presence of the Object, without any other
inducement. The mercy of God many times does not stay till we be actually
miserable; but looks forward a great way, and pities us at a great distance,
and prevents our misery. God does not only pity us in great Calamities; but
considers those lesser Evils that are upon us. God is merciful to us, when we
have deserved all the Evils that are upon us, and far greater, when we are less
than the least of all his mercies, when we deserved all the misery that is upon
us, and have with violent hands pulled it upon our own heads, and have been the
authors and procurers of it to our selves. Though God, in respect of his Nature,
be at an infinite distance from us, yet his mercy is near to us, and he cannot
possibly have any self-interest in it. The Divine Nature is not liable to want,
or injury, or suffering; he is secure of his own happiness and fullness, and
can neither wish the enlargement nor fear the impairment of his Estate; he can
never stand in need of pity or relief from us or any other; and yet he pities
us.

Now if we consider the vast difference of this affection in God and us, how
tender his mercies are, and how sensible his bowels; and yet we who have so
many arguments to move us to pity, how hard our hearts are, and how unapt to
relent, as if we were born of the rock, and were the offspring of the nether
millstone; sure when we duly consider this, we cannot but admire the mercy of
God.

How cruel are we to Creatures below us! with how little remorse can we kill a
Flea, or tread upon a Worm? partly because we are secure that they cannot hurt
us, nor revenge themselves upon us; and partly because they are so despicable
in our Eyes, and so far below us, that they do not fall under the consideration
of our Pity. Look upward, proud Man! and take notice of him who is above thee,
thou did not make the Creatures below thee as God did, there is but a finite
distance between thee and the meanest Creatures; but there is an infinite
distance between thee and God. Man is a Name of Dignity, when we compare our
selves with other Creatures; but compared to God, we are Worms, and not Men;
yea, we are nothing, yea, less than nothing and vanity. How great then is the
Mercy of God, which regards us, who are so far below him, which takes into
Consideration such inconsiderable nothings as we are! we may say with David,
Ps. 8.4. Lord! What is man, that thou art so mindful of him, or the Son of Man
that thou visitest him! And with Job 7.17. What is Man that thou should
magnify him, and that thou should set thine Heart upon him!

And then how hard do we find it to forgive those who have injured us? if any
one have offended, or provoked us; how hard are we to be reconciled? How
mindful of an Injury? How do anger and revenge boil within us? How do we
upbraid Men with their faults? What vile and low Submission do we require of
them, before we will receive them into Favor, and grant them Peace? And if we
forgive once, we think that is much; but if an offense and provocation be
renewed often, we are inexorable. Even the Disciples of our Savior, after he
had so emphatically taught them Forgiveness, in the Petition in the Lord's
Prayer, yet they had very narrow Spirits as to this; Matthew. 18.21. Peter comes
to him, and asks him, How often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive
him? till seven times? He thought that was much: And yet we have great
obligations to Pardoning and Forgiving others, because we are obnoxious to God
and one another, we shall many times stand in need of Pardon from God and Men;
and it may be our own case, and when it is, we are too apt to be very indulgent
to our selves, and conceive good hopes of the Mercy of others; we would have
our ignorance, and inadvertencies, and mistakes, and all occasions and
temptations and provocations considered; and when we have done amiss, upon
Submission and Acknowledgment of our Fault, we would be received into Favor:
but God who is not at all liable to us, how ready is he to Forgive! If we
confess our Sins to him, he is merciful to Forgive; he Pardons freely; and such
are the condescentions of his Mercy, though he be the party offended, yet he
offers Pardon to us, and beseeches us to be reconciled; if we do but come
toward him, he runs to meet us, as in the Parable of the Prodigal, Luke 15.20.
What reason have we then thankfully to acknowledge and admire the Mercy of God
to us?

Use 2. The great mercy of God to us, should stir up in us shame and sorrow for
Sin. The Judgments of God may break us; but the consideration of God's Mercy
should rather melt and dissolve us into Tears, Luke 7.47. The Woman that washed
Christ's Feet with her Tears, and wiped them with her Hair, the account that
our Savior gives of the great Affection that she expressed to him, was, she
Loved much, because much was forgiven her; and she grieved much, because much
was forgiven her.

Especially we should sorrow for those Sins, which have been committed by us
after God's Mercies received. Mercies after Sins should touch our Hearts, and
make us relent. It should grieve us that we should offend and provoke a God so
Gracious and Merciful, so slow to anger, and so ready to forgive: But Sin
against Mercies, and after we have received them, is attended with one of the
greatest Aggravations of Sin. And as Mercy raises the guilt of our Sins, so it
should raise our sorrow for them. No Consideration is more apt to work upon
human Nature, than that of kindness, and the greater Mercy has been showed to
us, the greater our sins, and the greater cause of sorrow for them; contraries
do illustrate, and set off one another; in the great Goodness and Mercy of God
to us, we see the great Evil of our Sins against him.

Every Sin has the Nature of Rebellion and Disobedience; but sins against Mercy
have Ingratitude in them. When ever we break the Laws of God, we rebel against
our Sovereign; but as we sin against the Mercies of God, we injure our
Benefactor. This makes our sin to be horrid, and astonishing, Isa. 1.2. Hear, O
heavens! and give ear, O earth! I have nourished and brought up children, and
they have rebelled against me. All the Mercies of God are aggravations of our
sins, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8, 9. And Nathan said to David, thus says the Lord God of
Israel, I anointed thee king over Israel, and delivered thee out of the hands
of Saul, and I gave thee thy masters house, and thy masters wives into thy
bosom, and gave thee the house of Isreal, and of Judah, and if that had been
too little, I would moreover have given thee such and such things. Wherefore
have thou despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his sight? God
reckons up all his Mercies, and from them aggravates David's sin; 1 Kings 11.9.
He takes notice of all the unkind returns that we make to his Mercy; and it is
the worst temper in the World not to be wrought upon by kindness, not to be
melted by Mercy; no greater evidence of a wicked Heart, than that the Mercies
of God have no effect upon it; Esaias 26.10. Let favor be shown to the wicked;
yet will he not learn righteousness.

Use 3. Let us imitate the merciful Nature of God. This branch of God's
goodness is very proper for our imitation. The general Exhortation of our
Savior, Matt. 5.48. Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father which is in heaven
is perfect, is more particularly expressed by St. Luke, Luke 6.30. Be ye
therefore merciful, as your Father which is in heaven is merciful. Men affect
to make Images, and impossible Representations of God; but as Seneca says,
Creed Deos, cum propitii essent, fictiles fuisse. We may draw this Image and
likeness of God; we may be gracious and merciful as he is. Christ, who was the
express image of his Father, his whole life and undertaking was a continued
work of mercy; he went about doing good to the Souls of Men, by Preaching the
Gospel to them; and to the Bodies of Men, in healing all manner of Diseases.
There is nothing that he recommends more to us in his Gospel than this Spirit
and Temper; Mat. 5.7. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.
How many Parables does he use to set forth the mercy of God to us, with a
design to draw us to the imitation of it? The Parable of the Prodigal; of the
good Samaritan; of the Servant to whom he forgave 10000 Talents. We should
imitate God in this; in being tender and compassionate to those that are in
misery.

This is a piece of natural, indispensable Religion, to which positive and
instituted Religion must give way; Amos 6.6. I desired mercy, and not
sacrifice; which is twice cited and used by our Savior. Micah. 6.8. He has
showed thee, O Man, what it is that the Lord thy God requires of thee, to do
justice, and love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.

This is always one part of the description of a good Man, that he is apt to
pity the miseries and necessities of others. Psalm. 37.26. He is ever merciful
and lends. He is far from cruelty, not only to Men, but even to the brute
Creatures; Prove. 12.10. A righteous man regards the life of his beast. There
is nothing more contrary to the nature of God, than a cruel and savage
disposition, not to be affected with the miseries and sufferings of others; how
unlike is this to the father of mercies, and the God of consolation! When we
can see Cruelty exercised, and our Bowels not be stirred within us, nor our
hearts be pricked; how unlike is this to God, who is very pitiful, and of
tender mercies! But to rejoice at the miseries of others, this is inhumane and
barbarous. Hear how God threatens Edom for rejoicing at the miseries of his
Brother Jacob; Obadiah 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. But to delight to make others
miserable, and to aggravate their sufferings, this is devilish; this is the
temper of Hell, and the very spirit of the Destroyer.

It becomes Man above all other Creatures to be merciful, who has had such
ample and happy experience of God's mercy to him, and does still continually
stand in need of mercy from God. God has been very merciful to us. Had it not
been for the tender Mercies of God to us, we had all of us long since been
miserable. Now as we have received mercy from God, we should show it to others.
The Apostle uses this as an Argument why we should relieve those that are in
misery and want, because we have had such experience of the mercy and love of
God to us; 1 John 3.16, 17. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid
down his life for us. But whosoever has this worlds goods, and sees his brother
have need, etc. how dwells the love of God in him? That Man has no sense of
the mercy of God abiding upon his Heart, that is not merciful to his Brother.
And it is an Argument why we should forgive one another; Ephesians. 4.32. Be ye kind
one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's
sake has forgiven you. Chap. 5.1. Be ye therefore followers of God as dear
Children. Col. 3.12, 13. Put on therefore (as the elect of God holy and
beloved) bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness,
long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man
have a quarrel against any: even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye.

And we continually stand in need of mercy both from God and Man. We are liable
one to another, and in the change of human Affairs, we may be all subject to
one another by turns, and stand in need of one another pity and compassion;
and we must expect, that with what measure we mete to others, with the same it
shall be measured to us again. To restrain the Cruelties, and check the
Insolences of Men, God has so ordered in his Providence, that very often in
this World Men's Cruelties return upon their own heads, and their violent
dealings upon their own pates. Bajazet meets with a Tamerlane.

But if Men were not thus liable to one another, we all stand in need of mercy
from God. If we be merciful to others in suffering, and forgiving them that
have injured us, God will be so to us, he will pardon our sins to us. Prove.
16.5. By mercy and truth iniquity is purged. 2. Sam. 22.26. With the merciful
thou will show thy self merciful. Prove. 14.21. He that has mercy on the poor,
happy is he. Prove. 21.21. He that follows after mercy finds life. Matthew.
6.14. If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly father will also
forgive you. But on the other hand, if we be malicious and revengeful, and
implacable to those that have offended us, and inexorable to those who desire
to be received to favor, and cruel to those who lie at our mercy, hard hearted
to them that are in necessity; what can we expect, but that the mercy of God
will leave us, that he will forget to be gracious, and shut up in anger his
tender mercy. Mat. 6.15. If ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will
your heavenly Father forgive your trespasses. That is a dreadful passage, S.
James 2.13. He shall have judgment without mercy, that has showed no mercy.
How angry is the Lord with the Servant who was so inexorable to his fellow
Servant, after he had forgiven him so great a debt, as you find in the Parable,
Mat. 18.24. He owed him ten thousand Talents, and upon his submission and
entreaty to have patience with him, he was moved with compassion and loosed
him, and forgave him all: but no sooner had this favor been done to him by his
Lord, but going forth he meets his fellow Servant, who owed him a small
inconsiderable debt, an hundred Pence, he lays Hands on him, and takes him by
the Throat, and roundly demands payment of him; he falls down at his Feet, and
uses the same form of supplication that he had used to his Lord, but he
rejects his request, and puts him in Prison. Now what says the Lord to him? v.
32, 33, 34. O thou wicked Servant, I forgave thee all the debt, because thou
desiredst me. Should not thou also have had compassion on thy fellow
servant, even as I had pity on thee? And the Lord was wroth, and delivered him
to the tormentors, till he should pay all that was due unto him. Now what
application does our Savior make of this? v. 35. So likewise shall my heavenly
Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not every one his
brother their trespasses.

God's readiness to forgive us should be a powerful motive and argument to us
to forgive others. The greatest Injuries that we can suffer from Men, if we
compare them to the sins that we commit against God, they bear no proportion to
them, neither in weight nor number; they are but as an hundred pence to ten
thousand talents. If we would be like God, we should forgive the greatest
Injuries; he pardons our sins though they be exceeding great: many Injuries,
though offenses be renewed, and provocations multiplied; for so God does to us,
He pardons iniquity, transgression, and sin, Ex. 34.7. Is. 55.7. He will have
mercy, he will abundantly pardon. We would not have God only to forgive us
seven times, but seventy seven times, as often as we offend him: so should we
forgive our Brother.

And we should not be backward to this Work; God is ready to forgive us; Neh.
9.17. And we should do it heartily, not only in word, when we retain malice in
our hearts, and while we say we forgive, carry on a secret design in our hearts
of revenging our selves when we have opportunity; but we should from our hearts
forgive every one; for so God does to us, who when he forgives us, casts our
iniquities behind his back, and throws them into the bottom of the sea, and
blots out our transgression, so as to remember our iniquity no more.

If we do not do thus, every time we put up the Petition to God, Forgive us our
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us, we do not pray for
mercy, but for judgment; we invoke his wrath, and do not put up a Prayer, but a
dreadful Imprecation against our selves; we pronounce the Sentence of our own
Condemnation, and importune God not to forgive us.

Use 4. If the mercy of God be so great, this may comfort us against Despair.
Sinners are apt to be dejected, when they consider their unworthiness, the
nature and number of their Sins, and the many heavy aggravations of them; they
are apt to say with Cain, That their sin is greater than can be forgiven. But
do not look only upon thy sins; but upon the mercies of God. Thou can not be
too sensible of the evil of sin, and of the desert of it; but whilst we
aggravate our sins, we must not lessen the mercies of God. When we consider the
multitude of our sins, we must consider also the multitude of God's tender
mercies; we have been great sinners, and God is of great mercy; we have
multiplied our provocations, and he multiplies to pardon.

Do but thou put thy self in a capacity of mercy, by repenting of thy sins, and
forsaking of them, and thou have no reason to doubt but the mercy of God will
receive thee; If we confess our sins, he is merciful and faithful to forgive
them. If we had offended Man as we have done God, we might despair of pardon;
but it is God and not Man that we have to deal with; and his ways are not as
our ways, nor his thoughts as our thoughts; but as the heavens are high above
the earth, so are his ways above our ways, and his thoughts above our thoughts.

We cannot be more injurious to God, than by hard thoughts of him, as if fury
were in him, and when we have provoked him, he were not to be appeased and
reconciled to us. We disparage the Goodness and Truth of God, when we distrust
those gracious declarations which he has made of his mercy and goodness, if we
do not think that he does heartily pity and compassionate sinners, and really
dedesire their happiness. Does not he condescend so low as to represent himself
afflicted for the miseries of Men, and to rejoice in the conversion of a
Sinner? and shall not we believe that he is in good earnest? Does Christ weep
over impenitent Sinners, because they will not know the things of their peace?
and can thou think he will not pardon thee upon thy repentance? Is he grieved
that Men will undo themselves, and will not be saved? and can thou think that
he is unwilling to forgive? We cannot honor and glorify God more, than by
entertaining great thoughts of his Mercy. As we are said to glorify God by our
repentance, because thereby we acknowledge God's holiness and justice; so we
glorify him by believing his mercy, because we conceive a right opinion of his
goodness and truth; we set to our Seal that God is merciful and true; Psalm.
147.11. it is said, That God takes pleasure in them that hope in his mercy. As
he delights in mercy, so in our acknowledgments of it; that Sinners should
conceive great hopes of it, and believe him to be what he is. Provided thou
do submit to the terms of God's mercy, thou have no reason to despair of it;
and he that thinks that his sins are more or greater than the mercy of God can
pardon, must think that there may be more evil in the Creature than there is
goodness in God.

Use 5. By way of Caution against the presumptuous Sinner. If there be any that
trespass upon the goodness of God, and presume to encourage themselves in sin
upon the hopes of his mercy, let such know, that God is just as well as
merciful. A God all of mercy is an Idol, such a God as Men set up in their own
imaginations; but not the true God, whom the Scriptures describe. To such
persons the Scripture describes him after another manner; Nah. 1.2. God is
jealous, the Lord revengeth and is furious, the Lord will take vengeance on his
adversaries, and reserveth wrath for his enemies. If any Man abuse the mercy of
God to the strengthening of himself in his own wickedness, and bless himself in
his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of my own
heart, and add drunkeness to thirst: The Lord will not spare him, but the anger
of the Lord and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses
that are written in this book shall lie upon him, and he will blot out his name
from under heaven, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.

Though it be the nature of God to be merciful, yet the exercise of his mercy
is regulated by his Wisdom; he will not be merciful to those that despise his
mercy, to those that abuse it, to those that are resolved to go on in their
sins to tempt his mercy, and make bold to say, Let us sin that grace may
abound. God designs his mercy for those that are prepared to receive it; Is.
55.7. Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts,
and turn unto the Lord, and he will have mercy, and to our God, for he will
abundantly pardon. The mercy of God is an enemy to sin, as well as his justice;
and it is no where offered to countenance sin, but to convert the sinner; and is
not intended to encourage our impenitency, but our repentance. God has no
where said that he will be merciful to those, who upon the score of his mercy
are bold with him, and presume to offend him; but the mercy of the Lord is upon
them that fear him, and keep his covenant, and remember his commandments to do
them. There is forgiveness with him, that he may be feared; but not that he may
be despised and affronted. This is to contradict the very end of God's mercy,
which is to lead us to repentance, to engage us to leave our sins, not to
encourage us to continue in them.

Take heed then of abusing the mercy of God; we cannot provoke the justice of
God more than by presuming upon his mercy. This is the time of God's mercy, use
this opportunity; if thou neglectest it, a day of justice and vengeance is
coming; Romans 2.4, 5. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, not knowing
that the goodness of God leads to repentance? And treasurest up to thy self
wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation of the righteous judgment of
God? Now is the manifestation of God's mercy; but there is a time a coming,
when the righteous Judgment of God will be revealed against those who abuse his
mercy, not knowing that the goodness of God leads to repentance. To think
that the goodness of God was intended for any other end than to take us off
from sin, is a gross and affected ignorance that will ruin us; and they who
draw any conclusion from the mercy of God, which may harden them in their sins,
they are such as the Prophet speaks of, Is. 27.11. A people of no
understanding; therefore he that made them will not save them, and he that
formed them will have no mercy on them. Mercy it self will rejoice in the ruin
of those that abuse it, and it will aggravate their Condemnation. There is no
person toward whom God will be more severely just, than toward such. The
justice of God exasperated, and set on by his injured and abused mercy, like a
Razor set in Oil, will have the keener edge, and be the sharper for its
smoothness. Those that have made the mercy of God their Enemy, must expect the
worst his justice can do unto them.

SERMON VI. Vol VII.
The Patience of God.
2 PET. III.9. The Lord is not slack concerning his Promise, as some Men count
slackness; but is long-suffering, not willing that any should perish, but that
all should come to Repentance.


IN the beginning of this Chapter, the Apostle puts the Christians, to whom he
writes, in mind of the Predictions of the ancient Prophets, and of the Apostles
of our Lord and Savior, concerning the general Judgment of the World, which by
many (and perhaps by the Apostles themselves) had been thought to be very near,
and that it would presently follow the destruction of Jerusalem; but he tells
them, that before that, there would arise a certain Sect, or sort of Men, that
would deride the expectation of a future Judgment, designing probably the
Carpocratians (a branch of that large Sect of the Gnostics) of whom St. Austin
expressly says, That they denied the Resurrection, and consequently a future
Judgment. These St. Peter calls Scoffers, v. 3, 4. Knowing this first, that
there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, and
saying, Where is the promise of his coming? The word is (...), which signifies
a Declaration in general, whether it be by way of Promise or Threatening. What
is become of that Declaration of Christ so frequently repeated in the Gospel,
concerning his coming to Judgment? For since the Fathers fell asleep, or,
saving that the Fathers are fallen asleep, except only that Men die, and one
Generation succeeds another, all things continue as they were from the creation
of the world; that is, the World continues still as it was from the beginning,
and there is no sign of any such change and alteration as is foretold. To this
he answers two things.

1. That these Scoffers, though they took themselves to be Wits, did betray great
Ignorance, both of the condition of the World, and of the nature of God. They
talked very ignorantly concerning the World, when they said, All things
continued as they were from the Creation of it, when so remarkable a change had
already happened, as the destruction of it by Water; and therefore the Prediction
concerning the destruction of it by Fire, before the great and terrible day of
Judgment, was no ways incredible. And they showed themselves likewise very
ignorant of the Perfection of the Divine Nature, to which, being eternally the
same, a thousand years and one day are all one; and if God make good his word
some thousand of Years hence, it will make no sensible difference, considering
his eternal duration, it being no matter when a duration begins, which is never
to have an end; v. 8. Be not ignorant of this one thing, that one day is with
the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. This, it seems,
was a common saying among the Jews, to signify, that to the Eternity of God,
no finite duration bears any proportion; and therefore with regard to Eternity,
it is all one whether it be a thousand Years or one Day. The Psalmist has an
Expression much to the same purpose, Psalm. 90.4. For a thousand years in thy
sight are but as yesterday when it is past; and as a watch in the night. And
the Son of Sirach likewise, Ecclus. 18.10. As a drop of water to the sea, and
as a grain of sand to the sea shore, so are a thousand years to the days of
eternity. The like Expression we meet with in Heathen Writers; To the Gods no
time is long, says Pythagoras: And Plutarch, The whole space of a Man's life
to the Gods is as nothing. And in his excellent Discourse of the slowness of
the Divine Vengeance, (the very Argument St. Peter is here upon) he has this
Passage, That a thousand, or ten thousand years, are but as an indivisible
point to an infinite duration. And therefore when the Judgment is to be
eternal, the delay of it, though it were for a thousand Years, is an Objection
of no force, against either the certainty, or the terror of it; for to
Eternity, all time is equally short; and it matters not when the punishment of
Sinners begins, if it shall never have an end.

2. But because the distance between the Declaration of a future Judgment, and
the coming of it, though it be nothing to God, yet it seemed long to them;
therefore he gives such an account of it, as does not in the least impeach the
truth and faithfulness of God, but is a clear argument and demonstration of his
goodness. Admitting what they said to be true, that God delays Judgment for a
great while, yet this gives no ground to conclude that Judgment will never be;
but it shows the great goodness of God to sinners, that he gives them so long a
space of repentace, that so they may prevent the terror of that day whenever it
comes, and escape that dreadful ruin which will certainly overtake, sooner or
later, all impenitent sinners; The Lord is not slack concerning his promise;
that is, as to the Declaration which he has made of a future Judgment, as some
Men account slackness; That is, as if the delay of Judgment were an argument it
would never come. This is a false inference from the delay of punishment, and
an ill interpretation of the goodness of God to sinners, who bears long with
them, and delays Judgment, on purpose to give men time to repent, and by
repentance to prevent their own eternal ruin; God is not slack concerning his
promise, as some men count slackness; but is long suffering to usward, not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. In the
handling of these words, I shall do these three things.

First, I shall consider the patience and long-suffering of God, as it is an
Attribute and Perfection of the Divine Nature; God is long-suffering to usward.

Secondly, I shall show, that the Patience of God, and the delay of Judgment,
is no just ground why sinners should hope for Impunity, as the Scoffers, here
foretold by the Apostle, argued, That because our Lord delayeth his coming to
Judgment so long, therefore he would never come; God is not slack concerning
his promise, as some men count slackness.

Thirdly, I will consider the true Reason of God's Patience and long-suffering
toward Mankind, which the Apostle here gives; He is long-suffering to usward,
not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.

First, I will consider the Patience and long-suffering of God toward Mankind,
as it is an Attribute and Perfection of the Divine Nature; God is
long-suffering to usward. In the handling of this, I shall do these three
things.

I. I shall show what is meant by the Patience and long-suffering of God.

II. That this is a Perfection of the Divine Nature.

III. I shall give some proof and demonstration of the great Patience and
long-suffering of God to Mankind.

I. What is meant by the Patience and long-suffering of God.

The Hebrew word signifies one that keeps his anger long, or that is long
before he is angry. In the New Testament it is sometimes expressed by the word
(...), which signifies God's forbearance and patient waiting for our
repentance; some times by the word (...), which signifies God's holding in his
wrath, and restraining himself from punishing; and sometimes by (...), which
signifies the extent of his patience, his long-suffering and forbearing for a
long time the punishment due to sinners.

So that the patience of God is his goodness to sinners, in deferring or
moderating the punishment due to them for their sins; the deferring of deserved
punishment in whole or in part, which if it be extended to a long time, it is
properly his long-suffering; and the moderating, as well as the deferring of
the punishment due to sin, is an instance likewise of God's patience; and not
only the deferring and moderating of temporal punishment, but the adjourning of
the eternal misery of sinners, is a principal instance of God's patience; so
that the patience of God takes in all that space of repentance which God
affords to sinners in this life; nay, all temporal judgments and afflictions
which befall sinners in this life, and are short of cutting them off and turning
them into Hell, are comprehended in the patience of God. Whenever God
punishes, it is of his great mercy and patience that we are not consumed, and
because his compassions fail not. I proceed to the

II. Thing I proposed, which was to show, that Patience is a Perfection of the
Divine Nature.

It is not necessarily due to us, but it is due to the Perfection of the Divine
Nature, and essentially belongs to it; it is a principal branch of God's
goodness, which is the highest and most glorious Perfection of all other, and
therefore we always find it in Scripture, in the company of God's milder and
sweeter Attributes. When God would give the most perfect description of
himself, and as he says to Moses, make all his glory to pass before us, he
usually does it by those Attributes which declare his Goodness; and Patience is
always one of them, Exodus 34.6. The Lord passed by before Moses, and
proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long-suffering,
abundant in goodness and truth. Psalm. 86.15. But thou, O Lord, art a God full
of compassion, and gracious, long suffering, and plenteous in mercy and truth.
Psalm. 103.8. The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in
mercy. And the same you find, Psalm. 145.8 Jonah 4.2. Joel 2.13.

Sometimes indeed you find a severer Attribute added to these, as that he will
by no means clear the guilty, Exodus 34.7. But it is always put in the last
place, to declare to us, that God's goodness, and mercy, and patience, are his
first and primary Perfections; and it is only when these fail, and have no
effect upon us, but are abused by us to the encouragement of our selves in an
impenitent course, that his Justice takes place.

Nay, even among Men it is esteemed a Perfection to be able to forbear and to
restrain our anger; Passion is impotency and folly, but Patience is power and
wisdom; Prove. 14.29. He that is hasty of spirit exalts folly; but he that is
slow to wrath, is of great understanding. Prove. 16.32. He that is slow to
wrath, is better than the mighty: and he that rules his spirit, than he that
conquereth a city. Romans 12.21. Be not overcome of Evil: but overcome Evil with
good. To be impatient is to be overcome, but to forbear anger and revenge is a
victory. Patience is an argument of great power and command of our selves, and
therefore God himself, who is the most powerful Being, is slow to anger, and of
infinite patience; and nothing does more declare the Power of God, than his
Patience, that when he is provoked by such vile and despicable Creatures as we
are, he can withhold his hand from destroying us. This is the argument which
Moses uses Numb. 14.17, 18. that the Power of God, does so eminently appear in
his patience; And now, I pray thee, let the power of my Lord be great, as he
has spoken, saying, the Lord is gracious and long-suffering. And yet Power,
where it is not restrained by wisdom and goodness, is a great temptation to
anger; because where there is Power, there is something to back it and make it
good. And therefore the Psalmist does recommend and set off the Patience of
God, from the consideration of his Power; Psalm. 7.11. God is strong and
patient, God is provoked every day; God is strong, and therefore patient; or he
is infinitely patient, notwithstanding his Almighty Power to revenge the daily
provocations of his Creatures.

Among Men, anger and weakness commonly go together; but they are ill matched,
as is excellently observed by the Son of Sirach, Ecclus. 10.18. Pride was not
made for man, nor furious anger for him that is born of a woman. So that anger
and impatience is every where unreasonable. Where there is Power, impatience is
below it, and a thing too mean for Omnipotency; and where there wants Power,
anger is above it; it is too much for a weak and impotent Creature to be angry.
Where there is Power, anger is needless and of no use; and where there is no
Power, it is vain and to no purpose. So that Patience is every where a
Perfection, both in God and Man. I proceed to the

III. Thing I proposed, which was to give some proof and demonstration of the
great patience and long-suffering of God to Mankind. And this will evidently
appear, if we consider these two things.

1. How Men deal with God.

2. How, notwithstanding this, God deals with them.

1. How Men deal with God. Every day we highly offend and provoke him, we
grieve and weary him with our Iniquities, as the Expression is in the Prophet,
Isa. 43.24. Thou have made me to serve with thy sins, thou have wearied me with
thine iniquities. Every sin that we commit, is an affront to the Divine
Majesty, and a contempt of his Authority. By denying submission to his Laws, we
question his Omnipresence, and say, Does God see? and is there knowledge in the
most high? Or if we acknowledge his Omnipresence, and that he regards what we
do, the provocation is still the greater, because then we affront him to his
face; we dare his Justice, and challenge his Omnipotency, and provoke the Lord
to jealousy, as if we were stronger than he.

Is not God patient, when the whole world lies in wickedness, and the earth is
overspread with violence, and is full of the habitations of cruelty? when he
who is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, and is so highly offended at the
sins of Men, has yet the patience to look upon them that deal treacherously,
and to hold his peace? when the wicked persecutes and devours the man that is
more righteous than he? when even that part of the World which professes the
Name of God and Christ, do by their vile and obominable lives, blaspheme that
holy and glorious name whereby they are called?

Every moment God has greater injuries done to him, and more affronts put upon
him, than were ever offered to all the Sons of Men; and surely provocations are
trials of patience, especially when they are so numerous and so heinous; for if
offenses rise according to the dignity of the person injured, and the meanness
of him that does the injury, then no offenses are so great as those that are
committed by Men against God, no affronts like to those which are offered to
the Divine Majesty by the continual provocations of his Creatures. And is not
this an argument of God's patience, that the glorious Majesty of Heaven should
bear such multiplied indignities from such vile Worms? that he who is the
Former of all things, should endure his own Creatures to rebel against him, and
the work of his hands to strike at him? that he who is our great Benefactor
should put up such affronts from those who depend upon his bounty, and are
maintained at his charge? that he, in whose hands our breath is, should suffer
Men to breath out Oaths, and Curses, and Blasphemies against him? Surely these
prove the patience of God to purpose, and are equally trials and arguments of
it.

2. The Patience of God will further appear, if we consider how,
notwithstanding all this, God deals with us. He is patient to the whole World,
in that he does not turn us out of Being, and turn the wicked together into
hell, with all the nations that forget God. He is patient to the greatest part
of Mankind, in that he makes but a few terrible Examples of his Justice, that
others may hear and fear, and take warning by them. He is patient to particular
persons, in that, notwithstanding our daily provocations, he prevents us daily
with the blessings of his goodness, prolonging our lives, and vouchsafing so
many favors to us, that by this great goodness we may be led to repentance.

But the Patience of God will more illustriously appear, if we consider these
following particulars, which are so many Evidences and Instances of it.

1. That God is not obliged to spare and forbear us at all. It is patience that
he does not surprise us in the very act of sin, and let fly at us with a
Thunderbolt so soon as ever we have offended; that the wrath of God does not
fall upon the intemperate person, as it did upon the Israelites, whilst the
meat and drink is yet in their mouths; that a Man is not struck dead or mad
whilst he is telling a Lie; that the Soul of the profane and false Swearer
does not expire with his Oaths and Perjuries.

2. That God spares us when it is in his power so easily to ruin us; when he
can with one word command us out of Being, and by cutting asunder one little
thread, let us drop into Hell. If God were disposed to severity, he could deal
with us after another manner; and as the expression is in the Prophet, ease
himself of his Adversaries, and be avenged of his Enemies.

3. That God exercises this patience to Sinners, flagrante bello, while they
are up in Arms against him, and committing Hostilities upon him; he bears with
us, even when we are challenging his Justice to punish us, and provoking his
Power to destroy us.

4. That he is so very slow and unwilling to punish, and to inflict his
Judgments upon us. As for eternal Punishments, God defers them a long while;
and by all proper ways and means endeavors to prevent them, and to bring us to
repentance. And as for those temporal Judgments which God inflicts upon
Sinners, he carries himself so, that we may plainly see all the signs of
unwillingness that can be; he trys to prevent them, he is loath to set about
this work; and when he does, it is with much reluctance; and then he is easily
persuaded and prevailed withal not to do it; and when he does, he does it not
rigorously, and to extremity; and he is soon taken off after he is engaged in
it. All which are great instances and evidences of his wonderful patience to
Sinners.

(1.) God's unwillingness to punish appears, in that he labors to prevent
punishment; and that he may effectually do this, he endeavors to prevent sin,
the meritorious Cause of God's Judgments. To this end he has threatened it
with severe punishments, that the dread of them may make us afraid to offend;
and if this will not do, he does not yet give us over, but gives us a space of
repentance, and invites us earnestly to turn to him, and thereby to prevent his
Judgments; he expostulates with Sinners, and reasons the case with them, as if
he were more concerned not to punish, than they are not to be punished; and
thus by his earnest desire of our repentance, he shows how little he desires
our ruin.

(2.) He is long before he goes about this work. Judgment is in Scripture
called his strange work; as if he were not acquainted with it, and hardly knew
how to go about it on the sudden. He is represented as not prepared for such a
work, Deuteronomy. 32.41. If I whet my glittering Sword; as if the Instruments of
Punishment were not ready for us. Nay, by a strange kind of condescension to
our Capacities, and to set forth to us the patience of God, and his slowness to
wrath, after the manner of Men, he is represented as keeping out of the way,
that he may not be tempted to destroy us; Exodus 33.2, 3. where he tells Moses,
that he would send an Angel before them, but I will not go up in the midst of
thee, lest I consume thee in the way.

At works of Mercy he is very ready and forward. When Daniel prayed for the
deliverance of the People of Israel out of Captivity, the Angel tells him, that
at the beginning of his supplication, the commandment came forth, to bring him
a promise of their deliverance. The mercy of God many times prevents our
Prayers, and outruns our Wishes and Desires: but when he comes to affliction,
he takes time to do it; he passes by many provocations, and waits long in
expectation, that by our repentance we will prevent his Judgments; he hearkened
and heard (says God in the Prophet Jeremiah) but they spoke not aright, no man
repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? He is represented as
waiting and listening, to hear if any penitent word would drop from them; he
gives the Sinner time to repent and reflect upon his actions, and to consider
what he has done, and space to reason himself into repentance. For this reason
the Judgments of God do often follow the sins of Men at a great distance,
otherwise he could easily make them mend their pace, and consume us in a moment.

(3.) When he goes about this work, he does it with much reluctance, Amos 11.8,
9. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel? mine
heart is turned within me, and my repentings are kindled together. He is
represented as making many essays and offers before he came to it. Psalm.
106.26. Many a time lifted he up his hand in the wilderness to destroy them. He
made as if he would do it, and let fall his hand again, as if he could not find
in his heart to be so severe. God witholds his Judgments till he is weary of
holding in, as the Expression is, Jer. 6.11. till he can forbear no longer.
Jer. 44.22. So that the Lord could no longer bear, because of the evil of your
doings, and because of the abominations, which ye have committed.

(4.) God is easily prevailed upon not to punish. When he seemed resolved upon
it, to destroy the murmuring Israelites, yet how often, at the intercession of
Moses, did he turn away his wrath? That he will accept of very low terms to
spare a very wicked People, appears by the instance of Sodom, where if there
had been but ten righteous persons, he would not have destroyed them for the
ten's sake. Yea, when his truth seemed to have been pawned, (at least in the
apprehension of his Prophet) yet even then repentance took him off, as in the
case of Nineveh. Nay, how glad is he to be thus prevented! with what joy does
he tell the Prophet the news of Ahab's humiliation! See thou how Ahab
humbles himself? Because he humbles himself, I will not bring the evil in his
days.

(5.) When he punishes, he does it very seldom rigorously, and to extremity,
not so much as we deserve; Psalm. 103.10. He has not dealt with us after our
sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities. Nor so much as he can; he
does not let loose the fierceness of his anger, nor pour forth all his wrath;
Psalm. 78.38. Being full of compassion, he forgave their iniquity, and destroyed
them not; yea many a time turned he his anger away, and did not stir up all his
wrath.

(6.) After he has begun to punish, and is engaged in the work, he is not hard
to be taken off. There is a famous instance of this, 2. Sam. 24. when God had
sent three days Pestilence upon Israel for David's sin in numbering the People,
and at the end of the third day, the Angel of the Lord had stretched forth his
hand over Jerusalem to destroy it, upon the Prayer of David, it is said, that
the Lord repented of the evil, and said to the Angel that destroyed, It is
enough, stay now thine hand. Nay, so ready is God to be taken off from this
work, that he sets a high value upon those who stand in the gap to turn away
his wrath; Numb. 25.11, 12, 13. Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, has turned my
wrath away from the children of Israel, that I consumed them not in my
jealousy; wherefore behold I give unto him my covenant of peace, and to his
seed after him, because he was zealous for his God, and made an atonement for
the children of Israel. That which God values in this action of Phinehas, next
to his zeal for him, is, that he turned away his wrath, and made an atonement
for the Children of Israel.

5. and Lastly, The patience of God will yet appear with further advantage, if
we consider some eminent and remarkable Instances of it; which are so much the
more considerable, because they are instances, not only of God's patience
extended to a long time, but to a great many persons. The long-suffering of God
waited in the days of Noah upon the whole World, as is probably conjectured,
for the space of an hundred and twenty years. God bore with the People of
Israel in the Wilderness, after they had tempted him ten times, for the space
of forty Years; Acts 13.18. And about the space of forty years suffered he
their manners in the Wilderness. And this instance of God's patience will be
the more remarkable, if we compare it with the great impatience of that People;
if they did but want Flesh or Water, they were out of patience with God; when
Moses was in the Mount with God but forty days, they presently fall to make new
Gods; they had not the patience of forty days, and yet God bore their manners
forty years. God had spared Niniveh for some Ages, and when his patience was
even expired, and he seems to have past a final Sentence upon it, yet he grants
a Reprieve for forty days, that they might sue out their Pardon in that time,
and they did so; they turned from their evil ways, and God turned from the evil
he said he would do to them, and he did it not.

But the most remarkable instance of God's long-suffering is to the Jews, if we
consider it with all the circumstances of it; after they had rejected the Son
of God, notwithstanding the purity of his Doctrine, and the power of his
Miracles; after they had unjustly condemned, and cruelly murdered the Lord of
life, yet the patience of God respited the ruin of that People forty Years.

Besides all these, there are many instances of God's patience to particular
Persons; but it were endless to enumerate these; every one of us may be an
instance to our selves of God's long-suffering.

I shall only add, as a further advantage to set off the patience of God to
Sinners, that his forbearance is so great, that he has been complained of for
it by his own Servants. Job, who was so patient a Man himself, thought much at
it; Job 21.7, 8. Wherefore does the wicked live, yea, become old? Their seed is
established in their sight, and their posterity before their eyes. Jonah
challenges God for it, Chapter 4.2. Was not this that which I said when I was yet
in my own country? and therefore I fled before unto Tarshish, because I knew
thou art a gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger, etc. Jonah had observed
God to be so prone to this, that he was loath to be sent upon his Message, least
God should discredit his Prophet, in not being so good (shall I say) so severe
as his word.

I have done with the first thing I proposed to speak to, viz. The great
patience and long-suffering of God to Mankind.

SERMON VII. Vol. VII.
The Patience of God.
2 PET. III.9. The Lord is not slack concerning his Promise, as some Men count
slackness; but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to Repentance.


I Have made entrance into these words, in the handling of which, I proposed to
do these three things.

First, To consider the patience and long-suffering of God, as it is an
Attribute and Perfection of the Divine Nature; God is long suffering to usward.

Secondly, To show that the Patience of God, and the delay of his Judgment, is
no just ground why Sinners should hope for impunity; God is not slack
concerning his promise, as some men count slackness.

Thirdly, To consider the true reason of God's patience and long-suffering
toward Mankind; He is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance. I have already spoken to the

First of these, namely, The patience and long-suffering of God, as it is an
Attribute and Perfection of the Divine Nature. I proceed now to the

Second thing I proposed, namely, To show that the Patience of God, and the
delay of Judgment, is no just ground why Sinners should hope for impunity; God
is not slack concerning his promise, as some men count slackness; that is, as
the Scoffers here mentioned by the Apostle, did ignorantly and maliciously
reason, that because our Lord delayed his coming to Judgment so long, therefore
he would never come.

There was indeed some pretense for this Objection, because the Christians did
generally apprehend, that the day of Judgment was very near, and that it would
immediately follow the destruction of Jerusalem; and it seems the Disciples
themselves were of that persuasion before our Savior's death, when our Savior
discoursing to them of the destruction of the Temple, they put these two
questions to him, Mat. 24.3. And as he sat upon the mount of Olives, the
disciples came unto him privately, saying, When shall these things be? and what
shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world? When shall these
things be? That is, the things he had been speaking of immediately before, viz.
the destruction of Jerusalem, and the dissolution of the Temple; that is
plainly the meaning of the first question, to which they subjoined another, And
what shall be the sign of thy coming? that is to Judgment; and of the end of
the world? which in all probability, was added to the former; because they
supposed that the one was presently to follow the other, and therefore the same
answer would serve them both; and it appears by our Savior's answer, that he
was not concerned to rectify them in this mistake, which might be of good use
to them, both to make them more zealous to propagate the Gospel, since there
was like to be so little time for it; and likewise to wean their affections
from this World, which they thought to be so near an end.

One thing indeed our Savior says, which (had they not been prepossest with
another Opinion) does sufficiently intimate that there might be a considerable
space of time, betwixt the destruction of Jerusalem and the day of Judgment;
and this we find only in St. Luke, Chapter 21.24. where speaking of the Miseries
and Calamities that should come upon the Jews, he says, They shall fall by the
edge of the sword, and be carried into captivity into all nations; and
Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the time of the Gentiles
be fulfilled. So that here were a great many Events foretold, betwixt the
destruction of Jerusalem and the end of the World, the accomplishment whereof
might take up a great deal of time, as appears by the Event of things,
Jerusalem being at this day still trodden down by the Gentiles, and the Jews
still continuing dispersed over the world: but the Disciples it seems did not
much mind this, being carried away with a prejudicate conceit that the end of
the World would happen before the end of that Age; in which they were much
confirmed, by what our Savior, after his Resurrection, said of St. John, upon
occasion of Peter's question concerning him; John 21.21, 22. Lord, what shall
this man do? Jesus says unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is
that to thee? Upon which words of our Savior concerning him, St. John himself
adds, v. 23. Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that
disciple should not die, that is, that he should live till the coming of our
Lord, and then be taken up with him into Heaven; from all which they probably
(as they thought) concluded, that the day of Judgment would happen before the
end of that Age, whilst St. John was alive; but St. John, who writ last of all
the Evangelists (as Eusebius tells us) and lived till after the destruction of
Jerusalem, as he acquaints us with this mistake, which was current among the
Christians, so he takes care to rectify it, telling us, That Jesus said not,
he should not die; but if I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to
thee? He tells us, that our Savior did not affirm that he should not die; but
to repress St Peter's Curiosity, he says, If it were my pleasure that he should
not die at all, but live till I come to Judgment, what is that to thee? And St.
Peter likewise (or whoever was the Author of this second Epistle, or at least
of this third Chapter, which seems to be a new Epistle by it self) takes notice
of this mistake, about the nearness of the day of Judgment, as that which gave
occasion to these Scoffers to deride the expectation of a future Judgment among
the Christians, because they had been already deceived about the time of it;
and this the Scoffers twitted them with in that Question, Where is the promise
of his coming? And therefore the learned Grotius conjectures very probably,
that this last Epistle (contained in the third Chapter) was written after the
destruction of Jerusalem, which was the time fixed for Christ's coming to
Judgment, and therefore there could be no ground for this Scoff till after that
time. St. Peter indeed did not live so long, and therefore Grotius thinks, that
this Epistle was writ by Simeon, or Simon, who was Successor of St. James, in
the Bishopric of Jerusalem, and lived to the time of Trajan.

I have been the longer in giving an account of this, that we might understand
where the ground and force of this Scoff lay; namely in this, That because the
Christians had generally been very confident, that the coming of Christ to
Judgment would be presently after the destruction of Jerusalem, and were now
found to be deceived in that, therefore there was no regard to be had at all to
their expectation of a future Judgment; because they might be deceived in that,
as well as in the other.

But herein they argued very falsely, because our Savior had positively and
peremptorily foretold his coming to Judgment, but had never fixed and determined
the time of it; nay, so far was he from that, that he had plainly told his
Disciples, that the precise time of the day of Judgment God had reserved as a
Secret to himself, which he had not imparted to any, no, not to the Angels in
Heaven, nor to the Son himself; Mark 13.32, 33. But of that day and hour
knows no man, no not the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the
Father. Take ye heed, watch and pray: for ye know not when the time is. So that
if they presumed to make any conjectures about the time when the day of
Judgment would be, they did it without any Warrant from our Lord; it was great
presumption in them to determine the time of it, when our Savior had so
expressly told them, that the Father had reserved this as a Secret, which he had
never communicated to any, and therefore if they were mistaken about it, it was
no wonder. But their mistake in this, was no prejudice to the truth of our
Savior's clear Prediction of a future Judgment, without any determination of
the time of it, for that might be at some thousands of Years distance, and yet
be certain for all that; and the delay of it was no sign of the uncertainty of
our Savior's Prediction concerning it, but only of God's great Patience and
long-suffering to Sinners, in expectation of their Repentance; God is not slack
concerning his promise, as some men count slackness, but is long-suffering to
usward. And this brings me to the

Third, and last Particular in the Text, namely, The true Reason of God's
Patience and long-suffering to Mankind; He is long-suffering to usward, not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. And for
this St. Peter cites St. Paul, v. 15 th of this Chapter; And account that the
long-suffering of the Lord is salvation, that is, that the great End and Design
of God's goodness and long-suffering to Sinners, is that they may repent and be
saved; Account that the long-suffering of our Lord is salvation, even as our
beloved brother Paul also, according to the wisdom given unto him, has written
unto you. Now these words are not expressly found in St. Paul's Writings; but
the Sense and Effect of them is, viz. in Romans 2.4. Despisest thou the riches of
his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the
goodness of God leads thee to repentance? God has a very gracious and
merciful design in his Patience to Sinners; he is good, that he may make us so,
and that his goodness may lead us to repentance; he defers Punishment on
purpose, that he may give Men time to bethink themselves, and to return to a
better Mind; He winks at the sins of men, that they may repent, says the Son of
Sirach. The Patience of God aims at the cure and recovery of those, who are not
desperately and resolutely wicked.

This is the primary End and Intention of God's Patience to Sinners; and if he
fail of this End through our hardness and impenitency, he has other Ends which
he will infallibly attain. He will hereby glorify the riches of his Mercy, and
vindicate the righteousness of his Justice; the damned in Hell shall
acknowledge, that the Patience of God was great Mercy and Goodness to them,
though they abused it; for God does not lose the glory of his Patience, though we
lose the benefit of it, and he will make it subvervient to his Justice one way
or other. Those great Offenders whom he spares, after there are no hopes of
their amendment, he many times makes use of, as Instruments for the punishing
of others, as rods of his wrath for the discipline of the world; and he often
reserves those who are incorrigibly bad for a more remarkable ruin. But
however, they are reserved to the Judgment of the great Day; and if after God
has exercised much Patience toward Sinners in this World, he inflict
Punishment on them in the next, it must be acknowledged to be most just; for
what can he do less, than to condemn those who would not be saved, and to make
them miserable, who so obstinately refused to be happy?

Before I come to apply this Discourse concerning the Patience and
long-suffering of God to Sinners, I must remove an Objection or two.

I. The Severity of God to some Sinners in this Life, and to all impenitent
Sinners in the next, seems to contradict what has been said concerning God's
Patience and long-suffering.

As for the severity of God toward impenitent Sinners in the next Life, this
does not at all contradict the Patience of God, because the very nature of
Patience, and forbearance, and long-suffering, does suppose a determinate time,
and that they will not last always; this Life is the day of God's Patience, and
in the next World his Justice and Severity will take place. And therefore the
punishment of Sinners in another World, after God has tried them in this, and
expected their Repentance, is no ways contrary to his Patience and Goodness,
and very agreeable to his Wisdom and Justice; for it is no part of Goodness, to
see it self perpetually abused; it is not Patience, but stupidity and
insensibleness, to endure to be always trampled upon, and to bear to have his
holy and just Laws for ever despised and contemned.

And as for his Severity to some Sinners in this Life; as to Lot's Wife, to the
Israelites that gathered Sticks on the Sabbath Day, to Nadab and Abihu, to
Vzza, to Ananias and Sapphira, and to Herod Agrippa; in all which Instances God
seems to have made quick work, and to have executed Judgment speedily; to these
I answer, That this Severity of God to some few, does rather magnify his
Patience to the rest of Mankind; he may be severe to some few, for Example and
warning to many, that they may learn to make better use of his Patience, and
not to trespass so boldly upon it; and perhaps he has exercised much Patience
already toward those, to whom at last he is so severe; as is plain in the case
of Herod, and it may well be supposed in most of the other Instances; or else
the Sin so suddenly and severely punished, was very heinous and presumptuous, of
a contagious and spreading nature, and of dangerous Example. Lot's Wife sinned
very presumptuously against an express and an easy Command, and whilst God was
taking care of her deliverance in a very extraordinary manner. That of Nadab
and Abihu, and of the Man that gathered Sticks on the Sabbath Day, were
presently after the giving of the Law; in which case great severity is
necessary; and that of Ananias and Sapphira, at the first publishing of the
Gospel, that the Majesty of the Divine Spirit, and the Authority of the first
publishers of it might not be contemned. That of Vzza was upon the return of
the Ark of God from among the Philistines, that the People might not lose their
reverence for it after it had been taken Captive; so that these necessary
Severities to a few, in comparison of those many that are warned by them, are
rather Arguments of God's Patience, than Objections against it.

II. It is objected, That if God do not desire the ruin of Sinners, but their
repentance, whence comes it to pass, that all are not brought to repentance?
for who has resisted his Will? To this I answer.

1. That there is no doubt but God is able to do this. He can, if he pleases,
conquer and reclaim the most obstinate Spirits; he is able out of stones to
raise up children unto Abraham. And sometimes he exerts his Omnipotence herein,
as in the Conversion of St. Paul, in a kind of violent and irresistible manner:
but he has no where declared, that he will do this to all; and we see plainly
in experience, that he does not do it.

2. God may very well be said, not to be willing that any should perish, but
that all should come to repentance, when he does on his part what is sufficient
to that end; and upon this ground, the Scripture every where represents God as
desiring the repentance of Sinners, and their obedience to his Laws; Deuteronomy.
5.29. O that there were such a heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep
all my commandments always, that it might be well with them! So Jer. 13.27. O
Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean? when shall it once be? Is. 5.3, 4. we
find God there solemnly appealing to the People of Israel, whether there had
been any thing wanting on his part that was fit to be done; And now, O
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I pray you, betwixt me and
my vineyard. What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not
done to it? wherefore when I looked it should bring forth grapes, brought it
forth wild grapes? God may justly look for the Fruits of Repentance and
Obedience from those, to whom he affords a sufficiency of Means to that End.
And if so, then

3. The true Reason why Men do not repent, but perish, is because they are
obstinate, and will not repent; and this account the Scripture every where
gives of the impenitency of Men, and the ruin consequent upon it. Psalm. 81.13.
O that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my statutes!
But my people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me. Ezekiel.
33.11. Why will ye dye, O house of Israel? Prove. 1.29, 30, 31. They hated
knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord. They would none of my
counsels, they despised all my reproof. Therefore shall they eat the fruit of
their own ways, and be filled with their own devices. The ruin of Sinners does
not proceed from the counsel of God; but from their own choice. And so likewise
our Savior every where charge the ruin and destruction of the Jews upon
their own wilful obstinacy.

The Inferences from this Discourse concerning the Patience and long-suffering
of God toward Mankind, shall be these three.

I. To stir us up to a thankful acknowledgment of the great Patience of God
toward us, notwithstanding our manifold and heinous provocations. We may every
one of us take to our selves those words, Lam. 3.22. It is of the Lords mercy
that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not. They are renewed
every morning. When ever we sin (and we provoke God every day) it is of his
Patience that we are not destroyed; and when we sin again, this is a new and
greater Instance of God's Patience. The mercies of God's Patience are no more
to be numbered than our sins; we may say with David, How great is the sum of
them? The goodness of God in sparing us, is in some respect greater than his
goodness in creating us; because he had no provocation not to make us, but we
provoke him daily to destroy us.

II. Let us propound the Patience of God for a pattern to our selves. Plutarch
says, That God sets forth himself in the midst of the World for our Imitation,
and propounds to us the Example of his Patience, to teach us not to revenge
Injuries hastily upon one another.

III. Let us comply with the design of God's Patience and long-suffering
toward us, which is to bring us to repentance. Men are very apt to abuse it to
a quite contrary purpose, to the encouraging themselves in their evil ways. So
Solomon observes, Eccl. 8.11. Because sentence against an evil work is not
executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them
to do evil: But this is very false reasoning; for the Patience of God is an
enemy to sin, as well as his Justice, and the design of it is not to
countenance sin, but to convert the Sinner; Romans 2.4. Despisest thou the riches
of his goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the
goodness of God leads thee to repentance? Patience in God should produce
Repentance in us; and we should look upon it as an opportunity given us by God
to repent and be saved; 2 Pet. 3.15. Account that the long-suffering of God is
salvation. They that do not improve the Patience of God to their own Salvation,
mistake the true meaning and intent of it. But many are so far from making this
use of it, that they presume upon it, and sin with more courage and confidence
because of it; but that we may be sensible of the danger of this, I will offer
these two or three Considerations.

1. That nothing is more provoking to God, than the abuse of his Patience.
God's Patience waits for our Repentance, and all long attendance, even of
Inferiors upon their Superiors, has something in it that is grievous; how much
more grievous and provoking must it be to the great God, after he has laid out
upon us all the riches of his Goodness and long-suffering, to have that
despised! after his Patience has waited a long time upon us, not only to be
thrust away with contempt, but to have that which should be an argument to us
to leave our sins, abused into an encouragement to continue in them! God takes
an account of all the days of his Patience and forbearance; Luke 13.7. Behold,
these three years I come seeking fruit, and find none; cut it down; why
cumbreth it the ground?

2. Consider that the Patience of God will have an end. Though God suffers long,
he will not suffer always; we may provoke God so long, till he can forbear no
longer without injury and dishonor to his Wisdom, and Justice, and Holiness;
and God will not suffer one Attribute to wrong the rest; his Wisdom will
determine the length of his Patience; when his Patience is to no purpose, when
there is no hopes of our amendment, his Wisdom will then put a period to it;
then the Patience of his Mercy will determine. How often would I have gathered
you, and you would not? therefore your house is left unto you desolate. And the
Patience of God's Judgments will then determine. Why should they be smitten any
more? they will revolt more and more. Yea, Patience it self, after a long and
fruitless expectation, will expire. A Sinner may continue so long impenitent,
till the Patience of God, as I may say, grows impatient, and then our ruin will
make haste, and destruction will come upon us in a moment. If Men will not come
to repentance, the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, as it
follows in the next Verse after the Text; the Judgment of God will suddenly
surprise those who will not be gained by his Patience.

3. Consider that nothing will more hasten and aggravate our ruin, than the
abuse of God's Patience. All this time of God's Patience, his Wrath is coming
toward us, and the more we presume upon it, the sooner it will overtake us;
Luke 12.45, 46. The wicked servant, who said his Lord delayed his coming, and
fell to rioting and drunkenness, our Savior tells us, That the Lord of that
servant will come in a day when he looks not for him.

And it will aggravate our ruin; the longer punishment is a coming the heavier
it will be; those things which are long in preparation, are terrible in
execution; the weight of God's wrath will make amends for the slowness of it,
and the delay of Judgment will be fully recompensed in the dreadfulness of it
when it comes.

Let all those consider this who go on in their sin, and are deaf to the voice
of God's Patience, which calls upon them every moment of their lives. There is
a day of Vengeance a coming upon those who trifle away this day of God's
Patience; nothing will sooner and more inflame the wrath and displeasure of God
against us, than his abused Patience, and the despised riches of his Goodness.
As Oil, though it be soft and smooth, yet when it is once inflamed, burns most
fiercely; so the Patience of God, when it is abused, turns into Fury, and his
mildest Attributes into the greatest Severities.

And if the Patience of God do not bring us to Repentance, it will but prepare
us for a more intolerable ruin. After God has kept a long indignation in his
Breast, it will at length break forth with the greater violence. The Patience
of God increases his Judgments by an incredible kind of proportion; Levit
26.18. And if you will still (says God to the People of Israel) walk contrary
to me, and if ye will not be reformed by all these things, I will punish you
yet seven times more. And v. 27. I will bring seven times more plagues upon
you, according to your sins. At first God's Justice accuses Sinners; but after
a long time of Patience, his Mercy comes in against us, and instead of staying
his hand, adds weight to his blows; Romans 9.22. What if God willing to show his
wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much long-suffering the
vessels of wrath fitted for destruction. They, upon whom the Patience of God
has no good effect, are vessels of wrath, preapred and fitted for destruction.
If ever God display his wrath, and make his anger known, he will do it in the
most severe manner upon those who have despised and abused his Patience; for
these, in a more peculiar manner, do treasure up for themselves wrath against
the day of wrath, and the revelation of the righteous judgment of God.

To conclude, Let us all take a review of our lives, and consider how long the
Patience of God has waited upon us, and born with us; with some twenty, forty,
perhaps sixty Years, and longer. Do we not remember how God spared us in such a
danger, when we gave our selves for lost? and how he recovered us in such a
sickness, when the Physician gave us up for gone? and what use we made of this
Patience and long-suffering of God toward us? It is the worst temper in the
World, not to be melted by kindness, not to be obliged by benefits, not to be
tamed by gentle usage. He that is not wrought upon, neither by the patience of
his Mercy, nor by the patience of his Judgments, his case is desperate and past
remedy. Consider this all ye that forget God, left his Patience turn into Fury;
for God is not slack, as some men count slackness; but long-suffering to
sinners, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance.

SERMON VIII. Vol. VII.
The Long-suffering of God.
ECCLES. VIII.11. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed
speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do
evil.


NOthing is more evident, than that the world lies in wickedness, and that
iniquity every where abounds; and yet nothing is more certain, than that God
will not acquit the guilty, and let sin go unpunished. All Men, excepting those
who have offered notorious violence to the light of their own Minds, and have
put the candle of the Lord, which is in them, under a bushel, do believe, that
there is a God in the World, to whose holy Nature and Will sin is perfectly
contrary, who loves righteousness and hates iniquity, that his eyes are upon
the ways of man, and he sees all his goings, that there is no darkness nor
shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves. All Men,
except those whose Consciences are seared, as it were with a hot Iron, are
convinced of the difference of good and evil, and that it is not all one
whether men serve God or serve him not, do well, or live wickedly. Every Man
from his inward Sense and Experience is satisfied of his own Liberty, and that
God lays upon Men no necessity of sinning, but that when ever we do amiss, it
is our own act, and we choose to do so; and so far is he from giving the least
countenance to sin, that he has given all imaginable discouragement to it, by
the most severe and terrible threatenings, such as one would think sufficient to
deter Men for ever from it, and to drive it out of the World; and to make his
Threatenings the more awful and effectual, his Providence has not been wanting
to give remarkable Instances of his Justice and Severity upon notorious
Offenders, even in this life: and yet for all this, Men do and will sin; nay,
they are zealously set and bent upon it.

Now here is the wonder; what it is that gives sinners such heart, and makes
them so resolute and undaunted in so dangerous a course. Solomon gives us this
account of it, because the Punishments and Judgments of God follow the sins of
Men so slowly, and are long before they overtake the sinner, Because sentence
against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the hearts of the sons
of men are fully set in them to do evil.

The scope of the wise Man's discourse is this, That by reason of God's
forbearance and long-suffering toward sinners in this life, it is not so easy
to discern the difference between them and other Men; this life is the day of
God's Patience, but the next will be a day of retribution and recompense. Now
because God does defer and moderate the punishment of sinners in this World,
and reserve the weight of his Judgments to the next, because through the
long-suffering of God many great sinners live and dye without any remarkable
testimony of God's wrath and displeasure against them, therefore the hearts of
the children of men are fully set in them to do evil.

If we render the Text word for word from the Original, it runs thus, Because
nothing is done as a recompense to an evil work, therefore the hearts of the
sons of men are full in them to do evil; that is, because Men are not opposed
and contradicted in their evil ways, because Divine Justice does not presently
check and control sinners, because sentence is not immediately past upon them,
and judgment executed, therefore the heart of the sons of men is full in them
to do evil, that is, therefore Men grow bold and presumptuous in sin; for the
Hebrew word which we render, is fully set in them, we find Esth. 7.5. where
Ahashuerus says concerning Haman, Who is he? and where is he, that durst
presume in his heart to do so? Whose heart was full to do so, Fervet in iis cor
filiorum hominum; so some render it, the hearts of men boil with wickedness,
are so full of it, that it works over. Men are resolute in an evil course,
their hearts are strengthened and hardened in them to do evil, so others
translate the words. The Translation of the LXX is very emphatical, (...), the
heart of the sons of men is fully persuaded and assured to do evil. All these
Translations agree in the main scope and sense, viz. That sinners are very apt
to presume upon the long-suffering of God, and to abuse it, to the hardening and
encouraging of themselves in their evil ways. In the handling of this, I shall

First, Briefly show that it is so.

Secondly, Whence this comes to pass, and upon what pretenses and colors of
reason, Men encourage themselves in sin, from the Patience of God.

Thirdly, I shall endeavor to answer an Objection about this matter.

First, That Men are very apt to abuse the long-suffering of God, to the
encouraging and hardening of themselves in an evil course, the experience of the
World in all Ages does give abundant testimony. Thus it was with the old World,
when the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while he was
preparing an Ark, for the space of a hundred and twenty years, 1 Pet. 3.20. For
the wickedness of Man, which was great upon the Earth, a general deluge was
threatened, but God was patient, and delayed his Judgment a great while;
hereupon they grew secure in their impenitency, and went on in their course, as
if they had no apprehension of danger, no fear of the Judgment threatened. So
our Savior tells us, Matthew. 24.38, 39. As in the days that were before the
flood, they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until
the day that Noah entered into the Ark, and knew not until the flood came and
took them all away. And so it was with Sodom, Luke 17.28. And likewise also as
it was in the days of Lot, they eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they
planted, they built. And so our Savior tells us it will be in the end of the
World; Even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed. So
likewise the Apostle St. Paul, Romans 2.4, 5. Despisest thou the riches of his
goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of
God leads thee to repentance? But after thy hardness and impenitent heart,
treasurest up to thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation of
the righteous judgment of God. The goodness and long-suffering of God, which
ought in all reason to lead Men to repentance, is to many an occasion of
greater hardness and impenitency. So also St. Peter foretells, 2 Pet. 3.3. that
in the last days there should come scoffers, who should walk after their own
hearts lusts, saying, Where is the promise of his coming? And we see in daily
experience, that the greatest part of sinners grow more obstinate and confirmed
in their wicked ways, upon account of God's Patience, and because he delays the
punishment due to them for their sins. Let us consider in the

Second place, whence this comes to pass, and upon what pretense and color of
Reason, Men encourage themselves in sin, from the long-suffering of God. And
there is no doubt but this proceeds from our ignorance and inconsiderateness,
and from an evil heart of unbelief, from the temptation and suggestion of the
Devil, one of whose great arts it is, to make Men question the threatenings of
God, and to insinuate, as he did to our first Parents, either that he has not
denounced such threatenings, or that he will not execute them so severely. All
these Causes do concur to the producing this monstrous Effect; but that which I
design to enquire into, is, from what pretense of Reason, grounded upon the
long-suffering of God, sinners argue themselves into this confidence and
presumption. For when the wise Man says, that because sentence against an evil
work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully
set in them to do evil, he does not intend to insinuate, that God's
long-suffering fills the hearts of Men with wicked designs and resolutions, and
does by a proper and direct efficacy, harden sinners in their course; but that
wicked Men upon some account or other, do take occasion from the long-suffering
of God, to harden themselves in sin; they draw false conclusions from it to
impose upon themselves, as if it were really a ground of encouragement; they
think they see something in the forbearance of God and his delay of punishment,
which makes them hope for impunity in an evil course, notwithstanding the
threatenings of God.

And therefore I shall endeavor to show, what those false conclusions are,
which wicked Men draw from the delay of punishment, and to discover the
sophistry and fallacy of them; and I shall rank them under two Heads; those
which are more gross and atheistical, and those which are not so gross, but yet
more common and frequent.

I. Those conclusions which are more gross and atheistical, which bad Men draw
to the hardening and encourageing of themselves in sin, from the delay of
punishment (which we who believe a God, call the patience or long-suffering of
God) are these three; either that there is no God; or if there be, that there
is no Providence; or that there is no difference between Good and Evil.

I shall speak more briefly of these, because I hope there are but few in the
World of such irregular and besotted understandings, as to make such Inferences
as these from the delay of punishment.

1 st. From hence some would fain conclude, that there is no God. That some are
so absurd as to reason in this manner, the Scripture tells us, Psalm. 14.1. The
fool has said in his heart, There is no God: they are corrupt, and have done
abominable works. Now the Argument that these Men frame to themselves, is this;
God does not take a speedy course with sinners, and revenge himself immediately
upon the workers of Iniquity, therefore there is no God; for if there were, he
would show himself, and not bear the affronts of sinners, when it is so easy
for him to vindicate himself by a swift and speedy Vengeance. Thus the Poet
represents the Atheist arguing, Nullos esse deos, inane coelum, affirmat
Selius, probatque, quod se factum, dum negat hoc, videt beatum. Selius affirms
there are no Gods, and that Heaven is an empty place, and proves it, because
whilst he denis God, he sees himself in a very happy and prosperous condition.

And here it is worthy our notice, at what a contradictious rate these Men
reason. First they would have no God, lest he should be just and punish them as
they deserve; and then in another mood, they would have him to be nothing but
Justice and Severity, lest there should be a God; as if no other Notion could
be framed of the Divine Nature, but of a ^a^h Fury, and impetuous Revenge, and
an impotent Passion, which when it is offended and provoked, cannot contain it
self, and forbear punishment for a moment. Justice is not such a Perfection as
does necessarily exclude Wisdom, and Goodness, and Patience; it does in no wise
contradict the Perfection of the Divine Nature, to bear with sinners in
expectation of their repentance and amendment; or if God foresees their final
impenitency, to respit their punishment to the most fit and convenient season.
God may suffer long, and yet be resolved, if sinners persist in the abuse of
his Goodness and Patience, to execute Vengeance upon them in due time. It is a
pitiful ground of Atheism, that because God is so much better than wicked Men
deserve, they will not allow him to be at all.

2 dly, Others infer from the delay of punishment, that there is no Providence
that administers the Affairs of the World, and regards the good and bad Actions
of Men. For though the Being of God be acknowledged, yet if he do not regard what
is done here below, nor concern himself in humane Affairs, sinners are as safe
and free to do what they please, as if there were no God; and upon this ground,
the Scripture tells us, many encourage themselves in their wickedness; Psalm.
64.5. They encourage themselves in an evil matter, they commune of laying
snares privately; for they say, Who shall see them? And more expressly, Psalm.
94.4, 5, 6, 7. How long shall the workers of iniquity boast themselves? They
break in pieces thy People, O Lord, and afflict thine heritage, and slay the
widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless; and yet they say, The Lord
shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. And if this were so,
well might they encourage themselves. If it were true which Epicurus says,
That God takes no knowledge of the Actions of Men, that he is far removed from
us, and contented with himself, and not at all concerned in what we do; If this
were true, the Inference which Lucretius makes, were very just; Quare relligio
pedibus subjecta vicissim Obteritur; Men might trample Religion under their
Feet, and live without any regard to the Laws of it.

But let us see how they infer this from the long-suffering of God, that he
neglects the Affairs of the World, and has no consideration of the Actions of
Men, because they see the ungodly to prosper in the World, equally with others
that are strictly devout and virtuous, yea, many times to be in a more
prosperous and flourishing condition; they are not in trouble like other men,
neither are they plagued like other men. So that if there be a God, it seems
(say they) that he connives at the Crimes of Men, and looks on upon them that
deal treacherously, and holds his peace, whilst the wicked devoureth the man
that is more righteous than himself; as the Prophet expresses it, Hab. 1.13.

For answer to this, I shall only give this reasonable and credible Account of
the long-suffering of God, and the impunity of wicked Men in this Life, which
not only the Scripture gives us, but the Heathen were able to give from the
light of Nature, and is agreeable to the common Sense of Mankind; namely, That
this Life is a state of probation and trial, wherein God suffers men to walk in
their own ways without any visible check and restraint, and does not usually
inflict present and remarkable punishments upon them for their evil deeds;
because this being a state of trial of the dispositions and manners of Men, is
rather the proper season of Patience, than of punishments and rewards; and
therefore it is very reasonable to suppose, that God reserves sinners for a
solemn and public Trial, at the great Assizes of the World, when he will
openly vindicate the honor of his Justice, upon the despisers of his Patience
and long-suffering, when he will make his judgment to break forth as the light,
and his righteousness as the noon day. In the mean time the providence of God,
when he sees it fit, gives some remarkable Instances of his Justice upon great
and notorious Offenders in this life, as a pledge and earnest of a future
Judgment; and these sometimes more general, as in the destruction of the old
World, by an universal Deluge, when he saw the wickedness of men to be great
upon the earth. And such was that terrible Vengeance which was poured down upon
Sodom and Gomorrah, and the Cities about them; which, as St. Jude tells us, are
set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of eternal fire, that is, of
a perpetual destruction by Fire.

3 dly, Another gross and Atheistical Inference, which Men are apt to make from
the delay of punishment, is, that there is no such difference of good and evil
as is pretended; because they do not see the good and bad Actions of Men
differenced in their rewards, because Divine Justice does not presently
manifest it self, and every transgression and disobedience does not immediately
receive a just recompense of reward, therefore they cannot believe, that the
difference between good and evil is so great and evident.

For answer to this. Not to insist upon the difference which the Providence of
God sometimes makes between them in this life, I appeal to the Consciences of
Men, whether they do not secretly and inwardly acknowledge a clear difference
between good and evil. Are not the worst of Men apt to conceive better hopes of
success, when they are about a just and honest undertaking, than when they are
engaged in a wicked design? Do not bad Men feel a secret shame and horror, when
no Eye sees them, and the wickedness they are about to commit does not fall
under the cognizance and censure of any human Court or Tribunal? Have they not
many checks and rebukes in their own Spirits, much disturbance and confusion of
Mind, when they are enterprising a wicked thing? And does not this plainly
argue, that they are guilty to themselves, that they are about something which
they ought not to do?

It Is very true that most Men are more sensible of the Evil of an Action, when
they feel the ill effects and consequences of it, and suffer the punishment
that is due to it: but yet the sense of good and evil is so deeply impressed upon
humane Nature, that I think no Man, remaining a Man, can quite deface and blot
out the difference of good and evil. So that if Men will but attend to the
natural dictates and suggestions of their own Minds, they cannot possibly infer
from the delay of punishment, that there is no difference of good and evil.

But because those who argue thus are but few in comparison, there being not
many in the World arrived to that degree of blindness and height of impiety, as
to disbelieve a God and a Providence, and I think none have attained to that
perfect conquest of Conscience, as to have lost all sense of good and evil;
therefore I shall rather insist

II. Upon those kind of Reasonings which are more ordinary and common among bad
Men, and whereby they cheat themselves into everlasting Perdition; and they are
such as these.

1. Because sentence against an evil work is not speedily executed, therefore
Sin is not so great an Evil.

2. Therefore God is not so highly offended and provoked by it. Or,

3. God is not so severe in his own Nature, as he is commonly represented.

4. Therefore the punishment of sin is not so certain.

5. Or however it is at a distance, and may be prevented time enough, by a
future Repentance, in our old Age, or at the hour of Death; by some such false
reasonings as these, which Men think may probably be collected from the
Patience and long-suffering of God, they harden and encourage themselves in an
evil course.

1. Because the punishment of sin is deferred, therefore they conclude it is
not so great an Evil; they do not feel the ill Effects of it at present, all
things go well and prosperously with them, no less than with those who are so
strict and conscientious; and therefore they hope there is no such great Evil
in Sin, as melancholy People are apt to fancy to themselves. For answer to this,

(1.) Consider seriously what Sin is; and then thou will see reason enough to
call it a great Evil. To sin against God, is to contemn the greatest Authority
in the World, to contradict the greatest Holiness and Purity, to abuse the
greatest Goodness, and to provoke Almighty Justice to take Vengeance upon thee,
and to make thee as miserable as thou art capable of being. To sin against God,
is to be disobedient to thy Sovereign, and unthankful to thy best Benefactor,
and to act contrary to the greatest Obligations, against thy best Reason and
truest Interest; to disoblige thy kindest Friend, and to gratify thy worst and
bitterest Enemy; it is to disorder thy self, to create perpetual disquiet to
thy own Mind, and to do the greatest mischief possible to thy self; to deprive
thy self of the greatest Happiness, and to draw down upon thy self extreme and
eternal Misery. And what do we call a great Evil, if this be not, which
contains in it all the kinds, and all the aggravations of Evil that can be, and
has all the circumstances of ugliness and deformity in it that can be imagined?

(2.) What ever Sin be in it self, yet from hence we can in no wise conclude,
that it is not a great Evil, because the punishment of it is deferred for a
while; from hence indeed it follows, that God is very good in deferring the
punishment which is due to thee for thy sins, but by no means that Sin is not
very Evil. The Reprieve of a Traitor does indeed argue the goodness and
clemency of the Prince, but does not at all abate of the heinousness of the
Crime for which he is sentenced. The great Evil of Sin is evident, because the
holy and just God has forbidden it, and declared his hatred and detestation of
it, and threatened it with most severe and direful punishments; but that God
respites the punishment which is due to sin, and does not immediately take
Vengeance upon Sinners, but affords them a space, and means, and opportunity of
repentance, this does not at all lessen the Evil of Sin, but is rather an
aggravation of it; that we should offend and provoke that God, who is so
patient and long-suffering toward us, so very loath to bring those Evils upon
us, which we are so rash and forward to pull down upon our selves.

2. If God does not immediately punish sin upon the commission of it, and
instantly let fly at the Sinner, this they would construe to be a sign that he
is not so highly offended and provoked by it; if he were, he would manifest his
displeasure against it, by the sudden and violent effusions of his Wrath. For
answer to this, I desire these two things may be considered.

(1.) That God himself in his word every where plainly declares to us his great
displeasure against sin; Psalm. 5.4, 5. Thou art not a God that have pleasure in
wickedness, neither shall evil dwell with thee. The foolish shall not stand in
thy sight; thou hate all the workers of iniquity. Thou art not a God that
have pleasure in wickedness. The words are a (...), and less is spoken than is
meant and intended, viz. That God is so far from taking pleasure in the sins of
Men, that he is highly displeased at them, and bears an implacable hatred
against them.

And do not the terrible threatenings of God against sin declare him to be
highly offended at it? when he says, That he will come in flaming fire, to
render vengeance to all them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of
his Son, and that they shall be punished with everlasting destruction, from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. Can we think that all
the threatenings of God's Word, and all those direful curses which are written
in his book, shall return empty, without doing any execution? Thou that now
flatterest thy self with vain and groundless hopes, that none of these Evils
shall come upon thee, when thou come to stand before the great Judge of the
World, and to behold the killing frowns of his Countenance, and to hear those
bitter words of eternal displeasure from the Mouth of God himself, Depart ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, thou will
then believe, that God is heartily angry and offended with thee for thy sins.
We shall find in that day, that the threatenings of God's Word, which we now
hear so securely, and without terror, had a full signification, or rather, that
no words could convey to us the terror of them. What the Scripture says of the
happiness and glory of the next life, is true also of the misery and
punishments of the other World, that eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither
have entered into the heart of man, those terrible things, which God has
reserved for the workers of iniquity.

But above all, the direful Sufferings of the Son of God, when sin was but
imputed to him, are a demonstration of God's implacable hatred of sin; for that
rather than sin should go unpunished, God was pleased to subject his own Son to
the sufferings due to it; this plainly shows, that he hated sin as much as he
loved his own Son.

But (2 dly) God may conceive a very great displeasure against sin, and be
highly incensed and provoked by it, and yet suspend the Effects of his
displeasure, and defer the punishment of it for a great while; and to imagine
otherwise, argues a gross mistake of the Nature of God, arising from our not
considering the Attributes and Perfections of God in conjunction and
consistency with one another. When we consider one Attribute of God singly, and
separate it from the rest, and frame such wide and large apprehensions of it,
as to exclude his other Perfections, we have a false Notion of God; and the
reason of this mistake is, because among Men, an eminent degree of any one
Excellency, does commonly shut out others; because in our narrow and finite
Nature, many Perfections cannot stand together; but it is quite otherwise in the
Divine Nature. In Infinite Perfection, all Perfections do meet and consist
together, one Perfection does not hinder and exclude another, and therefore in
our conceptions of God, we are to take great heed, that we do not raise any one
Attribute or Perfection of God upon the ruin of the rest.

So that it is a false imagination of God, when we so attribute Justice or
Anger to him, as to exclude his Patience and long-suffering; for God is not
impotent in his Anger, as we are; every thing that provokes him, does not
presently put him out of patience, so that he cannot contain his Wrath, and
forbear immediately to revenge himself upon Sinners. In this sense God says of
himself, Isa. 27.4. Fury is not in me. There is nothing of a rash and
ungoverned Passion in the wise and just God. Every sin indeed kindles his
anger, and provokes his displeasure against us, and by our repeated and
continued Offenses, we still add Fuel to his Wrath; but it does not of
necessity instantly break forth like a consuming fire, and a devouring flame.
The holy and righteous Nature of God makes him necessarily offended and
displeased with the sins of Men; but as to the manifestation of his Wrath, and
the effects of his Anger, his Wisdom and Goodness do regulate and determine the
proper time and circumstances of Punishment.

3. From the Patience of God and the delay of punishment, Men are apt to
conclude, that God is not so severe in his Nature as he is commonly
represented. It Is true he has declared his displeasure against sin, and
threatened it with dreadful punishments, which he may do, in great wisdom, to
keep the World in awe and order; but great things are likewise spoken of his
Mercy, and of the wonderful delight he takes in the exercise of his Mercy; so
that notwithstanding all the threatenings which are denounced against sin, it is
to be hoped, that when Sentence comes to be past, and Judgment to be executed,
God will remember mercy in the midst of judgment, and that mercy will triumph
over judgment; and that as now his Patience stays his hand, and turns away his
wrath, so at the last, the milder Attributes of his Goodness and Mercy will
interpose and moderate the rigor and severity of his Justice; and of this, his
great Patience and long-suffering toward Sinners for the present, seems to be
some kind of pledge and earnest; he that is so slow to anger, and so loath to
execute punishment, may probably be prevailed upon by his own Pity and Goodness
to remit it at the last, and this is the more credible, because it is granted
on all hands, that no person is obliged to execute his threatenings, as he is to
make good his promises; he that promises passes a right to another, but he
that threatens keeps the right and power of doing what he pleases in his own
hands.

I shall speak a little more fully to this, because it is almost incredible,
how much Men bear up themselves upon vain and groundless hopes of the boundless
Mercy of God, and bless themselves in their hearts, saying, They shall have
peace, though they walk in the imagination of their hearts, to add drunkenness to
thirst, that is, though they still persist in their Vices, and add one degree of
sin to another.

Now for answer to this;

(1.) Let it be granted, that a bare threatening does not necessarily infer the
certainty of the event, and that the thing threatened shall infallibly come to
pass; no person is obliged to perform his threatenings, as he is his promises;
the threatenings of God declare what sin deserves, and what the sinner may
justly expect if he continue impenitent and incorrigible. But then we are to
take notice, that repentance is the only condition that is employed in the
threatenings of God, and will effectually hinder the execution of them, Jer.
18.7, 8, 9, 10. At what instant I speak (says God) concerning a nation, and
concerning a kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it; If
that nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent
of the evil that I thought to do unto them. And at what instant I shall speak
concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant it; if it
do evil in my sight, and obey not my voice, then will I repent of the good,
wherewith I said I would benefit them. Now if when God has promised to do good
to a People, sin will hinder the blessing promised, and bring down Judgments
upon them, much more when it is particularly threatened.

But as to the case of final impenitency and unbelief, God, that he might
strengthen his threatenings, has added a sign of immutability to them, having
confirmed them with an Oath, I have sworn (says the Lord) that they shall not
enter into my rest; which though it was spoken to the unbelieving Jews, the
Apostle to the Hebrews applys it to final unbelief and impenitency under the
Gospel, of which the infidelity of the Israelites was a Type and Figure. Now
though God may remit of his threatenings; yet his Oath is a plain declaration that
he will not; because it signifies the firm and immutable determination of his
Will, and thereby puts an end to all doubts and controversies concerning the
fulfilling of his threatenings.

(2.) It is certainly much the wisest and safest way, to believe the
threatenings of God in the strictness and rigor of them, unless there be some
tacit condition evidently employed in them; because if we do not believe them,
and the thing prove otherwise, the consequence of our mistake is fatal and
dreadful. It Is true indeed, that God by his threatenings did intend to keep
sinners in awe, and to deter them from sin; but if he had any where revealed,
that he would not be rigorous in the execution of these threatenings, such a
revelation would quite take off the edge and terror of them, and contradict the
end and design of them; for threatenings signify very little, but upon this
supposition, that in all probability they will be executed; and if this be
true, it is the greatest madness and folly in the World to run the hazard of it.

(3.) As for those large declarations which the Scripture makes of the
boundless Mercy of God to Sinners, we are to limit them, as the Scripture has
done, to the time and season of mercy, which is this life, and while we are in
the way. This is the day of mercy and salvation, and when this life is ended,
the opportunities of Grace and Mercy are past, and the day of recompense and
vengeance will begin. Now God tries us, and offers Mercy to us; but if we
obstinately refuse it, Judgment will take hold of us.

And then we must limit the Mercy of God to the conditions upon which he offers
it, which are repentance for sins past, and sincere obedience for the future:
but if Men continue obstinate and impenitent, and encourage themselves in sin
from the Mercy and Patience of God, this is not a case that admits of Mercy;
but, on the contrary, his Justice will triumph in the ruin and destruction of
those, who instead of embracing the offers of his Mercy, do despise and abuse
them. He will laugh at their calamity, and mock when their fear comes; when
their fear comes as desolation, and their destruction as a whirlwind; when
distress and anguish comes upon them; then they may call upon him, but he will
not answer; they may seek him early, but they shall not find him. If we despise
the riches of God's goodness, and long-suffering, and forbearance, he knows how
to handle us, and will do it to purpose; with the froward he will show himself
froward, and will be in a more especial manner severe toward those, who take
encouragement from his Mercy, to disbelieve and despise his threatenings. And
this God has as plainly told us, as words can express any thing, Deuteronomy. 29.19,
20. And if it come to pass, that when he hears the words of this curse, he
bless himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of my heart, to add drunkenness to thirst: The Lord will not spare
him, but then the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that
man, and all the curses that are written in this book, shall lie upon him, and
the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven. What ever right and power
God has reserved to himself about the execution of his threatenings, he has
plainly declared, that of all others, those who encourage themselves in a
sinful course from the hopes of God's Mercy, notwithstanding his threatenings,
shall find no favor and mercy at his hand; whatever he may remit of his
threatenings to others, he will certainly not spare those, who believe so
largely concerning the Mercy of God, not with a mind to submit to the terms of
it, but to presume so much the more upon it.

(4.) God has not been wanting to show some remarkable Instances of his
severity toward Sinners in this World. As he is pleased sometimes to give good
Men some fore-tastes of Heaven, and earnests of their future happiness; so
likewise by some present stroke to let Sinners feel what they are to expect
hereafter; some sparks of Hell do now and then fall upon the Consciences of
Sinners. That fear which is sometimes kindled in Men's Consciences in this
life, that horrible anguish and those unspeakable terrors which some Sinners
have had experience of in this World, may serve to forewarn us of the wrath
which is to come, and to convince us of the reality of those expressions of the
Torments of Hell, by the worm that dies not, and the fire that is not quenched.
That miraculous Deluge which swallowed up the old World, that Hell which was
rained down from Heaven, in those terrible showers of Fire and Brimstone, to
consume Sodom and Gomorrah; the Earth opening her mouth upon Corah and his
seditious company; to let them down, as it were, quick into Hell; these and
many other remarkable Judgments of God in several Ages upon particular Persons,
and upon Cities and Nations, may satisfy us in some measure of the severity of
God against sin, and be as it were Pledges to assure Sinners of the
insupportable Misery and Torments of the next Life.

(5.) The Argument is much stronger the other way, that because the punishment
of Sinners is delayed so long, therefore it will be much heavier and severer
when it comes; that the wrath of God is growing all this while, and as we fill
up the measure of our sins, he fills the vials of his wrath; Romans 2.5. And
according to thy hard and impenitent heart, treasurest up to thy self wrath,
against the day of wrath, and the revelation of the righteous judgment of God.
God now keeps in his dis-pleasure; but all the while we go on in an impenitent
course, the wrath of God is continually increasing, and will at last be
manifested by the righteous Judgment of God upon Sinners. God now exercises
and displayeth his milder Attributes, his Goodness, and Mercy, and Patience;
but these will not always hold out, there is a dreadful day a coming, wherein
(as the Apostle speaks) God will show his wrath, and make his power known,
after he has endured with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted for
destruction. All this long time of God's patience and forbearance his wrath is
kindling, and he is whetting his glittering sword, and making sharp his arrows;
and this long preparation does portend a much more dreadful Execution; so that
we should reason thus from the long-suffering of God; God bears with us, and
spares us at present, and keeps in his anger; therefore if we go on to provoke
him, time will come when he will not spare, but his anger will flame forth, and
his jealousy smoke against us. This is but reasonable to expect, that they who
in this World forsake their own mercies, the mercy of God in the next should
forsake them.

4. Another false conclusion which Men draw from the delay of punishment is,
that because it is delayed, therefore it is not so certain; the Sinner escapes
for the present, and though he have some misgivings and fearful apprehensions of
the future, yet he hopes his fears may be greater than his danger.

It Is true indeed, we are not so certain of the misery of wicked Men in another
World, as if it were present, and we lay groaning under the weight of it; such
a certainty as this, would not only leave no place for doubting, but even for
that which we properly and strictly call Faith; for faith is the evidence of
things not seen. But sure we have other Faculties besides Sense to judge of
things by; we may be sufficiently certain of many things which are neither
present nor sensible, of many things past and future, upon good ground and
testimony; we are sure that we were born, and yet we have no remembrance of it;
we are certain that we shall dye, though we never had the experience of it.
Things may be certain in their causes, as well as in their present existence;
if the causes be certain. The truth of God, who has declared these things to
us, is an abundant ground of assurance to us, though they be at a great distance.
The certainty of things is not shaken by our wavering belief concerning them.

Besides, the very light of Nature, and the common Reason of Mankind, has
always made a contrary inference from the long-suffering of God and the delay
of present punishment. Though Men are apt to think, that because Judgment is
deferred, therefore it is not certain; yet the very light of Nature has taught
Men to reason otherwise; that because God is so patient to Sinners in this
life, therefore there will a time come when they shall be punished; that because
this life is a time of trial and forbearance, therefore there shall be another
state after this life, which shall be a season of recompenses. And by this
argument chiefly it was that the wisest of the Heathen satisfied themselves
concerning another state after this life, and answered the troublesome
Objection against the Providence of God, from the unequal administration of
things in this World, so visible in the afflictions and sufferings of good Men,
and the prosperity of the wicked; viz. That there would be another state that
would adjust all these matters, and set them straight, when good and bad Men
should receive the full recompense of their deeds.

The 5 th and last false conclusion, which Men draw from the long-suffering of
God and the delay of Punishment is this, that it is however probably at some
distance, and therefore they may sin yet a while longer, and all this danger
may be prevented time enough, by a future repentance in our old Age, or at the
hour of death; and they are confirmed very much in this hope, because they see
Men much worse than themselves, great Criminals and Malefactors, upon two or
three days warning, to perform this work of repentance very substantially, and
to dye with great comfort and assurance of their Salvation. This is the most
common delusion of all the rest, and has been, I am afraid, the ruin of more
Souls than all the other which I have mentioned; they may have slain their
thousands; but this its ten thousands.

For answer to this, be pleased seriously to lay to heart these following
considerations, most of which I shall speak but briefly to, because I have,
upon other occasions, spoken largely to them.

(1.) If there be a future Judgment, then it is certain, at how great a
distance soever it may be. That which shall be a thousand Years hence will
certainly be; and it is but very small comfort and encouragement, considering
the vast disproportion between Time and Eternity, to think, that after twenty
or forty Years shall be past and gone, then must I enter upon eternal Misery;
then will those intolerable Torments begin which shall never have an end.

(2.) But it is not certain that it is at such a distance; when we put from us
the evil day, it is many times nearer to us than we are aware, and when we
think the Judgment of God is at a great distance, the Judge may be near even at
the door. Our times are not in our own hands, but we are perfectly at the
disposal of another, who when he pleases can put a period to them, and cause
our Breath to cease from our Nostrils, and we shall not be; There is no man
has power over the Spirit, to retain the Spirit, neither has he power in the
day of death, says the wise Man a little before the Text. Thou dreamest
perhaps of many Years continuance in this World, and perhaps in the height of
this vain imagination, the decree is sealed, and the commandment come forth to
summon thee out of this World, and thou art just dropping into that misery
which thou fanciest to be at such a distance; whilst thou art vainly promising
thy self the ease of many years, God may say to thee, Thou fool, this night
shall thy soul be required of thee, and then where are all thy hopes?

(3.) Supposing the evil Day were at a considerable distance, yet Men run an
infinite hazard in venturing all the hopes of their Salvation upon a future
repentance; for what know thou, O Man! but thou may be surprised by a
sudden stroke which may give thee no warning, leave thee no space of
repentance? a violent Disease may seize upon thee, which may disorder thy
Understanding, and so weaken all thy Faculties, as to render thee unfit for all
reasonable operations. At the best, how unfit are we for the most serious work
of our lives, when we are hardly fit to do any thing? Old Age is a very
unseasonable time for repentance, when we are full of weakness and infirmity,
and our Minds are crooked and bowed down by Vice, as our Bodies are by Age, and
as hard to be recovered to their first streightness; much more is it an
improper time for this work, when Sickness and old Age meet together. There are
two things in which Men, in other things wise enough, do usually miscarry; in
putting off the making of their Wills, and their Repentance, till it be too
late. Men had need then be of sound Understanding and perfect Memory, when they
set about matters of so great consequence in respect of their temporal and
eternal concernments; especially when Men have the happiness of all Eternity to
take care of and provide for, they had need have their understandings about
them, and all the advantages of leisure and consideration, to make a sober
reflection upon their past lives, and make up their Accounts with God, and to
set all things right between him and them; and it is well if after all a
repentance wilfully deferred so long, so short and imperfect, so confused and
hudled up, will at last be accepted as a tolerable atonement for the crimes and
miscarriages of a long life.

(4.) Suppose thou were sure to repent before thou leavest the World, and to do
this work thoroughly, which no Man can promise to himself that deliberately
delays it, yet this can be no reasonable encouragement to go on in an evil
course, because we do but hereby aggravate our own trouble, and treasure up so
much more sorrow and affliction to our selves against the day of repentance,
and consequently sin on, in hopes of being hereafter so much the more troubled
and grieved for what we have done; as if a Man should go on to break the Laws,
in hopes of a more severe and exemplary Punishment; sure this can be no
encouragement or ground of hope to any reasonable and considerate Man.

Lastly, As to the encouragement which Men take from the sudden repentance of
great Criminals and Malefactors, and their dying with so much comfort and
assurance; if this be well considered, there is little comfort to be fetched
from such Examples. For,

1 st, Though a sincere repentance in such circumstances be possible, yet it is
almost impossible for the Party himself concerned, much more for others, upon
any good ground, to judge when it is sincere. God who knows the hearts of Men,
and whether, if they had lived longer, they would in the future course of their
lives have justified and made good their repentance and good resolutions, only
knows the sincerity of it.

But, 2 dly, no certain judgment is to be made from the comfort and confidence
of the Party concerned; for the business is not what comfort and confidence Men
have, but what ground they have for it; and whereas Men are apt piously to
suppose, that so extraordinary a comfort and assurance is wrought in them by
the Spirit of God, nothing is more uncertain; because we sometimes see those
who give no such testimony of their repentance, to dye with every whit as much
courage, and comfort, and confident persuasion of their Salvation, as those
that do. But this certainly is not from the Spirit of God; a natural Obstinacy
and Courage may carry Men a great way; and false and mistaken Principles may
fill Men for the present with as much comfort and confidence, as well grounded
hopes. In the Church of Rome, great numbers of those who have led very wicked
lives, after a formal Confession and Absolution, and some good words of
encouragement from the Priest, dye as full of peace and comfort, to all
appearance, as the best of Men.

Indeed it is very natural to Men, who find themselves in a desperate
condition, to be strangely elevated and raised, upon any hopes given of
escaping so great a danger as they apprehend themselves to be in; especially if
these hopes be given them by a grave Man, of whose Piety and Judgment they have
a venerable opinion. When Men have the Sentence of death in themselves, as all
wicked livers must have, they are naturally apt to be overjoyed at the
unexpected news of a Pardon.

To speak my mind freely in this matter, I have no great opinion of that
extraordinary comfort and confidence which some have, upon a sudden repentance
for great and flagrant crimes, because I cannot discern any sufficient ground
for it. I think great humility and dejection of mind, and a doubtful
apprehension of their condition, next almost to despair of it, would much
better become them; because their case is really so very doubtful in it self.
There is great reason for the repentance of such persons, and it becomes them
well; but I see very little reason for their great comfort and confidence, nor
does it become their circumstances and condition. Let them exercise as deep a
repentance as is possible, and bring forth all the fruits meet for it that are
possible in so short a time; let them humble themselves before God, and pray
incessantly to him day and night for mercy; make all the reparation they can
for the injuries they have done, by confession and acknowledgment, and by
making satisfaction to the parties injured, if it be in their power, by giving
Alms to the Poor, by warning others, and endeavoring to reclaim them to a
better mind and course of life; and for the rest humbly commit themselves to
the mercy of God in Jesus Christ; let them imitate, as near as they can, the
behavior of the penitent Thief, the only Example the Scripture has left us of
a late repentance that proved effectual, who gave the greatest testimony that
could be of a penitent sorrow for his sins, and of his Faith in the Savior of
the World, by a generous and courageous owning of him in the midst of his
disgrace and suffering, when even his own Disciples had denied and forsaken
him; but we do not find in him any signs of extraordinary comfort, much less of
confidence; but he humbly commended himself to the mercy and goodness of his
Savior, saying, Lord remember me, when thou come into thy Kingdom.

SERMON IX. Vol. VII.
The Long-suffering of God.
ECCLES. VIII.11. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed
speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do
evil.


I Have considered how apt Men are to abuse the long-suffering of God, to the
hardening and encouraging of themselves in sin, and whence this comes to pass;
where I considered the several false conclusions which Sinners draw from the
delay of Punishment, as if there were no God, or Providence, or difference of
good and evil; or else, as is more commonly pretended, that Sin is not so great
an Evil, and that God is not so highly offended at it, or that God is not so
severe as he is represented, that the punishment of sin is not so certain, or
however, it is at a distance, and may be prevented by a future repentance; all
which I have spoken fully to, and endeavored to show the fallacy and
unreasonableness of them. I shall now proceed to the

Third and last thing I propounded, which was to answer an Objection to which
this Discourse may seem liable; and that is this. If the long-suffering of God
be the occasion of Men's hardness and impenitency, then why is God so patient
to Sinners, when they are so prone to abuse his Goodness and Patience? And how
is it goodness in God to forbear Sinners so long, when this forbearance of his
is so apt to minister to them an occasion of their further mischief and greater
ruin? It should seem according to this, that it would be much greater Mercy to
the greatest part of Sinners, not to be patient toward them at all; but
instantly upon the first occasion and provocation, to cut them off, and so to
put a stop to their wickedness, and to hinder them from making themselves more
miserable, by increasing their guilt, and treasuring up wrath to themselves
against the day of wrath.

This is the Objection, and because it seems to be of some weight, I shall
endeavor to return a satisfactory answer to it in these following particulars.
And

I. I ask the Sinner if he will stand to this? Art thou serious, and would
thou in good earnest have God to deal thus with thee, to take the very first
advantage to destroy thee or turn thee into Hell, and to make thee miserable
beyond all hopes of recovery? Consider of it again. Do thou think it
desirable, that God should deal thus with thee, and let fly his Judgments upon
thee so soon as ever thou have sinned? If not, why do Men trifle, and make an
Objection against the long-suffering of God, which they would be very loath
should be made good upon them?

II. It is likewise to be considered, that the long-suffering of God toward
Sinners is not a total forbearance; it is usually so mixed with Afflictions and
Judgments of one kind or other, upon our selves or others, as to be a
sufficient warning to us, if we would consider and lay it to heart, to sin no
more, lest a worse thing come upon us; lest that Judgment which we saw
inflicted upon others come home to us. And is not this great goodness, to warn
us when he might destroy us, to leave room for a retreat, when he might put our
case past remedy?

All this time of God's Patience, he threatens Sinners, to awaken them out of
their security; he punishes them gently, that we may have no ground to hope
for impunity; he makes Examples of some in a more severe and remarkable manner,
that others may hear, and fear, and be afraid to commit the like sins, lest the
like punishment overtake them; he whips some Offenders before our Eyes, to show
us what sin deserves, and what we also may justly expect, if we do the same
things; and will nothing be a warning to us but our own sufferings?

Nay, God does usually send some Judgment or other upon every Sinner in this
life; he lets him feel the Rod, that he may know that it is an evil and bitter
thing to sin against him. He exercises Men with many afflictions, and crosses,
and disappointments, which their own consciences tell them are the just
recompenses of their deeds; and by these lighter strokes, he gives us a
merciful warning to avoid his heavier blows; when Mercy alone will not work
upon us and win us, but being fed to the full, we grow wanton and foolish, he
administers Physic to us, by affliction and by adversity endeavors to bring
us to consideration and a sober mind; and many have been cured this way, and
the Judgments of God have done them that good, which his Mercies and Blessings
could not; for God would save us any way, by his Mercy or by his Judgment, by
Sickness or by Health, by Plenty or by Want, by what we desire or by what we
dread; so desirous is he of our, repentance and happiness, that he leaves no
method unattempted that may probably do us good; he strikes upon every Passion
in the Heart of Man; he works upon our Love by his Goodness, upon our Hopes by
his Promises, and upon our Fears, first by his Threatenings, and if they be not
effectual, then by his Judgments; he tries every Affection and takes hold of
it, if by any means he may draw us to himself; and will nothing warn us, but
what will ruin us, and render our case desperate and past hope?

And if any Sinner be free from outward Afflictions and Sufferings, yet sin
never fails to carry its own Punishment along with it; there is a secret Sting
and Worm, a divine Nemesis and Revenge that is bred in the Bowels of every Sin,
and makes it a heavy Punishment to it self; the Conscience of a Sinner does
frequently torment him, and his Guilt haunts and dogs him wherever he goes;
for when ever a Man commits a known and willful sin, he drinks down Poison,
which though it may work slowly, yet it will give him many a Gripe, and if no
means be used to expel it, will destroy him at last.

So that the long-suffering of God is wisely ordered, and there is such a
mixture of Judgment in it, as is sufficient to awaken Sinners, and much more
apt to deter them from sin, than to encourage them to go on and continue in it.

III. Nothing is farther from the intention of God, than to harden Men by his
long-suffering. This the Scripture most expressly declares, 2 Pet. 3.9. He is
long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance. He has a very gracious and merciful design in his
Patience toward Sinners, and is therefore good, that he may make us so, and
that we may cease to do evil. The event of God's long-suffering may, by our own
fault and abuse of it, prove our ruin; but the design and intention of it, is
our repentance. He winks at the sins of men (says the Son of Syrach) that they
may repent. He passes them by, and does not take speedy Vengeance upon Sinners
for them, that they may have time to repent of them, and to make their peace
with him, while they are yet in the way.

Nay, his long-suffering does not only give space for Repentance, but is a
great argument and encouragement to it. That he is so loath to surprise Sinners,
that he gives them the liberty of second thoughts, time to reflect upon
themselves, to consider what they have done, and to retract it by repentance,
is a sufficient intimation that he has no mind to ruin us, that he desires not
the death of a sinner, but rather that he should turn from his wickedness and
live. And should not this goodness of his make us sorry that we have offended
him? Does it not naturally lead and invite us to repentance? What other
interpretation can we make of his Patience, what other use in reason should we
make of it, but to repent and return, that we may be saved?

IV. There is nothing in the long-suffering of God, that is in truth any ground
of encouragement to Men in any evil course; the proper and natural tendency of
God's goodness is to lead men to repentance, and by repentance to bring them to
happiness; Romans 2.4. Despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and patience,
and long-suffering, not knowing that the goodness of God leads thee to
repentance? This St. Peter, with relation to these very words of St. Paul,
interprets, leading to salvation; 2 Pet. 3.15. And account that the
long-suffering of our Lord is salvation, as our beloved brother Paul also has
written unto you. Now where did St. Paul write so, unless in this Text; Not
knowing that the goodness of God leads to repentance? It Is not only great
ignorance, and a very gross mistake, to think that it is the design and
intention of God's Patience and long-suffering to encourage Men in sin; but
likewise to think, that in the nature of the thing, goodness can have any
tendency to make Men evil; not knowing that the goodness of God leads to
repentance.

V. That through the long-suffering of God Sinners are hardened in their evil
ways, is wholly to be ascribed to their abuse of God's goodness; it is neither
the End and Intention, nor the proper and natural Effect of the thing, but the
accidental Event of it, through our own fault. And is this any real Objection
against the long-suffering of God? May not God be patient, though Sinners be
impenitent? May not he be good, though we be so foolish as to make an ill use of
his goodness? Because Men are apt to abuse the Mercies and Favors of God, is
it therefore a fault in him to bestow them upon us? Is it not enough for us to
abuse them, but will we challenge God also of unkindness in giving them? May
not God use wise and fitting means for our recovery, because we are so foolish
as not to make a wise use of them? And must he be charged with our ruin,
because he seeks by all means to prevent it? Is it not enough to be injurious
to our selves, but will we be unthankful to God also? When God has laid out
the riches of his goodness and patience upon Sinners, will they challenge him
as accessory to their ruin? As if a foolish Heir that has prodigally wasted
the fair Estate that was left him, should be so far from blaming himself, as to
charge his Father with undoing him. Are these the best returns which the
infinite Mercy and Patience of God has deserved from us? Do we thus requite
the Lord, foolish people and unwise?

God's Patience would save Sinners, but they ruin themselves by their abuse of
it; let the blame then lie where it is due, and let God have the glory of his
Goodness, though Men refuse the benefit and advantage of it.

VI. And Lastly, But because this Objection pincheth hardest in one point; viz.
That God certainly fore-sees that a great many will abuse his long-suffering,
to the increasing of their Guilt, and the aggravating of their Condemnation;
and how is his long-suffering any Mercy and Goodness to those, who he certainly
fore-knows will in the event be so much the more miserable, for having had so
much Patience extended to them? Therefore for a full answer, I desire these six
things may be considered.

1. That God designs this life for the trial of our Obedience, that according
as we behave our selves he might reward or punish us in another World.

2. That there could be no trial of our Obedience, nor any capacity of Rewards
and Punishments, but upon the supposition of freedom and liberty; that is, that
we do not do what we do upon force and necessity, but upon free choice.

3. That God, by virtue of the infinite Perfection of his Knowledge, does
clearly and certainly foresee all future Events, even those which are most
contingent, such as are the arbitrary actions of free and voluntary Agents.
This I know has been denied, but without reason; since it is not only contrary
to the common apprehensions of Mankind from the very light of Nature, that God
should not foreknow future Events, but to clear and express Scripture; and
that in such Instances, for the sake of which they deny God's foreknowledge in
general of the future actions of free and voluntary Agents, I mean, that the
Scripture expressly declares God's determinate foreknowledge of the most wicked
actions; as the Crucifying of Christ, who is said, according to the determinate
counsel and foreknowledge of God, to have been by wicked hands crucified and
slain.

4. That the bare foreknowledge of things future has no more influence upon
them to make them to be, than the sight and knowledge of things present has
upon them to make them to be present. I may see or know that the Sun is risen,
without being the cause of its rising; and no more is bare knowledge of future
Events the cause that they are, when they are. And if any Man ask how God can
certainly foreknow things, which depend upon free and arbitrary causes, unless
he do some way decree and determine them? I answer, that this is not a fair and
reasonable demand, to ask of Men, who have but finite Understandings, to make
out and declare all the ways that infinite Knowledge has of knowing and of
foreseeing the actions of free Creatures, without prejudice to their liberty
and freedom of acting. However, it is of the two much more credible to reason,
that infinite Knowledge should certainly foreknow things, which our
Understandings cannot imagine how they should be fore-known, than that God
should any ways be the Author of Sin, by determining and decreeing the wicked
actions of Men. The first only argues the imperfection of our Understandings;
but the other lays the greatest blemish and imperfection that can be upon the
Divine Nature.

So that this difficult Controversy about the foreknowledge of God is brought
to this point, Whether a Man had better believe, that infinite Knowledge may be
able to foreknow things in a way which our finite understanding cannot
comprehend: or to ascribe something to God, from whence it would unavoidably
follow that he is the author of Sin. The (...) is only a modest and just
acknowledgment of our own ignorance; the lost is the utmost and greatest
absurdity that a Man can be brought to; and to say that we cannot believe the
foreknowledge of God, unless we can make out the particular manner of it, is
more unreasonable, than if an ignorant Man should deny a difficult proposition
in Euclid or Archimedes to be demonstrated, because he knows not how to
demonstrate it.

5. And consequently foreknowledge and liberty may very well consist; and
notwithstanding God's foreknowledge of what Men will do, they may be as free
as if he did not foreknow it. And,

Lastly, That God does not deal with Men according to his foreknowledge of the
good or bad use of their liberty, but according to the nature and reason of
things; and therefore if he be long-suffering toward Sinners, and do not cut
them off upon the first Provocation, but give them a space and opportunity of
repentance, and use all proper means and arguments to bring them to repentance,
and be ready to afford his Grace to excite good resolutions in them, and to
second and assist them, and they refuse and resist all this; their wilful
Obstinacy and Impenitency is as culpable, and God's Goodness and Patience as
much to be acknowledged, as if God did not foresee the abuse of it; because his
foresight and knowledge of what they would do, laid no necessity upon them to
do what they did.

If a Prince had the privilege of foreknowledge as God has, and did
certainly foresee, that a great many of his Subjects would certainly incur the
penalty of his Laws, and that others would abuse his goodness and clemency to
them; yet if he would govern them like free and reasonable Creatures, he ought
to make the same wise Laws to restrain their exorbitancy, and to use the same
clemency in all cases that did fairly admit of it, as if he did not at all
foresee what they would do, nor how they would abuse his clemency; for it is
nevertheless fit to make wise and reasonable Laws, and to govern with equity
and clemency, though it were certainly foreseen, that they that are governed
would act very foolishly and unreasonably in the use of their liberty. It is
great goodness in God to give Men the means and opportunity of being saved,
though they abuse this goodness to their farther ruin; and he may be heartily
grieved for that folly and obstinacy in Men, which he certainly fore-sees will
end in their ruin; and may with great seriousness and sincerity wish they would
do otherwise, and were as wise to do good, as they are wilful to do evil. And
thus he is represented in Scripture, as regretting the mischief which Men
wilfully bring upon themselves; O that they were wise, O that they would
understand, and consider their latter end!

And this is sufficient to vindicate the goodness of God in his Patience and
long-suffering to Sinners, and to make them wholly guilty of all that befalls
them for their wilful contempt and abuse of it.

I shall draw some Inferences from this whole Discourse upon this Argument.

I. This shows the unreasonableness and perverse disingenuity of Men, who take
occasion to harden and encourage themselves in sin from the long-suffering of
God, which above all things in the World should melt and soften them. Thou have
sinned and art liable to the Justice of God, Sentence is gone forth, but God
respites the execution of it, and has granted thee a Reprieve, and time and
opportunity to sue out thy Pardon. Now what use ought we in reason to make of
this Patience of God toward us? We ought certainly to break off our sins by a
speedy repentance, lest iniquity be our ruin; immediately to sue out our
Pardon, and to make our peace with God, while we are yet in the way, and to
resolve, never any more willingly to offend that God who is so gracious and
merciful, so long-suffering and full of compassion. But what use do Men
commonly make of it? They take occasion to confirm and strengthen themselves in
their wickedness, and to reason themselves into vain and groundless hopes of
impunity. Now what a folly is this, because punishment does not come, therefore
to hasten it, and to draw it down upon our selves? Because it has not yet
overtaken us, therefore to go forth and meet it? Because there is yet a
possibility of escaping it, therefore to take a certain course to make it
unavoidable? Because there is yet hope concerning us, therefore to make our
case desperate and past remedy? See how unreasonably Men bring ruin upon
themselves; so that well might the Psalmist ask that Question, Have all the
workers of iniquity no knowledge?

But their folly and unreasonableness is not so great, but their perverseness
and disingenuity is greater. To sin, because God is long-suffering, is to be
evil, because he is good, and to provoke him, because he spares us; it is to
strive with God, and to contend with his goodness, as if we were resolved to
try the utmost length of his Patience; and because God is loath to punish,
therefore to urge and importune him to that which is so contrary to his
Inclination.

II. This may serve to convince Men of the great evil and danger of thus
abusing the long-suffering of God. It is a provocation of the highest nature,
because it is to trample upon his dearest Attributes, those which he most
delights and glories in, his Goodness and Mercy; for the long-suffering of God
is his Goodness to the guilty, and his Mercy to those who deserve to be
miserable.

Nothing makes our ruin more certain, more speedy, and more intolerable, than
the abuse of God's Goodness and Patience. After God had born long with that
rebellious People, the Children of Israel, and notwithstanding all their
murmurings, all their infidelity and impenitency, had spared them ten times, at
last he sets his Seal to their ruin, Heb. 3.8, 9. Harden not your hearts, as in
the provocation, in the day of temptation in the wilderness: When your Fathers
proved me, and saw my works forty years. This was a high provocation indeed, to
harden their hearts under the Patience and long-suffering of God, after forty
Years trial and experience of it; v. 10. Wherefore I was grieved with that
generation, and said, They are a people that do err in their hearts, for they
have not known my ways. And what was the issue of all this? Upon this God takes
up a fixed resolution to bear no longer with them, but to cut them off from the
Blessings he had promised to bestow upon them; He swear in his wrath, that they
should not enter into his rest. To whom swear he, that they should not enter
into his rest, but to them that believed not? or as the word may be rendered, to
them that were disobedient? that is, to them who went on in their rebellion
against him, after he had suffered their manners forty years.

And as the abuse of God's Patience renders our destruction more certain, so
more speedy and more intolerable. We think that because God suffers long, he
will suffer always; and because punishment is delayed, therefore it will never
come; but it will come the sooner for this: So our Lord tells us, Luke 12. When
the servant said, His Lord delayed his coming, the Lord of that servant shall
come in a day that he looks not for him, and at an hour when he is not aware,
and shall cut him in sunder, and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites.
None so like to be surprised by the Judgment of God, as those who trespass so
boldly upon his Patience.

III. To persuade us to make a right use of the Patience and long-suffering of
God, and to comply with the merciful end and design of God therein.

1. It is the design of God's long-suffering, to give us a space of repentance.
Were it not that God had this design and reasonable expectation from us, he
would not reprieve a sinner for one moment, but would execute Judgment upon him
so soon as ever he had offended: This our Savior declares to us by the Parable
of the Figtree, Luke 13.6. Were it not that God expects from us the fruit of
repentance, he would cut us down, and not suffer us to cumber the ground; after
he had waited three years, seeking fruit and finding none, he spares it one
year more, to see if it would bear fruit.

2. The long-suffering of God is a great encouragement to repentance. We see by
his Patience that he is not ready to take advantage against us; that he spares
us when we offend, is a very good sign that he will forgive us if we repent.
Thus natural Light would reason, and so the King of Nineveh, a Heathen,
reasons, Who can tell if God will turn and repent? But we are fully assured of
this by the gracious declarations of the Gospel, and the way of pardon and
forgiveness which is therein established through faith in the blood of Jesus
Christ, who was made a propitiation for the sins of the whole world.

Therefore the long-suffering of God should be a powerful argument to us to
break off our sins by repentance: For this is the End of God's Patience; He is
long-suffering to us ward, not willing that any should perish, but that all
should come to repentance. He has no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but
that the wicked should turn from his way and live. God every where expresses a
vehement desire and earnest expectation of our repentance and conversion; Jer.
4.14. O Jerusalem! wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved.
And Chap. 13.27. Woe unto thee Jerusalem! will thou not be made clean? when
shall it once be? He who is so patient as to the punishment of our sins, is
almost impatient of our repentance for them; Will thou not be made clean? when
shall it once be? And can we stand out against his earnest desire of our
happiness, whom we have so often and so long provoked to make us miserable?

Let us then return into our selves, and think seriously what our case and
condition is; how we have lived, and how long the Patience of God has suffered
our manners, and waited for our repentance, and how inevitable and intolerable
the misery of those must be who live and dye in the contempt and abuse of it;
let us heartily repent of our wicked lives, and say, What have we done? How
careless have we been of our own happiness, and what pains have we taken to
undo our selves?

Let us speedily set about this Work, because we do not know how long the
Patience of God may last, and the opportunities of our Salvation be continued
to us. This day of God's Grace and Patience will have an end, therefore, as the
Prophet exhorts, Isa. 55.6. Seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon
him while he is near. Now God graciously invites Sinners to come to him, and is
ready to receive them; nay, if they do but move toward him, he is ready to go
forth and meet them half way; but the time will come, when he will bid them
depart from him, when they shall cry, Lord, Lord, open unto us, and the door of
mercy shall be shut against them.

All the while thou delayest this necessary work, thou venturest thy immortal
Soul, and put thy eternal Salvation upon a desperate hazard, and should God
snatch thee suddenly away in an impenitent state, what would become of thee?
Thou art yet in the way, and God is yet reconcilable, but Death is not far
off, and perhaps much nearer to thee than thou art aware; at the best thy Life
is uncertain, and Death will infallibly put a period to this day of God's Grace
and Patience.

Repentance is a work so necessary, that methinks no Man should lose so much
time as to deliberate, whether he should set about it or not; de necessariis
nulla est deliberatio; no man deliberates about what he must do, or be undone
if he do it not. It Is a work of so great consequence and concernment, and the
delay of it so infinitely dangerous, that one would think no wise Man could
entertain a thought of deferring it. What greater folly and stupidity can there
be, than for Men to venture their immortal Souls, and to run an apparent hazard
in matters of everlasting consequence?

This day of God's Patience is the great opportunity of our Salvation, and if
we let it slip, it is never to be recovered: If we mis-improve this time of our
life, we shall not be permitted to live it over again to improve it better. Our
state of trial ends with this life, after that God will prove us no more; then
we shall wish, O that I had known in that my day, the things which belonged to
my peace, but now they are hid from mine eyes; therefore to day, whilst it is
called to day, harden not your hearts, make no tarrying to turn to the Lord,
and put not off from day to day, for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord break
forth, and in thy security thou shall be destroyed; exercise repentance in the
time of health, and defer not till death to be justified.

SERMON X. Vol. VII^
The Power of God.
PSALM. LXII.11. God has spoken once; twice have I heard this, that power
belongs unto God.


IN treating of the Attributes of God, I have considered those which relate to
the Divine Understanding, to which I referred his Knowledge and Wisdom; those
also which relate to the Divine Will; viz. God's Justice, Truth, Holiness, and
Goodness; I come now to consider his Power of acting, which is his Omnipotency;
this I shall speak to from these words.

In the beginning of this Psalm, David declares that God was the great Object
of his trust and confidence, and that all his hopes and expectation of safety
and deliverance were from him, v. 1, 2. And this makes him challenge his
Enemies for all their mischievous qualities and devices against him, as vain
attempts, v. 3, 4. Hereupon he charge himself to continue his trust and
confidence in God, from whom was all his expectation, and who was able to save
and deliver him; v. 5, 6, 7. And from his Example and Experience, he
encourages and exhorts all others to trust in God, v. 8. and that from two
Arguments.

1. Because all other Objects of our trust and confidence are vain and
insufficient, and will fail those that rely upon them. If we will rely upon any
thing in this World, it must either be Persons or Things; but we cannot safely
repose our trust in either of these. Not in Persons: They may be reduced to one
of these two Heads, either high or low: Those that are of a mean condition, it
would be in vain to trust them; they that cannot secure themselves from
meanness, cannot secure others from mischief, Men of low degree are vanity: But
great ones of the World, they seem to promise something of assistance and
security to us; but if we depend upon them, they will frustrate us, Men of high
degree are a lie. As for the Things of the World; that which Men usually place
their confidence in, is Riches; these are either got by unlawful, or lawful
means; if they be ill gotten, by Oppression or Robbery, they will be so far
from securing us from Evil, that they will bring it upon us; if they be well
gotten, they are of an uncertain nature, that we have little reason to place
our hopes in them; If riches increase, set not your hearts upon them, that is,
your hope; for heart in Scripture signifies any of the Affections.

2. Because God is the proper Object of our trust and confidence. We may safely
rely upon any one, in whom these two things concur, a Power to help us, and
Goodness to incline him so to do. Now David tells us, that both these are
eminently in God, and do in a peculiar manner belong to him; Power, v. 11. and
Goodness, v. 12.

I shall speak to that which David makes the first ground of our confidence,
the Power of God; Power belongs to God: For which he brings the testimony of
God himself, once has God spoken, yea twice have I heard this. Some
Interpreters trouble themselves about the meaning of this Expression, as if it
did refer to some particular Revelation of God; and then again they are
troubled how to reconcile God's speaking this but once, with David's hearing it
twice; but I do not love to spy Mysteries in these Expressions which are
capable of a plain Sense; for I understand no more by it but this, that God
has several times revealed this; he frequently declared himself by this
Attribute, once, yea twice, that is, he has spoken it often, and David had
heard it often. This is answerable to that Phrase of the Latins, Semel atque
iterum; and it is usual in all Writers, to use a certain number for an
uncertain, and particularly among Poets, Felices ter and amplius, Hor. And so
in the Poetical Writers of Scripture, Job 5.19. He has delivered thee in six
troubles, yea, in seven there shall no evil ^ouch thee; that is, in several and
various troubles. Eccles. 11.2. Give a portion to seven and also to eight, that
is, distribute thy Charity to many; and which is nearest to this, Job 40.5.
Once have I spoken, but I will not answer: yea twice, but I will proceed no
further; that is, I have had several Discourses with my Friends; and 33.14. God
speaks once, yea twice, in a dream, in a vision of the night; that is, God
reveals himself in several ways and manners to Men; so here, God has spoken
once, yea twice, that is, God has often declared this. And if I would be so
curious to refer to a particular declaration of God, I should think, that it
related either to the Preface to the Law, I am the Lord thy God, that is, the
great and powerful God, that brought thee out of the land of Egypt; or rather
to the declaration which God made of himself to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, by
the name of the Almighty God, Genesis 17.1. Concerning which revelation of God, it
is said expressly, Ex. 6.3. I appeared unto Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, by
the Name of God Almighty, but by my Name Jehovah, was I not known to them.

But that which I design to speak to, is the Proposition it self, that Power
belongs to God; that is, that the excellency of Power, Power in its highest
degree and perfection; all Power belongs to God, that is, that Omnipotence is a
Property or Perfection of the Divine Nature.

In the handling of this, I shall show,

First, What we are to understand by the Omnipotence of God.

Secondly, That this Perfection belongs to God.

First, What we are to understand by the Omnipotence of God. And this I shall
consider, I. As to the Principle. And, II. As to the Exercise of it.


I. As to the Principle, it is an ability to do all things; the doing of which
speaks Power and Perfection; that is, whatever is not repugnant either to the
nature of things, or of God; whatever does not imply a contradiction in the
Thing, or an imperfection in the Doer; an ability to do all things which are
consistent with it self, and with the divine Nature and Perfection; by which we
must mean an executive Power, the Effect whereof is without himself; for what
he is said to do within himself, the acts of his Understanding and Will, as we
conceive his Will to be distinct from his Power, are not to be referred to his
Omnipotence. To have a right conception of Omnipotence, we must imagine the
most perfect active Principle that we can, and it is still something more
perfect than that, or any thing we can imagine. To help our conception,

1. Let us imagine a Principle from which all other power is derived, and upon
which it depends, and to which it is perfectly subject and subordinate.

2. A perfect active Principle, which can do, not only what any finite Being or
Creature can do, but what all Beings joined together can do; nay more and
greater things than they all can do.

3. A perfect active Principle, to which nothing can make any considerable,
much less effectual resistance, which can check and countermand at pleasure,
and carry down before it, and annihilate all other Powers that we can imagine
besides this; because we cannot imagine any other Power, that is not derived
from this, and does not depend upon it.

4. A perfect active Principle, which can do all things in a most perfect
manner, and can do all things at once and in an instant, and that with ease. We
can but do one thing at once, and the greater and more considerable it is, the
more time it will ask us to do it, and we find it the harder and more difficult
to be done; but God, to whose knowledge all things are present at once, and
together; and the acts of whose Will are as quick and perfect as of his
Understanding, has a Power answerable to the Perfection of both, and therefore
it is as easy to him to do all things, as one thing, at once, as successively,
and in time; for this is the privilege of an Infinite Spirit, that it does not
only act without Hands and material Engines or Instruments, as every Spirit
does, but without motion from one place to another, because he is every where
and fills all places; he acts per modum voluntatis, as if his actings were
nothing else but a willing that such a thing be done, and ipso facto every
thing is so, as he wills it should be, and when he wills it should be; as if
things did start up into Being, or vanish out of Being, as if they did break
forth into Being, and sculk again into nothing, and undergo such and such
changes, ad nutum voluntatis, at the beck of his will. And this is the most
perfect way of acting that can be imagined, which the Scripture seems to
express to us, when it represents God as making things by his word, upholding
all things by the word of his power; as if he did but speak the word, and say,
Let such a thing be, and it was so; as if there were nothing more required to
the doing of any thing, but an express act of the Divine Will, which is all we
can understand by God's speaking, by his word, and voice, and saying, Let
things be; but the least that it can signify, is the quick and speedy manner
of working, whereby God is able to do things in an instant, as soon as a word
can be spoken.

And as he can do all things at once, and in an instant; so with ease, without
any pain or laborious endeavor; for what is it can object any difficulty to
him? At the first Creation of things there was nothing to resist him; and since
the Creation, there is nothing but what was made by him, and consequently all
whose power is derived from him, and depends upon him, and is subject to him,
and being finite and limited, is infinitely unequal to the infinite Power of
God; so that we may imagine, the Divine Power would pass through all the
resistance that all created Power can make, and all the difficulties it can
object to it, with more ease than a Bullet passes through the thin Air, or a
Man would pass through a Net of Cobweb.

5. The most perfect active Principle we can imagine, the utmost bounds and
limits of whose Perfection we cannot imagine, that is, when we have imagined it
to be as perfect, and to act in as perfect a manner as we can imagine, yet we
have not reached the Perfection of it; but after all this, that it can do many
things more than we can imagine, and in a manner much more perfect than we can
imagine. This is the Omnipotence of God, as to the Principle, which has no
bounds and limits. And,

II. As to the Exercise of it, it is only limited by the Divine Will and
Wisdom. The Divine Will determins it to its exercise, the Divine Wisdom directs
and regulates the exercise of it; that is, God exercises his Power willingly,
and not by necessity, and in such manner, for the producing such Effects, and
in order to such Ends and Purposes, as seem best to his Wisdom. Hence He is
said to act all things according to his good pleasure, and according to the
counsel of his will; that is, freely and wisely.

As to the Extent of this Power, I said it was an ability to do all things that
are consistent with it self, and with the Nature and Perfection of God.

First, That are consistent with it self, that is, with a Power to do all
things. It is a contradiction to imagine, that Omnipotence can do that, which
if it could be done, would render all Power insignificant. Upon this account,
the Divine Power is not said to extend to the working of any thing which
implies a contradiction, and the terms whereof speak a repugnancy to one
another, and mutually destroy one another, and the doing whereof is contrary to
the nature of the thing which is supposed to be done, that is, is nonsense, and
cannot be imagined to be. For Example, That a thing should be, and not be at
the same time. For a Power to make a thing to be, so as it should not be while
it is, signifies nothing; because such a Being as is not, is nothing; and to
make such a Being, would be to do nothing, and consequently such a Power would
signify nothing. So likewise we cannot say, that the Divine Power can cause
that the same thing should be made and not be made, that that which has been,
should not have been; for the Power which makes a thing so as that it was not
made, and causes a thing to have been, so as that it has not been, does
nothing; and consequently is no Power. Nor can we say, that the Divine Power
can effect that any thing should be made by it self, that is, be the cause of
its own Being; for that would be to cause that a thing should be before it is,
that is, be, when it is not, which signifies nothing. We cannot say that the
Divine Power can effect, that twice two should not make four; for that would be
to cause that things should not be what they are, if they be at all, which is
to cause that things should be and not be at all, when they are, which amounts
to nothing.

We cannot say, that the Divine Power can make a sound to be seen, and color
to be heard; for that would be to make color and sound all one, that is,
things that differ, to be the same while they differ, which is to make color
and sound not to be color and sound while they are so, which is to do nothing,
and consequently argues no Power.

We cannot say the Divine Power can make that which is intrinsecally and
essentially good, to be evil; and on the contrary: Or that which is necessarily
true to be false; and on the contrary. For to make that which is intrinsecally
and essentially good to be evil, is to make that which is always good to be
sometimes evil, that is, to be evil whilst it is good, that is to make good and
evil all one; which is to bring two things together, which so soon as they do
exist, destroy one another, which is to no purpose, because it is to do just
nothing; and there is the same reason of true and false.

We cannot say, that the Power of God can cause that the same thing should be
hot and cold, dead and alive at the same time; because these destroy one
another, and if they were both, neither of them would be, and so the effect we
attribute to this Power would be nothing.

We cannot say, that the Divine Power can effect, that the same impression
should give a thing two contrary motions, upward and downward at the same time;
that the same Body should be in two contrary postures, in motion and at rest,
and in several places, which are the contradictions of Transubstantiation; for,
for the same Body to be at the same time in two several places, is to be
limited and circumscribed by each of these, that is, so to be in each of them,
as not to be in the other, or in any other, so that if it be in this place, it
is not in that, nor any other besides this; if it be in that place, it is not
in this, nor any other besides that; but if it be in two, it is both in this
and in that, and therefore in neither of them, nor any where else; so that a
Power to make a Body to be in two places at once, is a Power to make it to be
no where, that is, not to be at all, which is no Power; and there is the same
reason of the same Body's being in contrary motion, or in motion and at rest,
or in two contrary postures at the same time.

So that by all these Instances it appears, that a Power to do any thing which
implies a contradiction, and is repugnant to the nature of things, signifies
nothing, and the supposed Effect of it is only to bring terms together, which
if they could be brought together, so soon as they meet, will mutually take
away and destroy one another, which would be vain and to no purpose.

I have the more explicitly laid open these contradictions, with relation to
the gross Doctrine of Transubstantiation, in which all, or most of the
contradictions which I have mentioned are involved. I know they stiffly deny,
that these contradictions follow from that Doctrine, and use pitiful shifts to
avoid them; but being not able to satisfy themselves that way, if the worst
should come to the worst, they can grant these contradictions, but then they
fly to the Power of God, which can do things which we call contradictions; or
else they say, there are as many contradictions in the Doctrine of the Trinity,
which all Christians believe. And thus they reproach Christianity, to defend
Popery; and if they cannot persuade Men to be Papists, do what they can to make
them Atheists, or at least, to hinder them from being Christians: but there is
not so much malice in this Objection, but there is as little strength. Is it
any contradiction, that the same thing should be three and one in several
respects? which is all that the Scripture teaches concerning the Trinity: but
if Men will undertake to explain this more particularly than God thought fit to
do, and do it in such a manner, as that they cannot free themselves from
contradiction, let them look to it, the Christian Religion is not at all
concerned in this, further than to censure such Men's boldness and curiosity.

But against this exemption of things that imply a contradiction from the
compass and extent of the Divine Power, there are two Objections which are more
considerable, and deserve to be taken notice of.

I. We grant God's foreknowledge of future Events, which seem to us to be
impossible to be foreknown; now why may we not as well grant, that God can do
things which seem to us impossible to be done by any Power, as foreknow things
which it is impossible for any Understanding to know? For why should we pretend
to know the utmost of what infinite Power can do, any more than the utmost of
what infinite Understanding can know?

Ans. I know no reason but that the Argument should be granted, if there were
an equal necessity of granting the possibility of those things, which seem to
us impossible to be done, that there is of granting the possibility of
fore-knowing future contingencies, though they seem to us impossible to be known.
We must grant the possibility of fore-knowing future contingencies, because the
Scripture, which we believe to be a Divine Revelation, expressly tells us, that
God does foreknow them, and gives us Instances of it in several Prophecies and
Predictions. Now if any Man can show me as express Texts, which say, that God
can make a Body to be in two places at once, I would believe it, though I do not
see how it is possible; because it is reasonable I should believe, that
infinite Power can do many things, the possibility of which my finite
Understanding cannot reach. Now whereas the Papists say, the Scripture has
said that from which this necessarily follows, viz. This is my Body; this is
not enough, unless they could either prove, that it is necessary to understand
all Texts of Scripture in a rigorous and strict propriety of the Letter,
without admitting any trope or figure in the words; which they do not pretend:
or else show a clear reason, why this should be understood so, more than a
thousand others; which they have not done, and I think never can do.

But if it be further argued; If we grant in one case, that those things which
seem to be contradictions to us may be possible, why not in all cases? Unless
we had some certain way of distinguishing between seeming contradictions and
real ones. And if we grant all contradictions possible, then there is no reason
to exempt these from the extent of the Divine Power; but we may safely say,
that the Divine Power can make a thing to be and not to be at the same time. To
this I answer,

1. I do not grant, that any thing that seems to me to be a contradiction,
ought to be granted by me to be possible, unless I have higher assurance and
greater reason to believe it to be possible, than I have to believe it to be a
contradiction; for Example, Suppose it were clearly revealed in Scripture, that
two Bodies may be in the same place at the same time (which is not, nor any
thing like it) then having a revelation for this, and no revelation that it is
not a contradiction, I have higher assurance and greater reason to believe it
is possible, than that it is a contradiction; and consequently I have reason to
believe it is no contradiction, and that from thence it would not follow, that
the same thing may be, and not be at the same time: but though in case of Divine
Revelation, I may believe that to be no contradiction, which seems to me to be
a contradiction; yet I am not, without great necessity and clear evidence, to
offer violence to reason, and affront the faculty of Understading which God
has endowed me withal, by entertaining any thing which seems to me to be a
contradiction; which the Papists do in the business of Transubstantiation,
without any evidence of Revelation, and consequently without necessity.

2. But if this were revealed in Scripture, that the same thing may be and not
be at the same time, I could have no reason to believe that, because I could
have no assurance, if that were true, that the Scriptures were a Divine
Revelation, or that it were to be believed if it were; for if it were true,
that the same thing may be and not be, then a Divine Revelation may be no
Divine Revelation, and when I am bound to believe a thing, I may be bound at
the same time not to believe it, and so all things would fall into uncertainty,
and the foundation of all assurance, and of all duty and obedience, both of
Faith and Practice, would be taken away.

The II. Objection is from the power of Creation, which is generally
acknowledged to be a making of something out of nothing; now say the Objectors,
this seems as palpable a Contradiction as any thing else.

Ans. To us indeed, who converse with material things, and never saw any thing
made, but out of pre-existent matter, it is very hard to conceive how any thing
should be created, that is, produced out of nothing: but every thing that is
strange is not a contradiction. It is strange to us, and hard to conceive, that
there should be such a thing as a Spirit, who never saw, nor can see any thing
but matter; and yet we grant there are Spirits. It is hard to us to conceive
how any thing should be made, but out of matter; and yet Spirit, if it were
made of any thing pre-existent, cannot be made of matter: but if we will attend
to those common dictates of Reason, which every Man, whether he will or no,
must assent to, we may easily understand Creation to be possible, and free from
contradiction. For the clearing of this, I will proceed by these steps.

1. The true Notion of Creation, is the bringing of something into Being, which
before had no Being at all; for the Phrase of making something out of nothing,
or out of no pre-existent matter, does mislead our Understandings into odd
Conceits, as if nothing could be the material cause of something, or as if
nothing could be what is material.

2. Every one must grant, that something is; for we see that things are,
however they came to be.

3. Every one must grant, that something is of it self, whether matter, or that
Being which we call God.

4. Every one must grant, that that which was of it self was always; for
nothing can begin to be of it self.

5. It is much more easy to conceive how a thing that once was not, might
sometime be brought into Being by another, than how a thing should be always of
it self; for that which once was not, is supposed to have something before it,
by which it might be made, though not out of which it was made; but that which
was always, neither had, nor could have any thing by which, or out of which it
could be made. And why cannot a thing come into a Being, when there was nothing
before it, out of which it was made, as well as a thing be always, when there
could not be any thing before it, out of which it should be?

Secondly, I exempt those things from the Extent of Omnipotence, which imply
Imperfection, which are contrary to the Nature and Perfection of God, both
natural and moral imperfections; for these also destroy Power, because they are
not arguments of Power, but of Impotence. Natural Imperfections; as to dye, to
be sick, to be in want, to eat, to sleep, to forget, etc. Moral Imperfections,
those which contradict the holiness of God, as sin and vice, or to compel any
to sin; which contradict his Goodness, as to be cruel; which contradict his
Truth, as to lie, to deceive, to break his promise, to deny himself; Tit. 1.2.
2 Timothy 2.13. Jam. 1.13. He is said to be (...). Contrary to the constancy and
immutability of his Nature, as to change his decree, to repent; Contrary to
Justice and Equity, as for ever to spare and to pardon obstinate sinners,
eternally to punish innocent and good Men; for these are Moral Imperfections,
and contradict the Holiness, and Truth, and Goodness, and Justice, and
Immutability of the Divine Nature; and that distinction between God's absolute
and ordinate Power, that is, that God has an absolute Power of doing some
things, which yet upon supposition of his decree, or promise, or goodness, or
justice, he cannot do, is vain and frivolous, unless Men mean by it only this,
that some things which argue an imperfection, do not imply a contradiction,
which is most true; but both these are absolutely and equally impossible to
God. I proceed to the

Second Thing I proposed, That this Perfection belongs to God; and this I shall
show,

I. From the dictates of Natural Light.

II. From the Scripture, or Divine Revelation.

I. From the dictates of Natural Light. This was one of the most usual Titles
which the Heathens gave to their Supreme Deity, Optimus Maximus; next to his
Goodness they placed his Greatness, which does chiefly appear in his Power; and
they did not only attribute a great Power to him, but an Omnipotence. Nihil est
quod Deus efficere non potest, says Tully de Div. Now their Natural Reason did
convince them, that this Perfection did belong to God by these three Arguments.

1. From those two great Instances and Expressions of his Power, Creation and
Providence; for the Heathens did generally acknowledge the making of the World,
and the Preservation and Government of it, to be the effects of Power,
determined by Goodness, and regulated by Wisdom. Hence they gave those Titles
to God of Opifex rerum, and Rector mundi. I say generally, I except Aristotle,
who supposed the World not to have been made, but to have been from Eternity;
and Epicurus with his followers, who ascribed the regular and orderly Frame of
Nature to a happy casualty and fortunate concourse of Atoms: but generally the
wiser did look upon the vast Frame of Nature, this stately Fabric of the
World, and the upholding and preserving of it, as an argument of a divine and
invisible Power. And so the Apostle tells us, Romans 1.20. that by the Light of
Nature, the invisible things of God were clearly seen by the things that were
made, even his eternal power and godhead.

2. Because all other Perfections without this would be insignificant and
ineffectual, or else could not be at all. Without this Goodness would be an
empty piece of good meaning, and not able to give any demonstration of it self;
Knowledge would be an idle speculation; and Wisdom to contrive things, without
Power to effect them, would be an useless thing. There would be no such thing
as Justice, if the Divine Nature were without a Power to reward and punish; no
such thing as Faithfulness, if he had not a power to perform what he promises;
no Providence, for it would be in vain for him that has no power, to take upon
him to govern and to intermeddle in the Affairs of the World.

3. Without this there could be no Religion. Take away the Power of God, and
there can be no foundation of Faith and Trust, no reason for fear; all
arguments from hope and fear would be taken away; we could not expect any good,
nor fear any harm from an impotent Being that could do nothing. The sanction of
God's Laws would be taken away. To give authority to Laws, there must not only
be a right to command, but power to back those commands; the grand security and
last resort of all Government and Authority is Power; James 4.12. There is one
Lawgiver, who is able to save, and to destroy. None can be a Lawgiver, but he
that has this power, to reward and punish, to make Men happy or miserable, to
save, or to destroy. Men would not pray to God, nor make any address to him, if
they did not believe he were able to supply their wants, and relieve them in
their straits; Nec in hunc furorem omnes mortales consensissent alloquendi
surda numina and inefficaces deos, Sen. There would be no encouragement for Men
to serve God, if they did not believe that he were able to reward them, and
bring them to happiness, and to defend them against all the Enemies of their
welfare, so that it should not be in the power of the most malicious Spirits to
hinder them of their happiness.

II. From Scripture or Divine Revelation. In producing Texts to this purpose, I
will proceed by these steps.

1. Take notice of those which in general ascribe Power, and Might, and
Strength to God. Psalm. 24.8. The Lord strong and mighty. So girt with power;
the mighty God; thine is the greatness and the power; thine is the kingdom, and
the power, and the glory. Of the same nature are those places which call upon
all Creatures to ascribe this to God; Give unto the Lord ye mighty, give unto
the Lord glory and strength.

2. Those which ascribe this to God in an eminent degree. Job 9.4. He is mighty
in strength; excellent in power; who is like unto him? The Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength.

3. Those Texts which ascribe such a Power as transcends any human or created
Power. Such as those which express all the power which Men have to be derived
from God; John 19.11. Thou could have no power at all, except it were given
thee from above. And those which advance the Power of God above the Power of
Men; Luke 18.27. The things which are impossible with men, are possible with
God; He is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or think.
Ephesians. 3.20. 2 Chronicles. 20.6. Job 9.4. According to his mighty power, whereby he is
able to subdue all things to himself, Phil. 3.21. Dan. 4.35. Those which
declare all things to be equally easy to him, and nothing difficult; There is
nothing too hard for thee, Jer. 32.17. 2 Chronicles. 14.11. 1 Samuel 14.6.

4. Those which ascribe all Power to him, by the Titles of Almighty,
Alsufficient, Genesis 17.1. Rev. 4.8, 11.15.3.16.7.19.26. Job. 42.2. Thou can do
all things. Matthew. 19.6. Mark. 10.27. Luke 1.37.

I have dispatched what I proposed upon this Argument, give me leave to apply
all in the following particulars.

Use. First, The consideration of God's Omnipotence may cause terror to wicked
Men. All this Power which I have described, or rather, which is so great that I
cannot describe it, is engaged against Sinners; His power and his wrath is
against all that forsake him, Ezra 8.22. And who knows what those words
signify, Psalm. 99.11. Who knows the power of thine anger? as is thy fear, so
is thy wrath. There is no Passion in the Heart of Man more infinite than our
Fear, it troubles us with jealousy and suspicion of the utmost that may
happen; but when we have extended our Fears to the utmost, the power of God's
wrath reaches further. Whenever we sin, we challenge the Almighty, and dare
infinite Power to do its worst to us; Job 15.25. speaking of the wicked Man, He
stretches out his hand against God, and strengthens himself against the
Almighty. Whom will thou fear, if not him who can make thee extremely happy or
miserable for ever? Will ye provoke the Lord to jealousy? are ye stronger than
he? Because he does nothing against thee for the present, think thou he can
do nothing? Nah. 1.3. He is slow to anger, and great in power, and will not
acquit the wicked. There is a day a coming, when the Son of man shall come in
the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory.

Secondly, The consideration of God's Omnipotence should check the Pride and
vain Confidence of Men. What have we to be proud of? What have we that we have
not received? Where then is cause of boasting? Who may glory in his sight?
Those that have the greatest Power should remember whence it is derived, and
render back the Glory of it to the Fountain of it. Psalm. 29.1. Give unto the
Lord, O ye mighty, give unto the Lord glory and strength. So likewise it should
take Men off from relying upon their own strength, which at the best is but an
arm of flesh, as the Scripture calls it, for the weakness of it. Do we not see,
that many times the battle is not to the strong? That things are not done by
might and by power, but by the spirit of the Lord. When he appears against the
most potent, their hearts melt within them, and there is no more spirit left in
them, as it is said of the mighty Inhabitants of Canaan, Josh. 5.1.

Thirdly, We should make this Omnipotence of God the Object of our trust and
confidence. This is the most proper use we can make of this Doctrine, as David
does in this Psalm; and this was used for a form of blessing the People in the
Name of God; Psalm. 136.3. The Lord that made heaven and earth, bless thee. And
David, when he magnifies God's deliverance of his People from the multitude of
their Enemies, resolves it into this, Our help stands in the name of the
Lord, who made heaven and earth. Thus did the great Pattern and Example of
Faith encourage and support his confidence in God in a very difficult trial; he
staggered not at it, because he believed God who quickens the dead, and
calls those things that be not as though they were; therefore against hope he
believed in hope, etc. Romans 4.17. etc. This gives life to all our Devotion, to
be persuaded, that God is able to do for us exceedingly above what we can ask
or think, and that his is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory.

I shall only caution two things as to our relyance on the Power of God.

I. Labor to be such Persons to whom God has promised that he will engage and
employ his Omnipotence for their good. If we hope for any good from the
Almighty, we must walk before him and be perfect, as he said to Abraham. Good
Men have a peculiar interest in God's Power; hence he is called the strength of
Israel, and the mighty one of Israel. If we do what God requires of us, we may
expect that he will put forth his Power, and exert his Arm for us; but if we
disobey, we must expect he will manifest his Power against us, Ez. 8.22. When
we do well, we may commit the keeping of our souls to him, 1 Pet. 4.19.

II. Our expectations from the Omnipotence of God must be with submission to
his Pleasure, and Goodness, and Wisdom; we must not expect that God will
manifest his Power, when we think there is occasion for it, but when it seems
best to him; he will so employ his Omnipotence, as to manifest his Goodness and
Wisdom.

And with these two Cautions, we may rely upon him in all our Wants, both
Spiritual and Temporal; for his Divine Power can give us all things that
pertain to life and godliness; 2 Pet. 1.3. We may trust him at all times, for
the Omnipotent God neither slumbereth nor sleeps, the Almighty faints not,
neither is he weary; trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength.

SERMON XI. Vol. VII^
The Spirituality of the Divine Nature.
JOHN. IV.24. God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
Spirit and in truth.


THese are the words of our Savior to the Woman of Samaria, who was speaking
to him of the difference between the Samaritans and the Jews concerning
Religion; v. 20. Our Fathers worshipped in this mountain, but ye say, that in
Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship. Christ tells her, The time
was coming, when the worshippers of God should neither be confined to that
mountain, nor to Jerusalem; but men should worship the Father in spirit and in
truth, when this carnal, and ceremonial, and typical Worship of God should be
exalted into a more spiritual, a more real, and true, and substantial Religion,
which should not be confined to one Temple, but should be universally diffused
through the World. Now such a Worship as this, is most agreeable to the Nature
of God; for he is a spirit, and those who worship him, must worship him in
spirit and in truth. In the words we have,

First, A Proposition laid down, God is a spirit.

Secondly, A Corollary or Inference deduced from it, they that worship him,
must worship him in Spirit and in truth. I shall speak of the Proposition, as
that which concerns my present Design; and afterward speak something to the
Corollary or Inference deduced from it, together with some other Inferences
drawn from this truth, by way of Application.

First, That God is a spirit. This expression is singular, and not to be
paralleled again in the Scripture; indeed we have often mention made in
Scripture of the spirit of God, and the spirit of the Lord, which signifies a
Divine Power and Energy; and of the holy Spirit, signifying the third Person in
the Trinity; God is called the God of the Spirits of all flesh; Numb.
16.22.27.16. much in the same Sense, as he is called the Father of Spirits,
Heb. 12.9. that is, the Creator of the Souls of Men; but we no where meet with
this expression, or any other equivalent to it, that God is a spirit, but only
in this place; nor had it been used here, but to prove that the best Worship of
God, that which is most proper to him, is spiritual; so that the thing which
our Savior here intends, is not to prove the Spiritual Nature of God, but that
his Worship ought to be spiritual; nor indeed is there any necessity that it
should have been any where said in Scripture, that God is a spirit, it being
the natural Notion of a God; no more than it is necessary that it should be
told us, that God is good, or that he is infinite, and eternal, and the like;
or that the Scripture should prove to us the Being of a God. All these are
manifest by the Light of Nature, and if the Scripture mention them, it is ex
abundanti, and it is usually in order to some further purpose.

For we are to know, that the Scripture supposes us to be Men, and to partake
of the common Notions of Human Nature, and therefore does not teach us
Philosophy, nor solicitously instruct us in those things which are born with
us, but supposes the knowledge of these, and makes use of these common
Principles and Notions which are in us concerning God, and the immortality of
our Souls, and the Life to come, to excite us to our Duty, and quicken our
Endeavors after Happiness. For I do not find that the Doctrine of the
immortality of the Soul, is any where expressly delivered in Scripture, but
taken for granted; in like manner that the Scripture does not solicitously
instruct us in the natural Notions which we have of God, but supposes them
known to us; and if it mention them, it is not so much in order to knowledge as
to practice; and therefore we need not wonder that this expression, which does
set forth to us the Nature of God, is but once used in Scripture, and that
brought in upon occasion, and for another purpose; because it is a thing
naturally known. Plato says, that God is (...), without Body. In like manner
Tully, Nec enim deus ipse qui intelligitur a nobis alio modo intelligi potest,
nisi men's quaedam soluta and libera, segregata ab omni concretione mortali; we
cannot conceive of God, but as of a pure Mind, entirely free from all mortal
composition or mixture. And Plutarch after him, (...), God is a Mind, an
abstract being, pure from all matter, and disintangled from whatever is
passible or capable of suffering. So that Natural Light informing us that God
is a Spirit, there was no need why the Scripture should inculcate this; it is
an excellent medium or argument to prove that the Worship of God should chiefly
be spiritual; and although it was not necessary that it should have been mentioned
for it self, that is, to inform us of a thing which we could not otherwise
know, yet the Wisdom of God, by the express mention of this, seems to have
provided against an Error which some weaker and grosser Spirits might be
subject to. You know God is pleased, by way of condescension and accommodation
of himself to our capacity, to represent himself to us in Scripture by human
Imperfections, and gives such descriptions of himself, as if he had a Body, and
bodily Members; now to prevent any error or mistake that might be occasioned
hereby, it seems very becoming the Wisdom of God, somewhere in Scripture
expressly to declare the spiritual Nature of God, that none through weakness or
wilfulness might entertain gross apprehensions of him. In speaking to this
Proposition, I shall,

I. Explain what is meant by a Spirit.

II. Endeavor to prove to you, that God is a spirit.

III. Answer an Objection or two.

IV. Draw some Inferences or Corollaries from the whole.

I. For the explication of the Notion of a Spirit. I shall not trouble you with
the strict Philosophical Notion of it, as that it is such a substance as is
penetrable, that is, may be in the same place with a Body, and neither keep out
the Body nor be kept out by it; and that the parts which we imagine in it
cannot be divided, that is really separated and torn from one another, as the
parts of a Body: but I will give you a negative description of it. A Spirit is
not Matter, it does not fall under any of our Senses, it is that which we
cannot see nor touch; it is not a Body, not Flesh, and Blood, and Bones; for so
we find Spirit in Scripture opposed to Flesh and Body; Isa. 31.3. Their horses
are flesh, and not spirit. So Luke 24. when Christ appeared to his Disciples
after his Resurrection, they were terrified, and supposed it had been a spirit,
v. 39. But he said, Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self; handle
me, and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. The most
usual description of a Spirit is by these Negatives, it is not a Body, has not
Flesh and Bones, does not consist of Matter, or of any thing that falls under
our Senses, that we can see or touch.

II. For the proof of this Proposition, that God is a spirit. This is not to be
proved by way of demonstration, for there is nothing before God, or which can
be a cause of him; but by way of conviction, by showing the absurdity of the
contrary. The first and most natural Notion that we have of God, is, that he is
a Being every way perfect, and from this Notion we must argue concerning the
properties which are attributed to God, and govern all our Reasonings
concerning God by this; so that when any thing is said of God, the best way to
know whether it be to be attributed to him, is to enquire whether it be a
Perfection or not; if it be, it belongs to him; if it be not, it is to be
removed from him; and if any Man ask, why I say God is so, or so, a Spirit, or
Good, or Just; the best reason that can be given, is, because these are
Perfections, and the contrary to these are Imperfections. So that if I show
that it would be an Imperfection for God to be imagined to be a Body, or
Matter, I prove that he is a Spirit, because it is an imperfection, that is, an
absurdity to imagine him any thing else. To imagine God to be a Body, or
Matter, does evidently codtradict four great Perfections of God.

1. His Infiniteness, or the immensity of his Being. Grant me but these two
things, that there is something in the World besides God, some other matter, as
the Heavens, the Air, the Earth, and all those things which we see; and grant
me that two Bodies cannot be in the same place at once, and then it will
evidently follow, that wherever these are, God is shut out; and consequently
God should not be infinite, nor in all places; and so much as there is of
another matter in the World besides God, so many breaches there would be in the
Divine Nature, so many Hiatus.

2. The Knowledge and Wisdom of God. It cannot be imagined how mere Matter can
understand, how it can distinctly comprehend such variety of Objects, and at
one view take in past, present, and to come. Tully speaking of Spirits, says,
Animorum nulla in terris origo inveniri potest; their original cannot be found
upon Earth; for, says he, there is no material or bodily thing, Quod vim
memoriae, mentis, cogitationis habeat, quod and praeterita teneat, and futura
provideat, and complecti possit praesentia; quae sola divina sunt; which has
the power of Memory, of Understanding, of Thought; which can retain things
past, forsee things future, and comprehend things present; all which Powers are
purely Divine.

3. Freedom and Liberty. For the Laws of matter are necessary, nor can we
imagine any (...), any arbitrary Principle in it. This puzzled the Epicureans,
as we see in Lucretius, For if (says he) all things move by certain and
necessary Laws, and there be a connection of the parts of matter unto each
other, so that if you move this, that must necessarily be moved; whence, says
he, is Liberty? Vnde est hec inquam fatis avulsa voluntas; Whence is this
Principle of Will, whose motions are not under any law of necessity.

4. Goodness. This follows from the former; for he is not good who does not
know what he does, nor does it freely; so that take away Understanding and
Liberty, and you take away Goodness; now take away from God Infiniteness, and
Knowledge, and Liberty, and Goodness, and you divest him of his Glory; you take
away his most essential Perfections. So that these great absurdities following
from the supposing of God to be mere Matter or Body, we are to conceive of him
as another kind of substance, that is, a Spirit. So that I wonder that the
Author of the Leviathan, who does more than once expressly affirm, that there
can be nothing in the World, but what is material and corporeal, did not see
that the necessary consequence of this Position, is to banish God out of the
World. I would not be uncharitable, but I doubt he did see it, and was content
with the consequence, and willing the World should entertain it; for it is so
evident, that by supposing the Divine Essence to consist of Matter, the
immensity of the Divine Nature is taken away; and it is also so utterly
unimaginable how mere Matter should understand, and be endowed with liberty,
and consequently with goodness, that I cannot but vehemently suspect the Man
who denies God to be a Spirit, either to have a gross and faulty understanding,
or a very ill will against God, and an evil design to root out of the Minds of
Men the belief of a God. I come in the

III. Place, to consider the Objections.

1 Obj. Why then is God represented to us so often in Scripture by the Parts
and Members of Men's Bodies? Ans. I shall only say at present, that all these
descriptions and representations of God, are plainly made to comply with our
weakness, by way of condescension and accommodation to our capacities.

2 Obj. How is it said that Man was made after the the Image of God, If God be
a Spirit, of which there can be no likeness nor resemblance. Ans. Man is not
said to be made after the image of God, in respect of the outward Shape and
Features of his Body; but in respect of the Qualities of his Mind, as Holiness
and Righteousness; or of his Faculties, as Understanding and Will; or which the
Text seems most to favor, in respect of his Dominion and Sovereignty over the
Creatures; for in the two former respects the Angels are made after the Image
of God. Now this seems to be spoken peculiarly of Men; Genesis 1.26. Let us make
man in our own image, after our own likeness, and let them have dominion over
the fish of the sea, and the fowls of the air, etc.

IV. I come now to draw some Inferences or Corollaries from hence, and they
shall be partly speculative, partly practical.

First, Speculative Inferences.

1. That God is invisible. The proper Object of sight is Color, and that
arises from the various dispositions of the parts of Matter which cause
several reflections of Light; now a Spirit has no Parts nor Matter, and
therefore is invisible; 1 Timothy 1.17. Unto the eternal, immortal, invisible, the
only wise God. Heb. 11.27. He endured, as seeing him who is invisible; as
seeing him by an Eye of Faith, who is invisible by an Eye of Sense. 1 Timothy
6.16. Whom no Man has seen, nor can see.

When Moses and the Elders of Israel are said to have seen God, and Jacob to
have seen him face to face, Exodus 2.9. Genesis 32.30. it is meant of an Angel
covered with divine Glory and Majesty, as we shall see if we compare these with
other Texts. When Moses is said to have spoken to him face to face, that is
familiarly; and so Micaiah, 1 Kings 22.19. is said to have seen God upon his
throne, and all Israel scattered up and down; this was in a Vision. And it is
promised, that in Heaven we shall see God, that is, have a more perfect
knowledge of him and full enjoyment; as to see good days, is to enjoy them.
Those Texts where it is said, No man can see God and live, Exodus 33.20. and
John 1.18. No man has seen God at any time, do not intimate that God is
visible, though we cannot see him; but seeing is metaphorically used for knowing,
and the meaning is, that in this Life we are not capable of a perfect knowledge
of God. A clear discovery of God to our Understanding would let in joys into
our Souls, and create desires in us too great for frail Mortality to bear.

2. That he is the living God. Spirit and Life are often put together in
Scripture.

3. That God is immortal. This the Scripture attributes to him, 1 Timothy 1.17. To
the King immortal, invisible. 1 Timothy 6.16. Who only has immortality. This also
flows from God's Spirituality; a Spiritual Nature has no principles of
Corruption in it, nothing that is liable to perish, or decay, or dye. Now this
does so eminently agree to God, either because he is purely spiritual, and
immaterial, as possibly no Creature is; or else because he is not only immortal
in his own Nature, but is not liable to be reduced to nothing by any other,
because he has an original and independent Immortality, and therefore the
Apostle does attribute it to him in such a singular and peculiar manner; Who
only has Immortality.

Secondly, Practical Inferences.

1. We are not to conceive of God as having a Body, or any corporeal Shape or
Members. This was the gross conceit of the Anthropomorphites of old, and of
some Socinians of late, which they ground upon the gross and literal
Interpretation of many figurative Speeches in Scripture concerning God, as
where it speaks of his Face, and Hand, and Arm, etc. But we are very unthankful
to God, who condescends to represent himself to us according to our Capacities,
if we abuse this condescension to the blemish and reproach of the Divine
Nature. If God be pleased to stoop to our weakness, we must not therefore level
him to our Infirmities.

2. If God be a Spirit, we are not to worship God by any Image or sensible
representation. Because God is a Spirit, we are not to liken him to any thing
that is corporeal; we are not to represent him by the likeness of any thing
that is in Heaven above, that is, of any Birds; or in the earth beneath, that
is, of any Beast; or in the waters under the earth, that is, of any Fish; as it
is in the second Commandment. For, as the Prophet tells us, there is nothing
that we can liken God to; Isa. 40:18. To whom will ye liken God? or what
likeness will ye compare to him? We debase his Spiritual and Incorruptible
Nature, when we compare him to corruptible Creatures; Romans 1.22, 23. Speaking
of the Heathen Idolatry, Who professing themselves wise, became fools, and
changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like to
corruptible man, and to birds, and to fourfooted Beasts, and creeping things.
They became Fools; this is the folly of Idolatry, to liken a Spirit, which has
no bodily shape, to things that are corporeal and corruptible. So that however
some are pleased to mince the matter, I cannot see how the Church of Rome,
which worships God by or toward some Image or sensible representation, can be
excused from Idolatry; and the Church of England does not without very just
cause challenge the Romish Church with it, and make it a ground of separation
from her.

3. If God be a Spirit, then we should worship him in spirit and in truth. This
is the Inference of the Text, and therefore I shall speak a little more largely
of it; only I must explain what is meant by worshipping in spirit and in truth,
and show you the force of this Consequence, how it follows, that because God is
a Spirit, therefore he must be worshipped in spirit and in truth.

1 st. For the explication of it. This word Spirit is sometimes applied to the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and so it is opposed to Letter, by which Name the
Doctrine of Moses is called; 2 Cor. 3.6. Who has made us able Ministers of the
new Testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit; not of the Law which was
written in Tables of Stone, but which Christ by his Spirit writes in the Hearts
of Believers. Sometimes to the worship of the Gospel; and so it is opposed to
the Flesh, Gal. 3.3. Having begun in the spirit, are ye now made perfect by the
flesh? that is by the works of the ceremonial Law, which is therefore called
Flesh, because the principal ceremony of it, Circumcision, was made in the
Flesh, and because their Sacrifices, a chief part of their Worship, were of the
Flesh of Beasts; and because the greatest part of their Ordinances, as washing,
and the like, related to the Body. Hence it is the Apostle calls the worship of
the Jews, the law of a carnal commandment, Heb. 7.16. and Heb. 9.10. Carnal
Ordinances, speaking of the Service of the Law, which, says he, stood in
meats, and drinks, and diverse washings, and carnal ordinances. Now in
opposition to this carnal and ceremonial Worship, we are to worship God in the
Spirit. The Worship of the Jews was most a bodily service; but we are to give
God a reasonable service, to serve him with the spirit of our minds, as the
Apostle speaks; instead of offering the flesh of bulls and goats, we are to
consecrate our selves to the service of God; this is a holy and acceptable
sacrifice, or reasonable service.

And in truth. Either in opposition to the false Worship of the Samaritans (as
in spirit is opposed to the Worship of the Jews) as our Savior tells the
Woman, that they worshipped they knew not what; or (which I rather think) in
opposition to the shadows of the Law; and so it is opposed, John 1.17. The Law
was given by Moses: but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.

Not that the external Service of God is here excluded, not that we are to show
no outward reverence to him: but that as under the Law, the Service of God was
chiefly external and corporeal, so now it should chiefly be inward and
spiritual; the Worship of God under the Gospel should chiefly be spiritual and
substantial, not a carnal, and bodily, and ceremonious Devotion.

2 dly. For the force of the Consequence, it does not lie in this, that just
such as God is, such must our Worship of him be; for this would exclude all
bodily and outward worship; our Worship of God must therefore be invisible,
eternal, etc. for so is he; and besides the Will of God seems rather to be the
rule of his Worship, than his Nature: but the force of it is this, God is of a
spiritual Nature, and this is to be supposed to be his Will, that our Worship
should be as agreeable to the Object of it, as the nature of the Creature who is
to give it will bear; now says Christ to the Woman, the Jews and the
Samaritans they limit their Worship to a certain place, and it consists chiefly
in certain carnal Rites and Ordinances; but, says he, though God have permitted
this for a time, because of the carnality and hardness of their hearts, yet the
time is coming, when a more spiritual, and solid, and substantial Worship of
God is to be introduced, which will be free from all particular Places and
Rites, not tied to the Temple, or to such external Ceremonies, but consisting
in the devotion of our Spirits, even the inward frame and temper of our Hearts;
all outward Circumstances (excepting those of the two Sacraments which are
positive) being left by the Gospel to as great a liberty, as natural necessity
and decency will permit.

We must worship God, and therefore it is naturally necessary that we should do
it somewhere, in some place; now seeing some body must determine this, it is
most convenient that Authority should determine it, according to the
convenience of cohabitation. We must not be rude, nor do any thing that is
naturally undecent in the Worship of God; this Authority should restrain; but
further than this, I doubt not but the Gospel has left us free; and to this
end, that the less we are tied to external Observances, the more intent we
should be upon the spiritual and substantial parts of Religion, the conforming
of our selves to the Mind and Will of God, endeavoring to be like God, and to
have our Souls and Spirits engaged in those Duties we perform to him. So that
our Savior's argument is this; God is a Spirit, that is, the most excellent
Nature and Being, and therefore must be served with the best. We consist of
Body and Soul, it is true, and we must serve him with our whole Man; but
principally with our Souls, which are the most excellent Part of our selves;
the Service of our Mind and Spirit is the best we can perform, and therefore
most agreeable to God who is a Spirit, and the best and most perfect Being.

So that the Inference is this, that if God be a Spirit, we must worship him in
spirit and in truth; our Religion must be real, and inward, and sincere, and
substantial; we must not think to put off God with external observances, and
with bodily reverence and attendance; this we must give him, but we must
principally regard that our Service of him be reasonable, that is, directed by
our Understandings, and accompanied with our Affections. Our Religion must
consist principally in a sincere love and affection to God, which expresses it
self in a real conformity of our lives and actions to his Will; and when we
make our solemn approaches to him, in the Duties of his Worship and Service, we
must perform all acts of outward Worship to God with a pure and sincere Mind;
whatever we do in the Service of God, we must do it heartily as to the Lord.
God is a pure Spirit, present to our Spirits, intimate to our Souls, and
conscious to the most secret and retired motions of our Hearts; now because we
serve the Searcher of Hearts, we must serve him with our Hearts.

Indeed if we did worship God only to be seen of Men, a pompous and external
Worship would be very suitable to such an end; but Religion is not intended to
please Men, but God, and therefore it must be spiritual, and inward, and real.

And wherever the external part of Religion is principally regarded, and Men
are more careful to worship God with outward pomp and ceremony, than in spirit
and in truth, Religion degenerates into Superstition, and Men embrace the
shadow of Religion, and let go the substance. And this the Church of Rome has
done almost to the utter ruin of Christianity; she has clogged Religion, and
the Worship of God, with so many Rites and Ceremonies, under one Pretense or
other, that the Yoke of Christ is become heavier than that of Moses; and they
have made the Gospel a more carnal Commandment than the Law; and whatever
Christians or Churches are intent upon external Rites and Observances, to the
neglect of the weightier Parts of Religion, regarding meats and drinks, etc. to
the prejudice of righteousness and peace, wherein the kingdom of God consists,
they advance a Religion as contrary to the Nature of God, and as unsuitable to
the genius and temper of the Gospel, as can be imagined.

It is an Observation of Sir Edwin Sands, that as Children are pleased with
Toys, so, says he, it is a pitiful and childish Spirit that is predominant in
the contrivers and zealots of a ceremonious Religion. I deny not but that very
honest and devout Men may be this way addicted; but the wiser any Man is, the
better he understands the Nature of God and of Religion, the further he will be
from this temper.

A Religion that consists in external and little things, does most easily gain
upon and possess the weakest Minds, and whoever entertain it, it will enfeeble
their Spirits, and unfit them for the more generous and excellent Duties of
Christianity. We have but a finite heat, and zeal, and activity, and if we let
out much of it upon small things, there will be too little left for those parts
of Religion which are of greatest moment and concernment; if our heat evaporate
in externals, the heart and vitals of Religion will insensibly cool and decline.

How should we blush who are Christians, that we have not learnt this easy
truth from the Gospel, which even the Light of Nature taught the Heathen;
Cultus autem deorum est optimus itemque sanctissimus atque castissimus,
plenissimusque pietatis, ut eos semper pura integra and incorrupta mente and
voce veneremur, Tully. The best, the surest, the most chaste, and most devout
worship of the Gods, is that which is paid them with a pure, sincere, and
incorrupt Mind, and words truly representing the thoughts of the Heart.
Compositum jus fasque animi, etc. Serve God with a pure, honest, holy frame of
Spirit, bring him a heart that is but generously honest, and he will accept of
the plainest Sacrifice.

And let me tell you, that the ceremonious Worship of the Jews was never a
thing in it self acceptable to God, or which he did delight in; and though God
was pleased with their obedience to the ceremonial Law after it was commanded,
yet antecedently he did not desire it; but that which our Savior says
concerning the Law of Divorce, is true likewise of the ceremonial, that it was
permitted to the Jews for the hardness of their hearts, and for their proneness
to Idolatry. God did not command it so much by way of approbation, as by way of
condescension to their weakness; it was because of the hardness of their carnal
hearts that God brought them under the Law of a carnal Commandment, as the
Apostle calls it. See Psalm. 51.16, 17. Jer. 7.21.

The reason why I have insisted so long upon this, is to let you understand,
what is the true nature of Christ's Religion, and to abate the intemperate heat
and zeal which Men are apt to have for external and indifferent things in
Religion. The Sacrifices and Rites of the Jews were very unagreeable and
unsuitable to the Nature of God; Psalm. 50.13. Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or
drink the blood of goats? Spirits neither eat nor drink; it was a very
unsuitable way of service to kill Oxen and Sheep for God; and there is the same
reason of all other Rites which either natural necessity or decency does not
require. Can any Man in earnest think, that God who is a Spirit is pleased with
the pompous bravery and pageantry which affects our Senses? So little does God
value indifferent Rites, that even the necessary external Service of God, and
outward Reverence, where they are separated from spirit and truth, from real
holiness and obedience to the indispensable Laws of Christ, are so far from
being acceptable to God, that they are abominable; nay, if they be used for a
Cloak of Sin, or in opposition to real Religion, and with a design to undermine
it, God accounts such Service in the number of the most heinous Sins.

You who spend the strength and vigor of your Spirits about external things,
whose zeal for or against Ceremonies is ready to eat you up, you who hate and
persecute one another because of these things, and break the necessary and
indispensable Commands of Love, as an indifferent and unnecessary Ceremony, go
and learn what that means, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, which our
Savior does so often inculcate, and that Romans 14.17. The kingdom of God is not
meat and drink, etc. And study the meaning of this, God is a Spirit, and they
that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in truth.

SERMON XII. Vol. VII.
The Immensity of the Divine Nature.
PSALM. CXXXIX.7, 8, 9, 10. Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall
I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there; if I make
my bed in hell, behold, thou art there. If I take the wings of the morning, and
dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, and
thy right hand shall hold me.


THAT Attribute of God which I last discoursed of is most Absolute, and
declares his Essence most immediately; the spirituality of the Divine Nature. I
shall in the next place speak of those which relate to the manner of his Being,
Immensity and Eternity, that is, the infiniteness of his Essence, both in
respect of space and duration; that the Divine Nature has no limits of its
Being, nor bounds of its duration. I shall at the present speak to the first of
these, his Immensity, and that from these words which I here read to you,
Whither shall I go from thy spirit, etc. The meaning of which is this, That God
is a Spirit, infinitely diffusing himself, present in all places, so that
wherever I go, God is there; we cannot flee from his presence. If I ascend into
heaven, he is there; if I go down into the grave, the place of silence and
obscurity, he is there; (for that is the meaning of the Expression, If I make
my bed in hell.) If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost
parts of the sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall
hold me; that is, if my motion should be as swift as that of the light, which
when the Sun rises darts it self in an instant from one part of the World to
another, over the Earth and the Sea, the remotest parts of the World which are
unknown to us, yet would God be present to me in the motion, and all along as I
go must I be led and upholden by him; so that all these Expressions do but
signify to us the Immensity of God's Essence, that his Being is infinitely
diffused and present in all Places.

In speaking to this Attribute of God's Immensity, I shall First explain it to
you a little.

Secondly, Prove that it does belong to him.

Thirdly, Answer an Objection or two that may be made against it.

Fourthly, Draw some doctrinal Inferences from it.

Fifthly, Make some use and improvement of it.

First, For the explication of it. By the Immensity of God, I mean that his
Being has no bounds or limits, but does every way spread and diffuse it self
beyond what we can imagine; so that you cannot define the presence of God by
any certain place, so as to say here he is, but not there; nor by any limits,
so as to say, thus far his Being reaches, and no further; but he is every
where present after a most infinite manner, in the darkest corners and most
private recesses; the most secret Closet that is in the whole World, the Heart
of Man, darkness and privacy cannot keep him out; the presence of another
Being, even of a Body, which is the grossest substance, does not exclude him;
the whole World does not confine him; but he fills all the space which we can
imagine beyond this visible World, and infinitely more than we can imagine.

Secondly, For the proof of it. I shall attempt it,

I. From the natural Notions and Dictates of our Minds.

II. From Scripture and Divine Revelation.

III. From the inconvenience of the contrary.

I. From the natural Notions and Dictates of our Minds. We find that the
Heathen, by the Light of Nature, did attribute this Perfection to God. Tully
tells us, De Not. deor. That Pythagoras thought, Deum esse animam per naturam
rerum omnem intentum and commeantem, That God is as it were a Soul passing
through and inspiring all Nature. And in l. 2. de leg. that this was Thales his
Opinion which he commends, Homines existimare oportere deos omnia cernere,
deorum omnia esse plena, That Men ought to believe, that the Gods see all
things, that all things are full of them. So Sen. Epist. 95. Vbique and omnibus
praesto est; He is every where present and at hand. and de Benef. L. 4.
Quocunque te flexeris, ibi illum videbis occurrentem tibi, nihil ab illo vacat,
opus suum ipse implet; Which way soever thou turnest thy self, thou shall find
him meeting thee, nothing is without him, he fills his own work. Not much
differing from the Expression of the Psalmist here.

II. From Scripture and Divine Revelation. I shall instance in some remarkable
places; 1 Kings 8.27. Behold, the heaven, and heaven of heavens cannot contain
thee. Job. 11.7, 8, 9. Can thou by searching find out God? can thou find
out the Almighty unto perfection? Isa. 66.1. Thus says the Lord, behold,
heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool: where is the house that ye
build unto me? and where is the place of my rest? Jer. 23.23, 24. Am I a God at
hand, says the Lord, and not a God afar off? Can any hide himself in secret
places that I shall not see him, says the Lord? do not I fill heaven and
earth, says the Lord? Amos 9.2, 3. Though they dig into hell, thence shall mine
hand take them; though they climb up to heaven, thence will I bring them down.
And though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search and take
them out thence: and though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the sea,
thence will I command he serpent and he shall bite them. Acts 17.27, 28. Tho he
be not far from every one of us. For in him we live, and move, and have our
being, as certain also of your own Poets have said, For we are also his
offspring.

III. From the inconveniences of the contrary. And this is the most proper way
of proving any of God's Perfections; for as I have told you formerly, there
being nothing before God, nor any cause of his being, his Perfections cannot be
proved by way of demonstration, but of conviction, by showing the absurdity of
the contrary. The first and most easy Notion that we have of God, is, that he
is a Being which has all Perfection, and is free from all Imperfection; now if
I prove that the Immensity of God's Essence is a Perfection, or which is the
same, that the contrary is an Imperfection, I do sufficiently prove the thing
intended.

Now to suppose the Divine Essence to be limited, or confined, and his presence
to be any where excluded, does contradict both this necessary Perfection of
God, his universal Providence; and this necessary Duty of Creatures, to worship
and trust in him; and the voluntary manifestation and appearance of God, in the
Incarnation of Jesus Christ.

1. It contradicts the universal Providence of God. The universal Providence of
God supposes many Perfections, viz. infinite Knowledge, and infinite Power,
his Omniscience and Omnipotence, neither of which can be imagined without
Omnipresence. We find that all finite Beings, have a finite Knowledge, and a
finite Power; and it cannot be conceived how infinite Understanding and Power
can be founded any where else than in an infinite Essence. To have an infinite
Knowledge of all things, even those things which are most secret and hidden, to
be able to do all things, to steer and govern the Actions of all Creatures, and
to have a perfect care of them, seems to all the Reason of Mankind to require
immediate Presence.

2. It contradicts the necessary Duty of the Creature, which is to worship God,
to depend upon him for every thing, and in every thing to acknowledge him. Now
all Worship of God is rendered vain, or at least uncertain, if God be not
present to us to hear our Prayers, to take notice of our Wants, and receive our
Acknowledgments; it will much abate our Confidence in God, and our Fear to
offend him, if we be uncertain whether he be present to us or not, whether he
sees our Actions or not.

3. It contradicts a voluntary Manifestation and Appearance of God in the
Incarnation of Christ. He that supposes God not to be every where present by
his Essence, must in all reason confine his Presence to Heaven, and suppose him
to be present elsewhere only by his Virtue and Power: but if this were so, how
could the Divinity be essentially united to the Humane Nature of Christ, which
was here upon Earth? How is God with us; How does he pitch his Tabernacle among
Men; if his essential Presence be confined to Heaven?

Thirdly, I come to answer Objections against this Doctrine.

There are two Objections against this.

1. From Reason. 2. From Scripture.
1. Obj. Reason will be ready to suggest, that this is a disparagement to the
Divine Nature, to tie his Presence to this vile Dunghill of the Earth, and
fordid Sink of Hell. This is a gross Apprehension of God, and a measuring of
him by our selves. Indeed if we look upon God as capable of Injury, and
Suffering, and Offense from the Contagion of any thing here below, as we are,
then indeed there were some strength in this Objection: but he is a blessed and
pure Being, Men's segregata ab omni concretione mortali, A Mind free from all
mortal Composition or Mixture. Tully; (...), disentangled from every thing
passible; as Plut. Those things that are nauseous to our Senses, do not affect
him: Darkness is uncomfortable to us, but the Darkness and the Light are all
one to him. Wickedness may hurt a man, or the son of man; but if we multiply
our transgressions, we do nothing to God, as Elihu speaks, Job 35.6. Nothing
can disquiet or discompose his happy and blessed Nature, but he converseth here
in this dark and troubled World with less danger of Disturbance, or any impure
Contagion, than the Sunbeams.

2. Obj. Does not the Scripture tell us, that God sits in the Heavens, and
dwells on high, that Heaven is his throne, and that it is the City of the great
God? Does not the Lord's Prayer teach us to say, Our Father which art in
heaven? Is he not said to look down from heaven, and to hear in heaven his
dewlling place? Is it not said that he does not dwell in temples made with
hands? And does not Solomon, 1 Kings 8.27. put it as a strange question, will
God indeed dwell on the earth? Is he not said to come down and draw near to us,
and to be afar off from us? Now how does this agree with his Immensity and
Omnipresence?

For answer to this, I must distinguish the Presence of God. There is, 1 st,
his glorious Presence, that is, such a Presence of God as is accompanied with
an extraordinary manifestation of his Glory, and that is especially and chiefly
confined to Heaven, in respect of which it is called his Seat, and Throne, and
the Habitation of his Glory. Some degree of this was in the Temple, which is
the reason of Solomon's Admiration, will God indeed dwell on Earth?

2 dly, There is his gracious Presence, which discovers it self by miraculous
effects of his Favor, and Goodness, and Assistance, and thereby he is said to
dwell in the hearts of good Men, and with them that are of an humble and
contrite Spirit, Isa. 57.15. and in respect of this he is said to draw near to
us, to look down upon us; and in respect of the absence of this to be far from
us.

3 dly, There is his essential Presence, which is equally and alike in all
Places; and this is not excluded by those former Expressions which the
Scripture uses to denote to us the glorious and gracious Presence of God.

Fourthly, To make some Inferences. I will mention only such as the Scripture
here takes notice of, speaking of God's Immensity.

I. Inf. That God is a Spirit. This necessarily flows from his Immensity; for
if the Essence of God be every where diffused, the Divine Nature must be
spiritual, otherwise it could not be in the same place were Body and Matter is,
but must be shut out of the World. But this I spoke more largely to, in my
Discourse of God's being a Spirit. This the Psalmist observes here, Where shall
I go from thy Spirit? If he were not a Spirit, we might go from him, and hide
our selves from his Presence.

II. Inf. That God is Incomprehensible. That which is infinite cannot be
measured and comprehended by that which is finite; and this also the Psalmist
takes notice of, in the Verse before my Text, Such knowledge is too wonderful
for me, it is high, I cannot attain it.

III. Inf. That God is Omniscient. If God be every where, then he knows all
things, yea even the hidden things of Darkness, the Secrets of our Hearts;
nothing can be hid from an infinite Eye; he is present to our Thoughts,
intimate to our Hearts and Reins; this the Psalmist takes notice of, 1, 2, 3,
4, and 12 Verses.

IV. Inf. That God is Omnipotent. He can do all things. Distance limits the
Power of Creatures, and makes their hands short; but God is every where,
nothing is out of his reach; and this also the Psalmist intimates in the Text,
v. 10. Even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand hold me.

Fifthly, The Use and Improvement I shall make of this, shall be,

1. To awaken our Fear of him.

2. To encourage our Faith and Confidence in him.

1. To awaken our Fear of him. The Consideration of God's Presence should
awaken in us a Fear of Reverence. The Presence of an earthly Majesty will awe
our Spirits, and compose us to Reverence; yea the Presence of a wise and good
Man; how much more should the Presence of the great and glorious, the wise and
the holy, and the just God strike an awe upon our Spirits? Wherever we are God
is with us, we always converse with him, and live continually in his Presence;
now a Heathen could say, cum Diis verecunae agendum, We must behave our selves
modestly because we are in the presence of God.

And it should awaken in us a Fear to offend God, and a Fear of the divine
displeasure for having offended him. Fear is the most wakeful Passion in the
Soul of man, and is the first Principle that is wrought upon in us from the
Apprehensions of a Deity, it flows immediately from the principle of
Self-preservation which God has planted in every Man's Nature; we have a
natural Dread and Horror for every thing that can hurt us, and endanger our
Being or Happiness: now the greatest Danger is from the greatest Power, for
where we are clearly over-match'd, we cannot hope to make Opposition nor
Resistance with security and success, to r^bel with Safety: now he that
apprehends God to be near him, and present to him, believes such a Being to
stand by him as is possessed of an infinite and irresistible Power, and will
vindicate all Contempt of the Divine Majesty, and Violation of his Laws. If we
believe God to be always present with us, Fear will continually take hold of
us, and we shall say of every place, as Jacob did of Bethel, surely God is in
this place, how dreadful is this place? When we have at any time provoked God,
if we believe the just God is at hand to revenge himself, and if we believe the
power of his anger, we shall say with David, Psa. 76.7. Thou even thou art to
be feared, and who may stand before thee when thou art angry? Psa. 119.120. My
flesh trembles because of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments.

Sinners consider this, It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God, and every time you sin, you are within his reach. Let then the
consideration of God's Presence deter us from Sin, and quicken us to our Duty.
The Eye and Presence of a Superior will lay a great restraint upon Men; the Eye
of our Prince, or our Master, or our Father, will make us afraid or ashamed to
do any thing that is foolish or unseemly: And will we do that under the Eye of
God, which we should blush to do before a grave or wise Person, yea before a
Child or a Fool? Did but Men live under this apprehension, that God is present
to them, that an holy and all-seeing Eye beholds them, they would be afraid to
do any thing that is vile and wicked, to profane and pollute God's glorious
name, by a trifling use of it in customary swearing and cursing. Whenever you
sin, you affront God to his Face; and provoke the omnipotent justice which is
at the door, and ready to break in upon you.

And the consideration of this should especially deter us from secret Sins.
This is the use the Psalmist here makes of it. If we believe that God searches
us and knows us, that he knows our down-sitting, and our up-rising, and
understands our thoughts afar off, that he compasses our path, and our lying
down, and is acquainted with all our ways, that there is not a word in our
tongue, but he knows it altogether, that he has beset us behind and before,
that the darkness hides not from him, but the night shines as the day, and
the darkness and light are both alike; I say, if we believe this, how should we
live in an awful sense of the Majesty which is always above us, and before us,
and about us, and within us, and is as inseparable from us, as we are from our
selves, whose Eye is upon us from the beginning of our Lives to the end of our
Days? Did Men believe that God is always with them, that his Eye pierces the
Darkness, and sees through all those Clouds with which they hide and muffle
themselves, and pries into the most secret Recesses of their Hearts, how would
this check and restrain them from devising mischief in their hearts, or in
their Bed chamber? The holy Presence, and the pure Eye of God would be to us a
thousand times more than to have our Father, or our Master, or our Prince, or
him whom we most revere, to stand by us. Did but Men representare sibi Deum,
make God present to them, by living under a continual sense of his Presence,
they would, as the Expression of the wise Man is, be in the fear of the Lord
all day. Magna spes peccatorum tollitur, si peccaturis testis adsistat: aliquem
habeat animus quem vereatur, cujus authoritate etiam secretum suum sanctius
facit; The main hope of Sinners is to remain undiscovered, let but some body be
privy to their designs, and they are utterly disappointed: It Is fit for the
Mind of a Man to have an awe of some Being, whose Authority may render even its
privacy more solemn. This is the Character of wicked Men, Psa. 86.14. that they
have not God before their Eyes. One great cause of all the Wickedness, and
Violence, and Looseness that is upon the Earth is, they do not believe that God
is near them, and stands by them.

And as the consideration of God's Presence should deter us from Sin, so it
should quicken and animate us to our Duty. It is ordinarily a great
Encouragement to Men to acquit themselves handsomely, to have the Eyes of Men
upon them, especially of those whose Applause and Approbation they value. God
alone is amplum Theatrum, he is a greater Theater than the World, and it should
be more to us that he stands by us, than if the Eyes of all the World were
fixed upon us. Sen. advises it as an excellent means to promote Virtue, to
propound to our selves, and set before our Eyes some eminently virtuous Person,
as Cato or Laelius, ut sic tanquam illo spectante vivamus, and omnia tanquam
illo vidente faciamus: That we may live just as if he were locking upon us, and
do all things just as if he beheld us. How much greater incitement will it be
to us, to think that God looks upon us, and sees us, and really stands by us,
than faintly to imagine the Presence of Laelius or Cato?

This should have an Influence upon all the Duties we perform, and the manner
of performing them, that we do it to him who stands by us, and is familiarly
acquainted with us, and is more intimate to us than we are to our selves. This
Cic. in l. 2. de leg. looks upon as a great principle of Religion, sit igitur
hoc persuasum civibus, and qualis quisque sit, quid agat, quid in se admittat,
qua mente, qua pietate religiones colat, deos intueri, and piorum impiorumque
rationem habere: Let Men be thoroughly persuaded of this, that the Gods observe,
both the disposition and the actions of every particular Man, what he consents
to, what he allows himself in, particularly with what meaning, with what degree
of inward Devotion he performs his religious worship; and that they distinguish
between the pious and the impious.

2. To encourage our Faith and Confidence in him. When we are in Straits, and
Difficulties, and Dangers, God is with us; when Trouble is near to us, God is
not far from us; where ever we are, how remote soever from Friends and
Companions, we cannot be banished from God's Presence; if we dwell beyond the
utmost parts of the Sea, there his hand leads us, and his right hand holds us.
Psa. 16.8. I have set the Lord always before me; because he is at my right
hand, I shall not be moved. The consideration of God's Presence is the great
stay and support of our Faith, Psa. 46.1, 2. God is our refuge and strength, a
very present help in trouble; therefore will not we fear though the earth be
removed, and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea. In the
greatest Commotions, and the most imminent and threatening Dangers, this should
charm and allay our Fears, that God is a present help.

This was the support of Moses his Faith in his Sufferings, as the Apostle
tells us, Heb. 11.27. he endured, as seeing him who is invisible.

To conclude all, when ever we are under any Pressure or Trouble, we should
rebuke our own Fears, and challenge our anxious Thoughts, with David, Psa.
42.11. Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou so disquieted within
me? trust still in God; believe that God is with thee, and that Omnipotent
Goodness stands by thee, who can and will support thee, and relieve thee, and
deliver thee when it seems best to his Wisdom.

SERMON XIII. Vol. VII.
The Eternity of God.
PSALM XC.2. Before the mountains were brought forth, or ever thou had
formed the earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting thou art
God.


THE Immensity, and Eternity of God are those Attributes which relate to his
Nature, or manner of Being. Having spoken of the former, I proceed to consider
the latter, from these words.

The Title of this Psalm is the Prayer of Moses, the man of God. He begins his
Prayer with the acknowledgment of God's Providence to his people from the
beginning of the World; Lord, thou have been our dwelling place from all
generations; in generation and generation; so the Hebrew. He was well
acquainted with the History of the World, and the Providence of God from the
beginning of it, and as if he had spoken too little of God, in saying, that his
Providence had been exercised in all the Ages of the World, he tells us here in
the Text, that he was before the World, and he made it, he was from all
Eternity, and should continue to all Eternity the same. Before the mountains
were brought forth; the most firm and durable parts of the World, the most
eminent and conspicuous; Or ever thou had formed the earth and the world;
before any thing was created; from everlasting to everlasting thou art God. In
speaking of this Attribute, I shall,

First, Give you the Explication of it.

Secondly, Endeavor to prove that it does belong to God, and ought to be
attributed to the Divine Nature.

Thirdly, Draw some Corollaries from the whole.

First, For the Explication of it. Eternity is a duration without bounds or
limits: Now there are two limits of duration, beginning and ending; that which
has always been is without beginning; that which always shall be is without
ending. Now we may conceive of a thing always to have been, and the continuance
of its being now to cease, though there be no such thing in the World: and there
are some things which have had a beginning of their Being, but shall have no
end, shall always continue, as the Angels, and Spirits of Men. The first of
these the Schoolmen call Eternity, a part ante, that is duration without
beginning; the latter Eternity a part post, a duration without ending: but
Eternity absolutely taken comprehends both these, and signifies an infinite
duration which had no beginning, nor shall have any end; so that when we say
God is Eternal, we mean that he always was, and shall be for ever; that he had
no beginning of Life, nor shall have any end of Days; but that he is from
everlasting to everlasting, as it is here in the Text.

It Is true indeed, that as to God's Eternity, a part ante, as to his having
always been, the Scripture does not give us any solicitous account of it; it
only tells us in general, that God was before the world was, and that he
created it; it does not descend to gratify our curiosity, in giving us any
account of what God did before he made the World, or how he entertaind himself
from all Eterninity; it does not give us any distinct account of his infinite
duration; for that had been impossible for our finite understandings to
comprehend; if we should have ascended upward millions of Ages, yet we should
never have ascended to the top, never have arrived at the beginning of
infinity; therefore the Scripture, which was wrote to instruct us in what was
necessary, and not to satisfy our curiosity, tells us this, that God was from
everlasting, before the world was made, and that he laid the foundations of it.

So that by the Eternity of God, you are to understand the perpetual
continuance of his Being, without beginning or ending.

I shall not trouble you with the inconsistent and unintelligible notions of
the Schoolmen; that it is duratio tota simul, in which we are not to conceive
any succession, but to imagine it an instant. We may as well conceive the
Immensity of God to be a point, as his Eternity to be an instant; and as
according to our manner of conceiving, we must necessarily suppose the
Immensity of God, to be an infinite Expansion of his Essence, a presence of it
to all places, and imaginable space; so must we suppose the Eternity of God to
be a perpetual continuance, coexistent to all imaginable succession of Ages.
Now how that can be together, which must necessarily be imagined to be
coexistent to successions, let them that can conceive.

Secondly, For the proof of this, I shall attempt it two ways.

I. From the Dictates of Natural Light and Reason.

II. From Scripture and Divine Revelation.

I. From the Dictates of Natural Reason. This attribute of God is of all other
least disputed among the Philosophers; indeed all agree that God is a perfect
and happy Being, but wherein that happiness and perfection consists, they
differ exceedingly; but all agree that God is Eternal, and are agreed what
Eternity is, viz. a boundless duration: and however they did attribute a
beginning to their Heroes and Demons, whence come the Genealogies of their
Gods; yet the Supreme God, they looked upon as without beginning; and it is a
good evidence, that this perfection does clearly belong to God, that Epicurus,
who had the lowest and meanest conceptions of God, and robbed him of as many
Perfections, as his imperfect Reason would let him, yet is forced to attribute
this to him. Tully de Not Deor. l. 1. says to the Epicureans, ubi igitur
vestrum beatum and aeternum quibus duobus verbis significatis deum? Where then
is your happy and eternal Being, by which two Epithets you express God? And
Lucretius, who has undertaken to represent to the World the Doctrine of
Epicurus, gives this account of the Divine Nature, Omnis enim per se divum
naturae necesse est
Immortali aevo summa cum pace fruatur.


It Is absolutely necessary to the nature of the Gods, to pass an Eternity in
profound peace and quiet.

The Poets who had the wildest Notions of God, yet they constantly give them
the title of (...): the heathen never mention the name of God without this
Attribute. Dii immortales! Immortal Gods! was their ordinary exclamation; and
they swear constantly by this Attribute, deos testor immortales; and to mention
no more, Tully says expressly, Nos deum nisi sempiternum intelligere qui
possumus? How can we conceive of God, but as of an Eternal Being?

Now the Reason of this is evident, because it would be the greatest
imperfection we could attribute to his Being; and the more perfect his Being
were otherwise, the greater imperfection would it be for such a Being, to die;
so excellent a Nature to cease to be; it would be an infinite abasement to all
his other perfections, his Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness, that these should
all be perishing. Nay, it would hinder several of his perfections, and
contradict their very Being; his self-existence; had he not always been, he had
not been of himself; his necessary existence; for that is not necessarily,
which may at any time not be, or cease to be what it is; and it would much
abate the duty of the Creature; we could not have that assurance of his
promise, and that security of the recompense of the next life, if the
continuance of his Being, who should be the dispenser of them, were uncertain.

Now these Absurdities and inconveniences following from the denial of this
Perfection to God, is sufficient evidence that it belongs to him; for I told
you the Perfections of God cannot be proved by way of demonstration, but only
by way of conviction, by showing the Absurdity of the contrary.

II. From Scripture and Divine Revelation. There are innumerable places to this
purpose which speak of the Eternity of God Directly, and by Consequence: By
Consequence, those words, 2 Peter 3.8. One day with the Lord is as a thousand
years, and a thousand years as one day, which words, however Interpreters have
troubled themselves about them, being afraid of a contradiction in them, yet
the plain meaning of them is this, that such is the infinite duration of God,
that all measures of time bear no proportion to it; for that this is the plain
meaning, appears by this 90 Psalm, out of which they are cited, for a thousand
years in thy sight are but as yesterday, when it is past, and as a watch in the
night; that is, as the time past, as a few hours slept away, for that is the
meaning of a watch in the night, that is as nothing; now St. Peter's conversion
of the words, one day is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day,
only signifies this, that the longest duration of time is so inconsiderable to
God, that it is as the shortest, that is, bears no proportion to the Eternity
of God.

But Directly, the Scripture frequently mentions this attribute, He Is called
the everlasting God, Genesis 21.33. The Eternal God, Deuteronomy. 33.27. and which is to
the same purpose, he that inhabiteth Eternity, Isa. 57.15. And this as it is
attributed to him in respect of his Being, so in respect of all his other
Perfections, Psalm. 103.17. the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting, to
everlasting. Romans 1. 20. his eternal power. 1 Timothy 1.17. the King eternal.
Those Doxologies which the Scripture uses, are but acknowledgments of this
Attribute, Blessed be the Lord for ever and ever. Neh. 9.5. To whom be glory,
and honor, and dominion, for ever and ever. Gal. 1.5. and in many other places.

Hither we may refer all those places which speak of him as without beginning;
Psalm. 93.2. Thou art from everlasting. Mich. 5.2. Whose goings forth have been
from everlasting. Hab. 1.12. Art not thou from everlasting? O Lord! And those
which speak of the perpetual continuance of his duration; Psalm. 102.24, 25, 26,
27. Thy years are throughout all generations; of old thou have laid the
foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the work of thy hands; they shall
perish, but thou shall endure; yea all of them shall wax old like a garment,
and as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed; but thou
art the same, and thy years shall have no end.

And those which speak of him as the first and the last; Isa. 43.10 Before me
there was no God formed, neither shall there be any after me. I am the first,
and I am the last, and besides me there is no God. And to mention no more,
those which speak of his Being, as coexistent to all difference of time, past,
present, and to come, Rev. 1.8. I am Alpha, and Omega, the beginning, and the
ending, says the Lord which is, and which was, and which is to come.

Thirdly, I shall from hence draw, I. Some Doctrinal Corollaries. II. Some
Practical Inferences.


I. Doctrinal Corollaries, that you may see how the Perfections of God depend
one upon another, and may be deduced one from another.

1. Corol. From the Eternity of God we may infer that he is of himself. That
which always is, can have nothing before it to be a cause of its Being.

2. Corol. We may hence infer the necessity of his Being. It Is necessary every
thing should be, when it is; now that which is always, is absolutely necessary,
because always so.

3. Corol. The Immutability of the Divine Nature; for being always, he is
necessarily, and being necessarily, he cannot but be what he is; a change of
his Being is as impossible as a cessation. Therefore the Psalmist puts his
Immutability and Eternity together. Psalm. 102.27. But thou art the same, and
thy years shall have no end.

II. By way of Practical Inference or Application.

1. The consideration of God's Eternity may serve for the support of our Faith.
This Moses here uses as a ground of his Faith; Lord, thou have been our
dwelling place, in all generations, before the mountains were brought forth,
etc. Psalm. 62.8. Trust in him at all times, ye people. His Immensity is an
Argument why all should trust in him, he is a present help to all; and why they
should trust in him at all times, his Eternity is an Argument, Deuteronomy. 33.27. The
eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms. There are
two Attributes which are the proper Objects of our Faith and Confidence, God's
Goodness, and his Power, both these are Eternal; the goodness of the Lord
endures for ever, as it is frequently in the Psalms: And his Power is Eternal;
the Apostle speaks of his Eternal Power, as well as Godhead; Romans 1.20. Isa.
26.4. Trust ye in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting
strength. Isa. 40.28. The everlasting God, the Lord, the creator of the ends
of the earth faints not, neither is weary.

We cannot trust in men, because there is nothing in man to be a Foundation of
our Confidence; his good will toward us may change, his Power may faint, and
he may grow weary; or if these continue, yet they that have a mind and a power
to help us, themselves may fail; therefore the Psalmist uses this
consideration of men's mortality, to take us off from confidence in man, Psalm.
146.3, 4. Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there
is no help; his breath goes forth, he returns to his earth, in that very day
his thoughts perish. Isa. 2.22. Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his
nostrils; for wherein is he to be accounted of? The greatest of the Sons of Men
are but lying refuges to the everlasting God; they are but broken reeds to the
rock of Ages.

And this may support our Faith, not only in reference to our own condition for
the future, but in reference to our posterity, and the condition of God's
Church to the end of the World. When we die we may leave ours and the Church in
his hands, who lives for ever, and reigns for ever. The enemies of God's
Church, and those who have the most malicious designs against it, what ever
share they may have in the affairs of the World, they can but domineer for a
while, they must die, and that very day their thoughts perish: But thy throne,
O God, is for ever and ever.

2. For the encouragement of our obedience. We serve the God who can give us an
everlasting reward. The reward of the next Life is called Eternal Life, an
Eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. Eternal Salvation, Heb. 5.9.. an Eternal
Inheritance, Heb. 9.15. That place where good Men shall be rewarded is called,
everlasting habitations, Luke 16.9. a house Eternal in the heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1.
As the promise of our future reward is founded in the Goodness of God, and the
greatness of it in his Power, so the duration of it in his Eternity. Now what
an encouragement is this to us, that we serve him and suffer for him who lives
for ever, and will make us happy for ever? When we serve the great men of this
World, though we be secure of their affection, yet we are uncertain of their
lives; and this discourageth many, and makes men worship the rising Sun, and
many times takes off men's eyes from the King to his Successor: but he that
serves God, serves the King everlasting, as the Apostle calls him, who will
live to dispense rewards to all those who are faithful to him.

3. For the terror of wicked men. The Sentence which shall be past upon men at
the day of judgment, is called Eternal Judgment, Heb. 6.2. because it decides
men's Eternal state; the Punishment that shall follow this Sentence which shall
pass upon the wicked, is called, Everlasting punishment, Matt. 25.46.
Everlasting fire. Matt. 25.41. Everlasting destruction, 2 These. 2.9. The
vengeance of Eternal fire, Jude 7. The smoke of the bottomless pit, is said to
ascend for ever and ever, Rev. 14.11. and the wicked to be tormented day and
night, for ever and ever. Rev. 20.10. Now as the punishment of wicked men is
founded in the Justice of God; and the greatness of it in his Power; so the
perpetuity and continuance of it in his Eternity. The Apostle says Heb. 10.31.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God; because he that
lives for ever, can punish for ever; as the Eternal Demerit of sin feeds, and
animates, and keeps alive the never dying worm, so the wrath of the Eternal God
blows up the Eternal Flame.

How should this awaken in us a fear of the Eternal God! Sinners, what a folly
is it, for the pleasures of sin, which are but for a season, to incense that
Justice which will Punish and torment you for ever! As good men shall have the
everlasting God for their Reward, and their Happiness; so wicked men shall have
him for their Judge and Avenger.

We fear the wrath of men, whose power is short, and whose breath is in their
nostrils, who can afflict but a little, and for a little while. Do thou fear
man that shall die, and the son of man that shall be made as grass? and is not
the wrath of the Eternal God much more terrible? Luke 12.4, 5. And I say unto
you, my friends, be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that have
no more that they can do: but I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear; fear him,
who after he has killed, has power to cast into hell, yea I say unto you,
fear him. The wrath of man is despicable, because it has bounds and limits;
the fury of man can but reach to the body, it can go no further; it expires
with this life, it cannot follow us beyond the Grave: But the wrath of the
Eternal God does not only reach the Body, but the Soul; it is not confined to
this Life, but pursues us to the other World, and extends it self to all
Eternity.

Fear him, who after he has killed, has power to cast into hell, that is, to
inflict Eternal Torments; Yea, I say unto you, fear him.

SERMON XIV. Vol. VII.
The Incomprehensibleness of God.
JOB XI.7. Can thou by searching find out God? Can thou find out the
Almighty unto perfection?


IN treating of the Properties and Perfections of God, I shall at present
consider that which results from the infinite exellency of his Nature and
Perfection, compared with the Imperfection of our understandings, which is
commonly called the Incomprehensibleness of God. This you have expressed here
in the words of Zophar, Can thou by searching find out God? etc.

There is no great difficulty in the words; Can thou by searching find out
God, potesne pervestigare intima dei, so Castalio Translates it, Do thou know
God intimately, and thoroughly, within and without? Can thou pierce into the
center of his Perfections, and dive into the bottom of them? and, Can thou
find out the Almighty to perfection? Can thou find out the Almighty, usque ad
ultima, to the very last and utmost of him? so as thou can say after a
thorough search and enquiry, There is no Perfection in God beyond this, There
is nothing of him now that remains to be known; this he is, and no other; that
he is, and no otherwise; this he can do, and no more; hither does his
Knowledge, and Power, and Wisdom reach, and no further.

Can thou do this? These interrogations have the force of a vehement
negation; as if he had said, no, thou can not; God is unsearchable, he is
Incomprehensible.

The two Questions in the Text seem to be only two several expressions of the
same thing. The first Question is undoubtedly general, concerning the Nature
and Perfections of God in general; Can thou by searching find out God? Can
thou by the most diligent search and enquiry come to a perfect Knowledge and
Undrestanding of him?

The second Question may seem to be a particular instance to the general truth
implied in the first question; he seems to instance in his Power; as if he had
said, God is unsearchable, and then had instanced in a particular Perfection,
the power of God. Can thou by searching find out God? Thou can not
comprehend the Divine Nature and Perfections in general; Can thou find out
the Almighty to Perfection? Consider particularly his Power, and see if thou
can know the utmost of that. But I rather think that the latter Question is
altogether the same in sense with the former; and that the Attribute of
Almighty, which is here given to God, is used by way of description, and not
intended by way of instance. Can thou find out the Almighty, that is God, to
Perfection? Which way soever we take the Words, it is not much material; we may
ground this Observation upon them.

That God is Incomprehensible.

This term or Attribute is a relative term, and speaks a relation between an
Object and a Faculty, between God and a Created Understanding; so that the
meaning of it is plainly this, That no Created understanding can comprehend
God, that is, have a perfect and exact knowledge of him, such a knowledge as is
adequate to the Perfection of the Object: Or thus, the Nature and Perfections
of God are above the understanding of any of his Creatures; it is only his own
infinite understanding that can frame a perfect Idea of his own Perfection. God
knows himself, his own understanding commprehends his own Perfections: But he
is Incomprehensible to his Creatures.

Indeed there is nothing more obvious than God; for he is not far from every
one of us, in him we live, and move, and have our Being; there need no great
search to find out that there is a God; An eternal power and Deity are clearly
seen in the things which are made, as the Apostle tells us; but the manner of
the Being, and Proproperties, and Perfections of this God, these cannot be
comprehended by a finite understanding. I shall prove the Doctrine, and then
apply it.

First, For the proof of it. I will attempt it these three ways.

I. By way of instance, or induction of particulars.

II. By way of conviction.

III. By giving the clear reason of it.

I. By way of instance. And I shall give you instances both on the part of the
Object; and of the Subject, or the persons who are capable of knowing God in
any degree.

1. On the part of the Object. The Nature of God, the Excellency and Perfection
of God, the Works and Ways of God are above our thoughts and apprehensions. The
Nature of God; it is vast and infinite, Job 36.26. God is great, and we know
him not. Job 37. 23. Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out. Psalm.
145.3. His greatness is unsearchable.

The Excellencies and Perfections of God; his Immensity, 2 Chronicles. 2.6. The
heaven of heavens cannot contain him: The Eternity of his duration, from
everlasting to everlasting he is God. We cannot imagine any limits of his
presence, nor bounds of his duration: The infiniteness of his knowledge, Psalm.
147.5. his understanding is infinite. When we think of the Wisdom and Knowledge
of God, our best way is to fall into admiration, Romans 11.33. O the depth of the
riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!

Where the Scripture speaks of those Perfections of God, which the Creatures do
in some measure and degree partake of, as his Goodness, and Power, and Wisdom,
and Holiness, and Immortality, it attributes them in such a peculiar and Divine
manner to God, as does exclude and shut out the Creature from any claim or
share or title to them, Matt. 19.16, 17. Why Call'st thou me good; there is none
good but one, that is God. 1 Timothy 6.15, 16. Who is the blessed and only
potentate, who only has immortality. 1 Timothy 1.17. The only wise God. Rev.
15.4. For thou only art holy. In so inconceivable a manner does God possess
these Perfections which he Communicates, and we can only understand them as he
Communicates them, and not as he possesses them; so that when we consider any
of these Divine Perfections, we must not frame Notions of them contrary to what
they are in the Creature, nor must we limit them by what they are in the
Creature, but say, the Goodness and the Wisdom of God are all this which is in
the Creature, and much more which I am not able to comprehend; the transcendent
degree, and the singularity of these Divine Perfections, which are
communicable, is beyond what we are able to conceive.

The Works of God, they are likewise unsearchable; the Works of Creation and of
Redemption. Job 5.9. Which does great things, and unsearchable, marvelous,
things past finding out: And then he instanceth in the Works of God, Job 26.14.
Lo these are part of his ways: But how little a portion is heard of him? and
the thunder of his voice who can understand? So that he tells us expressly, we
cannot find out the Works of God, we do but know part of them. The question
which he puts, Job 37.16. Do thou know the wondrous works of him that is
perfect in knowledge? can only be answered by the words of the Psalmist, Psalm.
104.24. O Lord how wonderful are thy works! in wisdom have thou made them all.
The work of Redemption: In this there shines forth such Wisdom, Mercy, and
Love, as our understandings cannot reach; this work is called the Wisdom of God
in a mystery, hidden Wisdom, (...), 1 Cor. 2.7. The Mercy, and Grace, and Love
of it is called, the riches of Gods mercy, the exceeding riches of his grace,
Ephesians. 2.4, 7. Now Riches is when you cannot tell the utmost of them, pauperis
est numerare, Ephesians. 3.18, 19. That ye may be able to comprehend with all Saints,
what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love
of Christ which passes knowledge. When we have the largest apprehensions of
this love, so that we think we comprehend it and know it, it passes knowledge;
yea the Effects of God's Power and Love which he manifests in believers are
unspeakable; for he is able to do for us exceeding abundantly above what we can
ask or think, according to the power which works in us, Ephesians. 3.20. The Peace
which guards their souls passes all understanding, Phil. 4.7. Those Joys which
fill their hearts are not to be expressed. 1 Pet. 1.8. We read of Joy
unspeakable and full of glory. The Happiness which they hope for is
inconceivable, it is that which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has
entered into the heart of man, which God has laid up for us.

The Ways of God's Providence, they are not to be traced, Psalm. 77.19. Thy way
is in the sea, and thy paths in the great waters, and thy footsteps are not
known. Eccles. 3.11. No man can find out the work that God makes from the
beginning to the end. We are but of yesterday, and know nothing. When we look
upon Gods Providence, we take a part from the whole, and consider it by it
self, without relation to the whole series of his Dispensation; we cannot see
the whole of God's Providence at one view, and never see from the beginning of
the Works of God to the end; therefore our knowledge of them must needs be very
imperfect, and full of mistakes, and false judgments of things; we cannot by
our petty and short-sighted designs, judge of the Works of God, and the Designs
of Providence; for our ways are not as his ways, nor our thoughts as his
thoughts. but as the heavens are high above the earth, so are his ways above
our ways, and his thoughts above our thoughts, Isa. 55.8, 9. The ways of God's
Mercy, Psalm. 103. As the heavens are high above the earth, so great is God's
mercy. Psalm. 139.17, 18. How precious are thy thoughts unto me? how great is
the sum of them? If I should count them, they are more in number than the sand.
And the ways of God's Judgments; the severity and greatness of his Judgment is
not known, Psalm. 90. Who knows the power of thy anger? And who may stand
before thee when thou art angry? And the Reasons of his Judgments are
unsearchable, Psalm. 36.6. Thy Judgments are a great deep. Romans 11.35. How
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding out! These are the
Instances on the part of the Object.

2. On the part of the Subject, or the persons capable of knowing God in any
measure. The perfect knowledge of God is above a finite Creature's
understanding. Wicked men they are ignorant of God, and full of false
apprehensions of him; the Scripture gives this description of them; they are
those that know not God, 2 Thessalonians. 1. Wicked men are so far from knowing God to
Perfection, that they have hardly any true knowledge of him; for as the man
himself is, so will God seem to be to him; the Idea and Notion which men have
of God, is but the picture of their own complexion. To a true knowledge there
is required likeness; a Man's mind must be like the thing he would understand;
therefore the Apostle tells us, the natural, or animal man, does not receive
the things of God, he is not capable of them, because his mind is unsuitable to
them, he is (...), full of body, and he cannot relish spiritual things* even
those Natural notions which wicked men have of God, they are strangely
tinctured and obscured by the temper of the man; they are lux sepulta in opaca
materia, light buried and hid in matter and darkness, in the blackness of a
soul and impure heart; so that there is no question of them, whither they
comprehend God or not.

But good men they cannot find out God, they have some false apprehensions of
him; all their apprehensions are dark, have much of obscurity in them; they
know God to Salvation, but not to Perfection; in this life we do but know God
in part, that is, in comparison of the knowledge which our natures are capable
of.

But I will instance yet higher; the Angels and the Spirits of just men made
perfect; though they have true apprehensions of God, yet they do not arrive to
perfect knowledge of him, they cannot pervestigare ultima, know the utmost of
God; the Cherubims themselves are continually looking at the Mercy Seat. To
which the Apostle alludes, 1 Pet. 1.12. when he tells us, the Mystery of God's
mercy in the Gospel was a thing which the Angels desired to pry into. In Heaven
that which is in part shall be done away, that is, our knowledge shall be
perfect as our Natures are capable; but it shall be finite. When we shall see
God face to face, that is, have an immediate vision of him, and see him as he
is, that is, not having our understandings tinctured by any lust or passion
that may darken our mind, or misrepresent the Object; for the Apostle tells us,
we shall see him, because we shall be like him; yet then we shall have short
and unadequate apprehensions of him, we shall still retain our limited Natures
and finite understandings.

II. By way of Conviction. Do thou know perfectly the nature of a finite
Spirit, the Perfection and the Power of an Angel, how being immaterial they can
act upon matter, and move that which can make no resistance to a Spirit? Do
thou know how they can move themselves to a great distance in a moment, and
dart themselves from one part of the World to another? Do thou know how man
is formed in the lowest parts of the earth, as the Psalmist expresses it; and
the curious Frame of our Bodies is wrought from such rude Principles in so dark
a Shop? Can thou give an account how the Soul is united to the Body, by what
bands or holds a Spirit is so closely and intimately conjoined to Matter? Do
thou know how thy self understandest any thing, and can retain the distinct
Ideas and Notions of so many Objects without confusion? Do thou know the
least parts of Matter, how they are knit together, and by what Cement they
cleave so fast to one another, that they can hardly be separated?

Now if the Creatures be so unsearchable, and the knowledge of these be too
hard for thee; is not the Creator of them much more Incomprehensible, who
possesses all these Perfections which he communicates, and many which cannot
be communicated to a Creature? If in Natural and Sensible Things, maxima pars
eorum quae scimus, est minima pars eorum quae nescimus, how much more is it
true of God, that our ignorance is more than our knowledge; when the whole
Earth and all the Creatures bear no proportion to him? Isa. 40.15, 17. Behold
all the Nations of the earth are as the drop of the bucket, and as the small
dust of the balance; all nations before him are nothing, and are accounted to
him less than nothing.

III. By showing you the clear Reason of it, which is this, the disproportion
between the Faculty and the Object, the finiteness of our understandings, and
the Infiniteness of the Divine Nature and Perfections. God is greater than our
hearts, and therefore as he knows more than we do, as the Apostle reasons, 1
John 3.20. so he is more than can be known by us; he is too vast an Object for
our understanding to entertain, for our minds to receive Thou may as well
mete out the Heaven with a span, and measure the Waters in the hollow of thy
hand, and comprehend the dust of the earth in a little Urn, and weigh the
Mountains in some Scales, and the hills in a little Balance; as think to
circumscribe God in the narrow limits of thy thoughts, or to bring that which
is infinite within the compass of that which is finite.

And there is not only the vastness and greatness of the Object; but the Glory
and Resplendency of it does so dazzle our sight, that we cannot perfectly see
it, 1 Timothy 6.16. He dwells in light which no man can approach unto, whom no
man has seen, nor can see. As God is too big, so he is too bright an Object
for our understandings; the presence of his Glory overpowers our minds, and
bears down our Faculties, and conquers our understandings.

I come now to apply this Doctrine of the Incomprehensibleness of the Divine
Nature. If the Nature, and Perfections, and Ways, and Works of God be
Incomprehensible, and past finding out,

I. It calls for our Admiration, and Veneration, and Reverence. These are the
best apprehensions of him, that is Incomprehensible; a silent Veneration of his
Excellencies, is the best acknowledgment of them. We must admire what we cannot
apprehend or express, Zach. 9.17. How great is his goodness, and how great is
his beauty? The best way to celebrate the praises of God, is that which
Nehemiah uses Nehem. 9.5. And blessed be thy glorious name, which is exalted
above all blessing and praise. When ever we speak or think of God, we
necessarily detract from his Perfections; but even this necessity is glorious
to him, and this speaks his Perfection, that the highest finite understanding
must have imperfect thoughts of him.

We should make up in Reverence and Veneration what we fall short of in
knowledge. Reverence is an acknowledgment of distance; by our reverence of the
Divine Majesty, we should best awe our hearts, in a sense of the distance which
is between his infinite Nature and Perfection, and our finite apprehensions.
Worldly greatness will cause wonder, the thoughts of Earthly Majesty will
compose us to Reverence; how much more should those excellencies which are
beyond what we can imagine! Isa. 6. you have there God represented sitting upon
his throne, and the Seraphims about him, which are described to us as having
each six wings, and with twain they cover their faces. Creatures of the
brightest understanding, and the most exalted purity and Holiness, cover their
faces in the presence of God's glory, they choose rather to venerate God than
look upon him

II. This calls for humility and modesty. The consideration of God's
unsearchable Perfections should make the haughtiness of man to stoop, and bring
down his proud looks, and God alone should be exalted. The thought of God's
Excellency should abase us, and make us vile in our own eyes, it should make
all those petty Excellencies that we pride our selves in to vanish and
disappear. Those treasures of wisdom and knowledge which are in God, should
hide pride from man. It should hide those little parts and gifts which we are
so apt to glory in, as the Sun hides the Stars. When we consider God, we should
be so far from admiring our selves, that we should with an humble thankfulness
wonder that God should regard such inconsiderable nothings as we are. Psalm.
8.1, 3, 4. O Lord our God, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! who have
set thy glory above the heavens. When I consider the heavens, the work of thy
fingers, the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained; what is man, that
thou art mindful of him? or the Son of man, that thou visitest him? He that
considers the Glory of God, and the greatness of his Works, will think so
meanly of himself, that he will be astonished that God should mind him or visit
him. This is a noble strain of humility in David, by which he acknowledges
that the greatest King of the Earth, how considerable soever he may be in
respect of men, is yet but a pitiful thing to God.

When we speak to God, we should do it with great humility, Eccles. 5.2, 3. Let
thy words be few, for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth. We should say to
God, Job 37.19. Teach us what we shall say unto thee, for we cannot order our
speech by reason of darkness. And when we think or speak of him, we should do
it with great modesty; we should not rashly pronounce or determine any thing
concerning God. Simonides being asked what God was, desired one days time to
consider, then he desired two, and then four. The more we think of God, the
less peremptory shall we be in defining him. He that considers that God is
Incomprehensible, will not pretend to know all the ways of infinite knowledge,
and the utmost of infinite Power, and all the Reasons of God's Ways and
Providence. He that rightly values his own short understanding, and the
unlimited Perfections of God, will not be apt to say, this God cannot do, this
he cannot know, such ways are not agreeable to his wisdom. He that knows God
and himself, will be modest in these cases, he will (...), abstain from all
peremptory pronouncing in these matters; he considers that one man many times
differs so much from another in knowledge and skill of working, that he can do
those things which another believes impossible: but we have pitiful thoughts of
God, if we think the differerce between one man and another, is any thing to
the vast distance that is between the Divine Understanding and our ignorance,
the Divine Power and our weakness, the Wisdom of God and the folly of men.

III. The Incomprehensibleness of God's Perfections calls for the highest
degree of our affection. How should we fear this great and glorious God! Psalm.
90.11. Who knows the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is
thy wrath. Fear is the most infinite of all our passions, and fills us with the
most endless jealousy and suspicions; God's wrath is greater than our fear,
according to thy fear so is thy wrath.

How should we love him, when we are astonished with admiration of God's
goodness, and say, how great is thy goodness, and how great is thy beauty!
Behold, what manner of love the father has bestowed upon us! How great should
our love be to him! What manner of love should we return to him!

This calls for the highest degree of our Faith. With what confidence should we
rely upon him, who is able to do for us exceeding abundantly above what we can
ask or think!

To conclude, This requires the highest degree of our service: How should our
hearts be enlarged to run the ways of his commandments, who has laid up for us
such things, that eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor have entered into the
heart of man!

SERMON XV. Vol. VII.
God the first Cause, and last End.
ROM XI.36. For of him, and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be
Glory for ever. Amen.


HAving considered the more Eminent and Absolute Perfections of the Divine
Nature, as also that which results from the infinite Excellency and Perfection
of God, compared with the Imperfection of our Understandings, I come in the
last place to treat of such as are merely and purely Relative; as that He is
the first Cause, and the last End of all things; to which purpose I have chosen
these words of the Apostle, for the Subject of my present Discourse; For of
him, and through him etc,

The dependence of these Words upon the former is briefly this. The Apostle had
been speaking before in this Chapter, several things that might tend to raise
us to an Admiration of the Wisdom, and Goodness, and Mercy of God, in the
dispensation of his Grace, for the Salvation of men, both Jews and Gentiles,
and therefore would have us ascribe this work wholly to God; the contrivance of
it to his Wisdom, and not to our own counsel, v. 34. For who has known the
mind of the Lord? and who has been his counselor? and the bestowing this
grace, to his free Goodness and Mercy, and not to any desert of ours, v. 35. Or
who has first given to him, and it shall be recompensed to him again? Yea, and
not only in the dispensation of Grace, but of all good things; not only in this
work of Redemption, but also of Creation, God is the Fountain, and Original,
and first Cause, from whence every thing proceeds; and the last End, to which
every thing is to be referred. For of him, etc. (...), from him, the efficient
Cause producing all things; (...), by, or through him, as the efficient
conserving Cause of all things; (...), and to him, as the final Cause of all
things, and the End for which they were made.

The Proposition I shall speak to is, that God is the first Cause, and last End.

First, I shall a little Explain the Terms.

Secondly, Confirm the Proposition.

Thirdly, Apply it.

First, For the Explication of the Terms.

I. That God is the first Cause signifies,

1. Negatively, that he had no Cause, did not derive his Being from any other,
or does depend upon any other Being; but that he was always, and eternally of
himself.

2. Positively, that he is the Cause of all things besides himself, the
Fountain and Original of all Created Beings, from whom all things proceed, and
upon whom all things depend; or, that I may use the expression of Saint John,
Joh. 1.3. which I know is appropriated to the Second Person in the Trinity, By
him all things were made, and without him was nothing made that was made. So
that when we attribute to God, that he is the first, we mean, that there was
nothing before him, and that he was before all things, and that all things are
by him.

II. The last End, that is, that all things refer to him; that is, the design
and aim of all things that are made, is the Illustration of God's Glory some
way or other, and the manifestation of his Perfections.

Secondly, For the Confirmation, I shall briefly, according to my usual Method,
attempt it these two ways.

I. By Natural light. The Notion of a God contains in it all possible
Perfection. Now the utmost Perfection we can imagine is, for a Being to be
always of it self, before all other Beings, and not only so, but to be the
Cause of all other Beings; that is, that there should be nothing, but what
derives its Being from him, and continually depends upon him; from whence
follows, that all things must refer to him, as their last End. For every wise
Agent acts with design, and in order to an End. Now the End is that which is
best, which is most worthy the attaining, and that is God himself. Now his
Being and Perfections are already, and the best next to the existence of his
Being and Perfections, is the manifestation of them, which is called God's
Glory; and this is the highest End that we can imagine, to which all the
Effects of the Divine Power and Goodness, and Wisdom do refer.

And that these Titles are to be attributed to God, is not only reasonable,
when it is revealed and discovered, but was discovered by the Natural light of
the heathens. Hence it was that Aristotle gives to God those Titles of the
first Being, the first Cause, and the first Mover; and his Master Plato calls
God the Author, and Parent of all things, the Maker and Architect of the World,
and of all Creatures; the Fountain and Original of all things. Porphyry calls
him (...), the first, from whence he Reasons to this sense, that he is the
ultimate end, and that all things move toward God, that all motions center in
him; because, says he, it is most proper and natural for things to refer to
their Original, and to refer all to him, from whom they receive all. Antoninus,
the Emperor and Philosopher, speaking of Nature (which with the Stoics
signified God) has these words, which are so very like these of the Apostle,
that they may seem to be taken from him; (...), Of thee are all things, in thee
are all things, to thee are all things.

II. From Scripture. Hither belong all those places where he declares himself
to be the first, and the last, Isa. 41.4. Who has wrought and done it, calling
the generations from the beginning? I the Lord, the first, and with the last. I
am he. Isa. 43.10. Before me there was no God formed, (or as it is in the
margin) there was nothing formed of God, neither shall there be after me. Isa.
44.6. I am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God. Isa.
48.12, 13. I am the first, I also am the last, my hand has laid the foundation
of the earth, my right hand has spread the heavens; which is as much as to
say, he made the World, and was the first Cause of all things. Rev. 1.8. I am
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, says the Lord, which is, and which
was, and which is to come.

But more expressly, 1 Cor. 8.6. But to us there is but one God, the father, of
whom are all things, and we by him, (...), and we to him, and for him. Acts
17.24. God that made the world, and all things therein. v. 25. He gives to all
life, and breath, and all things. v. 28. In him we live, and move, and have our
Being. v. 29. For as much then as we are the offspring of God.

Hither we may refer those Texts which attribute the same to the Second Person
in the Trinity, as the Eternal Wisdom and Word of God, whereby all things were
made, Joh. 1.3. All things were made by him, and without him was nothing made,
that was made, v. 10. And the World was made by him. 1 Cor. 8.6. And one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. Ephesians. 3.9. God, who Created
all things by Jesus Christ. Col. 1.16. By him were all things Created that are
in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they be
thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or powers, all things were Created by
him, and for him, and he is before all things, and by him all things consist.
Heb. 1.2. By whom also he made the Worlds. And, v. 3. Upholding all things by
the word of his power.

Thirdly, and lastly, to apply this Doctrine.

Use. First, If God be the first Cause of all things, who did at first produce
all Creatures, and does since Preserve them and Govern them, and disposes of
all their concernments, and orders all things that befall them, from hence let
us learn,

1. With Humility and Thankfullness to own and acknowledge, and admire and
bless God as the Author and Original of our Being, as the Spring and Fountain
of all the Blessings and good things that we enjoy. If we do but consider what
these words signify, that God is the first Cause of all things, we shall see
great Reason to own and acknowledge, to adore and praise him, and that with the
greatest humility; because we have not given him any thing, but have received
all from him; he is the Cause of all things, who did freely and of his own good
will and pleasure communicate Beings to us, without any constraint or
necessity, but what his own goodness laid upon him, Rev. 4.11. Thou art worthy,
O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power; for thou have Created all
things, and for thy pleasure they are and were Created. We could not, before we
were, deserve any thing from him, or move him by any Arguments, or importune
him by entreaties to make us; but he freely gave us Being; and ever since we
depend upon him, and have been preserved by him, and cannot subsist one moment
without the continued influence of the Power and Goodness which first called us
out of nothing. He is the Author of all the good, and the Fountain of all those
Blessing, which for the present we enjoy, and for the future hope for.

When he made us at first, he designed us for Happiness; and when we by our sin
and wilful mascarriage fell short of the Happiness which he designed us for, he
sent his Son into the World for our recovery, and gave his life for the Ransom
of our Souls. He has not only admitted us into a new Covenant, wherein he has
promised pardon, and eternal life to us; but he has also purchased these
Blessings for us, by the most endearing price, the blood of his own Son, and
has saved us in such a manner as may justly astonish us. Upon these
Considerations we should awaken our selves to the praise of God, and with the
holy Psalmist, call up our Spirits, and summon all the Powers and Faculties of
our Souls, to assist us in this Work, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3, 4. etc. Bless the
Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me bless his holy name; bless the Lord,
O my Soul, and forget not all his benefits; who forgiveth all thy iniquities,
who heals all thy diseases, who redeemeth thy life from destruction, who
crowns thee with loving kindness, and tender mercies; it is he that satisfies
our Souls with good things, and crowns us with tender mercies, and loving
hindness; that has promised Eternal Life and Happiness to us, and must confer
and bestow this upon us; Therefore our Souls and all that is within us should
bless his holy name.

2. If God be the first Cause, that is, orders all things that befall us, and
by his Providence disposes of all our concernments, this should teach us with
patience, and quietness, to submit to all Events, to all evils and afflictions,
that come upon us, as being disposed by his wise Providence, and coming from
him. We are apt to attribute all things to the next and immediate Agent, and to
look no higher than Second Causes; not considering that all the motions of
Natural Causes are directly subordinate to the first Cause, and all the actions
of free Creatures are under the Government of God's wise Providence, so that
nothing happens to us besides the design and intention of God.

And methinks this is one particular Excellency of the style of the Scripture
above all other Books, that the constant Phrase of the Sacred Dialect is to
attribute all Events (excepting sins only) to God, so that every one that reads
it cannot but take notice, that it is wrote with a more attentive consideration
of God than any other Book, as appears by those frequent and express
acknowledgments of God as the Cause of all Events; so that what in other
Writers would be said to be done by this or that Person, is ascribed to God.
Therefore it is so often said, that the Lord did this, and that, stirred up
such an Enemy, brought such a Judgment. And we shall find that holy men in
Scripture make excellent use of this consideration, to argue themselves into
patience and contentedness in every condition. So Eli, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the
Lord, let him do what seems him good. So Job, he did not so consider the
Sabeans and Chaldeans who had carried away his Oxen and his Camels, and slain
his Servants; nor the Wind which had thrown down his House, and killed his
Sons, and his Daughters; but he looks up to God, the great Governor and
Disposer of all these Events; The Lord gives, and the Lord has taken away,
blessed be the name of the Lord. So David, Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb and spoke not
a word, because thou Lord did it. So our Blessed Savior, when he was ready
to suffer, he did not consider the malice of the Jews, which was the cause of
his death; but looks to a higher hand; the cup which my father gives me to
drink, shall not I drink it?

He that looks upon all things as coming from second Causes, and does not eye
the first Cause, the good and wise Governor, will be apt to take offense at
every cross and unwelcome accident. Men are apt to be angry, when one flings
Water upon them as they pass in the Streets; but no man is offended, if he is
wet by Rain from Heaven. When we look upon Evils as coming only from men, we
are apt to be impatient, and know not how to bear them; but we should look upon
all things as under the Government and disposal of the first Cause, and the
Circumstances of every condition as allotted to us by the wise Providence of
God; this Consideration, that it is the hand of God, and that he has done it,
would still all the murmurings of our Spirits. As when a Seditious Multitude is
in an uproar, the presence of a grave and venerable person will hush the noise,
and quell the tumult; so if we would but represent God as present to all
actions, and governing and disposing all Events, this would still and appease
our Spirits, when they are ready to riot and mutiny against any of his
Dispensations.

Use the Second. If God be the last End of all, let us make him our last End,
and refer all our Actions to his glory. This is that which is due to him, as he
is the first Cause, and therefore he does most reasonably require it of us.

And herein likewise the Scripture does excel all other Books, that is, does
more frequently and expressly mind us of this End, and calls upon us to propose
it to our selves as our ultimate aim and design. We should love him as our
chief End, Mat. 22.37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. Thus to love God is that which, in
the language of the Schools, is loving God as our Chief End. So likewise the
Apostle requires, that we should refer all the Actions of our lives to this
End, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat or drink, do all to the glory of God; that we
should glorify him in our souls, and in our bodies, which are his. He is the
Author of all the powers that we have, and therefore we should use them for
him; we do all by him, and therefore we should do all to him.

And that we may the better understand our selves as to this duty, I shall
endeavor to give satisfaction to a Question or two which may arise about it.

First, Whether an actual intention of God's Glory be necessary to make every
Action that we do, good and acceptable to God?

Answ. 1. It is necessary that the glory of God either Formally or Virtually
should be the ultimate end and scope of our lives, and all our Actions;
otherwise they will be defective in that which in moral Actions is most
considerable, and that is the End. If a man should keep all the Commandments of
the Gospel, this excepted of making God's glory his Supreme End, only with a
design to gain reputation, or some other advantage in the World, this very
thing would vitiate all, and render him unacceptable to God.

2. It is very requisite and convenient, as a good sign, that we should very
frequently, actually think upon, and intend this End; for if it be very much
out of our thoughts, we have some reason to be jealous of our selves, that we
do not intend it at all.

3. It is so far from being necessary, that we should in every Action have this
intention of God's glory, that it is not morally possible that we should; no
more than it is possible, that a man that goes a Journey of a thousand miles,
should every step he takes have actual thoughts of his Journey's end: nor is it
more necessary; for consideration of the end is only so far necessary, as it is
necessary to guide and quicken us in the use of means; as it is not necessary
for a man to think of his journey's end, further than to direct and excite him
to go thither. And this appears further by the contrary; it is not necessary to
make a sinful Action, that a man should Formally, much less Actually intend
God's dishonor; it is enough to constitute a man a wicked man, if he willingly
transgress God's Law, the doing whereof does by consequence reflect a dishonor
upon him: so on the other hand, it is sufficient to make an Action good and
acceptable, if it be conformable to God's Law, and such as by consequence
redounds to God's glory.

Second Question. Whether the Glory of God may, or ought to be considered, as
an End separate and distinct from our own Happiness?

Answ. I shall speak but briefly to this, because I have elsewhere spoken to
it; but in that little which I have to say for satisfaction to this Question, I
will proceed by these steps.

I. By the glory of God, we mean the Demonstration, or Illustration, or
Manifestation of some or all of his Perfections, more especially his Goodness,
and Mercy, and Justice, and Wisdom, and Power, and Holiness.

II. It is plain that the manifestation of some of these Perfections is a thing
that may be separated from the Happiness of a Creature; for his Holiness, and
Justice, and Power, may and shall be manifested in the final and eternal ruin
of impenitent sinners.

III. The Manifestation of any of God's Perfections, ought many times to be
propounded by us as an end distinct and separate from our respective Happiness;
such a Happiness, as respects only some particulars, and some particular
duration, in opposition to absolute and Eternal Happiness. In this sense our
Savior says, that he sought not his own Glory, but the Glory of him that sent
him; by which he does not mean, that he quitted everlasting Glory and
Happiness; but that in order to the glory of God, he did for a time lay aside
his own glory, and divest himself of it while he was in this World; for the
Apostle tells us, that he was encouraged to do this out of a respect to a
greater glory, Heb. 12.2. Who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of
God. And in this sense, we are to understand the command of self-denial in the
Gospel, with reference to our particular or temporal, not our eternal interest;
and that it is no more, is plain from the Argument our Savior uses to
encourage this self-denial, the promise of a far greater Happiness than that we
deny; no man that forsakes father and mother for my sake, but shall have
eternal life; And proportionably we are to understand those Commands of loving
Christ more than our selves, that is, more than any temporal interest*

IV. The manifestation of any of God's Perfections, neither ought nor can
reasonably be propounded by us, as an End separated from, or opposite to our
Eternal Blessedness; that is, we cannot naturally or reasonably desire the
glory of God should be advanced, though it were to our final ruin, either by
annihilation, or eternal misery.

1. We cannot either naturally, or reasonably desire God should be glorified by
our annihilation.

(1.) Not naturally. Because such a desire would be directly contrary to the
natural desire of self-preservation, which God himself has planted in us, and
is most intimate and essential to our Natures.

(2.) Not reasonably. Because it is utterly unimaginable, how God can be
glorified by the annihilation of a Creature. All the Attributes that we can
imagine can be manifested herein, are Power and Sovereignty; his Power has
already been as much manifested in creating and making the Creature out of
nothing, as it can be by reducing it into nothing; for to Create is the very
same demonstration of Power, as to annihilate. And as for his Sovereignty, God
will never manifest that in contradiction to his Goodness, or Wisdom, or any
other Perfection of the Divine Nature. To unmake a Creature, and take away the
Being which he had given, would argue either a failure of his Goodness toward
the Creature, or that he did repent he had made it, which would reflect upon
his Wisdom and Constancy. I do not say, that in Justice God cannot annihilate a
Creature; far be it from me; for what he gave was his own, and he may without
any wrong to the Creature take it again.

2. Much less can we naturally desire that God should be glorified in our
Eternal Misery. The Reasons which I gave about annihilation are stronger here;
therefore we cannot naturally desire it; nor reasonably, for the demonstration
of his Power, or Sovereignty, or Justice, or Holiness, which I think are all
the Attributes which we can imagine to be glorified hereby. Not as the
Manifestation of his Power; for that would be as much manifested in the
Happiness, as Misery of the Creature: Not of his Sovereignty; for God will not
manifest that in contradiction to his Goodness, upon which nothing can reflect
more, than merely, pro arbitrio, for his pleasure, to make an innocent Creature
for ever miserable: Not his Justice, and Holiness; for these presuppose sin and
demerit in the Creature, out of hatred to which he makes it miserable; but God
has declared that he esteems himself more glorified by the Obedience and
Happiness of his Creatures, than by their sin and destruction; and if it were
reasonable to desire the Justice and Holiness of God might be glorified in my
eternal ruin, which I have deserved by sin, this would plainly follow from it,
that it were reasonable to sin, that Justice might abound, which of the two is
a greater Absurdity, than that which the Apostle condemns, of sinning that
grace may abound.

V. There is a strict and inviolable connection between the greatest glory of
God; and our Obedience and Happiness: I say, between his greatest glory;
because he esteems himself more glorified by the Obedience and Happiness of his
Creatures, than by their ruin and misery; and that we may believe it, we have
his Oath for it, As I live, says the Lord, I delight not in the death of a
sinner, but rather that he should turn, and live. And it is observable, that
the Apostle, in 1 Cor. 10.31, 32, 33. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye
do, do all to the glory of God, giving none offense, neither to the Jews, nor
to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God; even as I please all men, in all
things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many that they may be
saved; explains the glorifying of God, by edifying, and promoting the Salvation
of others.

VI. We may consider the glory of God, as some ways distinct from our
Happiness; that is, we may consider the manifestation of his Goodness, and
Mercy, and Wisdom, in our Happiness, as that which results from it: but this is
not enough to make it a distinct End, but the same diversely considered; as the
public good is that which results from the general good of particular Persons,
but cannot reasonably be propounded by any man, as an End distinct from the
general Happiness of particular Persons, without ruining and destroying the
Notion of public good.

VII. Though considered as we are particular Beings, we can have no greater End
than our own Happiness, in which God is eminently glorified, yet as we are part
of the whole Creation and Workmanship of God, which is the noblest
consideration of our selves, the glory of God which results from the
manifestation of all his Perfections in and about his Creatures, is precisely
our ultimate End, and yet not an End really distinct from our own Happiness;
and therefore it is most proper, and becoming, and agreeable to the wise style
of Scripture, to give our End its denomination, not from the more particular
and narrow, but the more noble consideration of our selves, as we are parts of
the whole Creation and Workmanship of God; as it is more generous and becoming
for the Members of a Civil Society to mention the public good as their End,
than their private Happiness and Advantage, though that be so really and
effectually promoted by the public good.

Thus I have finished what I proposed on this Argument, and concerning the
Attributes of God in general; Of whom, and through whom, and to whom are all
things. To Him be Glory for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Sermons concerning the Divine Attributes, contained in this, and the
former Volume, having not been transcribed, and consequently not printed, in
the Order in which they were preached, and there being also two other Sermons
published by the most Reverend Author himself, relating to the Divine Being; It
may not be unacceptable to the Reader, to present him with a Scheme of the
Order in which they seem to have been designed; viz.

1 Sermon. Concerning the Existence of God, or the Unreasonableness of Atheism.
Job 28.28. 1 Sermon. Concerning the Unity of the Divine Nature, and the B.
Trinity. 1 Timothy 2.15. These two published by the Author.

These following from the Originals, by Dr. Barker.
Vol. page The Perfection of God. 2 Sermon. Matthew. 5.48. 6 ^ The Happiness of
God. 1 Sermon. 1 Timothy 1.11. 6 67 The Unchangeableness of God. 1 Sermon. Jam. 1.17.
6 97 The Spirituality of the Divine Nature. 1 Sermon. John 4.24. 7 299 The
Immensity of the Divine Nature. 1 Sermon. Ps. 139.7, 8, 9, 10. 7 331 The Eternity
of God. 1 Sermon. Ps. 90.2. 7 355 The Knowledge of God. 2 Sermon. 1 Samuel 2.3. 6 121
The Wisdom of God. 1 Sermon. [ In which also the Majesty and Glory, the Dominion
and Soveraingty of God, are treated of.]
Jude 25. 6 187 The Wisdom of God in the Creation. 1 Sermon. Ps. 104.24. 6 219
The Wisdom of God in his Providence. 1 Sermon. 1 Pet. 5.7. 6 243 The Wisdom of
God in the Redemption of Mankind. 1 Sermon. 1 Cor. 1.24. 6 275 The Justice of
God, in the distribution of Rewards and Punishments. 1 Sermon. Genesis 18.25. 6 305
The Truth of God. 1 Sermon. Deuteronomy. 32.4. 6 337 The Holiness of God. 1 Sermon. 1 Pet.
^.16. 6 369 The Goodness of God. 4 Sermon. Ps. 145.9. 7 1 The Mercy of God. 1
Sermon. Numb. 14.18. 7 105 The Patience of God. 2 Sermon. 2 Pet. 3.9. 7 143 The
Long-Suffering of God. 2 Sermon. Eccl. 8.11. 7 193 The Power of God. 1 Sermon.
Psalm. 62.11. 7 265 The Incomprehensibleness of God. 1 Sermon. Job 11.7. 7 377 God
the first Cause, and last End. 1 Sermon. Romans 11.36. 7 403


