A SERMON LATELY PREACHED ON 1 CORINTHIANS. 3.15.

BY A Reverend Divine OF THE Church of England.

DVBLIN, Reprinted for Joseph Howes Bookseller, at the Kings-Arms in
Castle-street, 1685.

1 CORINTHIANS. 3.15. But he himself shall be saved, yet so as by Fire.
THE Context runs thus. According to the Grace of God which is given unto me,
as a wise Master Builder, I have laid the Foundation, and another builds
thereon: But let every man take heed how he builds thereupon. For other
Foundation can no man lay, than that which is laid, Jesus Christ. Now if any
man build upon this Foundation Gold, Silver, precious Stones, Wood, Hay,
Stubble, every man's work shall be made manifest, for the day shall declare it;
but it shall be revealed by Fire, and the Fire shall try every man's work of
what sort it is. If any man's work abide which he has built thereupon, he shall
receive a Reward. If any man's work shall be burnt, he shall suffer loss; But he
himself shall be saved, yet so as by Fire.

In these Words the Apostle speaks of a sort of persons, who held indeed the
Foundation of Christianity, but built upon it such Doctrines or Practices as
would not bear the trial; which he expresses to us by Wood, Hay, and Stubble,
which are not proof against the Fire. Such a person, the Apostle tells us, has
brought himself into a very dangerous state, though he would not absolutely
deny the possibility of his Salvation; He himself shall be saved, yet so as by
Fire.

That by Fire here, is not meant the Fire of Purgatory, as some pretend (who
would be glad of any shadow of a Text of Scripture to countenance their own
dreams) I shall neither trouble you nor my self to manifest.

It is very well known, that this is a Proverbial phrase, used not only in
Scripture, but in profane Authors, to signify a narrow escape out of a great
danger. He shall be saved, yet so as by Fire, (...), out of the Fire. Just as
(...) is used 1 Pet. 3.20. where the Apostle speaking of the eight persons of
Noah's Family, who escaped the Flood, (...), they escaped out of the Water. So
here this phrase is to be rendered in the Text, He himself shall escape, yet so
as out of Fire. The like expression you have, Amos 4.11. I have plucked them as
a firebrand out of the fire. And Jude 23. Others save with fear, plucking them
out of the fire. All which expressions signify the greatness of the danger,
and the difficulty of escaping it. And so the Roman Orator Tully.
(who, it is likely, did not think of Purgatory,) uses this phrase; Quo ex
judicio, velut ex incendio, nudus effugit; From which Judgment or Sentence he
escaped naked, as it were out of a burning. And one of the Greek Orators
Aristotle.
tells us, that to save a man out of the fire, was a common proverbial speech.
And thus St. Chrysostom interprets this very place, He shall escape as one that
escapes out of the fire, that is, (says he) as one who when his house at
midnight is set on fire, wakes and leaps out of his Bed, and runs naked out of
the doors, taking nothing that is within along with him, but employing his
whole care to save his body from the flames.

From the words thus explained, the Observation that naturally arises is this;
That men may hold all the Fundamentals of Christian Religion, and yet may super
add other things whereby they may greatly endanger their salvation. What those
things were, which some among the Corinthians built upon the foundation of
Christianity, whereby they endangered their Salvation, we may probably
conjecture, by what the Apostle reproves in this Epistle, as the tolerating of
Incestuous Marriages, communicating in Idol Feasts, etc. And especially by the
Doctrine of the false Apostles, who at that time did so much disturb the peace
of most Christian Churches, and who are so often and so severely reflected upon
in this Epistle. And what their Doctrine was, we have an account, Acts 15. viz.
that they impose upon the Gentile Christians Circumcision, and the Observation
of the Jewish Law, teaching, that unless they were Circumcised, and kept the
Law of Moses, they could not be saved. So that they did not only build these
Doctrines upon Christianity, but they made them equal with the Foundation,
saying, That unless men believed and practiced such things, they could not be
saved.

I shall at this time take occasion from this passage of the Apostles to
consider these two things.

1. Some Doctrines and Practices which have been built upon the foundation of
Christianity, to the great hazard and danger of men's Salvation; And to be
plain, I mean particularly by the Church of Rome.

2. Whether our granting a possibility of Salvation (though with great hazard)
to those in the communion of the Roman Church, and their denying it to us, be a
reasonable argument and encouragement to any man to betake himself to that
Church.

And there is the more reason to consider these things, when so many seducing
Spirits are so active and busy ^o pervert men from the Truth; and when we see
every day so many persons and their Religion so easily parted. For this reason
these two Considerations shall be the subject of the following Discourse.

I. First, we will consider some Doctrines and Practices which the Church of
Rome has built upon the Foundation of Christianity, to the great hazard and
danger of men's Salvation. It is not denied by the most judicious Protestant,
but that the Church of Rome do hold all the Articles of the Christian Faith
which are necessary to Salvation. But that which we charge upon them as a just
ground of our separation from them, is the imposing of new Doctrines and
Practices upon Christians, as necessary to Salvation, which were never taught
by our Savior, or his Apostles; and which are either directly contrary to the
Doctrine of Christianity, or too apparently destructive of a good Life. And I
begin,

1. With their Doctrines. And, because I have no mind to aggravate lesser
matters, I will single out four or five points of Doctrine, which they have
added to the Christian Religion, and which were neither taught by our Savior
and his Apostles, nor owned in the first ages of Christianity. And the

First which I shall mention, and which being once admitted, makes way for as
many Errors as they please to bring in, is this, their Doctrine of
Infallibility. And this they are stiff and peremptory in, though they are not
agreed among themselves, where this Infallibility is seated; whether in the
Pope alone, or a Council alone, or in both together, or in the diffusive body
of Christians; But they are sure they have it, though they know not where it is:

And is this no prejudice against it? can any man think that this privilege
was at first conferred upon the Church of Rome, and that Christians in all ages
did believe it, and had constant recourse to it, for the determining of
differences, and yet that that very Church, which has enjoyed and used it so
long, should now be at a loss where to find it? Nothing could fall out more
unluckily, than that there should be such differences among them about that
which they pretend to be the only means of ending all differences.

There is not the least intimation in Scripture of this privilege conferred
upon the Roman Church; nor do the Apostles in all their Epistles, ever so much
as give the least directions to Christians to appeal to the Bishop of Rome for
a determination of many differences, which, even in those times happened among
them: And it is strange they should be so silent in this matter, when there
were so many occasions to speak of it; if our Savior had plainly appointed
such an infallible Judge of Controversies, for this very end, to decide the
differences that should happen among Christians It is strange that the Ancient
Fathers in their disputes with Heretics should never appeal to this Judge; nay
it is strange they should not constantly do it in all cases, it being so short
and expedite a way for the ending of Controversies. And this very consideration
to a wise man, is instead of a thousand arguments to satisfy him that in those
times no such thing was believed in the whole world.

Now this Doctrine of Infallibility, if it be not true, is of so much the more
pernicious consequence to Christianity, because the conceit of it does confirm
them that think they have it in all their other errors; and gives them a
pretense of assuming an Authority to themselves to impose their own fancies and
mistakes upon the whole Christian world.

2. Their Doctrine about Repentance. Which consists in confessing their sins to
the Priest; which if it be but accompanied with any degree of Contrition, does,
upon Absolution received from the Priest, put them into a state of Salvation,
though they have lived the most lewd and debauched lives that can be imagined;
than which nothing can be more destructive of a good life. For if this be true,
all the hazard that the most wicked man runs of his Salvation is, only the
danger of so sudden a death, as gives him no space for Confession and
Absolution. A case that happens so rarely, that any man that is strongly
addicted to his Lusts, will be content to venture his Salvation upon this
hazard; and all the arguments to a good life will be very insignificant to a
man that has a mind to be wicked, when remission of Sins may be had upon such
cheap terms.

3. The Doctrine of Purgatory. By which they mean a state of temporary
punishments after this life, from which men may be released and translated into
Heaven by the Prayers of the Living, and the Sacrifice of the Mass. That this
Doctrine was not known in the Primitive Church, nor can be proved from
Scripture, we have the free acknowledgment of as Learned and Eminent men as any
of that Church; which is to acknowledge that it is a superstructure upon the
Christian Religion. And though in one sense it be indeed a building of Gold and
Silver upon the foundation of Christianity, considering the vast Revenues which
this Doctrine (and that of Indulgences, which depends upon it) brings into that
Church; yet I doubt not, but in the Apostles sense, it will be found to be Hay
and Stubble. But how groundless soever it be, it is too gainful a Doctrine to
be easily parted withal.

4. The Doctrine of Transubstantiation. A hard word, but I would to God that
were the worst of it; the thing is much more difficult. I have taken some pains
to consider other Religions that have been in the world, and I must freely
declare, that I never yet, in any of them, met with any Article or Proposition,
imposed upon the belief of men, half so unreasonable and hard to be believed as
this is. And yet this, in the Romish Church, is esteemed one of the most
principal Articles of the Christian Faith: though there is no more certain
Foundation for it in Scripture, than for our Saviors being substantially
changed into all those things which are said of him, as that he is a Rock, a
Vine, a Door, and an hundred other things.

But this is not all This Doctrine has not only no certain Foundation in
Scripture, but I have a far heavier charge against it, namely, that it
undermines the very Foundation of Christianity it self. And surely nothing
ought to be admitted to be a part of the Christian Doctrine, which destroys the
reason of our belief of the whole. And that this Doctrine does so, will appear
evidently, if we consider what was the main Argument which the Apostles used to
convince the world of the truth of Christianity. And that was this; That our
Blessed Savior, the Author of this Doctrine, wrought such and such miracles,
and particularly that he rose again from the dead; And this they proved,
because they were eyewitnesses of his Miracles, and had seen him and conversed
with him after he was risen from the dead. But what if their senses did deceive
them in this matter? then it cannot be denied, but that the main proof of
Christianity falls to the ground.

Well! We will now suppose (as the Church of Rome does) Transubstantiation to
have been one principal part of the Christian Doctrine, which the Apostles
preached. But if this Doctrine be true, then all men's Senses are deceived in a
plain sensible matter, wherein it is as hard for them to be deceived, as in any
thing in the world; For two things can hardly be imagined more different, than
a little bit of Wafer, and the whole Body of a Man.

So that the Apostles persuading men to believe this Doctrine, persuaded them
not to trust their Senses, and yet the Argument which they used to persuade
them to this was built upon the direct contrary principle, that men's Senses are
not to be trusted; For if they be not, then notwithstanding all the evidence
the Apostles offered for the Resurrection of our Savior, he might not be
risen; and so the Faith of Christians was vain. So they that represent the
Apostles as absurdly as is possible, viz. going about to persuade men out of
their Senses, by virtue of an Argument, the whole strength whereof depends upon
the certainty of Sense.

And now the matter is brought to a fair issue. If the testimony of Sense be to
be relied upon, then Transubstantiation is false: If it be not, then no man is
sure that Christianity is true. For the utmost assurance that the Apostles had
of the truth of Christianity, was the testimony of their own Senses concerning
our Saviors Miracles; and this Testimony every man has against
Transubstantiation. From whence it plainly follows, that no man (no not the
Apostles themselves) had more reason to believe Christianity to be true, than
every man has to believe Transubstantion to be false. And we who did not see
our Saviors Miracles (as the Apostles did) and have only a credible Relation
of them, but do see the Sacrament, have less evidence of the truth of
Christianity than of the falsehood of Transubstantiation.

But cannot God impose upon the Senses of men, and represent things to them
otherwise than they are? Yes, undoubtedly. And if he has revealed that he does
this, are we not to believe him? Most certainly. But then we ought to be
assured that he has made such a Revelation; which Assurance no man can have,
the certainty of Sense being taken away.

I shall press the business a little farther. Supposing the Scripture to be a
Divine Revelation, and that these words, [ This is my Body] if they be in
Scripture, must necessarily be taken in the strict and literal sense, I ask
now, What greater evidence any man has, that these words [ This is my Body] are
in the Bible, than every man has that the Bread is not changed in the
Sacrament? Nay no man has so much; for we have only the evidence of one Sense
that these words are in the Bible, but that the Bread is not changed we have
the concurring testimony of several of our Senses. In a word, if this be once
admitted, that the Senses of all men are deceived in one of the most plain
sensible matters that can be, there is no certain means left either to convey
or prove a Divine Revelation to Men; nor is there any way to confute the
grossest imposture in the world: For if the clear evidence of all men's Senses
be not sufficient for this purpose, let any man if he can find a better and
more convincing Argument.

5. I will give but one instance more of their Doctrines. And that shall be
their Doctrine of deposing Kings in case of Heresy, and absolving their
Subjects from their Allegiance to them. And this is not a mere speculative
Doctrine, but has been put in practice many a time by the Bishops of Rome, as
every one knows that is versed in History. For the Troubles and Confusions
which were occasioned by this very thing make a good part of the History of
several ages.

I hope no body expects that I should take the pains to show, that this was not
the Doctrine of our Savior and his Apostles, nor of the Primitive Christians.
The Papists are many of them so far from pretending to this, that in some times
and places, when it is not seasonable and for their purpose, we have much a-doe
to persuade them that ever it was their Doctrine. But if Transubstantiation be
their Doctrine, this is; for they came both out of the same Forge, I mean the
Council of Lateran under Pope Innocent the third. And if (as they tell us)
Transubstantiation was then established so was this. And indeed one would think
they were Twins, and brought forth at the same time, they are so like one
another, that is, both so monstrously unreasonable.

II. I come now in the Second place, to consider some Practices of the Church
of Rome, which I am afraid will prove as bad as her Doctrines. I shall instance
in these Five.

1. Their celebrating of their Divine Service in an unknown Tongue: And that
not only contrary to the practice of the Primitive Church, and to the great end
and design of Religious Worship, which is the Edification of those who are
concerned in it, (and it is hard to imagine how men can be edified by what they
do not understand) but likewise in direct contradiction to St. Paul, who has
no less than a whole Chapter, wherein he confutes this Practice as fully, and
condemns it as plainly as any thing is condemned in the whole Bible. And they
that can have the face to maintain that this Practice was not condemned by St.
Paul, or that it was allowed and used in the first Ages of Christianity, need
not be ashamed to set up for the defense of any Paradox in the world.

2. The Communion in one kind. And that notwithstanding that even, by their own
acknowledgment, our Savior instituted it in both kinds, and the Primitive
Church administered it in both kinds. This I must acknowledge is no addition to
Christianity, but a Sacrilegious taking away of an Essential part of the
Sacrament. For the Cup is as essential a part of the Institution as the Bread;
and they might as well, and by the same Authority take away the one as the
other, and both as well as either.

3. Their worshipping of Images. Which practice (notwithstanding all their
distinctions about it, which are no other but what the Heathens used in the
same case) flies as full in the face of the Second Commandment, as a deliberate
and malicious killing of a man is against the Sixth. But if the case be so
plain, a man would think that at least the Teachers and Guides of that Church
should be sensible of it. Why, they are so, and afraid the people should be so
too; And therefore in their ordinary Catechisms and Manuals of Devotion, they
leave out the Second Commandment, and divide the Tenth into two to make up the
number, lest if the common people should know it, their Consciences should
start at the doing of a thing so directly contrary to the plain command of God.

4. The worshipping of the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist, out of a false and
groundless persuasion, that they are substantially changed into the Body and
Blood of Christ. Which if it be not true (and it has good fortune if it be,
for certainly it is one of the most incredible things in the whole world) then
by the confession of several of their own learned Writers, they are guilty of
gross Idolatry.

5. The Worship and Invocation of Saints and Angels; and particularly of the
Virgin Mary, which has now for some Ages been a principal part of their
Religion. Now a man may justly wonder that so considerable a part of Religion,
as they make this to be, should have no manner of foundation in the Scripture.
Does our Savior any where speak one word concerning the worshipping of Her?
Nay, does he not take all occasions to restrain all extravagant apprehensions
and imaginations concerning the Honor due to her, as foreseeing the degeneracy
of the Church in this thing? When he was told that his Mother and Brethren were
without: Who (says he) are my Mother and my Brethren? He that does the will of
my Father, the same is my Mother, and Sister, and Brother. And when the Woman
brake forth into that rapture concerning the blessed Mother of our Lord;
Blessed is the Womb that bare thee, and the Paps that gave thee suck! Our
Savior diverts it to another thing; Yea rather, blessed are they that hear the
word of God and keep it. Does either our Savior or his Apostles in all their
Precepts and Directions concerning Prayer, and the manner of it, and by whom we
are to address our selves to God, give the least intimation of Prayer to the
Virgin Mary, or making use of her Mediation? And can any man believe, that if
this had been the Practice of the Church from the beginning, our Savior and
his Apostles would have been so silent about so considerable a part of
Religion; insomuch, that in all the Epistles of the Apostles I do not remember
that her Name is so much as once mentioned? And yet the worship of her in the
Church of Rome is a main part of their public Worship; yea and of their
Private Devotion too, in which it is usual with them to say ten Ave Mary's for
one Pater noster, that is, for one Prayer they make to Almighty God, they make
ten Addresses to the blessed Virgin, for that is the proportion observed in
their R^saries. He that considers this, and had never seen the Bible, would
have been apt to think, that there had been more said concerning Her in
Scripture, than either concerning God, or our blessed Savior; and that the New
Testament were full from one end to the other of Precepts and Exhortations to
the worshipping of her; and yet when all is done, I challenge any man to show
me so much as one Sentence in the whole Bible that sounds that way. And there
is as little in the Christian Writers of the first 300 years. The truth is,
this practice began to creep in among some superstitious people about the
middle of the fourth Century, And I remember particularly, that Epiphanius, who
lived about that time, calls it, the Heresy of the Women.

And thus I have given you some Instances of several Doctrines and Practices,
which the Church of Rome have built upon the Foundation of Christianity. Much
more might have been said of them; but from what has been said, any man may
easily discern how dangerous they are to the Salvation of men.

I proceed now in the second place.

II. To consider whether our granting a possibility of Salvation, though with
great hazard, to those in the Communion of the Roman Church, and their denying
it to us be a sufficient argument and encouragement to any man to quit our
Church and go to theirs. And there is the more need to consider this, because
this is the great popular Argument, wherewith the Emissaries and Agents of that
Church are wont to assault our people. Your Church (say they) grants that a
Papist may be saved; Ours denies that a Protestant can be saved; therefore
safest to be of our Church, in which Salvation, by the acknowledgment of both
sides, is possible.

For Answer to this, I shall endeavor to show that this is so far from being a
good Argument, that it is so intolerable weak and sophistical, that any
considerate man ought to be ashamed to be caught by it. For either it is good
of it self, and sufficient to persuade a man to relinquish our Church, and to
pass over to theirs, without entering into the Merits of the Cause on either
side, and without comparing the Doctrines and Practices of both the Churches
together, or it is not. If it be not sufficient of it self to persuade a man to
leave our Church, without comparing the Doctrines on both sides, then it is to
no purpose, and there is nothing got by it. For if upon examination and
comparing of Doctrines, the one appear to be true, and the other false, this
alone is sufficient inducement to any man to cleave to that Church where the
true Doctrine is found, and then there is no need of this Argument.

If it be said, that this Argument is good in it self, without the examination
of the Doctrines of both Churches; this seems a very strange thing for any man
to affirm, that it is reason enough to a man to be of any Church, what ever her
Doctrines and Practices be, if she do but damn those that differ from her, and
if the Church that differs from her do but allow a possibility of Salvation in
her Communion.

But they who use this Argument, pretend that it is sufficient of it self; and
therefore I shall apply my self to show, as briefly and plainly as I can, the
miserable weakness and insufficiency of it, to satisfy any man's Conscience or
Prudence to change his Religion. And to this end I shall, 1. Show the weakness
of the Principle upon which this Argument relies. 2. Give some parallel
Instances by which it will clearly appear that it concludes false. 3. I shall
take notice of some gross absurdities that follow from it. 4. Show how unfit it
is to work upon those to whom it is propounded. And 5. How improper it is to be
urged by those that make use of it.


1. I shall show the weakness of the Principle upon which this Argument relies.
And that is this: That whatever different Parties in Religion agree in, is
safest to be chosen. The true consequence of which Principle, if it be driven
to the head, is, to persuade men to forsake Christianity, and to make them take
up in the Principles of natural Religion, for in these all Religions do agree.
For if this Principle be true, and signify any thing, it is dangerous to
embrace any thing wherein the several parties in Religion differ; because that
only is safe and prudent to be chosen wherein all agree. So that this Argument,
if the foundation of it be good, will persuade furrher then those who make use
of it desire it should do; for it will not only make men forsake the Protestant
Religion, but Popery too, and, which is much more considerable, Christianity it
self.

2. I will give some parallel instances, by which it will clearly be seen that
this Argument concludes false. The Donatists denied the Baptism of the
Catholics to be good, but the Catholics acknowledged the Baptism of the
Donatists to be valid. So that both sides were agreed that the Baptism of the
Donatists was good; therefore the safest way for St. Austin and other
Catholics (according to this Argument) was to be baptized again by the
Donatists; because, by the acknowledgment of both sides, Baptism among them was
valid. But, to come nearer to the Romish Church. Several in that Church hold
the personal Infallibility of the Pope, and the lawfulness of deposing and
killing Kings for Heresy, to be de fide, viz. necessary Articles of Faith, and
consequently, that whoever does not believe them, cannot be saved. But a great
many Papists, though they believe these things to be no matters of Faith, yet
they think those that hold them may be saved, and they are generally very
favorable toward them. But now, according to this Argument, they ought all to
be of their opinion in these points, because both sides are agreed, that they
that hold them may be saved; but one side positively says, that men cannot be
saved if they do not hold them.

But my Text furnishes me with as good an instance to this purpose as can be
desired. St. Paul here in the Text acknowledges the possibility of the
Salvation of those, who built hay and stubble upon the foundation of
Christianity, that they might be saved, though with great difficulty, and as it
were out of the fire. But now among those Builders with hay and stubble, there
were those who denied the possibility of St. Paul's Salvation, and of those who
were of his mind. We are told of some who built the Jewish Ceremonies and
Observances upon the Foundation of Christianity, and said, that unless men were
Circumcised and kept the law of Moses, they could not be saved. So that by this
argument St. Paul and his followers ought to have gone over to those Judaizing
Christians, because it was acknowledged on both sides, that they might be
saved: But these Judaizing Christians were as uncharitable to St. Paul and
other Christians, as the Church of Rome is now to us; for they said positively
that they could not be saved. But can any man think that St. Paul would have
been moved by this argument, to leave a safe and certain way of Salvation, for
that which was only possible, and that with great difficulty and hazard? The
argument you see is the very same, and yet it concludes the wrong way; which
plainly shows, that it is a contingent argument, and concludes uncertainly, and
by chance, and therefore no man ought to be moved by it.

3. I shall take notice of some gross Absurdities that follow from it. I shall
mention but these two.

1. According to this Principle, it is always safest to be on the uncharitable
side. And yet uncharitableness is as bad an evidence, either of a true
Christian, or a true Church, as a man would wish. Charity is one of the most
essential marks of Christianity, and what the Apostle says of particular
Christians, is as true of whole Churches; that though they have all Faith, yet
if they have not Charity, they are nothing.

I grant that no Charity teaches men to see others damned, and not to tell
them the danger of their condition. But it is to be considered, that the
damning of men is a very hard thing, and therefore when ever we do it, the case
must be wonderfully plain. And is it so in this case? They of the Church of
Rome cannot deny, but that we embrace all the Doctrines of our Savior, and his
Apostles Creed, and determined by the four first General Councils; and yet they
will not allow this, and a good life, to put us within a possibility of
Salvation; because we will not submit to all the Innovasions they would impose
upon us. And yet I think there is scarce any Doctrine or Practice, in
difference between them and us, which some or other of their most learned
Writers have not acknowledged, either not to be sufficiently contained in
Scripture, or not to have been held and practiced by the Primitive Church; so
that nothing can excuse their uncharitableness toward us. And they pay dear
for the little advantage they get by this argument; for they do what in them
lies to make themselves no Christians, that they may prove themselves the truer
Church; A medium which we do not desire to make use of.

2. If this argument were good, then by this trick a man may bring over all the
world to agree with him in an Error, which another does not account damnable,
whatever it be; provided he do but damn all those that do not hold it, and
there wants nothing but confidence and uncharitableness to do this. But is
there any sense, that another man's boldness and want of Charity should be an
argument to move me to be of his opinion? I cannot illustrate this better, than
by the difference between a skilful Physician and a Mountebank. A learned and
skilful Physician is modest, and speaks justly of things: He says that such a
method of Cure which he has directed is safe, and withal, that that which the
Mountebank prescribes may possibly do the work; but there is great hazard and
danger in it. But the Mountebank who never talks of any thing less than
Infallible Cures (and always the more Mountebank, the stronger pretense to
Infallibility) he is positive that that method which the Physician prescribes
will destroy the Patient, but his Receipt is Infallible, and never fails: Is
there any reason in this case, that this man should carry it, merely by his
confidence? And yet if this argument be good, the safest way is to reject the
Physicians advice, and to stick to the Mountebanks; For both sides are agreed,
that there is a possibility of Cure in the Mountebanks method, but not in the
Physicians; and so the whole force of the argument lies in the confidence of an
ignorant man:

4. This Argument is very unfit to work upon those to whom it is propounded:
for either they believe we say true in this, or not. If they think we do not,
they have no reason to be moved by what we say. If they think we do, why do
they not take in all that we say in this matter? Namely, that though it be
possible for some in the Communion of the Roman Church to be saved, yet it is
very hazardous; and that they are in a safe condition already in our Church;
and why then should a bare Possibility, accompanied with infinite and apparent
hazard, be an Argument to any man to run into that danger?

Lastly, This Argument is very improper to be urged by those who make use of
it. Part of the strength of it lies in this, that we Protestants acknowledge,
that it is possible a Papist may be saved. But why should they lay any stress
upon this? what matter is it, what we Heretics say, who are so damnably
mistaken in all other things? Methinks, if there were no other reason, yet
because we say it, it should seem to them to be unlikely to be true. But I
perceive, when it serves for their purpose we have some little credit and
authority among them.

By this time I hope every one is in some measure satisfied of the weakness of
this Argument, which is so transparent, that no wise man can honestly use it,
and he must have a very odd understanding that can be cheated by it. The truth
is, it is a casual and contingent Argument, and sometimes it concludes right,
and oftener wrong: and therefore no prudent man can be moved by it, except only
in one case; when all things are so equal on both sides, that there is nothing
else in the whole world to dermine him; which surely can never happen in
matters of Religion necessarily to be believed. No man is so weak, as not to
consider in the change of his Religion, the merits of the Cause it self; to
examine the Doctrines and Practices of the Churches on both sides; to take
notice of the confidence and charity of both parties, together with all other
things which ought to move a conscientious and a prudent man. And if upon
enquiry there appear to be a clear advantage on either side, then this Argument
is needless, and comes too late, because the work is already done without it.

Besides, that the great hazard of Salvation in the Roman Church, (which we
declare upon account of the Doctrines and Practices which I have mentioned)
ought to deter any man much more from that Religion, than the acknowledged
possibility of Salvation in it, ought to encourage any man to the embracing of
it: Never did any Christian Church build so much Hay and Stubble upon the
Foundation of Christianity: and therefore those that are saved in it, must be
saved, as it were, out of the Fire. And tho Purgatory be not meant in the Text,
yet it is a Doctrine very well suited to their manner of Building; for there is
need of an Ignis Purgatorius, of a Fire to try their work, what it is, and to
burn up their Hay and Stubble. And I have so much Charity (and I desire always
to have it) as to hope, that a great many among them who live piously, and have
been almost inevitably detained in that Church by the prejudice of Education
and an invincible Ignorance, will upon a general Repentance find mercy with
God; and though their work suffer loss and be burnt, yet they themselves may
escape as out of the Fire. But as for those who have had the opportunities of
coming to the knowledge of the Truth, if they continue in the Errors of that
Church, or Apostatize from the Truth, I think their condition so far from being
safe, that there must be extraordinary favorable circumstances in their case
to give a man hopes of their Salvation.

I have now done with the two things I propounded to speak to: And I am sorry
that the necessary defense of our Religion, against the restless importunities
and attempts of of its adversaries upon all sorts of persons, has engaged me
to spend so much time in matters of Dispute, which I had much rather have
employed in another way. Many of you can be my witnesses, that I have
constantly made it my business, in this great Presence and Assembly, to plead
against the impieties and wickedness of men; and have endeavored, by the best
arguments I could think of, to gain men over to a firm belief, and serious
practice of the main things of Religion: And I do assure you, I had much rather
persuade any one to be a good man, than to be of any party or denomination of
Christians whatsoever: For I doubt not but the belief of the ancient Creed,
without the addition of any other Articles, together with a good life, will
certainly save a man; and without this no man can have reasonable hopes of
Salvation, no, not in an Infallible Church, if there were any such to be found
in the world:

I have been, according to my opportunities, not a negligent observer of the
Genius and Humor of the several Sects and Professions in Religion: And upon
the whole matter, I do in my conscience believe the Church of England to be the
best constituted Church this day in the World; and that, as to the main, the
Doctrine, and Government, and Worship of it, are excellently framed to make men
soberly Religious: ^ securing men on the one hand from the wild freaks of
Enthusiasm; and on the other, from the gross follies of Superstition. And our
Church has this peculiar advantage above several Professions that we know in
the world, that it acknowledges a due and just Subordination to the Civil
Authority, and has always been untainted in its Loyalty.

And now shall every trifling consideration be sufficient to move a man to
relinquish such a Church? There is no greater disparagement to a man's
Understanding, no greater Argument of a light and ungenerous Mind, than rashly
to change ones Religion. Religion is our greatest concernment of all other, and
it is not every little Argument, no, nor a great noise about Infallibity,
nothing but very plain and convincing Evidence, that should sway a man in this
case. But they are utterly inexcusable, who make a change of such concernment
upon the insinuations of one side only, without ever hearing what can be said
for the Church they were baptized and brought up in, before they leave it. They
that can yield thus easily to the Impressions of every one that has a design
and interest to make Proselytes,, may at this rate of discretion change their
Religion twice in a day and instead of Morning and Evening Prayer, they may
have a Morning and an Evening Religion.

Therefore, for Gods sake, and for our own Souls sake, and for the sake of our
Reputation, let us consider and show our selves men; let us not suffer our
selves to be shaken and carried away with every wind; let us not run our selves
into danger when we may be safe. Let us stick to the Foundation of Religion,
the Articles of our Common Belief, and build upon them Gold and Silver, and
precious Stones, I mean, the virtues and actions of a good Life; and if we
would do this, we should not be apt to set such a value upon Hay and Stubble.
If we would sincerely endeavor to live holy and virtuous lives, we should not
need to cast about for a Religion, which may furnish us with easy and indirect
ways to get to Heaven.

I will conclude all with the Apostles Exhortation. Wherefore my beloved
Brethren, be ye steadfast and unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord.

Now the God of Peace which brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ,
the great Shepherd of the Sheep, by the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, make
you perfect in every good work, to do his will; working in you that which is
well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

